Metal–support interactions for heterogeneous catalysis: mechanisms, characterization techniques and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA10036C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA10036C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 8540-8572Metal–support interactions for heterogeneous catalysis: mechanisms, characterization techniques and applications

        
          
            Jian 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yantong 
            Zhang
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Zihan 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Dongyu 
            Hou
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Fengning 
            Bai
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Han
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Chengxu 
            Zhang
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Yingjie 
            Zhang
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Jue 
            Hu
          
        
      *ab
aNational and Local Joint Engineering Laboratory for Lithium-ion Batteries and Materials Preparation Technology, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650093, China. E-mail: chxzhang@kust.edu.cn; zyjkmust@126.com; hujue@kust.edu.cn
bFaculty of Metallurgical and Energy Engineering, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650093, China
cFaculty of Materials Science and Engineering, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650093, China
dFaculty of Land Resources Engineering, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650093, China
Received 
      27th December 2022
    , Accepted 13th March 2023First published on 22nd March 2023AbstractMetal–support interactions (MSIs) have become one of the research directions of great interest in the field of heterogeneous catalysis and are significant for the design of supported metal catalysts with improved catalytic activity and controlled product selectivity. Depending on the interactions of the loaded metal or metal oxide, MSIs can mainly be classified as strong metal–support interactions (SMSIs), medium metal–support interactions (MMSIs) and weak metal–support interactions (WMSIs). Furthermore, SMSI can be divided into covalent metal–support interactions (CMSIs) and electronic metal–support interactions (EMSIs) based on the principles of their action. An extensive discussion of the recent theoretical developments is included in this review, as well as the factors influencing these developments. Additionally, the methods for the characterization of the fundamental properties, the fabrication and applications of MSIs and their wide application in the chemical industry, energy conversion and other fields are presented. Conclusively, the challenges and directions for future research and perspectives are discussed.
1. Introduction
Energy plays a pivotal role in the progression of life.1 Simultaneously, the traditional fossil energy resources are limited, and thus under the continuous exploitation and utilization of these resources presently, humans will inevitably face their depletion in the future, such as coal, oil and natural gas.2,3 Furthermore, the process of obtaining energy from natural fossil energy results in the emission of several harmful gases, such as CO2 and SO2, inevitably causing severe environmental pollution. At present, solar energy, wind energy, and geothermal energy are among the clean and renewable energy sources being developed.4 In promoting the application of new energy industries, the innovative advancement of electric energy conversion and storage technology plays a vital role.5,6 For the progression of new energy technologies and the conversion of new energy, it is essential to design and develop heterogeneous catalysts with excellent performances.
Supported metal catalysts (SMCs), i.e., nanostructured metal active substances immobilized on the boundary of a support, have become a hot topic in heterogeneous catalysis because the metal–support interactions (MSIs) confer positive catalytic activity and better stability to SMCs compared with pure metal nanoparticle (NP) catalysts.7,8 The carriers in SMCs not only play a physical role, but also interact with the active metals. Among the interactions, the MSI effect is revolutionizing the field of catalysis.9,10
As a significant concept in heterogeneous catalysis,11 MSIs often lead to phenomena such as charge transfer, molecular adsorption modulation and metal structural change,10 ultimately strongly affecting the performance of catalysts. Thus, MSIs have become one of the research directions highly sought after in the domain of heterogeneous catalysis. In the late 1970s, Tauster et al. discovered a phenomenon known as strong metal support interaction (SMSI), which is mainly used to study the loss of the ability of TiO2-loaded Pt-group precious metals to adsorb smaller molecules after high-temperature reduction.12 Thereafter, Hu et al. observed the chemical adsorption of CO on a Pt/TiO2 catalyst using infrared spectroscopy (IR).13 They proposed hydrogen overflow and reverse overflow in SMSI through the red-shift and violet-shift of the CO-infrared absorption peaks. Later, other reducible metal oxides were found to exhibit similar phenomena. The “blue shift” of the CO band is caused by the interaction of CO with the hydrogen provided by the TiO2 support, and the strong band in the IR spectrum of the adsorbed CO gradually experiences a “blue shift” with the corresponding change in conductivity. Today, MSIs are widely recognized to play a decisive role in stabilizing carrier active metals. Also, they are extremely important in studying the reaction mechanism and regulating the catalytic activity.14 MSIs in heterogeneous catalysis mostly occur on reducible metal-based supports.15 With the development of advanced material characterization techniques, such as in situ high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM),16 new insights have been gained to enable our understanding of the MSI behavior. Simultaneously, we note that the concept of MSIs has been inaccurately used in some cases, and general MSIs are considered SMSIs.17 Consequently, in this critical and systematic overview of MSIs, we look at their basic features and recent developments, the identification of different MSIs, and the understanding and application of MSIs, which are necessary and desirable for heterogeneous catalyst development.
Although the research on MSIs has made great progress, their concept is mostly applied to oxide supported/modified metallic catalysts. According to recent reports, the synergy between suboxides and alloys can enhance the performance of catalysts.18 On the one hand, alloying may cause strain, and then change the position of the d-band center of the metal. On the other hand, in the process of alloying, the electronic transfer between metal elements with different electronegativity will change the electronic structure of a single metal.19 Then, the adsorption and desorption of the reactants, intermediates and products on the active sites will be changed by the change in the position of the center of the d-band and the modification of the electronic structure.20 Therefore, the synergistic effect between the alloy and suboxide in alloy-suboxide catalysts may greatly affect their catalytic performance.
In this review, we discuss the theoretical evolution, characterization techniques, and applications of MSIs based on recent developments. In situ TEM and XPS are among the advanced characterization techniques that can be used to better understand the evolution of MSIs. In addition, MSI systems with different geometric shapes have different effects, which can be used for the construction of heterogeneous catalysts, such as particle size effect and spacing effect. For example, metal particle size usually promotes the catalytic activity of the metal species after they form MSIs.21 Therefore, it is noteworthy to understand the behavior of MSIs to regulate the catalytic performance of metal species. Here, we summarize the history and evolution of MSIs, starting with the exploration of the theoretical and experimental characterization of MSIs, which is helpful for a deeper understanding of MSIs. Then, the recent discoveries and applications of SMSIs are described in terms of charge transfer, intermetallic bonding, special morphological structures and carrier encapsulation of metal clusters, and the effects of weak metal–support interactions (WMSIs) and medium metal–support interaction (MMSIs)22 on catalytic performance are again elaborated (Fig. 1). Finally, we present our personal views on the future application areas and research directions of MSIs.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the research on MSIs. 
2. The formation and influencing factors of MSIs
2.1 The formation of MSIs
Presently, MSIs have been gaining increasing attention and a wider range of applications with the explosion in the work on heterogeneous catalytic materials, and it is hard to believe that there has been nearly 90 years of research into MSIs. Adadurov reported the presence of high-charged cations on the surface of a carrier polarized metal supported on a support as early as the 1930s,23 and in the mid-1950s, Schwab et al. proposed the collective-electron theory of MSIs (i.e., this theory of ferromagnetism states that the electrons that produce ferromagnetism move around the crystal more or less freely, and they interact with each other aligned due to the exchange) based on the solid-state energy theory and research techniques developed in the field of semiconductor physics.24 Schwab believed that the different Fermi energy between the metal and support caused electron transport across the interface. For example, the SMSI interface of Pt–ZrO2 nanoparticles (NPs) catalyzed by HCHO was described by Peng et al. based on oxygen vacancies (VOs) at room temperature (Fig. 2a), showing the formation of interface-dependent reactive oxygen species (O*).25
 Fig. 2  (a) SMSI interface interaction between Pt/ZrO2 NPs.25 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (b) Representative HRTEM images of different samples ((a) Au-3 nm, (b) Au-3 nm-H600, (c) Au-7 nm, (d) Au-7 nm-H500, (e) Au-9 nm, (f) Au-9 nm-H400, (g) Au-13 nm, and (h) Au-13 nm-H400).29 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (c) First-order rate constant and TOF of BPA removal by catalysts with different Cu site densities, and comparison of kinetics of organic pollutants removal by the latest material-activated PDS system.34 Copyright 2022, John Wiley and Sons. (d) In situ drift spectra of CO2 adsorption on the catalyst.36 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 
Back in 1978, the findings of Tauster et al. implied that if TiO2-supported group VIII metal catalysts were applied, then the metals (e.g., Pt/TiO2, Pd/TiO2, Ru/TiO2, and Rh/TiO2) were reduced at high temperature. Furthermore, the metals would be encapsulated by TiO2, thereby losing the adsorption capacity of gas molecules (such as O2).12,26 Based on these experimental phenomena, they proposed that under high-temperature H2 reduction conditions, interactions will occur between the group VIII metals and TiO2 beyond the ordinary MSIs, which are SMSIs. Increasing experimental and theoretical work has gradually recognized and accepted this phenomenon, and it can be used to explain many phenomena in other catalytic systems as well. After decades of accumulation, the concept of SMSIs has been clearly defined.27 The metal may still adsorb H2 if it is supported on a reducible metal support, but its reactivity with H2 will decrease during reduction at high temperatures, which is the result of the strong interaction between the reducible support and metal, and the support will release an electron. Subsequently, it is transferred to the metal, thereby reducing the chemisorption capacity of H2.
The weak and medium and strong metal carrier interactions (WMSIs, MMSIs and SMS1s) were distinguished by Burch.28 The van der Waals interactions between metals act as WMSIs. MMSIs occur between metals in the zeolite channel, while SMSIs occur on metals loaded on reducible oxides.12
Recently, with the progress of research, Du's team made new progress in the study of the SMSIs of catalysts, and found that the particle size effect of SMSIs in the Au/TiO2 system provides a new way for the regulation of catalyst performance (Fig. 2b).29 If the change in surface tension between the wrapping layer and air is neglected, the surface stretching force equilibrium equation is shown in eqn (1) and (2), where r and θ are used to denote the state of the particle. r is the radius of the NP, θ denotes the degree of encapsulation, and γ interfacial stress is defined as the response of the surface excess Gibbs free energy. K = 1/B, where B is the bulk modulus. According to the surface tension equilibrium eqn (1) and (2), the surface tension of the metal can be compared with the magnitude of the carrier. γAu = γint + γTiO2−x(1) (2)
Subsequently, Tang's team discovered the SMSI effects of platinum group metal heterogeneous catalysts.30–33 In single-atom catalysts (SACs), the single atoms should be more affected by the interaction of the metal support than supported catalysts as the active centers. Then, Wang and others reported a slight spacing effect, emphasizing the degree of matching between the distance between adjacent Cu atoms (dCu1–Cu1) and the molecular size of the reactant peroxydisulfate (PDS) (Fig. 2c), and determined the activity of the Fenton-like reactions on carbon-loaded SAC.34 Understanding the inter-site interaction properties in SACs is monumental for their application in various catalytic reactions, particularly for SACs with a high site density.35 As scientists continue to work on MSIs, the knowledge and application of MSIs are becoming more comprehensive.
2.2 Factors influencing MSIs
A loaded metal catalyst produces both dispersion and stabilization of metal NPs, as well as MSIs, which frequently result in interfacial charge transfer, change in metal structure, molecular adsorption modulation, and other phenomena, affecting the activity, selectivity, and stability of the catalyst. As we proceed through this section, we investigate how elements such as the carrier, metal particles, and temperature affect MSIs.37 Depending on the catalyst and reaction, different factors may play a different leading role.

2.2.1 Support. 
It is important to understand how MSIs are influenced by the composition, morphology, doping, and oxygen vacancies of the carrier. The appearance, composition of the support (e.g., degree of hydroxylation), electronic structure (particularly important for heterogeneous catalysis or photocatalysis), reactivity of the carrier, ion mobility (e.g., composition of oxygen vacancies and cation diffusion), and the possibility of cations remaining behind to form intermetallic compounds affect the operator properties of MSIs.38 In the case of oxygen vacancies in the carrier, the creation of stable oxygen vacancies at the metal–carrier interface should contribute to the more likely occurrence of MSI effects, and using a pre-reduced TiO2-x carrier, Zhang et al. prepared and characterized Cu catalysts.36 The oxygen vacancies that are present in the TiO2-x carriers bolster the SMSIs between TiO2 and Cu and enhance the adsorption and activation of CO2 (Fig. 2d). Jiang et al. stabilized Pt single atoms on the oxygen vacancy of CeO2 on different exposed surfaces through SMSIs,39 thus realizing the maximum deformation of Pt1–CeO2 {100} Pt–O–Ce. This deformed interface improved the adsorption capacity of O2 and methanol.
For carriers with different structural forms, Lan et al. achieved highly dispersed Ag NPs by taking advantage of the distinctive capturing influence offered by various forms of hydroxyapatite (HAP) as well as the protective advantage of the hydroxyl groups on the surface of HAP.40 The preparation of this highly dispersed Ag/HAP catalyst was simple. Herein, MSIs of different strengths and weaknesses were generated with Ag NPs at different positions using a novel structure of HAP as a carrier. Among them, the Ag/HAP-s catalyst layered on a nanosheet structure achieved 100% conversion at 160 °C, showing remarkable catalytic activity. By controlling the Ag NPs, their agglomeration and SMSI effects were reduced, and their dispersion in the catalytic reaction was significantly improved. Furthermore, it was concluded by Rios-Escobedo et al. that TiO2 or TiO2–ZrO2 is an essential carrier in anisole hydrodeoxygenation (HDO).41 Depending on the carrier surface acidity, the oxygen defects dispersed on the surface and metal phases dispersed on the surface of the SMSIs, and these differences lead to a change in the product distribution and high performance on the catalyst. However, SMSIs were observed for the reconstructed Cu when sputtered on flame-produced LaTiO2 but not for Cu NP loaded on commercial TiO2 at 500 °C.42
Transition metal NPs and their carriers may interact mainly through the movement of absorbed substances between the metal and oxide surfaces in heterogeneous catalysts. After encapsulating NPs in an oxidizing environment, Frey et al. found that redox-active environments caused the overlayer to be removed, followed by the appearance of particle dynamics.43 Therefore, the classical SMSI state disappears once the surface is exposed to a reactive atmosphere. MSIs play a crucial role in the reaction pathway by modifying the catalytic properties of the metal phase. Martínez et al. showed that the surface hydroxyl groups of the carriers were important for the activity and selectivity of Ru/TiO2 catalysts for CO activation.44 Also, as the crystallinity of the carrier changed, the SMSIs changed as well, affecting the metal phase dispersion and size (Fig. 3a).
 Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of catalysts.44 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (b) TEM images and corresponding particle size distribution histograms of catalysts with different iridium loadings.49 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (c) EDS map of Pt/S–C catalyst after H2 treatment.50 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (d) In situ drift spectra of Pt/TiO2 HX and Pt/TiO2–H600–O300.51 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (e) SEM image of the catalyst.52 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. 
When a metal reacts with another metal, the carriers are responsible for controlling its size, shape, dispersion, and structural stability. MSIs are often optimized throughout the synthesis of catalysts,45 and best MSIs will increase the quantity of chemical process active sites and stop metal sintering, thus increasing the chemical process performance.46


2.2.2 Metal nanoparticles. 
The MSIs of a catalyst can also be affected by the morphology, loading of metal and the particle size, in addition to its inherent properties. In the case of the size of metal particles with different loads, an effective method for enhancing the catalyst performance is to reduce the size of metal structures. By incorporating aerosol-assisted evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA) method in alumina catalysts, Seo and colleagues synthesized nickel-loaded alumina catalysts.47 Because the nickel particles were smaller than 10 nm, Ni/Sr-MA had the highest coke resistance. As a result of the uniform and broad particle size in the catalyst, the SMSIs were distributed uniformly and effectively, promoting the thermal stability and coke resistance of the catalyst. It was discovered by Nakayama et al. that Mg2+ and Ce3+ can effectively stabilize Au agglomerates with diameters of less than 2 nm by adding them to Ca HAP and Sr HAP.48 Sr(Ca)HAP substituted with Au/Mg and Ce exhibited partially oxidative SMSIs, which accelerated the composition of positively charged Au species, although the SMSIs reduced the surface-exposed Au enrichment, showing higher catalytic activity compared to the SMSI one. However, Du et al. synthesized an Au/TiO2 catalyst with different particle size distributions by the colloidal precipitation method and studied their SMSI performance.29 It was found that the larger-size Au/TiO2 (∼9 nm and 13 nm) was more prone to SMSIs, and the CO adsorbed on Au evaporated comprehensively after reduction at 400 °C. Subsequently, the complete coating of Au NPs by the carrier could be achieved, while for the smaller-size Au/TiO2 (∼7 nm and 3 nm), the reduction temperatures for complete SMSI were 500 °C and 600 °C, respectively. Therefore, the implications of metal particle size in different catalysts on SMSIs have to be discussed specifically.
Furthermore, Ni/SiO2 catalysts prepared by various methods were tested by Chen et al., and the samples attained by ammonia evaporation had outstanding catalytic property.53 Based on the characterization results, in addition to SMSIs, the catalyst had undersized Ni particles and an abundance of Ni–O–Si units, which contributed to its excellent performance. Significant improvements were observed in the anti-sintering/coking properties of the catalysts. Nevertheless, as a result of the impregnation method, the nickel species were unevenly distributed in the Ni/SiO2-IM catalysts, the particle size was large, and the MSIs were weak, performing poorly in methane dry reforming.
The influence of metal particles with different loading amounts on MSIs is also significant, where metal particles of smaller sizes are typically formed when a smaller amount of metal species is loaded on the carrier, which results in the formation of more particles and exposure of more active sites, favoring the promotion of the catalyst activity. However, Yu et al. demonstrated the highest activity by increasing the loading of Ir on a titanium dioxide carrier, with the catalysts with significantly higher loading levels (6 wt%) displaying the highest activity.49 In the process of hydrogen reduction, higher loading levels may inhibit the SMSIs between the Ir species and the Ti dioxide carrier, thus maintaining higher partial reduction characteristics (Fig. 3b).


2.2.3 Temperature. 
It is well known that adjusting the reduction temperature is one of the commonly used methods for regulating MSIs at present.54 Therefore, when it is necessary to package or decorate metal particles to different degrees, we can use a reducible carrier thin layer. The temperature largely decides the formation process of MSIs. The surface energy of metallic NPs decreases at elevated temperatures due to the increased surface entropy. Because of the increase in entropy on smaller metallic NPs, they have a lower surface free energy.55 Therefore, SMSIs can only form at a higher temperature on smaller metal NPs. The classical SMSIs between Pt and sulfur-doped carbon (S–C) carriers were reported by Yin et al. with electron transfer, inhibition of H2/CO adsorption, and encapsulation of carbon carriers at high temperatures.50 Using a carbon matrix doped with Pt and sulfur atoms, the SMSIs between Pt and sulfur inhibited the overgrowth of Pt in the temperature range of 300 °C to 700 °C, followed by the formation of SMSI packaging structures on Pt NPs at a higher temperatures of 900 °C (Fig. 3c). The study by Han et al. showed that single-atom-modified TiO2 exhibits SMSIs at high reduction temperatures than Pt NPs.51 In general, SMSIs on TiO2-supported Pt catalysts occur at reduction temperatures over 400 °C. By reducing the Pt NPs at 250 °C, the CO adsorption was eliminated, clearly demonstrating the reversible encapsulation and indicating that in the presence of Pt NPs and TiO2 (B) nanosheets, SMSIs can occur at a lower reduction temperature (250 °C) (Fig. 3d).
Besides the above, a new Pt/TiOx interface was created by traditional wet impregnation of Pt NCs by Seo et al.52 During wet impregnation relating to the atmosphere thermal treatment process, TiOx voluntarily populated and partially overlapped the Pt surface, and thus the Pt particles were protected from blocking or coking at higher temperatures of CH4 or even under oxidizing conditions (Fig. 3e). Their SMSI phenomenon achieved by oxygen heat treatment remained stable even in an oxidation and reduction atmosphere. The study by Fu et al. found that SMSI growth occurs mainly on metals whose work functions exceed 5.3 eV and surface energies exceed 2 J m−2, while for group IB metals, when incorporating Cu (4.46 eV) and Au (5.3 eV),56 it is difficult to package them owing to their low surface energy or low work function.

3. Characterization
Many characterization techniques have been developed to delve into the MSI of SMCs, which is another significant part of MSIs. With the rapid development of science and technology, a variety of excellent characterization methods has been expanded, and available technology has greatly helped in realizing the application of MSI. Thus far, the techniques employed for the characterization of MSIs include X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray adsorption spectroscopy (XAS)57,58 and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM).59 These techniques start investigating MSIs from various angles, resulting in an improved understanding of their mechanism. A deeper understanding of MSI characterization in heterogeneous catalysis can assist researchers in researching and implementing heterogeneous catalysts, which also perform well in a range of interactions.
3.1 XPS
In the early 1960s, Siegbahn et al. first utilized the concept of differential pumping in XPS.60 Also, they reported the construction of a solid XPS system for studying up to 1 mbar, which was eventually commercialized in the late 1970s.61 XPS is an advanced analytical technology, which depends on the energy of photoelectrons emitted by the measured atoms when they are irradiated by soft X-ray photons (1–2 keV).62 Since it was reported in 1970, this technology has provided scientists with a lot of useful information, which has a strong impact on our views in the field of surface chemistry.63 This technique has already been frequently used to measure the electronic structure of heterogeneous catalysts.
In addition, Fu et al. prepared NiCeAl catalysts with various CeO2 NPs decentralized at a higher CeO2 support loading (≥20 wt%) using EISA, impregnation and precipitation, and they observed the process for the formation of SMSIs through in situ XPS spectroscopy.64 NiCeAl-EISA (Fig. 4a and d), NiCeAl-WI (Fig. 4b and e) and NiCeAl-CP (Fig. 4c) possessed smaller amounts of Ce3+ at room temperature, owing to the composition of the CeAlO3 perovskite phase, which in turn increased the number of Brønsted acid sites (Fig. 4e) and Ni NPs dispersed by shortening the Ni–Al stronger interaction. The reinforced SMSIs accelerated the composition of rich oxygen vacancies and interface positions at 100 °C (Fig. 4f). NiCeAl catalysts with SMSIs exhibited high resistance to clotting and possessed stronger and dispersed Ni sites for superior performance. Zhang et al. analyzed the changes in MSIs caused by charge transfer by measuring the binding energy of electrons using XPS.65 As shown in Fig. 4g, the 3 anionic catalysts showed a clear tendency of peak drift. The supported Pd NPs transferred electrons to N, which decreased the conjunction strength and the MSI effect became weaker. Dai et al. probed the electron transfer behavior of MSIs induced in Ir/Mo2TiC2Tx catalysts by XPS.66 As shown in Fig. 4h, the three samples also transferred to lower binding energies with an increase in the reduction temperature, indicating enhanced electron transfer from the substrate to the metal. The results showed that the highest electron enrichment of the Ir atomic layer at the boundary and the electron transfer from the Mo2TiC2 carrier to Ir atoms.
 Fig. 4  
In situ XPS spectra of (a) Ni2p3/2 of NiCeAl-EISA, (b) NiCeAl-WI, (c) NiCeAl-CP, (d) Ce 3d of NiCeAl-EISA, (e) NiCeAl-WI and (f) NiCeAl-CP.64 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (g) N 1s XPS spectra of PILs with different anions.65 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (h) Ir 4f XPS spectra of Ir/Mo2TiC2Tx samples.66 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. 
In conclusion, all the above-mentioned results obtained from XPS suggest that XPS can be a beneficial tool for the detection of MSIs because XPS, as important surface analysis technology, can provide molecular structure and atomic valence state information for research, as well as the elemental composition and chemical state of compounds. However, more precise characterization under in situ conditions is needed.
3.2 XAS
As a synchrotron-based technique for characterizing materials, XAS studies the X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS).67 Due to its atomic-level resolving power and higher productiveness, XAS has become a practical tool for studying the electronic states between metals and carriers in heterogeneous catalysts.68 Several research groups have noted the usefulness of XAS in probing charge jumps between metal atoms and carriers. A metal atom can be investigated through its electrons in different orbitals using this probe.69 For instance, the highest peak in XANES, often known as the white line (WL) peak, is a significant aspect for detecting unoccupied orbitals of the determined elements. The intensity, shape and parallel capabilities of the WL peaks can be very helpful for MSI studies.70 In addition, operational XAS can provide electronic information throughout the reaction to investigate the additional changes that occur in the MSIs during the reaction.71
For example, Eggart et al. prepared two groups of 0.5–1% Pt-loaded CeO2 catalysts with unequal Pt dispersion and oxidation states.72 Operational XAS combined with theoretical simulations demonstrated an increase in Pt–Ce interaction when reacting with CH4 at 975 °C. Analysis of the extended EXAFS spectra demonstrated the modification and packaging of Pt the particles by the CeO2/Ce2O3 carriers or partial Ce–Pt alloy formation due to SMSIs. Furthermore, Zhou et al. focused on Prussian blue analogues (PBA) with the molecular formula of Na2Co2+[Fe2+(CN)6]·nH2O after post-treatment at 400 °C.73 The observed ligand coordination changes (Fig. 5a) were further confirmed by the O K-edge spectra, as shown in Fig. 5d and e. In the N K XAS spectrum, and N K-edge of CF-PBA-400 had a strong frontier of 398.6 eV, which was related to the covalency of the metal 3d-N 2p. Therefore, a larger strong front produces a strong covalent interaction. The characteristic peak of LS Co3+ of Co–C disappeared in all the samples after the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) (Fig. 5b and c), indicating the loss and shortening of the Co–C bond or the possible absence of MSIs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Sketch of the ligand transformation for Co and Fe ions. (b) Co L2,3-edge, (c) Fe L2,3-edge, (d) N K-edge, and (e) O K-edge XAS of CF-PBA-400 and CF-PBA-400-A.73 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Electron microscopy
Heterogeneous catalysts have been extensively characterized using electron microscopy since its invention by Ruska in the early 1930s.74 For instance, in 1940, Ardenne et al. emphasized the usefulness of TEM in detecting the morphology and structure of SMCs.75 Later, with the further advancement of electron microscopes and imaging theory, by using electron microscopy, atomic-level information about MSIs on catalysts could be obtained.76
For example, Frey et al. observed the particle dynamics and directional particle migration under the dynamic interaction between noble metal particles and reducible metal oxide carriers by transmission electron microscopy.43 Lattice mismatch-induced interface strain minimization drives the preferential orientation and repetitive step-like flow in the Pt (111) plane. In addition, Shi et al. synthesized Pd–Cu bimetallic catalysts with different loading sequences and annealing temperatures based on γ-Al2O3 and used STEM to characterize the catalysts, demonstrating that the loading method affects the dispersibility of the catalysts.77 As shown in Fig. 6a, the majority the Pd–Cu catalysts existed in the shape of undersized NPs (0–15 nm), but the spread of these small and roundish NPs on the γ-Al2O3 was non-uniform. As shown in Fig. 6b, the scattering of Pd–Cu catalysts on the γ-Al2O3 surface was poor and large particles (5–30 nm) were produced. The Pd–Cu particles with a smaller size (about 0–6 nm) could be uniformly dispersed on the γ-Al2O3 surface (Fig. 6c). It was observed that the distribution of the interaction between Pd–Cu and γ-Al2O3 was even. As shown in Fig. 6d, by loading Cu first, and then Pd, a smaller size (∼1–5 nm) and more uniformly dispersed Pd2.5%/γ-Al2O3 (Cu1%) catalyst (900 °C) could be obtained.
 Fig. 6  HAADF-STEM images and particle size distributions of (a) Pd2.5%Cu1%/γ-Al2O3, (b) Pd2.5%–Cu1%/γ-Al2O3, (c) Cu1%–Pd2.5%/γ-Al2O3 and (d) Cu1% (900 °C)–Pd2.5%/γ-Al2O3.77 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (e and f) IL-HRTEM images of Pt/S–C-1100(H) and Pt/S–C-1100(H)-200(O), respectively.50 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 
Further, by using conventional impregnation techniques, Yin et al. prepared Pt/S–C catalysts.50 As shown in Fig. 6e and f, it was observed that the carbon encapsulation of Pt NPs located in the support edge region consisted of 1–4 graphene layers, verifying the SMSI encapsulation state. The SMSI resulted from electron transfer between the metal particles and the support.
3.4 Raman spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy is a non-destructive examination technique that uses the interaction of light and materials. Raman spectroscopy can provide details about the chemical structure, phase and morphology, crystallinity, and molecular interaction of a sample.78 The Raman spectrum is a type of scattering spectrum. We can use Raman spectroscopy to analyze the scattering spectra of different incident light frequencies to obtain the rotational and vibrational information of the detected molecules, which can also be used to study the molecular structure. This method is based on the Raman scattering effect discovered by the Indian scientist Raman.79 Also, because of these advantages, Raman spectroscopy is increasingly used in MSI research to better reveal the close relationship between the metal and carrier.
For instance, Grabchenko et al. used Raman spectroscopy to study the content of lattice oxygen defects and oxygen vacancies.80Fig. 7a shows the Raman spectra of CeO2 and Ag/CeO2 samples before and after CO oxidation. The red shift in the observed band showed that there were defects in the structure of cerium dioxide. Jia et al. used Raman spectroscopy to determine the structure of carbon products (as shown in Fig. 7b).81 According to the typical D band at 1340 cm−1 and G band at 1570 cm−2 in the spectrum, it can be concluded that the defect density is the highest among the carbon products synthesized on Ni/Mg and the lowest on Ni/Sr. Chytil et al. clearly identified a monoclinic phase (m-ZrO2) in the spectral profile, which has a prominent peak at 480 cm−1 and a peak corresponding to the tetragonal phase (t-ZrO2) at 315 and 640 cm−1 (Fig. 7c).82 After immersion in Mn, the spectral characteristics of the carrier almost disappeared, and a poorly defined spectrum (Mn15–ZrO2) was obtained. The broad peaks with centers at 350, 460, 550 and 640 cm−1 may be the contribution of the carrier and manganese oxide.
 Fig. 7  (a) Raman spectra of CeO2 and Ag/CeO2 catalysts.80 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) Raman spectra of carbon products from LDPE and PP over different catalysts.81 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Vis-Raman spectra of parent supports, fresh Mn adsorbents and adsorbents regenerated after the 13th adsorption cycle.82 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) IR spectra of adsorbed CO at room temperature on Pd/θ-Al2O3 and Pd/γ-Al2O3 with various Pd particle sizes.83 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (e) FTIR spectra obtained after the adsorption of CO (50 torr) at room temperature on N and Cl sample reduced at: Tr = 373 K, Tr = 573 K, Tr = 773 K.84 Copyright 2001, Elsevier. 
3.5 Infrared spectroscopy
At the beginning of the 20th century, scientists began to study IR.62 By 1940, after the commercial application of infrared spectrometers, IR was widely used in material and chemical research.
At present, IR is also widely used in the study of MSIs. Murata et al. obtained information about the surface structure of Pd particles on a Pd/Al2O3 catalyst by using its CO adsorption IR spectrum.83Fig. 7d shows the IR spectra of CO adsorption on Pd/θ-Al2O3 with different Pd particle sizes, and Pd/θ-Al2O3 increased as the Pd particle size increased to about 7 nm, and then decreased as Pd particle size increased above 7 nm. Force et al. introduced the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of carbonyl groups formed by the adsorption of N and CO samples with reduced Cl in H2 at different temperatures.84 It can be seen that for the Cl and N samples, when the sample was reduced at Tr = 573 K, the FTIR band strength corresponding to the bridged carbonyl group adsorbed on the metal particles decreased, and as the temperature increased, the band underwent a strong blue shift (as shown in Fig. 7e). Based on this, in general, we can use the sintering of metal particles and the MSI effect process to explain the reduction in the amount of CO or H2 adsorbed on metal particles, which is why we use FTIR.
3.6 Other characterizations
In addition to the above-mentioned three techniques, there are also ways to obtain information about the active sites, which indicates heterogeneous-catalyzed MSIs. For example, some basic electrochemical techniques such as cyclic voltammetry (CV)85 and Tafel slope86 can be used to research the electron transfer rates and rate certainty steps to investigate the intensity of MSIs.
For example, Yu et al. prepared for the first time SMSI catalysts, Pt/X-NCNT, with different ratios of pyridine-N and pyrrole-N. Among them, Pt/8-NCNT demonstrated the best hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) performance compared to Pt/4-NCNT and Pt/16-NCNT (Fig. 8a).87 As shown in Fig. 8b, Pt/8-NCC exhibited a low overpotential at high current densities, demanding only 107 and 153 mV to actualize current densities of 500 and 1000 mA cm−2, respectively. The Tafel slope is also a noteworthy indicator of catalytic performance. In 1.0 M KOH solution, Pt/8-NCNT showed a low Tafel slope of 33.3 mV dec−1, which was lower than that of Pt/C (49.2 mV dec−1), Pt/4-NCNT (57.8 mV dec−1), Pt/12-NCNT (69.6 mV dec−1) and Pt/16-NCNT (74.2 mV dec−1) under the equivalent conditions (Fig. 8c), which indicated that the charge transfer between the Pt/8-NCNT catalyst and reactants was faster and the MSIs of Pt/8-NCNT were stronger. In addition, the turnover frequency (TOF) was calculated to balance the intrinsic activity of the catalysts (Fig. 8d). As shown in Fig. 8e, the linear scanning voltammetry (LSV) curve of Pt/X-NCNT remained essentially unchanged after 5000 CV cycles, which briefly illustrated the positive stability of the catalyst. Moreover, the stability of Pt/8-NCC was tested under higher current density conditions (Fig. 8f). The above-mentioned results illustrate that electrochemical techniques are useful in understanding the MSIs of SMCs, but they should be combined with other techniques to fully understand how the MSIs enhance and maintain the catalytic activity to draw accurate conclusions.
 Fig. 8  (a) HER polarization curves of Pt/X-NCNT (X = 4, 8, 12, and 16) and Pt/C. (b) HER polarization curves of Pt/8-NCC at high current. (c) Tafel slopes of catalysts. (d) Potential-dependent TOF curves of Pt/X-NCNT and Pt/C. (e) Polarization curves for Pt/X-NCNT catalysts before and after 5000 cycles. (f) Current–time (i–t) stability curves up to 100 h duration of Pt/8-NCC at high current density.87 Copyright 2022, John Wiley and Sons. 
Besides the characterizations helpful for understanding MSIs, other appropriate experimental techniques are required to gain more insight into MSIs, not only in a fixed setting, but also under the operational conditions. In terms of characterization techniques, CO-probe molecular IR, STEM, EXAFS, XANES, and Raman spectroscopy88 are available to achieve considerable information on the spatial distribution, electronic structure, ligand environment, and chemical valence states of the active atoms in the catalyst, and auxiliary characterization techniques such as metal dispersion, XPS, and STM can be used appropriately in conjunction with the actual catalyst system under study. Through the organic combination of various characterization techniques and the high integration of various characterization data, the multidimensional characterization of catalysts from local information and overall average information, quantitative analysis and qualitative analysis is a research direction and an important guarantee for the future development of catalytic technology.
4. SMSI
Heterogeneous catalysis is one of the major concepts that involve SMSIs, which include metal structure changes, molecular adsorption modulation, and many other phenomena, resulting in reversible nanoscale structural changes. The changes ultimately impact the catalytic reaction performance, and most of the studies on the role of SMSI involve metal/oxide catalytic systems. Among them, SMSIs can be divided into CMSIs89 and electronic metal support interactions (EMSIs).90 In CMSIs, a covalent bond is formed between the metal and the carrier, whereas in EMSIs, strong electronic interactions generate the bond between the metal and the carrier. CMSIs must accompany EMSIs, but EMSIs do not necessarily accompany CMSIs.91 The SMSI effect in heterogeneous catalysis has been explained in terms of four aspects including metal-to-metal bonding, specific morphology, charge transfer, and carrier-to-metal coating. In addition, we describe the application of SMSIs in heterogeneous catalysts and their effects on catalyst activity, selectivity and stability.
4.1 CMSI
In general, metal NPs usually produce non-saturable coordination sites on supports with strengthened affinity.35,92 Positively charged and surface-anchored metal NPs form worthwhile covalent chemical bonds with the carrier, thereby extending the super stability and significant catalytic nature. Qiao et al. synthesized and characterized a novel Au1/FeOx SAC with significant catalytic activity for CO oxidation.93 The results clearly showed that the Au1/FeOx catalyst did not only have higher activity but also extraordinary stability for CO oxidation, even at temperatures up to 400 °C. They proposed that the individual Au1 atoms were located in the Fe vacancies of the FeOx nanocrystals and that the Au1 atoms and oxygen atoms in the lattice formed strong covalent metal–carrier bonding interactions due to the high positive charge of the nanocrystals. This catalyst reveals a key aspect of SMCs with significant CMSIs.

4.1.1 Charge transfer. 
The CMSIs elicited by charge transfer have been incorporated through experiment and theoretically in the catalytic applications of heterogeneous catalysts. For instance, by introducing the impregnation method, Lee et al. studied the result of noble metals (M = Ag, Au, Pd, Pt and Rh) on the improved fume oxidative activity of CeO2 by impregnation, calculation and modeling experiments and density practical theory (DFT) calculations.94 The electronic states of the p-orbital and f-orbital of the metal compound were investigated and compared with the Ce4f electrons, which have an impact on the reaction properties. Rh/CeO2 and Ag/CeO2 increased the oxidative activity, increased the power to form element vacancies, element sorption, and exaggerated negatron transfer, where even porous materials have applications. Chu et al. prepared a supported Au25(SG)18 catalyst by the associate degree equal volume impregnation methodology.95 The charge transfer from Au25(SG)18 to Mil-101-Cr induced a charged Auδ+ (0 < δ < 1), whereas charge transfer occurred from ZIF-8 to Au25(SG)18 because of the various metal–support interactions with the charge Auδ−. The charge state of Auδ− inhibited the adsorption of the binary compound (H−) due to the electric repulsion, whereas Auδ+ impaired the reducing ability of the adsorbed binary compound (H−) due to the sturdy affinity between the adsorbents. Particularly, the stability and catalytic activity. Besides, Li et al. prepared Ni/La2O3–Al2O3 and Ni/La2O2CO3–Al2O3 by inchoate condition impregnation.96 This methodology can be employed for regulating the interaction between metallic elements and the corundum support. Also, low angles allow the metallic element to interact with the substrate more effectively, resulting in a reduction in sintering under harsh reaction conditions. This modification methodology will simultaneously enhance the reactivity and stability of the catalyst by dynamical SMSIs. Bele et al. used oxidization and impregnation strategies to arrange TiON–Ir catalysts.97 Supported by the complementary DFT model, the improved chemical performance is attributed to the SMSIs between Ir and TiON. The existence of protecting oxidizing materials, which hinder the over-oxidation of Ir, is another issue that may justify its wonderful properties. The higher element OER activity and higher stabilization demonstrate the potential application of this production method. The improved OER performance is because of SMSIs. Chu et al. prepared Pd/Ga2O3 catalysts using the well-established wet impregnation methodology.98 The results showed that the Pd0.34Ga1 NPs include a gas property of 98.2% at a gas conversion of 96.6%, whereas the Pd/Ga2O3 catalyst included an abundant lower gas property of 76.3% at a gas conversion of 94.5%. Drift measurements and DFT calculations justify their superior performance, showing that the SMSIs among the independent and dispersed Pd0.34Ga1 NPs considerably altered their boundary characteristics, resulting in changes in the reaction pathways. Tuo et al. employed the early wet impregnation and dynamic platinum loading and reduction temperature to prepare Pt/CNF catalysts of various sizes.99 Owing to the interaction between the platinum atom and the element atom on the surface of MgAl2O4, the activity of the partially charged platinum increased. The defective negative electronic state of platinum helped weaken the bonds of Pt–(C–C) and repelled the adsorbed hydrocarbon from the higher active Pt border site. Consequently, the site potential of the platinum atoms in Pt/MgAl2O4 was higher than that of Pt/CNF (Fig. 9a–e).
 Fig. 9  (a) Typical HAADF-STEM images of catalysts. (b) Conversion and selectivity results of Pt/MgAl2O4 and Pt/CNF as a function of average Pt particle size. (c) Typical HRTEM image of Pt NP supported on MgAl2O4. (d) Number of surface atoms per gram of Pt as a function of Pt particle size on the cuboctahedron particle. (e) Plots of normalized TOFs based on the hydrogen evolution rate at 230 °C with Pt particle size for Pt/MgAl2O4.99 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
Furthermore, Zhang et al. synthesized an associate degree iron-doped nickel-based metal–organic framework (MOF) nanosheet array (FeNi-MOF NS) via a one-step hydrothermal methodology.100 The results showed that the doped metallic element plays a vital role in the electronic structure reconstruction of the MOF, not only inducing electron transfer from the metallic element, which resulted in the formation of abundant high-valence surface molecules that act as active centers of the urea oxidization reaction (UOR). Additionally, it creates additional electronic states to optimize the adsorption energy of the reactants, intermediates, and products on the surface molecules. Thereby, the UOR dynamics are enhanced. The FeNi-MOF NS exhibited tremendous catalytic activity for the UOR, only requiring overpotentials of 131 and 100 and 55 mV to attain current densities of 10 and 100 mA cm−2, respectively. Employing supported FeNi-MOF NPs, an organic compound electrolytic cell was assembled to deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.431 V with good stability throughout long electrolysis. A series of (Ce, Zr, La)O2(CZL) mixed oxides and corresponding supported Rh catalysts with unequal Ce/Zr molar ratios were composed by Wang et al.101 Through numerous characterizations, insights into the connection between the structure and MSIs and multilateral chemical action performances were obtained. The structural properties of the Rh/CZL catalysts were closely associated with the Ce/Zr quantitative ratio. An applicable Ce/Zr quantitative ratio significantly affected the interaction between RhOx and the CZL carrier. Thereby, the formation of additional active Rh species (Rh0+ and Rh3+) and the reduction of element species at the Rh–Ce interface were promoted.
Guan et al. prepared Pd19/TiO2(1 1 0)-R-OV, Pd19/TiO2(1 0 1)-A-OV, Pd19/α-Al2O3(0 0 0 1), Pd19/MgO(1 0 0)-OV, Cu19/γ-Al2O3(1 0 0), and Cu19/MgO(1 0 0)-OV.102 The results demonstrates that the MSIs of the supported metallic element catalyst were considerably stronger than that of the supported Cu catalyst, leading to high alkene activity and property than the supported metallic element catalyst. Zeng and associates prepared extremely active CuCe-DR catalysts via a twin reaction method.103 The advantage of the double reaction method is that additional Ce3+ ions are produced, which suppress the agglomeration of the catalyst, and the additional Cu2+ ions are located in the CeO2 lattice, boosting the Cu–Ce interaction in the CuCe-DR catalyst. The stronger Cu–Ce interaction accelerates the electron transfer between oxide and CeO2 in CuCe-DR. Fan et al. prepared Pt/NCB catalysts using Hummer's methodology.104 Experiments verified that this Pt/NCB-n structure provided increased MSIs, which suggest that its catalytic activity changed the behavior of the wood alcohol electrooxidation process, which was considerably optimized. For wood alcohol oxidation, the obtained Pt/NCB-n exhibited an excellent catalytic performance, particularly the ECSA of Pt/NCB-10 was 76.3 m2 g−1, and it possessed an ultra-high positive peak current density (0.593 A mg−1 in acidic medium and alkali medium 3.02 A mg−1), and good tolerance and stability. Because of the distinct nanostructure of Pt/NCB-n, it possessed abundant catalytic active sites, unhampered negative electron transmission channels, and increased sturdy interactions. Especially, in a recent study, Yuan et al. explored how metal oxides interact with carbon supports and how their interactions affect the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) catalytic performance.105 The strong metal oxide–support interaction (SMOSI) will alter the favorable electron transfer from the carrier to the tin compound NPs, and the charged tin compound surface will facilitate the adsorption of carbonaceous acid gas and CO2−, enhancing the absorption of CO2 for the CO2RR. The results showed that SnO2/NSC with the strongest SMOSI had the best CO2RR property for acid, reaching 94.4%, and partial current density as high as 56.0 mA cm−2, which is higher than that of most Sn-based catalysts. Meanwhile, SMOSI significantly improved the stability of SnO2/NSC in the CO2RR.
As an additional consequence of heterogeneous chemical action with the natures of the catalyst itself, the influence of varying temperatures on the fundamental interaction between valence metals is dramatically different. The temperature distinction will have an effect on the magnitude and polarity of the transferred charges in the catalyst. He et al. prepared several Ni/Al2O3 catalysts with different oxidation temperatures (450 °C, 550 °C, 650 °C and 750 °C) by wet impregnation methodology.106 The characterization result showed that the oxidation temperature has a vital impact on the area, nickel grain size, degree of reduction, nickel metal dispersion and MSIs. High oxidation temperatures resulted in robust interactions between the nickel species and Al oxidation, forming Ni–Al spinel. The Ni/Al2O3-750 catalyst showed the best activity at all the temperature ranges, with the CH4 conversion of 89.8% and CO2 conversion of 92.9% at 750 °C. Zhang and co-workers prepared Mn3Ce2-300 supports by employing Mn/Ce-MOF and supported Pd NPs by impregnation methodology.107 The H2-TPR result showed Pd/Mn3Ce2-300 has good reduction ability at a certain temperature, and the Mn–cerium species interact with the poly-oxygen species. Diverse CZ-supported cobalt catalysts with completely separate carriers were prepared by Parastaev's group via the wet impregnation methodology.54 The improved MSIs favored the dispersion of cobalt during high temperature reduction, leading to the best CO2 methanation activity. The elaborate characterization revealed the dynamic properties of the Co–CZ surface. The rich chemical properties of the optimized Co–CZ surface created the stable metal NPs under the high temperature reducing conditions and enhanced the CO2 activation. In addition, Wang et al. prepared Cu–2DSiO2 catalysts using conventional impregnation, which exhibited higher CO2 conversion and stability in long-term experiments than Cu catalysts loaded on 2DSiO2 or mercantile SiO2.108 As shown in Fig. 10a, all the Cu catalysts exhibited a selectivity of 100% for CO, but the CO2 conversion of Cu–2DSiO2-400r (19.1%) was much higher than that of Cuim/2DSiO2r (12.9%) and Cuim/SiO2r (10.1%) Cu. According to the Arrhenius diagram, the Cu–2DSiO2-400r and Cu–2DSiO2-850r catalysts exhibited homologous superficial activation energies for CO generation, indicating that the equivalent reaction mechanisms emerged in both samples (Fig. 10b). The prolonged stabilization of the copper catalyst was further estimated in a flow reactor (Fig. 10c). Each Cu catalyst had a CO2 conversion value lower than the equilibrium value under this test condition, ensuring their stable performance.
 Fig. 10  (a) CO2 conversion after 54 h testing and CO selectivity. (b) Arrhenius plot fitting from the CO rates. (c) CO2 conversion under 500 °C during a 54 h test for the different Cu catalysts.108 Copyright 2022, John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition, Dai et al. and Li et al. prepared supported nickel catalysts exploiting a similar synthetic methodology.96,109 It appears that the nickel oxycarbonate interface was stable under the high temperature reduction conditions and in CO2 methanation reactions. Moderately fundamental locus spread on the interface of La2O2CO3 contributed to the high adsorption and activation capability of CO2. These species are extremely reactive and tolerant to CO poisoning throughout the conversion to gas. The results of this study confirmed that modification with stable reaction intermediates is also an efficient strategy to modulate the MSI effect of loaded metal catalysts for CO2 chemical action. Benhmid et al. prepared numerous Pd–Sb catalysts loaded on various metal oxides by the impregnation method.110 The results showed the nearly complete inhibition of the adsorption catalyst submitted to high temperature reduction (HTR), the inhibition is overcome by the reduction in the oxidization of the Pd/MeOx catalyst followed by metal element at 453 K (LTR), and is attributed to the impact of SMSIs of the Schottky species of alternative reducible supports such as titanium dioxide, ZrO2, CeO2 and Nb2O5. Lin et al. synthesized Ru/CeO2 catalysts via impregnation and drying strategies.111 Their studies showed that the formation of partially reduced metallic element oxide and gas vacancies results in the synthesis of electron-rich Ruδ− species and Ruδ−–OV–Ce3+ sites, thereby advancing the disintegration of nitrogen. There is a dynamic exchange between the absorbable elements on the Ru catalyst and the elements in the gas section. At 400 °C and 1.0 MPa, Ru/CeO2–C500H exhibited a rate of 9.24 mmol gcat−1 h−1. Because of the distinctive chelating ability of the ethyne bonds in hydrogen-substituted graphdiyne (HsGDY), HsGDY–Cu3Pd catalysts were successfully prepared via the in situ growth on the surface of HsGD by Guo's group.112 The results showed that the catalytic activity of the HsGDY–Cu3Pd system was considerably improved. The most effective HsGDY/Cu3Pd-750 catalysts exhibited an excellent catalytic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) performance with a superb half-wave potential of 0.870 V and a formidable current dynamic density of 57.7 mA cm−2, surpassing the most advanced Pt/C catalysts (0.859 V and 15.8 mA cm−2, respectively). Experimental and DFT studies showed that the HsGDY–Cu3pd interaction causes changes in the length of the CC bond on the HsGDY surface and structural distortion, leading to an asymmetrical distribution of electrons on the two carbon atoms of the ethyne bond. This weakens the shoulder–shoulder π coupling p–p orbitals, and ultimately will increase the activity of the HsGDY–Cu3Pd catalyst system. A CuMnFeO4 catalyst for the efficient reduction of NO was prepared by Yang et al. using a sol–gel self-combustion synthesis method at low temperatures.113 The adsorption mechanism is responsible for the adsorption of NO and ammonia on the CuMnFeO4 catalyst. The N and iron atoms are orbital conjugated, which affects how the reactants interact with the catalyst surface. Humphreys et al. prepared Ce0.8Sm0.2O2−δ(SDC) with external gas vacancies by the precipitation methodology as an initiator for the formation of Fe–SDC composite catalysts.114 The further introduction of external gas vacancies enhanced the SMSIs, preventing the expansion of the prepared iron particles, which resulted in excellent stability and higher tolerance to oxygenates. For the optimal catalyst, the best activity was determined at 450 °C, with the activity of 8.7 mmol g−1 h−1 at 1 MPa and 12.3 mmol g−1 h−1 at 3 MPa. Furthermore, Lee et al. used the solvothermal methodology to organize micron-sized nickel-dissolved calcium TiO2.115 This catalyst displayed a large surface area and SMSIs, giving rise to 26% high geometric activity (25-fold high-mass activity 1.4 V Eon-set) and stable OER with only 0.72 μg base metal content compared to the standard 20 wt% Ni/C and even the industrial 20 wt% Ir/C.
As research continues to deepen, Wu et al. successfully anchored Pt NPs on h-BN for the preparation of a Pt/h-BN catalyst.116 In addition to the high dispersion of Pt NPs, it also formed a high degree of SMSIs between the Pt NPs and h-BN, which led to its good activity. Specifically, it exhibited a 98.3% desulfurization rate of DBT at 130 °C (TOF = 15.33 h−1). Therefore, by transferring electrons to substrates rich in electrons, reactive gas species is generated, which promotes the formation of interactions. Hu et al. proposed an element reduction methodology to modulate the SMSIs between metal species and an alumina support.117 The results showed that the strength of the SMSIs will increase with an increase in the H2 pretreatment temperature, and the Cr/Al2O3 catalyst with SMSIs had higher activity for PDH and may reduce barrier of propene to avoid cracking and deep dehydrogenation. Qiao et al. synthesized Pt/TiO2 catalysts via the hydrothermal methodology and reported that SMSIs may occur between the noble metal single atoms and TiO2 support, but the reduction temperature was higher than that on NPs.10 They showed that in the reaction of 3-nitrostyrene, single-atom sites play a significant role. Also, they showed that the selective encapsulation of NPs is negligible. This new discovery provides a way to review and establish the active sites by slightly adjusting the SMSIs. Co adsorption on Pt/TiO2–C occurred under moderate conditions (T = 40 °C, P = 3 bar) with a conversion rate of 83.4%. A 1.86 wt% Au/2 wt% rGO/3DOM Co3O4 catalyst was prepared using the Na borohydride-assisted PVA (molecular weight (MW) = 10000 g mol−1) protection reduction methodology by Xie et al.118 Their study showed that the introduction of reduced graphene chemical compound will enhance the SMSIs between Au and 3DOM Co3O4, elevating the chemical element activation ability and low-temperature activity for CO oxidation. Jin et al. synthesized Au@mTiO2 by EISA.119 Heat treatment enhanced the crystallinity of TiO2 and induced a change in SMSIs, both having robust effects on its performance. Under photochemical radiation, the photocatalytic activity of Au@mTiO2 was damaged by the Au+ species generated from SMSI of Au–TiO2. The photocurrent of Au@mTiO2-600-24 h was 127.9 μA cm−2 under ultraviolet light.
It is typically believed that lower metal loadings tend to result in low overall activity of catalysts, limiting the general performance and applications of SACs. Therefore, the development of methods to prepare catalysts with a high metal loading is necessary but challenging in the field of heterogeneous catalysis. Ag/CeO2 catalysts with a nominal silver supporting of 100% were prepared by Grabchenko et al.80 The results showed that there is a correlation between the chemical performance of Ag/Ce catalysts and MSIs. The improvement in the MSIs followed the order of Ag/CeO2(imp) < Ag–CeO2(co-DP) ≤ Ag/CeO2(red imp) with an increase in CO and the soot reaction activity with an increase in Ag in the catalyst. Therefore, the management of MSIs can be the key for the design of cheap catalysts without the Pt and Ru metallic elements. Saelee et al. used the wet impregnation technique to introduce WOx on a γ-Al2O3 support to synthesize 5 wt% Pt/WOx/γ-Al2O3 catalyst.120 In the case of the addition of WOx accelerators to the Pt/γ-Al2O3 catalyst to make Pt/WOx/γ-Al2O3, the glycerol conversion rate of the catalyst was 35.8%, the platinum natural action rate was 0.2%, and the W natural action rate was 30.3%. The improved stability is due to the SMSIs occurring in the catalyst. Moreover, the discovered sturdy metal support–promoter interactions (SMSPIs) are a different way to stop leaching. SMSPIs arise from the extra bonding between the WOx species and the platinum site, which considerably enhanced the adsorption of platinum because of the high electron transfer from platinum and alumina to the WOx promoter. This implies that promising promoters that react in the liquid part can improve the stability of catalysts if SMSIs happen, which in the special case of WOx promoters, extremely enhances the stability.
Additionally, Liu et al. synthesized 0.5% Pt/TiO2 (denoted as Pt/TiO2) via the impregnation technique.121 SMSIs occurred on the changed Pt/TiO2 and induced the formation of active noble metal sites. Therefore, the performance of the changed Pt/TiO2 catalyst for H2-SCR in the dark was greater than that of the traditional Pt/TiO2 catalyst. The impregnation method was used by Yang et al. to synthesize Pt/ZrO2 and Pd/ZrO2 catalysts with 1 wt% Pt and 1 wt% Pd, respectively.122 The results showed that I-SMSIs arise between the Zr-1-supported noble metal species and surface structures, whereas B-SMSIs arise at the Zr-2-supported Brønsted acid sites by interacting with metallic element species. It has been demonstrated that SMSIs weaken the chemical bonds and inhibit the formation of active oxygen species, which improves the low-temperature reducibility of H2-TPR and O2-TPD. I-SMSI and B-SMSI promoted oxygen activation and accelerated the reaction of the solvent based on activity investigation and drift spectrographic analysis, considerably increasing its performance. Wang et al. synthesized the 2.5% Si@PtGa/Al2O3 catalyst via the early impregnation technique.123 This strategy provides a lot of SMSI effects, prevents the migration of isolated platinum active sites, and provides a stable coordination atmosphere for platinum throughout the PDH reaction, enhancing the catalyst performance. Also, it has superior potential for the atomic utilization of noble metals (only 0.1%), instead of an oversized quantity of standard precious metal. The readied a pair of 2.5% Si@PtGa/Al2O3 catalyst exhibited wonderful chemical activity (acrylic yield 0.5 mol gcat−1 h−1) moderate equilibrium conversion rate (24.5%), and high stability (inactivation constant: 0.007 h−1) at 450 °C. Chen et al. synthesized PTO-VO-H/C catalysts containing Pt NPs via the hydrothermal method and atomic layer deposition (ALD) strategies (Fig. 11a).124 The introduction of VO helped to anchor the low-loaded extremely dispersed Pt NPs and strengthened the SMSIs, thereby enhancing the activity for the ORR. Pt NPs and TiOx/C composite carriers interact electronically and produce electron-rich NPs and a powerful SMSI result, both experimentally and theoretically, that was beneficial for electron transfer and stabilization of the Pt NPs (Fig. 11c). At 0.1 M HClO4, the half-wave potential of PTO-VO-H/C was 0.87 V (Fig. 11b).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the synthesis strategy of PTO-VO-H/C catalysts. CVs and LSVs of (b) PTO-VO-H/C. (c) I–V polarization curves of PTO-VO-H/C and commercial Pt/C catalysts in single cells before and after 3000 cycles.124 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. 
Size represents a dominant factor in chemical composition to govern the chemical properties of matter at the mesoscale in materials science. Metal size effects are a promising approach to organize superior heterogeneous catalysts. MSIs have expanded to include metal size-dependent charge transfers, which provide a new way to tune the electronic composition of metal catalysts for diverse chemical reactions. Bhunia et al. synthesized Ni@DS catalysts by impregnation and transformation.125 The result of mixed oxidation states of tiny metal NP catalysts could account for the activity under gentle conditions. In both methylbenzene (aprotic) and water (polar protic), the catalyst could produce primary amines due to the presence of tiny metal NPs. Mao et al. successfully prepared high-surface area LaFeO3 thin films by atomic layer deposition.126 Upon heat reduction, the platinum on LaFeO3/MgAl2O4 exhibited superior CO oxidation activity even when subjected to harsh pretreatment. The stabilization of the platinum particle size is because of the fundamental interaction between the platinum and support, as proven by the emergence of platinum particles relative to the perovskite supports. Weiss et al. synthesized an antimony-loaded tin chemical compound with a molar ratio (Sb:Sn) of 5:95 by the hydrothermal technique.127 The change in the size of the Ir NPs was controlled in the range of 2–4 nm. Thereupon, it possessed a higher surface-to-mass ratio, which probably enhanced the natural action with the support for SMSIs. ATO was employed due to its very high electrical conduction (2 S cm−1) and its high area (50 m2 g−1), and the high catalyst dispersion resulted in much higher OER activity for the Ir/ATO catalyst (1100 A gIr−1 at 80 °C, at 1.45 V versus RHE). Wei et al. prepared heterogeneous Pd/α-Fe2O3 catalysts by restraining the spread of Pd clusters (1.5 nm) on industrial α-Fe2O3via in situ growth.128 The synthesized Pd catalyst possessed SMSIs and high-valent Pdδ+, which reduced the CO active barrier and accelerated the activation and adsorption of CO under gentle conditions. Meanwhile, the existence of α-Fe2O3 promoted the composition of the active Pd–H species. Neumann et al. synthesized ‘surfactant-free’ Pt NPs of various sizes via the hydrothermal method and investigated whether or not similar helpful or harmful SMSI effects were discovered in Pt and iron oxides interacting at the nanoscale.129 Consequently, the loss of the active Pt surface of the bimetallic NPs resulted in a decrease in activity, which is analogous to the result of Pt NPs on the harmful SMSIs of FeOx carriers upon pretreatment.
Furthermore, Utomo et al. assembled Cu NPs with hypoxic TiO2 (OV–TiO2), expecting Cu NPs and OVs as active sites for the NRR.130 As shown in Fig. 12a, the LSV curve from −0.3 to −0.8 V vs. RHE shows that the current density in the N2-saturated solution increased compared to the current density in the Ar-saturated solution, indicating that the NRR occurred.131Fig. 12b shows the corresponding CA curves at different potentials. The current density increased with an increase in the negative potential. In addition, a stable current density was observed, indicating the stability of the electrolytic system. The corresponding UV-visible absorption spectrum of the electrolyte after the reaction is shown in Fig. 12c. The NRR tests performed at −0.5 V versus RHE showed the highest absorption intensity from the UV-visible absorption spectrum, indicating that the highest amount of NH3 was produced. The NH3 yield measurements further validated this prediction (Fig. 12d). The NH3 yield increased with an increase in the applied potential and reached a maximum of 13.6 μg mgcat−1 h−1 at −0.5 V compared to the FE of 5.9% for RHE. These NH3 yields and FE were 12.3- and 6.5-times higher than the original TiO2, with values of 1.1 μg mgcat−1 h−1 and FE of 0.9%, respectively. As shown in Fig. 12e, no significant NH3 was detected on 2.0% Cu/OV-TiO2 for all the control experiments. The absence of N2H4 also indicates that N2 reduction to NH3 follows the corresponding remote mechanism, as shown in Fig. 12f and g.132 2.0% Cu/OV-TiO2 exhibited an enhanced performance for catalytic NRR under ambient conditions. Cu NPs with hypoxic TiO2 possessed enhanced electrochemical activity, enhanced electron transfer, and increased electron density, all of which contribute to the enhanced performance.
 Fig. 12  (a) LSV curves of 2.0% Cu/OV-TiO2. (b) Chronoamperometry (CA) results, (c) UV-Vis spectra of the electrolytes after NRR, and (d) NH3 yields and faradaic efficiencies of 2.0% Cu/OV-TiO2. (e) UV-Vis spectra of the electrolytes after the control experiments. (f) NH3 yields and faradaic efficiencies of 2.0% Cu/OV-TiO2 at −0.5 V versus RHE for the initial six consecutive tests. (g) Schematic illustrations of the associative distal mechanism.130 Copyright 2022, John Wiley and Sons. 


4.1.2 Bonding between metals. 
Conventional chemical bonds include ionic bonds, covalent bonds and metal bonds. The bond length is comparatively short and the bond energy is comparatively strong, whereas unit forces such as H bonds and the van der Waals bond length are comparatively long and the bond energy is comparatively weak.133 The interaction of the intermetallic bonds between the valent metal supports in heterogeneous catalysts play a very important role in the activity and stability of catalysts. According to the research in recent years, Zhang et al. prepared sodium-based catalysts on varying carriers via absorbent impregnation.134 The stability of Co2C stems from the SMSIs fashioned by Si–O–Co bonds. The mechanistic studies showed that the overlap with the reverse water gas conversion (RWGS) is broken in the CHx intermediate on the Co2C to get fermentation alcohol. At an equivalent time, the decomposed surface Co2C may be unceasingly regenerated and restored by CO induction, achieving long stability. Wet chemical techniques were used by Zhang et al. to immobilize NiMo NPs based on transition metals on Ti3C2Tx surfaces (Tx: surface termini, such as O, OH, and F).135 The result showed that the NiMo NPs are surface-functionalized monodispersed on Ti3C2Tx. These monodisperse NPs yielded enhanced HER and hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) activities in alkaline media. NiMo KOH/Ti3C2Tx produced a current of 10 mA cm−2 at −0.044 V with RHE, which is almost 232 mV lower than that of the parent NiMo NPs. NiMoNPs/Ti3C2Tx produced an HOR current density of 1.5 mA cm−2 at 0.1 V versus RHE. Additionally, the DFT results indicated that the Ti3C2Tx support can accelerate charge transfer to gold NPs and tune the electronic structure of the active site, optimizing the surface assimilation free energy of H* species in H chemistry. Fortunato et al. used the hydrothermal methodology to arrange Ti/Pt–Pd/GNR and Pt–Pd/GNR catalysts for the ORR.136 In contrast to SMSIs, this mechanism resulted in the reaction of Pt and Pd by transferring electrons from the catalyst to metal carrier. Additionally, platinum with chemical compound characteristics is beneficial on the non-electrochemically and electrochemically stable Ti/Pt–Pd/GNR nanocomposite electrodes. For Ti-containing catalysts, the higher activity is due to the improvement in their intrinsic activity, whereas the high property for 4-electron ORR is due to the presence of Ti, which enables the gas separation energy of these nanocomposites to shift towards additional positive values.
The catalytic performance of the metals will be stimulated by the addition of metal elements at moderate temperatures as well as the addition of appropriate metal elements. Zhang et al. synthesized a Pt/CeO2 catalyst by deposition.137 The deposition of tiny noble metal particles in cerium-generating systems with a short Pt–Pt distance caused giant lepton disturbances in the valence metals, demonstrating that SMSIs can promote Pt/CeO2(111) and Pt/CeO2 powders give rise to system binding of dioxide and methane at room temperature and excellent and stable catalysts to promote methane dry reforming (MDR) processes at moderate temperatures (500 °C). Siakavelas et al. prepared CeO2-based oxides via the microwave-assisted sol–gel methodology and prepared Sm2O3–CeO2, Pr2O3–CeO2 and MgO–CeO2 by wet impregnation.138 Generally, Sm3+, Pr3+ or magnesia has not been employed to promote metallic element oxide as a support material for nickel-based catalysts in dioxide methanation reactions. The results showed that the addition of Sm3+ or Pr3+ to the CeO2 lattice produced element vacancies, but the Ni/Pr–Ce catalyst had abundant surface element vacancies (e.g., Ce4+-OV-Pr3+ solids). Alternatively, the addition of Mg2+ led to string MSIs, which enhanced the sintering resistance of the Ni/Mg–Ce catalyst. The experiment (WGHSV = 25000 mL g−1 h−1, H2/CO2 = 4:1, T = 350 °C) demonstrated that Ni/PR-Ce had the best activity according to its CO2 conversion (54.5%) and CH4 property (100%) at lower reaction temperatures. Rui et al. used a deposition–precipitation methodology to introduce gold in In2O3 to synthesize Au/In2O3 catalysts.139 There is a possibility that the dramatic change in performance is directly attributed to the force between the gold and the carrier, which is key to the distribution of charges in the metal and gives rise to the composition of an active interface of Auδ+–In2O3–x. The ensuing Auδ+–In2O3–x surface sites will activate H2 and greenhouse gases for economical wood spirit production. The methanol selectivity reached 100.0% at temperatures below 225 °C. At 300 °C, the space time yield of methanol was 0.47 gMeOH h−1 gcat−1, which is more than that of pure In2O3. This study confirms that utilizing the robust Au/In2O3 interaction will considerably improve the performance of gold catalysts. Zhao et al. prepared Pt/TiO2 catalysts by mixture deposition.140 Element reduction at 473–773 K exhibited the standard characteristics of SMSIs; however, it formed a surface noble metal–Ti alloy on the Pt particles, instead of by wrapping the noble metal particles through a TiOx layer. Noble metals exist in the form of particles, clusters, and single atoms, which promote element reduction of reactants. On the surface of 673 K TiO2, Ti and noble metal atoms will simply diffuse to form a surface Pt–Ti alloy. The synthesis of Pt-series catalysts by the dilution of Ti atoms and the associated electron interactions shaped by Pt–Ti bonds considerably weakened the chemical adsorption of H2 and CO, reducing the reaction activity. Surface Pt–Ti alloy at 673 K re-oxidation and element reduction at 473 K completely enhanced the chemical adsorption properties and chemical change activity of H2 and CO, indicating the tunability of SMSIs.
Size effects are influenced by different metal sizes, while the metal loading affects the metal-to-metal bonding in different ways. For example, Guntida et al. prepared a metallic element catalyst via amorphous-treated silicon dioxide synthesis by the impregnation technique and epoxidation of ordered silicon dioxide (SBA-15) with oxide.141 The characterization showed that the 4Ti/SBA-15-WI catalyst possessed a stable Ti surface with SMSIs. This is because of the sturdy Ti4+ tetrahedral coordination of the Si–O–Ti bond, the low reduction degree of Ti catalyst, the high dispersion of Ti and the small particle size. Thus, this changed surface will alleviate perpetual catalyst deactivation provoked by surface O vacancies. Tanaka et al. prepared gold-end complexes containing 2Au and 3Au by exploiting Au–CC–CC–Ru(dppe)2–{CC–Th–CC–Ru(dppe)2}n−1–CC–CC–Au (n = 1–3).142 Despite its molecular size of 2–4 nm, the multinuclear lines exhibited higher physical phenomenon and decay issue at the single-molecule level. The DFT-NEGF calculation showed the effective energy arrangement between the Fermi energy state of the metal conductor and the HOMO level of the multinucleated molecular line. Chemistry and DFT studies showed that the HOMO energy state is exaggerated by the sturdy Ru–Ru interaction of the bridge substance, leading to a Fermi energy state, which finally results in high physical phenomenon and small b-value. Liu et al. prepared Ru/MAFO-IWI samples by initially employing the immersion technique and the physical mixture (PM) technique, which were denoted as Ru/MAFO and Ru/MA (the nominal weight load of Ru was 2 wt%).143 Infrared XAS analysis and aberration-corrected scanning transmission microscopy confirmed the dispersion of Ru. A study showed that the dispersion method does not involve gas atom capture, but rather anti-Ostwald maturation speed up by strong CMSIs. As reported by Ma et al., ethylene oxychlorination was catalyzed by the support surface not the catalyst layer.144 A sheet of 30–80 nm γ-Al2O3 is shown in Fig. 13a, while nanotube γ-Al2O3 is shown in Fig. 11e, with a length and diameter of approximately 80 and 6 nm, respectively. The enlarged TEM images of the flake and tubular γ-Al2O3 are demonstrated in Fig. 13b, c, f, and g, respectively. The wafer γ-Al2O3 (Fig. 13c) possessed a lattice spacing of 0.28 nm, corresponding to the (110) crystal plane, which could be observed on its surface. The tubular γ-Al2O3 (Fig. 13e–g) is surrounded by (111) faces, as demonstrated by the lattice spacing of 0.46 nm. No significant divergence was observed in the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern, but significantly at 2θ ∼19°, as shown in Fig. 13d and h, the peak Al2O3-T was observed on the sample, which can be attributed to the (111) surface, but not on Al2O3-P. Therefore, an excellent performance, higher selectivity, good activity, and stability we observed for the catalyst containing Al2O3 (110).
 Fig. 13  (a–c) TEM images and (d) XRD pattern of Al2O3-P. (e–g) TEM images and (h) XRD pattern of Al2O3-T.144 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. 
Meanwhile, Li et al. used the anchoring action of defect-rich carbon substrates to prepare a novel P-modified single-atom Co catalyst (Co-SACs).145 By modifying Co atoms with P, the asymmetry in the charge distribution and electron redistribution were optimized, which was conducive to activating n O bonds and promoting the formation of nitrogen-containing species in the intermediates. Consequently, the Co-SACs exhibited higher activity for the production of ammonia and excellent cycle stability, Faraday efficiency of up to 92.0%, and the maximum ammonia production rate of 433.3 μgNH4 h−1 cm−2, making it have broad application prospect in actual wastewater treatment.


4.1.3 Special morphology. 
Metal NPs can be modified by CMSIs to alter their morphology and electronic properties, thus altering their reactivity and properties, which has a vital impact on their performance. For example, Li et al. used graphene to construct a 3Dp-CNG backbone by victimization of graphite assisted by stencil technology, and made a 3Dp-CNG-M (Au, Pd, Pt) composite catalyst.146 The characteristic three-dimensional porous structures and bonding between g-C3N4 and graphene increased the specific area and improve the anchoring stability of the cocatalyst. The metallic element cocatalyst acted as an associate electron acceptor, considerably increasing the number of active sites and promoting electron–hole separation. Thus, the synthesized 3Dp-CNG-M composite catalyst exhibited considerably increased HER activity under SSL, and the best 3Dp-CNG-Pt composite catalyst had wonderful activity (2565.81 μmol g−1 h−1), which was 136-times that of the 3Dp-CNG backbone (18.93 μmol g−1 h−1). Wu et al. homogeneously deposited double NPs on reduced graphene (Gr) compound nanosheets via the hydrothermal method and synthesized Bi/Gr hybrids based on the CMSIs between Bi NPs and ultra-thin Gr nanosheets.147 Through these interactions, the properties for CO2 reduction were significantly improved, resulting in high efficiency over a wide negative potential range. In the CO2RR, Bi/Gr exhibited the best *HCOOH value of −28.1 mA cm−2 at −1.17 V (relative to RHE), which is higher than the cathode potential of bismuth and Bi-GR at 7.9 and 14.1 mA cm−2. Kinetic experiments showed that the SMSIs can be attributed to the increased CO2 reduction activity through enhanced surface electron transfer. Sun et al. prepared metallic element Ni/SBA-16 catalysts via 3 synthesis strategies including wet impregnation, acid acid-assisted wet immersion, and ammonia evaporation (AE).148 The large amount of Ni0 particles and a stronger interaction with metallic elements accounted for the enhanced activity of these catalysts. Ni/SBA-16-AE exhibited positive stability in CRM reactions with no nickel sintering and restricted carbon deposition. Supported by the characterization techniques, the improved performance of Ni/SBA-16-AE is ascribed to the CMSIs, owing to the formation of Ni-layered silicate. Additionally, a higher metallic element dispersion was observed, which can be associated with the limitation of the cage-like holes in the SBA-16 matrix. Niu et al. used an easy and expandable “degrease-impregnation-carbonization” strategy to manufacture regularly distributed NiFe alloy antiparticles.149 Hard carbon fibers possess inherent polysaccharide fibers with a porous structure that is interconnected. Additionally, the CMSIs between NiFe NPs and N-doped carbon and their cooperative effects can result in enhanced activity. NiFe@N-CFs gave the best OER activity with a minimum overpotential of 300 mV, a reference current density of 10 mA cm−2, ORR half-wave potential (E1/2) of 0.82 V, and 0.1 M KOH.
Furthermore, Kottayintavida et al. synthesized nickel nanowires (NWs) via the wet chemical reduction methodology.150 The mixture of enlarged area of NW morphology, electronic modification evoked by SMSIs, and PdNi bifunctional mechanism resulted in higher activity in the Pd-changed Ni NWs. The distinct nanowire morphology obtained by the wet chemical reduction strategy eliminated the requirement for any capping agents or surfactants. The content of the valuable metal metallic element was reduced by ninety WTC, and the chemical process potency was improved. The ethanol product electrooxidation studies showed the corresponding improvement activity, with a mass activity of 1479.79 mA mgPd−1. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs),151 the hexagonal structure of these nanomaterials, are lightweight, connected perfectly, and have a number of unusual properties mechanically, electrically, and chemically. Recently, with the on-going in-depth research on CNTs and nanomaterials, their applications have become increasingly diverse. Huang et al. synthesized Mn0.65Fe2.35O4 (MnFeO) and Mn0.65Fe2.35O4-CNTs (MnFeO-CNTs) via the hydrothermal methodology.152 This study revealed that SMSI between CNTs and Mn0.65Fe2.35O4 (MnFeO) promotes peroxymonosulfate (PMS) activation, resulting in the speedy degradation of glycerol (SMX). The SMX degradation increase 24-fold from 0.47 × 10−2 to 11.4 × 10−2 min−1. The catalyst dose, PMS and SMX concentrations, and initial pH value had a major effect on the degradation of SMX on the MnFeO-CNTs/PMS and MnFeO/PMS systems. Niu et al. prepared an MgFe2O4/NPC catalyst via the solvothermal methodology, and used the surfactant-free glycol reduction methodology to deposit active metal noble metal particles on the ORR composite catalyst.153 The superb performance of Pt/MFO/NPC (0.1 M KOH, E1/2 = 0.835 V) is attributed to the 3-dimensional porous carbon material, which increased the reactions, and the significant N doping and SMSIs between MFO and Pt been increased to enhance the sturdiness of the catalyst. Kong et al. used the sol–gel method combined with associate hardening method to synthesize fullerene CNT-supported Ti NPs, and used photoelectric positioning technology to deposit noble metal NPs around Ti NPs to synthesize Pt/TiO2@CNT catalysts.154 The E1/2 of the catalyst was 0.927 V, its mass activity was 0.358 A mg−1 Pt1@0.9 V, and it exhibited extremely high stability for the ORR. The high ORR performance is attributed to the low oxygen surface assimilation energy of Pt, which is due to the SMSIs caused by the deposition of Pt NPs around the TiO2 NPs.
The temperature influences the particle size, dispersion, and morphology of different heterogeneous catalysts, which is the result of CMSIs produced by the catalysts. As an example, Qiu et al. prepared ordered Co NP arrays on silicon and titania single crystals employing a polymer reverse particle encapsulation method.155 Compared with Co NPs on SiOxSi, the stronger MSIs between Co NPs on TiO2 (110) resulted in the retention of larger interparticle distances, and the important amendment in morphology finally resulted in the omelet-like form of Co NPs. For higher performance, there is space for additional optimization/tuning of the Co NPs/TiO2 interface, especially the application of heat, and therefore the properties of the reactive gas atmosphere, presumably together with the target initial particle size. Pu et al. prepared a Pd/ZnO catalyst via the typical impregnation methodology, and synthesized zinc oxide nanorods and nanosheets with completely separate exposed crystal faces via hydrothermal methodology, which were used as supports.156 Upon treatment at 600 °C, the morphology of the zinc oxide nanorods rearranged into the corresponding irregular form. Additionally, Pd NPs exhibit completely different sintering behaviors on zinc oxide nanorods and nanosheets. Upon oxidation at 600 °C, the particle size of the Pd NPs increased from 1.1 nm to 5.7 nm, whereas a high dispersion was maintained on the cut surfaces. During CO oxidation, sintering, and heat treatment, the Pd/ZnO–N catalyst showed significant inactivation. The Pd/ZnO–P catalyst showed enhanced activity when oxidation was performed at 400 °C and 600 °C, which was due to the natural activity between the extremely dispersed palladium species and the polar species during the reaction. Hongmanorom et al. successfully prepared Ni and Ni–Mg silicate chitin SBA-15 catalysts via the wet impregnation methodology and ammonia evaporation method, respectively.157 Compared with the catalysts prepared via the wet impregnation method, phyllosilicate-structured catalysts have superior performance in carbon dioxide methanation due to the increased MSIs and weak base sites provided by surface radical species. The CMSI is generated by the phyllosilicate structure and the confinement impact of SBA-15 inhibit metal sintering, leading to good stability. At 400 °C, the CO2 conversion on the Ni–Mg/SBA-15 catalyst was 55.3%. Jomjaree et al. prepared Ni/CeO2 catalysts via the wet impregnation methodology and studied the dioxide methanation reaction of Ni on nano polyhedron, nanorods and NPs.158 Among the various CeO2 morphologies, the Ni/CeO2-NR catalyst has the biggest area, and therefore the highest reducibility, affording excellent oxygen vacancy/oxygen storage capability (OSC). However, the SMSIs between Ni and metal on the Ni/CeO2-NR catalyst as determined by H2-TPR negatively affected the CO2 conversion at low temperatures. The Ni/CeO2-PH catalysts exhibited the best activity at 350 °C with a CO2 conversion of 57.7% and CH4 property of 97.5%. Wu et al. prepared a Pd–Fe3O4–H catalyst via oxidation and precipitation.159 With the production of SMSIs, the core–shell Pd–FeOx NPs recombine into Pd–Fe3O4–H with a singular porous shell structure, facilitating contact with the palladium. XAFS studies and DFT simulation confirmed that palladium atoms were inserted in the ferrous oxide matrix and formed sturdy interactions. This catalyst exhibited wonderful catalytic properties in the acetylene semi-chemical process, with 100% conversion and 85.1% ethene property at 80 °C. The transfer of electrons detected by CO drift and XPS indicates that the electron is transferred from palladium to the ferrous oxide shell, forming SMSIs.
Wen et al. prepared cerium compound nanospheres, spindles, and nanospheres via the hydrothermal methodology, and used the common impregnation methodology to anchor Pd NPs in 3 completely different morphologies of metallic element compound to prepare Pd/CeO2 catalysts.160 The results demonstrated that the Pd/CeO2 catalysts possessed an important structure–activity relationship, and the surface interaction of palladium with completely different CeO2 supports has unequal impacts on the surface oxygen vacancies, surface active oxygen and reducing ability of the Pd/CeO2 catalysts. The support between SMSIs increased the chemical action activity. Among these catalysts, Pd/CeO2-SP had the most effective catalytic activity for the oxidization of ethyl acetate (T90 = 180 °C, WHSV = 60000 mL g−1 h−1), which is attributed to the metal NPs and CeO2-SP support. A methionine-encapsulated CoFe carbon cube was synthesized by Lian et al. using Co–Fe Prussian Blue Analogue (PBA) as a catalyst (Fig. 14a–f).161 Through SMSIs, the essential amino acid coating provided a strong shell to inhibit the cube-shaped morphology of PBA from changing, which has proven to be quite beneficial in enhancing the surface area and exposure of active sites, resulting in excellent activity comparable to the important bifunctional ORR and OER references Pt/C and RuO2. The results showed that the optimized PB@Met-700 catalyst achieved important chemical action activity in both the ORR (E1/2 = 0.855 V) and OER (η10 = 1.56 V) compared with the benchmark Pt/C and RuO2, and the Tafel slope reduction dynamics were higher (Fig. 14g–i).
 Fig. 14  (a–c) SEM and (d–f) TEM images of Co–Fe PBA, PB@Met, and PB@Met-700, respectively. (g) CVs obtained in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. (h) RDE LSV curves at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (i) Corresponding Tafel slopes of (h).161 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. 
Additionally, in situ encapsulation and reduction methods were used by Chen et al. to synthesize SMSI nanomaterials based on hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) using sodium borohydride, sodium amide and noble metal salt as precursors.162 The as-prepared catalysts exhibited low thermal conductivity, high sintering resistance, and could be heated to 950 °C without losing their stability, and they exhibited a high performance during CO oxidation, even in the presence of water and hydrocarbons.
There are various types of catalysts that can be loaded with metal, and their morphology can affect the dispersion of the active metal, which can influence the catalysis. Ren et al. successfully synthesized hydrotalcite-derived Mg–Al supports with different morphologies by co-precipitation and loaded 20 wt% Ni by wet impregnation.163 The distinction in catalytic activity is due to the change in the morphology of the support, resulting in the distinction of the dispersion of the active metal. TOF calculations for all the catalysts demonstrated the high activity of Ni/HT-10. Additionally, Ni/HT-10 exhibited good stability within the long-run of 120 h. Besides, Siang et al. prepared a dendritic fiber X% Rh/FSA catalyst by microwave-assisted microemulsion and standard wet impregnation technique.164 FTIR measurements confirmed that Si–O–Rh were increased with an increase in Rh support, and combined with the H2-TPR results, the extent of MSIs doubled following the order of FSA < 0.5% Rh/FSA < 1% Rh/FSA < 1.5% Rh/FSA. The formation rate of methane is comparable to the formation trend of carbon dioxide conversion, which can result in the upper basic strength and increased MSIs of the Rh particles, promoting the surface absorption of carbon dioxide and lowering the activation barrier. Song et al. prepared two-dimensional platinum/oxide nanowire composite catalysts with cross-stacked Pt NW structures and compound (CoO2 or TiO2) nanowire structures by the solvent-aided nano transfer printing technique.165 The catalytic performance of the oxide substrates was greatly improved compared to Pt/CoO2NW or Pt NW, which is attributed to the loading impact and low bonding energy of the metal compound NWs loaded with metal atoms (Co and Ti) and oxygen atoms.
Furthermore, Liu et al. used UV pulsed lasers to in situ grow defective Al2O3−x-L (Ru–Al2O3−x-L) on aluminum foil for efficient photothermal CO2 methanation. The Al2O3−x-L flocculant effectively captured light and guaranteed light adsorption of Ru–Al2O3−x-L. The defects in Al2O3−x-L effectively anchored Ru.166 SMSI action is structured between the subminiature Ru NPs and Al2O3−x-L. Ru–Al2O3−x-L demonstrated extraordinary photothermal catalytic (CH4 yield 12.35 mol gRu−1 h−1) in a closed batch system. A microchannel catalyst was then integrated in the flow reactor, which was prepared with Ru–Al2O3−x-L. Owing to the partial pressure at the edge of the microchannel, the CH4 yield was further increased to 14.04 mol gRu−1 h−1. Finally, the open-air installation demonstrated the practicability of methanation of photothermal CO2 (CH4 yield of 18.00 mmol min−1). This work extends a new perspective for constructing multistage micro/nanostructured integrated catalysts for photothermal CO2 methanation.


4.1.4 Coating of metal clusters by carrier. 
By coating metal clusters with carriers, not only is the CMSIs are improved, but also more active sites are generated on the catalyst, which increase its stability and effectiveness. For example, Chen et al. prepared epitaxial Pd nanocrystals on SrTiO3(001) and anatase Ti(001) substrates by precipitation and oxidation under ultra-high vacuum conditions.167 The packaged crystal increased at a lower rate, suggesting that in the SMSIs method, high-energy interface structures are created between the particle and compound, which additionally ends up with smaller strain on the encapsulated particles. There is a reduction in the elastic strain energy of larger crystals, which is proportional to their volume, leading to SMSI. Then, Shi et al. used ALD ultrasonic chemical action (ultrasonic-assisted polyol synthesis, ultrasound-assisted polyol synthesis) technique to prepare Pd/NiO/C catalysts.168 According to the results, the uniform thin nickel oxide coating is superior to the patch-like thick nickel oxide coating. By altering the electronic structure of the interaction between Pd NPs and NiO and by providing a bifunctional surface around Pd NPs, Pd/NiO/C exhibited improved catalytic properties. Hong et al. synthesized TiO2@xCN composites via an easy hydrothermal impregnation technique and used them as carriers for cobalt-based linear unit catalysts.169 Because of the tough reducibility of cobalt, the initial linear unit activity of titanium-supported cobalt catalysts containing an excess quantity of spent carbon compound is lower compared to the non-promoted catalysts. The presence of the carbon compound layer stabilized the cobalt metal NPs and enhanced the stability of the catalyst during the FT reaction. Zhou et al. constructed a unique Ti/RuO2–IrO2@Pt anode by preparing Pt/Ru infrared compound catalysts by changing the microemulsion technique and electrode calcination method.170 The distinctive interaction between the platinum NPs and the RuO2–IrO2 capping layer yielded glorious benefits by enhancing the catalytic activity and stability and increasing the electron transport. The catalyst was employed for the degradation (99.30%) and mineralization (91.32%) of PFOA. Chen et al. used a photochemically driven technique to organize Pd/TiO2 catalysts. Once the TiO2-supported metal NPs were irradiated by UV radiation, the metal NPs were lined by a TiOx capping layer rich in Ti3+ and OV inside the framework.171 These properties worked synergistically to supply higher activity for the surface magnesium product. SMSI construction can be a key strategy to supply thermally strong catalysts in industrial catalysis. Chen et al. synthesized several core–shell structured Au@SiO2 catalysts by the soft template technique.172 By tuning the quantity of gold cores and the thickness of the oxide shell, they first reported the correlation between gold-based catalysts with a core–shell structure and the chemical change behavior of aldehyde. The results showed that each Au3+ shaped by mononucleate construction and Au+ shaped by multinuclear construction are active sites for the catalytic oxidation of aldehyde.
Coating of metal clusters by a carrier encourages stronger interactions. Zhao et al. prepared Cr-based samples via the wet impregnation methodology.173 Compared with silicon oxide supports, the CO2-TPD, FTIR and TG results indicated that the interface of the aluminum oxide supports was lined with thick hydroxyl groups, leading to stronger MSIs. Significantly, the MSIs play a vital role in the distribution, number, reducibility, and acidity and alkaline of chromium. Therefore, the xCr/AlO catalyst is superior to xCr/SiO in CH3SH conversion owing to the strong interaction of chromium and alumina carrier on the boundary. Chen et al. used the impregnation methodology to disperse Co2+ on Mn2P2O7, and consequently reconstruction of Co3O4/Mn2P2O7 occurred, forming a new MnP-3 load of Co2PNP in one step, and the package overlay (Co2PL/MnP-3) (Fig. 15a and b).174 They found a robust interaction between Co2PNPs and metal phosphate (Co2PL/MnP-3). A form of SMPSI arises when P is activated in the vector, resulting in the formation of metal phosphide NPs and the migration of the carrier concurrently. Smart acid and reaction resistance, together with overlay development and charge transfer between phosphides and phosphate carriers attest the benefits of SMPSIs. Hydrogenation on all the supports displayed 100% conversion and 100% property for the impregnated diacid of interest (Fig. 15c–h). Additionally, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a robust interaction between metal phosphides and phosphate carriers.
 Fig. 15  (a and b) Synthesis route of Co2PL/MnP-3 catalyst and formation process of SMPSIs. (c) FESEM image of Co2PL/MnP-3. (d) HAADF-STEM image and corresponding EDS elemental mappings of Co2PL/MnP-3. (e) STEM image of Co2PL/MnP-3. Lattice fringe seen area in (e1). (f) STEM image of MnP-3. (g) SAED pattern of the area in (f). (h) HAADF-STEM image and corresponding EDS elemental mappings of the local Co2P NPs.174 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. 
Metal clusters coated with supports have attracted considerable interest due to their unmatched physicochemical qualities, where the amount and size of metal particles should also be considered. Zhang et al. prepared an Au/TiO2 catalyst with an Au loading of 2 wt% by deposition–precipitation method.175 The Au–TiO2 SMSIs of ca AuNPs 5 nm seemed to be enhanced. The TiO2 planes show that Au–TiO2 SMSI are superior. The TiO2@x overlay made on AuNPs is Ti:O. The quantitative relation is about 6:11. The TiO2@x-Au interface wrapped in the AuNPs and the TiO2@x-Au interface wrapped within the TiO2@x-Au catalyst represent easier lattice element activation in catalyzing low-temperature CO oxidation compared to the Au–TiO2 interface that passes through the SMSIs. Wang et al. synthesized a Pt/BN catalyst with a target Pt loading of 0.5 wt% by impregnating h-BN with Pt(NH3)4(NO3)2 solutions.176 According to their study, the Pt/BN catalyst exhibited high coking resistance and gas property not only because the boron support has low acidity, but because of the SMSIs, leading to partly encapsulated platinum particle box coverage layer. As the research continues to deepen, Gesesse et al. prepared the SiO2@TiO2@Au system catalyst employing the plum-pudding strategy, and used an analogous methodology to synthesize the SMSI SiO2@Au@TiO2 system catalyst.177 Under UV illumination, electrons were injected from the AuNPs into the TiO2 capping layer, increasing the time of the SMSIs in the SiO2@Au@TiO2 system. The CMSIs between the AuNPs and TiO2 shells showed increased photoactivity with an optimum Au/TiO2 quantitative relation regarding 1 wt%. The size resulted in the classical SMSIs in Au/TiO2, in which larger Au particles were easier to encapsulate than small Au particles, as reported by Du et al.178 By selecting AuNPs encapsulated in larger shapes, the catalytic representation of Au/TiO2 catalysts with heterogeneous sizes will be enhanced. Han et al. prepared a unique MDR confinement catalytic (Ni/CeO2) @SiO2 by calcining at the same time to inhibit Ni clotting and carbon deposits.179 The results showed that the natural action of Ni size, Ni–CeO2 interactivity and Si restriction fully solved the matter of Ni calcining and carbon deposit reduction, and is extremely appropriate for different reactions in which sintering and carbon deposit occur. For mechanisms, Zhang et al. proposed a method to promote SMSI generation through a co-reduction mechanism, and a unique mechanism for generating SMSI through the co-reducing oxide interface on an Ru/TiO2 catalyst.180 By heightening the incineration temperature on the Ru/TiO2 catalyst, the formation of the RuxTi1−xO2 oxide interface phase can be easily increased, while increasing the overlay on the encapsulated metal ruthenium NPs of TiOx occurs in subsequent reduction at the interface of this oxide. By improving the SMSIs of the Ru/TiO2 catalyst, it could selectively generate CH4 with 100% efficiency during CO2 methanation. By means of the covalent chemical bonding effect, the active site of the catalyst is easily adapted to the characteristics of the support, and the metal and carrier undergo CMSIs, accompanied by morphological structure and a coating between the metal and the carrier, which promotes the catalytic activity and provides more active sites. Consequently, they lead to variations in the charge state of the catalyst, etc. in terms of its various coordinated circumstances on dissimilar carriers. Simultaneously, the CMSIs are adjusted by controlling the metal loading, particle size, particle size spacing, etc., for improving the metal utilization rate and catalytic performance.

4.2 EMSI
According to Campbell et al. (2012), EMSIs first emerged as a result of interactions between platinum and cerium.90 To explore the interaction in depth, they conducted DFT calculations and showed that metal oxide surfaces are redistributed by EMSIs. An important contribution of EMSIs is that they bridge the gap between studies of electronic theory and the design of heterogeneous catalysts.181 The interaction between metal and carrier can be exploited to improve the catalytic efficiency by exploiting their structural and synergistic effects.

4.2.1 Charge transfer. 
With the strong interaction between the metal NPs and the carrier, the electronic structure of the metal catalyst site can be controlled during heterogeneous catalysis. By utilizing EMSIs generated by charge transfer, theoretical calculations and the like may be applied to enhance the activity of the catalyst. Yang et al. proposed a catalyst designed by EMSIs, which was proven to be a reliable strategy for catalysts.182 They first performed density functional theory calculations to design an acceptable catalyst. The M1–M2–X (X = C, N, O) model was implemented throughout the calculation and the Rh1–TiC catalyst was prepared by wet impregnation. As one of the catalysts they selected, Rh1TiC has the EMSI Rh1–Ti2C2, which makes it best-suited for the HER. Experiments demonstrated the feasibility of the EMSI strategy via the catalytic potency of SACs of Rh1–TiC. The device achieved tiny overpotentials of 22 mV and 86 mV with current densities of 10 mA cm−2 and 100 mA cm−2 in acid media. The Tafel slope was 25 mV dec−1 and the mass activity was 54403.9 mA cm−2 mg−1 (in place of 192.2 mA cm−2 mg−1 Pt/C). Yang et al. synthesized monoclinic- and polygonal-shape zirconium oxide by co-precipitation.183 By combining in situ XPS experiments with theoretical studies, they discovered support-dependent methanol selectivity properties as a result of the SMSIs between In2O3 and monoclinic zirconium oxide (m-ZrO2). In2O3/m-ZrO2 was methanol-selective up to 84.6% and the CO2 conversion was 12.1%. DFT and XPS calculations confirmed that the negative charges of m-ZrO2 were transferred to In2O3, which led to the hydrogenation of the formic acid intermediate to methanol. Han et al. made use of the anchoring technique to anchor Ni clusters on the surface of 3 substrates (cerium compound, TiO2, and BNO).184 A transparent negative electron transfer occurred between BNO and an alkene during the catalytic hydrogenation of the alkene, where Ni4/TiO2 > Ni4/CeO2 > Ni4/BNO are the clusters that were produced. A study has shown that EMSIs between metal NPs and their support material are capable of modulating the support metal charge state and negative electron density, which both determine the activity of the catalyst. Baidya et al.185 reported a solution combustion technique to prepare Cu/CeO2 catalysts. The oxidoreduction properties of the copper species were considerably improved owing to the strong force with the CeO2 support. The Cu2+ species in Ce1−xCuxO2−δ were initially reduced, and then because of the reduced support, the electron transfer of the oxide part began to decrease. Absolutely, it was found that the Cu/CeO2 catalyst displayed a lot of CO adsorption compared to the physical mixture of ceria and oxide, indicating the presence of surface interactions in the Cu/CeO2 catalyst. Furthermore, Lin et al. prepared Pt/TiO2-VONPs catalysts by hydrogenation.186 By introducing EMSIs in defective TiO2-VO, negative electrons were transferred to Pt NPs, enhancing the density of negative electrons on the noble metal surface, increasing the photoreduction activity of CO2, and improving the property of alkane. Moreover, in this 8 h photoreaction, the EMSIs prevented stepwise loss of metal Pt0 and oxygen vacancies, thus delaying the catalyst deactivation. The optimized Pt/TiO2-VO exhibited a high quantum yield of 1.49% and high CH4 property (81%). Xie et al. synthesized an atomically spread gold catalyst supported on VO2(B) nanovolt for a solvothermal-assisted exfoliation technique, which may degrade ROPs expeditiously and stably.187 The significant inclination between Au and V drives electron transfer from V to Au. Sturdy EMSIs were established between the Au atoms and VO2(B) nanovolt scaffolds, which may speedily activate PDS to get sulfate-radicals to remove different ROPs (usually RhB, phenol, and BPA). The Au/VO2 catalyst with the optimized TOF of 21.42 min−1 for RhB degradation exhibited the most effective catalytic performance.
Furthermore, the charge transfer also can result in partial oxidization between the metal on the catalyst and the support, was reduced the density, etc., improving the chemical change stability. Liang et al.188 prepared NPAuLi3@NF via the electrodeposition method. Using first-principles calculations, it appears that theophylline originates from the Li-atom interactions with Au atoms in the AuLi3 part. The NPAuLi3@NF-based LMAs will operate stably for 1420 h at current densities of 1 and 2 mA cm−2 with a capability of 2 mA h−1 cm−2. Additionally, the Li@NPAuLi3@NF|LFP full cell maintained a decent 83.8% and a cerium of 99.8% for 1000 cycles at 5C, with smart rate capability. By hydrothermally immobilizing heterogeneous CoS/CoO crystals on Co-doped graphene, Tian et al.189 systematically designed a nanocomposite catalyst. DFT calculations showed that the Co sulfide/oxide interface effectively improved the conduction, and the surface coupling impact between CoS/CoO and n-doped graphene could create a catalyst with excellent stability. The ZAB solution of the prepared CoS/CoO@NGNs cathode featured the highest energy density of 137.8 mW cm−2, special capability of 723.9 mA h−1 g−1 and smart cycle stability (100 hours of continuous operation) with high cycle potential. Lin et al. synthesized a Pt/NGC catalyst via the anchoring methodology to boost EMSIs (Fig. 16a and b).190 Further verification of this was proven by the O2 temperature-programmed desorption results, which show a reduction in the electron density of the noble metal atoms on the surface as well as a weakening of the dipole impact between the noble metals and O2. Considering the accelerated, Pt/NGC demonstrated an ultra-low dissolution rate, which was only 1/3 of that of Pt/GC and 1/18 of that of commercial Pt, ORR activity and ECSA compared with Pt/GC and the Pt drop in In/C was negligible. The lowering of the energy barrier during initial relaxation is responsible for the suppression of noble metal dissolution on the Pt/NGC surfaces. It is incontestable that the utilization of EMSIs to weaken the dipole moment to boost the steadiness throughout electrochemical processes is feasible (Fig. 16c and d). In addition, using Pt/NGC for the ORR, E1/2 = 0.85 V at 0.1 M HClO4 (Fig. 16e) after 2000 cycles was achieved. Huang et al. synthesized Ru/d-BN catalysts through stirring, sonication, activity and transmutation processes.191 Atomic Ru was embedded on the B- and n-vacant gits, leading to overall charge transfer from Ru to d-BN, resulting in the segmental oxidization of Rud+ (3 ≤ δ ≤ 4) active species, indicating pronounced EMSIs. The interface between both the d-BN and Ru metal anchors Ru active sites enhances the catalytic activity and sintering performance of DMO hydrogenation flow for 100 h.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram of catalyst synthesis. (b) Comparison of NGC and GC support affecting Pt–O interaction. (c) DOS of C orbital in NGC and Pt/NGC. (d) Illustration of EMSIs between Pt and NGC. (e) ORR polarization curve of catalyst after 20000 cycles in 0.1 M HClO4 solution.190 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. 
SACs exhibit wonderful catalytic performances in heterogeneous catalytic reactions, and it is important to review the charge transfer between single atoms and substrates. Shi et al. synthesized different ce-TMD nanosheets (Pt–SAs/TMDs) by site-specific electrodeposition.192 Through the modulation of the Pt–H/Pt–OH interaction, the oxidation state of single-atom Pt affects its catalytic activity for the HER. This atomic-level comprehension of the structural–activity relationship contributes to additional understanding of alternative SAC reduction reactions that occur together with water decomposition or hydrogen adsorption/desorption steps in carbon dioxide reduction and nitrogen reduction reactions. The overpotential of Pt–SAs/MoSe2 in 1.0 M KOH was 29 mV at 10 mA cm−2, whereas that of Pt–SAs/WS2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 was 32 mV at 10 mA cm−2.
The different loadings of metals in the catalysts can have a significant influence on the charge transfer. Kuang et al. synthesized Pt NPs/MHCS employing a reported precipitate method with delicate heat treatment (Fig. 17a).193 Additionally, N doping resulted in heavy electron transfer, causing a robust EMSI impact between Pt atoms and NMHCS molecules (Fig. 17b–d). The experiments demonstrated that Pt1/NMHCS exhibited outstanding HER activity compared with the nitrogen-free Pt NPs/MHCS and 20 wt% Pt/C and the overwhelming at large sophisticated SACs. Specifically, Pt1/NMHCS showed an occasional overpotential of 40 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, outsized TOF value of 20.18 s−1 at 300 mV, and a mass activity of 2.07 mgPt−1 at over 50 mV potential (Fig. 17e–g). Furthermore, as a result of the robust EMSI impact in Pt1/NMHCS, the Pt1 single atoms remained isolated, whereas the Pt particles tended to agglomerate. Sun et al. synthesized Pt/CN composites with controllable interfaces by photoreduction deposition and oxidation, which exhibited outstanding carbon dioxide methanation performance.194 The distinctive interaction between Pt2+ and N atoms on Pt/CN suppresses the H2 evolution reaction through the presence of Pt2+, and promotes the transfer of electrons to chemical molecules to participate in the generation of alkane, which has achieved marvelous results. Also, 2%-Pt/CN methanation at 125 °C was 14.8 μmol g−1 h−1.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagram of catalyst preparation. (b) SEM images of the SiO2@PDA. (c and d) SEM and TEM images of the SiO2@NMC (c) and NMHCS (d). (e) Polarization curve and Tafel slope of catalyst. (f) Mass activity and overpotential histogram of catalyst. (g) Comparison between Pt1/NMHCS and other catalysts.193 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. 
The size of EMSIs caused by charge transfer is affected by temperature; moreover, alloying between the carrier and metal alloy NPs, promoting oxygen association. Roy and Kumar used ball milling to prepare Co/Mo2C catalysts, which have strong electronic supply capacity to dissociate nitrogen molecules.195 The activity of the Co/Mo2C catalyst under atmospheric pressure was higher than that of the different tested catalysts. At 520 °C and 1 bar, the activity of Co/Mo2C was calculated to be 11.73 μmol h−1 m−2. This is attributed to the sturdy base sites on the surface of Co/Mo2C, which offer additional electrons to take up nitrogen molecules and facilitate the fission of NN. Compared with Fe/Mo2C, this sturdy electron transfer ability of Co/Mo2C additionally reduces the energy needed for ammonia synthesis. Sun et al. prepared an AgxPd(10−x)/TiO2 catalyst via the wet impregnation method.196 Ag2Pd8/TiO2-M-450 catalyzed dehydrogenation at 60 °C with a TOF value of 2579 h, which was attributed to the low crystallinity of the anatase structure and the large area of the titania support present in the catalyst. Specifically, AgPd-NP represents the alloy and facilitates electron transfer between the carrier and metal alloy NPs. He et al. used a low-temperature solid reduction methodology to prepare low-load Pd (i.e., Pd/TiO2 and reduced Pd/TiO2 [Pd/TiO2-R]) catalysts.197 The reduced titania formed negatively charged palladium NPs by transferring electrons from the carrier to Pd, which considerably induces EMSIs and promotes oxygen association. Meanwhile, compared with the pristine TiO2, reduced TiO2 provides additional anchoring sites and electron-rich sites, significantly increasing the dispersion and reduction degree of Pd. The Pd/TiO2-R catalyst showed an HCHO conversion of 100% at 100 ppm HCHO, WHSV 120000 mL g−1 h−1, 30 °C.


4.2.2 Bonding between metals. 
Intermetallic bonds in heterogeneous catalysis are related to electronic interactions, and the positive effects dramatically enhance their activity for catalytic applications. Nowadays, many studies use metal substrates as carriers to study the M–M interaction (i.e., EMSIs) of adjacent different metal atoms. Most of them use active elements such as Pd, Ru, Rh and Mo to load on selective and inert metals or metal oxides.198 This is mainly because the M–M bond has a higher level of d orbital overlap. Song et al. prepared Pt–Co(OH)2/SiO2 catalysts by the wet impregnation method,182 and demonstrated the EMSIs between Pt NPs and Co(OH)2 sheets by in situ diffuse reflection infrared Fourier transformations spectroscopy (DRIFTS) and XAFS technology, revealing the formation of Pt–Co intermetallic bonds, electron transfer from Co to Pt, and the negative charge of Pt atoms lowered the d-band center and weakened CO adsorption, resulting in a significant enhancement in catalytic activity.
Moderate temperature treatment will promote the charge transfer between metals or metal oxides, and the increase in active electrons will also promote the formation of metal bonds. Zhang et al. found that when the heat treatment temperature was 200 °C, the charge of partially reduced ZnO will be transferred to Rh, which may be attributed to the EMSIs between Rh and ZnO.57 Simultaneously, an increase in the number of electrons at the active site promotes the formation of metal bonds with the reactant, which ultimately improves the efficiency and selectivity of the catalyst.


4.2.3 Special morphology. 
The special morphological structure formed by the catalyst is affected by factors such as the temperature to a certain extent. The stability and activity shown during the catalytic process are attributed to the EMSIs, which may limit or promote the formation of the morphology. Zhao et al. successfully synthesized NiFe-MS/MOF@NF via a one-step solvothermal method. It had a vertically arranged nanosheet structure. The catalyst prepared by in situ growth of metal sulfide clusters on NF exhibited positive HER activity and OER activity in alkaline solution.199 It demonstrated vital catalytic activity and stability for the OER (η = 230 mV, 50 mA cm−2) and HER (η = 156 mV, 50 mA cm−2) in basic media. The existence of metal sulfide clusters plays an important role. This is because they contribute to the formation of ultra-thin MOF nanosheets and enhance the overall conductivity of the catalyst. Among them, sulfide clusters can well adjust the adsorption energy on the active oxygen sites of O-containing intermediates during the formation of amorphous hydroxides in situ, which can improve their catalytic performance. Wu et al. prepared an MgO-supported Co catalyst using the impregnation method, which fashioned sensible and stable Co NPs throughout the reduction method, and this was attributed to EMSIs and the electrostatic stability of the Co–MgO interface.200 The supported metal NPs on the oxide substrate act as a reasonable catalyst for the expansion of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT), which are hindered by particle coarsening at high synthesis temperatures. Extremely stable Co NPs through CO disproportion lead to the growth of (6, 5) SWCNT predominantly at 700 °C, and therefore the predominant SWCNT species found to be (7, 5) SWCNT at the reaction temperature of 800 °C (Fig. 18a).
 Fig. 18  (a) Changes in Raman spectra, UV Vis NIR absorption spectra and PL emission of the catalysts prepared under different conditions with excitation wavelength.200 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) HRTEM image of catalysts.201 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. 


4.2.4 Coating of metal clusters by carrier. 
EMSIs occur between the supported metal and the capping layer, which change each of the active sites and active intermediates. Additionally, there is a synergistic impact between the metal particles and the capping layer. Wang et al. prepared Au/MgO-Cx, Au/MgO-con and Au/MgCO3 catalysts by the deposition technique, impregnation technique and oxidation method, respectively.202 CO2-induced SMSIs were incontestable in the MgO-loaded gold NPs and supported Le Chatelier's Principle. Recently, the development of EMSIs has been increasing rapidly. They can be used for the formation of magnesium-covered gold NPs, the strong interaction between metal and carrier, and the stability of CO oxidation activity.203
Furthermore, Lai et al. successfully prepared an excellent H–PtCo@Pt1N–C supported catalyst with the participation of Pt salt in the coordination of methylimidazole anion with cobalt cation.204 Due to the synergistic effect between the hollow PtCo alloy core and the Pt SA/N co-doped C shell, the H–PtCo@Pt1N–C catalyst exhibited stable ORR in HClO4 at 0.9 V for an extended time for 10000 cycles with no weakening and in organic electrolytes. Zhang et al. prepared a Pd/TiC catalyst employing a novel time-dependent mechanical ball edge technique for precise tuning of the EMSI.201 On the Pd/TiC catalyst ball mill with a high starting potential for 6 h, the high property of ORR to H2O2 was maintained for more than 90 cycles (0.877 V versus RHE) inside the potential window of 0.1–0.7 V versus RHE and greatly improved durability. Spectroscopic and theoretical studies revealed the underlying cause, showing strong electronic interactions between the supported metal and the reduced oxide capping layer, which ultimately led to the density of states of the site and the changed adsorption energy toward the reactive intermediate (Fig. 18b).
The catalytic performance of EMSI was promoted by adjusting the catalyst loading, particle size and spacing. In addition, a catalytic reaction is affected by the EMSI effect, which happens when metal particles transfer their charges to the support in the catalyst. Electrons can be transferred between the supported metal and the support, as well as the electronic state of both the support and the metal can be adjusted, and the reduction of the reaction intermediates optimized. The EMSI effect plays a vital role in the dispersion and stability of metal particles.205 In addition, this effect influences the electronic structure of the carrier metal, d-band center and the adsorption energy of the intermediates during the reaction,206,207 generally leading to excellent catalytic activity.

5. Other interactions
5.1 WMSI
Compared with SMSIs, WMSIs have less intensity and narrower scope of action, but their application cannot be ignored. WMSIs can be constructed by changing the morphology and structure of the carrier to improve the heterogeneous catalytic performance. For example, Sun et al. successfully synthesized Pt/Ti4O7-(5, 10, 20) with different loadings (Pt and Ti4O7 were 0.05, 0.1, and 0.2, respectively) using an improved polyol technique.208 The uniformly distributed Pt NPs showed different morphologies, with Pt/Ti4O7-5 being rod-like and Pt/Ti4O7-10 and Pt/Ti4O7-20 being approximately spherical. The lattice distortions and dislocations in the high-loading samples imply WMSIs. In this regard, Wang et al. prepared a catalyst by wet impregnation. The nickel ions supported in the catalyst will preferentially occupy the γ-tetrahedral vacancy of the Al2O3 carrier, whereas WMSIs were found in the γ-Al2O3 support, indicating an attainable mechanism to clarify the various morphologies and different MSIs.209 As observed in the κ-Al2O3 carrier. Once redundant hydrogenation sites were present, the Ni/γ-Al2O3 catalyst with SMSIs had a higher isoprene conversion, higher stability and lower property. The weak interaction encompasses a positive impact on the formation of coke, which is especially associated with hydrogenolysis, resulting in a higher property for monoolefin within the main reaction and a marked decrease in isoprene conversion. Anchoring platinum catalysts on suitable carriers, such as MXenes,210 is a viable way to achieve ideal anodes for direct methanol fuel cells. A number of factors affect the catalytic activity of platinum, including its occupation of active sites, poisoning, weak interactions with carriers, and dissolution. Zhu et al. constructed three-dimensional crinkled Ti3C2Tx MXene spheres with abundant Ti vacancies to confine platinum by spray drying.211 The Pt cluster/Ti3C2Tx (Ptc/Ti3C2Tx) catalyst had a low over potential, high tolerance to CO poisoning and high stability, showing good electrocatalytic methanol oxidation reaction (MOR) activity.
The weak interaction is additionally affected by the loading level, temperature and size impact, which suggests that the interaction is monitored by adjusting these factors to attain the aim of enhancing the activity and stability of the catalyst. Yahya and Amin improved the catalytic performance of palm shell-based activated carbon (AC) catalyst by using hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and Ni, Co support.212 H2O2-modified AC possesses increased surface chemical reaction practical groups and ultra-micropores, resulting in extremely dispersed active metal sites with uniform distribution and high acidity after Ni–Co impregnation. Among the catalysts, 10% Ni–10% Co/ACP had the highest catalytic activity, with 93.8% H2 yield and 90.2% toluene conversion, with a stability of 325 h. This can be attributed to the higher turnover frequency and smaller grain size, WMSIs and synchronal Ni single bond Co reducibility. WMSIs can result in the formation of carbon nanotubes with a tip growth mechanism, and can effectively inhibit catalyst deactivation. Yang et al. prepared two different types of Pt/CeO2 catalysts by a surfactant-assisted strategy for CO and toluene oxidation (Fig. 19a).213 The results showed that the synthesized Pt/CeO2–NH catalyst is beneficial for the oxidation of toluene, while the comparative Pt/CeO2-AH was favorable for the oxidation of CO. Simultaneously, the Pt/CeO2–NH catalyst had good thermal stability at a high temperature (such as 400 °C) (Fig. 19b–e). Different characterization techniques elucidated that the Pt/CeO2–NH catalyst possessed a higher surface Pt0 ratio, WMSI and more oxygen vacancies. Ratkovic et al. prepared two catalysts by calcining, and completely different degrees of WMSIs determined their different single behaviors.214 When calcining Fe/Al2O3 samples, WMSIs caused the metal particles to become thin and join when they are reduced or used, eventually forming giant particles with sizes surpassing the micromillimeter scale. These particles result in very poor activity and property in CNT growth, additionally to being deactivated by graphene layer deposition. Alternatively, the Fe–Ni/Al2O3 catalyst samples developed a special degree of interaction when calcining, thus maintaining the best size of metal particles stable throughout the subsequent steps of their reduction. Kumar et al. synthesized Ni/Al2O3, Ni/TiO2, Ni/SBA-15 and Ni/MgO catalysts by wet impregnation.215 By controlling the oxidization temperature of the catalyst, the strength of the MSIs was different. The formation of metal-supported compound catalysts at higher reaction temperatures resulted in stronger MSIs, whereas the nickel oxide species at the positioning of SBA-15 and the underlying MgO resulted in stronger MSI for Ni/SBA-15 and Ni/MgO, severally. For the catalysts with Ni/TiO2, Ni/MgO, and Ni/SBA-15, a significant and sophisticated relationship was found between the MSI strength and activity, where the weaker the MSI, the higher the initial alkane series, carbonic acid gas, and water conversion.
 Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis route of Pt/CeO2 catalyst. (b) Thermal stability of toluene oxidation at different temperatures. (c) Pt 4f XPS spectra of Pt/CeO2–NH and Pt/CeO2–AH catalysts. TEM images of (d) Pt/CeO2–NH and (e) Pt/CeO2–AH catalysts.213 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 
5.2 MMSIs
MMSIs are a force between WMSIs and SMSIs, which are expressed as the interaction between metals in zeolite channels. This can be seen from the bonding between metals, for instance, Jia et al. used pyrolysis and in-line catalysis to convert plastic into value-added CNTs.81 The result showed that the decreasing order of nickel catalyst activity was Ni/La, Ni/Sr, Ni/Mg, which was closely associated with the degree of metal compatibility interaction. The sturdy metal organic compound port interaction within the Ni/Mg catalyst is not responsible for the dissolution of a large quantity of metal Ni, leading to a low yield of carbon nanotubes. Alternatively, weaker metal interactions in Ni/Sr do not seem to be conducive to high coverage of Ni NPs, resulting in the coincident growth of carbon nanorods and carbon nanotubes. Because of the optimization of the amount, size, and surface coverage of Ni NPs, the Ni/La catalysts with moderate metal–compatible interactions produced the best CNT yields.
As the research continues to deepen, we know that one of the reasons for the increase in oxygen vacancies is the enhanced transfer of active electrons, and MMSIs are also generated. Grabchenko et al. synthesized Ad/CeO2 catalysts with varying degrees of MSIs for the oxidation of CO at low temperatures and the combustion of soot at low temperatures. The enhanced MSIs increased the number of oxygen vacancies and the extent of cerium reduction, leading to higher catalytic activity in soot combustion and CO oxidation.80 Gao et al. also observed a similar phenomenon. They believed that the excellent activity and stability of the Ru/Mn6Ce1OY catalyst were attributed to the strong interaction between the Ru metal and Mn6Ce1OY support, which led to the aerobic oxidation of 2,5-furanedicarboxylic acid by 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF).216 Contrary to the above experimental results, Ni/Y2O3 catalysts with MMSIs converted to better activity and stability in the CO2 methanation reaction. Also, the catalysts with WMSIs showed poor stability, while that with SMSIs had poor activity.217 According to Jiang et al., for the methane triple reaction, neither strong nor WMSIs were beneficial for the performance of Ni/MgxTi1−xO catalysts. MMSIs contributed the most to the high stability of the catalysts.218
In summary, we discussed MSIs based on three aspects, i.e., WMSIs, MMSIs and SMSIs, and discussed the importance of MSIs in the fields of chemistry and materials from the morphology and structure of the carrier, the loading capacity of metal particles, the grain size of metal particles and the reduction temperature of metal particles. It is particularly important to understand and use MSIs with different strengths more deeply. We often start with their influencing factors. For example, different reduction temperatures will generally make the carrier package or wrap metal or metal oxide to different degrees, and relatively high reduction temperatures will produce SMSIs. Here, we collected a lot of information about MSI applications, which is shown in Table 1. The chart shows the applications of different MSIs in the HER, OER, ORR, CO2RR, CO2 methanation, etc., and lists the relevant experimental methods and conditions, as well as the corresponding performance. Unlike the in-depth research and extensive application of SMSIs, the scope of application and mechanism of WMSIs and MMSIs still need further exploration.
Table 1 Comparison of catalytic performances of various heterogeneous catalysts under the action of MSIs




Types of MSI
Catalyst
Applications
Methods
Work Conditions
Performances
Ref.




CMSI
Pt–TiN(C)
HER
Gas-phase synthesis
0.5 M H2SO4
31 mV@10 mA cm−2

219



CMSI
W/PdGa
HER
Hydrothermal and calcination
0.5 M H2SO4
42 mV@10 mA cm−2

220



CMSI
RuMo2C@CNT
HER
Solid-phase microwave pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
15 mV@10 mA cm−2

221



CMSI
IrRu/T90G10
OER
Ultrasonic spray pyrolysis
0.1 M HClO4
54 mV@10 mA cm−2

222



CMSI
11.0 wt% Ir/ATO
OER
A hydrothermal method
0.1 M H2SO4
1100 A gIr−1@1.45 V vs. RHE

127



CMSI
NiFe@N-CFs
OER
Delignin-impregnation-carbonization
0.1 M KOH
300 mV@10 mA cm−2

149







ORR





E
1/2 = 0.82 V




CMSI
PdNi/Ni@N–C
OER
Anchoring
0.1 M KOH
360 mV@10 mA cm−2

223







ORR





E
1/2 = 0.89 V




CMSI
HsGDY/Cu3Pd-750
ORR

In situ growth
1 M KOH
0.870 V@57.7 mA cm−2

112



CMSI
PB@Met-700
ORR
Pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH

E
1/2 = 0.855 V

161



CMSI
Pt/MFO/NPC
ORR
Solvothermal method
0.1 M KOH

E
1/2 = 0.835 V

153



CMSI
PTO-Vo-H/C
ORR
Hydrothermal and atomic layer deposition (ALD)
0.1 M HClO4

E
1/2 = 0.87 V

124



CMSI
Pt/TiO2@CNT
ORR
a sol–gel process
0.1 M HClO4

E
1/2 = 0.927 V

154



CMSI
SnO2/NSC
CO2RR
A molecular engineering strategy
0.5 M KHCO3
56.0 mA cm−2@1.15 V (vs. RHE)

105



CMSI
Bi/Gr
CO2RR
Hydrothermal method
0.5 M KHCO3
28.1 mA cm−2@1.17 V (vs. RHE)

147



CMSI
Ni/La2O2CO3
CO2 methanation
Incipient wetness impregnation
30 °C, 20000 h−1 GHSV
CO2 conversion of 85%

109



CMSI
Ni/HT-10
CO2 methanation
Wet impregnation, co-precipitation
400 °C
CO2 conversion of 83.5%

163



CMSI
Ni–Mg/SBA-15
CO2 methanation
Wet impregnation method and ammonia evaporation method (AE)
400 °C
CO2 conversion of 55.3%

157



CMSI
Co/MnO@PGC
CO2 methanation
One-step pyrolysis
160 °C
High STYCH4 of 0.14 μmol CH4 s−1 gcat−1

224



CMSI
Pt/CeO2(111)
CO2 methanation
Microwave-assisted sol–gel method, wet impregnation
350 °C
CO2 conversion of 54.5%

138













CH4 conversion of 100%




CMSI
Ni/CeO2-PH
CO2 methanation
Wet impregnation
350 °C
CO2 conversion of 57.7%

158













CH4 selectivity of 97.5%




CMSI
25 wt% Ni–5 wt% CeO2–Al2O3
CO2 methanation
Ultrasonic-assisted co-precipitation
350 °C
CO2 conversion of 76.4%

225













CH4 selectivity of 99.1%




CMSI
Ni/Al2O3-750
Dry reforming of methane
Wet impregnation
750 °C
CH4 conversions of 89.8%

106













CO2 conversions of 92.9%




CMSI
Ag/CeO2 (red-imp)
CO oxidation
Impregnation, co-deposition precipitation
100 °C
CO conversion of 50%

80



CMSI
Pd/Fe2O3–H2-100
CO oxidation
Adsorption method
150 °C
CO conversion of 93.2%

226



CMSI
Pt/TiO2–H250
CO adsorption
Hydrothermal method

T = 40 °C, P = 3 bar
The conversation of 83.4%

51



CMSI
Pd0.8Au0.2/UiO-66-D
Dehydrogenation of formic acid
Double solvent impregnation
333 K
FA conversion of 100%

101



CMSI
Pd-modified Ni NWs
Methanol oxidation reaction (MOR)
Wet chemical reduction
0.5 M KOH + 0.5 M ethanol
Mass activity of 1479.79 mA mg−1

150



CMSI
Pt/NCB-10
Methanol oxidation reaction (MOR)
Hummer's method
0.5 M H2SO4
The ECSA value of 76.3 m2 g−1

104



CMSI
FeNi-MOFNSs
Urea oxidization reaction (UOR)
A one-step hydrothermal method
1 M KOH
131 mV@10 mA cm−2

100



CMSI
1 wt% Pt/ZrO2
Toluene oxidation reaction (TOR)
Impregnation
150 and 155 °C

E
a = 129 kJ mol−1

122



CMSI
MnFeO-CNTs/PMS
Peroxymonosulfate (PMS) activation
Hydrothermal method
PH = 7.0, 25 °C
The kobs for SMX degradation of 11.4 × 10−2 min−1

152



CMSI
Pd0.34Ga1 NPs
Propyne semi-hydrogenation (PSH)
Well-established wet impregnation
30 °C and atmospheric pressure
Propylene selectivity of 98.2%, propylene conversion of 96.6%

128



CMSI
5 wt% Pt/WOx/γ-Al2O3
Glycerol hydrogenolysis reaction
Wet impregnation
Addition of WOx
Glycerol conversion of 35.8%

120



CMSI
2.5% Si@PtGa/Al2O3
Propane dehydrogenation (PDH)
Incipient wetness impregnation
450 °C
Acrylic yield 0.5 mol gcat−1 h

123



CMSI
80 wt% Fe–20 wt% Ce0.8Sm0.2O2−δ
Production of ammonia
Precipitation
450 °C
8.7 mmol g−1 h−1@1 MPa, and 12.3 mmol g−1 h−1@3 MPa

114



CMSI
Pt/h-BN
Sulfur removal of DBT
Anchoring
130 °C (TOF = 15.33 h−1)
Sulfur removal of DBT reached 98.3%

116



CMSI
Au/In2O3
CO2 hydrogenation to methanol
Deposition–precipitation
Below 225 °C
The methanol selectivity reaches 100%

227



CMSI
Ru–MoO3
CO2 hydrogenation reaction
Encapsulated metal NPs
250 °C
CO selectivity of 99.0%

228



CMSI
Pd–Fe3O4–H
Semi-hydrogenation of acetylene
Calcination and precipitation
80 °C
Acetylene conversion of 100%

159













Acetylene selectivity of 85.1%




CMSI
Ti/RuO2–IrO2@Pt
Decomposing perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA)
Modified microemulsion method and electrode calcination method
1 M H2SO4, 40 °C
The PFOA degradation of 99.30%

170













PFOA mineralization of 91.32%




CMSI
Ru@SiO2
Dry reforming of methane (DRM)
An inverse microemulsion
700 °C
CH4 and CO2 conversions of 75% and 76%

229



CMSI
Au@SiO2
HCHO catalytic oxidation
Soft template method
500 ppm, 15000 mL g−1 h−1
HCHO conversion/removal of 100%

172



CMSI
Co2PL/MnP-3
Hydrogenation of levulinic acid (LA)
The impregnation method
110 °C, 3 MPa H2, 3.5 h (LA), 90 °C, 2.5 MPa H2, 5 h (benzaldehyde), 120 °C, 3.5 MPa H2, 8 h (glucose)
100.0% conversion of and 100% selectivity of γ-valerolactone, benzyl alcohol, and sorbitol

174



CMSI
Au0.5Pd@Co3O4
The selective oxidation
Calcination
90 °C
95% yield of HMF to FDCA of 95%

230



CMSI
Pd/CeO2-SP
Ethyl acetate oxidation
Hydrothermal method
WHSV = 60000 mL g−1 h−1, T90 = 180 °C

S
BET of 78.3 m2 g−1

160



EMSI
SACs of Rh1–TiC
HER
Wetness impregnation
0.5 M H2SO4
22 mV@10 mA cm−2

182



EMSI
Pt–SAs/MoSe2
HER
Site-specific electrodeposition
1.0 M KOH
29 mV@10 mA cm−2

124





Pt–SAs/WS2




0.5 M H2SO4
32 mV@10 mA cm−2




EMSI
PtNP/MHCS
HER
Pre-precipitation
0.5 M H2SO4
40 mV@10 mA cm−2

193



EMSI
NiMo/Ti3C2Tx
HER
A wet chemical method
1.0 M KOH
HER current density of 10 mA cm−2@0.044 V

135







HOR




HOR current density of 1.5 mA cm−2@0.1 V




EMSI
NiFe-MS/MOF@NF
OER
A simple one-step solvothermal reaction
1 M KOH
230 mV@50 mA cm−2

199







HER




156 mV@50 mA cm−2




EMSI
H–PtCo@Pt1N–C
ORR
Stirring, centrifugation, drying, annealing
0.1 M HClO4

E
1/2 = 0.9V

204



EMSI
2%-Pt/CN
CO2 methanation
Photoreduction deposition and calcination
125 °C
CH4 rate of 14.8 μmol g−1 h−1

194



EMSI
In2O3/m-ZrO2
CO2 hydrogenation to methanol
Co-precipitation
280 °C
Methanol selectivity of 84.6%, CO2 conversion of 12.1%

183



EMSI
NPAuLi3@NF
Lithium plating/stripping
Electrodeposition
1000 cycles
Coulombic efficiency of 99.8%

188



EMSI
Co/Mo2C
Ammonia synthesis
Ball milling
520 °C and 1 bar
Specific activity of 11.73 μmol h−1 m−2

195



EMSI
Ag2Pd8/TiO2–M-450
FA dehydrogenation
Wet impregnation
60 °C
TOF value of 2579 h

196



EMSI
Pd/TiO2-R
Formaldehyde oxidation
Low-temperature solid reduction
100 ppm HCHO, 50% RH, WHSV 120000 mL gcat−1 h−1, 30 °C
HCHO conversion of 100%

197



EMSI
Pt/TiO2-VO
CO2 reduction

In situ hydrogenation
700 °C
CH4 selectivity of 81%

186



EMSI
Au/VO2
The degradation of recalcitrant organic pollutants (ROPs)
a one-step solvothermal-assisted exfoliation
15 M Na2S2O8
TOF of 21.42 min−1 for RhB degradation

187



EMSI
Pt/MgAl2O4
Dehydrogenation activity
Incipient wetness impregnation
230 °C
Electrons of naphthalene: Pt10/MAO (0.62 e−) < Pt10/CNF (0.83 e−)

99



EMSI
Pd/TiC
Electrosynthesis of H2O2
Ball milling
6 h
H2O2 selectivity of 90%

201



WMSI
10% Ni–10% Co/ACP
Activated carbon (AC)
Wet impregnation method
700 °C
H2 yield of 93.8%, toluene conversion of 90.2%

212





6. Summary and outlook
In summary, heterogeneous catalysts have been developed rapidly, which has highlighted the importance of the fundamental interaction force between various metal supports. The MSIs will not only be effectively explained by charge transfer, metal-to-metal bonding, special topographical structure and coating of metal clusters by carriers, but also the improved dominant metal loading, metal size, temperature, etc. At present, diverse supports have been developed, together with carbon-based materials and non-carbon-based materials. Metals or metal oxides are anchored on the supports in numerous coordination and process ways, benefitting from the variations fashioned between them. An essential element that boosts the stability and activity of chemical reactions is the interaction force between the metal supports. In addition, a mixture of theoretical style and experiments are also projected to accelerate the catalytic applications of MSIs in the OER, HER, ORR, UOR, MOR, CO2RR, etc. Despite the progress made in applying SMSIs in advance carrier materials, further analysis is required; nevertheless, MSIs are used for a variety of applications, and future analysis directions are projected.
Firstly, advances in preparation methods and treatment methods are being considered to broaden the variety and possibilities of catalyst preparation and MSI generation methods. The innovation of preparation methods and treatment methods focus on innovative thinking, according to previous methods, combined with new methods, and further exploration of MSI of catalysts. At present, there are many commonly used methods, such as impregnation, hydrothermal and precipitation methods, and new methods, such as magnetron sputtering on carbon fiber cloth (CFC) are necessary. Wang et al. synthesized FeCoNiCuPd films with an underlying core-cubic (FCC) structure for alkaline oxygen and hydrogen evolution reactions, achieving excellent results.231
Secondly, a variety of factors, such as metal load, size, and temperature, can be controlled to achieve precise MSI control in heterogeneous catalysis. In heterogeneous catalytic materials, factors such as the level of metal loading, the size of metal particles, and the optimal reaction temperature corresponding to the catalytic material will have an effect on the strength of MSIs. The purpose of studying MSIs is to better apply and materials, how to accurately control the size of its force has become particularly important, which has important future research value for whether MSIs can develop by leaps and bounds. At present, there are relatively few reports about WMIs and MMSIs. We know that not all MSIs that promote catalytic performance are as strong as possible. Finding suitable MSIs can not only improve the catalytic performance, but also greatly improve our efficiency in synthesizing effective catalysts and our understanding of the mechanism.
Thirdly, further exploration of the mechanisms of MSI in heterogeneous catalysis. Since SMSIs were proposed in 1978, great strides have been made in the study of the mechanism of strong interactions between metal carriers. With the rapid development of the modern scientific and technological levels, both the means of representation and theoretical research are steadily advancing. The structural information and characteristics of the catalytic material itself are explained, and then the content implied in the material is explained by text and three-dimensional model. At present, the representation methods are becoming more abundant, such as in situ XRD, FTIR and in situ Raman spectroscopy,232 which is of great meaning for the in-depth exploration of the MSI mechanism. To date, the causation between the encapsulation reaction and the charge transfer is not clear and the boundaries of the type of catalyst that MSIs can form need further exploration.
Finally, strengthening the wide applications of MSIs in more heterogeneous chemical fields. The significance of scientific research is very university-level in being able to put it into practice and benefit the human public. At present, MSIs have been used for a long time in many heterogeneous chemical directions, such as OER, HER, ORR, CO2RR, UOR and MOR, but there are many directions that need to be expanded. For example, materials science,233 electronics,234 environment,37 and aerospace.235 In the field, the application of MSIs has also received the attention of many engineers and researchers around the world. It is of great importance to use the MSI effect to develop more catalyst performance regulation strategies and expand their application areas.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by National Nature Science Foundation of China (Nos. 51864024, 21862011) and the Fund of the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Comprehensive Utilization of Platinum Metals (CXHZ-2021-0101).
References
J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 14–18 RSC .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 28–41 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Z. Pei, H. Li, Z. Wang, Q. Xue and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8344–8364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Wang, L. Wang, S. Ali, C. Wang, L. Wang, X. Meng, B. Li, D. S. Su and F.-S. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2975–2983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, M.-H. Liu, Y.-C. Luo, C.-Y. Mou, S. D. Lin, H. Cheng, J.-M. Chen, J.-F. Lee and T.-S. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10251–10258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dong, Q. Fu, H. Li, J. Xiao, B. Yang, B. Zhang, Y. Bai, T. Song, R. Zhang, L. Gao, J. Cai, H. Zhang, Z. Liu and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17167–17174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Han, Y. Guo, Y. Huang, W. Xi, J. Xu, J. Luo, H. Qi, Y. Ren, X. Liu, B. Qiao and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11824–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. K. Rideal, Nature, 1948, 161, 461–462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tauster, S. C. Fung and R. L. Garten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 170–175 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Hu, Z. Hong, Y. Song and H. Jang, Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, Elsevier,  1983, vol. 17, pp. 53–62. Search PubMed .
S. Bonanni, K. Aït-Mansour, W. Harbich and H. Brune, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3445–3450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, W. Xu, Y. Niu, B. Zhang, L. Zheng, W. Liu, L. Li and J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Willinger, W. Zhang, O. Bondarchuk, S. Shaikhutdinov, H.-J. Freund and R. Schlögl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5998–6001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lei, X. Li, C. Sun, J. Zeng, S. S. Siwal and Q. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1804722 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Snider, V. Streibel, M. A. Hubert, T. S. Choksi, E. Valle, D. C. Upham, J. Schumann, M. S. Duyar, A. Gallo, F. Abild-Pedersen and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3399–3412 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, X. Yu and S. Wang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16103 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, L. Xu, L. Huang, W. He, H. Li, S. Wang, Z. Long and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 11151–11161 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gai, N. Zhu, S. K. Hoekman, Z. Liu, W. Jiao and N. Peng, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 183, 474–484 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshitake and Y. Iwasawa, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 1329–1334 CrossRef CAS .
E. I. Adadurov, J. Phys. Chem., 1935, 6, 206 Search PubMed .
G.-M. Schwab, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1950, 8, 166 RSC .
S. Peng, R. Li, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang, J. Cao and S. Lee, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 600, 154056 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Tauster, Acc. Chem. Res., 1987, 20, 6 CrossRef .
Q. Fu and T. Wagner, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2007, 62, 431–498 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Burch, Z. Paal and P. G. Menon, Hydrogen Effects in Catalysis, Dekker, New York,  1988 Search PubMed .
X. Du, Y. Huang, X. Pan, B. Han, Y. Su, Q. Jiang, M. Li, H. Tang, G. Li and B. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tang, F. Liu, J. Wei, B. Qiao, K. Zhao, Y. Su, C. Jin, L. Li, J. J. Liu, J. Wang and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 10764–10769 CrossRef .
H. Tang, J. Wei, F. Liu, B. Qiao, X. Pan, L. Li, J. Liu, J. Wang and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 56–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tang, Y. Su, Y. Guo, L. Zhang, T. Li, K. Zang, F. Liu, L. Li, J. Luo, B. Qiao and J. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6679–6684 RSC .
H. Tang, Y. Su, B. Zhang, A. F. Lee, M. A. Isaacs, K. Wilson, L. Li, Y. Ren, J. Huang, M. Haruta, B. Qiao, X. Liu, C. Jin, D. Su, J. Wang and T. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700231 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, C. Cheng, M. Jin, J. He, H. Zhang, W. Ren, J. Li, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., 2022, 134(33), e202207268 Search PubMed .
X.-F. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, L. Wang, U. J. Etim, Y. Song, O. M. Gazit and Z. Zhong, J. Catal., 2022, 413, 284–296 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. van Deelen, C. Hernández Mejía and K. P. de Jong, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 955–970 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, J. Liu, X. Liu, Z. Gao, N. Rui, S. Yao, F. Zhang, M. Wang, C. Liu, L. Han, F. Yang, S. Zhang, X. Wen, S. D. Senanayake, Y. Wu, X. Li, J. A. Rodriguez and D. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 6978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jiang, M. Jing, X. Feng, J. Xiong, C. He, M. Douthwaite, L. Zheng, W. Song, J. Liu and Z. Qu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 278, 119304 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Lan, X.-Y. Yang, S.-X. Liu, Y.-X. Miao and Z. Zhao, New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 6940–6945 RSC .
R. Rios-Escobedo, E. Ortiz-Santos, J. A. Colín-Luna, J. N. Díaz de León, P. del Angel, J. Escobar and J. A. de los Reyes, Top. Catal., 2022, 65, 1448–1461 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, X. Sun, X. Tong, J. Zhang, J. Li, S. Li, Y. Liu, N. Tsubaki, T. Abe and J. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 7209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Frey, A. Beck, X. Huang, J. A. van Bokhoven and M. G. Willinger, Science, 2022, 376, 982–987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Martínez T, A. Muñoz, A. Pérez, O. H. Laguna, L. F. Bobadilla, M. A. Centeno and J. A. Odriozola, Appl. Catal., A, 2022, 641, 118678 CrossRef .
F. Wang, L. Xu, J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, H. Li, H. X. Li, K. Wu, G. Q. Xu and W. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 511–520 CrossRef CAS .
S. Najafishirtari, C. Guglieri, S. Marras, A. Scarpellini, R. Brescia, M. Prato, G. Righi, A. Franchini, R. Magri, L. Manna and M. Colombo, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 753–762 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Seo, E. Cho, J. Kim, S. B. Kim, J.-R. Youn, D. H. Kim, P. K. Ramasamy, K. Lee and C. H. Ko, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 108058 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nakayama, R. Sodenaga, Y. Gangarajula, A. Taketoshi, T. Murayama, T. Honma, N. Sakaguchi, T. Shimada, S. Takagi, M. Haruta, B. Qiao, J. Wang and T. Ishida, J. Catal., 2022, 410, 194–205 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, L. Ma, K. Wada, R. Kurihara, Q. Feng, S. Uemura and K. Isoda, Catal. Today, 2022, 411–412, 113839 Search PubMed .
P. Yin, S.-C. Shen, L.-L. Zhang, X.-S. Zheng, M. Zuo, Y.-W. Ding and H.-W. Liang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2022, 100984 CrossRef CAS .
B. Han, Y. Guo, Y. Huang, W. Xi, J. Xu, J. Luo, H. Qi, Y. Ren, X. Liu, B. Qiao and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11824–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Seo, S. Jeon, S. Lee, D.-K. Lim, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. Ahn and W. Jung, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 8593–8600 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, W. Wang, Q. Ren, R. Ye, N. Nie, Z. Liu, L. Zhang and J. Xiao, Front. Chem., 2022, 10, 993691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Parastaev, V. Muravev, E. Huertas Osta, A. J. F. van Hoof, T. F. Kimpel, N. Kosinov and E. J. M. Hensen, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 526–533 CrossRef CAS .
B. Molleman and T. Hiemstra, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 20575–20587 RSC .
H. K. Kim, A. S. Hyla, P. Winget, H. Li, C. M. Wyss, A. J. Jordan, F. A. Larrain, J. P. Sadighi, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, B. Kippelen, J.-L. Brédas, S. Barlow and S. R. Marder, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3403–3411 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lang, T. Li, D. Matsumura, S. Miao, Y. Ren, Y.-T. Cui, Y. Tan, B. Qiao, L. Li, A. Wang, X. Wang and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 16054–16058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yu. Khyzhun, J. Alloys Compd., 2000, 305, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
N. Katada, S. I. Woo, Y. Okamoto and M. Niwa, Catal. Today, 2006, 111, 145–146 CrossRef CAS .
K. Siegbahn, ESCA: atomic, molecular and solid state structure studies by means of electron spectroscopy, Nova Acta Regiae Soc. Sci. Ups., 1967, 275–282 Search PubMed .
K. Siegbahn, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1974, 5(1), 3–97 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1995, 34, 2059–2060 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. McIntyre, R. D. Davidson, G. Kim and J. T. Francis, Vacuum, 2002, 69, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fu, Z. Liu, X. Li, Y. Li, H. Yang and Y. Liu, Fuel, 2022, 322, 124027 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, H. Gai, Q. Li, B. Feng, M. Xiao, T. Huang and H. Song, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132224 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dai, Y. Shen, J. Z. Chen, L. Zhou, X. Wu, Z. Li, J. Wang, W. Huang, J. T. Miller, Q. Wang, A. Cao and Y. Wu, Small, 2022, 18, 2105226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Babonneau, S. Doeuff, A. Leaustic, C. Sanchez, C. Cartier and M. Verdaguer, Inorg. Chem., 1988, 27, 3166–3172 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, W. Jiang, J. Zhang, E. C. Lovell, R. Amal, Z. Han and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Park, A. Katoch, K. H. Chae, S. Gautam, P. Miedema, S. W. Cho, M. Kim, R.-P. Wang, M. Lazemi, F. de Groot and S. Kwon, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 2531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiong, D. Si, J. Yi, Y. Huang, H. Li and R. Cao, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 314, 121498 CrossRef CAS .
D. Norman, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1986, 19, 3273–3311 CrossRef CAS .
D. Eggart, X. Huang, A. Zimina, J. Yang, Y. Pan, X. Pan and J.-D. Grunwaldt, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 3897–3908 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Y. Hu, Y.-C. Chang, Z. Hu, Y.-C. Huang, Y. Fan, H.-J. Lin, C.-W. Pao, C.-L. Dong, J.-F. Lee, C.-T. Chen, J.-Q. Wang and L. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 3138–3148 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ruska, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1987, 59, 627–638 CrossRef CAS .
M. v. Ardenne and D. Beischer, Angew. Chem., 1940, 53, 103–107 CrossRef .
M. Makri, C. G. Vayenas, S. Bebelis, K. H. Besocke and C. Cavalca, Surf. Sci., 1996, 369, 351–359 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shi, J. Li, J. Liang, C. Bao, J. Gu, K. Li and J. Jia, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 434, 134748 CrossRef CAS .
A. Orlando, F. Franceschini, C. Muscas, S. Pidkova, M. Bartoli, M. Rovere and A. Tagliaferro, Chemosensors, 2021, 9, 262 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Jones, D. C. Hooper, L. Zhang, D. Wolverson and V. K. Valev, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 231 CrossRef PubMed .
M. V. Grabchenko, G. V. Mamontov, V. I. Zaikovskii, V. La Parola, L. F. Liotta and O. V. Vodyankina, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118148 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, A. Veksha, T.-T. Lim and G. Lisak, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 258, 120633 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chytil, M. Kure, R. Lødeng and E. A. Blekkan, Fuel, 2017, 196, 124–133 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murata, Y. Mahara, J. Ohyama, Y. Yamamoto, S. Arai and A. Satsuma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15993–15997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Force, J. P. Belzunegui, J. Sanz, A. Martínez-Arias and J. Soria, J. Catal., 2001, 197, 192–199 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Kissinger and W. R. Heineman, J. Chem. Educ., 1983, 60, 5 Search PubMed .
G. Song, Cem. Concr. Res., 2000, 30, 1723–1730 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, H. Huang, Y. Qin, D. Zhang, Y. Zhang, K. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. Lai and L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200110 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, S. Vijay, Y. Zhao, N. J. Oliveira, K. Chan and B. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 2656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lang, W. Xi, J.-C. Liu, Y.-T. Cui, T. Li, A. F. Lee, F. Chen, Y. Chen, L. Li, L. Li, J. Lin, S. Miao, X. Liu, A.-Q. Wang, X. Wang, J. Luo, B. Qiao, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 234 CrossRef PubMed .
C. T. Campbell, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 597–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sui, L. Zhang, J. Li, K. Doyle-Davis, R. Li, Z. Wang and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2102556 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Remediakis, N. Lopez and J. K. Nørskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1824–1826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiao, J.-X. Liang, A. Wang, C.-Q. Xu, J. Li, T. Zhang and J. J. Liu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 2913–2924 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, D. Y. Jo, J. W. Choung, C. H. Kim, H. C. Ham and K.-Y. Lee, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 403, 124085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chu, Y. Luo, D. Wu, Z. Su, J. Shi, J. Z. Zhang and C.-Y. Su, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 8003–8008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, C. Pei, X. Li, S. Chen, X. Zhang, R. Liu and J. Gong, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118448 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bele, P. Jovanovič, Ž. Marinko, S. Drev, V. S. Šelih, J. Kovač, M. Gaberšček, G. Koderman Podboršek, G. Dražić, N. Hodnik, A. Kokalj and L. Suhadolnik, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 13688–13700 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chu, Q. Pan, W. Bian, Y. Liu, M. Cao, C. Zhang, H. Lin, Q. Zhang and Y. Xu, J. Catal., 2021, 395, 36–45 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tuo, Y. Meng, C. Chen, D. Lin, X. Feng, Y. Pan, P. Li, D. Chen, Z. Liu, Y. Zhou and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 288, 119996 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Fang, K. Zhu, W. Yuan, T. Jiang, H. Xue and J. Tian, J. Power Sources, 2022, 520, 230882 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, Y. Li and R. Zhou, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2020, 27, 30352–30366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guan, M. Xue, Z. Li, R. Zhang and B. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 503, 144142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, K.-G. Haw, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, P. Hongmanorom, Q. Zhong and S. Kawi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 404, 124088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, C. Hu, W. Zhang, Y. Fu and X. Wang, J. Mater. Sci., 2022, 57, 3252–3267 CrossRef CAS .
L.-P. Yuan, W.-J. Jiang, X.-L. Liu, Y.-H. He, C. He, T. Tang, J. Zhang and J.-S. Hu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 13227–13235 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, Y. Ren, B. Yue, S. C. E. Tsang and H. He, Processes, 2021, 9, 706 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hyok Ri, F. Bi, A. Guan and X. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 586, 836–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, K. Feng, D. Zhang, D. Yang, M. Xiao, C. Zhang, L. He, B. Yan, G. A. Ozin and W. Sun, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2104972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, M. Xu, Q. Wang, R. Huang, Y. Jin, B. Bian, C. Tumurbaatar, B. Ishtsog, T. Bold and Y. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 277, 119271 CrossRef CAS .
A. Benhmid, K. E. Ttaib, K. Edbey, V. N. Kalevaru and B. Lücke, Open J. Met., 2020, 10, 17–33 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, B. Fang, Y. Wu, C. Li, J. Ni, X. Wang, J. Lin, C. Au and L. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 1331–1339 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, J. Liu, Q. Yang, L. Ma, Y. Zhao, Z. Huang, X. Li, B. Dong, X. Fu and C. Zhi, Small, 2020, 16, 1907341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, J. Liu, X. Du, J. Ding and F. Liu, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 15424–15432 CrossRef CAS .
J. Humphreys, R. Lan, S. Chen and S. Tao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16676–16689 RSC .
J. G. Lee, J. Myung, A. B. Naden, O. S. Jeon, Y. G. Shul and J. T. S. Irvine, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903693 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wu, Y. Wu, L. Chen, J. He, M. Hua, F. Zhu, X. Chu, J. Xiong, M. He, W. Zhu and H. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122526 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-P. Hu, Z. Wang and Z.-Y. Yuan, Mol. Catal., 2020, 493, 111052 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Deng, J. Yang, X. Zhao, Z. Han, K. Zhang, Y. Lu, F. Liu and H. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 31467–31476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jin, B. Liu, M. E. Louis, G. Li and J. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 9617–9627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Saelee, P. Limsoonthakul, P. Aphichoksiri, M. Rittiruam, M. Lerdpongsiripaisarn, T. Miyake, H. Yamashita, K. Mori, Y. Kuwahara, S. Praserthdam and P. Praserthdam, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, B. Jia, Y. Zhang and M. Haneda, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 13916–13922 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, X. Ma, X. Yu and M. Ge, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118355 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, J. Yao, Q. Jiang, X. Gao, D. Lin, H. Yang, L. Wu, Y. Tang and L. Tan, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 300, 120731 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Xue, G. Wang and R. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2022, 61, 5148–5156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Bhunia, D. Chandra, H. Abe, Y. Niwa and M. Hara, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 4144–4154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Mao, A. C. Foucher, T. Montini, E. A. Stach, P. Fornasiero and R. J. Gorte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 10373–10382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hartig-Weiss, M. Miller, H. Beyer, A. Schmitt, A. Siebel, A. T. S. Freiberg, H. A. Gasteiger and H. A. El-Sayed, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 2185–2196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, Z. Ma, J. Lu, X. Mu and B. Hu, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 1221–1227 RSC .
S. Neumann, H. H. Doebler, S. Keil, A. J. Erdt, C. Gutsche, H. Borchert, J. Kolny-Olesiak, J. Parisi, M. Bäumer and S. Kunz, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4136–4150 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Utomo, H. Wu and Y. H. Ng, Small, 2022, 18, 2200996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wan, H. Zhou, M. Zheng, Z. Huang, F. Kang, J. Li and R. Lv, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100300 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Hu, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. Xu, Y. Xue, L. Liu and M. K. H. Leung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9091–9098 RSC .
M. Bonn and J. Hunger, Science, 2021, 371, 123–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Shao, H. Wang and Y. Sun, J. Catal., 2020, 382, 86–96 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, S. Debow, F. Song, Y. Qian, W. R. Creasy, B. G. DeLacy and Y. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 11361–11370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Fortunato, E. S. F. Cardoso, B. K. Martini and G. Maia, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 1610–1618 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, R. A. Gutiérrez, P. G. Lustemberg, Z. Liu, N. Rui, T. Wu, P. J. Ramírez, W. Xu, H. Idriss, M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, S. D. Senanayake and J. A. Rodriguez, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 1613–1623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. I. Siakavelas, N. D. Charisiou, S. AlKhoori, A. A. AlKhoori, V. Sebastian, S. J. Hinder, M. A. Baker, I. V. Yentekakis, K. Polychronopoulou and M. A. Goula, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119562 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rui, F. Zhang, K. Sun, Z. Liu, W. Xu, E. Stavitski, S. D. Senanayake, J. A. Rodriguez and C.-J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11307–11317 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, D. Zhou, S. Han, Y. Li, J. Liu, Y. Zhou, M. Li, X. Zhang and W. Shen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 10386–10396 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guntida, B. Jongsomjit, S. Praserthdam and P. Praserthdam, Fuel, 2022, 314, 122736 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tanaka, Y. Kato, K. Sugimoto, R. Kawano, T. Tada, S. Fujii, M. Kiguchi and M. Akita, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 4338–4344 RSC .
K. Liu, X. Zhao, G. Ren, T. Yang, Y. Ren, A. F. Lee, Y. Su, X. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Yang, X. Liu, T. Zhou, W. Xi, J. Luo, C. Zeng, H. Matsumoto, W. Liu, Q. Jiang, K. Wilson, A. Wang, B. Qiao, W. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ma, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, G. Ma, W. Zhang, Y. Qi, T. Fuglerud, Z. Jiang, W. Ding and D. Chen, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 8027–8037 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, M. Li, N. An, S. Zhang, Q. Song, Y. Yang, J. Li and X. Liu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2022, 119, e2123450119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, X. Chu, F. Wang, Y. Dang, X. Liu, X. Wang and C. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 288, 120034 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, W. Chen, X. Wang, X.-Z. Fu and J.-L. Luo, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 37, 353–359 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, P. Summa, Y. Wang, K. Świrk, A. Miró i Rovira, S. Casale, K. Świerczek, C. Hu, M. Rønning and P. Da Costa, Appl. Mater. Today, 2022, 26, 101354 CrossRef .
Y. Niu, X. Teng, S. Gong and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13725–13734 RSC .
R. Kottayintavida and N. K. Gopalan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 8396–8404 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fu, Z. Sheng and X. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 9378–9388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huang, S. Peng, W. Xiang, C. Wang, X. Wu, J. Mao and T. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132372 CrossRef CAS .
F. Niu, R. Gao, X. Wan, K. Su, H. Yue, H. Dong, Z. Cao, Y. Yin and S. Yang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 33521–33531 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kong, Y.-H. Qin, T.-L. Wang and C.-W. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 1991–1997 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qiu, Y. Odarchenko, Q. Meng, P. Cong, M. A. W. Schoen, A. Kleibert, T. Forrest and A. M. Beale, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 13060–13070 RSC .
Y. Pu, Y. Niu, Y. Wang, Q. Liang, L. Zhang and B. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 20351–20359 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hongmanorom, J. Ashok, G. Zhang, Z. Bian, M. H. Wai, Y. Zeng, S. Xi, A. Borgna and S. Kawi, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119564 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jomjaree, P. Sintuya, A. Srifa, W. Koo-amornpattana, S. Kiatphuengporn, S. Assabumrungrat, M. Sudoh, R. Watanabe, C. Fukuhara and S. Ratchahat, Catal. Today, 2021, 375, 234–244 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wu, S. Tan, J. Moon, Z. Yan, V. Fung, N. Li, S.-Z. Yang, Y. Cheng, C. W. Abney, Z. Wu, A. Savara, A. M. Momen, D. Jiang, D. Su, H. Li, W. Zhu, S. Dai and H. Zhu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wen, W. Li, J. Yan, X. Wang, E. Ren, Z. Shi, J. Li, X. Ding, S. Mo and D. Mo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 1450–1461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lian, K. Shi, H. Yang, H. Sun, P. Qi, J. Ye, W. Wu, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, Small, 2020, 16, 1907368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, S.-Z. Yang, Z. Yang, W. Lin, H. Xu, Q. Wan, X. Suo, T. Wang, D. Jiang, J. Fu and S. Dai, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1617–1627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ren, C. Mebrahtu and R. Palkovits, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 1902–1913 RSC .
T. J. Siang, A. A. Jalil, N. A. A. Fatah and M. E. Chung, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 104616 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Song, G. R. Lee, K. Jeon, H. Lee, S. W. Lee, Y. S. Jung and J. Y. Park, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 8335–8342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C. Xing, F. Yang, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, T. Dong, L. Zhao, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 2201009 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, Y. Gao and M. R. Castell, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2021, 5, 075001 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, A.-H. Park, B. J. Cha, H.-U. Park, Y.-D. Kim and Y.-U. Kwon, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 504, 144355 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hong, B. Wang, G. Xiao, N. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Y. Khodakov and J. Li, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5554–5566 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, T. Wang, C. Cheng, F. Pan, Y. Zhu, H. Ma and J. Niu, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 3579–3588 RSC .
H. Chen, Z. Yang, X. Wang, F. Polo-Garzon, P. W. Halstenberg, T. Wang, X. Suo, S.-Z. Yang, H. M. Meyer, Z. Wu and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 8521–8526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, J. Shi and H. Shen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 385, 123887 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, D. Chen, J. Liu, D. He, X. Cao, C. Han, J. Lu and Y. Luo, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124384 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, X. Zeng, X. Li, Z. Lv, J. Li and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2106724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, K. Qian, A. Jia, D. Li, L. Shi, J. Hu, J. Zhu and W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 12074–12081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Wang, P. Zheng, C. Sun, J. Luo and X. Xie, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 67, 451–457 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Gesesse, C. Wang, B. K. Chang, S.-H. Tai, P. Beaunier, R. Wojcieszak, H. Remita, C. Colbeau-Justin and M. N. Ghazzal, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7011–7023 RSC .
X. Du, Y. Huang, X. Pan, B. Han, Y. Su, Q. Jiang, M. Li, H. Tang, G. Li and B. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Han, S. Xu, Y. Wang, S. Wang, L. Zhao, J. Kambonde, H. Yu, W. Shi and F. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2021, 506, 230232 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, W. Yan, H. Qi, X. Su, Y. Su, X. Liu, L. Li, X. Yang, Y. Huang and T. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 1697–1705 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, W. Li, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, W. Li, S. Tan, K. Xu, Y. Wang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 19233–19239 CrossRef .
C. Yang, C. Pei, R. Luo, S. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19523–19531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Han, B. Yu, J. Wang, M. Liu, G. Gao, K. Xia, Q. Gao and C. Zhou, Mol. Catal., 2021, 511, 111731 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baidya, T. Mazumder, K. Yu. Koltunov, P. R. Likhar, A. H. Clark, K. Tiwari, V. I. Sobolev, S. Payra, T. Murayama, M. Lin, P. Bera, S. Roy, K. Biswas, O. Safonova, B. Srinivasa Rao and M. Haruta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 14131–14146 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Y. Lin, S. Kavadiya, X. He, W.-N. Wang, B. B. Karakocak, Y.-C. Lin, M. Y. Berezin and P. Biswas, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 123450 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, F. Dai, J. Li, X. Dang, J. Guo, W. Lv, Z. Zhang and X. Lu, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 14491–14496 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, Y. Chen, X. Ke, Z. Zhang, W. Wu, G. Lin, Z. Zhou and Z. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18094–18105 RSC .
Y. Tian, L. Xu, M. Li, D. Yuan, X. Liu, J. Qian, Y. Dou, J. Qiu and S. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 3 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Lin, Q. Ju, Y. Jin, X. Qi, W. Liu, F. Huang and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101050 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, X.-F. Liu, J. Zou, X. Duan, Z.-C. Chen, Z.-H. Zhou, L. Ye, X. Liang, S.-Y. Xie and Y. Yuan, J. Catal., 2022, 406, 115–125 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, Z.-R. Ma, Y.-Y. Xiao, Y.-C. Yin, W.-M. Huang, Z.-C. Huang, Y.-Z. Zheng, F.-Y. Mu, R. Huang, G.-Y. Shi, Y.-Y. Sun, X.-H. Xia and W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3021 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Kuang, Y. Wang, B. Zhu, F. Xia, C. Tung, J. Wu, H. M. Chen and J. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sun, Y. Zhu, M. Li, J. Zhang, J. Qin, Y. Li and C. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120565 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Roy and S. Kumar, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 7167–7179 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, F. Li, Z. Wang, H. An, W. Xue and Y. Wang, ChemCatChem, 2022, 14(2), e202101528 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, Y. Cao, J. Ji, K. Li and H. Huang, J. Catal., 2021, 396, 122–135 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Darby, M. Stamatakis, A. Michaelides, E. Charles and H. Sykes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5636–5646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhao, W. Li, J. Li, W. Hu and C. M. Li, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, L. Qiu, L. Zhang, H. Liu, R. Ma, P. Xie, R. Liu, P. Hou, F. Ding, C. Liu and M. He, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 133487 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Ma, T. S. Choksi, D. Zhou, S. Han, Y.-F. Liao, H. B. Yang, D. Liu, Z. Zeng, W. Liu, X. Sun, T. Zhang and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 2255–2263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Wang, D. Lin, X. Feng, Y. Niu, B. Zhang and F.-S. Xiao, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 418–424 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Cheng, G. Zhang, W. Qiu, H. He and G. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 266, 118629 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lai, B. Zhang, Z. Hu, X. Qu, Y. Jiang, Y. Wang, J. Wang, H. K. Liu and S. Chou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807340 CrossRef .
J. Li, Q. Guan, H. Wu, W. Liu, Y. Lin, Z. Sun, X. Ye, X. Zheng, H. Pan, J. Zhu, S. Chen, W. Zhang, S. Wei and J. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14515–14519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Acerbi, S. C. E. Tsang, G. Jones, S. Golunski and P. Collier, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 7891–7895 CrossRef .
P. Hu, Z. Huang, Z. Amghouz, M. Makkee, F. Xu, F. Kapteijn, A. Dikhtiarenko, Y. Chen, X. Gu and X. Tang, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 3486–3489 CrossRef .
X. Sun, Z. Wang, W. Yan and C. Zhou, Catalysts, 2022, 12, 480 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, Y. Li, R. Shi and M. Yang, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2011, 344, 122–127 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dhamodharan, V. Dhinakaran and H.-S. Byun, Carbon, 2022, 192, 366–383 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, L. Xia, R. Yu, R. Lu, J. Li, R. He, Y. Wu, W. Zhang, X. Hong, W. Chen, Y. Zhao, L. Zhou, L. Mai and Z. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144(34), 15529–15538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. M. Yahya and N. A. S. Amin, Fuel Process. Technol., 2022, 232, 107275 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, L. Li, X. Wang and Y. Ma, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ratkovic, Dj. Vujicic, E. Kiss, G. Boskovic and O. Geszti, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 129, 398–405 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, K. Kumar, K. K. Pant and N. V. Choudary, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 1911–1929 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, J. Chen, W. Fang, Q. Cao, W. Su and F. Dumeignil, J. Catal., 2018, 368, 53–68 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, Y. Dai, Y. Yang and A. A. Lapkin, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 504–512 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, H. Li, H. Xu and Y. Zhang, Fuel Process. Technol., 2007, 88, 988–995 CrossRef CAS .
A. Datta, Z. Ziadi, P. Kumar, T. Sasaki, E. Danielson and A. J. Porkovich, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 1407–1414 RSC .
Q. Yang, G. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Rao, T. Heine, C. Felser and Y. Sun, npj Comput. Mater., 2021, 7, 207 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Z. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. Qin, M. Wang, Y. Han, T. Zhan, B. Yang, S. Li, J. Lai and L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. G. Kim, A. Lim, J. H. Jang, K.-Y. Lee, I. W. Nah and S. Park, J. Power Sources, 2021, 501, 230002 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, H. Li, M. Li, J. Hu, Y. Liu, D. Sun, G. Fu and Y. Tang, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 42, 118–128 CrossRef .
W.-G. Cui, X.-Y. Zhuang, Y.-T. Li, H. Zhang, J.-J. Dai, L. Zhou, Z. Hu and T.-L. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 287, 119959 CrossRef CAS .
R. Daroughegi, F. Meshkani and M. Rezaei, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2021, 230, 116194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, L. Wang, F. Okejiri, J. Luo, J. Zhao, P. Zhang, M. Liu, S. Yang, Z. Zhang, W. Song, W. Zhu, J. Liu, Z. Zhao, G. Feng, C. Xu and S. Dai, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 8950–8959 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rui, K. Sun, C. Shen and C.-J. Liu, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 42, 101313 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xin, L. Lin, R. Li, D. Li, T. Song, R. Mu, Q. Fu and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 4874–4882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, J. Wang, J. Zhao, Y. Bai, H. Du, Q. Wang, B. Jiang and H. Li, J. CO2 Util., 2022, 57, 101893 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Liao, V. C. Nguyen, N. Ishiguro, A. P. Young, C.-K. Tsung and K. C.-W. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118805 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, B. Xu, W. Huo, H. Feng, X. Zhou, F. Fang, Z. Xie, J. K. Shang and J. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 313, 121472 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, X.-D. Tian, J.-S. Lin, J.-C. Dong, X.-M. Lin and J.-F. Li, Nano Res., 2022, 16(4), 4855–4866 Search PubMed .
J. Zheng, R. Yang, L. Xie, J. Qu, Y. Liu and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1451–1473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Lin, W. Zhou, M. Gong, Z. He, F. Shi, X. Li, J. Z. Wu, K. T. Lam, J. N. Wang, F. Yang, Q. Zeng, J. Guo, W. Gao, J.-M. Zuo, J. Liu, G. Hong, A. L. Antaris, M.-C. Lin, W. L. Mao and H. Dai, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 653–663 CrossRef CAS .
A. Voevodin and J. Zabinski, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2005, 65(5), 741–748 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the research on MSIs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SMSI interface interaction between Pt/ZrO2 NPs.25 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (b) Representative HRTEM images of different samples ((a) Au-3 nm, (b) Au-3 nm-H600, (c) Au-7 nm, (d) Au-7 nm-H500, (e) Au-9 nm, (f) Au-9 nm-H400, (g) Au-13 nm, and (h) Au-13 nm-H400).29 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (c) First-order rate constant and TOF of BPA removal by catalysts with different Cu site densities, and comparison of kinetics of organic pollutants removal by the latest material-activated PDS system.34 Copyright 2022, John Wiley and Sons. (d) In situ drift spectra of CO2 adsorption on the catalyst.36 Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 
γAu = γint + γTiO2−x	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of catalysts.44 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (b) TEM images and corresponding particle size distribution histograms of catalysts with different iridium loadings.49 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (c) EDS map of Pt/S–C catalyst after H2 treatment.50 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (d) In situ drift spectra of Pt/TiO2 HX and Pt/TiO2–H600–O300.51 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (e) SEM image of the catalyst.52 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  
In situ XPS spectra of (a) Ni2p3/2 of NiCeAl-EISA, (b) NiCeAl-WI, (c) NiCeAl-CP, (d) Ce 3d of NiCeAl-EISA, (e) NiCeAl-WI and (f) NiCeAl-CP.64 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (g) N 1s XPS spectra of PILs with different anions.65 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (h) Ir 4f XPS spectra of Ir/Mo2TiC2Tx samples.66 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Sketch of the ligand transformation for Co and Fe ions. (b) Co L2,3-edge, (c) Fe L2,3-edge, (d) N K-edge, and (e) O K-edge XAS of CF-PBA-400 and CF-PBA-400-A.73 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  HAADF-STEM images and particle size distributions of (a) Pd2.5%Cu1%/γ-Al2O3, (b) Pd2.5%–Cu1%/γ-Al2O3, (c) Cu1%–Pd2.5%/γ-Al2O3 and (d) Cu1% (900 °C)–Pd2.5%/γ-Al2O3.77 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (e and f) IL-HRTEM images of Pt/S–C-1100(H) and Pt/S–C-1100(H)-200(O), respectively.50 Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Raman spectra of CeO2 and Ag/CeO2 catalysts.80 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) Raman spectra of carbon products from LDPE and PP over different catalysts.81 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Vis-Raman spectra of parent supports, fresh Mn adsorbents and adsorbents regenerated after the 13th adsorption cycle.82 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) IR spectra of adsorbed CO at room temperature on Pd/θ-Al2O3 and Pd/γ-Al2O3 with various Pd particle sizes.83 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (e) FTIR spectra obtained after the adsorption of CO (50 torr) at room temperature on N and Cl sample reduced at: Tr = 373 K, Tr = 573 K, Tr = 773 K.84 Copyright 2001, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) HER polarization curves of Pt/X-NCNT (X = 4, 8, 12, and 16) and Pt/C. (b) HER polarization curves of Pt/8-NCC at high current. (c) Tafel slopes of catalysts. (d) Potential-dependent TOF curves of Pt/X-NCNT and Pt/C. (e) Polarization curves for Pt/X-NCNT catalysts before and after 5000 cycles. (f) Current–time (i–t) stability curves up to 100 h duration of Pt/8-NCC at high current density.87 Copyright 2022, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Typical HAADF-STEM images of catalysts. (b) Conversion and selectivity results of Pt/MgAl2O4 and Pt/CNF as a function of average Pt particle size. (c) Typical HRTEM image of Pt NP supported on MgAl2O4. (d) Number of surface atoms per gram of Pt as a function of Pt particle size on the cuboctahedron particle. (e) Plots of normalized TOFs based on the hydrogen evolution rate at 230 °C with Pt particle size for Pt/MgAl2O4.99 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) CO2 conversion after 54 h testing and CO selectivity. (b) Arrhenius plot fitting from the CO rates. (c) CO2 conversion under 500 °C during a 54 h test for the different Cu catalysts.108 Copyright 2022, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the synthesis strategy of PTO-VO-H/C catalysts. CVs and LSVs of (b) PTO-VO-H/C. (c) I–V polarization curves of PTO-VO-H/C and commercial Pt/C catalysts in single cells before and after 3000 cycles.124 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) LSV curves of 2.0% Cu/OV-TiO2. (b) Chronoamperometry (CA) results, (c) UV-Vis spectra of the electrolytes after NRR, and (d) NH3 yields and faradaic efficiencies of 2.0% Cu/OV-TiO2. (e) UV-Vis spectra of the electrolytes after the control experiments. (f) NH3 yields and faradaic efficiencies of 2.0% Cu/OV-TiO2 at −0.5 V versus RHE for the initial six consecutive tests. (g) Schematic illustrations of the associative distal mechanism.130 Copyright 2022, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a–c) TEM images and (d) XRD pattern of Al2O3-P. (e–g) TEM images and (h) XRD pattern of Al2O3-T.144 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a–c) SEM and (d–f) TEM images of Co–Fe PBA, PB@Met, and PB@Met-700, respectively. (g) CVs obtained in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. (h) RDE LSV curves at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (i) Corresponding Tafel slopes of (h).161 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) Synthesis route of Co2PL/MnP-3 catalyst and formation process of SMPSIs. (c) FESEM image of Co2PL/MnP-3. (d) HAADF-STEM image and corresponding EDS elemental mappings of Co2PL/MnP-3. (e) STEM image of Co2PL/MnP-3. Lattice fringe seen area in (e1). (f) STEM image of MnP-3. (g) SAED pattern of the area in (f). (h) HAADF-STEM image and corresponding EDS elemental mappings of the local Co2P NPs.174 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram of catalyst synthesis. (b) Comparison of NGC and GC support affecting Pt–O interaction. (c) DOS of C orbital in NGC and Pt/NGC. (d) Illustration of EMSIs between Pt and NGC. (e) ORR polarization curve of catalyst after 20000 cycles in 0.1 M HClO4 solution.190 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagram of catalyst preparation. (b) SEM images of the SiO2@PDA. (c and d) SEM and TEM images of the SiO2@NMC (c) and NMHCS (d). (e) Polarization curve and Tafel slope of catalyst. (f) Mass activity and overpotential histogram of catalyst. (g) Comparison between Pt1/NMHCS and other catalysts.193 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Changes in Raman spectra, UV Vis NIR absorption spectra and PL emission of the catalysts prepared under different conditions with excitation wavelength.200 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) HRTEM image of catalysts.201 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis route of Pt/CeO2 catalyst. (b) Thermal stability of toluene oxidation at different temperatures. (c) Pt 4f XPS spectra of Pt/CeO2–NH and Pt/CeO2–AH catalysts. TEM images of (d) Pt/CeO2–NH and (e) Pt/CeO2–AH catalysts.213 Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

CMSI	Pt–TiN(C)	HER	Gas-phase synthesis	0.5 M H2SO4	31 mV@10 mA cm−2	
219

CMSI	W/PdGa	HER	Hydrothermal and calcination	0.5 M H2SO4	42 mV@10 mA cm−2	
220

CMSI	RuMo2C@CNT	HER	Solid-phase microwave pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	15 mV@10 mA cm−2	
221

CMSI	IrRu/T90G10	OER	Ultrasonic spray pyrolysis	0.1 M HClO4	54 mV@10 mA cm−2	
222

CMSI	11.0 wt% Ir/ATO	OER	A hydrothermal method	0.1 M H2SO4	1100 A gIr−1@1.45 V vs. RHE	
127

CMSI	NiFe@N-CFs	OER	Delignin-impregnation-carbonization	0.1 M KOH	300 mV@10 mA cm−2	
149


	
	ORR	
	
	
E
1/2 = 0.82 V	

CMSI	PdNi/Ni@N–C	OER	Anchoring	0.1 M KOH	360 mV@10 mA cm−2	
223


	
	ORR	
	
	
E
1/2 = 0.89 V	

CMSI	HsGDY/Cu3Pd-750	ORR	
In situ growth	1 M KOH	0.870 V@57.7 mA cm−2	
112

CMSI	PB@Met-700	ORR	Pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	
E
1/2 = 0.855 V	
161

CMSI	Pt/MFO/NPC	ORR	Solvothermal method	0.1 M KOH	
E
1/2 = 0.835 V	
153

CMSI	PTO-Vo-H/C	ORR	Hydrothermal and atomic layer deposition (ALD)	0.1 M HClO4	
E
1/2 = 0.87 V	
124

CMSI	Pt/TiO2@CNT	ORR	a sol–gel process	0.1 M HClO4	
E
1/2 = 0.927 V	
154

CMSI	SnO2/NSC	CO2RR	A molecular engineering strategy	0.5 M KHCO3	56.0 mA cm−2@1.15 V (vs. RHE)	
105

CMSI	Bi/Gr	CO2RR	Hydrothermal method	0.5 M KHCO3	28.1 mA cm−2@1.17 V (vs. RHE)	
147

CMSI	Ni/La2O2CO3	CO2 methanation	Incipient wetness impregnation	30 °C, 20000 h−1 GHSV	CO2 conversion of 85%	
109

CMSI	Ni/HT-10	CO2 methanation	Wet impregnation, co-precipitation	400 °C	CO2 conversion of 83.5%	
163

CMSI	Ni–Mg/SBA-15	CO2 methanation	Wet impregnation method and ammonia evaporation method (AE)	400 °C	CO2 conversion of 55.3%	
157

CMSI	Co/MnO@PGC	CO2 methanation	One-step pyrolysis	160 °C	High STYCH4 of 0.14 μmol CH4 s−1 gcat−1	
224

CMSI	Pt/CeO2(111)	CO2 methanation	Microwave-assisted sol–gel method, wet impregnation	350 °C	CO2 conversion of 54.5%	
138


	
	
	
	
	CH4 conversion of 100%	

CMSI	Ni/CeO2-PH	CO2 methanation	Wet impregnation	350 °C	CO2 conversion of 57.7%	
158


	
	
	
	
	CH4 selectivity of 97.5%	

CMSI	25 wt% Ni–5 wt% CeO2–Al2O3	CO2 methanation	Ultrasonic-assisted co-precipitation	350 °C	CO2 conversion of 76.4%	
225


	
	
	
	
	CH4 selectivity of 99.1%	

CMSI	Ni/Al2O3-750	Dry reforming of methane	Wet impregnation	750 °C	CH4 conversions of 89.8%	
106


	
	
	
	
	CO2 conversions of 92.9%	

CMSI	Ag/CeO2 (red-imp)	CO oxidation	Impregnation, co-deposition precipitation	100 °C	CO conversion of 50%	
80

CMSI	Pd/Fe2O3–H2-100	CO oxidation	Adsorption method	150 °C	CO conversion of 93.2%	
226

CMSI	Pt/TiO2–H250	CO adsorption	Hydrothermal method	
T = 40 °C, P = 3 bar	The conversation of 83.4%	
51

CMSI	Pd0.8Au0.2/UiO-66-D	Dehydrogenation of formic acid	Double solvent impregnation	333 K	FA conversion of 100%	
101

CMSI	Pd-modified Ni NWs	Methanol oxidation reaction (MOR)	Wet chemical reduction	0.5 M KOH + 0.5 M ethanol	Mass activity of 1479.79 mA mg−1	
150

CMSI	Pt/NCB-10	Methanol oxidation reaction (MOR)	Hummer's method	0.5 M H2SO4	The ECSA value of 76.3 m2 g−1	
104

CMSI	FeNi-MOFNSs	Urea oxidization reaction (UOR)	A one-step hydrothermal method	1 M KOH	131 mV@10 mA cm−2	
100

CMSI	1 wt% Pt/ZrO2	Toluene oxidation reaction (TOR)	Impregnation	150 and 155 °C	
E
a = 129 kJ mol−1	
122

CMSI	MnFeO-CNTs/PMS	Peroxymonosulfate (PMS) activation	Hydrothermal method	PH = 7.0, 25 °C	The kobs for SMX degradation of 11.4 × 10−2 min−1	
152

CMSI	Pd0.34Ga1 NPs	Propyne semi-hydrogenation (PSH)	Well-established wet impregnation	30 °C and atmospheric pressure	Propylene selectivity of 98.2%, propylene conversion of 96.6%	
128

CMSI	5 wt% Pt/WOx/γ-Al2O3	Glycerol hydrogenolysis reaction	Wet impregnation	Addition of WOx	Glycerol conversion of 35.8%	
120

CMSI	2.5% Si@PtGa/Al2O3	Propane dehydrogenation (PDH)	Incipient wetness impregnation	450 °C	Acrylic yield 0.5 mol gcat−1 h	
123

CMSI	80 wt% Fe–20 wt% Ce0.8Sm0.2O2−δ	Production of ammonia	Precipitation	450 °C	8.7 mmol g−1 h−1@1 MPa, and 12.3 mmol g−1 h−1@3 MPa	
114

CMSI	Pt/h-BN	Sulfur removal of DBT	Anchoring	130 °C (TOF = 15.33 h−1)	Sulfur removal of DBT reached 98.3%	
116

CMSI	Au/In2O3	CO2 hydrogenation to methanol	Deposition–precipitation	Below 225 °C	The methanol selectivity reaches 100%	
227

CMSI	Ru–MoO3	CO2 hydrogenation reaction	Encapsulated metal NPs	250 °C	CO selectivity of 99.0%	
228

CMSI	Pd–Fe3O4–H	Semi-hydrogenation of acetylene	Calcination and precipitation	80 °C	Acetylene conversion of 100%	
159


	
	
	
	
	Acetylene selectivity of 85.1%	

CMSI	Ti/RuO2–IrO2@Pt	Decomposing perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA)	Modified microemulsion method and electrode calcination method	1 M H2SO4, 40 °C	The PFOA degradation of 99.30%	
170


	
	
	
	
	PFOA mineralization of 91.32%	

CMSI	Ru@SiO2	Dry reforming of methane (DRM)	An inverse microemulsion	700 °C	CH4 and CO2 conversions of 75% and 76%	
229

CMSI	Au@SiO2	HCHO catalytic oxidation	Soft template method	500 ppm, 15000 mL g−1 h−1	HCHO conversion/removal of 100%	
172

CMSI	Co2PL/MnP-3	Hydrogenation of levulinic acid (LA)	The impregnation method	110 °C, 3 MPa H2, 3.5 h (LA), 90 °C, 2.5 MPa H2, 5 h (benzaldehyde), 120 °C, 3.5 MPa H2, 8 h (glucose)	100.0% conversion of and 100% selectivity of γ-valerolactone, benzyl alcohol, and sorbitol	
174

CMSI	Au0.5Pd@Co3O4	The selective oxidation	Calcination	90 °C	95% yield of HMF to FDCA of 95%	
230

CMSI	Pd/CeO2-SP	Ethyl acetate oxidation	Hydrothermal method	WHSV = 60000 mL g−1 h−1, T90 = 180 °C	
S
BET of 78.3 m2 g−1	
160

EMSI	SACs of Rh1–TiC	HER	Wetness impregnation	0.5 M H2SO4	22 mV@10 mA cm−2	
182

EMSI	Pt–SAs/MoSe2	HER	Site-specific electrodeposition	1.0 M KOH	29 mV@10 mA cm−2	
124


	Pt–SAs/WS2	
	
	0.5 M H2SO4	32 mV@10 mA cm−2	

EMSI	PtNP/MHCS	HER	Pre-precipitation	0.5 M H2SO4	40 mV@10 mA cm−2	
193

EMSI	NiMo/Ti3C2Tx	HER	A wet chemical method	1.0 M KOH	HER current density of 10 mA cm−2@0.044 V	
135


	
	HOR	
	
	HOR current density of 1.5 mA cm−2@0.1 V	

EMSI	NiFe-MS/MOF@NF	OER	A simple one-step solvothermal reaction	1 M KOH	230 mV@50 mA cm−2	
199


	
	HER	
	
	156 mV@50 mA cm−2	

EMSI	H–PtCo@Pt1N–C	ORR	Stirring, centrifugation, drying, annealing	0.1 M HClO4	
E
1/2 = 0.9V	
204

EMSI	2%-Pt/CN	CO2 methanation	Photoreduction deposition and calcination	125 °C	CH4 rate of 14.8 μmol g−1 h−1	
194

EMSI	In2O3/m-ZrO2	CO2 hydrogenation to methanol	Co-precipitation	280 °C	Methanol selectivity of 84.6%, CO2 conversion of 12.1%	
183

EMSI	NPAuLi3@NF	Lithium plating/stripping	Electrodeposition	1000 cycles	Coulombic efficiency of 99.8%	
188

EMSI	Co/Mo2C	Ammonia synthesis	Ball milling	520 °C and 1 bar	Specific activity of 11.73 μmol h−1 m−2	
195

EMSI	Ag2Pd8/TiO2–M-450	FA dehydrogenation	Wet impregnation	60 °C	TOF value of 2579 h	
196

EMSI	Pd/TiO2-R	Formaldehyde oxidation	Low-temperature solid reduction	100 ppm HCHO, 50% RH, WHSV 120000 mL gcat−1 h−1, 30 °C	HCHO conversion of 100%	
197

EMSI	Pt/TiO2-VO	CO2 reduction	
In situ hydrogenation	700 °C	CH4 selectivity of 81%	
186

EMSI	Au/VO2	The degradation of recalcitrant organic pollutants (ROPs)	a one-step solvothermal-assisted exfoliation	15 M Na2S2O8	TOF of 21.42 min−1 for RhB degradation	
187

EMSI	Pt/MgAl2O4	Dehydrogenation activity	Incipient wetness impregnation	230 °C	Electrons of naphthalene: Pt10/MAO (0.62 e−) < Pt10/CNF (0.83 e−)	
99

EMSI	Pd/TiC	Electrosynthesis of H2O2	Ball milling	6 h	H2O2 selectivity of 90%	
201

WMSI	10% Ni–10% Co/ACP	Activated carbon (AC)	Wet impregnation method	700 °C	H2 yield of 93.8%, toluene conversion of 90.2%	
212


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
