Functional hyperbranched polymers with advanced optical, electrical and magnetic properties  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CS00224E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CS00224E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3997-4022Functional hyperbranched polymers with advanced optical, electrical and magnetic properties

        
          
            Wenbo 
            Wu†
, 
      
        
          
            Runli 
            Tang†
, 
      
        
          
            Qianqian 
            Li
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zhen 
            Li
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: lizhen@whu.edu.cn; lichemlab@163.com;  Fax: +86 027 68755363
Received 
      2nd July 2014
    First published on 29th August 2014AbstractAs one kind of important functional material, those with advanced optical, electrical and magnetic characteristics have attracted increasing attention due to their essential and irreplaceable role in the daily life of humans. In particular, optical, electrical and magnetic hyperbranched polymers (HBPs) exhibit some unique properties, partially derived from their highly branched topological structures. This review summarizes the recent progress in the field of functional HBPs and their application in optics, electronics and magnetics, including light-emitting polymers, nonlinear optical materials, chemosensors, solar cells, magnetic materials, etc., and also gives some outlooks for further exploration in this field at the end of this paper.
Wenbo Wu
Wenbo Wu received his Bachelor's degree of Science from Wuhan University, China in 2009, and his PhD degree at the same university, under the supervision of Prof. Zhen Li. His research focuses on organic second-order nonlinear optical materials and the synthesis of hyperbranched polymers and dendrimers.
Runli Tang
Runli Tang was born in Yunnan, China. She obtained her Bachelor's degree (2011) in the Department of Chemistry at the Wuhan University (China). She is currently a PhD student in the group of Prof. Zhen Li. Her research focuses on the design of new efficient second-order nonlinear optical (NLO) materials.
Qianqian Li
Qianqian Li received her BSc degree from Hubei University in China in 2004, and then obtained her PhD degree at Wuhan University in 2009. She is now an associate professor at Wuhan University, and her research interests are in the design and synthesis of new electric and optical functional materials.
Zhen Li
Zhen Li received his BSc and PhD degrees from Wuhan University (WHU) in China in 1997 and 2002, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Jingui Qin. In 2003–2004, he worked in the Hongkong University of Science and Technology as Research Associate in the group of Prof. Ben Zhong Tang. In 2010, he worked at the Georgia Institute of Technology in the group of Prof. Seth Marder. In 2014, he worked at the National University of Singapore as a visiting professor for one month. He has been a full professor at WHU since 2006, and his research interests are in the development of organic molecules and polymers with new structure and functions for organic electronics and photonics.
1. Introduction
There is no doubt that the development of science and technology has brought about very important functions for humanity, in which the optical, electronic, and magnetic ones are basic requirements in our daily life. Actually, in addition to the light-emitting materials utilized in lighting and display, many other ones improve the quality of our life, especially functional polymers with optical, electrical and magnetic characteristics. The first investigation goes back to 1976, in which the electrical conductivity of the polyacetylenes was found to be increased one million times just by simple electrochemical doping.1 Thereafter, prompted by the important scientific significance and huge potential applications in daily production and life, systematic and extensive research referring to aspects of the chemistry and physics of polymeric materials containing conjugative structures was conducted, which usually demonstrated some special properties in terms of optics, electronics and magnetics. To reward their contributions, the 2000 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was endowed to the three pioneers, Professors Alan Heeger, Alan MacDiarmid, and Hideki Shirakawa.
On the other hand, in 1952 in the research field of polymers, in contrast to traditional linear polymers (LPs), Flory proposed that highly branched polymers could be prepared by utilizing multi-functional monomers.2 After that, in the late 20th century, Kim and Webster synthesized a highly branched polyphenylene from an AB2-type monomer, and named this type of polymer as a hyperbranched polymer (HBP).3 This new type of highly branched polymer quickly attracted much attention, due to their highly three-dimensional (3D) branched topological structure, and their unique properties which differ from normal LPs, e.g. good solubility, low viscosity, etc.
In comparison with other dendritic macromolecules, e.g. dendrimers with defect-free and perfect monodisperse 3D branched structures,4–8 there are some linear parts and defects in HBPs. However, HBPs can be prepared very easily, typically by one-pot syntheses, while dendrimers are yielded through tedious and costly multi-step reactions, comprising of repetitive protection, deprotection and purification processes.9–12 Generally, easy synthesis is the basis of practical applications. As a consequence, HBPs are likely to have more industrial and commercial value to be explored. In fact, during the past decades, thanks to the great efforts of scientists, the synthetic methods and technology of HPBs have been improved to a large degree, with one of the aims to achieve more perfect dendritic structures. Fortunately, some do work! Polymerization methods have now been extended from the initial ABn-type (n ≥ 2) polycondensation2,13,14 to numerous approaches, including A2 + Bn (n ≥ 3) polycondensation,15–17 addition step-growth polymerizations,18–20 self-condensing vinyl polymerization,21–23 and ring-opening multibranching polymerization,24–26etc. Some scientists tried hard to control the one-pot hyperbranched polymerization and as a result, the obtained HBPs possessed more regular dendritic structure, with an enhanced degree of branching and decreased polydispersity index.27–37 This improvement directly led to the improved performance of the functional HBPs, as confirmed by some examples of optical HBPs presented herein.
Three main characteristics of HBPs are very important: (1) good solubility and low viscosity could improve processability in comparison with normal LPs and small molecules; (2) their special 3D topological structures could prevent the wound and aggregation among polymer chains, resulting in some completely different properties from LPs; (3) unlike LPs, there are many functional groups along the periphery of HBPs, and their properties, e.g. the glass transition temperature (Tg),38 solubility39etc., could be conveniently adjusted by changing the groups along the periphery. By utilizing these special properties, HBPs have been applied to many areas, such as drug release,40–42 self-healing materials,43,44 catalysis,45–47etc.
HBPs have also caught the interests of scientists in recent years in the opto-electric materials field. Up to now, the applications of HBPs have been intensively explored (Fig. 1), such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), aggregation-induced emission (AIE) materials, nonlinear optical (NLO) materials, chemosensors, solar cells, magnetic materials, etc. In some of these areas, HBPs even demonstrated much better performance than the normal LPs. In this paper, we would like to review the recent progress of optical, electrical and magnetic HBPs.
 Fig. 1  The applications of HBPs in various material fields. 
2. Hyperbranched polymers with advanced optical properties
2.1 Light-emitting materials
As recorded, fire with light emission was closely related to the human civilization. There is no reason to doubt the great demand for good light-emitting materials to enhance our daily life. In comparison with other ones, the light-emitting HBPs possess some interesting properties, derived from their hyperbranched structure.48,49 As there are many reports of light-emitting HBPs, only a small number have been chosen in this paper, and more can be found in the literature or other review papers.

2.1.1 Fluorescent and phosphorescent HBPs and their applications in polymeric light-emitting devices. 
In 1987, Tang et al. fabricated a two-layer organic LED by using 8-hydroxyquinoline aluminum (Alq3) as the emitting layer, giving birth to a new research field.50 Shortly after that in 1990, the light-emitting diode based on the conjugated polymer poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV), was fabricated by Friend and co-workers.51 Since then, polymeric LEDs (PLEDs) have attracted more and more scientific and industrial interest, and very quickly, a myriad of light-emitting polymers were designed for their application in PLEDs.52
Generally, a full-color display requires red, green and blue emission. Because of the intrinsically wide band gap of blue emitting materials, the performance of a blue emitting device is often much lower than that of green or red ones. Among different kinds of blue emitting polymers, polyfluorene (PF) and its derivatives are considered as promising ones for their exceptionally high efficiency.53 However, PFs (and most other polymeric light-emitters) are likely to aggregate and form excimers in the solid state, directly leading to fluorescence quenching, namely the aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ) effect, hence inhibiting their prospective utilization to a large degree.54 As mentioned above, the 3D topological structure of HBPs could prevent the wound and aggregation among the polymer chains. Thus, it should be a good idea to utilize fluorene as a co-block to construct conjugated hyperbranched polymers. In 2004, four soluble hyperbranched tetrahedral polymers 1–4 (Fig. 2) were prepared by a one-pot Suzuki coupling reaction between tetrabromoarylmethane/silane (A4-type monomers) and 9,9-dihexylfluorene-2,7-diboronic acid (B2-type monomer) by He and co-workers.55 The anti-aggregation effect of the hyperbranched structure was apparent: the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of their solid films exhibited only a 1–8 nm red-shift in comparison with those measured in solution; also, there were no excimer emissions observed at 500–600 nm. However, it was a pity that the efficiencies of the corresponding PLED devices were not high, and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of a PLED based on HBP 4 was only 0.60% (at 7.5 V with a current density of 110 mA cm−2 and a brightness of 70 cd m−2). As shown in Fig. 2, some other research groups also designed and synthesized some hyperbranched PFs, e.g.5 by Bo, 6 and 7 by Chen,56–598 by Hsu and their co-workers,60etc., through different synthetic approaches.61,62 The anti-aggregation effect could be realized in all of them, much better than their linear analogues. However, once these HBPs were used as the emitting layer (EML) of PLEDs, the efficiency was not satisfactory.
 Fig. 2  The chemical structures of HBPs 1–8. 
Generally, the LED performance of linear polymeric EML materials could be improved through the introduction of some hole or electro-transporting moieties (Fig. 3) as a result of the increased and balanced charge transporting ability, e.g. oxadiazole,63,64 triazine,65etc. as electron-transporting blocks, and carbazole,66 triphenylamine,67etc. as hole-transporting blocks. This design strategy has also been successfully applied to HBPs. In 2005, by utilizing oxadiazole as a branching unit, Huang et al. synthesized a series of hyperbranched PFs 9 (Fig. 4) via “A2 + A′2 + B3” Suzuki polycondensation.68 The polymer films exhibited very stable blue light emission even after being annealed at 200 °C in air. Moreover, the EQE value was measured at 1.5% in the LED device of ITO/PEDOT/PVK/Polymer/Ba/Al. Once triazine was used instead of oxadiazole, the yielded hyperbranched PFs exhibited an EQE value of 1.4% in their LED devices.69 Similar phenomena were observed in other reports. For example, recently, we used hexaphenylbenzene, an anti-aggregation moiety, to construct another series of hyperbranched PFs 10 (Fig. 4).70 After oxadiazole was utilized to adjust their electron-transporting properties, the efficiency of the PLED could be improved. When the two monomers of hexaphenylbenzene and oxadiazole groups were fed into the reaction system in equivalent quantities, the maximum luminescence efficiency of the PLED based on the obtained polymer was 0.72 cd A−1, higher than the value of 0.46 cd A−1 without the presence of oxadiazole.
 Fig. 3  Some examples of hole or electro-transporting moieties. 
 Fig. 4  The chemical structures of HBPs 9–13. 
In theory, the introduction of some hole-transporting blocks into HBPs could be another approach to improve the performance. In 2005, Bo and co-workers designed and synthesized a series of fluorene–triphenylamine alternating HBPs,71 which possessed large molecular weights (the Mw was 169 kg mol−1), excellent stability (the 5% weight loss temperature was up to 416 °C) and high fluorescence quantum yields (up to 0.75). Later, Huang et al. utilized tris(4-(9-phenyl-fluoren-9-yl)phenyl)amine, instead of triphenylamine, to further enhance the thermal and optical stability of the resultant HBPs, 11 (Fig. 4).72 Another high-mobility segment, pyreneyl, was also introduced as an end-capped unit to further enhance the charge injection and transport, with a luminescence efficiency of up to 0.16 cd A−1, in their blue LED devices. To extend the potential applications of HBPs, the white PLED (EML: 11 and poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene], namely MEH–PPV mixture) based on 11 was also fabricated, and the luminescence efficiency of 0.32 cd A−1 was achieved. In 2006, carbazole, a good hole-transporting agent, has also been applied by Lin and co-workers in the form of N-phenyl-carbazole to construct hyperbranched PFs.73 The resultant product 12 (Fig. 4) was a good blue light-emitter, with an efficiency of up to 0.35 cd A−1. So far, by using this design strategy, many kinds of hyperbranched PFs containing hole-transporting blocks have been prepared.74–80 With the aim of balancing the mobility of both charge carriers to improve the electroluminescent (EL) efficiency,81 Chen and co-workers designed hyperbranched PF 13 (Fig. 4) with carbazole as the pendant unit and aromatic 1,2,4-triazole as the branched unit.82 However, the efficiency was very low and the maximum current efficiency was only 0.059 cd A−1. Thus, this type of dipolar hyperbranched PF has not attracted much attention, and to date, examples of dipolar hyperbranched PFs are still scarce. Truxene, a derivative of fluorene, inherits many properties of fluorene and acts as a good construction block for light emitters via readily available functionalization at its C-2, C-7, and C-12 positions and C-5, C-10, and C-15 positions, respectively.83 Also, its unique C3 symmetry and rigid structure give it some special features, such as planarity, high stability, etc.84,85 In 2004, Pei and co-workers synthesized a series of hyperbranched alternating copolymers of fluorene and truxene (14) via Suzuki coupling polymerization (Fig. 5),86 which exhibited strong blue emission both in solution and film. Interestingly, their molecular weights could significantly affect the stability of their thin films: the higher the molecular weight, the better the stability. However, their PL spectra were almost the same, regardless of the very different molecular weights. Huang et al. also introduced carbazole units into this type of HBP.87 The raised HOMO level was beneficial to the hole injection, and improved the efficiencies of PLEDs.
 Fig. 5  The chemical structures of HBPs 14–20. 
Ladder-type polymers, first reported by Scherf and Müllen in 1991,88 possess a rigid coplanar structure, which enhances the conjugation, carrier mobility and luminescence intensity. In 2010, Wu et al. reported a series of new hyperbranched ladder-type poly(p-phenylene)s (15–18) containing truxene units (Fig. 5).89 The UV-vis absorption and PL spectra of their keto-functionalized precursor polymers were almost the same, while the ladder-type ones were different, indicating that the conjugation and aggregation of ladder-type HBPs could be modified more easily. Due to their different linear units, HBPs 15–18 (Fig. 5) showed different emissions from 417 to 465 nm. Another planar fused ring compound, triindole (also known as triazatruxene), with a similar structure to truxene, was also used to construct dendritic light-emitting materials and the efficiency was even higher than that of truxene.90 However, possibly due to the difficult syntheses, just like the case of truxene, there are not many reports concerning triindole-containing HBPs.
By modifying the molecular structure, HBPs with green and even red emissions could be yielded. For example, just changing the single bonds between the fluorene moieties to double ones in hyperbranched PFs, the emission could be adjusted from blue to green.58,74 In addition to HBPs 1–4 mentioned above, He and co-workers have also introduced oligothiophenes, with a narrow band-gap, into hyperbranched PFs91 and the emission color could be tuned from blue to green, then to red, as a result of the extended conjugation length. The luminescence efficiency of the corresponding blue LED devices was 0.78 cd A−1, but only 0.04 cd A−1 for green ones. In 2012, Hsu et al.60 introduced some other units with narrow band-gap (2,1,3-benzothiadiazole and 4,7-dithienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole), into hyperbranched polyterfluorene 19 (Fig. 5), through [2+2+2] polycyclotrimerization. 19 showed broad blue-green emission, and once 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole or 4,7-dithienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole was introduced, the emission could be tuned to green or red, respectively, and the highest luminescence efficiency was measured at 3.39 cd A−1. As mentioned above, there are a large number of end groups along the periphery of HBPs, which could affect the properties to a large degree. Thus, the emissions of HBPs could be further tuned by different end-capped groups. In 2007, Bo and Sun synthesized a series of fluorene–triphenylamine alternating hyperbranched copolymers 20a–e (Fig. 5) with different end-capped groups to tune the emission colour.92 HBP 20a and 20b demonstrated blue emissions with maxima at about 440 nm, mainly derived from the conjugated HBP core. However, HBP 20c and 20d displayed a blue-green emission (460 nm) and green emission (490 nm), respectively, due to the peripheral moieties. The porphyrin-capped HBP 20e exhibited saturated red emission due to the efficient energy transfer from the blue-light-emitting core to the red-light-emitting periphery.
Besides hyperbranched PFs, there were many other HBPs prepared as light-emitting materials, e.g. hyperbranched PPV,93–95 hyperbranched polytriphenylamine,96etc. and their derivatives.97–101 However, once these HBPs were used as EMLs in PLEDs, the efficiencies were always unsatisfactory, although scientists have tried hard to optimize their structures. The relatively low efficiency was mainly due to the following reasons: (1) the HBPs were mixtures of macromolecules, and the purity was usually much lower than small molecules. In comparison with normal LPs, the purities of HBPs are poor, since some solvents and impurities are liable to be trapped in the pores of HBPs. Therefore, the impurities would affect the efficiencies of LEDs based on HBPs; (2) due to the large molecular weight, the thin films of HBPs were usually fabricated by a spin-coating method, and the quality was thus not as good as those fabricated by vacuum evaporation, which would decrease the efficiencies of HBPs; (3) the highest internal quantum efficiency by harvesting singlet excitons was only 25% in theory, which would directly decrease the efficiencies of fluorescent materials.102 Thus, although the highly branched structures of HBPs could prevent the wound and aggregations, research on fluorescent LEDs based on HBPs has gradually decreased recently, and other types of LEDs, such as phosphorescence LEDs, etc., have caught increasing attention.
Different from normal fluorescent LEDs, phosphorescent LEDs based on heavy metal complexes could utilize both singlet and triplet excitons, leading to an almost 100% internal quantum efficiency in theory.103 Therefore, phosphorescent LEDs usually demonstrate much better performance than fluorescent ones. For highly efficient electrophosphorescence, it is necessary to reduce the concentration quenching and triplet–triplet annihilation. The normal method is to dope heavy-metal complexes into a suitable host material.104 However, due to the phase separation, fast efficiency loss upon the increase of current density seems to be inevitable. Thus, it is considered possible to overcome the phase separation by using heavy-metal complexes as co-monomers to construct functional conjugated HBPs.
Earlier in 2005, Yang, Cao and co-workers reported some pioneering work. In their research, fac-tris(2-phenyl-pyridine)iridium was chosen as a light-emitting unit, while p-phenylenes were selected as the host segments (Fig. 6).105 All the obtained HBPs 21–23 (Fig. 6) showed a very strong green emission centered at 520 nm, with a nearly invisible emitting peak at 420 nm derived from host segments, indicating that the energy transfer from the hyperbranched main chain to the Ir-complex was efficient. In comparison with the normal fluorescent PLEDs, the phosphorescent PLEDs based on these HBPs demonstrated much higher performance, with a maximum luminescence efficiency of 3.6 cd A−1 and a maximum EQE value of 1.5%. However, in comparison with doped phosphorescent LEDs103 and dendrimeric phosphorescent LEDs,106,107 their performances were not good enough, since poly(p-phenylene)s might lead to the quenching of the phosphorescent green light-emission.108 In 2009, to overcome this problem, they used 3,6-carbazole and 2,6-pyridine as host segments instead of p-phenylenes, to construct phosphorescent HBPs 24 (Fig. 7).109 Carbazole and pyridine, an hole-transporting block and an electron-transporting one could balance the charge transport in the LED devices to improve the performance. The results were encouraging and the performance of phosphorescent PLEDs based on 24 exhibited remarkable enhancement in comparison with that of 21–23. When the feed ratio of the iridium complex was 3 mol% and that of the 2,6-pyridine moiety was 10 mol%, the obtained HBP demonstrated the best performance for green emission, with a luminance of 82059 cd m−2, a current efficiency of 30.1 cd A−1, and an EQE value as high as 13.3%. In 2012, they also used 3,6-carbazole-co-2,8-dioctyldibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide-3,7-diyl as the main chain to improve the performance of the corresponding LED devices.110 After optimization, an even higher efficiency of green emission was achieved (current efficiency: 50.5 cd A−1; EQE value: 15.3%).
 Fig. 6  The chemical structures of HBPs 21–23. 
 Fig. 7  The synthetic routes to HBPs 24–26. 
By changing the above fac-tris(2-phenyl-pyridine)iridium moieties to other iridium complexes, the emission color of the resultant HBPs could be tuned. In 2011, a series of red phosphorescent HBPs 25 (Fig. 7) containing iridium complexes were designed and prepared via a one-pot Suzuki polycondensation.111 The efficient energy transfer from the poly(3,6-carbazole-alt-2,7-fluorene) segment to the iridium complex occurred when the content of Ir complex was as low as 1 mol% in the copolymer. The maximum EQE of 6.1% and a luminous efficiency of 4.7 cd A−1 were obtained with a CIE coordinate of (0.63, 0.32) for the LED device based on HBP 25, better than all the reported red fluorescent PLEDs at that time. [(Piq)2Ir(Pytz)] (where Piq is 1-phenylisoquinoline and Pytz is 3-(pyridin-2-yl)-1H-1,2,4-triazole) was also utilized as a red light-emitting unit to construct phosphorescent HBPs. In 2012, based on this complex, by using PF or poly(fluorene-alt-carbazole) as the host main chain, a series of red phosphorescent HBPs 26 (Fig. 7) was prepared via “A2 + A′2 + B3” Suzuki polymerization.112 Their LED devices showed a standard red emission at about 610 nm, with a maximum current efficiency of 6.54 cd A−1 and EQE value of 4.88%. Interestingly, the efficiencies were relatively stable upon increasing the current density, unlike the general phosphorescent LED devices, indicating that phase separation, usually encountered in doping systems, could be overcome in HBP systems.
The phosphorescent HBPs could combine the advantages of high efficiency of phosphorescence, good solubilities, and processabilities of HBPs; thus, they should be good candidates for applications in PLEDs. However, the relative number of reports are still a little scarce, possibly due to the difficult synthesis of functional heavy-metal complexes. On the other hand, there are no successful examples of blue phosphorescent HBPs as a result of the absence of suitable hyperbranched main chains with high triplet energy levels, for use as a host for heavy-metal complexes. These are the major problems to overcome in the development of this area.


2.1.2 Fluorescent materials with aggregation-induced emission. 
Aggregation-induced emission (AIE), first reported by the group of Ben Zhong Tang at HKUST in 2001,113 is a novel abnormal phenomenon: a series of molecules are nonluminescent in solution but are induced to emit efficiently by aggregate formation (solid state or nanoparticles). If these molecules were used as light-emitting materials, it seems that the problematic ACQ effect could be solved completely. So far, most of the reported AIE systems are small molecules, such as tetraphenylethene (TPE), hexaphenylsilole, etc.114,115
In 2010, Tang and co-workers found that when pyrene, a typical light emitter with ACQ effect, was modified by the TPE unit, it could exhibit AIE characteristics just like the TPE unit.116 Thus, it was easy to consider that in a similar manner, normal light-emitter materials with ACQ effect, just like PF, could be converted to AIE luminogens to improve their performance. From this standpoint, our group synthesized poly(fluorene-alt-tetraphenylethene) by changing half of the fluorene unit in PF to TPE moieties.117 As expected, the obtained polymer was no longer ACQ, but AIE active. Encouraged by the results and considering the special features of hyperbranched PFs, in 2012 a conjugated hyperbranched copolymer of fluorene and TPE 27 (Fig. 8) was prepared through an “A2 + B4” approach by using a one-pot Suzuki polycondensation.118 It showed strong green emission at 506 nm with aggregation enhanced emission (AEE) thanks to the introduction of the TPE unit. Once 27 was used as the EML in LED devices, the luminance was 958 cd m−2 with a maximum luminous efficiency of 1.15 cd A−1, higher than normal derivatives of hyperbranched PFs as discussed above. Furthermore, carbazole as a hole-transporting block was used to construct TPE-based fully conjugated HBP 28 (Fig. 8).119 As a result, the maximum luminous efficiency of 2.13 cd A−1 could be achieved, which should be the highest value for fluorescent LEDs based on HBPs, confirming the advantages of AI(E)E activity. Also, since these HBPs have strong emission in the solid state and aggregation, they could be used as chemosensors for explosives.
 Fig. 8  The chemical structures of HBPs 27–31. 
Some other synthetic approaches have also been successfully applied to the preparation of HBPs with AIE characteristics. Recently, Tang, Qin and co-workers synthesized a series of HBPs 29 containing the TPE unit via metal-free click polymerization through the “A2 + B3” approach.120 Click chemistry reactions of alkynes and azides, first proposed by Sharpless and co-workers,121 have some remarkable features such as nearly quantitative yields, mild reaction conditions, broad tolerance toward functional groups, low susceptibility to side reactions and simple product isolation. Additionally, the metal-free click polymerization of activated alkynes (aroylacetylenes/propiolates) and azides could avoid the catalyst residue in normal click chemistry.122 For 29a, the yield was up to 91.6%, much higher than those of 27 (63.5%) and 28 (48.8%). Similar to 27 and 28, due to the TPE unit, HBPs 29 (Fig. 8) were also AIE active and could be used as chemosensors for explosives. In addition, since HBPs 29 were not fully conjugated and the electronic communications were broken, they demonstrated excellent optical transparency: they absorbed no light at wavelengths longer than 390 nm in chloroform solutions, making them promising candidates for photonic applications. Since 29 contained polarized triazole rings and ester groups, they showed high refractive index values of 1.614–1.586 (29a) and 1.622–1.589 (29b) in the wavelength region of 600–1550 nm with low chromatic dispersion, higher than those of the important commercial optical plastics such as poly(methyl methacrylate) (1.489) and polycarbonate (1.582). Since the remaining ethynyl and azide groups along their peripheries could be cross-linked upon UV irradiation, the polymer films of 29 could also be utilized to generate fluorescent patterns. Some other multifunctional AIE HBPs prepared by this click chemistry reaction have been reported.48,123
Polycyclotrimerization of diacetylenes or diynes was another way to construct HBPs. Tang et al. developed a new effective transition-metal catalyst system for this polymerization, which could proceed rapidly under ambient conditions to yield HBPs (30) with high molecular weights (up to several million) in high yields (up to 100%).124,125 Similar to 29, HBP 30 (Fig. 8) could act as a chemosensor for explosives and find use in fluorescent patterning, besides optical limiting devices (which can offer high transmittance at low inputs but low transmittance at high laser doses).
In addition to the TPE unit, some other AI(E)E active dyes, e.g. silole,126 triphenylbenzene,49etc., could be used to construct HBPs. However, to date, the research on AIE HBPs has mainly focused on the usage of TPE as an AIE chromophore,127,128 due to its facile synthesis, good stability, easy functionalization, and high fluorescence quantum yield. Prompted by the so far obtained results, the AIE active HBPs containing other AIE chromophores besides the TPE one should be a new trend in material fields.

2.2 Hyperbranched fluorescent chemosensors
Along with social development, environmental issues have attracted more and more attention. As a result, the design of various sensors or probes for the detection of analytes in particular samples is badly needed.129 Among the different types of sensors, fluorescent chemosensors usually possess innate advantages over others due to their high sensitivity, specificity, simplicity of implementation, low background, and fast response time. Fluorescent HBPs could offer multiple exciton migration channels and diffusion pathways via numerous branches in the 3D space. Thus, “turn-off” hyperbranched chemosensors usually demonstrate a greater fluorescent response than small molecules and linear polymers under the same conditions, which is usually known as the “superamplified effect”.48,49 The AIE active HBPs 29 were good examples to illustrate this effect. Usually, 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (picric acid, PA) was used as a model explosive due to its commercial availability. The aggregates of TPE, a small molecule, emitted blue fluorescence and could be used to detect PA. The Stern–Volmer plot was almost linear with PA concentration, giving a quenching constant of 13400 M−1when the PA concentration was lower than 20 μg mL−1. As expected, HBPs 29 showed larger quenching constants of 19500 (29a) and 26700 M−1 (29b), respectively, indicating that at the same concentration of PA, the fluorescence quenching of HBPs 29 was more obvious than that of TPE.120 On the other hand, the “molecular wire effect” in conjugated polymers can greatly enhance the sensitivity of the polymer-based chemosensors, due to the enhanced electronic communication.130 Thus, the fully conjugated HBPs can usually demonstrate lower detection limits than normal ones. Also, taking explosive chemosensors as an example, HBPs 29, which are TPE based non-conjugated HBPs, showed a low detection limit of 1.0 ppm; however, the detection limit of HBP 28, a fully conjugated HBP, was as low as 0.33 ppm.119 Similar results were observed in another AEE active fully conjugated HBP 31 (Fig. 8), with a detection limit of 0.5 ppm for PA.131 Thus, conjugated HBPs should be a good choice for fluorescent chemosensors because of the “superamplified effect” and “molecular wire effect”. Furthermore, AI(E)E active HBPs have another advantage: their fluorescence is very strong in the solid state, thus, their paper films could be used to detect explosives for real-world applications. Interestingly, in 2012, Wang et al. found an exception to the “superamplified effect” in explosives detection.132 They synthesized hyperbranched and linear conjugated polysiloles incorporating arylene ethynylene subunits (32 and 33, respectively) via the Sonogashira reaction (Fig. 9). It was noteworthy that the quenching constants of HBP 32 for PA and TNT were 4.7 × 10−2 and 4.6 × 10−3 ppm−1, respectively, while those of LP 33 were 8.6 × 10−2 and 6.5 × 10−3 ppm−1. The abnormal phenomena is likely due to the steric hindrance. The copolymer units of these two polymers were very small and the large steric hindrance prevented interactions between siloles and the nitroaromatic explosives. The steric hindrance of LP 33 was smaller than that of HBP 32, leading to the larger quenching constants. This example showed that, although the “superamplified effect” and “molecular wire effect” could result in better performance of conjugated HBPs for fluorescent chemosensors, the selection of copolymer unit is also very important.
 Fig. 9  The chemical structures of HBPs 32–37 and compound 38. 
HBPs were not only used to detect nitroaromatic explosives, but also some metal ions. In 2009, a fluorescent hyperbranched copolymer 34 and its linear analogue 35, both containing triphenylamine and divinyl bipyridyl units, were synthesized via the Heck cross-coupling reaction (Fig. 9).133 Since the 2,2′-bipyridyl moieties of the polymers could coordinate to the metal ions and quench the fluorescence, they could be used as metal sensors. Interestingly, the Stern–Volmer constants of HBP 34 for all the ions were much larger than for its linear analogue 35. For Mn2+, the Stern–Volmer constants of HBP 34 were up to 3.2 × 105 M−1, 32 times that of 35, again confirming the “superamplified effect” of HBPs. In the same year, Chen and Yu prepared a hyperbranched PF 36 (Fig. 9) bearing a 15-crown-4 side chain, which could coordinate with cations.134 Both hyperbranched PF 36 and its linear analogue exhibited selective fluorescence quenching toward Fe3+ and Ru3+, with the Stern–Volmer coefficients to Ru3+ being 2.0 × 104 and 1.9 × 104 M−1, respectively. However, the stability constants of the formed complexes with Ru3+ were 3.1 × 103 and 5 × 103 M−1, respectively, exactly opposite to their Stern–Volmer coefficients, i.e. HBP 36 possessed a lower stability constant with Ru3+, but a higher Stern–Volmer coefficient. This might be another example which confirms the advantages of the “superamplified effect”. Shortly after that, Wang, Zhan and co-workers synthesized another series of hyperbranched PFs with carboxylate side chains.135 The obtained polymers were water-soluble, and exhibited high selectivity toward Hg2+ and Cu2+ ions in a NaH2PO4–Na2HPO4 buffer solution.
In comparison with various cation chemosensors, designing a direct approach for anion detection was very difficult due to the larger dimension, complicated geometric structure and high hydration energy of anions. Thus, an indirect approach became an alternative strategy to detect anions.129 In 2013, considering the advantages of hyperbranched fluorescent chemosensors, fluorescent HBPs were also used for anion detection indirectly.136 The anionically-functionalized, conjugated HBP 37 (Fig. 9) with sulfonic acid side chains was used as a fluorescent illuminant, which could be quenched by the cationic viologen compound 38 (Fig. 9) due to the electrostatic interactions between the cations and the sulfonate groups in HBP 37. As a result of the stronger interactions between the viologen-based cations and cyanide anions (CN−), the electrostatic complex would dissociate into individual molecules upon the addition of CN−, resulting in the recovery of fluorescence. The detection limit of cyanide was found to be 1.0 μM (0.026 ppm), which was lower than most small molecules and LPs.129 Moreover, recent studies have shown that the lethal cyanide concentration in the blood of fire victims is ca. 20 μM.137,138 Therefore, 37 might be utilized as a sensitive chemosensor to probe trace CN− in practical applications.
Besides those normal analytes, recently, fluorescent HBPs were also applied to the detection of biomacromolecules,139 gases,140,141etc. Even so, the quantity of hyperbranched fluorescent chemosensors required was still much less than normal small molecules and linear fluorescent chemosensors. The possible reason, in addition to the relatively difficult synthesis in comparison with linear polymers, might be that the relatively complicated hyperbranched structures would reduce their selectivity, another important parameter for chemosensors, although they usually had lower detection limits. Thus, how to amplify the “superamplified effect” and improve the selectivity of fluorescent HBPs has become an urgent problem in this field.
2.3 Fluorescent HBPs for bioimaging
Bioimaging is the visualization of the biological processes in living animals or humans by combining sophisticated bioimaging probes with modern advanced modalities, which has already played an important role in the diagnosis of disease in modern medicine.142,143 Among the different kinds of imaging modalities, optical imaging is fast, inexpensive and suitable for repeated sessions and has therefore attracted much attention. Recently, a combination of optical bioimaging and fluorescent HBPs has led to the application of HBP-based fluorescent probes in physiology and clinical medicine.144
As mentioned above, fluorescent HBPs could prevent the wound and aggregation between the polymer chains, and lead to high fluorescence quantum yields. Also, their solubility could be adjusted by changing the groups along the periphery. Thus, it should be feasible to graft the hydrophilic units on the periphery of conjugated HBPs to make them soluble (or dispersible) in aqueous solution for cell imaging. Conjugated HBP 39 is a green light emitter, and polyethylene glycol (PEG) is a famous hydrophilic and biocompatible polymer. The linear PEG arms were grafted on the HBP 39 core to yield a new series of HBPs 40via an acylhydrazone connection by Zhu and co-workers (Fig. 10).145 Different from the traditional linear copolymers, HBP 40 could form unimolecular micelles and further self-assemble into large multimolecular micelles in water, which could prevent the intermolecular aggregation of fluorescent cores and phase separation, thus greatly enhancing the emission of multi-micelle aggregates. This point is beneficial for cell imaging. As shown in Fig. 10, the strong fluorescence was observed mainly in the cytoplasm of the human breast adenocarcinoma cells (MCF-7 cells), when the cells were cultured in HBP 40b for 2 h. For comparison, little fluorescence was localized in the cells when they were incubated with HBP 39. Similar to the functional groups along the periphery, the side chains of fluorescent HBPs could also be modified easily, just like HBP 37. Thus, another strategy for the use of HBPs in imaging is the introduction of hydrophilic ionic side chains into conjugated HBPs to yield hyperbranched conjugated polyelectrolytes.146 Liu and co-workers have conducted some excellent work in this field. They designed and synthesized a series of fluorescent HBPs with quaternary ammonium salts as side chains via alkyne polycyclotrimerization. The PEG arms, with good biocompatibility, could be further linked onto these HBPs to yield 41–43 with core–shell architecture via a click chemistry reaction (Fig. 11).147–149 Thanks to their PEG shells, these HBPs could naturally form spherical nanoparticles, which could prevent some nonspecific interactions with biomolecules in aqueous solutions. After anti-HER2 affibody (HER2 is short for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2) was bioconjugated to them via a carbodiimide-activated coupling reaction, these core–shell nanoparticles showed specific cell binding, which was beneficial for bioimaging with high selectivity. As shown in Fig. 11, green fluorescence in the cytoplasm of SKBR-3 cells (breast cancer cells with high HER2 expression) was obviously brighter than that for both MCF-7 and NIH-3T3 cells (fibroblast normal cells, with both MCF-7 and NIH-3T3 cells lacking HER2 expression) after incubation with 43-affibody for 2 h, while HBP 43 itself exhibited nonspecific interactions and all green fluorescence from three kinds of cellular cytoplasm was visible. Recently, by utilizing gadolinium ion (Gd(III))-chelated fluorescent HBPs, they have realized the fluorescence and magnetic resonance dual imaging in live animals.150
 Fig. 10  The chemical structures of HBPs 39–40 and CLSM (confocal laser scanning microscope) images of MCF-7 cells incubated with 40b. The cells were incubated for 2 h. 
 Fig. 11  The chemical structures of HBPs 41–43 and CLSM images of SKBR-3 (a), MCF-7 (b) and NIH-3T3 cells (c) treated with 43 (0.5 μg mL−1) for 2 h at 37 °C; CLSM images of SKBR-3 (d), MCF-7 (e) and NIH-3T3 cells (f) treated with 43-affibody conjugate (0.5 μg mL−1) for 2 h at 37 °C. The cellular nuclei are stained by PI. The images are obtained by merging two fluorescent channels: 520–550 nm upon excitation at 408 nm for 43 and 575–635 nm upon excitation at 543 nm for PI. 
Interestingly, in recent years it has been found that not only do conjugated structures lead to light emission, but a few kinds of polymers only containing auxochromophore or unconventional chromophore moieties could also demonstrate strong luminescence under proper conditions,151 such as hyperbranched poly(amido amine) (PAMAM),152 hyperbranched poly(amino ester)s (PAE),153 hyperbranched poly(ether amide)s (PEA),154etc. Since these HBPs have good biocompatibility, they demonstrated some intrinsic advantages when applied to bioimaging, although their luminance and fluorescence quantum yields were usually relatively low. In 2011, Pan et al. designed and synthesized a series of hyperbranched PAMAM nanoparticles with multiple functions, including biodegradability, autofluorescence, and specific affinity via Michael addition polymerization of N,N′-cystaminebisacrylamide, 1-(2-aminoethyl)piperazine and N-galactosamine hydrochloride (or N-glucosamine hydrochloride) in a methanol–water solution.155 The fluorescence from these HPAMAM nanoparticles is attributed to the tertiary amine chromophore. Additionally, in these nanoparticles, the cross-linking could restrict the collision of tertiary amines resulting in strong fluorescence, which overcame the shortcoming of relatively low fluorescence quantum yields of hyperbranched PAMAM. It was found that they demonstrated low cytotoxicity and could be recognized by an asialoglycoprotein receptor on the surface of HepG2 (human liver cancer cells) and then internalized. Moreover, these HBPs could be used as the carriers in drug or gene delivery. In 2012, the application of hyperbranched PAE in cell imaging was successfully realized,156 and it was found that the molecular weights were an important factor affecting the fluorescence quantum yields: the larger the molecular weights, the higher the fluorescence efficiencies.
So far, the utilization of HBPs as fluorescent probes in bioimaging is still a brand new field, with little related research. As reported in the limited literature mentioned above,142–156 HBPs used in this field usually exhibit enhanced stability, reduced toxicity, prolonged plasma half-life and improved targeting specificity. It has also been developed from normal optical imaging to magnetic resonance imaging,157 nuclear imaging,158etc., demonstrating their important role in the early diagnosis of disease in the future.
2.4 Nonlinear optical materials
When a beam of light propagates through a material, the interaction of the electromagnetic field with molecules in the material induces polarization which is the charge variation and displacement of associated atoms (or ions in ionic substances). Quantitatively, the macroscopic polarization (P) is frequently expressed as a function of a medium-dependent susceptibility χ(1), as given in eqn (1), so long as the electric field strength (E) is small. P = χ(1)E(1)
The nonlinear optical phenomenon arises from the breakdown of eqn (1). As the applied field strengths increase, the polarization response of the medium is no longer linear, which can be expressed as a nonlinear equation as follows: P = χ(1)E + χ(2)E2 + χ(3)E3 +…(2)
Generally, the higher order susceptibility is only about 10−7–10−8 times that of the lower one. Therefore, it was only after the advent of the laser that the nonlinear optical (NLO) effects such as second-harmonic generation (SHG) effect, Pockels effect, photorefractive, two-photon absorption effect, etc., were gradually observed.159–162 At present, these effects have played an important role in many fields of science and technology.

2.4.1 Second-order nonlinear optical HBPs. 
The 21st century is an age of global information. Increasing attention has been paid to transmitting information by photonics due to its good parallelism, high frequency, wide bandwidth, high speed, anti-jamming, etc. One of the crucial limitations in photonics technology is how to prepare electro-optical (EO) materials, one type of second-order NLO material (namely its χ(2) ≠ 0, while the third-order NLO material was a material with χ(3) ≠ 0, etc.), with excellent performance, and this field has already become very important in the frontier of material science and optical engineering. For organic (or polymeric) materials to exhibit an active second-order NLO effect, the arrangement of the dipoles of NLO chromophores, which usually possess a donor–π–acceptor (D–π–A) structure with large dipoles, should be noncentrosymmetric, which is usually achieved by the poling procedure.163 However, the strong intermolecular dipole–dipole interactions within these D–π–A structures typically make the poling-induced noncentrosymmetric alignment of the chromophores a daunting task, which has become the major problem in NLO research.164 Therefore, it seems that HBPs are a good choice for second-order NLO materials, since the three-dimensional (3D) spatial separation endows the polymers with a favorable site-isolation effect (which could minimize the strong intermolecular electrostatic interactions among chromophore moieties with high dipole moment, thus enhancing the macroscopic optical nonlinearities).165,166
Zhang et al. reported the first hyperbranched NLO materials in 1997.167 However, the NLO property of the obtained HBP was only 2.8 pm V−1, much lower than normal LPs at that time. Thus, their work did not attract much interest. The low NLO coefficient might probably be caused by the low first hyperpolarizability (β) of the chromophore moieties used and the difficulty in the orderly alignment of the NLO chromophore moieties, which were at the cross positions of the branches, just like the head-to-tail polymers.
In 2004, an ultrahigh NLO coefficient of 177 pm V−1, which was the highest value reported at that time, was achieved by very simple azo-functionalized hyperbranched poly(aryleneethynylene) 44 (Fig. 12), as reported by Li and Tang.168,169 Meanwhile, HBPs 44 displayed good film-forming ability and large exothermic peaks starting at 88 (44a) and 120 °C (44b), respectively, in their DSC thermograms due to the cross-linking reactions accompanying the thermally induced acetylene polymerization. Therefore, the optical nonlinearities of the poled films were thermally stable (no drop in the NLO coefficient of 44a when heated to 152 °C). In 2005, Wang and co-workers designed some hyperbranched oligomeric dopants 45 (Fig. 12) with a number average molecular weight of 3300 g mol−1.170 When it was doped in poly(ether sulfone) as the NLO guest with a concentration of about 15 wt%, the resultant polymeric system exhibited high NLO effects, with an EO coefficient of up to 65 pm V−1, much higher than that of the linear analogue (18 pm V−1). Furthermore, the poled film could be cross-linked at 200–210 °C, and the EO coefficient of the obtained cross-linked poled films remained at about 90% of the original one, even after being stored at 85 °C for 1200 h under an atmosphere of nitrogen.
 Fig. 12  The chemical structures of HBPs 44 and 45. 
Stimulated by these successful examples, from 2006, our group prepared many series of NLO HBPs (46–48 as examples, Fig. 13) and their linear analogues (49–51, Fig. 13) to systematically research the effect of 3D architectural structure in NLO materials. All the experimental data led to one conclusion: the NLO coefficients and stabilities of these HBPs were higher than those of the corresponding linear polymers;171–173 sometimes, the optical transparency could also be improved.171,172 These indicated that the 3D architectural structure of HBPs and the spatial chromophore isolation in the macromolecular spheres were beneficial to the enhancement of their optical nonlinearities. Other groups also prepared some HBPs through different synthetic strategies.173–179 In comparison with the normal linear NLO polymers, these HBPs demonstrated much better performance, confirming the importance of 3D topological structure in the NLO field once again.
 Fig. 13  The chemical structures of HBPs 46–48 and their linear analogues 49–51. 
All of the above examples of NLO hyperbranched polymers were side-chain or main-chain. Considering that the periphery of HBPs could be easily modified, NLO activity could also be achieved by introducing an NLO chromophore into the periphery of normal HBPs, and the hyperbranched core could also decrease the dipole–dipole interactions among the NLO chromophore moieties along the periphery. In 2009, Odobel et al. synthesized two HBPs 52a–b with Disperse Red-1 as NLO chromophore moieties (Fig. 14), which exhibited relatively high NLO coefficients of 65 (52a) and 42 (52b) pm V−1, and good stability (the NLO coefficient remained stable up to 130 °C).180 Recently, they used a higher performance chromophore CPO (an NLO chromophore consisting of an indoline donor group coupled to a tricyanofuran through a ring-locking polyene) instead of Disperse Red-1. The NLO coefficient of the obtained HBP 52c (Fig. 14) could be enhanced more than 5 times in comparison with that of 52a.181 Our group also conducted some work on the post-functionalization of the periphery of NLO HBPs. Two series of HBPs 53 and 54 (Fig. 15) containing nitro azobenzene as NLO chromophore moieties in the core were successfully prepared, in which different isolation groups of different size were introduced to their periphery as end-capped moieties via the click chemistry reaction.39,182–184 The results showed that the end-capping groups in the periphery could adjust the site-isolation effect of HBPs, and further affect the macroscopic NLO coefficients of HBPs. In both of these two series of HBPs, carbazole was the most suitable end-capped group, and the NLO coefficient of 54d was up to 113.8 pm V−1. Furthermore, the solubility and processability of these HBPs could be modified by these end-capped groups in the periphery,39 indicating the importance of functional groups in the periphery of HBPs once again.
 Fig. 14  The chemical structures of HBPs 52 and compound CPO. 
 Fig. 15  The chemical structures of HBPs 53 and 54. 
Recently, some new design strategies for NLO macromolecules were proposed, such as the concepts of “suitable isolation group”165 and “isolation chromophore”,185 and the utilization of the Ar–ArF self-assembly effect,186etc. These strategies were also applied to the design of NLO HBPs in the past two years. In 2012, by using the concept of “suitable isolation group” (for a given chromophore moiety and a given linkage position, there should be a suitable isolation group present to boost its microscopic β value to higher macroscopic NLO property), two new series of main chain NLO HBPs were prepared, by changing the bulky size of the co-monomers.187 The NLO coefficient of HBP, derived from the co-monomer of suitable size, was up to 152.6 pm V−1. According to the concept of “isolation chromophore” (a chromophore with a lower μβ value as an isolation group for another chromophore group with a higher μβ such that the different electrostatic potential distribution of the two types of chromophore could affect the alignment of the chromophore moieties to enhance the NLO coefficient), different HBPs with two types of chromophore moieties arranged orderly, have been prepared by different synthetic routes.188–190 All of them demonstrated improved performance compared to their linear analogues or hyperbranched analogue with only one type of chromophore moiety, with an NLO coefficient of 167.4 pm V−1 achieved.188 Recently, the reversible self-assembly between normal aromatic rings (electron-rich) and perfluoroaromatic rings (electron-poor) were also utilized in HBPs to improve their NLO coefficients and stabilities.191,192 As a result, a high NLO coefficient (145.0 pm V−1) and good stability (no drop in the NLO coefficient when heated to 105 °C) were achieved by introducing pentafluorophenyl groups in the periphery of NLO HBPs derived from AB2-type monomers.
Although HBPs demonstrated such advantages in the NLO field, the shortcomings of HBPs (e.g. the linear defect) has limited their development in this area in comparison with dendrimers with defect-free and perfect, monodisperse 3D structures. Recently, our group prepared a new series of NLO dendrimers through a convergent approach or the combination of divergent and convergent approaches (a “double-stage” method) by using the click chemistry reaction.193 Accompanying the growth of the NLO dendrimers, the 3D topological structure became better and better, and the loading density of the effective chromophore moieties also increased, leading to the increased NLO coefficients. For the fifth generation dendrimer G5 (Fig. 16), the NLO coefficient was up to 193.1 pm V−1. If we linked them to a branched core to further improve their topological structures in Core-G3 (Fig. 16), an even higher NLO coefficient (246.0 pm V−1) could be achieved.194
 Fig. 16  The chemical structures of HBP 55, dendrimers G5 and Core-G3. 
However, the NLO coefficient of HBP 55, which was derived from the same monomer of G5 and with the same end-capped group of G5, was only 116.8 pm V−1 (60% of the NLO coefficient of G5).191 The degree of branching (DB), which directly correlates with the density of the dendritic structure and the end groups, is one of the most important parameters for the characterization of HBPs. In contrast to perfectly branched dendrimers, which possess only dendritic and terminal units, normal HBPs usually demonstrated DB values in a range of 0–1. Thus, it was very important to enhance the DB values and decrease the polydispersity of HBPs in order to make HBPs more like dendrimers. From this standpoint, we recently tried to enhance the DB values of NLO HBPs in order to decrease their linear defects. The result showed that the NLO coefficients and optical transparency were all improved to a large degree with the enhanced DB value.195 Thus, this should be an important strategy for the preparation of high performance NLO HBPs with easy syntheses in the future.


2.4.2 HBPs with two-photon absorption properties. 
Different from traditional one photon processes, multiphoton absorption is the simultaneous absorption of more than one photon by the same molecule, which could access an electronically excited state by absorption of lower energy photons. As a special case, the two-photon absorption first observed in 1961, 2PA,196 is a third-order NLO phenomenon and could be utilized in stimulated scattering, laser scanning microscopy, data storage and microfabrication, etc.,197 since the long wavelength excitation light beam could easily penetrate deeper into the materials or even pass through them.
In 1999, Prasad et al. prepared a series of multi-branched 2PA molecules 56 (Fig. 17), which were synthesized by coupling one, two and three two-photon active asymmetric donor–acceptor chromophores together through a triphenylamine group.198 As shown in Fig. 17, the two-photon cross-sections, measured both with nanosecond and femtosecond pulses, showed that the value for the trimer was more than six times larger than that for the monomer, and the value for the dimer was three times that of the monomer. This phenomenon is called cooperative enhancement, which could be explained by Beljonne's exciton model.199 Thus, dendritic macromolecules have been considered as good candidates for 2PA materials.
 Fig. 17  The chemical structures of compounds 56 and their two-photon cross-sections. 
As typical examples of dendritic structures, conjugated HBPs were also designed for 2PA materials shortly after the finding of cooperative enhancement. In 2004, Tian and co-workers designed and synthesized a series of new HBPs 57 with triphenylamine and long hexyloxy side chain substituted PPV (Fig. 18).200 The triphenylamine unit in the main chain could improve the hole-transporting ability, and the introduction of long hexyloxy groups into phenyl rings could further inhibit the polymer chain alignment, minimize inter-chain interactions, and also act as additional donors on the conjugated chain. Furthermore, the HBPs were end-capped by different aromatic aldehydes via the Wittig reaction to form different D–π–D or D–π–A structures. The TPA cross-section of 57a with a D–π–D structure, measured by the femtosecond (fs) Z-scan technique, was 1.43 × 10−20 cm4 GW−1 (namely 358 GM) per repeat unit, much larger than those polymers reported previously,201,202 while a cross-section of 0.64 × 10−20 cm4 GW−1 (namely 160 GM) was found for 57b with a D–π–A structure. Meanwhile, HBPs 57 exhibited strong two-photon induced frequency up-converted fluorescence under the excitation of 120 fs pulses at 800 nm. In 2009, they also prepared HBP 58 (Fig. 18) with a D–π–A structure in its interior.203 Triphenylamine (donor) was still used as the core in 58, but the connecting unit was changed to 2,5-dioctylpyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-(2H,5H)-dione (DPP) (acceptor). The TPA cross-section of the HBP 58 was determined by the fs open-aperture Z-scan technique, and the value of the 2PA cross-section was up to 579 GM per repeating unit, since the whole HBP chain was constructed by D–π–A conjugated units. HBP 58 demonstrated high two-photon fluorescence quantum yields. 4,4′-Dihexyl-2,2′-bithiazole was also used as acceptor and connecting units to construct 2PA HBPs, and a 2PA cross-section of 552 GM per repeat unit was achieved.204
 Fig. 18  The chemical structures of HBPs 57 and 58. 
In 2003, it was found that cooperative enhancement also existed in branched 2PA materials with electron-withdrawing cores (e.g. triazine),205 and the 2PA cross-section was a little larger than those of branched molecules with triphenylamine as the core.198 Based on these results, Chen and co-workers designed and synthesized a series of 2PA HBPs 59 with 2,4,6-tris(thiophen-2-yl)-1,3,5-triazine as the core (Fig. 19).206 These HBPs demonstrated large 2PA cross-sections in the range 1000 to 5000 GM. After normalizing their 2PA cross-sections by their molecular weights, their 2PA cross-sections per unit weight was in the order of 59d (0.100 GM mol g−1) > 59c (0.098 GM mol g−1) > 59b (0.075 GM mol g−1) > 59a (0.067 GM mol g−1), in agreement with the molar ratio of 2,4,6-tris-(thiophen-2-yl)-1,3,5-triazine units in the polymers, since this core in these HBPs could not only extend the conjugation length, but also improve their rigidity and planarity, which were the main factors for enhancing the 2PA cross-section of the polymers. Interestingly, their absorption wavelength corresponding to the two-photon absorption maximum was significantly blue-shifted by twice that of the linear absorption maximum wavelength (for 59d, the maximum two-photon absorption was 715 nm, while its maximum linear absorption wavelength was 403 nm; 715 nm was more blue-shifted than 806 nm), due to the existence of a centre of inversion in the two-photon active core, which correlated with the C3h symmetry of the triazine–thiophene core.
 Fig. 19  The synthetic routes and chemical structures of HBPs 59. 
In this field, the structure and molecular weights of HBPs, which could affect the 2PA cross-section to a large degree, were not accurately identified. Even now, how to accurately test the molecular weight is still a problem in the field of HBPs. Meanwhile, just like EO materials, the 2PA cross-section of HBPs were usually lower than those of dendrimers. Thus, more and more researchers have given attention to 2PA dendrimers but not HBPs. On the other hand, this also confirmed the importance of controllability in the syntheses of HBPs once again.


2.4.3 Hyperbranched optical limiting polymers. 
An optical limiter, which can be used for the protection of human eyes or optical sensors against high-intensity laser radiation-induced damage, is a special device in which the optical transmissivity decreases when the input signal intensity increases.197 In the 1990s, optical limiting materials were developed from traditional inorganic semiconductors to organic conjugated polymers, due to their large nonlinearity, ultrafast response time, low threshold, wide limiting band, etc., which could be not achieved by inorganic semiconductors.
In 2002, conjugated HBPs were reported as optical limiting materials. Tang and co-workers prepared a series of conjugated HBPs 60a–f by using different monomers and end-capped groups via the polycyclotrimerization of diacetylenes (Fig. 20).207 Among these HBPs, 60d demonstrated the best optical limiting properties with the threshold (the incident fluence at which nonlinear transmittance is 50% of the initial linear one) of 126 mJ cm−2 and the signal suppression (the ratio of saturated transmitted fluence to maximum incident fluence) of 11% at 532 nm, which was similar to C60208 (a well-known optical limiter, and was usually used as a reference for organic optical limiters) and much better than linear PPV. Furthermore, the optical limiting properties could be changed to a large degree once the monomer or the end-capped groups changed a little, indicating that the nonlinear optical properties could be easily manipulated by molecular engineering. Then in 2003, they further used functional silole, a famous AIE active molecule, as a monomer to construct a series of multifunctional HBPs 61 (Fig. 20).209 Interestingly, the obtained polymers 61 were not AIE active anymore. The main reason should be the stiff polyene rods and the hard polyarylene balls may have been randomly piled up when aggregated in the poor solvent environment and further generated large free volumes,210 in which the phenyl rings may still be able to rotate around the axes of the single bonds linked to the silacyclopentadiene core. However, their light emission was sensitive to temperature change: the photoluminescence intensities of the polymer solutions increased when temperatures decreased, which should also be caused by the RIR process. Their optical limiting properties were still very good, and even better than that of C60. Furthermore, their optical limiting properties decreased when the content of the nonconjugated 1-alkyne moieties increased in the HBPs. Besides this, the hyperbranched polycarbazole,211 hyperbranched polythiophene,212etc. were also prepared with optical limiting properties.
 Fig. 20  The chemical structures of HBPs 60–62. 
Usually, optical limiting was achieved by using various kinds of NLO activities, such as nonlinear absorption, nonlinear refraction, nonlinear scattering, etc. 2PA was a typical third-order nonlinear absorption phenomenon, which could also lead to optical limiting activity. For example, Liu et al. prepared a hyperbranched PPV 62 (Fig. 20) with excellent optical limiting performance in the visible region from 490 to 610 nm.213 Their research showed that the mechanism of optical limiting was mainly due to 2PA at long wavelengths, and at short wavelengths both 2PA and reverse saturable absorption, another type of nonlinear absorption in which the absorption coefficient could be enhanced with the increase in light intensity. However, to date, the detailed optical limiting mechanism for conjugated HBPs is still not very clear, possibly because of the complicated structures of HBPs.
Generally, because of the 3D topological structure, dendritic macromolecules usually demonstrate good performance once used as NLO materials. HBPs, with the remarkable feature of synthetic accessibility, have already played an important role in this field. However, because of the inherent flaws of HBPs, their performances are usually lower than those of dendrimers and other types of dendritic macromolecules with defect-free structures. Therefore, a new avenue to improve their comprehensive performance would be controlling the hyperbranched polymerization in order to enhance the branching degree and decrease the polydispersity of the yielded HBPs.

3. Hyperbranched polymers with advanced electrical properties
As mentioned in the introduction, the initial investigation of the optical, electrical and magnetic polymeric materials was the doping of polyacetylenes to give high conductivity. Stimulated by these exciting results, many other conductive polymers have been studied systematically, with polyacetylenes, polyanilines, polypyrroles, and polythiophenes as typical examples. The special hyperbranched structure has also been utilized to improve the conductivity of polymers. In 2010, Albertsson et al. synthesized a series of linear and hyperbranched copolymers through an “A2 + Bn (n = 2, 3, 4)” strategy using carboxyl-capped aniline pentamer (CCAP) and branched poly(ε-caprolactone)s (PCLs) by coupling reactions.214 The hyperbranched copolymers 63b and 63c had a higher conductivity than the linear one 63a, suggesting that the higher conductivity of the hyperbranched copolymer was due to the ordered distribution of the peripheral emeraldine state of the aniline pentamer (EMAP) segments that more easily form a conductive network. Thus, the conductivity of the polymers could be improved and controlled by the macromolecular architecture (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  The chemical structures of HBPs 63. 
Also, some new hyperbranched polyelectrolytes were designed and used as membranes for lithium batteries, demonstrating some interesting results. However, their is little related work, including conductive hyperbranched polymers and hyperbranched polyelectrolytes.215–217 On the other hand, the investigation of hyperbranched polymers utilized in solar cells has attracted more attention, since energy is one of the most important factors to influence human society in the 21st century.
Nowadays, the development of renewable energies generated from natural resources such as sunlight, wind, tides and geothermal heat etc., is the cornerstone of achieving sustainable development. Among them, sunlight has the most potential to make the largest energy contribution. Accordingly, research on solar cells has become popular.
Solar cells, also called photovoltaics, are devices based on solar technology, which can convert sunlight directly into electricity by the photovoltaic effect.218 In comparison with traditional monocrystalline silicon solar cells, organic solar cells have numerous advantages such as low cost, light weight and the potential for the preparation of flexible large area devices by roll-to-roll manufacturing, etc., and thus have become one of the hottest topics in recent years. At present, there are mainly two types of solar cell: polymeric bulk-heterojunction solar cells (PSCs) and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).
3.1 Hyperbranched bulk-heterojunction solar cells
In PSCs, the donor phase is intimately intermixed with the acceptor phase, and the excitons can dissociate to holes and electrons at the donor–acceptor interface under sunlight. Subsequently, the free charge carriers will move to the corresponding electrodes by following the continuous route of either donors or acceptors, and then generate the electric current.218
Among the different kinds of polymeric donors, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) (Fig. 22) is one of the most commonly used and the power conversion efficiency (PCE), the most important parameter for solar cells, of the PSCs based on this donor could be higher than 5%, after optimizing the device.219–223 However, P3HT is a semicrystalline polymer, which tends to crystallize badly due to undesired π–π stacking, thus further affecting the charge transporting properties.224 Therefore, it was very easy to think that the hyperbranched structure could inhibit the crystallization of P3HT. In 2007, by using the copolymerization of 2,5-dibromo-3-hexylthiophene and 2,2′,5,5′-tetrabromo-3,3′-bithiophene, Tu and co-workers prepared a series of hyperbranched polythiophenes 64 (Fig. 22).225 As expected, with the increase of the branched structure, the solubilities and processabilities of these HBPs were all enhanced, while their crystallinity decreased, which should be attributed to less intermolecular stacking. However, the introduction of branched structures led to a big drop in PCE (from 3.5% of P3HT to 0.13% of 64c), which was unexpected. They further investigated the atomic force microscopy (AFM) of P3HT and 64/PCBM (a fullerene derivative, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, which was usually used as an acceptor material in PSCs) mixtures, after annealing the films to 150 °C for 10 min under vacuum. While the thin films based on non-branched P3HT clearly showed a lamellar structure with a nanoscale, regular morphology, that of HBPs 64 led to the formation of larger, irregular aggregates, indicating that HBPs 64 could not form good heterojunctions with PCBM, directly resulting in the decreased PCE. After that, in 2012, Ludwigs et al. prepared another series of soluble hyperbranched polythiophenes 65via oxidative coupling polymerization (Fig. 22).226 The charge carrier mobilities of 65 were 1–2 orders of magnitude lower than the mobility obtained for P3HT, thus, low PCEs were obtained (after optimizing the device, the best PCE of the PSC based on 65 was only 0.61%).
 Fig. 22  The synthetic routes to furnish HBPs 64a–c and chemical structures of P3HT and HBPs 65–68. 
Besides hyperbranched polythiophenes, hyperbranched PPV was also used as a polymeric donor in the preparation of PSCs (HBP 66, Fig. 22).227 Similar to other hyperbranched materials, the performances of HBPs 66 were also related to the end-capped groups. HBP 66c, with pyridyl as an end-capped group, has the widest absorption and the highest absorption coefficient, which is good for the absorption of sunlight. Therefore, the PSC based on this HBP also demonstrated the best performance, with the highest PCE of 0.11%. However, the efficiency was still unsatisfactory.
There was also some work concerning dendrimer solar cells.228,229 In comparison with HBPs, dendrimers demonstrated slightly higher PCEs, but still much lower than normal LPs. In some sense, HBPs and dendrimers with highly branched structures were not suitable for the preparation of PSCs in comparison with normal LPs. The main reason was that they could not form good heterojunctions when mixed with the acceptors (fullerene derivatives), due to their 3D topological structures. Therefore, research in this field has been unable to attract much interest. Alternatively, hyperbranched polymers could be used as a cathode interlayer for high efficiency OPVs, with a PCE of 7.7% obtained, comparable to traditional devices fabricated with a highly reactive Ca/Al cathode.230 This might be another good choice for hyperbranched polymers in PSCs.
3.2 Hyperbranched dye-sensitized solar cells
In DSSCs, the sensitizers first absorb light, accompanied by the excitation of electrons to the excited states. Subsequently, the excited electrons transfer to the conduction band of TiO2, then transport to the anode by electron diffusion through the disordered network of TiO2 nanoparticles. Meanwhile, the oxidized dye molecules are regenerated by the iodide redox couple or hole-transporter with the positive charge being transported from the electrolyte to the platinum counter electrode.231 Generally, the sensitizing molecule is the most important part of the whole DSSC and critical to its performance. Thus, scientists usually focus on the design of good sensitizers for DSSCs.
HBPs were first used in DSSCs in 2007. Schanze, Reynolds and co-workers synthesized two hyperbranched polyelectrolytes 67 through the A3 + B2 type approach based on Heck polycondensation (Fig. 22).232 These HBPs were anionic (67a, containing SO3− unit) and cationic (67b, containing NMe3+), respectively, and could act as sensitizers to fabricate DSSCs. The PCEs of DSSCs based on these HBPs were only 0.57% and 0.33%, respectively. On the other hand, 67a and 67b were of opposite charge, and there should be strong ionic interactions between them. When they were used to fabricate hybrid DSSCs, these strong ionic interactions could enhance optical density and provide efficient light harvesting, which might possibly facilitate an enhanced energy and charge migration. As expected, the PCEs of hybrid DSSCs were improved to 0.62% and 0.55%, respectively.
Thiophene and its derivatives are frequently used to construct small molecular photosensitizers with good performance. In 2010, Tan et al. designed and synthesized a series of HBPs 68via an A3 + B2 type Wittig–Horner polymerization of 1,3,5-tri(diethyl-phosphonate-methyl)-2-(octyloxy)benzene and 1,2-bis(5-formyl-2-thienyl)ethylene (Fig. 22).233 To adjust their performance, their end-capped groups were changed to an electron donor of triphenylamine (68a), an electron acceptor of cyanoacetic acid (68b) and both of them (68c). These changes could affect the Jsc (short-circuit current) to a large degree: the Jsc of the DSSC based on 68c was 8.76 mA cm−2, more than twice that of the DSSC based on 68a (4.12 mA cm−1). Therefore, the DSSC based on 68c demonstrated the highest PCE of 3.65%. Usually, the aggregation of sensitizers on TiO2 would lead to the charge recombination between the redox couple and the injected electrons in the TiO2, and further decrease the efficiency of the DSSCs. As mentioned above, an important role of HBPs should be the anti-aggregation. Therefore, when HBPs were used as sensitizing molecules, the aggregation of sensitizer should have been prevented. Therefore, when chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA, a transparent, organic compound which binds strongly to the surface of nanostructured TiO2, being able to displace dye molecules from the semiconductor surface and therefore hinder the formation of dye aggregates and further improve the performance234) was added to the dye solution as a coadsorbent, the PCEs of the DSSCs based on these HBPs 68a–c saw only a limited improvement.
Besides these HBPs, hyperbranched polyphthalocyanines235 and hyperbranched polyurethanes,236–238etc., were also applied as sensitizers in DSSCs. Although HBPs were very useful in hindering the formation of dye aggregates once used in DSSCs, their PCEs were still much lower than normal small molecules (already higher than 13%239). Their relatively low PCEs have already become the major problem which restricts the further development of this field.
4. HBPs with magnetic properties
At present, magnetic responsive materials are becoming more and more important at the frontier of materials science because of their potential breakthrough applications in many fields, such as biomedical science, microfluidics, coatings, etc.240
Pyrolytic ceramization is an important way to prepare magnetic ceramics. The preparation of precursors, namely organometallic polymers, is the critical step for this method since the precursors could seriously affect the activities of the target magnetic materials. Usually, hyperbranched organometallic polymers are better precursors to magnetic ceramics than linear ones, since their 3D topological structures enable better retention of pyrolyzed species and steadier growth of magnetic crystallites. The comparison of Tang's work in 2000241 and Manner's work in 1995242 provides important evidence for this point. Manner and co-workers prepared a linear poly(silaferrocenophane) 69a (Fig. 23) as a precursor, and the final iron-, silicon- and carbon-containing ceramic exhibited a saturation magnetization (Ms) of ∼3.5 emu g−1. Tang and co-workers synthesized a hyperbranched poly[1,1′-ferrocenylene(methyl)silyne] 69b (Fig. 23) as a precursor, and the corresponding ceramic exhibited an Ms of 51 emu g−1, much higher than 3.5 emu g−1. Shortly after that, Tang also used some other comonomers to construct the ferrocene-containing HBP precursor, and the yielded ceramics exhibited very large Ms (51 emu g−1).243
 Fig. 23  The synthetic routes and chemical structures of HBPs 69–71 (left). Plots of magnetization (M) versus applied magnetic field (H) at 300 K for magnetoceramics 69d and 69e. Insets: enlarged portions of the M–H plots in the low strength region of the applied magnetic field (right). 
In organometallic chemistry, the triple bond is a versatile ligand, which can form complexes with various metals, of course including some magnetic metals, such as cobalt. In 2004, by using Glaser–Hay oxidative coupling polymerization of tris(4-ethynylphenyl)amine, Tang and co-workers prepared a hyperbranched polytriphenylamine 70 (Fig. 23).244 After the reaction between the triple bonds in 70a and Co2(CO)8 or CpCo(CO)2, another series of hyperbranched precursors 70b or 70c were yielded. By pyrolyzing the complexes 70b or 70c in a tube furnace under nitrogen at high temperature for 1 h, the magnetic ceramics 70d or 70e were yielded. This is a good example to illustrate the importance of organometallic polymeric precursors: only a small change of the ligands can lead to a large difference in the properties of the final products. The Ms of 70d was up to 118 emu g−1, while an Ms of only 26 emu g−1 could be achieved by 70e. Recently, ferrocene was also used as co-monomer to construct this type of precursor,245–247 and an even better performance was achieved (the Ms was up to 126 emu g−1)247).
Unlike the direct pyrolysis of organometallic polymeric precursors, another linear polymer could be added in the pyrolysis process to further modify the structure and properties of the yielded ceramics. In 2014, Kong et al.248 synthesized Si–Fe–C–N magnetoceramics by bulk pyrolysis of commercial polysilazane, crosslinked by a polyferrocenylcarbosilane with hyperbranched polymer 71a (Fig. 23). The terminal reactive groups, the silicon hydrogen bonds, could react with the vinyl groups in the side chains of polysilazane, via hydrosilylation or free-radical polymerization below 300 °C. Then, the resultant crosslinked polymers 71b underwent pyrolysis at 1100 or 1300 °C, to yield the tunable magnetoceramics 71c with a homogeneous nanostructure. The nanocrystal-containing ceramics showed good ferromagnetism with an ultralow (close to 0) hysteresis loss. This synthetic approach could further broaden the research field of the pyrolysis method, and many other functional polymers could be applied to the preparation of different ceramics with diverse properties.
In contrast to the above pyrolysis method, the magnetic nanoparticles from other synthetic strategies could be further modified by some other active molecules, which is actually very important for the application of magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs). In 2009, by the surface-initiated ring-opening multibranching polymerization of glycidol, Neoh and co-workers prepared hyperbranched polyglycerol-grafted Fe3O4 nanoparticles 72 (Fig. 24), which demonstrated an Ms value of 30 emu g−1.249 Thanks to their hydrophilic and biocompatible branched chains, these nanoparticles were stable in aqueous solutions and cells, which could not be achieved by normal Fe3O4 nanoparticles. Furthermore, these nanoparticles did not exhibit any significant cytotoxicity towards macrophage and fibroblast cells. Coupled with their magnetic properties and stability, these nanoparticles had great potential for application as contrast agents in magnetic resonance imaging.
 Fig. 24  The synthetic routes and chemical structures of HBP 72 (MNP: magnetic nanoparticles). 
5. Concluding remarks
In this paper, recent progress of optical, electrical and magnetic hyperbranched polymers has been reviewed. We classified the selected examples by different functions, such as light emitting diodes, sensors, nonlinear optical materials, solar cells, and others. Due to the length limitation, we could not summarize all of the related beautiful work in this review. Alternatively, through the selected examples, we mainly focused on the design of HBPs at the molecular level, tried to demonstrate the ideas hidden in the cited papers, and attempted to draw together the structure–property relationship of optical, electrical and magnetic hyperbranched polymers. From this point, we would like to present the developing trend of optical, electrical and magnetic hyperbranched polymers, and discuss the next step of research in this area.
In comparison with normal LPs, HBPs possess special 3D branched structures and some other differences.
(1) The solubility and processability of HBPs were usually better than their linear analogues, which was the principal reason for the research in this area.
(2) Their special 3D branched structures can bring out some special useful features. In light-emitting materials, they can prevent the wound and aggregation between the polymer chains, and thus inhibit the notorious ACQ effect, and the so-called “superamplified effect” could dramatically enhance the sensitivity of HBP-based chemosensors; in second-order NLO materials, they can decrease the dipole–dipole interactions among the chromophore moieties with a D–π–A structure, and enhance their NLO coefficients; in DSSCs, they can decrease the aggregation of sensitizers on TiO2, and then increase their PCEs; in the precursors of magnetic materials, they can enable good retention of pyrolyzed species and steadier growth of magnetic crystallites, and lead to excellent magnetic properties, etc.
(3) A lot of reactive moieties along their periphery can make the modification of HBPs much more convenient, which can not be achieved in normal LPs. As for fluorescent materials, the emissions can be easily tuned by introducing different functional groups in the periphery; for bioimaging materials, the functional groups in the periphery can improve the water solubility and biocompatibility of HBPs; in second-order NLO materials, the size of isolation groups in the periphery can affect the NLO effect to a large degree; for 2PA materials, the activity of functional groups in the periphery could adjust the push–pull electronic structures; etc.
However, unlike the defect-free dendritic structure of dendrimers, there are still some linear parts in HBPs, which led to unexpected defects and somehow undefined and defective chemical structures. Thus, these inherent flaws make their performance poorer than those of dendrimers with similar structure, and restrict their development to some degree. For example, as for second-order NLO materials, the NLO coefficients of dendrimers are usually higher than those of HBPs with similar structure.
For the further development of HBPs with optical, electrical and magnetic properties, methods to enhance their advantages and improve the flaws are badly needed, as mentioned above. Thus, perhaps at least three issues confusing scientists should be addressed: the controlled synthesis, the defined structure, and the detailed relationship between the structures and properties.
As mentioned above, the typical advantage of HBPs over dendrimers with defect-free structures is the relatively easy synthesis, without the requirement of the tedious synthesis and the protection–deprotection reactions. Thus, it is a challenge for synthetic chemists to prepare HBPs with similar defect-free structures from one-pot hyperbranched polymerization. That is to say, how can the synthesis be controlled and the contents of the linear unit in HBPs decreased. As reported earlier in 2000 by Ishida et al.,250 just through changing the structure of ABn-type monomers, the degree of branching (DB) of the corresponding hyperbranched polymers increased with increasingly branched monomers: AB2 monomers gave a DB of only 32%, AB4 monomers 72%, and AB8 ones 84%. Excitingly, recently in the case of Ueda and coworkers, a DB of 100% (i.e. there are no linear units in them) was achieved, with the polydispersity index as low as 1.12.37 These results confirmed that the highly branched HBPs could be prepared by elaborately designing the polymerization approach of monomers with perfect structures. However, so far, related research is still very scarce. New design ideas for monomers and new synthetic strategies are badly needed, with the aim to yield HBPs with a similar defect-free dendritic structure to that of dendrimers. Recently, low generation dendrimers have been successfully utilized to construct hyperbranched polymers as a new type of monomers in our lab. We could name the new type of hyperbranched polymers as “Dendronized Hyperbranched Polymers”, which demonstrate some interesting polymerization behavior and possess unique structure and good performance.251,252
Despite the tedious synthesis of dendrimers, generally, the structure of dendrimers is distinct. This makes it easy to explore the structure–property relationship. However, the structure of HBPs is not clear, making it difficult to design HBPs with the exact required functions. For example, it could be summarized from the experimental results that the “superamplified effect” could dramatically enhance the sensitivity of HBP-based chemosensors, but how can we design another HBP with an even better “superamplified effect”, or could the “superamplified effect” be predicted for a special HBP? Without the defined structure, there would only be some feeling derived from the experimental results of ambiguous structures, but no good rules to guide the design of functional HBPs. Thus, it is not surprising that the properties of the target HBPs cannot be anticipated accurately. Also, the obtained results of HBPs cannot be understood deeply. To investigate the exact structure of functional HBPs, perhaps modern testing instruments for polymer physics and analogous calculation should be utilized, in addition to the traditional synthesis of analogues and model compounds. Surely, controllable synthetic approaches could aid the investigation.
For functional materials, it is very important to understand the structure–property relationship, which is also entirely suitable for HBPs with optical, electrical and magnetic characteristics. On one hand, the relationship could explain the inherent reason for the observed interesting phenomena; one the other hand, it could guide the preparation of HBPs with optimized properties. However, it is a difficult task to summarize the relationship, even with the defined structure and exact properties, since it is not easy to assign functions to specific moieties. For this reason alone, the exploration of the detailed relationship between the structure and properties is one of the important issues for the further development of optical, electrical and magnetic functional hyperbranched polymers. Thus, systematic research should be conducted by adjusting their subtle structure, with the aid of controllable syntheses and defined structures of HBPs, coupled with other related investigations. In particular, the performance of optical, electrical and magnetic functional hyperbranched polymers depends heavily on the corresponding device fabrication, surface modification, biotechnology, etc.
Actually, the above three issues are not only limited to optical, electrical and magnetic functional hyperbranched polymers, but can also be applied to other functional HBPs. The exciting results obtained so far have already indicated that HBPs could be promising candidates for phosphorescent emitters, sensors, nonlinear optical materials, and precursors of magnetic nanomaterials, while other applications in optical, electrical and magnetic fields should be further studied and considered. Excitingly, the rapid progress of this field recorded so far is encouraging, and indicates that more success could be achieved. Thus, it is reasonable to believe that many good HBPs could be explored for practical applications in the research field of optics, electronics, and magnetics. Also, in the same way that other successful rules concluded from other areas have been utilized in this field, the experience gained in the field of optical, electrical and magnetic functional hyperbranched polymers could surely be applied to other functional HBPs, and further extend to various types of materials, including dendrimers with defect-free structure. Thus, when focusing the research on optical, electrical and magnetic HBPs, we should pay close attention to the interactions between HBPs and other fields, such as organic chemistry, surface engineering, biology, physics, communication technology, electronics, etc. To conclude, the research of optical, electrical and magnetic HBPs, just like their functions, is full of promise, with efficient light, powerful electricity, and passionate magnetic attractions.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the National Science Foundation of China (no. 21034006, 21325416), the National Fundamental Key Research Program (2013CB834701, 2011CB932702) for financial support.
Notes and references
H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. MacDiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, Chem. Commun., 1977, 578–580 RSC .
P. J. Flory, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1952, 74, 2718–2723 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim and O. W. Webster, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 4592–4593 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Walter and M. Malkoch, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4593–4609 RSC .
A. M. Caminade, A. Ouali, M. Keller and J. P. Majoral, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4113–4125 RSC .
L. M. Bronstein and Z. B. Shifrina, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 5301–5344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Astruc, E. Boisselier and C. Ornelas, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 1857–1959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Franc and A. K. Kakkar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1536–1544 RSC .
J. M. J. Fréchet, Science, 1994, 263, 1710–1715 Search PubMed .
A. J. Berresheim, M. Müller and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1747–1785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Lo and P. L. Burn, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1097–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Crespo, G. Sanclimens, M. Pons, E. Giralt, M. Royo and F. Albericio, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1663–1681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Hawker, R. Lee and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 4583–4588 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Kricheldorf and O. Stöber, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1994, 15, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jikei and M. Kakimoto, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2004, 42, 1293–1309 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lin and T. E. Long, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 9809–9816 CrossRef CAS .
M. Smet, Y. Fu, X. Zhang, E. H. Schacht and W. Dehaen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 1458–1463 CrossRef CAS .
R. Spindler and J. M. J. Fréchet, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 1453–1454 CrossRef .
W. J. Feast, S. P. Rannard and A. Stoddart, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 9704–9706 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Mathias and T. W. Carothers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 4043–4044 CrossRef CAS .
B. Voit, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 2679–2699 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. W. Simon and A. H. E. Müller, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 6206–6213 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Powell, C. Cheng and K. L. Wooley, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 4509–4515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Suzuki, A. Ii and T. Saegusa, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 7071–7072 CrossRef CAS .
M. Smet, C. Gottschalk, S. Skaria and H. Frey, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2005, 206, 2421–2428 CrossRef CAS .
M. Suzuki, S. Yoshida, K. Shiraga and T. Saegusa, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 1716–1719 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ishida, A. C. F. Sun, M. Jikei and M. Kakimoto, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 2832–2838 CrossRef CAS .
E. Malmström, M. Johansson and A. Hult, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 1698–1703 CrossRef .
P. Bharathi and J. S. Moore, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 3212–3218 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bo and A. D. Schlüter, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2354–2355 RSC .
D. Holter and H. Frey, Acta Polym., 1997, 48, 298–309 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, L. Su and Z. Bo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10348–20439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Smet, E. Schacht and W. Dehaen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4547–4550 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Segawa, T. Higashihara and M. Ueda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 132, 11000–11001 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mock, A. Burgath, R. Hanselmann and H. Frey, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 7692–7698 CrossRef .
D. P. Bernal, L. Bedrossian, K. Collins and E. Fossum, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 333–338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Segawa, T. Higashihara and M. Ueda, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 1746–1759 RSC .
Y. H. Kim and R. Beckerbauer, Macromolecules, 1994, 27, 1968–1971 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Wu, G. Qiu, G. Yu, Y. Liu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 1977–1987 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, A. Patel, A. K. Gaharwar, S. M. Mihaila, G. Iviglia, S. Mukundan, H. Bae, H. Yang and A. Khademhosseini, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 1299–1310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Pang, Z. Zhu, D. Wang, C. Li, W. Huang, X. Zhu and D. Yan, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 1627–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hu, M. Chen, G. Li, Y. Pang, D. Wang, J. Wu, F. Qiu, X. Zhu and J. Sun, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 3552–3561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wei, J. Wang, X. Shen, X. Zhang, J. Sun, A. Qin and B. Z. Tang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1093–1099 Search PubMed .
P. D. Tatiya, R. K. Hedaoo, P. P. Mahulikar and V. V. Gite, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 1562–1570 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hu, J. Yin, Q. Tang and Y. Chen, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 3826–3834 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Cheng, T. Li and A. Zhang, Macromol. Res., 2012, 20, 549–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, I. R. Oviedo and L. J. Twyman, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7776–7779 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Mei, W. Yuan, P. Lu, A. Qin, J. Sun, Y. Ma and B. Z. Tang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4056–4059 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Zhong, P. Lu, Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam, M. Faisal, Y. Yu, K. S. Wong and B. Z. Tang, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 426–429 RSC .
C. W. Tang and S. A. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burns and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539–541 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Bernius, M. Inbasekaran, J. O'Brien and W. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1737–1750 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pei and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 7416–7417 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dreuw, J. Plöner, L. Lorenz, J. Wachtveitl, J. E. Djanhan, J. Brüning, T. Metz, M. Bolte and M. U. Schmidt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7783–7786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C. He, X. Hao, L. Tan, Y. Li and K. S. Ong, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 5965–5970 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and Z. Bo, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 2013–2015 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ding, Z. Bo, Q. Chu, J. Li, L. Dai, Y. Pang, F. E. Karasz and M. F. Durstock, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2006, 207, 870–878 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tsai and Y. Chen, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 5098–5106 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tsai and Y. Chen, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 70–84 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shih, R. Wu, P. Shih, C. Wang and C. Hsu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 696–710 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kim, D. Park and T. Ahn, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2012, 567, 125–131 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tang, G. Wen, X. Qi, H. Wang, B. Peng, W. Wei and W. Huang, Polymer, 2007, 48, 4412–4418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, H. Meng, J. Pei, W. Huang, Y. Li and A. J. Heeger, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 4838–4844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhan, Y. Liu, X. Wu, S. Wang and D. Zhu, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 2529–2537 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fink, C. Frenz, M. Thelakkat and H. W. Schmidt, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 8177–8181 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. J. Thomas, J. T. Lin, Y. Tao and C. W. Ko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9404–9411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. J. Thomas, J. T. Lin, Y. Tao and C. W. Ko, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1354–1361 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xin, G. Wen, W. Zeng, L. Zhao, X. Zhu, Q. Fan, J. Feng, L. Wang, W. Wei, B. Peng, Y. Cao and W. Huang, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 6755–6758 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wen, Y. Xin, X. Zhu, W. Zeng, R. Zhu, J. Feng, Y. Cao, L. Zhao, L. Wang, W. Wei, B. Peng and W. Huang, Polymer, 2007, 48, 1824–1829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, S. Ye, Y. Liu, G. Yu, W. Wu, J. Qin and Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 9101–9108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sun, J. Li, B. Li, Y. Fu and Z. Bo, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 2651–2658 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, J. Liu, R. Liu, X. Hou, L. Xie, H. Wu, C. Tang, W. Wei, Y. Cao and W. Huang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 6451–6462 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu and H. Lin, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 7232–7240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu and Y. Chen, Polymer, 2010, 51, 4484–4492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Palai, S. P. Mishra, A. Kumar, R. Srivastava, M. N. Kamalasanan and M. Patri, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 832–841 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zheng, M. Häussler, H. Dong, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 7973–7984 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wua, Y. Yang, C. He, X. Chen and Y. Li, Eur. Polym. J., 2008, 44, 4047–4053 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Wang, W. Wang, G. Yang, T. Liu, J. Yu and Y. Jiang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 790–802 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Xu, X. Lu and C. He, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 1397–1402 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Di, Z. Zhu, G. Yu, Z. Li, Q. Zeng, Q. Li, Y. Liu and J. Qin, Polymer, 2006, 47, 7889–7899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Strukelj, F. Papadimitrakopoulos, M. T. Miller and L. J. Rothberg, Science, 1995, 267, 1969–1972 CAS .
L. Tsai and Y. Chen, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 2984–2992 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Bliznyuk, S. A. Carter, J. C. Scott, G. Klärner, R. D. Miller and D. C. Miller, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 361–369 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pei, J. Wang, X. Cao, X. Zhou and W. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9944–9945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, W. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Zhou, H. Lu and J. Pei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12430–12431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, X. Zhou, H. Zi and J. Pei, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 8874–8882 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, W. Lai, Z. Ma, D. Chen and W. Huang, Eur. Polym. J., 2008, 44, 3169–3176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Scherf and K. Müllen, Makromol. Chem., Rapid Commun., 1991, 12, 489–497 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, X. Hao, J. Wu, J. Jin and X. Ba, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 731–738 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lai, Q. He, R. Zhu, Q. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 265–276 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, T. Lin, J. Huang, X. Hao, K. S. Ong and C. He, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 5965–5970 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun and Z. Bo, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 111–124 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Sun, Z. Qi, F. Kong, Y. Ha, S. Yin and S. Lin, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3537–3542 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, H. Huang, Q. Sun, H. Lin, J. Yang and F. Bai, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2004, 15, 43–47 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, Q. Sun, N. Song, H. Wang, H. Fan and Y. Li, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2006, 17, 145–149 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Paul, J. Mwaura, A. A. Argun, P. Taranekar and J. R. Reynold, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 7789–7792 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, M. Shiotsuki, N. Kobayashi, F. Sanda and T. Masuda, Polymer, 2007, 48, 6481–6490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, H. Huang, J. Yang, H. Lin and F. Bai, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1085–1089 RSC .
T. Tsai, C. Lai, R. Chien, J. Hong and A. Yeh, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 237–249 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Jiang, Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Qin, G. Yu and Y. Liu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015, 43, 439–504 Search PubMed .
M. Haussler, J. Liu, R. Zheng, J. W. Y. Lam, A. Qin and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1914–1925 CrossRef .
M. A. Baldo, D. F. O'Brien, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 14422–14428 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Baldo, D. F. O'Brien, Y. You, A. Shoustikov, S. Sibley, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 1998, 395, 151–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tao, C. Yang and J. Qin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2943–2970 RSC .
W. Yang, H. Y. Zhen, C. Y. Jiang, L. J. Su, J. X. Jiang, H. H. Shi and Y. Cao, Synth. Met., 2005, 153, 189–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Lo, N. A. H. Male, J. P. J. Markham, S. W. Magennis, P. L. Burn, O. V. Salata and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 975–979 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Anthopoulos, M. J. Frampton, E. B. Namdas, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 557–560 CrossRef CAS .
I. Avilov, P. Marsal, J. L. Brédas and D. Beljonner, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1624–1629 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guan, Y. Xu, L. Ying, W. Yang, H. Wu, Q. Chen and Y Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 531–537 RSC .
J. Liu, L. Yu, C. Zhong, R. He, W. Yang, H. Wu and Y. Cao, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 689–696 RSC .
T. Guo, R. Guan, J. Zou, J. Liu, L. Ying, W. Yang, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2193–2203 RSC .
T. Guo, L. Yu, B. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Tao, W. Yang, Q. Hou, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 820–828 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, Z. Xie, J. Lam, L. Cheng, H. Chen, C. Qiu, H. S. Kwok, X. Zhan, Y. Liu, D. Zhu and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1740–1741 RSC .
Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5361–5388 RSC .
Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4332–4353 RSC .
Z. Zhao, S. Chen, J. W. Y. Lam, P. Lu, Y. Zhong, K. S. Wong, H. S. Kwok and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2221–2223 RSC .
W. Wu, S. Ye, R. Tang, L. Huang, Q. Li, G. Yu, Y. Liu, J. Qin and Z. Li, Polymer, 2012, 53, 3163–3171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, S. Ye, G. Yu, Y. Liu, J. Qin and Z. Li, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 164–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, S. Ye, L. Huang, L. Xiao, Y. Fu, Q. Huang, G. Yu, Y. Liu, J. Qin, Q. Li and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6374–6382 RSC .
H. Li, H. Wu, E. Zhao, J. Li, J. Sun, A. Qin and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 3907–3914 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Rostovtsev, L. G. Green, V. V. Fokin and K. B. Sharpless, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2596–2599 CrossRef CAS .
A. Qin, L. Tang, J. W. Y. Lam, C. K. W. Jim, Y. Yu, H. Zhao, J. Sun and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1891–1900 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Mei, E. Zhao, Z. Song, A. Qin, J. Sun and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 7692–7703 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zheng, H. Dong, H. Peng, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 5196–5210 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hu, J. W. Y. Lam, J. Liu, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, Z. Yue, K. S. Wong, M. M. F. Yuen and B. Z. Tang, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 1481–1489 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Zhong, J. W. Y. Lam, P. Lu, Y. Hong, Y. Yu, Y. Yue, M. Faisal, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, K. S. Wong and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 4921–4936 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. Deng, N. Tseng, C. Y. K. Chan, Y. Yue, J. C. Y. Ng, J. W. Y. Lam, J. Wang, Y. Hong, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1850–1859 RSC .
R. Hu, J. W. Y. Lam, Y. Yu, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, M. M. F. Yuen and B. Z. Tang, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 95–105 RSC .
X. Lou, D. Ou, Q. Li and Z. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8462–8477 RSC .
T. M. Swager, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 201–207 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yuan, R. Hu, J. W. Y. Lam, N. Xie, C. K. W. Jim and B. Z. Tang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 2847–2856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shu, C. Guan, W. Guo, C. Wang and Y. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3075–3081 RSC .
J. Feng, Y. Li and M. Yang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 222–230 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu and Y. Chen, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 8052–8061 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bao, L. Yuwen, X. Zhan and L. Wang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 3431–3439 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seo, D. Kim, G. Jang, J. Kim and T. S. Lee, Polymer, 2013, 54, 1323–1328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Badugu, J. R. Lakowicz and C. D. Geddes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3635–3641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Baud, P. Barriot and V. Toffis, New Engl. J. Med., 1991, 325, 1761–1766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aied, B. Glynn, H. Cao, Y. Zheng, H. Tai, A. Pandit and W. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 332–334 RSC .
Y. Liu, P. Xu, H. Yu, G. Zuo, Z. Cheng, D. W. Lee and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18004–18009 RSC .
R. Hu, J. W. Y. Lam, Y. Yu, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, M. M. F. Yuen and B. Z. Tang, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 95–105 RSC .
B. M. Weinstein, Trends Cell Biol., 2002, 12, 439–445 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, K. Park, H. Y. Nam, S. Lee, K. Kim and I. C. Kwon, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 1031–1053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhu, F. Qiu, B. Zhu and X. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2071–2083 RSC .
F. Qiu, C. Tu, R. Wang, L. Zhu, Y. Chen, G. Tong, B. Zhu, L. He, D. Yan and X. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9678–9680 RSC .
K. Y. Pu and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3408–3423 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Pu, K. Li, J. B. Shi and B. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3816–3822 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, K. Y. Pu, L. P. Cai and B. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2113–2119 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Pu, J. B. Shi, L. P. Cai, K. Li and B. Liu, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 2966–2974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ding, G. Wang, J. Liu, K. Li, K. Y. Pu, Y. Hu, J. C. Y. Ng, B. Z. Tang and B. Liu, Small, 2012, 8, 3523–3530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Huang, Z. Wang, A. Qin, J. Sun and B. Z. Tang, Acta Chim. Sin., 2013, 71, 979–990 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, W. Yang, C. Wang and S. Fu, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 2007, 44, 417–424 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, Y. Liu, C. He and S. H. Goh, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 9906–9909 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Gao, H. Liu and Y. Li, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 3237–3246 CrossRef .
W. Yang, C. Pan, X. Liu and J. Wang, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 1523–1531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sun, C. Hong and C. Pan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20581–20584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Li, Y. F. Qian, T. Liu, X. L. Hu, G. Y. Zhang, Y. Z. You and S. Y. Liu, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 6595–6605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Saatchi, N. Gelder, P. Gershkovich, O. Sivak, K. M. Wasan, R. K. Kainthan, D. E. Brooks and U. O. Häfeli, Int. J. Pharm., 2012, 422, 418–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Dalton, P. A. Sullivan and D. H. Bale, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 25–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. E. Moerner and S. M. Silence, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 127–155 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bredas, C. Adant, P. Tackx, A. Persoons and B. M. Pierce, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 243–278 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lee, H. E. Katz, C. Erben, D. M. Gill, P. Gopalan, J. D. Heber and D. J. McGee, Science, 2002, 298, 1401–1403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Meredith, J. G. Van Dusen and D. J. Williams, Macromolecules, 1982, 15, 1385–1389 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Robinson and L. R. Dalton, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 4785–4795 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Q. Li and J. Qin, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2723–2740 RSC .
W. Wu, J. Qin and Z. Li, Polymer, 2013, 54, 4351–4382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. Wada and H. Sasabe, Polymer, 1997, 38, 2893–2897 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. W. Y. Lam, Y. Dong, Y. Dong, B. Z. Tang, A. Qin and C. Ye, Polym. Prepr., 2004, 45, 833–834 CAS .
Z. Li, A. Qin, J. W. Y. Lam, Y. Dong, Y. Dong, C. Ye, I. Williams and B. Tang, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 1436–1442 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, N. Song, J. P. Gao, X. Sun, X. Wang, G. Yu and Z. Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2060–2061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, Z. Li, Y. Tan, Z. Li, Q. Li, Q. Zeng, C. Ye and J. Qin, Polymer, 2006, 47, 7881–7888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, W. Wu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2010, 211, 916–923 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Wu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 78–81 RSC .
J. Xie, X. Deng, Z. Cao, Q. Shen, W. Zhang and W. Shi, Polymer, 2007, 48, 5988–5993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mori, K. Nakaya, X. Piao, K. Yamamoto, A. Otomo and S. Yokoyama, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 1254–1260 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chang, T. Chao, C. Yang, S. A. Dai and R. Jeng, Eur. Polym. J., 2007, 43, 3988–3996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, L. Hu, W. Shi, X. Deng, Z. Cao and Q. Shen, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2008, 46, 1140–1148 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tsai, T. Chao, H. Lin, Y. Liu, H. Chang, Y. Liu and R. Jeng, Dyes Pigm., 2009, 82, 31–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Siao, S. Shau, S. Hu, R. Lee, C. Li and R. Jeng, Polymer, 2013, 54, 3850–3859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Scarpaci, E. Blart, V. Montembault, L. Fontaine, V. Rodriguez and F. Odobel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1799–1806 CAS .
C. Cabanetos, W. Bentoumi, E. Blart, Y. Pellegrin, V. Montembault, Y. Bretonnière, C. Andraud, L. Mager, L. Fontainec and F. Odobel, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2013, 24, 473–477 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, G. Yu, P. Hu, C. Ye, Y. Liu, J. Qin and Z. Li, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 1589–1596 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Wu, G. Qiu, G. Yu, Y. Liu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 1977–1987 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 2361–2370 RSC .
W. Wu, C. Li, G. Yu, Y. Liu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 11019–11028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, Q. Huang, G. Qiu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18486–18495 RSC .
Z. Li, W. Wu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Polymer, 2012, 53, 153–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, C. Ye, G. Yu, Y. Liu, J. Qin and Z. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 4426–4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, L. Huang, L. Xiao, Q. Huang, R. Tang, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6520–6526 RSC .
W. Wu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 1702–1709 Search PubMed .
W. Wu, Y. Fu, C. Wang, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 2787–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, Z. Zhu, G. Qiu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 5124–5133 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Wu, Q. Li, G. Yu, L. Xiao, Y. Liu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2763–2767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, L. Huang, C. Song, G. Yu, C. Ye, Y. Liu, J. Qin, Q. Li and Z. Li, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1256–1261 RSC .
W. Wu and Z. Li, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 5100–5108 RSC .
W. Kaiser and C. G. B. Garrett, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1961, 7, 229–231 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. He, L. Tan, Q. Zheng and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 1245–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chung, K. Kim, T. Lin, G. S. He, J. Swiatkiewicz and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 10741–10745 CrossRef CAS .
D. Beljonne, W. Wenseleers, E. Zojer, Z. Shuai, H. Vogel, S. J. K. Pond, J. W. Perry, S. R. Marder and J.-L. Brédas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 631–641 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hua, B. Li, F. Meng, F. Ding, S. Qian and H. Tian, Polymer, 2004, 45, 7143–7149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Chung, G. S. Maciel, H. E. Pudavar, T. C. Lin, G. S. He, J. Swiatkiewicz and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 7512–7520 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hohenau, C. Cagran, G. Kranzelbinder, U. Scherf and G. Leising, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1303–1307 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, Y. Wang, J. Hua, S. Qu, S. Qian and H. Tian, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 4400–4408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, Y. Wang, J. Yang, J. Hua, B. Wang, S. Qian and H. Tian, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 1830–1839 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Q. Fang, Z. Huang, G. Xue, G. Xua and W. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2443–2449 RSC .
L. Zou, Y. Liu, N. Ma, E. Maçóas, J. M. G. Martinho, M. Pettersson, X. Chen and J. Qin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 8838–8846 RSC .
H. Peng, L. Cheng, J. Luo, K. Xu, Q. Sun, Y. Dong, F. Salhi, P. P. S. Lee, J. Chen and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 5349–5351 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Tutt and A. Kost, Nature, 1992, 356, 225–226 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, H. Peng, C. C. W. Law, Y. Dong, J. W. Y. Lam, I. D. Williams and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 4319–4327 CrossRef CAS .
T. Masuda, M. Takatsuka, B. Z. Tang and T. Higashimura, J. Membr. Sci., 1990, 49, 69–83 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ha1ussler, J. Liu, R. Zheng, J. W. Y. Lam, A. Qin and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1914–1925 CrossRef .
H. Peng, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Polymer, 2005, 46, 5746–5751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, C. Liu, Q. Li and Q. Gong, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 400, 569–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guo, A. Finne-Wistrand and A.-C. Albertsson, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 4472–4480 CrossRef CAS .
B. Guo and X. Ma, Sci. China: Chem., 2014, 57, 490–500 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Tigelaar, M. A. B. Meador and W. R. Bennett, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 4159–4164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ren, H. Chang, L. He, X. Dang, Y. Fang, L. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Hu and Y. Lin, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 129, 1131–1142 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, M. Liu, N. G. Pschirer, M. Baumgarten and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6817–6855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, T. Goh, X. Li, M. Y. Sfeir, E. A. Bielinski, S. Tomasulo, M. L. Lee, N. Hazari and A. D. Taylor, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 479–485 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Irwin, B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783–2787 CrossRef CAS .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Dang, L. Hirsch, G. Wantz and J. D. Wuest, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3734–3765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. W. Crossland, K. Rahimi, G. Reiter, U. Steiner and S. Ludwigs, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 518–524 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tu, A. Bilge, S. Adamczyk, M. Forster, R. Heiderhoff, L. J. Balk, D. Mühlbacher, M. Morana, M. Koppe, M. C. Scharber, S. A. Choulis, C. J. Brabec and U. Scherf, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1781–1785 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Mangold, T. V. Richter, S. Link, U. Würfel and S. Ludwigs, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 154–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiao, C. Yang, Q. He, F. Bai and Y. Li, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2004, 92, 1459–1466 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Mozer, C. Ma, W. W. H. Wong, D. J. Jones, P. Bäuerle and G. G. Wallace, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 573–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Q. Ma, M. Fonrodona, M. C. Schikora, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and P. Bäuerle, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3323–3331 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lv, S. Li, J. J. Jasieniak, J. Hou, J. Zhu, Z. Tan, S. E. Watkins, Y. Li and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6889–6894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ning and H. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5483–5495 RSC .
P. Taranekar, Q. Qiao, H. Jiang, I. Ghiviriga, K. S. Schanze and J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8958–8959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, P. Shen, T. Ding, H. Huang, B. Zhao and S. Tan, Eur. Polym. J., 2010, 46, 2033–2041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, J. Shi, H. Li, S. Li, C. Zhong, F. Guo, M. Peng, J. Hua, J. Qin and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6689–6696 RSC .
Y. Li, M. Yan, M. Jiang, R. Dhakal, P. S. Thapaliya and X. Yan, J. Photonics Energy, 2011, 1, 011115 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Shanavas, M. Vanjinathan, A. S. Nasar, S. Amudha and S. A. Suthanthiraraj, High Perform. Polym., 2012, 24, 561–570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sathiyaraj, M. Vanjinathan, A. Shanavas, S. Amudha, S. A. Suthanthiraraj and A. S. Nasar, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131 DOI:10.1002/app.40408 .
W. Wu, Y. Xu, H. Rao, C. Su and D. Kuang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6437–6445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Thévenot, H. Oliveira, O. Sandre and S. Lecommandoux, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7099–7116 RSC .
Q. Sun, J. W. Y. Lam, K. Xu, H. Xu, J. A. K. Cha, P. C. L. Wong, G. Wen, X. Zhang, X. Jing, F. Wang and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2617–2624 CrossRef CAS .
R. Petersen, D. A. Foucher, B. Z. Tang, A. Lough, N. Raju, J. Greedan and I. Manners, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 2045–2053 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, K. Xu, H. Peng, R. Zheng, M. Häussler and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 2309–2320 CrossRef CAS .
M. Häussler, R. Zheng, J. W. Y. Lam, H. Tong, H. Dong and B. Z. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 10645–10650 CrossRef .
C. K. W. Jim, J. W. Y. Lam, A. Qin, C. W. T. Leung, L. Jianzhao, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams and B. Z. Tang, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2013, 23, 147–157 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, C. J. W. Jim, F. Mahtab, J. Liu, J. W. Y. Lam, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, Y. Dong and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 680–690 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, B. Tong, Z. Li, J. Shen, W. Zhao, H. Fu, J. Zhi, Y. Dong, M. Häussler, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 8195–8204 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kong, M. Kong, X. Zhang, L. Chen and L. An, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10367–10375 CAS .
L. Wang, K. G. Neoh, E. T. Kang, B. Shuter and S. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2615–2622 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ishida, A. C. F. Sun, M. Jikei and M. Kakimoto, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 2832–2838 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, L. Huang, Y. Fu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2013, 58, 2753–2761 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, Z. Xu and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014 10.1039/c4tc01396d .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this paper.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Wenbo Wu
	Wenbo Wu received his Bachelor's degree of Science from Wuhan University, China in 2009, and his PhD degree at the same university, under the supervision of Prof. Zhen Li. His research focuses on organic second-order nonlinear optical materials and the synthesis of hyperbranched polymers and dendrimers.

Runli Tang
	Runli Tang was born in Yunnan, China. She obtained her Bachelor's degree (2011) in the Department of Chemistry at the Wuhan University (China). She is currently a PhD student in the group of Prof. Zhen Li. Her research focuses on the design of new efficient second-order nonlinear optical (NLO) materials.

Qianqian Li
	Qianqian Li received her BSc degree from Hubei University in China in 2004, and then obtained her PhD degree at Wuhan University in 2009. She is now an associate professor at Wuhan University, and her research interests are in the design and synthesis of new electric and optical functional materials.

Zhen Li
	Zhen Li received his BSc and PhD degrees from Wuhan University (WHU) in China in 1997 and 2002, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Jingui Qin. In 2003–2004, he worked in the Hongkong University of Science and Technology as Research Associate in the group of Prof. Ben Zhong Tang. In 2010, he worked at the Georgia Institute of Technology in the group of Prof. Seth Marder. In 2014, he worked at the National University of Singapore as a visiting professor for one month. He has been a full professor at WHU since 2006, and his research interests are in the development of organic molecules and polymers with new structure and functions for organic electronics and photonics.

 	Fig. 1  The applications of HBPs in various material fields.	 

 	Fig. 2  The chemical structures of HBPs 1–8.	 

 	Fig. 3  Some examples of hole or electro-transporting moieties.	 

 	Fig. 4  The chemical structures of HBPs 9–13.	 

 	Fig. 5  The chemical structures of HBPs 14–20.	 

 	Fig. 6  The chemical structures of HBPs 21–23.	 

 	Fig. 7  The synthetic routes to HBPs 24–26.	 

 	Fig. 8  The chemical structures of HBPs 27–31.	 

 	Fig. 9  The chemical structures of HBPs 32–37 and compound 38.	 

 	Fig. 10  The chemical structures of HBPs 39–40 and CLSM (confocal laser scanning microscope) images of MCF-7 cells incubated with 40b. The cells were incubated for 2 h.	 

 	Fig. 11  The chemical structures of HBPs 41–43 and CLSM images of SKBR-3 (a), MCF-7 (b) and NIH-3T3 cells (c) treated with 43 (0.5 μg mL−1) for 2 h at 37 °C; CLSM images of SKBR-3 (d), MCF-7 (e) and NIH-3T3 cells (f) treated with 43-affibody conjugate (0.5 μg mL−1) for 2 h at 37 °C. The cellular nuclei are stained by PI. The images are obtained by merging two fluorescent channels: 520–550 nm upon excitation at 408 nm for 43 and 575–635 nm upon excitation at 543 nm for PI.	 
P = χ(1)E	(1)
P = χ(1)E + χ(2)E2 + χ(3)E3 +…	(2)

 	Fig. 12  The chemical structures of HBPs 44 and 45.	 

 	Fig. 13  The chemical structures of HBPs 46–48 and their linear analogues 49–51.	 

 	Fig. 14  The chemical structures of HBPs 52 and compound CPO.	 

 	Fig. 15  The chemical structures of HBPs 53 and 54.	 

 	Fig. 16  The chemical structures of HBP 55, dendrimers G5 and Core-G3.	 

 	Fig. 17  The chemical structures of compounds 56 and their two-photon cross-sections.	 

 	Fig. 18  The chemical structures of HBPs 57 and 58.	 

 	Fig. 19  The synthetic routes and chemical structures of HBPs 59.	 

 	Fig. 20  The chemical structures of HBPs 60–62.	 

 	Fig. 21  The chemical structures of HBPs 63.	 

 	Fig. 22  The synthetic routes to furnish HBPs 64a–c and chemical structures of P3HT and HBPs 65–68.	 

 	Fig. 23  The synthetic routes and chemical structures of HBPs 69–71 (left). Plots of magnetization (M) versus applied magnetic field (H) at 300 K for magnetoceramics 69d and 69e. Insets: enlarged portions of the M–H plots in the low strength region of the applied magnetic field (right).	 

 	Fig. 24  The synthetic routes and chemical structures of HBP 72 (MNP: magnetic nanoparticles).	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this paper.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
