Water-soluble conjugated polymers for bioelectronic systems  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2MH01520J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2MH01520J
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2023, 10, 1210-1233Water-soluble conjugated polymers for bioelectronic systems

        
          
            Zenghao 
            Wang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hongrui 
            Lin
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Miaomiao 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wen 
            Yu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chuanwei 
            Zhu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Pengcheng 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yiming 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fengting 
            Lv
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haotian 
            Bai
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Shu 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ab
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: baihaotian@iccas.ac.cn; wangshu@iccas.ac.cn
bCollege of Chemistry, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
Received 
      13th December 2022
    , Accepted 24th January 2023First published on 24th January 2023AbstractBioelectronics is an interdisciplinary field of research that aims to establish a synergy between electronics and biology. Contributing to a deeper understanding of bioelectronic processes and the built bioelectronic systems, a variety of new phenomena, mechanisms and concepts have been derived in the field of biology, medicine, energy, artificial intelligence science, etc. Organic semiconductors can promote the applications of bioelectronics in improving original performance and creating new features for organisms due to their excellent photoelectric and electrical properties. Recently, water-soluble conjugated polymers (WSCPs) have been employed as a class of ideal interface materials to regulate bioelectronic processes between biological systems and electronic systems, relying on their satisfying ionic conductivity, water-solubility, good biocompatibility and the additional mechanical and electrical properties. In this review, we summarize the prominent contributions of WSCPs in the aspect of the regulation of bioelectronic processes and highlight the latest advances in WSCPs for bioelectronic applications, involving biosynthetic systems, photosynthetic systems, biophotovoltaic systems, and bioelectronic devices. The challenges and outlooks of WSCPs in designing high-performance bioelectronic systems are also discussed.
Zenghao Wang
Zenghao Wang received his bachelor's degree from Hunan University in 2016 and his master's degree from Shandong University in 2019. He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Shu Wang at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research focuses on the design and construction of novel bioelectronic systems based on water-soluble conjugated polymers.
Haotian Bai
Haotian Bai earned his BS degree from Hunan University in 2012 and his PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2017. He subsequently completed postdoctoral research at the University of California, Los Angeles, and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Currently, he is a professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include the investigation of conductive polymers and fluorescent materials for bioelectronic regulation and application.
Shu Wang
Shu Wang obtained his BS degree from Hebei University in 1994, and a PhD degree from Peking University in 1999. He was a postdoctoral researcher at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences from 1999 to 2001, and then a postdoctoral researcher at the University of California at Santa Barbara from 2001 to 2004. In 2004, he became a full-time professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include design, synthesis and properties of water-soluble conjugated polymers, photosynthesis, biosynthesis and bioelectronic devices.
1. Introduction
Bioelectronics is an interdisciplinary field of research that aims to establish a synergy between electronics and biology at the forefront of science.1 It mainly focuses on the electronic communications between biology and electronic devices today.2–5 Many various commercialized multi-wearable and implantable devices such as cardiac pacemakers,6 electronic tattoos,7 and deep-brain stimulators8,9 have been exploited to collect and transmit bioelectronic signals from the heart,10 skin11,12 and brain13 for clinical applications. Implantable devices have also brought breakthroughs in the treatment of neurological disorders, including Parkinson's disease,8,14 essential tremors15 and spinal cord injuries.16,17 Bioelectronic processes, in the form of electron transfer in living organisms, occur in nearly all organisms. Regulating the bioelectronic processes can provide a thorough understanding of the electron transfer mechanism in biology and contribute to the design of new bioelectronic devices. For regulating the bioelectronic processes in systems, the key factor of information transfer efficiency is usually limited by the mechanical properties (high vs. low Young's modulus), chemical structure (inorganic vs. organic), and electrical properties (electronic vs. ionic conduction).18 The interface materials between the biological system and electronic devices are crucial to overcoming these challenges.19
Conjugated polymers (CPs) are semiconducting materials that have large π-conjugated molecular backbones and delocalized electronic structures.20 Owing to their unique electrical properties,21–24 CPs have been employed as interface materials for electrophysiology,1,25 electrically active tissue engineering scaffolds,26 biosensors,27–29 and drug delivery.30 While adjusting the backbone structures of CPs allows fine-tuning of their electrical properties, installing functional side chain groups facilitates the interfacing between CPs and organisms for bioelectronic applications.31–33 To improve the solubility in biocompatible aqueous media, water-soluble conjugated polymers (WSCPs) are commonly equipped with ionic side chains of positive (quaternary ammonium groups) or negative charges (carboxylate or sulfonate groups).34 Through electrostatic interactions, these charged side chains also allow WSCPs to selectively bind to membranes of cellular compartments and establish an interfacial assembly between WSCPs and living organisms, such as bacteria, thylakoids, chloroplasts, and Cyanobacteria, etc.35–38 Moreover, the WSCPs can be processed into various forms (e.g., fibers,37 hydrogels,38,39 3D scaffolds40,41) that endow them with elasticity similar to biological tissues for facile integration in bioelectronics. Relying on their optical, electrical, and biological properties, WSCPs have been widely employed in bioelectronics to regulate living processes in organisms and to achieve innovative applications.42–44
This review focuses on some recent advances in WSCPs for bioelectronic regulation and bioelectronic applications (Fig. 1). We first discuss the direct intervention of WSCPs in the bioelectronic processes in microorganisms to achieve the synthesis of valuable chemicals. Then, we introduce the regulation of bioelectronic processes by WSCPs in the chloroplast, Chlorella pyrenoidosa, Arabidopsis thaliana, Synechococcus, Rhodopseudomonas palustris and the resulting enhancement in the efficiency of photosynthesis. Subsequently, we present the optimized bioelectronic processes by WSCPs to enhance the interfacial electron transfer in thylakoid based biophotovoltaic systems. Bioelectronic devices, which enable electronic communication with biological tissues, have been used to address a variety of disorders. Finally, we provide advances in bioelectronic devices that are based on the modulation of bioelectronic processes by WSCPs. This review will mainly focus on several representative conceptual advances in bioelectronics enabled by WSCPs.
 Fig. 1  Overview of the bioelectronic applications of WSCPs. 
2. Reformed biosynthetic systems by direct bioelectronic regulation
Photosynthetic routes have been exploited to satisfy humans’ growing demands for energy and resources.45,46 As emerging bioelectronic systems, photosynthetic biohybrid systems integrate the light-collecting capability of semiconductors and the synthesis ability of bioenzyme or biological cells.42,47 Under illumination, the photo-induced electrons could directly regulate the electronic communications between the semiconductors and the organisms to drive the synthesis of valuable chemicals. Thus, improving the light-collecting capability, charge-separating efficiency, and electron transport between semiconductors and biological systems are the key to enhancing the performance of photosynthetic biohybrid systems.42,48
Owing to the light-harvesting ability and photoelectric conversion capacity, inorganic semiconductors-based photosynthetic biohybrid systems have been designed to synthesize valuable chemicals. Yang and co-workers constructed a bioelectronic system combining Moorella thermoacetica (M. thermoacetica) and cadmium sulfide (CdS) nanoparticles to reduce CO2 to acetic acid.49 As a non-photosynthetic bacteria, M. thermoacetica has been considered as an ideal model bacteria in biohybrid systems.50 As the light collectors, CdS has a proper band structure for the photosynthesis of chemicals.51 Under light irradiation, CdS nanoparticles could generate electrons, which could produce a reducing equivalent, [H]. After that, M. thermoacetica utilized the [H] to synthesize acetic acid via the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway. In addition to bacteria, fungi also have the potential to construct photosynthetic biohybrid systems. Guo et al. developed a bioelectronic system composed of indium phosphide (InP) nanoparticles and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (S. cerevisiae) to realize the production of fine chemicals.52 Under irradiation, the photogenerated electrons by InP nanoparticles were transferred to S. cerevisiae Δzwf1, thereby promoting the regeneration of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) in the cytosol. Regenerated NADPH could drive the conversion of 3-dehydroshikimic acid (DHS) into shikimic acid (SA). Under illumination, S. cerevisiae Δzwf1 combined with InP nanoparticles had the highest DHS-to-SA conversion rate (23.5 ± 1.6) than the dark group (0.67 ± 0.3).
Considering the potential heavy metal toxicity, phototoxicity, and difficult-to-adjust optical properties of inorganic semiconductors, researchers have applied organic semiconductors in photosynthetic biohybrid systems.53,54 By adjusting the backbone structure and hybridizing with other materials, the conductivity, optoelectronic properties, band structure and charge separation efficiency of the WSCPs could be optimized, which endow WSCPs with great prospects in photosynthetic hybrid systems.55 The Wang group employed the p–n heterojunction strategy to obtain higher electron/hole separation efficiency. Wang and co-workers constructed a bioelectronic system based on organic semiconductor heterojunctions to directly regulate the bioelectronic process, thereby reducing CO2 to acetic acid (Fig. 2A). The p–n heterojunction composed of p-type water-soluble conjugated polymers (PFPs) and n-type perylene diimide (PDI) (Fig. 2B) was coated on the surface of M. thermoacetica.42 Under illumination, the p–n heterojunction exhibited light-absorbing ability and high charge-separating efficiency (Fig. 2D). More importantly, the reduction potentials of the PDI/PFP are higher when compared to the potential of redox mediators rubredoxin and flavoproteins (Fig. 2C), thus facilitating the transfer of photoelectrons from the p–n heterojunction to membrane proteins. The cyclic voltammetry results confirmed that the photoelectrons flow into the bacteria might be through the rubredoxin and flavoproteins on the M. thermoacetica membrane in the bioelectronic process (Fig. 2E). Due to the positively charged side chains, PFPs that intercalated into the membrane of M. thermoacetica could accelerate the bioelectronic process between the p–n heterojunction and bacteria. Subsequently, M. thermoacetica utilized photogenerated electrons from the p–n heterojunction to produce acetic acid through the Wood−Ljungdahl pathway. The acetic acid yield of PDI/PFP/M. thermoacetica reached 0.63 mM, which was significantly higher than that of PFP/M. thermoacetica (0.4 mM), PDI/M. thermoacetica (0.25 mM) and M. thermoacetica (0.1 mM) (Fig. 2F). Notably, calculated based on the amount of acetic acid generated on the third day (Fig. 2G), the efficiency of the bioelectronic system reached 1.6%, which was comparable to the inorganic bioelectronic system.
 Fig. 2  (A) Schematic illustration of the photosynthetic hybrid system. (B) The chemical structures of PDI and PFP. (C) The energy level map of PDI/PFP and electron transfer proteins. (D) Photocurrents of PDI/PFP heterojunction at different concentrations. (E) Cyclic voltammetry curves of PDI/PFP, M. thermoacetica and PDI/PFP/M. thermoacetica. (F) The amount of acetic acid produced by conjugated polymers/M. thermoacetica under light and dark conditions. (G) The acetic acid production of PDI/PFP/M. thermoacetica over three days (A, C–G were reprinted with permission from ref. 42, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co). 
In addition to the proteins on the cell membrane surface of M. thermoacetica for direct electron transport, the cationic molecule of neutral red (NR), which can cross cell membranes, can be employed as the electron shuttle with excellent electrochemical reversibility and compatible redox potential. Thus, Yu et al. designed a bioelectronic system based on organic semiconductor polymer dots (Pdots) for transmembrane electron transfer, thereby converting CO2 to poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) (Fig. 3A).56 Due to the high charge-separating efficiency and proper energy level matching of Pdots, the photogenerated electrons from Pdots were transferred into the Ralstonia eutropha H16 (RH16) by neutral red (NR). The reduced NR drove bacterial metabolism to synthesize PHB by NADPH regeneration (Fig. 3B and C). With the addition of NR and Pdots, the intracellular NADPH/NADP+ ratio in RH16 reached 1.25, which was significantly higher than that of only RH16 (0.96) (Fig. 3D). Notably, under illumination, the yield of PHB from RH16/NR/Pdots reached 21.3 mg L−1, which was 192% higher than that of RH16 (Fig. 3E).
 Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustration of the photosynthetic hybrid system. (B) The energy level map of Pdots and NR. (C) Photocurrents of NR, Pdots and Pdots/NR. (D) The amount of NADPH/NADP+ ratio by RH16, RH16/NR, RH16/Pdots and RH16/NR/pdots, respectively. (E) The PHB production under different conditions (A–E were reprinted with permission from ref. 56, Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society). 
Because natural metabolite is hard to fully satisfy human demands, the artificially modified bioelectronic systems for producing high-value chemicals have greater significance for humans. Hybridization strategies of WSCPs with enzymes could endow the bioelectronic systems with novel functions and contribute to the production of high-value chemicals. Wang group designed and fabricated a ternary biohybrid system capable of converting glucose to value-added chemicals.57 The bioelectronic system consisted of threonine deaminase-modified donor–acceptor water-soluble conjugated polymer nanoparticles (D–A CPNs@Enzyme) and engineered Escherichia coli (E. coli) (Fig. 4A). Both polymers differ by more than 0.28 eV in the HOMO and LOMO energy levels, thus effectively driving the charge separation (Fig. 4B and C). Under light irradiation, D–A CPNs@Enzyme could regulate the bioelectronic process in which photogenerated electrons by the D–A CPNs@Enzyme could flow into the bacterial cytoplasmic media through the proteins on the bacterial surface. Subsequently, the photoelectrons could increase the content of NADPH, which contributed to the synthesis of threonine. Furthermore, threonine deaminase catalyzed threonine to 2-oxobutyrate. Notably, under irradiation, the yield of threonine from E. coli/D–A CPNs reached 11.3 mM, which was 37% higher than that of E. coli (Fig. 4D). Moreover, the yield of 2-oxobutyrate from E. coli/D–A CPNs@Enzyme reached 6.0 mM under irradiation, which was 58% higher than that of E. coli/D–A CPNs@Enzyme under dark conditions (Fig. 4E).
 Fig. 4  (A) Chemical structures of MEH-PPV, PFTP and PSMA in D–A CPNs@Enzyme. (B) The energy level instructions of PFTP and MEH-PPV. (C) The photocurrent responses of MEH-PPV, PFTP and MEH-PPV/PFTP. (D) Time courses of threonine concentrations produced by different groups of E. coli with light and dark states. (E) Time courses of 2-oxobutyrate concentrations produced by different groups of E. coli with light and dark states (A–E were reprinted with permission from ref. 57, Copyright 2022, China Association for Science and Technology). 
3. Improved photosynthesis by bioelectronic regulation
Photosynthesis is the natural process by which photosynthetic organisms convert carbon dioxide and water into carbohydrates and release O2. In particular, photosynthesis powers almost all living organisms for sustaining their life on earth.58 However, around 1% energy conversion efficiency of photosynthetic organisms is well below its theoretical maximum (microalgae and plants are 12% and 6%, respectively).48,59 The key to improving photosynthesis efficiency is to accelerate light-dependent and light-independent reactions, which are determined by light-harvesting antennas, photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) spectrum, ribulose-1,5-biphosphate carboxylase–oxygenase, etc.60–62 Notably, light absorption is the prerequisite for photosynthesis, but photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) spectrum is mainly concentrated on 400–700 nm, which only accounts for 48.7% of the incident sunlight.63 Hence, light-capturing additives, such as carbon nanotubes64 and phosphorescent dyes,65 have been used to augment photosynthesis. Profiting from the unique structural features, WSCPs have been employed in photosynthesis.66 WSCPs can rapidly transfer excitons to nearby low-energy receptors, as the energy transfer that occurs in antenna pigments. This similarity provides WSCPs with similar functions to natural photosynthetic pigments.43 In addition, the absorption spectra, emission spectra, and band structure of WSCPs can be well-tuned by changing the main chain structure and length. The easily tunable spectra enable WSCPs to regulate the bioelectronic process in photosynthetic organisms for augmenting photosynthesis efficiency. Zhou et al. developed WSCPs by side chain modification strategy to enhance the photosynthesis of Chlorella pyrenoidosa (C. pyrenoidosa) and Arabidopsis thaliana (A. thaliana) by bioelectronic regulation. They designed and synthesized poly(boron-dipyrromethene-co-fluorene) (PBF) with cationic quaternary ammonium side chains to facilitate the bioelectronic process in light-dependent reactions. (Fig. 5A and B).43 The scholars first studied the impact of PBF on the photosynthesis of C. pyrenoidosa. PBF can absorb green light (470–650 nm) and has red emission (570–800 nm). The absorption range of C. pyrenoidosa is mainly concentrated on 400–500 nm and 650–700 nm (Fig. 5C). Furthermore, the cationic side groups drive PBF to bind with C. pyrenoidosa via electrostatic interactions (Fig. 5D). This will reduce the distance between PBF and C. pyrenoidosa, thus, facilitating the energy transfer between them (Fig. 5E). Due to the matched photophysical properties, PBF increased the activity of PSI. Subsequently, the binding of light-harvesting complexes II and PSII (state 2 to state 1) was promoted, thus the activity of PSII was improved. Moreover, PBF enhanced the activity of ribulose-1,5-biphosphate carboxylase–oxygenase (RuBisCO) by up-regulating the expression of related genes. Contributing to the improved light-dependent and light-independent reactions, the production of O2, ATP, NADPH, and the activity of RuBisCO in the bioelectronic system, respectively, increased by 120%, 97%, 76%, and 150% under the presence of PBF (Fig. 5F). More importantly, they investigated the mechanism of PBF promoting the light-dependent reactions. With the addition of PBF, TRo/RC, REo/RC, REo/CSm, ABS/RC, TRo/CSm, ETo/RC, ETo/CSm and ABS/CSm were significantly improved, which demonstrated that PBF enhanced the bioelectronic process consisting of electron transfer and energy capture in the light-dependent reactions (Fig. 5G and H). After that, they presented the effect of PBF on the photosynthesis of an A. thaliana-based bioelectronic system. Results showed that PBF improved the light utilization efficiency and photochemical efficiency of A. thaliana. In addition, PBF absorbed by A. thaliana could accelerate cell mitosis, thereby making A. thaliana grow taller and blossom a week earlier than the control group (Fig. 5I).
 Fig. 5  (A) Schematic representation of PBF for enhancing the photosynthesis of C. pyrenoidosa. (B) Chemical structure of PBF. (C) Absorption and fluorescence spectra of PBF and C. pyrenoidosa. (D) Isothermal titration calorimetry curve of the titration of PBF into C. pyrenoidosa. (E) The fluorescence lifetime curves of PBF and C. pyrenoidosa/PBF. (F) Productions of NADPH, NADP+, and ATP by C. pyrenoidosa and C. pyrenoidosa/PBF. (G) The chlorophyll fluorescence parameters of C. pyrenoidosa and C. pyrenoidosa/PBF. (H) Schematic representation of the energy transfer. (I) the photographs of A. thaliana with different concentrations of PBF (A–I were reprinted with permission from ref. 43, Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science). 
Exploring the electron transport mechanism in the bioelectronic processes has a more scientific significance. Cyanobacteria capable of generating carbohydrates and extracellular electrons have been extensively studied.67 Zeng et al. utilized PFP to enhance the photosynthetic properties of the Synechococcus-based bioelectronic system. After that, they studied the electron transport mechanism in the bioelectronic process.68Synechococcus has broad absorption ranging at 350–520 nm and 640–680 nm. The maximum absorption wavelength and emission scope of PFPs are 385 nm and 400–500 nm, respectively. Owing to the good spectral overlap, PFPs broadened the spectral absorption range and enhanced the bioelectronic process in the light-dependent reactions of Synechococcus. The content of O2, ATP, and NADPH formed in light-dependent photosynthetic reactions increased by 52.8%, 27.2%, and 47.9%, respectively. In addition, the efflux electrons generated by Synechococcus in photosynthesis could reduce the exogenous oxidized cytochrome C (Cyt c). Subsequently, they added zinc chloride (ZnCl2) and N-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-N-dimethylurea (DCMU) to explore the electron transport mechanism in the bioelectronic process. ZnCl2 and DCMU can interdict plastid quinone binding sites in cytochrome b6f and PSII, respectively.69,70 DCMU significantly inhibited the reduction of Cyt c, while ZnCl2 resulted in a slight reduction. Hence, the possible position of Cyt c reduced by electron donor in the electron transport chain is between PSII and plastoquinone. Water-soluble side chain modification strategies can give rise to the dispersion in water, while water-soluble conjugated polymer nanoparticles (WSCPNs) possess the essential properties of WSCPs, and at the same time exhibit superior photostability, energy transfer efficiency, and water dispersibility.30 Wang et al. reported two water-soluble conjugated polymer-based nanoparticles to enhance the photosynthesis of chloroplasts.71 PFP and poly(fluorene benzothiadiazole) (PFBT) nanoparticles (PFP-NPs and PFBT-NPs) have good light-harvesting ability at 300–400 nm and 300–550 nm. So the blue and green emissions from PFP-NPs and PFBT-NPs could enhance the absorption of chloroplasts towards the ultraviolet part and could further promote the bioelectronic process. Results showed that nanoparticle-bound chloroplasts accelerated the electron transfer rates, compared to chloroplasts alone. With the regulation of bioelectronic processes, the performances of chloroplast-based bioelectronic systems were enhanced, such as photosynthesis-derived adenosine triphosphate (ATP) also increased. Functional group modification strategies confer new functions to WSCPNs and contribute to the adaptation of WSCPNs in complex biological systems. Xing and co-workers modified WSCPNs with penetrating peptide TAT (CPNs-TAT), thus WSCPNs could bind to the surface of Rhodopseudomonas palustris (R. palustris) through electrostatic interaction and enhance the bioelectronic process of the bioelectronic system.72 The scholars utilized three WSCPs (Fig. 6A) to fabricate CPNs-TAT, which could absorb ultraviolet light (300–380 nm) and visible light (400–550 nm) except CP1Ns-TAT (Fig. 6B–D). Under light irradiation, the maximum emission wavelengths of the three CPNs-TAT were 420, 480 and 560 nm, respectively, which could be absorbed by R. palustris. The expansion of the absorption spectrum allows CPNs-TAT to improve the antenna conversion efficiency (Fig. 6E), electron transport rate (Fig. 6F) and ATP production efficiency (Fig. 6G) of R. palustris. Therefore, CPNs-TAT regulated the bioelectronic process by accelerating the light reaction, thus enhancing the photosynthesis of R. palustris-based bioelectronic system.
 Fig. 6  (A) Chemical structures of three CPNs-TAT. Absorption and fluorescence spectra of (B) CP1Ns-TAT, (C) CP2Ns-TAT, and (D) CP3Ns-TAT. (E) The antenna conversion efficiency of R. palustris and R. palustris/CPNs-TAT. (F) The electron transfer rate of R. palustris and R. palustris/CPNs-TAT. (G) ATP productions of CPNs-TAT, R. palustris and R. palustris/CPNs-TAT under light irradiation (A–G were reprinted with permission from ref. 72, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society). 
Compared with the exogenously added WSCPs, the WSCPs formed by in situ polymerization possibly regulate the bioelectronic process more efficiently. Qi et al. developed an in situ polymerization strategy to synthesize the water-soluble conjugated poly(phenylene-ethynylene) (PPE) on the surface of C. pyrenoidosa.73 They first catalyzed the synthesis of PPE from Pd in an aqueous solution by Sonogashira coupling (Fig. 7A). After that, the conversion efficiency was well optimized by adjusting the monomer concentration and reaction time (Fig. 7B). For the in situ polymerization, Pd2+ was first electrostatically bound to the cell surface and then reduced to “bio-Pd” catalysts by the reductive ability of cells (Fig. 7C). The Sonagashira polymerization to form PPE was triggered by bio-Pd in situ on the surfaces of C. pyrenoidosa. The in situ formed PPE displayed excellent light absorption capacity and blue emission (Fig. 7D), which matched well with the absorption of C. pyrenoidosa. Benefiting from special optical properties, PPE accelerated the ATP synthesis by adjusting the bioelectronic process in light-dependent reactions and promoted the efficiencies of the C. pyrenoidosa bioelectronic system (Fig. 7E).
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration of Sonagashira polymerization triggered by Pd to form PPE. (B) Transformation efficiency in relation to monomer concentrations. (C) Isothermal titration calorimetry curve of the titration of palladium ions into E. coli. The inset is the EDS map of palladium (D) schematic illustration of PPE to increase the production of ATP in C. pyrenoidosa photosynthesis. (E) The ATP production of different groups (A–E were reprinted with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co). 
Natural photosynthetic systems have evolved over thousands of years to establish high quantum efficiency in charge separation and redox reactions.74 Therefore, artificial photosynthetic systems are anticipated to mimic the functions of natural photosynthetic systems by regulating the bioelectronic processes.75–78 The key features of WSCPs in photocatalytic processes are nontoxicity, visible-light activity, and robustness, which make WSCPs promising materials for artificial photosynthetic systems.79 Inspired by the mechanism and function of thylakoid, Jiang and co-workers fabricated a triazine-type CP nanolayer coordinated with (Cp*RhCl2)2 (CPNL-Rh) for the regeneration of NADH.80 Moreover, the CP-based system was coupled with glutamate dehydrogenase to synthesize L-glutamate. To eliminate the possible toxicity caused by heavy metal catalysts, Wang and co-workers constructed a conjugated polymeric system consisting of cyanamide and selenium-functionalized heptazine-based melon to achieve solar-to-chemical conversion.81 The light sources utilized in natural and artificial photosynthetic systems are mainly sunlight. Apart from sunlight, other alternative light sources with matched spectrum ranges have also been investigated for regulating the bioelectronic process. Yuan et al. employed bioluminescence produced by luminol, hydrogen peroxide, and horseradish peroxidase as an alternative light source of sunlight.82 Results showed that bioluminescence could boost electron production and promote the photosynthesis of chloroplasts. Except for the non-covalent strategy, Bai et al. employed molecules with aggregation-induced emission (AIE) properties to covalently modify the chloroplasts for improving the photosynthetic efficiency.83 Synthetic AIE molecules (TPE–PPO and TPA–TPO) first adhered to the chloroplast surface via a metal-free “Click” reaction. Subsequently, TPE–PPO and TPA–TPO could convert ultraviolet and green light that chloroplasts could not utilize into blue and red light that chloroplasts could utilize, respectively. The results indicated that the AIE-chloroplast systems performed more activity in the photosynthesis process.
4. Optimized-biophotovoltaic systems by bioelectronic regulation
Photosynthetic organisms could absorb light energy and then convert it into chemical energy, where the water splitting is accrued producing dioxygen gas, protons, and photosynthetic electrons (PEs).84–86 Biophotovoltaic systems (BPVs) are emerging bioelectronic systems in which solar energy is saved as electrical energy by capturing electrons from photosynthetic organisms.87 However, the poor contact between photosynthetic organisms and the electrode and the limited spectral matching hamper the improvement of BPVs’ properties. Notably, a large number of bioelectronic systems have been developed to promote electrical communications between photosynthetic organisms and electrodes.88 More specifically, enhancing the interfacial electron transfer is an effective direct strategy for regulating the bioelectronic process, thereby improving the BPVs’ properties.
Inorganic materials with high electronic transfer capability are normally selected to regulate the bioelectronic processes as well as facilitate the interfacial electron transfer.89–91 Nonetheless, the potential limitations of physical damage to cells and the complicated fabrication process would hinder the further applications of inorganic materials in BPVs. WSCPs possess mild mechanical properties, expected water solubility, and biocompatibility.32 The backbone structure of WSCPs plays a decisive role in their physical and chemical properties. Tuning the constitution and conformations of the backbones could endow WSCPs with distinguished conductivity and optoelectronic properties, which are ideal for application in biophotovoltaic systems.92 Bazan and co-workers designed a series of water-soluble conjugated oligoelectrolytes (COEs) by tuning the backbone structure and side chains to regulate the bioelectronic processes, thus increasing the photogenerated electrons and ameliorate interfacial electrical contact.93 Due to the unique structural features, COEs exhibited a strong affinity for lipid bilayers and were expected to intercalate into thylakoid membranes. Thus, the membrane-intercalating COEs increased the photogenerated electrons and promoted interfacial contact. The bioelectronic system fabricated with COEs-thylakoid bioanodes showed significant photocurrent increase, such as amperometric photocurrent densities, short-circuit photocurrent and short-circuit dark current were increased by up to 2.3-fold, 1.7-fold, and 1.4-fold, respectively. Because of their unique optical properties, WSCPs could improve the light-harvesting efficiency of photosynthetic organisms.94 Using the quaternary ammonium salt side chain modification strategy, Wang and co-workers synthesized water-soluble cationic polyfluorene derivative (PFP) to directly facilitate the bioelectronic process, thereby promoting the photosynthetic electron transfer and improving the light utility efficiency of thylakoids (Fig. 8A).95 Owing to the quaternary ammonium salt side chain (Fig. 8B), PFPs could bind to thylakoids through electrostatic interactions, thus, the interfacial properties between thylakoids and electrodes were improved. Under light irradiation, PFPs could absorb light at 300–420 nm and emit blue light, which overlapped with the absorption spectra of thylakoids, respectively (Fig. 8C). In addition, the electrode modified with PFPs had better hydrophilicity and conductivity. Specifically, the interface electron transfer impedance reduced from 3448 Ω to 660 Ω (Fig. 8D). Therefore, under the synergistic effect of better interfacial properties and spectral matching, PFPs could regulate the bioelectronic processes of thylakoids. As the result shown, the photocurrent of the PFP-thylakoid bioanode was 1245 nA cm−2, which was about four times higher than that of the thylakoid bioanode (Fig. 8E). Furthermore, they adequately described the bioelectronic process. As shown in Fig. 8F, the reduction and oxidation potential of PFP were −2.51 V and +0.53 V (vs. NHE), respectively, which were well matched with the proteins in the electron transport chain. Thus, PFPs could conduct the electrons produced by photosynthetic organisms to the electrodes. Subsequently, they added DCMU to explore the origin of the photocurrent. DCMU can interdict plastid quinone binding sites in PSII, thus it can interrupt the electron transport chain and inhibit electron generation.70Fig. 8G shows that DCMU significantly inhibited the photocurrent of thylakoids and PFPs/thylakoids, respectively. This indicates that the photocurrent is derived from the electron transport chain in thylakoids. To make the hybrid bioelectrode more practical, they further fabricated a bioelectrochemical system consisting of a PFP/PSII-enriched membrane (BBY) photoanode and a bilirubin oxidase biocathode for solar energy conversion.44 Under light irradiation, PFPs could absorb light at 300–420 nm and exhibit blue emission which can be utilized by PSII, which could broaden the absorption range of PSII in light-dependent reactions. Besides, the electrode modified by PFPs showed better hydrophilicity and decreased the charge transfer resistance from 1670 Ω to 834 Ω. As a result, the photocurrent density produced by the PFP/BBY photoanode was 2.5 times more than that of the BBY photoanode. Overall, WSCPs regulate the bioelectronic processes by simultaneously improving light utilization and enhancing electron transfer, thus enhancing the performances of photosynthetic organisms-based bioelectronic systems.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of biohybrid thylakoid photoelectric system. (B) Chemical structure of PFPs. (C) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of PFP/thylakoid and thylakoid electrodes under different conditions. The insets show the equivalent circuit of the EIS. (D) Absorption and fluorescent spectra of PFPs and thylakoids. (E) Photocurrent response of different electrodes. (F) The redox potentials of PFPs and the main proteins in the electron transport process. (G) Photocurrent response of different electrodes in the absence and presence of DCMU (A, C–G were reprinted with permission from ref. 95, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co). 
Constructions to the backbone and modifications to the side chains endow WSCPs with a range of excellent properties, while the single-type material hardly meets all the demands in different bioelectronic applications. Therefore, combining with other materials to prepare composite is a promising strategy.92 Li et al. integrated benzoquinone (BQ) doped PPy (PPyBQ) with PSII to construct a biohybrid photoanode, which exhibited improved bioelectronic performances.96 PPy possesses a conjugated structure that permits electron transfer.97 Subsequently, BQ is bound to the PPy backbone as a mediator allowing efficient electron transfer. Upon light illumination, the electrons generated from PSII were transported to the ITO electrode through PPyBQ (Fig. 9A). More specifically, in the bioelectronic process, the electrons may be flowing to the ITO electrode through P680*, P680+, pheophytin, and plastoquinone QA or QB (Fig. 9B). PPyBQ showed a carpet-like structure (Fig. 9C), which increased the specific surface area. Thus, the PPyBQ-modified electrodes could be well covered by PSII (Fig. 9D). Due to the excellent conductivity and high specific surface area, the photocurrent of PPyBQ was enhanced by 39 times compared to that one without PPyBQ (Fig. 9E and F). As a result, PPy directly promoted the bioelectronic process and augmented the properties of PSII-based bioelectronic systems.
 Fig. 9  (A) Schematic illustration of biohybrid photoelectric system consisting of PSII and PPyBQ. (B) The possible redox potentials of the main proteins in the electron transport process. (C) The scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) pictures of PPyBQ nanostructures. The inset is the cross-sectional view. (D) The SEM pictures of PSII covered the PPyBQ electrode. (E) Photocurrents of different biohybrid photoanodes. (i) ITO, (ii) ITO/PSII, (iii) ITO/PPy, (iv) ITO/PPy/PSII, (v) ITO/PPyBQ, (vi) ITO/PPyBQ/PSII, and (vii) ITO/PPyBQ/PSII in the presence of DCMU. (F) Photocurrent responses at different applied bias voltages (A–F was reprinted with permission from ref. 96, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co). 
In addition to hybridization with natural materials, hybridization with artificial systems will further enrich the applications of WSCPs. Bedford et al. fabricated electrospun fibers composed of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT/PSS) and poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) to encapsulate thylakoid and enhance the bioelectronic process.98 Due to the delocalized π electrons characteristic (Fig. 10A), PEDOT/PSS demonstrates conductive features. After electrospinning, the thylakoids were successfully immobilized inside the conductive fiber (Fig. 10B and C). With the lights on, the current generated by the PEDOT/PEO/thylakoid fibers gradually rose. When the lights are turned off, the current gradually decreased (Fig. 10D), which proved that the immobilized thylakoids still retained their biological activity. Hence, the PEDOT/PSS-based fibers could modulate the bioelectronic process of thylakoids that were encapsulated in the fibers.
 Fig. 10  (A) Chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS. (B) Transmission electronic microscopy (TEM) images of PEDOT/PEO fibers with thylakoids. (C) Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images of Nile-red-stained PEDOT/PEO fibers with thylakoids. (D) Photocurrent responses of PEDOT/PEO/Thylakoid fibers under on and off switched light (B–D were reprinted with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). 
It is important to design optoelectronic systems with intrinsic light sources for practical applications, freeing them from dependence on external light sources. Bioluminescence and chemiluminescence have been successfully used to replace natural sunlight irradiation in photosynthesis. Wang and co-workers designed and fabricated a bioelectronic system that utilized luminol chemiluminescence as the light source to activate bacteriorhodopsin (bR).99 The bioanode was bR modified with conjugated oligo(phenylene-vinylene) (OPV), and the cathode was a bare ITO electrode. bR could play the role of photosynthetic protein in Halobacterium salinarum and could transport protons from inside the cell to outside once activated.100 The luminol chemiluminescence system could emit blue luminescence. After that, OPV could be excited by the blue luminescence and emitted green fluorescence. Under the illumination of green and blue light, this bioelectronic system could generate a stable current, and the current density reached the maximum of 157.32 nA cm−2. Notably, the current density generated by the bR/OPV bioanode was 4.2 times that of the bR bioanode (Table 1).
Table 1 A summary of WSCPs and their applications mentioned in this review




Material
Chemical structure
Application
Ref.




PFP



Biosynthetic system

42







Photosynthesis

68,71







Biophotovoltaic systems

95



PFTP



Biosynthetic system

57



PBF



Photosynthesis

43



PFBT



Photosynthesis

71,72



PPE



Photosynthesis

73



COEs-1



Biophotovoltaic systems

93



COEs-2



Biophotovoltaic systems

93



PPy



Biophotovoltaic systems

96



PEDOT:PSS



Biophotovoltaic systems

98







Bioelectronic device

195



PMNT



Bioelectronic device

132



Functional PPy



Bioelectronic device

145



PEDOT:S-H



Bioelectronic device

204



DSSN+



Bioelectronic device

124



DSFO+



Bioelectronic device

123





5. Advanced bioelectronic devices
Bioelectronic devices are an emerging technology that has achieved tremendous advances in electronic communications with biological systems.101–103 In the past two decades, bioelectronic devices are being designed to be perfectly portable, implantable, and wearable for intelligent life support, recovery, and even human improvement.104–109 Investigators are innovating materials, processing, and device design to dramatically optimize the performance of bioelectronic devices.110 WSCPs have emerged as superior candidates for bioelectronic devices, because of their unique optical and electrical properties, adaptable charge transport properties, mechanical deformability, and controllable molecular orbital energy levels.111–115
In particular, at the small end, the single colonies and cells exist on the bioelectronic devices, where the electrical monitoring is typically conducted with extracellular electrodes and patch-clamp.111 The introduction of hydrophilic groups such as quaternary ammonium salts, sulfonic acids, and carboxylic acids allow WSCPs to exhibit good interactions with bacteria, thus presenting a unique advantage in advanced bioelectronic devices.116–121 Zhang et al. employed water-soluble cationic polythiophene derivative (PMNT) to regulate the bioelectronic process in the Shewanella oneidensis (S. oneidensis) MR-1 based bioelectronic system.122 Attributing to the alkyl quaternary ammonium groups, PMNT combined with S. oneidensis MR-1 to form the aggregates that could promote the biofilm formation and accelerate the electron transfer from S. oneidensis MR-1 to the electrode. Bioelectronic processes were enhanced, as evidenced by the maximum current density and power density of PMNT/S. oneidensis MR-1 were 4.6 times and 5.5 times than those of native S. oneidensis MR-1, respectively. In addition to the direct modification of WSCPs on the surface of S. oneidensis MR-1, WSCPs that mimic the function of electron transport proteins have been investigated. Kirchhofer et al. designed and synthesized the redox-active conjugated oligoelectrolyte (DSFO+) which mimics the function of the heme-containing protein to promote the biological respiratory transmembrane electron transport.123 As a redox-active molecule, DSFO+ might intercalate into cellular membranes. Due to the proper redox potential, DSFO+ could catalyze the transmembrane electron transport pathway. Results showed that DSFO+ significantly improved the anodic biocurrents from two non-electrogenic S. oneidensis MR-1. To improve the electron equivalent extraction efficiency at the biotic-abiotic interfaces, Wang et al. designed a water-soluble conjugated oligoelectrolyte (DSSN+) that could spontaneously intercalate into the E. coli membrane to regulate the bioelectronic process.124 The final current density of DSSN+-modified E. coli. increased by >300% compared to that employed unmodified bacteria as the anode. It is relevant to point out that the in situ polymerization of WSCPs is a promising strategy to enhance the microorganisms’ performance in bioelectronic systems. Song et al. designed and coated a conductive PPy layer onto individual cells of S. oneidensis MR-1 to improve the electron transfer efficiency.125 In this work, the PPy coating layer reduced the charge transfer resistance without affecting bacterial viability. The bioelectronic system using PPy-coated S. oneidensis MR-1 as the anode showed an order of magnitude increase in current densities compared to the control group that employed unmodified bacteria as the anode. In addition to PPy, PEDOT:PSS has also been in situ electropolymerized by Zajdel et al.126 The researchers found that the anode with in situ electropolymerized PEDOT:PSS increased 20 times steady-state current than native biofilms grown on unmodified carbon felt. In summary, by interacting with bacteria or mimicking the function of electron transfer proteins on bacteria surfaces, WSCPs could modulate the bioelectronic processes in bacteria, thereby speeding up the electronic communication between bacteria and devices.
Living materials can simultaneously maintain the biological activity inside the material and have a fixed shape, so they can be used to integrate microorganisms-based bioelectronic systems with devices.127–131 Wang and co-workers fabricated a flexible bioelectronic device composed of water-soluble conjugated polymer PMNT and S. oneidensis MR-1 to monitor lactate concentration and count tumor cells by regulating the bioelectronic process.132 With positively charged side chains (Fig. 11A), PMNT could bind to S. oneidensis MR-1 by electrostatic interaction to accelerate the formation of PMNT-Living materials. Owing to the matched potential, PMNT could enhance the electron transfer between S. oneidensis MR-1 and the electrode (Fig. 11B). Subsequently, PMNT-Living material was integrated with a flexible bioelectronic device that can wirelessly transmit data (Fig. 11C). CV results showed that the redox potentials were changed and the redox peaks were increased with the addition of PMNT (Fig. 11D). This demonstrated that PMNT may facilitate electron transfer through proteins on the surface of the bacteria. Notably, PMNT significantly reduced the charge transfer impedance with the aid of the conductivity of PMNT (Fig. 11E). Therefore, the current produced by PMNT-Living material was more than doubled compared to pure S. oneidensis MR-1 (Fig. 11F). The PMNT-Living material based device showed the lactate detection limit of 78 μM, which was much lower than the device fabricated with pure S. oneidensis MR-1 (Fig. 11G). In addition, the lactate concentrations in sweat, urine, and plasma as well as the number of tumor cells could be detected by the flexible bioelectronic device and related information could be transmitted to a mobile phone for easy access and further analysis (Fig. 11H and I).
 Fig. 11  (A) Chemical structure of PMNT. (B) Schematic illustration of the electron transfer pathway in PMNT-Living materials. (C) Photographs of the flexible device. (D) Cyclic voltammetry curves of PMNT-Living material and S. oneidensis MR-1. (E) The Nyquist curves of S. oneidensis MR-1, PMNT, and PMNT-Living material (inset). (F) The values of the currents generated by the detecting system. (G) The calibration plots of PMNT-Living material and S. oneidensis MR-1. (H) Current generations from the bioelectronic device in different HeLa cell numbers. (I) Current generations from the bioelectronic device with the addition of lactate in urine (B–I was reprinted with permission from ref. 132, Copyright 2022, American Association for the Advancement of Science). 
Additional strategies, such as adding functional groups that are already successfully utilized in other materials, fabricating WSCP-based nanoparticles, surface and core modification on the WSCP-based nanoparticles, and hybridization strategies, are already successfully utilized to endow WSCPs with additional functionality.92,133,134 In biosensing applications, the functional groups comprise targeting groups and reactive groups, among others. Swager group developed a series of biosensor devices based on WSCPs.135–139 For example, they designed polypyrrole core–shell nanoparticles, which displayed dynamically driven shapes and configurations when the PPy at the interface was chemically oxidized or reduced.140 In addition, they prepared CPs derivatives by modifying various terminal aromatic groups,141,142 and single-walled carbon nanotubes143 to improve device performance. Subsequently, they used a hybridization strategy to prepare polyaniline-based nanofiber networks that can be used as sensor devices for heavy metal ions in water.144 More importantly, they integrated the carboxylate-functionalized PPy core–shell nanoparticles (PPyNPs) with the radio frequency identification (RFID) circuits to create a portable, low-cost and rapid bioelectronic device.145 The electrical conductivity of carboxylate-functionalized PPyNPs (Fig. 12A) could decrease when exposed to oxidase-generated H2O2. Subsequently, glucose oxidase or pyruvate oxidase was coupled to the surface of the PPyNPs, thus causing a reduction in electrical conductivity when glucose or pyruvate is present in the test sample. After that, these nanoparticles were coated on the test strip to create a test line (Fig. 12B) to develop a portable detection device. SEM results showed that these nanoparticle-coated test strips had high porosity, which is favorable for the uptake of the test sample (Fig. 12C). Finally, the bioelectronic device successfully detected glucose (Fig. 12D). Interestingly, by biocoupling the C-reactive protein (CRP) antibody to the PPyNPs surface and creating a test line, the bioelectronic device also targeted the measurement of CRP (Fig. 12E).
 Fig. 12  (A) Chemical structure of the functional undoped PPy. (B) Schematic illustration of the wireless detection system. (C) SEM images of PPy core–shell particles coated nitrocellulose membrane. (D) The responses of the device in different concentrations of glucose. (E) The responses of the device in different concentrations of CRP (A–E were reprinted with permission from ref. 145, Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society). 
In addition to biosensing, WSCPs show great promise in developing therapeutic bioelectronic devices.146 Liu et al. designed and synthesized a water-soluble cationic oligo (p-phenylenevinylene) (OPV), which was integrated with the electrochemiluminescence (ECL) system to kill pathogenic bacteria (Fig. 13A).147 ECL is a luminescence phenomenon generated by the redox reaction of an electrically generated reactant. It is widely applied in clinical diagnosis, etc.148 In this research, the ECL system consisting of luminol and hydrogen peroxide could generate blue light by applying a certain voltage. Due to the spectral overlap between OPV and blue light, the blue light underwent energy transfer with OPV (Fig. 13B), which could sensitize the surrounding oxygen into reactive oxygen species (ROS) to kill the pathogenic bacteria (Fig. 13C). Moreover, researchers combined the bioelectronic system with a flexible hydrogel to fabricate antibacterial devices (Fig. 13D-13E). Even after switching off, the device continued to emit light for 10 minutes and could effectively kill pathogenic bacteria (Fig. 13F). Although the ECL based on luminol has a matching spectrum with the WSCPs, the luminescence of luminol is relatively weak, which limits its furthermore application. Thus, other materials with stronger luminescence have been applied to fabricate bioelectronic devices. Zhang et al. designed and constructed an ECL-based bioelectronic system that could generate ROS to eradicate pathogens.149 Rose bengal (RB) and rubrene (Rub) were used as the photosensitizer and electroluminescent material in the system (Fig. 13G), respectively. The flexible therapeutic device was fabricated by encapsulating RB and Rub into a flexible hydrogel (Fig. 13H). The results showed that the flexible therapeutic device had antibacterial effects on both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. Furthermore, in a rodent model, the flexible therapeutic device could accelerate wound healing without causing drug resistance (Fig. 13I).
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of ECL-therapeutics. (B) The ECL spectra of different groups. (C) The fluorescence intensity for the detection of ROS in luminol–H2O2 before and after adding OPV or porphyrin. (D) Charged luminol–H2O2 hydrogel of various mechanical operations. (E) Frozen scanning electron microscopy images of the hydrogel. (F) Antimicrobial effect of the chargeable hydrogel against Candida albicans. (G) Preparation process of RB/Rub hydrogel. (H) Deformation photographs of the RB/Rub hydrogel. (I) Mice model treated with the RB/Rub hydrogel system (A–F were reprinted with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; G–I were reprinted with permission from ref. 149, Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co). 
Biological senses are essential for the survival of living organisms. A significant amount of effort has concentrated on clarifying the underlying physiological mechanisms of the senses, enlightening a variety of artificial sensing technologies.150,151 In particular, due to the various components and complicated signal processing and transmission, the nervous system raises enormous challenges for the incorporation of modern electronics.152 Because of these constraints, considerable developments, and interests in the integration of WSCPs with the nervous system have emerged.153 WSCPs offer many functionalities, such as electron and ion transport properties, and soft mechanical properties, and are easily adjusted by chemical design, making them a promising bridge between biological systems (usually hydrated ions) and electronic devices (electrons).154–156 Brain-inspired artificial neural networks have been implemented in prosthetics and brain-computer interfaces.157–159 While promising, these applications are highly dependent on artificial neural network algorithms. The ultimate goal of the researchers is to establish artificial neural networks that simultaneously communicate with living tissues and electronic devices.160,161 Notably, the first step toward the ultimate artificial neural network is the implementation of synaptic regulation based on the biochemical signaling activity. Keene et al. constructed a neurotransmitter-mediated biohybrid synapse consisting of dopaminergic cells and an organic neuromorphic apparatus.162 In the constructed biohybrid synapse, dopamine secreted by PC-12 cells, located at the front of the synapse, is oxidized at the postsynaptic gate electrode (Fig. 14A). After that, dopamine oxidation alters the gate electrode charge state and induces ion flow in the electrolyte, thereby inducing changes in the conductance of the postsynaptic channel.163 Dopamine oxidation process and postsynaptic channel conductance changes mimic receptor binding and the regulation of synaptic weight by neurotransmitters in biological synapses, respectively. The gap between the dopaminergic cells in the presynaptic region and the PEDOT:PSS electrode mimics the synaptic gap in biological synapses with an average spacing and minimum distance of 100 nm and 5–10 nm (Fig. 14B), respectively, which is comparable to previous reports.164 Finally, the regulation of synaptic plasticity and synaptically conditioned reflexes by dopamine are demonstrated (Fig. 14C). Current artificial neural networks rely primarily on the conduction and transformation of electrophysiological signals.165,166 However, some biological information such as memory and emotion in biological neuronal networks is encoded or transmitted by chemical molecules.167–170 This mismatch is disruptive to the comprehensive understanding of human consciousness. To alleviate this problem and optimize the present artificial neural network, Wang et al. designed a chemical molecule-mediated artificial neuron that communicates bidirectionally by receiving and releasing neurotransmitters.171 This artificial neural system comprises three primary components: a dopamine electrochemical sensor fabricated from carbon nanomaterials, a memristor device with synaptic plasticity, and a thermally responsive hydrogel encapsulating dopamine. When exposed to an environment containing dopamine, the dopamine electrochemical sensor outputs a current signal, which adjusts the internal resistance of the memristor. The internal resistance of the memristor reaches a desired value and results in a heater switching on, which triggers the release of dopamine from the hydrogel. Thanks to the natural collocation of dopamine receptors with G proteins, dopamine could augment the release of intracellular calcium and activate K+-ion pathways in neuronal cells.172–174 When the artificial neuron was stimulated with 100 μM dopamine, Ca2+ fluorescence imaging and K+-ion current revealed significant increases in intracellular calcium fluorescence intensity and K+-ion current in the pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells connected to this artificial neuron (Fig. 14D and E), suggesting that the artificial neuron system successfully activated the PC12 cells. More importantly, increasing dopamine concentration stimulated the leg movements of mice in the experiments of mice sciatic nerve (Fig. 14F).
 Fig. 14  (A) Schematic illustration of a biological synapse. (B) Cross-sectional SEM image of the cell membrane to the electrode. (C) Synaptic regulation of PC-12 dopaminergic cells by the neuromorphic device. (D) Responses of the nerve in mice with the stimulus of dopamine. (E) Responses of the K+-ion current with the stimulus of dopamine. (F) The angle of rotation of mouse legs under dopamine stimulation (A–C were reprinted with permission from ref. 162, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature; D–F were reprinted with permission from ref. 171, Copyright 2022, Springer Nature). 
To meet the demands of neuromodulation and other biological function regulation, the Bao group has made a lot of original and scientifically important contributions in designing highly stretchable and conductive CPs.175–186 For instance, they reported the synthesis of fully degradable n-type and p-type semiconductor polymers through a modular synthesis strategy.187 To address the challenges of high mobility and mechanical reversibility, they employed simple strategies to synthesize terpolymers and regulate conjugated polymer chain packaging, achieving intrinsic stretchability and multiscale ordering.188,189 Using a combination of dissolution shear deposition and solvent treatment, they synthesized PEDOT:PSS films with metal-like conductivity.190 Furthermore, they developed a series of strategies to tune the mechanical and electrical properties of CPs by modulating side chains and hydrogen bonding interactions.191,192 Bioelectronic devices have demonstrated promise in the treatment of neurological disorders,193 however, their constant dimensions do not accommodate tissue growth and may also interfere with neuro development.194 Thereby, Bao and co-workers employed a CPs-based material hybridization strategy to develop a morphing bioelectronic device (MorphE), which possesses the function of actively adapting to in vivo tissue growth.195 MorphE is composed of PEDOT:PSS-based viscoplastic conductive electrodes and insulating viscoplastic polymers (Fig. 15A). Thanks to the excellent stretchability, MorphE could withstand 100% strain stretching (Fig. 15B). The PEDOT:PSS-based viscoplastic conductive electrode displayed zero stress at low strain rates (0.05% s−1), indicating that the sciatic nerve would not be mechanically constrained at natural growth rates (Fig. 15C). After that, in the rat sciatic nerve, the device allowed the sciatic nerve to be wound and then attached to the other side, forming a soft envelope (Fig. 15D). Besides, MorphE caused minimal nerve damage in rats during their fastest growth period, despite a 2.4-fold increase in nerve diameter (Fig. 15E). Subsequently, they performed electrophysiological measurements of pubertal developmental processes in rats. Compared to cuff electrodes, MorphE has stable neuromodulation properties (Fig. 15F).
 Fig. 15  (A) Composition of the morphing bioelectronic devices and chemical structure of the insulator. (B) The images of the morphing bioelectronic devices under 50% and 100% strain stretching. (C) Stress-strain curves of the PEDOT:PSS-based viscoplastic conductive electrode at different strain rates. (D) Schematic illustration and images of the implantation process for the bioelectronic device. (E) SEM image revealing the interface between the morphing bioelectronic devices and sciatic nerve. (F) The intensity of the compound action potential for the cuff electrode and the bioelectronic device (A–F were reprinted with permission from ref. 195, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature). 
Plants are very essential for life on the planet since they are the major sources of food, atmospheric regulator and contributors of various materials.196 Therefore, it is of great significance to understand and assist plants in responding and adapting to various biotic and abiotic stresses. Bioelectronic devices can translate the input biological signals into electronic signals for output, allowing real-time monitoring and dynamic conditioning of plant physiology on account of their less invasive characteristics.197,198 Bioelectronic devices produced from CPs offer distinct advantages for communicating with plants which are ionic conductors by their ionic and electronic conduction properties.24,199 Andrew and co-workers printed CPs electrodes directly on live plants to enable long-term plant health monitoring via bioimpedance spectroscopy.200 Persistently p-doped poly(3,4-propylenedioxythiophene) (PProDOT-Cl) (Fig. 16A) features a porous morphology as well as the mixed hole and ionic conducting properties, which can improve the measurement precision of bioimpedance spectra.201,202 Through vapor deposition, the polymer coating was continuously painted on the plant surface, without yet affecting the shape of the plant itself (Fig. 16B). When plants are exposed to drought stress, the water content of leaves decreases, which leads to changes in impedance and phase. Specifically, variations in cell membrane capacitance exhibit a particularly strong correlation with water content (Fig. 16C). Furthermore, ultraviolet A radiation could cause deep tissue damage in the plant, and these could likewise be fed back by cell membrane capacitance and tonoplast capacitance (Fig. 16D). In contrast to electronic tattoos on the plant surface, bioelectronic devices within the plant could precisely regulate isolated or coupled plant functions in a more complex and higher spatiotemporal resolution manner.203 Berggren and co-workers employed CPs to produce integrated organic analog and digital circuits in plants.204 PEDOT material systems, such as PEDPT:PSS, PEDOT-S:H (self-doped with covalently attached anionic side group), have both high electronic and ionic conductivity in the hydrated state. When the cuttings of roses were incubated with the PEDOT-S:H aqueous solution, uniformly organized PEDOT-S:H hydrogel wires were formed in the xylem tubular channels with a conductivity of 0.13 S cm−1 (Fig. 16E). Subsequently, PEDOT-S:H hydrogel wires were utilized to construct organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) in plants in which the carriers in the OECT channels were gradually depleted by applying positive potentials to the gate electrodes (Fig. 16F). Following the construction of the OECTs, they successfully demonstrated the xylem logic circuit with PEDOT-S:H hydrogel wires in which the voltages below −0.5 V represent “0” and the voltages above −0.3 V is “1” (Fig. 16G). More importantly, the researchers deposited PEDOT:PSS and nanocellulose (PEDOT:PSS-NFC) into the apoplast of rose leaves by vacuum infiltration technique and found that PEDOT:PSS-NFC was confined in compartments. The orientation of the electrochromic gradient observed in the leaves reflects the potential gradient within the electrolyte, indicating higher conductivity in isolated chambers.
 Fig. 16  (A) The chemical structure and synthesis process of PProDOT-Cl. (B) The picture of the vapor-printed electrode. (C) Variation of cell membrane capacitance with water content. (D) The impedance of the original (green) and UVA-exposed (purple) hosta leaf. The inset shows the equivalent circuit model. (E) Chemical structure and the schematic diagram of the formation of PEDOT-S:H in plants. (F) The electrochemical properties of xylem-OECT. (G) Schematic illustration and the properties of xylem-OECT-based logic circuits. (A–D were reprinted with permission from ref. 200, Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science; E–G were reprinted with permission from ref. 204, Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science). 
6. Conclusions and perspectives
In this review, the applications of WSCPs in the regulation of bioelectronic processes were discussed according to their mechanisms and functions. These examples involved various conjugated polymer backbones and a broad range of biological topics including thylakoids, chloroplasts, microorganisms, mammalian cells, and plants.205 Besides the remarkable achievements in bioelectronics, further studies would be desirable for advances in this promising field.
One important aspect would be the modulation of optoelectrical properties of WSCPs through further optimized molecular designs. The chemical structures of WSCPs heavily impact their optoelectrical properties, which can be experimentally characterized by optical spectra, redox potentials, and electrical conductivity. Based on these results, systematic studies of the structure–property relationship would guide the reasonable molecular design of WSCPs candidates for a particular bioelectronic application. Considering the structural diversity of WSCPs, the backbones and side chains utilized in bioelectronics are currently limited in scope. The incorporation of electron donor and acceptor units in WSCPs could improve charge separation efficiency, thereby enhancing the synthetic efficiency in biosynthetic systems. In the future, novel WSCPs with unique energy levels should be designed so that they favorably match the interactive components in biological membranes. The photophysical properties of WSCPs impact the efficiency of photosynthesis. Therefore, enriching the structural diversity of WSCPs would introduce abundant spectra that could further promote photosynthesis. Electron flow pathways between WSCPs and photosynthetic organisms play important roles in regulating the bioelectronic process. Thus, richer techniques, such as scanning ion conductance microscopy and linear-sweep voltammetry, are available to probe electron flow pathways in detail.
Another crucial aspect would be the material design in the fabrication of flexible bioelectronic devices. Tuning the backbones and side chains could endow WSCPs with distinguished conductivity and intrinsic stretchability, which are critical for designing flexible bioelectronic devices. Besides structural modifications through synthetic methods, the combination of WSCPs with flexible or conductive materials also offers strategies for fine-tuning the key properties of flexible bioelectronic devices. These properties would determine the physical and biological processes at the interface between WSCPs and organisms. Through the rational design of WSCP-based materials, which are tailored to the surface features of cells (microbes, plants, or mammalian cells), biological organisms and electronic devices can be seamlessly merged in individual bioelectronic applications. Future achievements in bioelectronic applications would potentially benefit the research and development of synthetic biology, smart materials, and wearable devices for healthcare.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 22021002, 22020102005, 22074150, 22022705, and 22277122), the CAS-Croucher Funding Scheme for Joint Laboratories and K. C. Wong Education Foundation (GJTD-2020-02).
References
I. B. Dimov, M. Moser, G. G. Malliaras and I. McCulloch, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 4356–4396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zhang and C. M. Lieber, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 215–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Someya, Z. Bao and G. G. Malliaras, Nature, 2016, 540, 379–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Malliaras and I. McCulloch, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 4323–4324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, T. Zhang, C.-T. Chen, S. Yang, Z. Lv, L. Cao, J. Ren, Z. Shao, L.-B. Jiang and S. Ling, Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 1735–1749 RSC .
H. Ouyang, Z. Liu, N. Li, B. Shi, Y. Zou, F. Xie, Y. Ma, Z. Li, H. Li, Q. Zheng, X. Qu, Y. Fan, Z. L. Wang, H. Zhang and Z. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1821 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, S. Ling, X. Liang, H. Wang, H. Lu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808695 CrossRef .
A. L. Benabid, Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 2003, 13, 696–706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Kringelbach, N. Jenkinson, S. L. Owen and T. Z. Aziz, Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 2007, 8, 623–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, S. R. Gutbrod, A. P. Bonifas, Y. Su, M. S. Sulkin, N. Lu, H. J. Chung, K. I. Jang, Z. Liu, M. Ying, C. Lu, R. C. Webb, J. S. Kim, J. I. Laughner, H. Cheng, Y. Liu, A. Ameen, J. W. Jeong, G. T. Kim, Y. Huang, I. R. Efimov and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3329 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ma, Y. S. Kim, R. H. Kim, S. Wang, J. Wu, S. M. Won, H. Tao, A. Islam, K. J. Yu, T. I. Kim, R. Chowdhury, M. Ying, L. Xu, M. Li, H. J. Chung, H. Keum, M. McCormick, P. Liu, Y. W. Zhang, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, T. Coleman and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2011, 333, 838–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Webb, A. P. Bonifas, A. Behnaz, Y. Zhang, K. J. Yu, H. Cheng, M. Shi, Z. Bian, Z. Liu, Y. S. Kim, W. H. Yeo, J. S. Park, J. Song, Y. Li, Y. Huang, A. M. Gorbach and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 938–944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, J. Viventi, J. J. Amsden, J. Xiao, L. Vigeland, Y. S. Kim, J. A. Blanco, B. Panilaitis, E. S. Frechette, D. Contreras, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, K. C. Hwang, M. R. Zakin, B. Litt and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 511–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. de Hemptinne, N. C. Swann, J. L. Ostrem, E. S. Ryapolova-Webb, M. San Luciano, N. B. Galifianakis and P. A. Starr, Nat. Neurosci., 2015, 18, 779–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ondo, J. Jankovic, K. Schwartz, M. Almaguer and R. K. Simpson, Neurology, 1998, 51, 1063–1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Bouton, A. Shaikhouni, N. V. Annetta, M. A. Bockbrader, D. A. Friedenberg, D. M. Nielson, G. Sharma, P. B. Sederberg, B. C. Glenn, W. J. Mysiw, A. G. Morgan, M. Deogaonkar and A. R. Rezai, Nature, 2016, 533, 247–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Capogrosso, T. Milekovic, D. Borton, F. Wagner, E. M. Moraud, J. B. Mignardot, N. Buse, J. Gandar, Q. Barraud, D. Xing, E. Rey, S. Duis, Y. Jianzhong, W. K. Ko, Q. Li, P. Detemple, T. Denison, S. Micera, E. Bezard, J. Bloch and G. Courtine, Nature, 2016, 539, 284–288 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Inal, J. Rivnay, A. O. Suiu, G. G. Malliaras and I. McCulloch, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1368–1376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Cho, S. H. Sunwoo, Y. J. Hong, J. H. Koo, J. H. Kim, S. Baik, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 5068–5143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Song, F. Lv, Y. Huang, H. Bai and S. Wang, ChemPlusChem, 2022, 87, e202200073 CAS .
J. Rivnay, R. M. Owens and G. G. Malliaras, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 679–685 CrossRef CAS .
M. Berggren and A. Richter-Dahlfors, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3201–3213 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Simon, E. O. Gabrielsson, K. Tybrandt and M. Berggren, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 13009–13041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Paulsen, K. Tybrandt, E. Stavrinidou and J. Rivnay, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 13–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shen, Y. Huang, A. Yuan, F. Lv, L. Liu and S. Wang, CCS Chem., 2021, 3, 129–135 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Wan, S. Inal, T. Williams, K. Wang, P. Leleux, L. Estevez, E. P. Giannelis, C. Fischbach, G. G. Malliaras and D. Gourdon, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 5040–5048 RSC .
A. M. Pappa, O. Parlak, G. Scheiblin, P. Mailley, A. Salleo and R. M. Owens, Trends Biotechnol., 2018, 36, 45–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Torsi, M. Magliulo, K. Manoli and G. Palazzo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8612–8628 RSC .
P. Lin and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 34–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Uguz, C. M. Proctor, V. F. Curto, A.-M. Pappa, M. J. Donahue, M. Ferro, R. M. Owens, D. Khodagholy, S. Inal and G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701217 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Feng, L. Liu, S. Wang and D. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2411–2419 RSC .
H. Lin, H. Bai, Z. Yang, Q. Shen, M. Li, Y. Huang, F. Lv and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 7232–7244 RSC .
M. Rimmele, F. Glöcklhofer and M. Heeney, Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 2678–2697 RSC .
C. Zhu, L. Liu, Q. Yang, F. Lv and S. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4687–4735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, Y. Zeng, F. Lv, H. Bai and S. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 156–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, F. Lv, L. Liu and S. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3211–3222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gao, E. Zhang, H. Zhao, S. Xia, H. Bai, Y. Huang, F. Lv, L. Liu and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 12106–12115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xia, H. Bai, E. Zhang, W. Yu, Z. Gao, F. Lv, Y. Huang, D. Zhu and S. Wang, CCS Chem., 2022 DOI:10.31635/ccschem.022.202202463 .
V. Fasano, R. Laurita, M. Moffa, C. Gualandi, V. Colombo, M. Gherardi, E. Zussman, G. Vasilyew, L. Persano, A. Camposeo, M. L. Focarete and D. Pisignano, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 26320–26329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Byun, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3381–3387 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Tomé, L. Porcarelli, J. E. Bara, M. Forsyth and D. Mecerreyes, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 3239–3265 RSC .
P. Gai, W. Yu, H. Zhao, R. Qi, F. Li, L. Liu, F. Lv and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 7224–7229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, Y. Zeng, Y. Tang, Y. Huang, F. Lv, L. Liu and S. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabc5237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, P. Gai, P. Zhang, H. Sun, F. Lv, L. Liu and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 38993–39000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, S. Kalathil, G. Divitini, Q. Wang and E. Reisner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 5074–5080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Sakimoto, N. Kornienko and P. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 476–481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, S. Kalathil and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4926–4952 RSC .
K. K. Sakimoto, A. B. Wong and P. Yang, Science, 2016, 351, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Drake and S. L. Daniel, Res. Microbiol., 2004, 155, 869–883 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Vogel, P. Hoyer and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 3183–3188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, M. Suástegui, K. K. Sakimoto, V. M. Moody, G. Xiao, D. G. Nocera and N. S. Joshi, Science, 2018, 362, 813–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Quek, R. J. Vázquez, S. R. McCuskey, B. Kundukad and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2203480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, C. S. Kley, Y. Li and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10560–10565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Dai, H. Zhao, W. Yu, F. Lv, L. Liu and S. Wang, Sci. China: Chem., 2021, 64, 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, M. V. Pavliuk, A. Liu, Y. Zeng, S. Xia, Y. Huang, H. Bai, F. Lv, H. Tian and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2023, 15, 2183–2191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, H. Bai, Y. Zeng, H. Zhao, S. Xia, Y. Huang, F. Lv and S. Wang, Research, 2022, 2022, 9834093 CAS .
D. I. Arnon, Nature, 1959, 184, 10–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Ooms, C. T. Dinh, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Vecchi, S. Barera, R. Bassi and L. Dall'Osto, Plants, 2020, 9 Search PubMed .
L. Wondraczek, M. Batentschuk, M. A. Schmidt, R. Borchardt, S. Scheiner, B. Seemann, P. Schweizer and C. J. Brabec, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2047 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Ambavaram, S. Basu, A. Krishnan, V. Ramegowda, U. Batlang, L. Rahman, N. Baisakh and A. Pereira, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Kruse, J. Rupprecht, J. H. Mussgnug, G. C. Dismukes and B. Hankamer, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2005, 4, 957–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Giraldo, M. P. Landry, S. M. Faltermeier, T. P. McNicholas, N. M. Iverson, A. A. Boghossian, N. F. Reuel, A. J. Hilmer, F. Sen, J. A. Brew and M. S. Strano, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 400–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wondraczek, M. Batentschuk, M. A. Schmidt, R. Borchardt, S. Scheiner, B. Seemann, P. Schweizer and C. J. Brabec, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2047 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, Y. Zeng, F. Lv, H. Bai and S. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 156–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Safi, B. Zebib, O. Merah, P.-Y. Pontalier and C. Vaca-Garcia, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 35, 265–278 CrossRef .
Y. Zeng, X. Zhou, R. Qi, N. Dai, X. Fu, H. Zhao, K. Peng, H. Yuan, Y. Huang, F. Lv, L. Liu and S. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007814 CrossRef CAS .
R. I. Pinhassi, D. Kallmann, G. Saper, H. Dotan, A. Linkov, A. Kay, V. Liveanu, G. Schuster, N. Adir and A. Rothschild, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Roberts, M. K. Bowman and D. M. Kramer, Biochemistry, 2004, 43, 7707–7716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Li, L. Liu, F. Lv and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5308–5311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. Gao, Y. Zhan and C. Xing, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 3423–3429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Qi, H. Zhao, X. Zhou, J. Liu, N. Dai, Y. Zeng, E. Zhang, F. Lv, Y. Huang, L. Liu, Y. Wang and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 5759–5765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, H. Wang, Q. Zhu, W. Qin, G. Han, J.-R. Shen, X. Zong and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9229–9233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-T. Poon, D. Wu and V. W.-W. Yam, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3647–3651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-X. Ye, J. Pan, Y. Shen, M. Shen, H. Yan, J. He, X. Yang, F. Zhu, J. Xu, J. He and G. Ouyang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2021, 118, e2115666118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. E. Miller, T. Beneyton, T. Schwander, C. Diehl, M. Girault, R. McLean, T. Chotel, P. Claus, N. S. Cortina, J.-C. Baret and T. J. Erb, Science, 2020, 368, 649–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Lee, S.-J. Park, K. A. Lee, S.-H. Kim, H. Kim, Y. Meroz, L. Mahadevan, K.-H. Jung, T. K. Ahn, K. K. Parker and K. Shin, Nat. Biotechnol., 2018, 36, 530–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Z.-A. Lan and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15712–15727 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Cheng, Y. Chen, J. Li, Y. Sun, J. Shi and Z. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 317, 121772 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ou, X. Chen, L. Lin, Y. Fang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8729–8733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuan, L. Liu, F. Lv and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10685–10687 RSC .
H. Bai, H. Liu, X. Chen, R. Hu, M. Li, W. He, J. Du, Z. Liu, A. Qin, J. W. Y. Lam, R. T. K. Kwok and B. Z. Tang, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 1433–1438 RSC .
R. Emerson, R. Chalmers and C. Cederstrand, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1957, 43, 133–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gust and T. A. Moore, Science, 1989, 244, 35–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hong, J. M. Lee, J. Yun, Y. J. Kim, S. I. Kim, H. Shin, H. S. Ahn, S. J. Hwang and W. Ryu, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabf2543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tel-Vered and I. Willner, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1778–1797 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Lv, Y. Huang, L. Liu and S. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 15065–15073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sekar, Y. Umasankar and R. P. Ramasamy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7862–7871 RSC .
J. O. Calkins, Y. Umasankar, H. O'Neill and R. P. Ramasamy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1891–1900 RSC .
K. Hasan, Y. Dilgin, S. C. Emek, M. Tavahodi, H.-E. Åkerlund, P.-Å. Albertsson and L. Gorton, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 131–139 CrossRef .
J. Wang, F. Lv, L. Liu, Y. Ma and S. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 354, 135–154 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Kirchhofer, M. A. Rasmussen, F. W. Dahlquist, S. D. Minteer and G. C. Bazan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2698–2706 RSC .
X. Zhou, P. Zhang, F. Lv, L. Liu and S. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 3469–3473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, L. Zhou, P. Zhang, F. Lv, L. Liu, R. Qi, Y. Wang, M.-Y. Shen, H.-H. Yu, G. Bazan and S. Wang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800789 CrossRef .
G. Li, X. Feng, J. Fei, P. Cai, J. Li, J. Huang and J. Li, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1600619 CrossRef .
J. Fei, Y. Cui, X. Yan, Y. Yang, Y. Su and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3263–3267 RSC .
N. M. Bedford, G. D. Winget, S. Punnamaraju and A. J. Steckl, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 778–784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, F. Lv, L. Liu, Y. Huang and S. Wang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1901551 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Sci. China: Chem., 2011, 54, 603–610 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian and C. M. Lieber, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 9136–9152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Miao, L. Meng and B. Tian, Nanoscale Horiz., 2022, 7, 94–111 RSC .
L. Jiang, B. Wu, X. Wei, X. Lv, H. Xue, G. Lu, Y. Zeng, J. Xing, W. Wu and J. Wu, Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 2180–2190 RSC .
X. Chen, J. A. Rogers, S. P. Lacour, W. Hu and D.-H. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1431–1433 RSC .
Y. Wang, H. Haick, S. Guo, C. Wang, S. Lee, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 3759–3793 RSC .
G.-H. Lee, H. Moon, H. Kim, G. H. Lee, W. Kwon, S. Yoo, D. Myung, S. H. Yun, Z. Bao and S. K. Hahn, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 149–165 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wang, Q.-L. Lei, M. Wang, G. Deng, L. Yang, X. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Cui, K. G. Utama, R. Ni and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Yu, T. Wang, C. Li, Y. Wei, X. Deng and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 3341–3356 RSC .
D. Li, W.-Y. Lai, Y.-Z. Zhang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704738 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Moser, Y. Wang, T. C. Hidalgo, H. Liao, Y. Yu, J. Chen, J. Duan, F. Moruzzi, S. Griggs, A. Marks, N. Gasparini, A. Wadsworth, S. Inal, I. McCulloch and W. Yue, Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 973–980 RSC .
J. T. Atkinson, L. Su, X. Zhang, G. N. Bennett, J. J. Silberg and C. M. Ajo-Franklin, Nature, 2022, 611, 548–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, J. Kim, S.-Y. Kim, W. H. Cheong, J. Jang, Y.-G. Park, K. Na, Y.-T. Kim, J. H. Heo, C. Y. Lee, J. H. Lee, F. Bien and J.-U. Park, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaap9841 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qian, X. Zhang, L. Xie, D. Qi, B. K. Chandran, X. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9243–9265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Zhong, Y. Sun, A. Li, J. Huang, F. Meng, B. K. Chandran, S. Li, L. Jiang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2978–2982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wen, C. Tan, J. Zhang, F. Meng, L. Jiang, Y. Sun and X. Chen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7760–7764 RSC .
M. O. Yee, J. Deutzmann, A. Spormann and A. E. Rotaru, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 174003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Trigodet, N. Larché, H. G. Morrison, M. Jebbar, D. Thierry and L. Maignien, Front. Microbiol., 2019, 10, 170 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. Cahoon and N. E. Freitag, Nature, 2018, 562, 43–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. McCuskey, Y. Su, D. Leifert, A. S. Moreland and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. McCuskey, J. Chatsirisupachai, E. Zeglio, O. Parlak, P. Panoy, A. Herland, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 4791–4825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Kirchhofer, S. R. McCuskey, C.-K. Mai and G. C. Bazan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6519–6522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, X. Zhou, R. Qi, P. Gai, L. Liu, F. Lv and S. Wang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1900320 CrossRef .
N. D. Kirchhofer, Z. D. Rengert, F. W. Dahlquist, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Chem, 2017, 2, 240–257 CAS .
V. B. Wang, J. Du, X. Chen, A. W. Thomas, N. D. Kirchhofer, L. E. Garner, M. T. Maw, W. H. Poh, J. Hinks, S. Wuertz, S. Kjelleberg, Q. Zhang, J. S. C. Loo and G. C. Bazan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 5867–5872 RSC .
R. B. Song, Y. Wu, Z. Q. Lin, J. Xie, C. H. Tan, J. S. C. Loo, B. Cao, J. R. Zhang, J. J. Zhu and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10516–10520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Zajdel, M. Baruch, G. Méhes, E. Stavrinidou, M. Berggren, M. M. Maharbiz, D. T. Simon and C. M. Ajo-Franklin, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 15293 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shang, C. Shao, J. Chi and Y. Zhao, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 59–70 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, S. Liu, C. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Pu, F. Ba, S. Xue, H. Ye, T. Zhao, K. Li, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Wang, C. Fan, T. K. Lu and C. Zhong, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2019, 15, 34–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-C. Tang, B. An, Y. Huang, S. Vasikaran, Y. Wang, X. Jiang, T. K. Lu and C. Zhong, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 332–350 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, T.-C. Tang, E. Tham, H. Yuk, S. Lin, T. K. Lu and X. Zhao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 2200–2205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ma, B. Li, B. Shao, D. Chen, J. Su, H. Zhang and K. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21481–21487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, H. Bai, W. Yu, Z. Gao, W. Chen, Z. Yang, C. Zhu, Y. Huang, F. Lv and S. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabo1458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Koklu, D. Ohayon, S. Wustoni, V. Druet, A. Saleh and S. Inal, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 4581–4635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, D. Qi, H. Yang, Z. Liu, M. Wang, W. R. Leow, G. Chen, J. Yu, K. He, H. Cheng, Y.-L. Wu, H. Zhang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803883 CrossRef PubMed .
T. M. Swager, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 4867–4886 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rochat and T. M. Swager, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9792–9796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. VanVeller and T. M. Swager, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5761–5763 RSC .
S. Rochat and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17703–17706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rochat and T. M. Swager, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4488–4502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yuan, H. Vijayamohanan, S.-X. L. Luo, K. Husted, J. A. Johnson and T. M. Swager, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 3013–3019 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lobez, T. L. Andrew, V. Bulović and T. M. Swager, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3044–3056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, I. Jeon, Z. Lin, M. D. Peeks, S. Savagatrup, S. E. Kooi, T. Van Voorhis and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6501–6508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Soylemez, B. Yoon, L. Toppare and T. M. Swager, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 1123–1127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, Z. Lin, I. Jeon, T. Van Voorhis and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14413–14420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, W. Yuan, S.-X. L. Luo, M. J. Bezdek, A. Peraire-Bueno and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 15786–15792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Feng and L. Liu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 33, 4605–4609 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, H. Yuan, H. Bai, P. Zhang, F. Lv, L. Liu, Z. Dai, J. Bao and S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2284–2291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu and Q. Ma, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 13879–13898 RSC .
J. Zhang, Q. Jia, Z. Yue, J. Huo, J. Chai, L. Yu, R. Nie, H. Shao, Y. Zhao, P. Li and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2200334 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Wang, P. Cai, Y. Luo, Z. Cui, X. J. Loh and X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 18671–18678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Li, J. Sun, H. He, B. Li, C. Ma, K. Liu and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8148–8152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Berggren, E. D. Głowacki, D. T. Simon, E. Stavrinidou and K. Tybrandt, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 4826–4846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Lozano, N. Lipsman, H. Bergman, P. Brown, S. Chabardes, J. W. Chang, K. Matthews, C. C. McIntyre, T. E. Schlaepfer, M. Schulder, Y. Temel, J. Volkmann and J. K. Krauss, Nat. Rev. Neurol., 2019, 15, 148–160 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 2109–2146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fratini, M. Nikolka, A. Salleo, G. Schweicher and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 491–502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Huang, K. Wang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2110639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Grahn, G. W. Mallory, B. M. Berry, J. T. Hachmann, D. A. Lobel and J. L. Lujan, Front. Neurosci., 2014, 8, 169 Search PubMed .
P. Bonifazi, F. Difato, P. Massobrio, G. L. Breschi, V. Pasquale, T. Levi, M. Goldin, Y. Bornat, M. Tedesco, M. Bisio, R. Galron, S. Kanner, J. Tessadori, S. Taverna and M. Chiappalone, Front. Neural Circuits, 2013, 7, 40 Search PubMed .
L. Li, L. Hu, K. Liu, K.-C. Chang, R. Zhang, X. Lin, S. Zhang, P. Huang, H.-J. Liu and T.-P. Kuo, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 3072–3081 RSC .
E. R. W. van Doremaele, P. Gkoupidenis and Y. van de Burgt, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12754–12760 RSC .
E. J. Fuller, S. T. Keene, A. Melianas, Z. Wang, S. Agarwal, Y. Li, Y. Tuchman, C. D. James, M. J. Marinella, J. J. Yang, A. Salleo and A. A. Talin, Science, 2019, 364, 570–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Keene, C. Lubrano, S. Kazemzadeh, A. Melianas, Y. Tuchman, G. Polino, P. Scognamiglio, L. Cinà, A. Salleo, Y. van de Burgt and F. Santoro, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 969–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. van de Burgt, E. Lubberman, E. J. Fuller, S. T. Keene, G. C. Faria, S. Agarwal, M. J. Marinella, A. Alec Talin and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 414–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Santoro, W. Zhao, L.-M. Joubert, L. Duan, J. Schnitker, Y. van de Burgt, H.-Y. Lou, B. Liu, A. Salleo, L. Cui, Y. Cui and B. Cui, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8320–8328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, Z. Tang, X. Liu and J. Van der Spiegel, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 191–200 CrossRef .
S. R. Patel and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Biotechnol., 2019, 37, 1007–1012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Sabandal, J. A. Berry and R. L. Davis, Nature, 2021, 591, 426–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Berke, Nat. Neurosci., 2018, 21, 787–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pristerà, C. Blomeley, E. Lopes, S. Threlfell, E. Merlini, D. Burdakov, S. Cragg, F. Guillemot and S.-L. Ang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 3817–3826 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wang, M. Wang, L. Yang, Z. Li, X. J. Loh and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, M. Wang, J. Wang, L. Yang, X. Ren, G. Song, S. Chen, Y. Yuan, R. Liu, L. Pan, Z. Li, W. R. Leow, Y. Luo, S. Ji, Z. Cui, K. He, F. Zhang, F. Lv, Y. Tian, K. Cai, B. Yang, J. Niu, H. Zou, S. Liu, G. Xu, X. Fan, B. Hu, X. J. Loh, L. Wang and X. Chen, Nat. Electron., 2022, 5, 586–595 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Rashid, C. H. So, M. M. C. Kong, T. Furtak, M. El-Ghundi, R. Cheng, B. F. O'Dowd and S. R. George, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 654–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, P. Goel and P. S. Kaeser, Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 2021, 22, 345–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, C.-L. Sun, P. An, X. Liu, R. Dong, J. Sun, X. Zhang, Y. Xie, C. Qin, W. Zheng, H.-L. Zhang and X. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8816–8824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, J. Mun, G. Chen, N. J. Schuster, W. Wang, Y. Zheng, S. Nikzad, J.-C. Lai, Y. Wu, D. Zhong, Y. Lin, Y. Lei, Y. Chen, S. Gam, J. W. Chung, Y. Yun, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 11679–11689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Matsuhisa, S. Niu, S. J. K. O’Neill, J. Kang, Y. Ochiai, T. Katsumata, H.-C. Wu, M. Ashizawa, G.-J. N. Wang, D. Zhong, X. Wang, X. Gong, R. Ning, H. Gong, I. You, Y. Zheng, Z. Zhang, J. B. H. Tok, X. Chen and Z. Bao, Nature, 2021, 600, 246–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Q. Zheng, Y. Liu, D. Zhong, S. Nikzad, S. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Liu, H.-C. Wu, C. Zhu, J. Li, H. Tran, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Science, 2021, 373, 88–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Wu, F. Lissel, G.-J. N. Wang, D. M. Koshy, S. Nikzad, H. Yan, J. Xu, S. Luo, N. Matsuhisa, Y. Cheng, F. Wang, B. Ji, D. Li, W.-C. Chen, G. Xue and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009201 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, V. R. Feig and Z. Bao, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2021, 10, 2001916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Feig, S. Santhanam, K. W. McConnell, K. Liu, M. Azadian, L. G. Brunel, Z. Huang, H. Tran, P. M. George and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 6, 2100162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Chiong, Y. Zheng, S. Zhang, G. Ma, Y. Wu, G. Ngaruka, Y. Lin, X. Gu and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 3717–3726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. Rodrigo, P. D. Loftus, J. Aparicio-Valenzuela, J. Zheng, T. Pong, K. J. Cyr, M. Babakhanian, J. Hasi, J. Li, Y. Jiang, C. J. Kenney, P. J. Wang, A. M. Lee and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 14769–14778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, S. Zhang, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 4699–4715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, H.-C. Wu, C. Zhu, A. Ehrlich, L. Shaw, M. Nikolka, S. Wang, F. Molina-Lopez, X. Gu, S. Luo, D. Zhou, Y.-H. Kim, G.-J. N. Wang, K. Gu, V. R. Feig, S. Chen, Y. Kim, T. Katsumata, Y.-Q. Zheng, H. Yan, J. W. Chung, J. Lopez, B. Murmann and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 594–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Oh, D. Son, T. Katsumata, Y. Lee, Y. Kim, J. Lopez, H.-C. Wu, J. Kang, J. Park, X. Gu, J. Mun, N. G.-J. Wang, Y. Yin, W. Cai, Y. Yun, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav3097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Feig, H. Tran, M. Lee, K. Liu, Z. Huang, L. Beker, D. G. Mackanic and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902869 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tran, S. Nikzad, J. A. Chiong, N. J. Schuster, A. E. Peña-Alcántara, V. R. Feig, Y.-Q. Zheng and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 7465–7474 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mun, Y. Ochiai, W. Wang, Y. Zheng, Y.-Q. Zheng, H.-C. Wu, N. Matsuhisa, T. Higashihara, J. B. H. Tok, Y. Yun and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, H.-C. Wu, J. Mun, R. Ning, W. Wang, G.-J. N. Wang, S. Nikzad, H. Yan, X. Gu, S. Luo, D. Zhou, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2104747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Hinckley, S. C. Andrews, M. T. Dunham, A. Sood, M. T. Barako, S. Schneider, M. F. Toney, K. E. Goodson and Z. Bao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2021, 7, 2001190 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, Y. Lei, X. Ji, Y. Wu, Y. Lin, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Zheng, Y. Chen, J.-C. Lai, D. Zhong, H.-W. Cheng, J. A. Chiong, X. Gu, S. Gam, Y. Yun, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2203527 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, M. Ashizawa, S. Zhang, J. Kang, S. Nikzad, Z. Yu, Y. Ochiai, H.-C. Wu, H. Tran, J. Mun, Y.-Q. Zheng, J. B. H. Tok, X. Gu and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 5700–5714 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jonsson, Z. Song, D. Nilsson, B. A. Meyerson, D. T. Simon, B. Linderoth and M. Berggren, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500039 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Borzage, S. Blüml and I. Seri, Brain Struct. Funct., 2014, 219, 141–150 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Li, S. Song, J. Kang, Y. Tsao, S. Chen, V. Mottini, K. McConnell, W. Xu, Y.-Q. Zheng, J. B. H. Tok, P. M. George and Z. Bao, Nat. Biotechnol., 2020, 38, 1031–1036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dufil, I. Bernacka-Wojcik, A. Armada-Moreira and E. Stavrinidou, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 4847–4883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Kwak, J. P. Giraldo, M. H. Wong, V. B. Koman, T. T. S. Lew, J. Ell, M. C. Weidman, R. M. Sinclair, M. P. Landry, W. A. Tisdale and M. S. Strano, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7951–7961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Wong, J. P. Giraldo, S.-Y. Kwak, V. B. Koman, R. Sinclair, T. T. S. Lew, G. Bisker, P. Liu and M. S. Strano, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 264–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Kim, R. Fan, L. K. Allison and T. L. Andrew, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabc3296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Kim, L. K. Allison and T. L. Andrew, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw0463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Beaujuge and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 268–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Green, N. H. Lovell, G. G. Wallace and L. A. Poole-Warren, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 3393–3399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Parker, Y. Daguerre, G. Dufil, D. Mantione, E. Solano, E. Cloutet, G. Hadziioannou, T. Näsholm, M. Berggren, E. Pavlopoulou and E. Stavrinidou, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 3295–3305 RSC .
E. Stavrinidou, R. Gabrielsson, E. Gomez, X. Crispin, O. Nilsson, D. T. Simon and M. Berggren, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1501136 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, N. Matsuhisa, Z. Liu, M. Wang, Y. Luo, P. Cai, G. Chen, F. Zhang, C. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Lv, W. Zhang and X. Chen, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 134–142 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Zenghao Wang
	Zenghao Wang received his bachelor's degree from Hunan University in 2016 and his master's degree from Shandong University in 2019. He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Shu Wang at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research focuses on the design and construction of novel bioelectronic systems based on water-soluble conjugated polymers.

Haotian Bai
	Haotian Bai earned his BS degree from Hunan University in 2012 and his PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2017. He subsequently completed postdoctoral research at the University of California, Los Angeles, and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Currently, he is a professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include the investigation of conductive polymers and fluorescent materials for bioelectronic regulation and application.

Shu Wang
	Shu Wang obtained his BS degree from Hebei University in 1994, and a PhD degree from Peking University in 1999. He was a postdoctoral researcher at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences from 1999 to 2001, and then a postdoctoral researcher at the University of California at Santa Barbara from 2001 to 2004. In 2004, he became a full-time professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include design, synthesis and properties of water-soluble conjugated polymers, photosynthesis, biosynthesis and bioelectronic devices.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of the bioelectronic applications of WSCPs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Schematic illustration of the photosynthetic hybrid system. (B) The chemical structures of PDI and PFP. (C) The energy level map of PDI/PFP and electron transfer proteins. (D) Photocurrents of PDI/PFP heterojunction at different concentrations. (E) Cyclic voltammetry curves of PDI/PFP, M. thermoacetica and PDI/PFP/M. thermoacetica. (F) The amount of acetic acid produced by conjugated polymers/M. thermoacetica under light and dark conditions. (G) The acetic acid production of PDI/PFP/M. thermoacetica over three days (A, C–G were reprinted with permission from ref. 42, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co).	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustration of the photosynthetic hybrid system. (B) The energy level map of Pdots and NR. (C) Photocurrents of NR, Pdots and Pdots/NR. (D) The amount of NADPH/NADP+ ratio by RH16, RH16/NR, RH16/Pdots and RH16/NR/pdots, respectively. (E) The PHB production under different conditions (A–E were reprinted with permission from ref. 56, Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Chemical structures of MEH-PPV, PFTP and PSMA in D–A CPNs@Enzyme. (B) The energy level instructions of PFTP and MEH-PPV. (C) The photocurrent responses of MEH-PPV, PFTP and MEH-PPV/PFTP. (D) Time courses of threonine concentrations produced by different groups of E. coli with light and dark states. (E) Time courses of 2-oxobutyrate concentrations produced by different groups of E. coli with light and dark states (A–E were reprinted with permission from ref. 57, Copyright 2022, China Association for Science and Technology).	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Schematic representation of PBF for enhancing the photosynthesis of C. pyrenoidosa. (B) Chemical structure of PBF. (C) Absorption and fluorescence spectra of PBF and C. pyrenoidosa. (D) Isothermal titration calorimetry curve of the titration of PBF into C. pyrenoidosa. (E) The fluorescence lifetime curves of PBF and C. pyrenoidosa/PBF. (F) Productions of NADPH, NADP+, and ATP by C. pyrenoidosa and C. pyrenoidosa/PBF. (G) The chlorophyll fluorescence parameters of C. pyrenoidosa and C. pyrenoidosa/PBF. (H) Schematic representation of the energy transfer. (I) the photographs of A. thaliana with different concentrations of PBF (A–I were reprinted with permission from ref. 43, Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Chemical structures of three CPNs-TAT. Absorption and fluorescence spectra of (B) CP1Ns-TAT, (C) CP2Ns-TAT, and (D) CP3Ns-TAT. (E) The antenna conversion efficiency of R. palustris and R. palustris/CPNs-TAT. (F) The electron transfer rate of R. palustris and R. palustris/CPNs-TAT. (G) ATP productions of CPNs-TAT, R. palustris and R. palustris/CPNs-TAT under light irradiation (A–G were reprinted with permission from ref. 72, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration of Sonagashira polymerization triggered by Pd to form PPE. (B) Transformation efficiency in relation to monomer concentrations. (C) Isothermal titration calorimetry curve of the titration of palladium ions into E. coli. The inset is the EDS map of palladium (D) schematic illustration of PPE to increase the production of ATP in C. pyrenoidosa photosynthesis. (E) The ATP production of different groups (A–E were reprinted with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co).	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of biohybrid thylakoid photoelectric system. (B) Chemical structure of PFPs. (C) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of PFP/thylakoid and thylakoid electrodes under different conditions. The insets show the equivalent circuit of the EIS. (D) Absorption and fluorescent spectra of PFPs and thylakoids. (E) Photocurrent response of different electrodes. (F) The redox potentials of PFPs and the main proteins in the electron transport process. (G) Photocurrent response of different electrodes in the absence and presence of DCMU (A, C–G were reprinted with permission from ref. 95, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co).	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Schematic illustration of biohybrid photoelectric system consisting of PSII and PPyBQ. (B) The possible redox potentials of the main proteins in the electron transport process. (C) The scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) pictures of PPyBQ nanostructures. The inset is the cross-sectional view. (D) The SEM pictures of PSII covered the PPyBQ electrode. (E) Photocurrents of different biohybrid photoanodes. (i) ITO, (ii) ITO/PSII, (iii) ITO/PPy, (iv) ITO/PPy/PSII, (v) ITO/PPyBQ, (vi) ITO/PPyBQ/PSII, and (vii) ITO/PPyBQ/PSII in the presence of DCMU. (F) Photocurrent responses at different applied bias voltages (A–F was reprinted with permission from ref. 96, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co).	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS. (B) Transmission electronic microscopy (TEM) images of PEDOT/PEO fibers with thylakoids. (C) Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images of Nile-red-stained PEDOT/PEO fibers with thylakoids. (D) Photocurrent responses of PEDOT/PEO/Thylakoid fibers under on and off switched light (B–D were reprinted with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society).	 

PFP	

	Biosynthetic system	
42


	
	Photosynthesis	
68,71


	
	Biophotovoltaic systems	
95

PFTP	

	Biosynthetic system	
57

PBF	

	Photosynthesis	
43

PFBT	

	Photosynthesis	
71,72

PPE	

	Photosynthesis	
73

COEs-1	

	Biophotovoltaic systems	
93

COEs-2	

	Biophotovoltaic systems	
93

PPy	

	Biophotovoltaic systems	
96

PEDOT:PSS	

	Biophotovoltaic systems	
98


	
	Bioelectronic device	
195

PMNT	

	Bioelectronic device	
132

Functional PPy	

	Bioelectronic device	
145

PEDOT:S-H	

	Bioelectronic device	
204

DSSN+	

	Bioelectronic device	
124

DSFO+	

	Bioelectronic device	
123


 	Fig. 11  (A) Chemical structure of PMNT. (B) Schematic illustration of the electron transfer pathway in PMNT-Living materials. (C) Photographs of the flexible device. (D) Cyclic voltammetry curves of PMNT-Living material and S. oneidensis MR-1. (E) The Nyquist curves of S. oneidensis MR-1, PMNT, and PMNT-Living material (inset). (F) The values of the currents generated by the detecting system. (G) The calibration plots of PMNT-Living material and S. oneidensis MR-1. (H) Current generations from the bioelectronic device in different HeLa cell numbers. (I) Current generations from the bioelectronic device with the addition of lactate in urine (B–I was reprinted with permission from ref. 132, Copyright 2022, American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Chemical structure of the functional undoped PPy. (B) Schematic illustration of the wireless detection system. (C) SEM images of PPy core–shell particles coated nitrocellulose membrane. (D) The responses of the device in different concentrations of glucose. (E) The responses of the device in different concentrations of CRP (A–E were reprinted with permission from ref. 145, Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of ECL-therapeutics. (B) The ECL spectra of different groups. (C) The fluorescence intensity for the detection of ROS in luminol–H2O2 before and after adding OPV or porphyrin. (D) Charged luminol–H2O2 hydrogel of various mechanical operations. (E) Frozen scanning electron microscopy images of the hydrogel. (F) Antimicrobial effect of the chargeable hydrogel against Candida albicans. (G) Preparation process of RB/Rub hydrogel. (H) Deformation photographs of the RB/Rub hydrogel. (I) Mice model treated with the RB/Rub hydrogel system (A–F were reprinted with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; G–I were reprinted with permission from ref. 149, Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co).	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Schematic illustration of a biological synapse. (B) Cross-sectional SEM image of the cell membrane to the electrode. (C) Synaptic regulation of PC-12 dopaminergic cells by the neuromorphic device. (D) Responses of the nerve in mice with the stimulus of dopamine. (E) Responses of the K+-ion current with the stimulus of dopamine. (F) The angle of rotation of mouse legs under dopamine stimulation (A–C were reprinted with permission from ref. 162, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature; D–F were reprinted with permission from ref. 171, Copyright 2022, Springer Nature).	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Composition of the morphing bioelectronic devices and chemical structure of the insulator. (B) The images of the morphing bioelectronic devices under 50% and 100% strain stretching. (C) Stress-strain curves of the PEDOT:PSS-based viscoplastic conductive electrode at different strain rates. (D) Schematic illustration and images of the implantation process for the bioelectronic device. (E) SEM image revealing the interface between the morphing bioelectronic devices and sciatic nerve. (F) The intensity of the compound action potential for the cuff electrode and the bioelectronic device (A–F were reprinted with permission from ref. 195, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature).	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) The chemical structure and synthesis process of PProDOT-Cl. (B) The picture of the vapor-printed electrode. (C) Variation of cell membrane capacitance with water content. (D) The impedance of the original (green) and UVA-exposed (purple) hosta leaf. The inset shows the equivalent circuit model. (E) Chemical structure and the schematic diagram of the formation of PEDOT-S:H in plants. (F) The electrochemical properties of xylem-OECT. (G) Schematic illustration and the properties of xylem-OECT-based logic circuits. (A–D were reprinted with permission from ref. 200, Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science; E–G were reprinted with permission from ref. 204, Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
