Molecular gel sorbent materials for environmental remediation and wastewater treatment  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA05782J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA05782J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18759-18791Molecular gel sorbent materials for environmental remediation and wastewater treatment

        
          
            Jason Y. C. 
            Lim
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Shermin S. 
            Goh
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sing Shy 
            Liow
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kun 
            Xue
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xian Jun 
            Loh
          
          
        
      *
      Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 2 Fusionopolis Way, Innovis 138634, Singapore. E-mail: jason_lim@imre.a-star.edu.sg; lohxj@imre.a-star.edu.sg
Received 
      30th May 2019
    , Accepted 22nd July 2019First published on 22nd July 2019AbstractMolecular gels are promising new classes of materials for the treatment of polluted water owing to their large surface area for pollutant sorption and ease of chemical modification. In recent years, exceptional gel performance in the removal of pollutants such as oil, excess and/or toxic cations and anions, as well as dyes and pharmaceutical products have been reported. However, for them to be used in real-life settings, numerous practical considerations such as gel mechanical properties and recyclability also need to be taken into account. In this review, we highlight key advances in the development of this class of sorbent materials with an emphasis on hydrogels, comprising small molecule supramolecular gelators, polymers and composites comprising graphene/graphene oxide, microorganisms and iron nanoparticles achieved during the last decade. In our ‘bottom-up’ approach, we emphasise the key design features of each gel material accounting for its target pollutant adsorption characteristics and material properties, together with the most important practical considerations necessary for real-life usage. By putting these into perspective, we hope that this review will stimulate further strategic translational research into practical gel remediators capable of integrating with and complementing existing water treatment technologies.Jason Y. C. LimJason Y. C. Lim received his DPhil (2018) from the University of Oxford, where he worked on anion recognition and sensing using halogen- and chalcogen-bonding receptors with Prof. Paul D. Beer. After a postdoctoral stint with Prof. Charlotte Williams in the same institution on stereoselective ring-opening polymerisation of lactide using rotaxane organocatalysts, he returned to Singapore where he is now a research scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), A*STAR. Working on hydrogels and anion sensors at the moment, his main research interests centres around the applications of supramolecular chemistry in materials and sustainable chemistry.Xian Jun LohDr Xian Jun Loh completed his basic and postgraduate studies at the National University of Singapore. A polymer chemist by training, he is currently the Head of Department of the Soft Materials Department at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), A*STAR. As a pioneer in the area of biodegradable thermogels, he is highly knowledgeable in developing these materials for various applications spanning biomedical, engineering, cosmetics, personal care and food. His scientific contributions have earned him the position of Fellowship in both Fitzwilliam College in the University of Cambridge as well as in the Royal Society of Chemistry. He is also the current Vice President and member of the Executive Committee of the Singapore National Institute of Chemistry. With his extensive experience in authoring >200 journal papers, 38 patents and know-hows, >30 book chapters and 7 books, he currently sits on several editorial boards of international journals as an expert in his area. He has also successfully helped in the commercialization of 8 different products and is always interested in the translation of science to products.
1. Introduction
Molecular gels are a class of soft materials consisting of cross-linked solid-like networks dispersed within either an aqueous medium or organic solvent to form hydrogels and organogels respectively. Molecules capable of forming these materials are known as gelators, and despite the huge repertoire of known candidates, they can be broadly categorised into polymeric and low-molecular weight (LMW)/supramolecular (Mw of organic molecules < 2000 Da) gelators. These (macro)molecules self-assemble within the carrier solvent to form extensive cross-linked networks, giving rise to the gel phase, which behave as solids, yet possess highly porous structures allowing percolation of solvent and high internal diffusion rates.1–5 At the same time, this enables a very large exposed surface area allowing intimate contact of the gel material with the solvent. By varying their molecular constituents and functional groups, the bulk material properties (e.g. stiffness, sol–gel transition temperature) of the gel can be varied. Furthermore, gels can also exhibit responsiveness to light, pH, temperature, sonication and chemical stimuli which trigger bulk physical changes such as formation/breakdown of the gel phase or swelling/shrinking behaviour.6–8 These useful and readily-tunable properties enable gels, in particular hydrogels, to find diverse applications which include, but are not limited to drug delivery,9 tissue engineering10 and regeneration,11 energy storage,12 catalysis,13 molecular sensing,14 consumer care15 and as food texture modifiers.16
Although the exploitation of gel materials in environmental remediation has largely been overlooked, recent years have witnessed a surge in interest in this area. This is especially pertinent in light of the fact that anthropogenic activities have resulted in a deluge of hazardous industrial and domestic waste released into the environment. Comprising of non-biodegradable heavy metal cations, fertilisers, dyes, pharmaceutical agents, petroleum derivatives and microorganisms, these agents accumulate in the biosphere and inadvertently find their way back to the human diet, with potentially serious health ramifications. Traditionally, whilst physicochemical methods such as sedimentation, flocculation and photocatalysis have been employed in treating heavily-polluted water (e.g. sewage), they show limited effectiveness in the removal of micropollutants such as toxic household and industrial chemicals. Although adsorbent materials such as activated carbons,17 mineral-18 and organo-clays,19 zeolites,20 noble metal nanoparticles21,22 and aerogels comprising of inorganic oxides23 and semiconductor chalcogenides24,25 have been employed for the uptake of these micropollutants, the majority suffer from poor bio-degradability and significant environmental toxicity.26–30 In these regards, gel materials show great promise as alternative materials for environmental remediation. As aforementioned, not only do they have the capacity for immobilising a diverse range of chemical entities, their vast and well-established chemistry allows programmability, stimuli-responsiveness and biocompatibility, ultimately resulting in a unique combination of favourable properties not easily achievable with conventional water-treatment materials.
In this review, we present a broad overview of the advances in the use of organic small molecule or polymeric gelators for environmental remediation achieved during the last decade, which can be applied to polluted water bodies either as pre-formed gels, in the dried state (xerogels) or as in situ gelators in water. Although gel materials have been investigated for water purification via methods such as solar vapour generation31 and membrane distillation,32 our discussion will focus on the use of gels, in particular hydrogels, as sorbents of pollutants from wastewater and the environment. In addition, novel composite hydrogel materials containing additives such as biological entities and iron nanoparticles embedded within the organic hydrogel network, capable of imbuing them with specific properties aiding water treatment, will be considered. In our discussion, special consideration will also be given to the design of the gel materials that allow them to sequester specific target pollutants, whilst giving material properties which facilitate practical real-life applications.
2. Design considerations
In order for the hydrogels to be practically applicable, numerous factors need to be considered. Other than tailoring the properties of the gel material to target the pollutant of interest, practical considerations such as material cost, biocompatibility, physicochemical stability, rate of pollutant uptake and the potential for multiple reusability must be taken into account. It is envisaged that the eventual use of hydrogel remediators in wastewater treatment would follow the process summarised schematically in Scheme 1, with the major considerations in each step of the process discussed in greater detail below.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the water treatment process using hydrogel remediators. 
2.1 Classes of pollutants, general recognition strategies and challenges
Surface water contaminants, which arise mainly from sewage, industrial and agricultural effluents, include a diverse range of chemical and biological entities. To target a specific class of chemical pollutant, the hydrogel material should contain chemical functionalities which establish stronger interactions with the target contaminant than with the surrounding aqueous environment, thermodynamically favouring sequestration. Nonetheless, due to the contrasting properties of certain classes of pollutants (e.g. toxic anions and cations) which require fundamentally antagonistic interactions (e.g. Lewis acids and bases respectively), the design of hydrogels capable of indiscriminate ‘universal’ pollutant uptake remains a formidable challenge. Nonetheless, numerous hydrogels targeting different pollutants could be employed in tandem at the same time for remediating wastewater containing multiple classes of contaminants.

Petrochemicals. 
The intentional or accidental discharge of liquid petroleum hydrocarbons from tankers, drilling rigs and offshore platforms is devastating to the environment. With major oil spills often spreading for hundreds of square miles, current remediation efforts based on absorption and emulsification are costly and difficult to implement, whilst frequently leaving toxic by-products behind.33 Unique amongst major chemical pollutants, these hydrocarbons are largely immiscible with water, and hydrogel materials capable of remediation should contain hydrophobic functionalities which allow them to partition better in the oil phase than water. Upon dissolution in the organic phase, intermolecular interactions such as hydrogen bonding and π-stacking should decrease the solubility of the material such that they can then form 3D entangled fibrillary networks to gel the hydrocarbons. However, heavy crude oil fractions, and inevitable weathering processes such as evaporation and emulsification from wave action,34 can result in highly viscous oil slicks, which impedes the efficient diffusion and dispersal of gelator molecules for oil uptake. To overcome this limitation, gelators (especially small molecules) are often first dissolved in a water-miscible organic carrier solvent (e.g. THF) before application.35 However, the toxicity and bio-incompatibility of these solvents make this process practically non-viable. The ideal on-site crude oil hydrogelator should be non-toxic and able to quickly form strong, mechanically-robust gels at low concentration with a wide range of crude oil fractions upon application as a powder, an aqueous suspension or in (preferably minimal quantities of) environmentally-benign carrier solvents.36,37 To facilitate retrieval, the gelled hydrocarbons should still be able to float on the surface of water.


Inorganic ions. 
Unlike petrochemicals, cations and anions are dissolved in water, and hence any hydrogel material capable of sequestering them must extract them from the solution phase. Toxic cations such as ammonium and heavy metals discharged into waterways from industrial activities are especially hazardous. Anions such as phosphates and nitrate, whilst essential for life, can cause eutrophication when present in large quantities. Other polluting anions include cyanide from mining activities, oxoanions such as the toxic arsenate (AsO43−), explosive perchlorate (ClO4−), radioactive pertechnetate (99TcO4−) and other transition metal oxides (e.g. molybdates, tungstate, chromates).
To sequester these species, pre-formed hydrogels and in situ gelators which form gels in the presence of these ions have been used, although the latter requires the critical ionic concentration for inducing gelation to be as low as possible. The uptake of these ions are often hampered by their strong hydration energies,38 which requires any binding motif to outcompete the ions' hydration shell for absorption. For metal cations, their often high charge densities and well-defined coordination preferences partially alleviate this problem, and gel materials usually contain Lewis bases such as carboxylates, sulfonates and N-heterocycles (e.g. pyridine) capable of strong cation coordination. Compared to cations, anions often display a larger range of protonation equilibria, have smaller charge-to-size ratios which reduces the effectiveness of binding by electrostatic attractions, and lack the coordination preferences of metal cations.39 The considerably more limited examples of anion-sequestering gels are often polycationic or possess potent hydrogen bond-donor groups such as amides. Due to the ubiquity and abundance of naturally-occurring ions in the environment (e.g. Na+, K+, Cl−, HCO3−), hydrogels need to be able to preferentially remove the target ionic pollutant from the more abundant and benign competing ions. To achieve this, principles of supramolecular ionic recognition should be applied, exploiting host–guest geometric complementarity, preferential cation coordination geometries, and even Hofmeister biases resulting from the chaotropic/kosmotropic properties of target ions.40


Dissolved organic dyes and pharmaceuticals. 
Dyes are a class of structurally-diverse highly-conjugated synthetic organic compounds, whose annual production includes more than 10000 different compounds and exceeds 105 tonnes.41 A significant fraction of dyes used in the textile industry are discharged as effluent wastewater. Other than being aesthetically unappealing, they are highly persistent in the environment, difficult to degrade, and can be toxic and carcinogenic.42 In addition, their intense colours result in reduced visible light penetration, adversely affecting aquatic photosynthetic efficiency and thus oxygenation of waterways.
Like dyes, pharmaceutical products such as analgesics, anti-inflammatory drugs and antibiotics are found in waterways in many parts of the world.43–45 Mainly a result of human healthcare and agriculture, antibiotic pollution arises as only a small quantity administered is absorbed by the body, with the remaining chemically-unmodified drug expelled through the urine and faeces. This is a major cause for concern as their presence in waterways can potentially allow the introduction and spread of antibiotic resistance amongst microorganisms.46
Hydrogels designed to sequester these dissolved organic compounds exploit the aromatic functionalities on these molecules, which interact preferentially with hydrophobic surfaces within the gel matrix, or the extended π-surfaces on additives such as graphene oxide via donor–acceptor π–π stacking interactions (vide infra). In addition, a large majority of dyes are charged to aid dissolution in water for practical textile applications, whilst many classes of antibiotics are ionised at ambient surface water pH. For instance, tetracyclines47 and quinolones48 are zwitterionic at neutral pH, whilst macrolides and beta-lactams exist as cations and anions by virtue of their tertiary amine and carboxylic acid groups respectively. By incorporating appropriately-charged groups or Lewis acidic/basic functionalities within the hydrogel structure as aforementioned for ion-uptake, the sequestration of these organic pollutants can be enhanced. Hydrogen bond-donor functionalities within the hydrogel framework capable of interacting with Lewis basic groups (e.g. amines, carbonyls) on the organic pollutants are also often exploited.

2.2 Practical considerations
Other than bearing the appropriate chemical functionalities to sequester the target pollutant, the following criteria should also be optimised to ensure practical applicability.

Gelation conditions. 
Ideally, the hydrogels should be applied as a pre-formed gel or as a powder, the latter capable of gelating rapidly under ambient conditions (fresh or seawater) without the use of carrier solvents. In addition, gels which can only form under heat–cool cycles and mechanical stimuli (e.g. sonication)49–51 are not suitable for in situ gelation of pollutants.


Cost and synthetic ease. 
As application over a large surface area may be expected, the hydrogels should be synthesised from cheap, abundant starting materials, with the synthetic protocols amenable to scale-up. In this respect, gels comprising of derivatives of sugars such as dibenzylidene-D-sorbitol (DBS),52 amino acids,53 and naturally-occurring polymers such as chitosan,54 alginates55 and cellulose56 have been reported. Other than their availability and cost, these natural materials also exhibit excellent biocompatibility.


Environmental compatibility. 
As aforementioned, the gels should comprise of environmentally-benign materials and applied without the need for organic carrier solvents. The use of toxic heavy metal derivatives such as those of tin and mercury, as reagents or catalysts during gel synthesis should be ideally avoided. Similarly, the use of metallogels containing toxic heavy metals such as Cu2+ and Cd2+, despite being shown to be highly effective for dye absorption,57–59 should be abstained.


Stability. 
The hydrogels should be stable to hydrolysis, photodegradation as well as high concentrations of salt (typically 35000 ppm of NaCl in seawater for marine applications). To ensure applicability under diverse environmental conditions, the gels should not exhibit shear-thinning behaviour,60 yet retain their gel structure over a wide temperature range, even as low as 0 °C.


Mechanical strength. 
To facilitate recovery, physical manipulation and disposal, the hydrogel materials should possess favourable mechanical properties which should not be compromised upon uptake of pollutant. In many cases, supramolecular gels show poorer mechanical properties than polymeric gels as they are held solely by intermolecular interactions.61 To overcome this problem, hybrid gels containing small molecule gelators reinforced by polymer additives have been explored. Nonetheless, the ability to control the self-assembly of gelators is of crucial importance for engineering the macroscopic mechanical properties of the gel. For instance, the thickness of the self-assembled fibres, types and frequency of fibre crosslinks and their 3D spatial distribution profoundly affect the gel's mechanical strength.62
In polymeric hydrogels, physical crosslinks can form from well-defined coordination sites, e.g. between polyvalent cations and alginate.63 Alternatively, as demonstrated for agarose hydrogels, fibre formation occurs by epitaxial nucleation of the polymer chains, whilst structural mismatches during this process give rise to network branches (Fig. 1A).64 Compared to polymeric gels, LMW gels often contain a higher degree of crystallinity,65 with three main types of hierarchical self-assembled networks being identified (Fig. 1B). For gels comprising of acyclic single crystal networks, their storage modulus G′ is proportional to the average branching distance (which determines mesh size), otherwise known as the correlation length ξ.64,66 Alternatively, multi-domain networks contain groups of single crystal networks (e.g. spherulites) whose inter-domain interactions can be weak or strong. The rheological and mechanical properties of multi-domain gels are a function of the inter-domain interactions.65
 Fig. 1  Gel network formation by (A) structural mismatch during epitaxial nucleation of agarose polymer chains.64 Figure adapted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society; and (B) single crystal network and spherulite domains with weak or strong inter-domain interactions.65 Adapted from ref. 65 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The branching density of these self-assembled fibres from LMWGs determine the mesh size of the gel network and their compactness. Highly compact fibre networks mutually-exclude each other to form multi-domains, while less compact fibres tend to grow into each other to form interpenetrated networks. To enhance single network branching, thermal processes such as supersaturation66 and supercooling67 can be applied, as well as chemical additives such as polymers (e.g. EVACP – ethylene/vinyl acetate copolymer) and surfactants.68 The strength of gels can be further enhanced by converting multi-domain networks with weak interactions into interpenetrated fibres by seeding69 and ultrasonication.70 In a notable example, Liu and co-workers reconstructed the compact fibre networks of non-gelating spherulites of N-lauroyl-L-glutamic acid di-n-butylamide in octanol or propylene glycol into an-interpenetrated fibrillar network by ultrasonication, thereby forming a self-supporting gel.71 The interested reader is referred to a comprehensive review by Liu and co-workers on strategies to engineer crystal networks, with profound influences on the mechanical properties of supramolecular gels.65


Kinetics and quantity of pollutant uptake. 
For practical applications, the hydrogel remediator should ideally exhibit rapid pollutant uptake. However in reality, while having a small mesh size in gels results in better mechanical properties, it limits the rate of diffusion through the pores72 and slows down the rate of pollutant uptake. The rate of transport of solutes through hydrogels is highly complex, and is affected by hydrogel composition, ionic charge, hydrophobicity, solute size and hydrodynamic interactions between the solution and the gel matrix. The network morphology of the gel needs to be optimised for the target pollutant: for instance, dissolved dyes and ions have very different chemical and physical properties (e.g. hydration energy, hydrophobicity and size), and a gel capable of effectively sequestering an anionic dye may work poorly for toxic anions such as AsO43−.
Modifying the chemical constituents within the hydrogel offers scope for tuning its absorption capacity and selectivity. For instance, when a solution of tris-urea 1 (Fig. 2) and sodium hydroxide was mixed with either HCl or CaCl2, the gel resulting from the latter showed approximately 1.5 times the uptake capacity for the cationic rhodamine 6G dye than the former. At the same time, while the 1-CaCl2 hydrogel was stable to the presence of anionic dyes acid orange 7 and acid red 12 and even showed modest uptake, partial collapse of 1-HCl occurred.73 For LMWGs, altering the gelators' chemical structure has profound influences on the mesh size and hence porosity of the gel, often giving rise to large differences in their pollutant uptake properties.74 Unfortunately, the exact relationship and influences of chemical functionalities is difficult to control and predict a priori, hence requiring much optimisation.
 Fig. 2  Structures of tris-urea gelator 1 and dye molecules rhodamine 6G, acid orange 7 and acid red 12 used in Hasegawa and Yamanaka's study.73 
The rate and capacity of pollutant uptake is also dependent on the solution pH, which affects the ionisation of both adsorbate and gel. For instance, an anionic polymer hydrogel absorbs less Cd2+ and Cr3+ when the pH was lowered below 4 due to protonation of the coordinating carboxylate groups within the gel.75 Although most gels are found to perform optimally within a narrow pH range, a practical approach would require them to work in as wide a pH range as possible. This may be possibly achieved using permanently charged groups, e.g. quarternary ammoniums (NR4+), where the degree of ionisation and surface charge is pH-independent. Indeed, a gel containing this functionality could absorb dyes effectively from pH 2–11.76


Gel morphology. 
The applied hydrogel remediator should also be formulated in the most appropriate morphology for its target application, i.e. as monolithic blocks, films or micro/nanoparticles. Although most reported hydrogel remediators are formulated and tested (under laboratory settings) as monoliths, this may not be the most ideal morphology for application in certain real-life situations. For instance, the greatly augmented exposed surface area of micro/nanoparticulate gels and resulting shorter diffusion distances can substantially increase the efficiency of absorption compared with monoliths. Indeed, Tang and co-workers showed that by grinding the bulk monolithic hydrogel down into a powder, the time required for Cr(VI) absorption could be reduced from 2 hours to 5 minutes.77 Despite this obvious advantage, which potentially allows treatment of fast flowing water, microparticles are difficult to handle and recover, often requiring sedimentation and centrifugation when used in tank reactors. Comparatively, monoliths are much easier to manipulate physically and recover post-application. On the other hand, hydrogels formulated as thin films are most optimal as smart responsive surfaces for sensing pollutants (e.g. CWAs), or as a membrane coating for low-pressure filtration protocols.78

2.3 Reusability and regeneration of gels
One of the most desirable features of using hydrogels for water remediation lies in their ease of regeneration, allowing the hydrogel to be re-used and the adsorbed pollutant recovered. Not only is this economically and environmentally attractive, but the recovered pollutant materials, especially precious metal ions and dyes, can be recycled back into industrial and manufacturing processes. At the time of writing, hydrogel regeneration is rarely studied under laboratory settings for more than five adsorption–regeneration cycles. Indeed, more future research emphasis should be placed on this important aspect of hydrogel research, focusing on parameters such as optimum regeneration time, lifetime and stability of the hydrogel material under regeneration conditions, and regeneration conditions (e.g. temperature, nature and concentration of solution). While the last factor is critically dependent on the nature of the adsorbed pollutant and the chemical makeup of the hydrogel, the regeneration solution (which are usually solutions of mineral acids and bases) should be cheap, abundant, easily prepared and non-hazardous. Key approaches to recycle gels are summarised in Fig. 3 and discussed below.
 Fig. 3  Strategies for recovering hydrogel materials for reuse in multiple adsorption–regeneration cycles. 
For most LMWGs (Fig. 3A), the weak non-covalent interactions responsible for self-assembly of the gel structure are reversible, allowing the hydrogel to be easily broken up to release the adsorbed pollutant. Following which, the recovered gelator can be re-assembled into the appropriate gel morphology and re-used. This approach has been demonstrated by Feng and co-workers using a LMWG which forms stable gels in acid capable of absorbing dissolved aqueous methylene blue.74 To regenerate the gel, the dye-impregnated gel was broken up in aqueous NaOH, and the dye was recovered by extraction with chloroform. Acidification of the aqueous solution after complete dye extraction regenerated the gel material, which retained excellent absorption capacity of >95% even after three recycling cycles, substantially superior to activated carbon. For metal extraction, strategies such as using chelating agents such as EDTA to complex metal cations can be considered.79
Methods which do not involve hydrogel disassembly are especially suitable for polymeric gels, but are also applicable to LMWGs as long as the gel remains stable under these conditions. Gels which adsorb pollutants based on ionic interactions are most conveniently regenerated by (1) weakening the electrostatic attraction between the adsorbate and the gel (Fig. 3B); or (2) ion exchange by regeneration solutions containing large excess of (non-toxic) ions which outcompetes the adsorbed pollutant (Fig. 3C). The former can be achieved by manipulating the pH, which modulates the ionisation of acidic/basic functional groups within the gel. For example, transition metal cations immobilised within an EDTA-functionalised polymeric gel can be released by protonating the carboxylate groups with 1 M HCl.80 Gel regeneration by ion exchange can be exemplified by Lin's cationic pyridinium nanotube gelator, which are effective in adsorbing anionic dyes such as methylene blue. By immersing the dye-impregnated gel in brine, excess Cl− outcompetes the anionic dyes for the cationic binding sites, leading to complete gel regeneration. Notably, these gels could be re-used for at least five adsorption–regeneration cycles whilst retaining their dye adsorption capacity.81
Having considered the main design considerations behind the design of effective hydrogels for water remediation, the following sections will examine in greater detail examples engineered for removing specific pollutants in water.
3. Small molecule hydrogelators
Small molecule gelators, also known as low-molecular-weight gelators (LMWGs), are supramolecular polymer gels formed from organic compounds with molecular weights <2000 Da in water. These small molecules reversibly self-assemble into the solid-like network through non-covalent interactions such as van der Waals forces, π–π stacking or hydrophobic effects, dipole–dipole, charge-transfer or coordination interactions, or hydrogen bonding.
LMWGs possess several unique advantages: (1) they are highly solvated; (2) they are highly responsive to the environment since non-covalent interactions can be triggered by many stimuli; (3) they have rapid uptake of pollutants since diffusion is faster prior to gelation; (4) they are easily separated from pollutants since gelation is reversible.
The key to which stimuli and interactions affect gelation depends on the design of the gelator molecule. This design governs the hierarchical self-assembly of the gelators, which first form aggregates, then fibrils and finally entangled fibres which immobilise large solvent volumes to form the hydrogel.
This section will focus on the advances in the design of organic small molecule hydrogels for environmental remediation. A comprehensive review61 covering the early literature is available; hence in this section, we will only consider key advances in LMWG research in the last decade.
3.1 Oil spill remediation
LMWGs have been studied for remediation of oil spills since the 1970s.82 Due to the non-covalent interactions within the gels, oil can easily be recovered from the gel by distillation. Yet, for widespread use of this approach, several issues need to be addressed: (1) ease of large-scale synthesis, (2) bio-/environmental-compatibility of gel and co-solvent (if necessary), (3) gelation without heat–cool cycles or pH changes and (4) stability and mechanical strength.
In recent years, phase-selective organogelators (PSOGs), organogels which selectively gel oil in the presence of water, have come to the forefront of this field.83 Particularly of interest are powder PSOGs, which can effect gelation even when applied in powder form, without the requirement of any (toxic) co-solvent.
One example is the glucose-based powder PSOG reported by Sureshan and co-workers (2016).84 Starting from the known alkyl 4,5-O-benzylidene-glycopyranosides organogelators,85–88 the authors modified the anomeric position by replacing the ether (–OR) group with a thioether (–SR) to increase the hydrophobicity of the gelator to impart phase-selectivity. The PSOGs 2a and 2b (Fig. 4) could be obtained by simple 3-step synthesis, and were found to be supergelators of crude oil, with critical gel concentrations (CGC) at 0.5 and 0.6 wt% respectively. The gels were stable for several months under ambient conditions and could withstand stress of up to 100 Pa. Although the biphasic critical gel concentrations (BCGCs) were slightly higher (0.7 and 0.9 wt% respectively) than their corresponding CGCs, the PSOGs indeed showed phase-selectivity since only the oil phase was captured in the gel while the water phase turned clear. The gel could be scooped up and distilled to recover both the oil (benzene) and gelator, which could be reused. To demonstrate the practical use of this gelator, the authors added 1 wt% of PSOG 2a as a fine powder to a 1:100 v/v mixture of crude oil with sea water; the resulting gel could be skimmed off the surface easily after 3 hours. In the case of crude oil, the oil could be recovered but the gelator could not be reused to contamination from other components of crude oil. The simple synthesis, easy application and low amount of PSOG required are promising attributes for environmental application.
 Fig. 4  Structures of PSOGs 2a and 2b used in Sureshan and co-workers' study.84 
While most PSOGs reported have long gelation times for crude oil, Zeng and co-workers89 reported the first example of instant gelation of crude oil under ambient conditions. The group synthesised a library of 20 alkylated Fmoc-protected amino acids (Fmoc-AA-Cn, Fig. 5A) with the following design features: the amino acid has amide bonds for H-bonding and a chiral centre to control molecular conformation to facilitate 1D H-bonding interactions, the Fmoc group enables π-stacking and the alkyl chain increases solubility in oil. Control compound Fmoc-Gly-C4 with no chiral centre was also synthesised. All gelators were able to gel most crude oils using a heat–cool cycle with CGC values between 0.4–3.5 wt%, while the control compound precipitated in oil (Fig. 5B). Based on the crystal structures of the compounds, the authors attributed this behaviour to extensive intermolecular H-bonding in Fmoc-Gly-C4, leading to poor solubility in oil. In contrast, the amino acid side groups of the gelators prevented intercolumnar stacking, allowing oil to disrupt the 3D packing to form instead an entangled fibrous gel. In a real-life oil spill, a heat–cool cycle is impractical for remediation. Thus, the authors investigated a gelation protocol under ambient conditions. Powder Fmoc-Leu-C6 and Fmoc-Leu-C8 (3.2 wt%) were found to gel Grissik crude oil at room temperature after 48 h; however, this was with vigorous shaking. Thus, the authors decided to use environmentally benign carrier solvents to dissolve and apply the PSOGs. Only four of the gelators, Fmoc-Ala-C4, Fmoc-Ala-C6, Fmoc-Leu-C4 and Fmoc-Leu-C6 were soluble in acetone/ethanol or ethyl acetate/ethanol mixtures. Toxicity testing of these gelators showed that only the leucine-based PSOGs did not harm zebrafish embryo and larvae after 4 days at concentrations of up to 100 ppm. When a solution of Fmoc-Leu-C4 (200 mg mL−1 in 3:2 v/v ethyl acetate and ethanol) was applied to a 1:4 v/v mixture of crude oil and sea water, gelation was complete within a minute; BCGC values were between 0.4–1.4 wt%. Fmoc-Leu-C4 was also shown to gel weathered crude oils, albeit at slightly higher BCGC. The as-formed gels were stable for more than 6 months and could withstand stress of up to 80 Pa. As with other PSOGs, the oil could be recovered quantitatively by distillation, but the gelator could not be reused due to crude oil contamination. This comprehensive study yielded two non-toxic PSOGs (Fmoc-Leu-C4 and Fmoc-Leu-C6) with low BCGC values, easily applied via concentrated solutions in environmentally benign solvents, which can instantly solidify crude oils at ambient temperatures. Instantaneous gelation is crucial to reduce weathering, which increases the difficulty of remediation and the persistence of oil in water.90 More importantly, the insights into gelation gained from this study can lead to better rational design of PSOGs.
 Fig. 5  (A) Structures of PSOGs used in Zeng and co-workers' studies.89,91–93 (B) A comparison of hierarchical assemblies of gelators forming hydrogel network vs. control compound Fmoc-Gly-C4 which precipitates in water. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Zeng and co-workers continued their investigation into their gelator library by varying the amino acid protecting group with other aromatic groups91e.g. Napth, Ph and Cbz and acetate92 (Ac) (Fig. 5A). They found the performance of non-toxic Ac-Ile-C8 to be similar to their previous best gelator Fmoc-Leu-C4, and with lower unit cost. However, applying the PSOG in powder form still took too long to effect gelation. Thus, the authors again turned to powder wetting to improve gelation efficiency.93 Notably, addition of the gelator as a solution in ethyl acetate (5 vol% of oil) lowered the BCGC values in weathered and unweathered crude oils from 2.3–6.3 wt% to 0.4–0.7 wt%, with gelation complete in less than 2 min. The authors also used this principle of polar solvent addition to reduce the BCGC values of other known gelators, highlighting the general applicability of this method.
In an academic study, Kuroda and co-workers reported a different approach using deep eutectic solvents (DES),94 mixtures of a H-bond acceptor and a H-bond donor which have a melting point lower than either compound.95 The authors mixed solid lauric acid and N-methylacetamide, both of which have low toxicity and are biodegradable feedstock chemicals, in a 1:2 molar ratio to obtain a DES with a melting point of 17 °C. When 28 wt% of DES (corresponding to 15.9 wt% lauric acid) was added to a 1:10 mixture of pump oil and water, gelation was observed after shaking for a few seconds. The as-formed gel could be removed with a spatula. Infrared spectroscopy of this gel showed that it contained only oil and lauric acid, but not N-methylacetamide. This prompted the authors to test the gelation of pure lauric acid with pure oil – here the CGC was 11.5 wt%. Thus, the authors propose that lauric acid acts as the oil gelator, while N-methylacetamide acts as the carrier. While its role may be seemingly unimportant, the authors found that replacing N-methylacetamide with ethanol as the carrier solvent increased the amount of lauric acid required for gelation by about 30%. While this DES system uses low cost feedstock chemicals with low toxicity, this study is still far from real-life application since gelation tests only involved pump oil, and not crude oil. In addition, the high BCGC value hinders its adoption for oil spill remediation. However, this new concept of using DES for remediation should be further explored as new research may yield other DES with lower BCGC values.
Most recently, Chaudhuri and co-workers managed to remove the requirement of powder wetting, developing a powder PSOG which can instantaneously gel crude oil from water.96 Their design 3 (Fig. 6) utilised a naphthalene diimide core for π-stacking, with a phenylalanine (Phe) side chain for H-bonding and a n-dodecyl side chain to increase hydrophobicity and confer oil phase selectivity. This rational design resulted in almost negligible solubility in water (∼0.001 wt%), while forming a stable gel in oil (diesel, crude and refined petroleum and other organic solvents). Substitution of the side groups with either two Phe or two dodecyl side chains led to no gelation. The CGC of 3 in oils, including heavy crude oils, was about 1.3–2.3 wt%, and remained below 2.5 wt% even in biphasic mixtures with 3.5 wt% aqueous NaCl (BCGC). The as-formed gels could withstand stress of up to 4200 Pa and remained stable for months at ambient conditions. The practical use of PSOG 3 was demonstrated by dispersing it as a fine powder (2.5 wt%) to a 1:6 v/v mixture of crude oil with salt water (3.5 wt% aq. NaCl) at ambient temperature; within 20 seconds the crude oil layer completely gelated. Gelation could even occur at temperatures below 0 °C and could be reversed by heating to above 55 °C. PSOG 3 is a marked improvement over previous LMWGs, with its synthetic ease, low BCGC, negligible solubility in water, rapid gelation and robustness of the formed gels making it the strongest candidate for marine oil spill remediation to date.
 Fig. 6  Structure of PSOG 3 used in Chaudhuri and co-workers' study.96 
Recent improvements in the field of phase-selective organogelators (PSOGs) have largely addressed the problems preventing early adoption of PSOGs for oil spill remediation. Critical to the design are: (1) H-bonding groups for gel formation, (2) π-stacking groups to drive self-assembly of fibres, and (3) alkyl chains for oil solubility. Using this design, stable gels with high mechanical strength can easily be synthesised in three steps. High solubility of the gelator in oil allows application in powdered (or wetted) form and gelation time to be reduced; poor solubility in water also reduces the environmental impact of the gelator. Of the PSOGs discussed, Zeng's amino acid-based PSOGs (wetted) and Chaudhuri's PSOG 3 show the most promise for crude oil remediation due to their short gelation time under ambient conditions (Table 1).
Table 1 Comparison of PSOGs for oil adsorption




PSOG
Synthetic steps
BCGCa/wt%
Gel time/min
Yield stress/Pa
Ref.





a Biphasic critical gelation concentration of crude oil in sea/salt water.
b Wetted: 200 mg mL−1 PSOG in 3:2 v/v ethyl acetate and ethanol.
c With shaking.






2a

3
0.7
180
100

84



Fmoc-Leu-C4
2
3.2
2880c
—

89



Fmoc-Leu-C4 (wetted)b
2
0.4–1.4
<1
80

89




3

3
<2.5
<0.33
4200

96





3.2 Cations
Another area of interest for hydrogels in environmental remediation is the removal of heavy metals from wastewater or contaminated water bodies. In contrast to polymeric gelators, LMWGs only form gels when triggered by the binding of toxic metal cations, leading to more efficient cation uptake as compared to slow diffusion into a pre-formed hydrogel.
King and McNeil reported an elegant design method for selective in situ gelators.50 Reasoning that 1D intermolecular interactions present in single-crystal X-ray structures could also promote 1D self-assembly to form fibres, the authors searched the Cambridge Structural Database97 for aromatic molecules which could coordinate Hg2+ in a linear complex and form intermolecular cation–π interactions. Their survey led them to complex 4a,98 which they used to design ligands 5a–5c (Fig. 7). While 4a and 4b could not form gels, 4c could gel in MeOH/H2O mixtures of varying ratios. 4c in hot MeOH could also gel in situ upon addition of Hg(OAc)2 in water. The CGC in MeOH/H2O (9:1 to 6:4) was ∼1.2 wt% (22 mM). The authors also tested other metal acetates – cobalt Co(OAc)2, nickel Ni(OAc)2, cadmium Cd(OAc)2, barium Ba(OAc)2, copper Cu(OAc)2, zinc Zn(OAc)2, or silver AgOAc – but none of them could induce gelation, confirming the selectivity for mercury. To demonstrate its use in environmental remediation, water containing 3900 ppm of Hg(OAc)2 was added to the gelator (2 equiv.) in MeOH. After in situ gelation, only 289 ppm of Hg2+ remained; i.e. 92% of mercury was removed. Gelation could be reversed by addition of n-Bu4NCl (1 equiv.); the anion dependence occurs because Cl− has a stronger binding affinity to Hg2+ than ligand 4c. While this work provided a good framework for identification of possible metallogelators, the CGC of the Hg–quinoxalinone is too high for real life applications.
 Fig. 7  Structures of gelators 4a–e used in McNeil and co-workers' studies.49,50 
McNeil and co-workers continued this work by synthesising a library of quinoxalinones and their Hg2+-complexes.49 Four new gelators were found: 4d, 4e, 4f and 4g (Fig. 7). The lowest CGC was 3.5 mM (∼0.19 wt%) for 4d in EtOH/HOAc (100:1) and 4g in MeOH. In situ gelation of Hg(OAc)2 (0.03 mmol) by all gelators (2.13 equiv.) showed >98% uptake of Hg2+; the almost quantitatively recovery of mercury (even with the original gel 4c) was promoted by superstoichiometric addition of the quinoxalinone. Again, these gelators were all selective for Hg2+ over other cations. Previously, the 4c gel was reported to transform to sol upon addition of stoichiometric Cl−, making it unsuitable for use in salt water. Gratifyingly, gels of 4g were stable to chloride, even for months. The yield stress of this gel 4g (∼100 Pa) is also much higher than the original gel 4c (3.7 Pa). The improvements of gelator 4g over its predecessor – lower CGC, chloride-tolerance and higher yield stress – have made it a more promising candidate for environmental mercury remediation. The authors have showed that gelation occurs even in contaminated river water samples. However, the biocompatibility of the gelator still needs to be studied for actual in situ environmental applications.
Instead of extracting metal cations from contaminated waters, Barthélémy and co-workers demonstrated the first example of metal nanoparticle removal from contaminated waters.99 The authors used a glycosylated-nucleoside fluorinated amphiphile (GNF 6, Fig. 8) in situ to trap nanoparticles (NP, <50 nm diameter) from contaminated water. Powdered GNF 6 (0.1% w/v), a supergelator, was added to contaminated aqueous solutions, which was heated to 80 °C for hydrogel formation and then allowed to stand for 48 h at room temperature. Fluorescence and UV-Vis measurements thereafter showed complete removal of lipid-encapsulated quantum dots (17 μg mL−1), borohydride-reduced gold nanoparticles (lysine-capped or not, 0.1 mM). For negatively charged titanium dioxide nanoparticles (0.1 mg mL−1 in 0.001 M NaCl), the aggregation time was even shorter (2 h). The presence of GNF in the supernatant after hydrogel removal was also investigated; only ∼0.01 wt% of GNF (i.e. 1% of added GNF) remained, which has been shown to not have any cytotoxic effects. The authors suggested that the aggregation of NPs by hydrogel was thermodynamically controlled – transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images show the nanoparticles trapped by gel fibres. This research is timely since there has been an increase in utilisation of nanomaterials for many industrial processes and products.100 This has resulted in increased exposure of humans and the environment to the risk of toxicity and other adverse effects.101,102 While Barthélémy and co-workers' research is suitable for recovering NPs from industrial wastewater before discharge, the heat–cool cycle required for GNF hydrogel formation is unsuitable for on-site environmental remediation. Thus, more efforts need to be focused on remediation of NPs.
 Fig. 8  Structure of GNF 6 and its use in the removal of NPs from aqueous samples in Barthélémy and co-workers' study. Adapted from ref. 99 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Instead of in situ gelation, De and Mondal used pre-formed LMW hydrogels to adsorb toxic metal cations, forming metallogels.103 The authors designed gelator 7 (Fig. 9) with dangling pyridyl-pyrazole groups flanking a central pyridine ring to chelate metal cations while preventing coordination polymer formation, as well as diamide groups to H-bond and immobilise solvent for gel formation. 7 (1 wt%) could form a colourless hydrogel in DMSO/H2O (1:1). Upon addition of aqueous solutions of lead, mercury or cadmium, the gel started to change colour and morphology. These changes did not affect the strength of the gel, indicating that the hydrogel had transformed into a metallogel; also evidenced by TEM images of nanoscale metal–organic particles growing from the hydrogel fibres. The authors also investigated in situ metallogel formation by adding metal salts in water to gelator 7 in DMSO. The CGC for Pb(OAc)2 (2 equiv.) triggered metallogel was 0.5 wt% 7. However, the strongest Pb gel was formed with 7 (1 wt%) and Pb(OAc)2 in DMSO/H2O (1:4); up to 5 equiv. of Pb could be incorporated in the gel. Using 1 wt% of gelator 7, 2 equiv. of mercury Hg(OAc)2 formed the best gel in DMSO/H2O (2:3); while for cadmium Cd(NO3)2 the best gel was formed in DMSO/H2O (2:3). The maximum amount of Hg2+ and Cd2+ for gel formation was 2 equiv.; both gels also took a longer time congeal as compared to Pb2+ (a few minutes). All metallogels and the hydrogel were stable under ambient conditions for several weeks. The yield stress of all gels were greater than 10 Pa; while addition of Hg2+ and Cd2+ did not strengthen the hydrogel, the Pb metallogel improved the yield stress to more than 100 Pa. Microscopy images of these in situ formed metallogels showed nanoscale metal–organic particles, similar to those observed for the hydrogel-transformed metallogel. To demonstrate the utility of the hydrogel in removing toxic metals via filtration, the authors added 2 mL of metal solution on top of a pre-formed hydrogel column (1 wt%, 2 mL) and tracked the change in concentration of metal in the supernatant over time. From a starting Pb2+ concentration of 301.5 mg L−1, 32.0% of Pb was adsorbed by the gel after 15 days, and 85.6% after 3 months. Similarly, the gel was also effective at sequestering Hg2+ – from a starting Hg2+ concentration of 24.12 mg L−1, 49.1% of Hg was removed by the gel after 15 days, and 99.95% after 3 months. The uptake of Cd into the gel was insignificant. While this method can remove up to 2 equiv. of Hg2+ and up to 5 equiv. of Pb2+ from contaminated water, the efficiency is too low to be employed. In situ formation of the metallogel is more rapid and may prove more useful for remediation, but the toxicity of gelator 7 will have to be studied before it can be adopted in the environment.
 Fig. 9  Structure of gelator 7 used in De and Mondal's study.103 
In another approach, Smith and co-workers used pre-formed supramolecular hydrogels to selectively adsorb heavy metal cations from contaminated water and convert them into nanoparticles.104 The authors first prepared hydrogels from dibenzylidenesorbitol-based (DBS) supergelator 8 (ref. 52) (0.4 wt%, 0.5 mL) (Fig. 10) through a heat–cool cycle. They proceeded to add water contaminated with gold or silver cations (10 mM, 2 mL) to the above gel and allow the mixture to stand for 48 h. The gel's capacity for gold was 2000 mg g−1 and for silver 900 mg g−1; but higher loadings caused the gel to collapse. To test the selectivity of gel, an aqueous solution containing equal amounts of NiCl2, CuCl2, ZnCl2, FeCl2, PtCl2, PdCl2, AuCl3 and AgNO3 (100 mg L−1) was added to the gel; 100% of precious metals Ag, Pd, Pt and Au were extracted, while only 25–50% of the other metals were removed. Selectivity mostly followed the electrochemical series (standard reduction potentials from low to high):Zn < Fe < Ni < Cu < Ag < Pd < Pt < Au
 Fig. 10  Structure of gelator 8 used in Smith and co-workers' studies.104 
The authors thus suggested that the selectivity arises from in situ reduction of the cations by the hydrazide group on the hydrogel. This observation was supported by evidence from XPS indicating the presence of only reduced Au0 or Ag0 instead of their charged counterparts Au3+ or Ag+ in the hydrogel. Reduction of the cations was accompanied by a colour change of the gel from colourless to ruby red (Au) or yellow (Ag) as NPs formed. TEM images showed that the NPs were dispersed on the gel fibres rather than the solvent pockets, likely a result of localisation after metal ion reduction by the hydrazide groups of 8. These NP–hydrogel hybrid was stable up to >67 °C and between pH 2 and 12. The authors proposed that these hybrid gels could be repurposed as conductive materials. First, they increased the strength of the hybrid gel by mixing gelator 8 with an agarose polymer hydrogel and demonstrated that it had the same NP uptake as before. Next, they measured the conductance of the NP–hydrogel; the AuNP–hydrogel and AgNP–hydrogel had similar conductance as compared to hydrogel doped with single-walled carbon nanotubes (positive control), while the bare hydrogel (negative control) was hardly conductive. Upon air-drying for 3 h, corresponding to a 30% loss of water, the conductance of all gels increased, but particularly so for the NP–hydrogels (AuNP–hydrogel ∼225 μS, AgNP–hydrogel ∼160 μS). The authors attributed this effect to the decrease in distance between NPs upon drying, thus reducing the tunnelling distance for electrons. The AuNP–hydrogel could catalyse O2 reduction, and may be employed in electrocatalysis and other nanoelectronics applications. This work highlights the opportunity for turning waste into new, high-value materials.
Recent improvements in the field LMWGs for cation remediation have increased the metal uptake capacity of hydrogels. Critical to the design are: (1) cation chelating groups, (2) H-bonding groups for gel formation, (3) hydrophobic groups to drive self-assembly of fibres. Alternatively, cation chelating groups can be replaced by functional groups which selectively react with desired cations, as demonstrated by Smith and co-workers with their precious-metal reducing hydrazide groups.52 Also of interest is the use of supramolecular gels to capture metal nanoparticles99 – a new solution to a growing problem.
3.3 Anions
In comparison to its cationic counterpart, the field of LMWGs for anion remediation has been relatively less studied. Prior to 2008, only examples of anion sensing could be found. In most cases, the presence of anions disrupted hydrogen bonding gel networks, resulting in gel-to-sol transition instead of the desired gelation behaviour.105–109 In other examples, strongly binding anions were detected by colorimetry upon binding to metallogels.110,111
Mocerino, Ogden and co-workers reported the first example of anion-induced gelation in 2008.112 They showed that acidic solutions of proline-functionalised calix[4]-arene 9 (Fig. 11) form gels in the presence of specific anions, partially mediated by their cationic counterpart. Gelation efficacy roughly followed the Hofmeister series:I− > ClO4− > NO3− > Br− > Cl− > SO42−
 Fig. 11  Structure of calix[4]-arene 9 used in Mocerino, Ogden and co-workers' study.112 
Kosmotropic (strongly hydrated) anions (e.g. SO42−) do not form gels, while chaotropic (less hydrated) anions promote gelation by decreasing the overall solubility of the complexes. As hydration decreases, the anion can form gels in more dilute solutions and also with more cationic partners: NO3− > Br− > Cl−. However, strongly chaotropic anions (I− and ClO4−) rapidly form gels which crystallise and cause gel collapse. While the use of this LMW hydrogelator in environmental remediation has not been studied, it already meets several criteria for application. First, it can be applied as an aqueous solution and gelation can be achieved over a pH range of 0 to 7; second, the hydrogelator can be formed in a single step from calix[4]arene; third, the gels are stable for at least 7 days; and fourth, the hydrogelator and anion can be separately recovered from the gel by the addition of base. Nevertheless, the system will have to be further investigated to improve selectivity, uptake and mechanical strength before it can be applied in situ.
Zhang and co-workers demonstrated that protonated melamine 10 undergo gelation with a different series of anions.113 They showed that oxoanions, such as PO43−, NO3−, SO42− and adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP), could cause gelation at room temperature between pH 2 to 5. Gelation could be reversed by addition of base to pH 7, or by heating the mixture to above 50 °C. The anion selectivity was explained by the unique ability of the oxoanions to form “bridges” between the protonated melamine molecules through hydrogen bonding since they possess 3 or more oxygen atoms (Fig. 12). These gels could form in solutions of varying ionic strength (NaCl, 0 to 1 M) and were stable (with the exception of SO42−) for more than 3 months. The selectivity of this gel can be useful for targeting phosphates and nitrates, which cause eutrophication of water bodies if present in excess.
 Fig. 12  Proposed structure of hydrogel formed from melamine 10 in Zhang and co-workers' study.113 
Anion remediation still remains an underdeveloped field. A key challenge would be to increase anion binding capacities while retaining selectivity.
3.4 Dyes
Synthetic dyes typically have hydrophobic conjugated π-systems which are responsible for the colour, as well as hydrophilic groups which are responsible for the water solubility. The similar design of LMWGs make them compatible for forming non-covalent interactions with dyes via π-stacking or electrostatic attraction.
Das and co-workers reported that amino acids coupled with a long-chain amine at the C-terminus 11 could be selectively modified at the N-terminus to prepare either organogelators, hydrogelators or ionogelators. Coupling with a long-chain acid could form organogelators53,114 (Fig. 13a), while quarternisation of the amine group could form hydrogelators115 (Fig. 13b) and coupling with benzoic or cyclohexanoic acid could form ionogelators116 (Fig. 13c). Through careful tuning of the amphiphilicity of the molecules, the authors could synthesise hydrogelator 12 with a CGC of 0.3 wt%, organogelator 13 with a CGC of 0.5% w/v in toluene (among other organic solvents) and ionogelator 14 with a CGC of 1.3% w/v in 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide (BMIMBr)/H2O (9:1). 14 could also gel in organic solvents (e.g. CGC of 1.0% w/v in toluene). Both 13 and 14 were dye adsorbers. 13 had an uptake capacity of 14.3 mg g−1 for methyl violet and 9.4 mg g−1 for rhodamine B. Although these values are low, it was the first example of supramolecular gels which could adsorb dyes without metal coordination. Ionogel 14 (2.0% w/v in BMIMPF6, 0.1 mL) could adsorb up to 65% of cationic crystal violet and 45% anionic naphthol blue black (0.01 mM in water, 3 mL each) over 5 min. More than 90% of crystal violet was adsorbed in 8 h, corresponding to a dye uptake capacity of 30.5 mg g−1; the uptake capacity naphthol blue black was 41.6 mg g−1, and it took 20 h for >90% adsorption. In contrast, the organogel of 14 (2.0% w/v in toluene, 0.1 mL) had a slower rate of adsorption – 50% of crystal violet adsorption took 6 h, and for naphthol blue black it took 20 h. To determine the effect of the ionic liquid on dye adsorption, pure BMIMPF6 (0.1 mL) was added to the dyes under the same conditions. Slow adsorption of both dyes was observed – after 30 h, 90% of crystal violet and 35% of naphthol blue black was removed – demonstrating the role of ionic liquids in facilitating the adsorption of dyes into ionogels. This research highlights the importance of gelator design by showing how small modifications to the core structure could drastically change the optimal environment for gelation.
 Fig. 13  Synthesis of (a) hydrogelator 12, (b) organogelator and (c) ionogelator 14 from the same amino acid precursor 11 in Das and co-workers' study. Structure of organogelator 13 is also shown.53,114–116 
Hayes and co-workers synthesised a library of pH-tunable LMWGs and studied their dye adsorption properties (2012).117 Their gelator design features a urea core flanked by an aromatic nitro group and an aromatic diacid group, enabling H-bonding and π-stacking interactions, based on gelator 15a (Fig. 14);118 most of the compounds were obtained through a one-pot synthesis. All compounds were soluble in basic solutions (0.2 M NaOH, pH 13) and six of them formed homogeneous gels upon acidification via addition of HCl (0.1 M to pH 3) or by Adams' glucono-δ-lactone pH switching protocol.119 In support of the authors' design, all molecules with electron-withdrawing groups on the aromatic ring gelled, while those without (15b, 15f and 15i) formed precipitates. The CGC of the gelators were between 0.03 to 0.60 wt%, i.e. all are supergelators, with 15a having the lowest CGC. Notably, when the diacid was replaced with a monoacid (15c), the CGC increased to 0.60 wt%. Similarly, repositioning the nitro group on the aromatic ring (15d and 15e) increased the CGC significantly. The thermal stability of the gels was also evaluated, with the lowest gel-to-sol transition observed for gels 15d and 15h at 40 °C, while the most stable gel 15a remained in gel form even above 100 °C. Dye adsorption studies on 15a showed that it could adsorb cationic dyes methylene blue and methyl violet 2B, while anionic dye indigo carmine was rejected. Further studies on methylene blue (8 mg L−1, 100 mL) adsorption from pre-formed gels (0.60 wt%, pH 1, 1 mL) for 280 min showed that hydrogels of 15a and 15h both adsorbed >98% of the dye, with 15h almost completely removing all dye in 20 min. This corresponds to a dye uptake of 1020 mg g−1 for 15a and 15h, one of the highest values reported to date. In contrast, the other gels had dye uptake values of between 37 to 88 mg g−1, underscoring the importance of the para-electron withdrawing group in the gelator design. The authors proposed intercalation as the mechanism of dye adsorption since aggregation of the gel fibres (from 8 nm to 50 nm width) was observed upon dye addition; however, dye adsorption also resulted in a decrease in fibre length from >10 μm to 600 nm. In a later report, a series of bis amide-aromatic urea analogs 16 with different linker lengths were synthesised.120 However, none of these gels could match the gelation and dye adsorption properties of 15a and 15h. While the pH-switching protocol cannot be undertaken in environmental waters, the low CGC and efficient methylene blue uptake of pre-formed gel 15h make it a promising candidate for remediation of dyes.
 Fig. 14  Structures of gelators 15a–i and 16 used in Hayes and co-workers' studies.117,118 
In 2012, Song and co-workers reported a two-component hydrogel formed from lithocholic acid 17, a biocompatible bile acid, and dodecyldimethylamine oxide 18, a nonionic surfactant (Fig. 15).121 This gel could form at room temperature or below (10–35 °C) by addition of two parts of an aqueous solution of lithocholic acid to an aqueous solution of 18, with CGC at or lower than 0.1 wt% (2 mM 17/1 mM 18). At such low concentration, the hydrogel has a low yield stress of ∼0.8 Pa. However, at higher concentrations, the strength of the hydrogel increases, up to 130 Pa at 5 wt%. The hydrogel could also be formed below the molar ratio of 18:17 = 2:1, albeit with lower yield stress. The authors proposed that the addition of 17 disrupts the micelle of 18 in aqueous solutions via electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding. Initially, mixed micelles are formed. However, as more 17 is added, these micelles transform into helical fibrils to accommodate the growing hydrophobic interactions between the steroidal cores of 17. The hydrogel could selectively adsorb anionic dye amido black 10B with a dye uptake capacity of 202 mg g−1 in 15 h. In contrast, other anionic dyes e.g. methyl orange and rhodamine 6G and cationic dye chromeazurol S were not adsorbed readily. The authors attributed this to strong hydrophobic interactions between amido black 10B and the hydrogel.
 Fig. 15  Structures of lithocholic acid (LCA) 17, dodecyldimethylamine oxide (C12DMAO) 18 and the proposed formation of helical fibres in Song and co-workers' studies. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.121 
Lithiocholate 17 could also form hydrogels with monovalent cations NH4+, Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+ and Cs+ by adding MCl salts to a solution of sodium lithiocholate (Na-17, 20 mM), prepared by adding 1 equiv. of NaOH to lithocholic acid, at room temperature.122 Among the alkali metal cations, cations with smaller ionic radii showed stronger gelation ability, with only 60 mM of Li+ required for gelation to occur, in contrast to up to 130 mM of Cs+. Gels (20 mM Na-17, 200 mM MCl) of Li+ and NH4+ showed higher yield stress (∼500 Pa), while gels of other alkali metal cations yielded at 6–10 Pa. Addition of Na+ salts with different anions appeared to have negligible effect on the gelation and rheological properties. The as-prepared gels (20 mM Na-17, 80–160 mM MCl) were used in dye adsorption experiments. All gels could adsorb cationic dyes methylene blue and rhodamine 6G almost completely (>99%) within 20 min; with excellent dye uptake capacities ranging from 870–1100 mg g−1 for methylene blue, and 1120–1420 mg g−1 for rhodamine 6G. In contrast, the adsorption of anionic dyes amido black 10B, chrome azurol S and methyl orange were much lower. Thus, the authors suggest that electrostatic attraction between the cationic dyes and the negatively charged hydrogel fibres contribute to the high selectivity and capacity of cationic dye uptake. This work is highly applicable to environmental remediation since the hydrogels were formed from biocompatible lithiocholate at close to neutral pH. Their almost stoichiometric uptake of cationic dyes is the best reported thus far.
While previous examples of LMW hydrogelators for dye uptake were based on the carboxylic acid group thus were pH sensitive, Okesola and Smith (2013) demonstrated that their DBS-based supergelator 8 (Fig. 10) could form a gel (0.4 wt%, 0.5 mL) which was stable between pH 2 to 11.5 up to 70 °C.52 The gel of 8 (0.8 wt%, 0.5 mL) showed pH-dependent removal of dyes from aqueous solutions over 24 h. At high pH (11.5), the gel could selectively remove cationic dye methylene blue, with uptake of 770 mg g−1, while anionic dyes were hardly adsorbed (<100 mg g−1). In contrast, at low pH (2.4), the gel selectively removed anionic dyes naphthol blue black (668 mg g−1) and acid blue 25 (876 mg g−1). At neutral pH, the uptake of all dyes was low (<150 mg g−1). The authors proposed that the pH dependency of dye uptake is related to their charge – dyes are best adsorbed by the hydrogel at the pH where they are least charged. The reversibility of dye adsorption was shown by pH switching, demonstrating the recovery of dye and recyclability of gelator 8. The high anionic dye uptake capacity of this gel is unrivalled at present.
In 2014, Davis and co-workers demonstrated the use of guanosine hydrogels for dye remediation, based on the propensity of guanosine (G, 19, Fig. 16) to form G4·M+ quartets 20 which can self-assemble into higher order structures.123 The authors found that addition of potassium borate (KB(OH)4, 0.5 equiv.) to G 19 (1 wt%, 36 mM) in water resulted in the formation of a transparent gel which was stable for more than a year. Neither addition of LiB(OH)4 nor KCl could effect such a transformation, with a clear solution and a precipitate obtained respectively. A mechanistic study indicated that borate diesters 22 and 23, with a 1:2 ratio of borate to G 19, are involved in the formation of the G4·K+ quartet 24. Thus, when less KB(OH)4 was added, undissolved G 19 was observed; while excess KB(OH)4 hindered gel formation by favouring the monoester 21. The quartets stack into columns which entangle to form the guanosine-borate hydrogel which is stable in K+ salt solutions (155 mM). This gel is capable of adsorbing cationic dye; a 2 wt% gel (0.5 mL) adsorbed 90% of methylene blue (12.5 μM, 3 mL) after 24 h. In contrast, anionic dyes were not taken into the gel.
 Fig. 16  Structures of guanosine analogues and the G4 quartets formed in Davis and co-workers' studies.123–126 Figure adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
This work was followed by the discovery that the cationic dye thioflavin (ThT, 25) could increase the efficiency of gelation and improve the rheological properties of the guanosine-borate gel 24.124 Notably, addition of ThT 25 (2 mol%) to the weak G4·Li+ hydrogel increased its gel–sol transition point from 45 °C to 55 °C. NMR spectroscopic studies showed that ThT 25 promoted gel formation by accelerating the conversion of an intermediate to gel phase. The authors also hypothesise that ThT 25 can sandwich G4 stacks to form larger stable G4 assemblies. Rheological studies of the hydrogel showed that the storage modulus (G′) increased as more ThT 25 was added, up to 10 times the original at the saturation point of 1 mol% ThT 25. In addition, ThT 25 could heal guanosine-borate gels weakened by stress – hydrogels under high oscillatory strain transition from gel to sol; without ThT 25, a weaker gel would reform, but with ThT 25 (0.25 mol%), the reformed gel had the same G′ as the original even after 3 cycles of repair. A survey of other cationic dyes also showed that crystal violet, thiazole orange, and methylene blue, as well as neutral dye methylene violet (to a lesser extent) could also improve G′ of the gel.
While previous iterations of the G4 quartet hydrogels could only adsorb cationic, and to a lesser extent neutral dyes, none of them could adsorb anionic dyes. This changed in 2017 when Davis and co-workers reported binary G4·M2+ (M = Ba, Sr, Pb) hydrogels.125 The authors used 8-aminoguanosine 19a as co-gelator with G 19 since it was expected to be partially protonated (pKa = 9.4) and thus attract anions to the hydrogel. Remarkably, while neither 19 nor 19a could bind nitrate salts, a 1:1 mixture of the gelators (2 wt%, 70 mM total) formed transparent gels with nitrate salts of K+, Ba2+ and Pb2+ (2 equiv.). The CGC for KNO3 and Ba(NO3)2 gels was 18 mM, while that for Pb2+ was 26 mM. This finding alone is significant, since this was the first example of a divalent cation-stabilised G4 hydrogel, and also showed that guanosine-type gelators could be used for heavy metal remediation. Nonetheless, the authors proceeded to show that the onset of gelation for K+ gels began at 0.25 equiv. of KNO3, while only 0.125 equiv. of divalent cations was required for gelation, indicating that the stoichiometry of the divalent gels is (G4)2·M2+. The BaCl2 gel (2 wt%, 0.5 mL) could adsorb anionic dyes (12.5 μM, 3 mL) selectively – removing 89% of naphthol blue black and 75% of rose bengal – as compared to cationic dyes (15% of safranin O) after 24 h. In contrast, the KCl gel adsorbed less dye, while the KB(OH)4 adsorbed more safranin O (61%) compared to the anionic dyes (<22%). This study highlights the ability to tune the G4 quartet hydrogels to selectively adsorb either cationic or anionic dyes just by simple addition of the appropriate salt.
Another modification to G4·M+ hydrogels, substitution of the hydroxyl group on the 5′-position of guanosine with a hydrazino group, yielded gelators 19b, which could gel anionic dyes in colloidal suspensions in situ.126 Xiao and Davis initially synthesised a variety of 5′-modified guanosines (19b, 19c–19f) to find a hydrogelator (2 wt%, ca. 68 mM) that could gel upon addition of KCl (0.5 equiv.) to a heated solution. They found that the poorly water-soluble guanosines 19, 19d127,128 and 19e formed a precipitate after cooling. In contrast, 19f, which was highly water-soluble, did not form a gel. Only guanosines 19b and 19c, which were moderately soluble, formed self-standing hydrogels upon cooling. The authors thus proposed moderate water solubility as a design rule for G4 quartet hydrogels, reasoning that it is a easy screening factor to identify the fine point of balance between solution, precipitate and the desired gel. Continuing the investigation with 19b (2 wt%, 68 mM), the authors found that gelation could be achieved with only 0.25 equiv. of KCl, as expected from the stoichiometry of G4·K+. However, the gel formed was more fluid (G′ ∼ 30 Pa) than before; in fact, as the KCl concentration increased, the stiffness of the gel increased, up to G′ ∼ 3000 Pa at 2.0 equiv. Having established the gelation of 19b, Xiao and Davis proceeded to test the in situ addition of KCl to 19b (14.5 mM) at room temperature. As hypothesised, increasing KCl addition (12.5 to 100 mM) led to the formation of increasing amounts of a colloidal suspension of G4 quartets. This procedure could be used in situ to remove anionic dyes from solution: KCl was added in aliquots to a solution of naphthol blue black (100 μM) and gelator 19b (14.5 mM); addition of 12.5 mM KCl removed 70% of dye, and more was removed as KCl was increased up to 100 mM. In contrast, only 10% of cationic dye crystal violet was adsorbed by the colloidal suspension. Another function of the hydrazine hydrogel is for remediation of aldehydes by covalent capture to form hydrazones. The 19b -based hydrogel (68 mM, 2 eq. KCl) was demonstrated to take up >90% of propionaldehyde, a drinking water contaminant, from a salt solution (3.37 mM propionaldehyde, 155 mM KCl). In addition, the hydrogel (68 mM, 0.5 equiv, KCl) could also remove >95% of propionaldehyde (1 equiv.) from the gas phase.
At present, the study of G4 quartets for cation or dye uptake appears to be more academic than applicable to real-life. The low binding capacity of cations and dyes needs to be improved before it can be considered as a viable remediation strategy. Nonetheless, several gelators52,117,122 have already demonstrated rapid and high binding capacities to different dye types across complementary conditions. In particular, gelators 15a and M-17 are selective for cationic dyes, while gelator 8 can be tuned to selectively adsorb cationic or anionic dyes at high and low pH respectively (Table 2).
Table 2 Comparison of LMW gelators for dye adsorption




Gelator
Gel/wt%
Cationic dye uptake (mg g−1)
Anionic dye uptake (mg g−1)
Ref.





a pH switching protocol required for gelation.
b 0.75 wt% (20 mM) of 17, 4 to 8 equiv. of MCl.






15a



0.6
Methylene blue (1020)
—

118



M-17 (M = NH4, Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs)
0.75b
Methylene blue (870–1100)
—

122



Rhodamine 6G (1120–1420)



8 at pH 11.5
0.8
Methylene blue (770)
—

52




8 at pH 2.4
0.8
—
Naphthol blue black (668)

52



Acid blue 25 (876)




3.5 Summary
Improvements in the field of small molecule gelators have largely been design-driven, with most gelators bearing: (1) H-bonding groups for gel formation, (2) π-stacking groups to drive self-assembly of fibres and (3) functional groups for adsorption. The latter may be in the form of alkyl groups for oil solubility, chelating groups for metal coordination, cationic groups for anion binding or π-stacking groups for dye adsorption.
Thus far, much of the research has been focused on oil spill remediation and dye adsorption since the functional groups for adsorption of these molecules are similar to those required for gelation. In contrast, the requirement of selective chelation/binding for metal and anion adsorption presents a challenge. In particular, anion remediation is still tricky, which is somewhat surprising given the rich supramolecular chemistry of anion recognition.129,130
In addition, while synthetic ease, CGCs, gelation time and strength have been advanced, there remain several issues, such as toxicity and ease of application, to be studied before these gelators can be practically applied to environmental waters.
4. Polymeric hydrogels
Polymeric hydrogels, which often possess covalent crosslinks, have a 3D network and show excellent swelling behaviour due to their capability to absorb large amount of water. The chemistry of the polymeric network can be tailored to adsorb various pollutants based on mechanisms such as complexation, electrostatic interactions or physical adhesion. While existing functional groups on polymers are often sufficient to allow pollutant adsorption (e.g. anionic poly(acrylic acid) for cations), greater selectivity can be achieved using specific units such as macrocycles and DNA nucleobases (e.g. thymine for Hg2+, vide infra). Compared to LMWGs, polymeric hydrogels have better mechanical properties131 and are less prone to disruption of the hydrogel structure by interactions with adsorbates, and can be further mechanically-reinforced with inorganic particles. These properties facilitate post-application gel recovery for regeneration or disposal, and their often stable polymeric structures also minimise chemical degradation and subsequent leaching of the gel materials into the environment. In this section, we survey key examples of polymeric gel materials developed for removing various types of pollutants.
4.1 Oil spill
Owing to the immiscibility of oil with water, polymeric hydrogels capable of oil removal contain amphiphilic groups capable of interacting with the hydrocarbon phase. Parameters such as porosity and surface area can be tuned to favour the absorption of oil of different viscosities.
Sureshan introduced a novel concept for oil removal of using an oleophobic matrix comprising of cellulose pulp with the PSOG 1,2:5,6-di-O-cyclohexylidene-mannitol 26 (Fig. 17), which form extensive hydrogen bonds with the exposed OH groups of the cellulose fibrils to render them temporarily hydrophobic.132 Upon contact with the oil–water mixture, the oil would be selectively absorbed by the fibres instantaneously due to their hydrophobicity and high porosity. The PSOG would then dissolve and self-assemble through hydrogen bonding to entrap the oil and form 3D entangled fibrillary networks to gel the hydrocarbon phase. The cellulose sorbent showed high capacity in absorbing crude oil, which could be recovered by distillation. Importantly, the self-assembly of the supramolecular polymer entrapping the oil within the covalently-linked cellulose matrix forms very strong and rigid gels which facilitate practical recovery.
 Fig. 17  Eco-friendly marine oil-spill recovery using Sureshan's cellulose matrix containing PSOG 26. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132, copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons. 
Using a similar concept, electrospun gelatin fibres were used as the hydrophilic matrix, and the surface was modified with hydrophobic perfluoroalkyl groups via a carbene insertion reaction to selectively absorb oil.133 The surface modification allowed the electrospun gelatin fibres to maintain their porosity, providing a large surface area for high absorption capability, while minimising water absorption and allowing the oil to be immobilised. The resulting oil absorption capacities were usually high, with oil mass ranging from 5–16 times of the original sorbent mass. To recover the absorbed oil, extraction was performed with cyclohexane, and the organic layer was extracted and further purified using rotary evaporation. This method is less environmental friendly as it generated solvent waste during the oil recovery process. In another study, a hydrogel bowl with hydrophobic surface was developed to physically separate the oil from oil/water mixture through infusion from macroscopic openings at the side of the bowls,134 which was useful in removing high viscosity oil through the macroscopic openings. The hydrogel bowl could float on water covered with a layer of oil, and collect the oil effectively (50 mL oil in 23 s). The retrieval of the collected oil was done by using a pump. Although the hydrogel bowl could change significantly when kept in air or water owing to gel dehydration and water absorption respectively, retention of the bowl dimensions for up to two months could be achieved by storing it in oil.
4.2 Cations

Poly(acrylic acid), polyacrylamide and derivatives. 
The ammonium (NH4+) cation is a significant contributor to eutrophication of water bodies, and excessive quantities can be toxic to aquatic organisms. Polymeric hydrogels based on poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) were used to remove ammonium from domestic waste water via electrostatic interactions.135 In common waste water of pH 5–8, the ionised negatively-charged carboxylate groups of PAA are able to attract the cationic NH4+ ions. PAA hydrogels were able to rapidly remove ammonium from domestic waste water (at low ammonium concentration of 40–60 mg L−1 of NH4–N), and can be effectively regenerated under mild acidic conditions (pH 4). However, PAA hydrogels are known to be brittle;136 to further improve the gels' mechanical strength, additives such as the silicate mineral tourmaline (Tm) can be added to maintain the gel's structural integrity and reduce swelling.137 Wang and coworkers have also grafted PAA and unexpanded vermiculite (UVMT) onto the exposed hydroxyl and amine groups of chitosan to prepare a gel for NH4+ remediation from water.138 UVMT, a layered aluminium silicate, possesses reactive surface hydroxyl groups. After polymerisation, exfoliation and dispersion of the material within the gel matrix facilitates the formation of structured 3D hydrophilic networks which reduces resistance to diffusion, accelerating the adsorption process. However, as the UVMT has a lower adsorption capacity to NH4+, excessive amount of UVMT in the hydrogel can lower its effectiveness for adsorption of the cation.
Besides NH4+, PAA-containing polymeric hydrogels have been developed to adsorb toxic heavy metal cations. Xu and co-workers have applied PAA to remove uranium(VI) in the form of UO22+, where the adsorption process is largely dependent on intraparticle diffusion.139 As expected, more effective adsorption was observed as the pH was increased from 1.0 to 5.5, in line with increasing PAA ionisation. A maximum uranium adsorption capacity of 445.11 mg g−1 was achieved. The hydrogel could be easily regenerated using 0.1 M HNO3 with only a 10% loss in adsorption capacity over 5 cycles. With its high adsorption capacity and ease of recycling, PAA appears to be a highly promising material for U(VI) remediation. In a separate study, Shen demonstrated that by attaching PAA onto the biodegradable and environmentally-benign poly(ethylene glycol)/poly(propylene glycol) Pluronic F127 copolymer, the resulting gel could remove Hg2+ and Cu2+ effectively from simulated organic waste water.140 Although acid-containing sorbents have rarely been effective for Hg2+ uptake, the exceptional performance of the PAA/F127 gel was attributed to the presence of hydrophobic interactions with the poly(propylene glycol) units. This gel also showed enhanced mechanical properties after swelling compared with pure F127 and PAA gels, and uniquely, the antifouling properties of F127 reduced the interference of organic matter in the adsorption of metal cations.
In an innovative approach to selectively sequester Hg2+, Liu appended thymine (T)-rich DNA sequences onto polyacrylamide to form hydrogels which could bind to Hg2+via both the thymine nucleobases and the polyacrylamide matrix (Fig. 18A).141 Selectivity for Hg2+ was conferred by the intrinsic specificity of thymine to form very stable T–Hg2+–T adducts. The authors also imbued the gel with unique sensory capabilities for Hg2+ as well by the addition of the nucleic acid stain SYBR Green I: the weak yellow fluorescence observed in the absence of Hg2+ was greatly amplified and blue-shifted to give bright green fluorescence when the DNA formed hairpin structures on Hg2+ coordination (Fig. 18B). Enhanced stability of the DNA towards degradation by enzymes such as nucleases was also observed, owing to the decreased rate of enzyme diffusion within the gel matrix. Notably, the hydrogel can be regenerated by soaking it in dilute HCl followed by a Tris buffer (pH 8.0) containing sodium nitrate, and stored in dried form for long term storage and protection of the DNA.
 Fig. 18  (A) Coordination of Hg2+ by thymine nucleobases and the polyacrylamide matrix; (B) mechanism of Hg2+ sensing by the thymine-polyacrylamide hydrogel in the presence of SYBR Green I. The inset photos show the yellow and green fluorescence seen in the presence of 0 and 50 nM Hg2+ respectively. Figures adapted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 


Natural polysaccharides. 
Hydrogels based on natural polysaccharides such as alginate, chitosan, maltodextrin, cellulose and gum Arabic (Fig. 19) are effective adsorbents to remove metal ions from waste water due to the presence of numerous functionalities capable of coordinating metal cations. Furthermore, these polymers offer advantages such as low cost, abundance, renewability and biodegradability. To improve the mechanical strength of the gels, the polysaccharides are often subjected to chemical modification such as cross-linking. For example, hydrogels based on chitosan, maltodextrin and gum Arabic, functionalised with acrylate groups for cross-linking, were used as adsorbents for Cd2+.142 Between the three polysaccharides however, the chitosan-based gel showed the greatest Cd2+ uptake per unit mass of dried gel (69.6 mg g−1). While acidic conditions (pH < 4) were detrimental for Cd2+ uptake, both chitosan and gum Arabic gels showed almost twice the Cd2+ uptake capacity of maltodextrin at their optimum pH of 4.5–5.5. In a similar way, cross-linked alginate hydrogels, which contain metal cation-chelating carboxylate groups, are known to be effective in removal of heavy metal cations e.g. Pb2+, Cd2+, Ni2+.143 The porosity and exposed surface area for cation uptake of alginate gels have been explored with the incorporation of clay materials. Attapulgite (APT), a magnesium–aluminium silicate material, contains reactive Si–OH groups on its surface which are amenable to covalent attachment to sodium alginate with acrylate groups.144 A composition containing 5 wt% APT in a gel containing sodium alginate and sodium acrylate was found to be optimal for adsorption of Zn2+ and Cu2+, whilst higher weight percentages resulted in loss of uptake capacity. The presence of APT was also found to improve the regeneration ratio of the gel when subjected to treatment in dilute HCl compared with a purely alginate–acrylate composite.
 Fig. 19  Structures of common polysaccharides employed for adsorption of dissolved metal cations. 
The abundance of cellulose, with 1011–1012 tonnes produced annually by photosynthesis, makes it a convenient and cheap raw material for water remediation. However, in its native form, cellulose has poor metal adsorption capacity, and chemical modifications are necessary to enhance its chelative properties.145 For example, Isogai and coworkers first prepared a cellulose hydrogel and oxidised the surface hydroxyl groups of the gel (up to 20 μm) to carboxylate, catalysed by TEMPO in the presence of sodium hypochlorite and NaBr.146 The hydrogel was designed such that only thin surface region was selectively oxidized to maintain gel strength. The surface-oxidised gel could adsorb up to 4 times more Cu2+ than the unmodified hydrogel, with maximum adsorption capacity of 268.2 mg g−1 for Cu2+. The gel could be regenerated with 0.1 M HCl, albeit with some loss of adsorption capacity upon repeated regeneration which was attributed to gel shrinkage and loss of active surface area. The gel could adsorb a range of other cations (Zn2+, Fe3+, Cd2+ and Cs+), making it a general-purpose adsorbent material.


Temperature-responsive polymers. 
Hydrogels based on temperature-responsive polymers were reported as an alternative method to achieve adsorption–desorption of metal cations in water without using acid solvents.147–149 This is an environmentally-friendly method, which functions based on the “swollen–shrunken” configuration change of the polymer network triggered by temperature change. Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) is a classic temperature-responsive polymer. It has a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) of around 32 °C in aqueous solution, indicating that the crosslinked PNIPAM polymer network could swell in water below LCST, and shrink as temperature increased to above LCST.150 This occurs as the polymer could reversibly change from hydrophilic to hydrophobic when the temperature was increased, and has attracted significant attention for biomedical applications such as drug release matrix151,152 and cell sheet engineering.153,154 This property was elegantly exploited by Tokuyama and Iwama for temperature-swing solid-phase extraction (TS-SPE) of Cu2+, where the cation was first complexed with anionic surfactants such as sodium n-dodecylbenzenesulfonate (SDBS) or n-dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid (DBS).148 At temperatures higher than the LCST of PNIPAM, the hydrophobic groups of the complexes and/or resulting micelles are selectively adsorbed onto the hydrogel via hydrophobic interactions (Fig. 20). Desorption of Cu2+ occurred simply by cooling the hydrogel below its LCST.
 Fig. 20  Tokuyama and Iwama's TS-SPE technique of Cu2+ extraction using PNIPAM hydrogels. Figure reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society. 
A different adsorption–desorption mechanism was reported on the investigation of PNIPAM and benzo-18-crown-6-acrylamide (BCAm) copolymer hydrogel.149 The adsorption capabilities of the hydrogel was due to the formation of host–guest complexes between the BCAm groups and Pb2+. At temperatures below the LCST, the swelling of the copolymer network allowed accessible interaction between crown ether moieties and Pb2+, allowing uptake of the cations. Conversely, the collapse of the polymer network above the LCST brought the Pb2+/BCAm complexes closer spatially, leading to greater electrostatic repulsion which destabilised the host–guest complexes and resulted in Pb2+ desorption from the hydrogel.

4.3 Inorganic anions

Hydrogels for general anion adsorption. 
Compared with LMWGs, which necessitate specific directional interactions with anions for gelation, the design of anion-adsorbing polymeric hydrogels is considerably more straightforward by simply incorporating Lewis acidic or cationic anion binding groups into the polymers, which are capable of interacting with anions either by electrostatic interactions or hydrogen bonds. As a consequence, the repertoire of anion-adsorbing polymeric hydrogels is considerably more extensive. These broad-spectrum hydrogels are generally non-specific and are capable of removing a large range of both inorganic and organic anions.
In 2018, Sessler and coworkers reported a crosslinked polymeric hydrogel containing a tetracationic macrocycle which was capable of removing a variety of inorganic ions (NO3−, NO2−, SO42−, SH−, HSO4− and F−) and organic anionic dyes, ranging in removal efficiency from 47% for F− to more than 90% for all four organic anionic dyes that were tested (Fig. 21).155 The macrocycle present was important for host–guest recognition to achieve anion uptake: when the authors investigated a cationic gel with the macrocycle replaced by cationic pyridinium groups, no appreciable anion uptake was observed. Subsequently, the anions could be released from the hydrogel by mixing with dilute acid followed by dialysis, and the hydrogel could be then recycled for another round of purification. While using macrocycles for water treatment is still a new and exciting area to explore, this present example is limited by the demanding macrocycle synthesis, which may limit practical applicability. Nonetheless, this work suggests new avenues of using polymers containing macrocycles to achieve greater selectivity of anion uptake, with numerous examples of macrocycles with known anion selectivities reported in the literature being useful starting points for exploration.156 Together with this macrocycle, there are a variety of polymeric hydrogels capable of high anion adsorption (Table 3), which will be discussed in the following pages.
 Fig. 21  Using macrocycles in polymeric hydrogels for anion binding and removal. (A) Chemical structures and cartoon representations of the polymeric network containing the tetracationic macrocycle. (B) List of inorganic ions and organic anionic dyes that could be removed by the hydrogel. (C) Schematic of anion removal from water. (D) Schematic for regeneration process. Reproduced from ref. 155. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 
Table 3 Comparison of polymer hydrogels for anion adsorption/removal




Polymeric system
Anions
Adsorption capacity (mg g−1)
Reuse cycles (capacity%)
Ref.




PVA hydrogel crosslinked with tetracationic macrocycle
NO3−, SO42−, F−
—
3

155



Chitosan/poly(vinylamine) with base anion exchange microspheres
Cr2O72−
317
5 (65.7%)

157



Polyaniline (PANI) hydrogel with folic acid as crosslinker
Cr2O72−
171.2
5 (73%)

158



Cationic acrylamide hydrogels with iron oxide and lanthanum
F−
136.8
5 (70%)

159



Chitosan hydrogel beads with monetite bundles
F−
50.01
—

160



Cationic acrylamide hydrogels with iron oxide and lanthanum cations/oxide
PO43−
90.2
5 (72%)

161







Hydrogels for heavy metal anions. 
Olariu and colleagues used a composite hydrogel–microsphere system for removal of Cr(VI)-containing anions.157 Chitosan and poly(vinyl amine) (PVAm) is crosslinked with glutaraldehyde and ethylene glycol diglycidyl ether, and the hydrogel matrix was dispersed with microspheres of strong base anion exchangers with ammonium chloride functional groups. Chitosan and PVAm have an abundance of primary amine groups which facilitate the chelation of the heavy metal anion. While the maximum Cr(VI) adsorption capacity was more than 200 mg g−1 of adsorbent, the adsorption capacity dropped to around 65% of the original capacity after 5 times of reuse. In a separate study, a folic acid (F)–polyaniline (PANI) hydrogel was formed by in situ polymerisation of aniline and using folic acid as the crosslinker for the polyaniline chains.158 At neutral or acidic pH, PANI is present in the positively charged doped emeraldine salt (ES) state as radical cations, and thus is able to exhibit a high adsorption capacity of Cr(VI) anions of 171.2 mg g−1 owing to electrostatic interactions. Furthermore, the hydrogel could reduce Cr(VI) to the less environmentally toxic species Cr(III), while PANI is maintained in its ES state due to doping with folic acid. The hydrogel could adsorb Cr(VI) at greater than 85% removal efficiency from various different contaminated water sources after 4 h and still showed greater than 80% removal efficiency after 5 adsorption cycles, demonstrating its applicability.
The integration of inorganic minerals possessing intrinsic anion affinities into polymers to form hybrid hydrogels is also an effective method for anion remediation, whilst concurrently improving hydrogel retrieval and reuse. For instance, Ruan and Frost co-polymerised N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAm) with silylanized Mg/Al layered double hydroxides (SiLDHs) to form gel-like nanocomposites.162 Making use of the special layered structure of LDHs which contain numerous cationic sites for anion interaction, the adsorption capacity for As(V) anions was 1.69 mg g−1. Anion desorption was achieved by the coil-globule phase transition which occurs when heated to 40 °C. However, the regeneration protocol may need further optimisation, as only about a quarter of the adsorptive capacity remains after 5 reuse cycles. Separately, Copello and co-workers incorporated TiO2 nanoparticles as fillers within chitin hydrogels, both to provide mechanical strength as well as to provide for arsenic adsorption.163 Adsorption only takes place below the isoelectric point of TiO2 at pH 6.9, where TiO2 is positively charged. Thus, the main mechanism of adsorption is expected to be electrostatic attraction. The adsorption process reached equilibrium in 4 hours, and the maximum adsorption capacity of arsenate was 3.1 mg g−1. Unfortunately, commonly available competitive anions present in natural waters (NO3−, Cl−, SO42−) decreased adsorptive capacity by 40% at a concentration of 10 mg mL−1, with SO42− in particular interfering to a large degree.


Fluoride-adsorbing gels. 
Although the small size of fluoride (1.33 Å)164 and its strong hydration energies make it a challenging target to remove from the aqueous medium, its high charge density and ‘hardness’ allow the use of strongly Lewis acidic functionalities to sequester it. With this in mind, Wang and colleagues developed cationic hydrogels loaded with lanthanum, which is a widely used rare-earth with high fluoride adsorption capabilities.159 The resulting gel showed fast F− adsorption, with 93% of final adsorption capacity reached within the first 10 min, and had a maximum fluoride adsorption capacity of 136.78 mg g−1. The optimal adsorption was at pH 2.8–4, although adsorption capacity still stayed above 100 mg g−1 at neutral pH. The adsorption capacity dropped to about 70% of the original capacity after 5 times of reuse.
Highly Lewis-acidic calcium-based minerals such as calcite165 and hydroxyapatite166 are known for fluoride adsorption. These minerals can be incorporated into composite hydrogels as exemplified by the composite hydrogel system of Shen et al. containing monetite bundles inlaid within chitosan hydrogel beads.160 The hydrogel system also showed a fast fluoride adsorption efficiency of around 90% in 1 hour. There was also a moderately high maximum fluoride adsorption capacity of 50.01 mg g−1. Significantly, common anions such as NO3−, Cl−, SO42−, HCO3− and H2PO4− showed very small competitive influences for fluoride uptake. It is likely that the small anion radii of fluoride allowed it to fit selectively into the monetite crystal structure to form the thermodynamically stable CaPO3F product. However, regeneration of this composite hydrogel for reuse was not demonstrated.


Phosphate-adsorbing gels. 
Zheng and colleagues developed cationic hydrogels containing lanthanum cations (La3+) and lanthanum oxides which can adsorb phosphates.161 For the lanthanum oxide hydrogels which was prepared in a binary mixture of ethyl alcohol and water, the maximum absorption capacity of phosphate could reach around 90 mg g−1. The adsorption capacity was high between a pH of 4.5 and 11, and competitive anions such as nitrate, sulfate also did not affect adsorption.

4.4 Dyes
The charged ionic nature of many water-soluble dyes render the use of electrostatics and hydrogen bonding as the main driving forces for adsorption by polymeric hydrogels, in a similar way as that for inorganic ions discussed in Sections 4.2 and 4.3. For instance, Li's cationic quaternary ammonium hydrogel composed of poly(epichlorohydrin) and ethylenediamine, which was synthesized via a simple one-step copolymerization, could adsorb anionic dye DR23 at 240 mg g−1 and over a large pH range between pH 2 to pH 12, and could also remove other anionic dyes at almost 100% efficiency.167 The effectiveness of the gel over a wide pH range was due to the intrinsic cationic nature of the gel, which rendered its ionisation independent of pH. Conversely, cationic dyes such as crystal violet have been adsorbed by polyanionic hydrogels such as Vishalakshi's crosslinked gellan gum-based example at neutral pH, where the carboxylate groups present are ionised.168
Although the innate chemical functionalities present on the polymers are important for the gel to achieve their adsorption properties, the gels can be susceptible to deformation due to inevitable swelling, which obstruct the flow/diffusion of water through its pores and reduce the number of adsorption sites accessible. For example, while PAA is a common adsorbent for cationic dyes owing to its ionisable carboxylic acid groups (see Section 4.2), PAA hydrogels with an uneven three-dimensional structure show poor water penetration. Thus to improve PAA gels' adsorption capacity, Sun and colleagues designed PAA-based nanocomposite hydrogels (NC gels) by free radical polymerisation of acrylic acid with calcium hydroxide nano-spherulites (CNS) as crosslinkers.169 The incorporation of CNS crosslinkers induced the formation of a more three-dimensionally structured hydrogel (Fig. 22). The NC hydrogels were able to swell up to 500 times, and the high water penetration together with loose and porous structure allowed maximal methylene blue (MB) access to the adsorption sites. The maximal adsorption capacity for MB could reach 2100 mg g−1, which the authors claimed to be the highest yet reported for PAA-NC gels, and the adsorption reached equilibrium within 5 days. The NC hydrogel showed an adsorption capacity of almost 90% after 5 cycles of reuse. In another example, Zhao and colleagues made poly(methacryloxyethyltrimethyl ammonium chloride) (PDMC) composite hydrogel microspheres, with hydrophobic polyethersulfone included to improve mechanical strength and also to reduce hydrogel swelling.170 The gel showed an exceptionally high ion exchange capacity of more than 3.8 mequiv. g−1, and also showed a high adsorption for anionic dyes. The adsorption capacity was 1491 mg g−1 for methyl orange, 1693 mg g−1 for Congo red, and 204.7 mg g−1 for amaranth. The hydrogel could also be recycled, showing an adsorption efficiency of more than 90% after 3 cycles of use. When installed in a chromatographic column, over 95% of the anionic dye methyl orange could be removed.
 Fig. 22  Well-crosslinked hydrogels for high Methylene Blue (MB) adsorption capacity. (A) Ca2+ crystallized to form calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2) nano-spherulites (CNSs) with diameter around 5 nm. These were then mixed together with acrylic acid, sodium acrylate to start free radical polymerization. Hydrogels were formed with CNS as crosslinkers, with hydrogen bonds between residual –COOH groups of the polymer chains and oxygen-containing functional group of the CNSs responsible for the well-crosslinked network structure. (B) The effect of initial concentration of MB on the adsorption capacity of the hydrogel adsorbent at different temperatures: pH = 7, t = 7 days, 1 g of adsorbent. The maximum adsorption capacity is seen at 298 K and at 2100 mg g−1. Adapted from ref. 169 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.5 Dual cation and anion-adsorbing gels
Although counter-intuitive (see Section 2.1), polymeric hydrogels that can adsorb cations and anions depending on the pH of the solution have also been developed. These polymers contain functional groups which can be ionised under both acidic and basic conditions to attract the oppositely-charged ion electrostatically (Fig. 23). This principle can be exemplified by a zwitterionic hydrogel containing cationic quarternary ammonium groups and acrylic acid functionalities.171 At low pH, the acrylic acid units are protonated to give an overall cationic gel which can remove anionic dyes quinoline yellow and amaranth red effectively. As the pH is increased, the carboxylic acid units are gradually deprotonated, counteracting the positive quarternary ammonium groups, such that cationic dyes methylene blue and methylene violet can be adsorbed when the gel becomes overall anionic. This principle can also be extended to hydrogels composed of proteins such as Rao's hydrogel beads comprised of bovine serum albumin (BSA) and luminescent gold nanoclusters, which exhibited pH-switchable ion uptake behaviour owing to protonation and deprotonation of R-groups on the BSA's amino acid residues under acidic and basic conditions respectively.172 Beads stored in acidic medium could adsorb inorganic anions (MnO4−, PdCl42− and AuCl4−) as well organic anionic dyes, but not cationic dyes. Conversely, beads stored in basic medium in contrast could adsorb heavy metal cations (Cd2+, Pb2+, Hg2+) and cationic dyes. The maximal adsorption capacity for the cationic dye MB was found to be 313 mg g−1. The hydrogel beads can be reused by changing the pH to the opposite of the storage pH, and the ion desorption can occur within 20–30 minutes. Impressively, the beads retain almost 100% of its original adsorption capacity over 8 cycles of reuse.
 Fig. 23  Schematic illustration of polymer hydrogels capable of pH-switchable cation and anion adsorption. 
In certain situations, it may be useful to change the pH of the waste water by removing hydroxide anions instead of adding additional acids.173 Towards this end, Yang and colleagues used a poly(indole)-based hydrogel 27 to remove hydroxyl ions.174 The indole amine moiety and phenolic-OH groups acted as sites for hydroxide binding, with the possibility of the latter being deprotonated to increase the electron-density in the indoles' aromatic rings, thus enhancing Na+ uptake by cation–π interactions (Fig. 24). When the hydrogel was used, the amount of NaOH reduced from 25 mM initially to 9.0 mM after 0.5 hours and down to 2.3 mM after 7 hours. The hydrogel could be recycled in acid solution, and the adsorptive capacity stayed mostly similar after 4 cycles of reuse.
 Fig. 24  Design of Yang's poly(indole) 27 hydrogel for synergistic uptake of Na+ and OH−.174 
4.6 Other pollutants
Hydrogels can go beyond purely adsorption of pollutants, and can be coupled with catalytic or reactive groups to assist in the breakdown and detection of other kinds of pollutants in the water. This has been applied for enhancing the hydrolysis of chemical warfare agents by Bromberg et al., who post-synthetically modified hydrophilic polyalkylamine polymers with nucleophilic groups and crosslinked with epichlorohydrin to form hydrogel particles.175 The modified hydrogel particles are able to hydrolyse the nerve agent simulant diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP) at a rate 5.5–10 fold higher than unmodified gels. The modified gels were also able to speed up the dehydrochlorination reaction of blistering agents sulfur mustard (HD) and its analogue 2-chloroethyl ethylsulfide (CEES). The speed of hydrolysis is largely affected by the polymer nucleophilicity and how well the amino and aminopyridine groups can interact with the hydrolysis products.
Hydrogels have also been used in the detection of chemical warfare agents. Swager and colleagues designed responsive units incorporated into random triple copolymers to form colorimetrically responsive hydrogels.176 Triarylmethanol-containing polymers 28a/b (Fig. 25), synthesised by ring-opening metathesis polymerisation (ROMP) were used as responsive units towards the nerve agent simulant diethyl chlorophosphate (DCP) 29 due to phosphorylation of the nucleophilic hydroxyl group, resulting in formation of highly-coloured carbocations 30a/b which was immediately observed upon DCP addition. The polymers could show ppm-level theoretical detection capability towards the nerve agent simulant. The coloured hydrogel could be regenerated to the colourless form by using ammonium hydroxide, and the hydrogel could be reused several times without any impact on the visual change in colour. Hydrogels could also be used to facilitate breakdown and electrochemical detection of chemical warfare agent. Polyacrylamide (PAAm)-based hydrogel films were embedded with the enzyme diisopropyl fluorophosphatase (DFPase) that breaks down sarin simulant and releases fluoride ions.177 The hydrogel was designed with a gradient moving from neutral PAAm to quaternary ammonium functionalized PAAm to promote directional transport of fluoride ions to a miniature electrochemical sensor. This system provided a 30-fold amplification of the fluoride ions generated, and allows the rapid detection of sarin simulant at a low level 1 dose within minutes.
 Fig. 25  Swager's triarylmethanol hydrogel polymers capable of colorimetric detection of nerve agent simulant diethyl DCP.176 
Hydrogels can help to degrade antibiotics and preservatives in water to prevent adverse effects on the environment. One viable strategy is to embed entities capable of generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) within the hydrogel material. Yang et al. developed a composite hydrogel catalyst composed of poly(hydroxyethyl acrylate/N-methyl maleic acid) and copper sulfide nanoparticles.178 Its maximum adsorption capacity of sulfamethoxazole (SMX) antibiotic was 31 mg g−1 of the composite hydrogel. After adsorption, 90.9% of SMX was degraded after 12 h upon irradiation of 500 W of visible light (see Fig. 26). The mechanism is likely to be visible light excitation of CuS nanoparticles, followed by oxidation of water into hydroxyl radicals which led to breakdown of the antibiotic molecule. When the degradation process reached equilibrium, 43.6% of SMX was mineralized to carbon dioxide and water. In a separate study, Hu et al. designed a poly(hydroxyethyl acrylate/acrylamidopropyl trimethylammonium) hydrogel with bismuth iodide catalyst and peroxymonosulfate activator.179 The hydrogel system could degrade about 99% of methylparaben in 90 minutes when placed under visible light, and the photocatalytic oxidation process was efficacious from pH 3 to pH 11.
 Fig. 26  P(HEA/NMMA)–CuS hydrogel for copper sulfide catalyzed degradation of antibiotic sulfamethoxazole (SMX). (a) Black line – adsorption process without visible light. Equilibrium was reached at 17.5% adsorption. Red line – photocatalytic degradation kinetics of SMX under 500 W visible light. 90.9% was degraded within 12 hours. (b) Photodegradation of SMX could occur over several cycles. Conditions: 0.1 g hydrogel, 0.2 mM SMX. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission. 
4.7 Summary
In this section, we have surveyed the applications of polymeric hydrogel materials for removal of pollutants from effluent wastewater. These polymers contain repeating functional groups such as hydroxyls, amines and carboxylates, which could theoretically allow for multiple strong interactions with pollutants. Indeed, we see that polymeric gels can achieve remarkably high pollutant adsorption capacity. Strategies for strengthening the gels such as more structured covalent crosslinking or formation of clay composites have been explored. Unusual pollutant-adsorption behaviour, such as stimuli-responsive cation/anion binding and in situ degradation of pollutants have demonstrated the versatility of polymeric gels as remediators.
Many polymeric gels show good reusability, as they can be regenerated using appropriate solutions for multiple cycles without significant loss of adsorption capacity, which are essential criteria for practical applications. It would be worthwhile to further explore other ways of regeneration which can effectively strip pollutants from the saturated gels. One notable example we have discussed involves the exploitation of the LCST of thermo-responsive polymers to modulate pollutant adsorption/desorption simply by temperature control without using any regeneration solutions. In addition, the polymeric gels need to be designed such that they can effectively remove target pollutants in the presence of excessive naturally-occurring ions. While adsorption specificity can be engineered by exploiting the unique recognition capabilities of units such as the thymine nucleobase and designed macrocycles, further work needs to be done to improve their performance in this respect.
5. Novel hydrogel composites
While the addition of clay materials to polymeric hydrogels has long been exploited to improve adsorption capacity, enhance material strength and provide more stable crosslinked networks, recent years have witnessed the emergence of gels comprised of innovative additives such as graphene oxide, magnetic nanoparticles, ionic liquid components and even microorganisms. The ways these additives enhance the pollutant adsorbing properties of hydrogels is discussed herein.
5.1 Composites containing graphene derivatives
Carbon nanomaterials possess a large specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1 for graphene),180 and are promising materials for adsorption of pollutants, especially aromatic-rich organic molecules such as dyes. However, their practical applications in water treatment is hampered by their tendency to aggregate under aqueous conditions due to the strong inter-sheet van der Waals interactions, which reduces their exposed surface area. Furthermore, they can pose biological risks due to their difficulty of removal post-application.181,182 In this regard, embedding them in hydrogels not only facilitates recovery and removal, but also retains their large surface area for adsorption by reducing their tendency to aggregate. To ensure stability over prolonged usage and over multiple adsorption–regeneration cycles, the carbon nanomaterials are anchored to the hydrogel matrix either by strong non-covalent interactions or permanent covalent linkages. As this can be difficult to achieve for native graphene and carbon nanotubes due to their low density of surface functional groups capable of acting as points of attachment, graphene oxide (GO) has been the most popular candidate for gel incorporation due to the presence of various oxygen-rich functionalities (e.g. COOH, carbonyls, OH) that allow strong hydrogen bonding and covalent attachment (representative structure in Fig. 27A). These covalent linkages also improves the gels' mechanical properties by providing additional crosslinking points. In addition, these groups on GO allow strong interactions with inorganic cations and dyes, whilst still retaining their extended π-surface for strong π–π stacking interactions with aromatic organic pollutants.
 Fig. 27  Structures of (A) GO which is able to interact non-covalently with (B) polyethyleneimine and (C) agarose to form stable gels. 
Polymers rich in Lewis basic functional groups can form strong hydrogen bonding interactions with the oxygen-rich groups of GO, allowing it to be strongly attached to the gel matrix non-covalently. For example, amine-rich polyethyleneimine (PEI) forms stable self-assembled gels with GO (Fig. 27B), which can completely remove the cationic dyes methylene blue and rhodamine B from water within 4 hours.183 Due to its high cross-linking density, the resulting gel showed better thermal stability than free GO itself. In addition, polysaccharides such as agarose (Fig. 27C) can also interact with GO via a combination of hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions.184 Furthermore, the reducing properties of saccharides could be exploited to chemically reduce the GO present to form reduced GO in the presence of aqueous ammonia. Due to the smaller degree of oxygen-functionalisation on RGO/agarose, its resulting greater hydrophobicity enabled more efficient uptake of the cationic triphenylmethane dye malachite green compared with its GO precursor. The authors also demonstrated that by eluting an aqueous mixture of four dyes through a column loaded with the RGO/agarose gel by gravity, nearly complete absorption of the dyes could be achieved. RGO hydrogels can also be produced by in situ reduction of GO suspended within polydopamine,† held by strong hydrogen bonding and π–π stacking interactions.185 In addition to dyes, the catechol functionalities on polydopamine also allows bidentate chelation and removal of toxic metal cations such as Pb2+ and Cd2+. Advantageously, the RGO/polydopamine gels can be regenerated using 0.1 M HCl over ten adsorption/desorption cycles, whilst retaining more than 80% of its adsorptive capacity. Separately, RGO/cellulose composite hydrogels were also shown to be more effective in removing six triazine pesticides from water compared with established sorbents such as graphite carbon black.186
Covalently linking GO to biocompatible polymers provides strong points of attachment that prevent the resulting hydrogels from leaching the carbon nanomaterials over prolonged usage. While the use of reactions such as copper(I)-catalysed azide–alkyne cycloadditions (CuAAC) have proven effective,187 they require Cu(I) catalysts. To avoid the use of toxic metals completely in their synthesis, Zhang capitalised on the thiol–ene Click reaction to cross-link thiol-functionalised GO with PEG diacrylate using UV irradiation to form gels capable of dye sequestration (Fig. 28A).188 Interestingly and contrary to expectations, more anionic Congo red could be adsorbed at equilibrium than cationic methylene blue and rhodamine B. Non-functionalised GO can also be attached covalently to polymers using appropriate cross-linking agents. This was demonstrated by using epichlorohydrin to join the hydroxyl groups of GO and cellulose (Fig. 28B), forming gels able to sequester Zn2+, Fe3+, Cu2+ and Pb2+ at an optimal pH of 5.3.189 The stability of the resulting ether linkages in the gel allowed it to be regenerated using 1 M HCl without detectable losses in adsorption capacity after 5 cycles.
 Fig. 28  Covalently-attached GO–hydrogel composites: (A) thiol–ene Click reaction by Zhang;188 (B) epichlorohydrin cross-linkage of OH groups on GO and cellulose;189 (C) Tehrani's GO slide-ring gel.193 
Owing to their large specific surface area capable of forming extensive interactions with polymers, GO can also act as effective nanofillers for polymer reinforcement, improving the bulk mechanical strength and toughness of the gel.190 To further increase gel strength, Shi and coworkers formed ternary composite gels by interpenetrating independent networks of layered GO, Ca2+-crosslinked alginate and covalently-crosslinked polyacrylamide (PAM).191 The oxygen-rich functionalities on the GO nanosheets can act as chain transfer agents in free radical polymerisation, allowing the covalent grafting of PAM onto them. Together with forming extensive hydrogen bonding with alginate and PAM, GO imbued the resulting gel with good elasticity, compressibility and tensile strength, whilst concurrently allowing absorption of a large range of dyes from water. To engineer adsorbent gels with great elasticity, innovative ‘slide-ring’ gels containing polyrotaxanes as a key structural component have been used.192 Polyrotaxanes resemble molecular daisy chains whose molecular components are not held covalently together, but are mechanically-interlocked, allowing freedom for them to slide relative to each other in response to applied forces and tension. The first example of a GO slide-ring gel by Tehrani was produced by grafting α-cyclodextrin/PEG poly(pseudorotaxanes) onto GO sheets, followed by the induction of additional crosslinking with polyacrylamide (Fig. 28C).193 While the mechanical properties of the gel were not reported, rapid removal of methylene blue from water was demonstrated.
The antibacterial properties of graphene derivatives in gels have been exploited in the treatment of bacteria-contaminated water. Huang demonstrated that GO/agarose and RGO/agarose gels could induce bacteria cell death when they were incubated with Gram-positive S. aureus and Gram-negative E. coli.184 While the exact mechanism of graphene's bactericidal effects remains debatable, it has been proposed that graphene can induce membrane damage and oxidation stress.194 Even when the bacteria-contaminated water was passed through a column loaded with the graphene/agarose hydrogels under gravity, significant removal of bacteria was observed compared with a control column containing just agarose gel. This present study highlights the potential of graphene/hydrogel composites in the treatment of bacteria-laden sewage effluents as well.
In an intriguing recent study, Zeng and coworkers reported the synthesis of amphiphobic fluorographene gels under mild reaction conditions by the conjugate addition of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecanethiol to RGO.195 While the fluorographene hydrogel could adsorb a large variety of organic solvents up to as much as 20 times its original mass, it can be primed towards selective permeation of water or oil depending on its pre-soaking treatment. When pre-soaked in oil, an oil–water mixture could be effectively separated by passing it through the gel under gravity, whereupon only the oil phase could pass through. Conversely, pre-soaking with water allows only permeation of the aqueous layer, potentially allowing this gel to function as a filtration material, and could also physically repel oil droplets underwater. Indeed, this fluorographene gel shows great promise as an oil-fence material for remediation of open-water oil spills or in industrial processes requiring oil–water separations.
5.2 Magnetic hydrogels (ferrogels)
The post-application recovery of hydrogels in wastewater treatment has traditionally been highly challenging. Taking advantage of the speed, convenience and environmental-friendliness of the widely-adopted magnetically-assisted industrial separation processes,196 ferrogels containing magnetic-responsive iron oxide nanoparticles (FeONPs) have been developed to facilitate gel recovery. For this purpose, ferrogels should exhibit superparamagnetism, which refers to the lack of magnetic interaction between magnetic domains in the absence of an applied field; as well as significant magnetic saturation allowing a good response of the gel material to low field strength.197 As FeONPs such as magnetite (Fe3O4) and maghemite (γ-Fe2O3) possess both desirable criteria, they are commonly used for the production of ferrogels. Other than for environmental remediation described herein, ferrogels have found numerous biomedical applications which include tissue engineering and controlled drug release.198
Ferrogels for water remediation are produced via two main methods: Firstly, pre-synthesised FeONPs are first mixed with a hydrogel precursor, followed by the addition of a suitable cross-linking agent which forms the gels containing the FeONPs dispersed within the gel matrix (Fig. 29A). While this method allows good control of FeONP dimensions, leaching of FeONPs out of the gels can occur, and uniform particle dispersion within the gel matrix can be difficult to achieve. Nonetheless, Lo and coworkers have embedded γ-Fe2O3 into cross-linked poly(APTMCl) (Fig. 29A) hydrogels capable of sequestering anions such as Cr2O72−,199,200 nitrates and phosphates200 and anionic dyes such as amaranth,200 acid red and acid orange.76 Due to the low content of γ-Fe2O3 within the gel material, adsorption arising from the FeONPs are minor compared to the cationic gel matrix. Under a 200 mT magnetic field, separation efficiency of >99% was consistently achieved over 60 adsorption–desorption cycles with aq. NaCl as the recovery solution.200 In addition to pre-synthesising FeONPs, fly ash, an abundant waste product from thermal power plants and steel mills, is another source of Fe2O3. Liu and Jiang have incorporated fly ash with attapulgite and poly(acrylic acid) into a ternary magnetic hydrogel capable of sequestering aqueous Pb2+ and Cu2+.201
 Fig. 29  Methods of synthesising ferrogels using (A) pre-synthesising FeONPs, as exemplified by Lo's poly(APTMCl) ferrogel76 and (B) forming FeONPs in situ within a hydrogel matrix, which can be further functionalised and cross-linked if necessary. 
Secondly, Ferrogels have also been prepared by forming FeONPs in situ within the hydrogel matrix (Fig. 29B). Using a gelator with functional groups capable of chelating Fe2+/Fe3+ cations (e.g. amines in chitosan),202 the gel is first immersed in a concentrated solution containing these species. After cation uptake, the addition of alkali (e.g. aqueous ammonia) forms FeONPs after heating via coprecipitation:198Fe2+ + 2Fe3+ + 8OH− → Fe3O4↓ + 4H2O
Further crosslinking agents are added if necessary to increase the gel's mechanical strength. This method allows good dispersion of FeONPs throughout the gel and provides greater stability to the FeONPs from leaching due to the intimate association of their surfaces with functional groups of the gel material, as long as the gel matrix does not get degraded by base. Indeed, Linghu and Peng showed that in Fe3O4–gelatin composite ferrogels, less than 3% of the Fe present was leached at pH 2, while 35% Fe loss was observed for unprotected Fe3O4.203 The same ferrogels can also successfully remove uranium(VI) salts via a chemisorption process involving the formation of inner-sphere surface complexes. The popularity of gelatin in ferrogels arises from the numerous OH, NH2 and COOH groups present capable of chelating Fe2+/Fe3+ cations. This polymer was also used by Qiao to template FeONP formation and subsequently assemble ferrogels by cross-linking with glutaraldehyde, which was capable of Cr2O72− absorption.204 To further enhance the absorption capability of the gelatin-containing ferrogels, Li et al. covalently grafted cationic chitosan/PEI copolymers onto the surface of gelatin–FeONP composites, which were crosslinked using the transglutaminase enzyme to further improve the gel's mechanical strength.205 At an optimum pH of 6–7, 10 mg of ferrogel could purify 0.8 L of water containing Cd2+ and 0.4 L of Pb2+ solution, both at initial concentrations of 300 mg L−1. However, the presence of Ca2+ and hypochlorite (ClO2−) were found to compete with the active sites within the gel matrix, decreasing the effectiveness of adsorption.
5.3 Hydrogels containing biological entities
Microorganisms such as bacteria and algae have been applied in wastewater treatment processes for their natural ability to degrade aqueous pollutants, e.g. phenols,206,207 phthalic acid esters208 and even remove anions such as nitrates by denitrification. Compared to being suspended as free cells in the treatment tank, their immobilisation on solid substrates is advantageous not only for facilitating solid–liquid separation, but also increases the microorganism concentration for more effective water treatment.
In this respect, PVA hydrogels are popular as the solid carrier material for microorganisms due to their non-toxicity, physico-chemical stability, permeability, low cost and high mechanical strength- the last is especially important to withstand the high shear forces arising from aeration in tanks and fluid turbulence. The desired mechanical strength can be achieved by copolymerising, acrylamide and N,N′-methylene bis(acrylamide) to yield tough PVA hydrogels,209 or by crosslinking hydrogels with glycerol and boric acid (H3BO3)210 to achieve uniform and dense network formation without compromising with the immobilised bacteria's. In the latter, microbial immobilisation was achieved by adding a precursor solution containing PVA, alginate, glycerol and activated sludge dropwise to a curing solution containing CaCl2 and H3BO3 to form spherical beads. Similarly, the presence of powdered ethyl acrylate rubber (ACM) in PVA/alginate composite gels crosslinked with CaCl2 and H3BO3 acted as nucleating agents to decrease pore size and increase network density, enhancing the gel's shear elastic modulus and hydraulic shock resistance (Fig. 30).211 A composite containing 1.5 wt% ACM was found to give the optimal long-term hydraulic stability, whilst retaining the best microorganism activity and chemical oxygen demand (COD) removal rate. The loss of microbial activity at ACM content of >1.5 wt% was attributed to reduced gel permeability as its pore density was too high, hindering the mass transport of microorganisms.
 Fig. 30  Images of microorganism-immobilised PVA hydrogel composites containing 1.5 wt% of ACM (A) before aeration and (B) after aeration for 11 months. Image reprinted with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
GO-intercalated gels possess excellent mechanical properties, but may be unsuitable for microorganism immobilisation due to their intrinsic antibacterial properties (see Section 5.1). Lin and co-workers elegantly mitigated GO's cytotoxicity by grafting biocompatible glutamic acid onto the surface of GO.212 The presence of glutamic acid could also enhanced the hydrogen bonding interactions with PVA to increase the gel's mechanical properties. Compared to PVA/GO composites, the PVA/GO/glutamic acid gel supported higher cell proliferation rates and survival ratio. Significantly, the presence of GO–glutamic acid hybrids resulted in larger specific area and pore volume relative to native PVA gels, in turn allowing higher microorganism loading capacities which enhanced its wastewater treatment efficiency.
Despite these promising studies, it is noteworthy that the applications of biological entities and biomolecules in hydrogel composites for water treatment are only in their infancy. For instance, the removal of ammonium has been recently explored with Ca2+/alginate gels immobilised with the marine algae Nannochloropsis sp.,213 and textile dyes such as alizarin red S and toluidine blue can be sequestered by hydrogels containing fungi.214 The interactions of microorganisms with various hydrogel composite materials such as carbon nanomaterials is also currently poorly understood, yet may hold unexpected potential for gel synthesis and behaviour. As a case in point, strains of the bacteria Shewanella sp. were found to reduce GO to rGO, which facilitated interesting remediation behaviour such as Cr(VI) bioreduction.215 In addition, the immobilisation of biomolecules such as protein enzymes (e.g. lipases) in gel matrices may also be useful for treatment of municipal wastewater to remove excessive lipids which may otherwise congeal in sewers to form ‘fatbergs’.216
5.4 Ionic liquid gelators (ionogels)
Other than hydrogels and organogels, ionogels are a novel class of gel where the liquid phase is an ionic liquid (IL). Being organic salts which are liquids at ambient temperature, ILs are generally non-flammable, non-volatile and exhibit excellent physical and chemical stability. Thus, they are considered to be more environmentally-friendly than conventional organic solvents. Ionogels possess the properties of both supramolecular gels and ILs, namely stimuli-responsiveness, electrical conductivity, whilst allowing their properties to be easily modulated by varying the structure of the gelator. Furthermore, the high ionic nature of ILs provide a unique microenvironment which have by themselves been considered nanostructured materials.217
ILs are by themselves effective solvents for organic dyes.218,219 However when gelated, the solid gels allow much easier recovery from the aqueous medium in which they are added to for disposal and/or reuse. In a study by Marullo and D'Anna,220 a series of diimidazolium salt gelators bearing either fumarate or maleate counterions were able to gelate Bmim-based ILs at critical gelation concentrations of less than 7 wt% (Fig. 31A). Gelators with longer C12 chains form ionogels with better mechanical properties, while C10 gels are too unstable for dye absorption studies to be performed. Interestingly, the cationic rhodamine B dye was adsorbed more efficiently than the anionic methyl orange, while the fumarate salts provided faster adsorption kinetics than maleate. The counteranion of the ILs also significantly affected the rate of adsorption, with SCN− performing much worse than PF6− and NTf2−. Generally, conditions favouring the formation of spherulitic networks facilitated dye adsorption. Similarly, gels of didodecylimidazolium-carboxylate salts in ILs could remove rhodamine B effectively.221 The [C12C12im]2[2,6-NDC]/[Bzmim][NTf2] ionogel (Fig. 31B) exhibited unique self-strengthening behaviour, where applying a destructive strain allowed the fibrillar network to reorganise to form a stronger gel material. The ionogel also showed excellent recyclability by retaining its adsorption efficiency for up to 20 cycles. Owing to its load-bearing capacity and self-sustaining nature, the gel also allowed applications in a dialysis membrane and syringes, allowing removal of up to 95% of rhodamine B from an aqueous eluent in less than 10 minutes. Nonetheless, despite the efficiency of these ionogels in dye removal, little is known about their mechanism of action. The authors have suggested that electrostatic attractions between the carboxylate anion and cationic dye played an important role, aided in part by cation–π and π–π interactions with the ILs.
 Fig. 31  LMW ionogelators comprising of (A) fumarate/maleate salts of diimidazolium cations220 and (B) didodecylimidazolium-carboxylate salts;221 as well as (C) cross-linked polymeric ionogels containing short-chain C2-hydrophilic and long-chain C12-hydrophobic monomers.222 
Other than LMWG ionogels, gels comprising of polymers containing IL subunits have also been applied in water remediation. Peng and Zhai have synthesised a family of polymeric gels by γ-irradiation of an aqueous solution of monomers (Fig. 31C) which can remove ReO4− anions via physical anion exchange.222 The polymer contains hydrophilic ethylimidazolium and hydrophobic dodecylimidazolium units, whose relative proportion affects ReO4− uptake kinetics and selectivity over NO3−. For instance, hydrophilic units accelerated adsorption, whilst ReO4− selectivity was improved with more hydrophobic components. As ReO4− shares many similar physicochemical properties and is used as a surrogate for radioactive 99TcO4− in lab settings,223 the best performing gel, containing hydrophilic and hydrophobic units in a 1:4 mole ratio and could adsorb 559 mg of Re per gram of gel material with an equilibration time of 24 h, could be used to treat radioactive effluents from nuclear power plants. Furthermore, the gel could be regenerated with nitric acid and showed negligible loss of uptake capacity even after 4 cycles. While not demonstrated, the anion exchange process may also allow this polymeric ionogel to remove other toxic anions such as CrO42− or anionic dyes.
5.5 Summary
In this section, we have highlighted four classes of hydrogel composites which have attracted considerable recent attention for wastewater remediation, the vast majority of which involving polymeric scaffolds. For GO gels, the presence of this carbon nanomaterial both strengthens the gels and enhances the adsorption of aromatic molecules, making them especially useful for dye removal. While the presence of FeONPs by themselves do not enhance the gels' pollutant adsorption capability, they offer unprecedented ease of gel recovery for regeneration and reuse, simply by applying a magnetic field of sufficient strength. Gels containing biological entities necessarily comprise of biocompatible materials such as PVA and/or alginate, where the microorganisms present facilitate the uptake and breakdown of aqueous contaminants. However, conditions for application of these gels (e.g. pH, temperature) need to be well-controlled to ensure the survival of the microorganisms for continued water remediation. Finally, ionogels combine the innate adsorption capabilities of ILs with the greater ease of recovery and stimuli-responsiveness of gels. It is likely that in coming years, much future development and innovations can be expected in these classes of gel remediators, bringing about material and adsorption properties not easily achieved by using polymeric or LMW gelators alone.
6. Conclusions and perspectives
This review has provided a broad conceptual overview of the development of three main classes of gel materials, namely LMWGs, polymeric gels and composite gel materials, for water remediation and uptake of major classes of pollutants such as oil spills, inorganic ions and dyes. As evident from the numerous examples herein, research effort during the last decade has seen greater focus on practical aspects such as mechanical strength, environmental-friendliness, biodegradability, gel regeneration/recycling and post-application recovery. In terms of synthetic efficiency, which has implications on cost and overall environmental impact, the most promising gel materials have simple syntheses of less than 3 separate synthetic steps. Novel composite gel materials comprising additives such as carbon nanomaterials and magnetic particles have also received considerable interest, owing to their ability to enhance the gels' pollutant adsorbent performance and/or provide novel means of recovery and stimuli-responsiveness.
For pollutant removal, LMWGs and polymeric gels complement each other in many ways. The response of LMWGs are often faster than polymeric gels due to the latter's limitation by diffusion, and this advantage has been amply exploited in oil spill remediation, for which very few examples of polymeric gels have been reported. Also, LMWGs are generally more stimuli-responsive than polymeric gels, as they form from reversible supramolecular interactions whilst the latter are restricted by their covalent crosslinks. This is advantageous for regeneration where it is easy to separate the gel material from pollutants. On the other hand, LMWGs possess weaker mechanical properties than polymeric gels, and are more challenging to integrate with materials such as magnetic nanoparticles to form functional composites. Polymeric gels are also often simpler to design, especially when non-directional interactions such as electrostatics play the dominant role in pollutant uptake: while LMWGs' structural design needs to be carefully optimised to achieve adsorption and maintain gel integrity, polymeric gels can be effective sorbents by simply incorporating the appropriate functional groups, as gel integrity is maintained by their inherently crosslinked nature. Consequently, it is unsurprising that the repertoire of polymeric gels for inorganic anion adsorption (Section 4.3) is much larger than those by LMWGs (Section 3.4).
While the issues of cost and adsorption kinetics will always be key areas to improve on, the examples summarised in this review show that numerous lines of future research and optimisation can be envisaged in the following areas:
6.1 Gel adsorption capacity and range of pollutants
Although it is compelling to think that the gel adsorption capacity can be increased by simply increasing the density of binding groups on the gel material itself, increasing the accessibility of adsorption sites within the gels is also an effective, yet overlooked strategy. Ideally, binding groups should all interact with the pollutant, but steric hindrance and material deformations could reduce accessibility to these sites, leading to non-optimal pollutant adsorption. For instance, a polymeric gel with a well crosslinked network structure showed that stabilising the structure of the gel could be one strategy towards high methylene blue adsorption.169
Instead of considering the various classes of gel sorbents described in this review separately, amalgamating them can offer unique benefits. Polymeric gels could be used as the matrix in concert with other gel materials such as LMWGs. For example, usually-hydrophilic cellulose pulp can be rendered temporarily hydrophobic by LMWGs to facilitate a higher oil adsorption capacity,132 and the addition of graphene oxides augments the gel's adsorption of aromatic organic pollutants. Composite systems, when suitably designed, could harness the advantages of polymeric gels and other systems to improve adsorption removal.
The vast majority of gel remediators have been developed to target the main classes of pollutants covered in this review, namely oil spills, ions and dyes. However, many major classes of contaminants have received fleeting research attention at best.224–226 These include, but are not limited to, pharmaceutical drugs such as antibiotics and their metabolites, cosmetic compounds, insecticides and pesticides, organic solvents, especially chlorinated ones, as well as fats and grease from food processing. The development of the appropriate gel materials to sequester these pollutants provides many opportunities for study and innovation.
6.2 Pollutant selectivity
Most of the gel technologies reviewed herein are studied under well-controlled laboratory settings, which differ from those in practice. In real-life, the issue of selectivity becomes pertinent, as numerous gels described herein become considerably less potent at uptake of their target pollutant(s) in the presence of common competing ions in nature. New strategies need to be developed to enhance selectivity, possibly the judicious use of specific recognition motifs which are easily-accessible synthetically, or even molecular imprinting technologies.227,228 Alternatively, supramolecular interactions such as halogen bonding and other related σ–hole interactions, which have been shown to provide unusual selectivity for guest binding,229 may also be investigated. Furthermore, the problem of bio-fouling of the gels needs to be addressed as this can also reduce the efficacy of pollutant adsorption.
6.3 Practical considerations
A good integration of gels with effluent water treatment infrastructure needs to be achieved for them to be widely-adopted industrially. With the exception of treating oil spills/grease, the adsorption of dissolved pollutants (i.e. dyes, toxic ions) may require the gels to be incorporated into filtration technologies. As an example, Zhang and Jin have recently fabricated tight ultrafiltration membranes embedded with sodium polyacrylate-modified polyacrylonitrile hydrogels which could separate dyes from wastewater under a driving pressure of as low as 1 bar. The dyes adsorbed onto the membranes could be easily removed by water immersion, and the membranes can be re-used for up to 20 cycles of regeneration with little loss of dye-removal capacity and water permeance.230 Similarly, De and Mondal showed that a column of their pre-formed LMW hydrogels could adsorb toxic metal cations from wastewater under low pressure.103 For implementation in fixed bed reactors or stirred tank reactors, factors such as gel particle size and mechanical strength needs to be carefully optimised to ensure maximum adsorption without physical gel disintegration.
Convenient means of assessing the gels' degree of adsorption saturation will be needed to determine when to regenerate the gels. Although visual indication is an obvious means for dye removal, other non-coloured dissolved pollutants require other forms of sensory output. These may include integration with electrochemical sensors or optical indicators which give an obvious colour change upon saturation.
6.4 Gel recovery and reuse
Methods to easily recover the gels for regeneration after they are saturated with adsorbed pollutants, especially when employed in stirred bed reactors, are currently very lacking. Magnetic hydrogels appear to be the most promising technology at present, and electromagnets have been used to separate hydrogel particles.199 However, as this is an integral part of the gel water treatment process, and given the nascent stage of current research into hydrogel recovery technology, many opportunities for innovation remain. Following recovery, innovative solutions can also be developed to increase the speed of hydrogel regeneration for reuse. Gels relying on diffusion of the regeneration solution through their pores for physical desorption of the pollutants can take a long time before reuse. To remedy this, new means of stimuli-responsiveness should also be explored to trigger gelation/release of entrapped pollutants during regeneration for both LMWGs and polymeric gels, for example with light231 and ultrasound.232
An interesting alternative strategy is to develop applications for the pollutant-impregnated hydrogel, i.e. turning waste into useful materials. This was demonstrated by Smith and co-workers in their hydrazide-functionalised hydrogel which reduced gold and silver nanoparticles and incorporated them in the gel matrix to form conductive hydrogels useful in nanoelectronics.104
Given the advanced state of development of some classes of gelators, an important future thrust would be for these materials to be employed in actual field trials for better assessment of their practicality and areas for optimisation. Indeed, we expect that in a few years, gel-based wastewater remediators can become commercially-viable and even employed in wastewater treatment on practical scales. We hope that this review will provide a foundation and stimulus for further advances in the applications of sorbent gel materials for wastewater treatment, ultimately helping to generate cleaner and safer sources of water for consumption and environmental preservation.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
Z. X. Zhang, D. J. Young, Z. Li and X. J. Loh, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800270 CrossRef .
K. Xue, X. Wang, P. W. Yong, D. J. Young, Y. L. Wu, Z. Li and X. J. Loh, Adv. Ther., 2019, 2, 1800088 CrossRef .
X. J. Loh, P. L. Chee and C. Owh, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800313 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, S. S. Liow, S. L. Lai, A. Alli-Shaik, G. E. Holder, B. H. Parikh, S. Krishnakumar, Z. Li, M. J. Tan, J. Gunaratne, V. A. Barathi, W. Hunziker, R. Lakshminarayanan, C. W. T. Tan, C. K. Chee, P. Zhao, G. Lingam, X. J. Loh and X. Su, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2019, 1,  DOI:10.1038/s41551-019-0382-7 .
X. Liu, Z. Li, X. J. Loh, K. Chen, Z. Li and Y. L. Wu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40, e1800117 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Koetting, J. T. Peters, S. D. Steichen and N. A. Peppas, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2015, 93, 1–49 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xue, S. S. Liow, A. A. Karim, Z. Li and X. J. Loh, Chem. Rec., 2018, 18, 1517–1529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Deen and X. J. Loh, Gels, 2018, 4, 13 CrossRef PubMed .
C. K. Liu, Q. Dou, S. S. Liow, J. N. Kumar and X. J. Loh, Aust. J. Chem., 2016, 69, 363–371 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, X. Zeng, C. Ma, H. Yi, Z. Ali, X. Mou, S. Li, Y. Deng and N. He, Bone Res., 2017, 5, 17014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, D. J. Young, Y.-L. Wu and X. J. Loh, Molecules, 2018, 23, 553 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, H. Li, Z. Tang, Z. Liu, Z. Ruan, L. Ma, Q. Yang, D. Wang and C. Zhi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804560 CrossRef .
N. Sahiner, S. Butun, O. Ozay and B. Dibek, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 373, 122–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kawamura, Polym. J., 2017, 49, 751 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Zheng and X. J. Loh, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2016, 27, 1664–1679 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee and S. Bhattacharya, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 2012, 52, 334–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Hager, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1967, 1, 287–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Srinivasan, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2011, 2011, 872531 Search PubMed .
G. W. Beall, Appl. Clay Sci., 2003, 24, 11–20 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang and Y. Peng, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 156, 11–24 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Pantapasis and A. M. Grumezescu, in Water Purification, ed. A. M. Grumezescu, Academic Press,  2017, pp. 447–477,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-804300-4.00013-7 .
T. Pradeep and Anshup, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 6441–6478 CrossRef CAS .
H. Maleki, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 300, 98–118 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Mohanan, I. U. Arachchige and S. L. Brock, Science, 2005, 307, 397 CAS .
K. S. Subrahmanyam, D. Sarma, C. D. Malliakas, K. Polychronopoulou, B. J. Riley, D. A. Pierce, J. Chun and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2619–2626 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, Y. Zhang, R. Guo, F. Meng, Y. Gao, C. Ma and H. Zhang, Chemosphere, 2019, 214, 830–838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maisanaba, S. Pichardo, M. Puerto, D. Gutiérrez-Praena, A. M. Cameán and A. Jos, Environ. Res., 2015, 138, 233–254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Smith, P. G. Hatcher, S. Kumar and J. W. Lee, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2550–2558 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, C. Zhang and Z. Hu, Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts, 2013, 15, 39–48 RSC .
J. Zhao, Z. Wang, J. C. White and B. Xing, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 9995–10009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Majidi Salehi, G. Di Profio, E. Fontananova, F. P. Nicoletta, E. Curcio and G. De Filpo, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 504, 220–229 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dave and A. E. Ghaly, Am. J. Environ. Sci., 2011, 7, 423–440 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Mishra and G. S. Kumar, Aquat. Procedia, 2015, 4, 435–442 CrossRef .
S. Mukherjee, C. Shang, X. Chen, X. Chang, K. Liu, C. Yu and Y. Fang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13940–13943 RSC .
S. Aparicio and R. Alcalde, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 65–78 RSC .
C. Capello, U. Fischer and K. Hungerbühler, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 927–934 RSC .
Y. Marcus, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1991, 87, 2995–2999 RSC .
M. J. Langton, C. J. Serpell and P. D. Beer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1974–1987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Salis and B. W. Ninham, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7358–7377 RSC .

          F. M. D. Chequer, G. A. R. de Oliveira, E. R. A. Ferraz, J. C. Cardoso, M. V. B. Zanoni and D. P. de Oliveira, in Eco-friendly Textile Dyeing and Finishing, ed. M. Gunay, InTech Press, Croatia,  2013 Search PubMed .
K.-T. Chung, J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part C: Environ. Carcinog. Ecotoxicol. Rev., 2016, 34, 233–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Benotti, R. A. Trenholm, B. J. Vanderford, J. C. Holady, B. D. Stanford and S. A. Snyder, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 597–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Botero-Coy, D. Martínez-Pachón, C. Boix, R. J. Rincón, N. Castillo, L. P. Arias-Marín, L. Manrique-Losada, R. Torres-Palma, A. Moncayo-Lasso and F. Hernández, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 642, 842–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Gracia-Lor, J. V. Sancho, R. Serrano and F. Hernández, Chemosphere, 2012, 87, 453–462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Baquero, J.-L. Martínez and R. Cantón, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2008, 19, 260–265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Daghrir and P. Drogui, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2013, 11, 209–227 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Irwin, C. P. McCoy and L. Carson, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2013, 115, 382–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Carter, H. B. Rycenga and A. J. McNeil, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 3522–3527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. King and A. J. McNeil, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3511–3513 RSC .
S. Ray, A. K. Das and A. Banerjee, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1633–1639 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Okesola and D. K. Smith, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11164–11166 RSC .
S. Debnath, A. Shome, S. Dutta and P. K. Das, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 6870–6881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chatterjee, T. Chatterjee, S. R. Lim and S. H. Woo, Environ. Technol., 2011, 32, 1503–1514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bhattacharyya and S. K. Ray, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 22, 92–102 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, L. Yi, H. Deng and P. Sun, J. Environ. Sci., 2014, 26, 1203–1211 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Cho, I. Y. Jeong, S. J. Lee, W. S. Han, J. K. Kang and J. H. Jung, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 1076–1079 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Karan and M. Bhattacharjee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5526–5535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Samai and K. Biradha, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1165–1173 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Chen, L. L. Wang, J. J. Chung, Y.-H. Kim, P. Atluri and J. A. Burdick, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 3, 3146–3160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O. Okesola and D. K. Smith, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4226–4251 RSC .
J. Raeburn, A. Zamith Cardoso and D. J. Adams, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5143–5156 RSC .
J. Brus, M. Urbanova, J. Czernek, M. Pavelkova, K. Kubova, J. Vyslouzil, S. Abbrent, R. Konefal, J. Horský, D. Vetchy, J. Vysloužil and P. Kulich, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 2478–2488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Xiong, X.-Y. Liu, J.-L. Li and M. W. Vallon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 5558–5563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yu, N. Lin, W. Yu and X. Y. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 7986–8010 RSC .
J.-L. Li, X.-Y. Liu, R.-Y. Wang and J.-Y. Xiong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 24231–24235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Rogers, A. J. Wright and A. G. Marangoni, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 1483–1490 RSC .
X. Y. Liu, P. D. Sawant, W. B. Tan, I. B. M. Noor, C. Pramesti and B. H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 15055–15063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, X.-Y. Liu, J. Xiong and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7275–7280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cravotto and P. Cintas, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2684–2697 RSC .
R.-Y. Wang, X.-Y. Liu and J.-L. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3286–3291 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, S. Joseph and N. R. Aluru, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 3512–3520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Takeshita, Y. Hasegawa, K. Yanai, A. Yamamoto, A. Ishii, M. Hasegawa and M. Yamanaka, Chem.–Asian J., 2017, 12, 2029–2032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dou, P. Li, D. Zhang and C.-L. Feng, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 3231–3238 RSC .
M. Ajmal, M. Siddiq, N. Aktas and N. Sahiner, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 43873–43884 RSC .
M. Khan and I. M. C. Lo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 322, 195–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. N. Tang, P. Wang, K. Yin and I. M. C. Lo, Environ. Eng. Sci., 2010, 27, 947–954 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, N. Liu, Y. Wei and L. Feng, Soft Matter, 2018, 14, 2649–2654 RSC .
S. Lata, P. K. Singh and S. R. Samadder, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 12, 1461–1478 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, G. Zhou, L. Chu, Y. Liu, C. Liu, S. Luo and Y. Wei, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 843–851 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Chee, A. Prasad, X. Fang, C. Owh, V. J. J. Yeo and X. J. Loh, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2014, 39, 6–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Saito, Y. Matsuzawa, S. Ninagawa, M. Honna, M. Takesada and M. Takehara, US Pat., 3969087A,  1976 .
J. Li, Y. Huo, M. Liu and H. Zeng, Prog. Chem., 2017, 29, 617–627 Search PubMed .
A. M. Vibhute, V. Muvvala and K. M. Sureshan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7782–7785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Gronwald and S. Shinkai, Chem.–Eur. J., 2001, 7, 4328–4334 CrossRef CAS .
N. Amanokura, Y. Kanekiyo, S. Shinkai and D. N. Reinhoudt, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1999, 1995–2000 RSC .
S. Roy, A. Chakraborty and R. Ghosh, Carbohydr. Res., 2008, 343, 2523–2529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Datta and S. Bhattacharya, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5596–5637 RSC .
G. H. B. Ng, J. Shen, J. Y. Ying, H. Wu, K.-H. Chan, C. Teh, H. Zeng and C. Ren, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4001–4008 CrossRef .

          Transportation Research Board and National Research Council, Oil in the Sea III: Inputs, Fates, and Effects. The National Academies Press, Washington, DC,  2003 Search PubMed .
C. Ren, F. Chen, F. Zhou, J. Shen, H. Su and H. Zeng, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 13510–13516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ren, J. Shen, F. Chen and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3847–3851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Huo and H. Zeng, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 8058–8064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, M. C. Li, Q. Wu, J. A. Pojman and D. G. Kuroda, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33549–33553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Smith, A. P. Abbott and K. S. Ryder, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11060–11082 CrossRef CAS .
S. Datta, S. Samanta and D. Chaudhuri, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2922–2926 RSC .
C. R. Groom, I. J. Bruno, M. P. Lightfoot and S. C. Ward, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., Cryst. Eng. Mater., 2016, 72, 171–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. L. Goodgame, S. P. W. Hill and D. J. Williams, Polyhedron, 1992, 11, 1507–1512 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patwa, J. Labille, J. Y. Bottero, A. Thiéry and P. Barthélémy, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2547–2550 RSC .
W. J. Stark, P. R. Stoessel, W. Wohlleben and A. Hafner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5793–5805 RSC .
A. Nel, Science, 2006, 311, 622–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Farré, K. Gajda-Schrantz, L. Kantiani and D. Barceló, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 393, 81–95 CrossRef PubMed .
A. De and R. Mondal, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 6022–6030 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Okesola, S. K. Suravaram, A. Parkin and D. K. Smith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 183–187 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Stanley, N. Clarke, K. M. Anderson, J. A. Elder, J. T. Lenthall and J. W. Steed, Chem. Commun., 2006, 3199 RSC .
J. W. Steed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3686 RSC .
G. O. Lloyd and J. W. Steed, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 75–84 RSC .
J.-S. Shen, D.-H. Li, Q.-G. Cai and Y.-B. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6219 RSC .
Q. Xia, Y. Mao, J. Wu, T. Shu and T. Yi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1854–1861 RSC .
J. Sun, Y. Liu, L. Jin, T. Chen and B. Yin, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 768–771 RSC .
Q. Lin, T.-T. Lu, X. Zhu, B. Sun, Q.-P. Yang, T.-B. Wei and Y.-M. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1635–1638 RSC .
T. Becker, C. Yong Goh, F. Jones, M. J. McIldowie, M. Mocerino and M. I. Ogden, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3900–3902,  10.1039/b807248e .
J. S. Shen, Q. G. Cai, Y. B. Jiang and H. W. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6786–6788 RSC .
T. Kar, S. Debnath, D. Das, A. Shome and P. K. Das, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 8639–8648 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roy, A. Dasgupta, S. Debnath, P. K. Das, D. Das and R. N. Mitra, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 5068–5074 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dutta, D. Das, A. Dasgupta and P. K. Das, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 1493–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Wood, B. W. Greenland, A. L. Acton, F. Rodríguez-Llansola, C. A. Murray, C. J. Cardin, J. F. Miravet, B. Escuder, I. W. Hamley and W. Hayes, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 2692–2699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hermida-Merino, C. J. Cardin, W. Hayes, J. F. Miravet, I. W. Hamley, F. Rodríguez-Llansola and B. Escuder, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7960 RSC .
D. J. Adams, M. F. Butler, W. J. Frith, M. Kirkland, L. Mullen and P. Sanderson, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1856 RSC .
B. C. Baker, A. L. Acton, G. C. Stevens and W. Hayes, Tetrahedron, 2014, 70, 8303–8311 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, L. Feng, A. Song and J. Hao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 12850–12856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, W. Xu, S. Song, L. Feng, A. Song and J. Hao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 4693–4701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Hyman, S. P. Brown, J. T. Davis, G. M. Peters, L. P. Skala, G. N. Manjunatha Reddy, T. N. Plank and A. Marsh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12596–12599 CrossRef PubMed .
G. M. Peters, L. P. Skala and J. T. Davis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 134–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Plank, L. P. Skala and J. T. Davis, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6235–6238 RSC .
S. Xiao and J. T. Davis, Faraday Discuss., 2018, 209, 97–112 RSC .
N. Sreenivasachary and J.-M. Lehn, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 5938–5943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sreenivasachary and J.-M. Lehn, Chem.–Asian J., 2008, 3, 134–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Gale, E. N. W. Howe and X. Wu, Chem, 2016, 1, 351–422 CAS .
S. Kubik, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3648–3663 RSC .
H. Wang, X. Ji, M. Ahmed, F. Huang and J. L. Sessler, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1394–1403 RSC .
A. Prathap and K. M. Sureshan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2017, 56, 9405–9409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, P. Yang, M. G. Moloney, L. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Wang, L. Liu and Y. Pan, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 3928–3935 CrossRef CAS .
V. T. Tran, X. Xu, M. T. I. Mredha, J. Cui, J. J. Vlassak and I. Jeon, Water Res., 2018, 145, 640–649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cruz, P. Luckman, T. Seviour, W. Verstraete, B. Laycock and I. Pikaar, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 2912 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Ozay, S. Ekici, Y. Baran, N. Aktas and N. Sahiner, Water Res., 2009, 43, 4403–4411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Liu and A. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 171, 1201–1208 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Xie and A. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 179, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yi, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, X. Guo, M. Ou and X. Xu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 6278–6287 RSC .
Q. Meng, B. Peng and C. Shen, Colloids Surf., B, 2018, 167, 176–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Dave, M. Y. Chan, P.-J. J. Huang, B. D. Smith and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12668–12673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Paulino, L. A. Belfiore, L. T. Kubota, E. C. Muniz and E. B. Tambourgi, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 168, 68–76 CrossRef CAS .
D. l. Şolpan and M. Torun, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl.Chem., 2005, 42, 1435–1449 CrossRef .
D. Huang, W. Wang and A. Wang, Adsorpt. Sci. Technol., 2013, 31, 611–623 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. O'Connell, C. Birkinshaw and T. F. O'Dwyer, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 6709–6724 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Isobe, X. Chen, U.-J. Kim, S. Kimura, M. Wada, T. Saito and A. Isogai, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 260, 195–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, L. Zhu, C. Zhao and J. Zheng, J. Environ. Anal. Toxicol., 2012, S2, 001 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tokuyama and T. Iwama, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 13104–13108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Loh, J. Gong, M. Sakuragi, T. Kitajima, M. Liu, J. Li and Y. Ito, Macromol. Biosci., 2009, 9, 1069–1079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-X. Zhang, X. Liu, F. J. Xu, X. J. Loh, E.-T. Kang, K.-G. Neoh and J. Li, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 5967–5970 CrossRef CAS .
G. Barouti, S. S. Liow, Q. Dou, H. Ye, C. Orione, S. M. Guillaume and X. J. Loh, Chemistry, 2016, 22, 10501–10512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Liow, Q. Dou, D. Kai, A. A. Karim, K. Zhang, F. Xu and X. J. Loh, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2, 295–316 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimizu, M. Yamato, A. Kikuchi and T. Okano, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 2309–2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Chen, P.-C. Tsou, J.-M. Lo, H.-C. Tsai, Y.-Z. Wang and G.-H. Hsiue, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 7328–7334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, R.-T. Wu, L. Long, C. Guo, N. M. Khashab, F. Huang and J. L. Sessler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2777–2780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. A. Katayev, P. J. Melfi and J. L. Sessler, Modern Supramolecular Chemistry,  2008 Search PubMed .
E. S. Dragan, D. Humelnicu, M. V. Dinu and R. I. Olariu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 330, 675–691 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, P. Chakraborty, R. Ghosh, S. Paul, S. Mondal, A. Panja and A. K. Nandi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9325–9337 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong and Y. Wang, Water Res., 2016, 88, 852–860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shen, L. Wu, Y. Chen, S. Li, S. Rashid, Y. Gao and J. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 303, 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhou and H. Zheng, Water Res., 2017, 126, 433–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, G. Qian, X. Ruan and R. L. Frost, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 448, 65–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Peralta Ramos, J. A. González, S. G. Albornoz, C. J. Pérez, M. E. Villanueva, S. A. Giorgieri and G. J. Copello, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 285, 581–587 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Giannimaras and P. G. Koutsoukos, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1987, 116, 423–430 CrossRef CAS .
S. Budyanto, Y.-L. Kuo and J. C. Liu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015, 150, 325–331 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jiménez-Reyes and M. Solache-Ríos, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 180, 297–302 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, Q. Li, N. Bai, H. Dong and D. Mao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 5598–5607 CrossRef CAS .
K. Arun Krishna and B. Vishalakshi, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134, 45527 CrossRef .
X.-S. Hu, R. Liang and G. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17612–17624 RSC .
H. Ji, X. Song, C. He, C. Tang, L. Xiong, W. Zhao and C. Zhao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 532, 680–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wei, W. Song, F. Yang, J. Zhou, M. Zhang, X. Zhang, W. Zhao and C. Zhao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 8209–8219 CrossRef CAS .
A. Upadhyay and C. P. Rao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7965–7973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Peters, X. Chi, C. Brockman and J. L. Sessler, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5407–5409 RSC .
G. Chang, Y. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Xu and L. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9785–9788 RSC .
L. Bromberg, W. R. Creasy, D. J. McGarvey, E. Wilusz and T. A. Hatton, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22001–22011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Belger, J. G. Weis, E. Egap and T. M. Swager, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 7990–7994 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ali, T.-H. Tsai and P. V. Braun, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 14665–14670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Z. Li and H. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 603–614 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, Z. Li, J. Yang and H. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 360, 200–211 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Chen and B. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 4817–4825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liao, Y. Li and C. S. Tjong, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2018, 19, 3564 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-H. Liao, Y.-S. Lin, C. W. Macosko and C. L. Haynes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2607–2615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, T. Jiao, Q. Zhang, W. Guo, Q. Peng and X. Yan, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 272 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, P. Zhang, C. F. Liu and C. Z. Huang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9240–9246 RSC .
H. Gao, Y. Sun, J. Zhou, R. Xu and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 425–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, R. Z. Zhang, Y. Q. Ma, W. B. Guan, X. L. Wu, X. Liu, H. Li, Y. L. Du and C. P. Pan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 396–405 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. An, T. Liu, R. Tian, S.-X. Liu, Y.-N. Han, Q.-Q. Wang and W.-J. Sheng, React. Funct. Polym., 2015, 94, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, K. Zhu, T. Jiao, R. Xing, W. Hong, L. Zhang, Q. Zhang and Q. Peng, Colloids Surf., A, 2017, 529, 668–676 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Zhou, L. Zhang, T. You and F. Xu, Materials, 2016, 9, 582 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fan, Z. Shi, M. Lian, H. Li and J. Yin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7433–7443 RSC .
K. Jang, K. Miura, Y. Koyama and T. Takata, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 3088–3091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Soleimani, A. Dadkhah Tehrani and M. Adeli, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 187, 94–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, T. H. Zeng, M. Hofmann, E. Burcombe, J. Wei, R. Jiang, J. Kong and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6971–6980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hu, P. Zhang, X. Liu, B. Yan, L. Xiang, J. Zhang, L. Gong, J. Huang, K. Cui, L. Zhu and H. Zeng, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 353, 708–716 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Yavuz, A. Prakash, J. T. Mayo and V. L. Colvin, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2009, 64, 2510–2521 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Ambashta and M. Sillanpää, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 180, 38–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, G. Huang, X. Zhang, B. Li, Y. Chen, T. Lu, T. J. Lu and F. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 660–672 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. N. Tang, D. Y. S. Yan and I. M. C. Lo, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 15718–15724 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wu, Y. S. Yan Dickson, M. Khan, Z. Zhang and M. C. Lo Irene, J. Hazard., Toxic Radioact. Waste, 2017, 21, 04016008 CrossRef .
L. Jiang and P. Liu, ACS Sustainable
Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 1785–1794 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, X. Zhang and Y. Huang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 11956–11966 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tang, J. Shen, Z. Hu, G. Bai, M. Wang, B. Peng, R. Shen and W. Linghu, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 221, 497–506 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, C. Qiao, Y. Wang and J. Yao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 15576–15581 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, F. Zhou, K. Huang, Y. Wang, S. Mei, Y. Zhou and T. Jing, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. V. Pradeep, S. Anupama, K. Navya, H. N. Shalini, M. Idris and U. S. Hampannavar, Appl. Water Sci., 2015, 5, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
Ş. Şeker, H. Beyenal, B. Salih and A. Tanyolaç, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1997, 47, 610–614 CrossRef .
J. Wang, P. Liu and Y. Qian, Environ. Int., 1997, 23, 775–782 CrossRef .
J. Li, Z. Suo and J. J. Vlassak, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 6708–6713 CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Hui and L. Ye, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 91414–91422 RSC .
Y. Zhang, B. Hui and L. Ye, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 9934–9943 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, Y. Shu and L. Ye, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 336, 306–314 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Soo, C.-A. Chen, O. Bojo and Y.-S. Hii, Int. J. Polym. Sci., 2017, 2017, 7 Search PubMed .
T. E. Dudu, D. Alpaslan, Y. Uzun and N. Aktas, Int. J. Environ. Res., 2017, 11, 557–568 CrossRef .
L. Shen, Z. Jin, D. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Lu, Chemosphere, 2018, 190, 201–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Oakes, New Sci., 2019, 241, 22–23 CrossRef .
R. Hayes, G. G. Warr and R. Atkin, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 6357–6426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Ferreira, J. A. P. Coutinho, A. M. Fernandes and M. G. Freire, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 128, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zambare, X. Song, S. Bhuvana, J. S. Antony Prince and P. Nemade, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 6026–6035 CrossRef CAS .
S. Marullo, C. Rizzo, N. T. Dintcheva, F. Giannici and F. D'Anna, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 517, 182–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Rizzo, S. Marullo, P. R. Campodonico, I. Pibiri, N. T. Dintcheva, R. Noto, D. Millan and F. D'Anna, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 12453–12462 CrossRef CAS .
D. Han, X. Li, Y. Cui, X. Yang, X. Chen, L. Xu, J. Peng, J. Li and M. Zhai, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 9311–9319 RSC .
A. M. Desai and P. K. Singh, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 277, 205–209 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Abd El-Mohdy, E. A. Hegazy, E. M. El-Nesr and M. A. El-Wahab, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl.Chem., 2012, 49, 814–827 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Aouada, Z. Pan, W. J. Orts and L. H. C. Mattoso, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 114, 2139–2148 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhuang, F. Yu, J. Ma and J. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 507, 250–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gong, K.-L. Wong and M. H. W. Lam, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1353–1358 CrossRef CAS .
A. Korytkowska-Wałach, Polym. Bull., 2013, 70, 1647–1657 CrossRef .
J. Y. C. Lim and P. D. Beer, Chem, 2018, 4, 731–783 CAS .
G. Jiang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhu, S. Gao, H. Jin, L. Luo, F. Zhang and J. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2927–2934 RSC .
L. Li, J. M. Scheiger and P. A. Levkin, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807333 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Manouras and M. Vamvakaki, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 74–96 RSC .
M. Cîrcu and C. Filip, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 3379–3387 RSC .

Footnote† The structure of polydopamine is highly complex and has yet to be fully elucidated.233This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Jason Y. C. Lim	Jason Y. C. Lim received his DPhil (2018) from the University of Oxford, where he worked on anion recognition and sensing using halogen- and chalcogen-bonding receptors with Prof. Paul D. Beer. After a postdoctoral stint with Prof. Charlotte Williams in the same institution on stereoselective ring-opening polymerisation of lactide using rotaxane organocatalysts, he returned to Singapore where he is now a research scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), A*STAR. Working on hydrogels and anion sensors at the moment, his main research interests centres around the applications of supramolecular chemistry in materials and sustainable chemistry.
Xian Jun Loh	Dr Xian Jun Loh completed his basic and postgraduate studies at the National University of Singapore. A polymer chemist by training, he is currently the Head of Department of the Soft Materials Department at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), A*STAR. As a pioneer in the area of biodegradable thermogels, he is highly knowledgeable in developing these materials for various applications spanning biomedical, engineering, cosmetics, personal care and food. His scientific contributions have earned him the position of Fellowship in both Fitzwilliam College in the University of Cambridge as well as in the Royal Society of Chemistry. He is also the current Vice President and member of the Executive Committee of the Singapore National Institute of Chemistry. With his extensive experience in authoring >200 journal papers, 38 patents and know-hows, >30 book chapters and 7 books, he currently sits on several editorial boards of international journals as an expert in his area. He has also successfully helped in the commercialization of 8 different products and is always interested in the translation of science to products.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the water treatment process using hydrogel remediators.	 

 	Fig. 1  Gel network formation by (A) structural mismatch during epitaxial nucleation of agarose polymer chains.64 Figure adapted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society; and (B) single crystal network and spherulite domains with weak or strong inter-domain interactions.65 Adapted from ref. 65 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structures of tris-urea gelator 1 and dye molecules rhodamine 6G, acid orange 7 and acid red 12 used in Hasegawa and Yamanaka's study.73	 

 	Fig. 3  Strategies for recovering hydrogel materials for reuse in multiple adsorption–regeneration cycles.	 

 	Fig. 4  Structures of PSOGs 2a and 2b used in Sureshan and co-workers' study.84	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Structures of PSOGs used in Zeng and co-workers' studies.89,91–93 (B) A comparison of hierarchical assemblies of gelators forming hydrogel network vs. control compound Fmoc-Gly-C4 which precipitates in water. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure of PSOG 3 used in Chaudhuri and co-workers' study.96	 



2a
	3	0.7	180	100	
84

Fmoc-Leu-C4	2	3.2	2880c	—	
89

Fmoc-Leu-C4 (wetted)b	2	0.4–1.4	<1	80	
89


3
	3	<2.5	<0.33	4200	
96


 	Fig. 7  Structures of gelators 4a–e used in McNeil and co-workers' studies.49,50	 

 	Fig. 8  Structure of GNF 6 and its use in the removal of NPs from aqueous samples in Barthélémy and co-workers' study. Adapted from ref. 99 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structure of gelator 7 used in De and Mondal's study.103	 
Zn < Fe < Ni < Cu < Ag < Pd < Pt < Au

 	Fig. 10  Structure of gelator 8 used in Smith and co-workers' studies.104	 
I− > ClO4− > NO3− > Br− > Cl− > SO42−

 	Fig. 11  Structure of calix[4]-arene 9 used in Mocerino, Ogden and co-workers' study.112	 

 	Fig. 12  Proposed structure of hydrogel formed from melamine 10 in Zhang and co-workers' study.113	 

 	Fig. 13  Synthesis of (a) hydrogelator 12, (b) organogelator and (c) ionogelator 14 from the same amino acid precursor 11 in Das and co-workers' study. Structure of organogelator 13 is also shown.53,114–116	 

 	Fig. 14  Structures of gelators 15a–i and 16 used in Hayes and co-workers' studies.117,118	 

 	Fig. 15  Structures of lithocholic acid (LCA) 17, dodecyldimethylamine oxide (C12DMAO) 18 and the proposed formation of helical fibres in Song and co-workers' studies. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.121	 

 	Fig. 16  Structures of guanosine analogues and the G4 quartets formed in Davis and co-workers' studies.123–126 Figure adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 



15a


	0.6	Methylene blue (1020)	—	
118

M-17 (M = NH4, Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs)	0.75b	Methylene blue (870–1100)	—	
122

Rhodamine 6G (1120–1420)

8 at pH 11.5	0.8	Methylene blue (770)	—	
52


8 at pH 2.4	0.8	—	Naphthol blue black (668)	
52

Acid blue 25 (876)

 	Fig. 17  Eco-friendly marine oil-spill recovery using Sureshan's cellulose matrix containing PSOG 26. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132, copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Coordination of Hg2+ by thymine nucleobases and the polyacrylamide matrix; (B) mechanism of Hg2+ sensing by the thymine-polyacrylamide hydrogel in the presence of SYBR Green I. The inset photos show the yellow and green fluorescence seen in the presence of 0 and 50 nM Hg2+ respectively. Figures adapted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Structures of common polysaccharides employed for adsorption of dissolved metal cations.	 

 	Fig. 20  Tokuyama and Iwama's TS-SPE technique of Cu2+ extraction using PNIPAM hydrogels. Figure reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Using macrocycles in polymeric hydrogels for anion binding and removal. (A) Chemical structures and cartoon representations of the polymeric network containing the tetracationic macrocycle. (B) List of inorganic ions and organic anionic dyes that could be removed by the hydrogel. (C) Schematic of anion removal from water. (D) Schematic for regeneration process. Reproduced from ref. 155. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.	 

PVA hydrogel crosslinked with tetracationic macrocycle	NO3−, SO42−, F−	—	3	
155

Chitosan/poly(vinylamine) with base anion exchange microspheres	Cr2O72−	317	5 (65.7%)	
157

Polyaniline (PANI) hydrogel with folic acid as crosslinker	Cr2O72−	171.2	5 (73%)	
158

Cationic acrylamide hydrogels with iron oxide and lanthanum	F−	136.8	5 (70%)	
159

Chitosan hydrogel beads with monetite bundles	F−	50.01	—	
160

Cationic acrylamide hydrogels with iron oxide and lanthanum cations/oxide	PO43−	90.2	5 (72%)	
161


 	Fig. 22  Well-crosslinked hydrogels for high Methylene Blue (MB) adsorption capacity. (A) Ca2+ crystallized to form calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2) nano-spherulites (CNSs) with diameter around 5 nm. These were then mixed together with acrylic acid, sodium acrylate to start free radical polymerization. Hydrogels were formed with CNS as crosslinkers, with hydrogen bonds between residual –COOH groups of the polymer chains and oxygen-containing functional group of the CNSs responsible for the well-crosslinked network structure. (B) The effect of initial concentration of MB on the adsorption capacity of the hydrogel adsorbent at different temperatures: pH = 7, t = 7 days, 1 g of adsorbent. The maximum adsorption capacity is seen at 298 K and at 2100 mg g−1. Adapted from ref. 169 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic illustration of polymer hydrogels capable of pH-switchable cation and anion adsorption.	 

 	Fig. 24  Design of Yang's poly(indole) 27 hydrogel for synergistic uptake of Na+ and OH−.174	 

 	Fig. 25  Swager's triarylmethanol hydrogel polymers capable of colorimetric detection of nerve agent simulant diethyl DCP.176	 

 	Fig. 26  P(HEA/NMMA)–CuS hydrogel for copper sulfide catalyzed degradation of antibiotic sulfamethoxazole (SMX). (a) Black line – adsorption process without visible light. Equilibrium was reached at 17.5% adsorption. Red line – photocatalytic degradation kinetics of SMX under 500 W visible light. 90.9% was degraded within 12 hours. (b) Photodegradation of SMX could occur over several cycles. Conditions: 0.1 g hydrogel, 0.2 mM SMX. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 27  Structures of (A) GO which is able to interact non-covalently with (B) polyethyleneimine and (C) agarose to form stable gels.	 

 	Fig. 28  Covalently-attached GO–hydrogel composites: (A) thiol–ene Click reaction by Zhang;188 (B) epichlorohydrin cross-linkage of OH groups on GO and cellulose;189 (C) Tehrani's GO slide-ring gel.193	 

 	Fig. 29  Methods of synthesising ferrogels using (A) pre-synthesising FeONPs, as exemplified by Lo's poly(APTMCl) ferrogel76 and (B) forming FeONPs in situ within a hydrogel matrix, which can be further functionalised and cross-linked if necessary.	 
Fe2+ + 2Fe3+ + 8OH− → Fe3O4↓ + 4H2O

 	Fig. 30  Images of microorganism-immobilised PVA hydrogel composites containing 1.5 wt% of ACM (A) before aeration and (B) after aeration for 11 months. Image reprinted with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  LMW ionogelators comprising of (A) fumarate/maleate salts of diimidazolium cations220 and (B) didodecylimidazolium-carboxylate salts;221 as well as (C) cross-linked polymeric ionogels containing short-chain C2-hydrophilic and long-chain C12-hydrophobic monomers.222	 
Footnote
† The structure of polydopamine is highly complex and has yet to be fully elucidated.233

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
