The unique role of nanoparticles in nanomedicine: imaging, drug delivery and therapy   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS15260F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS15260F
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2885-2911Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsThe unique role of nanoparticles in nanomedicine: imaging, drug delivery and therapy†

        
          
            Tennyson L. 
            Doane
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Clemens 
            Burda
          
          
        
      *
      Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH, USA. E-mail: clemens.burda@case.edu;  Fax: +1 216-368-3006;   Tel: +1 216-368-5918
Received 
      21st September 2011
    First published on 27th January 2012AbstractThis critical review will present the role of nanoparticles (NPs) in the directions that are vital to the new field of nanomedicine, including imaging and drug delivery. We reflect on the physical properties that make NPs advantageous for in vivo efficacy, and review recent advances in major NP based biomedical applications. Critical questions of transport, uptake, and clearance will be discussed and illustrated through the success and opportunities of NP imaging and therapy on a photodynamic therapy (PDT) based NP system that has been developed in our lab over the past decade (540 references).
Tennyson L. Doane
Tennyson Doane obtained his BS from Eastern Nazarene College under the guidance of Dr Lowell Hall and Dr Timothy Wooster. Currently, Tennyson is pursuing his doctorate under the direction of Dr Clemens Burda at Case Western Reserve University. His interests include bionanomaterials, ultrafast spectroscopy, transport, and surface properties of nanomaterials. He resides in Cleveland, OH with his wife Jennie who is an oncology nurse.
Clemens Burda
Prof. Burda obtained his PhD from the University of Basel, Switzerland. He was a postdoctoral fellow at the Georgia Institute of Technology with Prof. El-Sayed. Currently he holds faculty positions in Chemistry and Materials Science and Engineering at Case Western Reserve University, in Cleveland, Ohio. His research focus is on nanomaterials chemistry and laser spectroscopy. Prof. Burda is an author of several book chapters, and lead investigator of over a hundred publications in the field of nanoscience. He is a founder and co-director of the Center for Chemical Dynamics at Case Western Reserve University.
1 Introduction: why nanomedicine?
The use of nanoparticles (NPs) for biomedical applications is prevalent in the literature and continues to be a rapidly growing research field, with heavy emphasis on imaging and drug delivery.1,2 The unique properties of NP based systems lend strategic advantages over pure molecular therapeutics,3 but new complexities must be explored to make NP based applications a viable option in the clinic. In this review, we aim to lay out how specific NP properties aid in imaging, photodynamic therapy, and drug delivery in vivo. We begin by highlighting how the NP modifiable platform character, surface to volume ratio, shape and size, and optical properties readily contribute to their use for biomedicine.
After covering the physical properties of NPs, we review recent advances in NP based (i) imaging and therapies, and (ii) drug delivery. As we are the most proficient with light based applications involving inorganic NPs, we will leave the discussion of magnetic NPs and polymeric NPs to others, although our examination of the physical properties of NPs will broadly apply to these nanomedical applications as well.
Due to the wealth of work utilizing inorganic NPs in nanomedicine, this review aims to highlight the role of NPs for a given application rather than providing an exhaustive compilation of work from the past decade. In addition to “single” function NP systems, a discussion of multimodal NP systems will be presented. Moreover, we discuss the practical challenges facing nanomedicine from a physical standpoint. We conclude by reviewing the development of a PDT system utilizing an organic photosensitizer loaded onto PEGylated Au NPs as a case study, providing the reader with a perspective of how biomedical research can evolve, and where we see the field is heading in the near future.
2 Some unique properties of nanoparticles
The field of inorganic particle based nanotechnology has exploded within the last two decades. Following pioneering work by Brus,4 NPs of all materials and sizes have been investigated for diverse applications in biology and medicine ranging from NP based therapies5 to biosensors.6 Applications utilizing NPs can be described by four paradigm shifting properties: “scaffolds” to build upon, high surface to volume ratio, shape, and unique optical properties. While some of these properties can be associated with other materials (including dendrimers, proteins, etc.), NPs often encompass all of these properties simultaneously. As an example, Fig. 1 illustrates a 5 nm inorganic NP with high surface to volume ratio, modifiable ligands (green spheres), and defined shape (golden). Here, we will review each property while retaining the larger perspective on how these properties enhance biomedical applications.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of a nanoparticle typically used in many nanomedicine applications with a solid core (gold), large surface area (blue), modifiable chemical interface packed into an organic layer (green spheres), and here with overall spherical shape. 
2.1 Nanoparticle platforms
One of the strategic advantages of NPs for biomedical applications is their versatile modification possibilities, acting as platforms for the assembly of well defined multifunctional structures. Once prepared, these structures still retain efficient solubility and colloidal properties for use in complex environments (e.g. blood, tissues, etc.). Slight variations in composition, surface coating, and ligand choice can lead to a wealth of possibilities for sensing, imaging, and targeting of NPs in biological systems.7–9 Rotello et al. have often pointed to this concept when successfully assembling biomedically relevant NP systems.10,11 After ensuring particle stability, the NPs can be functionalized with different moieties (fluorescent dyes, drugs, targeting ligands, etc.) to provide multi-modal treatments.
2.2 Surface to volume ratio
The stability of NP based platforms and their versatile modification is complimented by a large surface to volume ratio. In contrast to the extremely small surface to volume ratio of bulk materials and a maximum for molecules, NPs provide intermediate values which can be effectively controlled through the size of the material. Such a property is vitally important for optimizing drug payloads and other NP based interactions. Fig. 1 illustrates the high surface to volume ratio at the base of the protective polymer coating (blue). In addition, the solid surface of NPs eliminates some of the complexities due to unfolding and molecular rearrangement which can take place in biological or even molecular systems, providing a higher degree of control when attempting to design the physical chemistry taking place.
2.3 Controlled shape and size
The shape of nanomaterials also plays a direct role in their function in biological systems. Using the previously introduced concept of molecular platforms, NPs can be synthesized into structures with a myriad of shapes and sizes based on a variety of syntheses.3 An excellent overview of state of the art synthesis has recently been provided by Mirkin and coworkers.12 Utilizing selective growth upon different crystallographic facets and sacrificial templates, a myriad of shapes can be generated which include nanorods,13–17 nanoshells,18–21 nanoplates,22,23 nanoprisms,12 nanocubes,24–30 nanocages,24,31–34 and even nanostars.35,36Fig. 2 shows a few of the more commonly used structures used in nanomedicine.
 Fig. 2  Different shapes available for NPs: triangle prisms, cubes, truncated cages, plates, spheres, shells (using a SiO2 core), and nanorods. 
The shape of nanomaterials has a direct effect on how NPs function in vivo. Many groups have explored how cellular uptake is affected by shape, especially the relative accumulation of NRs to NPs.37–39 In addition, the size of these structures impacts where NPs accumulate in the body. The well known phenomenon of the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect shows that larger nanomaterials accumulate in areas of leaky vasculature (as in solid tumors) to higher degree than smaller NPs (Fig. 3).40–42 However, seminal work by Bawendi, Jain, and Fukamura has shown that NPs with a hydrodynamic diameter smaller than 5.5 nm effectively clear the renal system, providing a unique opportunity for balancing efficacy with minimal toxicity.43 In addition, work by Chan and coworkers has recently commented on how NP shape affects cellular responses in vivo.44 Such investigations provide a unique opportunity to explore biological system function at the nanoscale using the same material, and thus providing a vital control for optimizing nanomedical platforms.
 Fig. 3  Illustration of the differences in vasculature architecture for cancerous (dark blue) and healthy (blue) cells, which allows NPs (gold) to diffuse into solid tumors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
2.4 Optical properties
The optical properties of nanoparticles have always been critically important to optimizing NP based technologies such as solar cells,45–48 sensors,49–54 catalysts,55–61 and imaging agents.62–66 For in vivo applications, the window in which light is able to penetrate tissue is relatively narrow. Fig. 4 shows the absorption profile of different biologically relevant components, effectively limiting the excitation/fluorescence window to 650–900 nm.67,68 Although this window often poses a problem for effective excitation of organic fluorophores,69 the use of NPs presents a versatile opportunity for exploiting this spectral regime.
 Fig. 4  The spectral response of oxygenated hemoglobin, deoxygenated hemoglobin, and water as a function of wavelength. The red highlighted area indicates the biological optical window where adsorption due to the body is at a minimum. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2001, Nature Publishing Group. 
In general, inorganic nanoparticles with optical properties can be divided into two classes: semiconductor and metallic nanostructures. In both cases, the physical confinement of the material on the order of nanometres induces specific optical properties. For semiconductor materials, this “quantum effect” can be described by treating electronic excitation as a particle in a three dimensional box.70 Thus a physical change in NP characteristics directly changes its electronic structure, enabling highly selective rational designs. The resulting change in absorption also corresponds to a shift in its photoluminescence (PL), allowing for effective “tuning” for a desired application. Fig. 5 shows a series of CdSe quantum dots with different emission wavelengths due only to changes in size. Note that confinement is material specific, increasing the number of possibilities for designing biomedical QDs.71 Moreover, exploiting the charge transfer properties of core–shell quantum dots allows for further tunable emission while maintaining small sizes.72,73
 Fig. 5  CdTe/CdSe quantum dot photoluminescence under UV excitation. The size of the QDs increases from left to right, modulating the emission from 520 nm to the NIR. 
For metallic nanostructures, the strong absorption of light is due to a quite different phenomenon known as the surface plasmon resonance (SPR).74,75 In metals, the conduction electrons at the surface of the NP collectively oscillate with a corresponding excitation of a resonant wavelength of light. This collective oscillation results in a strong absorption of typically 109 M−1 cm−1 OD for a 40 nm gold NP and ultrafast electronic relaxation.76 As the shape of the metal is extended, the radiation needed to excite the SPR gradually shifts towards longer wavelengths. Also, with an increase in NP size, the amount of light scattering due to the NP increases according to Mie theory, and variations in shape (nanorods, nanocubes, nanocages, nanoplates, etc.) lead to unique scattering properties. Fig. 6 shows the scattered light of nanocubes (left) compared to that of nanohexagons (right), which are clearly distinguishable based on scattered color.77 The scattering is coupled to the unique SPR phenomenon of metallic nano-structures, resulting in a dramatic enhancement which can be used for biomedical imaging applications.
 Fig. 6  Optical microscopy image of scattered light from nanocubes (left) and nanohexagons (right). Insets show the high monodispersity and well controlled shape of the cubes and hexagons (left and right, respectively). Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. 
3 Nanoparticles and light: a vibrant interaction
The use of light to activate nanoparticles and the drugs that they carry presents a new opportunity for noninvasive therapy for a variety of diseases. Using the unique optical properties, one can image and treat select areas without exposing the rest of the body. Here, we discuss the relationship between light and NPs in more detail, and examine several imaging applications including semiconductor photoluminescence, optical microscopy, photoacoustic imaging (PAI), surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) techniques, and metallic surface enhanced fluorescence (MSEF). Furthermore, we discuss how NPs can be both active participants and carefully designed transport vectors for a variety of light induced therapies, including photodynamic therapy (PDT), photothermal therapy (PTT), and light induced drug activation (LIDA).
3.1 Quantum dot based photoluminescence
The spectacular photoluminescence (PL) properties of QDs easily lend themselves to biomedical applications. Tuning the particle size just a few nanometres as in the case of II–VI semiconductor QDs can shift the absorption and emission properties into the 650–900 nm window, allowing for real time imaging of NPs. Due to the abundance of excellent QD PL imaging reviews,71,78–80 this review will highlight experiments conducted over the past decade in both in vitro and in vivo, and evaluate future directions for in vivo QD based PL imaging.
The work conducted by Chan and Nie81 and that of Bruchez, Weiss, and Alivisatos' group82in vitro has been recognized as the start of biomedical QD imaging.78 Since then, numerous imaging experiments using QDs have been undertaken in vitro,83–96 and this continues to be a very active field today.97–106 These studies can be generally separated into targeted64,84,86,89–94,97–102,104 and non-targeted studies.83,87,88,93,95,103,105,106 The study of both is critical for understanding QD interactions with cells specifically and to obtain a general understanding of how nanometre sized materials are dealt with in vivo. Jaiswal et al. have reported a comparison between targeted and untargeted uptake mechanisms, providing insights into how NP uptake is controlled at the cellular level.85 Several studies have targeted the cell membrane specifically,64,90,104 while many other studies have looked at the internal compartmentalization of the QDs after uptake.86,95,105,106 These experiments have brought about several innovative imaging techniques as well, including 3-dimensional spatial imaging97 and five color imaging using different sized QDs combined with different biological targeting ligands and fluorescence resonant energy transfer (FRET).102 The promise of QDs as disease diagnostics has also been shown by Liu et al. who demonstrated the detection of the rare Hodgkin's and Reed–Sternberg (HRS) cells within a tissue biopsy from Hodgkin's lymphoma patients.100
The use of QDs for in vivo imaging has also steadily increased in the last decade.107–112 Work by Akerman et al. demonstrated that QDs could be selectively targeted to different areas of the body using different uptake-specific peptides.107 Demonstration of the EPR effect using QDs was achieved by Gao et al. in addition to biomolecule targeting.108 Kim et al. demonstrated the effective study of sentinel lymph nodes using NIR emitting QDs.109 Later, the same group was able to distinguish tumor cells from the surrounding matrix in mice, and observed the relationship of particle size on uptake.110Fig. 7 shows how 470 nm and 660 nm emitting quantum dots can be used to image the vasculature near tumors (b, c, and d), which is not as easily done using conventional approaches (a). Perrault and Chan have recently demonstrated that the assembly of NP building blocks with a fluorescent contrast agent within a tumor greatly enhances imaging.111 He et al. have reported a new series of ultra small NIR-emitting CdTe QDs with which they have conducted both in vitro and in vivo experiments, demonstrating both stability and significant PL signal when compared to the mouse autofluorescence.112Fig. 8 shows the PL of uptaken NIR emitting QDs located in a tumor both with and without autofluorescence from the mouse, demonstrating excellent contrast. However, several groups have also demonstrated that the use of QDs consisting of heavy metals (such as Cd) can have detrimental effects on the animals being studied. An excellent review on this subject is provided by Bottrill and Green.113 Fitzpatrick et al. reported that the PL of Cd based QDs blue shifted over time in mice, indicating that despite the protective ZnS shell, the particles slowly decomposed over time.114 For shorter time periods, however, the ZnS coating seems to greatly decrease toxicity. Qu et al. found that the ZnS shell does help reduce QD toxicity in Caenorhabditis elegans in comparison to uncapped CdTe nanoparticles within a month period.115 Furthermore, Yong et al. found that mice injected with CdSe0.25Te0.75CdS QDs coated with lysine cross linked mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA) showed no signs of toxicity over a 3 month period.116 This seems to indicate that if efficient clearance of QDs can be achieved, toxicity may be avoidable. Such rapid clearance has recently been demonstrated for PbSe QDs coated with a fatty acid layer as a “stealth” ligand.117
 Fig. 7  Vascular imaging with quantum dots using (a) cascade blue conjugated dextran and (b) 470 nm emitting QDs. In the case of the flexible dextran, significant leakage of the dye into the tumor interstitium is observed while the QD retained sharp contrast of the vasculature. (c) Concurrent imaging of both QD470 and GFP (indicated in green) provides clear separation of the vessel from GFP-expressing perivascular cells. (d) Vessels highlighted with a deep red (QD660) micelle preparation were imaged simultaneously with the second harmonic generation signal of tumor collagen (indicated in blue). Scale bar, 50 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2005, Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 8  NIR fluorescence image of a mouse with a QD loaded tumor (red) both with (a) and without (b) autofluorescence. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2011, Wiley Publications. 
The current research objective for QD based PL imaging is to decrease cytotoxicity while maintaining or improving photophysical properties. Despite favorable renal clearance of small QDs,43 the toxicity of QDs continues to be troubling for biomedical applications,80,113,118,119 requiring creative ways to retain the desirable optical properties but eliminate unwanted side effects. Many groups have begun to investigate other materials that either reduce or eliminate altogether heavy metals, including InAs(ZnS),120,121 ZnO,122 Si QDs,123,124 InP,96 InAs(ZnCdS),66 AgInS,125 and nanodiamond126 based photoluminescent NPs. Alternatively, Deka et al. reported the use of “double thick” CdSe/CdS/ZnS coated nanorods (NRs), which the authors describe as being less toxic than CdSe/CdS NRs and CdSe/ZnS NPs when normalized against total surface area.127 Although this system still contains toxic Cd, the use of thicker shells should in principle also protect the highly luminescent core until imaging is complete and the QD is cleared. It seems that the field will continue to move in the direction of “bio-friendly” QDs through novel materials, size control, and protective surface coatings. The use of shells will also be highly relevant due to how QD surface properties dictate their photophysical and biological activity. Indeed, the methodology of alloying shells to quantum dots has been proposed as the future of QD bioapplications due to the elimination of the blinking phenomenon.128 Future research will continue to explore the balance of improved NP photoluminescence imaging techniques using NIR light66,129–131 with improved compatibility with living systems.
3.2 Optical microscopy
The enhanced scattering of light due to coupling with the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) in metallic nanostructures provides a powerful method for imaging the location of NPs in complex environments.132 The use of optical microscopy for imaging NPs within cells has been reviewed by several authors.51,63,132–135 In the technique of optical microscopy, a light source (usually white light) is shown on the sample containing a strongly scattering NP, and the light frequencies corresponding to the SPR are reflected.51 The light is collected and imaged through a confocal microscope, presenting a colored image of the sample on a black background.51,132 The wavelength of light scattered can be effectively “tuned” by changing the nanostructure shape and dimensions.76,136 Although many initial studies focused on Ag NPs for SPR based optical microscopy,137–139 much of the work within the last decade has shifted to Au nanostructures.140–153
The main use of NPs in optical microscopy has been for in vitro applications. Sokolov et al. found that cancer cells in tissue could be imaged using anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) antibodies conjugated to Au NPs.140 Soon after, Xu et al. demonstrated the efficient uptake of Ag NPs with diameters up to 80 nm in cells using optical microscopy.138 El-Sayed et al. compared the binding of anti-EGFR labeled Au nanorods (NRs) to both malignant and nonmalignant cell lines, and found a nearly 600-fold enhancement of specific uptake by cancerous cells.142Fig. 9 shows the dramatic difference between (a) normal and (c) cancerous cells in the presence of EGFR targeted Au NRs. The same authors found that tuning Au NRs to absorb NIR light allowed for both imaging and therapeutic treatment.143 Since the work of Sokolov and El-Sayed, many other groups have reported using Au NPs,144,150–153 NRs,144–149,152,153 and so called nanourchins.153 Notably, Murphy and coworkers have used this technique to explore how the extracellular environment in groups of cells interacts with Au NRs.145,146 In addition to pure Au nano-structures, the use of both Au–iron oxide hybrids154 and Au–SiO2155 nanoshells for optical microscopy has also been reported.
 Fig. 9  Light scattering from EGF targeted Au NRs in (a) noncancerous and (b) cancerous cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. 
Although optical microscopy is a powerful technique for in vitro analysis, the use of optical microscopy for in vivo applications is severely limited by the use of visible light. For this reason, optical microscopy is highly advantageous for working with thin samples such as biofilms and cell cultures. Several authors have reported the luminescence of Au nanostructures upon two photon excitation,153,156–165 which has been proposed as a useful biomedical imaging technique.17,74,166 The proposed mechanism for two photon luminescence (TPL) is the coupling of weak interband electronic transitions to the SPR band upon excitation, leading to increased photoluminescence ranging from 400 nm to 700 nm.132,156,167,168 Recently, Tcherniak et al. have investigated Au NR PL with single photon excitation, and have proposed a similar coupling mechanism.169 Experiments utilizing TPL have been demonstrated both in vitro153,156–164 and in vivo,156,165 with Wang successfully illuminating blood vessels in a mouse ear.156 Recently, however, Zhou et al. have compared cellular imaging using both optical microscopy and two photon luminescence, and found that the necessary high laser fluence needed for TPL caused photothermal damage.170 The problem of photothermal heating has been recently addressed by Tong et al. who demonstrated a three photon photoluminescence of Au/Ag cages.171 In this work, the authors noted that photothermal damage to cells was greatly decreased, but that the efficiency of using 1290 nm light was poor in comparison to the TPL mechanism. Future research with TPL must continue to explore the dynamic processes of electronic-SPR coupling, and discern how NP PL can be shifted into the biological optical window.
3.3 Photoacoustic imaging
In addition to imaging techniques that rely solely on light, the combination of sound and light can be a powerful combination. The general term photoacoustic imaging (PAI) encompasses a range of techniques which rely on the combination of ultrasound with NIR light, each with its own specific advantages depending on where in the body imaging is taking place.172 The mechanism of PAI, described in depth in several reviews,173–178 is attributed to the non-radiative relaxation of a probe after excitation with light. Upon excitation, materials can dissipate the energy via radiative pathways (such as QD PL and molecular fluorescence) or non-radiative pathways such as vibrational relaxation, resulting in the generation of heat. In PAI, the local heating of the environment causes a pressure buildup, releasing ultrasound waves.178 These sound waves are then collected using transducers and converted to electrical signals, providing information that can be either reconstructed (photoacoustic computed tomography (PACT)) or directly correlated to an image (photoacoustic microscopy (PAM)).178 The major advantage of this technique is that it has a deeper depth profile than light based techniques and greater spatial resolution than ultrasound imaging.179,180
The role of NPs in PAI has been well documented in the literature.181–183 Keeping in mind the absorption of light by the human body (Fig. 4), the NP must have (A) absorption in the NIR and (B) efficient conversion to thermal energy. For this reason, NP based PAI applications have relied heavily on Au structures, including nanocages,33,184,185 nanoshells,186, hollow nanospheres,187 nanobeacons,188,189 nanostars,190 nanoparticles,191–193 and nanorods.194–202 In addition, carbon nanotubes,203–207 perfluorocarbon NPs,208 gold flecked silica NPs,209 and gold coated Co NPs have been used in PAI studies.210 In addition, molecular dyes such as indocyanine green have been used for PAI,178 but the optical, surface to volume, and modular properties make NPs attractive for imaging specific target areas.
Within the past decade, PAI has been used extensively for in vivo applications. Imaging the vasculature system using PAI, in particular, has been extensively explored.172,211 Wang et al. described the imaging of a rat brain in vivo using nanoshells.186 The same group went on to identify tumors surrounding the vasculature system in vivo.212Fig. 10 shows the photoacoustic projection of a flank tumor on a mouse with a penetration of 3 mm. In addition to mapping the vasculature in vivo, PAI also can be used for the diagnosis of cancerous tissue.213 Agarwal et al. have reported the imaging of prostate cancer using targeted Au nanorods.196 Targeting moieties have also been used to image potential thrombus formation with fibrin targeting moieties located on “nanobeacons”.188 In keeping with the trend of all NPs developed for biomedical applications, the use of targeting ligands and multimodal PAI NP agents continues to be a growing field. Moon et al. have recently reported the development of Au nanocages which can be used for PAI and controlled release of a drug payload upon ultrasonication or heating.185 In summary, multimodal NPs will continue to be an important research area to provide photoacoustic imaging and therapeutic capabilities.
 Fig. 10  
In vivo imaging of a subcutaneously inoculated B16-melanoma in an immunocompromised nude mouse using fPAM at 584 nm and 764 nm. A (a) photograph and (b) composite photoacoustic projection of the melanoma (labeled M), with blood vessels pseudocolored red in the 584 nm image and the melanoma is pseudo-colored brown in the 764 nm image. (c) Three dimensional rendering of the melanoma from the data acquired at 764 nm. Two MAP images at this wavelength projected along the x and y axes are shown on the two side walls, respectively. The composite image shown in (a) is projected at the bottom. The top surface of the tumor is 0.32 mm below the skin surface, and the thickness of the melanoma is 0.3 mm. (d) An enlarged cross-sectional (B-scan) image of the melanoma parallel with the z–x plane at the location marked with a dashed line in (a). (e) Hematoxylin-and-eosin (HE) stained section at the same marked location. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group. 
3.4 Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) based imaging
The use of surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) based imaging is becoming increasingly popular for in vivo imaging applications. Raman scattering is observed due to the relaxation of vibrational modes upon excitation with visible-NIR light,214 with scattering probability nearly 14 orders of magnitude smaller than that of fluorescence.215 However, when the molecule is located near a spatially confined metal surface, such as a NP, the electromagnetic fields generated from the SPR greatly enhance Raman scattering, leading to a boost in signal.216 A deeper account for theoretical contributions of the surface plasmon to SERS has been provided by several authors,216–219 and for brevity we refer readers to these excellent reviews. This powerful technique employing nano-supported surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) has already been used for single molecule analysis,220–222 and biomedical applications,223–226 including the development of novel nano-substrates for lab diagnostics.227,228
The use of nanoparticle based Raman scattering for imaging has developed extensively during the last decade.229 Using plasmonic NPs as probes, the structure of biomarkers, cells, and even tissue in vivo can be obtained noninvasively.230–233 According to Xie et al.,229 the first in vitro recording was reported by Kneipp et al. in 2002 using 60 nm Au NPs.234 Since their landmark paper, Kneipp and co-workers have further developed their technique with great success.235–237 In addition, several other groups have demonstrated the use of Surface Enhanced Raman for imaging in vivo.238–241 Qian et al. have demonstrated the selective uptake of tagged Au NRs in tumors.240Fig. 11 shows the dramatic difference in specific uptake between non-targeted (a and c) and targeted (b and d) Au NRs by monitoring the malachite green surface enhanced Raman signals in both the tumor and liver. Not only has imaging based on surface enhanced Raman been demonstrated as an efficient imaging method in deep tissue239 and solid cancerous tumors,240 but also for the detection of cancerous cells in the blood can be achieved using targeted NP based SERS.242
 Fig. 11  SERS spectra of (a) targeted and (b) non-targeted malchalite green tagged Au NRs accumulated in the tumor and liver. Selective excitation of the tumor (c) and the liver (d) was undertaken with a 785 nm laser. Reprinted with permission from ref. 240. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group. 
As with all NP based therapies covered in this review, the current initiatives in surface enhanced Raman based imaging focus on targeting and dual-function NP probes. Recently, Qian et al. have reported using functionalized gold nanorods for simultaneous deep NIR fluorescence imaging and Raman based imaging.243 Similarly, Wang et al. have reported using Au NP/QD hybrid structures to employ NIR fluorescence imaging with surface enhanced Raman.244 This trend will continue for some time, and multimodal imaging applications will be a key focus in the near future.
3.5 Metallic surface enhanced fluorescence
The electromagnetic field generated by a confined metallic surface also has been reported to induce dramatic effects on local fluorophores, leading to increased fluorescence yields. This phenomenon is referred to in the literature as both metal enhanced fluorescence (MEF) and surface enhanced fluorescence (SEF), but to avoid confusion we will adopt the term metallic surface enhanced fluorescence (MSEF). As with SERS, the process of MSEF reportedly involves the electromagnetic field generated by the NP which couples with the fluorophore.245 This coupling alters the way in which the fluorophore relaxes from the excited state, and how the molecule couples with the local environment. The end result is generally a decreased fluorescence lifetime with an increased fluorescence yield, or in other words, higher radiative rates when compared to non-radiative pathways.245 Several authors have reviewed the mechanism of MSEF in detail.246–249 Reportedly, the size of the nanoparticle dictates whether fluorescent enhancement occurs, with smaller particles effectively absorbing fluorophore emission and larger particles scattering it.247 In addition, the location of the fluorophore relative to the surface plasmon,250 NP surface characteristics,251 and solvent252 have all been cited as important considerations for optimizing MSEF in practical applications.
The first mention of metal surface enhanced fluorescence appears to be by Weitz et al. in 1983, where the authors compared the scattering due to SERS with the enhancement of fluorescence of molecules located close to Ag islands.253 Within the last decade, extensive work by Lakowicz and Geddes et al. has greatly expanded the utilization of MSEF, especially in conjunction with metallic NPs.246,254–259 During this period of time, MSEF has been demonstrated for NP materials including Ag,260,261 Au,262 Al,263 In,264 Au/Ag hybrids,265 Ag@SiO2,266 Au@SiO2,267 and mesoporous Au.268 In addition, a range of different fluorophore based experiments have been conducted including carbon nanotubes,269 hypericin,260,261 chlorophyll,270 phycobiliproteins,258 RNA,257 fluorescein-labeled oligonucliotides,255,256 and recently, a dynamic observation of protein translation has been reported.271 Interestingly, it has also been reported that PL of QDs at the surface of metallic NPs can also be enhanced,272–275 opening up the possibilities for rationally designed plasmonic/QD PL probes with enhanced emission.
The potential of MSEF for biomedical applications has already been recognized.276–278 Geddes et al. noted that MSEF would be especially useful for in vivo imaging using indocyanine green, a NIR emitting dye.276 To date however, most applications of MSEF have been to develop biomedical lab-on-chip diagnostics.279 Biomedical assays include DNA biochips,280 and hybridization,255 protein chips,281 and recently for Ca2+ ion detection.259 To the best of our knowledge, the only mention of using MSEF for in vitro analysis was recently published using polymer conjugated Ag@SiO2 NPs.282 Even though the dye in this work emits in the blue spectral region, the use of NIR absorbing and emitting dyes could help to move this research direction toward in vivo applications.
Although the use of MSEF for biomedical imaging is still in its early stages, future work may be greatly accelerated by examining current QD PL imaging. Taking into account how NPs interact with cells, the optimal wavelengths needed for tissue penetration, and determination of how the effects of biomolecule based “quenchers” can be diminished will be key components for translating NP based MSEF to living systems. As more groups begin to explore MSEF for biomedical imaging, the practical considerations learned from other areas of nanomedicine will expedite enhanced PL imaging probe development.
3.6 The role of NPs in photodynamic therapy (PDT)
One promising application of nanoparticle based therapy is photodynamic therapy (PDT). PDT can be broadly defined as a biochemical modification of cell function induced by light induced generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Although the use of light for therapy has been effectively applied by various cultures for thousands of years,283 the interest in using PDT to treat tumors has steadily increased, particularly in recent years.284 The action of PDT can be readily explained as the induction of cell death through the destruction of key components (DNA, proteins, compartmental membranes, etc.).285 PDT has many advantages when the following premises are fulfilled: no dark toxicity, highly spatially selective treatment, and coupled treatment and imaging regimes.285
Agents which can generate ROS and specifically singlet oxygen (1O2) upon irradiation are common in PDT research due to their effectiveness in destroying cellular components and chemical availability in vivo, even under hypotoxic conditions. Ogilby has presented a seminal review of the ROS species 1O2 photophysics and behavior in vivo.286 We will focus on the roles of NPs in drug solubility, transport, and 1O2 release. ROS result from the excitation of a sensitizer chromophore and subsequent energy conversion of the light to reactive chemical species (such as the excitation of 3O2 to 1O2). This is accomplished by exciting a chromophore which has (a) sufficient intersystem crossing yield to populate a triplet state and (b) a long triplet lifetime. Schweitzer and Schmidt provide a comprehensive review of this mechanism for the singlet oxygen species, detailing how both excitation and quenching occur in a variety of systems.287 The ROS then interact with nearby cellular components to induce cell death, namely through apoptosis or necrosis.288–292
The generation of ROS is highly dependent on the agent as well as the local environment in which the agent is placed.286 At the same time, careful design must ensure that the ROS are close enough to a target to be effective. The lifetime of singlet oxygen is on the order of microseconds and is limited to approximately 220 nm in diffusional range.293 Further optimization information has been provided by detailed investigations into the role of cell viscosity,294 PDT agent behavior,295 protein interactions,296 and distance dependent action297 of 1O2. In general, however, it is understood that the photophysical triplet yield and chemical targeting must be optimized in order to achieve effective PDT.
The necessity for NIR light (due to the limited spectral transparency of tissue) limits the choices of molecular chromophores available for PDT. Although many molecules can generate singlet oxygen, most molecular PDT agents consist of highly conjugated structures, systematically shifting the absorption to the red but also increasing the relative size of the molecule. A comprehensive list of different types of photosensitizers and their singlet oxygen yields has been compiled by Redmond and Gamlin.298 Porphyrins such as the commercially available Photofrin® and phthalocyanines have been heavily researched for this application due to tunable absorption characteristics and their non-toxic properties in the dark.299–302 These molecules, while desirable photophyscially, are often too hydrophobic to be used without chemical modification, and face significant challenges for localization in tumor cells.303
The role of NPs in PDT, then, can be broadly categorized into (A) transport or (B) sensitizer applications. The use of nanoparticles for molecular transport is advantageous for providing an inert environment which protects the drug from recognition and clearance before reaching the target. The same argument has been used for the development of other transport vectors (including micelles, liposomes, dendrimers, and polymer based NPs)285 for drug stabilization until reaching the tumor target. The nanoparticle surface allows for efficient ligand exchange and chemical modification which limits or removes the need for chemical modification of the drug itself, which leaves the efficacy of the PDT agent in tact.304,305 The coating of NPs with so called “stealth” ligands helps to prevent immuno-recognition and increases drug circulation time, increasing the efficiency of PDT (a fascinating subject in and of itself).306–312 A further discussion of how NPs can be used to transport drugs (via either covalent or non-covalent mechanisms) will be provided further below in this review (Section 4).
In addition to molecular PDT agents, NP based sensitizers have also been reported.313–316 NPs are extremely photostable and can readily undergo chemical surface modification, both of which can be challenging for molecular based PDT agents.317 The generation of singlet oxygen using NP based photosensitizers has been reported to occur both via energy transfer318 or via surface mediated electron transfer,319 which has recently been reviewed by Biju et al.80 In addition, the formation of NP-sensitized complexes has been proposed as an alternative method for high ROS production.320–325 Utilizing energy transfer mechanisms, which we have previously investigated,326–328 molecules with long lived triplet states can be used to produce more ROS. For example, Chen et al. have reported that CdSe QDs solutions can effectively eliminate nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells, while Rakovich et al. reported that methylene blue–CdSe QDs improve cell killing efficiency in HepG2 and HeLa cell lines.319,323 While the overall photophysical stability of NP based PDT agents can be higher than their molecular counterparts, considerations such as large hydrodynamic size can make transport and uptake into cells challenging,329 and the use of heavy metals such as Cd has made the field wary.113 However, with increasingly better design criteria,330 the use of NP based photosensitizers will continue to be an area of highly active research.
Once the ROS has been generated within the cell, a dynamic oxidation of cellular components begins to take place. When the cell is overwhelmed with radical or excited oxygen species it begins to break down. The result can be an induced cellular response, namely either apoptosis (programmed cell death) or necrosis (unregulated cell death), which has been covered in detail by several authors.288–292 To examine the role of NPs in this process, the spatial dimensions of both the NP and cell are important. Redmond and Kochevar divide the effects of 1O2 into three locations: the immediate molecular environment, organelles, and the entire cell.293 In the immediate environment, 1O2 attacks not only lipids, DNA, cholesterol, and proteins, but has also been reported to specifically target thiol bearing cellular constituents, including the antioxidant glutathione (GSH) and the known aptoptic signaling caspase biomolecules.331 Similarly, organelle based damage due to ROS is highly dependent on where the PDT drug is located.332 Due to the restrictions on lifetime and range,293 damage to organelles by 1O2 requires proper localization of the sensitizer. Penning and Dubbleman provide an overview of how 1O2 destroys tumors through damage to the vasculature, plasma membranes, cell mitochondria, and cell nuclei.333 Juarranz et al. note in addition to these local effects, immuno-responses against tumor cells are also triggered.334
3.7 The role of nanoparticles in photothermal therapy (PTT)
The use of light to cause damage to diseased cells through localized heat generation is referred to as photothermal therapy (PTT). Many photothermal methodologies rely on the use of metallic nanostructures due to their unique plasmonic properties, which has been heavily reviewed in the literature.5,51,132,335,336 Upon absorption of a photon, the metallic NP surface can dissipate the absorbed energy into the surrounding solution via intrinsic-to-external phonon–phonon coupling, with subsequent local heating.132 Fundamental work by El-Sayed and coworkers has provided insights into how to optimize metallic NP based PTT, including how shape influences heat generation efficiency76 and the critical temperatures associated with therapy (typically 70–80 °C).337
In a recent review,5 El-Sayed and coworkers have cited the work of Pitsillides et al. as the first demonstration of PTT, in which Au NPs were used as the thermal sensitizer.338 Since that time, several other studies have examined the use of Au NPs in PTT, and specifically when they are in close contact with one another.339–341 One of the more popular PTT agents, however, is the Au NR which is readily synthesized since the pioneering work of Catherine Murphy's group.77 The main advantage of Au NRs in comparison to spherical NPs is the existence of a second SPR band which absorbs in the NIR spectral range.51 NRs have been extensively studied for PTT applications in vitro143,342,343 and in vivo.344,345 Notably, El-Sayed and coworkers found that Au NRs labeled with an EGFR targeting ligand was effective for PTT under NIR illumination, showing efficacy both in vitro143 and in vivo.344 In addition, a myriad of other Au nanostructures have been explored. Soon after the first report of PTT utilizing Au NPs, excellent work by the groups of Halas and West demonstrated that nanoshells (SiO2 cores coated with Au) were excellent PTT agents both in vitro and in vivo.19Fig. 12 shows the results of NIR illumination of nanoshells which had accumulated in tumor tissue. Since that time, the same groups have greatly expanded on their previous work,20,21,346 and the use of nanoshells by others has also been reported.347 Similarly, other Au structures including hollow nanospheres,348–350 nanocages,33,351 nanocubes,352 and nano- “popcorn”353 structures have been reported as potential PTT agents. In addition to pure Au structures, the use of hybrid structures for multimodal functionality has also been reported. Qian et al. have recently reported Au decorated up-conversion nanoparticles which were shown to photothermally decompose neoblastoma cells,354 and Sharma et al. have reported Au speckled SiO2 particles as well.355 Ji et al. reported the successful synthesis of FeO–silica nanoparticles coated with a gold shell for dual MRI and PTT applications.356
 Fig. 12  Comparison of (a) gross pathology, (b) silver staining, (c) hematoxylin/eosin staining and (d) magnetic resonance temperature imaging (MRTI) calculations of tumor tissue after in vivo treatment with nanoshells and NIR laser treatment. Evidence for hemorrhaging (a) and tissue damage (c) is correlated to the presence of silver-stained Au nanoshells (b) and the heating profile obtained via MRTI (d) upon laser treatment, indicating effective PTT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2003, National Academy of Sciences. 
Although metal NPs are common photothermal agents, other nanomaterials also can function as PTT agents. Carbon nanotubes have been extensively reported in the literature for PTT applications.357–359 Similarly, graphene,360 graphene oxide,361,362 and graphite coated Fe–Co NPs363,364 have been employed for PTT applications. In addition to carbon based materials, several promising new materials have been investigated for PTT efficacy, including Pd nanosheets,365,366 zero valent Ge NPs,367 porous Si,368 and both CuS369 and CuSe370 plasmonic semiconductor QDs. Hessel et al. note that CuSe NPs can be excited using 980 nm light and destroy a human colorectal cell line, while at the same time retaining a desirable size for long circulation times.370 Furthermore, the authors note that CuSe NPs also have a better thermal efficiency when compared to both Au NRs and Au NPs.370
The result of PTT on cells is generally considered to be necrosis with the corresponding melting of cell membranes and organelles.5 In contrast, El-Sayed and coworkers point out that for only slight increases in temperature (known as hyperthermia) the main pathway by which cells are destroyed is apoptosis, a result of disruptions in normal cellular function.5 The boundaries between these two mechanisms, however, can be difficult to establish. One of these cellular responses is the release of heat shock proteins (HSPs) which help to restore normal processes to the cell, and their relation to therapy (especially anti-cancer therapies) has been the subject of several reviews.371–374 Recently, it has been demonstrated that using bifunctional nanoparticles to effectively mitigate HSP response in cells can improve PTT. Huang et al. have shown that using 17-(allylamino)-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) as a HSP inhibitor in combination with Au NPs improved PTT efficacy from 90 percent cell survival when either is used individually to 10 percent cell survival when used together.343 Interestingly, this seems to imply that in addition to the local thermal effects, significant improvements in NP mediated PTT can also take advantage of limiting cellular responses. Notably, these same considerations also apply to PDT, which has also been shown to induce HSPs.375 In addition to considering cellular responses, highly localized NP heating requires active targeting as for ROS generating PDT.
3.8 Light induced drug activation
The use of NP optical properties to directly modify cellular components has been immensely popular, but is by no means the only methodology available for the treatment of human diseases. The use of what we term light induced drug activation (LIDA) based on NPs has only developed within the last three years,376 and yet holds great potential for highly controlled treatments. To date the mechanism for LIDA involves the activation of a prodrug via a photoinduced electron transfer (PET) reaction from a nearby sensitizer. Here, we discuss the potential impact of NP based LIDA through the exploration of cisplatin analogues, and comment on what challenges the technique may face.
The use of platinum (Pt) metal complexes for the treatment of cancer has been a breakthrough for chemotherapeutic drugs.377 Kelland has provided a concise history of the Pt(II) complex cisplatin and its analogues, including how current research is attempting to overcome nephrotoxicity,377 and Wang and Lippard have provided a robust account of the effect of Pt anticancer drugs on cells.378 Several unwanted cytotoxic effects, however, have spurred the development of safer and more sophisticated Pt anticancer agents.377
One methodology for reducing the cytotoxicity is to use a Pt(IV) prodrug which can be subsequently converted to the more active Pt(II) drug within the cell. The generation of the active Pt(II) species has been shown to mainly occur due to cellular reduction mechanisms.379 An alternative approach to making Pt(IV) drugs more efficient is the use of LIDA to photoreduce the drug to Pt(II), providing selective targeting.379 Although the Pt complexes typically have absorption in the UV, Farrer et al. have recently reported the development of Pt(IV) complexes that can adsorb light in the visible region.380 In addition, several other transition metal complexes have been considered for cancer therapy, diversifying the chemistry available for future drug development.381
As we have previously seen for PDT and PTT, the use of selective excitation can greatly diminish unwanted side effects and specific tumor uptake can have a dramatic effect on efficacy. The same challenges (NIR excitation, drug modification, etc.) that faced PDT and PTT, however, continue to apply to LIDA. As with the previous applications, NPs can be used to address many of the problems faced by LIDA drugs in vivo. As a proof of concept, Blanco et al. have reported a CdSe@ZnS QD coated with phospholipids carrying a Pt(IV) complex which upon visible light excitation (530 nm) reduces the complex to a Pt(II) species.376 Although this study has yet to be conducted in cells, the concept of using electron transfer from QDs to local drug cargo is an interesting application of LIDA for selective treatments. As in imaging, QD photophysical properties can be tuned so that NIR absorption is possible, and provided that efficient electron transfer can be achieved, drugs can be both transported and activated by NP carriers. Indeed, photoactivated drugs have been recently noted as promising options for cancer therapy,382 and the use of NPs will enhance their utility.
4 Nanoparticles and drug delivery: improvements of efficacy
The efficient delivery and release of drugs to a target remains a crucial challenge to improving therapies for a range of human diseases.383 As in the case of PDT agents, many effective drugs are hydrophobic, or if soluble, never reach their destination. The use of nanometre size “transporters” is a common phenomenon in nature,384 and NPs are promising for improving drug efficacy through enhanced delivery, targeting, and protection.8,385–388 NP based drug delivery vectors range from inorganic gold NPs304 to organic dendrimers,389 but all NP based drug delivery vectors must be able to both transport and release the drug to a specific location. Here we review the role of NPs in drug delivery with an emphasis on the role of inorganic NPs, particularly Au390,391 and SiO2 based materials.392–394 Much of our discussion will also apply to other nano-drug delivery agents, including dendrimers,389,395,396 biocompatible microcapsules (including liposomes and polymeric based NPs),307,397–399 and hydrogel based transport vectors.400,401 Specifically, we will explore drug delivery in terms of non-covalent and covalent systems, and examine literature reports for how hydrophobicity, pH, temperature, biomolecular reactions, and light can be used to control drug delivery.
4.1 Non-covalent versus covalent drug delivery
Non-covalent drug delivery can include any form of transport that does not involve a direct chemical bond to the drug in question. In practice, non-covalent drug delivery utilizing NPs involves either an encapsulation mechanism or a stabilizing pocket (Fig. 13). For non-covalent drug loading, a complete understanding of how a drug which is not directly bound to the NP platform is effectively transported can be difficult to establish. Generally, however, all non-covalent drug systems must exhibit an environment that stabilizes the drug until it is released. Utilizing non-covalent drug delivery has several unique advantages. Firstly, non-covalent drug systems can be designed without direct modification of the drug, which retains therapeutic efficacy. Secondly, optimizing non-covalent drug transport for one drug can be applied to other drugs with similar properties, allowing for a broader assessment of how NPs function in vivo. Finally, non-covalently bound drugs do not require additional external stimuli to break free from the nano-platform, but rather are released from the NP based solely on changes in the local environment. For systems relying on a hydrophobic pocket based mechanism, this is usually determined by the NP encountering an even more hydrophobic environment (such as a cell membrane) into which the drug diffuses.305 In the case of encapsulation, changes in pH, temperature, or those induced by other external stimuli are required to modify the NP to allow for drug diffusion.
 Fig. 13  Introduction to methodologies in NP drug delivery utilizing either covalent or non-covalent approaches (A). After identifying whether surface immobilized or encapsulated delivery is preferred (B), a variety of triggers can be utilized for controlled release (C). 
Covalent drug delivery is oppositely described as a drug covalently bound to the transport vector (Fig. 13). In contrast to non-covalent systems, covalent drug delivery requires direct breaking of the chemical bond between the drug and the NP platform. While requiring external stimuli, the binding of the drug covalently to the NP platform may also decrease non-specific release. The drug can only be as flexible as the linker to which it is attached, providing further control over the vector until it reaches the target. Careful design of this linker can afford site specific cleavage based on enzymatic, thermal, or pH induced release, selectivity which is often not available in a non-covalent system.
Ultimately, all NP based drug delivery systems must optimize the transfer of the drug from the NP vector to the cell (the advantage of non-covalently bound drugs), while at the same time ensuring stability during transport (the advantage of covalently bound drugs). The requirement for efficient but selective delivery has led to many different specific release strategies. Here, we explore how hydrophobicity, pH, temperature, biomolecules, and light can be used for effective drug delivery.
4.2 Hydrophobicity induced drug release
The use of hydrophobic/hydrophilic forces applies mostly to non-covalently bound drugs. Historically, this principle has been used for using encapsulation based drug delivery. Liposome based drug delivery agents have been used for transporting cancer fighting drugs since the 1990's, with the commercially available Doxil® (doxorubicin in PEGylated liposomes) as an example.387 Recently, a “buckysome” has been proposed to help transport drugs to cells, with similar efficacy to commercially available delivery agents for the anti-cancer drug paclitaxel.402 These NPs would be expected to be much more rigid than liposomes, providing stability during transport.
An alternative to encapsulation methods (which normally rely on external stimuli to release) is the use of hydrophobic pockets on the surface of the nanoparticle. Cheng et al. reported the delivery of a hydrophobic photodynamic therapy drug Pc 4 using PEGylated Au NPs, showing an increase in drug tumor accumulation.304 The drug was found to reside deep within the PEG layer, and the fluorescence of the drug was only seen after release and delivery. This system was further explored using a covalently bound analogue, in which it was found that hardly any drug was delivered when bound to the Au NP.305 Similarly, Kim et al. found that two hydrophobic cancer drugs could be incorporated into a zwitterionic Au NP with a hydrophobic pocket, and demonstrated their efficacy against a cancerous cell line.403
In either encapsulating or hydrophobic pocket-based drug delivery systems, external changes in hydrophobicity dictate whether or not the drug is delivered efficiently. The use of diffusion based drug release tends to be the bottleneck of this drug delivery scheme. Non-selective release of drugs before reaching the target is always a risk, and as it is often difficult to predict how a drug prefers the NP platform environment versus a myriad of biological micro environments, control of this mechanism remains a challenge. Still, preliminary results in vivo make this system highly interesting for understanding how the efficiency of hydrophobic drug delivery correlates with the physical properties of the NP system.
4.3 pH induced drug release
The use of different pH environments in vivo has been a promising avenue for NP based drug delivery. pH sensitive polymers are readily available,404–407 which is especially important for encapsulation based NP drug delivery vectors. The controlled triggered release is governed by the difference in physiological pH (pH 7.4) from that of endosomes and lysosomes (pH 5–6).408 Furthermore, tumor tissues are known to have a lower pH than regular tissues,409 which is especially helpful for cancer specific drug delivery. Here, we briefly review how inorganic NPs serve as platforms for the design of pH sensitive drug delivery vectors, including polymer–NP composites, molecular “lids”, and pH sensitive drug linkers.
Examples of the incorporation of pH sensitive polymers with inorganic NPs show a wide range of applications. Mok et al. showed that pH sensitive polymer coatings could effectively be removed from both QDs and gene bearing adenoviruses, resulting in a positive surface charge which showed greater accumulation in cells.410 pH induced gel shrinkage has also been used for selective imaging using Ag NPs.411 Recently, Luo et al. reported incorporating magnetic NPs with a pH responsive polymer which dissolved in acidic environments.412 In this way, imaging and therapy could be achieved simultaneously with specific localization. Despite these promising results, however, it has been noted recently that many polymeric systems are limited by a lack of sensitivity to small changes in physiological pH.407 The challenge of synthesizing highly selective pH responsive polymers is necessary for advancing pH induced drug delivery with polymer–NP composites.
In addition to using pH sensitive polymers, the use of pH sensitive molecular “valves” and “lids” has been reported.413–418 Elegant work by Stoddart and Zink et al. has utilized changes in pH to open molecular valves on the surface of mesoporous silicate NPs to release hydrophobic drugs, with valve components including cucurbit[6]uril,413 pseudorotaxanes414 and cyclodextrin.415–417 The drug which is encapsulated in the mesoporous silica NP released through changes in external pH (such as <6 in Fig. 14) and the valve is open (Fig. 14).392,417 Similarly, Muhammad et al. have recently reported a mesoporous silica NP capped with ZnO “lids” which dissolve in the acidic compartments of cells, and thus release their drug contents.418 In these systems, modification takes place at the NP surface which leads to drug release, in contrast to pH responsive polymers where the polymer corona plays the essential role for drug delivery. The use of NP surface properties has also been demonstrated by Pornpattananangkul et al. who used pH sensitive ligands on the surface of gold nanoparticles to regulate liposome fusion, effectively preventing the formation of larger aggregates.419 As liposomes have been extensively used for drug delivery, this concept could be important for improving clinically viable treatments.
 Fig. 14  Illustration of a pH responsive lid consisting of a benzimidazole stock and cyclodextrin caps on mesoporous silica NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 417. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Another approach to pH sensitive drug delivery, which is common in the literature, is drug delivery through drug modification. Dhar et al. have successfully shown that covalently bound Pt(IV) drugs could be released from DNA conjugated Au NPs via pH induced bond reduction.420 Using pH mediated delivery, several other groups have demonstrated controlled release of doxorubicin to cancerous cells.421–424 The pKa of doxorubicin is reported to be 8.2, and bears a positive charge in physiological environments.422 By rationally designing the NP to bear pH sensitive ligands, the bond between the drug and its molecular tether can be broken. Zhang et al. have reported the release of doxorubicin from carbon nanotubes modified with carboxylate groups and coated with polysaccharides, noting that the loading efficiency and release rate can be controlled by carefully tuning the surface properties.421 Meng et al. have demonstrated the effective co-delivery of doxorubicin and siRNA to combat multi drug resistant cancer using a mesoporous silica NP containing carboxylate and phosphonate functional groups for electrostatic stabilization.422 In acidic environments such as the cell lysosome, the stabilization interaction is diminished and the drug can diffuse into the cell. Recently, Zhang et al. have shown that hollow mesoporous silica nanoshells with incorporated magnetic nanoparticles can transport doxorubicin bound through an amide functionality, with the corresponding release at lower pH.423 A similar strategy has been employed for the release of bound doxorubicin from Au NPs utilizing a carbamate linkage.424
4.4 Temperature induced drug delivery
The use of temperature sensitive nano-composites has been heavily explored for controlled drug delivery.425,426 Three distinctive areas of thermoresponsive drug delivery schemes have been reported: (a) diffusion from temperature sensitive hydrogels, (b) induced breakage of encapsulate drugs, and (c) thermal induced release from NP platforms. The roles of inorganic NPs, and more specifically metal and magnetic NPs, are to provide both a means of thermal excitation through external stimuli427 and a scaffold to build upon.10 Here, we review each of the three methodologies through a survey of the literature.
Thermally induced drug delivery based from polymer–NP composites is popular, and there are many different polymers available for optimization.404–407 Changes to water–polymer interactions (i.e. hydrophilic or hydrophobic interactions) through heating allow the encapsulated drug to diffuse out of the matrix and into the target.404,426 Once thermally stimulated, the nanocomposite can release drugs by either swelling (positive mechanism based on the upper critical solution temperature UCST) or shrinkage (negative mechanism based on the lowest critical solution temperature LCST) of the polymer coating.427 One of the earliest examples of a functional nano-composite was reported by Sershen et al. who synthesized Au nanoshells and filled them with a thermoresponsive polymer.18 The authors demonstrated that thermally induced shrinkage of the polymer hydrogel led to release of methylene blue and proteins. In addition to Au nanoshells, other structures utilizing thermoresponsive polymers have been reported including Au NPs,428–432 Au NRs,433–436 bimetallic Ag/Au NPs,437 SiO2–Au nanoshells,438 magnetic NPs,439,440 and carbon nanotubes.441 The use of thermoresponsive polymers in mesoporous silica NPs has also been reported.442–444 The applicability of these nanocomposites has also been tested in vitro. Interestingly, Hribar et al. were able to selectively release doxorubicin from microspheres containing Au NRs via a stepwise mechanism, and although the microspheres did passively leak doxorubicin without NIR radiation, significant decreases in cell viability with NIR excitation were observed.445 The microspheres without doxorubicin, however, did not exhibit any significant photothermal destruction when tested. In contrast, Zhao et al. have reported a significant effect of NP induced PTT on cell killing when testing their thermoresponsive Au NP–polymer system with and without 5-fluoruoracil.432 The authors noted that the use of both PTT and chemotherapy provides a synergistic effect when treating cancers. The application of thermoresponsive nanocomposites in vivo has also been recently explored, with Niidome et al. reporting that hydrophilic polymer coated Au NRs could be made hydrophobic with NIR excitation and accumulation of the rods in the locally excited tissue.436
A similar technique to thermoresponsive hydrogels is to incorporate NPs into the outer structure of soft materials (micelles, liposomes, microcapsules, etc.) for thermally induced drug release. Using the same principles applied in PTT and hydrogel nanocomposite drug delivery, the excitation of the nanostructure generates thermal energy which exceeds the intermolecular forces that stabilize the transporter, leading to drug leakage. For light induced encapsulation destruction, metallic NPs continue to be a research focus. Skirtach et al. have shown that low power excitation of Ag NPs containing microcapsules led to capsule perforation.446 The same team explored the mechanism of this localized destruction using AuS/Au NPs and a fluorescent cargo,447 and further demonstrated the use of Ag containing fluorescent AF-488 dextran in vitro.448 Co-currently, Caruso and coworkers reported the synthesis of a Au NP infiltrated microcapsule filled with the enzyme lysozyme,449 and demonstrated controlled release with pulsed 1064 nm light.450 In addition to microcapsules, several groups have been successful at sensitizing liposomes with Au nanostructures for controlled drug release, including outer Au coatings,451 Au nanoshells,452 Au NPs,453,454 and Au NRs.455 Agarwal et al. have recently demonstrated the effective release of doxorubicin from liposomes using Au NRs as sensitizers.455 Kyrsting et al. have recently shown that heating lipid encapsulated Au NPs leads to degradation and release of a dye molecule, which they were able to examine in 3 dimensions to provide a better physical understanding of drug release.454
The third common method for drug release is to attach a therapeutic, namely DNA or RNA, to the surface of a NP and initiate desorption through local heating or NP melting. Takahashi et al. reported that the heating of Au NRs led to a morphological change which released plasmid DNA in aqueous media.456 Since that time, several groups have reported the release of DNA, RNA, and genes from Au NRs,457,458 Au nanoshells,459,460 Au nanoprisms,461 and Au NPs.462–464 The same principles were applied by Slocik et al. to explore the spontaneous assembly of QDs and Au NPs with peptides upon excitation.465 In a unique experiment demonstrating DNA release, Chen et al. showed the release of the enhanced fluorescent green protein gene from Au NRs by observing cell bioluminescence after selective release with NIR light.457 The mechanism of bond breakage has been explored recently, with Poon et al. exploring the role of laser fluence in promoting denaturing versus Au–S bond breakage,463 while Ibrahimkutty et al. showed that pulse repetition rate determined whether DNA was denatured or simply expelled from the surface.464 In addition to oligonucleotide based molecular delivery, the photothermal release of other small molecules has been tested.Yaguee et al. have recently demonstrated the release of absorbed ibuprofen on the surface of porous SiO2/AuNPs upon irradiation with NIR light.466 Bakhtiari et al. elegantly showed the efficient release of a fluorescein dye which, when conjugated to SiO2@Au or Au NPs was quenched, was effectively released (and thereby fluorescent) due to excitation both at a NP absorption resonant wavelength and in a water bath.467 Recently, You et al. have reported the thermal induced release of doxorubicin from hollow Au nanospheres, although at lower pH some of the drug was released spontaneously without the laser.468 The use of thermally induced drug modification will need to continue to assess whether other factors (pH, biomolecule substitution, enzymatic cleavage, etc.) are in competition with heat regulated delivery to determine the extent of non-specific release.
4.5 Biomolecular induced drug delivery
A similar approach to pH and temperature dependent drug delivery is to synthesize drug vectors which are sensitive to inherent biomolecules of the target. This methodology can be generally divided into three components: (a) ligand exchange mediated release, (b) enzymatic release, and (c) chemical reduction based release. Here, nanoparticles are mainly transport agents and are not chemically active participants in drug release. Nevertheless, the modification of the nanoparticle scaffold is vital for the success of biomolecular induced drug delivery, which we will explore in each of the described methods.
The use of surface exchange mediated drug delivery utilizes the fact that certain biological molecules are produced in excess at a target site in comparison to healthy cells. The best example of this phenomenon is illustrated through the work of Rotello and coworkers who utilize gold nanoparticles to transport thiolated drugs.388 In this system, the strong Au–S bond to the surface of the NP allows for effective transport and minimal drug loss. When the Au NP reaches the target (in this example, tumor cells), the high prevalence of glutathione (GSH) molecules forces an exchange reaction between the drug and the antioxidant, freeing the drug for therapeutic action. As the intracellular GSH concentration is higher than extracellular concentrations,388 selective release of the drug inside of the cells is enhanced. Verma et al. demonstrated the effective release and activation of a galactosidase from Au NPs through interactions with GSH.469 The release of both DNA470 and dye molecules471 from 2 nm Au NPs was also demonstrated in vitro soon thereafter (Fig. 15). Rotello's team further quantified the contribution of biogenic thiols as a function of Au NP surface charge,472 demonstrating this approach for gene delivery.473 Such behavior was also proposed for the enhanced delivery of 6-mercaptopurine on Au NPs for the treatment of leukemia.474 GSH was also shown to exhibit selective release of plasmid DNA from QDs,475 and for triggering the release of an anticancer drug from cyclodextrin coated Au NPs.476 Interestingly, it has been reported that single stranded DNA bound to NPs can be released by combination with the complementary strand rather than through ligand exchange,477 which could lead to new methodologies for targeted gene therapy.
 Fig. 15  A (A) detailed schematic and (B) demonstration of the release of dye molecules from the surface of a Au NP as a function of glutathione (GSH) concentrations in cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 471. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. 
The use of enzymatic triggered drug delivery is a promising option for specific therapy without prior location of diseased cells.478 A large amount of work in enzymatic based release work has focused on triggered release from encapsulation drug carriers. The use of enzymes for the release of molecular “lids” has also been explored in detail.479–484 Patel et al. reported the use of porcine liver esterase to remove cyclodextrin based covers on mesoporous silica NPs, releasing the trapped Rhodamine B molecules inside.479 The use of mesoporous silica NPs for enzymatic release has been further demonstrated using cyclodextrin,480 other saccharides,481,482 biotin-avidin,483 insulin,484 peptides,485,486 aptamers,487 duplex DNA,488 and poly(l-lysine).489 Notably, Bernardos et al. demonstrated the effective delivery of the chemotherapeutic doxorubicin S1-DOX in vitro to HeLa cells using saccharide capped mesoporous silica NPs.482 Recently, Zhu et al. have reported that Au NP caps functionalized with ATP aptamers could be opened with high selectivity, showing promise for more specific biological mediated drug delivery.487 In theory, these same considerations should apply to drugs linked to other nanoparticles; indeed, Wang et al. have shown that the degradation of peptides can release encapsulated fluorophores from the surface of AU NPs.489 However, work by See et al. has shown that peptides conjugated to Au NPs are effectively digested in endosomes by the protease cathepsin L;490 the authors note that NPs uptaken via endocytosis are likely to be degraded, presenting challenges for bioselective intercellular targeting.
Finally, the use of cellular redox chemistry has been researched as effective triggering drug release. The use of dithiol bonds, in particular, has been of great interest due to the reductive environment maintained in cells.491 Both the covalent loading of drugs with dithiol linkers492,493 and the synthesis of dithiol based molecular lids494–499 have been explored in the literature. In addition, the use of diazo-linked caps has been explored for reductive opening.500 Lee et al. showed that conjugating siRNA with Au NPs utilizing a RSSR bond led to delivery which was as good or better than the commercially available lipid reagent.492 Similarly, Jung et al. have recently reported the incorporation of siRNA on QDs for intercellular delivery which utilizes a dithiol linker for triggered release.493 In a novel experiment, Lai et al. showed that CdS QDs could be removed from the surfaces of mesoporous silica NPs and effectively release their cargo in the presence of reducing agents.494 More recently, Ambrogio et al. have shown that the mesoporous silica NPs containing rotaxanes can be designed to effectively “snap off” when in a reducing environment through breakage of dithiol bonds for selective release.496 As with ligand exchange and enzyme activated strategies, the focus on using cellular properties to trigger drug release is a powerful way to approach diseases such as cancer, and is expected to be an active research field in the future.
4.6 Light induced drug delivery
The strong optical properties of NPs makes light activated drug delivery an appealing option for targeted therapy. Here, we focus mainly on how electronic interactions resulting from exciting NPs with light induces drug delivery, as we have already reviewed how IR light can be used for thermally releasing a drug (Section 4.4). As the optical window in which light sensitization can be used for drug release is small (Fig. 3), this technique has gained less attention than previously mentioned triggers. Nevertheless, light activated NP drug carriers have been reported in the literature.501 Indeed, systems using both covalently bound and encapsulated drugs have been reported. Wijtmans et al. demonstrated the release of coumarin bound to thiol terminated cinnamates from CdSe QDs upon excitation at 560 nm.502 In this experiment, both isomerization and electron transfer behavior of the cinnamate ligand was found to play a vital role in the release of the dye; however, the authors also described the decomposition of the QDs in aerobic conditions, which would release toxic Cd ions and limit their potential for therapeutics. Recently, Liu et al. have shown that both QDs with and without Cd can be used for releasing the anticancer drug 5-fluorouracil with visible light excitation above 400 nm.503 While this still remains outside of the optimum window, the prospects for biocompatible QD light triggered drug release should continue to be a vibrant field. In addition to QD based systems, Agasti et al. showed that Au nanocages could be used as a platform upon which to deliver doxorubicin conjugated with photolabile nitrobenzyl linkages cleavable at 365 nm.504 While this wavelength is too far from the optical window for direct application, the authors note that the use of two photon excitation could potentially lead to systematic release during in vivo studies.
Similar work with encapsulation drug delivery utilizing mesoporous silica NPs has been reported.505–510 Lu et al. have reported the use of nano-impellers for the delivery of both Rhodamine B and the anticancer drug camptothecin in several cancer cell lines using 413 nm wavelength light.505 Similarly, the effective release of Rhodamine B by the dismantling of cyclodextrin lids506 and the release of paclitaxel from Au NP capped mesoporous silica NPs507 were both demonstrated with UV excitation. Interestingly, Vivero-Escoto et al. found that excitation at the main plasmon band of the Au NPs (530 nm) did not result in drug release, which indicated a non-photothermal release method. Movement towards the biological optical window was recently reported by Knezevic et al., who showed that visible light can be used for selective release of the dye sulforhodamine 101 when the molecular cap consists of a Ru compound.509
The combination of covalent attachment of the drug with the protective environment presented by the mesoporous silica nanoparticle has recently been reported as an efficient light activated drug delivery system.508 Lin et al. found that by attaching the anticancer drug chlorambucil to a coumarin derivative allowed for both UV and NIR (via single and two photon mechanisms, respectively) excited drug release, as shown in Fig. 16.508 This system was also demonstrated to function in vitro and had minimal drug loss in the dark. The use of two photon activated drug release is a promising method to selectively delivering drugs to the target site with minimal nonspecific release.
 Fig. 16  Illustration of photolabile linkers (C) connected to a chemotherapeutic drug (D) encapsulated in a mesoporous silica nanorod with either single or two photon excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 508. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
5 Theranostics and the challenges facing nanomedicine
Modern NP based biomedical applications are no longer singular “imaging” or “therapeutic” systems, but are combinations of both which utilize the unique properties of NPs with those of the drug payload. Many of the literature examples we have mentioned simultaneously combine diagnostics and therapy to yield the term “theranostics”, which Kelkar and Reineke note can be originally attributed to Funkhouser nearly a decade ago.511 The potential advantages of theranostics have been covered by several authors for the development of nanomedicine,511–516 and specific applications of theranostics involving liposomes,517 lipoproteins,518 mesoporous silica NPs,394 magnetic NPS,519 and Au nanoshells350 have been specifically addressed. As this review has illustrated, many NP based drug delivery vectors (especially those based on QD or Au structures) are also readily optically imaged, restricted only by the NIR biological window. Thus the use of theranostics is not an additional design consideration, but often complimentary to a given nanomedical application based on what material is used. The use of imaging ligands (fluorophores, radioactive tags, etc.) can further functionalize NPs to achieve a wide range of diverse NP vectors.
The unique properties of NPs (molecular platforms, surface to volume ratio, shape/size control and inherent optical response) make the field of nanomedicine diverse and thus full of potential. Despite its promise, however, several critical challenges continue to face nanomedical research and its subsequent translation to the clinic.2 Two of the most well known (and highly discussed) issues are that of cytotoxicity113,520 and clearance from the body after therapy.43 The roles of NP properties, such as shape,44,106 size,87,88,521 coating,91,107,522–525 and surface charge,88,410,526 have all been explored to determine how specific NP properties dictate interactions with cells.527–529 Similarly, the same properties have been heavily explored to determine how to effectively clear NPs from the body. Bawendi and co-workers have conducted extensive work in vivo to determine what NP properties are essential for effective NP transport through the renal system and in tissue,43,110,121,330,530,531 demonstrating that NPs with a 5 nm hydrodynamic diameter and less could be effectively cleared from the renal system.43 Thanks in large part to these fundamental studies, current initiatives in nanomedicine look to optimize efficacy while lowering cytotoxicity and improving clearance from the body.
Both cytotoxicity and clearance issues illustrate the core challenge facing NPs: how can one rationally control and design NPs for a given application without compromising efficacy? Due to the extremely facile modification of NPs, many times research is conducted based on “addition” methods, whereby one potential problem is corrected by adding on new functionalities to the current structure. In a recent interview, Gao Xiahou, who recently reported using multimodal magnetic nanoparticles coated with a Au shell,532 has been quoted as saying, “In nanoparticles, one plus one is often less than two…” to indicate that modifications meant to improve a NP can yield a uniformly different vector.533 The physical characteristics of the particle, including ease of transport, electrostatic environment, pH dependence, and ligand behavior can drastically change with even the slightest changes in NP morphology. To complicate matters even more, it has recently been noted that differences in cell types also can have a drastic impact on how NPs function and are processed.95 As an example, the use of targeting ligands to improve specificity has been recently questioned by El-Sayed and Nie.534 The critical question facing nanomedicine, which directly incorporates those of cytotoxicity and clearance, is whether general NP properties can be found which apply to all (or at least a broad range) potential NP imaging and therapeutic applications. Moreover, it is apparent that as many different NP therapeutics require different cellular interactions (i.e. intracellular vs. extracellular location, ligand coatings, etc.), we must look at the broader picture of which methodologies have the greatest potential for eventual clearance and minimal long-term side effects.
From an objective view, it seems clear where the future of nanomedicine lies: biomedical NPs must ultimately be designed and prepared based on structure–activity-principles optimizing transport, biological interactions, and therapeutic mechanisms. This phenomenon is not new to chemistry; one of the greatest breakthroughs in drug design was the development of the quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR) which ultimately has helped expedite drug research. Can the same considerations be used for the design of a new generation of theranostics applied through the rational design of NPs? Not only does it seem possible, it seems to be vitally important for truly understanding how NPs can be further utilized for biomedical applications. Several of the fundamental criteria have already been established for the nanomedical approaches to cancer: a non-toxic solid core material of sizes less than 5 nm which can be functionalized to utilize the EPR effect seems to be very effective. Such insights have recently been recognized by Bawendi and co-workers to design a protease degradable gelatin NP (100 nm) containing 10 nm QDs which can be broken down after reaching the tumor.535
With more than a decade of successful in vitro and in vivo experiments behind us, we are now in an excellent position to assess a wide range of materials (QDs, metallic NPs, etc.) and therapies (imaging, PDT, PTT, and drug delivery) to determine what factors truly lead to efficient nanomedicine. Just as QSAR could not have been established without the fundamental drug testing that allowed us to understand how synthetic chemistry could interface with biological systems, a deeper understanding of the physical interactions between a NP and the complex environment of the body is vital for the development of nanomedicine. By considering these interactions, the rational design of nanoparticles can become systematic in nanoresearch. To achieve predictive rational design, it is apparent that diverse scientific disciplines including biology, chemistry, engineering, and physics are necessary for correctly moving nanomedicine forward. Interestingly, it has been specifically noted that physics can play an important role in the future treatment of cancer.536 An understanding of biological targeting, surface chemistry, fluid dynamics, and highly controlled NP assembly are all vital to future nanomedicine.
6 Case study: delivery of a non-covalently bound PDT drug via PEGylated Au NPs
In order to explore how nanomedical research is developed, and the process by which we can arrive at rational design, we now reflect on our own work investigating the delivery of the PDT drug silicon phthalocyanine 4 (Pc 4) using Au NPs. In keeping with the theme of this review, we will critically examine how the role of the NP dictates efficacy both in vitro and in vivo. Through this example, the development of a simultaneous imaging and PDT treatment can be examined, illustrating how the challenges to effective NP therapies can be practically approached.
6.1 The role of the Au NP in PDT drug delivery and efficacy in vitro and in vivo
Pc 4 is a silicon phthalocyanine with no equatorial modifications to the Pc ring system, but with modifications to the axial ligands (Fig. 17). Pc 4 was first utilized for PDT applications during the early 1990s, showing great promise for therapy due to its absorption of long wavelength light, minimal dark toxicity, efficient intersystem crossing, and high photostability.537 Despite its desirable photophysical properties, Pc 4 remains insoluble in aqueous systems, and aggregates in hydrophilic environments. For in vivo applications, it is difficult to accumulate the drug in tumors due to hindered transport and uptake.
 Fig. 17  Depiction of Pc 4 (blue) non-covalently attached to a PEGylated Au NP (gold sphere) and the structure of Pc 4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 304. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
One approach to the delivery of Pc 4 to tumors is the adsorption of Pc 4 on PEGylated Au NPs (Fig. 17). Due to the reported inert behavior of Au in biological systems,538 and the ease in which ligand exchange reactions can take place, our lab investigated whether or not 6 nm PEGylated Au NPs would be effective for transporting Pc 4 both in vitro and in vivo.304 The use of the PEG ligand provides not only colloidal stability through steric repulsion but also provides an amphiphilic environment in which to incorporate a hydrophobic drug such as Pc 4. To explore this effect, a bilayer system consisting of water and toluene was used to determine if a hydrophobic induced transfer occurred (Fig. 18). In keeping with the proposed mechanism, Pc 4 transferred to the upper toluene layer while the toluene insoluble PEGylated Au NPs remained in the aqueous layer. We further explored the production of 1O2 of both the free drug and the Au NP conjugates in ethanol solutions (not shown). We found that although there was a slight decrease in the amount of 1O2 produced by the Au NP–Pc 4 conjugates when compared to the free drug, the conjugates were better at generating 1O2 when compared to the control methylene blue dye.304
 Fig. 18  Monitoring the fluorescence of the upper toluene phase due to the transfer of Pc 4 from the PEGylated Au NPs in water. Inset: absorbance of Pc 4 shows the same trend as fluorescence data versus time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 304. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
Although this demonstration of hydrophobicity based release was promising, whether or not this would have any effect in complex biological systems required further exploration. To test whether Au NP mediated delivery of Pc 4 was a viable method for PDT, we tested the behavior of the conjugates in vitro to determine cell uptake and PDT efficiency. The localization of Pc 4 in HeLa cells was found to primarily occur in the mitochondrial membrane through examining the colocalization of the Mitotracker dye and Pc 4 fluorescence (not shown).304 These data indicated that the drug is not only released from the Au NP, but also is effectively transported from the outer cell membrane through the cytoplasm, fluid which is mostly water. Due to the effective quenching of Pc 4 fluorescence on the Au NP surface, it is clear that the Pc 4–Au NP conjugates must at some point dissociate before Pc 4 reaches the mitochondria. Subsequent illumination with 1 joule 670 nm light resulted in nearly complete mortality.
With such promising in vitro experiments, we decided to determine whether PDT could be effectively undertaken in vivo. Au NP–Pc 4 conjugates were injected intravenously through the tail vein into flank tumor bearing mice, and the Pc 4 accumulation was monitored via fluorescence imaging. Fig. 19 shows the uptake profile of Pc 4 alone at 2 hours (d) and Pc 4 on PEGylated Au NPs at 1, 30, and 120 min (a,b,c). The uptake of Pc 4 into the tumor was demonstrated to be at least ten times faster with Au NPs as carriers in comparison to Pc 4 alone. Moreover, within 4 hours PDT could be undertaken and showed dramatic decrease in the treated tumor volume when compared to the control.304
 Fig. 19  A comparison of the relative uptake of Pc 4 using Au NPs as carriers at 1 (a), 30 (b), and 120 min (c) to that of the uptake of the free drug in 120 min (d) during an in vivo imaging experiment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 304. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
Several interesting points can be drawn from these experiments. Firstly, the use of Au NPs effectively inactivates the PDT drug until delivery due to energy transfer from the photoexcited Pc 4 to the NP, as exhibited by the quenched fluorescence of the Pc 4–Au NP conjugates. This provides an inherent safety measure for PDT applications, as conjugates which have not yet delivered the photosensitizer are silenced. Moreover, this phenomenon also can be used to determine the pharmacokinetics and efficiency of photosensitizer delivery in real time. Secondly, while the use of non-covalent drug delivery strategies is inherently susceptible to early release, the large hydrodynamic radius (38 nm) allows for rapid accumulation in the leaky vasculature of tumors, and exhibits excellent tumor uptake. In this way, both the size and shape of the Au NP help for selective delivery of drug to the tumor, and although non-specific uptake by other organs is apparent (Fig. 19), the high selectivity of PDT via targeted irradiation allows for external control of drug action. Finally, the use of the non-covalent binding methodology did not result in any change in the drug itself, and once released from the NP, Pc 4 was highly efficient at generating 1O2 with 670 nm excitation. Thus, the properties of the utilized Au NPs (optical, size, shape, and surface:volume ratio) allowed the rational development of an effective PDT drug delivery vector.
6.2 Examining the mechanism of delivery and optimization with targeting ligands
As previously mentioned in our discussion of hydrophobicity induced drug delivery (Section 4.2), the exact mechanism by which drugs are stabilized can be difficult to establish. We compared the release behavior of the amine functionalized Pc 4 to that of its thiol analogue, Pc 219, in both biphase and in vitro experiments.305 In both experiments, the transfer of Pc 219 from the conjugate to hydrophobic environments was significantly slower. Similarly, the effect of 670 nm irradiation resulted in efficient PDT for Pc 4–Au NP conjugates, but was not appreciable in the Pc 219 analogues. Fig. 20 shows cell mortality with both 0.5 J and 1 J irradiation fluence as compared to the control samples for (A) Pc 4–Au NP conjugates and (B) Pc 219 conjugates. Note that in the case of Pc 4, increasing photosensitizer concentration resulted in dramatic increases in PDT efficiency, while even at high concentrations and high laser fluence the Pc 219 analogues resulted in slight cell mortality.
 Fig. 20  Comparison of cell mortality as a function of concentration and laser fluence for both (A) Pc 4–Au NP conjugates and (B) Pc 219–Au NP conjugates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
The examination of Pc 219 establishes that any association between Pc 4 and the Au NP is inherently weak, and effectively can be readily overcome in hydrophobic environments. Interestingly, the inefficiency of Pc 219–Au NP conjugates could be due to either energy transfer to the Au NP (no 1O2 production) or be too far from the cells to efficiently induce cell death (1O2 decay before therapy). In this experiment, it was found that Pc 219 was located mainly in vesicles within the cells. These vesicles are involved in the uptake of Au NPs, indicating that rather than diffusing through the cell membrane Pc 219 is uptaken with the Au NP into the cell. Thus it was found that both different localization and energy transfer considerations hindered effective PDT using Pc 219 conjugates. Little uptake of Au NPs by the HeLa cells was established based on inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images. Based on such quantitative analysis, we established that 99% of Pc 4 delivery is achieved through passive diffusion through the membrane and only 1% is due to endocytosis of the Au NP, as illustrated in Fig. 21.
 Fig. 21  Schematic of the two different methods by which Pc 4 is delivered to HeLa cells. Experimentally it was found that the primary pathway consists of diffusion through the cell membrane (99%) with only a small contribution from endocytosis of the Pc 4–Au NP conjugate (1%). Reprinted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Having established that non-covalently bound Pc 4 was more effective for PDT applications, our team was very interested in further improving delivery and specific uptake. As cancer cells are known to overly express endothelial growth factor receptors (EGFR), we chose an EGF targeting peptide to functionalize the Au NP (Fig. 22). In addition to the 5 kDa PEG ligands used to protect the Au NPs, shorter carboxyl functionalized PEG (3.5 kDa) were grafted to the Au NP surface and conjugated to the EGF peptide to give the same relative molecular weight ligand.539 Using controlled ratios of monofunctional to bifunctional PEG, the average number of targeting ligands per Au NP could be controlled.
 Fig. 22  Schematic of Pc 4 loaded Au NP conjugates with conjugated EGF peptide targeting ligands. Reprinted with permission from ref. 539. Copyright 2011, Wiley Publications. 
Once synthesized and purified, the targeted conjugates were injected intravenously into mice bearing brain tumors. These targeted conjugates were compared to non-targeted particles to determine both whether uptake could be improved and the particles could effectively cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB).539Fig. 23 shows the comparison of tumor uptake by nontargeted NPs vs. targeted NPs. From this image, it is clear that there is significantly more specific uptake of targeted Au NPs when compared to the non-targeted controls, even with the inherent difficulties of crossing the BBB. As previously seen for the untargeted conjugates, we again found very little uptake of the Au NPs by cells.
 Fig. 23  Comparison of targeting effect of EGF–Au NP–Pc 4 conjugates versus untargeted Au NP–Pc 4 conjugates in brain tumor-bearing mice with both (A) fluorescence imaging of extracted brains with tumors and (B) monochromatic imaging. The white circle indicates the tumor position in the brain, and each slice has a thickness of 2 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 539. Copyright 2011, Wiley Publications. 
Through this experiment, the use of Au NPs as delivery platforms is clearly illustrated. As we have noted throughout this review, the addition of targeting ligands and fluorophores covalently to the NP allows for higher selectivity, multimodality, and an overall increased efficacy of nanomedical applications. The success of treating brain tumors with targeted conjugates opens up a wide range of opportunities, including more selective targeting ligands, and dual ligand targeting. In contrast to previous concerns of whether targeting ligands work following intravenous injection,534 this system dramatically improved with the addition of targeting ligands. The use of Au NPs for the delivery of Pc 4 increased circulation time, tumor uptake, and selectivity for the PDT treatment of solid tumors, demonstrating the wealth of opportunities available to nanomedicine, and the promise of vastly improved drug design.
6.3 The fate of Au NPs in vivo and future work
Much of our discussion to this point has highlighted the fate of the Au NPs at a cellular level, but in order to be viable for any future clinical application, their clearance from the body is paramount. To that end, we have been systematically evaluating where the PEGylated Au NPs accumulated following drug delivery.42Fig. 24A shows the biodistribution of Au NPs over the period of 7 days from atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) measurements. Note that in addition to high uptake in the spleen and kidney, Au is found in both the urine and feces of the mouse. The presence of Au in urine indicates that in keeping with the design rationale presented by Bawendi and coworkers,43 the use of 6 nm Au NP cores does allow for renal clearance. However, the large proportions in both the kidney and spleen also indicate that a significant proportion is still retained in the body. Silver staining histology (Fig. 24B) shows the bioaccumulation of Au NPs over a period of a week. These images clearly show that Au NPs are effectively filtered from the blood, but the challenge of increasing the proportion excreted via the renal system remains.
 Fig. 24  (A) Bio-distribution of PEGylated Au NPs as a function of time in critical organs, feces, and urine. (B) Silver staining histology of the liver, kidney, spleen and urinary tract over a period of 7 days. All data acquired after intravenous injection with a Pc 4 concentration of 1 mg kg−1 (30 Pc 4 per Au NP). Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
The early successes of the conjugates in vitro and in vivo are highly encouraging, but as is typical with nanomedicine applications, our understanding of this system is far from complete. Is hydrophobicity the best force to stabilize the drug during transport? How do EGF peptides modify mobility in the blood (largely a physical phenomenon), tissue (diffusion and electrostatics) and cellular interactions (specific recognition)? Can delivery be even further improved to move drug accumulation from a probability of uptake to controlled release? How can one control the surface properties of NPs and the ligand coating which protects them? Each of these questions requires both an examination of the general physical properties of (A) the NP delivery system and (B) the biological target area. We are actively pursuing these fundamental questions relating to NP interactions in biological environments.540 The answers to many of these questions often broadly apply to the whole field of nanomedicine, which should help to expedite NP drug delivery design in the future.
7 Conclusions
The potential of NPs for the effective diagnosis and treatment of diseases continues to make the field of nanomedicine both exciting and fruitful. The inherent properties of inorganic nanoparticles such as their platform-like surface modifications, surface to volume ratios, controllable shapes, and unique optical properties make them excellent candidates for future biomedical applications. In this review, we have explored how the role of the NP in imaging (including photoluminescence, optical microscopy, photoacoustic imaging, surface enhanced Raman techniques, and metal enhanced fluorescence techniques), therapies (photodynamic, photothermal, and light induced drug activation) and drug delivery (utilizing both covalent and non-covalent techniques) can be a powerful tool for both single and multimodal treatments. Despite the great progress in nanomedicine, however, an understanding of the physical characteristics of NPs which dictate their in vivo efficacy is needed to overcome current bottlenecks in research and development of rationally designed nanoparticles. To illustrate this point, we have reviewed some of our own work utilizing PEGylated Au NPs for the delivery of a photodynamic therapy drug. Through this discussion, we have aimed to outline how typical nanomedical exploration is conducted (lab bench to in vitro to in vivo) and the specific challenges that arise when moving into the complex environment of the body, as well as approaches to overcome them.
References
K. K. Jain, BMC Med., 2010, 8, 83 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. S. Kim, J. T. Rutka and W. C. W. Chan, N. Engl. J. Med., 2010, 363, 2434–2443 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1514–1516 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Dreaden, M. A. Mackey, X. Huang, B. Kang and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3391–3404 RSC .
N. L. Rosi and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1547–1562 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shenhar and V. M. Rotello, Acc. Chem. Res., 2003, 36, 549–561 CrossRef CAS .
M. De, P. S. Ghosh and V. M. Rotello, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4225–4241 CrossRef CAS .
K. Saha, A. Bajaj, B. Duncan and V. M. Rotello, Small, 2011, 7, 1903–1918 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Boal and V. M. Rotello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 734–735 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Ghosh, G. Han, B. Erdogan, O. Rosado and V. M. Rotello, J. Pept. Sci., 2008, 14, 134–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Jones, K. D. Osberg, R. J. MacFarlane, M. R. Langille and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3736–3827 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dai, E. W. Wong, Y. Z. Lu, F. Shoushan and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 1995, 375, 769–772 CrossRef CAS .
W. Han, S. Fan, Q. Li and Y. Hu, Science, 1997, 277, 1287–1289 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Mohamed, K. Z. Ismail, S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 9370–9374 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-D. Li, H.-W. Liao, Y. Ding, Y.-T. Qian, L. Yang and G.-E. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2301–2303 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy, A. M. Gole, S. E. Hunyadi, J. W. Stone, P. N. Sisco, A. Alkilany, B. E. Kinard and P. Hankins, Chem. Commun., 2008, 544–557 RSC .
S. R. Sershen, S. L. Westcott, N. J. Halas and J. L. West, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2000, 51, 293–298 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Hirsch, R. J. Stafford, J. A. Bankson, S. R. Sershen, B. Rivera, R. E. Price, J. D. Hazle, N. J. Halas and J. L. West, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 13549–13554 CrossRef CAS .
C. Loo, A. Lowery, N. Halas, J. West and R. Drezek, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 709–711 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lal, S. E. Clare and N. J. Halas, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1842–1851 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Z. Fan and D. L. Carroll, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10777–10781 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen and D. L. Carroll, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1003–1007 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Science, 2002, 298, 2176–2179 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gou and C. J. Murphy, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 231–234 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu and V. W.-W. Yam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13200–13201 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Im, Y. T. Lee, B. Wiley and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2154–2157 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Sherry, S.-H. Chang, G. C. Schatz, R. P. Van Duyne, B. J. Wiley and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2034–2038 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, W. Zhou, W. Zhang, S. Ou, K. Jiang, W. Yu and Y. Qian, Cryst. Growth Des., 2005, 5, 147–150 CAS .
M. Chen, J. Kim, J. P. Liu, H. Fan and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7132–7133 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, B. Wiley, J. Chen, Z.-Y. Li, Y. Yin and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7913–7917 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, F. Saeki, B. J. Wiley, H. Cang, M. J. Cobb, Z.-Y. Li, L. Au, H. Zhang, M. B. Kimmey, X. Li and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 473–477 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Skrabalak, J. Chen, Y. Sun, X. Lu, L. Au, C. M. Cobley and Y. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, M. Yang, Q. Zhang, E. C. Cho, C. M. Cobley, C. Kim, C. Glaus, L. V. Wang, M. J. Welch and Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3684–3694 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Kumar, I. Pastoriza-Santos, B. Rodríguez-González, F. J. Garcia de Abajo and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 015606 CrossRef .
C. G. Khoury and T. Vo-Dinh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18849–18859 CAS .
B. D. Chithrani, A. A. Ghazani and W. C. W. Chan, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 662–668 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Chithrani and W. C. W. Chan, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1542–1550 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. A. Gratton, P. A. Ropp, P. D. Pohlhaus, J. C. Luft, V. J. Madden, M. E. Napier and J. M. De Simone, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 11613–11618 CrossRef CAS .
H. Maeda, J. Wu, T. Sawa, Y. Matsumura and K. Hori, J. Controlled Release, 2000, 65, 271–284 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Jain and T. Stylianopoulos, Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol., 2010, 7, 653–664 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, J. D. Meyers, A.-M. Broome, M. E. Kenney, J. P. Basilion and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2583–2591 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Choi, W. Liu, P. Misra, E. Tanaka, J. P. Zimmer, B. I. Ipe, M. G. Bawendi and J. V. Frangioni, Nat. Biotechnol., 2007, 25, 1165–1170 CrossRef CAS .
A. Albanese, E. A. Sykes and W. C. W. Chan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2490–2493 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CAS .
C.-Y. Huang, D.-Y. Wang, C.-H. Wang, Y.-T. Chen, Y.-T. Wang, Y.-T. Jiang, Y.-J. Yang, C.-C. Chen and Y.-F. Chen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5849–5854 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tvrdy, P. A. Frantsuzov and P. V. Kamat, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 29–34 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko, J. Huang, D. S. Chung and D. V. Talapin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 348–352 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 520A–526A CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Barone, S. Baik, D. A. Heller and M. S. Strano, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 86–92 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Jain, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1578–1586 CrossRef CAS .
P. Buecker, E. Trileva, M. Himmelhaus and R. Dahint, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8229–8239 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Chang, J. W. Ha, L. S. Slaughter and S. Link, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 2781–2786 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, J. Hu, D. Li, R. Luo, A. Chen and C. C. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12288–12294 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, Y. Lou, X. Chen, A. C. S. Samia, J. Stout and J. L. Gole, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1049–1051 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5018–5019 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Qiu and C. Burda, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2629–2636 CrossRef CAS .
S.-I. Naya, A. Inoue and H. Tada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6292–6293 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, B. Mao, J. L. Gole and C. Burda, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2257–2261 RSC .
J. L. Gole, S. M. Prokes, O. J. Glembocki, J. Wang, X. Qiu and C. Burda, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1134–1140 RSC .
N. R. Jana, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 385–396 RSC .
X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Methods Mol. Biol., 2010, 624, 343–357 CAS .
M. Howarth, W. Liu, S. Puthenveetil, Y. Zheng, L. F. Marshall, M. M. Schmidt, K. D. Wittrup, M. G. Bawendi and A. Y. Ting, Nat. Methods, 2008, 5, 397–399 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, M. Howarth, A. B. Greytak, Y. Zheng, D. G. Nocera, A. Y. Ting and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1274–1284 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Allen, W. Liu, V. P. Chauhan, J. Lee, A. Y. Ting, D. Fukumura, R. K. Jain and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 470–471 CrossRef CAS .
R. Weissleder, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 316–317 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vogel and V. Venugopalan, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 577–644 CrossRef CAS .
U. Resch-Genger, M. Grabolle, S. Cavaliere-Jaricot, R. Nitschke and T. Nann, Nat. Methods, 2008, 5, 763–775 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CAS .
X. Michalet, F. F. Pinaud, L. A. Bentolila, J. M. Tsay, S. Doose, J. J. Li, G. Sundaresan, A. M. Wu, S. S. Gambhir and S. Weiss, Science, 2005, 307, 538–544 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chuang, S. S. Lo, G. D. Scholes and C. Burda, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2530–2535 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chuang, T. L. Doane, S. S. Lo, G. D. Scholes and C. Burda, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6016–6024 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Neretina and M. A. El-Sayed, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4880–4910 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293–346 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Jain, K. S. Lee, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7238–7248 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy, T. K. Sau, A. M. Gole, C. J. Orendorff, J. Gao, L. Gou, S. E. Hunyadi and T. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13857–13870 CrossRef CAS .
V. Biju, T. Itoh, A. Anas, A. Sujith and M. Ishikawa, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391, 2469–2495 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zrazhevskiy, M. Sena and X. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4326–4354 RSC .
V. Biju, S. Mundayoor, R. V. Omkumar, A. Anas and M. Ishikawa, Biotechnol. Adv., 2010, 28, 199–213 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. W. Chan and S. Nie, Science, 1998, 281, 2016–2018 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bruchez, Jr., M. Moronne, P. Gin, S. Weiss and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1998, 281, 2013–2016 CrossRef .
W. J. Parak, R. Boudreau, M. Le Gros, D. Gerion, D. Zanchet, C. M. Micheel, S. C. Williams, A. P. Alivisatos and C. Larabell, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 882–885 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, H. Liu, J. Liu, K. N. Haley, J. A. Treadway, J. P. Larson, N. Ge, F. Peale and M. P. Bruchez, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Jaiswal, H. Mattoussi, J. M. Mauro and S. M. Simon, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Rajan and T. Q. Vu, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2049–2059 CrossRef CAS .
O. Seleverstov, O. Zabirnyk, M. Zscharnack, L. Bulavina, M. Nowicki, J.-M. Heinrich, M. Yezhelyev, F. Emmrich, R. O'Regan and A. Bader, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2826–2832 CrossRef CAS .
I. Nabiev, S. Mitchell, A. Davies, Y. Williams, D. Kelleher, R. Moore, Y. K. Gun'ko, S. Byrne, Y. P. Rakovich, J. F. Donegan, A. Sukhanova, J. Conroy, D. Cottell, N. Gaponik, A. Rogach and Y. Volkov, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3452–3461 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ruan, A. Agrawal, A. I. Marcus and S. Nie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14759–14766 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Rajan, H. Y. Liu and T. Q. Vu, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1153–1166 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. S. Kim, W. Jiang, J. Oreopoulos, C. M. Yip, J. T. Rutka and W. C. W. Chan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3887–3892 CrossRef CAS .
L. Helmick, A. Antunez de Mayolo, Y. Zhang, C.-M. Cheng, S. C. Watkins, C. Wu and P. R. LeDuc, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1303–1308 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qi and X. Gao, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1403–1410 CrossRef CAS .
V. Roullier, S. Clarke, C. You, F. Pinaud, G. Gouzer, D. Schaible, V. Marchi-Artzner, J. Piehler and M. Dahan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1228–1234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Williams, A. Sukhanova, M. Nowostawska, A. M. Davies, S. Mitchell, V. Oleinikov, Y. Gun'ko, I. Nabiev, D. Kelleher and Y. Volkov, Small, 2009, 5, 2581–2588 CrossRef CAS .
K.-T. Yong, H. Ding, I. Roy, W. C. Law, E. J. Bergey, A. Maitra and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 502–510 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Wells, G. A. Lessard, P. M. Goodwin, M. E. Phipps, P. J. Cutler, D. S. Lidke, B. S. Wilson and J. H. Werner, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4732–4737 CrossRef CAS .
B. Atmaja, B. H. Lui, Y. Hu, S. E. Beck, C. W. Frank and J. R. Cochran, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4091–4097 CrossRef CAS .
C. You, S. Wilmes, O. Beutel, S. Loechte, Y. Podoplelowa, F. Roder, C. Richter, T. Seine, D. Schaible, G. Uze, S. Clarke, F. Pinaud, M. Dahan and J. Piehler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4108–4112 CAS .
J. Liu, S. K. Lau, V. A. Varma, B. A. Kairdolf and S. Nie, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 6237–6243 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Choi, K. Kim, S. Hong, H. Kim, Y.-J. Kwon and R. Song, Bioconjugate Chem., 2011, 22, 1576–1586 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Delehanty, C. E. Bradburne, K. Susumu, K. Boeneman, B. C. Mei, D. Farrell, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson, H. Mattoussi and I. L. Medintz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10482–10489 CrossRef CAS .
K.-I. Joo, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, L. Xiao, Z. Gu, A. Tai, C.-L. Lee, Y. Tang and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3523–3535 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, S. Peng, J. C. Soo, M. Kuang, P. Chen and H. Duan, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 1124–1130 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Liu, Y.-w. Huang, J. G. Winiarz, H.-J. Chiang and H.-J. Lee, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 3520–3537 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Aaron, A. C. Greene, P. G. Kotula, G. D. Bachand and J. A. Timlin, Small, 2011, 7, 334–341 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Akerman, W. C. W. Chan, P. Laakkonen, S. N. Bhatia and E. Ruoslahti, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 12617–12621 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, Y. Cui, R. M. Levenson, L. W. K. Chung and S. Nie, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 969–976 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, Y. T. Lim, E. G. Soltesz, A. M. De Grand, J. Lee, A. Nakayama, J. A. Parker, T. Mihaljevic, R. G. Laurence, D. M. Dor, L. H. Cohn, M. G. Bawendi and J. V. Frangioni, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 93–97 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stroh, J. P. Zimmer, D. G. Duda, T. S. Levchenko, K. S. Cohen, E. B. Brown, D. T. Scadden, V. P. Torchilin, M. G. Bawendi, D. Fukumura and R. K. Jain, Nat. Med. (N. Y.), 2005, 11, 678–682 CAS .
S. P. Perrault and W. C. W. Chan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 11194–11199 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, Y.-L. Zhong, Y.-Y. Su, Y.-M. Lu, Z.-Y. Jiang, F. Peng, T.-T. Xu, S. Su, Q. Huang, C.-H. Fan and S.-T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5695–5698 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bottrill and M. Green, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7039–7050 RSC .
J. A. J. Fitzpatrick, S. K. Andreko, L. A. Ernst, A. S. Waggoner, B. Ballou and M. P. Bruchez, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2736–2741 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, W. Li, Y. Zhou, X. Liu, L. Zhang, L. Wang, Y.-f. Li, A. Iida, Z. Tang, Y. Zhao, Z. Chai and C. Chen, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3174–3183 CrossRef CAS .
K.-T. Yong, I. Roy, H. Ding, E. J. Bergey and P. N. Prasad, Small, 2009, 5, 1997–2004 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Shuhendler, P. Prasad, H.-K. C. Chan, C. R. Gordijo, B. Soroushian, M. Kolios, K. Yu, P. J. O'Brien, A. M. Rauth and X. Y. Wu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1958–1966 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bakalova, Z. Zhelev, I. Aoki and I. Kanno, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 487–489 CrossRef CAS .
M. Longmire, P. L. Choyke and H. Kobayashi, Nanomedicine, 2008, 3, 703–717 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Zimmer, S.-W. Kim, S. Ohnishi, E. Tanaka, J. V. Frangioni and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2526–2527 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Choi, B. I. Ipe, P. Misra, J. H. Lee, M. G. Bawendi and J. V. Frangioni, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2354–2359 CrossRef CAS .
H.-M. Xiong, Y. Xu, Q.-G. Ren and Y.-Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7522–7523 CrossRef CAS .
F. Erogbogbo, K.-T. Yong, I. Roy, G. Xu, P. N. Prasad and M. T. Swihart, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 873–878 CrossRef CAS .
K.-T. Yong, H. Ding, I. Roy, W.-C. Law, E. J. Bergey, A. Maitra and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 502–510 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mao, C.-H. Chuang, J. Wang and C. Burda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8945–8954 CAS .
M. Baker, Nat. Methods, 2010, 7, 957–962 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deka, A. Quarta, M. G. Lupo, A. Falqui, S. Boninelli, C. Giannini, G. Morello, M. De Giorgi, G. Lanzani, C. Spinella, R. Cingolani, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2948–2958 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Nat. Biotechnol., 2009, 27, 732–733 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 976–989 RSC .
S. Achilefu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9816–9818 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haase and H. Schaefer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5808–5829 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, P. K. Jain, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Nanomedicine, 2007, 2, 681–693 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Schultz, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2003, 14, 13–22 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy, A. M. Gole, J. W. Stone, P. N. Sisco, A. M. Alkilany, E. C. Goldsmith and S. C. Baxter, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1721–1730 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tong, Q. Wei, A. Wei and J.-X. Cheng, Photochem. Photobiol., 2009, 85, 21–32 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ni, X. Kou, Z. Yang and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 677–686 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schultz, D. R. Smith, J. J. Mock and D. A. Schultz, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2000, 97, 996–1001 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. N. Xu, W. J. Brownlow, S. V. Kyriacou, Q. Wan and J. J. Viola, Biochemistry, 2004, 43, 10400–10413 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. McFarland and R. P. Van Duyne, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1057–1062 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sokolov, M. Follen, J. Aaron, I. Pavlova, A. Malpica, R. Lotan and R. Richards-Kortum, Cancer Res., 2003, 63, 1999–2004 CAS .
G. Raschke, S. Kowarik, T. Franzl, C. Soennichsen, T. A. Klar, J. Feldmann, A. Nichtl and K. Kuerzinger, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 935–938 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. El-Sayed, X. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 829–834 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2115–2120 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hu, K.-T. Yong, I. Roy, H. Ding, S. He and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2676–2684 CAS .
J. W. Stone, P. N. Sisco, E. C. Goldsmith, S. C. Baxter and C. J. Murphy, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 116–119 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Wilson, P. N. Sisco, E. C. Goldsmith and C. J. Murphy, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6332–6340 RSC .
A. K. Oyelere, P. C. Chen, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Bioconjugate Chem., 2007, 18, 1490–1497 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, H. Nakshatri and J. Irudayaraj, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2300–2306 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, K.-T. Yong, I. Roy, H. E. Pudavar, W. C. Law, E. J. Bergey and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12552–12557 CAS .
G. Louit, T. Asahi, G. Tanaka, T. Uwada and H. Masuhara, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11766–11772 CAS .
Y.-H. Yang and J.-M. Nam, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 2564–2568 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qian, X. Huang, B. Kang and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Biomed. Opt., 2010, 15, 046025 Search PubMed .
E. Hutter, S. Boridy, S. Labrecque, M. Lalancette-Hebert, J. Kriz, F. M. Winnik and D. Maysinger, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2595–2606 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Aaron, J. Oh, T. A. Larson, S. Kumar, T. E. Milner and K. V. Sokolov, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 12930–12943 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Khanadeev, B. N. Khlebtsov, S. A. Staroverov, I. V. Vidyasheva, A. A. Skaptsov, E. S. Ileneva, V. A. Bogatyrev, L. A. Dykman and N. G. Khlebtsov, J. Biophotonics, 2011, 4, 74–83 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, T. B. Huff, D. A. Zweifel, W. He, P. S. Low, A. Wei and J.-X. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 15752–15756 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Durr, T. Larson, D. K. Smith, B. A. Korgel, K. Sokolov and A. Ben-Yakar, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 941–945 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bickford, J. Sun, K. Fu, N. Lewinski, V. Nammalvar, J. Chang and R. Drezek, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 315102 CrossRef .
C.-L. Liu, M.-L. Ho, Y.-C. Chen, C.-C. Hsieh, Y.-C. Lin, Y.-H. Wang, M.-J. Yang, H.-S. Duan, B.-S. Chen, J.-F. Lee, J.-K. Hsiao and P.-T. Chou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21082–21089 CAS .
K.-W. Hu, T.-M. Liu, K.-Y. Chung, K.-S. Huang, C.-T. Hsieh, C.-K. Sun and C.-S. Yeh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14186–14187 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, N. N. Horimoto, K. Imura, H. Okamoto, K. Matsui and R. Shigemoto, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2309–2313 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Li and M. Gu, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 9492–9498 CrossRef CAS .
L. Au, Q. Zhang, C. M. Cobley, M. Gidding, A. G. Schwartz, J. Chen and Y. Xia, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Dowling, L. Li, J. Park, G. Kumi, A. Nan, H. Ghandehari, J. T. Fourkas and P. DeShong, Bioconjugate Chem., 2010, 21, 1968–1977 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Tang, Y.-Y. Fu, W.-F. Lo, T.-E. Hua and H.-Y. Tuan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6278–6284 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Sau, A. L. Rogach, F. Jaeckel, T. A. Klar and J. Feldmann, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1805–1825 CrossRef CAS .
K. Imura and H. Okamoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11756–11759 CAS .
D.-S. Wang, F.-Y. Hsu and C.-W. Lin, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 11350–11359 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tcherniak, S. Dominguez-Medina, W.-S. Chang, P. Swanglap, L. S. Slaughter, C. F. Landes and S. Link, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15938–15949 CAS .
Y. Zhou, X. Wu, T. Wang, T. Ming, P. N. Wang, L. W. Zhou and J. Y. Chen, J. Microsc., 2010, 237, 200–207 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tong, C. M. Cobley, J. Chen, Y. Xia and J.-X. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3485–3488 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu and L.-H. V. Wang, J. Biomed. Opt., 2010, 15, 011101 CrossRef .
L. V. Wang, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 503–509 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu and L. V. Wang, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2006, 77, 041101 CrossRef .
C. Haisch, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 393, 473–479 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Emelianov, P.-C. Li and M. O'Donnell, Phys. Today, 2009, 62, 34–39 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Wang, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2008, 14, 171–179 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, C. Favazza and L. V. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2756–2782 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ntziachristos, Nat. Methods, 2010, 7, 603–614 CrossRef CAS .
D. Graham-Rowe, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 123–125 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, E. W. Stein, S. Ashkenazi and L. V. Wang, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2009, 1, 360–368 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan and H. Jiang, Methods Mol. Biol., 2010, 624, 309–324 CAS .
M. A. Hahn, A. K. Singh, P. Sharma, S. C. Brown and B. M. Moudgil, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 399, 3–27 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, S. E. Skrabalak, Z.-Y. Li, Y. Xia and L. V. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3798–3802 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Moon, S.-W. Choi, X. Cai, W. Li, E. C. Cho, U. Jeong, L. V. Wang and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4762–4765 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Xie, X. Wang, G. Ku, K. L. Gill, D. P. O'Neal, G. Stoica and L. V. Wang, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1689–1692 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, Q. Huang, G. Ku, X. Wen, M. Zhou, D. Guzatov, P. Brecht, R. Su, A. Oraevsky, L. V. Wang and C. Li, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 2617–2626 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, M. Pramanik, A. Senpan, X. Yang, K. H. Song, M. J. Scott, H. Zhang, P. J. Gaffney, S. A. Wickline, L. V. Wang and G. M. Lanza, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4170–4173 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, M. Pramanik, A. Senpan, S. Ghosh, S. A. Wickline, L. V. Wang and G. M. Lanza, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 4088–4093 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, H.-M. Song, X. Cai, J. Yao, A. Wei and L. V. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2841–2844 RSC .
Q. Zhang, N. Iwakuma, P. Sharma, B. M. Moudgil, C. Wu, J. McNeill, H. Jiang and S. R. Grobmyer, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 395102 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, E. Yantsen, T. Larson, A. B. Karpiouk, S. Sethuraman, J. L. Su, K. Sokolov and S. Y. Emelianov, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2212–2217 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yoon, S. Mallidi, J. M. Tam, J. O. Tam, A. Murthy, K. P. Johnston, K. V. Sokolov and S. Y. Emelianov, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 3751–3753 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Chamberland, A. Agarwal, N. Kotov, J. B. Fowlkes, P. L. Carson and X. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 095101/1–095101/7 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, S.-W. Huang, S. Ashkenazi, M. O'Donnell, A. Agarwal, N. A. Kotov, M. F. Denny and M. J. Kaplan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 223901 CrossRef .
A. Agarwal, S. W. Huang, M. O'Donnell, K. C. Day, M. Day, N. Kotov and S. Ashkenazi, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 064701 CrossRef .
L.-C. Chen, C.-W. Wei, J. S. Souris, S.-H. Cheng, C.-T. Chen, C.-S. Yang, P.-C. Li and L.-W. Lo, J. Biomed. Opt., 2010, 15, 016010 CrossRef .
Y.-S. Chen, W. Frey, S. Kim, P. Kruizinga, K. Homan and S. Emelianov, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 348–354 CrossRef CAS .
R. Olafsson, D. R. Bauer, L. G. Montilla and R. S. Witte, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 18625–18632 CrossRef CAS .
A. Taruttis, E. Herzog, D. Razansky and V. Ntziachristos, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 19592–19602 CrossRef CAS .
A. Agarwal, X. Shao, J. R. Rajian, H. Zhang, D. L. Chamberland, N. A. Kotov and X. Wang, J. Biomed. Opt., 2011, 16, 051307 CrossRef .
C. L. Bayer, Y.-S. Chen, S. Kim, S. Mallidi, K. Sokolov and S. Emelianov, Biomedical Optics Express, 2011, 2, 1828–1835 CrossRef CAS .
A. de la Zerda, C. Zavaleta, S. Keren, S. Vaithilingam, S. Bodapati, Z. Liu, J. Levi, B. R. Smith, T.-J. Ma, O. Oralkan, Z. Cheng, X. Chen, H. Dai, B. T. Khuri-Yakub and S. S. Gambhir, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 557–562 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pramanik, M. Swierczewska, D. Green, B. Sitharaman and L. V. Wang, J. Biomed. Opt., 2009, 14, 034018 CrossRef .
A. de la Zerda, Z. Liu, S. Bodapati, R. Teed, S. Vaithilingam, B. T. Khuri-Yakub, X. Chen, H. Dai and S. S. Gambhir, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2168–2172 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, K. Yang and S.-T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 586–598 RSC .
M. V. Khodakovskaya, K. de Silva, D. A. Nedosekin, E. Dervishi, A. S. Biris, E. V. Shashkov, E. I. Galanzha and V. P. Zharov, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 1028–1033 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Akers, C. Kim, M. Berezin, K. Guo, R. Fuhrhop, G. M. Lanza, G. M. Fischer, E. Daltrozzo, A. Zumbusch, X. Cai, L. V. Wang and S. Achilefu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 173–182 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sharma, S. C. Brown, N. Bengtsson, Q. Zhang, G. A. Walter, S. R. Grobmyer, S. Santra, H. Jiang, E. W. Scott and B. M. Moudgil, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6087–6094 CrossRef CAS .
L.-S. Bouchard, M. S. Anwar, G. L. Liu, B. Hann, Z. H. Xie, J. W. Gray, X. Wang, A. Pines and F. F. Chen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 4085–4089 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, J. L. Su, A. B. Karpiouk, K. V. Sokolov, R. W. Smalling and S. Y. Emelianov, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 588–599 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Zhang, K. Maslov, G. Stoica and L. V. Wang, Nat. Biotechnol., 2006, 24, 848–851 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallidi, T. Larson, J. Tam, P. P. Joshi, A. Karpiouk, K. Sokolov and S. Emelianov, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2825–2831 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Lyon, C. D. Keating, A. P. Fox, B. E. Baker, L. He, S. R. Nicewarner, S. P. Mulvaney and M. J. Natan, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70, 341R–361R CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Haynes, A. D. McFarland and R. P. Van Duyne, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 338A–346A CrossRef CAS .
L. Brus, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1742–1749 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kerker, Appl. Opt., 1979, 18, 1180–1189 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kerker, D. S. Wang and H. Chew, Appl. Opt., 1980, 19, 3733–3788 Search PubMed .
M. Kerker, Appl. Opt., 1991, 30, 4699–4705 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science, 1997, 275, 1102–1106 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Michaels, M. Nirmal and L. E. Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 9932–9939 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kneipp and H. Kneipp, Appl. Spectrosc., 2006, 60, 322A CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Hudson and G. Chumanov, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 394, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kneipp, H. Kneipp and K. Kneipp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1052–1060 RSC .
J. N. Anker, W. P. Hall, O. Lyandres, N. C. Shah, J. Zhao and R. P. Van Duyne, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 442–453 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghoshal, D. Mitra, S. Roy and D. Dutta Majumder, Sens. Transducers J., 2010, 113, 1–17 CAS .
M. J. Banholzer, J. E. Millstone, L. Qin and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 885–897 RSC .
X.-M. Lin, Y. Cui, Y.-H. Xu, B. Ren and Z.-Q. Tian, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 394, 1729–1745 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xie, P. Qiu and C. Mao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5190–5202 RSC .
I. Chourpa, F. H. Lei, P. Dubois, M. Manfait and G. D. Sockalingum, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 993–1000 RSC .
T. Vo-Dinh, H.-N. Wang and J. Scaffidi, J. Biophotonics, 2010, 3, 89–102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Hong and W. Cai, Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol., 2010, 11, 654–661 CAS .
S. Schluecker, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 1344–1354 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kneipp, A. S. Haka, H. Kneipp, K. Badizadegan, N. Yoshizawa, C. Boone, K. E. Shafer-Peltier, J. T. Motz, R. R. Dasari and M. S. Feld, Appl. Spectrosc., 2002, 56, 150–154 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kneipp, H. Kneipp, M. McLaughlin, D. Brown and K. Kneipp, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2225–2231 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kneipp, H. Kneipp, B. Wittig and K. Kneipp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7421–7426 CAS .
J. Kneipp, H. Kneipp, B. Wittig and K. Kneipp, Nanomedicine (Philadelphia, PA, U. S.), 2010, 6, 214–226 CAS .
G. R. Souza, C. S. Levin, A. Hajitou, R. Pasqualini, W. Arap and J. H. Miller, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 6232–6237 CrossRef CAS .
S. Keren, C. Zavaleta, Z. Cheng, A. de la Zerda, O. Gheysens and S. S. Gambhir, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 5844–5849 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, X.-H. Peng, D. O. Ansari, Q. Yin-Goen, G. Z. Chen, D. M. Shin, L. Yang, A. N. Young, M. D. Wang and S. Nie, Nat. Biotechnol., 2008, 26, 83–90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. L. Seebald, D. P. Szeto and J. Irudayaraj, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4039–4053 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Qian, J. J. Beitler, Z. G. Chen, F. R. Khuri, M. M. Lewis, H. J. C. Shin, S. Nie and D. M. Shin, Cancer Res., 2011, 71, 1526–1532 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian, L. Jiang, F. Cai, D. Wang and S. He, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 1601–1610 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Wu, C. Wang, S. Xu and Y. Cui, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4307–4313 RSC .
E. Fort and S. Gresillon, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 013001 CrossRef .
C. D. Geddes, K. Aslan, I. Gryczynski, J. Malicka and J. R. Lakowicz, Rev. Fluoresc., 2004, 1, 365–401 CAS .
J. R. Lakowicz, Anal. Biochem., 2005, 337, 171–194 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. G. Goulet and R. F. Aroca, Topics in Fluorescence Spectroscopy, 2005, 8, 223–247 CrossRef CAS .
M. Weisenberg, Y. Zhang and C. D. Geddes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 133103 CrossRef .
K. Ray, R. Badugu and J. R. Lakowicz, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5902–5909 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schmelzeisen, Y. Zhao, M. Klapper, K. Muellen and M. Kreiter, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3309–3317 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, S. Corni and B. Mennucci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5450–5460 CAS .
D. A. Weitz, S. Garoff, J. I. Gersten and A. Nitzan, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1983, 29, 363–370 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Lakowicz, C. D. Geddes, I. Gryczynski, J. Malicka, Z. Gryczynski, K. Aslan, J. Lukomska, E. Matveeva, J. Zhang, R. Badugu and J. Huang, J. Fluoresc., 2004, 14, 425–441 CrossRef CAS .
J. Malicka, I. Gryczynski and J. R. Lakowicz, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2003, 306, 213–218 CrossRef CAS .
J. Malicka, I. Gryczynski and J. R. Lakowicz, Biopolymers, 2004, 74, 263–271 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aslan, J. Huang, G. M. Wilson and C. D. Geddes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4206–4207 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Chowdhury, K. Ray, K. Aslan, J. R. Lakowicz and C. D. Geddes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18856–18863 CAS .
N. Bondre, Y. Zhang and C. D. Geddes, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 152, 82–87 CrossRef .
G. Lajos, D. Jancura, P. Miskovsky, J. V. García-Ramos and S. Sanchez-Cortes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12974–12980 CAS .
G. Lajos, D. Jancura, P. Miskovsky, J. V. García-Ramos and S. Sanchez-Cortes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7147–7154 CAS .
K. Asian, S. N. Malyn and C. D. Geddes, J. Fluoresc., 2007, 17, 7–13 Search PubMed .
M. H. Chowdhury, K. Ray, S. K. Gray, J. Pond and J. R. Lakowicz, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 1397–1403 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mishra, A. Dragan and C. D. Geddes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17227–17236 CAS .
E. del Puerto, C. Domingo, S. Sanchez-Cortes, J. V. García-Ramos and R. F. Aroca, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 16838–16843 CAS .
R.-H. Zhang, Z.-Y. Wang, C.-Y. Song, J. Yang, J. Li, A. Sadaf and Y.-P. Cui, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 992–998 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Guerrero and R. F. Aroca, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 665–668 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Lang, P. F. Guan, T. Fujita and M. W. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 3795–3799 RSC .
G. Hong, S. M. Tabakman, K. Welsher, H. Wang, X. Wang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15920–15923 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mackowski, S. Woermke, A. J. Maier, T. H. P. Brotosudarmo, H. Harutyunyan, A. Hartschuh, A. O. Govorov, H. Scheer and C. Braeuchle, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 558–564 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bharill, C. Chen, B. Stevens, J. Kaur, Z. Smilansky, W. Mandecki, I. Gryczynski, Z. Gryczynski, B. S. Cooperman and Y. E. Goldman, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 399–407 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ray, R. Badugu and J. R. Lakowicz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8998–8999 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Pompa, L. Martiradonna, A. Della Torre, F. Della Sala, L. Manna, M. De Vittorio, F. Calabi, R. Cingolani and R. Rinaldi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 126–130 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, S. Xu, C. Wang, H. Shao, Q. Xu and Y. Cui, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2582–2588 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. An, Y. Q. Yang, W. H. Su, J. Yi, C. X. Liu, K. F. Chao and Q. H. Zeng, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 2099–2103 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Geddes, H. Cao, I. Gryczynski, Z. Gryczynski, J. Fang and J. R. Lakowicz, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 3443–3449 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aslan, I. Gryczynski, J. Malicka, E. Matveeva, J. R. Lakowicz and C. D. Geddes, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2005, 16, 55–62 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aslan, J. R. Lakowicz and C. D. Geddes, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2005, 9, 538–544 CrossRef CAS .
O. Stranik, H. M. McEvoy, C. McDonagh and B. D. MacCraith, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 107, 148–153 CrossRef .
N. Stich, C. Mayer, G. D. Bauer and T. G. M. Schalkhammer, Proc. SPIE–Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2001, 4434, 128–137 CAS .
U. Sauer, C. Preininger, G. Krumpel, N. Stelzer and W. Kern, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 107, 178–183 CrossRef .
F. Tang, F. He, H. Cheng and L. Li, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11774–11778 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. J. G. J. Dolmans, D. Fukumura and R. K. Jain, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2003, 3, 380–387 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Celli, B. Q. Spring, I. Rizvi, C. L. Evans, K. S. Samkoe, S. Verma, B. W. Pogue and T. Hasan, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2795–2838 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Cheng and C. Burda, in Comprehensive Nanoscience and Technology, ed. D. L. Andrews, G. D. Scholes and G. P. Wiederrecht, Academic Press, Oxford,  2011, vol. 2, ch. 2.01 Nanoparticles For Photodynamic Therapy, pp. 1–28 Search PubMed .
P. R. Ogilby, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3181–3209 RSC .
C. Schweitzer and R. Schmidt, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 1685–1757 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo and D. Kessel, Photochem. Photobiol., 1997, 66, 479–483 CrossRef CAS .
W.-H. Chan, J.-S. Yu and S.-D. Yang, Biochem. J., 2000, 351, 221–232 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Oleinick, R. L. Morris and I. Belichenko, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2002, 1, 1–21 CAS .
A. P. Castano, P. Mroz and M. R. Hamblin, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2006, 6, 535–545 CrossRef CAS .
E. Buytaert, M. Dewaele and P. Agostinis, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Rev. Cancer, 2007, 1776, 86–107 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Redmond and I. E. Kochevar, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 1178–1186 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Kuimova, S. W. Botchway, A. W. Parker, M. Balaz, H. A. Collins, H. L. Anderson, K. Suhling and P. R. Ogilby, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 69–73 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Kuimova, M. Balaz, H. L. Anderson and P. R. Ogilby, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7948–7949 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Jensen, J. Arnbjerg, H. Birkedal and P. R. Ogilby, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7166–7173 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Kuimova, G. Yahioglu and P. R. Ogilby, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 332–340 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Redmond and J. N. Gamlin, Photochem. Photobiol., 1999, 70, 391–475 CAS .
M. Ethirajan, Y. Chen, P. Joshi and R. K. Pandey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 340–362 RSC .
D. Magda, M. Wright, R. A. Miller, J. L. Sessler and P. I. Sansom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 3629–3630 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Sery, Cancer Res., 1979, 39, 96–100 CAS .
L. M. Moreira, F. V. dos Santos, J. P. Lyon, M. Maftoum-Costa, C. Pacheco-Soares and N. S. da Silva, Aust. J. Chem., 2008, 61, 741–754 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Garland, C. M. Cassidy, D. Woolfson and R. F. Donnelly, Future Med. Chem., 2009, 1, 667–691 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, A. C. Samia, J. D. Meyers, I. Panagopoulos, B. Fei and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10643–10647 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, A. C. Samia, J. Li, M. E. Kenney, A. Resnick and C. Burda, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2248–2255 CrossRef CAS .
G. Storm, S. O. Belliot, T. Daemen and D. D. Lasic, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 1995, 17, 31–48 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Lasic and D. Needham, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 2601–2628 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gref, M. Lück, P. Quellec, M. Marchand, E. Dellacherie, S. Harnisch, T. Blunk and R. H. Müller, Colloids Surf., B, 2000, 18, 301–313 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vonarbourg, C. Passirani, P. Saulnier and J.-P. Benoit, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 4356–4373 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hamidi, A. Azadi and P. Rafiei, Drug Delivery, 2006, 13, 399–409 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Dobrovolskaia and S. E. McNeil, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 469–478 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Huynh, E. Roger, N. Lautram, J.-P. Benoit and C. Passirani, Nanomedicine, 2010, 5, 1415–1433 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, M. Kumar and P. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 6071–6072 CrossRef CAS .
P. Juzenas, R. Generalov, A. Juzeniene and J. Moan, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2008, 4, 450–456 CrossRef CAS .
P. Juzenas, W. Chen, Y.-P. Sun, M. Alvero Neto Coelho, R. Generalov, N. Generalova and I. L. Christensen, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2008, 60, 1600–1614 CrossRef CAS .
V. Morosini, T. Bastogne, C. Frochot, R. Schneider, A. François, F. Guillemin and M. Barberi-Heyob, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2011, 10, 842–851 CAS .
S. Dayal, R. Krolicki and C. Burda, Proc. SPIE–Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2005, 5705, 247–254 CAS .
A. Anas, H. Akita, H. Harashima, T. Itoh, M. Ishikawa and V. Biju, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 10005–10011 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Chen, Y.-M. Lee, D. Zhao, N.-K. Mak, R. N.-S. Wong, W.-H. Chan and N.-H. Cheung, Photochem. Photobiol., 2010, 86, 431–437 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, B. Hernandez and M. Selke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6278–6279 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, J.-Y. Chen, M. Idowu and T. Nyokong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 4465–4469 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moeno, E. Antunes, S. Khene, C. Litwinski and T. Nyokong, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 3460–3471 RSC .
A. Rakovich, D. Savateeva, T. Rakovich, J. F. Donegan, Y. P. Rakovich, V. Kelly, V. Lesnyak and A. Eychmüller, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 753–760 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-D. Qi, D.-W. Li, P. Jiang, F.-L. Jiang, Y.-S. Li, Y. Liu, W.-K. Wong and K.-W. Cheah, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2455–2458 RSC .
C. Ratanatawanate, A. Chyao and K. J. Balkus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3492–3497 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dayal, Y. Lou, A. C. S. Samia, J. C. Berlin, M. E. Kenney and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13974–13975 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dayal and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7977–7981 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dayal and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2890–2891 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Delehanty, H. Mattoussi and I. L. Medintz, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 393, 1091–1105 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Choi, W. Liu, F. Liu, K. Nasr, P. Misra, M. G. Bawendi and J. V. Frangioni, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 42–47 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Rahmanto, P. E. Morgan, C. L. Hawkins and M. J. Davies, Free Radical Biol. Med., 2010, 49, 1505–1515 CrossRef CAS .
T. Breitenbach, M. K. Kuimova, P. Gbur, S. Hatz, N. B. Schack, B. W. Pedersen, J. D. C. Lambert, L. Poulsen and P. R. Ogilby, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 442–452 CAS .
L. C. Penning and T. M. A. R. Dubbelman, Anti-Cancer Drugs, 1994, 5, 139–146 CrossRef CAS .
A. Juarranz, P. Jaén, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, J. Cuevas and S. González, Clin. Transl. Oncol., 2008, 10, 148–154 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Cole, N. A. Mirin, M. W. Knight, G. P. Goodrich and N. J. Halas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12090–12094 CAS .
H. Chen, L. Shao, T. Ming, Z. Sun, C. Zhao, B. Yang and J. Wang, Small, 2010, 6, 2272–2280 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, P. K. Jain, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Saved, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 412–417 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Pitsillides, E. K. Joe, X. Wei, R. R. Anderson and C. P. Lin, Biophys. J., 2003, 84, 4023–4032 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. El-Sayed, X. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, Cancer Lett. (Amsterdam, Neth.), 2006, 239, 129–135 CAS .
J. Nam, N. Won, H. Jin, H. Chung and S. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13639–13645 CrossRef CAS .
B. Van de Broek, N. Devoogdt, A. D'Hollander, H.-L. Gijs, K. Jans, L. Lagae, S. Muyldermans, G. Maes and G. Borghs, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4319–4328 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Norman, J. W. Stone, A. Gole, C. J. Murphy and T. L. Sabo-Attwood, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 302–306 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Huang, Y. Yang, A. Nanda, P. Koria and K. Rege, Nanomedicine, 2011, 6, 459–473 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Dickerson, E. C. Dreaden, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, H. Chu, S. Pushpanketh, J. F. McDonald and M. A. El-Sayed, Cancer Lett., 2008, 269, 57–66 CrossRef CAS .
W. I. Choi, J.-Y. Kim, C. Kang, C. C. Byeon, Y. H. Kim and G. Tae, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1995–2003 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Gobin, M. H. Lee, N. J. Halas, W. D. James, R. A. Drezek and J. L. West, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1929–1934 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, D. Chen, L. Li, T. Liu, L. Tan, X. Wu and F. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 891–895 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Melancon, W. Lu, Z. Yang, R. Zhang, Z. Cheng, A. M. Elliot, J. Stafford, T. Olson, J. Z. Zhang and C. Li, Mol. Cancer Ther., 2008, 7, 1730–1739 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, C. Xiong, G. Zhang, Q. Huang, R. Zhang, J. Z. Zhang and C. Li, Clin. Cancer Res., 2009, 15, 876–886 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Melancon, M. Zhou and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 947–956 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, C. Glaus, R. Laforest, Q. Zhang, M. Yang, M. Gidding, M. J. Welch and Y. Xia, Small, 2010, 6, 811–817 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, T. Ming, X. Wang, P. Wang, J. Wang and J. Chen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 113–120 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, A. K. Singh, S. A. Khan, D. Senapati, H. Yu and P. C. Ray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 18103–18114 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Qian, L. H. Zhou, H.-P. Too and G.-M. Chow, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 499–510 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sharma, S. C. Brown, A. Singh, N. Iwakuma, G. Pyrgiotakis, V. Krishna, J. A. Knapik, K. Barr, B. M. Moudgil and S. R. Grobmyer, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5182–5185 RSC .
X. Ji, R. Shao, A. M. Elliott, R. J. Stafford, E. Esparza-Coss, J. A. Bankson, G. Liang, Z.-P. Luo, K. Park, J. T. Markert and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6245–6251 CAS .
N. W. S. Kam, M. O'Connell, J. A. Wisdom and H. Dai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 11600–11605 CrossRef CAS .
H.-K. Moon, S.-H. Lee and H.-C. Choi, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3707–3713 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Fisher, S. Sarkar, C. F. Buchanan, C. S. Szot, J. Whitney, H. C. Hatcher, S. V. Torti, C. G. Rylander and M. N. Rylander, Cancer Res., 2010, 70, 9855–9864 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, S. Zhang, G. Zhang, X. Sun, S.-T. Lee and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3318–3323 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Robinson, S. M. Tabakman, Y. Liang, H. Wang, H. Sanchez Casalongue, D. Vinh and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6825–6831 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Z. Guo, D. Huang, Z. Liu, X. Guo and H. Zhong, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 8555–8561 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Seo, J. H. Lee, X. Sun, Y. Suzuki, D. Mann, Z. Liu, M. Terashima, P. C. Yang, M. V. McConnell, D. G. Nishimura and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 971–976 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Sherlock, S. M. Tabakman, L. Xie and H. Dai, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1505–1512 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tang, X. Huang and N. Zheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3948–3950 RSC .
X. Huang, S. Tang, X. Mu, Y. Dai, G. Chen, Z. Zhou, F. Ruan, Z. Yang and N. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 28–32 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Lambert, N. L. Andrews, H. Gerung, T. J. Boyle, J. M. Oliver, B. S. Wilson and S. M. Han, Small, 2007, 3, 691–699 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, H. Kim, C. Hong, M. Kim, S. S. Hong, D. H. Lee and W. I. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4790–4795 RSC .
Y. Li, W. Lu, Q. Huang, C. Li and W. Chen, Nanomedicine, 2010, 5, 1161–1171 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Hessel, V. P. Pattani, M. Rasch, M. G. Panthani, B. Koo, J. W. Tunnell and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2560–2566 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kroemer and M. Jaattela, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2005, 5, 886–897 CrossRef CAS .
L. Whitesell and S. L. Lindquist, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2005, 5, 761–772 CrossRef CAS .
J. Trepel, M. Mollapour, G. Giaccone and L. Neckers, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2010, 10, 537–549 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Eyles and L. M. Gierasch, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 2727–2728 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Gomer, S. W. Ryter, A. Ferrario, N. Rucker, S. Wong and A. M. R. Fisher, Cancer Res., 1996, 56, 2355–2360 CAS .
N. G. Blanco, C. R. Maldonado and J. C. Mareque-Rivas, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5257–5259 RSC .
L. Kelland, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2007, 7, 573–584 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang and S. J. Lippard, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2005, 4, 307–320 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Bednarski, F. S. Mackay and P. J. Sadler, Anti-Cancer Agents Med. Chem., 2007, 7, 75–93 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Farrer, J. A. Woods, L. Salassa, Y. Zhao, K. S. Robinson, G. Clarkson, F. S. Mackay and P. J. Sadler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8905–8908 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Farrer, L. Salassa and P. J. Sadler, Dalton Trans., 2009, 10690–10701 RSC .
S. J. Berners-Price, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 804–805 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Timko, K. Whitehead, W. Gao, D. S. Kohane, O. Farokhzad, D. Anderson and R. Langer, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lavik and H. von Recum, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3419–3424 CrossRef CAS .
D. Peer, J. M. Karp, S. Hong, O. C. Farokhzad, R. Margalit and R. Langer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 751–760 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Petros and J. M. De Simone, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2010, 9, 615–627 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Davis, Z. Chen and D. M. Shin, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2008, 7, 771–782 CrossRef CAS .
B. Duncan, C. Kim and V. M. Rotello, J. Controlled Release, 2010, 148, 122–127 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Medina and M. E. H. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 3141–3157 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Sperling, P. R. Gil, F. Zhang, M. Zanella and W. Parak, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1896–1908 RSC .
B. P. Timko, T. Dvir and D. S. Kohane, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4925–4943 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Coti, M. E. Belowich, M. Liong, M. W. Ambrogio, Y. A. Lau, H. A. Khatib, J. I. Zink, N. M. Khashab and J. F. Stoddart, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 16–39 RSC .
J. L. Vivero-Escoto, I. I. Slowing, B. G. Trewyn and V. S.-Y. Lin, Small, 2010, 6, 1952–1967 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Ambrogio, C. R. Thomas, Y.-L. Zhao, J. I. Zink and J. F. Stoddart, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 903–913 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Tekade, P. V. Kumar and N. K. Jain, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 49–87 CrossRef CAS .
D. Astruc, E. Boisselier and C. Ornelas, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 1857–1959 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, Y. Cui and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2292–2303 RSC .
S. F. M. van Dongen, H.-P. M. de Hoog, R. J. R. W. Peters, M. Nallani, R. J. M. Nolte and J. C. M. van Hest, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 6212–6274 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cavalli, F. Albericio and A. Kros, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 241–263 RSC .
N. A. Peppas, J. Z. Hilt, A. Khademhosseini and R. Langer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1345–1360 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lapcik, A. Lubomir, L. Lapcik, S. De Smedt, J. Demeester and P. Chabrecek, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 2663–2683 CrossRef .
R. Partha, L. R. Mitchell, J. L. Lyon, P. P. Joshi and J. L. Conyers, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1950–1958 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Kim, P. Ghosh, C. Pagliuca, Z.-J. Zhu, S. Menichetti and V. M. Rotello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1360–1361 CrossRef CAS .
C. d. l. H. Alarcón, S. Pennadam and C. Alexander, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 276–285 RSC .
A. K. Bajpai, S. K. Shukla, S. Bhanu and S. Kankane, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2008, 33, 1088–1118 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Mano, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2008, 10, 515–527 CrossRef CAS .
J.-O. You, D. Almeda, G. J. C. Ye and D. T. Auguste, J. Biol. Eng., 2010, 4, 15 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bae, N. Nishiyama, S. Fukushima, H. Koyama, M. Yasuhiro and K. Kataoka, Bioconjugate Chem., 2005, 16, 122–130 CrossRef CAS .
G. Helmlinger, F. Yuan, M. Dellian and R. K. Jain, Nat. Med. (N. Y.), 1997, 3, 177–182 CAS .
H. Mok, J. W. Park and T. G. Park, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 797–801 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, T. Zhou, A. Berliner, P. Banerjee and S. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1966–1976 CrossRef CAS .
B. Luo, S. Xu, A. Luo, W.-R. Wang, S.-L. Wang, J. Guo, Y. Lin, D.-Y. Zhao and C.-C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1428–1435 CrossRef CAS .
S. Angelos, N. M. Khashab, Y.-W. Yang, A. Trabolsi, H. A. Khatib, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12912–12914 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Khashab, M. E. Belowich, A. Trabolsi, D. C. Friedman, C. Valente, Y. Lau, H. A. Khatib, J. I. Zink and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5371–5373 RSC .
L. Du, S. Liao, H. A. Khatib, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15136–15142 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Zhao, Z. Li, S. Kabehie, Y. Y. Botros, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13016–13025 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xue, X. Zhong, Z. Shaposhnik, Y. Qu, F. Tamanoi, X. Duan and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8798–8801 CrossRef CAS .
F. Muhammad, M. Guo, W. Qi, F. Sun, A. Wang, Y. Guo and G. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8778–8781 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pornpattananangkul, S. Olson, S. Aryal, M. Sartor, C.-M. Huang, K. Vecchio and L. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1935–1942 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dhar, W. L. Daniel, D. A. Giljohann, C. A. Mirkin and S. J. Lippard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14652–14653 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Meng, Q. Lu, Z. Fei and P. J. Dyson, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 6041–6047 CrossRef CAS .
H. Meng, M. Liong, T. Xia, Z. Li, Z. Ji, J. I. Zink and A. E. Nel, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4539–4550 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Clime, H. Roberge, F. Normandin, L. Yahia, E. Sacher and T. Veres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1436–1443 CAS .
F. Wang, Y.-C. Wang, S. Dou, M.-H. Xiong, T.-M. Sun and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3679–3692 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bikram and J. L. West, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2008, 5, 1077–1091 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Strong and J. L. West, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2011, 3, 307–317 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Liechty, D. R. Kryscio, B. V. Slaughter and N. A. Peppas, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2010, 1, 149–173 CrossRef CAS .
J. Raula, J. Shan, M. Nuopponen, A. Niskanen, H. Jiang, E. I. Kauppinen and H. Tenhu, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 3499–3504 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim and T. R. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3647–3651 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim and T. R. Lee, Drug Dev. Res., 2006, 67, 61–69 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, N. T. Flynn and R. Langer, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1074–1079 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Q. Zhao, T.-X. Wang, W. Liu, C.-D. Wang, D. Wang, T. Shang, L.-H. Shen and L. Ren, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7240–7247 RSC .
I. Gorelikov, L. M. Field and E. Kumacheva, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15938–15939 CrossRef CAS .
M. Das, N. Sanson, D. Fava and E. Kumacheva, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 196–201 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shiotani, T. Mori, T. Niidome, Y. Niidome and Y. Katayama, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 4012–4018 CrossRef CAS .
T. Niidome, A. Shiotani, T. Mori and Y. Katayama, J. Controlled Release, 2010, 148, e65–e66 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, J. Shen, P. Banerjee and S. Zhou, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 598–609 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bikram, A. M. Gobin, R. E. Whitmire and J. L. West, J. Controlled Release, 2007, 123, 219–227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, W. Yang, C. Wang and S. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1729–1732 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, W. Yang, Y. Deng, C. Wang and S. Fu, Small, 2005, 1, 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujigaya, T. Morimoto, Y. Niidome and N. Nakashima, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3610–3614 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Z. You, K. K. Kalebaila, S. L. Brock and D. Oupicky, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3354–3359 CrossRef CAS .
A. de Sousa, D. A. Maria, R. G. de Sousa and E. M. Barros de Sousa, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 45, 1478–1486 CrossRef .
B.-S. Tian and C. Yang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 1871–1879 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Hribar, M. H. Lee, D. Lee and J. A. Burdick, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2948–2956 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Skirtach, A. A. Antipov, D. G. Shchukin and G. B. Sukhorukov, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 6988–6992 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Skirtach, C. Dejugnat, D. Braun, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, W. J. Parak, H. Moehwald and G. B. Sukhorukov, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1371–1377 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Skirtach, A. Munoz Javier, O. Kreft, K. Kehler, A. Piera Alberola, H. Moewald, W. J. Parak and G. B. Sukhorukov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4612–4617 CrossRef CAS .
B. Radt, T. A. Smith and F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2184–2189 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Angelatos, B. Radt and F. Caruso, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3071–3076 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Troutman, S. J. Leung and M. Romanowski, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2334–2338 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, A. Mikhailovsky, H. A. Khant, C. Fu, W. Chiu and J. A. Zasadzinski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8175–8177 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Volodkin, A. G. Skirtach and H. Moehwald, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1807–1809 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kyrsting, P. M. Bendix, D. G. Stamou and L. B. Oddershede, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 888–892 CrossRef CAS .
A. Agarwal, M. A. MacKey, M. A. El-Sayed and R. V. Bellamkonda, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4919–4926 CrossRef CAS .
H. Takahashi, Y. Niidome and S. Yamada, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2247–2249 RSC .
C.-C. Chen, Y.-P. Lin, C.-W. Wang, H.-C. Tzeng, C.-H. Wu, Y.-C. Chen, C.-P. Chen, L.-C. Chen and Y.-C. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3709–3715 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wijaya, S. B. Schaffer, I. G. Pallares and K. Hamad-Schifferli, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 80–86 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Braun, A. Pallaoro, G. Wu, D. Missirlis, J. A. Zasadzinski, M. Tirrell and N. O. Reich, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2007–2015 CrossRef CAS .
R. Huschka, O. Neumann, A. Barhoumi and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4117–4122 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Jones, J. E. Millstone, D. A. Giljohann, D. S. Seferos, K. L. Young and C. A. Mirkin, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 1461–1465 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Lee, G. L. Liu, F. Kim and L. P. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 562–570 CrossRef CAS .
L. Poon, W. Zandberg, D. Hsiao, Z. Erno, D. Sen, B. D. Gates and N. R. Branda, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6395–6403 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ibrahimkutty, J. Kim, M. Cammarata, F. Ewald, J. Choi, H. Ihee and A. Plech, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3788–3794 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Slocik, F. Tam, N. J. Halas and R. R. Naik, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1054–1058 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yaguee, M. Arruebo and J. Santamaria, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7513–7515 RSC .
A. B. S. Bakhtiari, D. Hsiao, G. Jin, B. D. Gates and N. R. Branda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4166–4169 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, G. Zhang and C. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1033–1041 CrossRef CAS .
A. Verma, J. M. Simard, J. W. E. Worrall and V. M. Rotello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13987–13991 CrossRef CAS .
G. Han, N. S. Chari, A. Verma, R. Hong, C. T. Martin and V. M. Rotello, Bioconjugate Chem., 2005, 16, 1356–1359 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hong, G. Han, J. M. Fernandez, B.-j. Kim, N. S. Forbes and V. M. Rotello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1078–1079 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chompoosor, G. Han and V. M. Rotello, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 1342–1345 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Ghosh, C.-K. Kim, G. Han, N. S. Forbes and V. M. Rotello, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2213–2218 CrossRef CAS .
P. Podsiadlo, V. A. Sinani, J. H. Bahng, N. W. S. Kam, J. Lee and N. A. Kotov, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 568–574 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, G. Li, W. Guo, P. Li, E. Wang and J. Wang, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 2776–2782 CrossRef CAS .
C. Park, H. Youn, H. Kim, T. Noh, Y. H. Kook, E. T. Oh, H. J. Park and C. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2310–2315 RSC .
E. Climent, R. Martinez-Manez, F. Sancenon, M. D. Marcos, J. Soto, A. Maquieira and P. Amoros, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7281–7283 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Andresen, D. H. Thompson and T. Kaasgaard, Mol. Membr. Biol., 2010, 27, 353–363 CrossRef CAS .
K. Patel, S. Angelos, W. R. Dichtel, A. Coskun, Y.-W. Yang, J. I. Zink and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2382–2383 CrossRef CAS .
C. Park, H. Kim, S. Kim and C. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16614–16615 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bernardos, E. Aznar, M. D. Marcos, R. Martínez-Máñez, F. Sancenón, J. Soto, J. M. Barat and P. Amorós, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5884–5887 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bernardos, L. Mondragón, E. Aznar, M. D. Marcos, R. Martínez-Máñez, F. Sancenón, J. Soto, J. M. Barat, E. Pérez-Payá, C. Guillem and P. Amorós, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6353–6368 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schlossbauer, J. Kecht and T. Bein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3092–3095 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, B. G. Trewyn, I. I. Slowing and V. S.-Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8398–8400 CrossRef CAS .
F. Porta, G. E. M. Lamers, J. I. Zink and A. Kros, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9982–9985 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Yue, G. Chen and J. Xia, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 7217–7222 RSC .
C.-L. Zhu, C.-H. Lu, X.-Y. Song, H.-H. Yang and X.-R. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1278–1281 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, J. Geng, F. Pu, X. Yang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 882–886 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, W. Meng, H. Gao and N. Hanagata, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13630–13636 CAS .
V. See, P. Free, Y. Cesbron, P. Nativo, U. Shaheen, D. Rigden, D. G. Spiller, D. G. Fernig, M. R. H. White, I. A. Prior, M. Brust, B. Lounis and R. Levy, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2461–2468 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Sen, Biochem. Pharmacol., 1998, 55, 1747–1758 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Lee, J. J. Green, K. T. Love, J. Sunshine, R. Langer and D. G. Anderson, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2402–2406 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jung, A. Solanki, K. A. Memoli, K.-I. Kamei, H. Kim, M. A. Drahl, L. J. Williams, H.-R. Tseng and K.-B. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 103–107 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lai, B. G. Trewyn, D. M. Jeftinija, K. Jeftinija, S. Xu, S. Jeftinija and V. S.-Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4451–4459 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, X. Zhao, T. Wu and P. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14418–14419 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Ambrogio, T. A. Pecorelli, K. Patel, N. M. Khashab, A. Trabolsi, H. A. Khatib, Y. Y. Botros, J. I. Zink and J. F. Stoddart, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 3304–3307 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, S. Kim, C. Park, H. Lee, H. J. Park and C. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4280–4283 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Sauer, A. Schlossbauer, N. Ruthardt, V. Cauda, T. Bein and C. Braeuchle, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3684–3691 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, H. Chen, C. Tripisciano, A. Jedrzejewska, M. H. Rüemmeli, R. Klingeler, R. J. Kalenczuk, P. K. Chu and E. Borowiak-Palen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 4454–4459 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, Y. Zhang and P. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15128–15129 CrossRef CAS .
C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, L. Bromberg and A. Concheiro, Photochem. Photobiol., 2009, 85, 848–860 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wijtmans, S. J. Rosenthal, B. Zwanenburg and N. A. Porter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11720–11726 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Q. Lin, Q. Huang, H. Liu, C. Bao, W. Zhang, X. Zhong and L. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1482–1484 RSC .
S. S. Agasti, A. Chompoosor, C.-C. You, P. Ghosh, C. K. Kim and V. M. Rotello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5728–5729 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, E. Choi, F. Tamanoi and J. I. Zink, Small, 2008, 4, 421–426 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Ferris, Y.-L. Zhao, N. M. Khashab, H. A. Khatib, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1686–1688 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Vivero-Escoto, I. I. Slowing, C.-W. Wu and V. S.-Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3462–3463 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lin, Q. Huang, C. Li, C. Bao, Z. Liu, F. Li and L. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10645–10647 CrossRef CAS .
N. Z. Knežević, B. G. Trewyn and V. S.-Y. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2817–2819 RSC .
N. Z. Knežević, B. G. Trewyn and V. S.-Y. Lin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3338–3342 CrossRef .
S. S. Kelkar and T. M. Reineke, Bioconjugate Chem., 2011, 22, 1879–1903 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Janib, A. S. Moses and J. A. MacKay, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2010, 62, 1052–1063 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lammers, S. Aime, W. E. Hennink, G. Storm and F. Kiessling, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 4, 1114–1122 Search PubMed .
X. Ma, Y. Zhao and X.-J. Liang, Acc. Chem. Res. Search PubMed  , ASAP.
M. E. Gindy and R. K. Prud'homme, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2009, 6, 865–878 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Scheinberg, C. H. Villa, F. E. Escorcia and M. R. McDevitt, Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol., 2010, 7, 266–276 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Al-Jamal and K. Kostarelos, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 1094–1104 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Ng, J. F. Lovell and G. Zheng, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 1105–1113 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ho, X.-L. Sun and S.-H. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 875–882 CrossRef CAS .
N. Khlebtsov and L. Dykman, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1647–1671 RSC .
H. Meng, M. Xue, T. Xia, Z. Ji, D. Y. Tarn, J. I. Zink and A. E. Nel, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4131–4144 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Weng, C. O. Noble, B. Papahadjopoulos-Sternberg, F. F. Chen, D. C. Drummond, D. B. Kirpotin, D. Wang, Y. K. Hom, B. Hann and J. W. Park, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2851–2857 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xia, M. Kovochich, M. Liong, H. Meng, S. Kabehie, S. George, J. I. Zink and A. E. Nel, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3273–3286 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Al-Jamal, K. T. Al-Jamal, B. Tian, L. Lacerda, P. H. Bomans, P. M. Frederik and K. Kostarelos, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 408–418 CrossRef CAS .
E.-K. Oh, J. B. Delehanty, K. E. Sapsford, K. Susumu, R. Goswami, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson, J. Granek, M. Shoff, Q. Zhang, P. L. Goering, A. Huston and I. L. Medintz, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6434–6448 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. Chen and Y. Zheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5421–5429 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mailänder and K. Landfester, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 2379–2400 CrossRef .
A. Verma and F. Stellacci, Small, 2010, 6, 12–21 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. T. Chou, K. Ming and W. C. W. Chan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 233–245 RSC .
H. S. Choi, Y. Ashitate, J. H. Lee, S. H. Kim, A. Matsui, N. Insin, M. G. Bawendi, M. Semmler-Behnke, J. V. Frangioni and A. Tsuda, Nat. Biotechnol., 2010, 28, 1300–1303 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stylianopoulos, M.-Z. Poh, N. Insin, M. G. Bawendi, D. Fukumura, L. L. Munn and R. K. Jain, Biophys. J., 2010, 99, 1342–1349 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, C. Jia, S.-W. Huang, M. O'Donnell and X. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 41 CrossRef .

          F. Shand, Nano Magazine (Online www.nanomagazine.co.uk),  2010 Search PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Peng, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, D. M. Shin, M. A. El-Sayed and S. Nie, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5887–5896 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wong, T. Stylianopoulos, J. Cui, J. Martin, V. P. Chauhan, W. Jiang, Z. Popovic, R. K. Jain, M. G. Bawendi and D. Fukumura, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 2426–2431 CrossRef CAS .
F. Michor, J. Liphardt, M. Ferrari and J. Widom, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2011, 11, 657–670 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Oleinick, A. R. Antunez, M. E. Clay, B. D. Rihter and M. E Kenney, Photochem. Photobiol., 1993, 57, 242–247 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Connor, J. Mwamuka, A. Gole, C. J. Murphy and M. D. Wyatt, Small, 2005, 1, 325–327 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, J. D. Meyers, R. S. Agnes, T. L. Doane, M. E. Kenney, A.-M. Broome, C. Burda and J. P. Basilion, Small, 2011, 7, 2301–2306 CrossRef CAS .
T. Doane, A. Babar, Y. Cheng, R. J. Hill and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15624–15631 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Part of the nanomedicine themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Tennyson L. Doane
	Tennyson Doane obtained his BS from Eastern Nazarene College under the guidance of Dr Lowell Hall and Dr Timothy Wooster. Currently, Tennyson is pursuing his doctorate under the direction of Dr Clemens Burda at Case Western Reserve University. His interests include bionanomaterials, ultrafast spectroscopy, transport, and surface properties of nanomaterials. He resides in Cleveland, OH with his wife Jennie who is an oncology nurse.

Clemens Burda
	Prof. Burda obtained his PhD from the University of Basel, Switzerland. He was a postdoctoral fellow at the Georgia Institute of Technology with Prof. El-Sayed. Currently he holds faculty positions in Chemistry and Materials Science and Engineering at Case Western Reserve University, in Cleveland, Ohio. His research focus is on nanomaterials chemistry and laser spectroscopy. Prof. Burda is an author of several book chapters, and lead investigator of over a hundred publications in the field of nanoscience. He is a founder and co-director of the Center for Chemical Dynamics at Case Western Reserve University.

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of a nanoparticle typically used in many nanomedicine applications with a solid core (gold), large surface area (blue), modifiable chemical interface packed into an organic layer (green spheres), and here with overall spherical shape.	 

 	Fig. 2  Different shapes available for NPs: triangle prisms, cubes, truncated cages, plates, spheres, shells (using a SiO2 core), and nanorods.	 

 	Fig. 3  Illustration of the differences in vasculature architecture for cancerous (dark blue) and healthy (blue) cells, which allows NPs (gold) to diffuse into solid tumors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  The spectral response of oxygenated hemoglobin, deoxygenated hemoglobin, and water as a function of wavelength. The red highlighted area indicates the biological optical window where adsorption due to the body is at a minimum. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2001, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  CdTe/CdSe quantum dot photoluminescence under UV excitation. The size of the QDs increases from left to right, modulating the emission from 520 nm to the NIR.	 

 	Fig. 6  Optical microscopy image of scattered light from nanocubes (left) and nanohexagons (right). Insets show the high monodispersity and well controlled shape of the cubes and hexagons (left and right, respectively). Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Vascular imaging with quantum dots using (a) cascade blue conjugated dextran and (b) 470 nm emitting QDs. In the case of the flexible dextran, significant leakage of the dye into the tumor interstitium is observed while the QD retained sharp contrast of the vasculature. (c) Concurrent imaging of both QD470 and GFP (indicated in green) provides clear separation of the vessel from GFP-expressing perivascular cells. (d) Vessels highlighted with a deep red (QD660) micelle preparation were imaged simultaneously with the second harmonic generation signal of tumor collagen (indicated in blue). Scale bar, 50 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2005, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  NIR fluorescence image of a mouse with a QD loaded tumor (red) both with (a) and without (b) autofluorescence. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2011, Wiley Publications.	 

 	Fig. 9  Light scattering from EGF targeted Au NRs in (a) noncancerous and (b) cancerous cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  
In vivo imaging of a subcutaneously inoculated B16-melanoma in an immunocompromised nude mouse using fPAM at 584 nm and 764 nm. A (a) photograph and (b) composite photoacoustic projection of the melanoma (labeled M), with blood vessels pseudocolored red in the 584 nm image and the melanoma is pseudo-colored brown in the 764 nm image. (c) Three dimensional rendering of the melanoma from the data acquired at 764 nm. Two MAP images at this wavelength projected along the x and y axes are shown on the two side walls, respectively. The composite image shown in (a) is projected at the bottom. The top surface of the tumor is 0.32 mm below the skin surface, and the thickness of the melanoma is 0.3 mm. (d) An enlarged cross-sectional (B-scan) image of the melanoma parallel with the z–x plane at the location marked with a dashed line in (a). (e) Hematoxylin-and-eosin (HE) stained section at the same marked location. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  SERS spectra of (a) targeted and (b) non-targeted malchalite green tagged Au NRs accumulated in the tumor and liver. Selective excitation of the tumor (c) and the liver (d) was undertaken with a 785 nm laser. Reprinted with permission from ref. 240. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  Comparison of (a) gross pathology, (b) silver staining, (c) hematoxylin/eosin staining and (d) magnetic resonance temperature imaging (MRTI) calculations of tumor tissue after in vivo treatment with nanoshells and NIR laser treatment. Evidence for hemorrhaging (a) and tissue damage (c) is correlated to the presence of silver-stained Au nanoshells (b) and the heating profile obtained via MRTI (d) upon laser treatment, indicating effective PTT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2003, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 13  Introduction to methodologies in NP drug delivery utilizing either covalent or non-covalent approaches (A). After identifying whether surface immobilized or encapsulated delivery is preferred (B), a variety of triggers can be utilized for controlled release (C).	 

 	Fig. 14  Illustration of a pH responsive lid consisting of a benzimidazole stock and cyclodextrin caps on mesoporous silica NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 417. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  A (A) detailed schematic and (B) demonstration of the release of dye molecules from the surface of a Au NP as a function of glutathione (GSH) concentrations in cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 471. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Illustration of photolabile linkers (C) connected to a chemotherapeutic drug (D) encapsulated in a mesoporous silica nanorod with either single or two photon excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 508. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Depiction of Pc 4 (blue) non-covalently attached to a PEGylated Au NP (gold sphere) and the structure of Pc 4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 304. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Monitoring the fluorescence of the upper toluene phase due to the transfer of Pc 4 from the PEGylated Au NPs in water. Inset: absorbance of Pc 4 shows the same trend as fluorescence data versus time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 304. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  A comparison of the relative uptake of Pc 4 using Au NPs as carriers at 1 (a), 30 (b), and 120 min (c) to that of the uptake of the free drug in 120 min (d) during an in vivo imaging experiment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 304. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Comparison of cell mortality as a function of concentration and laser fluence for both (A) Pc 4–Au NP conjugates and (B) Pc 219–Au NP conjugates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic of the two different methods by which Pc 4 is delivered to HeLa cells. Experimentally it was found that the primary pathway consists of diffusion through the cell membrane (99%) with only a small contribution from endocytosis of the Pc 4–Au NP conjugate (1%). Reprinted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic of Pc 4 loaded Au NP conjugates with conjugated EGF peptide targeting ligands. Reprinted with permission from ref. 539. Copyright 2011, Wiley Publications.	 

 	Fig. 23  Comparison of targeting effect of EGF–Au NP–Pc 4 conjugates versus untargeted Au NP–Pc 4 conjugates in brain tumor-bearing mice with both (A) fluorescence imaging of extracted brains with tumors and (B) monochromatic imaging. The white circle indicates the tumor position in the brain, and each slice has a thickness of 2 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 539. Copyright 2011, Wiley Publications.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Bio-distribution of PEGylated Au NPs as a function of time in critical organs, feces, and urine. (B) Silver staining histology of the liver, kidney, spleen and urinary tract over a period of 7 days. All data acquired after intravenous injection with a Pc 4 concentration of 1 mg kg−1 (30 Pc 4 per Au NP). Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Part of the nanomedicine themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
