Critical work of adhesion for economical patterning of silver nanowire-based transparent electrodes  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA01498E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA01498E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14536-14544Critical work of adhesion for economical patterning of silver nanowire-based transparent electrodes

        
          
            Dongwook 
            Ko
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bongjun 
            Gu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Seok Ju 
            Kang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sungjin 
            Jo
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Dong Choon 
            Hyun
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Chang Su 
            Kim
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Jongbok 
            Kim
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Kumoh National Institute of Technology, Gumi, Gyeongbuk 39177, Korea. E-mail: jbkim@kumoh.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-54-478-7769;   Tel: +82-54-478-7748
bSchool of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, Korea
cSchool of Architectural, Civil, Environmental, and Energy Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, Korea
dDepartment of Polymer Science and Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, Korea
eDepartment of Advanced Functional Thin Films, Korea Institute of Materials Science (KIMS), Changwon 51508, Korea
Received 
      9th February 2019
    , Accepted 4th April 2019First published on 5th April 2019AbstractThe lithographic process for flexible transparent electrodes is essential for constructing wearable optoelectronic devices with a well-defined active area. Although photolithography is a well-established patterning process, and can generate small features, it involves toxic materials and high processing cost. Herein, we introduce a novel lithographic process for both silver nanowire (AgNW)-embedded and AgNW-exposed flexible transparent electrodes. We selectively control the adhesion between AgNWs and the substrate via a local surface treatment with ultraviolet/ozone (UV/ozone), oxygen plasma, and atmosphere plasma. Since strong adhesion leads to retention of AgNWs on the substrate during embedding of AgNWs in a UV-curable polymer, selective control of adhesion induces selective embedding of AgNWs, generating AgNW-embedded and AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes with desirable patterns. Additionally, this process is versatile enough to be applicable to various substrates including poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)-coated surfaces, poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) films, and acrylic substrates, and various AgNWs with different surface energies. The critical work of adhesion to successfully pattern AgNW-based transparent electrodes is experimentally obtained. Conclusively, we demonstrate that patterning of AgNW-based electrodes by controlling the work of adhesion is economical and eco-friendly, and can be successfully applied for designing various optoelectronic devices such as organic photovoltaic cells and liquid crystal cells.
Introduction
Wearable optoelectronic devices that provide us with various functions and information require flexible and stretchable transparent electrodes to operate consistently without degradation, regardless of device bending, stretching, and twisting.1–4 A conventional approach to constructing flexible transparent electrodes involves the deposition of indium tin oxide (ITO) on flexible bases like polyethylene terephthalate (PET) films. However, thus-designed electrodes are so brittle5,6 that many alternatives for flexible and stretchable electrodes, including metal nanowires,7,8 metal grids,9,10 conductive polymers,11,12 and graphene,13,14 have emerged for application in reliable wearable optoelectronic devices. Metal grids were the most promising materials due to their high conductivity, high transmittance, and ease of control of their properties by changing the grid design.15,16 Although metal grids have been successfully used to fabricate large-area touch sensors,17–19 high processing cost associated with their fabrication has led researchers to consider other alternatives. Among other candidates, silver nanowires (AgNWs) have the greatest potential due to their high conductivity, high transmittance, and suitability to large-area processing with low cost,20–22 while conducting polymers and graphene suffer from relatively low conductivity and difficulty in large-area processing. In addition, AgNW-embedded transparent electrodes have recently been developed, in which AgNWs are embedded inside the polymer to create a smooth surface and to prevent shorting of the device, improving the applicability of AgNW-based flexible electrodes in various electronic devices.23–26
To fabricate various optoelectronic devices with AgNW-based flexible transparent electrodes, they must be patterned into specific shapes. Photolithography is the most common patterning method for AgNW-based transparent electrodes and various other materials such as silicon and ITO.27–29 To construct AgNW-based transparent electrodes with desirable patterns via a photolithographic process, AgNWs are first coated on a target substrate, followed by coating a photoresist (PR) on the AgNW film, exposing it to ultraviolet (UV) radiation of 365 nm wavelength with a photomask, and developing it to produce a PR pattern. Subsequent etching of the AgNW film and stripping of the PR layer produce a AgNW pattern on the substrate. AgNW-exposed flexible transparent electrodes with desirable patterns can thus be constructed when flexible films are used as the substrate. In addition, when a substrate with a releasing layer is adopted, a UV-curable polymer can be coated on the AgNW film with a specific shape. Subsequent curing of the UV-curable polymer and releasing it from the releasing layer complete the fabrication of AgNW-embedded transparent electrodes having desirable patterns. Although this photolithographic process has long been well established and can produce patterns of various sizes and shapes, it requires expensive equipment and toxic photoactive compounds, and involves many processing steps, resulting in high production costs to pattern AgNW-based flexible transparent electrodes and causing environmental pollution.
As an alternative to photolithography, many processes have been developed to pattern AgNW-based transparent electrodes, such as laser patterning,30,31 selective illumination of intense pulsed light (IPL),32,33 ink jet printing,34,35 spray coating,36,37 microchannel wetting,38,39 and transfer printing.40,41 These patterning techniques have been successfully applied to patterning AgNWs on substrates, allowing for the production of both AgNW-exposed and AgNW-embedded transparent electrodes. However, laser patterning and selective IPL illumination require expensive equipment and consume large amounts of energy to etch AgNWs using the laser or to generate intense light, thus degrading the price competitiveness of AgNW-based transparent electrodes. In addition, ink-jet printing and spray coating with a shadow mask have associated nozzle problems and reliability issues. Microchannel wetting and transfer printing are difficult to apply in large-area processing. Moreover, these patterning approaches significantly increase the number of steps to construct AgNW-embedded transparent electrodes because they require a post-AgNW embedding process to fabricate a AgNW-exposed pattern on the substrate. Therefore, a new patterning process is required, which economically patterns AgNW-exposed as well as AgNW-embedded transparent electrodes, with scalability to large-area processing and without any significant increase in the number of steps.
In this paper, we propose a new non-photolithographic patterning method for designing both AgNW-exposed and AgNW-embedded transparent flexible electrodes based on selective control of adhesion between AgNWs and the substrate and suggest a critical work of adhesion for successful patterning. Specifically, when AgNWs were coated on the target substrate, the adhesion between the AgNWs and the substrate was locally controlled via surface treatments with UV/ozone, oxygen plasma, and atmospheric plasma. Then, a UV-curable polymer was coated and released from the substrate. AgNWs were embedded in the UV-curable polymer when the adhesion between the AgNWs and substrate was weak, while they remained on the substrate when the adhesion was strong enough. Thus, local adhesion control via selective surface treatment allowed simultaneous fabrication of AgNW-exposed and AgNW-embedded transparent electrodes with desirable patterns whose resolution could be less than 100 μm. To investigate whether this approach applies only to specific substrates and AgNWs or to a wide range of substrates and AgNWs, AgNWs with different surface energies and various substrates like poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)-coated substrates, PET films, and acrylic substrates were tested. Regardless of the type of substrate and AgNWs used, AgNWs were successfully patterned and comparable critical work of adhesion for successful patterning was obtained. In addition, optoelectronic devices like organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells and liquid crystal (LC) cells were successfully constructed with two types of AgNW-based transparent electrodes. As a result, this approach was successfully applied to pattern two types of AgNW-based transparent electrodes by adding only one more step, compared to the general process of fabricating AgNW-embedded transparent electrodes, and was applicable to various substrates and AgNWs, thus strengthening the market competitiveness of AgNW-based transparent electrodes.
Results and discussion
Adhesion is the tendency of two different materials to stick together. Thus, sufficient adhesion between a material and target substrate is essential to coat a thin film on the substrate. Then, if another material is coated on the thin film and detached from the original film on the substrate, two kinds of situations are expected. If the adhesion between the thin film and substrate is stronger than that between the thin film and the detaching material, then the thin film will remain on the substrate. On the other hand, if the adhesion between the thin film and the detaching material is stronger, then the thin film will be removed from the substrate. Therefore, coating a UV-curable polymer with sufficient adhesion on the AgNW film on the substrate and detaching it to construct a AgNW-embedded flexible transparent electrode allow us to imagine a new approach to patterning AgNW-embedded as well as AgNW-exposed flexible transparent electrodes; that is, to selectively control the surface adhesion between the AgNW film and the substrate. To selectively control the adhesion in manufacturing AgNW-based transparent electrodes, we should know the adhesion theory. According to the adhesion theory, adhesion is attributed to mechanical interlocking, physical adsorption, chemical bonding, diffusion and electrostatic charges.42 When we coated AgNWs on various substrates, there was no driving force for chemical bonding or diffusion. Thus, physical adsorption is a main mechanism for the adhesion between the AgNWs and the substrates. However, when we coated the UV-curable polymer on the AgNWs, the UV-curable polymer wrapped the AgNWs and then was cured. Thus, mechanical interlocking is a main mechanism for the adhesion between the AgNWs and UV-curable polymer. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 1a, if the adsorption force between the AgNWs and the substrate is stronger than the mechanical interlocking force between the AgNWs and the UV-curable polymer, the AgNW film will be retained on the substrate. On the other hand, if the mechanical interlocking force between the AgNWs and UV-curable polymer is stronger, AgNWs will be embedded into the UV-curable polymer. Because the force of physical adsorption can be controlled by changing the surface energy,43,44 we can easily control the adsorption force between the AgNWs and the substrate. Thus, we expect the local change in physical adsorption to enable simultaneous fabrication of a AgNW-exposed flexible electrode with a specific pattern on the bottom and a AgNW-embedded electrode with a specific feature on the top, thereby accomplishing economic and ecofriendly patterning of two types of AgNW-based transparent flexible electrodes in a single process.
 Fig. 1  (a) Position of the AgNW films when the work of adhesion between the AgNW and the substrate is stronger or weaker than that between the AgNW and the polymer. (b) Contact angles of deionized water and glycerol on the PMMA-coated surface, (c) surface energy of the PMMA surface, and (d) work of adhesion between AgNWs and PMMA-coated surfaces, depending on UV/ozone treatment time. 
To demonstrate the applicability of our approach to patterning AgNW-based transparent electrodes, we designed an experimental procedure, as shown in Fig. S1,† based on the dependence of work of adhesion on the surface energy of each material. It should be noted that surface energies could be modified by surface treatments such as UV/ozone (UV-C with the peak position of 254 nm wavelength), oxygen plasma, and atmospheric plasma. Particularly, we prepared a substrate having a low surface energy, and thus, weak adhesion properties. As a representative substrate with a low surface energy, we used a PMMA-coated glass or silicon wafer. Then, we aligned a metal or a polymer mask with a desirable pattern on the substrate and treated it with UV/ozone. UV/ozone treatment selectively changed the surface energy of the substrate by producing hydroxyl groups and locally increased the adhesion of the substrate with other materials. After removing the mask, a AgNW solution was coated on the UV/ozone-treated substrate. Contrary to the wetting/dewetting approach to patterning functional materials on a surface comprising hydrophilic and hydrophobic areas, AgNWs were uniformly coated on the entire substrate. After drying the AgNW film at 100 °C for 1 min, we coated Norland Optical Adhesive 63 (NOA 63), a UV-curable polymer, on the AgNW film. Finally, we cured the UV-curable polymer under 365 nm UV illumination (UV-A) and detached it from the AgNW film on the substrate comprising two regions with different surface energies. The UV-curable polymer was fully detached form the substrates.24 Because the adhesion of AgNWs on the substrate area with a high surface energy to the substrate is strong, we expected the AgNWs to remain on the substrate after the removal of the UV-curable polymer. However, we expected the AgNWs on the substrate area with a low surface energy to easily embed and detach with the UV-curable polymer due to their weak adhesion to the substrate. Finally, two types of AgNW-based transparent electrodes with a desirable pattern could be generated without expensive photolithographic equipment in a single process.
To examine whether AgNW-based flexible transparent electrodes could be patterned by the above-mentioned experimental procedure, we first determined whether the surface energies can be well controlled via the UV/ozone treatment by measuring the contact angle of deionized (DI) water and glycerol depending on the UV/ozone treatment time and calculating the surface energy with the Owens–Wendt model.45Fig. 1b and c show the contact angles of DI water and glycerol, and the polar, dispersive, and total surface energies of the PMMA-coated glass substrates depending on the UV/ozone treatment time. Prior to UV/ozone treatment, the water contact angle was 67.1° and the glycerol contact angle was 66.2° on the PMMA surface, which indicated a polar energy of 26.5 mJ m−2, dispersive energy of 8.8 mJ m−2, and total surface energy of 35.3 mJ m−2. Because a low surface energy induces a low work of adhesion with other materials, we expected the AgNWs to have a low adhesive force with the as-prepared PMMA surface, thus easily detaching from the PMMA surface. After the UV/ozone treatment, the contact angles of DI water and glycerol decreased to 23.3° and 49.3°, respectively, after 60 min. As a result, the polar and dispersive energies changed from 26.5 to 88.4 mJ m−2 and from 8.8 to 0.45 mJ m−2, respectively, showing a sequential increase in total surface energy to 88.8 mJ m−2. Because the work of adhesion depends on the polar and nonpolar surface energies of the two materials according to eqn (1),43,44 (1)where γp1 and γp2 are the polar surface energies and γd1 and γd2 are the nonpolar surface energies of materials 1 and 2, respectively, we expected the adhesion force between the AgNW and PMMA-coated glass substrates to sequentially increase depending on the UV/ozone treatment time. Fig. 1d shows the work of adhesion of the AgNW film on the PMMA-coated glass substrates depending on the UV/ozone treatment time. As expected, the as-prepared PMMA surface showed a weak adhesive force of 112.5 mJ m−2 with the AgNW film having a polar surface energy of 131.3 mJ m−2 and a nonpolar surface energy of 10.3 mJ m−2. As the total surface energy of the PMMA surface increased with UV/ozone treatment, the work of adhesion sequentially increased to 223.0 mJ m−2 after 60 min. Conclusively, we could prepare PMMA-coated substrates with various surface energies and works of adhesion with the AgNW film.
Next, we examined whether this approach successfully patterns AgNW-embedded flexible transparent electrodes by laminating and delaminating the UV-curable polymer, NOA 63, after coating AgNWs on a selectively UV/ozone-treated PMMA surface. Fig. 2a shows the optical microscopy (OM) images of the AgNW-embedded transparent electrodes that were prepared on UV/ozone-treated PMMA surfaces for different times. As seen in Fig. 2a, when we used an as-prepared PMMA surface to construct the AgNW-embedded transparent electrodes, all AgNWs were detached from the PMMA surface, resulting in AgNW-embedded electrodes without any pattern. When the right side of the PMMA surface was treated with UV/ozone for 10 min, AgNWs could remain on the PMMA surface without falling off the PMMA surface. When we conducted UV/ozone treatment for more than 30 min, we finally acquired a desirable pattern with a sharp boundary between the area with and without the AgNWs, confirming that selective control of adhesion force between the AgNW film and the PMMA-coated substrate enables successful patterning of AgNW-embedded flexible electrodes.
 Fig. 2  (a) OM images of AgNW-embedded flexible transparent electrodes, depending on UV/ozone treatment time on the PMMA-coated surface. (b) SEM and EDX images of the AgNW-exposed electrode on a Si wafer. Ag, Si, and C were mapped to demonstrate a clear pattern of the AgNW on the substrate via controlling surface adhesion. XPS Ag 3d spectra obtained from (c) AgNW-embedded and (d) AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes in the area out of and inside the AgNW pattern, respectively. 
Further, we observed the PMMA-coated surface, which was laminated and delaminated by NOA 63 after conducting UV/ozone treatment for 30 min, to determine whether this process can construct AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes with a pattern using scanning electron microscope (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) systems. Fig. 2b shows the SEM and EDX images of a AgNW-exposed electrode with a line pattern that was prepared on a PMMA-coated silicon substrate. As seen from the SEM image, we successfully generated line patterns of AgNW-exposed electrodes. While there were AgNWs inside the line, no AgNW was present outside the line; thus, a selective conduction path was generated for electronic devices. In EDX analysis to confirm clear patterning, silver was only detected inside the line pattern and not outside the line. On the other hand, silicon and carbon signals were weak inside the line pattern because AgNWs covered the area inside the line pattern on the PMMA layer on the silicon wafer. Thus, we confirmed selective embedding and successful patterning of AgNW-exposed electrodes as well. This indicates that our approach simultaneously generated AgNW patterns on the substrate side as well as the embedded side, thus allowing us to save process cost for patterning AgNW-based transparent electrodes especially in the case of using a PET film as a substrate to construct two flexible transparent electrodes for optoelectronic devices in a single process.
We then investigated the conductive area where AgNWs should be present and the insulating space area where AgNWs should not be present by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to demonstrate that the approach generates a clear pattern without any AgNW residue in the space area. Fig. 2c and d present the XPS Ag 3d spectra obtained from the AgNW-embedded and AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes, respectively. The Ag 3d spectra of the conductive area in the AgNW-embedded electrode (red line in Fig. 2c) show a strong Ag peak, indicating that the polymer matrix contained many AgNWs inside the conductive area. On the other hand, the Ag peak was not observed in the space area (black line in Fig. 2c), indicating a clear AgNW pattern without any AgNW residue in the space area. The AgNW-exposed electrode exhibited the same result; that is, while the area inside the silver pattern showed a strong Ag 3d peak in the XPS spectra (red line in Fig. 2d), the Ag 3d peak was not detected in the area outside the silver pattern (black line in Fig. 2d). This confirmed that our approach clearly patterns AgNW-embedded and AgNW-exposed flexible transparent electrodes by the addition of only a single step to the construction process of AgNW-based transparent electrodes.
To investigate the achievable resolution of a new lithographic process, we prepared the masks with a variety of sizes. After masking them on the PMMA-coated surfaces, we proceeded with a new patterning process and observed their surfaces with a SEM. Fig. 3 shows the AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes that were patterned with different masks having different sizes. As seen in Fig. 3, the lines and spaces were clear at all pattern sizes and finally achieved 100 μm resolution. Since such resolution was limited by the mask size that we can make, if we could create a mask with a size less than 100 μm, we are sure that we could create smaller features with the new lithographic process.
 Fig. 3  AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes with a line and space pattern. Each electrode was patterned by controlling local adhesion between AgNW and a substrate. Pattern size was (a) 500 μm, (b) 300 μm, (c) 250 μm and (d) 100 μm, respectively. 
Next, we tried to identify the critical work of adhesion for successful patterning of AgNW-based transparent electrodes. For this purpose, we plotted the work of adhesion between the AgNW film and the PMMA-coated surface depending on the surface energy of the PMMA-coated surface, and marked the failure to pattern a AgNW-based electrode as a blank and successful patterning as a solid. In addition, we tested various AgNW films with different surface energies to ascertain that the critical work of adhesion is consistent regardless of the AgNW films. Similar to the effect of surface energy of the PMMA layer on the work of adhesion, the work of adhesion increased with increasing surface energy of the AgNWs although we used a PMMA surface with an identical UV/ozone treatment time. Fig. 4a represents the work of adhesion between AgNWs and the PMMA-coated surface depending on the surface energies of the PMMA layer. When the surface energy of the PMMA layer was 35.3 mJ m−2, the work of adhesion was 107.1 to 117.3 mJ m−2 depending on the AgNWs. However, all AgNWs were detached from the substrate and embedded into the polymer matrix without features, representing the failure to pattern AgNWs regardless of the surface energies of the AgNWs. When the surface energy of PMMA reached 48.8 mJ m−2, it still failed to pattern AgNW-based electrodes. However, we succeeded in patterning some AgNW films on the PMMA-coated surface with a surface energy of 54.3 mJ m−2. Particularly, the AgNW film having a surface energy of 163.9 mJ m−2 represented a work of adhesion of 163.0 mJ m−2, which was still low for clear patterning of AgNW-based electrodes. However, AgNWs having a surface energy of 174.5 mJ m−2 offered enough work of adhesion (165.4 mJ m−2) to selectively detach the AgNW film from the substrate, resulting in AgNW-based electrodes with a clear pattern. When the PMMA-coated surface had a surface energy of over 60.5 mJ m−2, the lowest work of adhesion between the AgNW films and the PMMA surface was 169.6 mJ m−2. Because this adhesive force was higher than 165.4 mJ m−2, all the PMMA surfaces and AgNW films presented a clear pattern of AgNW-based transparent electrodes. Thus, we speculated that the critical adhesion to pattern AgNW-based electrodes is around 165 mJ m−2.
 Fig. 4  Works of adhesion, depending on the surface energies of the substrates. We tested (a) a PMMA-coated surface, (b) a PET film, and (c) an acrylic substrate, and then marked the failure to pattern the AgNW-based electrode as a blank and successful patterning as a solid. 
In addition to the PMMA surface as a substrate, we adopted a PET film and an acrylic surface as a substrate to demonstrate the applicability to various substrates and to examine whether the critical work of adhesion is consistent for various substrates. Fig. 4b and c show the work of adhesion between the AgNWs and PET substrates and between the AgNWs and acrylic substrates depending on the surface energies of AgNWs and substrates, respectively. Similar to the PMMA-coated substrate, PET substrates having surface energies below 23.4 mJ m−2 induced a too low work of adhesion to pattern AgNWs (Fig. 4b). Thus, all AgNWs were embedded into the polymer matrix without any features. However, when the surface energy of the PET substrate reached 58.8 mJ m−2, they represented a work of adhesion between 163.2 mJ m−2 and 175.3 mJ m−2 depending on the AgNW surface energy. The adhesive force in the PET film having a work of adhesion above 165 mJ m−2 was strong enough to retain the AgNWs on the PET substrate, thus successfully patterning AgNW-exposed and AgNW-embedded flexible electrodes in a single process. The acrylic substrates showed a similar trend. When the surface energy of the acrylic substrate was lower than 47.6 mJ m−2, its work of adhesion was below 152.4 mJ m−2 and it failed to pattern AgNW-based electrodes. However, an acrylic substrate having a surface energy of 55.0 mJ m−2 could reach an adhesive force of more than 166.2 mJ m−2 and was capable of constructing AgNW-based electrodes with a clear pattern. Considering all the results obtained for various substrates and AgNWs, we inferred that the patterning process succeeded when the work of adhesion was above 164 mJ m−2 and failed when it was below 164 mJ m−2. Thus, we conclude that the critical work of adhesion required to selectively retain AgNWs on the substrate and clearly pattern AgNW-based electrodes is about 164 mJ m−2.
We then characterized the morphologies of AgNW-embedded and AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes with a PMMA-coated substrate using an atomic force microscope (AFM) to introduce them into optoelectronic devices. Fig. 5 shows the AFM images of AgNW-embedded and AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes. While the AgNW-embedded electrode was very smooth, the AgNW-exposed electrode represented a very rough surface. Their rms roughness was 1.56 nm and 8.82 nm, respectively. Then, we constructed OPV cells with AgNW-embedded transparent electrodes and LC cells with AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes, respectively; both electrodes were patterned by the above-mentioned new lithographic process. To construct OPV cells, we first prepared a AgNW-embedded flexible transparent electrode with a specific pattern to define the active area of the OPV cell by the above-mentioned lithographic process. We then stacked zinc oxide as an electron transport layer, PTB7:PCBM as a photoactive layer, PEDOT:PSS as a hole transport layer, and finally evaporated silver as a metal top electrode. The final architecture of the OPV cell having a AgNW-embedded transparent electrode is shown in Fig. 6a. To evaluate its photovoltaic performance, we measured the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics and compared them with the device performance of an OPV cell with an ITO/glass electrode. As seen in Fig. 6b, the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and short-circuit current density (JSC) were similar for the OPV cells with the rigid ITO electrode and the AgNW-embedded flexible electrode. The OPV cell with the ITO electrode presented a VOC of 0.73 ± 0.01 V and a JSC of 15.98 ± 0.33 mA m−2, resulting in a power conversion efficiency of 6.80 ± 0.74%. On the other hand, the OPV cell comprising the AgNW-embedded flexible electrode exhibited a VOC of 0.76 ± 0.01 V and a JSC of 14.91 ± 0.60 mA m−2, resulting in a power conversion efficiency of 6.60 ± 0.22%. This demonstrated that our approach to patterning a AgNW-embedded flexible transparent electrode is very useful for constructing flexible OPV cells having comparable device performances with those employing rigid ITO electrodes.
 Fig. 5  AFM images of (a) AgNW-embedded and (b) AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes. 
 Fig. 6  (a) Device architecture and (b) J–V characteristics of OPV cells constructed with AgNW-embedded flexible transparent electrodes. (c) Structural image of TN cells fabricated with AgNW-exposed electrodes and (d) their image with increasing applied voltage. 
With the AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes, we constructed LC cells. Particularly, we coated polyimide as an alignment layer on two AgNW-exposed electrodes and then annealed it for 20 min at 80 °C. After mechanically rubbing them with velvet clothes, we assembled the two electrodes as shown in Fig. 6c. The rubbing direction of the top and bottom electrodes was perpendicular to achieve LC cells with a twist nematic (TN) mode. Inserting the LCs into the space between the transparent electrodes finally completed the fabrication of LC cells with a TN mode. We then applied a voltage to check whether it clearly displays images. Fig. 6d shows the image of the LC cell with increasing applied voltage. Because LCs are twisted by 90° at 0 V in the TN mode, they rotate the polarization state of light by 90°, representing a white state between the crossed polarizers. We also observed a white state without any image prior to applying a voltage. When the applied voltage in the TN cell was increased, the LCs moved vertically and could induce a transition from gray to black. As seen in Fig. 6d, applying the voltage to the LC cell led to a display of images with gray color, and further increasing the applied voltage changed the color from gray to black. Thus, this confirms that our approach to patterning AgNW-exposed electrodes can be successfully used to construct LC cells to display images.
Conclusion
In this study, we developed a novel patterning process suitable for both AgNW-embedded and AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes by controlling the work of adhesion between AgNWs and the substrates. This process was simple, economical, and eco-friendly because it needs only one additional step in the production of AgNW-embedded transparent electrodes and does not use toxic photoresists. In addition, since simultaneous fabrication of two types of AgNW-based transparent electrodes with desirable patterns reduced the production cost of flexible transparent electrodes for application in wearable electronics, we expect this approach to strengthen the market competitiveness of AgNW-based transparent electrodes. This approach was not limited to specific substrates and AgNWs; it was applicable for PMMA-coated surfaces, PET films, and acrylic substrates, as well as various AgNWs with different surface energies, indicating its versatility in optoelectronics. Therefore, we believe that this process can be extended to a variety of materials, including carbon nanotubes and graphene, improving their competitiveness for wearable electronics applications.
Experimental
Patterning AgNW-based electrodes
We cleaned the glass or silicon wafer with acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) at 60 °C for 10 min. After drying them, we coated PMMA (PMMA A2, Microchem) at 3000 rpm for 1 min, followed by annealing at 180 °C for 30 s. After selectively masking the PMMA-coated substrates, we treated their surface with UV/ozone (UV-C, 254 nm) at 200 mW cm−2, low-pressure oxygen plasma at 30 W, or air plasma (BD-20V, ETP Inc.) to locally change adhesive characteristics. When PET and acrylic substrates with weak adhesion properties were used, we did not coat the PMMA layer and directly conducted surface treatment. Then, we spin-coated silver nanowires (AgNWs, 0.3 wt% in deionized water, C3nano Korea) and dried them at 100 °C for 1 min. After coating NOA 63 (Norland Products Inc.), a UV-curable polymer, we cured it for 30 min under 365 nm UV illumination (UV-A) and peeled it off from the substrates. Due to locally different surface adhesion between AgNWs and substrates, AgNWs were selectively embedded in the UV-curable polymer, resulting in AgNW-exposed and AgNW-embedded transparent electrodes with desirable patterns in a single patterning process.
Characterization
We used an optical microscope (OM, BX51, Olympus) and a SEM (JSM-6500F, Jeol) of 15 kV acceleration voltage, combined with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) system, to observe AgNW surfaces and acquire the atomic map. They easily indicated the success or failure of AgNW patterning. We also adopted XPS (K-Alpha, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to confirm the AgNW pattern. To examine the surface energies of various substrates depending on surface treatment, we measured the contact angle of deionized water and glycerol with a contact angle measurement system (DSA100, KRUSS). Then, we calculated the polar and dispersive surface energies using the Owens–Wendt model.
Constructing organic photovoltaic cells
We cleaned the conductive transparent electrodes with acetone and IPA at 60 °C for 10 min. Then, we prepared a zinc oxide precursor solution as reported elsewhere24 and spin-coated it at 2000 rpm for 100 s. The hydrolysis at 200 °C for 10 min completed the formation of a thin zinc oxide electron transport layer. We then spin-coated the cosolution of poly[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl] ((C41H53FO4S4)n, PTB7) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid (C82H14O2, PC71BM) at 1000 rpm for 60 s in a nitrogen atmosphere. The cosolution was prepared by mixing PTB7 (8 mg, 1-materials) and PCBM (12 mg, Nano-c) in chlorobenzene (970 μL, Sigma Aldrich), followed by adding 1,8-diiodooctane (30 μL, Sigma Aldrich). On the top of the photoactive layer, comprising PTB7 and PC71BM, we deposited a diluted poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, Clevios PVP Al 4083, Heraeus) solution in IPA (1:10 v/v) at 5000 rpm for 60 s and dried it at 120 °C for 1 min to form the hole transport layer. The deposition of a 100 nm-thick Ag electrode by thermal evaporation completed the construction of OPV cells with inverted architecture. Their performances were evaluated by measuring current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics using a solar simulator (ORIEL LCS-100, Newport) and a Keithley 2400 source meter under AM 1.5 G 100 mW cm−2 illumination.
Fabricating liquid crystal cells
We first patterned AgNW-based transparent electrodes by controlling the surface adhesion between AgNWs and substrates. Then, we spin-coated a polyimide as an alignment layer at 1500 rpm for 100 s, followed by drying at 80 °C for 20 min. After preparing two substrates having an alignment layer on the AgNW-based transparent electrodes, we rubbed them with a velvet cloth to align the liquid crystals (LC). After perpendicularly assembling the two substrates, we inserted LC molecules by capillary force to complete LC cell fabrication with a twisted nematic architecture. Applying voltage to the LC cell controlled the direction of LC molecules and changed their color from white to black.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Energy Technology Development Project of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) granted financial resource from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy, Republic of Korea (No. 1711026557), and the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (NRF-2018R1A6A1A03025761). J. Kim also acknowledges the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF-2015R1D1A1A01060134).
References
T. Sannicolo, M. Lagrange, A. Cabos, C. Celle, J.-P. Simonato and D. Bellet, Small, 2016, 12, 6052–6075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Ricciardulli, S. Yang, G.-J. A. H. Wetzelaer, X. Feng and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706010 CrossRef .
H.-G. Im, S.-H. Jung, J. Jin, D. Lee, J. Lee, D. Lee, J.-Y. Lee, I.-D. Kim and B.-S. Bae, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10973–10979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9760–9774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Kim, S.-H. Park, D.-H. Kim, Y.-C. Nah and H.-K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 160, 203–210 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Park, S.-M. Lee, E.-H. Ko, T.-H. Kim, Y.-C. Nah, S.-J. Lee, J. H. Lee and H.-K. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, G.-T. Hwang, S. Kim, J. Seo, H.-J. Park, K. Yu, T.-S. Kim and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603473 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Gao, Y. Wang, Q. Liu, S. Huang, C. F. Guo and Z. Ren, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1090–1096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Jin, Y. H. Lee, K. M. Yeom, J. Yun, H. Park, Y. R. Jeong, S. Y. Hong, G. Lee, S. Y. Oh, J. H. Lee, J. H. Noh and J. S. Ha, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30706–30715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Oh, H. Choi, J. Lee, H. Lee, D. Y. Choi, S.-U. Lee, K.-S. Yun, S. Yoo, T.-S. Kim, I. Park and H. J. Sung, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 11220 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Cheng, Y.-Z. Zhang, J.-D. Zhang, W.-Y. Lai and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10493–10499 RSC .
Y. Wang, C. Zhu, R. Pfattner, H. Yan, L. Jin, S. Chem, F. Molina-Lopez, F. Lissel, J. Liu, N. I. Rabiah, Z. Chen, J. W. Chung, C. Linder, M. F. Toney, B. Murmann and Z. Bao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602076 CrossRef PubMed .
I.-J. Park, T. I. Kim, T. Yoon, S. Kang, H. Cho, N. S. Cho, J.-I. Lee, T.-S. Kim and S.-Y. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704435 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, J. Du, D. Zhang, H. Sun, L. Yin, L. Ma, J. Chen, D. Ma, H.-M. Cheng and W. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Ghosh, T. L. Chen and V. Pruneri, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 041109 CrossRef .
S. Hong, J. Yeo, G. Kim, D. Kim, H. Lee, J. Kwon, H. Lee, P. Lee and S. H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5024–5031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-J. Kim, H.-J. Kim, K.-W. Seo, K.-H. Kim, T.-W. Kim and H.-K. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mohl, A. Dombovari, R. Vajtai, P. M. Ajayan and K. Kordas, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13710 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kwon, H. Cho, H. Eom, H. Lee, Y. D. Suh, H. Moon, J. Shin, S. Hong and S. H. Ko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11575–11582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-Y. Wang, E.-S. Lee, D.-S. Lim, H. W. Kang and Y.-J. Oh, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 7540–7546 RSC .
S. Cho, S. Kang, A. Pandya, R. Shanker, Z. Khan, Y. Lee, J. Park, S. L. Craig and H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4346–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liang, H. Hu, L. Liao, Y. He and C. Ye, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600535 CrossRef .
Y. Kim, T. I. Ryu, K.-H. Ok, M.-G. Kwak, S. Park, N.-G. Park, C. J. Han, B. S. Kim, M. J. Ko, H. J. Son and J.-W. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4580–4589 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nam, M. Song, D.-H. Kim, B. Cho, H. M. Lee, J.-D. Kwon, S.-G. Park, K.-S. Nam, Y. Jeong, S.-H. Kwon, Y. C. Park, S.-H. Jin, J.-W. Kang, S. Jo and C. S. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4788 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Chen, J. Liang, C. Liu, G. Saldanha, F. Zhao, K. Tong, J. Liu and Q. Pei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7512–7520 CrossRef .
D.-H. Kim, K.-C. Yu, Y. Kim and J.-W. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15214–15222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ko, J. Kim, D. Kim, Y. Yamauchi, J. H. Kim and J. You, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 2282 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kim, C.-H. Song, M.-G. Kwak, B.-K. Ju and J.-W. Kim, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 42500–42505 RSC .
J. Wu, X. Que, Q. Hu, D. Luo, T. Liu, F. Liu, T. P. Russell, R. Zhu and Q. Gong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4822–4828 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Yoon, W. S. Chang and S. H. Cho, Opt. Lasers Eng., 2015, 73, 40–45 CrossRef .
C. T. Pan, T. L. Yang, S. Y. Wang, C. K. Yen, S. P. Ju, C. W. Hung and Y. L. Shiue, Opt. Mater., 2018, 77, 55–56 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, C. J. Han, Y. Kim, B.-K. Ju and J.-W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10435–10443 RSC .
Z. Zhong, H. Lee, D. Kang, S. Kwon, Y.-M. Choi, I. Kim, K.-Y. Kim, Y. Lee, K. Woo and J. Moon, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7847–7854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-P. Chen, J. R. D. Retamal, D.-H. Lien, J.-H. He and Y.-C. Liao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 70707–70712 RSC .
K.-H. Choi, J. Yoo, C. K. Lee and S.-Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2812–2821 RSC .
J. Liang, L. Li, X. Niu, Z. Yu and Q. Pei, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 817–824 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chou, Y. Kim and S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6269–6276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-R. Yang, W. Cao, G.-S. Liu, H.-J. Chen, Y.-Y. Noh, T. Minari, H.-C. Hsiao, C.-Y. Lee, H.-P. D. Shieh and C. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21433–21441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-S. Liu, C. Liu, H.-J. Chen, W. Cao, J.-S. Qiu, H.-P. D. Shieh and B.-R. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5507–5515 RSC .
A. R. Madaria, A. Kumar and C. Zhou, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 245201 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Tybrandt, F. Stauffer and J. Vörös, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Han, D. H. Lee and K. Cho, Prospectives of Industrial Chemistry, 2004, 7, 43–59 Search PubMed .
S. Wu, J. Adhes., 1973, 5, 39–55 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cho, J. Kwak, J. Lim, M. Park, D. Lee, W. K. Bae, Y. S. Kim, K. Char, S. Lee and C. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10828–10833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. C. Lee, K. K. Manga, P. K. Ang, J. Lu, Y. P. Liu, C. T. Lim and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4285–4290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta01498e‡ Battery Assessment Team, Chungbuk Technopark IT Energy Center, Cheongju, 28116, Korea.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Position of the AgNW films when the work of adhesion between the AgNW and the substrate is stronger or weaker than that between the AgNW and the polymer. (b) Contact angles of deionized water and glycerol on the PMMA-coated surface, (c) surface energy of the PMMA surface, and (d) work of adhesion between AgNWs and PMMA-coated surfaces, depending on UV/ozone treatment time.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) OM images of AgNW-embedded flexible transparent electrodes, depending on UV/ozone treatment time on the PMMA-coated surface. (b) SEM and EDX images of the AgNW-exposed electrode on a Si wafer. Ag, Si, and C were mapped to demonstrate a clear pattern of the AgNW on the substrate via controlling surface adhesion. XPS Ag 3d spectra obtained from (c) AgNW-embedded and (d) AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes in the area out of and inside the AgNW pattern, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes with a line and space pattern. Each electrode was patterned by controlling local adhesion between AgNW and a substrate. Pattern size was (a) 500 μm, (b) 300 μm, (c) 250 μm and (d) 100 μm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Works of adhesion, depending on the surface energies of the substrates. We tested (a) a PMMA-coated surface, (b) a PET film, and (c) an acrylic substrate, and then marked the failure to pattern the AgNW-based electrode as a blank and successful patterning as a solid.	 

 	Fig. 5  AFM images of (a) AgNW-embedded and (b) AgNW-exposed transparent electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Device architecture and (b) J–V characteristics of OPV cells constructed with AgNW-embedded flexible transparent electrodes. (c) Structural image of TN cells fabricated with AgNW-exposed electrodes and (d) their image with increasing applied voltage.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta01498e
‡ Battery Assessment Team, Chungbuk Technopark IT Energy Center, Cheongju, 28116, Korea.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
