Hetero-nanostructured suspended photocatalysts for solar-to-fuel conversion  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE02914C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE02914C
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3934-3951Hetero-nanostructured suspended photocatalysts for solar-to-fuel conversion

        
          
            Yu-Peng 
            Yuan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lin-Wei 
            Ruan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            James 
            Barber
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Say Chye 
            Joachim Loo
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Can 
            Xue
          
          
        
      *c
aLaboratory of Advanced Porous Materials, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, P. R. China
bDepartment of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus, London SW7 2AZ, UK
cSolar Fuels Lab, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore. E-mail: joachimloo@ntu.edu.sg; cxue@ntu.edu.sg
Received 
      15th September 2014
    , Accepted 8th October 2014First published on 8th October 2014AbstractConverting solar energy into valuable hydrogen and hydrocarbon fuels through photocatalytic water splitting and CO2 photo-reduction is highly promising in addressing the growing demand for renewable and clean energy resources. Developing efficient photocatalysts for solar-driven H2 production and CO2 reduction is the most essential part in achieving this goal. For the purpose of attaining high photocatalytic efficiency, hetero-nanostructures formed by multiple material components have been demonstrated as an effective strategy. Within this heterostructure, its interface is a critical consideration, whereby it determines the principle of charge transfer across the heterojunctions and consequent surface reactions. This article reviews the recent developments of hetero-nanostructures for photocatalytic H2 production and CO2 reduction based on material compositions that form heterojunctions.Yu-Peng YuanYu-Peng Yuan is a faculty staff member at Anhui University. He received his BE and ME degrees from Hefei University of Technology and PhD degree from Nanjing University. He worked as a Research Fellow at Nanyang Technological University in 2012–2013. His current research interests focus on interfacial chemistry, gas adsorption, chemistry of materials, and first principle calculations.Lin-Wei RuanLin-Wei Ruan is currently a graduate student in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Anhui University where he obtained his Bachelor of Engineering in 2008. He is pursuing his research with Dr Yu-Peng Yuan on molecular simulations and first principles calculations.James BarberJames Barber is the Ernst Chain Professor of Biochemistry at Imperial College London and is a Fellow of The Royal Society of London and Royal Society of Chemistry. He is also a visiting professor at Nanyang Technological University and Lee Kuan Yew Distinguished Visitor to Singapore. He has been awarded several medals and prizes for his contributions to understanding the molecular processes of photosynthesis.Say Chye Joachim LooJoachim Loo is an associate professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) and the Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering (SCELSE) at Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in Singapore. He is also the Director of the NTU Solar Fuels Laboratory. His research interest lies in materials for energy, environmental and biomedical applications, and has filed several patents in this field. In 2012, he was awarded the Outstanding Mentor Award and the Nanyang Award for Excellence in Teaching. He is also an Assistant Chair (Students) in MSE, and a committee member of the ISO/TC 229 Nanotechnology National Working Group in Singapore.Can XueCan Xue is an assistant professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Nanyang Technological University. He received his BS degree at University of Science and Technology of China in 2002, and obtained his PhD degree at Northwestern University (IL, US) in 2007. He was awarded the Lee Kuan Yew Research Fellowship in 2008. His current research interests focus on the development of new plasmonic metal nanostructures and metal–semiconductor hybrid nanostructures for photocatalytic applications.

Broader context
The ever-growing concerns on global energy demand, and carbon dioxide (CO2) emission arising from the combustion of fossil fuels, have led researchers to explore other sources of renewable energy, while alleviating CO2 concentration in the air. One such strategy is by photocatalysis – the splitting of water molecules to generate hydrogen or drive the reduction of CO2 into valuable hydrocarbon fuels, using solar energy. Currently, a myriad of materials have been demonstrated to be potential candidates for such photocatalytic reactions. However, the solar-to-energy conversion efficiencies of these single material photocatalysts are currently still impractical to meet commercial requirements. The rapid recombination of photoexcited electrons and holes has been identified as a key reason behind such low photocatalytic reaction efficiencies. To suppress charge recombination, coupling two materials to form a heterojunction has been demonstrated to be a viable approach. This review highlights the recent progress in the last several years on hetero-nanostructured suspended photocatalysts that have been developed for enhanced hydrogen production, and for CO2 photoreduction into carbon-based fuels.

1. Introduction
The human civilization is mainly powered by fossil fuels such as petroleum, coal and natural gas. The combustion of these fossil fuels has caused detrimental environmental pollution and enormous CO2 emission. According to the British Petroleum (BP) statistical review of world energy 2014, the worldwide energy consumption in 2013 has reached 533 × 1018 J, corresponding to an average energy consumption rate of 16.9 TW. Most of the energy consumed (>85%) comes from fossil fuels with 38% from oil, 27.3% from natural gas and 34.7% from coal. In 2013 alone, the burning of fossil fuels has resulted in an unprecedented CO2 emission of 36 billion tonnes (Gt).1 In addition, the world energy consumption rate is projected to be ∼27.6 TW by 2050, corresponding to more than 40.3 Gt CO2 emission.2 In order to meet the projection by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) on carbon intensity (kg of C emitted to the atmosphere as CO2 per year per W of power produced from the fuel) of ∼0.45, significant contributions from carbon-free power resources are needed to substitute fossil fuels in total energy consumption.
The incident solar energy at the surface of the Earth is over 1.3 × 105 TW, which is far beyond the current global energy consumption rate (∼16.9 TW in 2013) by roughly four orders of magnitude. Although photovoltaic and electrochemical solar cells can reach high efficiency for solar energy conversion, several issues still remain unresolved, such as high fabrication costs, insufficient light harvesting, low output power density, and inconvenient transportation. Therefore, the conversion of solar energy into transportable chemical fuels, such as methanol, methane and hydrogen fuels, using sunlight, water and CO2, is one of the most attractive routes because these are highly abundant on earth.
In principle, the generation of solar fuels can be achieved by using solar light to drive the reaction of proton reduction (eqn (1)) or CO2 reduction via different pathways (eqn (2)–(6)) accompanied by a water oxidation process (eqn (7)).3 The redox potentials of these reactions are referred to NHE at pH = 7. 2H+ + 2e− → H2E0 = −0.42 V(1) CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O E0 = −0.24 V(2) CO + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O E0 = −0.53 V(3) CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O E0 = −0.38 V(4) CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O E0 = −0.48 V(5) CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH E0 = −0.61 V(6) 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e E0 = +0.81 V(7)
The potential success of solar-to-fuels conversion relies on the development of efficient photocatalysts that absorb photon energy from sunlight to create active charge carries, which are capable of implementing these redox processes towards hydrogen or carbohydrate fuel generation. A suitable semiconductor photocatalyst requires a sufficiently high conduction band (CB) edge to enable excited electrons to reduce water or CO2 (eqn (1)–(6)), and a deep valance band (VB) level to allow the photogenerated holes to oxidize water (eqn (7)).4 To date, more than a hundred types of semiconductor materials have been reported as possible photocatalysts for water splitting and CO2 reduction.5–9 However, most of these materials possess a fairly large bandgap, resulting in limited activity in the visible spectrum range that accounts for ∼43% of solar energy.
In addition, the overall efficiency of solar-to-fuels conversion over semiconductor photocatalysts is also determined by the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes, as well as the kinetics of the surface redox reactions.10–13 The fast recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes is one of dominant reasons that results in low photon conversion efficiency because the recombination process (∼10−9 s) is considerably faster than the surface redox processes (10−8 to 10−1 s).
In view of this, researchers have now recognized that a single semiconductor alone is hardly competent for efficient solar fuel generation because of the great challenges of balancing the four parameters: (1) VB/CB levels; (2) light-harvesting capability; (3) electron–hole separation efficiency; (4) surface reaction rate. Therefore, it is desirable to form a hybrid photocatalyst consisting of semiconductor heterojunctions, which not only allows a broader range of solar light absorption, but also significantly promotes the separation of photogenerated charge carriers, thereby improving the solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency.14–17
In heterostructured semiconductor photocatalysts, the key issue is the interface between the different components. Heterojunctions formed between different types of materials have different charge transfer principles and consequent activities. Therefore, we have divided the discussion in this review based on the material compositions that form heterojunctions: semiconductor–semiconductor, semiconductor–co-catalyst, and semiconductor–metal. For solar-to-fuel conversion, we will mainly focus on photocatalysts in particular for H2 production from proton reduction or CO2 reduction without an external electric field, since there already have been a number of recent reviews on heterojunction-based photoanodes or photocathodes for photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells.18–20
2. Semiconductor–semiconductor heterostructures
2.1 Design strategy: promoting interfacial charge separation
The idea of forming semiconductor heterojunctions relies on the band energy alignment between the two semiconductors at the interface. For example, Fig. 1 shows the band alignment and bending at the heterojunctions created by two n-type semiconductors with different band energy positions and Fermi levels. Once the junction is formed, electrons will flow from the semiconductor with the higher Fermi energy level (semiconductor I) to the semiconductor with the lower Fermi level (semiconductor II), which results in an electron-depletion region in semiconductor I and an electron-accumulation region in semiconductor II. This creates a built-in electric field at the interface with a potential difference between the two sides. The electron flow stops when the Fermi levels on both sides become equal. Consequently, equilibrium is established at the heterojunction with a built-in voltage of eVb (Ef1–Ef2). The energy difference between the interface and the bulk in the semiconductor due to electron flow causes the band to bend upward or downward.
 Fig. 1  Diagram of a typical n–n type heterojunction: (a) in contact (b) in equilibrium. 
Depending on the bandgap and relative energy level of the CB and VB, the semiconductor heterojunctions can be divided into three categories: straddling gap (type 1), staggered gap (type 2) and broken gap (type 3), as shown in Fig. 2. For the type 1 heterostructure, the CB and VB levels of the larger bandgap semiconductor straddle that of the narrower bandgap semiconductor. For the type 2 junction, the CB and VB levels are staggered between two semiconductors. For the type 3 junction, the CB level of semiconductor II lies below the VB level of semiconductor I.
 Fig. 2  Energy diagrams for three different types of heterojunctions. 
By choosing appropriate semiconductors, the obtained hetero-nanostructured photocatalysts can not only gain a wider spectral range of light absorption, but also improve the separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes. In the past several decades, the development of heterostructured photocatalysts has received tremendous interest for enhancing solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency.16,21,22 However, we have to point out that interfacial electron and/or hole transfer would possibly decrease the reducing ability of the excited electrons and oxidation ability of the holes. For example, even though more efficient charge separation can be achieved from the Cu2O–TiO2 heterostructure, it showed lower activity for Orange II degradation as compared to pure TiO2 under UV-vis light irradiation due to the lowered oxidation ability of the holes in Cu2O.23 Therefore, in order to obtain high photocatalytic efficiency, especially for proton reduction or CO2 reduction that requires high reduction potentials, the band energy level and charge separation are equally important considerations. In addition, the effectiveness of the electron/hole migration may also be influenced by the potential wells and barriers at the heterojunction,24 particle size and morphology, crystal phase and facets, and surface reactivity,22 all of which should be considered in designing heterostructured semiconductor photocatalysts.
In the fabrication of hetero-structured photocatalysts, the most common strategy is by in situ growing of one material onto the other material as the “base” or substrate. Therefore, the morphology and structure of the “base” material would have strong impact on the growth process of the growing materials, as well as the activities of the resultant heterojunctions. For example, if the “base” material exhibits a two-dimensional (2D) structure with excellent charge transport ability, it would allow for the controllable growth of the second photocatalyst on its surface with improved charge separation across the generated heterojunctions. Moreover, if the growing second material uniformly covers the base material, it would form a core–shell heterostructure with a large interfacial area that enables more efficient charge separation as compared to regular particle–particle junctions. Therefore in this section, we will discuss the semiconductor heterojunctions based on the geometrical configuration of the heterostructure, including particle–particle junction, particle-on-2D junction, and core–shell heterojunction. For particle–particle junction, the homo-junctions composed by the same compound with different band levels will be discussed in a separate sub-section because of their unique structural features.
2.2 Homo-junction of the same compound
It is known that for semiconductor nanostructures, the band energy levels are highly dependent on the crystal phase. Therefore, heterojunctions can be formed between different phases of one type of semiconductor with the same chemical composition. Similarly, charge separation can be promoted by the slight band alignment between different phases across the heterojunction.
A typical example is TiO2, which has three major crystalline phases: anatase, rutile, and brookite. In particular, the anatase and rutile phases have been extensively explored for photocatalytic applications. Due to their large bandgap (rutile: ∼3.0 eV; anatase: ∼3.2 eV),25–27 pure TiO2 can only act as a photocatalyst under UV-light excitation, and most of the photogenerated electrons and holes usually recombine within a few nanoseconds. Consequently, the available charge carriers for surface redox reactions are limited.28,29 However, researchers have recognized that creating TiO2 phase junctions can be an effective strategy for improving charge separation. The most famous example is Degussa P25, a highly benchmarked photocatalyst containing anatase (75 wt%) and rutile (25 wt%) TiO2, which shows notably higher photocatalytic efficiency than that of the single phase anatase or rutile TiO2 due to the large junction area between the two phases, and with a relatively more efficient charge separation.30,31 Furthermore, with the appropriate thermal treatment of P25, Li et al. found that the rutile content in P25 can be tuned to achieve 3–5 times higher photocatalytic activity for H2 production from biomass reforming.32
Nevertheless, there have been debates on how the bands align between anatase and rutile TiO2. Since 1996 when Kavan et al. reported that the flatband potential of anatase (101) is ∼0.2 eV more negative than that of rutile (001),33 several researchers have consented that the CB of anatase is ∼0.2 eV higher than that of rutile, which allows photogenerated electrons to transfer from anatase to rutile and the holes similarly migrate in the reverse direction (Fig. 3a). However, recent XPS studies by Scanlon et al. indicated that the VB of anatase lies ∼0.4 eV lower compared to rutile and its CB is ∼0.2 eV higher than the rutile CB (Fig. 3b),34 in which case its charge transfer direction is opposite.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the anatase–rutile TiO2 phase junction for electron–hole separation and electron transfer from (a) anatase to rutile,33 and (b) rutile to anatase.34 
Another phase, brookite TiO2, received less attention in the past decades because it is generally considered to have low photoactivity. However, Ohno et al. recently showed that brookite TiO2 nanorods with large (210) facets are quite active for photocatalytic CO2 reduction into methanol.35 Similar to P25, the mixed TiO2 phases of brookite with anatase and/or rutile were also determined to exhibit high photocatalytic activity.36–39 Bahnemann et al. demonstrated that the TiO2 mixtures of brookite nanorods and anatase particles exhibited a higher photocatalytic H2 generation rate from a methanol solution than pure anatase TiO2 particles because of the higher CB (∼0.14 eV) of brookite to anatase.36 Tay et al. also reported a similar phenomenon and proved the transfer of photogenerated electrons from brookite to anatase through transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy.40 Interestingly, Huang et al. found that the triple-phase composites of TiO2 can exhibit about four times higher activity in photocatalytic H2 production than P25 because the additional anatase–brookite junctions allow for more efficient charge separation.41 However, brookite–rutile junctions showed relatively weaker activity as compared to the single phase anatase or rutile, probably because the brookite phase is not active for H2 evolution.
In addition, recently, TiO2, some other phase junctions have also been explored. Li et al. reported the junction of α-Ga2O3 and β-Ga2O3, which was constructed through phase transformation from α-Ga2O3 through heat treatment.42 The prepared α-β-Ga2O3 junctions exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity compared to the pure α- and β-Ga2O3 for overall water splitting under UV-light irradiation. This was because of the band alignment at the α-β-Ga2O3 heterojunction resulting in more efficient interfacial charge separation.42 Using the molten salts method, Wark et al. presented the preparation of a series of phase junctions of calcium tantalate (cubic α-CaTa2O6, orthorhombic β-CaTa2O6.).43 These composites with mixed phase junctions showed high activity for photocatalytic H2 generation in a methanol solution without any co-catalyst. This is attributed to the significantly improved separation of photoexcited charge carriers at the interface of the different phases. Recently, Guo et al. demonstrated a twin-induced phase junction in Cd0.5Zn0.5S nanorods, which exhibited alternating zinc-blende (ZB) and wurtzite (WZ) segments along the [111] direction.44 The type-II staggered band alignment formed at the ZB–WZ junctions, resulted in highly efficient charge separation and a remarkable quantum efficiency of 62% in photocatalytic H2 production.
In addition to the phase difference, vacant sites could also lead to a variation of the electronic structure of the semiconductor compound. A representative example is Cu2O, which is a typical p-type semiconductor because of the dominant Cu vacancies. However, some researchers reported that the preparation of n-type Cu2O in acidic solution might favour the generation of oxygen vacancies though the nature of n-type Cu2O, though this is still under debate.45 However, the heterojunction of p–n Cu2O can be fabricated to promote the separation of photogenerated charge carriers and consequently improve photocatalytic activity.46,47
Compared to natural vacancies in the crystal structure, artificial doping by the addition of other elements is a more popular option to adjust the band structures of semiconductors. This allows for the heterojunction formation of the same compound, but with different types of doping. For example, TiO2 is an n-type semiconductor, but by creating Ti vacancies at elevated temperatures and pressures,48 or doping with low valence ions, such as Fe3+,49,50 Co3+,51 Cr3+,52 V3+,53 p-type TiO2 structures have been obtained and extensively studied for photocatalytic applications. Heterostructured hybrids by integrating n-type and p-type TiO2 have been demonstrated to assist the charge carrier separation for enhanced photocatalytic activities.54,55
2.3 Nanoparticle-heterojunctions between different semiconductors
In the past decade, a number of hetero-nanostructure photocatalysts composed of different semiconductor combinations have been reported because of their relatively more effective charge separation at the interfaces, as compared to their individual components. In particular, for the purpose of CO2 reduction or H2 generation via proton reduction, both semiconductors must have CB levels sufficiently higher than the redox potential of these two representative reactions. Therefore, some metal oxides, including TiO2, ZnO, In2O3, etc., have been widely used as base materials to couple with another semiconductor nanostructure of a higher CB level to form heterojunctions. However, these metal oxides usually have large bandgaps and very limited visible-light activity. Thus, they are usually coupled with relatively narrow bandgap semiconductors, which can effectively be excited by visible-light and are capable of injecting photogenerated electrons into the CB of the contacting metal oxides for reduction reactions.
TiO2, as the most common base photocatalyst with excellent stability, has been used to form heterostructures with CdS,56–59 TiSi2,60 CuO,61,62 In2S3,63 for photocatalytic H2 generation, and with CdSe,64 AgBr,65 PbS,66 for CO2 photoreduction. Among them, CdS or CdSe decorated TiO2 structures have received considerable attention because of the perfect band alignment with the highly efficient electron transfer from CdS/CdSe to TiO2 under visible light excitation. For example, Wang et al. employed CdSe quantum dots to sensitize platinized TiO2 (P25). Although the CB edge of bulk CdSe is only slightly higher than that of TiO2, the quantum confinement can shift it to a higher level. As a result, the photoinduced electrons are injected from CdSe quantum dots into TiO2, and this heterojunction is capable of catalyzing the photoreduction of CO2 into CH4 and CH3OH under visible light irradiation.64
To date, a variety of TiO2 nanostructures, including nanotubes and nanotube arrays,67–73 branched TiO2,74 hollow spheres,75 nanowires,76,77 and nanosheets78 have been decorated with CdS or CdSe for improved solar-to-hydrogen generation. In particular the one-dimensional TiO2 nanostructures, such as nanowires and nanotubes, can exhibit excellent efficiency in PEC after decoration with CdS or CdSe quantum dots, which benefits from the vectorial electron transport within the TiO2 structure (Fig. 4).79–81
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of charge vectorial transfer in (a) 1-D TiO2 nanostructure and (b) quantum dot sensitized 1-D TiO2 nanostructure for H2 generation and CO2 reduction. 
However, unlike organic dye-sensitized metal oxides in which the photogenerated electrons can quickly transfer into the metal oxide, trap-state Auger recombination at the interface of QDs and a metal oxide may result in slow electron injection with high charge recombination rates, which decreases the photocatalytic efficiency.82,83 To solve this problem, ternary heterostructures consisting of QDs, Au nanoparticles, and metal-oxide semiconductors have been constructed with improved photocatalytic efficiency.83–87 For example, Wu et al. have demonstrated that Au nanoparticle decoration between CdS QDs and TiO2 nanorods can serve as an electron relay to facilitate the charge transfer between photoexcited CdS and TiO2, which increases the charge-transfer lifetime, and reduces the trap-state Auger rate.83
An alternative to improve the activity is by the enhancement of light harvesting. Ding et al. demonstrated that the butterfly wing architectures of TiO2 can effectively reduce 40% reflection of UV light. The resulting CdS–TiO2 heterostructures exhibited an improved H2 generation efficiency by 200% as compared to plate-like TiO2.88 In addition to TiO2, ZnO and In2O3 have also been widely used to form heterojunctions with other semiconductors for photocatalytic H2 production, including ZnSe–ZnO,89 CdS–ZnO,90,91 ZnS–ZnO,92 CuO–ZnO,93 CuInS2–ZnO,94 In2O3–NaNbO3 (ref. 95) and Gd2Ti2O7–In2O3.96
In order to achieve suitable band alignment, doping is usually a favorable strategy to tune the band structures of semiconductors. For example, the Cr-doped Ba2In2O5–In2O3 heterojunctions can be used for H2 generation in a methanol solution under visible light irradiation, and overall water splitting under UV light irradiation.97 The appropriate Cr-doping allows perfect band alignment between Ba2In2O5 and In2O3 with effective separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes, which enables redox reactions to separately occur at the surface of Cr–In2O3 for H2 evolution and on Cr–Ba2In2O5 surfaces for O2 evolution. Li et al. showed that Zn-doping of β-Ga2O3 resulted in the formation of ZnGa2O4–β-Ga2O3 heterojunctions with a type-2 band alignment, which facilitated charge separation and enhanced photocatalytic activity for water splitting.98
Previously, the most reported heterostructured photocatalysts were constructed between two n-type semiconductors, even though a p–n junction is known to be more effective in charge separation because of the built-in electric field. Examples of p–n heterojunction photocatalysts are considerably fewer because p-type semiconductors are rather rare in nature as compared to n-type semiconductors. Lee et al. demonstrated that through a hydrothermal process, p-type CaFe2O4 nano-islands can be created on the n-type PbBi2Nb1.9W0.1O9 particles to form p–n heterojunctions that are capable of both H2 production in a methanol solution and water oxidation to O2 in an AgNO3 solution under visible light irradiation (Fig. 5).99 A similar p–n nanojunction of CaFe2O4–MgFe2O4 has also been constructed for improved photocatalytic H2 production in an isopropanol solution.100 Following this work, Kim et al. fabricated a heterojunction photoanode of p-CaFe2O4/n-TaON that exhibited five times enhancement in PEC.101
 Fig. 5  (a) HRTEM image of CaFe2O4–PbBi2Nb1.9W0.1O9 p–n heterojunction. (b) Schematic illustration of CaFe2O4–PbBi2Nb1.9W0.1O9 p–n heterojunction for H2 and O2 production. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2005, Wiley. 
In addition to metal oxides, some metal sulphides have also been used to form p–n junctions for photocatalytic applications. Yu et al. showed that by depositing p-type NiS nanoparticles onto n-type CdS nanorods, the resulting p–n hetero-nanostructures can exhibit an even higher H2 generation rate than 1 wt% Pt-loaded CdS nanorods under visible-light irradiation.102 However, in the heterostructures of metal sulphides, cation-diffusion between the segments of different segments may have a negative effect on photoactivity. Mokari et al. demonstrated that p-type Cu2S can be created on the tip of n-type CdS nanorods through cation exchange to form heterojunctions.103 However, Cu+ ions are able to diffuse into the CdS lattice and act as a recombination center, which decreases the exciton lifetime in the nanorods. As a result, the p-Cu2S/n-CdS hetero-nanorods showed even lower photocatalytic activity than the plain CdS nanorods.
Nevertheless, the presence of Cu+ in some heterostructures based on CuO or Cu2O may provide positive contributions to the photoactivity.61,104 For example, Xu et al. have shown that CuO-loaded TiO2 could exhibit higher activity for H2 production than Pt- or Pd-loaded TiO2.61,105 Recently Durgakumari et al. also reported a very high H2 production rate for CuO quantum dots decorated TiO2 nanotubes under solar light irradiation,106 and proposed that the electrons transferred from photoexcited TiO2 will accumulate on CuO, leading to the formation of Cu2O, thus facilitating the interfacial electron transfer to the proton in solution for H2 evolution.
2.4 Heterojunctions on 2-D nanomaterials
Graphene, as a typical two-dimensional (2-D) nanomaterial is composed of a single layer or a few layers of sp2-hybrid carbon atoms, and exhibits a high specific surface area and outstanding thermal, mechanical, optical, and especially electrical properties.107,108 The 2-D structure of graphene along with the large surface area allows it to serve as an excellent platform for supporting semiconductor nanoparticles. In addition, the work function of graphene is −4.42 eV, which is slightly higher than that of the H+/H2 reduction potential.109–111 Thus, when a semiconductor particle with a suitable CB position is deposited onto the graphene surface, the injection of photoexcited electrons from the deposited semiconductor particle to graphene would be thermodynamically favored. Moreover, graphene possesses an excellent electronic conductivity and high mobility of charge carriers, and thus the injected electrons can readily be transported along the graphene surface and collected for reduction reactions.112,113 For example, using transient absorption spectroscopy and time-domain terahertz spectroscopy, Meng et al. demonstrated that graphene can extract the photogenerated electrons from the α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles decorated on its surface, which increases the lifetime of charge carriers, and thereby improving the photocatalytic activity.114
Because of the challenges in the bulk-scale preparation of pristine graphene, most researchers synthesize graphene oxide (GO) based on Hummers method, and treat it with different reducing agents to achieve the format of reduced graphene oxide (r-GO). Graphene oxide also exhibits semiconductor characteristics with a tuneable bandgap depending on the oxidation degree or oxygen concentration in the structure,115 and has been used as a photocatalyst for H2 generation in a methanol solution.116 Although perfectly reduced graphene oxide without vacancy defects should be infinitely close to gapless and pristine graphene, the actual r-Go reported in literature usually possess a small bandgap down to 1 eV.117 However, in the past five years, GO and r-Go have been extensively used as 2-D substrates to form various heterojunction coupling semiconductor nanostructures to achieve enhanced photocatalytic activities for H2 generation and CO2 reduction.
The first example presented by Zhang et al. was the decoration of TiO2 particles onto r-GO surfaces, and the resulting TiO2/r-GO composite showed a higher H2 generation rate in Na2S and Na2SO3 solution than pristine TiO2 and P25.118 The excellent electronic conductivity of graphene enables the rapid transportation of the injected electrons from TiO2, thus promoting charge separation and photocatalytic activity. Following this work, other groups also reported different heterostructures constructed by r-GO with TiO2 nanowires,119 nanosheets,120 and nanotubes,105 respectively, which all exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity in H2 production as compared to individual TiO2 structures.
Compared to TiO2, CdS is more photoactive in the visible region, and has a direct bandgap allowing for a more efficient charge injection. Furthermore, researchers have made numerous efforts to fabricate heterojunctions of r-GO with CdS-based nanocrystals. For example, Gong et al. prepared CdS cluster-decorated r-GO through a solvothermal method.121 The resultant heterojunctions showed an ∼5 times higher H2 production rate than CdS nanoparticles alone. As illustrated by Fig. 6, the increased photocatalytic activities are attributed to the efficient electron collection by r-GO, which prolongs the lifetime of the photoinduced charge carriers from CdS. Jia et al. showed that compared with undoped r-GO, N-doped r-GO could further improve the H2 generation activity upon coupling with CdS.122 In addition, the electrons captured by graphene can readily be transported along r-GO surfaces to the nearby Pt co-catalyst for water reduction. Similar results of enhanced H2 production have also been achieved by coupling r-GO with ZnxCd1−xS,123 Zn0.5Cd0.5S porous nanosheets,124 ZnO–CdS,125 MoS2,126 and SiC.113,115 In addition, the reduction level of GO also strongly influences its activity. Fu et al. determined that for the heterostructure formed by ZnIn2S4 and r-GO, the higher the reduction level of GO, the better H2 generation rate was achieved, suggesting that the electron transport ability on graphene sheets plays a dominant role on the efficiency of charge separation over the heterostructures.127
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the charge separation and transfer in the graphene–CdS system under visible light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to H2 production, the photoreduction of CO2 has also been demonstrated by using graphene-based heterostructures. For example, through layer-by-layer (LBL) assemblies of Ti0.91O2 nanosheets and GO sheets onto a polymer sphere followed by microwave treatment, a Ti0.91O2/r-GO hollow sphere junction could be prepared and it shows considerably higher activity for the photocatalytic CO2 reduction than pure Ti0.91O2 and P25.116 The enhancement arises from the close contact of the Ti0.91O2 nanosheets with r-GO, as well as the hollow sphere structure that facilitates light absorption via a multi-scattering process. Zou et al. showed that by introducing Ti3+ to TiO2/r-GO hybrids with ethylenediamine as the reducing agent, the selective conversion of CO2 to CH4 and C2H6 could be achieved in the presence of water vapour because Ti3+ favours the coupling of photo-generated ˙CH3 radicals into C2H6.128 This work provided a new strategy for C–C catalytic reactions over graphene-based photocatalysts. More recently, Yu et al. prepared CdS nanorod/r-GO heterostructures through a one-step microwave-hydrothermal process, which showed over a 10 times higher CH4 production rate than pure CdS, and a better rate than Pt loaded CdS.129 It was believed that r-GO can not only enhance the adsorption and activation of CO2, but also generate photo-excited electrons, thus resulting in enhanced CO2 reduction over the CdS/r-GO photocatalyst. It is noteworthy that defects on r-GO could have negative effects on its photocatalytic activity. Hersam et al. compared P25/r-GO with P25/SEG (solvent exfoliated graphene) for CO2 photoreduction, and demonstrated that the former exhibited a significantly lower methane production rate than the latter.130 This observation again proves the high importance of charge transport on graphene for the performance of graphene-based heterostructures.
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) is another type of two-dimensional material with a bandgap of 2.4–2.8 eV,131,132 and can be synthesized through the calcination of some molecular precursors such as melamine,133 urea,134–136 and cyanamide.137 The raw g-C3N4 obtained right after calcination usually appears as a bulk crystal with random shapes, but one can easily exfoliate it into very thin nanosheets through ultrasonication in an appropriate chemical environment.138 Owing to its visible-light activity, high stability and suitable band levels capable of water splitting, g-C3N4 has attracted tremendous interest for photocatalytic applications in the past five years. However, individual g-C3N4 usually encounters the problem of rapid recombination of the photogenerated electrons and holes. Therefore, efforts have been made to couple g-C3N4 nanosheets with other materials, including graphene,139–142 TiO2,143–145 ZnO,146,147 In2O3,148 CdS,149–151 and TaON,152 in order to achieve more efficient charge separation and enhanced photocatalytic activity for H2 generation and CO2 reduction.
The heterojunction formed between two inorganic 2-D structures has also been explored. For instance, Ida et al. reported an ultrathin p–n junction by depositing nanosheets of p-type NiO and n-type calcium niobate (CNO) sequentially on a quartz substrate.153 The prepared CNO/NiO (n–p) junction films showed a two times higher rate of photocatalytic H2 generation compared to the individual n-CNO film and p-NiO film.
2.5 Core–shell heterojunctions
As stated earlier, the interfacial area of heterojunctions is critical in determining the final photocatalytic efficiency. In order to achieve a large interface area, a core–shell structure is often the more favourable approach as opposed to normal hetero-nanoparticles. In recent years, there is growing interest on the development of core–shell hetero-nanostructures for solar-to-fuel conversion.
For one-dimensional (1-D) semiconductor nanostructures, i.e. nanowires and nanotubes, which can be grown on a conductive substrate surface, creating core–shell junctions not only enables effective charge separation, but also can take advantage of vectorial charge transport along the 1-D structure. Therefore, a number of 1-D core–shell photoelectrodes, such as TiO2-coated Cu2O/CuO coaxial nanocables,154 CdSe sensitized CdS@ZnO nanowires,155 α-Fe2O3/graphene/BiV1−xMoxO4 nanorods,156 Si@ZnO nanowires,157 cobalt-doped α-Fe2O3@ MgFe2O4 nanorods,158 Si/InGaN hierarchical nanowire arrays,159 have been reported for PEC water splitting.
In comparison, for photocatalytic systems without an external circuit to drive the charge carriers, redox reactions occur at the surface of both core and shell materials especially for the type-II heterojunctions of core–shell structures. Moreover, the shell layer is usually porous or does not fully cover the core structure. For example, Fang et al. reported that hollow SnO2@SiC core–shell spheres showed enhanced photocatalytic activity in H2 evolution because of both interfacial charge separation and the porous structure.160 Another representative example was reported by Yu et al. on CdS@g-C3N4 core–shell nanowires that were prepared by suspending CdS nanowires and g-C3N4 thin nanosheets into methanol followed by a slow drying process (Fig. 6).161 With a small amount of surface g-C3N4, there were some uncovered sites of the CdS nanowire surfaces allowing for effective charge separation at the CdS/g-C3N4 heterojunctions, and more importantly H2 evolution on the CdS surface. However, the resulting CdS@g-C3N4 core–shell nanowires showed a two times higher H2 generation rate than the pure CdS nanowires without a shell (Fig. 7a). However, at a high concentration of g-C3N4 in the suspension, a dense and closed g-C3N4 shell covering the entire CdS nanowire surface leads to significant decrease in photocatalytic activity (Fig. 7b).
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of photocatalytic H2 production over a CdS nanowire partially covered g-C3N4 (a) or fully covered CdS nanowire (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
However, the situation is different and slightly surprising for type I core–shell structures that can also exhibit enhanced photocatalytic activity. For example, theoretically, in CdSe@CdS core–shell nanocrystal, as a type-I junction, photogenerated electrons and holes could be transported together towards the CdSe core, and the CdS shell acts as a physical barrier that inhibits access of photogenerated electrons to the nanocrystal surface, which should decrease the activity for photocatalytic reactions (Fig. 8a). However, Larsen et al. observed a 10-fold increase in photocatalytic H2 generation over the CdSe QDs passivated by a very thin layer of CdS shells as compared to the bare CdSe QDs.162 A similar phenomenon was also reported by Li et al. on CdS@ZnS core–shell nanocrystals, which showed considerably higher activity in photocatalytic H2 production than the CdS nanocrystal alone.163 It was proposed that the enhanced photoactivity of such type-I core–shell nanocrystals is attributed to the fast tunnelling of photogenerated electrons from the core to the shell surface (Fig. 8b), or electrons leaking from the uncovered core surface in the case of a very thin shell. In addition, shell passivation would prevent photocorrosion of the unstable core, which might be another reason for the improved activity. In contrast, Lee et al. reported an inversed-type I structure, In2O3–In2S3 core–shell nanorods, with enhanced H2 production in methanol solution under UV-vis light irradiation.164 In this case, the wide bandgap In2O3 nanorod core was covered by In2S3 nanoflakes with a narrow bandgap, which enabled the photoexcited electrons and holes in the In2O3 core to migrate towards the In2S3 shell surface for direct redox reactions.
 Fig. 8  (a) Theoretical charge transfer process in CdSe@CdS type I core–shell structure with decreased photocatalytic activity. (b) The proposed principle for CdS@ZnS structure with actually enhanced photocatalytic activity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
3. Heterojunctions of semiconductor photocatalysts and noble-metal-free co-catalysts for H2 evolution
For most semiconductor photocatalysts, the overpotentials at the surfaces for hydrogen evolution reactions (HER) are always a critical issue that restricts the overall photocatalytic efficiency of water splitting. It is common to deposit noble metals (e.g. Pt, Pd and Au.) to lower the overpotential and enhance efficiency. Nevertheless, because of the high cost of noble metals, researchers are making efforts to use cheap noble-metal-free co-catalysts with high efficiency for H2 evolution. By coupling the co-catalyst with the semiconductor photocatalyst, it forms a different type of heterojunction as compared to the semiconductor–semiconductor and metal–semiconductor junctions in terms of the nature and principle of interfacial charge transfer.
Some transition metal sulphides, oxides, and complexes have been found to be effective co-catalysts that can extract photoexcited electrons from the semiconductor photocatalyst for efficient proton reduction in H2. However, these co-catalyst compounds alone are not photoactive for H2 generation. In this section, we will review recent developments on heterojunctions of semiconductor-co-catalysts for photocatalytic H2 production based on the composition of the metal compound co-catalyst.
3.1 Transition metal oxide-semiconductor heterojunctions
Over the past several decades, some metal oxides such as RuO2,165,166 Cr2O3,155 Rh2−yCryO3,16,157 and CoOx,167 have been used as deposits on photocatalyst surfaces as co-catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) to promote photocatalytic efficiency for overall water splitting. However, for metal oxide co-catalysts for H2 evolution, there are fewer such examples reported.
A well-recognized example is NiO, which has been used for promoting H2 production for many years. An appropriate reduction–oxidation process is usually needed to achieve a high H2 production rate when NiOx is used as the co-catalyst.168,169 It is believed that the reduction process converts the loaded NiOx particle into metallic Ni, on which the outmost layer would be subsequently oxidized back to NiO again. As a result, the so called NiOx co-catalyst is in fact composed of a Ni core with a very thin layer of NiO shells. Such Ni–NiO core–shell structures formed at the surfaces of semiconductor photocatalysts could not only improve photocatalytic H2 production, but also suppress the back reaction of H2 and O2 into H2O.170 However, a recent study by Osterloh et al. indicates that an NiOx-loaded SrTiO3 photocatalyst behaves more like a three component Ni–SrTiO3–NiO structure that allows proton reduction and water oxidation to occur on Ni and NiO, respectively.169 A separate study by Hwang et al. also showed that the Ni/NiO co-loaded GO exhibits higher activity for H2 generation than NiO-loaded GO,168 indicating that the metallic Ni may have considerable contribution to the enhanced H2 evolution by NiOx.
3.2 Transition metal sulfide-semiconductor heterojunctions
Compared to metal oxides, transition metal sulphides are more capable of acting as HER co-catalysts when coupled with semiconductor photocatalysts for H2 production.132–146 The first example was reported by Li et al. in 2008 on the MoS2-loaded CdS that showed a 36 times higher H2 production rate compared CdS alone,171 while MoS2 alone is not photoactive for H2 generation. The intimate contact between MoS2 and CdS enables the electron transfer from photoexcited CdS to MoS2, and more importantly, MoS2 provides catalytically active sites,172,173 allowing the received electrons for efficient proton reduction. Similarly, to MoS2, WS2 belonging to the same group was found to have a similar function for improved H2 production when coupled with CdS.174
Apart from sulfide–sulfide contact, MoS2 can also be coupled with non-sulfide photocatalysts for improved H2 generation owing to the benefit of its surface active sites for HER. Zhang et al. demonstrated that a few layered MoS2 nanosheets can grow onto TiO2 nanobelts, which creates heterostructures showing high efficiency for photocatalytic H2 production. Hou et al. have reported layered nanojunctions between MoS2 and mesoporous g-C3N4 that improves H2 production.175 The very thin layered MoS2 with anisotropic conductivity promoted charge transport between different layers and shortened the electron migration distance and time.
Nickel sulfides are another group of popular HER co-catalysts, and have many different compositions and phases. Among them, NiS and NiS2 have been demonstrated as highly active co-catalysts for photocatalytic H2 production.176–182 Xu et al. have shown that the NiS–CdS heterostructures could exhibit a high apparent quantum yield (AQY) of 51.3% for H2 production at 420 nm excitation.176 It was proposed that the proton can bind with Ni2+ on NiS surfaces, which facilitates its reduction and consequent H2 evolution.183 Similarly, the deposition of NiS2 nanoparticles onto CdLa2S4 surfaces also resulted in remarkable enhancement in H2 generation under visible light irradiation as compared to pristine CdLa2S4.181 Both NiS and NiS2 have been successfully loaded on g-C3N4 surfaces to enhance photocatalytic H2 production.178,182
In comparison to MoS2 and nickel sulfide, CuS can also act as a co-catalyst but with a different mechanism. Gong et al. prepared CuS-loaded ZnS porous nanosheets via a hydrothermal process with cation exchange.184 Although ZnS alone is a wide bandgap semiconductor with no visible light activity and CuS alone is also not capable for photocatalytic H2 generation, CuS–ZnS heterojunctions exhibit high visible-light activity for H2 production with an AQY of 20% at 420 nm. The authors propose that the interfacial charge transfer (IFCT) from the valence band of ZnS to CuS (Fig. 9) with transition energy of 2.94 eV is responsible for its visible light activity, leading to the reduction of surface CuS clusters to Cu2S as an intermediate product that is subsequently converted back to CuS with accompanied proton reduction into H2. Following this work, CuS has been also decorated onto other semiconductors including ZnO,185 CdS,186 and ZnxCd1−xS,144,145 to achieve enhanced H2 production without the aid of noble-metals.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration for the proposed mechanism of visible light induced interfacial charge transfer (IFCT) from the valence band of ZnS to the CuS clusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
It is noteworthy that these metal sulfide co-catalysts, such as MoS2 and NiS,102,126,187 have also been reported as a type of semiconductor for some photocatalytic reactions. The exact principle of how these metal sulphide co-catalyst function as an electron receptor is still under debate.
3.3 Heterojunctions of semiconductors and metal complexes
In recent years, some transition metal complexes, such as hydrogenases,188,189 hydrogenase mimics,190,191 and Ni-complexes,192,193 have been proven as active HER co-catalysts when coupled with semiconductor photocatalysts. Unlike metal oxide or sulphide co-catalysts, which are deposited onto the semiconductor with close contact, these molecular co-catalysts are normally chemisorbed or electrostatically bound on the semiconductor surface. Nevertheless, these interactions still enable the electron transfer from photoexcited semiconductors to the molecular co-catalysts for proton reduction.
For example, by coupling a hydrogenase system consisting of Clostridium acetobutylicum [Fe–Fe]-hydrogenase I (CaI) and CdTe or CdS nanoparticles, high quantum efficiencies of 9% at 523 nm and 20% at 405 nm could be achieved.188,189 This is attributed to the fast electron transfer from excited CdTe or CdS to CaI serving as active sites for proton reduction to H2. In addition to natural hydrogenases, artificial hydrogenase mimics, such as dinuclear [Fe–Fe]-H2ase and cobaloximes, have also been used to promote H2 production through a similar electron transfer process.190,191,194,195
Recently, Krauss et al. reported a durable and active system containing dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA) capped CdSe quantum dots as the photocatalyst and water soluble Ni2+–DHLA as the co-catalyst for H2 production,192 which exhibited excellent long-term stability for H2 production, which maintained a high quantum yield over 15 days. Although the details of the catalytically active nickel species are still not clear, it was believed that the nickel–thiolate moieties attached on CdSe surfaces are responsible for proton reduction in this system. Similarly, some other Ni2+ complexes, such as Ni(dmgh)2,196 and [Ni(TEOA)2]2+,193 have also been reported as effective molecular co-catalysts to couple with semiconductor photocatalysts for efficient H2 production.
4. Metal–semiconductor heterojunctions for H2 production and CO2 reduction
4.1 Schottky junction
The close contact of a metal with an n-type semiconductor normally creates a Schottky junction with a potential barrier that prevents most electrons/holes from passing through them. The opposite case of a p-type semiconductor/metal junction represents an ohmic contact. Fig. 10 illustrates the energy band diagram of a typical metal–semiconductor Schottky junction. The height of the potential barrier (Φb) depends on the band bending of the semiconductor and the Fermi level of metal at equilibrium.197 Upon excitation of the semiconductor, the photogenerated electrons are able to transfer across the Schottky junction to the contacting metal, resulting in a shift of the Fermi level of the metal towards that of the semiconductor with a new equilibrium (Fig. 10).198–200 In this manner, the metal acts like an electron sink to enable the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes, and thus allowing more time for the holes on the semiconductor surface for oxidation reaction. Furthermore, the metal surface may provide active sites to lower the overpotentials for H2 generation and CO2 photoreduction.170,201
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustrations of (a) Schottky junction with energy level alignment and (b) photoinduced electron transfer across the metal–semiconductor junction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197 and 199. Copyright 2008 and 2004 American Chemical Society. 
To achieve efficient electron transfer across the Schottky junction, the Fermi level of the metal should be sufficiently lower than the semiconductor CB. Therefore, metals with a large working function (normally larger than 5.0 eV) such as Pt,136,202 Pd,203 Au,204,205 Rh,206 and Ru,207 have been commonly used to form heterojunctions with semiconductors. In addition, particularly for H2 generation, the M–H (M as transition metal) bond strength is also a critical issue. The stronger M–H bond may allow for the lower activation energy of proton reduction (H+ + e− → Had), but H2 desorption (2Had → H2) on the metal surface would be more difficult.208 Therefore, one has to find a balance of the M–H bond strength for efficient H2 evolution. Among all metals, Pt has been recognized as the optimal choice in terms of its work function and bond strength with hydrogen,170,201 and thus is the most popular metal co-catalyst for photocatalytic H2 production.
For example, a simple tip-loading of Pt on CdSe@CdS nanorods could result in an AQY of 20% at 420 nm irradiation for H2 production.178 An even higher AQY (60.3%) was reported by Bao et al. over porous CdS nanostructures with homogenous loading of Pt nanoparticles via UV-photodeposition, which benefits from the large surface area.177 Note that the pH of the precursor (e.g. H2PtCl6) solution for the photodeposition of Pt may also influence the photocatalytic activity of Pt-semiconductor structures. Xu et al. found that the Pt4+ species (in H2PtCl6) can be readily reduced to Pt0 in alkaline solution, while in acidic conditions, some Pt4+ can only be partially reduced to Pt2+.209 Thus, the CdS particles with Pt-loading at pH 13.5 showed a considerably higher photocatalytic H2 generation rate than that with Pt loading at pH 2.4.
Because of the high cost of Pt, researchers have attempted to reduce its usage by alloying Pt with earth abundant transition metals with a retained high efficiency for H2 evolution. Yu et al. found that loading 1 wt% Pt3Co onto CdS resulted in about two times higher H2 production rate than 1 wt% Pt-loaded CdS,210 which is attributed to the more effective accumulation of photoexcited electrons on Co than on Pt. Indeed, previous reports also showed that some earth abundant coinage metals, such as Ni,211–213 Co,214 Cu,215,216 could also act as co-catalysts for H2 evolution. For instance, Do et al. demonstrated that the visible-light-driven H2 production rate over 1.2 wt% Ni loaded CdS is nearly twice higher than that of 1.2 wt% Pt loaded CdS.213 Moreover, the nanocomposite of CdS nanoparticles growing on titanate nanodisks exhibited very weak photoactivity for H2 evolution (0.142 mmol g−1 h−1) in an ethanol–water solution because of the high overpotential on titanate surfaces. However, the loading of nickel clusters onto this composite led to 80 times enhancement on the photocatalytic H2 generation rate because the Ni clusters on titanate surfaces can trap the electrons injected from excited CdS and act as active sites for H2 evolution.
In addition to H2 evolution, the metal–semiconductor Schottky junction can also be used for enhanced CO2 photoreduction, and the loaded metal may exhibit certain selectivity for hydrocarbon formation. For example, CO2 photoreduction over Pd-loaded TiO2 led to CH4 as the main product and minor production of C2H6 and CO.217 Wang et al. demonstrated that the film of 1-D single crystal TiO2 coated with ultrafine Pt nanoparticles (0.5–2 nm) exhibited very high efficiency of CO2 photoreduction with the selective formation of methane (1361 μmol per g cat per h).218
Previous studies also proved that Cu could act as an active co-catalyst for CO2 photoduction.219,220 In 2010, Biswas et al. prepared mesoporous silica supported Cu–TiO2 nanocomposites for efficient CO2 photoreduction.221 Without the Cu co-catalyst, CO was found to be the main product, while the Cu-loading on TiO2 led to higher selectivity in CO2 reduction into CH4. Subsequently, the same group reported the rapid preparation of Cu–TiO2–SiO2 hybrids by the evaporation driven self-assembly of nanocolloids for the high yield photo-conversion of CO2 into CO.222
4.2 Plasmonic metal–semiconductor heterojunctions
In the past decade, the nanostructures of some noble metals such as Au, Ag and Pd, have attracted particularly strong interest because of their interactions with visible-light induced by surface plasmon resonance (SPR), referring to the collective coherent oscillations of metal surface electrons against the restoring force of positive nuclei.223,224 The SPR wavelengths highly depend on the composition, size, shape, geometric arrangement, and dielectric environment of the plasmonic metal nanostructures.225 This strong SPR effect has been used to improve the light-harvesting capability in photovoltaic devices due to light-trapping by the localized oscillating electric field of metal nanostructures.226
In 2005, Tatsuma et al. reported the first direct observation of a plasmon-induced photocurrent on the TiO2 film loaded with Au nanoparticles, and the action spectra for IPCE matched well with the absorption band of the Au particles.227 Later, the plasmon-induced photocurrent was also observed by other groups over different metal oxide–Au heterojunctions.83,228,229 Using ultrafast spectroscopy, Furube et al. have proven that upon plasmon excitation, the hot electrons of Au particles can be injected into the TiO2 conduction band within 250 fs,230 and these electrons are capable of diffusing into TiO2 for 100 ps to 10 ns depending on the particle size,231 leading to plasmon-induced charge separation. Brückner et al. further proved the plasmon-driven electron transfer from Au particles to TiO2 by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy, and determined that the injected hot electrons are trapped in the vacancies near the Au–TiO2 interface.232 These observations indicate that the hot-plasmon electrons can be used for some chemical reactions such as proton reduction to H2 under visible-light irradiation.
For instance, García et al. observed a clear H2 production for Au–TiO2 composites under irradiation at 532 nm.233 Other researchers further reported that the crystal facet and superstructure of TiO2 have a significant effect on the H2 generation activity because it influences the transport ability of injected hot electrons to the active site for proton reduction.234,235 Nevertheless, the activity of plasmon-induced H2 evolution over Au–TiO2 heterojunctions is still very low because the TiO2 surfaces have a high overpotential for H2 evolution. To solve this issue, Kominami et al. demonstrated that the co-loading of other metal co-catalysts onto Au–TiO2 structures led to improved H2 generation rate upon Au SPR excitation.236 Moreover, through systematic studies with dual-beam irradiation over Au/Pt co-decorated TiO2 nanofibers, Zhang et al. found a synergistic effect between Au SPR and TiO2 excitation, and indicated that the plasmon-driven H2 generation can be significantly enhanced when the TiO2 is co-excited (Fig. 11). This might enhance TiO2 conductivity so that the injected hot electrons from Au can be more effectively transported through TiO2 to nearby Pt sites for H2 evolution.237
 Fig. 11  Plasmon-driven photocatalytic hydrogen production over Au/Pt–TiO2 nanofibers. The hot plasmon electrons of Au nanoparticles can readily transport through TiO2 (when it is co-excited) to the nearby Pt particle for hydrogen generation. Reprinted from ref. 237 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to TiO2, some other materials have also been used to form heterojunctions with Au nanoparticles to observe plasmon-induced H2 evolution. For instance, Halas et al. demonstrated the hot-electron-induced photodissociation of H2 on small Au nanoparticles supported on SiO2.238 Interestingly, a recent study by Zheng et al. showed that even a bimetallic nanostructure, Au nanorod with a tip-loading of Pt, can exhibit H2 evolution in methanol through plasmon-induced hot electron transfer from Au to Pt.239 A similar process was also observed over the Pt/Au/WO3 photocatalysts with H2 generation in the presence of glycerin or 2-propanol.240 However, as more Pt are deposited onto gold particle surface, the Au SPR would be gradually dampened, leading to a decrease in the plasmon-driven photocatalytic activity.241
Moreover, the hot-electron mechanism, the plasmon-enhanced localized electric field has also been considered as another major contribution to the improved photocatalytic activity over plasmonic metal–semiconductor hybrid nanostructures. Upon SPR excitation, the local electric field nearby the metal particle surfaces can be significantly enhanced, and the enhancement factor exponentially drops along with the distance from the metal surface.223 Hence, the semiconductor that is located very near the metal surface would be exposed to this strong plasmonic field, which can enhance the semiconductor excitation with more exciton formation,242–244 leading to higher photocatalytic efficiency.
For example, Kumar et al. prepared a plasmonic TiO2/SiO2/Ag system in which a TiO2 film was deposited onto an Ag nanoparticle film with a very thin or SiO2 spacers between TiO2 and Ag for the purpose of excluding the injection of hot plasmon electrons. This tri-layer structure still showed enhanced photocatalytic activity with higher enhancement at smaller SiO2 layer thicknesses, which proves the effect of this plasmon field-enhancement mechanism.243 Han et al. reported interesting Janus Au–TiO2 nanoparticles that exhibit enhanced H2 generation in an isopropanol solution under visible-light irradiation with the rate of hydrogen generation following the order of Au70 nm–TiO2 > Au50 nm–TiO2 > Au30 nm–TiO2.245 The authors attributed the higher H2 generation rate to the strong Au plasmonic near field that enhanced the optical absorption and the electron–hole pair generation on the conjugated TiO2 particle.
In addition to the near-field enhancement, the SPR effect of metal nanoparticles can also promote the charge separation of the nearby semiconductor through a process of plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer (PIRET), in which the plasmonic energy is transferred from the metal to semiconductor through dipole–dipole interactions to induce charge separation in the semiconductor.246 Importantly, the PIRET process enables the generation of charge carriers even when the excitation photon energy is below the bandgap, and thereby allows us to utilize a wide range of low energy photons for photocatalytic reactions.
In addition to H2 production, plasmonic metal–semiconductor nanostructures have also been utilized for CO2 photoreduction. Cronin et al. achieved a 24-fold enhancement in CO2 reduction over Au–TiO2 heterojunctions when the incident photon energy matched the SPR of gold nanoparticles.247 Enhanced CO2 photoconversion to CH4 has also been reported by Fan et al. by using Ag-loaded TiO2 nanocomposites.248 Recently, Zhang et al. showed that the co-loading of gold nanoparticles into Pt–TiO2 nanofibers can result in higher efficiency for CO2 photoreduction due to plasmon field enhancement.
4.3 Z-scheme heterostructures of semiconductor–metal–semiconductor
The concept of the Z-scheme originated from the natural leaf, which utilizes two red photons to accomplish the photosynthetic processes. As shown in Fig. 12, the biomimetic Z-scheme water splitting system consists of two isolated semiconductors and redox couples in liquid electrolytes.249 However, the overall working efficiency in this Z-scheme is restricted by the slow diffusion of redox couple ions and the competitive backward reactions between them. In order to avoid these drawbacks, researchers have proposed an “all-solid-state” Z-scheme by using noble metals as the electron mediator to substitute solution-based redox couples, resulting in the ternary heterostructure of semiconductor–metal–semiconductor.84,85 Though some examples of Z-scheme semiconductor–metal–semiconductor heterostructures have been demonstrated with successful outcomes for photocatalytic water splitting or CO2 reduction,250,251 currently there is still a lack of solid evidence to verify the proposed Z-scheme electron transfer path.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of (a) liquid-based Z-scheme for water splitting; (b) “all-solid-state” Z-scheme consisting of semiconductor I (Sc I)–metal–semiconductor II (Sc II). Reprinted with permission from ref. 249 and 251. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society (a) and 2014 Wiley (b). 
5. Conclusion and perspectives
Significant advances have been achieved in the design and fabrication of hetero-nanostructure photocatalysts for efficient photocatalytic H2 production and CO2 reduction in the past decade. Although the photocatalytic activities, in most cases, can be enhanced by forming appropriate heterojunctions, actual solar-to-fuel conversion efficiencies are still a far cry from meeting the criteria for commercialization. This is because of the limitations of semiconductor photocatalysts such as high overpotentials for H2/O2 evolution and its very low activity for red-photons or near-IR light. In particular, long-term stability is the most serious problem especially for the noble-metal-free structures. In addition to these, there are still several important issues to be addressed in the design and fabrication of heterostructured photocatalysts in the future to achieve a satisfying efficiency in solar-to-fuel conversion.
(I) Charge transfer/separation at the interface: though there is a general consensus that heterojunctions facilitate the migration of photoexcited electrons or/and holes across interfaces so as to reduce charge recombination or enhance charge separation, there were very few direct experimental evidence or spectroscopic observations that unambiguously revealed the detailed mechanism of the photoinduced charge transfer process at the interface of heterostructures. The key challenges come from the interference between multiple complicated variables, such as surface status (crystal facets, defects, trapping sites etc.), excitation/relaxation dynamics, and surface reaction kinetics, especially when two or more components in the heterostructure make contributions simultaneously during the studies. Nevertheless, it is still important and critical to gain deep understanding on the charge transfer process through fundamental studies towards the rational design of heterostructures with high photocatalytic efficiencies.
(II) Competitive light-harvesting: the semiconductor-based photocatalysts are mostly active in the spectral region with high-energy photons (e.g. UV or blue light). Although some of them exhibit certain visible-light activity, their photo-conversion efficiency is very low. This problem becomes more notable for semiconductor heterostructures because the two semiconductor components would have to compete in absorbing high-energy photons for charge carrier generation, especially when their absorption range has a large overlap. Therefore, it is challenging to design heterostructures with the appropriate morphological-related orientation and position of each semiconductor unit within the structure. Alternatively, one would need to develop a new type of semiconductor that can efficiently utilize red photons or near-IR light with a suitable band structure and high stability.
(III) Interfaces versus surfaces: for heterostructures, the interfacial area is often critical to achieve optimal charge separation. Especially, for heterojunctions between two semiconductors, whereby a larger interfacial area would provide more chances for charge transfer across the junction towards a more efficient separation of photogenerated electrons and holes on both units. Based on this concern, it is important to have nanoscale units to create the heterojunction, allowing for a large interfacial area and reduced charge transport length towards the heterojunction. However, the overall photocatalytic efficiency is determined not only by charge separation, but also surface reactions. Thus, in the preparation of heterostructures, there would be strong challenges on how to balance the interfaces with the available surface area for redox reactions. More importantly, more systematic studies are required to explore theories or experimental methods to determine or estimate the optimal ratio between the interface and bare surface in different heterostructures.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the financial support from NTU seed funding for the Solar Fuels Laboratory, MOE AcRF-Tier1 RG 44/11, MOE AcRF-Tier2 (MOE2012-T2-2-041, ARC 5/13), and CRP (NRF-CRP5-2009-04) from NRF Singapore. Y. P. Yuan thanks the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51002001, 21303002), and acknowledges the group members, Lingli Liu, Haiyu Chen and Xin Jiang for their assistance in preparing the materials.
References

          http://cdiac.ornl.gov/GCP/carbonbudget/2013/
        .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, Z. Zhao, J. Zheng, M. Yang, L. Qiu, Z. Li and Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6772–6779 RSC .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 35–54 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
X. B. Chen, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler Jr, Science, 2002, 297, 2243–2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Chen, C. Li, M. Gratzel, R. Kostecki and S. S. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909–7937 RSC .
D. V. Bavykin, V. N. Parmon, A. A. Lapkin and F. C. Walsh, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 3370–3377 RSC .
M. T. Mayer, Y. Lin, G. Yuan and D. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1558–1566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Jang, H. G. Kim and J. S. Lee, Catal. Today, 2012, 185, 270–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Fan, Q. H. Zhang and Y. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2632–2649 RSC .
Y. J. Wang, Q. S. Wang, X. Y. Zhan, F. M. Wang, M. Safdar and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8326–8339 RSC .
K. S. Joya, Y. F. Joya, K. Ocakoglu and R. van de Krol, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10426–10437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Li, W. J. Luo, M. L. Zhang, J. Y. Feng and Z. G. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 347–370 CAS .
Y. Park, K. J. McDonaldb and K. S. Choi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2321–2337 RSC .
L. Li, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 24–42 RSC .
H. T. Yu and X. Quan, Prog. Chem., 2009, 21, 406–419 CAS .
Y. Bessekhouad, D. Robert and J. V. Weber, Catal. Today, 2005, 101, 315–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bessekhouad, D. Robert and J. V. Weber, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 163, 569–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mills and S. L. Hunte, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 108, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Q. Lu and J. T. Yates and Jr, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemannt, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Hernández-Alonso, F. Fresno, S. Suárez and J. M. Coronado, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1231–1257 Search PubMed .
D. C. Hurum, A. G. Agrios, K. A. Gray, T. Rajh and M. C. Thurnauer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4545–4549 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, A. V. Vorontsov and P. G. Smirniotis, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 3151–3156 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, Y. Ma, J. Zhang, X. L. Wang, Z. C. Feng and C. Li, J. Catal., 2011, 278, 329–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kavan, M. Grätzel, S. E. Gilbert, C. Klemenz and H. J. Scheel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6716–6723 CrossRef CAS .
D. O. Scanlon, C. W. Dunnill, J. Buckeridge, S. A. Shevlin, A. J. Logsdail, S. M. Woodley, C. R. A. Catlow, M. J. Powell, R. G. Palgrave, I. P. Parkin, G. W. Watson, T. W. Keal, P. Sherwood, A. Walsh and A. A. Sokol, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ohno, T. Higo, N. Murakami, H. Saito, Q. T. Zhang, Y. Yang and T. Tsubota, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152–153, 309–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Kandiel, A. Feldhoff, L. Robben, R. Dillert and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2050–2060 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Shen, J. L. Zhang, B. Z. Tian and M. Anpo, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 5743–5751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu and L. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1785–1790 CAS .
R. Boppella, P. Basak and S. V. Manorama, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1239–1246 CAS .
Q. Tay, X. F. Liu, Y. X. Tang, Z. L. Jiang, T. C. Sum and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14973–14982 CAS .
Y. X. Liu, Z. L. Wang, W. D. Wang and W. X. Huang, J. Catal., 2014, 310, 16–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Q. Xu, M. R. Li, S. Shen, X. L. Wang, Y. C. Wang, Z. C. Feng, J. Y. Shi, H. X. Han and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 13089–13092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, P. R. Chen, A. Kostka, R. Marschall and M. Wark, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4739–4745 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Liu, D. W. Jing, Z. H. Zhou and L. J. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2278 Search PubMed .
D. O. Scanlon and G. W. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2582–2585 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jiang, T. F. Xie, W. S. Yang, L. P. Chen, H. M. Fan and D. J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4619–4624 CAS .
L. C. K. Liau, Y. C. Lin and Y. J. Peng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26426–26431 CAS .
M. K. Nowotny, P. Bogdanoff, T. Dittrich, S. Fiechter, A. Fujishima and H. Tributsch, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 928–930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Ballyyz, E. N. Korobeinikovax, P. E. Schmid and F. Bussyk, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1998, 31, 1149–1154 CrossRef .
J. Chen, P. Rulis, L. Z. Ouyang, S. Satpathy and W. Y. Ching, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 235207 CrossRef .
C. Kim, K. S. Kim, H. Y. Kim and Y. S. Han, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5809–5814 RSC .
A. Ruiz, A. Cornet, G. Sakai, K. Shimanoe, J. R. Morante and N. Yamazoe, Chem. Lett., 2002, 31, 892–893 CrossRef .
S. Liu, T. H. Xie, Z. Chen and J. T. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 8587–8592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Chen, X. L. Yu, H. Y. Zhang and W. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, K96–K102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. H. Tang and D. Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21529–21534 CAS .
J. P. Zou, S. L. Lei, J. Yu, S. L. Luo, X. B. Luo, X. H. Tang, W. L. Dai, J. Sun, G. C. Guo and C. T. Au, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150–151, 466–471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, L. Ding, T. X. Fan, J. Ding, D. Zhang and Q. X. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 221–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Jang, H. G. Kim, U. A. Joshi, J. W. Jang and J. S. Lee, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 5975–5980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, W. Choi and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2379–2385 RSC .
S. Banerjee, S. K. Mohapatra and M. Misra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12643–12649 CAS .
S. Xu and D. D. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 6096–6104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Y. X. Liu, D. J. Martin, W. D. Wang, J. W. Tang and W. X. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 14956–14960 RSC .
B. Chai, T. Y. Peng, P. Zeng and J. Mao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14587–14593 RSC .
C. J. Wang, R. L. Thompson, J. Baltrus and C. Matranga, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Asi, C. He, M. H. Su, D. H. Xia, L. Lin, H. Q. Deng, Y. Xiong, R. L. Qiu and X. Z. Li, Catal. Today, 2011, 175, 256–263 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Wang, R. L. Thompson, P. Ohodnicki, J. Baltrus and C. Matranga, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13452–13457 RSC .
D. R. Baker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 805–811 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Kim, J. Choi, Y. B. Lee, J. H. Hong, J. I. Lee, J. W. Yang, W. I.Lee and N. H. Hur, Chem. Commun., 2006, 5024–5026 RSC .
H. Y. Wang, W. Zhu, B. H. Chong and K. Qin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 90–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Wu, J. Li, S. H. Zhang, L. Z. Long, X. J. Li and C. P. Cen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 22591–22597 CAS .
S. S. Kalanur, S. H. Lee, Y. J. Hwang and O. S. Joo, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2013, 259, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Li, J. Yuan, B. Y. Han, L. Jiang and W. F. Shangguan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7073–7079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bai, J. H. Li, Y. B. Liu, B. X. Zhou and W. M. Cai, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 95, 408–413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. L. Su, J. W. Lu, Y. Tian, X. B. Ma and J. L. Gong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12026–12032 RSC .
X. F. Cui, G. Y. Jiang, M. Zhu, Z. Zhao, L. C. Du, Y. X. Weng, C. M. Xu, D. K. Zhang, Q. L. Zhang, Y. C. Wei, A. J. Duan, J. Liu and J. S. Gao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 9065–9073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Wu, M. Tian and A. C. Chen, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 233, 65–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chaguetmi, F. Mammeri, M. Pasut, S. Nowak, H. Lecoq, P. Decorse, C. Costentin, S. Achour and S. Ammar, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15, 2140 CrossRef .
H. N. Kim, T. W. Kim, I. Y. Kim and S. J. Hwang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3111–3118 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Sun, Y. Yuan, H. Y. Pan, X. F. Gao, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pang, K. Cheng, Z. Q. Yuan, S. Y. Xu, G. Cheng and Z. L. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 201601 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. S. Bai, H. Zhang, Z. H. Zhang, J. H. Li and L. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16451–16455 CAS .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664–6688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, T. Senty, F. Meng, A. D. Bristow, A. Manivannan and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8438–8449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tada, T. Mitsui, T. Kiyonaga, T. Akita and K. Tanaka, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 782–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Yun, H. Lee, N. D. Kim, D. M. Lee, S. Yu and J. Yi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4084–4090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fang, L. Xu, Z. Zhang, Y. Yuan, S. Cao, Z. Wang, L. Yin, Y. Liao and C. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8088–8092 CAS .
Z. B. Yu, Y. P. Xie, G. Liu, G. Q. Lu, X. L. Ma and H. M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2772–2776 Search PubMed .
L. Ding, H. Zhou, S. Lou, J. Ding, D. Zhang, H. X. Zhu and T. X. Fan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 8244–8253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cho, J. W. Jang, S. H. Lim, H. J. Kang, S. W. Rhee, J. S. Lee and K. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17816–17822 RSC .
X. X. Zou, P. P. Wang, C. G. Li, J. Zhao, D. J. Wang, T. Asefa and G. D. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4682–4689 CAS .
X. W. Wang, G. Liu, Z. G. Chen, F. Li, L. Z. Wang, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3452–3454 RSC .
Z. Wang, S. W. Cao, S. C. J. Loo and C. Xue, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 5688–5693 RSC .
A. Kargar, Y. Jing, S. J. Kim, C. T. Riley, X. Q. Pan and D. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11112–11120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Li, Z. F. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. C. Liu, J. H. Han and J. Ya, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 15029–15037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, T. Kako, Z. S. Li, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6157–6162 CAS .
A. Nashim, S. Martha and K. M. Parida, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 2352–2359 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Wang, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3255–3261 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Shen, S. Q. Jin, J. X. Yang, M. R. Li, X. L. Wang, H. X. Han and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 19380–19386 RSC .
H. G. Kim, P. H. Borse, W. Choi and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4585–4589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Kim, P. H. Borse, J. S. Jang, E. D. Jeong, O. S. Jung, Y. J. Suh and J. S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5889–5891 RSC .
E. S. Kim, N. Nishimura, G. Magesh, J. Y. Kim, J. W. Jang, H. Jun, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5375–5383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Z. Qiao, L. F. Qi and J. G. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12088–12094 RSC .
I. J. L. Plante, A. Teitelboim, I. Pinkas, D. Oron and T. Mokari, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 590–596 CrossRef .
J. Bandara, C. P. Udawatta and C. S. Rajapakse, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2005, 4, 857–861 CAS .
S. Xu, J. Ng, X. Zhang, H. Bai and D. D. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 5254–5261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Kumar, M. V. Shankar, M. M. Kumari, G. Sadanandam, B. Srinivas and V. Durgakumari, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9443–9445 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lee, K. H. You and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1084–1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Zhang, Z. G. Xiong and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3634–3640 RSC .
Y. J. Yu, Y. Zhao, L. E. Brus, K. S. Kim and P. Kim, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3430–3434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
X. An and J. C. Yu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1426–1434 RSC .
F. Meng, J. Li, S. K. Cushing, J. Bright, M. Zhi, J. D. Rowley, Z. Hong, A. Manivannan, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 746–751 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Lian, Y. F. Ji, X. F. Li, M. X. Jin, D. J. Ding and Y. Luo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6049–6054 CAS .
T. F. Yeh, J. M. Syu, C. Cheng, T. H. Chang and H. Teng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2255–2262 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mathkar, D. Tozier, P. Cox, P. Ong, C. Galande, K. Balakrishnan, A. L. M. Reddy and P. M. Ajayan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 986–991 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Zhang, H. P. Li, X. L. Cui and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2801–2806 RSC .
X. Cao, G. Tian, Y. Chen, J. Zhou, W. Zhou, C. Tian and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4366–4374 CAS .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3670–3678 RSC .
Q. Li, B. D. Guo, J. G. Yu, J. R. Ran, B. H. Zhang, H. J. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878–10884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jia, D. H. Wang, Y. X. Huang, A. W. Xu and H. Q. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11466–11473 CAS .
Q. Li, H. Meng, J. G. Yu, W. Xiao, Y. Q. Zheng and J. Wang, Chem. Eur.–J., 2014, 20, 1176–1185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, W. W. Zhao, Y. Xu, H. L. Xu and B. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 702–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Wang, L. C. Yin and G. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3460–3463 RSC .
F. Meng, J. Li, S. K. Cushing, M. Zhi and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10286–10289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Ge, L. Wei, Z. Li, R. Yuan, P. Liu and X. Fu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1712–1717 CAS .
W. G. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, S. C. Yan, S. S. Bao, X. Y. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. G. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1743–1749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Yu, J. Jin, B. Cheng and M. Jaroniec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3407–3416 CAS .
Y. T. Liang, B. K. Vijayan, K. A. Gray and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2865–2870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717–6731 CAS .
S. C. Yan, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10397–10401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dong, L. W. Wu, Y. J. Sun, M. Fu, Z. B. Wu and S. C. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15171–15174 RSC .
J. H. Liu, T. K. Zhang, Z. C. Wang, G. Dawson and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14398–14401 RSC .
Y. P. Yuan, W. T. Xu, L. S. Yin, S. W. Cao, Y. S. Liao, Y. Q. Tng and C. Xue, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 13159–13163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Li, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2170–2174 RSC .
S. B. Yang, Y. J. Gong, J. S. Zhang, L. Zhan, L. L. Ma, Z. Y. Fang, R. Vajtai, X. C. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. Mori, L. Niu and J. Ye, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4517–4521 CAS .
G. Liao, S. Chen, X. Quan, H. Yu and H. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2721–2726 RSC .
A. Du, S. Sanvito, Z. Li, D. Wang, Y. Jiao, T. Liao, Q. Sun, Y. H. Ng, Z. Zhu, R. Amal and S. C. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4393–4397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CAS .
B. Chai, T. Peng, J. Mao, K. Li and L. Zan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 16745–16752 RSC .
S. Obregón and G. Colón, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 775–782 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Huang, H. Xie and A. Qu, Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy, 2014, 39, 6354–6363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, R. Shi, J. Lin and Y. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2922–2929 CAS .
J. X. Sun, Y. P. Yuan, L. G. Qiu, X. Jiang, A. J. Xie, Y. H. Shen and J. F. Zhu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 6756–6763 RSC .
S. W. Cao, X. F. Liu, Y. P. Yuan, Z. Y. Zhang, Y. S. Liao, J. Fang, S. C. J. Loo, T. C. Sum and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 940–946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ge, F. Zuo, J. Liu, Q. Ma, C. Wang, D. Sun, L. Bartels and P. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13708–13714 CAS .
S. W. Cao, Y. P. Yuan, J. Fang, M. M. Shahjamali, F. Y. C. Boey, J. Barber, S. C. Joachim Loo and C. Xue, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 1258–1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, B. Chang, Y. Tian, F. Xi and X. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3083–3090 CAS .
S. C. Yan, S. B. Lv, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 1488–1491 RSC .
S. Ida, A. Takashiba, S. Koga, H. Hagiwara and T. Ishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1872–1878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, F. Kang, H. Liu, Q. Li and X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2418–2425 CAS .
H. Kim, M. Seol, J. Lee and K. Yong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25429–25436 CAS .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. Dagg and P. Feng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6464–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shi, X. Pan, W. Qiu, D. Zheng, M. Xu and H. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15153–15159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. Dagg and P. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1248–1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Hwang, C. H. Wu, C. Hahn, H. E. Jeong and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1678–1682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Zhu, Y. J. Liu, X. Li, Q. Z. Gao, X. T. Liu and Y. P. Fang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1070–1073 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Lin, F. Huang and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10317–10324 CAS .
A. Thibert, F. A. Frame, E. Busby, M. A. Holmes, F. E. Osterloh and D. S. Larsen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2688–2694 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, X. Wang, J. Yang, G. Liu, J. Han and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11584–11591 CAS .
X. Yang, J. Xu, T. Wong, Q. Yang and C. S. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12688–12693 RSC .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286–8287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Kou, X. Chen, Z. Tian, J. Gao, S. Yan and Z. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14385–14387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, Z. Ji, W. Zou, X. Gu, Y. Deng, F. Gao, C. Tang and L. Dong, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2052–2061 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Agegnehu, C. J. Pan, J. Rick, J. F. Lee, W. N. Su and B. J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13849–13854 RSC .
T. K. Townsend, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9543–9550 CAS .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
X. Zong, H. Yan, G. Wu, G. Ma, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176–7177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zong, G. P. Wu, H. J. Yan, G. J. Ma, J. Y. Shi, F. Y. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1963–1968 CAS .
X. Zong, J. Han, G. Ma, H. Yan, G. Wu and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12202–12208 CAS .
Y. Hou, A. B. Laursen, J. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3621–3625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. Zhong and R. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7631–7633 RSC .
N. Bao, L. Shen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 110–117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hong, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Zhang and R. Xu, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2263–2268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, B. Tian, F. Chen and J. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 17060–17067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, B. Li, J. Chen, N. Li, J. Zheng, J. Zhao and Z. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 259, 118–123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Yuan, S. W. Cao, L. S. Yin, L. Xu and C. Xue, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 7218–7223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yin, Y. P. Yuan, S. W. Cao, Z. Zhang and C. Xue, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 6127–6132 RSC .
N. A. Assunçào, M. J. de Giz, G. TremiIiosi-FiIho and E. R. Gonzalez, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 2794–2800 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Yu, Y. Zhang, Q. Li and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4774–4779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gomathisankar, K. Hachisuka, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki, K. Funasaka and S. Kaneco, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 8625–8630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Zhang, T. F. Xie, D. J. Wang, S. Li, L. L. Wang, L. P. Chen and Y. C. Lu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 11811–11817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Santos Cruz, S. A. Mayén Hernández, F. Paraguay Delgado, O. Zelaya Angel, R. Castanedo Pérez and G. Torres Delgado, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2013, 2013, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Brown, S. Dayal, X. Ai, G. Rumbles and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9672–9680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5627–5636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, K. L. Mulfort, P. Du and L. X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16472–16475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Li, Z. J. Li, S. Yu, G. X. Wang, F. Wang, Q. Y. Meng, B. Chen, K. Feng, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2597–2602 CAS .
Z. Han, F. Qiu, R. Eisenberg, P. L. Holland and T. D. Krauss, Science, 2012, 338, 1321–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dong, M. Wang, X. Li, L. Chen, Y. He and L. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 2133–2138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Cao, X. F. Liu, Y. P. Yuan, Z. Y. Zhang, J. Fang, S. C. Loo, J. Barber, T. C. Sum and C. Xue, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18363–18366 RSC .
F. Y. Wen, X. L. Wang, L. Huan, G. J. Ma, J. H. Yang and C. Li, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 849–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Cao, Y. P. Yuan, J. Barber, S. C. J. Loo and C. Xue, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014 DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2014.04.094 .
K. Potje-Kamloth, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 367–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jakob, H. Levanon and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wood, M. Giersig and P. Mulvaney, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8810–8815 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yang, H. X. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Lingampalli, U. K. Gautam and C. N. R. Rao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3589–3594 CAS .
X. Wu, Q. Song, L. Jia, Q. Li, C. Yang and L. Lin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 109–114 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fang, L. Xu, Z. Zhang, Y. Yuan, S. Cao, Z. Wang, L. Yin, Y. Liao and C. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8088–8092 CAS .
S. W. Cao, J. Fang, M. M. Shahjamali, F. Y. C. Boey, J. Barber, S. C. J. Loo and C. Xue, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5513–5515 RSC .
Y. Sasaki, A. Iwase, H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Catal., 2008, 259, 133–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hara, J. Nunoshige, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2003, 3000–3001 RSC .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1972, 39, 163–184 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang and R. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 783–790 CAS .
Z. Hu and J. C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12221–12228 CAS .
D. S. Hall, C. Bock and B. R. MacDougall, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F235–F243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, S. Liu, L. Nie, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12033–12039 RSC .
C. T. Dinh, M. H. Pham, F. Kleitz and T.-O. Do, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13308–13313 CAS .
P. D. Tran, L. Xi, S. K. Batabyal, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. S. Loo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11596–11599 RSC .
H. Y. Lin, H. C. Yang and W. L. Wang, Catal. Today, 2011, 174, 106–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Foo, C. Zhang and G. W. Ho, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 759–764 RSC .
T. Yui, A. Kan, C. Saitoh, K. Koike, T. Ibusuki and O. Ishitani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2594–2600 CAS .
W. N. Wang, W. J. An, B. Ramalingam, S. Mukherjee, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, S. Gangopadhyay and P. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11276–11281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 531–533 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Tseng, J. C. S. Wu and H. Y. Chou, J. Catal., 2004, 221, 432440 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, W. N. Wang, Z. Zhan, M. H. Woo, C. Y. Wu and P. Biswas, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 100, 386–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. N. Wang, J. Park and P. Biswas, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 593–600 CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, B. Huang, Y. Dai and M. H. Whangbo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9813–9825 RSC .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Pu, G. Wang, K. D. Chang, Y. Ling, Y. K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C. M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y. J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852–14853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6454–6462 Search PubMed .
J. B. Priebe, M. Karnahl, H. Junge, M. Beller, D. Hollmann and A. Brückner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11420–11424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Silva, R. Juárez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595–602 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Long, H. Chang, Q. Gu, J. Xu, L. Fan, S. Wang, Y. Zhou, W. Wei, L. Huang, X. Wang, P. Liu and W. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 973–977 CAS .
Z. Bian, T. Tachikawa, P. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 458–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tanaka, S. Sakaguchi, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 79–85 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, A. Li, S. W. Cao, M. Bosman, S. Li and C. Xue, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5217–5222 RSC .
S. Mukherjee, L. Zhou, A. M. Goodman, N. Large, C. Ayala-Orozco, Y. Zhang, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 64–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, T. Tachikawa and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6870–6873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tanaka, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 586–589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grzelczak, J. Pérez-Juste, F. J. G. de Abajo and L. M. Liz-Marzán, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6183–6188 CAS .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Kumar, S. Krishnamoorthy, L. K. Tan, S. Y. Chiam, S. Tripathy and H. Gao, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 300–308 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202–5205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, S. Liu, M. Low, S. Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, A. Mlayah and M. Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2310–2314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hou, W. H. Hung, P. Pavaskar, A. Goeppert, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
E. Liu, L. Kang, F. Wu, T. Sun, X. Hu, Y. Yang, H. Liu and J. Fan, Plasmonics, 2014, 9, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1486–1503 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Liu, L. Wang, Z. G. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 42–46 CrossRef .
P. Zhou, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4920–4935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Yu-Peng Yuan	Yu-Peng Yuan is a faculty staff member at Anhui University. He received his BE and ME degrees from Hefei University of Technology and PhD degree from Nanjing University. He worked as a Research Fellow at Nanyang Technological University in 2012–2013. His current research interests focus on interfacial chemistry, gas adsorption, chemistry of materials, and first principle calculations.
Lin-Wei Ruan	Lin-Wei Ruan is currently a graduate student in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Anhui University where he obtained his Bachelor of Engineering in 2008. He is pursuing his research with Dr Yu-Peng Yuan on molecular simulations and first principles calculations.
James Barber	James Barber is the Ernst Chain Professor of Biochemistry at Imperial College London and is a Fellow of The Royal Society of London and Royal Society of Chemistry. He is also a visiting professor at Nanyang Technological University and Lee Kuan Yew Distinguished Visitor to Singapore. He has been awarded several medals and prizes for his contributions to understanding the molecular processes of photosynthesis.
Say Chye Joachim Loo	Joachim Loo is an associate professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) and the Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering (SCELSE) at Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in Singapore. He is also the Director of the NTU Solar Fuels Laboratory. His research interest lies in materials for energy, environmental and biomedical applications, and has filed several patents in this field. In 2012, he was awarded the Outstanding Mentor Award and the Nanyang Award for Excellence in Teaching. He is also an Assistant Chair (Students) in MSE, and a committee member of the ISO/TC 229 Nanotechnology National Working Group in Singapore.
Can Xue	Can Xue is an assistant professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Nanyang Technological University. He received his BS degree at University of Science and Technology of China in 2002, and obtained his PhD degree at Northwestern University (IL, US) in 2007. He was awarded the Lee Kuan Yew Research Fellowship in 2008. His current research interests focus on the development of new plasmonic metal nanostructures and metal–semiconductor hybrid nanostructures for photocatalytic applications.

Broader context
The ever-growing concerns on global energy demand, and carbon dioxide (CO2) emission arising from the combustion of fossil fuels, have led researchers to explore other sources of renewable energy, while alleviating CO2 concentration in the air. One such strategy is by photocatalysis – the splitting of water molecules to generate hydrogen or drive the reduction of CO2 into valuable hydrocarbon fuels, using solar energy. Currently, a myriad of materials have been demonstrated to be potential candidates for such photocatalytic reactions. However, the solar-to-energy conversion efficiencies of these single material photocatalysts are currently still impractical to meet commercial requirements. The rapid recombination of photoexcited electrons and holes has been identified as a key reason behind such low photocatalytic reaction efficiencies. To suppress charge recombination, coupling two materials to form a heterojunction has been demonstrated to be a viable approach. This review highlights the recent progress in the last several years on hetero-nanostructured suspended photocatalysts that have been developed for enhanced hydrogen production, and for CO2 photoreduction into carbon-based fuels.

2H+ + 2e− → H2E0 = −0.42 V	(1)
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O E0 = −0.24 V	(2)
CO + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O E0 = −0.53 V	(3)
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O E0 = −0.38 V	(4)
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O E0 = −0.48 V	(5)
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH E0 = −0.61 V	(6)
2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e E0 = +0.81 V	(7)

 	Fig. 1  Diagram of a typical n–n type heterojunction: (a) in contact (b) in equilibrium.	 

 	Fig. 2  Energy diagrams for three different types of heterojunctions.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the anatase–rutile TiO2 phase junction for electron–hole separation and electron transfer from (a) anatase to rutile,33 and (b) rutile to anatase.34	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of charge vectorial transfer in (a) 1-D TiO2 nanostructure and (b) quantum dot sensitized 1-D TiO2 nanostructure for H2 generation and CO2 reduction.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) HRTEM image of CaFe2O4–PbBi2Nb1.9W0.1O9 p–n heterojunction. (b) Schematic illustration of CaFe2O4–PbBi2Nb1.9W0.1O9 p–n heterojunction for H2 and O2 production. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2005, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the charge separation and transfer in the graphene–CdS system under visible light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of photocatalytic H2 production over a CdS nanowire partially covered g-C3N4 (a) or fully covered CdS nanowire (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Theoretical charge transfer process in CdSe@CdS type I core–shell structure with decreased photocatalytic activity. (b) The proposed principle for CdS@ZnS structure with actually enhanced photocatalytic activity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration for the proposed mechanism of visible light induced interfacial charge transfer (IFCT) from the valence band of ZnS to the CuS clusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustrations of (a) Schottky junction with energy level alignment and (b) photoinduced electron transfer across the metal–semiconductor junction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197 and 199. Copyright 2008 and 2004 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Plasmon-driven photocatalytic hydrogen production over Au/Pt–TiO2 nanofibers. The hot plasmon electrons of Au nanoparticles can readily transport through TiO2 (when it is co-excited) to the nearby Pt particle for hydrogen generation. Reprinted from ref. 237 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of (a) liquid-based Z-scheme for water splitting; (b) “all-solid-state” Z-scheme consisting of semiconductor I (Sc I)–metal–semiconductor II (Sc II). Reprinted with permission from ref. 249 and 251. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society (a) and 2014 Wiley (b).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
