Facile preparation of a robust porous photothermal membrane with antibacterial activity for efficient solar-driven interfacial water evaporation   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA09223K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA09223K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 704-710Facile preparation of a robust porous photothermal membrane with antibacterial activity for efficient solar-driven interfacial water evaporation†

        
          
            Yaling 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xuexue 
            Cui
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mingyu 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yunshi 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Leilei 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhijuan 
            Cao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shuguang 
            Yang
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yi 
            Wang
          
        
      *ab
aCenter for Advanced Low-dimension Materials, State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Material Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China. E-mail: shgyang@dhu.edu.cn; ywang@dhu.edu.cn
bCollege of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China
cSchool of Pharmacy, Fudan University, 826 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai, 201203, P. R. China
Received 
      22nd September 2018
    , Accepted 3rd December 2018First published on 4th December 2018AbstractFacile preparation of self-floating photothermal membranes with simultaneous mechanical stability and antibacterial activity for solar-driven interfacial water evaporation is regarded as a practical approach for clean water production. Herein, a robust porous bi-layered photothermal membrane (carbon nanotube@polyethylene imine/mixed cellulose esters, CNT@PEI/MCE), where the top solar conversion layer of pristine CNTs is seamlessly connected to the bottom heat transfer barrier layer of hydrophilic MCE, is facilely prepared via a simple vacuum filtration. With the synergistic integration of MCE-mediated heating localization, CNT-mediated solar-heating, PEI-mediated hygroscopicity and noncovalent interactions, the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane can stay at the water–air interface with Wenzel's wetting behavior and can thus achieve a high interfacial water evaporation efficiency (72%) and a rapid evaporation rate (4.23 times higher than that of pure water) under simulated solar irradiation. Meanwhile, the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane exhibits good mechanical stability, strong operability, distinct antibacterial activity and high durability. This advanced membrane, together with its cost-effectiveness, provides a practical sustainable energy technique for clean water production.
Introduction
Solar energy-driven interfacial water evaporation, which can localize the sustainable solar heating at the air–water interface to maximize solar utilization, has recently aroused significant scientific and practical interest in a variety of fields from distillation to desalination.1–4 To fulfill this special solar vapour generation, various photothermal interfaces (membranes) have been elaborately constructed.5,6 Typically, bi-layered structural membranes composed of a top photothermal layer and a bottom supporting layer are regarded as the most popular and promising types due to their high photothermal utilization efficiency and good operability.7 In this bi-layered structure, the top photothermal layer should maximize solar light absorbability and photothermal conversion,8 while the bottom supporting layer should minimize thermal dissipation and rapid replenishment of water molecules.9 Pursuing this purpose, a mixed cellulose ester (MCE) membrane is often used as the supporting layer because it can provide a self-floating porous structure with a wettable surface for feasible water transport from bulk water to the evaporation interface, and it simultaneously offers a cheap heat blocker with low thermal conductivity for minimum heat loss.10 Moreover, various solar absorbers, including semiconductor nanomaterials,11–15 noble-metal plasmonic nanoparticles,16 ultra-black carbon and polymer nanomaterials,17,18 which possess high solar-thermal performance, have widely been exploited as the top layers. Nevertheless, these solar absorbers often suffer from either labor-intensive preparation with high cost or low porosity with depressed vapor transportation. Comparatively, sp2-hybrid carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are relatively cheap and possess many unique properties including excellent optical absorption (π-band's optical transitions),19,20 rapid photothermal conversion and expedited thermal equilibrium,21 making them a promising candidate as a solar absorber. Furthermore, one-dimensional CNTs with a frictionless surface can also interconnect into hierarchical channels, leading to enhanced vapor transportation outside the interface. However, pristine CNTs often suffer from low dispersity in most kinds of solvents.22,23 Moreover, the top CNT layer tended to fall off from the supporting layer with time due to the weak interaction between them, causing an inadequate mechanical stability. What's worse, porous CNT films with super-hydrophobicity might also cause a Cassie's wetting behavior, where an air pocket with low thermal conductivity is formed to limit the contact between the droplets and the underlying solid surface,24 thus decreasing heat transfer and inhibiting water evaporation. Although oxidation of CNTs provides an opportunity to overcome this drawback, the oxidation-caused breaking of the inner electronic structure of CNTs would depress its photothermal efficiency.25 Additionally, to put the photothermal membranes into practice, the investigation of bio-fouling resulting from dissolved organic matter and other bio-species present in source water is urgently needed, but has been paid little attention.
Therefore, in this paper, a robust porous bi-layered photothermal membrane, where the top solar conversion layer of pristine CNTs was seamlessly connected to the bottom heat transfer barrier layer of hydrophilic MCE, was facilely prepared via a simple vacuum filtration. In this photothermal membrane, polyethylene imine (PEI), acting as a hygroscopic polymer with numerous cationic amine groups, was not only used to disperse the pristine CNTs for film formation, but also served as the antibacterial agent, imparting anti-fouling ability to the membrane. Meanwhile, the surface wettability with capillary pumping ability of the membrane was controlled to have the Wenzel's wetting behavior due to the hygroscopic PEI modification and porous structure, which enabled the membrane to spontaneously stay at the water–air interface and allowed for sufficient contact with the water to precisely heat the interfacial water under solar irradiation. Furthermore, assisted by the special hydrogen bonding/electrostatic interactions between PEI-CNTs and MCE and hydrophobic interaction between MCE-PEI and CNTs, the CNT@PEI/MCE photothermal membrane had good mechanical stability. Consequently, efficient solar-driven interfacial water evaporation with antibacterial activity was achieved, which together with the membrane's cost-effectiveness, operability and durability, provides a promising sustainable energy technique for clean water production.
Experimental
Materials
Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (inner diameter: 3–5 nm, outer diameter: 8–15 nm, length: about 50 μm) and polyethylene imine (PEI, molecular weight = 70000, 50% aqueous solution) were purchased from Aladdin Chemical Co., Ltd. (China). The mixed cellulose ester (MCE) membrane (pore size around 0.22 μm) was purchased from Lubitech Technologies Ltd. (Shanghai, China). All chemicals were used without further purification. Deionized water was obtained from a laboratory water purification system and used in all experiments.
Characterization
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements were performed on a Hitachi SU 8010 field emission SEM. X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were obtained using an Escalab 250Xi system. UV-vis spectra were collected on a Shimadzu UV-2550 spectrophotometer. UV-vis-NIR absorption and reflectance spectra of the samples were recorded on a spectrometer (Lambda 950). Water contact angle measurements were carried out on an OCA 40 Micro optical contact angle measurement system using a 3 μL droplet of water as an indicator. The thermal images of the absorbers were captured with a FOTRIC 225 infrared camera. Correspondingly, the average interfacial temperature curves within the beaker aperture area were recorded. Zeta potential was measured on a Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS system. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was obtained on a Discovery TGA 550 system with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 in a nitrogen atmosphere. The mechanical tests were carried out on an electronic universal testing machine (Shengzhen SUNS Technology Stock Co. Ltd.) with a tensile rate of 50 mm min−1. Solar evaporation tests were carried out with a xenon lamp (CEL-HXF300, Education Au-light Co., Beijing, China).
Fabrication of CNT@PEI/MCE
The CNT@PEI/MCE composite membrane was prepared via a home-made vacuum filtration method (Scheme 1). Briefly, 2 mg CNTs was dispersed into 20 mL deionized water with 25 mg PEI. Then, the dispersion was filtered onto an MCE membrane via vacuum filtration to obtain the CNT@PEI/MCE bi-layered membrane. PEI/MCE and CNT/MCE could be accordingly prepared without the addition of CNTs or PEI. To optimize the membrane formation, comparative trial CNT@PEI/MCE membranes were prepared with different amounts of PEI (0, 25, 50, 100, and 250 mg) or CNTs (0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, and 8.0 mg) through the same procedure. Correspondingly, CNT@PEI/MCE membranes with variable thickness of the top CNT layer could be facilely prepared using different concentrations of CNT@PEI aqueous solution via fixing the mass ratio of PEI and CNTs (PEI:CNTs = 25:2). Herein, M1 (25 mg L−1 CNTs and 312.5 mg L−1 PEI), M2 (50 mg L−1 CNTs and 625.0 mg L−1 PEI), M3 (100 mg L−1 CNTs and 1250 mg L−1 PEI), M4 (200 mg L−1 CNTs and 2500 mg L−1 PEI), and M5 (400 mg L−1 CNTs and 5000 mg L−1 PEI) were used in the fabrication.
 Scheme 1  Illustration of the fabrication and the main properties of the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane and the corresponding solar energy-driven interfacial water evaporation. 
Solar pervaporation performance measurement
The simulated solar irradiation was provided by a xenon lamp with a light density of 5 kW m−2. The beaker contained 80 mL water or saline water (3.5% NaCl solution) and varieties of membranes floating on it for the measurements. The solar pervaporation activity of membranes was evaluated by monitoring the mass change of water in the beaker using an electronic balance with an accuracy of 0.01 g during a certain time irradiation. To confirm the reusability and stability of the membrane, the same hybrid membrane was used for at least eight cycles. The evaporation rate can be obtained by using eqn (1) (1)where v is the water evaporation rate, m is the mass of evaporated water, S is the surface area of the photothermal membrane and t is the time duration.
According to the following eqn (2), the photothermal efficiency of the device can be estimated. (2)where η is the photothermal evaporation efficiency, He is the total enthalpy of sensible heat (315 J g−1, from 25 to 100 °C with a specific heat of 4.2 J g−1 K−1) and the phase change of liquid to water (2256 J g−1), v is the water evaporation rate and Qs is the power density of solar illumination.26,27
Antibacterial test

Escherichia coli (E. coli), a kind of typical Gram-negative bacterium, was used as the test organism. First, the raw materials (PEI and CNTs) were tested for their antibacterial performance. Typically, PEI, CNT and CNT@PEI aqueous solutions before filtration onto the MCE were added into a sterile centrifuge tube containing certain bacterial suspensions, respectively. The tubes were then shaken at 37 °C for 20 h. After that, the bacterial suspensions were taken out and diluted for the optical density (OD) test. At the same time, the PEI, CNT and CNT@PEI aqueous solutions were added dropwise onto the agar plate containing 100 μL diluted bacterial suspension, respectively. The plates were incubated for 18 h at 37 °C to show bacterial colony growth. Second, different membrane samples (MCE, PEI/MCE, CNT/MCE and CNT@PEI/MCE) were placed onto the agar plate containing 100 μL diluted bacterial suspension and incubated for 18 h at 37 °C. To directly observe the bacteriostatic effect, the membrane samples were fixed and prepared for SEM measurements. Furthermore, the various membrane samples were placed in conical flasks and then the E. coli suspension was pipetted onto the surface of the membranes. After a 12 h contact period at 37 °C, the suspensions were diluted with sterile distilled water, and then plated with agar and incubated for 18 h at 37 °C to corroborate the bacteriostatic efficacy. Because CNT@PEI/MCE had good anti-biofouling ability, the bacteria did not easily grow on it. Therefore, the bacterial colonies were artificially attached to the surface of the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane to study the membrane-mediated water evaporation performance after bio-fouling.
Results and discussion
A bi-layered CNT@PEI/MCE photothermal membrane was prepared via a simple vacuum filtration. First, hydrophilic PEI was ultrasonically grafted onto the CNT surface to decrease the surface tension and avoid the aggregation of pristine CNTs, which thus yielded a homogeneous CNT@PEI dispersion (Fig. S1 in the ESI†) via non-covalent interaction (Scheme 1).28 Then, a black photothermal membrane with a flat surface was prepared via a home-made vacuum filtration of CNT@PEI dispersions onto porous MCE, where the electronegative MCE with surface hydroxyls was closely connected with electropositive PEI (–NH2) grafted CNTs via electrostatic and hydrogen bonding interactions (Table S1 in the ESI† and Scheme 1). During this process, the PEI-assisted dispersion played a key role in the film formation, where an uneven or over-dense membrane was formed without PEI or with excess PEI, thus depressing the interfacial water evaporation efficiency. Under the optimal conditions, a layer of unformed CNT network with a thickness of about 1.6 μm, which was closely connected with the porous MCE layer (Fig. 1A–C), was observed as a CNT@PEI/MCE membrane (Fig. 1E). No obvious infiltration of CNTs into the pores of the MCE substrate and the hierarchically stacked CNT network ensured the interconnected channels for water transfer. Owing to the grafting of PEI on hydrophobic CNTs, the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane had an additional N composition of C–NH2 (400.3 eV) besides the typical sp2-hybrid C from CNTs (284.5 eV) (Fig. 1D and S2†).29 This also endowed the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane with optimal wettability, thus achieving self-floating on water for a long time (Fig. 1F). Owing to the simplicity of this film formation, the thickness of the top CNT layer can be facilely regulated via using different amounts of PEI and CNTs (Fig. S5 in the ESI†), which contributed an adjustable water evaporation (Fig. S3, S4 and S6 in the ESI†). These results demonstrated the controllable formation of a well-defined porous bi-layered photothermal membrane of CNT@PEI/MCE.
 Fig. 1  Top-view SEM images of MCE (A) and CNT@PEI/MCE (B) and cross section-view SEM image of CNT@PEI/MCE (C) with a CNT layer thickness of about 1.6 μm. (D) XPS and magnified N 1s and C 1s spectra (inset) of CNT@PEI/MCE. (E) Digital photos of the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane and (F) the corresponding self-floating on the water in the beaker. 
The CNT@PEI/MCE membrane possessed unique optical properties and surface wettability. As compared with MCE and PEI/MCE membranes, CNT@PEI/MCE showed significantly enhanced visible light absorbance and lower reflectivity from 200 nm to 2500 nm due to the black CNT layer, suggesting the potential of solar light-harvesting for photo-heating (Fig. 2A and S7 in the ESI†).30 The gradually decreased contact angle (<90°) of pristine MCE showed its relatively hydrophilic surface with capillarity. This property can be further enhanced via the hydrophilic PEI modification. Comparatively, MCE-supported pristine CNTs had a constant high contact angle due to the super-hydrophobic CNT layer-induced Cassie's wetting (existence of air pockets to prevent water permeation).24 After PEI grafting, the water contact angle of the CNT layer rapidly decreased to 0° in 60 s, indicating its Wenzel's wetting behavior (sufficient contact of water with the hotspots) possibly originating from the synergistic effect between the hygroscopicity of PEI and the surface roughness of the membrane (Fig. 3).31
 Fig. 2  (A) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of MCE, PEI/MCE and CNT@PEI/MCE. (B) Top-view and side-view IR thermal images of pure water and the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane on water under solar irradiation for different time periods. 
 Fig. 3  Water contact angles of MCE (a1–a3), PEI/MCE (b1–b3), CNT/MCE (c1–c3) and CNT@PEI/MCE (d1–d3) at different time periods. 
The CNT@PEI/MCE membrane had strong photothermal conversion ability for interfacial water heating. As shown by the IR thermal images in Fig. 2B and the average interfacial temperature trend curves in Fig. S8,† both the climactic and average interfacial temperatures of pure water without the membrane had only a slight increase upon simulated solar illumination (5 kW m−2) for 15 min. For the water with the floating CNT@PEI/MCE membrane, both the temperatures could sharply increase, indicating the great photothermal performance of the designed membrane. Furthermore, the side-view IR thermal images of CNT@PEI/MCE displayed only an interfacial temperature increment, revealing the membrane-mediated heating localization. This special light-to-heat conversion at the water–air interface and the low thermal conductivity of the MCE substrate (0.565 W m−1 K−1) contributed to the low heat loss. As a result, an accelerated water evaporation was observed for the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane. Correspondingly, the evaporation rate of the CNT@PEI/MCE device could reach 5.07 kg m−2 h−1, which was 4.23 times higher than that of pure water evaporation (1.20 kg m−2 h−1). And the calculated evaporation efficiency for the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane was 72% at a power density of 5 kW m−2. Although the value was inferior to that of some of the elaborated prepared self-floating photothermal materials such as flame-treated wood (∼72%)32 and graphene-based convertors (∼87%),33 possibly due to the high surface temperature-caused large thermal radiation heat loss and the inadequate MCE substrate thickness-induced conduction heat loss,7,34 it was still superior to that of many other photothermal membranes such as flexible thin-film black gold membranes (57% at 20 kW m−2),35 vertically aligned carbon nanotube arrays (60% at 5 kW m−2),19 and black TiOx-coated stainless-steel meshes (50.3% at 1 kW m−2).36 In addition, the comparisons of mass change for the different photothermal systems suggested the synergistic interfacial vaporization performance of the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane spurred by CNT-mediated photothermal heating, PEI-mediated wettability, porous membrane-mediated heating localization and mass transfer (Fig. 4A and B). Meanwhile, the vaporization performance wasn't affected when subjecting the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane to saline water (3.5% NaCl solution, Fig. S9 in the ESI†). And via measuring the ion conductivity, it was found that an effective salt interception could be achieved by this membrane-mediated interfacial evaporation. All of this also suggested the potential of the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane for seawater desalination.
 Fig. 4  (A) Water evaporation rate curves and (B) water evaporation quantities within 30 min of the different treatments via simulated solar irradiation. Here, CNT means CNT-dispersed bulk water evaporation. (C) CNT@PEI/MCE membrane-mediated water evaporation rate curves via repeated irradiation. (D) CNT@PEI/MCE membrane-mediated water evaporation quantities under the recycling uses with every cycle of 20 min. 
The CNT@PEI/MCE membrane had good stability due to its special bi-layered structure and compositions as well as the PEI-mediated hydrogen bonding/electrostatic interactions and hydrophobic interaction with MCE and CNTs, respectively. As shown in Fig. S10,† the CNT@PEI/MCE photothermal membrane including the MCE substrate and even the PEI coating didn't decompose until 185 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere, suggesting their good thermal stability. Meanwhile, the gradually increased fracture stress was present with the enhanced tensile elastic modulus after PEI modification and CNT loading, revealing the elevated mechanical properties.37 Furthermore, the multiple folding and rolling didn't result in any damage to the membrane with the maintenance of steam generation performance (Fig. 5) as well as the hygroscopic ability of the membrane with the water evaporated during the solar irradiation (Fig. S11 in the ESI†). And the repeated irradiation via the simulated 5 kW m−2 solar light also didn't affect the interfacial water evaporation efficiency (Fig. 4C and D). In addition, a long-term storage (112 days) of the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane didn't cause obvious depression of its water evaporation rate (Fig. S12 in the ESI†). All of this indicated the high stability, excellent flexibility and good durability of the prepared CNT@PEI/MCE membrane, which was extremely practical for on-site application.
 Fig. 5  Optical images of CNT@PEI/MCE membranes after different mechanical treatments: (A) folding for 12 h and (B) the corresponding release of folding. (C) Rolling for 12 h and (D) the corresponding release of rolling. (E) Stress–strain curves of MCE, PEI/MCE and CNT@PEI/MCE. (F) Comparisons of interfacial water evaporation for different mechanically treated CNT@PEI/MCE membranes. 
For the practical application, the bio-fouling of the photothermal materials resulting from dissolved organic matter and other biospecies present in source water could be expected.38 As shown in Fig. S13,† the artificial adhering of bacterial colonies to the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane caused a decreased water evaporation rate and a short-lived self-floating. Therefore, the antibacterial activity of the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane was evaluated via optical absorption and surface observation. The high optical density at 260–280 nm and the turbid appearance suggested the thriving bacterial growth.39 As demonstrated in Fig. S14,† the initial membrane material of CNTs had some antibacterial activity possibly due to its piercing damage to cell membranes, while PEI had an obvious bacteriostatic effect due to the fact that numerous cationic NH2+ can replace the divalent cations (Mg2+ and Ca2+), stabilizing a net negative charge on the outermost surface of bacteria, and thus causing the membranes to lose fluidity and the bacteria to die.40 Thus, PEI-grafted CNT dispersions could significantly inhibit the bacterial growth via the synergistic effect of PEI and CNTs. Correspondingly, there was no bacterial growth especially on the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane other than on the MCE substrate as observed from the SEM images (Fig. 6), and the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane retained its porous network without blocking by the bacteria. Moreover, the membrane-induced bacteriostatic effects were also verified via agar plate assays (Experimental section), where the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane exhibited the strongest antibacterial activity for its fewest colonies of viable bacteria than the others and particularly the blank MCE substrate. In addition, the antibacterial activity of the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane after eight cycles was only slightly decreased due to the inevitable PEI–NH2 oxidation during the photothermal treatment (Fig. S15 in the ESI†),41 suggesting that the antibacterial stability was almost completely preserved. These demonstrations revealed the advanced antibacterial performance of the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane via the synergistic effect of PEI and CNTs. Nevertheless, further studies to exploit the antibacterial mechanism and enhance the synergistic anti-fouling performance need to be carried out in the future. This work will pave a potential way for antibacterial photothermal membrane design.
 Fig. 6  SEM images of MCE (A), PEI/MCE (B), CNT/MCE (C) and CNT@PEI/MCE (D) after incubation with bacterial suspensions. The insets are optical images of agar plates after incubation with the corresponding membrane-treated bacterial suspensions. 
Conclusions
In summary, a porous bi-layered photothermal membrane, CNT@PEI/MCE, where the top solar conversion layer of pristine CNTs was seamlessly connected to the bottom heat transfer barrier layer of hydrophilic MCE, was facilely prepared via a simple vacuum filtration. In CNT@PEI/MCE, PEI, acting as a hygroscopic polymer with numerous cationic amine groups, was not only used to disperse the pristine CNTs for film formation, but also served as the antibacterial agent, imparting anti-fouling ability to the membrane. Meanwhile, PEI also contributed to the enhanced mechanical stability via the special hydrogen bonding/electrostatic interactions between PEI-CNTs and MCE and hydrophobic interaction between MCE-PEI and CNTs. Moreover, the interconnected porous structure with hygroscopic PEI modification induced a Wenzel's wetting behavior of the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane, which enabled the membrane to spontaneously stay at the water–air interface and allowed for sufficient contact with the water to precisely heat the interfacial water under solar irradiation. Consequently, an efficient solar-driven interfacial water evaporation with an evaporation efficiency of 72% and an evaporation rate 4.23 times higher than that of pure water was achieved. The CNT@PEI/MCE membrane with these advanced performances, coupled with the simple preparation, strong operability and high durability, provides a promising sustainable energy technique for clean water production.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21675032 and 21505023), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities and the DHU Distinguished Young Professor Program.
Notes and references
W. Shang and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16133 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, J. Xu and K. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 269–284 CrossRef CAS .
O. Neumann, A. D. Neumann, E. Silva, C. Ayala-Orozco, S. Tian, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7880–7885 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Tao, Q. Shen, N. Yi, F. Zhang, Q. Liu, C. Song, D. Zhang, W. Shang and T. Deng, Small, 2014, 10, 3234–3239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Chen, D. Guo, M. Cao and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13645–13652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 323–343 RSC .
C. Ma, J. Yan, Y. Huang, C. Wang and G. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas9894 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Yu, R. Feng, A. Bernard, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Duan, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Song and T. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2768–2774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, Y. Fu, X. Ma, W. Pi, D. Liu and X. Wang, Carbon, 2017, 114, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603730 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yao and G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3869–3876 RSC .
J. Yao, Z. Zheng and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16396–16403 RSC .
J. Yao, Z. Zheng and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2876–2886 RSC .
C. Ma, J. Yan, Y. Huang, C. Wang and G. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas9894 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, D. Ji, B. Zhu, P. Zhang, J. Xu, Q. Gan, Z. Yu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501227 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi, Y. Wang, L. Zhang and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 5, 16212–16219 RSC .
Q. Jiang, H. G. Derami, D. Ghim, S. Cao, Y. Jun and S. Singamaneni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18397–18402 RSC .
Z. Yin, H. Wang, M. Jian, Y. Li, K. Xia, M. Zhang, C. Wang, Q. Wang, M. Ma, Q. Zheng and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28596–28603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mizuno, J. Ishii, H. Kishida, Y. Hayamizu, S. Yasuda, D. N. Futaba, M. Yumura and K. Hata, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 6044–6047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1223–1230 CrossRef CAS .
C. Richard, F. Balavoine, P. Schultz, T. W. Ebbesen and C. Mioskowski, Science, 2003, 300, 775–778 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, A. Jagota, E. D. Semke, B. A. Diner, R. S. Mclean, S. R. Lustig, R. E. Richardson and N. G. Tassi, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, B. Tang, J. Wu, R. Li and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, C. A. Dougherty, K. Zhu and H. Hong, J. Controlled Release, 2015, 210, 230–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, L. Tian, K. K. Liu, S. Tadepalli, R. Raliya, P. Biswas, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9400–9407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kawamoto, P. He and Y. Ito, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602423 CrossRef .
X. Gao, H. Ren, J. Zhou, R. Du, C. Yin, R. Liu, H. Peng, L. Tong, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5777–5781 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. He, X. Liu, G. Cheng and J. Zhu, Appl. Energy, 2017, 195, 414–425 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Wu, M. N. Hedhili, X. Yang and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2844–2852 RSC .
G. Xue, K. Liu, Q. Chen, P. Yang, J. Li, T. Ding, J. Duan, B. Qi and J. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15052–15057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, R. Zhao, T. Zhang, K. Zhao, P. Xiao, Y. Ma, P. M. Ajayan, G. Shi and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 829–835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Li, J. Lu, N. Xu, C. Chen, X. Min, B. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu, T. Zhang and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1331–1338 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bae, G. Kang, S. K. Cho, W. Park, K. Kim and W. J. Padilla, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ye, J. Jia, Z. Wu, C. Qian, R. Chen, P. G. O'Brien, W. Sun, Y. Dong and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601811 CrossRef .
B. Liu and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17413–17418 RSC .
P. Wang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 1078–1089 RSC .
S. Liu, L. Wei, L. Hao, N. Fang, M. W. Chang, R. Xu, Y. Yang and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3891–3902 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gilbert and L. E. Moore, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2005, 99, 703–715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Nielsen, B. D'Anna, C. Dye, M. Graus, M. Karl, S. King, M. M. Maguto, M. Müller, N. Schmidbauer, Y. Stenstrøm, A. Wisthaler and S. Pedersenf, Energy Procedia, 2011, 4, 2245–2252 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09223kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Illustration of the fabrication and the main properties of the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane and the corresponding solar energy-driven interfacial water evaporation.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Top-view SEM images of MCE (A) and CNT@PEI/MCE (B) and cross section-view SEM image of CNT@PEI/MCE (C) with a CNT layer thickness of about 1.6 μm. (D) XPS and magnified N 1s and C 1s spectra (inset) of CNT@PEI/MCE. (E) Digital photos of the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane and (F) the corresponding self-floating on the water in the beaker.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of MCE, PEI/MCE and CNT@PEI/MCE. (B) Top-view and side-view IR thermal images of pure water and the CNT@PEI/MCE membrane on water under solar irradiation for different time periods.	 

 	Fig. 3  Water contact angles of MCE (a1–a3), PEI/MCE (b1–b3), CNT/MCE (c1–c3) and CNT@PEI/MCE (d1–d3) at different time periods.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Water evaporation rate curves and (B) water evaporation quantities within 30 min of the different treatments via simulated solar irradiation. Here, CNT means CNT-dispersed bulk water evaporation. (C) CNT@PEI/MCE membrane-mediated water evaporation rate curves via repeated irradiation. (D) CNT@PEI/MCE membrane-mediated water evaporation quantities under the recycling uses with every cycle of 20 min.	 

 	Fig. 5  Optical images of CNT@PEI/MCE membranes after different mechanical treatments: (A) folding for 12 h and (B) the corresponding release of folding. (C) Rolling for 12 h and (D) the corresponding release of rolling. (E) Stress–strain curves of MCE, PEI/MCE and CNT@PEI/MCE. (F) Comparisons of interfacial water evaporation for different mechanically treated CNT@PEI/MCE membranes.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of MCE (A), PEI/MCE (B), CNT/MCE (C) and CNT@PEI/MCE (D) after incubation with bacterial suspensions. The insets are optical images of agar plates after incubation with the corresponding membrane-treated bacterial suspensions.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09223k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
