Global potential of algae-based photobiological hydrogen production   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE00342B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE00342B
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2843-2857Global potential of algae-based photobiological hydrogen production†

        
          
            Yimin 
            Chen
          
        
      
Environmental and Ecological Engineering Technology Center, Industrial Technology Research Institute, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361021, People's Republic of China. E-mail: chenyimin@xmu.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-592-5781787
Received 
      29th January 2022
    , Accepted 20th May 2022First published on 23rd May 2022AbstractPhotobiological hydrogen production through algae (including green algae and cyanobacteria) is one of the most promising ways to obtain green hydrogen energy due to its outstanding light-harvesting and energy conversion efficacy. However, the sustainability and cost essentially impede its large-scale commercial production. This study aims to bridge this gap, present a blueprint for sustained and sustainable bioH2 production, and provide scientists and policymakers with a reference and foundation to evaluate its economic feasibility when applied locally. Evaluation is based on a simplified assumption of functioning algae as living ‘solar panels’. By revisiting the current literature, recent advancements in this technology are identified, offering potential solutions to overcome the issues. A combination of a promising algal bioH2 generating method with its derivative concept-design algae culturing model was compared with the largest photovoltaic electrolysis H2 plant in the world hitherto to show both pros and cons of these two methods. A global spatiotemporal dynamic map and scalability analysis were performed to demonstrate the potential of algal bioH2 production among various locations.

Broader context
Hydrogen is a dense and clean energy carrier with the potential to mitigate global warming. Algae-based photobiological hydrogen represents a sustainable and promising route for green hydrogen production that can reduce our reliance on fossil fuels toward carbon-neutral Earth. State-of-the-art science research in this area is drawing increasing attention, particularly in the feasibility of its large-scale production. Various pathways for bioH2 production and mechanisms for improving the performance of different algae have been disclosed with both pros and cons. Thanks to the unremitting efforts from the vast scientific community, the advances and breakthroughs of cutting-edge technologies and innovative strategies provide a wealth of opportunities to overcome the critical issues to fulfill the goal of sustained bioH2 production. This article revisited the theoretical bioH2 limit and proposed a new level, summarized typical species and the differing H2-evolving pathways with a highlight of recent outstanding achievements, proposed a novel scenario of bioH2 production with a comparison with the largest photovoltaic H2 plant in the world, and made a global spatiotemporal dynamic map. This article provides a comprehensive perspective for further research in the future that algae will play a pivotal role in unpacking the energy–environment–food nexus given the produced biomass.

1. Introduction
Hydrogen is a clean and superb energy carrier (142 kJ g−1) that has been considered as a highly desirable substitute for fossil fuels without releasing any pollutants except water during its combustion.1,2 Nevertheless, the current commercial H2 production is primarily derived from steam reforming of fossil fuels, which generates a significant release of CO2, making this type of blue H2 not as green as other types of H2 from clean energy resources such as solar energy.3 To meet the United Nations’ 2030 sustainable development goals, there is a need to explore low-carbon and renewable energy sources, including physicochemical and biological alternatives that have been under development.4 Among them, photobiological H2 production offers an interesting route that harvests and converts solar energy to produce H2 with the aid of a series of refreshable biocatalysts (enzymes).5
Most green algae and cyanobacteria are strongly photoautotrophic organisms with a higher light utilization efficiency than higher plants.6 These widely distributed organisms can express hydrogenases (H2ase) or nitrogenases (Nase) for H2 production in vivo, the latter pathway of which is technically a by-product of N2-fixation in cyanobacteria. The hydrogen metabolism in unicellular green algae was first discovered by Hans Gaffron in 1939,7 who revealed that Scenedesmus obliquus could absorb H2 as an electron donor in the CO2 fixation process in the dark or evolve H2 in the light.8 Over 80 years have passed, and our understanding of the algal H2 production mechanisms and their linkage with photosynthesis has vastly improved. However, our interest in using algae as a living source of photobiological H2 production has just been boosted over the last two decades, particularly with our technological advancements and increasing consciousness and concerns on the issues of energy and environmental sustainability.
Nowadays, many algae have been exploited for bioH2 production, as listed in Table 1, which gives several typical green algae and cyanobacteria species. Nevertheless, these promising bioH2 candidates also generate oxygen that intrinsically inhibits the activity of H2ase, leading to very low efficacy of bioH2 production under natural conditions. As such, establishing an anaerobic atmosphere is crucial to obviate the inactivation of H2ase and maintain an acceptable period of bioH2 production. The use of chemical oxygen scavengers, such as sodium sulfite (Na2SO3), sodium metabisulfite (Na2S2O5), and sodium dithionite (Na2S2O4), provides a strategy to reduce the oxygen concentration generated by photosynthesis.9 In comparison, applying external O2 absorbents without any disturbance to the growth seems safer than the direct addition of O2 scavengers into the cell culture.10 However, using these oxygen scavengers or absorbents may result in limited efficacy since there are other competing pathways. Therefore, it is better to combine them with other methods.10 Alternatively, one can resort to direct inhibition of the activity of the photosystem. Nutrient deficiency, such as sulfur or nitrogen limitation, is a standard method to inhibit photosynthesis.11–13 This method usually requires a two-stage culture mode by growing cells under different conditions for separate growth and H2 production. To avoid frequent harvest and transfer of cells, some have attempted bioreactor design innovations. A chemostat system was built to considerably prolong the H2 production period for more than 4000 h.14 Nevertheless, the H2 production was low with a maximal rate of 0.42–0.58 μl ml−1 h−1 or 1.17–1.71 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1 because the nutrient-deficient condition often leads to the degradation of the photosynthetic apparatus and even cell death, resulting in low light energy conversion efficiency (ECE).11
Table 1 Typical green algae and cyanobacteria species and their characteristics widely examined for bioH2 production




Key algae species
Typical conditions
Typical productivity
Metabolic pathways
Advantages
Disadvantages
Bottlenecks




Green algae

Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
11,15

(1) Nutrient deprivation:11,15,16 S–, N–, P–, Mg– and CO2–; (2) acclimation to hypoxia;17 (3) O2 removal;9 (4) imbalance of the photosystem ratio18
H2: 250 μl ml−1 in total during 96 h11
Direct biophotolysis: 2H2O + Fd(OX) + light → O2 + 4H+ + Fd(red)(4e−); 4H+ + Fd(red)(4e−) → 2H2 + Fd(OX); indirect biophotolysis: 12H2O + 6CO2 → C6H12O6 + 6O2; C6H12O6 + 6H2O → 6CO2 + 12H2
BioH2 production from water and sunlight; CO2 reduction in the environment; [FeFe]-hydrogenases accept lower-potential e− than [NiFe]-hydrogenases in cyanobaceria19
Poor growth in open ponds; sensitive to irradiance; low number of transgenes to regulate expression11
Oxygen inhibition; low energy conversion efficiency to H2





Chlorella pyrenoidosa
20



H2: 40 μl ml−1 in total during 200 h20




Difficult harvest due to small cells; the nuclear genome remains to be sequenced20







Chlorococcum minutum
9



H2: 3 μmol (mg Chl)−1 in total during 24 h9




Continuous consumption of chemical oxygen scavengers9




Cyano-bacteria

Anabaena variabilis
16



H2: 167.6 μmol (mg Chl a)−1 h−116
Direct biophotolysis: 2H2O + Fd(OX) + light → O2 + 4H+ + Fd(red)(4e−); 4H+ + Fd(red)(4e−) → 2H2 + Fd(OX); indirect biophotolysis: N2 + 8H+ + Fd(red)(8e−) + 16ATP → 2NH3 + H2 + Fd(OX) + 16ADP + 16Pi; 8H+ + 8e− + 16ATP→ 4H2 + 16ADP + 16Pi; 12H2O + 6CO2 → C6H12O6 + O2; C6H12O6 + 6H2O → 6CO2 + 12H2
BioH2 production from water and sunlight; CO2 reduction in the environment; BioH2 production is separated from O2 production
Nutrient starvation (e.g. N– or C–)16
Oxygen inhibition; consumption of H2 by uptake of hydrogenase; low energy conversion efficiency to H2





Anabaena sp.21


H2: 90.4 μmol (mg Chl a)−1 h−121




Algal culture needed to be transferred to nitrogen-limited medium21







Nostoc sp.22


H2: 18.78 μmol (mg Chl a)−1 h−122




Large genome sizes ranging from 7 to 10 Mbp; the majority of biosynthetic gene clusters are currently orphan23







Synechocystis sp.24


H2: 40.6 μmol (mg Chl a)−1 h−124




Approximately 45% of genes have no assigned function; shear-sensitive23






Since many countries and governments have established sustainable goals and carbon-neutral timing in the near future, it is more urgent than ever before to look for renewable energy sources. Numerous novel technologies have been developed to overcome the current issues of algae-based bioH2 production. Despite not yet being entirely solved, it is necessary to review and analyze these advances, particularly in the last decade and see where they have arrived and the gap to reach the theoretical limit of algal bioH2 production on an industrial scale. Moreover, a global spatiotemporal dynamic map of the bioH2 production potential from algae is given in this article that will provide scientists, the associated energy community, and policymakers a reference and foundation to roughly evaluate the economic feasibility when applied locally.
2. Theoretical bioH2 limit
Based on theoretical assumptions, the theoretical bioH2 limit defines the maximum bioH2 production obtained from algae's photobiological pathway. It provides an ideal goal for scientists to set up in their research after realizing the gaps between theory and practice. A revisit of the theoretical limit by dividing the whole bioH2 production into several steps can help better understand and identify the key bottlenecks, such as light distribution, photon absorption, photon transmission, and energy conversion. Advances in associated technologies that can relieve or solve these bottlenecks to narrow the gaps may result in a new limit level. They will promote the future commercialization of the algal bioH2 production, making the estimation of its global potential more exciting and realistic.
Photosynthesis is reckoned as a global energy producer.25 The photosynthesis efficiency peak has been widely examined in plants and algae for exploring the source abundance of food (or biomass) and biofuels, respectively.25,26 Theoretically, as high as 13% of this peak is feasible using solar energy,27 although it has been revealed that the practical conversion efficiency of solar energy to biomass usually ranges from 1 to 6%. Regardless of plants or algae, they generally share the same energy loss from several physical and photochemical routes, including ∼51.3%, 10%, and 15% of energy loss caused by non-photosynthetically active radiation, reflection and transmission, and photochemical inefficiency, respectively.25,26 The subsequent complicated carbon pathways and energy flows with varied conversion efficiencies determine the difference in eventual biomass or biofuel productivity in plants and algae.
The most arresting advantage of bioH2 production from living algal cells is that the harvested energy does not need to enter carbon-fixed pathways and dissipates in the process of biomass generation. As such, the theoretical ECE of bioH2 is intrinsically higher than that of any other biomass-based biofuels. Like photoautotrophic higher plants, algae's growth is inevitably subject to energy losses due to physical and photochemical dissipations. These include ∼55%, 10%, and 20.4% of energy losses caused by radiation outside PAR, reflection and transmission, and non-photochemical processes, respectively (Fig. 1).28 To fuel the conversion of bioH2, a further energy loss of 59% will be lost during charge-separation at photosystems. As a result, a theoretical ECE of bioH2 can reach up to 13.4%, according to Torzillo's evaluation.28
 Fig. 1  Theoretical bioH2 limit28 (A) and the method of truncation30,31 or dynamical regulation33 of light-harvesting antenna size with the potential to reduce or bypass the non-photochemical energy loss (B). 
Besides the first two types of physical energy losses during light energy transfer, photosynthesis initiates with harvesting light energy and transferring the excitation energy to photochemical reaction centers. The evolution of sizable arrays of light-harvesting antennae endows algae with a selective survival advantage in nature, mainly where sunlight intensity is limited for growth, but conversely becomes a negative factor in cases of high sunlight intensity and upper layers of algae in high-density liquid cultures. Excess absorbance of irradiance leads to oversaturation of photosynthesis and energy dissipation via non-photochemical quenching mechanisms.29 For this reason, truncating or minimizing the chlorophyll antenna size of the photosystems would improve the photo-inhibition point and as such reduce the energy losses.30 If the proportion of non-photochemical energy loss can be avoided and directed to produce hydrogen, then the theoretical bioH2 ECE by algae would be improved to 16.9% (Fig. 1), which is close to the current industrial level of photovoltaic efficiency. The improved theoretical bioH2 ECE from Torzillo's limit (13.4%) to the new level of 16.9% indicates an enhancement of 26.1%. Therefore, an increase of photosynthetic efficiency by 26.1% at least with the aim to reduce the energy dissipation caused by excess light absorbance, to some extent, can be assumed to be able to nearly bypass (if not wholly) the associated non-productive pathways. A C. vulgaris mutant with reduced chlorophyll antenna size yielded a 44.5% improvement in biomass productivity with reduced non-photochemical quenching under high light exposure.31 It is estimated that truncation of the light-harvesting antenna size can improve photosynthetic solar ECE and productivity in algal biomass up to threefold.32 By reducing the chlorophyll size, the bioH2 production of a C. reinhardtii mutant could reach 1.8–5.2 times higher than that of the wild-type.30 Numerous studies using associated technologies to modify the antenna have shown a tremendous improvement in bioH2 production, photosynthetic efficiency, or biomass, which is far more than 26.1%.
A smaller light-harvesting antenna, however, may still not stimulate the best photosynthetic performance in low or fluctuating light environments. Recently, an interesting technology has emerged that has substantially improved the photosynthetic efficiency by expressing a chlorophyllide a oxygenase (CAO) gene.33 The developed translational control system enables continuous alteration of Chlorophyll b levels and dynamical regulation of light-harvesting antenna size to acclimatize to the fluctuating light environments. As a result, the transgenic algae, having optimized intermediate antenna sizes with a Chl a/b ratio of 5, produced two-fold greater biomass than the wild-type algae. These strategies exhibit their powerful capacity to reduce the energy loss caused by excess irradiance, particularly acclimatizing to nature's varying light environments. Although they may not be able to completely bypass the non-photochemical processes, the potential new level of theoretical bioH2 limit at 16.9% demonstrates both opportunities and challenges to narrow the gap, which is also the pursuit of most recent research as discussed in the next section.
3. Metabolic pathways of bioH2 production
Some green algae and cyanobacteria are able to produce photosynthetic H2 naturally due to their possession of [FeFe]-hydrogenases, [NiFe]-hydrogenases, or nitrogenases. Depending on the photosynthetic systems (PSII and PSI) and species-specific features, three different H2 production pathways at least have been discovered with different energy conversion efficiencies (Fig. 2). These species and their pathways have both pros and cons. In recent decades, numerous strategies have been developed to overcome the drawbacks of each pathway with improved ECEs (Table 2).
 Fig. 2  Primary pathways for biophoto-H2 production in live algal cells. (A) H2 energy derived from PSII under hypoxic conditions. The metabolic pathways of A, B, and C indicate the competing routes of electrons for H2 production.34 (B) H2 energy derived from PSI by carbohydrate degradation through the respiration system. A photosynthetic electron flow inhibitor such as DCMU can be used to block the PSII pathway to avoid the competition of yielded O2. Electrons can be converted to H2 by hydrogenases (route A) or directly harvested by an external graphite electrode (route B).35 (C) H2 production in heterocyst cells of cyanobacteria and energy derived from the fixed carbon or sucrose imported from the adjacent vegetative cells.36 Red arrows represent the electron flow towards H2 production. LHC – Light harvesting complex; OEC – oxygen-evolving complex; PSII and PSI – photosystems II and I, respectively; PQ – plastoquinone; FlvA and FlvB – flavodiiron protein A and B, respectively; PC – plastocyanin; Fd – ferredoxin; Cytb6f – cytochrome b6f complex; G3P – glyceraldehyde 3 phosphate; TCA – tricarboxylic acid cycle. 
Table 2 Survey of key biotechnology strategies for improving the H2 efficiency of energy transfer in the cell factories of green algae and cyanobacteria




Biotechnology developments
Opportunities
Challenges




S-Deficiency11–13
Increase the hydrogenase expression and activity; inhibit the oxygen-evolving complex and supply electrons to PSII
Degradation of photosynthetic complexes and apparatus; low inherent energy conversion efficiency


Immobilization 46,47
Easy access to light; maximum rate of H2 production: 1.18 μmol (mg DW)−1 h−1
Nutrient deprivation is needed; noticeable oxidative stress can be induced at high light intensities


Preliminarily anaerobic incubation at low light intensity20
Avoid sulfur depletion; sustainable production of H2 for 200 h
Inhibited by increased oxygen with the concentration of acetate and the light intensity


Preliminarily anaerobic incubation with acetate removal and an O2-absorbent10
Ability to make use of high light intensity; yield 200 μl H2 per ml of culture (∼18.3 mg Chl) in 96 h, almost 4-fold higher than that with S-deficiency
A dark anaerobic incubation is needed for the recovery of H2


Engineering a robust chemoenzymatic cascade system48
Avoid sulfur depletion; stable production of H2 for nearly a month; cell flocculation for easy harvest; the average rate of H2 production: 0.44 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1
Two chemzymes are needed; near-neutral pH is required for maintaining the system; the H2 production efficiency needs further improvement


Short strong light pulses34
Avoid S-deficiency; without acetate; sustained H2 production for at least three days; maximum rate of H2 production: 25 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1
H2 production declines with time and its long-term running needs further investigation


Cycles of 2 minutes light and 3 minutes darkness under mixotrophic conditions49
The average rate of H2 production: 49 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1; maximum rate of H2 production: 150 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1 (irradiance: 370 μE m−2 s−1)
The long-term operation needs further investigation


Metabolic engineering, e.g. introduction of an endogenous microRNA (miRNA1166.1)38
Avoid S-deficiency; yield up to 6 μl H2 per ml of gas samples in 50 h with three cycles of heating–recovery
Repeated heat induction at 40 °C and recovery at 22 °C is needed


Introduction of the C12P mutation in HupS from the uptake hydrogenase41
Elimination of hydrogen uptake; H2 production: ∼1.1–1.3 μmol (mg Chl a)−1 h−1
Investigations are needed to understand the structural, spectroscopic, redox, and catalytic properties


PSI–hydrogenase (PsaD-HoxYH) fusion complex44
Uptake of H2 eliminated; an improved mean rate of lasting H2 production from 0.09 to 0.79 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1 for wild and mutant, respectively
Cell growth is inhibited; H2 productivity is not high enough; scalability and long-term stability need further investigation


Porous translucent electrodes23
Rapid photo-response times; electroactive for at least several days without light bleaching; O2 reduction at the anode does not compete with the collection of electrons; current: 11.5 mA m−2
Scalability and long-term stability need further investigation


Graphite electrodes with a microfluidizer35
Higher electric currents; hydrogen production at a bias of 0.65 V; an average rate of H2 production: 3.5 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1; current: 300–400 mA m−2
Scalability and long-term stability need further investigation




Biophoto-H2 production in vivo has been reported in green algae since approximately sixty years ago.7Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and Chlorella pyrenoidosa are two typical model species owing to their high hydrogenase activity, fast growth, easy cultivation, and clear genetic information. As shown in Fig. 2A, oxygen and hydrogen protons are evolved from the splitting of water during photosynthesis, and the formed protons are combined with the electrons from ferredoxin converting to hydrogen by the enzyme hydrogenase. Production of H2 has been found to be inhibited by the yielded O2 and compete for the reductants with several assimilatory and auxiliary pathways such as CO2 fixation in the Calvin cycle.37 To overcome the O2 sensitivity issue, the sulfur limitation has been widely employed to establish hypoxia that increases the hydrogenase expression and activity. The S-deprived condition downregulates the PSII activity and stimulates the expression of GDP-L-galactose phosphorylase to accumulate ascorbate, which may inhibit the oxygen-evolving complex and supply electrons to PSII.11 Nevertheless, this can also result in the degradation of photosynthetic complexes and apparatus, and even cell death on the timescale of days.12 Meanwhile, the S-deprived condition for sustained hydrogen photoproduction largely depends on acetate as an organic carbon source, indicating that it is not a photoautotrophic process with a low inherent ECE.13
Various methods have been developed to avoid the S-deprived condition due to the uneconomical shift of algal cells between S-sufficient and S-deprived media. Through preliminarily anaerobic incubation for 12 h and illumination at a relatively low light intensity of about 30 μE m−2 s−1, sustainable production of H2 from C. pyrenoidosa was obtained without sulfur depletion for 200 h.20 However, the oxygen evolution increased with the concentration of acetate and the light intensity.20 When the acetate was further removed and a simple catalyst was applied to absorb the evolved O2, the anaerobically pretreated cells (4 h) were able to use relatively high light intensity (approx. 320 μE m−2 s−1) and yield approx. 200 μl ml−1 H2 in 96 h, which is almost 4-fold higher than that in the S-deprived TAP (tris-acetate-phosphate) medium.10 Under the same S-sufficient and acetate-free condition, a more straightforward method by switching from continuous light to a train of short intense light pulses is also able to photoproduce sustained H2 in growing C. reinhardtii cultures for at least three days.34 The short light–dark cycles prevent activation of the Calvin cycle and bypass the competition of H2 production with CO2 assimilation while preserving the capacity of the photosynthetic machinery.34 The anoxic pretreatment of the algal cells to induce hydrogenase expression is a prerequisite for all of the above methods and essential for recovering the H2-producing capacity. Alternatively, metabolic engineering can also be used to modify the associated pathways towards photobio-H2 production. An endogenous microRNA (miRNA1166.1) responsive to S-deprivation was transformed into C. reinhardtii, which successfully induced the H2 production without S-deprivation.38
In nature, many algae species usually adopt a combination of photosynthetic systems (Fig. 2A) and carbohydrate decomposition (Fig. 2B) for H2 production. The H2 energy derived from the PSII system can take up to at least 70% in green algae with the remains from endogenous substrate degradation.20 However, the O2 yielded from the PSII pathway significantly inhibits hydrogenase activity, leading to a short period of H2 generation within only a few minutes under illumination. A photosynthetic electron flow inhibitor such as 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea (DCMU) has been used to block the PSII pathway to avoid the competition of yielded O2, resulting in a predominance of the substrate pathway.35 Then, the energy can be used to produce H2 by hydrogenase. Recently, a novel method has been developed to harvest the generated electrons directly. Some photosynthetically active bacteria are able to transfer electrons across membranes, and the generation of electrical photocurrents in biofilms is harvested by an external electrode (Fig. 2B).35 Cyanobacteria such as Nostoc punctiforme and Synechocystis sp. can be ideal model organisms.23 However, this mechanism is usually limited by the charge transfer efficiency to the electrode. For this reason, novel electrodes have been developed to enhance current generation from photosynthetic biofilms.23 Porous translucent electrodes provide rapid photo-response times that dramatically increase the current density remaining electroactive for at least several days without light bleaching.23 O2 reduction at the anode does not compete with the collection of electrons as it takes place at lower anode potentials (−400 mV) than those obtained in the bio-photovoltaic system (100 mV). Using graphite, another type of novel electrode can generate higher electric currents than those obtained in porous translucent electrodes.35 With the aid of an endogenous mediator, a non-harmful gentle physical treatment of the cyanobacterial cells by a microfluidizer to form live cellular biofilms enables light-driven electron transfer to the graphite electrode. As a result, the collected current is utilized for hydrogen production at a bias of 0.65 V.35
O2-Sensitiveness occurs not only for hydrogenases but also for nitrogenases in cyanobacteria. To prevent this, several filamentous cyanobacteria have evolved a specialized cell called a heterocyst to spatially separate nitrogen fixation and oxygenic photosynthesis (Fig. 2C). These heterocyst cells form a nutritionally symbiotic relation with their adjacent vegetative cells. However, since only about 25% of the electron flux is channeled by nitrogenases for proton reduction to hydrogen and about one in 10–20 cells differentiate into heterocysts, the nitrogenase-based light energy conversion efficiency is only about 0.1–0.4% and 4.6% in practice and theory, respectively.36 Moreover, the uptake of H2 is observed in the presence of an uptake hydrogenase HupSL. This uptake activity can be eliminated either by interruption of the gene for the specific maturation protease HupW or of a structural hup gene.39,40 Alternatively, introducing the C12P mutation in HupSL in Nostoc punctiforme by modifying the proximal iron–sulfur cluster in the hydrogenase small subunit HupS has successfully converted the cyanobacterium to a sustained light-driven hydrogen producer under nitrogen-fixing conditions.41 In those mutants with an engineered non-functional uptake hydrogenase, the light energy conversion efficiency could be significantly enhanced up to 1.2–4%.42,43 Some cyanobacteria (including non-nitrogen fixing) also contain bidirectional NiFe (Hox) hydrogenases with the capacity to either produce or oxidize H2. Using a photosystem I-hydrogenase fusion in vivo offers a feasible strategy for preventing H2 uptake.44 As a result, an improved mean rate of lasting H2 production was obtained from 0.09 to 0.79 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1 for the wild type and mutant, respectively.
It can be seen that many other pathways, such as the Calvin cycle, respiration, or nitrogen fixation, scramble for electrons from the H2-generating pathways. Although it is difficult to mitigate these issues under natural conditions with green algae and cyanobacteria, these competing pathways implicate the multi-choices and major targets of artificial disturbance either by changing the cultivation conditions or by genetic regulation. Recent advances in associated technologies can bring about mitigation or even elimination to counter these competing pathways. It is not easy to justify which green algae or cyanobacteria are superior in terms of H2 productivity since many factors should be considered in future industrialization. One example is the different expression in H2 productivity based on the chlorophyll content (in the form of per Chl per h) because some use total chlorophylls a and b (chl (a + b)−1 h−1) for green algae,10 but cyanobacteria only produce chlorophyll a.45 Another notable point is that the species selected should be robust under varying environments. Taking Synechocystis sp. as an example, this species grows fast in the laboratory but is usually easy to collapse at a large scale, perhaps due to its sensitivity to shear force.23
4. Commercialization of photobiological bioH2versus photovoltaic E-H2
Currently, water splitting via electrolysis contributes only 4% to global hydrogen production.50 Its integration with a renewable energy source like wind or solar power offers a sustainable route. As the most abundant and sustainable source of energy available to humanity, sunlight has been widely used for hydrogen production by various approaches, and their comparisons have received extensive attention to explore which one is the most promising. Recently, an interesting comparison of commercialization was drawn between a one-step photoelectrochemical (PEC) method and a two-step photovoltaic-electrolysis (PVE) method.51 It was found that on the same assumption of 10% ECE, the levelized cost of hydrogen for the off-grid PVE is lower than that for PEC, which are 6.22 and 8.42 $ per kgH2, respectively. The reason for the poorer performance of PEC is its less flexible and costlier devices owing to the stability of catalysts and a negative trade-off between the lifetime and cost of the semiconductor materials. Similar to PEC, algae-based bioH2 production can be regarded as a one-step photobiochemical (PBC) method. The difference is that the PBC method uses green algae or cyanobacteria as ‘cell factories’ for renewable production of biocatalysts. The remaining question for the PBC commercialization relies on the stability of the biocatalysts and the cost of large-scale algal cultivation. Given that PVE is one of the most feasible strategies for green H2 commercialization, it would be interesting to compare the two types of PBC and PVE H2 production.
The first attempt at using the PBC method to produce bioH2 outdoors was reported two decades ago by using a filamentous heterocystous cyanobacterium Anabaena variabilis.52 A computer-controlled rooftop tubular photobioreactor with a volume of 4.35 L was assembled, yielding a bioH2 production rate and efficiency of light energy to H2 energy conversion of 1.1 L d−1 PhBR−1 and 0.094%, respectively. Although the efficiency was relatively low, several critical conditions were discussed that were important for future commercialization. Among these conditions, temperature appears to be the main factor limiting hydrogen production, which was affected by weather fluctuation. This indicates that a temperature control system will benefit the stability of bioH2 production. Another notable trial was made by Scoma et al. by using C. reinhardtii as a model.53 On the basis of a 50 L horizontal tubular photobioreactor (PBR) exposed to sunlight (Fig. 3A), it was concluded that the PBC method by using this alga is feasible as long as this species has been acclimated to solar light in advance before transferring from the laboratory mode. A pre-acclimation step resulted in around a 12.6% reduction in chlorophyll per unit dry weight, improving bioH2 production. This further indicates that minimizing or truncating the chlorophyll antenna would increase the ECE of bioH2 given the photo-inhibition under the relatively high exposure to outdoor sunlight. However, the ECE of this outdoor pilot experiment was found to be only 18–20% of what was obtained in the laboratory. There are a few reasons, including the differences in the geometry of the PBR (tubular vs. flat), mixing system (pump vs. stir bar), rate of turbulence, mixing time, and light intensity and homogeneity. Apart from that, this pilot trial used the conventional method of sulfur deficiency, which is not an efficient strategy as discussed above.
 Fig. 3  Outdoor algal bioH2 production. A pilot of a 50-L horizontal tubular photobioreactor used for outdoor experiments (insert: the degasser),53 copyright Elsevier (A). A large-scale design concept based on the 2 min light/3 min dark cycle method49 combined with the substrate limitation method,10 drawn by the author (B). 
Comparing the state-of-the-art technologies developed in the most recent years as listed in Table 2, it can be found that the light cycle method of 2 min light/3 min dark seems to be a feasible strategy in large-scale practice due to its relatively higher operability and ECE than others.49 By using this method, oxygen has a limited influence on hydrogen production after 2 min of illumination, and the primary electron loss is caused by carbon fixation. To maintain continuous hydrogen production, the Calvin cycle can be blocked either by avoiding its activation34 or substrate limitation.10 Shifting algae from continuous illumination to a train of short light pulses with cycles of 1 s light/9 s dark enables inactivation of the Calvin cycle.34 However, this method seems only applicable with indoor artificial illumination and is not suitable for outdoor cultivation with solar energy. In contrast, substrate limitation (carbon limited) is a more feasible method to inhibit carbon fixation under sunlight conditions.10 By combining the substrate limitation and the 2 min light/3 min dark methods, a sustainable bioH2 production can be expected with a yield of an average rate of bioH2 production of 49 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1 under an irradiance of 370 μE m−2 s−1, which has been obtained in the short term 49. Assuming an average wavelength of 550 nm and an amount of Chl of 3 g m−2 then the ECE could reach up to 14.5% (see Table S1, ESI†). This value of ECE is higher than Torzillo's theoretical H2 limit (13.4%),28 indicating the promising application of this technology. Although another method (e.g. nutrient starvation) using different species such as Anabaena variabilis appears to yield higher H2 productivity (H2: 167.6 μmol (mg Chl a)−1 h−1),16 it deserves pointing out that this selection for the following comparison does not aim to demonstrate which one is the best but to give a relatively more feasible application for future commercialization.
A concept design for large-scale application of the light cycle method49 combined with the substrate limitation method10 is shown in Fig. 3B, consisting of a two-layer construction. The top layer photobioreactor is exposed to sunlight for bioH2 production, while the bottom tank is incubated under darkness for the recovery of H2ase enzymes. The flow rate is controlled by a water pump for maintaining each culture cycle of 2 min light/3 min dark. A degasser is installed on the top of the bottom tank to separate H2. Besides, the larger size design of the bottom tank can help the release of aqueous H2 due to changes in hydraulic pressure occurring in the interface between the top tube and the tank. Temperature control may be applied to the bottom tank rather than submerging the top photobioreactor in water like Fig. 3A by which light reflection or scattering would be increased. One advantage of this design is that many algal species are able to grow under mixotrophic conditions, and therefore, they can grow during the nighttime (with a limited supply of substrates that can be exhausted during the period) and produce bioH2 during the daytime. A regular harvest of algal cells is beneficial for sustained bioH2 production and continuous biomass generation. However, a proof of concept is needed in the future.
Nowadays, the largest photovoltaic H2 plant in the world is run at Fukushima, Japan, with a renewable energy-powered 10 MW-class hydrogen production unit (FH2R project, see Table 3).54 This PVE project consists of two sub-units, i.e., a photovoltaic system connected to a conventional water electrolyzer. It occupies a total area of 2.2 × 105 m2 with an annual H2 yield of 900 t per year. According to eqn (1), this H2 productivity corresponds to around 12.2% of ECE. Assuming that the algal PBC system consists of 2 × 105 m2 (i.e. 91% of total area) algal cultivation and 0.2 × 105 m2 (i.e. 9% of total area) of hydrogen separation, to reach the same overall 12.2% of ECE on the same basis of the total area as PVE, the ECE for algal bio-H2 should reach 14.1% if the efficiency of 95% hydrogen separation could be obtained (i.e. 12.2%/95%/91%= 14.1%). When transferring to a heterotrophic condition, O2 can be continuously consumed via respiration of organic compounds, improving the purity of the produced bioH2 by up to nearly 98% and reducing the cost of H2 separation.55 This hypothetical case of algal PBC indicates that if its ECE could reach 14.1% (close to the light cycle method), then the bio-H2 production would be comparable to the PVE method. In addition, the PBC method produces around 2,920 t per year of algal biomass, which would bring about considerable economic benefits. This intermediate biomass estimation is based on an average of 40 g m−2 d−1 of biomass productivity in an enclosed mixotrophic mode with bioH2 production in the light and heterotrophic growth in the dark, but notably phototrophic carbon fixation should be inhibited to prevent energy competition with bioH2 production. It has been found that C. reinhardtii was able to grow at a fast rate as high as up to 2656 mg l−1 d−1 of biomass under optimal mixotrophic conditions, and the heterotrophic mode is usually higher than the autotrophic and mixotrophic modes.56
Table 3 A theoretical case of algal bio-H2 production to reach the H2 productivity of the largest photovoltaic (PV) H2 plant on the basis of the total area in the world at Fukushima, Japan with a renewable energy-powered 10 MW-class hydrogen production unit (FH2R project).54 EEC%: the efficiency of energy conversion; HSP: hydrogen separator




Items
PV-H2
Algal bio-H2





a An average of insolation by using the all sky surface shortwave downward irradiance derived from the Prediction Of Worldwide Energy Resources (POWER) Single Point with an average between 2005 and 2015.57
b Estimation of the ECE is calculated according to eqn (1) as given in the text.
c Assuming an average of 40 g m−2 d−1 of biomass productivity in an enclosed mixotrophic mode (bioH2 production in the light and heterotrophic growth in the dark).





Location
Fukushima (Lat 37.76/Lon 140.47)


Insolation
4795 MJ m−2 per yeara


Total area
2.2 × 105 m2


H2 yield (EEC%)
900 t per year (12.2%b)


Facilities area
1.8 × 105 m2 (PV) + 0.4 × 105 m2 (E-H2)
2 × 105 m2 (bio-H2) + 0.2 × 105 m2 (HSP)


Facility efficiency
20% PV + 74.5% E-H2
14.1% bio-H2 + 95% HSP


Additional benefits
—
2920 t per year biomassc




5. Global evaluation of bioH2 production from living algae
Global evaluation of bioH2 production from living algae is critical for a better understanding of this technology and its commercialization potential, but currently, there is a lack of evaluation methods. The techno-economic, resource, and life cycle assessments of other algae-based biofuel production systems have been widely conducted by using various growth models.58–60 Using algal lipids for biodiesel production, for instance, Moody and colleagues61 established a large-scale outdoor photobioreactor algae growth model to predict the growth of Nannochloropsis and its lipid productivity potential. By taking biological effects such as respiration, nutrient uptake, and temperature into account, twenty-one reactor- and species-specific inputs were used to simulate the growth and generate global maps of its biomass and lipid productivity. Since more factors have been incorporated, this method can be expected to be more accurate than other models. However, this means that as many as 21 inputs should be obtained in advance, making it difficult in practice. Besides, there are other more intractable and critical factors in the case of bioH2 production, such as O2 inhibition, the activity of H2ase, and Calvin cycle competition, which are difficult to measure in an industrial scenario. To make it simple and easy for a practitioner to judge their current status of technology, algae are assumed to function as living 'solar panels', and the bioH2 production potential from algae is estimated simply according to eqn (1). On the basis of insolation and 14.1% of H2 energy conversion efficiency as mentioned above that can be comparable to the PVE method, the global spatiotemporal dynamic map of the bioH2 production can be obtained as shown in Fig. 4. By using the photobioreactor and cultivation mode as given in Fig. 3B, the light/dark cycle and temperature can be easily controlled within a suitable range for growth.
 Fig. 4  Global spatiotemporal dynamic map of the bioH2 production potential from algae on the basis of insolation and 14.1% of H2 energy conversion efficiency that can be reached in the literature and comparable to the photovoltaic electrolysis method. The insolation data is the incoming solar radiance sourced from the Clouds and the Earth's Radiant Energy System (CERES) project with an average between 2005–2015.62 
Variations of bioH2 production from 0–46 g m−2 d−1 with seasons and locations can be seen in Fig. 4. As expected, locations in the northern parts of the globe, where the light intensity changes immensely with different months, resulted in lower bioH2 productivity compared with regions more centrally located. Relatively stable and sustained bioH2 production can be observed around the equator over the whole year. That is different from the lipid yield as predicted by Moody and colleagues.61 One reason is due to the annual temperature stability around the equator. Another reason is that on the assumption of using the photobioreactor and mixotrophic cultivation mode as given in Fig. 3B, the disturbance of temperature and biomass accumulation can be eliminated.
The highest and lowest average daily yields in a single month from 12 locations across the globe are presented in Table 4. The variability changes from location to location due to the irradiance diversity. Locations with high bioH2 yields and low variability represent areas typically suitable for PBC bioH2 production and running year-round. For example, Kisumu (Kenya), Magdalena (Columbia), and Trivandrum (India) have a higher average daily bioH2 yield. In contrast, Poltavka (Russia), Punta Arenas (Chile), and Bagaskar (Finland) have lower average daily bioH2 yields not only because of the lower total irradiance but also due to the more considerable variability. The deficient light availability means that one or several months should be shut down, given the inefficient bioH2 yields. Although having close bioH2 yields annually, Guangzhou, China, would be a prime location over Fukushima, Japan, because of the warmer temperatures and minor irradiance variability in Guangzhou. These examples demonstrate that a significant deviation from the average irradiance harms the bioH2 productivity of the system. These results for locations are similar to the biomass and lipid productivity by using Moody and colleagues’ model.61 Like algal biomass and lipid production, integrating waste nutrients and heat from industrial processing plants makes it feasible for locations to achieve improved bioH2 productivity with low expenditure, but the availability of these resources will ultimately limit the scalability. To save energy for temperature control, the bottom tank can be buried in the ground to form dark conditions and heat insulation since the ground is usually used as an energy sink, energy source, or energy storage.63
Table 4 Average algal bioH2 production daily in the maximum month (MaxD), minimum month (MinD), and across one year (AveD) (g m−2 d−1), and total annually (TA) (g m−2 per year) of various regions around the world on the basis of 14.1% of H2 energy conversion efficiency. The bioH2 production was calculated according to eqn (1) by using the all sky surface shortwave downward irradiance derived from the Prediction Of Worldwide Energy Resources (POWER) Single Point with an average between 2005–201557




Location
Coordinates
MaxD
MinD
AveD
TA




Learmonth Australia
Lat −22.207 Lon 114.0383
29.39
13.99
22.36
8162.42


Yuma United States
Lat 32.6854 Lon −114.6244
29.71
11.82
21.37
7799.65


Kisumu Kenya
Lat −0.0982 Lon 34.7676
22.93
19.13
21.08
7696.00


Hawaii United States
Lat 21.4808 Lon −157.9107
25.13
14.27
20.23
7385.05


Magdalena Columbia
Lat 9.343 Lon −74.0962
20.55
17.25
19.20
7009.32


Trivandrum India
Lat 8.5595 Lon 76.8965
22.15
17.18
18.96
6918.62


Beijing China
Lat 39.7517 Lon 116.4632
20.59
7.88
14.02
5117.71


Guangzhou China
Lat 23.1166 Lon 113.2502
17.82
9.48
13.20
4819.72


Fukushima Japan
Lat 37.761 Lon 140.4737
18.42
6.99
12.96
4729.02


Poltavka Russia
Lat 54.8144 Lon 21.32
20.20
1.53
10.61
3873.91


Punta Arenas Chile
Lat −53.1536 Lon −70.9002
19.20
1.85
9.76
3562.96


Bagaskar Finland
Lat 59.9138 Lon 24.0386
20.48
0.64
9.76
3562.96




To further investigate the feasibility of algal bioH2 production, a scalability assessment was performed to meet various energy demands of global nations. By combining with the land availability,61 the assessment indicates algae's hypothetical bioH2 production potential and its scalability for supplementing energy and reducing demand for traditional fossil fuels (Table S2, ESI†). The assessment was based on the caloric energy density of transportation fossil fuels and H2.64 Two scenarios with a high and a low value of ECE were taken into account, i.e., 14.1% and 2.5%. Results from Table S1 (ESI†) show that these locations can be separated into three groups. It is the most feasible for Australia, Colombia, and Russia to replace 30% and even 100% of their transportation fuel consumption based on non-arable land, less than 1% required in both scenarios of ECE, for algae cultivation and processing. Although the bioH2 productivity varies, they have sizeable non-arable land and medium transportation fuel consumption. The second group with relative feasibility includes China, India, and the United States due to their medium bioH2 productivity, medium amount of non-arable land, and high transportation fuel consumption. This group is also likely to replace 100% of their transportation fuel consumption, but India may be struggling due to having relatively less non-arable land, particularly in the low ECE case. In contrast, Japan requires over 100% of non-arable land for 30% replacement through algal bioH2, mainly attributable to its low availability of non-arable land. These results are similar to Moody and colleagues’ evaluation61 of algal biodiesel, but it seems that algal bioH2 is superior to algal biodiesel due to the higher energy density of hydrogen.
6. Prospects
In the future, efforts should be further devoted to exploring new technologies for the improvement of ECE in both laboratory and large-scale outdoor pilots. A proof of concept is needed to verify the feasibility of the photobioreactor and algae culturing model as developed in this study. Like conventional algae production facilities based on photoautotrophy, various cultivation conditions are vital to maintain a productive culture of H2-producing algae, including temperature, irradiance, pH, dry biomass weight, pO2, and Chl a concentrations.52 As mentioned above, temperature and irradiance are the most critical parameters that should be given priority since they can significantly influence the cell viability and energy conversion efficiency. Bacterial contamination is another challenging issue in that these contaminated bacteria can compete for the medium nutrients, reduce the culture transparency and even inhibit the growth of algae.65 Some kinds of bacteriostat, such as cycloheximide, are usually needed to prevent algal contamination.52 An interesting strategy is using Escherichia coli as a symbiotic bacterium that could inhibit contamination of other harmful bacteria and improve both the biomass growth and the bioH2 production of algae.65 It was found that active photosynthesis was maintained in algae throughout the entire H2 evolution process, and meanwhile, bacterial respiration was essential to consume the oxygen in culture for the activation of algal hydrogenases, both of which contributed to sustainable H2 production. However, it should be noted that the mixed algal-bacterial cultures may limit the utilization of harvested biomass. Other issues that will need to be considered and addressed include maintaining an appropriate pH and minimizing fouling of the bioreactor surfaces.66
Productivity and commercialization are two key issues determining the future application of algal bioH2 production. It should be pointed out that the estimation of bioH2 productivity by using eqn (1) is based on a simplified assumption that the algae cultures function as living ‘solar panels’, and the actual production may be lower since there are numerous factors that can affect and reduce the energy conversion efficiency. Fortunately, the produced biomass can bring about additional economic benefits when used as a feedstock for food or other biofuels. In the Shanxi Province of China, the first and largest C. reinharditti plant was launched as a food resource in 2020 with an investment of around 46 million $. A biomass yield of 4000 t per year is expected with an annual revenue of 153.8 million $. Algal lipids can be used for biodiesel conversion, while the defatted and depigmented carbohydrate-rich biomass is suitable for bioethanol production.56 Besides, the spent media after ethanol fermentation can be subsequently used for methane production using a mixed microbial consortium. This indicates that the commercialization of algae cultivation has been realized in the market, and in the future, if it is combined with bioH2 production, it could generate energy-food double benefits, making it more economically feasible.
In the future, efficient and safe hydrogen storage materials with high volumetric and high gravimetric densities should be pursued for the upcoming hydrogen economy despite representing one of the most challenging bottlenecks. Solid-state and liquid-phase hydrogen storage materials are two primary directions in this area. Many solid-state hydrogen storage materials have been developed over recent decades, such as hydrides, amides, and their hybrids.67 For instance, a ternary hydride composite consisting of Mg(NH2)2, LiH, and LiBH4 has been reported recently, enabling reversible hydrogenation and dehydrogenation at temperatures below 373 K.68 Liquid-phase chemical hydrides, including ammonia borane, metal–boron hydrides, formic acid, aromatic compounds, and hydrazine hydrate, serve as another promising candidate.69 This is attributed to their excellent stability at room temperature and mild dehydrogenation conditions, making them ideal as the next generation of hydrogen storage medium.
Hydrogen fuel-cell vehicles (HFCVs) will be one of the most significant impetus and potential markets for hydrogen application, although some controversies still exist. Aside from the demand for further technical breakthroughs, understanding attitudes of HFCVs is another non-negligible factor that should be considered due to its influence on the commercial application.70 As of January 2021, Japan established the world's largest hydrogen station network, but the numbers of HFCVs on-road and hydrogen refueling stations are only half and one-third of that in the US, respectively.70 It has been found that HFCV adopters in Japan are mostly male in their 50s and above, who have a higher interest and a higher socioeconomic status than non-adopters. This is different from Europe and the US where younger households are more likely to purchase green fuel vehicles.71,72 The more robust financial and more stable position of the elderly in Japan is a significant reason for this trend. To promote the commercial applications of HFCVs, government policymakers not only need to remold the attitudes of those wait-and-see non-adopters by advocating their advantages of environmental protection but also solve the anxieties of adopters regarding the lack of refueling stations and short station business hours on the prerequisite of safety.
7. Conclusions
Hydrogen gas is a dense energy carrier, and its production from green algae and cyanobacteria in vivo has a higher light-to-H2 energy conversion efficiency than other biofuels based on biomass transformation. Current achievements in molecular biology have revealed three different metabolic pathways at least for sustained biophoto-H2 production. The advancements of recent novel biotechnologies have addressed or significantly mitigated the critical issues, such as the O2 inhibition, the Calvin cycle competition, and the inefficient light harvest efficiency. As such, the bioH2 ECEs under an assumed scenario (combining the 2 min light/3 min dark cycle and the substrate limitation methods) and a theoretical limit (assuming that the energy loss by non-photochemical processes can be bypassed through genetic or structural modification) are expected to reach new heights of 14.5% and 16.9%, respectively. As such, it is likely to realize the current 14.1% ECE of the H2 productivity of the largest photovoltaic (PV) H2 plant on the basis of the total area in the world, while the benefits of the produced algal biomass that are lacking in the photovoltaic method should be taken into account. As presented in this study, a global spatiotemporal dynamic map of the bioH2 production potential from algae does not aim to focus on its precision but to provide a reference and foundation to evaluate its economic feasibility when applied locally. Scalability analysis shows that many regions can supplement 30% and even 100% of their fuel consumption through algal bioH2 production by using nonarable land. This study verifies the feasibility of the simplified assumption throughout for evaluating the algal bioH2 production in that most results are similar to those elaborate methods by incorporating various refined parameters. Overall, the state-of-the-art technologies of algae-based photobiological hydrogen production have ignited a spark ready to start a prairie fire worldwide. In the future, a combination of these advanced technologies may promote energy conversion efficiency further. Besides, new research should be unceasingly conducted to explore and advocate minimizing the remainder of competitive electron transport reactions, preventing the inhibition of hydrogenase activity from O2, and sustainably diverting efficient electron flow towards H2 production, turning the technology into reality and commercialization.3
8. Methods
The following sections present details on evaluating the energy conversion efficiency and comparisons among different scenarios and methods. Insolation data is derived from NASA solar energy projects.
9. Energy conversion efficiency
Estimation of the ECE is based on the assumption that the algae cultures function as living ‘solar panels’. Then the ECE is simplified as the energy harvested in the forms of H2 over the total light irradiance, which can be estimated according to the following eqn (1), (1)where EH, EL, and EL0 are the energy of produced H2, light irradiance, and the average light irradiance per unit of time (kW h m−2), respectively; n is the number of moles of H2, E0 is the energy content of 1 mol H2 (i.e. 286 kJ mol−1), NA is the Avogadro constant 6.02 × 1023, Ir is the light irradiance in a unit of μE m−2 s−1 (e.g. 370 μE m−2 s−1 in the case of the light/dark cycle method49), h is the Planck constant (6.62 × 10−34), c is the light velocity (3 × 108 m s−1), and λ is the light wavelength. For solar energy, 550 nm is used as an average light wavelength. Given that various irradiance units have been presented in the literature, this equation can be used for their mutual conversion, making them comparable.
10. Comparison between PVE and PBC
Photovoltaic-electrolysis is another promising method for green hydrogen production and has actually been utilized in practice. To find the gap between the algal PBC method and the current PVE method, a hypothetical case of algal bio-H2 production was compared with the currently largest photovoltaic (PV) H2 plant in the world at Fukushima, Japan, with a 10 MW-class hydrogen production unit.54 To do this, the comparison was drawn on the assumption of the same total area (2.2 × 105 m2), insolation (4795 MJ m−2 per year), and hydrogen yield (900 t per year). The insolation was derived from the downward shortwave irradiance (DSI). In fact, the DSI or global horizontal irradiance is also referred to as 'solar insolation' and is the total shortwave irradiance from the hemisphere on a horizontal flat surface. The DSI is the primary source of Earth's energy budget and is often used to evaluate the performance of PVE.3,73 Since the algal bio-H2 plant is assumed to be a flat mode and to make it easy for comparison, the facility efficiency for PV-H2 is also based on a flat horizontal area without taking the tilted degree of the photovoltaic panels into account.
11. Global evaluation of bioH2 production
Currently, there is a lack of evaluation methods for the global evaluation of bioH2 production from living algae. To make it comparable and straightforward in the future for other studies, its evaluation in this study is also based on a simplified assumption as mentioned above that the algae cultures function as biological 'solar panels'. On the basis of insolation data and 14.1% of H2 energy conversion efficiency that can be reached in the literature49 and parallel with the PVE method, the global spatiotemporal dynamic map of the bioH2 production was generated according to eqn (1). The insolation data is the incoming solar radiance sourced from the Clouds and the Earth's Radiant Energy System (CERES) project with an average between 2005–2015.
12. Comparisons among several representative countries and scalability analysis
Comparisons were drawn among several representative countries from different continents across the world. The bioH2 production in different locations was calculated according to eqn (1) by using the All Sky Surface Shortwave Downward Irradiance derived from the Prediction Of Worldwide Energy Resources (POWER) Single Point with an average between 2005–2015.57 To further investigate the feasibility of algal bioH2 production, a scalability assessment was performed to meet the various energy demands of global nations. Like the ordinary kriging method that does not assume the mean of the data is constant over the entire spatial domain,74 representative cities with medium bioH2 production capacity were used in this study to evaluate their corresponding countries roughly. The assessment was based on the assumption that the caloric energy density of transportation fuels is an average of diesel and gasoline, i.e. (39 + 34) = 36.5 MJ l−1; meanwhile, the energy density of H2 is 143 MJ kg−1.64
13. Solar irradiance data
Two systems from NASA, i.e. The Clouds and the Earth's Radiant Energy System (CERES)62 and Prediction Of Worldwide Energy Resources (POWER)57 were used for global and individual country evaluation, respectively. Data were analyzed with an average between 2005 and 2015.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
I gratefully acknowledge the Specific Fund Project of Xiamen Marine and Fishery Development (19CZP011HJ08) for the funding support that made this work possible.
References
D. Das, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 7349–7357 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dawood, M. Anda and G. M. Shafiullah, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 3847–3869 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Tóth and I. Yacoby, Trends Biotechnol., 2019, 37, 1159–1163 CrossRef PubMed .
P. M. Falcone, M. Hiete and A. Sapio, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2021, 31, 100506 CrossRef CAS .
J. Koo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 10673–10679 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Eriksen, Biotechnol. Lett., 2008, 30, 1525–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gaffron, Nature, 1939, 143, 204–205 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gaffron, Biol. Rev., 1944, 19, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
K. Paramesh and T. Chandrasekhar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 7641–7646 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nagy, A. Podmaniczki, A. Vidal-Meireles, R. Tengölics, L. Kovács, G. Rákhely, A. Scoma and S. Z. Tóth, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2018, 11, 69 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Nagy, A. Vidal-Meireles, A. Podmaniczki, K. Szentmihályi, G. Rákhely, L. Zsigmond, L. Kovács and S. Z. Tóth, Plant J., 2018, 94, 548–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. Happe and A. Melis, Planta, 2002, 214, 552–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dubini and M. L. Ghirardi, Photosynth. Res., 2015, 123, 241–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Fedorov, S. Kosourov, M. L. Ghirardi and M. Seibert, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2005, 121, 403–412 CrossRef .
K. A. Batyrova, A. A. Tsygankov and S. N. Kosourov, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 8834–8839 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Sveshnikov, N. V. Sveshnikova, K. K. Rao and D. O. Hall, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 1997, 147, 297–301 CrossRef CAS .
A. Scoma, L. Durante, L. Bertin and F. Fava, New Phytol., 2014, 204, 890–900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Krishna, S. Styring and F. Mamedov, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 4683–4690 RSC .
C. Ducat Daniel, G. Sachdeva and A. Silver Pamela, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 3941–3946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Fan, Y. Zhang, D. Yang and R. Guo, Biotechnol. Lett., 2011, 33, 1345–1350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Vargas, M. Zaiat and M. D. C. Calijuri, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 30222–30231 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sukrachan and A. Incharoensakdi, J. Appl. Phycol., 2020, 32, 1103–1115 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wenzel, D. Härtter, P. Bombelli, C. J. Howe and U. Steiner, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1299 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Touloupakis, G. Rontogiannis, A. M. Silva Benavides, B. Cicchi, D. F. Ghanotakis and G. Torzillo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 15181–15186 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Stephenson, C. M. Moore, M. J. Terry, M. V. Zubkov and T. S. Bibby, Trends Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 615–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-G. Zhu, S. P. Long and D. R. Ort, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol, 2008, 19, 153–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Bolton and D. O. Hall, Photochem. Photobiol., 1991, 53, 545–548 CrossRef CAS .
G. Torzillo, A. Scoma, C. Faraloni and L. Giannelli, Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 2015, 35, 485–496 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. Ruban, Plant Physiol., 2017, 70, 1903–1916 Search PubMed .
S. Ban, W. Lin, Z. Luo and J. Luo, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 275, 425–429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-S. Shin, B. Lee, B.-R. Jeong, Y. K. Chang and J.-H. Kwon, J. Appl. Phycol., 2016, 28, 3193–3202 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kirst, S. T. Gabilly, K. K. Niyogi, P. G. Lemaux and A. Melis, Planta, 2017, 245, 1009–1020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Negi, Z. Perrine, N. Friedland, A. Kumar, R. Tokutsu, J. Minagawa, H. Berg, A. N. Barry, G. Govindjee and R. Sayre, Plant J., 2020, 103, 584–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kosourov, M. Jokel, E.-M. Aro and Y. Allahverdiyeva, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1431–1436 RSC .
G. Saper, D. Kallmann, F. Conzuelo, F. Zhao, T. N. Tóth, V. Liveanu, S. Meir, J. Szymanski, A. Aharoni, W. Schuhmann, A. Rothschild, G. Schuster and N. Adir, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2168 CrossRef PubMed .

          A. K. Mishra, M. S. Kaushik and D. N. Tiwari, in Cyanobacteria, ed. A. K. Mishra, D. N. Tiwari and A. N. Rai, Academic Press,  2019, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814667-5.00008-8, pp. 173–191 Search PubMed .
F. Khosravitabar and M. Hippler, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 17835–17844 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Zhuang, M. Chen, Z. Zeng, X. Cai, H. Li and Z. Hu, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2018, 11, 126 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Khetkorn, P. Lindblad and A. Incharoensakdi, J. Biol. Eng., 2012, 6, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lindberg, E. Devine, K. Stensjö and P. Lindblad, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2012, 78, 273–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Raleiras, N. Khanna, H. Miranda, L. S. Mészáros, H. Krassen, F. Ho, N. Battchikova, E.-M. Aro, A. Magnuson, P. Lindblad and S. Styring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 581–594 RSC .
H. Sakurai, H. Masukawa, M. Kitashima and K. Inoue, Life, 2015, 5, 997–1018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nyberg, T. Heidorn and P. Lindblad, J. Biotechnol., 2015, 215, 35–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Appel, V. Hueren, M. Boehm and K. Gutekunst, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 458–467 CrossRef CAS .
S. Satoh, M. Ikeuchi, M. Mimuro and A. Tanaka, J. Biol. Chem., 2001, 276, 4293–4297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Maswanna, S. Phunpruch, P. Lindblad and C. Maneeruttanarungroj, Biomass Bioenergy, 2018, 111, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kosourov, G. Murukesan, M. Seibert and Y. Allahverdiyeva, Algal Res., 2017, 28, 253–263 CrossRef .
J. Chen, J. Li, Q. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, H. Liu and C. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2064–2068 RSC .
Y. Milrad, S. Schweitzer, Y. Feldman and I. Yacoby, Plant Physiol., 2018, 177, 918–926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Doan, H. E. Lee, S. S. H. Shah, M. Kim, C.-H. Kim, H.-S. Cho and T. Kim, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 45, 14207–14220 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grimm, W. A. de Jong and G. J. Kramer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 22545–22555 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Tsygankov, A. S. Fedorov, S. N. Kosourov and K. K. Rao, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2002, 80, 777–783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Scoma, L. Giannelli, C. Faraloni and G. Torzillo, J. Biotechnol., 2012, 157, 620–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, T. Liu, Z. Zheng, M. Ishaq, G. Liang, P. Fan, T. Chen and J. Tang, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 67, 508–523 CrossRef .
E. Touloupakis, C. Faraloni, A. M. Silva Benavides, J. Masojídek and G. Torzillo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 3684–3694 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee, A. Ray and D. Das, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 762, 143080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NASA, 2021, accessed from: https://power.larc.nasa.gov/data-access-viewer/.
T. M. Mata, A. A. Martins and N. S. Caetano, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 217–232 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. Li, W. Dong, X. Zhang, R. D. Tyagi, P. Drogui and R. Y. Surampalli, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 90, 336–346 CrossRef .
V. Ananthi, R. Raja, I. S. Carvalho, K. Brindhadevi, A. Pugazhendhi and A. Arun, Fuel, 2021, 284, 118965 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Moody, C. M. McGinty and J. C. Quinn, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 8691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NASA, 2021, accessed from: https://ceres.larc.nasa.gov/.
G. A. Florides, P. D. Pouloupatis, S. Kalogirou, V. Messaritis, I. Panayides, Z. Zomeni, G. Partasides, A. Lizides, E. Sophocleous and K. Koutsoumpas, Energy, 2011, 36, 5027–5036 CrossRef .
M. Fischer, M. Werber and P. V. Schwartz, Energy Policy, 2009, 37, 2639–2641 CrossRef .
G. Lakatos, Z. Deák, I. Vass, T. Rétfalvi, S. Rozgonyi, G. Rákhely, V. Ördög, É. Kondorosi and G. Maróti, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4716–4727 RSC .
R. C. Prince and H. S. Kheshgi, Crit. Rev. Microbiol., 2005, 31, 19–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17064 CrossRef .
H. Wang, G. Wu, H. Cao, C. Pistidda, A.-L. Chaudhary, S. Garroni, M. Dornheim and P. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602456 CrossRef .
C. Lang, Y. Jia and X. Yao, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 290–312 CrossRef .
U. Khan, T. Yamamoto and H. Sato, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 30698–30717 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jenn, J. H. Lee, S. Hardman and G. Tal, Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract., 2020, 132, 97–109 CrossRef .
A. R. Campbell, T. Ryley and R. Thring, Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract., 2012, 46, 1318–1327 CrossRef .
B. L. Madhavan and M. Venkat Ratnam, Sol. Energy, 2021, 223, 351–366 CrossRef .
P. Qiao, M. Lei, S. Yang, J. Yang, G. Guo and X. Zhou, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2018, 25, 15597–15608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee00342bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Hydrogen is a dense and clean energy carrier with the potential to mitigate global warming. Algae-based photobiological hydrogen represents a sustainable and promising route for green hydrogen production that can reduce our reliance on fossil fuels toward carbon-neutral Earth. State-of-the-art science research in this area is drawing increasing attention, particularly in the feasibility of its large-scale production. Various pathways for bioH2 production and mechanisms for improving the performance of different algae have been disclosed with both pros and cons. Thanks to the unremitting efforts from the vast scientific community, the advances and breakthroughs of cutting-edge technologies and innovative strategies provide a wealth of opportunities to overcome the critical issues to fulfill the goal of sustained bioH2 production. This article revisited the theoretical bioH2 limit and proposed a new level, summarized typical species and the differing H2-evolving pathways with a highlight of recent outstanding achievements, proposed a novel scenario of bioH2 production with a comparison with the largest photovoltaic H2 plant in the world, and made a global spatiotemporal dynamic map. This article provides a comprehensive perspective for further research in the future that algae will play a pivotal role in unpacking the energy–environment–food nexus given the produced biomass.


Green algae	
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
11,15
	(1) Nutrient deprivation:11,15,16 S–, N–, P–, Mg– and CO2–; (2) acclimation to hypoxia;17 (3) O2 removal;9 (4) imbalance of the photosystem ratio18	H2: 250 μl ml−1 in total during 96 h11	Direct biophotolysis: 2H2O + Fd(OX) + light → O2 + 4H+ + Fd(red)(4e−); 4H+ + Fd(red)(4e−) → 2H2 + Fd(OX); indirect biophotolysis: 12H2O + 6CO2 → C6H12O6 + 6O2; C6H12O6 + 6H2O → 6CO2 + 12H2	BioH2 production from water and sunlight; CO2 reduction in the environment; [FeFe]-hydrogenases accept lower-potential e− than [NiFe]-hydrogenases in cyanobaceria19	Poor growth in open ponds; sensitive to irradiance; low number of transgenes to regulate expression11	Oxygen inhibition; low energy conversion efficiency to H2

	
Chlorella pyrenoidosa
20
	
	H2: 40 μl ml−1 in total during 200 h20	
	
	Difficult harvest due to small cells; the nuclear genome remains to be sequenced20	


	
Chlorococcum minutum
9
	
	H2: 3 μmol (mg Chl)−1 in total during 24 h9	
	
	Continuous consumption of chemical oxygen scavengers9	

Cyano-bacteria	
Anabaena variabilis
16
	
	H2: 167.6 μmol (mg Chl a)−1 h−116	Direct biophotolysis: 2H2O + Fd(OX) + light → O2 + 4H+ + Fd(red)(4e−); 4H+ + Fd(red)(4e−) → 2H2 + Fd(OX); indirect biophotolysis: N2 + 8H+ + Fd(red)(8e−) + 16ATP → 2NH3 + H2 + Fd(OX) + 16ADP + 16Pi; 8H+ + 8e− + 16ATP→ 4H2 + 16ADP + 16Pi; 12H2O + 6CO2 → C6H12O6 + O2; C6H12O6 + 6H2O → 6CO2 + 12H2	BioH2 production from water and sunlight; CO2 reduction in the environment; BioH2 production is separated from O2 production	Nutrient starvation (e.g. N– or C–)16	Oxygen inhibition; consumption of H2 by uptake of hydrogenase; low energy conversion efficiency to H2

	
Anabaena sp.21	
	H2: 90.4 μmol (mg Chl a)−1 h−121	
	
	Algal culture needed to be transferred to nitrogen-limited medium21	


	
Nostoc sp.22	
	H2: 18.78 μmol (mg Chl a)−1 h−122	
	
	Large genome sizes ranging from 7 to 10 Mbp; the majority of biosynthetic gene clusters are currently orphan23	


	
Synechocystis sp.24	
	H2: 40.6 μmol (mg Chl a)−1 h−124	
	
	Approximately 45% of genes have no assigned function; shear-sensitive23	


 	Fig. 1  Theoretical bioH2 limit28 (A) and the method of truncation30,31 or dynamical regulation33 of light-harvesting antenna size with the potential to reduce or bypass the non-photochemical energy loss (B).	 

 	Fig. 2  Primary pathways for biophoto-H2 production in live algal cells. (A) H2 energy derived from PSII under hypoxic conditions. The metabolic pathways of A, B, and C indicate the competing routes of electrons for H2 production.34 (B) H2 energy derived from PSI by carbohydrate degradation through the respiration system. A photosynthetic electron flow inhibitor such as DCMU can be used to block the PSII pathway to avoid the competition of yielded O2. Electrons can be converted to H2 by hydrogenases (route A) or directly harvested by an external graphite electrode (route B).35 (C) H2 production in heterocyst cells of cyanobacteria and energy derived from the fixed carbon or sucrose imported from the adjacent vegetative cells.36 Red arrows represent the electron flow towards H2 production. LHC – Light harvesting complex; OEC – oxygen-evolving complex; PSII and PSI – photosystems II and I, respectively; PQ – plastoquinone; FlvA and FlvB – flavodiiron protein A and B, respectively; PC – plastocyanin; Fd – ferredoxin; Cytb6f – cytochrome b6f complex; G3P – glyceraldehyde 3 phosphate; TCA – tricarboxylic acid cycle.	 

S-Deficiency11–13	Increase the hydrogenase expression and activity; inhibit the oxygen-evolving complex and supply electrons to PSII	Degradation of photosynthetic complexes and apparatus; low inherent energy conversion efficiency
Immobilization 46,47	Easy access to light; maximum rate of H2 production: 1.18 μmol (mg DW)−1 h−1	Nutrient deprivation is needed; noticeable oxidative stress can be induced at high light intensities
Preliminarily anaerobic incubation at low light intensity20	Avoid sulfur depletion; sustainable production of H2 for 200 h	Inhibited by increased oxygen with the concentration of acetate and the light intensity
Preliminarily anaerobic incubation with acetate removal and an O2-absorbent10	Ability to make use of high light intensity; yield 200 μl H2 per ml of culture (∼18.3 mg Chl) in 96 h, almost 4-fold higher than that with S-deficiency	A dark anaerobic incubation is needed for the recovery of H2
Engineering a robust chemoenzymatic cascade system48	Avoid sulfur depletion; stable production of H2 for nearly a month; cell flocculation for easy harvest; the average rate of H2 production: 0.44 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1	Two chemzymes are needed; near-neutral pH is required for maintaining the system; the H2 production efficiency needs further improvement
Short strong light pulses34	Avoid S-deficiency; without acetate; sustained H2 production for at least three days; maximum rate of H2 production: 25 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1	H2 production declines with time and its long-term running needs further investigation
Cycles of 2 minutes light and 3 minutes darkness under mixotrophic conditions49	The average rate of H2 production: 49 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1; maximum rate of H2 production: 150 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1 (irradiance: 370 μE m−2 s−1)	The long-term operation needs further investigation
Metabolic engineering, e.g. introduction of an endogenous microRNA (miRNA1166.1)38	Avoid S-deficiency; yield up to 6 μl H2 per ml of gas samples in 50 h with three cycles of heating–recovery	Repeated heat induction at 40 °C and recovery at 22 °C is needed
Introduction of the C12P mutation in HupS from the uptake hydrogenase41	Elimination of hydrogen uptake; H2 production: ∼1.1–1.3 μmol (mg Chl a)−1 h−1	Investigations are needed to understand the structural, spectroscopic, redox, and catalytic properties
PSI–hydrogenase (PsaD-HoxYH) fusion complex44	Uptake of H2 eliminated; an improved mean rate of lasting H2 production from 0.09 to 0.79 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1 for wild and mutant, respectively	Cell growth is inhibited; H2 productivity is not high enough; scalability and long-term stability need further investigation
Porous translucent electrodes23	Rapid photo-response times; electroactive for at least several days without light bleaching; O2 reduction at the anode does not compete with the collection of electrons; current: 11.5 mA m−2	Scalability and long-term stability need further investigation
Graphite electrodes with a microfluidizer35	Higher electric currents; hydrogen production at a bias of 0.65 V; an average rate of H2 production: 3.5 μmol (mg Chl)−1 h−1; current: 300–400 mA m−2	Scalability and long-term stability need further investigation

 	Fig. 3  Outdoor algal bioH2 production. A pilot of a 50-L horizontal tubular photobioreactor used for outdoor experiments (insert: the degasser),53 copyright Elsevier (A). A large-scale design concept based on the 2 min light/3 min dark cycle method49 combined with the substrate limitation method,10 drawn by the author (B).	 


Location	Fukushima (Lat 37.76/Lon 140.47)
Insolation	4795 MJ m−2 per yeara
Total area	2.2 × 105 m2
H2 yield (EEC%)	900 t per year (12.2%b)
Facilities area	1.8 × 105 m2 (PV) + 0.4 × 105 m2 (E-H2)	2 × 105 m2 (bio-H2) + 0.2 × 105 m2 (HSP)
Facility efficiency	20% PV + 74.5% E-H2	14.1% bio-H2 + 95% HSP
Additional benefits	—	2920 t per year biomassc

 	Fig. 4  Global spatiotemporal dynamic map of the bioH2 production potential from algae on the basis of insolation and 14.1% of H2 energy conversion efficiency that can be reached in the literature and comparable to the photovoltaic electrolysis method. The insolation data is the incoming solar radiance sourced from the Clouds and the Earth's Radiant Energy System (CERES) project with an average between 2005–2015.62	 

Learmonth Australia	Lat −22.207 Lon 114.0383	29.39	13.99	22.36	8162.42
Yuma United States	Lat 32.6854 Lon −114.6244	29.71	11.82	21.37	7799.65
Kisumu Kenya	Lat −0.0982 Lon 34.7676	22.93	19.13	21.08	7696.00
Hawaii United States	Lat 21.4808 Lon −157.9107	25.13	14.27	20.23	7385.05
Magdalena Columbia	Lat 9.343 Lon −74.0962	20.55	17.25	19.20	7009.32
Trivandrum India	Lat 8.5595 Lon 76.8965	22.15	17.18	18.96	6918.62
Beijing China	Lat 39.7517 Lon 116.4632	20.59	7.88	14.02	5117.71
Guangzhou China	Lat 23.1166 Lon 113.2502	17.82	9.48	13.20	4819.72
Fukushima Japan	Lat 37.761 Lon 140.4737	18.42	6.99	12.96	4729.02
Poltavka Russia	Lat 54.8144 Lon 21.32	20.20	1.53	10.61	3873.91
Punta Arenas Chile	Lat −53.1536 Lon −70.9002	19.20	1.85	9.76	3562.96
Bagaskar Finland	Lat 59.9138 Lon 24.0386	20.48	0.64	9.76	3562.96
	(1)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee00342b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
