Elementary processes and limiting factors in hybrid polymer / nanoparticle solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00181C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00181C
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1682-1694Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsElementary processes and limiting factors in hybrid polymer/nanoparticle solar cells†

        
          
            Holger 
            Borchert
          
          
        
      *
      University of Oldenburg, Department of Physics, Energy and Semiconductor Research Laboratory, Carl-von-Ossietzky-Str. 9-11, 26129, Oldenburg, Germany. E-mail: holger.borchert@uni-oldenburg.de
Received 
      23rd June 2010
    , Accepted 6th August 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      11th October 2010
    AbstractSemiconductor nanoparticles are promising for use as electron acceptors in polymer-based bulk heterojunction solar cells. Potential advantages over fullerene derivates that are widely used in organic photovoltaics are tuneable absorption properties and the possibility to use elongated nanoparticles for more efficient electron transport. Despite these advantages, efficiencies obtained with hybrid polymer/nanoparticle solar cells are still below those of state-of-the-art polymer/fullerene solar cells. This Perspective summarises the achievements in the field of hybrid solar cells, compares the knowledge on elementary processes in hybrid and organic systems and points out the most recent trends in research. The design of the polymer nanoparticle/interface by the choice of capping ligands and development of appropriate surface treatments for the nanoparticles plays an important role, and recent progress opens new perspectives for the future improvement of hybrid solar cells.
Holger Borchert
Holger Borchert studied physics in Hamburg and Paris and obtained his PhD in 2003 from the University of Hamburg (Germany), where he investigated surface properties of semiconductor nanoparticles in the group of Prof. Dr. Weller. Afterwards, he went to the Boreskov Institute of Catalysis in Novosibirsk/Russia, and later continued research on nanostructured catalysts at the universities of Oldenburg and Bremen (Germany). In 2007, he moved to the group of Prof. Dr. Parisi at the University of Oldenburg, where he is now in charge of the subdivision for hybrid photovoltaics and in parallel continues activities in the field of heterogeneous catalysis.

Broader context
Colloidal semiconductor nanoparticles are of strong interest for many fields of application because of their physical and chemical properties which become tuneable in the nanometre size regime. This review focuses on the usability of colloidal nanoparticles for hybrid polymer/nanoparticle solar cells. This is a subfield of organic, polymer-based solar cells, photovoltaic technology that is now operating at a level sufficient to enter the market. So far, a real benefit from the tuneable properties related to nanoparticles could not be realized in polymer-based solar cells, because new difficulties arise in comparison to purely organic solar cells. These difficulties relate, for example, to surface states inducing charge carrier traps as well as to the lack of advanced procedures for obtaining suitable blend morphologies. These findings on elementary processes such as charge carrier generation and recombination reviewed here should also be of interest for other potential applications of semiconductor nanoparticles in organic electronics, e.g. light-emitting diodes based on quantum dots.

1. Introduction
The world-wide growing energy demand and the limited resources of fossil fuels have caused at present rapidly increasing research efforts on alternative energy sources, among which photovoltaics is one of the key technologies. Nowadays, the photovoltaics market is still dominated by solar cells based on crystalline silicon, with efficiencies of over 20% and high life-times,1,2 but various thin film technologies have been developed as well, e.g. solar cells based on semiconductors with chalcopyrite structure such as Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2,3,4 solar cells based on amorphous and microcrystalline silicon,3 and organic solar cells based on conductive polymers.5,6 Organic photovoltaics (OPV) is an approach with a particularly high potential for low-cost production, because processing of the materials from solution allows for using technologies such as printing techniques and roll-to-roll processes.5,7,8 However, efficiencies and life-times of organic solar cells are still comparably low, which limits their large-scale application. Whereas extensive research was devoted to steadily improving the efficiency of OPV devices into the range of 5–8%,9–12 systematic studies on the long-term stability of organic solar cells are more rare so far and not always easily comparable due to different measurement conditions.13–16 To give an indication, some recent studies reported ∼10–20% efficiency loss in accelerated aging tests after 1000–1500 h of continuous illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 at elevated temperatures of 50–70 °C.13,16 The degradation mechanisms in organic solar cells are complex, chemical degradation induced by the diffusion of oxygen and water into the devices being one of the main processes.15 For this reason, research on efficient encapsulation technologies is an important subfield of OPV.15,17

Fig. 1 illustrates the working principle of a polymer-based bulk heterojunction solar cell. Basically, a disordered blend of two phases of different materials, the so-called “bulk heterojunction” (BHJ), is sandwiched between two electrodes, one of them being transparent. Additionally, material layers transporting holes or electrons only may be inserted between the BHJ and the electrodes.18–20 Conjugated polymers have high absorption coefficients (of the order of ∼105 cm−1 at the absorption maximum21) and constitute the main light absorber in this type of solar cell. The blended materials in the BHJ form a so-called “donor/acceptor system”. Typical donor materials are conjugated polymers such as derivates of polythiophene, e.g. poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), or different types of polyphenylenevinylene (PPV); typical acceptor materials are fullerene derivates such as [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). In the donor/acceptor system, light absorption by the polymer (electron donor) leads to the creation of an exciton. If the exciton diffuses to the interface, the electron can be transferred to the acceptor component which needs to have a higher electron affinity (i.e. a lower-lying LUMO level) than the donor.6 In contrast, the hole stays in the polymer phase because of a lower ionization potential (i.e. a higher-lying HOMO level).6 This charge transfer process is an important elementary step in the conversion of sunlight into electricity.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of a bulk heterojunction solar cell. Left side: typical device architecture; right side: energy scheme illustrating the charge separation process at the donor/acceptor interface. 
After successful charge separation the electrons and holes need to be transported to the respective electrodes, which requires the existence of so-called percolation pathways. Hole transport should occur through the polymer phase network, and electron transport should occur along the acceptor molecule chains, e.g. PCBM molecules.6,22 State-of-the-art organic bulk heterojunction solar cells currently reach efficiencies of 5–8%.9–12
The reasons for the limited efficiency of organic BHJ solar cells are complex. One limiting factor is given by the quite narrow absorption bands of typical polymers such as P3HT and the poor absorption properties of typical acceptor materials such as PCBM, which almost does not absorb in the visible range.23 For example in P3HT/PCBM films, the absorption coefficient goes to zero above ∼650 nm,23 meaning that transmission losses are much higher than in silicon solar cells. The theoretical limit for the efficiency of organic BHJ solar cells is, however, not only dependent on the band gaps of the two materials. The absolute position of the HOMO and LUMO levels with respect to the vacuum level is important as well, as it could be demonstrated that the energy difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor largely governs the open circuit voltage.24,25 Scharber et al. calculated efficiency limits for BHJ solar cells as a function of the donor band gap and the offset between the LUMO levels of donor and acceptor.25 Making assumptions for the external quantum efficiency and fill factor (in order to take account e.g. for thermalization and transport losses), a maximum efficiency of ∼11% was predicted for a donor band gap of ∼1.5 eV and a LUMO offset of 0.3 eV.25,26 Higher efficiency limits of ∼15% were predicted for organic tandem solar cells consisting of two BHJ cells with donor band gaps of 1.3 eV and 1.6 eV, respectively.26 For these reasons, research on low band-gap materials for OPV is currently a hot research topic.25–29
Another approach to improve the performance of polymer-based solar cells is to replace the organic acceptor, e.g. the poorly absorbing PCBM, by colloidally prepared semiconductor nanoparticles which can serve as alternative electron acceptors. Such organic–inorganic hybrid solar cells based on bulk heterojunctions of conductive polymer and semiconductor nanoparticles are in the focus of this review. Whereas a large number of reviews has been published on different aspects and progress in OPV,5,6,22,26,30–34 comparably few review articles have appeared on hybrid polymer/nanoparticle solar cells,35–40 and more recent developments opening new perspectives for this field will be reviewed here. Special attention will be paid to the elementary processes and limiting factors in comparison to organic BHJ solar cells.
2. Bulk heterojunction solar cells based on semiconductor nanoparticles and conductive polymers
2.1. Tuneable light absorption in semiconductor nanocrystals
Semiconductor nanocrystals possess physical and chemical properties that can significantly differ from those of the corresponding bulk material.41–45 One of the most impressive examples is the increase of the band gap with decreasing particle size which is observed at crystallite sizes below ∼10 nm.41 This phenomenon, the so-called quantum size effect, has its origin in the quantization energy which electrons and holes acquire according to the particle-in-a-box model, if they are confined in a small volume. Additionally, the exciton Bohr radius, i.e. the mean distance between the electron and the hole of an exciton, is of the order of a few nanometres in many semiconductors. Restricting this distance by a small particle size to a lower value than in the bulk material causes an additional change of the band gap. The simplest treatment of both effects (assuming the charge carriers in a spherical potential with infinite walls) leads to the following size-dependence of the band gap, or more precisely, of the energy of the lowest excited state:46–48  where Eg is the band gap of the bulk material, μ is the reduced mass of the electron–hole pair (to be calculated from the effective masses of the electron and hole) and R is the radius of the nanoparticle.
Due to the quantum size effect the absorption and emission properties of semiconductor nanoparticles can be tuned over a wide range by controlling the particle size. Fig. 2 shows as an example the tuneable absorption of colloidal CdSe nanocrystals. The position of the first absorption maximum shifts from ∼400 nm to ∼680 nm for particle diameters from ∼1.5 nm to ∼9 nm.49,50 In the case of CdTe nanocrystals, the first absorption maximum shifts from ∼550 nm to ∼750 nm when the particle size is varied from ∼3 nm to ∼9 nm.49 CuInS2 nanocrystals absorb light up to ∼800–900 nm,51 and the absorption of lead chalcogenides extends further into the IR region, e.g. for PbSe the first excitonic absorption peak shifts from ∼1050 nm to ∼1650 nm in the size range from ∼3–5.5 nm.52
 Fig. 2  Size-dependent absorption of colloidal CdSe nanocrystals: UV-Vis spectra (a), a TEM image with the corresponding histogram (b), and the correlation between the particle diameter and the position of the first absorption maximum (c). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.) 
In conclusion from this selection of examples, a wide spectral range can be covered by the choice of material and particle size. In conjunction with high extinction coefficients (e.g. reaching ∼105 cm−1 at 350 nm for CdSe50), this makes semiconductor nanocrystals attractive materials for light harvesting devices. Note also at this point that tuning the particle size not only offers the possibility to modify the band gap for improved absorption, but also has potential to increase the open circuit voltage which is influenced by the absolute position of the acceptor's LUMO level. Huynh et al. could demonstrate the second effect in solar cells with P3HT and two types of CdSe nanorods with different dimensions.53
2.2. Overview over polymer/nanoparticle solar cells
In this section, an overview will be given of the history and the material combinations that have been examined so far to obtain operating hybrid solar cells, before the following sections will go into detail and focus on elementary processes, limiting factors and strategies for improvement of the performance.
In a pioneering work in 1996 by Greenham, Peng and Alivisatos, colloidal CdS and CdSe nanocrystals were studied for the first time as light-harvesting component in polymer-based solar cells.54 The nanoparticles were blended with poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-p-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV), either with a ligand shell of trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) or with the ligands exchanged by pyridine. We note here that relatively long organic ligands such as TOPO are frequently used in colloidal chemistry to obtain a high degree of control over the size and shape of the nanoparticles. Photoluminescence quenching experiments indicated successful charge transfer after ligand exchange, and the first hybrid solar cells could be successfully fabricated, although the power conversion efficiency was only ∼0.1%.54 Quasi-spherical CdSe nanocrystals with the ligand shell exchanged with pyridine were later also blended with P3HT by Alivisatos and co-workers, and after optimization of various preparation parameters hybrid solar cells exhibited an external quantum efficiency (EQE) approaching 20% in the range from 400 nm to 600 nm, corresponding to a power conversion efficiency of about ∼0.5%.55 Similar efficiencies were also obtained by other groups for quasi-spherical CdSe nanoparticles in combination with MEH-PPV and P3HT.56
As another advantage of using nanoparticles as electron acceptors, it was recognized that the possibility to fabricate elongated nanocrystals has potential for improving electron transport by reducing the number of hopping steps.55,57 With CdSe nanorods and P3HT, solar cells having an EQE around ∼50% from 400–600 nm and an efficiency of 1.7% were successfully prepared.55 In that work it was also demonstrated that the absorption range was extended to ∼720 nm by using CdSe nanoparticles, i.e. beyond the range covered by the P3HT/PCBM system.55 Further improvement was achieved by using tetrapod-shaped CdSe nanocrystals with pyridine ligands. Whereas nanorods can be preferentially oriented parallel to the substrate, tetrapods always have an extension perpendicular to the substrate, which results in a stronger effect on the electron transport. In 2005, devices with CdSe tetrapods were reported to have efficiencies up to 2.8%,58 which is so far the highest efficiency obtained for polymer/CdSe hybrid solar cells. Using hyperbranched CdSe nanocrystals did not lead to further improvement,59 probably because the less-defined particle shape implies a lower degree of control over the blend morphology.
Concerning quasi-spherical CdSe nanoparticles, Han et al. improved the efficiency of bulk heterojunction solar cells up to ∼1% for MEH-PPV/CdSe and P3HT/CdSe, still following the strategy to apply a ligand exchange with pyridine.60Fig. 3 shows a typical current–voltage curve for such hybrid solar cells with pyridine-treated, quasi-spherical CdSe nanoparticles. Very recently, further progress was made by using other ligands than pyridine. Butylamine-capped quasi-spherical CdSe nanoparticles yielded 1.8% in combination with P3HT,61 and 2.0% were reported for P3HT/CdSe solar cells, where the initial ligand shell consisting of hexadecylamine was treated with hexanoic acid.62 These promising strategies for surface modification of the nanoparticles will be discussed in more detail later.
 Fig. 3  Current density-voltage (J–V) characteristic of a bulk heterojunction solar cell based on a 1:8 (weight ratio) blend of MEH-PPV and pyridine-treated, quasi-spherical CdSe nanoparticles under AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2006 IOP Publishing Ltd.). 
Other semiconductors than CdSe were examined for their use in hybrid solar cells as well. CdTe has an absorption extending more into the NIR region, and fairly uniform CdTe tetrapods can be synthesized by colloidal chemistry, making this material in principle more attractive for solar cells than CdSe. However, attempts to prepare P3HT/CdTe solar cells resulted in very low device performance.63,64 A systematic study of solar cells based on MEH-PPV and CdSexTe1−x tetrapods revealed that pure CdSe gives the best results, while cells with pure CdTe nanoparticles did not work well (efficiency below 0.1%).65 The reason is not fully clear, but is likely to be related to non-suitable alignment of energy levels. In some studies, the absolute position of the valence band of CdTe nanoparticles was determined (e.g. by cyclic voltammetry) to be around −5 eV and thus very close to the HOMO level of the widely used polymers P3HT and MEH-PPV, so that energy transfer can occur instead of charge separation.65 However, there is a lot of scatter in literature values for the valence band position of CdTe nanoparticles. Some sources report also values around −5.5 eV66 which should be suitable for charge separation in combination with polymers such as P3HT or PPV, and there is also a report on poly(3-octylthiophene)/CdTe solar cells reaching efficiencies of ∼1% and thus providing evidence that polymer/CdTe systems may be useful for hybrid solar cells.67 Although not in the focus of this review, it is noteworthy that all inorganic solar cells based on a bilayer junction of colloidally prepared CdSe and CdTe nanoparticles were successfully prepared as well and reached efficiencies of 2.9%, i.e. as high values as the best polymer/CdSe solar cells.68
Other promising candidates for hybrid solar cells are CuInS2 and CuInSe2 nanoparticles, because the absorption extends into the NIR and because of the success of these materials in inorganic thin film photovoltaics. Arici et al. were the first to study polymer/nanoparticle solar cells based on these materials, but efficiencies were far below 1%.35,69,70 However, the nanoparticles used in those studies were not as defined in size and shape as is usually possible by colloidal chemistry. More recently, colloidal synthesis methods for high-quality CuInS2 nanocrystals were developed,71,72 bringing up the question, whether colloidal CuInS2 nanoparticles with well-defined size and shape are suitable for the preparation of hybrid solar cells that can at least compete with the polymer/CdSe system. CuInS2 nanoparticles have also been proven to be suitable for solution-processed inorganic solar cells, where efficiencies up to 4% were reported.73
Another class of materials that attracted attention for application in hybrid solar cells are lead chalcogenides. First, these materials absorb in the infrared region, which would strongly enhance the spectral range of the solar radiation that is used for energy conversion. Additionally, thermalization losses after absorption of high-energy photons may be reduced, because the interesting phenomenon of multiple exciton generation can occur in these materials.74–76 In this process an exciton created by absorption of light with an energy exceeding the double of the band gap can relax by impact ionization. In this case, energy is transferred to another valence electron and a second electron–hole pair is created.75,77 For PbSe it was predicted by theoretical calculations that up to 7 excitons can be created by absorption of a single photon.75 Using transient absorption spectroscopy, Nozik and co-workers recently gave experimental proof for the generation of up to 2.4 excitons per incident photon in films of PbSe nanocrystals.78 This phenomenon provides solar cells based on lead chalcogenides a high potential for reducing thermalization losses, but it is of course not evident if more than one electron–hole pair can be extracted. So far, there is only one report claiming the successful exploitation of multiple carrier generation in MEH-PPV/PbSe solar cells by the observation of EQE values up to ∼150%.79 However, this result was doubted by other authors,40 and the general opinion is that extracting more than one electron–hole pair per incident photon due to multiple carrier generation in solar cells is still an unreached goal.76,78 Multiple carrier generation can also occur in CdSe,75 and recently Matylitsky et al. reported that 4 electron–hole pairs can be separated in blends of CdSe nanocrystals and the molecular electron acceptor methylviologen.80 The results appear promising, but the benefits of multiple carrier generation in CdSe-based solar cells have not been demonstrated so far.
There are only few reports on polymer/PbSe solar cells.79,81 Jiang et al. compared P3HT and MEH-PPV as polymers in combination with PbSe nanocrystals in the size range of 4–10 nm. The energy level alignment as measured by cyclic voltammetry was found to be a critical issue, because the valence band of PbSe is close to the HOMO level of the polymer, meaning that charge separation is not evident. P3HT was found to give better results, but also in this case the photocurrents were low and the device efficiency was below 0.1%.81 On the other hand, it must be mentioned that PbSe nanocrystals turned out to be suitable for inorganic nanoparticle-based solar cells, where a solution-processed nanoparticle layer was used instead of a polymer/nanoparticle bulk heterojunction and efficiencies up to 3.6% were reported.82–84
Hybrid solar cells based on PbS nanocrystals capped with octylamine ligands were studied in combination with MEH-PPV by Sargent and co-workers in 2005, but the devices suffered from rather low photocurrents.85,86 Watt et al. synthesized PbS nanoparticles directly in MEH-PPV, i.e. without additional surfactants.87 Using these composites, promising efficiencies of 0.7% could be achieved for a polymer/PbS system.87 Günes et al. and Seo et al. later examined the P3HT/PbS system, but also here the efficiencies were only 0.01%, mainly due to very low photocurrent.88,89 Similar to PbSe, also PbS nanocrystals turned out to be suitable for inorganic nanoparticle-based solar cells,90 and Ma et al. could recently demonstrate that PbSxSe1−x solid solutions yield better results than the pure PbS or PbSe materials.90
Wide bandgap semiconductors such as ZnO and TiO2 have the disadvantage that they cannot absorb most of the sunlight, but these oxide materials were studied in hybrid solar cells as well. Beek et al. reported on MDMO-PPV/ZnO and P3HT/ZnO solar cells and obtained efficiencies up to 1.6%.91,92 This is a remarkable result: Although ZnO is a much less efficient absorber of sunlight than semiconductors like CdSe, power conversion efficiencies are comparable to those obtained so far with hybrid solar cells based on quasi-spherical CdSe nanoparticles. This can also be interpreted as a clear sign that light absorption is not the most crucial factor limiting the efficiency of hybrid solar cells at present. Furthermore, ZnO and TiO2 can be grown as vertically oriented arrays of nanowires,93–98e.g. by electrochemical methods97 or by thermal evaporation.96 The dimensions of such nanowire arrays are currently still too large to enable obtaining efficient solar cells by filling the structures with polymer. However, success was achieved when filling arrays of ZnO nanowires97,99 or arrays of TiO2 nanotubes100 with P3HT/PCBM blends, where efficiencies reaching 2.4% and 4.1% were reported, respectively. An interesting approach was also presented by Greene et al. who prepared arrays of ZnO nanorods with a TiO2 shell and infiltrated the structures with P3HT. Device efficiencies were below 1%, but a positive effect of the TiO2 shell could be demonstrated.95
Finally, there are also a few reports on other semiconductors that have been used to fabricate polymer/nanoparticle solar cells. Novotny et al. prepared hybrid solar cells based on an InP nanowire array filled in with P3HT, the system showing a photoresponse, but the current density still being very low.101 Recently, Liu et al. obtained 1.15% efficiency with P3HT/Si solar cells.102 This work also demonstrated the possibilities of tuning the device performance by controlling the nanoparticle size. Smaller particles (in the range of 3–5 nm) gave the best results because of a more suitable relative alignment of the energy levels in the donor and acceptor.102
2.3. Charge separation in polymer/nanoparticle donor/acceptor blends
Charge separation at the donor/acceptor interface is a fundamental elementary step in the energy conversion in a bulk heterojunction solar cell. With respect to semiconductor nanoparticles as electron acceptors two main questions arise: First, are the energy levels appropriate to form a donor/acceptor system in conjunction with conductive polymer? And second, how do the nanoparticle surface and an eventually present ligand shell influence the charge transfer process?
The position of energy levels in polymer and semiconductor nanoparticles has been studied by cyclic voltammetry (CV).65,81,84,103–106 CV measurements are relatively easy to perform, but not always easy to interpret unambiguously. For example, it is still under debate whether the onset or the peak potentials should be used to determine the electron affinity (conduction band or LUMO position) and the ionization potential (valence band or HOMO position).106 Furthermore, in some cases, in particular for semiconductor nanoparticles, the oxidation and reduction peaks are not both similarly well pronounced.81,103 These and other effects introduce uncertainties into the values derived from CV measurements and lead to some degree of scatter between values reported for the same substance by different groups. For example, values reported for the HOMO level of P3HT vary between −4.76 eV107 and −5.24 eV.27 Especially in cases like the MEH-PPV/CdTe65 or P3HT/PbSe system,81 where the donor and acceptor have energy levels that are quite close to each other, such uncertainties become very critical to predict whether the material combination forms an operating donor/acceptor system or not. Therefore, it is at least advisable to measure the energy levels of both the donor and the acceptor within one study.
Another issue of CV measurements that is not fully understood yet is that many authors observed discrepancies between the electrochemically determined band gap and the band gap that can, for example, be derived from the onset of absorption spectra.107,108 Concerning CV measurements of nanoparticles, considerable work was done by Kucur et al.103,104,106 For example the electron affinity and ionization potential of CdSe nanoparticles of different size were determined and reasonable agreement between the electrochemical and optical band gaps was obtained when using the peak potentials in the CV data and the absorption onsets in the UV-Vis data.103 Recently, Markus et al. compared energy level positions for CdSe nanocrystals as measured by CV and by photoemission spectroscopy as a more sophisticated method.109 Reasonable agreement was found, but as an interesting result the authors observed that the valence band became independent of the particle size due to a pinning effect when the nanoparticles were measured on an Au substrate.109 This points out that interactions with a substrate may also influence the electrochemical measurements when studying thin films.
In conclusion from these considerations, measuring the energy levels by CV is a suitable estimation approach, if a material combination can be an operating donor/acceptor system, but more direct methods to study the charge transfer process itself are necessary to confirm the usability. Appropriate methods for this purpose are photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy, photo-induced absorption (PIA) spectroscopy and light-induced electron spin resonance (L-ESR). Because of its simplicity, PL spectroscopy is widely used.54,110 Pure conductive polymers such as P3HT or PPV have a strong PL, and if its intensity is quenched in the presence of nanoparticles, this is an indication for successful transfer of the excited electron to the acceptor material. However, if the absorption spectrum of the acceptor overlaps with the PL spectrum of the donor polymer, one cannot conclude from this technique alone, if only the electron is transferred (desired process) or if the entire electron–hole pair is transferred by Förster resonance energy transfer.54
A suitable method to distinguish between charge separation and Förster transfer is PIA spectroscopy. This method compares the absorption of the sample in the ground state and after light-excitation, Fig. 4 illustrates the working principle. Usually, a laser source is used to excite the polymer. If light absorption in the polymer is then followed by electron transfer to the acceptor, a hole is left on the polymer and a positive polaron is formed which has energy levels lying inside the band gap.111,112 If the absorption is measured now, additional transitions involving the polaron levels can be detected (labelled P1 and P2 in Fig. 4). The appearance of these bands in the PIA spectra give a clear indication of the formation of positive polarons in the polymer and therefore for successful charge separation at the donor/acceptor interface.113 Apart from transitions between polaron levels, PIA spectra can also contain bleaching bends (reduced absorption due to depletion of the ground state) as well as bands indicative for triplet states (if intersystem crossing occurs after creation of a singlet exciton, probing the absorption will comprise transitions to higher triplet states).113
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the working principle of photoinduced absorption (PIA) spectroscopy. 
Van Hal et al. studied charge transfer at the interface between different polymers and films of TiO2 nanoparticles, Fig. 5 showing as an example the PIA spectrum for MEH-PPV/TiO2.113 The PIA signals at 0.52 eV and 1.53 eV were assigned to the P1 and P2 transitions and the negative band at 2.38 eV to bleaching of the π–π* absorption. Electron transfer to the TiO2 was also observed with P3HT as polymer, where the P1 and P2 transitions were found at 0.38 eV and 1.27 eV, respectively. In that study, clear proof was given that the occurrence of positive polarons is really due to charge transfer at the donor/acceptor interface, because spectra of pure TiO2 as well as pure P3HT on glass did not show the P1 and P2 peaks.113 It is also noteworthy in this place that in regioregular P3HT the formation of ordered lamellae by π–π stacking can lead to shifts of the HOMO and LUMO levels as well as of the polaron levels, so that a pair of transitions corresponding to delocalized polarons (DP1 and DP2) can appear in addition to the P1 and P2 transitions.114,115 For pure P3HT films another band was observed in several studies at ∼1.06 eV which was assigned to a transition between triplet states after intersystem crossing.92,113 As an alternative interpretation this band was assigned by Österbacka et al. to singlet interchain excitons, i.e. excitons with the electron and hole not on the same polymer chain.114
 Fig. 5  PIA spectrum of MEH-PPV on a film of TiO2 nanoparticles showing two polaron bands at 0.52 and 1.53 eV as well as a bleaching band at 2.38 eV. The spectrum was recorded at 80 K utilizing a 2.54 eV (488 nm, 25 mW) excitation beam and a modulation frequency of 275 Hz. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 1999 American Chemical Society.) 
PIA spectroscopy was also used to study charge transfer in polymer/ZnO,92,116 polymer/CdSe,110,117–119 polymer/InP117 and polymer/PbSe118 hybrid systems, the polymers being either PPV derivates or P3HT in these studies. With ZnO, CdSe and InP indications for charge separation were observed by the appearance of the P1 and P2 transitions. In the case of PbSe, Noone et al. did not observe these polaron signatures when blending butylamine-capped PbSe nanoparticles in the size range of 3.5–6 nm with MDMO-PPV or P3HT, whereas it is mentioned in the same article that other researchers found indications for charge transfer by PIA when using pyridine-treated PbSe nanoparticles in combination with P3HT.118 Thus, charge transfer in polymer/PbSe blends is still under debate.
So far, PIA spectroscopy was discussed here as a suitable method for qualitatively examining, if charge separation and polaron generation take place in a given donor/acceptor system. Beyond this type of analysis, quantitative analysis of the spectra allows for obtaining more information on the physical processes in the blends. PIA is a modulation spectroscopy technique, where the excitation is periodically modulated with a certain frequency. Quantifying the dependence of the signal intensity on the modulation frequency then allows for extracting information on the lifetime of the detected species, because the contribution from species with lifetimes exceeding the inverse of the modulation frequency is suppressed in the PIA signal.110,119 For example, Heinemann et al. compared polaron recombination in P3HT/CdSe and P3HT/PCBM blends.119 Compared to the organic blend, significantly longer lifetimes extending into the ms regime were found for the P3HT/CdSe hybrid system. Whereas the frequency dependence of the hole polaron peak (P2 transition) could be roughly explained with a bimolecular recombination model for the P3HT/PCBM system, a dispersive model taking account for the presence of trap states was required to explain the frequency dependence in the case of the hybrid blend. This was interpreted as an indication for charge carrier trapping in the polymer/nanoparticle blend and points out an important difference between the two systems.119 Similarly long polaron lifetimes were also observed for MEH-PPV/CdSe blends by another group.110 Finally, it is noted here that PIA spectra can also be simulated. Schueppel et al. studied oligothiophenes and C60 as donor/acceptor systems and corroborated experimental PIA spectra with theoretical calculations.120
Another powerful method is ESR which is suitable to detect states with non-zero spin, such as polarons in conductive polymer as well as in acceptor molecules. Coupling an excitation source, e.g. a laser, into the sample cavity offers the possibility to compare ESR spectra in the dark and under light excitation (L-ESR). An increase of the polaron signal intensity upon light excitation then provides evidence for successful charge separation in the donor/acceptor system. This technique was successfully applied to study organic blends such as MDMO-PPV/PCBM121–123 or P3HT/PCBM.119,124,125 Since the positive polarons on the polymer and the negatively charged anion radicals of PCBM have different g-factors, both signals can be well distinguished and the increase of both signals after light excitation gave clear proof for charge separation.119,121–125
L-ESR was also used to study hybrid polymer/nanoparticle blends.117,119,126 For example, Dietmueller et al. investigated charge transfer between P3HT and Si nanocrystals with a size of ∼33 nm, Fig. 6 showing spectra measured in the dark and after illumination with a filtered light source covering the range from 340–680 nm.126 In the spectra (upper part of the figure) a signal originating from Si dangling bonds (Si-db) is visible as well as a signal corresponding to positive polarons in the P3HT phase (P+). The increase of the P+ signal after illumination provides evidence for successful charge separation at the donor/acceptor interface.126 The spectra in the lower part of the figure correspond to blends of the Si nanoparticles with PCBM, where also an increasing amount of PCBM anion radicals can be seen after light excitation.126 This result is of particular interest, because it means that semiconductor nanoparticles can in principle not only be used as electron acceptors in combination with polymer, but might also be used as donors in combination with fullerene derivates.
 Fig. 6  ESR (dashed line) and L-ESR (solid line) spectra of P3HT/Si and Si/PCBM composites measured at 5 K. The spectra of the P3HT/Si sample were scaled up by a factor of 1.8. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.) 
Charge transfer in MDMO-PPV/CdSe117 and P3HT/CdSe119 was also studied using L-ESR. Pientka et al. compared the charge transfer efficiency between MDMO-PPV and CdSe nanocrystals in the presence of a thick ligand shell (mixture of hexadecylamine, trioctylphosphine and trioctylphosphine oxide) and after ligand exchange with pyridine. The pyridine treatment was shown to enhance the intensity of the light-induced polaron signal, but the charge transfer was also not completely inhibited by the initial ligand shell in that study.117
Apart from the detection of successful charge transfer, L-ESR can also provide valuable information on the recombination kinetics of photo-generated charges. This is possible by observing the decay of the light-induced signals after switching off the excitation source. In 1999, Dyakonov et al. were the first to apply this method to MDMO-PPV/PCBM blends.121 It was found that only part of the signals from the positive and negative polarons decays fast at ∼90 K, whereas another part of the signal intensity decays very slowly and is persistent even after several hours. This persistent part of the signal was found to decay when heating the system to room temperature. As an interpretation it was concluded that part of the hole polarons get trapped in defect states due to disorder in the polymer backbone.121 Later, Schultz et al. confirmed these observations and proposed a theoretical model to describe the recombination of the persistent charge carriers.122 The basic idea of the model was to assume that the trapped charge carriers can only recombine by a tunnelling process, and the recombination rate for electrons and holes separated by the distance R was assumed to be of the following form:  where v0 is a recombination probability constant, and a is the effective localization radius describing the dimension to which the trapped charge carrier is confined. Based on this equation a complete model was developed which was indeed able to reproduce the experimentally observed decay curves.122 As a restriction, it has to be noted however, that the tunnelling probability depends in principle on both, the thickness of the tunnelling barrier (corresponding here to the parameter R) and the height of the barrier. In the proposed model the height of the energy barrier (or the depths of the trap states) is somehow hidden in the prefactor v0.122 Since a tunnelling probability can normally not be written as a product of two factors, one of them depending on the distance only and one on the barrier height only, there remains some doubt, if the proposed model is already a perfect description for the recombination process.
Heinemann et al. compared the recombination kinetics in hybrid P3HT/CdSe to organic P3HT/PCBM blends, and Fig. 7 shows the obtained decay curves.119 Here, the organic and the hybrid system were found to have different decay characteristics. Whereas the signal decays rapidly back to the dark level in the organic blend, a fast and a slow decay process are observed in the hybrid blend. The slow decay was interpreted by charge carrier trapping as in the studies discussed above. However, the depth of the trap states seemed to be deeper as in the MDMO-PPV/PCBM system, because annealing to ∼400 K was required to let the trapped charges recombine in the P3HT/CdSe system.119 Within that study, it was not possible to finally clarify if the trap states are located in the polymer phase (induced by disorder) or if there are electron traps in the nanoparticle phase so that the mobile hole polarons in the polymer cannot recombine because their recombination partners are trapped. However, comparison of the organic and the hybrid system shows that charge carrier trapping is much more pronounced in the polymer/nanoparticle blend, and it was concluded that this might be one of the reasons for the relatively limited efficiency of hybrid solar cells.119
 Fig. 7  Time evolution of the hole polaron resonance as measured in P3HT/CdSe and P3HT/PCBM by L-ESR at a laser power of 20 mW (532 nm excitation wave length), microwave power of 0.1 mW and T = 50 K. The beginning of photo-excitation is marked by *, and termination by **. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2009 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA) 
2.4. Charge transport in hybrid polymer/nanoparticle solar cells
After charge transfer at the donor/acceptor interface, the electrons and holes are still weakly bound by the Coulomb force and have to be spatially separated to prevent geminate recombination. The relatively strong attraction between the electrons and holes in organic as compared to inorganic semiconductors is due to the relatively low dielectric constants of organic material.22,32 Charge separation in polymer-based bulk heterojunction solar cells is finally achieved by diffusion of the electron and hole polarons away from the donor/acceptor interface. A broad Gaussian distribution of states in organic semiconductors implies the existence of energetically lower lying states in the neighbourhood of the interface and therefore causes a driving force for diffusion away from the interface.32 After having overcome the Coulomb attraction, the charge carriers have then to travel to the electrodes through the donor or acceptor phase, respectively. The charge transport process in organic solar cells was described by thermally assisted hopping of the charge carriers between localized states with a Gaussian distribution in energy.31,32,127
Ginger and Greenham studied charge transport in films of CdSe nanocrystals that were placed between an ITO and an Al electrode.128 They found that the conductivity is strongly temperature dependent and also in the case of CdSe nanoparticle films qualitatively compatible with the model of thermally activated hopping transport.128 This is the origin for the finding that hybrid polymer/CdSe solar cells based on elongated nanocrystals show higher performance than those with quasi-spherical quantum dots, because the number of hopping steps from nanoparticle to nanoparticle is reduced. This effect could be demonstrated initially with nanorods in comparison to quantum dots,55,57 and later, it was shown that tetrapods give the best results, because they will always have an extension into the right direction, i.e. perpendicular to the substrate.58,129
A number of studies focused on charge transport in semiconductor nanoparticle films and hybrid polymer/nanoparticle solar cells.53,128,130–134 For example, Huynh et al. modelled I–V curves for hybrid solar cells with P3HT and CdSe nanorods with a modified Shockley equation taking into account a series and shunt resistance as well as space charge effects.53 Kumari et al. also studied charge transport in P3HT/CdSe solar cells and proposed a space charge limited current (SCLC) trap model with an exponential distribution of traps in energy and space, according to which the presence of more and deeper trap states lowers the charge carrier mobility.133,134 The detrimental influence of deep trap states on charge transport was also studied in purely organic devices, e.g. in polymer diodes where a layer of P3HT or MDMO-PPV was sandwiched between two electrodes.135,136 These findings strengthen the hypothesis that trap states as evidenced by PIA and L-ESR spectroscopy (see last section) largely contribute to the limitation of the efficiency of hybrid polymer/nanoparticle solar cells.
2.5. Morphology control in polymer/nanoparticle solar cells
The morphology of the active layer is extremely important in organic solar cells, and many studies were dedicated to the characterization and control of morphology as well as to the establishment of correlations between the morphology and device performance of polymer/fullerene solar cells.30,137–141 The main reason for the high importance of morphology is the short exciton diffusion length in conductive polymer. For example, by quantitatively analyzing PL quenching in polymer films on a TiO2 surface, Shaw et al. determined the exciton diffusion length in P3HT to be only 8.5 nm.142 This means that the donor and acceptor phases must be finely intermixed with the extension of the polymer domains limited to ∼15–20 nm in order to avoid losses due to recombination of the photo-generated excitons. On the other hand, it is crucial for efficient charge transport that continuous pathways exist through each phase from any point where charge separation occurs towards the electrodes.
The bulk heterojunction concept is supposed to meet these demands, but causes several difficulties. First, many parameters such as concentration ratios of the donor and acceptor, solvents, processing temperatures, etc. were found to influence the morphology of organic30,137–139 and hybrid blends.60,65,143–145 Additionally, it is not as evident how to characterize the obtained morphology in a satisfactory manner. AFM and X-ray diffraction techniques are widely used, but AFM has the disadvantage of providing only information on the surface, and diffraction techniques are indirect methods in the sense that they only reveal averaged results over the sample, without providing a concrete picture for a selected area or volume. Here, important progress was recently made with modern electron microscopy methods. Moon et al. presented cross-sectional TEM images, where it was for the first time possible to visualize the phase separation of P3HT and PCBM in a cross section through the bulk heterojunction.139 Van Bavel et al. even used electron tomography and were able to reconstruct the three-dimensional networks of P3HT and PCBM in a selected analysis volume.140 Electron tomography was also applied by Oosterhout et al. to study hybrid P3HT/ZnO solar cells, where it needs to be mentioned that a continuous ZnO network was formed in the P3HT matrix,116i.e. this is not an example of a blend of polymer and individual ZnO nanoparticles. Fig. 8 shows reconstructed images of the three-dimensional ZnO network. These images enabled a detailed analysis not only of the size of phase domains, but also of the connectivity of pathways for electron and hole transport.116 Such detailed information on the morphology forms a basis for further evaluation of the limiting factors. In the case of the cited study, comparison of P3HT/ZnO films of different thickness (∼60–170 nm) revealed that phase separation occurred on a more favourable (smaller) length scale in the case of thicker layers which led to more efficient charge separation at the donor/acceptor interface. However, the percentage of monotonously connected pathways through the ZnO phase to the electrode was found to decrease with the layer thickness, meaning that charge transport became more important as limiting factor.116 Since the inorganic component gives a good contrast to the polymer, electron tomography is, in principle, even more suitable for studying hybrid blends than purely organic blends, and progress can be expected from the usage of such sophisticated techniques.
 Fig. 8  (a) Reconstructed volumes of P3HT/ZnO layers, obtained by electron tomography. Three samples with thicknesses of 57 nm (left), 100 nm (centre) and 167 nm (right) are shown. The size of all samples is 700 × 700 nm; ZnO appears yellow, P3HT transparent. (b) Reconstructed volume of a cross-section of the active layer of a completed P3HT/ZnO device. (c) The green arrow indicates an isolated ZnO domain. The red arrow indicates a ZnO domain that is connected to the top, but not through a strictly rising path. (Reprinted with permission from MacMillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Mater., 8, 818–824, copyright 2009 [116].) 
When comparing AFM studies of the morphology of hybrid systems such as P3HT/CdSe to organic polymer/fullerene systems, in many studies of hybrid solar cells a more coarse morphology and higher surface roughness were observed.143–146 One reason for this behaviour is related to solvents. After ligand exchange with pyridine, CdSe nanoparticles are no longer soluble in high concentration in good solvents for P3HT. On the other hand, P3HT is insoluble in pyridine. Therefore, a compromise needs to be found and the active layer is usually processed from a binary mixture of e.g. chloroform/pyridine or chlorobenzene/pyridine. Huynh et al. could show that the mixing ratio of the solvents is crucial for obtaining a smooth surface (with a root mean square roughness below ∼5 nm).143 A low surface roughness was found to correlate with higher EQE values.143 This correlation could be established in that study, because the evaluation of AFM topography and phase images revealed, that smoother surfaces were also related to phase separation on a smaller length scale, i.e. to a more suitable morphology.143 It needs to be noted, however, that directly concluding from the surface roughness on the EQE is in general not possible. In conclusion, the necessity to use binary solvent mixtures introduces an additional parameter and makes the task to obtain a good morphology more complex in the P3HT/CdSe hybrid system.
Although the bulk heterojunction concept is promising, an ideal donor/acceptor solar cell would be an ordered structure where vertically oriented columns of both materials penetrate each other in a regular manner, with the column diameter and the distance between neighboured columns of the order of the exciton diffusion length. Such an ideal heterojunction should allow for most efficient charge separation and charge transport. A brief overview over existing attempts to fabricate such ordered structures with hybrid polymer/nanoparticle systems was recently given by McGehee.147 Some promising approaches were reported in this field. For example, Coakley and McGehee prepared mesoporous TiO2 and infiltrated the nanostructure with P3HT by annealing the polymer film after deposition on top of the TiO2; the efficiencies of such ordered hybrid solar cells reached ∼0.5% and were higher than the values obtained for a reference system with a non-porous bilayer system.148 Such approaches are very promising, but the success in this field is still limited by the challenge to make ordered structures small enough as well as by the development of suitable procedures for infiltration of small inorganic nanostructures with polymer.147
2.6. Molecular design of the donor/acceptor interface in polymer/nanoparticle solar cells
The organic ligands capping the surface of colloidally prepared semiconductor nanoparticles play a key role in controlling the formation of monodisperse and well-shaped nanoparticles during the synthesis. However, as discussed before, a thick organic ligand shell is detrimental for charge transfer. Therefore, ligand exchange with pyridine was established as a standard technique to make nanoparticles suitable for hybrid solar cell applications, at least in the case of polymer/CdSe solar cells. On the other hand ligand exchange with pyridine has also disadvantages. As seen before, solvent mixtures need to be used for processing which makes morphology control more difficult. Furthermore, indications for the existence of trap states in hybrid blends were found. It seems likely that traps are at least partly due to surface dangling bonds, because Cd and Se dangling bonds are known to act as electron and hole traps, respectively.149 Here, it is important to note that post-preparative annealing treatments of hybrid P3HT/CdSe films were shown to remove at least part of the excess and interfacial pyridine,143 meaning that uncapped surface areas with dangling bonds occur. Moreover, ligand exchange with pyridine is usually not complete, so that part of the ligands used initially for synthesis will remain in the system.150,151
For these reasons ligand exchange with pyridine is not necessarily the most suitable way to obtain efficient hybrid solar cells. Recently, Olson et al. synthesized quasi-spherical CdSe nanocrystals with trioctylphosphine ligands and made a ligand exchange with a series of different ligands afterwards (tributylamine, oleic acid, pyridine, stearic acid and butylamine).61 Butylamine led to significantly better device performance than pyridine, and efficiencies up to 1.8% were achieved. This was mainly interpreted in terms of a more smooth and suitable morphology, because AFM measurements revealed strong differences in the phase separation behaviour when using different ligands.61 Ligands such as butylamine have the advantage of providing good solubility in typical polymer solvents such as chloroform or chlorobenzene, and at the same time the ligand shell is thin enough to enable charge transfer through the ligand shell. Relatively short amines were also found to be suitable ligands in the case of MEH-PPV/PbS: Zhang et al. compared solar cells with octylamine-capped PbS and oleic acid-capped PbS nanocrystals and obtained better performance with the amine ligand, although the overall efficiency was low in both cases.86 Ligand exchange from oleic acid to acetic acid, i.e. a very short acid, was also shown to significantly improve the performance of P3HT/PbS bulk heterojunction solar cells, with the finally obtained efficiency being low also in this case.89
An interesting approach to enable morphology control by well-soluble particles on the one hand and efficient charge transfer by a not too thick ligand shell on the other hand was made by Seo et al. in a study of P3HT/CdSe solar cells.152 The authors used a tert-butyl N-(2-mercaptoethyl) carbamate ligand which can, after deposition of the polymer/nanoparticle film, be partly decomposed, so that finally a shorter ligand shell remains on the surface.152 Very recently, Zhou et al. presented another strategy and treated CdSe nanoparticles with a relatively thick hexadecylamine (HDA) ligand shell with hexanoic acid.62 The acid was supposed to remove HDA ligands by the formation of a soluble, organic salt, and successful reduction of the ligand shell thickness was evidenced by TEM images showing reduced interparticle distances. The nanoparticles retained a good solubility in dichlorobenzene and could be mixed in high concentration with P3HT. Solar cells achieved efficiencies of 2.0% which is the highest value reported with quasi-spherical CdSe nanoparticles in combination with conductive polymer so far.62
There are also research efforts concentrating on the synthesis of semiconductor nanoparticles which are directly stabilized with polymer such as PPV or P3HT.87,153–155 Concerning CdSe, the synthesis procedures existing so far are either relatively complicated153,154 or require the use of highly toxic precursors such as dimethyl cadmium.155 Possibly for this reason, work on hybrid polymer/CdSe solar cells implementing polymer-stabilized CdSe nanoparticles was not reported so far. However, it is noteworthy that Liu et al. synthesized a modified P3HT with an end-functional amino group and observed higher efficiencies in P3HT/CdSe nanorod solar cells when using this polymer instead of P3HT without an amino group.156 TEM images showed that the CdSe particles were more homogeneously distributed in the modified polymer/nanoparticle films, and this was attributed to the amino groups of the P3HT forming bonds to the nanoparticle surface.156 The example shows that forming direct bonds between the nanoparticles and the polymer is a promising strategy. This was also demonstrated in the case of PbS, where hybrid solar cells were prepared by Watt et al. with nanoparticles directly stabilized by MEH-PPV.87 Efficiencies reached 0.7% in this case,87 which is the highest value reported so far for polymer/PbS solar cells.
3. Conclusions
The current status of research on hybrid polymer/nanoparticle bulk heterojunction solar cells has been reviewed, paying in particular attention to the elementary processes and limiting factors in comparison to organic BHJ solar cells. Semiconductor nanoparticles have advantages as electron acceptors when compared to fullerene derivates because of their absorption properties. Furthermore, the possibility to use elongated nanoparticles was demonstrated to have a positive effect on charge transport. Nevertheless, efficiencies reported for hybrid solar cells are still lower than those of state-of-the-art polymer/fullerene solar cells. So far, polymer/CdSe is the hybrid system giving the highest efficiencies (approaching ∼3%). Other semiconductors which have been examined for use in hybrid solar cells are mainly PbS, PbSe, CdTe, CuInS2, CuInSe2, Si, ZnO and TiO2.
The main reasons for the limited efficiency of polymer/nanoparticle solar cells seem to be related to morphology control and trap states. In comparison to organic polymer/fullerene blends, a more coarse morphology was observed in many studies, pointing towards the establishment of phase domains which are too large for efficient charge separation. Furthermore, studies of charge carrier recombination kinetics suggested that charge carrier trapping plays a more important role in hybrid as compared to organic blends.
Both phenomena seem to be related to the surface chemistry of colloidal semiconductor nanoparticles which are typically surrounded by a thick organic ligand shell after synthesis. Whereas ligand exchange with pyridine was established and then widely used as a convenient procedure to remove the thick shell, recent trends go in the direction of using other relatively short ligands. Improvements were for example achieved with short alkylamines. These have the advantage over pyridine to enable the usage of the same solvent for nanoparticles and polymer, and a positive effect on the resulting morphology was demonstrated. At the same time, charge transfer is still possible and the ligand shell can be kept on the nanoparticle surface and saturate dangling bonds which otherwise might be a source of trap states. Another approach aims at synthesizing nanoparticles directly stabilized with conductive polymer. In the case of MEH-PPV/PbS this procedure was already shown to be quite successful; efficiencies reached ∼0.7% which is an improvement compared to the very low efficiencies in all other works on polymer/PbS solar cells.
Thus, the upcoming tendencies to modify the surface of semiconductor nanoparticles in a way to enable efficient charge transfer, to avoid surface trap states and to enable a higher degree of morphology control appear very promising for further improvement. Nevertheless, hybrid bulk heterojunction solar cells still have to prove that they can really compete with purely organic polymer/fullerene cells. For the future development of the field it is also necessary to obtain a more detailed understanding of the limiting factors. Recent investigations on trap states as well as detailed studies of the morphology by electron tomography are an important step in this direction.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Prof. Parisi (University of Oldenburg) and the members of the research team for supporting the author's research in the field of hybrid solar cells. The work performed in this field by the author was financially supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF, project number 03SF0338C) as well as by the EWE Research Group “Thin Film Photovoltaics” by the EWE AG, Oldenburg.
References
S. W. Glunz, Adv. OptoElectron., 2007, vol. 2007, 97370 Search PubMed .

          G. Dennler and C. J. Brabec, Socio-Economic Impact of Low-Cost PV Technologies, in: Organic Photovoltaics, ed. C. Brabec, V. Dyakonov and U. Scherf, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2007, 18, 15 CrossRef .
M. Powalla and D. Bonnet, Adv. OptoElectron., 2007, vol. 2007, 97454 Search PubMed .
S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley and G. E. Jabbour, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 10 CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58 CrossRef .

          A. C. Hübler and H. Kempa, Roll-to-Roll Processing of Thin-Film Organic Semiconductors, in: Organic Photovoltaics, ed. C. Brabec, V. Dyakonov and U. Scherf, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
C. Girotto, B. P. Rand, J. Genoe and P. Heremans, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 454 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 Search PubMed .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. Michels and R. A. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lungenschmied, G. Dennler, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, M. Glatthaar, T. Meyer and A. Meyer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 379 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jorgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686 CrossRef .
B. Zimmermann, U. Würfel and M. Niggemann, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 491 CrossRef .

          L. Moro and R. J. Visser, Barrier Films for Photovoltaics Applications, in: Organic Photovoltaics, ed. C. Brabec, V. Dyakonov and U. Scherf, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H.-H. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gilot, I. Barbu, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 113520 CrossRef .
Y. Li, R. Mastria, A. Fiore, C. Nobile, L. Yin, M. Biasiucci, G. Cheng, A. M. Cucolo, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and G. Gigli, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1 .
P. D. Cunningham and L. M. Hayden, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7928 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cook, R. Katoh and A. Furube, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2547 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 347 RSC .
W. S. Shin, S. C. Kim, S.-J. Lee, M.-K. Kim, B. V. K. Naidu, S.-H. Jin, J.-K. Lee, J. W. Lee and Y.-G. Gal, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 1394 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schüppel, K. Schmidt, C. Uhrich, K. Schulze, D. Wynands, J. Bredas, E. Brier, E. Reinold, H. Bu, P. Baeuerle, B. Maennig, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 085311 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, Y. Wu, D. Feng, S.-T. Tsai, H.-J. Son, G. Li and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 56 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45 RSC .
A. Pivrikas, N. S. Sariciftci, G. Juska and R. Österbacka, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 677 Search PubMed .
D. Hertel and H. Bässler, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 666 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Bernède, J. Chil. Chem. Soc., 2008, 53, 1549 Search PubMed .
L.-M. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434 CrossRef CAS .
E. Arici, D. Meissner, F. Schäffler and N. S. Sariciftci, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2003, 5, 199 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Milliron, I. Gur and A. P. Alivisatos, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 41 CAS .
M. Afzaal and P. O'Brien, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1597 RSC .
S. Kumar and G. D. Scholes, Microchim. Acta, 2008, 160, 315 CrossRef .

          N. C. Greenham, Hybrid Polymer/Nanocrystal Photovoltaic Devices, in: Organic Photovoltaics, ed. C. Brabec, V. Dyakonov and U. Scherf, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .

          W. E. J. Beek and R. A. J. Janssen, Hybrid Polymer-Inorganic Photovoltaic Cells, in: Hybrid Nanocomposites for Nanotechnology, ed. L. Merhari, Springer Science + Business Media, New York,  2009 Search PubMed .
H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1993, 32, 41 CrossRef .
H. Weller, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 88 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13226 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6514 CrossRef .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Gaponenko, Optical Properties of Semiconductor Nanocrystals, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1998 Search PubMed .

          J. Müller, Elektrische Manipulation der Lichtemission von einzelnen CdSe/CdS Nanostäbchen, PhD thesis, University of Munich, Munich,  2005 (in German) .
W. W. Yu, L. Qu, W. Guo and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2854 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jasieniak, L. Smith, J. van Embden, P. Mulvaney and M. Califano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19468 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, D. Weng, X. Wang, Q. Xiao, W. Chen, C. Xu, Z. Yang and Y. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4221 RSC .
Q. Dai, Y. Wang, X. Li, P. D. J. Yu Zhang, M. Zhao, B. Zou, J. Seo, Y. Wang and W. W. Yu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1518 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer, N. Teclemariam, D. J. Milliron and P. A. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 115326 CrossRef .
N. C. Greenham, X. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 54, 17628 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Wang and Y. Cao, Front. Chem. China, 2007, 2, 383 Search PubMed .
W. U. Huynh, X. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 923 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, H. J. Snaith, A. S. Dhoot, S. Westenhoff and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 014914 CrossRef .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, C. P. Chen, A. G. Kanaras and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 409 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, D. Qin, X. Jiang, Y. Liu, L. Wang, J. Chen and Y. Cao, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4736 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Olson, G. P. Gray and S. A. Carter, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 519 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, F. S. Riehle, Y. Yuan, H.-F. Schleiermacher, M. Niggemann, G. A. Urban and M. Krüger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 013304 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim, I. J. Chung, Y. C. Kim and J.-W. Yu, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2004, 45, 231 Search PubMed .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25543 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Li, H. Zhong, J. Hou, Y. Ding, C. Yang and Y. Li, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4041 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. K. Chin, J. W. Stouwdam, S. S. van Bavel and R. A. J. Janssen, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 205602 CrossRef .
Y. Kang, N.-G. Park and D. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 113101 CrossRef .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462 CrossRef CAS .
E. Arici, N. S. Sariciftci and D. Meissner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 165 CrossRef CAS .
E. Arici, H. Hoppe, F. Schäffler, D. Meissner, M. A. Malik and N. S. Sariciftci, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 59 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xie, M. Rutherford and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5691 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Kruszynska, H. Borchert, J. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., submitted Search PubMed.
L. Li, N. Coates and D. Moses, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 22 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16827 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 457, 3 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Phys. E., 2002, 14, 115 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Beard, A. G. Midgett, M. Law, O. E. Semonin, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 836 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qi, M. Fischbein, M. Drndic and S. Selmic, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 093103 CrossRef .
V. V. Matylitsky, L. Dworak, V. V. Breus, T. Basché and J. Wachtveitl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2424 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, R. D. Schaller, S. B. Lee, J. M. Pietryga, V. I. Klimov and A. A. Zakhidov, J. Mater. Res., 2007, 22, 2204 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Luther, M. Law, M. C. Beard, Q. Song, M. O. Reese, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3488 CrossRef CAS .
G. I. Koleilat, L. Levina, H. Shukla, S. H. Myrskog, S. Hinds, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 833 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Choi, Y. Lim, M. E. B. Santiago-Berrios, M. Oh, B. Hyun, L. Sun, A. C. Bartnik, A. Goedhart, G. G. Malliaras, H. D. Abruna, F. W. Wise and T. Hanrath, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3749 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos, S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, E. J. D. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 138 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 233101 CrossRef .
A. A. R. Watt, D. Blake, J. H. Warner, E. A. Thmsen, E. L. Tavenner, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop and P. Meredith, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 2006 CrossRef CAS .
S. Günes, K. P. Fritz, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, S. Kumar and G. D. Scholes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 420 CrossRef .
J. Seo, S. J. Kim, W. J. Kim, R. Singh, M. Samoc, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 095202 CrossRef .
W. Ma, J. M. Luther, H. Zheng, Y. Wu and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1699 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk, M. Kemerink, X. Yang and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9505 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1112 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pradhan, S. K. Batabyal and A. J. Pal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 233109 CrossRef .
B. Pradhan, S. K. Batabyal and A. J. Pal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 769 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, B. D. Yuhas and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18451 CrossRef CAS .
T. Goshal, S. Biswas, S. Kar, A. Dev, S. Chakrabarti and S. Chaudhuri, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 065606 CrossRef .
Y. Hames, Z. Alpaslan, A. Kösemen, S. E. San and Y. Yerli, Sol. Energy, 2010, 84, 426 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuxiang, Z. Mei, G. Min and W. Xidong, Rare Met., 2010, 29, 286 Search PubMed .
D. C. Olson, J. Piris, R. T. Collins, S. E. Shaheen and D. S. Ginley, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 26 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 152111 CrossRef .
C. J. Novotny, E. T. Yu and P. K. L. Yu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 775 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Z. C. Holman and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 449 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kucur, J. Riegler, G. A. Urban and T. Nann, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 2333 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kucur, J. Riegler, G. A. Urban and T. Nann, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 1500 CrossRef CAS .
A. Petrella, M. Tamborra, M. L. Curri, P. Cosma, M. Striccoli, P. D. cozzoli and A. Agostiano, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1554 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kucur, W. Bücking and T. Nann, Microchim. Acta, 2008, 160, 299 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, Z. Tan, Y. Yan, Y. He, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4911 CrossRef CAS .
M. Al-Ibrahim, H. Roth, U. Zhokhavets, G. Gobsch and S. Sensfuss, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 85, 13 CAS .
T. Z. Markus, M. Wu, L. Wang, D. H. Waldeck, D. Oron and R. Naaman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14200 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Ginger and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 10622 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bredas and G. B. Street, Acc. Chem. Res., 1985, 18, 309 CrossRef CAS .
G. Harbeke, D. Baeriswyl, H. Kiess and W. Kobel, Phys. Scr., 1986, t13, 302 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. van Hal, M. P. T. Christiaans, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4352 CrossRef CAS .
R. Österbacka, C. P. An, X. M. Jiang and Z. V. Vardeny, Science, 2000, 287, 839 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hwang, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4350 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pientka, V. Dyakonov, D. Meissner, A. L. Rogach, D. V. Talapin, H. Weller, L. Lutsen and D. Vanderzande, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 163 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Noone, N. C. Anderson, N. E. Horwitz, A. M. Munro, A. P. Kulkarni and D. S. Ginger, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1345 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Heinemann, K. von Maydell, F. Zutz, J. Kolny-Olesiak, H. Borchert, I. Riedel and J. Parisi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3788 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schüppel, K. Schmidt, C. Uhrich, K. Schulze, D. Wynands, J. Bredas, E. Brier, E. Reinold, H. Bu, P. Baeuerle, B. Maennig, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 085311 CrossRef .
V. Dyakonov, G. Zoriniants, M. C. Scharber, C. J. Brabec, R. A. J. Janssen, J. C. Hummelen and N. S. Sariciftci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 8019 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Schultz, M. C. Scharber, C. J. Brabec and N. S. Sariciftci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 245210 CrossRef .
J. De Ceuster, E. Goovaerts, A. Bouwen, J. C. Hummelen and V. Dyakonov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 195206 CrossRef .
M. Al-Ibrahim, H. Roth, M. Schroedner, A. Konkin, U. Zhokhavets, G. Gobsch, P. Scharff and S. Sensfuss, Org. Electron., 2005, 6, 65 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Krinichnyi, E. I. Yudanova and N. N. Denisov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 131, 044515 CAS .
R. Dietmueller, A. R. Stegner, R. Lechner, S. Niesar, R. N. Pereira, M. S. Brandt, A. Ebbers, M. Trocha, H. Wiggers and M. Stutzmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 113301 CrossRef .
H. Bässler, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1993, 175, 15 CrossRef .
D. S. Ginger and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87, 1361 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, E. Marx and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 961 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, C. Wang and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Science, 2003, 300, 1277 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gyot-Sionnest and C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7355 CrossRef CAS .
R. Meier, R. C. Word, A. Nadarajah and R. Könenkamp, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 195314 CrossRef .
K. Kumari, S. Chand, P. Kumar, S. N. Sharma, V. D. Vankar and V. Kumar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 263504 CrossRef .
K. Kumari, S. Chand, V. D. Vankar and V. Kumar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 213503 CrossRef .
B. Bohnenbuck, E. von Hauff, J. Parisi, C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 024506 CrossRef .
J. Schafferhans, A. Baumann, C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 093303 CrossRef .
H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. J. van Duren, X. Yang, J. Loos, C. W. T. Bulle-Lieuwma, A. B. Sieval, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 425 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Moon, J. K. Lee, S. Cho, J. Byun and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 230 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bertho, W. D. Oosterbaan, V. Vrindts, J. D'Haen, T. J. Cleij, L. Lutsen, J. Manca and D. Vanderzande, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1248 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3516 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer, W. C. Libby, G. L. Whitting and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 73 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3557 RSC .
F. Zutz, I. Lokteva, N. Radychev, J. Kolny-Olesiak, I. Riedel, H. Borchert and J. Parisi, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2009, 206, 2700 CAS .
J. Albero, E. Martinez-Ferrero, J. Ajuria, C. Waldauf, R. Pacios and E. Palomares, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 9644 RSC .
M. D. McGehee, MRS Bull., 2009, 34, 95 CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3380 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guyot-Sionnest, M. Shim, C. Matranga and M. Hines, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, R2181 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. B. Katari, V. L. Colin and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 4109 CrossRef .
I. Lokteva, N. Radychev, F. Witt, H. Borchert, J. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12784 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seo, W. J. Kim, S. J. Kim, K. Lee, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 133302 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, T. P. Russell and T. Emrick, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3712 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 6294 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dayal, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17726 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, T. Tanaka, K. Sivula, A. P. Alivisatos and J. M. Frechet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6550 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† This article was submitted as part of an issue highlighting papers from the International Bunsen Discussion on Light Harvesting and Solar Energy Conversion held in March 2010 in Stuttgart, Germany.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Holger Borchert
	Holger Borchert studied physics in Hamburg and Paris and obtained his PhD in 2003 from the University of Hamburg (Germany), where he investigated surface properties of semiconductor nanoparticles in the group of Prof. Dr. Weller. Afterwards, he went to the Boreskov Institute of Catalysis in Novosibirsk/Russia, and later continued research on nanostructured catalysts at the universities of Oldenburg and Bremen (Germany). In 2007, he moved to the group of Prof. Dr. Parisi at the University of Oldenburg, where he is now in charge of the subdivision for hybrid photovoltaics and in parallel continues activities in the field of heterogeneous catalysis.

Broader context
Colloidal semiconductor nanoparticles are of strong interest for many fields of application because of their physical and chemical properties which become tuneable in the nanometre size regime. This review focuses on the usability of colloidal nanoparticles for hybrid polymer/nanoparticle solar cells. This is a subfield of organic, polymer-based solar cells, photovoltaic technology that is now operating at a level sufficient to enter the market. So far, a real benefit from the tuneable properties related to nanoparticles could not be realized in polymer-based solar cells, because new difficulties arise in comparison to purely organic solar cells. These difficulties relate, for example, to surface states inducing charge carrier traps as well as to the lack of advanced procedures for obtaining suitable blend morphologies. These findings on elementary processes such as charge carrier generation and recombination reviewed here should also be of interest for other potential applications of semiconductor nanoparticles in organic electronics, e.g. light-emitting diodes based on quantum dots.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of a bulk heterojunction solar cell. Left side: typical device architecture; right side: energy scheme illustrating the charge separation process at the donor/acceptor interface.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  Size-dependent absorption of colloidal CdSe nanocrystals: UV-Vis spectra (a), a TEM image with the corresponding histogram (b), and the correlation between the particle diameter and the position of the first absorption maximum (c). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Current density-voltage (J–V) characteristic of a bulk heterojunction solar cell based on a 1:8 (weight ratio) blend of MEH-PPV and pyridine-treated, quasi-spherical CdSe nanoparticles under AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2006 IOP Publishing Ltd.).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the working principle of photoinduced absorption (PIA) spectroscopy.	 

 	Fig. 5  PIA spectrum of MEH-PPV on a film of TiO2 nanoparticles showing two polaron bands at 0.52 and 1.53 eV as well as a bleaching band at 2.38 eV. The spectrum was recorded at 80 K utilizing a 2.54 eV (488 nm, 25 mW) excitation beam and a modulation frequency of 275 Hz. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 1999 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 6  ESR (dashed line) and L-ESR (solid line) spectra of P3HT/Si and Si/PCBM composites measured at 5 K. The spectra of the P3HT/Si sample were scaled up by a factor of 1.8. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.)	 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  Time evolution of the hole polaron resonance as measured in P3HT/CdSe and P3HT/PCBM by L-ESR at a laser power of 20 mW (532 nm excitation wave length), microwave power of 0.1 mW and T = 50 K. The beginning of photo-excitation is marked by *, and termination by **. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2009 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA)	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Reconstructed volumes of P3HT/ZnO layers, obtained by electron tomography. Three samples with thicknesses of 57 nm (left), 100 nm (centre) and 167 nm (right) are shown. The size of all samples is 700 × 700 nm; ZnO appears yellow, P3HT transparent. (b) Reconstructed volume of a cross-section of the active layer of a completed P3HT/ZnO device. (c) The green arrow indicates an isolated ZnO domain. The red arrow indicates a ZnO domain that is connected to the top, but not through a strictly rising path. (Reprinted with permission from MacMillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Mater., 8, 818–824, copyright 2009 [116].)	 
Footnote
† This article was submitted as part of an issue highlighting papers from the International Bunsen Discussion on Light Harvesting and Solar Energy Conversion held in March 2010 in Stuttgart, Germany.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
