Preparation of 2D material dispersions and their applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00254A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00254A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6224-6266Preparation of 2D material dispersions and their applications

        
          
            Xingke 
            Cai†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yuting 
            Luo†
a, 
      
        
          
            Bilu 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Hui-Ming 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *abc
aShenzhen Geim Graphene Center (SGC), Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute (TBSI), Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China. E-mail: bilu.liu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn; hmcheng@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
bShenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang 110016, P. R. China
cCenter of Excellence in Environmental Studies (CEES), King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      2nd April 2018
    First published on 15th June 2018AbstractExtensive research on two-dimensional (2D) materials has triggered the renaissance of an old topic, that is, the intercalation and exfoliation of layer materials. Such top-down exfoliation produced 2D materials and their dispersions have several advantages including low cost, scalable production capability, solution processability, and versatile functionalities stemming from the large number of species of layer materials, and show promising potential in many applications. In recent years, many new methods have been developed for exfoliating layer materials to 2D materials for different application purposes. In this review the different exfoliation approaches are first systematically analyzed from the viewpoint of methodology, and the advantages and disadvantages of each method are compared. Second, the assembly of exfoliated 2D materials into macrostructures by solution-based techniques is summarized. Third, the state-of-the-art applications of 2D material dispersions and their assemblies in electronics and optoelectronics, electrocatalysis, energy storage, etc., are discussed. Finally, insights and perspectives on current research challenges and future opportunities regarding the exfoliation and applications of 2D materials in dispersions are considered.
Xingke Cai
Xingke Cai received his BS degree from Central South University, China in 2009, and MS degree from Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2012 under the supervision of Prof. Chang Liu and Hongtao Cong. Afterwards, he obtained his PhD degree by studying with Prof. Takayoshi Sasaki from Tsukuba University and the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan, in 2015. Currently, he is a Postdoctoral Researcher in Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, in collaboration with Prof. Hui-Ming Cheng and Bilu Liu. His research interests focus on the preparation of 2D materials, their assembly and device applications.
Yuting Luo
Yuting Luo received her MS degree from Shanghai University, China in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Jiandong Wei from Shanghai University and Prof. Xuefeng Gao from Suzhou Institute of Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Currently, she is a PhD student in the Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, under the supervision of Prof. Bilu Liu. Her research interests focus on the electrocatalysis and electrochemistry of low-dimensional materials.
Bilu Liu
Bilu Liu is currently an Associate Professor and a Core-PI at Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute (TBSI), Tsinghua University, China. He received his bachelor's degree in Materials Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2006, and PhD degree in Materials Science from the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IMR, CAS) in 2012. He worked in the University of Southern California (USC) as a Postdoctoral Research Associate and later Research Assistant Professor between 2012 and 2016. His research interests cover the chemistry and materials science of low-dimensional materials with emphasis on carbon nanostructures, two-dimensional materials, and their heterostructures. His work relates to the controlled preparation of these materials and their applications in electronic, optoelectronics, and catalysis. He has published over 60 papers on these topics with >6500 citations and an H-index of 36.
Hui-Ming Cheng
Hui-Ming Cheng received his PhD in Materials Science from the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IMR CAS) in 1992. He worked at AIST-Kyushu and Nagasaki University of Japan from 1990 to 1993, and MIT, USA in 1998. He is the founding director of the Advanced Carbon Research Division at Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, IMR CAS since 2001 and also the founding director of the Low-Dimensional Materials and Devices Laboratory at Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, China, since 2016. His research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of carbon nanotubes, graphene and other 2D materials, high-performance bulk carbon and composite materials, and their applications in batteries, supercapacitors and hydrogen production from water photo-splitting. He has published more than 580 scientific papers with a total SCI citation of >58000 and an H-index of 106.
1. Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) materials are defined as a class of free-standing sheet-like nanomaterials, exhibiting a high ratio of lateral size (from tens of nanometers to tens of micrometers or even larger) to thickness (a few angstroms to a few nanometers).1 The most well-known 2D material is graphene, which is a single layer of a carbon honeycomb lattice and the thinnest material known to date.2 Based on composition and crystal structure, many other 2D materials have been predicted and prepared in the past decade.1,3–9 These materials have an ultrathin lamellar structure, but different functionalities for different applications. So far, a large family of 2D materials has been reported, such as graphene,10 graphene oxide (GO) and reduced GO (rGO),11 transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs),7,12 hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN),13 black phosphorene (b-P),5 black arsenic phosphorene (b-AsP),14 graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4),15 oxides,4 layered double hydroxides (LDHs),16 MXene,6etc. There is no doubt that 2D materials have become the research interest of scientists and engineers in a wide range of fields, because of the large number of species, their unique properties, versatile functionalities, and promising applications in electronics, optoelectronics, energy storage and conversion, etc.
There are many methods to produce 2D materials. The most well-known one is micromechanical cleavage (MC) using Scotch tape to cleave thin flakes from bulk layer materials.2 Although many important physical phenomena and excellent device performance have been exhibited in the high quality 2D materials produced by the MC technique, the demand of skill and the inability to produce 2D materials in large quantities hamper its suitability for practical applications. To transform the discoveries of 2D materials from lab to market, the first priority is their scalable production. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and chemical synthesis from small molecules are well established methods to synthesize nanomaterials, including zero-dimensional (0D), one- and two-dimensional (1D, and 2D) materials, in reasonably large quantities based on a bottom-up strategy.1 Different from 0D and 1D nanomaterials, another important strategy to obtain 2D materials is from a top-down path by exfoliating bulk layer materials to monolayer or few layer 2D materials. Compared with the bottom-up synthesis methods, such top-down exfoliation methods have some noticeable advantages. First, there are many species of layer materials available for exfoliation. It is noteworthy that many 2D materials such as b-P, b-AsxP1−x, metal oxides, mica, TaS2, LDHs and TiS2, that cannot be synthesized or are very challenging to synthesize by bottom-up CVD or chemical synthesis methods, but they can be easily prepared by top-down exfoliation methods. Second, top-down exfoliation can achieve the scalable production of exfoliated 2D materials in a cheap and easy fashion because of the low cost and large available quantity of layer precursors. Third, exfoliated 2D materials can be solution-processable, which may facilitate their further manufacture into desired structures and applications. Despite the relatively poorer quality and smaller domain sizes of the exfoliated 2D materials than those obtained by CVD, the advantages of top-down exfoliation methods over the CVD method and chemical synthesis are evident and desirable for many applications. Therefore, in this review, we emphasis the principles and the means to develop efficient methods for top-down exfoliation to produce 2D materials and dispersions, their assembly into macrostructures, and their applications.
Bulk layer precursors for exfoliation are defined as solids whose atoms within a layer are bonded by strong covalent or ionic bonds while the individual layers are held together by much weaker forces. In this case, layers can slip in the in-plane direction under a shear force or expand in the out-of-plane direction as a result of intercalation agents assisted exfoliation procedure, producing isolated few-layer or monolayer flakes which are termed 2D materials. It should be noted that some intercalated guest molecules or atoms may not weaken but increase the interactions between layers. For example, the intercalation of electronegative or electropositive agents, such as Li, K, F, Cl, and Br, increases the exfoliation energy of graphite 1.5–5 folds.17 In this case, a further treating process, such as the hydration of alkali metal atoms intercalated graphite, would be necessary to exfoliate the layer materials. The most related topic in the history of the exfoliation of layer materials is the intercalation of layer materials, such as graphite, TMDCs, silicates, metal chlorides, and clays, with guest atoms or molecules.18–20 In most cases, a small external force is enough to exfoliate these intercalated layer materials into ultrathin flakes. However, about three decades ago, only a few papers reported the exfoliation of intercalated layer materials using intercalating agents,19–23 while most work focused on intercalated bulk layer materials and the exploration of their uses.20,23–25 Presumably, the main reason is that intercalated layer materials have themselves attracted significant scientific interest and shown potential for applications. Indeed, intercalated materials are of particular physical interest because their high degree of structural ordering can be used to study many physical phenomena using simple structural models. For example, intercalation provides a means for the controlled modification of many physical properties of the host layer material over a wide range, including electrical conductivity, superconductivity, magnetism, electrochemical and catalytic properties.20 At present, several hundred chemical species are known to be able to intercalate into layer materials. By changing the intercalants and their concentrations, a large number of intercalated bulk layer materials with different properties have been prepared. For example, alkali metal atom-intercalated graphite exhibits electrical superconductivity by transferring electrons from regions of low mobility (intercalant) to regions of high mobility (graphite),24 and has shown to be a good catalyst for industrial catalytic reactions like ammonia synthesis.26 Meanwhile, by taking advantage of the gallery between layers, lithium-intercalated graphite has been used as the anode material for lithium ion batteries (LIBs).27–30 Although several 2D materials had been prepared before 2000, such as GO,31 TaS2,22 vermiculite,21 titanium oxide,25 and zirconium phosphonate,32 researchers have paid little attention to the properties of these ultrathin flakes themselves.
The milestone work that has attracted attention to 2D materials is the superior electrical properties of few layer graphene, such as its high carrier concentration and high room-temperature carrier mobility.2 In 2004, Novoselov, Geim, and coworkers isolated multilayer graphene with a thickness of around 3 nm by Scotch-tape-based MC.2 This 2D graphene without dangling bonds and surface states avoided or reduced the scattering of carriers by surface states in bulk materials. They found that the carrier mobility of this graphene film reached 104 cm2 V−1 s−1, over one order of magnitude higher than that of conventional doped silicon.2 Later, a room temperature quantum Hall effect, high Young's modulus (1 TPa), high thermal conductivity (4000 W m−1 K−1), and good optical transparency (2.7% absorbance for monolayer graphene) were demonstrated in graphene.10,33 Meanwhile, other 2D materials, obtained by the same Scotch-tape MC, also exhibited fantastic properties and research on them has become an important topic with numerous exciting results. For example, photodetectors using monolayer MoS2 as active materials possess a high photo-response due to a transition from an indirect band structure in bulk MoS2 to a direct band structure in monolayer 2D MoS2.7 In addition, when thin h-BN flake (<5 nm) is used as a substrate, the mobilities of graphene field-effect transistors (FETs) have been improved by an order of magnitude from 3000 to 30000 cm2 V−1 s−1.34 Here we only list a few examples, and many other interesting phenomena and novel properties have been discovered in these high quality 2D materials after exfoliation from bulk materials. Given the novel properties found in 2D materials prepared by MC, chemists started to pay attention to the exfoliation of bulk layer materials to obtain ultrathin 2D materials, which are suitable for flexible electronics and optoelectronics due to their solution stability, scalable production and mechanical robustness.35,36 Meanwhile, their greatly increased surface area after exfoliation gives 2D materials a better chance to be used for energy storage, catalysis and sensing, than their bulk precursors.6,37,38 Therefore, the exfoliation of layer materials and the exploration of their application in various fields has become interesting to scientists in many disciplines.
There is a large number of layer materials, which can be grouped into different types based on their composition and structure. Most of them have been exfoliated into thin 2D flakes, but there are a few exceptions such as CoO2, CuO2, and some nitrogen-containing MAX phase materials. Many reviews have been devoted to exfoliated 2D materials, but most of them focus on the exfoliation of a specific material and its applications.3,4,6,13,15,16,37,39–41 A few reviews have briefly summarized the exfoliation methods of 2D materials, but few of them have systematically organized and compared the advantages and disadvantages of these methods.1,3,41 An in-depth analysis from the viewpoint of fundamental exfoliation principles and methods is critical for the development of novel approaches to overcome the difficulties in existing methods. Meanwhile, the assembly of 2D materials as building blocks is another important topic that needs more attention. With the rapid development of exfoliation methods to produce 2D materials, much exciting progress has been achieved in the applications of 2D materials in various fields which deserve to be highlighted. Based on these considerations, in this review, as shown in Fig. 1, we will first analyze the exfoliation of layer materials from a basic understanding of exfoliation mechanisms. A detailed comparison and analysis of each method will be made. Second, we shall discuss 2D macrostructures, such as aggregated flocculates, multilayer thin films, membranes, and 3D forms, fabricated from solution-based 2D materials. Third, state-of-the-art applications using these exfoliated 2D materials will be reviewed, including electronics and optoelectronics, electrocatalysis, and energy storage. Finally, insight regarding the current challenges of exfoliated 2D materials will be offered, and an outlook for future opportunities given.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the main focuses of this review, including the exfoliation of layer materials into 2D materials, their assembly into films/membranes or 3D macrostructures, and their applications in different fields. 
2. Preparation of 2D material dispersions by exfoliating bulk layer materials
The general principle of exfoliating layer materials is based on weakening the interactions between layers either through an expansion of the interlayer distance by intercalation or slippage along the in-plane direction with the assistance of an external shear force. Although all bulk materials used for exfoliation have a layer structure, differences in composition and crystal structure make them exhibit totally different behaviors during exfoliation. There is no universal method that can exfoliate all layer materials. Currently, many methods have been well established to exfoliate various layer materials, including Hummer's method,31 alkali metal intercalation-assisted exfoliation,42–46 oxidants intercalation-assisted exfoliation,47,48 electrochemical exfoliation,49 molecule-assisted exfoliation,50,51 sonication,52,53 shear force like turbulence and microfluidization-assisted exfoliation,54–56 ball milling,57,58 ion exchange-assisted exfoliation,25 etching assisted-exfoliation,59,60etc. Based on the exfoliation mechanism, these exfoliation methods can be grouped into three major types, i.e., intercalation-assisted expansion and exfoliation, mechanical force-assisted exfoliation, and exfoliation of layer materials with guest ions or molecules between the host layers. In the following section, the working principles, procedures, and a comparison of the main exfoliation methods in each type will be discussed in detail.
2.1 Intercalation-assisted expansion and exfoliation

2.1.1 Oxidation-based intercalation and exfoliation. 
Strong oxidative agents can be used to intercalate the host gallery of layer materials, thus expanding the interlayer spacing the material. If a gas production reaction occurs or an external shear force is applied, the material can be exfoliated into thin flakes or even monolayers. The earliest studies related to oxidation-based exfoliation can be traced back to the 1860s, when graphite was oxidized to graphite oxide, also called graphitic acid, using oxidative agents.3 After applying a shear force, e.g. by a stirring bar or a sonication wave, to the swollen crystals, weak forces between the layers may be broken, producing individual layers dispersed in solvent (Fig. 2a and Table 1). The classical method for the production of oxidized graphene, i.e., GO, was developed by Hummers and coworkers in 1958 and is still widely used nowadays.31 The commonly used oxidizing agent is a mixture of potassium permanganate and concentrated sulfuric acid because of the strong oxidative ability of MnO4− and SO42−. Nitric acid, a good intercalation agent that increases the interlayer spacing and facilitates the intercalation of oxidative agents into graphite, has also been used in oxidation-based exfoliation. There are some other oxidative agents beyond conventional ones, which have been used to intercalate graphite based on the same reaction mechanism.61
 Fig. 2  Schematics of different methods to prepare 2D materials by exfoliating layer materials. (a) Oxidation-based functionalization and expansion of layer materials, particularly suitable for the preparation of GO. (b) Intercalation of reductants or oxidants by gas or in solvents. (c) Sonication-assisted exfoliation. (d) Shear force-assisted liquid phase exfoliation. (e) Ball milling-assisted exfoliation. (f) Ion exchange assisted-exfoliation. (g) Etching-assisted exfoliation. 
Table 1 A summary of main exfoliating methods to prepare 2D materials




Exfoliation methods
As-prepared 2D materials
Key exfoliation conditions
Product information
Advantages
Disadvantages




Oxidation-based intercalation and exfoliation (Fig. 2a and b)
GO31
Oxidation of graphite by KMnO4, KNO3, and concentrated H2SO4
Yield: >90% monolayer
(1) Scalable production
(1) Easy to explode under scalable production


Quality: ID/IG ∼ 161,94
(2) Rich in functional groups
(2) Low electrical conductivity of GO


Thickness: ∼1 nm






Lateral size: 1–100 μm






Graphene,47,48,62 h-BN63
Gas phase intercalation of (1) ICl and IBr; (2) AsF6; (3) SO3F; (4) FeCl3; into layer materials
Yield: depending on intercalation agents and extents. For IBr, 3% yield of few layers (40% bilayers, 35% trilayers, 25% others)
(1) Well preserved in-plane structure
(1) Only suitable for super-flat layer materials with strong in-plane bonding, like graphene and h-BN


Quality: for graphene, ID/IG < 0.1, exact value unknown48
(2) Controlled staging intercalation
(2) Oxidants may stay on the surface without complete removal


Thickness: few layers






Lateral size: 1–100 μm










Reduction-based intercalation and exfoliation (Fig. 2b)
Metal chalcogenides,20,42,49,66,67 graphene,24 h-BN95
Gas phase intercalation of pure alkali metals24 or LiBH468 in vacuum
Yield: high, exact value unknown
(1) High percentage of metallic phase with good conductivity for TMDCs
(1) Decomposition of materials at high temperatures or partial intercalation of them


Quality: for MoS2, 80% 1T and 20% 2H phase44
(2) High yield of monolayers
(2) Time-consuming


Thickness: mono to few layer


(3) May explode


Lateral size: 0.1–1 μm






Liquid phase intercalation of alkali metals in liquid ammonia,67 alkali metal in naphthalide66 or n-BuLi in hexane solution42
Yield: high, the highest monolayer yield reaches 90% for WS266
(1) Tunable percentage of metallic phase and semi-conductive phase for TMDCs
(1) High sensitivity to moisture and oxygen


Quality: for MoS2, in n-BuLi/hexane solvent, obtains 50% 1T and 50% 2H phase;42 in naphthalide containing alkali metal, main contains 2H phase;66 in liquid ammonia containing alkali metal, achieves 100% mesoporous 1T phase67
(2) High yield of monolayers
(2) Time-consuming


Thickness: mono to few layers


(3) Dissolving of many TMDCs after reaction with water


Lateral size: 0.1–20 μm






Electrochemical intercalation of lithium ions12,49
Yield: high, over 90% monolayers for MoS249
(1) High yield of monolayers
(1) High complexity to assemble battery cell


Quality: for MoS2, obtains mainly 2H phase
(2) Safe
(2) Difficult to remove additives


Thickness: mono to few layers
(3) Suitable for most layer materials
(3) High cost


Lateral size: several hundred nanometers


(4) Difficult for scalable production


Exfoliation of alkali metal atoms intercalated layer materials in polar aprotic organic solvents
Yield: high, exact value unknown
(1) High yield of monolayers
(1) Need to intercalate alkali metals atoms into layer material


Quality: for MoS2, pure 2H phase
(2) No need external forces for exfoliation
(2) Very sensitive to oxygen


Thickness: monolayers
(3) Suitable for most layer materials
(3) Need to exfoliate in inert atmosphere


Lateral size: 0.1–1 μm
(4) Charged, easy for assembly








Sonication assisted-exfoliation and shear force-assisted liquid phase exfoliation (Fig. 2c and d)
Graphene, h-BN, MoS2, WS2, b-P, GaS, TaSe2, MoTe2, TMOs, topological insulators, MOFs, etc.3,41
Ultrasonication or tip sonication of layered materials in solvents53
Yield: 7% monolayer for graphene52
(1) Easy production
(1) Difficult for scalable production to ton level


Quality: for graphene, ID/IG < 0.1, exact value unknown
(2) Well preserved structure
(2) Relatively small size


Thickness: monolayer to tens of layers
(3) Suitable to most layered materials
(3) Difficult to control lateral size and thickness


Lateral size: several hundred nanometers


(4) Low yield


Exfoliation of layer materials in liquids at a local shear rate exceeding 104 s−154
Yield: 3% monolayer and few layers for graphene54
(1) Scalable production
(1) Difficult to control lateral size and thickness


Quality: for graphene, ID/IG < 0.1, exact value unknown
(2) Well preserved structure
(2) Low yield and concentration


Thickness: monolayer to tens of layers
(3) Suitable to most layered materials




Lateral size: several hundred nanometers










Ball milling-assisted exfoliation (Fig. 2e)
Graphene, h-BN, MoS257,58
Rotation of a ball milling container with milling balls and layer materials57,58
Yield: >90% for graphene few layers58
(1) Scalable production
Small size and many defects


Quality: for graphene, ID/IG = 0.2–0.7
(2) Low cost


Thickness: few to tens of layers




Lateral size: tens to several hundred nanometers








Ion exchange-assisted intercalation and exfoliation (Fig. 2f)
TMOs and LDHs4,16
Exchange of alkali metal ions (anionic ions) between host layers with protons (or other anionic ions)
Yield: >90% monolayer yield for titania nanosheet39
(1) Monolayer 2D materials
(1) Complicated and time consuming


Quality: good crystal structure but have many vacancies89
(2) High yield
(2) Cannot produce ton quantities


Thickness: monolayers with thickness from 0.5 to 3 nm
(3) Intrinsically charged sheets, easy for assembly
(3) Only suitable for some oxides and LDHs


Laterals size: 2 nm to tens of micrometers










Etching and intercalation-assisted exfoliation (Fig. 2g)
MXene6
Etching elements bonding layers by HF or an organic base
Yield: medium, for Ti3C2 monolayers below 20%, exact value unknown92
(1) Water soluble
(1) Dangerous HF acid needed


Quality: good crystal structure but have many functional groups, such as –F and –OH6
(2) Suitable to many MAX materials
(2) Time consuming


Thickness: mono to few layers


(3) Only suitable to exfoliate MAX


Lateral size: several hundred nanometers








This method allows the production of monolayer GO with a high yield at low cost. In addition, oxidative functional groups like OH– and COOH– on the surface of GO make them negatively charged and water soluble, which can be used in solution-based processing. Abundant functional groups on GO can be used as nucleation sites to facilitate the growth of other nanomaterials on their surfaces, making them ideal dispersible templates for the construction of functional composites in solvents. However, these oxidative functional groups and defects severely degrade the electrical and thermal properties of graphene. Reduction to produce rGO, can partially recover the pristine structure of graphene and partially restore its electrical conductivity, which is still much less than that of pristine graphene. In addition, reactions between strong oxidants and graphite can release a huge amount of heat, so that in a scaled-up production, it is possible produce an explosion due to local overheating during the reaction process. So far, this method has been limited to prepare GO and is not suitable for the preparation of other 2D materials.
In addition to oxygen-containing oxidative agents, other oxidants have been proven to intercalate graphite, such as the halogen intercalants ICl and IBr (Fig. 2b and Table 1).48 These can enter the gallery between layers to form stage 2 or stage 3 intercalation compounds, namely intercalating into the gallery between each two or three sheet layers in the graphite. After rapid heat-induced expansion and sonication in a sodium cholate aqueous solution, bilayer or trilayer graphene-enriched dispersions have been obtained. The graphene layers have a decent hole carrier mobility of 400 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is much better than that of rGO, indicating the high quality of the materials obtained by this method. However, the yield of graphene by this route is around 3% and needs to be further improved. There are also many other oxidative agents such as metal halides, halides, AsF6, and SO3F that have been intercalated into graphite to tune its properties.20,47 However, only a few have been reported to produce graphene. For example, Pei et al. have exfoliated FeCl3-intercalated graphite using oxygen bubbles produced from reactions between FeCl3 and H2O2.62 In addition to graphite, there have been a few reports on the oxidation-based stage 1 intercalation of h-BN using super strong oxidizers, such as SO3F and S2O6F2,63 while no successful preparation of few or monolayer h-BN has been reported by such oxidant intercalation-based exfoliation. Presumably, the reason for this is the inertness of h-BN, making it difficult to intercalate with oxidizers, and no gas- and bubble-forming chemical reactions occur during exfoliation.
The intercalation of oxidizers into host materials has only been successfully implemented in graphite and h-BN, which have super-flat layer structures and strong in-plane covalent bonds.20,47,48 We note that oxidizing molecules are usually large and the interlayer spacing of the host materials is usually small. In addition, other layer materials do not have strong in-plane covalent bonds, which may lead to their decomposition if a strong oxidizer is used. However, even in this case, there may still be some chance of achieving the intercalation of layer materials like TMDCs and layer III–VI compounds, by oxidative intercalants. Because intercalation staging has been observed in graphite and h-BN, it would be very important if one could achieve the exfoliation of layer materials with a controlled number of layers in a high yield by optimizing the intercalation conditions. For example, MoS2 flakes with an odd number of layers show a pronounced piezoelectric effect, making it important to precisely control the number of layers in MoS2 and potentially other 2D TMDCs.64


2.1.2 Reduction-based intercalation of alkali metals and exfoliation. 
The intercalation of layer materials using alkali metal atoms or ions has been studied for over half a century (Fig. 2b and Table 1).23,24 The main advantage of alkali metal atoms or ions is their small size, which makes it easier for them to enter the gallery of the host material which has a small spacing between the layers. By adding alkali metal-intercalated layer materials to water, hydrogen bubbles produced by reactions between the alkali metals and water will expand the interlayer spacing and exfoliate them into 2D materials in solvents. The most-used alkali metal is lithium (Li), which has the smallest size and the highest reactivity among all the alkali metals. A series of layer materials has been exfoliated to 2D materials, including a variety of metal chalcogenides (e.g., MoS2, WS2, NbSe2, VSe2, Bi2Te3, WSe2, Sb2Se3, Ta2NiS5, and Ta2NiSe5), graphite, and h-BN.1,42,43,49 In principle, all layer materials can be intercalated by alkali metal atoms and then exfoliated, if there are no ions within the interlayer gallery, given the strong electron donating effect of alkali metals. However, alkali metals are highly reductive and can quickly dissolve or degrade layer materials such as metal oxides, metal hydroxides, and metal organic frameworks (MOFs). Furthermore, exfoliated 2D metal chalcogenides have many anion vacancies due to reactions between the alkali metals and sulfur/selenium, and these can degrade the properties.37,42,65–67
There are many different routes to intercalate alkali metal atoms into layer materials (Table 1). A typical method is directly heating a mixture of the layer material and pure alkali metals24 or LiBH468 in vacuum at high temperature. The evaporated alkali metals would enter the galleries of the precursor, forming an intercalated material. However, the alkali metals are reactive, leading to decomposition of layer materials or only partial intercalation of them. Additionally, the alkali metals also attack quartz tubes that are commonly used as a container for the intercalation process at high temperatures, which may lead to breakage of the tubes and explosion of alkali metals in air.
Alkali metals can also intercalate layer materials in liquid media, including treating host TMDCs with a solution of alkali metal in liquid ammonia67 or in naphthalide,66 or n-butyllithium (n-BuLi) in hexane42 (Table 1). The difference between these solvents is the reactivity of the alkali metals in them, following the sequence liquid ammonia > naphthalide > n-BuLi in hexane. After insertion of the alkali metals into the host, their hydration induces the production of hydrogen bubbles, expanding the materials to produce isolated 2D materials in dispersion. Here we use MoS2 as an example to illustrate the liquid-based intercalation of alkali metals and their subsequent exfoliation. Eda et al.42 have reported the use of n-BuLi to exfoliate MoS2, following the recipe used in Frindt and Morrison's pioneering work.69 The 2D materials obtained have lateral sizes of 300–800 nm and thicknesses of 1–1.2 nm, with a mixture of metallic 1T (50%) and semiconducting 2H MoS2 phases (50%). We note that the direct preparation of pure phases for desired applications, such as the 1T phase for electrocatalysis and 2H phase for FETs, is highly desirable and needs further investigation. In Goki et al.'s work, they found that after heating the mixed phase materials at 300 °C, the 1T phase had been completely converted into the 2H phase. The preparation of large 2D semiconducting materials would be quite important for thin film transistors (TFTs), because they would reduce the number of junctions in the film, and increase the carrier mobility of the devices. Zheng et al. recently combined hydrothermal synthesis and chemical ion intercalation-assisted liquid exfoliation to produce large MoS2 nanosheets.66 First, they treated the bulk precursor with hydrazine to expand the interlayer spacing. The expanded bulk crystals were then intercalated by an alkali metal in naphthalenide. The obtained MoS2 had a monolayer yield of up to 90%, and a lateral area up to 400 μm2. After baking at 200 °C, the single MoS2 nanosheets were used as channel materials in a TFT and the device showed carrier mobilities of 20–80 cm2 V−1 s−1. This result shows evidence of the high quality of the 2D materials obtained by this method. However, for some other applications, such as electrocatalysis, a high percentage of the 1T phase and the presence of defects would be desirable. The MoS2 nanosheets obtained by exfoliation in alkali ammonia would be the pure 1T phase and contain many sulfur vacancies and edges due to the strong reducibility of the dissociative alkali atoms in ammonia.67 As a result, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) performance of the porous 1T MoS2 obtained is fairly good, with an overpotential η = 153 mV vs. a reversible hydrogen electrode at a current density (j) of 10 mA cm−2, and a small Tafel slope of 43 mV dec−1.
According to the preceding description, the quality of the 2D materials obtained can be controlled by using different organic solvents, which can tune the activity of the dissolved alkali metals. The monolayer yield is high and the size of the flakes is determined by the precursor and the organic solvent used. However, the organometallic materials used in this method are highly explosive and very sensitive to moisture and oxygen. Therefore, strict experimental conditions are required, which usually means operating in an inert gas-filled glovebox with extreme caution. Another drawback of liquid-based alkali metal intercalation and exfoliation is the long time required, with several days needed to finish an experiment. Although most layer materials, such as metal selenides or tellurides, can be intercalated with alkali metals in liquid media, their exfoliation requires the addition of water or ethanol to produce hydrogen bubbles under sonication. A high frequency sonication wave could greatly promote the reaction of lithium with layer materials and decompose them. Therefore, more gentle reaction conditions for lithium intercalation and gas production solvents may be helpful to preserve the pristine structure and properties of the 2D materials. Besides the exfoliation of layer materials into monolayers, researchers have recently found that bulk MoS2 can be exfoliated into high quality 2H phase trilayer flakes by using a sub-stoichiometric amount of n-BuLi to MoS2.70 Based on these encouraging results, the controlled exfoliation of layer materials in alkali metal organic solvents into the desired number of layers, lateral size and phase may also be feasible by tuning the exfoliation parameters, such as the type of organic solvent, the amount of alkali metal for intercalation, the frequency of the sonication wave for exfoliation, and the solvent for producing hydrogen bubbles.
To avoid the dissolution or decomposition of layer materials in organic solvents containing an alkali metal or gas intercalation process, Zeng et al.49 have developed a green electrochemical route to intercalate alkali metal ions into layer materials based on the working principle of LIBs (Fig. 2b and Table 1). Compared with using organometallic materials, the major difference is that the Li intercalation was driven by an electrochemical force and a Li foil rather than an organometallic material was used as the Li source. A typical process is as follows. First, the layer bulk precursor was used as the cathode and the pure alkali metal was used as the anode in a LIB, and a discharge process was used to intercalate the bulk layer crystals with Li ions to form Li intercalated materials. Second, the Li-intercalated cathode was removed, washed, and sonicated in water or ethanol to obtain 2D material dispersions. In this case, the reactivity of the Li+ is not strong, and does not lead to side effects stemming from the reactive alkali metal or alkali metal organics, such as the dissociation of the layer material or the removal of sulfur atoms in MoS2. Therefore, many kinds of layer materials have been exfoliated to be 2D materials, such as graphene, h-BN, and many metal chalcogenides (MoS2, WS2, TiS2, TaS2, ZrS2, NbSe2, WSe2, Sb2Se3, Bi2Te3, Ta2NiS5, etc.). The production yield of this method is very high, and sometimes exceeds 90%. The amount of Li+ and the intercalation speed can be finely tuned by controlling the cutoff voltage and discharge current in the discharge process, which means the quality and phase of the 2D materials obtained can potentially be controlled. Under a suitable voltage, one may obtain high quality 2D materials with a pure 2H phase. However, this electrochemical Li intercalation-assisted liquid exfoliation method is complicated because it requires the assembly of a battery. Additional additives, such as polyvinylidenefluoride (PVDF) and activated carbon, were mixed with the bulk layer crystals to increase the mechanical strength and conductivity of the electrodes. The residual additives may be absorbed on the exfoliated 2D materials, thus influencing their properties. What is more, this method is not suitable for the scalable production of 2D materials considering the high cost and the small size of battery cells.
Besides considering the intercalation process of alkali metal atoms into layer materials, the vigorous exfoliation condition by hydration of alkali metals with water has also been optimized, where the bubbles produced in the hydration process will lead to the formation of mixed phases and even porous structures in 2D materials. Vallés et al. used polar protic organic solvents, such as NMP, DMF, and tetrahydrofuran (THF), instead of water, to spontaneously dissolve potassium intercalated graphite, and exfoliate them to be negative charged monolayer graphene without chemical reactions or agitations.71 The exfoliation principle is based on the entropy-driven solvation of metal cations in polar protic solvents, where the entropy will increase after the dissolving of cations in solvent and accompanied with dissolving negatively charged graphene.71–73 Such charged graphene in polar protic solvents can also be functionalized or de-charged by other chemicals, such as benzonitrile,46 4-tert-butylphenyl,74 and iodine.51 As water is a polar protic solvent as well, the charged 2D materials can also be transferred to water and stabilized without adding any surfactants. Later, Cullen et al. proved the universality of this method to exfoliate other layer materials, such as MoS2, Bi2Te3, and carbide nitrides.45,75 The as obtained monolayer 2D materials in polar protic solvents inherit the in-plane structure of their bulk materials and show good crystalline quality with negligible defects. In addition, the MoS2 exfoliated in NMP has a pure 2H phase without any 1T phase, while 1T phase is a main product when the exfoliation is done in water.45 Note that the alkali metal intercalated layer materials and the resulting solutions are strongly reductive, which can react with trace amount of oxygen in solvent to form superoxide anion and the exfoliation will lose efficacy. One main concern of this method still lies on the intercalation of alkali metal atoms into the layer materials, which is a dangerous process. Moreover, all the exfoliation experiments should be done in strict inert atmosphere, which increases the cost of production.

2.2 Mechanical force-assisted exfoliation

2.2.1 Sonication-assisted exfoliation and shear force-assisted liquid phase exfoliation. 
Although high quality monolayer 2D materials can be prepared in a high yield based on the intercalation of oxidizers or reducers into the host layer material, these methods are usually complicated, time consuming, and have safety concerns because of the materials used. In 2008, Coleman, et al. developed a simple method to directly exfoliate graphite to monolayer or few layer graphene in various solvents, such as N-methyl-pyrrolidone (NMP) and di-methyl formamide (DMF), using a normal ultrasonication bath (Fig. 2c and Table 1).52 Although there was an early report on the exfoliation of graphite by sonication in dichlorobenzene,76 they were the pioneers who systematically studied the direct exfoliation of layer materials in solvents. In the presence of the ultrasonic waves, bubbles are generated in the solvents, and the collapse of bubbles produces forces that exfoliate the bulk layer materials into 2D materials. The key parameter for achieving efficient exfoliation is matching the surface energy between the layer material and the solvent. Such exfoliation can only occur if the net energetic cost is very small based on the Hansen solubility parameter theory. This method produces a low concentration dispersion of small but high-quality graphene flakes. Later, this sonication-assisted exfoliation method was expanded to exfoliate other 2D materials, such as h-BN, MoS2, WS2, b-P, GaS, TaSe2, MoTe2, transition metal oxides (TMOs, such as MoO3, WO3, MnO2), topological insulators (e.g., Bi2Te3, Bi2Se3, and Sb2Te3), and metal organic frameworks (MOFs).3,53
To enhance the exfoliation of 2D materials, tip sonication with a high power density has been used.53 Increasing the amount of the pristine layer materials and the sonication time are other routes to increase the concentrations of the 2D material dispersions produced.77 The stability of the 2D materials in the solvents is another aspect to be considered. As mentioned above, only solvents that have a matching surface energy with the exfoliated 2D materials can stabilize them. The surface energy of different 2D materials are different, and therefore, different solvents are needed to disperse and stabilized different 2D materials. Specifically, the surface energy of graphene, h-BN, MoS2 are 70, 44–66, 46–65 mJ cm−2.52,53,78 Therefore, NMP and DMF which have surface energy of around 70 and 67 mJ cm−2 are good to disperse graphene.79 Isopropanol and benzyl benzoate which have surface energy of 53 and 63 mJ cm−2 are good to disperse h-BN.80 However, note that the good solvents for different 2D materials are generally having high boiling point and toxic.53 For example, the organic NMP and DMF, which are good solvents for graphene, have high boiling points of 203 and 153 °C.3,52 For many practical applications, however, dispersants with low boiling points would be desirable, because residual solvents can degrade the performance of 2D materials. Motivated by this consideration, O’Neill et al. have found that 2D materials could be dispersed in isopropanol and chloroform, which have low boiling points of 82 and 61 °C, respectively.81 Nevertheless, the most commonly used solvent, water, has a large surface energy (∼100 mJ m−2) and consequently it is difficult to disperse 2D materials by sonication in water. To match the surface tensions of the solvents and the 2D material, one can consider modifying the surface tension of the solvent by several methods. For example, the surface tension of solvents can be tuned by mixing them together, like water with ethanol,82 or by changing the temperature.83 However, these methods have their drawbacks. For example, the solubility of 2D materials in mixed water containing solvents and heated water is usually not high due to the intrinsic low solubility of water. To overcome the low concentration problem of 2D materials in water or organic solvents, ionic surfactants, nonionic surfactants, polymers, biomolecules and organic molecules have been added into water/organic solvents during exfoliation. These additives have been demonstrated to promote the exfoliation of layer materials during sonication and also stabilize exfoliated 2D materials in solution with increased concentration,1,41 the so-called molecule-assisted liquid phase exfoliation.79,84 The added molecules would adsorb on the basal planes of 2D materials through physisorption of their hydrophobic moieties during the exfoliation of layer materials in liquid media. Meanwhile the other end of the molecules would be soluble in the solvent to prevent aggregation of exfoliated 2D materials. In addition to the good stability of 2D materials in water and other environmentally friendly solvents, the main advantage of this method is to use the functions of the molecules adsorbed on the 2D material surfaces. For example, when MoS2 was exfoliated in proteins, the as obtained 2D MoS2 modified with proteins has shown good bio-compatibility for bio-related applications.50 However, for many applications, organic molecules and polymers can affect the properties of 2D materials, because they attach on the materials and are not easy remove completely. In addition, the broad size distribution of the 2D materials produced by the sonication-assisted liquid exfoliation method is one of the main obstacles for their applications. To solve this challenge, Hersam et al. have done pioneering work to sort 2D materials in dispersions using density gradient centrifugation method and have obtained 2D materials such as h-BN, graphene, MoS2 and b-P with narrow size distributions.85 Nevertheless, the size of the 2D materials produced by sonication method is usually below 1 μm, which is smaller than 2D materials produced by intercalation-assisted methods and are not suitable for some applications where large grain sizes are needed to exhibit improved device performance.
Although the sonication-assisted exfoliation methods can obtain a considerable amount of 2D materials compared with MC, for industrial applications, it is still not sufficient. To increase production, Paton et al. have developed a method for the exfoliation of bulk layer materials by using shear forces with high shear rates (Fig. 2d and Table 1).54 A typical exfoliation experiment is as follows. Bulk layer precursors are added to solvents with a matching surface energy, such as NMP, and a rotor is immersed in the solvents with a rotation speed of over 104 s−1. By changing the sizes of the rotor and container, the production rate of the 2D material can be controlled. The production of few layer graphene can reach as high as 5.3 g h−1 although the concentration is relatively low, around 0.07 mg ml−1.60 The as-prepared graphene have 1–10 layers and sizes of 300–800 nm, and show good quality based on the TEM and Raman results. These results imply that industrial rotating blade stirred tank reactors could be promising for the large-scale production of 2D materials, such as graphene, h-BN and MoS2. To further improve the exfoliation efficiency, microfluidization-assisted method based on the same exfoliation mechanism was developed.56 It uses high pressure to force the layer material containing solvents to pass through a microchannel to provide a shearing speed >106 s−1 to all the layer materials. Typically, bulk graphite can be exfoliated to be thin flakes with 100% yield, including 96% thin graphite flakes (thickness: 4–70 nm) and 4% few layered graphene (thickness: <4 nm).56
Mechanical force-assisted liquid phase exfoliation of 2D materials has been well studied in the past ten years since the pioneering work by Coleman et al.52 Compared with other methods, the main advantages of this method are its simplicity and low cost, and the 2D materials produced have high quality with few defects. As a result, the use of 2D materials produced by this method has been widely explored in LIBs, electrocatalysis, and TFTs. A major drawback is that their concentration in the liquid is not high, so that a time-consuming procedure to dry the dispersions into powders or condense them to higher concentrations is required. The relatively small sizes of the materials produced and their low yield also limit their practical applications. The development of pure shear force methods to exfoliate layer materials with a high yield in a short period is urgently needed.


2.2.2 Ball milling-assisted exfoliation. 
Ball milling is another mechanical method to exfoliate layer materials and its most noticeable advantage is that it can prepare 2D materials in large quantities. The mechanism of ball milling is also based on a shear force parallel to the layers. During rotation of the containers, the balls inside collide with each other and layer materials can be exfoliated if their in-plane direction is parallel to the direction of momentum of the balls (Fig. 2e and Table 1). In principle, all layer materials can be exfoliated by ball milling because of the large momentum of the balls at high rotation speeds. This is the reason why a benchmark 2D material, h-BN, which is very difficult to exfoliate by other methods, can be efficiently exfoliated by ball milling.57 So far, several layer materials have been exfoliated by ball milling, including graphene, h-BN, and MoS2.57,58 However, the lateral sizes of the materials obtained are relatively small due to their rupture by the large impact forces perpendicular to the layer direction in the mill. In general, the lateral size of 2D materials produced by this method is less than 200 nm and the quality of the materials is also degraded by the collisions between the balls. To improve the quality of the ball milling products, the most important consideration is to reduce the momentum of the balls by introducing buffering materials, including solids and solvents. A typical example is to use aromatic molecules to help produce high quality graphene by ball milling. Aromatic molecules modify the surface of graphite due to the π–π interactions between them, and these can absorb most of impact forces, as shown in recent work.58 This leads to a high yield in the exfoliation of graphite to graphene without forming amorphous carbon. The preparation of large h-BN flakes in a KOH solution by ball milling has been recently reported, in which KOH was found to be able to etch the bulk h-BN precursor,86 resulting in an average lateral size of the 2D h-BN of around 1.5 μm with a yield of 18 wt%.
Compared with the liquid-based exfoliation methods discussed above, ball milling is a mature method for changing large materials into smaller ones, which has been well studied and can easily produce materials in large quantity. Although the relatively small size and low quality of 2D flakes produced by ball milling means that they are not preferred for electronics and optoelectronics, they may be attractive for energy-related applications like electrocatalysis and energy storage. The large forces available during ball milling modifies exfoliated 2D materials with various functional groups, which could be a big advantage for chemistry-related applications. For example, ammonia functionalized 2D h-BN flakes may improve the performance of a sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone) film for vanadium flow batteries due to increased proton conductivity.87

2.3 Exfoliation of layer materials containing ions or molecules between the layers

2.3.1 Ion exchange-assisted intercalation and exfoliation. 
Ion exchange-induced intercalation can be used to exfoliate specific types of layer materials, such as oxides and hydroxides, which have ions or molecules between the layers. These materials are difficult to exfoliate by the oxidation or reduction-based exfoliation methods discussed in the Section 2.1, due to their sensitivity to oxidative acids and reductive alkali metals. In addition, the ions between the layers have a strong electrostatic attraction with atoms in the layers, and this is comparable to the in-plane bonding force, making them difficult to exfoliate by the mechanical force-assisted methods mentioned in Section 2.2. Exfoliation of these materials is based on the principle of expanding their interlayer gallery to weaken the interactions between layers. The difficulty of exfoliation depends on the area charge density of the materials. The higher the charge density, the stronger the interaction between ions and layers, and the more difficult it is to exfoliate them into isolated layers. Although smectite clays and protonated calcium niobate have been exfoliated to monolayers with the assistance of organic bases, such as tetrabutylammonium and propylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH and TPAOH),88 the most representative study is the exfoliation of titanium-based layer materials with alkali metals ions between the host layers by Sasaki et al.25 They used dilute hydrochloride acid to exchange alkali metal ions with protons, and then used TBAOH to exfoliate the protonated layer materials based on reactions between OH− and H+ to produce water (Fig. 2f and Table 1).25 This method has greatly expanded the range of layer materials that can be exfoliated, since there are many precursors with alkali metals (oxides) or anionic atoms (LDHs) between the layers. So far a large number of 2D oxide and LDH have been prepared by this method, such as titanium oxide, manganese oxide, calcium niobate, tungsten oxide, ruthenium oxide, and M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2Ax/nn−·yH2O (here M2+ = Mg2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+, etc.; M3+ = Al3+, Fe3+, Co3+, etc.).4
2D materials obtained by this method usually have a thickness of one-unit cell, which is around 0.5–3 nm depending on the structure of the precursor. Their lateral sizes can be from 2 nm to 50 μm, depending on the size of the pristine layer material, intercalation base, and external exfoliation force.39 Theoretically, the intercalation of organic cations or anions into layer materials is 100% under a suitable concentration of organic base, leading to the full exfoliation of the materials with a high yield. The quality of the 2D materials obtained is also very good. Despite the existence of a high percentage of vacancies, the crystal structure of the 2D material is well preserved.89 In addition, the exfoliated 2D materials produces by this method are charged due to the removal of charged ions in the galleries, resulting in an opposite charge in the 2D materials obtained.
The synthesis of these 2D oxide and LDH has been extensively studied for over 20 years, and many general problems, including the yield of the monolayers and their lateral size and quality, have been solved. However, there are still several problems that need to be overcome. First, the current preparation procedure is complicated and time consuming. Second, scalable production of 2D materials in the ton quantities has not yet been reported. This has hindered their applications in many fields, such as supercapacitors and catalysis, where a large quantity of material is needed. Third, there are many layer oxide materials that have not yet been exfoliated by this method, such as CoO2 and CuO2. A monolayer of these oxides has very high area charge density and is inherently difficult to exfoliate. Nevertheless, there is a strong motivation to exfoliate these materials as they may exhibit superconducting properties. The production of materials with a high areal charge density may need to overcome difficulties: (i) the large attraction force between ions and host layers, and (ii) stabilization of oxide nanosheets with a high areal charge density immediately after exfoliation. It may be necessary to exchange suitable acids with the alkali metals ions between the CoO2 layers and suitable solvents will be needed to stabilize them.


2.3.2 Etching and intercalation-assisted exfoliation. 
Besides layer oxides and LDHs, there are other types of layer materials having elements in the galleries of host layers, such as ceramic MAX phase materials. These materials cannot be exfoliated by the ion exchange process due to very strong bonding between ions and the host layers, some of them being strong covalent bonds. To break the bonds connecting the layers, a strong force or chemical reaction is needed. However, MAX phases are even resistant to strong etchants like HF acid (Fig. 2g and Table 1). In 2011, Naguib et al. have used HF to etch aluminum layers in Ti3AlC2 bulk materials,59 and isolated 2D Ti3C2 were obtained after intercalating with various polar organic molecules, such as hydrazine, urea, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and isopropylamine or other large organic based molecules.6 The isolated MXene layers, which are 2D MAX phase materials with element A being selectively etched away, have mixed terminating functional groups such as –OH, –O and –F, making them negatively charged and stable in solvent. The lateral sizes of these 2D materials can vary from several hundred nanometers to 3–5 micrometers, depending on the exfoliation method. The defect density is also related to the exfoliation method, for example, sonication inducing more defects than shaking by hand. In addition, increasing the concentration of HF can also induce additional defects. Later, other kinds of MAX were exfoliated to 2D materials using HF, such as Zr-, V-, Nb-, Ta- and Mo-containing carbides.6 Because HF is a very dangerous acid, mixtures of strong acid and fluoride salt have later been used to exfoliate MAX.90 Recently, some results have demonstrated the successful exfoliation of MAX without using any fluorine-containing agents as etchants, however, the efficiency of exfoliation is lower.91,92 We note that despite great progress in exfoliating many types of MAX, especially carbides, many other species such as a chromium-based MAX have not yet been exfoliated. This is because of the low stability of chromium-based carbides, which can be easily transformed to other phases, such as oxides, in aqueous solutions. Nitrogen-based MAX phases are also difficult to exfoliate because of the equally strong bonding forces of in-plane and out-of-plane bonds, which may lead to the decomposition of the whole material during a harsh exfoliation process. The only successful exfoliation is of Ti4AlN3, which was exfoliated in a molten fluorine-containing salt.60
At present, the etching-induced exfoliation approach has been used to prepare MXene. In total, there are over one hundred MAX species in light of theoretical predictions. Most of them have still not been exfoliated.6 To expand the functionalities of MXenes, the synthesis of new MAX phases is an important research direction to pursue. Exfoliation of existing MAX phases that have not yet been extensively studied, such as nitrides, is also a critical issue. They may need a more suitable etching agent to achieve exfoliation. In addition, although HF has been used to exfoliate a number of ternary layer carbides, it is a very dangerous procedure and is time-consuming. Therefore, developing safe etching agents and efficient etching procedures is another important topic. Besides MAX phases, there are oxides and LDHs and other kinds of layer materials with similar structures, such as Bi2O2Se, which has selenium atoms between the Bi2O2 layers.93 This kind of material may not be suitable for exfoliation by ion exchange and etching, and therefore, new methods need to be developed. For example, if agents can be found that react with elements in the galleries to increase their height, followed by an external force such as sonication, we may be able to exfoliate these interesting layer materials.

3. Assembly of solution-based 2D materials into macrostructures
The abundant species and versatile functions of exfoliated 2D materials indicate countless applications. We notice that not only the 2D materials themselves but also macrostructures constructed from can have critical roles. New functions can be created and superior properties can be achieved by integrating nanoscale building blocks. For example, when using 2D materials as electrochemical capacitors, porous 3D macrostructures are preferred because they have a large surface area for ions to access in solution. In the use of 2D materials as active channels for TFTs, a thin film with a well-ordered structure would be desirable because of reduced charge carrier scattering from junctions and strong electrostatic gating. Therefore, the ability to accurately control and tune the features of macrostructures assembled from exfoliated 2D materials is important to determine the performance of devices made from them. In general, final performances of the assembled products are mainly influenced by the parameters of dispersions and their assembling methods used. The dispersion parameters of nanomaterials, including rheology, concentration, stability, etc., will impact the interaction of nanoparticles or 2D materials in dispersions, leading to different assembling behavior.96 On the other hand, the assembly method used will directly determine the macrostructure or morphology of the products. In this section, we will focus on methods to assemble 2D materials from a dispersion into different macrostructures, including 2D films or membranes, and 3D macrostructures. The different assembly methods are discussed and the pros and cons of each method are compared (Fig. 3, 4 and Table 2). Accompanied with these discussions, the requirements on the dispersions for each assembling method are also discussed.
 Fig. 3  Assembly of 2D films or membranes from 2D material dispersions. (a) Layer-by-layer assembly. (b) Langmuir–Blodgett assembly. (c) Spin coating. (d) An AFM image of a neatly-packed monolayer film of titanium oxide nanosheets prepared by spin coating.109 Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2017. (e) Inkjet printing.111 Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from the Annual Reviews, copyright 2010. (f) Spray coating. (g) A picture of large-area graphene-based transparent conductive electrode fabricated by spray coating.41 Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from the John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (h) Vacuum filtration. (i) Self-assembly at the interface of two phases. (j) A free-standing GO membrane obtained by self-assembly at a water/air interface.118 Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from the John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2009. 
 Fig. 4  Assembly of 2D nanosheets to form powdery or 3D macrostructures. (a) Schematic of the flocculation process. (b) SEM image of flocculated GO/Ti0.87O20.52−.129 Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) Schematic of the preparation of hollow capsules by layer-by-layer assembly. (d) TEM image of Ti0.87O20.52− nanosheet hollow capsules.131 Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2002. (e) Schematic of the freeze-drying process. (f) 3D GO networks prepared by freeze drying.134 Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from the John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013. (g) Schematic of spray drying. (h) SEM image of Fe2O3/GO composites fabricated by spray drying.133 Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. 
Table 2 A summary of assembly methods used to organize exfoliated 2D materials into 2D or 3D macrostructures






Advantages
Disadvantages
Applications




Films or membranes


Layer-by-layer assembly (Fig. 3a)
(1) Controllable fine increase of film thickness by only 1 nm
(1) Time consuming to prepare thick films (∼1 nm h−1)
Photocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry,138,139 dielectrics,107 FETs,99 photodetectors100


(2) Simple process
(2) Limited thickness of thin film (<50 nm)


(3) Suitability for large substrates
(3) Polyelectrolyte incorporation into film


(4) Artificial organization on the molecular scale
(4) Only suitable to charged 2D materials






Langmuir–Blodgett assembly (Fig. 3b)
(1) High controllability
(1) High demands on equipment
Dielectrics,107 TCFs,103 ultrathin capacitors106


(2) High-quality monolayer film
(2) Small size of films prepared


(3) Suitable for most 2D materials, including charged and neutral ones, if suitable solvents are used103–105
(3) Time consuming




(4) Limited thickness of thin film (<50 nm)




(5) Not suitable to NMP and DMF, common solvents in sonication and liquid phase exfoliation53






Spin coating (Fig. 3c)
(1) Simplicity and common instrument
(1) Limited thickness of thin film (<50 nm)
Dielectrics,109 FETs108


(2) Fast
(2) Difficulty to prepare homogeneous films on a large scale


(3) Controllable increase of thickness of neatly packed monolayer
(3) Need to use charged 2D materials to form high quality films109






Inkjet printing (Fig. 3e)
(1) Direct printing of 2D materials with desired patterns for flexible and transparent electronics
(1) Complicated printing instruments
Optoelectronics,35 FETs, TCFs;140 read-only memories;35 bio-applications35


(2) Good spatial resolution of ∼5 μm, suitable for TFTs
(2) Need to optimize many parameters of 2D material dispersions


(3) Suitable for most 2D materials35,140








Spray coating (Fig. 3f)
(1) Easy fabrication of large size films on substrates
(1) Not well ordered layered structure
Capacitors,113 FETs36


(2) Suitable for most 2D materials
(2) Spatial resolution of ∼100 μm






Vacuum filtration (Fig. 3h)
(1) Easy preparation of free-standing thick membranes
(1) Extra transferring procedure onto desired substrate
TCFs and FETs115


(2) Simple process
(2) Size of film depends on filtration instruments
Separation of gases and ions114,117


(3) Suitable for most 2D materials
(3) Time consuming to prepare thick membranes
Electrochemical capacitors116






Self-assembly at the interface of two phases (Fig. 3i)
(1) Controllable membrane sizes
(1) Difficulty to prepare ultrathin films for electronic applications
LIBs and solar cells141


(2) Easy preparation of free standing membranes with thickness on μm order
(2) Only work for a few materials, such as GO and LDH






Powdery or 3D macrostructures


Flocculation (Fig. 4a)
(1) Simple process
(1) Not well-organized macrostructure
Photoluminescence,125 photocatalysis,126 superconductivity,127 electrochemical capacitors,128 LIBs142


(2) Easy fabrication in a scalable way
(2) Guest ions for flocculation may influence properties


(3) Feasibility to realize superlattice stacking
(3) Only suitable for charged 2D materials


(4) Mesoporous structure with large specific surface area








Layer-by-layer assembly (Fig. 4c)
Controlled thickness and diameter of hollow shells
(1) Complicated procedure
Photocatalysis,143 electrochemical capacitors144


(2) Time consuming


(3) Infeasibility for large quantity preparation


(4) Only suitable for charged 2D materials






Freeze drying and spraying (Fig. 4e and g)
(1) Easy fabrication in a scalable way
Not well-organized microstructure and macrostructure
LIBs,133 compressible materials134


(2) Suitable for most 2D materials






Other methods for GO
Formation of well-connected 3D networks with good mechanical properties
Only suitable for GO
Electrochemical supercapacitors135,137




3.1 2D films or membranes

3.1.1 Layer-by-layer assembly. 
The earliest procedure to assemble 2D materials into films was electrostatic deposition, which was developed in last century before such materials became popular. The principle of electrostatic deposition is based on the fact that the exfoliated 2D materials usually carry charges, and can be adsorbed onto substrates with opposite charges (Fig. 3a and Table 2). By alternatively dipping a substrate into a dispersion of the 2D material and an oppositely charged aqueous polyelectrolyte solution, multilayer films can be fabricated. The dispersion used is diluted to be below 0.1 g L−1 with good stability. The absolute value of zeta potential for 2D dispersions used is generally above 30 because of the charges on their surfaces. The most studied 2D material for layer-by-layer assembly was GO, which is organized into multilayer films with assistance of poly(diallylmethylammonium) chloride in solution, which is a positively charged polymer and used as the counter ion. By using the alternating deposition procedure described above, up to 30 layers of GO have been deposited onto a quartz substrate.97 Later, Mallouk et al.98 used a similar procedure to assemble clay minerals and α-zirconium phosphate. Such procedures have also been used to assemble 2D oxidise and LDH into films.4,99,100 MoS2 modified by a polyelectrolyte has also been assembled on substrates using a layer-by-layer deposition procedure.101
The most noticeable benefit of layer-by-layer assembly is that it can add 2D materials with a thickness as small as one monolayer (∼1 nm thick) per deposition cycle. In principle, this process should be suitable for the assembly of any 2D material on a substrate if there is an attractive force, such as an electrostatic adsorption force, between the substrates and the 2D material. This method can be easily scaled up to produce films with very large areas if one uses large substrates. The procedure is very simple as one only needs to simply immerse the substrate in a suspension of the 2D material which, with the polyelectrolyte, will be deposited onto the substrate. However, the whole fabrication process is time consuming, because each cycle could take over half an hour to deposit a layer around 1 nm in thickness. In general, to fabricate films with 20 layers of 2D materials, it may need around 2 days. In addition, deposition gradually becomes more difficult due to increased roughness of film surface as deposition continues. After reaching a limit, no more material can be deposited, and the final film thickness usually cannot exceed 50 nm. Therefore, this process may be good for the preparation of ultrathin films that are preferred in applications such as thin film-based electronics or optoelectronics, and UV shielding devices.


3.1.2 Langmuir–Blodgett assembly. 
Langmuir–Blodgett assembly is a method that can prepare a neatly-packed monolayer film on a substrate. After forming a layer of floating 2D material on the liquid surface, a pair of sliding barriers is used to compress the surface to form a well-organized monolayer of 2D material. By vertically dipping or lifting a substrate with good affinity with the liquid, a monolayer of the 2D material can be deposited on the substrate (Fig. 3b and Table 2) and by repeating this procedure, a multilayer film can be fabricated.
Compared with other assembly methods, Langmuir–Blodgett assembly is highly controllable and high-quality monolayer films can be obtained with good reproducibility. So far, many 2D materials have been organized into films using Langmuir–Blodgett assembly, such as zirconium 1,10-decanebisphosphonate,102 graphene,103 GO,104 and titanium oxide nanosheets.105 However, the 2D materials should be able to stably float on the liquid–air or liquid–liquid interface in order to form a well packed film under the moving of sliding barrier, which means the process is very sensitive to the environment. Moreover, the demands of the equipment and small sizes of the films prepared by this method prevent its widespread application. In addition, Langmuir–Blodgett assembly is time-taking, for example, 2 hours to prepare a monolayer oxide nanosheet film.105 Therefore, the uses of Langmuir–Blodgett assembled films must be focused on fields which need high film quality but small sample size, such as an ultrathin capacitor or ultrathin dielectric layer.106,107


3.1.3 Spin coating. 
For the use of 2D material films in the semiconductor industry, large films with high quality are required. To reduce fabrication time, spin coating, a conventional method to prepare thin films in the semiconductor industry, is used to fabricate them. After dropping a certain amount of a 2D material dispersion onto a substrate adhered to a spin coater, a suitable rotation speed is applied, and the 2D material in the dispersant will slide to the edge of the substrate due to centrifugal force. Solvent and excess 2D materials are removed during rotation, leaving a film consisting of the 2D material (Fig. 3c, d and Table 2). The as-formed film may then experience a heating or UV treatment to increase its adhesion to the substrate. By repeating the above process, a multilayer film can be formed. Many types of 2D materials have been fabricated into films by the spin coating process, such as GO and oxide nanosheets.108–110 The stacking of 2D materials in each cycle depends on several parameters including the viscosity of the solvent, the concentration of the 2D materials, rotation speed, and surfactants in solvents. Recently, Matsuba et al. have reported a general method to form a neat monolayer film of many types of 2D materials, where they used TBA+ as a surfactant to stabilize 2D flakes in the dispersion and DMSO to tune the viscosity of the solution.109
Spin coating is a widely used technique in the semiconductor industry and has many advantages, such as simplicity and speed. The highly efficient preparation of 2D material films and the ability to achieve monolayer tiling of 2D flakes comparable to Langmuir–Blodgett assembly show great promise for using this method in practical applications, particularly in the semiconductor industry. For example, one can prepare ten-layer oxide nanosheet films with a thickness of around 10 nm on substrates and use them as dielectric layers for ultrathin TFT devices. Nevertheless, we note that spin coating is not suitable for the preparation of 2D material films over 50 nm in thickness, because very complicated cycling processes may be needed to form such thick films.


3.1.4 Inkjet printing. 
Besides the quality and size of the as-fabricated films and the fabrication time, another important parameter for electronics is the patterning of the active materials. Techniques for fabricating films with pre-designed patterns have been developed, such as inkjet printing and spray coating. Inkjet printing is an automatic direct-writing technique, in which patterns can be designed and printed with the assistance of computer software. In brief, one can directly print 2D material dispersions onto substrates with desired patterns to fabricate electronic and optoelectronic devices, similar to printers used today (Fig. 3e and Table 2). The difference is that the ink used in inkjet printing is a functional material like the 2D flakes, while the inks in ordinary printers are carbon balls. Nowadays, the inkjet printing of exfoliated 2D materials is a hot topic for flexible electronics, and represents a major direction for future electronic devices. Good inkjet printing needs the printed patterns to be densely stacked with sharp edges. Many parameters need to be optimized to satisfy this requirement. Currently, most research focuses on tuning the properties of the solvents and types of surfactants used to control the rheological properties, concentration, and stability of dispersions. A suitable solvent should have good dispersion for 2D materials, which can allow a high concentration the 2D materials in the solvent desirable for printing. At the same time, the viscosity and surface tension of the solvent must also be suitable to print patterns with sharp edges and high resolution. Usually, 2D material inks are dissolved in solvents with high boiling points.52,53,111 For example, Coleman et al. used NMP and DMF as solvents, which have a good dispersion for 2D materials and high boiling points, for the sonication-assisted liquid phase exfoliation of 2D materials. However, residues of these high boiling point solvents degrade the device performance of the 2D films produced, and there are toxicity concerns over the use of these solvents. Therefore, many other solvents with low boiling points and good dispersion have been used for printing, such as terpineol and a pyrene sulfonic acid water solution.35,112 By suitable tuning of the key parameters during inkjet printing, good results have been achieved. For example, an inkjet printed graphene FET with a decent carrier mobility of around 90 cm2 V−1 s−1 has been fabricated. An inkjet printed photodetector made of vertically aligned graphene/WS2/graphene heterostructures has also been fabricated, and showed a photoresponsivity of over 1 mA W−1.35
Inkjet printing of 2D materials is a technology mainly suitable for electronic and optoelectronic applications. Compared to spin coating and Langmuir–Blodgett assembly, the advantages and disadvantages of inkjet printing are apparent. On the one hand, inkjet printing can directly write electronic devices without additional etching or transfer procedures, which is beneficial in reducing cost. On the other hand, the structure of inkjet printed 2D materials is not well-organized, and is far inferior to the neat monolayer packing produced by spin coating or Langmuir–Blodgett assembly, indicating that the performance and controllability of the devices may not be good. The device performance will also be influenced by surfactant and solvent residues, and the performance reliability of inkjet printed devices is a big problem. In addition, the relatively high cost of instruments for printing large devices must be considered for practical applications.


3.1.5 Spray coating. 
The working principle of spray coating is as follows. By using a gas pressure or an electrical voltage to disperse 2D material dispersions into small aerosol drops, they can be sprayed onto a substrate surface (Fig. 3f, g and Table 2). The small drops quickly dry when the solvent evaporates due to the large surface area of the small drops of solvent, and finally a thin film is formed on the substrate. Spray coating can be used to fabricate patterns of 2D material films, and is convenient and suitable for flexible substrates of any size. With a shadow mask, the preparation of channels with a resolution of 100 μm or smaller is feasible. For devices with simple stacking structures but large size, the spray coating method is superior to inkjet printing because of its speed and low cost. Its main disadvantage is the requirement of a mask and manual changing of the mask. In comparison, inkjet printing can automatically print multilayered structures without any manual procedure, which is critical for complicated device structures. In addition, for expensive inks such as 2D material inks, spray coating may not be a good choice since much ink is wasted. In some recent studies, Kelly et al. have used spray coating to prepare 2D films on flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates and fabricated devices such as supercapacitors113 and TFTs.36 Similar to inkjet printing, the 2D materials in the channel have local disorder, which greatly degrades the performance of the fabricated devices. In short, exfoliated 2D materials are compatible with the spray coating method to fabricate TFTs, optoelectronics, and other devices for low-end applications that have low demands on the carrier mobility and device performance, but require low cost, flexibility, and larger sizes.


3.1.6 Vacuum filtration. 
Fabricating membranes with thicknesses of the order of micrometers expands the applications of exfoliated 2D materials to many areas, such as flexible supercapacitors, LIBs, as well as the separation of ions and gases.114–116 Vacuum filtration is the most-widely used method to prepare membranes of 2D materials due to its simplicity. By using a vacuum pump to suck 2D material dispersions through a filter, the solvent would pass through the filter and the 2D material would form a membrane on top (Fig. 3h and Table 1). Vacuum filtration has many advantages, such as simplicity, speed, and low cost, compared to the other methods used to prepare thick membranes, in addition to its main advantage that the as-formed membranes can be easily peeled off the filter to make a free-standing structure if a suitable filter is used. The thickness of the obtained films or membranes usually range from 1.8 nm to 100 μm, and can be tuned by the pore size of the filter and the quantity of 2D material in the dispersion for filtration.117 However, this method is not suitable for preparing membranes with a thickness of the order of millimeters because of the very strong blocking effect when the membrane thickness exceeds 100 μm. For the fabrication of very thin films with thicknesses below 20 nm, a further procedure to transfer the membranes to a desired substrate is needed. This feature makes vacuum filtration less competitive compared with other methods for preparing high quality films with a small thickness.114,117


3.1.7 Self-assembly at the interface of two phases. 
Besides vacuum filtration, another important method to prepare free-standing membranes or films of 2D materials is based on self-assembly of 2D materials at the interface of two phases. Similar to the Langmuir–Blodgett assembly, 2D materials first float at an air/liquid interface or one between two liquids due to surface tension at the interface. Under solvent evaporation or other driving forces, 2D materials in the dispersion can assemble at the interface to form densely packed membranes (Fig. 3i, j and Table 2). The most typical example of this method is the assembly of GO at a water/air interface. For example, after heating GO in water at 80 °C, a GO membrane is formed,118 which has a similar layer structure as GO membranes prepared by filtration.119,120 In another study, Hu et al. have oriented hydroxide nanosheet films on a water/hexane interface by dropping ethanol into a water/hexane solvent.121 Through a transfer process by Langmuir–Blodgett assembly, the film was transferred to substrates. Compared with other methods, self-assembly at the interface of two phases is a quite simple process that is highly efficient in preparing free-standing membranes. The thickness of assembled membrane can reach tens of micrometers, and its size depends on the area of the interface, suggesting that a large container can in principle produce large free-standing membranes. The uses of self-assembled 2D membranes for energy storage applications have been widely reported.118,122,123
In Section 3.1, we have systematically discussed different methods for the fabrication of films or membranes from 2D material dispersions. The advantages and disadvantages of these methods for fabricating films or membranes were summarized in Table 2. Each method has its own advantages under certain circumstances. In general, layer-by-layer assembly, Langmuir–Blodgett assembly, and spin coating are suitable for the fabrication of ultrathin 2D material films and have good thickness controllability with a 1 nm thickness deviation, and a good in-plane layer structure. Spray coating and inkjet printing are simple methods to fabricate patterned films on substrates with different sizes and spatial resolutions. Vacuum filtration and self-assembly at the interface of two phases are good methods to obtain free-standing membranes. The above analysis indicates that we can choose a suitable method to fabricate films or membranes depending on the final purpose. Meanwhile, we should notice that each method has its drawbacks when using the present processing conditions, which need to be further improved in terms of performance, cost, time, and sample size. We should also notice the 2D materials prepared by different methods have different concentration limit, stability, charges, viscosity, etc. A choose of suitable assembly method is important. For example, a recent study by Matsuba et al. has shown that neat monolayer packing of 2D oxides can be achieved within 1 min using spin coating with tuned surfactants and solvents.109 This result represents a significant advance in using spin coating to fabricate 2D material films, although the applicability of this new method to other 2D materials is still unclear and the size of the film is small for industrial demands and therefore needs further development.

3.2 Restacking 2D flakes to form powdery or 3D macrostructures

3.2.1 Flocculation. 
Top-down exfoliated 2D materials usually carry charges in dispersions that are stabilized either through grafted functional groups or intrinsic stoichiometric defects. The addition of counter ions to 2D material dispersions induces a local high concentration of opposite charges, resulting in local collection of the 2D materials to balance the high concentration of counter ions, which results in visible aggregates in a flocculation process (Fig. 4a, b and Table 2). Usually the species used for the flocculation of anionic 2D materials are positively charged ions or molecules, such as metal ions (Li+, K+, Eu3+, Tb3+, Ru3+, Co2+, etc.), polyoxocations (Al13 Keggin ion), polyelectrolytes (polyethylenimine, poly(diallyldimethylammonium) chloride), and positively charged nanomaterials (nanoparticles, nanowires, and 2D materials). In contrast, the flocculation of positively charged 2D materials occurs when anions (OH−, Cl−, Br−), polyanions (poly(styrene 4-sulfonate)), and anionic 2D materials (2D oxides, GO, and negatively charged TMDCs), are added. For example, Wang et al. have used Li+ to flocculate negatively-charged MnO2 nanosheets to form a Li0.36MnO2·0.7H2O aggregate, exhibiting a large capacity of over 193 mA h g−1 when used as a cathode material for LIBs.124 Interestingly, the flocculation of oxide nanosheets with rare-earth ions (Eu3+,Tb3+) can be used to prepare photoluminescent materials.125 By flocculation of positively-charged monolayer 2D materials with anionic 2D materials, superlattice-like stacking has been achieved. Such superlattice structures have interesting chemical and physical properties, such as improved photocatalytic properties,126 coexistence of magnetism and superconductivity,127 and good electrochemical capacitance.128 However, the relatively few species of cationic 2D materials available limit the choice of combinations. Recently, Cai et al. have developed a method to tune the surface charges of exfoliated 2D materials, and a superlattice structure from two kinds of anionic 2D materials have been achieved.129
Flocculation can produce powdery samples in a large quantity by simply mixing 2D materials with counter ions, and this may have wide applications in fields that need a large quantity of materials, such as batteries, catalysis, and photoluminescence.4 By flocculating various functional 2D materials with ions of different functionalities, novel or multiple functionalities may be achieved in flocculated composites. Meanwhile, heterostructures of 2D materials have received much attention recently, and many fantastic phenomena have been observed. For example, the coexistence of magnetism and superconductivity has been found in superlattices made of stacked TaS2 and Ni–Fe LDH nanosheets.130 In another study, superlattices made of stacked rGO and Co–Ni LDH nanosheets show a 6-fold increase of electrochemical capacitance compared with rGO only.128 Different from van der Waals heterostructures prepared by the MC method with high quality interfaces, which can be used to study new physics, solution-based flocculation can produce heterostructures with interesting chemical properties. Exploring combinations of different 2D materials produced by flocculation and their uses should be an important field for further pursuit.


3.2.2 Layer-by-layer assembly. 
As mentioned above, layer-by-layer assembly is a common method to prepare 2D material films on flat substrates, such as a silicon wafer and PET. If one use 3D substrates instead of flat ones for 2D material assembly, powdery samples are produced (Fig. 4c, d and Table 2). For example, when polystyrene balls are used as substrates for the assembly, hollow balls of the 2D materials have been prepared after removing the polystyrene template.131 Many 2D materials, such as Ti0.87O20.52−, MnO20.4−, LDHs, and graphene, have been fabricated in the form of hollow balls using similar methods.4 Powdery samples prepared by this method should be suitable for some specific applications, such as electrochemical supercapacitors. The main advantage of this method is the controllable sizes of the hollow ball templates and the thickness of the shells. However, the assembly procedure for multilayer hollow balls is complicated and time-consuming.


3.2.3 Freeze drying and spray drying. 
2D material dispersions become solids at temperatures below the melting point of the solvents, and these solid solvents can be removed by vacuum sublimation, leaving 2D materials as an ensemble. In a freeze-drying process, as-formed 2D materials do not aggregate due to capillary forces introduced during the drying of the liquid solution. As a result, 2D materials with large surface areas are produced (Fig. 4e, f and Table 2). Another method, spray drying, is to pulverize 2D material dispersions using high pressures or high voltages. During the pulverization process, the surface area of the dispersions will increase significantly and evaporation of the solvent will be very quick (Fig. 4g, h and Table 2). During spray drying, 2D materials do not have sufficient time to stack together. By controlling the parameters, the 2D materials can be made to form different morphologies, such as hollow balls.132
Freeze drying and spray drying can be used to prepare 3D macrostructures on a large scale for industrial applications. In addition, the two methods can be used to dry almost all materials dissolved in solvents. For example, graphene/Fe2O3 composites have been prepared by spray drying and showed good cyclic stability and rate capability when used as the anode for LIBs.133 Furthermore, freeze drying can be used as a post-processing procedure to dry well organized 3D macrostructures from other routes. The most typical material is GO, which has a large number of oxygen-containing functional groups on its surface. GO hydrogels can be organized to form interconnected 3D macrostructures due to the reactions of the oxidative functional groups on the surface. In a recent study, Hu et al. have used ethylenediamine to synthesize a functionalized graphene hydrogel, which was converted into a functionalized graphene aerogel after freeze-drying.134 In another study, Lei et al. have freeze dried a h-BN hydrogel prepared by ball milling and formed a 3D monolith structure.57
Freeze drying and spray drying are well developed techniques to dry materials on a large scale, and can well preserve the large surface area of nanomaterials without aggregation. On the one hand, for applications that need large quantities of materials, the drying of exfoliated 2D materials by these two methods would be good choices. On the other hand, when the 2D materials are assembled by capillary forces during drying the controllability of their microstructures at the molecular level is not good.
Besides the methods mentioned above, there are other routes to assemble 2D materials into 3D macrostructures, especially GO which has many functional groups. The removal of the functional groups can be used to assemble individual sheets together during the reduction of GO to rGO. For example, Xu et al. have developed a method to organize GO into 3D networks with a cylindrical structure by hydrothermal treatment of a GO suspension (1 or 2 mg ml−1) at 180 °C.135 Later, they used chemical reducing agents, such as sodium ascorbate, to assemble the GO into a 3D network.136 The electrochemical reduction of materials can also induce their assembly into 3D structures.137 To the best of our knowledge, these methods only work for GO, which has a large number of removable functional groups on its surface. The successful assembly of other 2D materials into 3D networks with good mechanical strength has not yet been reported due to their lack of functional groups and reactions between adjacent sheets. These chemical reactions can result in strong bonding forces between the sheets to produce a high mechanical strength. If such removable functional groups can be grafted onto other 2D materials, the methods for organizing GO may possibly be used for other 2D materials, which would significantly improve the techniques for the assembly of 2D materials for various applications.

4. 2D materials for electronics and optoelectronics
It is a natural choice to use exfoliated 2D materials for electronics and optoelectronics because of their good mechanical flexibility, tunable electronic properties, high optical transparency, and low temperature solution processability, all of which are desirable for printed and/or flexible devices. Therefore, if scalable production and the cost problem of high-quality 2D materials can be solved, they would be very promising for applications in these areas. Another very important benefit is that there are many species of 2D materials which have diverse and tunable electronic structures. 2D materials cover insulating (h-BN,34 Ti0.87O20.52−39, calcium niobate (Ca2Nb3O10−),145 tantalum oxide (TaO3−),146 Ti/Nb mixed oxides,147etc.), semiconducting (g-C3N4,15 TMDCs like MoS2, WSe2, PtSe2, etc.,12,148–152 b-P,153 black arsenic-phosphorene (b-AsxP1−x),14,154 InSe,155,156 MoO3,157 Bi2O2Se,93 Te,158etc.), metallic (graphene,2 titanium carbides (Ti3C2),59 RuO2,159 MoO2,160etc.), and superconducting (NbSe2155) properties (Fig. 5). Meanwhile, for semiconducting 2D materials, their bandgaps cover long-wavelength infrared light (LWIR, b-As0.87P0.13) to middle-wavelength infrared light (MWIR, b-P), near-infrared light (b-P, few layered MoS2), visible light (TMDCs, g-C3N4), UV (Ti0.87O20.52−, Ca2Nb3O10−, etc.), and further to deep UV (TaO3−, h-BN) (Fig. 5). This makes it possible to choose 2D materials with different properties for the desired electronic and optoelectronic related applications.
 Fig. 5  Summary of the bandgaps and carrier mobilities of typical 2D materials covering metals, semiconductors with different bandgaps, and insulators. The numbers in brackets indicate the reference number. 
4.1 TFTs
A TFT is a type of FET that uses a semiconducting thin film as an active channel material. By injecting charges into the channel through gate voltages, current flowing in the channel can be modulated by electrostatic gating. Compared with the state-of-the-art high-performance FETs in modern integrated circuits, which have a very short channel length (several nm to tens of nm) and high carrier mobility (several thousands of cm2 V−1 s−1), TFT devices usually have a channel length on the order of tens to hundreds of micrometers and a carrier mobility around 0.1–100 cm2 V−1 s−1.161 Such TFT devices have much a lower cost than FET devices used in integrated circuits, and therefore, have great potential for low-cost electronics with reliable performance, such as display electronics and printed electronics.161 For example, TFTs are used to drive the orientation of liquid crystals or the illumination of organic emission layers in displays, and there is a high demand to make flexible displays for future electronics, where semiconducting 2D materials like MoS2, WSe2 and b-P, would be good choices because of their high carrier mobility and high on/off ratios.150,152,153
rGO was one of the first studied 2D materials as TFT channels.115 The fabricated TFTs showed ambipolar behavior with carrier mobilities of 1 and 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for holes and electrons, respectively, which is suitable to drive liquid crystal displays (LCDs). However, the current on/off ratio of the devices (<10) cannot meet the requirement of >106 for LCDs.161 Torrisi et al. have recently shown that when graphene was combined with poly[5,50-bis(3-dodecyl-2-thienyl)-2,20-bithiophene] and used as channels for TFTs, it showed a carrier mobility of 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 with an on/off ratio of 105.140 In addition to rGO and graphene, other semiconducting 2D materials have been used for TFT applications.157 For example, TFTs using oxygen vacancy-rich MoO3 nanoflakes as channel materials showed an optimized carrier mobility of 600 cm2 V−1 s−1 with an on/off ratio of 105.157 Recently, Kelly et al. used a simple spray coating method to prepare large-area flexible TFTs using sonication-exfoliated TMDCs as channels, which showed carrier mobilities below 0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and on/off ratios of ∼600 (Fig. 6a and b).36
 Fig. 6  Solution-exfoliated 2D materials for electronic and optoelectronic applications. (a) Schematic of all 2D material TFT devices with WSe2 as the channel, h-BN as dielectric layer and exfoliated graphene as the conductive electrodes.36 (b) Flexible TFTs fabricated from inkjet-printed TMDCs.36 Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2017. (c) Dielectrics made of 2D Ti0.87O20.52−.105 Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. (d) TCFs made of rGO.115 Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from the Springer Nature, copyright 2008. (e) Photodetectors made of graphene/WS2/graphene heterostructures.35 Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Springer Nature, copyright 2017. 
Compared with extensive research on the use of CVD-grown 2D materials for TFTs and other electronics,162–164 there are far fewer reports on the use of solution-exfoliated materials for electronics. This fact is easy to understand because TFTs based on solution-exfoliated 2D materials usually have an inferior performance to those made from CVD-grown 2D materials for the following two reasons. First, high temperature CVD-grown samples usually have a higher quality than solution-exfoliated 2D materials. Second, the domain sizes of CVD-grown 2D materials are usually larger than solution-exfoliated 2D materials, leading to fewer junctions in the channel and improved TFT performance. Although the metallic and semiconducting 2D materials for TFT applications are generally exfoliated by liquid phase exfoliation with good crystal quality, their mobilities are several orders of magnitude lower than CVD grown samples. The theoretical room temperature carrier mobilities of semiconducting 2D materials are usually from 1000 to 10000 cm2 V−1 s−1, which may be greatly reduced to 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 or even less for films assembled from exfoliated 2D materials. Such a performance should be sufficient to drive LCDs, but is not enough to drive OLEDs because they need a higher carrier mobility (>10 cm2 V−1 s−1).161 Despite these disadvantages, it is difficult to synthesize inch-size single crystal or homogenous polycrystalline 2D semiconductors by CVD, while it is quite easy to make inch-size or much larger films using solution-exfoliated 2D materials based on the methods discussed in Section 2. Therefore, solution-exfoliated 2D materials do have the potential for electronic applications, especially for low-end applications which do not require high carrier mobilities and on/off ratios. According to literature, the exfoliation methods, types of 2D materials, and assembly methods have great influences on the final electrical performances of TFTs (Table 3). Hence, further work needs to be done to improve the quality and flake size of 2D materials during exfoliation and their assembly methods, which may significantly improve device performance to meet application requirements, for example, to drive OLEDs.
Table 3 A summary of exfoliated 2D materials for TFT applications




Materials
Exfoliation method
Morphology
Assembling method
Carrier mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
On/off ratio
Ref.




rGO (reduced by N2H4)
Hummers method
Film
Vacuum filtration
Electron: 0.2
1–10

115



Hole: 1


rGO (reduced at 1000 °C)
Hummers method
Film
Inkjet printing
Electron: 5479
10

165



Hole: 5511


rGO/titania nanosheet
Hummers method and ion exchange assisted exfoliation
Film
Layer-by-layer assembly
Electron: 0.08
1.2

100



Hole: 0.07


Graphene
Sonication
Film
Inkjet printing
Electron: 95a
10

140



Graphene/poly[5,50-bis(3-dodecyl-2-thienyl)-2,20-bithiophene]
Sonication
Film
Inkjet printing
Electron: 0.1
105

140



MoS2
Electrochemical method
Single sheet
Spin coating
p-Type, exact value unknown
—

49



MoS2
Sonication
Single sheet
Spin coating
n type, 0.01
—

53



b-P
Sonication
Film
Langmuir–Blodgett assembly
Unknown
104

166



MoO3−x
Sonication
Film
Drop casting
Hole: 600
105

157



WS2
Sonication
Film
Spraying or inkjet printing
Electron: 0.3
600

36





4.2 Contact electrodes and dielectrics
Contacts have a great impact on the performances of electronic devices, not only from the aspect of contact resistance but also from the aspect of conductive polarity. Unfortunately, the intact surface and ultrathin body of 2D semiconductors make it difficult to make them have good contact with conventional metallic electrodes. To form good contacts, researchers have developed many strategies, including using metallic 2D materials as contact electrodes, such as graphene and its derivatives, and 1T phase TMDCs, etc.35,36,113,167–171 Graphene has a widely tunable Fermi level, which can form ohmic contacts with most semiconducting 2D materials. For example, Cui et al. have used graphene to contact MoS2, and this showed typical ohmic contact behavior with a contact resistance of the order of kΩ μm, among the best value for MoS2 FETs.172 In addition, Kelly et al. have inkjet printed graphene electrodes and fabricated flexible TFTs, where the graphene electrodes showed good contact with 2D channel semiconductors (Fig. 6a).36 More recently, titanium carbide flakes have been also used as electrodes for WSe2 and WS2 FETs.173 The use of 1T metallic TMDCs as contacts for 2H semiconducting TMDCs in FETs has been demonstrated in several CVD-grown or MC samples, but not yet been reported in solution-exfoliated samples.
Besides contact electrodes, dielectrics are also important components for electronics. The most well-known 2D dielectric material is h-BN, which has been used to form hetero-structures with graphene as early as 2010.34 h-BN has many advantages for use as a dielectric for improving the carrier mobility of 2D semiconducting materials or semimetals, such as graphene,34 MoS2172 and b-P.174 First, h-BN has strong in-plane ionic bonding in a planar hexagonal lattice structure, which is relatively inert and is expected to be free of dangling bonds or surface charge traps.34 Second, an atomically-flat surface of h-BN can suppress rippling in superimposed 2D semiconductors or semimetals, reducing scattering from the substrate. By using solution-assembled h-BN nanosheets as a dielectric and CVD-grown graphene as the channel material, h-BN/graphene heterostructure FETs showed a room temperature mobility of 7100 cm2 V−1 s−1.175 In addition, h-BN has been used for ultrathin dielectric capacitors113 and oxide nanosheets have been used as dielectric materials, which have a super high dielectric constant (εr = 100–400).107 The oxide nanosheets prepared by early methods have limitations when used as dielectric layers for high speed transistors because of intrinsic non-stoichiometric charges on their surfaces. These charges significantly scatter charge carriers and dope channel materials, resulting in low-performance devices with a large hysteresis. Nevertheless, their large dielectric constants and the fact that they are ultrathin make these oxide 2D materials good candidates as ultrathin dielectric capacitors (Fig. 6c), showing a εr of 125 at a thickness of 10 nm, much higher than a conventional silicon dioxide layer (εr = 3.8) with a much larger thickness (300 nm).106
4.3 TCFs
For TCF applications, the active materials should have the characteristics of good optical transparency to visible light and high electrical conductivity. Exfoliated 2D materials have thicknesses of less than a few nanometers and may therefore have a low absorption of visible light. In addition, 2D materials offer other advantages over conventional metal oxide-based TCFs, such as being flexible, bendable, and stretchable due to their mechanical robustness. Graphene and its derivatives are the most commonly used 2D materials for TCFs because of their high electrical conductivities (Fig. 6d and Table 4).11,115 Watcharotone et al. first reported the use of GO for TCFs by incorporating them into silica,176 however, the conductivity was rather low at that time. Later, pure films of rGO or graphene have been studied for TCF applications. For example, Wang et al. have reduced GO films at high temperature and fabricated rGO films with conductivity of 550 S cm−1 and a transparency of over 70% at 1000–3000 nm.168 To improve the conductivity of the films, Zhao et al. have prepared large GO flakes with an average area of 7000 μm2.177 After reduction by HI acid, the film showed a sheet resistance of 840 Ω sq−1 at a 78% transmittance, comparable with few layer graphene films grown on Ni by CVD. A systematic comparison and optimization of various reduction methods has resulted in a 90% transparency with a sheet resistance of a few kΩ sq−1, which was obtained after a H2 reduction at 1100 °C.11 Exfoliation of graphite without oxidation has been achieved by Hernandez et al.52 and Li et al.,103 and the TCFs made of such a material show a comparable or lower performance than rGO film-based TCFs. We think that the small sizes of as-obtained graphene is responsible for the poor performance reported in these studies, because small flake sizes result in many sheet junctions that would degrade the electrical conductivity of the TCFs. We also note that other metallic 2D materials, such as Ti3C2 and TiS2, have rarely been used as TCFs, presumably due to their stronger absorbance of visible light and a lower electrical conductivity than graphene.
Table 4 A summary of exfoliated 2D materials for TCF applications




Materials
Exfoliation method
Assembling method
Sheet resistance (Ω sq−1)
Transmittance (%)
Ref.




GO film reduced by hydrazine vapor, then annealed at 200 °C
Hummers method
Vacuum filtration
43000
63

115



Sonication exfoliated graphene film, annealed at 250 °C in Ar/H2
Sonication
Vacuum filtration
5100
42

52



Langmuir–Blodgett assembled monolayer graphene film
Intercalation assisted sonication
Langmuir–Blodgett
8000
80

103



Spray dried GO film reduced by NaBH4 and doped by AuCl3
Hummers method
Spray drying
1400
76.8

179



GO film assembled from large size sheet reduced in 55% HI at 100 °C for 1 h
Hummers method
Assembled at air/liquid interfaces
1600
85

180



GO film assembled from large size sheet reduced in 55% HI at 100 °C for 1 h
Hummers method
Assembled at air/liquid interfaces
840
78

177





Graphene or graphene-derived material based TCFs have already been commercialized because of their good conductivity, flexibility, homogeneity, and transparency.178 They have the potential to replace or complement conventional oxide TCFs, especially for flexible transparent electronics. However, there are other competing materials, such as silver nanowires and carbon nanotubes, which are also solution processable and flexible. To make exfoliated graphene or rGO competitive and stand out from the crowd, two strategies can be used, including developing more effective routes to reduce GO and suitable methods to exfoliate graphite to large size few-layer or monolayer graphene with good quality.
4.4 Photodetectors and optoelectronic devices
Optoelectronic devices, including photodetectors and photovoltaic devices, are based on the principle of absorbing light and producing electrical signals, which means that light absorptivity and photoelectrical conversion ability are two key parameters that influence the performance of the devices. The large number of 2D materials guarantees their ability to absorb light across all wavelengths, including long, middle and near infrared light, visible light and UV light (Fig. 5). Meanwhile, the tunability of the bandgap from an indirect to a direct one by changing the thickness of the 2D material makes them suitable to various optoelectronic devices with different purposes.156,181 The good photo-response of 2D semiconductors have been demonstrated in high-quality CVD and MC samples over a broad range of wavelengths. For example, monolayer MoS2 formed by MC showed a photoresponse of 880 A W−1 at a 561 nm wavelength.182 Recently, Long et al. have detected long-wavelength infrared light up to 8.2 μm at room temperature by using 2D As0.83P0.17.154 Nevertheless, we note that exfoliated 2D materials have so far rarely been used for optoelectronic devices, which may be due to their poor quality. Exfoliated 2D materials contain many defects, impurities, and sheet junctions in assembled films, all of which degrade their intrinsic performance. Many photo-response mechanisms become very weak and negligible, such as the plasmonic effect, bolometer effect, photothermal effect and photovoltaic effect.183 Despite this decreased performance, exfoliated 2D materials have the advantages of low cost and the easy fabrication of large films from them, and many studies demonstrate their potential for practical optoelectronic devices if their quality can be improved. For example, photodetectors made of a superlattice of stacked 2D titanium oxide and rGO, prepared by layer-by-layer assembly, showed a 7-fold improvement of electrical conductance under UV illumination, where titanium oxide was used as the photoactive material and rGO was used to separate photogenerated carriers and transport them in channels.100 By inkjet-printing graphene/WS2/graphene heterostructures, Withers et al. have fabricated visible light photodetectors with a photoresponsivity of 0.03 mA W−1.184 Recently, McManus et al. inkjet-printed vertically aligned graphene/WS2/graphene heterostructures based on liquid-exfoliated 2D materials that have good interfacial structures, (Fig. 6e).35 The on/off ratio of these devices under light illumination (λ = 514 nm) was around 10, and photoresponse was higher than 1 mA W−1. Besides photodetection, the use of 2D materials for other optoelectronic devices, such as light emission diodes (LEDs) and solar cells, has also been reported. For example, Yin et al.185 have fabricated LEDs by using n-type SiC/p-type MoS2–MoO3 heterojunctions as active layers. In another study, Eda et al.167 used rGO as a transparent conductive electrode and fabricated organic photovoltaic devices.
Similar to electronic devices, for the next generation optoelectronics flexibility and transparency are very important considerations. 2D materials, comprising a large number of species with different bandgaps, should have a great chance of detecting light of different wavelengths. For the large-scale preparation of these optoelectronic devices, the exfoliation method may be a feasible route to prepare the materials if the quality can be improved. These materials are solution processable, which means that one can easily construct films with broad range/all wavelength absorption capability and the cost of devices made from exfoliated materials may be much lower than from CVD ones. b-P and b-AsxP1−x with bandgaps of around 0.15 eV can be used to detect mid-infrared light up to a wavelength of around 8 μm.154 So far, these important 2D materials with mid-infrared light response have not yet been synthesized by CVD. The assembly of these exfoliated materials into films for mid-infrared light detection should be an interesting research topic. Based on the above discussion, there are many opportunities for using exfoliated 2D materials for optoelectronic devices.
5. 2D materials for electrocatalysis
With increasing concern over the rising global population, impending climate change, and severe fossil fuel shortage, developing sustainable, high-efficiency and safe ways to produce fuels and chemicals has become increasingly important.186 One prospective strategy is to develop low energy-consuming electrochemical conversion processes that can convert small molecules into fuels with a high energy density. To increase the rate and selectivity of electrochemical reactions, developing durable and high efficient electrocatalysts composed of earth-abundant and cheap materials is of critical importance.187 In the past decade, substantial progress has been made in the development of highly-efficient electrocatalysts.186–188 Among these, 2D materials are of particular interest due to their unique structural and electronic properties, which have been used to provide more active sites and better intrinsic catalytic activity than conventional catalysts, as highlighted in Fig. 7. On the one hand, 2D materials have large specific surface areas (e.g., >2600 m2 g−1 for monolayer graphene189), which can provide many potential active sites by proper nano-structuring and surface engineering. Moreover, when using 2D materials as supports, shells or hosts of other catalytic materials, they mitigate catalyst aggregation and/or confine the catalytic materials in small sizes, resulting in a small reduction in the effective number of catalytic active sites during long-term cycling. On the other hand, atomic-scale thickness may destroy their structural symmetry and increase the electron density of states around the Fermi energy and this theoretically improves the activity. For example, atomic-thick 2D materials usually have surface distortion, destroying the original symmetry in the atomic arrangement, which may enable some atoms to become active for certain reactions.190 Ultrathin 2D materials also improve electron and mass diffusion and transport in comparison to the bulk counterparts, nanoparticles or nanoarrays. More importantly, the electronic structures and density of states around the Fermi energy can be largely tuned in 2D materials by coupling with heteroatoms or interfaces or changing the original lattice constants by pressure.191–194 Based on the above advantages, 2D materials have been considered promising catalysts for several electrochemical reactions. Additionally, 2D materials are ideal model electrocatalysts due to their clear and simple crystalline structure, compatible to microfabrication and encapsulation, and easy to control with only one variable, building a bridge between understanding and design of electrocatalysts. In this section, we present recent progress on 2D materials and their heterostructures as they relate to their role as electrocatalysts in HER, the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR), the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), and other emerging reactions including carbon dioxide reduction (CRR) and the nitrogen reduction (NRR) reactions. We also discuss challenges in this field and future opportunities.
 Fig. 7  Schematic showing the ways in which 2D materials may be important for electrocatalysis. The roles that 2D materials play in electrocatalysis can be divided into two categories: increasing active sites (upper semicircle) and improving intrinsic catalytic activity (bottom semicircle). 
5.1 HER/HOR
HER is a promising way to produce hydrogen on a large scale for use as a high-power-density fuel.187 Active electrocatalysts that can remarkably decrease the onset overpotential are essential to drive HER so that an increased amount of hydrogen can be generated for a fixed amount of electricity, based on the reaction 2H+ + 2e− → H2. This reaction is a two-step process that can be described as follows. Volmer step: H+ + e− + * → H*(1) Heyrovsky step: H* + H+ + e− → H2 + * or Tafel step: 2H* → H2 + 2*(2)Here, H* is an intermediate and * denotes an active site on a catalyst surface. Pt is a well-known good electrocatalyst for HER. However, its widespread industrial use is hindered by its high cost and scarcity. Therefore, seeking earth-abundant and cheap electrocatalysts to replace Pt has become one of the biggest challenges in the field of the electrochemical production of hydrogen.
It is well-known that the overall rate of the HER is largely determined by the hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔGH), which depends on the electronic structures of the catalyst. The optimal value of ΔGH is 0 eV, where hydrogen is bound neither too strongly nor too weakly on the catalyst surface. Unfortunately, only a few noble metals such as Pt and Ru are found to have a ΔGH close to 0 eV, while other earth-abundant metals have values that are either too high or too low with unsatisfactory catalytic activity, referred to the famous hydrogen volcano.195 In order to improve catalytic activity, strategies to tune the electronic structure and provide abundant active sites are necessary. As shown in Fig. 8, currently there are four main strategies to improve the HER activity of 2D material catalysts. The first is the introduction of surface defects (e.g., dopants, vacancies and edges), which usually improves the catalytic activity (Fig. 8a).191,196,197 Taking MoS2 as an example, that for a long time has been known to be a rather poor HER catalyst.198 However, studies showed that MoS2 nanosheets were indeed active for HER in acid media.199,200 This apparent contradiction was subsequently explained by Jaramillo et al.201 by the fact that hydrogen evolution occurs preferentially at MoS2 edge sites, while its basal plane is much less active. To fully use the active edges, vertically aligned MoS2 nanostructures were synthesized,202–204 that not only exposed a large number of edge sites but also promote electron transport to conductive substrates. In spite of this the vast majority of surface sites on the basal plane of MoS2 are not exploited. Using density functional theory (DFT) calculations, Li et al.192 found that the catalytic activity of the MoS2 basal plane can be tuned by introducing sulfur vacancies (Fig. 8e), suggesting a way to activate and use the basal plane for HER. The second strategy is to exert strain on the material (Fig. 8b). For example, Li et al.192 found that combining surface defect engineering with applying strain to the MoS2 surface significantly increased its HER activity (Fig. 8e). This increase can be attributed to the fact that after the introduction of sulfur vacancies and strain, ΔGH on the basal plane approached to 0 eV and the density of states around the Fermi energy increased, leading to an improvement in HER activity. In addition, Xie et al.197 demonstrated that the HER activity of 2D MoS2 was dramatically increased by a combination of controlled disorder engineering and oxygen incorporation (Fig. 8f). In this case, the disordered structure offers abundant unsaturated sulfur atoms as active sites for HER, and the oxygen incorporation effectively regulates the electronic structure and further improves the electrical conductivity. The third strategy for enhancing the HER activity of 2D materials is phase engineering (Fig. 8c). For example, a recent study has shown that metallic 1T phase MoS2 nanosheets have a better HER activity than the semiconducting 2H phase.44,205 This improvement is related to the fact that the metallic 1T phase MoS2 shows better electron transfer ability and higher activity on the basal planes than their 2H phase counterpart, leading to improved catalytic activity (Fig. 8g). The fourth strategy is interface modulation, which can tune the electronic structures of 2D materials and their density of states around the Fermi energy, resulting in improved HER activity (Fig. 8d). Li et al.206 demonstrated that the HER activity of 2D MoS2 was greatly improved by constructing MoS2/rGO heterostructures (Fig. 8h). Luo et al.207 showed that the HER activity of MoS2 in alkaline medium was improved by confining hydroxides nanoclusters in the gallery of 2D MoS2. Analogously, besides MoS2 many other 2D materials and their heterostructures show good HER activity as a result of using the above interface modulation strategies, such as graphene, β-Mo2C, TaS2, and NbS2.208–213 The HER activities of four types of promising 2D materials, including graphene, TMDCs, carbides, and 2D heterostructures, in acid media are summarized in Fig. 8i.
 Fig. 8  Improving the activity of 2D material electrocatalysts for HER. (a–d) Schematic showing main strategies to improve the catalytic activities of 2D material catalysts. (e) Improving the catalytic activity of MoS2 by sulfur vacancies and strain.192 Reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from the Springer Nature, Copyright 2016. (f) Oxygen incorporation.197 Reproduced from ref. 197 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013. (g) 1T′-MoS2.205 Reproduced from ref. 205 with permission from the Springer Nature, Copyright 2016. (h) Formation of heterostructures.206 Reproduced from ref. 206 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013. (i) A summary of the overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slopes of 2D material catalysts for HER (shown in brackets, units are mV and V dec−1, respectively). These data points are divided into two parts, i.e., the Volmer–Tafel pathway (purple background) and Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway (blue background). 
Obviously, tremendous advances have been made to explore Pt-replacement catalysts for the HER in recent years. However, some issues need to be solved before their practical use. (1) Although the hydrogen evolution reaction only has one intermediate, its dynamic mechanism is not clear. How does hydrogen absorb on active sites, what are the roles of different surface sites, and are the dynamic processes on different catalytic surfaces similar? All these open questions wait for answers and rely on advances in in situ characterization techniques and theoretical calculations. (2) Scientists have found that electrochemical reactions can significantly influence the surface chemistry and structure of metal catalysts.214 However, changes in the surface chemistry/structure and the adsorption of ions or surface state on 2D material catalysts in electrochemical processes have attracted less attention than they should. We note that the surface chemistry/structure of 2D catalysts is critical for understanding their activity, especially for metallic ones. (3) In order to dramatically increase the HER activity, one strategy is to make single atom catalysts despite the fact that it is technologically very challenging because single atoms are so active that they can aggregate easily to form clusters or particles. Another strategy is to form atomic scale defects in 2D materials, such as single atom vacancies, which in principle can be more stable than single atom catalysts when they have comparable densities of active centers.
HOR, which involves the same reactions as HER, but with a reverse reaction sequence, has also attracted increased attention recently due to its importance in developing hydrogen-based fuel cells. In this reaction, H2 is oxidized to H2O as the sole product, accompanied by chemical energy being converted into electricity. Similar to HER, an ideal HOR electrocatalyst should exhibit a ΔGH close to 0 eV, and Pt is also the best pure metal catalyst for HOR in acid media. However, good HER catalysts may not always be good HOR catalysts, for example MoS2 as an example of a 2D electrocatalyst. One noticeable difference between Pt and MoS2 catalysts in the HOR is the coverage effect.215 The ΔGH of Pt has little dependence on hydrogen coverage whereas for MoS2 hydrogen absorption can significantly change ΔGH. Understanding the differences between Pt and non-noble metal 2D materials for the HOR remains a research frontier.
5.2 ORR/OER
Electrochemical reduction of oxygen by ORR is a critical step in various energy storage and conversion devices, such as fuel cells and metal–air batteries.186,187 Unfortunately, as shown in eqn (3), ORR is a kinetically sluggish process because it involves four proton–electron transfers to reduce oxygen to water. O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O(3)In addition, the formation of hydrogen peroxide, which involves a two proton-electron transfer, is a reaction competing with the formation of water. The ORR reaction can be described as having either dissociative or associative pathways depending on the oxygen dissociation barrier on different catalytic surfaces. The dissociative pathway follows the one-step dissociation of oxygen into oxygen intermediates, while the associative pathway needs three steps to form oxygen intermediates. As shown in Fig. 9, unlike HER/HOR with only one reaction intermediate, the four-electron ORR involves multiple intermediates (i.e., OOH*, O*, OH* generated in steps 2, 3, and 4, respectively), and the binding energies of these intermediates are strongly correlated and cannot be decoupled easily because of the scaling relations.216 Accordingly, even for the best Pt catalysts, the overpotential of ORR is not trivial. In addition to the electron-transfer steps, the dissolution of oxygen reactants into the electrolyte is another significant difference between ORR and HER. Because the solubility of oxygen in the electrolyte is limited (∼102 μM) and its diffusion is rather slow, the whole ORR process is easily slowed down if oxygen diffusion is insufficient.217 Therefore, electrocatalysts with appropriate oxygen paths are necessary to accelerate the sluggish kinetics of ORR. Noble metal-based electrocatalysts such as Pt, Ru, and their alloys, have high catalytic activities, however, their high cost and scarcity severely hinder large-scale practical applications. Thus, exploring abundant and cheap noble metal alternatives for efficient ORR catalysts has attracted increasing attention in recent years.
 Fig. 9  Schematic showing that ORR activity can be increased by the optimization of both the surface structure and surface chemistry of electrocatalysts. First, in the electron-transport steps, three intermediates, OOH*, O*, OH* are involved, and their binding energies are strongly correlated and cannot easily be decoupled because of the scaling relations. As a result, even the best Pt-based catalyst has a considerable ORR overpotential. Second, in addition to the electron-transfer step, the slow diffusion of dissolved oxygen in the electrolyte is another significant factor that affects ORR activity. 
In order to make superior 2D catalysts for ORR, strategies based on either the optimization of chemical composition or surface structure or both have been developed (Fig. 9). Tremendous efforts have been made to optimize the chemical composition of 2D material catalysts to achieve a high ORR activity. Specifically, strategies are similar to those mentioned in HER, such as defect engineering, interfacial modulation, phase engineering, and strain engineering, and all of these follow the principle of tuning the electronic structures to optimize the free energy of intermediates. Take graphene as an example, which exhibits better electric conductivity than most 2D materials but lacks intrinsic catalytic activity. To endow graphene with ORR activity, one strategy is to incorporate heteroatoms such as N, B, P, S, or transition metals. For example, Yu et al.218 showed that the electronegativity differences between C and heteroatoms induce positive or negative charges on C, resulting in an increased density of states at the Fermi level of adjacent C atoms. Besides graphene, many other 2D materials have been found to have ORR activity. For instance, Yang et al. and Jiao et al. have reported that g-C3N4 is a highly efficient metal-free electrocatalyst for ORR.219,220 In another study, Li et al.221 prepared ORR catalysts based on few-wall carbon nanotube–graphene complexes, where the outer walls of the carbon nanotubes were partially unzipped into graphene sheets and contained an extremely small amount of iron and nitrogen which were introduced during nanotube synthesis. They found that this nanotube–graphene complex exhibited an ORR activity close to that of Pt/C catalysts and good durability in both acidic and alkaline solutions (Fig. 10a and c). Their results also demonstrated that the high ORR activity stems from iron-containing catalytic sites, where iron atoms on the edges of graphene sheets are in close proximity to nitrogen species (Fig. 10b). In addition, unlike 2D materials which usually have weak interlayer interactions and no in-plane dangling bonds, other emerging ultrathin nanosheets made of transition metal compounds such as oxides, phosphides, and sulfides, have recently attracted increasing attention.222,223 One noticeable advantage of ultrathin transition metal compounds is that they have many atoms on their surfaces that are low-coordinated and can act as active sites in ORR. In addition, some transition metal compounds such as Co9S8, NiP and CoS are semimetals with outstanding electrical conductivity, and this is better than many semiconducting 2D materials used for electrocatalysis in terms of improved charge transfer. Besides chemical composition optimization, many efforts have been devoted to optimizing the structures of 2D material catalysts to achieve a high ORR activity. For example, Lu et al.217 have constructed hierarchical catalytic structures with surface aerophilicity from nanosheets, and found that they can enhance the diffusion of dissolved O2 to the catalyst surface. Such a structure promotes the diffusion of O2 in the electrolyte, and does not degrade the electrical conductivity of catalyst, thus ensuring they have an increased current density (Fig. 10d). To construct ideal surface nanostructures, we should simultaneously consider the number of active sites and their accessibility to O2, the interaction strength between the O2 and the catalytic surface, and the electrical conductivity of the catalyst itself. We also note that despite great effort related to ORR catalysts relating to constructing proper surface nanostructures, interactions between O2 and catalytic surfaces are rarely considered. Therefore, understanding the relationship between ORR activity and O2 diffusion to catalytic surfaces deserves further study.
 Fig. 10  2D materials as electrocatalysts for ORR. (a) TEM image of few-wall carbon nanotube–graphene complexes.221 (b) ADF-STEM image and EELS maps of carbon nanotube–graphene complexes, which indicates that the good ORR performance stems from Fe-containing active sites.221 (c) Nanotube–graphene complex catalysts with high activity and good durability in both acidic and alkaline conditions.221 Reproduced from ref. 221 with permission from the Springer Nature, Copyright 2012. (d) Schematic and the corresponding optical images of oxygen-bubble adhesion behavior on Pt/C and superaerophilic catalysts surfaces. In sharp contrast to the pinning of oxygen bubbles on Pt/C in an electrolyte, a bursting effect is observed on the superaerophilic structured electrode, indicating accelerated oxygen diffusion.217 Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from the John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2016. 
OER, which involves the same reactions as the ORR but in a reverse sequence, has also received increased attention in recent years because it is the rate-determining reaction in water splitting and also plays an important role in carbon dioxide electrochemical reduction. Unlike Pt which is the best catalyst for the ORR, the best catalyst found experimentally for the OER is IrO2 in acid. However, IrO2 is far from an ideal OER catalyst in terms of its poor activity and the fact that it is not very stable under high oxidative potentials.186 In fact, even for IrO2 and RuO2, which are the best two electrocatalysts developed so far for OER, a substantial overpotential is required to drive the reaction. In this respect, developing efficient 2D material catalysts for the OER is of great importance. For example, Song et al.224 have recently reported that exfoliated single-layer nanosheets of double hydroxides exhibit a much higher oxygen evolution activity and stability than the corresponding bulk LDHs in alkaline conditions and also outperform commercial IrO2 catalysts.
Although there have been much research on 2D material-based ORR/OER catalysts, many issues still need to be solved before they can be used. First, a noteworthy shortcoming of most such catalysts for ORR/OER, such as transition metal oxides and graphene, is their poor stability. The production of catalysts for ORR/OER that have both high activity and stability in acidic media (e.g., ORR for proton exchange membrane fuel cells) remains a serious challenge. Second, in addition to the electron-transfer step, slow diffusion of dissolved oxygen is another significant factor that affects ORR activity. Further studies are needed to elucidate the relationship of ORR activity and oxygen diffusion with the surface structure of the catalysts and their affinity to oxygen and electrolytes. Third, due to the high potential and high salt concentration around OER electrodes, the surface valence and structure of catalysts such as LDHs may change during the OER process.225 There are several challenging questions for OER such as the roles of high-valance nickel (Ni4+) and Fe3+, the role of lattice oxygen, and whether an amorphous or crystalline surface is more active, which needs careful in situ electrochemical characterization.
5.3 Emerging reactions of interest
In addition to the aforementioned HER, HOR, ORR, and OER reactions, there are other emerging energy conversion reactions including CRR and NRR that can also produce important chemicals, but are relatively less explored than the first four reactions. Due to their large specific surface area, versatile and tunable electronic structures, and easy transport of electrons and the mass of 2D materials, they could be good electrocatalysts for emerging reactions including the CRR and NRR.

5.3.1 CRR. 
The electrochemical CRR, which refers to the reduction of CO2 to value-added chemicals and fuels using renewable energy, is an important energy conversion reaction that has attracted increasing interest.226–233 Similar to ORR, CRR is a multiple electron reduction reaction involving a number of different reaction intermediates, but unlike ORR with only two major end products (water and hydrogen peroxide), there are many possible products in CRR, including carbon monoxide, formate, formaldehyde, methane, methanol, C2+ hydrocarbons, and oxygenates. Moreover, HER is a competing reaction with CRR because both reactions can happen under reduction potentials. Therefore, improving selectivity among the many carbon-based products is a major challenge in CRR, which calls for the development of electrocatalysts with not only a high activity but also a high selectivity for the product of interest.
Metals are important electrocatalysts for CRR, and different major products, including (i) hydrogen, (ii) carbon monoxide, (iii) hydrocarbon, and (iv) oxygenates, can be produced when using different metal electrocatalysts. DFT calculations have revealed that the overall effect of the binding energies of different intermediates (e.g., COO−, CO*, CHO*, and H*) on the catalyst determines its reaction selectivity and activity for CORR.186 For example, when Pt is used as the catalyst, HER is more competitive than other reactions and hydrogen is the main product (case i). However, in cases (ii) and (iii), HER is slow and the main product is carbon monoxide if the binding energy of CO* on the metal catalyst is relatively weak (when Au or Ag is used), or hydrocarbon if the binding energy of CO* is strong (when Cu is used). In order to improve the selectivity and activity of CORR electrocatalysts, many strategies have been developed, including those based on controlling the surface composition of the catalysts such as alloying, forming oxygen vacancies, doping and surface structuring, and those based on the modification of electrolytes by additives and ionic liquids, etc.226,228–230,232–235
2D materials could be good electrocatalysts for CRR due to their well-defined structure which benefits reaction mechanism studies, as well as the fact that 2D materials can contain abundant low-coordinated sites to improve CRR activity. 2D electrocatalysts for CRR are summarized in Table 5. Because metals are the most widely studied electrocatalysts for CRR, it is natural to make form them into 2D thin sheets and use these for CRR. For example, Gao et al.232 have synthesized partially oxidized atomically thin Co layers and found that they have greatly increased CRR activity and selectivity compared to bulk Co, showing a formate Faradaic efficiency (FE) of 90%, which outperforms previously reported metals or metal oxides under comparable conditions.227 The reaction mechanism remains unclear and needs further study. It was found that 2D Co sheets with atomic thickness have abundant surface dangling bonds that are generally considered as potential active sites for electrochemical reactions. Furthermore, it has been reported that the controlled growth of a 2D ultrathin TMO (such as Co3O4) with an abundance of low-coordinated surface metal atoms may produce a significantly larger number of potential active sites and hence increase the CRR activity of catalysts.233 In addition, reducing the thickness of the Co3O4 nanosheets exposes oxygen vacancies on the surface, and further increases their fomate FE. DFT calculations have disclosed that bivalent oxygen vacancies favor the rate-limiting proton transfer step by stabilizing the HCOO−* immediate, and hence lower the activation energy barrier for generating intermediate HCOO−*.226
Table 5 A summary of 2D material-based CRR electrocatalysis




2D materials
CRR Products
Performance or parameters
Origin of activity or reaction mechanism




2D metals with partial oxidation
Formate
Partially oxidized Co nanosheets
Reaction mechanism remains unclear


FE ∼90% (overpotential of 0.24 V) in 40 h232 (outperform metals or metal oxides under comparable conditions227)
Co oxides may facilitate the rate-determining chemical reaction.






Ultrathin TMO (e.g., Co3O4)
Formate
1.72 nm thick Co3O4 nanosheets
Abundant low-coordinated surface Co atoms as potential active sites.


FE ∼60% in 20 h, Tafel slope ∼56 mV dec−1.233


Formate
Oxygen vacancy-rich Co3O4 nanosheets
Bivalent oxygen vacancies favored proton transfer by stabilizing an HCOO−* intermediate, and lowering the activation energy barrier.


FE ∼85% in 40 h, Tafel slope of 37 mV dec−1.226






“Sandwich” structures based on 2D materials
Formate
Sn quantum sheets confined in graphene
Sn quantum nanosheets have strong affinity to the CO2 intermediate, which lowers the overall reaction barrier.


FE ∼85% in 50 h, Tafel slope of 83 mV dec−1.229






Doped/modified graphene
Formate
B-Doped graphene
Not clear.


FE of 66%.234


CO
Ni–N-modified graphene
HER activity of Ni–N-Gr is much lower than bulk Ni, which is likely to increase the FE of CO.


FE ∼90%.235


C2H4 and C2H5OH
N-Doped graphene QDs
Utmost exposure of edge sites and heteroatom N doping result in high FE and CRR activity.


FE comparable to Cu-based catalysts.228






2D TMDCs (e.g., MoxByS2)
Methanol
Mo–Bi bimetallic chalcogenide nanosheets
A synergistic effect between Mo and Bi for producing methanol.


FE of 71.2%, current density of 12.1 mA cm−2.230




For 2D materials which have no dangling bonds on their basal plane, as represented by graphene, strategies based on doping, modification or alloying have been developed to improve their CRR activity.228–230,234,235 Another method is to modify the graphene with dopants (like boron or nitrogen) or domains (like Gr–N–Ni).229,234,235 For instance, Wu et al.228 have synthesized nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots that selectively produce multi-carbon hydrocarbons and oxygenates like C2H4 and C2H5OH with a FE comparable to those obtained using Cu-based nanocrystals.
Currently, studies on 2D electrocatalysts for CRR are in their infancy, and several key challenges remain. Given the complexity of the CRR process, more experimental and theoretical investigations are needed to elucidate the underlying reaction mechanisms and to improve the activity and selectivity of the catalysts.


5.3.2 NRR. 
The reduction of nitrogen to ammonia, i.e., the NRR reaction, is a requisite transformation for maintaining life. In industry, a vast amount of nitrogen can be fixed by the Haber–Bosch process using a solid-state Fe-based catalyst at high temperatures and pressures.236 Surprisingly, in nature, nitrogenase enzymes facilitate this process under ambient conditions.237 Inspired by nature, a new electrochemical pathway for nitrogen reduction has been proposed, based on an electron/proton delivery mechanism that has been proved by earlier work.236 N2 + 6H+ + 6e− → 2NH3(4)
N2 molecules are particularly inert because the N–N triple bond is one of the most stable bonds. Therefore, one of the major challenges in chemistry is to develop catalysts that can activate N2. The reduction of N2 involves multiple intermediates, and the HER is a major competing reaction, suggesting that how to improve the selectivity towards NH3 is a great challenge.
Up to now, a NRR based on 2D electrocatalysts is very rare, however, theoretical guidance has been provided.238–242 For example, by using first-principles calculations, Li et al.240 have predicted that FeN3 embedded in graphene is a good catalyst for NRR. The FeN3 embedded in graphene defects is highly spin-polarized with a localized magnetic moment, and can substantially promote N2 adsorption and activate its inert N–N triple bond. Transition metals combined with graphene or MXene are also predicted to be promising NRR catalysts. For instance, by DFT calculations, Sun et al. claimed that MXene thermodynamically prefers to capture N2 over CO2 and H2O,238 and N2 on MXene experiences weakening of the N–N triple bond which promotes its catalytic conversion into NH3 under mild conditions. However, experimental NRR results so far show extremely poor performance in terms of a high overpotential, low current density, and low selectivity. We believe NRR will become an important reaction system in the electrochemical field. A future application of NRR is to directly produce nitrogenous fertilizer for plants, driven by electricity from solar or wind energy.
In recent years we have witnessed a blossoming interest in the development of 2D materials for electrocatalysts for many reactions including HER/HOR, ORR/OER, CRR, and NRR. However, the use of 2D materials as electrocatalysts faces several scientific and technological challenges. (1) How to achieve the controllable synthesis of 2D electrocatalysts with the desired surface structure and surface chemistry so as to achieve good performance in various reaction systems. Besides the intrinsic surface chemistry and structure of the material, changes in its surface chemistry or structure during the reaction also needs to be carefully studied. For example, transition metals, TMOs and LDHs are used as electrocatalysts in alkaline media, however, some of them undergo surface chemistry or structure changes during electrochemical process.243 (2) A deep understanding of the mechanism of 2D electrocatalysis in different reaction media is needed. Although 2D materials provide a well-defined model to bridge realistic systems and theoretical calculations, present research on them is often focused on catalytic performance and pays little attention to the catalysis mechanism, presumably due to the unclear structure and chemical models in most of these studies. Lack of in situ characterization at the atomic scale also hinders a study of the mechanism. Although few direct or in situ observation techniques at the nanometer scale have been developed in thermal catalysis, in situ characterizations at the atomic or nanometer are difficult due to the liquid reaction environment.244 In addition, the effects of reaction media on the electrocatalytic mechanism deserve additional research.

6. 2D materials for energy storage
To achieve the ambitious goal of developing advanced techniques to utilize renewable energy sources to replace or complement current fossil energy sources, we also need to develop highly-efficient energy storage materials and devices in addition to the energy conversion discussed in Section 5. 2D materials provide opportunities for high-performance energy storage applications, such as lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors. First, the large interlayer spacing in 2D materials that allows the storage and release of lithium ions, electric charges, or molecules is an essential requirement for LIBs. Second, the large specific surface area of 2D materials provides them with more active sites. As a result, the most famous 2D material, graphene, with a theoretical specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1),189 much larger than that of activated carbon (typically smaller than 900 m2 g−1)245 or carbon nanotubes (usually from 100 to 1000 m2 g−1),246 has been regarded as an ideal platform for surface-active applications, such as supercapacitors. In recent years, other 2D materials, e.g., TMDCs and MXenes have shown potential as energy storage materials because of their unique structures and electronic properties, such as an appropriate interlayer spacing, high mechanical strength, and electrochemical and thermal stability within the devices’ operational potential window and temperature range.247 In this section, we highlight the recent progress on 2D materials as energy storage materials in LIBs and supercapacitors and also discuss their future opportunities and challenges.
6.1 LIBs
Rechargeable LIBs are important energy storage devices in our daily life, and have the advantages of less environmental impact, longer lifetime, and higher energy density than other rechargeable batteries. Most commercial LIBs are based on a LiCoO2 cathode and a graphite anode, with a theoretical energy density of ∼380 W h kg−1 and practical values between 120 and 150 W h kg−1.248 These values are much higher than those of other batteries such as lead–acid (∼30 W h kg−1) and nickel-metal hydride (45–68 W h kg−1).249 However, with growing power and energy demands for advanced electronic devices, currently-available LIBs are not adequate due to their low energy density, slow charging rate, short cycle life, and safety concerns. Indeed, 2D materials are appealing both as cathodes and anodes in LIBs for the following reasons (Fig. 11). First, the large interlayer spacing facilitates the intercalation/deintercalation of Li+ and shorten the Li+ diffusion distances.250 Second, many 2D materials, such as graphene, MXenes, and metallic phase TMDCs, are metallic with a high electrical conductivity that benefits charge transport and improves rate performance. Third, because of the combined advantages of easy structural engineering (surfaces, defects, doping, or edges) and their large surface area, 2D materials can offer more lithium storage than their bulk counterparts, leading to a high specific capacity.
 Fig. 11  Schematic of 2D material-based LIBs. A variety of 2D materials could work as active materials for the anode and cathode due to their unique structure, electrical, and electrochemical properties. 
The charge/discharge capacity and rate performance (C-rate) are two important indicators to evaluate the performance of batteries. Here, the C-rate (referred to as the discharge current) is a measure of the rate at which a battery is discharged relative to its maximum capacity.247 In order to improve the performance of LIBs based on 2D materials, several strategies have been developed (Fig. 12). Taking graphene as an example, the first is to confine the electrochemically active nanomaterials (such as S, Co3O4, or Fe3O4) between ultrathin graphene nanosheets (Fig. 12a). For example, wrapping Co3O4 nanoparticles with graphene suppresses their aggregation, accommodates the volume expansion/contraction of Co3O4 upon lithiation/delithiation, and provides a high electrical conductivity, leading to improved specific capacity and cycling performance of a Co3O4/graphene composite electrode.251 Second, surface defects and edges of graphene introduced during exfoliation serve as active sites for lithium storage, which leads to a specific capacity higher than the theoretical value for graphite (Fig. 12b). For example, it has been reported that graphene has an reversible capacity of 848 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1.252 Notably, after doping with boron atoms or clusters, graphene shows a ultrahigh capacity up to 1327 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1, which is partially due to the heteroatomic defects generated in doped-graphene.253
 Fig. 12  Schematics showing the strategies developed to improve the performance of 2D material-based LIBs. (a) 2D materials confine active species between their layers so as to improve the performance of composite electrodes. (b) Doping, defects and edges of 2D materials act as active sites for increasing the storage of lithium ions. (c) 2D materials (exemplified by MoS2) have redox reactions that can greatly increase the specific capacity of batteries. (d) 2D materials (exemplified by MXenes) with good electrical conductivity facilitate electron transfer and thus the performance of batteries. 
In addition to graphene, other 2D materials such as TMDCs, TMOs, and LDHs have been widely explored and show promise for LIBs. As a typical graphite analogue, MoS2 has a layer structure with a theoretical capacity up to ∼670 mA h g−1 based on the following lithium storage reaction. MoS2 + 4Li+ + 4e− ↔ Mo + 2Li2S(5)
As a result, MoS2 has been extensively studied as an anode material for LIBs (Fig. 12c).254 For example, LIBs with a specific capacity of ∼750 mA h g−1 have been fabricated using turbostratically restacked MoS2 single layers as the electrode.203 The restacking of MoS2 increases the c axis parameter (i.e., the space between layers) and thus increases the accessibility of Li+ to the inner layers. Similar results have also been reported in other TMDCs and TMOs, like WS2, VS2, SnS2 and SnO2,255–257 clearly indicating the advantages and promising future of using TMDCs in rechargeable LIBs.
MXenes, as a new family of 2D materials, have a large number of chemical and structural varieties that make them competitive with other 2D materials and have found increasing interest in their use in LIBs (Fig. 12d).258 Anasori et al. reported that after incorporation of S into Ti2CTx (T stands for a surface terminating group like –O and –F.) by heat treatment, a strong interaction was established by the formation of a S–Ti–C bond. The resultant S–Ti2C hybrids with a sulfur concentration of 70 wt% delivered a high reversible capacity of 723 mA h g−1, and their cycling performance was comparable to those of other reported 2D host materials, such as N,S-doped graphene.259 The decent Li–S battery performance of the hybrid electrode is attributed to a combination of the high stability and electrical conductivity of the hybrids. On the one hand, the strong interaction between Ti2C and formed Li2Sn inhibits the loss of active material during cycling, leading to an improved cycling performance. Moreover, the metallic nature of Ti2CTx benefits the high-rate performance of a S–Ti2C hybrid electrode, due to its high electrical conductivity. However, one concern in using MXenes is the abundance of surface charge, which is important but still not easy to control. This is because surface terminations are a factor that has a large effect on the performance of batteries, as demonstrated by theoretical investigations. For example, oxygen terminations are considered most favorable, while hydroxyls and fluorines result in a lower capacity and lower lithium-ion transport.260 Therefore, developing ways to control the surface terminations of MXenes is of great importance for their practical use in LIBs. Although 2D materials show advantages as LIB electrode materials, their low first cycle columbic efficiency caused by the high specific surface area and large irreversible capacity is a barrier to their practical use in LIBs.
6.2 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors are promising energy storage devices with typical characteristics of high power density (∼103 W kg−1), a fast charge/discharge rate (∼1 s), excellent cycling life (∼104 cycles) and safe operation. According to the Ragone plot,261 supercapacitors have a much higher power density than conventional capacitors and batteries, making them very useful in areas where a high power density is required, such as transportation, lighting and elevators. However, supercapacitors have a lower energy density than batteries. Therefore, one of the biggest tasks in supercapacitor research is to achieve a proper balance between power density and energy density.
There are two kinds of supercapacitors based on different working mechanisms, i.e., electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLC) based on a surface charge adsorption mechanism and pseudo-capacitors based on a faradaic redox reaction mechanism (Fig. 13). According to the surface charge-storage mechanism, specific surface area, surface terminates, and electrical conductivity are three key factors that affect the performance of the electrode materials. Taking commercially-used activated carbon as an example, the construction of porous structures can give activated carbon a high specific surface area ∼103 m2 g−1.262 However, a broad distribution of pores and poor affinity of the carbon walls to electrolyte ions lead to a much lower specific capacitance (e.g., <10 μF cm−2) than the theoretical one (15–25 mF cm−2).263 Introducing surface functional groups on the carbon walls increases their affinity to an aqueous electrolyte, but remarkably decreases their electrical conductivity. As discussed in the Section 5, reducing the thickness of the 2D material produces more surface area to be exposed to electrolyte ions compared to other nanostructured materials. In addition, some 2D materials (e.g., graphene, metallic TMDCs, MXene) have very high electrical conductivities that are ideal for EDLC-based supercapacitors.
 Fig. 13  Schematics showing strategies to improve the performance of EDLCs and pseudocapacitors based on 2D materials. The left panel shows different strategies for EDLCs based on stabilizing the porosity of the graphene. The right panel shows different strategies for pseudocapacitors based on active 2D materials and/or 2D materials with a high conductivity. 
Because of the unique properties of graphene, its theoretical capacitance is as high as 550 F g−1, far surpassing values for other types of carbon materials.264 However, graphene nanosheets tend to restack due to van der Waals interaction, leading to a loss of their unique properties. Thus, one of the main issues is to prevent graphene from restacking. As shown in Fig. 13, there are two main strategies for this, which are based on the idea of introducing stable voids/gaps between graphene nanosheets. The first is to engineer in-plane pores in the graphene nanosheets. For example, Ruoff et al. have reported a porous graphene with an ultrahigh surface area of 3100 m2 g−1, synthesized by the chemical activation of GO using KOH at 800 °C.265 Its symmetrical supercapacitor showed an improved performance with a specific capacitance of 150 F g−1 at a current density of 0.8 A g−1. The performance of supercapacitors can be further improved by the controllable fabrication of in-plane porous graphene combined with the intrinsic chemistry of materials. Another strategy to avoid the restacking of graphene nanosheets by maintaining the gaps between them (Fig. 13). For example, Choi et al.266 have fabricated a 3D porous graphene foam using a sacrificial polymer template. A supercapacitor based on the porous graphene electrode shows a specific capacitance of 202 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. Modified graphene nanosheets with “spacer” molecules or inserted “spacer” species between the graphene layers also ensure large spaces between the nanosheets and thus avoid the restacking of graphene. These strategies are useful because the increased porosity of graphene ensures a higher surface area and also acts as pathways for the transport of electrolyte ions, thus giving a better supercapacitor performance. However, the porous nature of materials produced by these two strategies decreases the volumetric energy and power densities of supercapacitors. Therefore, other strategies beyond those based only on porosity engineering are needed. Li et al.267 developed a packed graphene membrane with H2SO4 electrolyte as the ‘spacer’ in the graphene interlayer spacing, ensuring that the supercapacitors had a higher volumetric energy. To further improve the performance of EDLC-based supercapacitors, comprehensive considerations are necessary, including ways of packing the nanosheets, surface functional groups, additives, electrolytes, etc.
In addition to EDLCs, another type of supercapacitor is based on the faradaic redox mechanism shown in the right panel of Fig. 13. Unlike EDLCs, extra energy can be reversibly stored/released accompanied by faradic processes, such as electrochemical doping/de-doping or surface redox reactions. For example, TMDCs, TMOs, and LDHs are demonstrated to be 2D materials for supercapacitors with a faradaic redox behavior. Although these supercapacitors show a higher specific capacitance and energy density than EDLCs, they exhibit a lower power density and poorer electrochemical stability due to their poor electrical conductivity and unstable structures, and this is one of the biggest challenges for pseudocapacitors. To solve this issue, 2D materials with good electrical conductivity have been proposed, such as metallic 1T phase MoS2 and MXenes (Fig. 13). MXenes are a family of emerging 2D materials with good electrical conductivity that can store extra charge through the intercalation of electrolyte ions into their interlayer spaces as well as reversible redox reactions. Ling et al. recently reported a pseudocapacitive device based on exfoliated Ti3C2 with –O–, –OH, and –F functional groups on its surface. The supercapacitor exhibited an extremely high specific capacitance of up to 450 F g−1.268 It should be noted that the abundant surface functional groups (e.g., –OH and –F) generated in the special etching process using HF, make them chemically active and hydrophilic to the electrolyte, which may be one of the keys to achieving this superior performance. However, there is a still lack of methods to precisely control the surface chemistry and charges of various MXenes, and this deserves further study.
Although great progress has been made on the use of 2D materials for supercapacitors, including graphene and “beyond-graphene” 2D materials, challenges remain. First of all, most 2D materials lack natural dangling bonds and surface charges and this results in self-restacking and poor affinity to electrolyte ions. In addition, a large number of 2D materials are insulating or semiconducting with a relatively low electrical conductivity compared to commercial carbon and other competing materials. Composite engineering may alleviate the problem, but also make the processing complicated and increase costs. As a result, novel 2D materials with good conductivity as well as stability need to be developed to make better supercapacitors than the current ones.
Furthermore, the practical use of 2D materials in energy storage has still a long way to go. Several major scientific and technological barriers need to be overcome. First, the specific surface area is a critical factor in energy storage applications, but 2D materials are prone to restacking, thus losing their high initial surface area. Although several strategies based on introduction of voids/gaps have been proposed, they often cause a negative impact at the same time. Second, surface charges/terminates of 2D materials can greatly affect the ability of the electrodes to access and store electrolyte ions. However, there is still a lack of effective ways to precisely control the surface charges/terminates of 2D materials. This is especially important for materials like MXenes, which can easily be modified with functional groups during their chemical exfoliation process using HF as etchant. Third, except for graphene, large quantities of most other 2D materials are not yet commercially available, or though available their cost is too high for their use in practical energy storage devices.
In the Sections 4–6, we have reviewed some main applications of solution-processed 2D materials. Actually, many other applications of 2D material dispersions have been explored in the last few years. Some typical applications, rather than an exhaustive list, are summarized in Table 6. The abundance of 2D materials with different compositions and crystal structures provides a wide range of functionalities, in addition to the benefit of low temperature solution processibility. At the same time, we also note that more new layer materials are being explored and exfoliated, and we expect these to further expand the applications of exfoliated 2D materials.
Table 6 A summary of the applications of solution-processed 2D materials




TCFs
rGO,168,176 graphene52,103


TFTs
Channel materials: rGO,115 MoO3,157 rGO/Ti0.87O20.52−99, WS2,36 graphene,140 b-P166


Contact electrode: graphene,35,36,112,113 rGO167


Dielectric layer: h-BN,175 oxide nanosheets107






Non-volatile resistive memory devices
GO,269 rGO,270 MoS2/GO,271 MoOx/MoS2 heterostructures272






Photodetectors
WS2,35 TMDCs (MoS2, WS2, etc.),273 b-P,274 rGO/Ti0.87O20.52−100






LEDs
MoS2/MoO3 hybrids,185 WOx/WS2,275 WOx/WSe2275


Solar cells
Conductive electrode: rGO168


Hole extraction layer: partially oxidized MoS2276






Photoluminescence
La0.90Sm0.05Nb2O7 nanosheet,277 Eu0.56Ta2O7 nanosheet,278


Eu3+/titanium oxide nanosheet,125 MoS242


Electrocatalysis
MoS2 (HER in acid media),192,279 N- or B-doped graphene (ORR221 and CRR228)


MXenes (HER208,280 and CRR281), LDH (HER282 and ORR224,283 in alkaline media)






Batteries
Graphene,251,253 TMDCs,254,284 MXene259






Supercapacitors
MXene,285 TMDCs,268,286 graphene,265,267


Gas separation and ion separation membranes
Ions separation: Ti3C2Tx,287 GO114


Gas separation: copper 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate MOF lamellae,288 GO117






Sensors
Strain sensor: crumpled rGO/nanocellulose,289 rGO290


Gas sensor: NH3: b-P,291 Ti2CO2;292 CO2: V2C;293


NO2: MoS2,294 SnO2/MoS2295


Ion and pH sensor: MoS2,296 MoS2/Au,297 MoS2/graphene298


Biosensor: MXene,299 MoS2,38 WS2300






Composites and coating layers
Reinforcing filler: b-P,291 h-BN,301 MXene,285


Conductive filler: rGO,302 graphene303


Anticorrosion filler: rGO and graphene,40 h-BN304


Fire retardant coating layer: graphene,305,306 h-BN307






Adsorbants
MXene,308 rGO,309,310 h-BN311






Thermal interfacial materials and thermal management
h-BN,312,313 rGO309,314




7. Summary and outlook
In this Review, we have discussed the preparation of 2D materials from the ways of exfoliating layer materials, their assembly into 2D films/membranes or 3D powdery samples/macrostructures, and the state-of-the-art applications of solution-processed 2D materials in electronics, optoelectronics, electrocatalysis, and energy storage. The exfoliation techniques of layer materials can be classified into three main types, i.e., oxidation and reduction-based intercalation and exfoliation, mechanical force-assisted exfoliation, and exfoliation of layer materials by placing ions and molecules between the layers. A systematic comparison of these exfoliation methods clearly shows their advantages and disadvantages, and future developments have been discussed for each method. Different macrostructures fabricated from these exfoliated 2D materials have also been summarized by dividing their morphology into 2D films/membranes and 3D powdery samples/macrostructures. Detailed comparisons of these methods have been made in terms of the thickness and size of the macrostructures, as well as the controllability and complexity of the fabrication methods.
The large number of species of exfoliated 2D materials encompasses electronic materials from insulators to semiconductors, conductors and even superconductors, and those with optical absorption from UV to visible light, NIR, and MIR. These features mean that one can easily choose a desired 2D material for different electronic and optoelectronic applications. For applications in electrocatalysis and energy storage, the large surface area of 2D materials means abundant active sites for electrochemical reactions, which are needed for such applications. On the one hand, 2D materials with good activity and electron conductivity are generally good electrocatalysts, such as Mo2C and metallic 1T MoS2. On the other hand, some insulating 2D materials can also be good electrocatalysts after combining them with conductive additives. For batteries, some 2D materials such as graphene and MXene are good conducting additives and have been extensively studied. Despite the drawback of a large capacity fade after the first cycle, the stabilized capacity of 2D materials as electrode materials is still very high. For supercapacitors, exfoliated 2D materials are promising because they have a large surface area for ions to access based on the EDLC effect. Additionally, some 2D materials, such as LDHs and TMOs, also have a large pseudo-capacitance, making them good candidates for high-rate capacitors with high capacitance. Nevertheless, although the potentials of exfoliated 2D materials have been demonstrated in many fields, great challenges exist and prevent their practical application at present. We now propose several key challenges and research opportunities concerning the exfoliation and applications of 2D materials.
(1) Mass production of 2D materials
The mass production of 2D materials is critical for industrial applications. So far, only graphene and its derivatives such as GO and rGO can be produced in over ton quantities per year. There are two major challenges for the mass production of 2D materials, i.e., the lack of a large quantity of the layer precursor and the lack of efficient exfoliation methods. Except for some conventional layer materials, such as graphite, h-BN, and MoS2, most layer materials, such as b-P, b-As0.83P0.17, and PtSe2, are only available in small quantities and only suitable for lab-level research. Therefore, developing new approaches for the synthesis of layer materials in large quantities would greatly accelerate the development of the corresponding 2D materials. In addition, how to improve the quality of raw layer materials, like reducing the number of defects and increasing crystal size, should also be important. We note that many conventional layer materials, such as h-BN and MoS2, can be mass produced, but their exfoliation to 2D materials by present methods has many problems. So far, no method can produce 2D h-BN or MoS2 materials with a satisfactory combination of mass production ability, high yield, high quality, and low cost. For example, ball milling can produce 2D materials in large quantities and with low cost, but the 2D materials produced have a very small size and many defects. Therefore, new exfoliation methods to solve the problem of mass production while preserving crystal quality would significantly promote their practical applications. These needs call for a more fundamental and in-depth understanding of the nature of the interactions between adjacent layers in the materials. Comparative studies are interesting and of great importance. For example, graphite and h-BN have a similar structure and interlayer spacing, while h-BN is much more difficult to exfoliate than graphite. Fundamental reasons for this fact should be carefully studied. In addition to the efficient exfoliation of layer materials, another important point is the homogeneity of as-exfoliated materials. Most current exfoliation methods are uncontrollable and the exfoliated materials have large distributions in lateral size and thickness. Therefore, sorting or separating the exfoliated 2D materials by for example, density gradient ultracentrifugation, will be necessary for their future applications especially those are high-end.
(2) Exfoliation of some unique 2D materials
We note that there are many 2D materials, such as dielectric oxide nanosheets, MIR-responsive b-P and b-AsxP1−x, franckeite, mica etc. that cannot currently be grown by bottom-up synthesis methods. These materials have unique properties, so their top-down exfoliation is very important for their use. For example, dielectric oxide nanosheets have large dielectric constants (εr) of several hundreds at thicknesses of 1–3 nm, which are promising for next generation ultrathin flexible TFT devices.109 2D b-AsxP1−x shows optical absorption up to a wavelength of 8 μm at room temperature, and can be a good channel material for room temperature flexible MIR detection applications.154 In addition, a recently exfoliated 2D material, mineral franckeite, which composed of natural van der Waals heterostructures and showed interesting electrochemical and electrical properties.315 Exfoliation of such new 2D materials with unique structures and properties deserves more investigations.
(3) Assembly of exfoliated 2D materials into heterostructures
The microstructures and macrostructures of assembled 2D materials also have a great influence on the device performance. Recent work based on van der Waals heterostructures from MC and CVD 2D materials demonstrates the strong coupling between different 2D materials, which suggests many fascinating phenomena.8 Research on heterostructures based on solution-exfoliated 2D materials are still in their infancy, but a few examples have demonstrated their power in improving device performance.100,107,129 Because an increasing number of 2D materials have been prepared by exfoliation, more effort should be put into their hetero-assembly and explorations of their properties and applications.
(4) 3D networks of 2D materials beyond graphene
The assembly of 2D materials other than graphene into 3D networks is another challenge that needs to be tackled. So far, only GO has been assembled into 3D networks with good mechanical strength. The removal of oxidative groups on GO can be used to assemble individual sheets, and this impedes slipping between adjacent sheets due to the strong chemical bonds formed between layers. For other 2D materials, no such force exists to bind adjacent sheets because of the lack of functional groups on their surface. However, the importance of 3D networks fabricated by 2D materials is evident. For example, 3D networks assembled from oxide nanosheets with good mechanical properties and a large specific surface area would be an ideal support for catalysts and a good filter for waste water treatment. Therefore, more effort should be devoted to the fabrication of 3D macrostructures using solution-exfoliated 2D materials other than GO, to further expand the use of these materials. One possible method is to combine GO with another 2D material to fabricate hybrid 3D macrostructures, where GO serves as a framework with good mechanical strength while the other 2D material serves as a functional unit. In addition, coordination between defects on the surface of a 2D material and organic functional groups might be a suitable route to produce surface functionalized 2D materials similar to GO, which can be further used for direct assembly into 3D macrostructures.
(5) Using 2D materials as model materials for electrochemistry
2D materials provide a well-defined model for theoretical calculations due to their flat surface and simple structure, and thus they may provide opportunities for fundamental electrochemistry studies. We believe that a combination of electrochemical reactions based on 2D materials with microcircuit techniques can be very powerful for quantitative studies on the mechanisms involved and influence of individual factors on their performance. Such understanding can guide the design of good electrocatalysts and electrode materials. For example, Voiry et al.316 have recently combined MoS2-based electrocatalytic HER and FET devices to qualitatively study the roles of contact resistance and charge transport on the performance of MoS2 catalysts for HER. In their experiments, edges or basal planes of MoS2 were selectively exposed by microfabrication and patterning. In this way, researchers could avoid effects caused by an active difference between the edges and basal planes of MoS2 on HER performance and single out contact resistance as the only variable changing with HER performance. Also, because of the high electron potential and high salt concentration around the electrode in electrochemical reactions, surface structure, valance, and the chemical composition of materials may not remain the same during electrochemical reactions. These changes in the electrochemical materials need to be well characterized and understood so that one can know where the reactivity arises and how to optimize it. Therefore, combinations of electrochemical reactions based on 2D materials and in situ characterization tools are very important for understanding the interplay between the materials and reactants during electrochemical reactions at the nanoscale or even the atomic level. Such in situ characterization tools can include near-field characterization techniques (e.g., tip-enhanced spectroscopy317) and surface techniques suitable for atmosphere operation (e.g., atmosphere XPS244 and synchrotron techniques318). Such studies are helpful in shedding light on the changes in the surface structure, valance, and chemical composition of 2D materials at the atomic or nanoscale level and to further guide finding good 2D electrochemical materials.
(6) Metallic 2D materials for electrocatalysis and energy storage
Metallic 2D materials are very promising substitutes for noble metal electrocatalysts. They show a better electronic conductivity and more catalytically active sites than semiconducting 2D electrocatalysts like MoS2 and MoSe2, in which only the edges are active.210 Compared to nanosheets from non-lamellar structures like Co3O4 and Co9S8 with abundant active sites stemming from their unsaturated coordination on the basal planes, metallic 2D materials from lamellar structures may be more stable and provide long-term stability in electrochemical reactions. First, large throughput theoretical calculations are needed to drive the discovery of more metallic 2D materials with a high catalytic activity and stability. Second, preparation methods beyond the CVD growth of metallic 2D electrocatalysts such as TaS2,209,210 NbS2,210 and VS2210,319 need to be developed. Third, for metallic 2D electrocatalysts, sharing similar properties with metals, we need to pay more attention to their in situ surface characterization in electrochemical processes, which is especially important for understanding catalytic mechanisms. In terms of energy storage, metallic 2D materials such as MXenes258 and TaS2320 are promising electrode materials for supercapacitors due to their high specific surface area, good conductivity, and reactivity. In addition, surface charges/terminates of 2D materials can greatly affect the ability of electrodes to access and store electrolyte ions in supercapacitors. Metallic 2D materials like MXenes may provide a chance to tune the surface charges/terminates because they are easy to functionalize. These features make metallic 2D materials promising for supercapacitors.
(7) Rational choice of 2D materials for target applications
The potentials of exfoliated 2D materials are definitely not restricted to the applications mentioned above, and many more uses are given in Table 6. To satisfy the demands of different applications, one needs to carefully choose from the 2D library suitable materials with different compositions, structures, and properties. Meanwhile, one needs to rationally design and choose their sizes, functional groups, defects, etc., rather than examining the performance of all possible materials. These considerations should be comprehensive from the matching of the demands of a certain application to the properties of the material. For example, to drive liquid crystal displays, the demands for a TFT require a carrier mobility larger than 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an on/off ratio larger than 106, which means that one needs to choose a semiconducting 2D material with a matching performance as the channel material. In addition to the performance demands, one should also consider the cost, stability, and scalability of the production of the exfoliated 2D material. From these viewpoints, we could surmise that exfoliated 2H phase TMDCs of high quality are probably the most suitable 2D materials for TFT display applications. In contrast for use in antistatic carpets, which requires a surface resistance lower than 1011 Ω, graphene can be used as a suitable conducting additive because of its good electrical conductivity and low cost compared to other 2D materials. Therefore, one needs to conduct 2D material exfoliation with purpose towards different target applications.
Finally, we believe that the development of exfoliated 2D material dispersions provides another class of solution-based nanomaterials in addition to 1D nanowires/nanotubes and 0D nanoparticles/quantum dots. One noticeable advantage of 2D materials is their possibility of being produced by a top-down method by exfoliating corresponding bulk layer materials. This feature means that mass production would not be a bottleneck for the industrial application of 2D materials if suitable exfoliation methods can be developed. By exfoliating bulk layer materials to few layers or even monolayers, many special phenomena and impressive properties have already been demonstrated, and new impressive results are producing continuously. Therefore, more effort on the exfoliation of 2D materials to solve the afore-mentioned challenges deserves to be made both for fundamental research and practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge support by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51521091 and 51722206), the Youth 1000-Talent Program of China, the Economic, Trade and Information Commission of Shenzhen Municipality for the “2017 Graphene Manufacturing Innovation Center Project”, the Development and Reform Commission of Shenzhen Municipality for the development of the “Low-Dimensional Materials and Devices” discipline, and the Shenzhen Basic Research Project (No. JCYJ20170307140956657). Xingke Cai thanks support by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2017M610886). We acknowledge Dr Usman Khan's help for drawing Fig. 7, and Dr Shaohua Chen and Dr Linchao Zeng for helpful discussions.
References
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, Y. Jian, Z. Xiao, J. Chen, Z. Wei, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5082–5104 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ling, H. Wang, S. Huang, F. Xia and M. S. Dresselhaus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4523–4530 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Cai, B. Liu, X. Zou and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2018 DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00536 .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2392–2415 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Lai, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8816–8838 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Weng, X. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3989–4012 RSC .
B. Liu, M. Köpf, A. N. Abbas, X. Wang, Q. Guo, Y. Jia, F. Xia, R. Weihrich, F. Bachhuber, F. Pielnhofer, H. Wang, R. Dhall, S. B. Cronin, M. Ge, X. Fang, T. Nilges and C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4423–4429 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717–6731 RSC .
Q. Wang and D. O’Hare, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4124–4155 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yoon, D.-H. Seo, K. Ku, J. Kim, S. Jeon and K. Kang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2067–2073 CrossRef .
U. Hofmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1968, 7, 681–692 CrossRef .

          M. S. Whittingham and A. J. Jacobson, Intercalation chemistry, Academic Press,  1980 Search PubMed .

          M. S. Dresselhaus, Intercalation in Layered Materials, Springer, US,  1986 Search PubMed .
G. F. Walker and W. G. Garrett, Science, 1967, 156, 385–387 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. Murphy and G. W. Hull Jr, J. Chem. Phys., 1975, 62, 973–978 CrossRef .
D. W. Murphy, F. J. Di Salvo, G. W. Hull Jr and J. V. Waszczak, Inorg. Chem., 1976, 15, 17–21 CrossRef .
Y. Koike, H. Suematsu, K. Higuchi and S. Tanuma, Solid State Commun., 1978, 27, 623–627 CrossRef .
T. Sasaki, M. Watanabe, H. Hashizume, H. Yamada and H. Nakazawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 8329–8335 CrossRef .
K. Kalucki and A. W. Morawski, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2010, 47, 357–363 CrossRef .
F. Wang, J. Yi, Y. Wang, C. Wang, J. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 5866–5874 Search PubMed .
J. R. Dahn, U. von Sacken, M. W. Juzkow and H. Al-Janaby, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 2207–2211 CrossRef .
J. R. Dahn, A. K. Sleigh, H. Shi, J. N. Reimers, Q. Zhong and B. M. Way, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 1179–1191 CrossRef .
N. Takami, A. Satoh, M. Hara and T. Ohsaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 371–379 CrossRef .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef .
H.-N. Kim, S. W. Keller, T. E. Mallouk, J. Schmitt and G. Decher, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1414–1421 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722–726 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Mcmanus, S. Vranic, F. Withers, V. Sanchezromaguera, M. Macucci, H. Yang, R. Sorrentino, K. Parvez, S. K. Son, G. Iannaccone, K. Kostarelos, G. Fiori and C. Casiraghi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 343–350 CrossRef PubMed .
A. G. Kelly, T. Hallam, C. Backes, A. Harvey, A. S. Esmaeily, I. Godwin, J. Coelho, V. Nicolosi, J. Lauth, A. Kulkarni, S. Kinge, L. D. A. Siebbeles, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2017, 356, 69–73 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Voiry, J. Yang and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6197–6206 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhu, Z. Zeng, H. Li, F. Li, C. Fan and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5998–6001 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang and T. Sasaki, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9455–9486 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ahn, B. Hong, F. Torrisi, J. Coleman, J. Liu, S. Bohm, M. Drndic, K. Kostarelos, K. Novoselov and E. Siochi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 737–747 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, A. Bartolotta, J. N. Coleman and C. Backes, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6136–6166 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Py and R. R. Haering, Can. J. Phys., 1983, 61, 76–84 CrossRef .
D. Voiry, M. Salehi, R. Silva, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6222–6227 CrossRef PubMed .
P. L. Cullen, K. M. Cox, M. K. Bin Subhan, L. Picco, O. D. Payton, D. J. Buckley, T. S. Miller, S. A. Hodge, N. T. Skipper, V. Tileli and C. A. Howard, Nat. Chem., 2016, 9, 244–249 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Englert, C. Dotzer, G. Yang, M. Schmid, C. Papp, J. M. Gottfried, H. P. Steinrück, E. Spiecker, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 279 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Okino and N. Bartlett, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1993, 32, 2081–2090 RSC .
C.-J. Shih, A. Vijayaraghavan, R. Krishnan, R. Sharma, J.-H. Han, M.-H. Ham, Z. Jin, S. Lin, G. L. C. Paulus, N. F. Reuel, Q. H. Wang, D. Blankschtein and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 439–445 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zeng, Z. Yin, X. Huang, H. Li, Q. He, G. Lu, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11093–11097 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Guan, S. Zhang, S. Liu, Y. Cai, M. Low, C. P. Teng, I. Y. Phang, Y. Cheng, K. L. Duei and B. M. Srinivasan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6152–6155 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Hodge, D. J. Buckley, H. C. Yau, N. T. Skipper, C. A. Howard and M. S. P. Shaffer, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3150–3158 RSC .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'Ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O’Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef PubMed .
K. R. Paton, E. Varrla, C. Backes, R. J. Smith, U. Khan, A. O’Neill, C. Boland, M. Lotya, O. M. Istrate, P. King, T. Higgins, S. Barwich, P. May, P. Puczkarski, I. Ahmed, M. Moebius, H. Pettersson, E. Long, J. Coelho, S. E. O’Brien, E. K. McGuire, B. M. Sanchez, G. S. Duesberg, N. McEvoy, T. J. Pennycook, L. CDowning, A. Crossley, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 624–630 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Varrla, K. R. Paton, C. Backes, A. Harvey, R. J. Smith, J. Mccauley and J. N. Coleman, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11810 RSC .
P. G. Karagiannidis, S. A. Hodge, L. Lombardi, F. Tomarchio, N. Decorde, S. Milana, I. Goykhman, Y. Su, S. V. Mesite and D. N. Johnstone, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2742–2755 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lei, V. N. Mochalin, D. Liu, S. Qin, G. Yury and Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8849 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Buzaglo, I. P. Bar, M. Varenik, L. Shunak, S. Pevzner and O. Regev, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603528 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Anasori, T. Makaryan, D. Er, S. Kota, P. L. Walsh, M. Zhao, V. B. Shenoy, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385–11391 RSC .
L. Peng, Z. Xu, Z. Liu, Y. Wei, H. Sun, Z. Li, X. Zhao and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5716 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. Pei, J. Du, F. Li, K. Huang, W. Ren and H.-M. Cheng, China Pat., CN201110282370.5,  2012 Search PubMed .
F. R. Hartley, S. G. Murray and M. R. Williams, J. Solid State Chem., 1998, 147, 74–81 Search PubMed .
W. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Li, F. Zhang, L. Lin, S. Niu, D. Chenet, X. Zhang, Y. Hao, T. F. Heinz, J. Hone and Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2014, 514, 470–474 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Voiry, A. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2702–2712 RSC .
J. Zheng, H. Zhang, S. Dong, Y. Liu, T. N. Chang, H. S. Shin, Y. J. Hu, B. Liu and K. P. Loh, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 2995 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yin, J. Han, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, P. Xu, Q. Yuan, L. Samad, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, P. Zhang, X. Cao, B. Song and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7965–7972 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-L. Tsai, J. Heising, J. L. Schindler, C. R. Kannewurf and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 879–882 CrossRef .
P. Joensen, R. F. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 457–461 CrossRef .
X. Fan, P. Xu, Y. C. Li, D. Zhou, Y. Sun, M. A. T. Nguyen, M. Terrones and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5143–5149 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Vallés, C. Drummond, H. Saadaoui, C. A. Furtado, M. He, O. Roubeau, L. Ortolani, M. Monthioux and A. Pénicaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15802–15804 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. Milner, N. T. Skipper, C. A. Howard, M. S. Shaffer, D. J. Buckley, K. A. Rahnejat, P. L. Cullen, R. K. Heenan, P. Lindner and R. Schweins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8302 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Pénicaud and C. Drummond, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 129–137 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Philipp, H. Johannes, K. F. Edelthalhammer, M. Udo, P. Herwig, H. Frank and H. Andreas, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12411 CrossRef PubMed .
T. S. Miller, T. M. Suter, A. M. Telford, L. Picco, O. D. Payton, F. Russellpavier, P. L. Cullen, A. Sella, S. Msp and J. Nelson, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5891–5896 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bunch, Y. Yaish, M. Brink, K. Bolotin and P. Mceuen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 287–290 CrossRef PubMed .
A. O’Neill, U. Khan and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2414–2421 CrossRef .
N. Rathod and S. G. Hatzikiriakos, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2004, 44, 1543–1550 CrossRef .
A. Ciesielski and P. Samorì, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6030–6051 CrossRef PubMed .

          D. R. Lide, CRC Handbook of chemistry and physics: a ready-reference book of chemical and physical data, CRC Press,  1985 Search PubMed .
A. O’Neill, U. Khan, P. N. Nirmalraj, J. Boland and J. N. Coleman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5422–5428 CrossRef .
K.-G. Zhou, N.-N. Mao, H.-X. Wang, Y. Peng and H.-L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10839–10842 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, S. Kwon, D. H. Cho, B. Kang, H. Kwon, Y. Kim, S. O. Park, G. Y. Jung, E. Shin and W. G. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8294 CrossRef PubMed .
J. I. Paredes and S. Villarrodil, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15389–15413 RSC .
J. Kang, V. K. Sangwan, J. D. Wood and M. C. Hersam, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 943–951 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lee, B. Lee, K. H. Park, H. J. Ryu, S. Jeon and S. H. Hong, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1238–1244 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hu, M. Lozadahidalgo, F. C. Wang, A. Mishchenko, F. Schedin, R. R. Nair, E. W. Hill, D. W. Boukhvalov, M. I. Katsnelson and R. A. W. Dryfe, Nature, 2014, 516, 227 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Jacobson, Mater. Sci. Forum, 1994, 152–153, 1–12 Search PubMed .
M. Ohwada, K. Kimoto, T. Mizoguchi, Y. Ebina and T. Sasaki, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2801 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 Search PubMed .
M. Naguib, R. R. Unocic, B. L. Armstrong and J. Nanda, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 9353–9358 RSC .
J. Xuan, Z. Wang, Y. Chen, D. Liang, L. Cheng, X. Yang, Z. Liu, R. Ma, T. Sasaki and F. Geng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14569–14574 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, H. Yuan, M. Meng, C. Cheng, S. Yan, Z. Chen, W. Dang, C. Tan, Y. Liu, J. Yin, Y. Zhou, S. Huang, H. Q. Xu, Y. Cui, H. Y. Hwang, Z. Liu, Y. Chen, B. Yan and H. Peng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 530–535 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef .
A. Sumiyoshi, H. Hyodo, Y. Sato, M. Terauchi and K. Kimura, Solid State Sci., 2015, 47, 68–72 CrossRef .
C. A. Silvera Batista, R. G. Larson and N. A. Kotov, Science, 2015, 350, 1242477 CrossRef PubMed .
N. A. Kotov, I. Dékány and J. H. Fendler, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 637–641 CrossRef .
T. E. Mallouk and J. A. Gavin, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 209–217 CrossRef .
X. Cai, R. Ma, T. C. Ozawa, N. Sakai, A. Funatsu and T. Sasaki, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14419–14427 RSC .
X. Cai, N. Sakai, T. C. Ozawa, A. Funatsu, R. Ma, Y. Ebina and T. Sasaki, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11436–11443 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shen, Y. Pei, P. Dong, J. Ji, Z. Cui, J. Yuan, R. Baines, P. M. Ajayan and M. Ye, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9641–9647 RSC .
H. Lee, L. J. Kepley, H. G. Hong and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 618–620 CrossRef .
X. Li, G. Zhang, X. Bai, X. Sun, X. Wang, E. Wang and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538–542 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Cote, F. Kim and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 1043–1049 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Akatsuka, M.-a. Haga, Y. Ebina, M. Osada, K. Fukuda and T. Sasaki, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1097–1106 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, M. Osada, Y. Ebina, B.-W. Li, K. Akatsuka, K. Fukuda, W. Sugimoto, R. Ma and T. Sasaki, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2658–2666 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 210–228 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yamaguchi, G. Eda, C. Mattevi, H. Kim and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 524–528 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Matsuba, C. Wang, K. Saruwatari, Y. Uesusuki, K. Akatsuka, M. Osada, Y. Ebina, R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700414 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Kim, D. Kang, T. H. Kim, S. G. Lee, N. Byun, D. W. Lee, B. H. Seo, R. S. Ruoff and H. S. Shin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8082–8088 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Derby, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2010, 40, 395–414 CrossRef .
J. Li, F. Ye, S. Vaziri, M. Muhammed, M. C. Lemme and M. Östling, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3985–3992 CrossRef PubMed .
A. G. Kelly, D. Finn, A. Harvey, T. Hallam and J. N. Coleman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 023107 CrossRef .
J. Abraham, K. S. Vasu, C. D. Williams, K. Gopinadhan, Y. Su, C. T. Cherian, J. Dix, E. Prestat, S. J. Haigh and I. V. Grigorieva, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 546–550 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xiao, Z. Wu, L. Chen, F. Zhou, S. Zheng, W. Ren, H. Cheng and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7284–7292 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Song, X. Zhang, Y. Huang, S. Li, Y. Mao, H. J. Ploehn, Y. Bao and M. Yu, Science, 2013, 342, 95–98 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, Q. H. Yang, Y. Yang, W. Lv, Y. Wen, P. X. Hou, M. Wang and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3007–3011 CrossRef .
W. Lv, D. M. Tang, Y. B. He, C. H. You, Z. Q. Shi, X. C. Chen, C. M. Chen, P. X. Hou, C. Liu and Q. H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3730–3736 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Chen, J. Q. Huang, Q. Zhang, W. Z. Gong, Q. H. Yang, M. Z. Wang and Y. G. Yang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 659–667 CrossRef .
L. Hu, R. Ma, T. C. Ozawa, F. Geng, N. Iyi and T. Sasaki, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4897–4899 RSC .
S. D. Wu, W. Lv, J. Xu, D. Han, X. Chen, P. Wang and Q. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17204–17209 RSC .
W. Lv, Z. Xia, S. Wu, Y. Tao, F. M. Jin, B. Li, H. Du, Z. P. Zhu, Q. H. Yang and F. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3359–3364 RSC .
L. Wang, K. Takada, A. Kajiyama, M. Onoda, Y. Michiue, L. Zhang, M. Watanabe and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4508–4514 CrossRef .
H. Xin, R. Ma, L. Wang and Y. Ebina, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 4187–4189 CrossRef .
J. L. Gunjakar, T. W. Kim, H. N. Kim, I. Y. Kim and S.-J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14998–15007 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Coronado, C. Martí-Gastaldo, E. Navarro-Moratalla, E. Burzurí, A. Camón and F. Luis, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5021–5026 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ma, X. Liu, J. Liang, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4173–4178 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cai, T. C. Ozawa, A. Funatsu, R. Ma, Y. Ebina and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2844–2847 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Coronado, C. Martí-Gastaldo, E. Navarro-Moratalla, A. Ribera, S. J. Blundell and P. J. Baker, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 1031–1036 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, T. Sasaki, Y. Ebina, K. Kurashima and M. Watanabe, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4827–4832 CrossRef .
R. Mei, X. Song, Y. Hu, Y. Yang and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 540–545 CrossRef .
G. W. Zhou, J. Wang, P. Gao, X. Yang, Y. S. He, X. Z. Liao, J. Yang and Z. F. Ma, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 1197–1204 CrossRef .
H. Hu, Z. Zhao, W. Wan, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2219–2223 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-X. Sheng, Y.-X. Xu, C. Li and G.-Q. Shi, New Carbon Mater., 2011, 26, 9–15 CrossRef .
K. Sheng, Y. Sun, C. Li, W. Yuan and G. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 247 CrossRef PubMed .
K. K. Manga, Y. Zhou, Y. Yan and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3638–3643 CrossRef .
N. Sakai, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5851–5858 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Torrisi, T. Hasan, W. Wu, Z. Sun, A. Lombardo, T. S. Kulmala, G. W. Hsieh, S. Jung, F. Bonaccorso, P. J. Paul, D. Chu and A. C. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2992–3006 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Luo, W. Lv, W. Yu, S. Wu, P. Hou, Q. Yang, Q. Meng, C. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 486–490 CrossRef .
L. Wang, K. Takada, A. Kajiyama, M. Onoda, Y. Michiue, L. Zhang, M. Watanabe and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4508–4514 CrossRef .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Tian, J. Gao, X. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1215–1221 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4283–4288 CrossRef .
Y. Ebina, T. Sasaki and M. Watanabe, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 151, 177–182 CrossRef .
X. Xu, K. Takada, K. Fukuda, T. Ohnishi, K. Akatsuka, M. Osada, B. T. Hang, K. Kumagai, T. Sekiguchi and T. Sasaki, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3509–3512 RSC .
K. Akatsuka, G. Takanashi, Y. Ebina, M. Haga and T. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12426–12433 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, J. Qiao, Z. Yu, P. Yu, K. Xu, S. P. Lau, W. Zhou, Z. Liu, X. Wang, W. Ji and Y. Chai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604230 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, A. Konar, W. S. Hwang, J. H. Lee, J. Lee, J. Yang, C. Jung, H. Kim, J. B. Yoo and J. Y. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1011 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fang, S. Chuang, T. C. Chang, K. Takei, T. Takahashi and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3788–3792 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ovchinnikov, A. Allain, Y. S. Huang, D. Dumcenco and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8174–8181 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Long, A. Gao, P. Wang, H. Xia, C. Ott, C. Pan, Y. Fu, E. Liu, X. Chen, W. Lu, T. Nilges, J. Xu, X. Wang, W. Hu and F. Miao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700589 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yoshida, J. Ye, T. Nishizaki, N. Kobayashi and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 202602 CrossRef .
D. A. Bandurin, A. V. Tyurnina, G. L. Yu, A. Mishchenko, V. Zólyomi, S. V. Morozov, R. K. Kumar, R. V. Gorbachev, Z. R. Kudrynskyi, S. Pezzini, Z. D. Kovalyuk, U. Zeitler, K. S. Novoselov, A. Patanè, L. Eaves, I. V. Grigorieva, V. I. Fal'ko, A. K. Geim and Y. Cao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 12, 223–227 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, A. F. Chrimes, T. Daeneke, S. Balendhran, D. O. Bellisario, Y. Son, M. R. Field, W. Zhang, H. Nili, E. P. Nguyen, K. Latham, J. van Embden, M. S. Strano, J. Z. Ou and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 91–100 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, G. Qiu, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Du, R. Wang, W. A. Goddard Iii, M. J. Kim, P. D. Ye and W. Wu, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 228–236 CrossRef .
J. Sato, H. Kato, M. Kimura, K. Fukuda and W. Sugimoto, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 18049–18054 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Kim, T. C. Ozawa, K. Fukuda, S. Ohshima, I. Nakai and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2700–2702 CrossRef .
R. A. Street, Adv. Mater., 2010, 21, 2007–2022 CrossRef .
B. Liu, Y. Ma, A. Zhang, L. Chen, A. N. Abbas, Y. Liu, C. Shen, H. Wan and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5153–5360 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, M. Fathi, L. Chen, A. Abbas, Y. Ma and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6119–6127 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, L. Chen, G. Liu, A. N. Abbas, M. Fathi and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5304–5314 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, P. K. Ang, Z. Wang, A. L. L. Tang, J. T. L. Thong and K. P. Loh, Nano Lett., 2009, 10, 92–98 Search PubMed .
H. Kaur, S. Yadav, A. K. Srivastava, N. Singh, J. J. Schneider, O. P. Sinha, V. V. Agrawal and R. Srivastava, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 34095 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Eda, Y. Y. Lin, S. Miller, C. W. Chen, W. F. Su and M. Chhowalla, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 209 CrossRef .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, I. Meric, P. Y. Huang, Q. Gao, Y. Gao, H. Tran, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, L. M. Campos, D. A. Muller, J. Guo, P. Kim, J. Hone, K. L. Shepard and C. R. Dean, Science, 2013, 342, 614–617 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, A. Abbas and C. Zhou, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700045 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, B. Liu, A. Zhang, L. Chen, M. Fathi, C. Shen, A. Abbas, M. Ge, M. Mecklenburg and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7383–7391 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cui, G. H. Lee, Y. D. Kim, G. Arefe, P. Y. Huang, C. H. Lee, D. A. Chenet, X. Zhang, L. Wang and F. Ye, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 534–540 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, J. Shim, J. H. Park and S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5328–5334 CrossRef .
L. Li, G. J. Ye, V. Tran, R. Fei, G. Chen, H. Wang, J. Wang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, L. Yang, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 608–613 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, J. Kang, J. Kang, D. Jariwala, J. D. Wood, J. W. Seo, K. S. Chen, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7029–7036 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Watcharotone, D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, R. Piner, I. Jung, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S.-E. Wu, S.-F. Chen, C.-P. Liu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1888–1892 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, S. Pei, W. Ren, L. Gao and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5245–5252 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ren and H. M. Cheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 726–730 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Shin, K. K. Kim, A. Benayad, S. M. Yoon, H. K. Park, I. S. Jung, M. H. Jin, H. K. Jeong, J. M. Kim and J. Y. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1987–1992 CrossRef .
S. Pei, J. Zhao, J. Du, W. Ren and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4466–4474 CrossRef .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef PubMed .
A. N. Grigorenko, M. Polini and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 749–758 CrossRef .
F. Withers, H. Yang, L. Britnell, A. P. Rooney, E. Lewis, A. Felten, C. R. Woods, V. Sanchez Romaguera, T. Georgiou, A. Eckmann, Y. J. Kim, S. G. Yeates, S. J. Haigh, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and C. Casiraghi, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3987–3992 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yin, X. Zhang, Y. Cai, J. Chen, J. I. Wong, Y.-Y. Tay, J. Chai, J. Wu, Z. Zeng, B. Zheng, H. Y. Yang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12560–12565 Search PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0003 CrossRef .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
H. K. Chae, D. Y. Siberio-Pérez, J. Kim, Y. Go, M. Eddaoudi, A. J. Matzger, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nature, 2004, 427, 523–527 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dou, T. Liao, Z. Ma, D. Tian, Q. Liu, F. Xiao, Z. Sun, J. Ho Kim and S. Xue Dou, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 267–275 CrossRef .
Y. Ito, W. Cong, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2131–2136 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Norskov and X. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 48–53 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, M. Leng, W. Xiao, M. Li, J. Ding, T. L. Tan, W. S. V. Lee and J. Xue, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604943 CrossRef .
J.-S. Li, Y. Wang, C.-H. Liu, S.-L. Li, Y.-G. Wang, L.-Z. Dong, Z.-H. Dai, Y.-F. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11204 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Parsons, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1958, 54, 1053–1063 RSC .
Y. Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, W. J. Jiang, X. Zhang, Z. Dai, L. J. Wan and J. S. Hu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8851–8860 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xie, J. Zhang, S. Li, F. Grote, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, R. Wang, Y. Lei, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17881–17888 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tributsch and J. C. Bennett, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1977, 81, 97–111 CrossRef .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tsai, K. R. Chan, J. K. Nørskov and F. Abild-Pedersen, Surf. Sci., 2015, 640, 133–140 CrossRef .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chatti, T. Gengenbach, R. King, L. Spiccia and A. N. Simonov, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3092–3099 CrossRef .
G. Liu, Z. Li, T. Hasan, X. Chen, W. Zheng, W. Feng, D. Jia, Y. Zhou and P. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1989–1995 RSC .
H. Wang, Z. Lu, S. Xu, D. Kong, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, P. C. Hsu, K. Yan, D. Bradshaw, F. B. Prinz and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 19701–19706 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Geng, W. Sun, W. Wu, B. Chen, A. Al-Hilo, M. Benamara, H. Zhu, F. Watanabe, J. Cui and T. P. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10672 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Luo, X. Li, X. Cai, X. Zou, F. Kang, H. M. Cheng and B. Liu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4565–4573 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wan, Y. N. Regmi and B. M. Leonard, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6407–6410 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shi, X. Wang, S. Zhang, L. Xiao, Y. Huan, Y. Gong, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Zhou, M. Hong, Q. Fang, Q. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Gu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 958 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Wu, K. P. Hackenberg, J. Zhang, Y. M. Wang, Y. Yang, K. Keyshar, J. Gu, T. Ogitsu, R. Vajtai, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, B. C. Wood and B. I. Yakobson, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17127 CrossRef .
M.-R. Gao, J.-X. Liang, Y.-R. Zheng, Y.-F. Xu, J. Jiang, Q. Gao, J. Li and S.-H. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5982 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, Z. Ma, J. Duan, H. Liu, G. Liu, T. Wang, K. Chang, M. Li, L. Shi, X. Meng, K. Wu and J. Ye, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 684–694 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Mahmood, F. Li, S.-M. Jung, M. S. Okyay, I. Ahmad, S.-J. Kim, N. Park, H. Y. Jeong and J.-B. Baek, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 441–446 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, S. Ghoshal, M. K. Bates, T. E. Miller, V. Davies, E. Stavitski, K. Attenkofer, S. Mukerjee, Z.-F. Ma and Q. Jia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15594–15598 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov and F. Abild-Pedersen, Surf. Sci., 2015, 640, 133–140 CrossRef .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir and L. Lindqvist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
Z. Lu, W. Xu, J. Ma, Y. Li, X. Sun and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7155–7161 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu, X. Pan, X. Cao, P. Hu and X. Bao, J. Catal., 2011, 282, 183–190 CrossRef .
S. Yang, X. Feng, X. Wang and K. Muellen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339–5343 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. T. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
Y. Li, W. Zhou, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, F. Wei, J. C. Idrobo, S. J. Pennycook and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 394–400 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Cho, S. H. Han and M. P. Suh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15301–15305 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, Y. Zhang, F. Hu and Q. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7616–7620 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Song and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4477 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zheng, B. Zhang, P. De Luna, Y. Liang, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, L. Han, F. P. García de Arquer, M. Liu, C. T. Dinh, T. Regier, J. J. Dynes, S. He, H. L. Xin, H. Peng, D. Prendergast, X. Du and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 149–154 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, Z. Sun, W. Liu, X. Jiao, X. Zu, Q. Hu, Y. Sun, T. Yao, W. Zhang, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14503 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Norskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 RSC .
J. Wu, S. Ma, J. Sun, J. I. Gold, C. Tiwary, B. Kim, L. Zhu, N. Chopra, I. N. Odeh, R. Vajtai, A. Z. Yu, R. Luo, J. Lou, G. Ding, P. J. A. Kenis and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13869 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Lei, W. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Xu, K. Liu, L. Liang, T. Yao, B. Pan, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12697 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sun, Q. Zhu, X. Kang, H. Liu, Q. Qian, Z. Zhang and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6770–6774 Search PubMed .
S. Zhang, P. Kang and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1734–1737 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Lin, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, Q. Luo, W. Zhang, D. Li, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Nature, 2016, 529, 68–71 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, X. Jiao, Z. Sun, W. Zhang, Y. Sun, C. Wang, Q. Hu, X. Zu, F. Yang, S. Yang, L. Liang, J. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 708–712 CrossRef .
N. Sreekanth, M. A. Nazrulla, T. V. Vineesh, K. Sailaja and K. L. Phani, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16061–16064 RSC .
P. Su, K. Iwase, S. Nakanishi, K. Hashimoto and K. Kamiya, Small, 2016, 12, 6083–6089 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, J. A. Schwalbe, M. Cargnello, K. Chan, T. F. Jaramillo, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 706–709 CrossRef .
R. J. Burford and M. D. Fryzuk, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0026 CrossRef .
L. M. Azofra, N. Li, D. R. MacFarlane and C. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2545–2549 RSC .
Y. Inoue, M. Kitano, K. Kishida, H. Abe, Y. Niwa, M. Sasase, Y. Fujita, H. Ishikawa, T. Yokoyama, M. Hara and H. Hosono, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7577–7584 CrossRef .
X.-F. Li, Q.-K. Li, J. Cheng, L. Liu, Q. Yan, Y. Wu, X.-H. Zhang, Z.-Y. Wang, Q. Qiu and Y. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8706–8709 CrossRef PubMed .
C. V. S. Kumar and V. Subramanian, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 15377–15387 RSC .
Y.-Q. Le, J. Gu and W. Q. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13319–13322 RSC .
O. T. Holton and J. W. Stevenson, Platinum Met. Rev., 2013, 57, 259–271 CrossRef .
H. S. Casalongue, S. Kaya, V. Viswanathan, D. J. Miller, D. Friebel, H. A. Hansen, J. K. Nørskov, A. Nilsson and H. Ogasawara, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2817 CrossRef .

          J. B. Donnet, R. C. Bansal and M.-J. Wang, Carbon Black Science and Technology, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1993 Search PubMed .
A. Peigney, Ch. Laurent, E. Flahaut, R. R. Bacsa and A. Rousset, Carbon, 2001, 39, 507–514 CrossRef .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef PubMed .
K. C. Divya and J. Ostergaard, Electr. Power Syst. Res., 2009, 79, 511–520 CrossRef .
J. Hassoun, F. Bonaccorso, M. Agostini, M. Angelucci, M. G. Betti, R. Cingolani, M. Gemmi, C. Mariani, S. Panero, V. Pellegrini and B. Scrosati, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4901–4906 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, X. Feng, S. Ivanovici and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8408–8411 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Lian, X. Zhu, S. Liang, Z. Li, W. Yang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3909–3914 CrossRef .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5463–5471 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Stephenson, Z. Li, B. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 209–231 RSC .
Y. Jing, Z. Zhou, C. R. Cabrera and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25409–25413 CrossRef .
Y. Du, Z. Yin, X. Rui, Z. Zeng, X.-J. Wu, J. Liu, Y. Zhu, J. Zhu, X. Huang, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1456–1459 RSC .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Small, 2013, 9, 1877–1893 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef .
X. Liang, A. Garsuch and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3907–3911 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xie, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, X. Yu, K.-W. Nam, X.-Q. Yang, A. I. Kolesnikov and P. R. C. Kent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6385–6394 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Raymundo-Piñero, K. Kierzek, J. Machnikowski and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2498–2507 CrossRef .
O. Barbieri, M. Hahn, A. Herzog and R. Kötz, Carbon, 2005, 43, 1303–1310 CrossRef .
J. Xia, F. Chen, J. Li and N. Tao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 505–509 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, A. E. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef PubMed .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020–4028 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833–2838 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco, J. Qiu, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 16676–16681 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. He, F. Zhuge, X. F. Zhou, M. Li, G. C. Zhou, Y. W. Liu, J. Z. Wang, B. Chen, W. J. Su and Z. P. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 2749 Search PubMed .
F. Zhao, J. Liu, X. Huang, X. Zou, G. Lu, P. Sun, S. Wu, W. Ai, M. Yi, X. Qi, L. Xie, J. Wang, H. Zhang and W. Huang, ACS Nano, 2016, 6, 3027–3033 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yin, Z. Zeng, J. Liu, Q. He, P. Chen and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 727–731 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Bessonov, M. N. Kirikova, D. I. Petukhov, M. Allen, T. Ryhänen and M. J. Bailey, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 199–204 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Cunningham, D. Hanlon, N. Mcevoy, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 198–208 RSC .
M. B. Erande, M. S. Pawar and D. J. Late, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11548–11556 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Han, X. Yang, Y. Zhu, C. Tan, X. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Huang, B. Chen, Z. Luo, Q. Ma, M. Sindoro, H. Zhang, X. Qi, H. Li, X. Huang, W. Huang, X. W. Sun, Y. Han and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10486–10490 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-M. Yun, Y. J. Noh, C. H. Lee, S. I. Na, S. Lee, S. M. Jo, H. I. Joh and D. Y. Kim, Small, 2014, 10, 2319–2324 CrossRef PubMed .
T. C. Ozawa, K. Fukuda, K. Akatsuka, Y. Ebina, K. Kurashima and T. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8735–8742 CrossRef .
T. C. Ozawa, K. Fukuda, K. Akatsuka, Y. Ebina, T. Sasaki, K. Kurashima and K. Kosuda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1312–1315 CrossRef .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 6, 100–102 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. T. Xu, X. Xiao, Z. M. Ye, S. Zhao, R. Shen, C. T. He, J. P. Zhang, Y. Li and X. M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5285–5288 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Li, X. Zhao, D. Wu and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12899–12903 RSC .
G. Jia, Y. Hu, Q. Qian, Y. Yao, S. Zhang, Z. Li and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14527–14534 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lu, L. Qian, W. Xu, Y. Tian, M. Jiang, Y. Li, X. Sun and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3152–3161 CrossRef .
P. Simon, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2393–2396 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco, J. Qiu, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 16676–16681 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Luo, W. Zhang, H. Yuan, C. Jin, L. Zhang, H. Huang, C. Liang, Y. Xia, J. Zhang, Y. Gan and X. Tao, ACS Nano, 2016, 11, 2459–2469 CrossRef PubMed .
C. E. Ren, K. B. Hatzell, M. Alhabeb, Z. Ling, K. A. Mahmoud and Y. Gogotsi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4026–4031 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Rodenas, I. Luz, G. Prieto, B. Seoane, H. Miro, A. Corma, F. Kapteijn, F. X. L. i Xamena and J. Gascon, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 48–55 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yan, J. Wang, W. Kang, M. Cui, X. Wang, C. Y. Foo, K. J. Chee and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2022–2027 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tian, Y. Shu, Y.-L. Cui, W.-T. Mi, Y. Yang, D. Xie and T.-L. Ren, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 699–705 RSC .
D. Hanlon, C. Backes, E. Doherty, C. S. Cucinotta, N. C. Berner, C. Boland, K. Lee, A. Harvey, P. Lynch, Z. Gholamvand, S. Zhang, K. Wang, G. Moynihan, A. Pokle, Q. M. Ramasse, N. McEvoy, W. J. Blau, J. Wang, G. Abellan, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch, S. Sanvito, D. D. O’Regan, G. S. Duesberg, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8563 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yu, Y. Li, J. B. Cheng, Z. B. Liu, Q. Z. Li, W. Z. Li, X. Yang and B. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13707–13713 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, K. Chen, D. Tong, Y. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Xue, Q. Huang and T. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 314–317 RSC .
Q. He, Z. Zeng, Z. Yin, H. Li, S. Wu, X. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 2994–2999 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cui, Z. Wen, X. Huang, J. Chang and J. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 2305–2313 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wu, Z. Zeng, Q. He, Z. Wang, S. J. Wang, Y. Du, Z. Yin, X. Sun, W. Chen and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 2264–2270 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Chu, L. Shen, W. Deng, M. Yan, S. Ge, J. Yu and X. Song, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 206, 30–36 CrossRef .
H. Song, Y. Ni and S. Kokot, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 56, 137–143 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Xu, M. Zhu, W. Zhang, X. Zhen, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, C. Zhi and P. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3333–3339 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yuan, R. Li and Z. Liu, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 3610–3615 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Khan, P. May, A. O'Neill, A. P. Bell, E. Boussac, A. Martin, J. Semplea and J. N. Coleman, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 581–587 RSC .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Chen, W. Weng, D. Wu and C. Wu, Eur. Polym. J., 2003, 39, 2329–2335 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Huang, T.-Y. Lo, C.-G. Chao and W.-T. Whang, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 260, 113–117 CrossRef .
M. J. Nine, M. A. Cole, D. N. H. Tran and D. Losic, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12580–12602 RSC .
S. Duquesne, M. L. Bras, S. Bourbigot, R. Delobel, H. Vezin, G. Camino, B. Eling, C. Lindsay and T. Roels, Fire Mater., 2003, 27, 103–117 CrossRef .
S. Madakbaş, E. Çakmakçı and M. V. Kahraman, Thermochim. Acta, 2013, 552, 1–4 CrossRef .
O. Mashtalir, K. M. Cook, V. Mochalin, M. Crowe, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14334–14338 RSC .
Z. Li, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, R. Wang and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13684 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ge, L.-A. Shi, Y.-C. Wang, H.-Y. Zhao, H.-B. Yao, Y.-B. Zhu, Y. Zhang, H.-W. Zhu, H.-A. Wu and S.-H. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 434–440 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Liu, W. Lei, S. Qin, K. D. Klika and Y. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 84–88 RSC .
Z. Kuang, Y. Chen, Y. Lu, L. Liu, S. Hu, S. Wen, Y. Mao and L. Zhang, Small, 2015, 11, 1655–1659 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Li, Z. Fang, J. Xu, F. Cao, J. Wan, C. Preston, B. Yang and L. Hu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3606–3613 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Xin, T. Yao, H. Sun, S. M. Scott, D. Shao, G. Wang and J. Lian, Science, 2015, 349, 1083–1087 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Velický, P. S. Toth, A. M. Rakowski, A. P. Rooney, A. Kozikov, C. R. Woods, A. Mishchenko, L. Fumagalli, J. Yin and V. Zólyomi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14410 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Voiry, R. Fullon, J. Yang, E. S. C. de Carvalho Castro, R. Kappera, I. Bozkurt, D. Kaplan, M. J. Lagos, P. E. Batson, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite, L. Dong, D. Er, V. B. Shenoy, T. Asefa and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1003–1009 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Wu, W. J. Wolf, Y. Levartovsky, H. A. Bechtel, M. C. Martin, F. D. Toste and E. Gross, Nature, 2017, 541, 511–515 CrossRef PubMed .
J. McBreen, W. E. O'Grady, K. I. Pandya, R. W. Hoffman and D. E. Sayers, Langmuir, 1987, 3, 428–433 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, J. Wu, W. J. Hardy, P. Loya, M. Lou, Y. Yang, S. Najmaei, M. Jiang, F. Qin, K. Keyshar, H. Ji, W. Gao, J. Bao, J. Kono, D. Natelson, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5605–5609 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, J. Peng, Z. Yu, Y. Zhou, Y. Guo, Z. Li, Y. Lin, K. Ruan, C. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 493–498 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† These two authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Xingke Cai
	Xingke Cai received his BS degree from Central South University, China in 2009, and MS degree from Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2012 under the supervision of Prof. Chang Liu and Hongtao Cong. Afterwards, he obtained his PhD degree by studying with Prof. Takayoshi Sasaki from Tsukuba University and the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan, in 2015. Currently, he is a Postdoctoral Researcher in Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, in collaboration with Prof. Hui-Ming Cheng and Bilu Liu. His research interests focus on the preparation of 2D materials, their assembly and device applications.

Yuting Luo
	Yuting Luo received her MS degree from Shanghai University, China in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Jiandong Wei from Shanghai University and Prof. Xuefeng Gao from Suzhou Institute of Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Currently, she is a PhD student in the Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, under the supervision of Prof. Bilu Liu. Her research interests focus on the electrocatalysis and electrochemistry of low-dimensional materials.

Bilu Liu
	Bilu Liu is currently an Associate Professor and a Core-PI at Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute (TBSI), Tsinghua University, China. He received his bachelor's degree in Materials Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2006, and PhD degree in Materials Science from the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IMR, CAS) in 2012. He worked in the University of Southern California (USC) as a Postdoctoral Research Associate and later Research Assistant Professor between 2012 and 2016. His research interests cover the chemistry and materials science of low-dimensional materials with emphasis on carbon nanostructures, two-dimensional materials, and their heterostructures. His work relates to the controlled preparation of these materials and their applications in electronic, optoelectronics, and catalysis. He has published over 60 papers on these topics with >6500 citations and an H-index of 36.

Hui-Ming Cheng
	Hui-Ming Cheng received his PhD in Materials Science from the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IMR CAS) in 1992. He worked at AIST-Kyushu and Nagasaki University of Japan from 1990 to 1993, and MIT, USA in 1998. He is the founding director of the Advanced Carbon Research Division at Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, IMR CAS since 2001 and also the founding director of the Low-Dimensional Materials and Devices Laboratory at Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, China, since 2016. His research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of carbon nanotubes, graphene and other 2D materials, high-performance bulk carbon and composite materials, and their applications in batteries, supercapacitors and hydrogen production from water photo-splitting. He has published more than 580 scientific papers with a total SCI citation of >58000 and an H-index of 106.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the main focuses of this review, including the exfoliation of layer materials into 2D materials, their assembly into films/membranes or 3D macrostructures, and their applications in different fields.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematics of different methods to prepare 2D materials by exfoliating layer materials. (a) Oxidation-based functionalization and expansion of layer materials, particularly suitable for the preparation of GO. (b) Intercalation of reductants or oxidants by gas or in solvents. (c) Sonication-assisted exfoliation. (d) Shear force-assisted liquid phase exfoliation. (e) Ball milling-assisted exfoliation. (f) Ion exchange assisted-exfoliation. (g) Etching-assisted exfoliation.	 

Oxidation-based intercalation and exfoliation (Fig. 2a and b)	GO31	Oxidation of graphite by KMnO4, KNO3, and concentrated H2SO4	Yield: >90% monolayer	(1) Scalable production	(1) Easy to explode under scalable production
Quality: ID/IG ∼ 161,94	(2) Rich in functional groups	(2) Low electrical conductivity of GO
Thickness: ∼1 nm	
	

Lateral size: 1–100 μm	
	

Graphene,47,48,62 h-BN63	Gas phase intercalation of (1) ICl and IBr; (2) AsF6; (3) SO3F; (4) FeCl3; into layer materials	Yield: depending on intercalation agents and extents. For IBr, 3% yield of few layers (40% bilayers, 35% trilayers, 25% others)	(1) Well preserved in-plane structure	(1) Only suitable for super-flat layer materials with strong in-plane bonding, like graphene and h-BN
Quality: for graphene, ID/IG < 0.1, exact value unknown48	(2) Controlled staging intercalation	(2) Oxidants may stay on the surface without complete removal
Thickness: few layers	
	

Lateral size: 1–100 μm	
	



Reduction-based intercalation and exfoliation (Fig. 2b)	Metal chalcogenides,20,42,49,66,67 graphene,24 h-BN95	Gas phase intercalation of pure alkali metals24 or LiBH468 in vacuum	Yield: high, exact value unknown	(1) High percentage of metallic phase with good conductivity for TMDCs	(1) Decomposition of materials at high temperatures or partial intercalation of them
Quality: for MoS2, 80% 1T and 20% 2H phase44	(2) High yield of monolayers	(2) Time-consuming
Thickness: mono to few layer	
	(3) May explode
Lateral size: 0.1–1 μm	
	

Liquid phase intercalation of alkali metals in liquid ammonia,67 alkali metal in naphthalide66 or n-BuLi in hexane solution42	Yield: high, the highest monolayer yield reaches 90% for WS266	(1) Tunable percentage of metallic phase and semi-conductive phase for TMDCs	(1) High sensitivity to moisture and oxygen
Quality: for MoS2, in n-BuLi/hexane solvent, obtains 50% 1T and 50% 2H phase;42 in naphthalide containing alkali metal, main contains 2H phase;66 in liquid ammonia containing alkali metal, achieves 100% mesoporous 1T phase67	(2) High yield of monolayers	(2) Time-consuming
Thickness: mono to few layers	
	(3) Dissolving of many TMDCs after reaction with water
Lateral size: 0.1–20 μm	
	

Electrochemical intercalation of lithium ions12,49	Yield: high, over 90% monolayers for MoS249	(1) High yield of monolayers	(1) High complexity to assemble battery cell
Quality: for MoS2, obtains mainly 2H phase	(2) Safe	(2) Difficult to remove additives
Thickness: mono to few layers	(3) Suitable for most layer materials	(3) High cost
Lateral size: several hundred nanometers	
	(4) Difficult for scalable production
Exfoliation of alkali metal atoms intercalated layer materials in polar aprotic organic solvents	Yield: high, exact value unknown	(1) High yield of monolayers	(1) Need to intercalate alkali metals atoms into layer material
Quality: for MoS2, pure 2H phase	(2) No need external forces for exfoliation	(2) Very sensitive to oxygen
Thickness: monolayers	(3) Suitable for most layer materials	(3) Need to exfoliate in inert atmosphere
Lateral size: 0.1–1 μm	(4) Charged, easy for assembly	



Sonication assisted-exfoliation and shear force-assisted liquid phase exfoliation (Fig. 2c and d)	Graphene, h-BN, MoS2, WS2, b-P, GaS, TaSe2, MoTe2, TMOs, topological insulators, MOFs, etc.3,41	Ultrasonication or tip sonication of layered materials in solvents53	Yield: 7% monolayer for graphene52	(1) Easy production	(1) Difficult for scalable production to ton level
Quality: for graphene, ID/IG < 0.1, exact value unknown	(2) Well preserved structure	(2) Relatively small size
Thickness: monolayer to tens of layers	(3) Suitable to most layered materials	(3) Difficult to control lateral size and thickness
Lateral size: several hundred nanometers	
	(4) Low yield
Exfoliation of layer materials in liquids at a local shear rate exceeding 104 s−154	Yield: 3% monolayer and few layers for graphene54	(1) Scalable production	(1) Difficult to control lateral size and thickness
Quality: for graphene, ID/IG < 0.1, exact value unknown	(2) Well preserved structure	(2) Low yield and concentration
Thickness: monolayer to tens of layers	(3) Suitable to most layered materials	

Lateral size: several hundred nanometers	
	



Ball milling-assisted exfoliation (Fig. 2e)	Graphene, h-BN, MoS257,58	Rotation of a ball milling container with milling balls and layer materials57,58	Yield: >90% for graphene few layers58	(1) Scalable production	Small size and many defects
Quality: for graphene, ID/IG = 0.2–0.7	(2) Low cost
Thickness: few to tens of layers	

Lateral size: tens to several hundred nanometers	



Ion exchange-assisted intercalation and exfoliation (Fig. 2f)	TMOs and LDHs4,16	Exchange of alkali metal ions (anionic ions) between host layers with protons (or other anionic ions)	Yield: >90% monolayer yield for titania nanosheet39	(1) Monolayer 2D materials	(1) Complicated and time consuming
Quality: good crystal structure but have many vacancies89	(2) High yield	(2) Cannot produce ton quantities
Thickness: monolayers with thickness from 0.5 to 3 nm	(3) Intrinsically charged sheets, easy for assembly	(3) Only suitable for some oxides and LDHs
Laterals size: 2 nm to tens of micrometers	
	



Etching and intercalation-assisted exfoliation (Fig. 2g)	MXene6	Etching elements bonding layers by HF or an organic base	Yield: medium, for Ti3C2 monolayers below 20%, exact value unknown92	(1) Water soluble	(1) Dangerous HF acid needed
Quality: good crystal structure but have many functional groups, such as –F and –OH6	(2) Suitable to many MAX materials	(2) Time consuming
Thickness: mono to few layers	
	(3) Only suitable to exfoliate MAX
Lateral size: several hundred nanometers	
	


 	Fig. 3  Assembly of 2D films or membranes from 2D material dispersions. (a) Layer-by-layer assembly. (b) Langmuir–Blodgett assembly. (c) Spin coating. (d) An AFM image of a neatly-packed monolayer film of titanium oxide nanosheets prepared by spin coating.109 Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2017. (e) Inkjet printing.111 Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from the Annual Reviews, copyright 2010. (f) Spray coating. (g) A picture of large-area graphene-based transparent conductive electrode fabricated by spray coating.41 Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from the John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (h) Vacuum filtration. (i) Self-assembly at the interface of two phases. (j) A free-standing GO membrane obtained by self-assembly at a water/air interface.118 Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from the John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2009.	 

 	Fig. 4  Assembly of 2D nanosheets to form powdery or 3D macrostructures. (a) Schematic of the flocculation process. (b) SEM image of flocculated GO/Ti0.87O20.52−.129 Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) Schematic of the preparation of hollow capsules by layer-by-layer assembly. (d) TEM image of Ti0.87O20.52− nanosheet hollow capsules.131 Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2002. (e) Schematic of the freeze-drying process. (f) 3D GO networks prepared by freeze drying.134 Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from the John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013. (g) Schematic of spray drying. (h) SEM image of Fe2O3/GO composites fabricated by spray drying.133 Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013.	 

Films or membranes
Layer-by-layer assembly (Fig. 3a)	(1) Controllable fine increase of film thickness by only 1 nm	(1) Time consuming to prepare thick films (∼1 nm h−1)	Photocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry,138,139 dielectrics,107 FETs,99 photodetectors100
(2) Simple process	(2) Limited thickness of thin film (<50 nm)
(3) Suitability for large substrates	(3) Polyelectrolyte incorporation into film
(4) Artificial organization on the molecular scale	(4) Only suitable to charged 2D materials


Langmuir–Blodgett assembly (Fig. 3b)	(1) High controllability	(1) High demands on equipment	Dielectrics,107 TCFs,103 ultrathin capacitors106
(2) High-quality monolayer film	(2) Small size of films prepared
(3) Suitable for most 2D materials, including charged and neutral ones, if suitable solvents are used103–105	(3) Time consuming

	(4) Limited thickness of thin film (<50 nm)

	(5) Not suitable to NMP and DMF, common solvents in sonication and liquid phase exfoliation53


Spin coating (Fig. 3c)	(1) Simplicity and common instrument	(1) Limited thickness of thin film (<50 nm)	Dielectrics,109 FETs108
(2) Fast	(2) Difficulty to prepare homogeneous films on a large scale
(3) Controllable increase of thickness of neatly packed monolayer	(3) Need to use charged 2D materials to form high quality films109


Inkjet printing (Fig. 3e)	(1) Direct printing of 2D materials with desired patterns for flexible and transparent electronics	(1) Complicated printing instruments	Optoelectronics,35 FETs, TCFs;140 read-only memories;35 bio-applications35
(2) Good spatial resolution of ∼5 μm, suitable for TFTs	(2) Need to optimize many parameters of 2D material dispersions
(3) Suitable for most 2D materials35,140	



Spray coating (Fig. 3f)	(1) Easy fabrication of large size films on substrates	(1) Not well ordered layered structure	Capacitors,113 FETs36
(2) Suitable for most 2D materials	(2) Spatial resolution of ∼100 μm


Vacuum filtration (Fig. 3h)	(1) Easy preparation of free-standing thick membranes	(1) Extra transferring procedure onto desired substrate	TCFs and FETs115
(2) Simple process	(2) Size of film depends on filtration instruments	Separation of gases and ions114,117
(3) Suitable for most 2D materials	(3) Time consuming to prepare thick membranes	Electrochemical capacitors116


Self-assembly at the interface of two phases (Fig. 3i)	(1) Controllable membrane sizes	(1) Difficulty to prepare ultrathin films for electronic applications	LIBs and solar cells141
(2) Easy preparation of free standing membranes with thickness on μm order	(2) Only work for a few materials, such as GO and LDH


Powdery or 3D macrostructures
Flocculation (Fig. 4a)	(1) Simple process	(1) Not well-organized macrostructure	Photoluminescence,125 photocatalysis,126 superconductivity,127 electrochemical capacitors,128 LIBs142
(2) Easy fabrication in a scalable way	(2) Guest ions for flocculation may influence properties
(3) Feasibility to realize superlattice stacking	(3) Only suitable for charged 2D materials
(4) Mesoporous structure with large specific surface area	



Layer-by-layer assembly (Fig. 4c)	Controlled thickness and diameter of hollow shells	(1) Complicated procedure	Photocatalysis,143 electrochemical capacitors144
(2) Time consuming
(3) Infeasibility for large quantity preparation
(4) Only suitable for charged 2D materials


Freeze drying and spraying (Fig. 4e and g)	(1) Easy fabrication in a scalable way	Not well-organized microstructure and macrostructure	LIBs,133 compressible materials134
(2) Suitable for most 2D materials


Other methods for GO	Formation of well-connected 3D networks with good mechanical properties	Only suitable for GO	Electrochemical supercapacitors135,137

 	Fig. 5  Summary of the bandgaps and carrier mobilities of typical 2D materials covering metals, semiconductors with different bandgaps, and insulators. The numbers in brackets indicate the reference number.	 

 	Fig. 6  Solution-exfoliated 2D materials for electronic and optoelectronic applications. (a) Schematic of all 2D material TFT devices with WSe2 as the channel, h-BN as dielectric layer and exfoliated graphene as the conductive electrodes.36 (b) Flexible TFTs fabricated from inkjet-printed TMDCs.36 Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2017. (c) Dielectrics made of 2D Ti0.87O20.52−.105 Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. (d) TCFs made of rGO.115 Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from the Springer Nature, copyright 2008. (e) Photodetectors made of graphene/WS2/graphene heterostructures.35 Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Springer Nature, copyright 2017.	 

rGO (reduced by N2H4)	Hummers method	Film	Vacuum filtration	Electron: 0.2	1–10	
115

Hole: 1
rGO (reduced at 1000 °C)	Hummers method	Film	Inkjet printing	Electron: 5479	10	
165

Hole: 5511
rGO/titania nanosheet	Hummers method and ion exchange assisted exfoliation	Film	Layer-by-layer assembly	Electron: 0.08	1.2	
100

Hole: 0.07
Graphene	Sonication	Film	Inkjet printing	Electron: 95a	10	
140

Graphene/poly[5,50-bis(3-dodecyl-2-thienyl)-2,20-bithiophene]	Sonication	Film	Inkjet printing	Electron: 0.1	105	
140

MoS2	Electrochemical method	Single sheet	Spin coating	p-Type, exact value unknown	—	
49

MoS2	Sonication	Single sheet	Spin coating	n type, 0.01	—	
53

b-P	Sonication	Film	Langmuir–Blodgett assembly	Unknown	104	
166

MoO3−x	Sonication	Film	Drop casting	Hole: 600	105	
157

WS2	Sonication	Film	Spraying or inkjet printing	Electron: 0.3	600	
36


GO film reduced by hydrazine vapor, then annealed at 200 °C	Hummers method	Vacuum filtration	43000	63	
115

Sonication exfoliated graphene film, annealed at 250 °C in Ar/H2	Sonication	Vacuum filtration	5100	42	
52

Langmuir–Blodgett assembled monolayer graphene film	Intercalation assisted sonication	Langmuir–Blodgett	8000	80	
103

Spray dried GO film reduced by NaBH4 and doped by AuCl3	Hummers method	Spray drying	1400	76.8	
179

GO film assembled from large size sheet reduced in 55% HI at 100 °C for 1 h	Hummers method	Assembled at air/liquid interfaces	1600	85	
180

GO film assembled from large size sheet reduced in 55% HI at 100 °C for 1 h	Hummers method	Assembled at air/liquid interfaces	840	78	
177


 	Fig. 7  Schematic showing the ways in which 2D materials may be important for electrocatalysis. The roles that 2D materials play in electrocatalysis can be divided into two categories: increasing active sites (upper semicircle) and improving intrinsic catalytic activity (bottom semicircle).	 
Volmer step: H+ + e− + * → H*	(1)
Heyrovsky step: H* + H+ + e− → H2 + * or Tafel step: 2H* → H2 + 2*	(2)

 	Fig. 8  Improving the activity of 2D material electrocatalysts for HER. (a–d) Schematic showing main strategies to improve the catalytic activities of 2D material catalysts. (e) Improving the catalytic activity of MoS2 by sulfur vacancies and strain.192 Reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from the Springer Nature, Copyright 2016. (f) Oxygen incorporation.197 Reproduced from ref. 197 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013. (g) 1T′-MoS2.205 Reproduced from ref. 205 with permission from the Springer Nature, Copyright 2016. (h) Formation of heterostructures.206 Reproduced from ref. 206 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013. (i) A summary of the overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slopes of 2D material catalysts for HER (shown in brackets, units are mV and V dec−1, respectively). These data points are divided into two parts, i.e., the Volmer–Tafel pathway (purple background) and Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway (blue background).	 
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O	(3)

 	Fig. 9  Schematic showing that ORR activity can be increased by the optimization of both the surface structure and surface chemistry of electrocatalysts. First, in the electron-transport steps, three intermediates, OOH*, O*, OH* are involved, and their binding energies are strongly correlated and cannot easily be decoupled because of the scaling relations. As a result, even the best Pt-based catalyst has a considerable ORR overpotential. Second, in addition to the electron-transfer step, the slow diffusion of dissolved oxygen in the electrolyte is another significant factor that affects ORR activity.	 

 	Fig. 10  2D materials as electrocatalysts for ORR. (a) TEM image of few-wall carbon nanotube–graphene complexes.221 (b) ADF-STEM image and EELS maps of carbon nanotube–graphene complexes, which indicates that the good ORR performance stems from Fe-containing active sites.221 (c) Nanotube–graphene complex catalysts with high activity and good durability in both acidic and alkaline conditions.221 Reproduced from ref. 221 with permission from the Springer Nature, Copyright 2012. (d) Schematic and the corresponding optical images of oxygen-bubble adhesion behavior on Pt/C and superaerophilic catalysts surfaces. In sharp contrast to the pinning of oxygen bubbles on Pt/C in an electrolyte, a bursting effect is observed on the superaerophilic structured electrode, indicating accelerated oxygen diffusion.217 Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from the John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2016.	 

2D metals with partial oxidation	Formate	Partially oxidized Co nanosheets	Reaction mechanism remains unclear
FE ∼90% (overpotential of 0.24 V) in 40 h232 (outperform metals or metal oxides under comparable conditions227)	Co oxides may facilitate the rate-determining chemical reaction.


Ultrathin TMO (e.g., Co3O4)	Formate	1.72 nm thick Co3O4 nanosheets	Abundant low-coordinated surface Co atoms as potential active sites.
FE ∼60% in 20 h, Tafel slope ∼56 mV dec−1.233
Formate	Oxygen vacancy-rich Co3O4 nanosheets	Bivalent oxygen vacancies favored proton transfer by stabilizing an HCOO−* intermediate, and lowering the activation energy barrier.
FE ∼85% in 40 h, Tafel slope of 37 mV dec−1.226


“Sandwich” structures based on 2D materials	Formate	Sn quantum sheets confined in graphene	Sn quantum nanosheets have strong affinity to the CO2 intermediate, which lowers the overall reaction barrier.
FE ∼85% in 50 h, Tafel slope of 83 mV dec−1.229


Doped/modified graphene	Formate	B-Doped graphene	Not clear.
FE of 66%.234
CO	Ni–N-modified graphene	HER activity of Ni–N-Gr is much lower than bulk Ni, which is likely to increase the FE of CO.
FE ∼90%.235
C2H4 and C2H5OH	N-Doped graphene QDs	Utmost exposure of edge sites and heteroatom N doping result in high FE and CRR activity.
FE comparable to Cu-based catalysts.228


2D TMDCs (e.g., MoxByS2)	Methanol	Mo–Bi bimetallic chalcogenide nanosheets	A synergistic effect between Mo and Bi for producing methanol.
FE of 71.2%, current density of 12.1 mA cm−2.230
N2 + 6H+ + 6e− → 2NH3	(4)

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of 2D material-based LIBs. A variety of 2D materials could work as active materials for the anode and cathode due to their unique structure, electrical, and electrochemical properties.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematics showing the strategies developed to improve the performance of 2D material-based LIBs. (a) 2D materials confine active species between their layers so as to improve the performance of composite electrodes. (b) Doping, defects and edges of 2D materials act as active sites for increasing the storage of lithium ions. (c) 2D materials (exemplified by MoS2) have redox reactions that can greatly increase the specific capacity of batteries. (d) 2D materials (exemplified by MXenes) with good electrical conductivity facilitate electron transfer and thus the performance of batteries.	 
MoS2 + 4Li+ + 4e− ↔ Mo + 2Li2S	(5)

 	Fig. 13  Schematics showing strategies to improve the performance of EDLCs and pseudocapacitors based on 2D materials. The left panel shows different strategies for EDLCs based on stabilizing the porosity of the graphene. The right panel shows different strategies for pseudocapacitors based on active 2D materials and/or 2D materials with a high conductivity.	 
TCFs	rGO,168,176 graphene52,103
TFTs	Channel materials: rGO,115 MoO3,157 rGO/Ti0.87O20.52−99, WS2,36 graphene,140 b-P166
Contact electrode: graphene,35,36,112,113 rGO167
Dielectric layer: h-BN,175 oxide nanosheets107


Non-volatile resistive memory devices	GO,269 rGO,270 MoS2/GO,271 MoOx/MoS2 heterostructures272


Photodetectors	WS2,35 TMDCs (MoS2, WS2, etc.),273 b-P,274 rGO/Ti0.87O20.52−100


LEDs	MoS2/MoO3 hybrids,185 WOx/WS2,275 WOx/WSe2275
Solar cells	Conductive electrode: rGO168
Hole extraction layer: partially oxidized MoS2276


Photoluminescence	La0.90Sm0.05Nb2O7 nanosheet,277 Eu0.56Ta2O7 nanosheet,278
Eu3+/titanium oxide nanosheet,125 MoS242
Electrocatalysis	MoS2 (HER in acid media),192,279 N- or B-doped graphene (ORR221 and CRR228)
MXenes (HER208,280 and CRR281), LDH (HER282 and ORR224,283 in alkaline media)


Batteries	Graphene,251,253 TMDCs,254,284 MXene259


Supercapacitors	MXene,285 TMDCs,268,286 graphene,265,267
Gas separation and ion separation membranes	Ions separation: Ti3C2Tx,287 GO114
Gas separation: copper 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate MOF lamellae,288 GO117


Sensors	Strain sensor: crumpled rGO/nanocellulose,289 rGO290
Gas sensor: NH3: b-P,291 Ti2CO2;292 CO2: V2C;293
NO2: MoS2,294 SnO2/MoS2295
Ion and pH sensor: MoS2,296 MoS2/Au,297 MoS2/graphene298
Biosensor: MXene,299 MoS2,38 WS2300


Composites and coating layers	Reinforcing filler: b-P,291 h-BN,301 MXene,285
Conductive filler: rGO,302 graphene303
Anticorrosion filler: rGO and graphene,40 h-BN304
Fire retardant coating layer: graphene,305,306 h-BN307


Adsorbants	MXene,308 rGO,309,310 h-BN311


Thermal interfacial materials and thermal management	h-BN,312,313 rGO309,314
Footnote
† These two authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
