Emerging advances in nanomedicine with engineered gold nanostructures  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR05112A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR05112A
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2502-2530Emerging advances in nanomedicine with engineered gold nanostructures

        
          
            Joseph A. 
            Webb
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Rizia 
            Bardhan
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Department, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA. E-mail: rizia.bardhan@vanderbilt.edu
Received 
      24th September 2013
    , Accepted 1st December 2013First published on 3rd December 2013AbstractGold nanostructures possess unique characteristics that enable their use as contrast agents, as therapeutic entities, and as scaffolds to adhere functional molecules, therapeutic cargo, and targeting ligands. Due to their ease of synthesis, straightforward surface functionalization, and non-toxicity, gold nanostructures have emerged as powerful nanoagents for cancer detection and treatment. This comprehensive review summarizes the progress made in nanomedicine with gold nanostructures (1) as probes for various bioimaging techniques including dark-field, one-photon and two-photon fluorescence, photothermal optical coherence tomography, photoacoustic tomography, positron emission tomography, and surface-enhanced Raman scattering based imaging, (2) as therapeutic components for photothermal therapy, gene and drug delivery, and radiofrequency ablation, and (3) as a theranostic platform to simultaneously achieve both cancer detection and treatment. Distinct from other published reviews, this article also discusses the recent advances of gold nanostructures as contrast agents and therapeutic actuators for inflammatory diseases including atherosclerotic plaque and arthritis. For each of the topics discussed above, the fundamental principles and progress made in the past five years are discussed. The review concludes with a detailed future outlook discussing the challenges in using gold nanostructures, cellular trafficking, and translational considerations that are imperative for rapid clinical viability of plasmonic nanostructures, as well as the significance of emerging technologies such as Fano resonant gold nanostructures in nanomedicine.Joseph A. WebbJoseph A. Webb received his B.S. degree in Biochemistry from Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, in 2010 and is currently pursuing a Ph.D. in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at Vanderbilt University under the guidance of Professor Rizia Bardhan. His research interests are the design of anisotropic plasmonic nanostructures and their use in theranostic nanomedicine, and paper-based biodiagnostics.Rizia BardhanRizia Bardhan is an Assistant Professor in the department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at Vanderbilt University. She received her Ph.D. in Chemistry from Rice University under the supervision of Prof. Naomi J. Halas. She joined Vanderbilt after a postdoctoral position at the Molecular Foundry in Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA. Her research interests are focused on design, characterization, and applications of plasmonic nanostructures in biodiagnostics, nanomedicine, solar energy conversion, and metamaterials. She was the recipient of the Forbes “Top 30 Under 30: Rising Stars of Science and Innovation” Award in 2011 for her work in plasmonics.
1. Introduction
Engineered gold nanostructures (GNS) have emerged as a promising new platform in nanomedicine due to their unprecedented ability to manipulate incident photons and subsequently scatter or absorb light, properties which have been extensively harnessed in biomedical diagnostics and targeted therapeutics.1,2 Unlike conventional chemotherapy drugs or small-molecule imaging agents, GNS offer several advantages for nanomedicine. These include (i) high biocompatibility and reduced toxicity governed by surface ligands,3 (ii) passive accumulation at tumor sites due to the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect,4 (iii) ease of bioconjugation enabling functionalization with multiple targeting groups for active tumor targeting,5 (iv) increased stability and stealth characteristics aided by hydrophilic polymer conjugation,6 (v) straightforward systemic delivery which enhances circulatory half-life,7 (vi) ability to deliver hydrophobic drugs and nucleic acids to cells by selective binding to the metal surface,8,9 and (vii) integration with contrast agents for visualization of intracellular localization and tracking of nanoparticles in vivo.10–12
The past two decades have witnessed significant advances in the design of new GNS and smart bioconjugation techniques to assemble diverse biochemical moieties on the nanostructure surface enabling them to perform multiple functions simultaneously.13–21Fig. 1 illustrates the multiple functionalities that can be achieved with GNS including targeting to specific cancer receptors via targeting ligands (antibodies, aptamers), cancer diagnostics via contrast agents (MRI, fluorescence probes), and tumor treatment via therapeutic molecules (DNA, drugs). A combination of all functionalities simultaneously will promote their use in cancer theranostics. Theranostic probes have evolved as a class of versatile biomedical agents with multifunctional therapeutic and diagnostic capabilities, enabling the detection and treatment of disease in a single procedure.12,22 For example, recently silica core/gold shell nanoshells were combined with iron oxide (Fe3O4) nanoparticles, indocyanine green (ICG) fluorophores, and anti-HER2 (human epidermal growth factor receptor 2) antibodies to enable simultaneous active targeting of HER2 expressing breast and ovarian cancer cells, diagnosis via dual modal MRI and near-infrared fluorescence, and photothermal therapy to treat the cancer cells.23,24
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation showing the use of plasmonic nanostructures conjugated with multiple therapeutic and diagnostic agents (center) for targeting cancer cells via antibodies on the nanostructure surface (top left), for cancer cell imaging (top right),30 for cancer treatment showing complete eradication of tumor in mice after photothermal therapy (bottom left),174 and for theranostics which enables a single plasmonic entity to deliver both therapeutic and diagnostic functionalities (bottom right).280 Copyright 2008 and 2009 AACR Publishing and 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. 
This review article will provide a brief overview of the optical characteristics of GNS which enable their use in nanomedicine followed by an account of the progress in plasmonic nanomedicine in the past 5 years for cancer detection, treatment, and theranostics. Further, this review will also discuss the role of plasmonics in inflammatory diseases particularly the imaging and therapy of atherosclerotic plaques and rheumatoid arthritic sites.
2. Optical characteristics of engineered gold nanostructures
2.1 Radiative properties
When GNS interact with light, the conduction electrons of the metal can be driven by the incident electric field into collective oscillations known as localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs).25,26 The LSPRs give rise to intense electromagnetic fields on the nanostructure surface with local field intensities that can be orders of magnitude greater than those of the incident field. These electromagnetic fields enhance the radiative and non-radiative properties of GNS which directly impact biomedical imaging and therapy. Following illumination plasmons can either decay nonradiatively, resulting in absorption, or radiatively, resulting in light scattering. By modulating the dimensions of GNS the relative contribution of absorption and scattering to the total extinction cross-section can be controlled.27 While smaller nanostructures predominantly absorb light, larger nanostructures are largely scattering. Calculations have shown that for simple geometries such as spherical Au nanoparticles (AuNPs), sizes ≤40 nm are highly absorbing and when the size is increased to ≥80 nm they are highly scattering.28 But in complex anisotropic nanostructures, for example nanostars, the absorption and scattering properties are not in a linear relationship with the size, rather are dependent on their unique geometry.29 Highly scattering gold nanostructures are extensively utilized as contrast agents for optical imaging using a simple dark-field microscope,30 and for computed tomographic (CT) imaging.31 Nanostructures with large scattering cross-sections and high polarizability also enhance the Raman signal of molecules in their vicinity enabling surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) based imaging. This plasmon-mediated diagnostic imaging will be discussed in detail in Section 3. Besides absorption and scattering properties, by engineering the metal nanostructure size, shape, morphology, interparticle distance, and dielectric environment their LSPRs can also be tuned from the visible to the far-infrared.25,27,32 A range of plasmonic nanostructures of variable shapes and sizes are shown in Fig. 2 and their tunable optical resonances are shown in Fig. 3. This is of particular interest as nanostructures resonant in the near-infrared (NIR) “water-window” (680–900 nm) enable deep tissue imaging and treatment due to low absorption of NIR light by biological fluids and greater photon penetration depth achieved by NIR light with minimal tissue damage. As the size of the GNS is increased, a red-shift in the LSPR is observed which is attributed to phase-retardation effects. Phase retardation arises from the oscillations of the electron cloud around a GNS. The amplitude of the electron oscillation enhances with increasing particle size which consequently increases the period of each oscillation, also known as plasmon lifetime.33,34 With increase in plasmon lifetime, the frequency of the waves decreases, which inversely increases or red-shifts the plasmon wavelength. Further, the increase in plasmon lifetime with increasing dimensions also results in broadening and damping of optical resonances. In addition to size, the LSPR wavelength is also tunable by altering the shape of the GNS. While the LSPR tunability of solid gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) is limited, by altering the nanostructure geometry to nanorods,20,35 nanostars,36,37 and nanoshells with a solid core or hollow interior,17,38–40 the optical resonances can be tuned to the desirable biological spectral window. A shift in the spectral position by altering the GNS shape is attributed to the enhanced polarizability, or ability to polarize incoming light, of the GNS.41 The effect of polarizability is particularly dominant for GNS with highly branched complex geometries such as nanostars.36,37,42–44 In simple nanostructures such as AuNPs polarizability is a function of their diameter. In nanostars polarizability is enhanced by increasing the number of protrusions with minimal increase in overall dimensions which gives rise to significant red-shifts in the plasmon resonances.43
 Fig. 2  SEM and TEM micrographs of gold nanostructures of various shapes and sizes: (a) nanoparticles, (b) nanorods,20 (c) nanobipyramids,16 (d) hollow interior nanosemishells,19 (e) hollow interior nanocages,18 (f) hematite core/Au shell nanorice,15 (g) nanostars, (h) silica core/Au shell nanoshells, and (i) nanocubes. The nanoparticle, nanostars, nanoshells, and nanocubes were designed in our laboratory. Copyright 2008, 2013, 2009, and 2012 ACS Publishing. 
 Fig. 3  Tunability of plasmon resonances achieved by varying the size of (a) nanostars designed in our laboratory, (b) nanorods,35 (c) nanocages,21 and (d) nanoshells.94 Copyright 2010 IOP Publishing, 2007 Nature Publishing, and 2004 TCRT Publishing. 
Additionally, red-shifts in LSPR are also observable for closely interacting clusters of GNS. The simplest example of this is Au nanosphere dimers which may be described as the coupling between two nearby dipoles.45 The interaction energy between these dipoles is given by  where p1 and p2 are the magnitudes of the dipole moments and d is the interparticle distance. E substantially increases as the interparticle distance decreases. For nearly touching nanosphere dimers, the longitudinally aligned dipoles give rise to a lower energy resonance which interacts strongly with incident light and is observed as a red-shift in the optical spectrum. For the higher energy resonance, the coupled dipoles cancel each other out resulting in zero net dipole moment which does not interact with light and is not observed in the optical spectrum.46–48 LSPR shifts for GNS dimers, trimers, and other higher order clusters are best described by the plasmon hybridization model. Discussion of the plasmon hybridization model is beyond the scope of this review but readers are suggested to refer to detailed reviews by Ghosh et al.49 and Halas et al.50 Formation of GNS assemblies, whether ordered or disordered, is not only discernible by a clear red-shift in the plasmon resonance but also by a dramatic change in solution color. These spectral and colorimetric changes have been harnessed in sensing DNA, proteins and other biomolecules.51–53 Further, intense electromagnetic fields, also known as “hot-spots”, are formed within the junctions of closely interacting GNS clusters which gives rise to substantial enhancement in SERS enabling the detection and treatment of cancer cells.54,55
2.2 Non-radiative properties
In addition to radiative decay, plasmons also relax nonradiatively via electron–electron collisions or electron–lattice phonon coupling which gives rise to light absorption by the nanoparticle.56 These non-radiative properties have been harnessed extensively for light to heat conversion inducing photothermal therapy23 and photothermal gene release in cancer cells,57 as well as for two-photon luminescence imaging of cells.37 The fundamental underpinning of the photothermal process has been extensively studied with ultrafast dynamics.58–60Fig. 4 shows the schematic representation of the principle underlying the photothermal characteristics of GNS. When metal nanostructures are excited with resonant photons, the photoexcitation of the electron gas results in rapid non-equilibrium heating. The initial electronic excitation is followed by relaxation at subpicosecond timescales by means of electron–electron scattering which results in rapid increase in the surface temperature of the metal.32,58 The rapid heating is followed by cooling to equilibrium by energy exchange between the electrons and the lattice phonons. In the first several hundred picoseconds following excitation, the lattice cools via phonon–phonon coupling resulting in heat dissipation into the medium surrounding the nanostructure. Thus, when GNS bound to cancer cells are illuminated, a large temperature difference between the hot nanostructure surface and the cooler surrounding biological medium occurs resulting in an abrupt local temperature increase and corresponding cell death.
 Fig. 4  Schematic describing the principle of photothermal light to heat conversion by plasmonic nanostructures. 
The nonradiative properties of GNS also result in single-photon and two-photon photoluminescence (TPL) of the metal. Emission in metals occurs in a three-step process: (1) electrons are excited from the d- to the sp-band to generate electron–hole pairs, (2) in the first few picoseconds scattering of electrons and holes occurs with partial energy transfer to the lattice phonons, and (3) finally recombination of electrons and holes results in photoluminescence.61 A two-photon excitation can be understood simply as sequential one photon processes where an electron in the sp conduction band is excited by the first photon from below the Fermi energy to above it via an intraband transition. This gives rise to a charge-separated state within the conduction band. A second photon then excites an electron from the d-band to the sp-band, transferring the hole to the d-band which eventually results in charge recombination and photoluminescence.61,62 TPL from nanorods, nanocages, and nanoshells excited with resonant NIR light has been extensively investigated and applied for cancer cell imaging.63–65
3. Engineered gold nanostructures for diagnostics
3.1 Dark Field Confocal Imaging (DFCI)
Bioimaging methods based on light scattering from GNS are most commonly adopted for cellular detection due to the straightforward image analysis. Using a DFC microscope with a high resolution objective lens, light scattered from GNS can be detected as bright spots even when the GNS size is smaller than the diffraction limit of the microscope. The potential of GNS as optical contrast agents for cancer cell detection was recently investigated with hollow nanoshells conjugated with anti-EGFR antibodies targeted to human squamous carcinoma cells.30In vitro binding and antibody mediated specific targeting to cancer cells were observed with dark field scattering. Scattering from AuNPs has also been used for imaging breast cancer cells,66,67 and for tracking dynamics of cancer cell mitosis and cell division.68 DFCI has also enabled visualization of nanorod mediated cancer cell targeting and cellular localization,69–71 and for real-time tracking of nanorod induced DNA damage causing cytokinesis arrest and apoptosis in cancer cells.72 While high scattering cross-sections of GNS have been exploited extensively for contrast enhancement in DFCI, this diagnostic technique has been limited to in vitro studies only. This is because to achieve good contrast in vivo, highly scattering nanostructures of sizes ≥100 nm have to be utilized. But studies have demonstrated that GNS in the size range of 20–70 nm have a longer blood circulation time and higher uptake and localization in tumors.2,11 Alternatively, a high density of smaller GNS can be incubated with cells which upon agglomeration in the cellular environment will increase the effective size and provide enhanced contrast by increasing the total light scattered from the GNS clusters. However, high density GNS have been shown to cause toxicity and cellular damage.73 These limitations have prohibited the use of DFCI in animal models.
3.2 One-photon and two-photon fluorescence imaging
Photoluminescence from gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) has drawn extensive research interest in the past decade due to their bright, non-blinking, and stable emission. Unlike GNS, AuNCs are typically <2 nm and in a size regime where they cannot support surface plasmon resonances due to quantum confinement effects.74 While the origin of fluorescence from AuNCs is unclear, it is hypothesized that luminescence may arise from the metal core due to the intrinsic quantization effects, and from the interaction of the metal core with the surface ligands. Wu et al. demonstrated that electron-rich atoms (e.g., N, O) or groups (e.g., –COOH, NH2) predominantly promote fluorescence in Au25 nanoclusters likely because these groups can directly donate the delocalized electron density to the gold core.74 NIR luminescent AuNCs were used for fluorescence imaging in cervical cancer and breast cancer xenografts with higher photostability than quantum dots.75 AuNCs have demonstrated potential both for one-photon and two-photon luminescence imaging in vitro and in vivo for cancer diagnostics,76,77 imaging myoblast cells,78 and also for Hg2+ sensing in live cells.79
Besides quantum sized AuNCs, GNS have been conjugated with NIR fluorophores for one-photon fluorescence imaging in cellular media and tumor models. For example indocyanine green (ICG) molecules, the only FDA approved NIR fluorophore extensively used in clinical setting, were incorporated with nanoshells enabling emission enhancement of ICG,12,80 and bright fluorescence detection was achieved both in vitro and in vivo in breast tumor models.23,81 Nanostars have been labeled with Cy-5, another promising NIR fluorophore, for nucleolin-mediated active trafficking to the cancer cell nucleus and detected with NIR fluorescence imaging.82 A range of GNS integrated with biocompatible dyes, quantum-dots, or single walled carbon nanotubes have been utilized for cancer diagnosis in vitro and in vivo via one-photon fluorescence imaging.83–86
Two-photon photoluminescence (TPL) has emerged as a powerful tool in the past two decades for cellular imaging and diagnostics and with the advent of new GNS, TPL efficiencies can now be improved by simply modifying the GNS geometry.87 Two-photon absorption occurs when GNS are excited with a femtosecond pulsed-laser resonant with the surface plasmon energy of the GNS which results in TPL from the metal. For example, recently a femtosecond laser was employed to simultaneously enable medically safe cancer detection via nanorod-enhanced TPL, and pulsed-laser induced microsurgery causing apoptosis of cancer cells.88 The TPL contrast of nanostars functionalized with wheat-germ agglutinin (Fig. 5) has also been utilized to image their uptake in breast cancer cells (Fig. 5a and b) as well as nanostars circulating in the vasculature in vivo in mouse models (Fig. 5c and d).37 Nanoshells,64,89,90 nanocages,65,91 and nanorods63,64 have also been extensively exploited as TPL contrast agents with near single particle resolution in blood vessels,90 to enable the tracking of GNS in vivo,91 and for fluorescence lifetime imaging to probe the dynamical processes of the GNS in cellular media.63 Due to their large multi-photon absorption capabilities, nanocages have also been utilized for three-photon luminescence (3PL) by exciting at 1290 nm with a femtosecond laser at 4 mW.92 3PL facilitated the detection of the distribution of intravenously injected nanocages in the liver of a mouse with minimal autofluorescence from the background and negligible photothermal toxicity. While 3PL contrast with GNS has not been substantially investigated, these initial results demonstrate the efficacy of this imaging modality for in vivo diagnostics.
 Fig. 5  (a) TPL image of nanostar conjugated with wheat-germ agglutinin and incubated with invasive ductal tumor. The blue and orange colors are from Hoescht 33342 and FM 1-43FX dyes respectively. The nanostars appear as bright spots. (b) The quadratic dependence of TPL intensity on the Pex from gold nanostar solutions of two different sizes. (c and d) TPL imaging through a dorsal window chamber (inset) on a nude mouse. (c) With nanostars, tissue vasculature was visible under 5% transmission with minimal background fluorescence. (d) Without nanostars, it required 20% transmission to see the vessels. The blue and green colors were from the collagen and blood. Scale bar: 100 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2012 IOP Publishing. 
3.3 Photothermal optical coherence tomography
GNS have also been employed as exogenous contrast agents in optical coherence tomography (OCT) for assessing tissue morphology. In OCT, tissue is illuminated with light of low coherence, and back-reflected light is detected based on coherence matching between the incident and reflected beams. Since coherence is essential for the detection process, OCT is predominantly sensitive to scattering from tissues rather than absorption.93 GNS resonant at the OCT excitation wavelength have been used as contrast-enhancing agents due to their ability to produce distinctive backscattered light detectable in highly scattering tissue.94 NIR resonant nanoshells were recently employed as OCT contrast agents for deep tissue (up to 2 mm depth) imaging of rabbit epidermal tissue with high spatiotemporal resolution. Nanoshells enhanced the OCT signal of the different regions of the dermis as well as augmented the contrast of hair follicles and glands in OCT images of skin tissue.95 Nanorod mediated OCT contrast enhancement in human breast tissue samples showed strong contrast at 2 mm depth with only 10–20 nM of nanorods.96 Without the nanorods, (control) OCT signal could only be detected within a few hundred micrometer tissue depth. AuNPs conjugated with anti-EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptors) antibodies were employed to enhance OCT contrast of oral dysplasia in a hamster model in vivo.97 By using microneedles, the delivery and penetration depth of AuNPs into skin tissue were improved and clear differences were observed with OCT imaging between micro-morphologies of the carcinogen-treated and untreated epithelial tissues. While OCT has evolved tremendously since its invention in 1991 (ref. 98) as a powerful three-dimensional diagnostic tool for real-time imaging without the need to remove specimens, resolutions have remained low due to intense scattering from optically dense tissue.
Recently, Photothermal OCT (PT-OCT) was adopted to overcome the challenges in traditional OCT primarily due to the high sensitivity of PT-OCT to the optical phase changes that are induced on the tissue by changes in the surrounding temperature. GNS when excited with light resonant with the plasmon energy efficiently convert light to heat which results in an increase in surface temperature. This gives rise to a variation in the local index of refraction. This change in refractive index can be optically detected with an amplitude modulated heating beam that spatially overlaps with the focus position of the sample arm of an interferometer. For example, AuNPs modified with anti-EGFR antibodies were incubated with EGFR overexpressing breast cancer cells, and a phase sensitive PT-OCT signal was achieved with a target sensitivity of 14 ppm.99 NIR resonant molecularly targeted nanoshells were also detected with PT-OCT phase microscopy in phantom experiments, and a high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was achieved with uniform thermal gradients suitable for in vivo applications.100 These nanoshells were injected into freshly excised human breast tissue collected from reduction mammoplasty specimens, and a high SNR was observed at ∼0.8 mm tissue depth. Other GNS including nanorods,101–103 AuNPs,104 and Au nanoroses105 have also been successfully employed as high contrast PT-OCT agents.
3.4 Photoacoustic imaging
As discussed in the previous section, optical tomography techniques can probe centimeters into tissue but with poor spatial resolution, attributed to the scrambled paths of the diffuse photons, which results in poor image reconstruction. Nonetheless, photons in tissue can be thermoelastically converted to ultrasonic pressure waves through the photoacoustic effect. Photoacoustic tomography (PAT) generates images by detecting these ultrasonic waves in tissues, and unlike optical imaging methods, PAT is not constrained by the optical diffusion limit due to low acoustic scattering in tissue. PAT can therefore generate high-resolution images of nanoscale biological structures with nearly two orders of magnitude higher contrast than DFCI and OCT.106 In PAT, tissue is irradiated with a nanosecond-pulsed laser stimulating thermal and acoustic responses. This phenomenon gives rise to a temperature rise ΔT and consequently a pressure rise, ρ0, due to thermoelastic expansion. This pressure rise is given by, ρ0 = βΔT/κ where β is the thermal expansion coefficient, and κ is the isothermal compressibility. For example, a temperature rise of 1 mK results in a pressure rise of 800 Pa, which provides a good signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) with a typical ultrasonic transducer. The pressure waves propagating through the tissue are detected by an ultrasonic transducer to subsequently form a high resolution tomographic image of optical absorption.106–108
GNS mediated PAT was first realized with nanoshells nearly a decade ago109 and was soon followed by nanorods110 and AuNPs.111 GNS mediated contrast enhancement in PAT is directly correlated with the photothermal efficiency of the GNS. Following photoexcitation of GNS, the non-radiative decay process results in light to heat conversion resulting in a temperature rise in the surrounding tissue, which enhances the thermal and acoustic responses in the tissue. This increased thermal response augments the pressure waves propagating through the tissue which ultimately improves the spatial and temporal resolution of the tomographic image.112 Multiwavelength PAT was performed on gelatin implants in ex vivo mouse tissue containing anti-EGFR labeled AuNPs targeted to epithelial carcinoma cells and compared to non-targeted AuNPs and a NIR absorbing dye. High sensitivity and selectivity in the photoacoustic signal were achieved with the molecularly targeted AuNPs.113 Nanocages bioconjugated with melanocyte stimulating hormone were investigated in vivo for molecular PAT of melanomas, and ∼300% enhancement was achieved relative to non-conjugated nanocages.114 Xia and co-workers recently demonstrated nanocage-enhanced PAT for sentinel lymph node mapping, which is typically the first location for metastatic spread, and high SNR was achieved even at ∼20 pM nanocages concentration.115 Later, the authors also utilized nanocages for dual modal PAT and fluorescence detection of protease activity.116 Nanorods have also demonstrated substantial PAT contrast enhancement and have been utilized for multiplexed cell sorting,117 real-time imaging of cardiovascular dynamics,118 mesenchymal stem cell imaging in living mice,119 as well as biodistribution and uptake in single cancer cells.120 These studies demonstrate the potential of GNS for contrast enhancement of PAT, and with development of new GNS and molecular targeting strategies, the spatiotemporal resolution of PAT can be improved even further.
3.5 Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
PET is a clinically relevant, highly sensitive nuclear imaging technique which utilizes a small dose of radioactive material and is extensively utilized for early stage diagnosis and staging of cancer. Radioactive small molecules often have a short circulatory lifetime in vivo and show rapid clearance via the reticuloendothelial system of the liver and spleen. Radiolabeled GNS can retain longer in the bloodstream enabling long term bioimaging and diagnosis, as well as selective localization in the malignant cells when molecularly targeted to the receptors on the cancer cells.121 Xie et al. demonstrated PET and pharmacokinetics of 64Cu labeled nanoshells in nude rats with a head and neck squamous cell carcinoma xenograft. Noteworthy differences in biodistribution and pharmacokinetics were observed for 64Cu-nanoshells and clear uptake in the tumor was observed at 20 h post-injection.122 Nanocages labeled with 64Cu have also been investigated for PET in a highly aggressive EMT-6 mammary tumor model, and enhanced tumor uptake was observed 24 h post-injection.18 In a recent work, radioactive Au nanocages were synthesized by replacing the Au precursor, HAuCl4 with H198AuCl4 resulting in Cerenkov luminescence. Cerenkov luminescence imaging, a new molecular imaging tool, is based on Cerenkov radiation, a phenomenon where optical photons are emitted when a charged species moves faster than the speed of light in a medium of known refractive index. These species arise from the decay of α-, β-, or positron-emitting radionuclides.123,124 Cerenkov imaging has been investigated with a range of radionuclides including 225Ac, 230U, 213Bi, 212Bi, 212At, 18F, 64Cu, 89Zr, 124I and 131I.125–127 The intensity of Cerenkov luminescence enhances with increasing velocity, which is directly correlated with the energy of the radionuclide, and also increases in high refractive index materials.124 In this innovative work, Xia and co-workers injected radioactive nanocages in vivo in EMT-6 tumor models enabling tumor monitoring over a period of 48 h post injection with Cerenkov luminescence imaging (Fig. 6). Biodistribution studies indicated increased uptake in the liver and spleen. This study shows that GNS mediated Cerenkov luminescence imaging effectively bridges the gap between optical imaging and nuclear imaging.128 Recently, gold–iron oxide heteronanostructures bioconjugated with affibody proteins and labeled with 64Cu were employed as a triple modal contrast agent for optical, PET, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).129 Affibodies are engineered affinity proteins with a three-helix bundle structure, which have a smaller size and molecular weight compared to antibodies (7 kDA relative to >100 kDa for antibodies).130 This enables rapid tumor targeting as well as a higher specificity than antibodies. These affibody modified heteronanostructures were specifically targeted to EGFR receptors in vitro and in vivo, and high tumor uptake was observed. 64Cu-labeled AuNPs were also used as PET contrast agents for imaging genetically engineered T-cells which are known to have translational implications due to their anti-tumor response.131 Radiolabeled nanorods have also been employed for PET mediated diagnostics of human gliobastoma cells,132 as well as to investigate the uptake of radiolabeled nanorods, their blood circulation, and long-term biodistribution.133
 Fig. 6  Representative bioluminescent images (with the excitation filter closed and emission filter open) of a mouse bearing EMT-6 tumors after tail vain injection of the PEGylated 198Au-doped AuNCs (64 μCi per mouse). The images were taken at 0, 0.25, 2, 6, 24, and 48 h post injection, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2013 ACS Publishing. 
While PET is a widely accepted tool in clinics for diagnosis of neoplasia, the surface characteristics, toxicity, biocompatibility, and in vivo clearance of radiolabeled GNS still need to be extensively evaluated prior to their transition from laboratory to clinical settings.
3.6 Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) based imaging
Since the inception of SERS in the late 1970s, a number of studies have been published on SERS based chemical and biological detection. The past decade has particularly witnessed a plethora of clinical SERS based studies demonstrating the efficacy of GNS conjugated with Raman active molecules for molecular imaging in cells and animal models.134–136 GNS mediated Raman scattering enhancement of vicinal molecules is primarily attributed to two mechanisms: electromagnetic (EM) and chemical enhancement (CE). EM enhancement of Raman scattering arises from intense EM fields generated on the individual GNS surface when illuminated at the plasmon resonance, as well as hot spots created within clusters of GNS. CE is based on dynamical charge transfer where photoexcitation of the metal creates a hot-electron hole pair which can transfer into the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of the nearby molecule. The electron subsequently transfers back to the metal with some changed internal molecular vibrations. The return of the electron to the metal is characterized by Stokes scattering, and this gives rise to GNS mediated CE.137,138 While there has been eminent progress in SERS based immunoassay for cancer biomarker detection,139–146 SERS-based imaging and image guided therapy has yet to reach the status of its counterpart, fluorescence imaging, mainly due to the poor efficiency of Raman scattering. SERS has several advantages as a clinical diagnostic tool including: portability to multiple locations, sub-picomolar level sensitivity, multiplexing with multiple Raman reporter molecules, low cost, and rapid assay times.
Recently, Gambhir and co-workers demonstrated multiplexing in vivo with ten different SERS nanotags with distinct spectral characteristics (Fig. 7a). A mixture of multiple SERS nanotags were administered in vivo, and their uptake in the liver was imaged 24 hours post-injection. Clearly distinguishable spectral characteristics were observed in vivo for each individual SERS nanotag at picomolar sensitivity.147 The authors also demonstrated dual-modal PET and Raman imaging of colon cancer with SERS nanotags administered both by intravenous and intrarectal injections. Both imaging modalities confirmed localized accumulation of SERS nanotags in the colon and cecum by intrarectal administration.148 In a similar study, multifunctional nanorods coded with different Raman reporters were injected in vivo in mice with breast cancer xenografts (Fig. 7b). Upon NIR excitation, quantitative SERS spectral signatures that are characteristic of the different Raman reporter coded nanorods were observed.149 Nanorods conjugated Raman active molecules were also evaluated for SERS imaging of MCF7 breast cancer cells,150 HeLa cervical cancer cells in vitro,151 and multimodal PAT/Raman imaging of ovarian cancer cells to simultaneously achieve high spatiotemporal resolution and sensitivity.152 Multimodal MRI-SERS imaging was also recently investigated in vivo with iron oxide–gold heteronanostructures injected deep into the gluteal muscle, and GNS mediated Raman enhancement was clearly observed.153 Immunoconjugated Raman tag labeled AuNPs have also been employed to detect circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from blood samples of patients with different stages of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. CTCs were detected with both high specificity and sensitivity relative to blood samples from healthy donors.154
 Fig. 7  GNS conjugated with SERS tags for diagnostic imaging. (a) Raman map of 10 different commercially purchased SERS nanoparticles injected in a nude mouse. Arbitrary colors have been assigned to each unique SERS nanoparticle batch injected. Adapted from ref. 147. Copyright 2009 NAS Publishing. (b) In vivo distinction of three SERS-coded nanorod populations. Athymic (nu/nu) mice were subcutaneously injected with each SERS-coded nanorods in distinct locations, and Raman spectra were recorded and compared to a region of native tissue. The Raman molecules are color coded and clearly identified. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. 
SERS based imaging has tremendous potential to deliver accurate diagnosis from the single cell level to subcutaneous tumors, and when coupled with other imaging techniques, multimodal SERS can simultaneously achieve high sensitivity and spatial resolution. GNS enabled SERS imaging probes form a promising platform for the future work of combining SERS imaging with a therapeutic response to generate plasmonic theranostic agents.
4. Engineered gold nanostructures for therapeutics
4.1 Photothermal therapy
Since the inception of the photothermal response of GNS, remarkable progress has been made in: the design of a range of GNS, novel conjugation chemistries to bind targeting moieties on their surface, and targeted photothermal therapy (PTT) of cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo. The photothermal therapeutic response of nanoshells, which are currently under FDA-trial, has been investigated extensively in the past decade. West and co-workers targeted NIR resonant nanoshells bound with antibodies against interleukin-13 receptor-alpha 2 (IL13Rα2) to medulloblastoma and glioma human brain tumor cell lines.155 These primary brain tumors have poor prognosis since tumor tissue is often intimately involved with vital structures within the brain making it difficult to perform total resection.156 Current chemotherapy strategies have thus far been unsuccessful in the complete treatment of brain tumors, and the mortality rate has remained high. Immunonanoshells induced PTT in medduloblastoma and glioma cells in vitro with high specificity and sensitivity, and required only pM concentration of nanoshells for complete cancer cell ablation. In vivo PTT of glioma tumor models was also investigated and clearly demonstrated ∼3 month survival rate of mice that were administered with nanoshells (excited with 800 nm CW laser) relative to a 3 week survival rate of mice receiving only laser treatment.157 Photothermal properties of nanoshells have also been combined with radiotherapy to induce mild hyperthermia and increase tumor vascular perfusion. The photothermal response of nanoshells reduces the resistance of the hypoxic fraction of tumors to radiotherapy; PTT can then be complemented with radiotherapy resulting in vascular disruption and extensive necrosis.158 Photothermal response of immunonanoshells has also been demonstrated in prostate cancer cells,159 metastatic liver tumors,160 trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer cells,161 and hepatocellular carcinomas both in vitro and in vivo.162 Clare and co-workers also loaded nanoshells in monocyte/macrophages as a “cellular Trojan horse” for delivery of nanoshells to breast cancer spheroids40 and brain metastasis of breast cancer.163 There is increasing evidence that suggests that tumor-associated macrophages are recruited in hypoxic regions within tumors and promote proliferation, growth, invasion, migration, and metastasis of malignant cells.164,165 Tumor hypoxic regions have been identified as the main cause of cancer resistance to radiation and chemotherapy. Unlike healthy tissues, hypoxic regions are deprived of oxygen due to the deteriorating diffusion geometry and structural abnormalities. While attractive for targeting, delivering drugs in hypoxic regions has been challenging because (1) these areas are remote from blood vessels and (2) specifically targeting hypoxic cells without impairing well-oxygenated surrounding normal cells has been difficult.166 Monocyte Trojan horse mediated nanoshell delivery and subsequent photothermal cell death, therefore, offers a promising approach to treat both solid tumors and metastatic cancer.40,163
PTT has also been achieved with other GNS including Au–AuS nanoshells,167 hollow nanoshells,30 branched gold nanostructures,168 and AuNPs.54 Recently, AuNPs modified with tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) were targeted to murine mammary cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, and PTT was induced at two different wavelengths (Fig. 8). Increased tissue damage and necrosis were observed for mice injected with AuNPs–TNF and irradiated with 532 nm laser (Fig. 8b). Mice treated with AuNPs–TNF and irradiated with 690 nm NIR laser did not show any evidence of necrosis, and the tumor volume reduced significantly. The size of the tumors treated with AuNPs only and laser only continued to increase over a period of 2 weeks.169 The photothermal characteristics of nanorods have also been extensively studied in the past decade.61,170 Nanorods, when synthesized in aqueous media are typically coated in cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) surfactant. Since CTAB is highly toxic to cellular media, prior to photothermal induction, various surface functionalizations have been performed to either replace or block the CTAB with biocompatible molecules. For example, poly(acrylic acid) was directly coated on CTAB-stabilized nanorods to block the CTAB layer, and, subsequently, the nanorods were incubated with human colorectal cancer cells for PTT.171 Chitosan modified Pluronic has also been conjugated on nanorods rendering them highly biocompatible and promoting high uptake in squamous carcinoma tumors in vivo. Complete disappearance of tumors was observed within 6 days of NIR laser irradiation with the chitosan-Pluronic nanorods.172 PEG-conjugated nanorods, which passively accumulate in tumors through fenestration in the vasculature, have demonstrated effective photothermal response in vivo in murine colon carcinoma models173 and breast cancer xenografts.174 While PEG conjugation effectively increases GNS blood circulation time due to the excellent stealth effects of PEG, this passive targeting approach largely results in GNS accumulation in the reticuloendothelial system of the liver and spleen. Recently, peptide modified nanorods were targeted to matrix metalloprotease (MMP), a family of zinc-dependent proteins which are known to be distinctly involved in cancer metabolism, and successful induction of PTT was demonstrated in vitro and in vivo.175 Peptide conjugated nanorods have also been targeted to breast cancer cells in vitro and demonstrated an exponential increase in temperature to ∼55 °C within 20 minutes of NIR laser irradiation and subsequent hyperthermia of cancer cells.176 Nanorods simultaneously functionalized with dendrimers and RGD (arginine–glycine–aspartic acid) peptides were also targeted to integrin receptors in human umbilical vein endothelial cells and demonstrated rapid uptake in vitro. Further, biodistribution studies in mouse models showed high uptake in tumors within 12 h of intravenous injection and >7 week survival rate of tumors treated with nanorods relative to a 3 week rate for untreated tumors.177
 Fig. 8  
In vivo anti-tumor effect of Au-TNF nanoparticles activated by pulsed laser at 690 nm wavelength. (a) Relative tumor volume increase after treatment with laser alone and laser with Au-TNF or Au-PEG at 8 h post i.v. injection of nanoparticles. (b) Tumor images of different mouse groups. Each group contained 5 mice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing. 
These studies demonstrate the remarkable progress that has been made with GNS based photothermal therapy in the past five years and the emergence of new therapeutic capabilities as GNS of unique geometries are invented. We anticipate that PTT will be eventually combined with other treatment strategies to generate a single platform with multiple therapeutic functions relevant for adjuvant settings.
4.2 Radiofrequency hyperthermia
Noninvasive radiofrequency (RF) fields, which have a frequency between 10 kHz and 900 MHz, have gained attention in the past decade due to their ability to induce cancer cell ablation.178 While RF fields had been used for decades in neurosurgical and cardiac procedures, the use of RF fields to treat malignant carcinomas commenced following the invention in 2004 by John Kanzius.179,180 Current RF ablation (RFA) techniques to treat diseases have several shortcomings. RFA is an invasive procedure requiring insertion of needle electrodes directly into the tumors to be treated which often results in thermal injury to both normal cells and malignant tissue and limits the use of this treatment to only specific organs (liver, kidney, breast, lung, bone). Further, for tumors >4 to 5 cm in diameter incomplete tumor destruction often occurs. Since focused RF fields have excellent tissue penetration in humans, RFA holds immense potential for treatment of both subcutaneous and deep tissue solid and metastatic tumors.181,182 To enable noninvasive RFA, intracellular agents that are thermally activated under the influence of RF field are required. Similar to photothermal therapy, GNS can absorb RF energy of specific frequencies and convert these frequencies to heat resulting in hyperthermia in tissue. For example, Curley and co-workers have extensively employed AuNPs for noninvasive RFA of human pancreatic carcinomas both in vitro and in vivo, and AuNPs mediated RFA demonstrated a necrotic pathway of cellular injury.183,184 Using a variable power 0–2 kW, 13.56 MHz RF field generator to excite AuNPs, Curley and co-workers also demonstrated enhanced RF-induced cytotoxicity of human gastrointestinal cancer cells.185 An analysis of the size-dependent joule heating of AuNPs using capacitively coupled RF fields demonstrated that AuNPs that are <20 nm in size generate more intense heat than larger nanoparticles. This is attributable to the increased resistivity of smaller AuNPs which results in an increased amount of heat generation by ohmic dissipation.186,187 O'Neil and co-workers recently demonstrated that the attenuation of a travelling wave passing through a suspension of colloidal AuNPs is controlled by the ionic contribution of the host medium. Hence the conductivity of the medium determines the absorption of electromagnetic waves and subsequent joule heating of AuNPs.188 While the efficacy of GNS-mediated RFA has been studied extensively,179,183–185,189,190 detailed analysis of thermal injuries, specificity, and sensitivity of the RFA procedure is required for transition of this technique from bench to bedside.
4.3 Drug delivery
Significant advances have been made in the past two decades in the delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs both in vitro and in vivo with GNS as nanocarriers. GNS surfaces functionalized with targeting ligands and cytotoxic drugs navigate the therapeutic cargo to localize specifically in the cancer cells with minimal toxicity to healthy cells. Additionally, drugs are small molecules with short circulation half-life and rapid clearance through the renal system. Conjugation to GNS surface enhances their circulation in vivo and enables controlled release of payload at specific time points.191–194 Two approaches have been employed to regulate the release of the payload from GNS surfaces: endogenous and exogenous activation. Endogenous activation methods exploit the physiochemical characteristics of the cellular microenvironment (such as pH, ions etc.) enabling biologically controlled release. Exogenous control of drug release employs orthogonal external stimuli (such as temperature, light, strain etc.) to control the release profile.194–198 In the past five years, AuNPs have been employed as an endogenous delivery vehicle for the transport and release of several cytotoxic drugs and drug analogues to induce cancer cell death.191–193,199,200 For example chemotherapeutic drugs were loaded in thiolated β-cyclodextrin bound to AuNP surface and controllably released by modulating glutathione concentration in the solution.8 Glutathione levels in cancer cells regulate mutagenic mechanisms, metastatic growth, and drug resistance.201 Endogenous release was also demonstrated by binding AuNP–DNA conjugates to Pt(IV) complexes for controlled release of a cytotoxic dose of cisplatin upon intracellular reduction. The Pt(IV) compound tethered to the AuNP–DNA surface demonstrated an enhanced cytotoxic effect relative to free cisplatin in lung and pancreatic cancer cells.202 Since its FDA approval nearly 4 decades ago, cisplatin and its analogues, carboplatin and oxaliplatin, have been extensively used for treating several human cancers.203 These Pt compounds bind to DNA, thereby preventing transcription and replication and, subsequently, inducing cellular apoptosis. Brown et al. recently developed AuNPs–PEG–oxaliplatin complexes with 30 nm AuNPs and observed accumulation in the lung cancer cell nucleus followed by enhanced cytotoxicity compared to the drug by itself.204 AuNP surface charge controlled delivery of payload in three-dimensional in vitro tumor models was also demonstrated by Kim et al.205 They showed that positively charged AuNPs exhibited higher uptake and dissociation by viable cells and improved delivery of payloads to the majority of cells in tumors. In comparison, negatively charged particles had a fast diffusion rate in cells and lower payload delivery efficacy.
Exogenous activation of GNS mediated delivery has been accomplished mostly by modulating the temperature and intensity of laser light at the plasmon resonance. AuNPs were recently utilized as scaffolds to conjugate anticancer drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) on their surface via a photoresponsive o-nitrobenzyl (ONB) linkage. Photocleavage of ONB with UV irradiation (365 nm light) resulted in controlled release of 5-FU in breast cancer cells in vitro.196 Xia and co-workers also employed exogenous stimuli, light and heat, to modulate drug release from nanocages coated with poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (pNIPAAm). Enhanced drug release was achieved at temperatures slightly above the LCST of pNIPAAm (32 °C) as well as by a pulsed NIR laser irradiation at flux >10 mW cm−2. Light-induced drug release is analogous to photothermal therapy except that lower laser powers are utilized to generate enough heat to mediate cargo release without inducing hyperthermia. These pNIPAAm coated nanocages were activated by light to controllably release doxorubicin (DOX), a commercially available chemotherapeutic drug, in breast cancer cells to induce cytoxicity.194 Nanorods coated with a mesoporous silica shell and wrapped in a layer of poly(NIPAAm-co-N-hydroxymethyl acrylamide) were also loaded with DOX to induce multimodal chemo-photothermal therapy in vitro in glioma cells. A cell viability assay demonstrated enhanced cell death when the two therapeutic strategies were combined.198 In another study, Shen et al. directly loaded DOX in the mesoporous silica shell encapsulating nanorods and used NIR light to induce drug release followed by photothermal therapy both in vitro and in vivo in lung adenocarcinoma cells. By conjugating a peptide specific to the cancer cell receptors, a high density of nanorods accumulated in the cancer cells leading to enhanced drug release and resulting in a substantial decrease in tumor volume 3 weeks post therapy.197 Nanoshells with a liposome/silica core and Au shell were also loaded with DOX by Wu et al., and NIR light mediated chemotherapy and simultaneous photothermal therapy were performed resulting in high therapeutic efficacy.206 Recently, a remotely triggered thermosensitive release of DOX was accomplished with NIR light activation of liposome modified nanorods in mouse models with human glioma cancer cell xenografts (Fig. 9).195 For mice treated with NIR light and a single dose of liposome–nanorod conjugates, the tumor volumes did not increase for up to 3 weeks relative to the control samples (Fig. 9a), and the treatment also successfully extended the overall survival (Fig. 9b). To analyze the immediate effect of drug release in vivo, Annexin-Vivo 750 was injected 18 hours post NIR irradiation to bind to apoptotic cells and provide information on cell death. In vivo images (Fig. 9c) and the corresponding fluorescence intensity bar graphs (Fig. 9d) demonstrate higher accumulation of Annexin-Vivo 750 in mice treated with both liposome-nanorods and NIR light. This study successfully demonstrates the smart design of stable GNS-based drug delivery vehicles that do not leak in systemic circulation and can precisely induce the release of therapeutic cargo with an externally controlled source. The remote trigger of drug release enables higher control on the therapeutic mechanism than endogenous slow release mechanisms provide.195
 Fig. 9  Therapeutic efficacy of nanorods for drug delivery. (a) Relative tumor volume after treatment administration in different groups (n = ∼6 to 9) was measured. Mice received either liposomal DOX (2.5 mg kg−1) or saline in combination with nanorods (GNR) at 5 pmol kg−1 of rods; 48 h later, mice received NIR irradiation with 808 nm laser at 0.5 W cm−2 for 10 min. (b) Percent survival for different treatment groups (n = ∼6 to 9). Mantel–Cox analysis indicated that TSL + GNR + NIR light was significantly different from all other groups (p < 0.0001). In vivo apoptosis imaging shows higher accumulation and retention of apoptosis marker Annexin-Vivo 750. (c) Representative in vivo images 24 h after Annexin-Vivo administration for different treatment groups. (d) Different groups of tumor-bearing animals, 18 h post-NIR irradiation, were administered Annexin-Vivo 750 i.v. and imaged 24 h later. Fluorescence intensity acquired in photons/s was quantified by drawing a region of interest around the tumor. The resulting radiance flux was then normalized by each animal's tumor volume measured using calipers. TSL: thermosensitive liposomes, NTSL: nonthermosensitive liposome. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2011 ACS Publishing. 
4.4 Gene therapy
Many scientific and clinical advances have been made in gene therapy as an alternative to toxic chemotherapy for cancer mediation.207–209 However, despite prodigious research efforts delivering therapeutic oligonucleotides with high spatiotemporal control is challenging due to their rapid intracellular degradation by nucleases and fast uptake by lysozymes and subsequent elimination from the body. In the past decade a number of studies have demonstrated the synthesis of non-viral gene delivery vectors as nanocarriers for controlled payload delivery of therapeutic genes.210–214 Therapeutic genes primarily include plasmid DNA (pDNA), single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), small interfering RNA (siRNA), short hairpin RNA (shRNA), and antisense DNA. Regulated delivery of oligonucleotides enables direct, sequence-specific control of intracellular genetic response and downregulation of disease causing proteins. Analogous to drug delivery, GNS mediated gene release can be regulated by both endogenous and exogenous activation. For example, 2 nm AuNPs functionalized with amino acids were employed as endogenous carriers for nucleic acid payload delivery and transfection of mammalian cells. The surface-charge density of these AuNPs was modulated by increasing the number of ammonium groups on their surface and higher transfection ability was achieved.215 Multicomponent AuNPs–siRNA conjugates have also been synthesized and functionalized with poly(β-amino ester)s to enhance cellular uptake and endosomal escape and to successfully achieve gene knockdown in cervical cancer cells.9 The bioconjugation approach applied to modify the surface characteristics of GNS carriers is a key factor in controlling the transfection efficacy in a cellular environment. For example, poly(ethyleneimine) (PEI) layers were bound to the AuNP surface by layer-by-layer assembly to generate siRNA-PEI-AuNPs and PEI-siRNA-PEI-AuNPs. Substantial enhancement in cellular uptake, stability in the cellular environment with minimum aggregation, and successful downregulation of green fluorescent proteins (GFP) in mammalian cancer cells (from hamster) were demonstrated.216,217 Lee and co-workers replaced the toxic CTAB on the nanorod surface with phospholipid bilayers and subsequently conjugated phosphorothioate RNA oligonucleotides to their surface to enable high cellular uptake, lower toxicity, and promote endocytosis in MCF-7 human breast carcinoma cells.218 Other strategies including dendrimer conjugated AuNPs for the release of pDNA219 and ssDNA functionalized AuNPs for the delivery of shRNA in various human cancer cell lines have also been demonstrated.220
Remotely triggered release of genetic material with an external modulator, such as light, provides high spatiotemporal control over the release mechanism in an intracellular environment. Light mediated exogenous release of oligonucleotides from the surface of GNS has been extensively applied for gene therapy. Halas and co-workers demonstrated NIR light induced release of ssDNA from the nanoshell surface and compared it to thermal release.221 The overall temperature rise by light to heat conversion was much lower than thermal activation which is encouraging for gene therapy as it ensures cell viability. However, only 50% of the gene was released by light induction relative to 90% by thermal activation.221 In a later study, the authors compared DNA release from nanoshells and nanorods and observed a higher efficacy with nanoshells due to both large absorption cross-section and physical cross-section which aided in achieving a high DNA packing density on the nanoshell surface.222 Nanoshells were also conjugated to double-stranded DNA (ds-DNA) and DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole), a blue fluorescent dye that binds reversibly to DNA, and the light mediated release of ssDNA from nanoshells was visualized by observing the fluorescence from DAPI in lung cancer cells in vitro.57 High light to heat conversion and subsequent release of ssDNA were achieved as quantified by the fluorescence intensity of DAPI. In a recent work, nanoshells conjugated with poly-L-lysine (PLL) peptides carrying GFP gene-specific ssDNA antisense oligonucleotide or ds-siRNA were used for gene silencing in GFP-expressing human lung carcinoma cells in vitro (Fig. 10a).223 A comparison of light-induced and thermal release demonstrated higher efficacy with the light-mediated approach for different ssDNA strands (Fig. 10b–d) demonstrating that smart bioconjugation methods can remarkably enhance the dynamics of photo-release. The delivery of antisense ssDNA (Fig. 10e) and siRNA (Fig. 10f) followed by NIR laser treatment with NS-PLL delivery vectors clearly indicated silencing of the target reporter GFP gene and downregulation of GFP protein expression in vitro.223 Light induced DNA release has also been demonstrated by exciting at the plasmon resonance of nanorod–oligonucleotide conjugates.224,225 A nanorod based plasmonic transmitter and receiver system was designed by Lee and co-workers which successfully blocked the translation of HER-2 neu gene in BT474 breast carcinoma cells in vitro.226 The authors also reported the precise control of perturbation and reconfiguration of gene circuits in various cancer cells and the direct observation of signaling pathways with siRNA–nanorod conjugates. By combining experiments with computation models, pulse switch photonic circuits were generated to study the temporal dynamics in native gene circuits.227 Other GNS including AuNPs and hollow nanoshells have also successfully demonstrated light activated gene delivery for cancer therapy.39,228–230
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation of a nanoshell-poly-L-lysine (NS-PLL)-based therapeutic siRNA/ssDNA delivery system. The negatively charged phosphate backbone of the siRNA/ssDNA (red) is electrostatically attached to the cationic peptide (blue), which consists of 1 cysteine, 1 tyrosine, 1 serine, and 50 lysine amino acids. Upon laser irradiation, the siRNA/ssDNA is released. (b and d) Thermal and laser-triggered release of ssDNA from an NS-PLL vector. Thermal release (red circles) and light release (black squares) of (b) short ssDNA (18 bases), (c) phosphorothioate-modified short ssDNA (18 bases), and (d) long ssDNA (50 bases). (e and f) Downregulation of GFP in H1299 GFP/RFP cell line by antisense ssDNA and siRNA using NS-PLL. Percent GFP/RFP fluorescence as a function of time with and without laser treatment for NS-PLL carrying (e) antisense ssDNA and (f) siRNA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2012 ACS Publishing. 
5. Engineered gold nanostructures for theranostics
The past two decades have witnessed a tremendous increase in GNS based diagnostic agents and therapeutic actuators. Recently, researchers and oncologists have begun to combine these two functionalities within single nanoscale platforms generating “theranostic” nanoprobes. Theranostic agents can simultaneously target, diagnose, and deliver a therapeutic function enabling highly specific disease detection and treatment in a single clinical procedure. GNS based theranostic nanoprobes have been developed either by combining a single imaging and therapeutic technique or by integrating dual-modality diagnostics with multiple therapeutic functionalities. Nearly a decade ago, before the term theranostic was coined, the theranostic potential of nanoshells was demonstrated with simultaneous dark field imaging and photothermal therapy.17,94,231 This was soon followed by the use of nanorods232 and other core–shell GNS233,234 for the imaging and therapy of malignant cells in vitro. Several examples of GNS-based antineoplastic theranostic agents have emerged recently; a representative list of progress made in the past five years is provided in Table 1. We recently synthesized theranostic nanoshells by encapsulating them in a thin silica epilayer doped with Fe3O4 nanocrystals and ICG molecules and targeted HER-2 receptors in breast cancer cells via antibodies.23,24,81 In this design approach, the near-field and far-field characteristics of nanoshells enabled enhancement of ICG quantum yield from a mere ∼1% to nearly ∼85%, and, simultaneously, the porous silica layer enabled rapid water diffusion enhancing the MRI relaxivity of the Fe3O4 nanocrystals. Such multifunctional probes combine the high sensitivity of fluorescence imaging with the high spatiotemporal resolution of MRI, and this is highly beneficial in a clinical setting because it enables pre- and post-operative MRI and intra-operative fluorescence during a single procedure. These theranostic nanoshells provided dual modal MRI and NIR fluorescence imaging capabilities (Fig. 11a–c) in breast cancer cells in vitro and simultaneous photothermal therapy (Fig. 11d) when excited with a 200 mW NIR laser overlapping the nanoshell plasmon resonance.23 The efficacy of theransotic nanoshells was also extended in vivo to mouse models with breast cancer xenografts. Nanoshells were administered systemically via the tail vein, and the animals were imaged between 4 and 72 hours post-injection (Fig. 11e and f).81 MRI and fluorescence imaging in vivo revealed that the maximum nanoshell accumulation in tumors occurs within 4 h of injection, and within 72 h, nanoshells clear from the tumors to the liver. Since Fe3O4 is a T2-contrast agent, as the nanoshell conjugates accumulate in the tumor, the tumor appears darker, and as they exit the tumor, the tumor appears brighter which is clearly observed in Fig. 11f.
Table 1 Examples of advances made in theranostic plasmonic nanostructures in the past 5 years and their corresponding diagnostic and therapeutic functiona




Plasmonic nanostructure
Diagnostic modality
Therapeutic function
Targeted cell line
Ref.





a MRI: magnetic resonance imaging, NIR: near-infrared, PET: positron emission tomography, PAT: photoacoustic tomography, ROS: reactive oxygen species, CT: computed tomography, SERS: surface enhanced Raman scattering.





SiO2/Au/Fe3O4 nanoshells
MRI, NIR fluorescence
Photothermal
SKBR3 breast cancer

23, 81



SiO2/Au nanoshells
PET
Photothermal
OVCAR3 ovarian cancer

24



U87 human glioblastoma

281



Fe3O4/SiO2/Au nanoshells
MRI
Photothermal
A431 human epithelial cancer

282



Polymer/Au nanoshell
Ultrasound
Photothermal
HeLa cervical cancer

283



Micelle/Au nanoshell
MRI
Light induced drug release
HeLa cervical cancer

284



Hollow Au nanospheres
PAT
Photothermal
U87 human glioblastoma transfected with luciferase gene

38



Nanostars
Two-photon fluorescence
Photothermal
SKBR3 breast cancer

36



SERS
ROS generation
BT549 breast cancer

285



Nanoroses
MRI, dark-field scattering
Photothermal
Primary peritoneal macrophages

286



Au nanoparticle–nanobubbles
Dark-field scattering
Photothermal
C4-2B prostate cancer

287



Au nanoparticles
CT imaging
Drug delivery
PC3 prostate cancer

288



PAT
Photothermal
SCK breast carcinoma

169



Au nanorods
SERS
Photothermal
HeLa cervical cancer

149



NIR fluorescence
Photodynamic, photothermal
SCC7 squamous cell carcinoma

289



Two-photon fluorescence
Drug delivery
A549 human lung cancer

235



NIR fluorescence
Photodynamic, photothermal
A549 human lung cancer

290



SERS, NIR fluorescence
Photodynamic
HeLa cervical cancer

236



X-ray, CT
Radiation, photothermal
MGC803 gastric cancer

257



MRI
Photothermal
KB human epidermoid oral carcinoma

291



Dark field, fluorescence
Drug delivery, photothermal
LoVo human colorectal cancer

292



Dark field
Photothermal
A375 human umbilical vein cancer

177



Fluorescence
Photothermal
HeLa cervical cancer

293



PET
Drug delivery
U87MG human malignant glioma

132





 Fig. 11  Theranostic efficacy of nanoshells conjugated with Fe3O4 nanocrystals, NIR dye ICG, and anti-HER2 antibodies. (a) MR image of HER2-positive SKBR3 breast cancer cells suspended in 0.5% agarose after incubating with theranostic nanoshell–anti-HER2 conjugates. (b) Maximum intensity projection of 64 × 128 × 64 pixel threshold T2 maps of the images corresponding to (a). (c) Fluorescence images of SKBR3 cells showing theranostic nanoshells binding on cell surface (red). The nucleus is stained with DAPI (blue), and the cytoplasm is stained with secondary antibody-Alexa-fluor 488 (green). (d) Photothermal ablation of cells incubated with theranostic nanoshells–anti-HER2 conjugates and treated with NIR laser at 808 nm. Live cells are stained green with calcein and dead cells are stained red with PI and laser spot is shown in white circle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (e) Theranostic nanoshell delivery in vivo observed with NIR fluorescence imaging of mice with HER-2 low expressing (control) MDAMB231 xenografts (top) and BT474AZ xenografts (bottom) at 0.3–72 h post-injection. (f) T2-weighted MRI images of MDAMB231 xenografts (top) and BT474AZ xenografts (bottom) pre-injection, 0 h, and 4–72 h post-injection. The tumor is marked with a red circle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2010 ACS Publications. 
In addition to nanoshells, nanorod-mediated theranostics have also rapidly increased within the past few years. Recently, Zhang et al. designed theranostic nanorods encapsulated in a mesoporous silica layer loaded with DOX for simultaneous two-photon imaging with dual chemo-photothermal therapy in human lung cancer cells (Fig. 12a and b).235 Maximum DOX release was observed with NIR laser treatment at a low pH (4.5) and solution temperature of 48 °C. The hyperthermic potential of theranostic nanorods was realized by analyzing the lysosomal membrane permeation (LMP) after NIR treatment. LMP was compromised resulting in cell death at a laser flux of 48 W cm−2 (Fig. 12c). A cell viability assay clearly indicated that enhanced therapeutic capability was achieved with dual treatment mechanisms rather than hyperthermia or chemotherapy alone (Fig. 12d). He and co-workers also developed silica coated nanorods with an additional layer of PEG and loaded the two layers with 3,3′-diethylthiatricarbocyanine iodide (DTTC) and protoporphyrin IX (PpIX), a cytotoxic molecule. These nanorods successfully demonstrated diagnosis via SERS and fluorescence imaging in vivo in mice bearing HeLa tumors and treatment via photodynamic therapy (PDT) mediated by PpIX.236 Several researchers have exemplified the theranostic capabilities of nanorods which are summarized in Table 1. Theranostic hollow nanospheres were also recently examined in an orthotopic mouse xenograft model of glioma by targeting brain tumor receptors via RGD peptides, imaging via PAT, and treating via PTT. Highly specific tumor diagnosis was achieved, and a decrease in tumor volume for up to 3 weeks post NIR laser treatment was observed. While tumor regrowth occurred after 3 weeks, by combining other treatment modalities (chemo-photothermal or gene-photothermal therapy), the therapeutic outcome could be potentially enhanced in future studies.38 Vo-Dinh et al. recently demonstrated the use of nanostars for in vivo particle tracking via two-photon imaging and simultaneous photothermal therapy in vivo via a dorsal window.36 The sharp-tips of the nanostars interact intensely with incident light enabling highly sensitive in vivo tracking in the vasculature within 30 minutes of intravenous injection. While PEGylated nanostars enabled effective PTT in vivo, localized blood vessel disruption and subsequent bleeding were observed in the treatment spot. While a strong therapeutic dose is often necessary in the case of aggressive tumors, vasculature damage and bleeding are not favorable for solid-tumor treatment due to the inherent risk of metastasis from the spreading of tumor cells via the bloodstream. This may be ameliorated by controlling the laser power and nanostar dosage in future experiments. The theranostic capabilities of nanocages were also demonstrated recently by Xia and co-workers by loading the hollow interior with dye molecules and 1-tetradecanol, a phase-change material (PCM) with a melting point of 39 °C.237 These PCM loaded nanocages simultaneously enhanced PAT contrast and demonstrated highly effective molecular release when high-intensity focused ultrasound or heat was used to activate the release process. While cellular applications were not performed in this study, these promising results are likely to be translated in vitro and in vivo in their future work.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of mesoporous silica-coated nanorods (Au@SiO2) as a multifunctional theranostic platform for dual modal chemo-hyperthermia cancer therapy. (b) TEM images of Au@SiO2. (c) The effects of NIR-laser irradiation on lysosomal membrane integrity determined by acridine orange staining. Human lung cancer cells (A549) are incubated with Au@SiO2-DOX and irradiated by a NIR laser (790 nm, 48 W cm−2) for 8 min resulting in lysosomal membrane disruption. (d) Differences in viability of A549 cells irradiated by NIR laser for 8 min (Au@SiO2) and for 3, 4, and 8 min (Au@SiO2–DOX), determined by CCK-8 assay. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. 
As new GNS are developed and complex synthetic methodologies are devised to generate novel theranostic agents, several critical aspects of the design strategy must be examined before theranostic nanomedicine is realized in clinical settings. These include (i) size, shape, surface charge, and ligands supporting the nanoprobes, (ii) comprehensive analysis of diagnostic and therapeutic components before cellular applications, (iii) sensitivity and specificity of targeting moieties, (iv) evaluation of cytotoxicity of the agents, (v) pharmacokinetics, biodistribution, and extravasation of agents in vivo, (vi) immunogenic response, elimination route, and long-term biocompatibility, and (vii) dosage requirement of the theranostic formulation and the exogenous modulator that control therapeutic activation (light, temperature etc.).
6. Engineered gold nanostructures for inflammatory diseases
In addition to cancer nanomedicine, recent investigation has demonstrated the promise of GNS as contrast agents and therapeutic actuators for inflammatory diseases. Inflammation is the body's key response to imbalances in the chemical equilibrium of the physiological system and is a symptom of many diseases including cardiovascular disease (CVD) and arthritis.238 CVD is one of the major causes of morbidity and mortality around the globe,239 and atherosclerotic plaque localization leading to arterial wall weakening occurs at the outset of the disease.240 Atherosclerotic plaques are discrete raised lesions that are formed on large and medium sized arteries where the endothelium is dysfunctional. These defects are induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines and risk factors such as hypertension, smoking, and hypercholesterolaemia.241 The plaques obstruct the vessel lumen, and at an advanced stage, they block blood flow in the vessel resulting in acute myocardial infarctions and ischaemic stroke.242 It is therefore imperative to identify nanoparticle agents that home specifically at sites of atherosclerotic plaque development, improve intravascular imaging, and deliver a therapeutic dosage of a targeting gene or drug to lower the mortality rate in patients with acute cardiovascular dysfunction.
Recently, GNS endocytosed in macrophages were employed as contrast agents for a dual-modality imaging system combining intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) and intravascular photoacoustics (IVPA) to distinguish the plaque sites in the vasculature.243 Macrophages are known to concentrate at the source of inflammation within the arterial wall leading to the development of atherosclerotic plaque. By identifying these inflammation sites in their early stages by multimodal imaging techniques, preventive medicine can be used to treat cardiovascular diseases. In this work, Wang et al. demonstrated the ability to locate macrophages with PEG functionalized AuNPs in a phantom matrix through the dual IVUS/IVPA system.243 Their phantom wall around the lumen consisted of four departments including with gel (control), AuNPs embedded in gel, macrophages encased in the gel, and macrophages with AuNPs within the cytoplasm embedded in the gel (Fig. 13a).243 The concentrated macrophages have poor reflection of the waves leading to low echoic properties and a weak signal within the IVUS image (Fig. 13d). However, AuNPs embedded in macrophages when excited with a resonant pulsed laser enabled plasmonic enhancement of the photoacoustic signal allowing visualization of the structural components of the phantom matrix via dual-modal IVUS/IVPA (Fig. 13b and c). While at 532 nm, the strong plasmon absorption by AuNPs results in intense photoacoustic signal of both the free-standing AuNPs in the gel and macrophages with AuNPs in the gel; varying the incident light source to 680 nm only enhanced the photoacoustic signal of the AuNPs within the macrophages (Fig. 13e and f). AuNPs tend to cluster within the cytoplasm of the macrophages upon endocytosis due to destabilization of charges on the AuNP surface. This clustering gives rise to phase retardation effects which result in a red-shift of the plasmon resonance of AuNPs from 532 nm to 680 nm. Thus, only the AuNPs within the macrophages absorb a signal upon illumination with the 680 nm laser leading to an enhanced IVPA response. This distinction allows for the differentiation of free standing nanoparticles within luminal flow of the arteries from the clustered particles within the macrophages that are concentrated at inflammation sites. By visualizing the localization of GNS in macrophages, early detection of atherosclerotic plaque can be achieved through the dual modality IVUS/IVPA system.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic representation and (d) IVUS image of the tissue mimicking phantom. The dynamic ranges of IVUS and IVPA images were 50 and 17 dB, respectively. The IVPA images of the same cross-section of the phantom were taken at (b) 532 nm and (e) 680 nm wavelength. The combined IVUS and IVPA images of the phantom at (c) 532 nm wavelength and (f) 680 nm wavelength indicating the origin of the photoacoustic responses in IVPA images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2009 ACS Publications. 
GNS mediated detection of atherosclerotic plaque was also achieved by combining dual-modal MRI with IVPA for simultaneous enhancement of the spatial resolution of tissues with MRI along with the high sensitivity composition details of IVPA. Qin et al. functionalized gold nanorods with gadolinium(III) generating an effective contrast agent with light-to-acoustic wave conversion capabilities and strong paramagnetic properties that enabled imaging down to the molecular level.244 MRI allows for quick identification of localized, engulfed GdIII–GNR within macrophages while IVPA determines the extent of localization of the macrophages for a given area. This dual-modality imaging system enabled quantitative analysis of macrophage localization as well as AuNPs penetration into the tissue, a knowledge that is critical for clinical procedures to assess the location and the dosage of therapeutic agents needed for treatment.
In addition to imaging atherosclerotic plaque formation, GNS-mediated treatment of CVD has also gained interest in the past few years. Gold nanocrystals conjugated with high density lipoprotein (HDL) were recently shown to mimic the natural behavior of HDL in trafficking cholesterol out of cells and in reducing inflammation within endothelial tissue.242 Site-specific AuNPs were also utilized to transport vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a cytokine that increases angiogenesis, to ischemic tissue caused by atherosclerosis.239,245 VEGF has both poor circulation and a short half-life which decrease its efficacy in specific delivery to the affected cells. The AuNPs modified VEGF nanoparticles had an increased circulation half-life with enhanced perfusion of ischemic musculature which consequently improved the pathways for leucocytes to initiate angiogenesis in the unhealthy tissue.245
Beyond the diagnosis of atherosclerotic plaque, GNS mediated contrast enhancement has enabled the imaging of other inflammatory diseases including rheumatoid arthritis. Recently, Shao et al. conjugated PEG-coated nanorods with CAM-1 antibodies radiolabeled with 125I (ICAM-1) and tracked the inflammation of articular tissues within arthritic sites in vivo in rat models via gamma imaging.246 CAM-1, anti-intercellular adhesion molecule 1, is a glycoprotein on endothelial cells that recruits leucocytes to localize and cause inflammation. Non-targeted and targeted nanorods were injected in vivo, and the radioactivity ratio of the ankle joint vs. adjacent muscle was evaluated in normal rats (control), arthritic rats with non-targeted nanorods (control 2), and arthritic rats with ICAM-1 conjugated nanorods. ICAM-1 biomarkers navigated the nanorods to the arthritic joints enabling higher accumulation of nanorod contrast agents in arthritic rat models relative to the two controls.
While the impact of plasmonic nanomedicine in the treatment of inflammatory diseases is currently in its infancy, promising opportunities exist to advance the design of bioconjugated plasmonic probes for diagnosis and therapy selectively at the inflammation site. Besides probe design, accurate animal models are also needed since small animals develop atherosclerosis at much faster rates implicating that their inflamed tissues respond differently than that of human atherosclerotic plaque.242 In addition, diets used for the small animals in these studies are often inconsistent and do not accurately mimic aspects of the human disease. Further, nanoparticle mediated treatment of cardiovascular diseases has not been extended to chronic atherosclerosis, and the response and stability of GNS in chronic atherosclerotic plaques sites are unclear. While GNS-based contrast agents have been utilized for imaging cardiovascular disease in animal models, GNS induced therapeutic delivery at atherosclerotic sites remains largely unexplored. GNS conjugated with targeting ligands can be used as delivery vehicles to navigate therapeutic cargo including vascular targeted genes and drugs to atherosclerotic sites and be controllably delivered by external triggers.247,248 GNS conjugated with phototoxic molecules can also be used for simultaneous photodynamic and photothermal therapy. Finally, GNS theranostic probes bioconjugated to multiple functional molecules such as fluorophores, MRI contrast agents, and oligonucleotides can be used for multimodal fluorescence and MRI imaging to diagnose the location of atherosclerotic plaque and dual-modal gene and photothermal therapy for treatment.
7. Conclusions
In conclusion, this review summarizes the effective implementation of GNS based diagnostic, therapeutic, and theranostic applications in nanomedicine. The past decade has witnessed the invention of a plethora of GNS with different geometry and morphology that has given rise to unique optical and thermophysical properties enabling multiple imaging and treatment strategies on a single, unified platform. GNS theranostic vectors have been successfully delivered to solid tumors in vivo, and with further pre-clinical studies, we anticipate their use in the detection and treatment of metastatic cancer. The diagnosis, control, and mediation of metastatic disease remains an active challenge in cancer treatment. Across all cancer types, only 20% of patients diagnosed with metastasis survive beyond five years.249,250 Therefore, several challenges associated with the use of GNS as well as translational issues have to be addressed before GNS based technologies can be transitioned to the pharmaceutical pipeline for clinical use.
8. Future outlook
8.1 Challenges of using engineered gold nanostructures
While the high biocompatibility, low cytotoxicity, and success in clinical trials have resulted in the FDA approval of a few GNS,251 several fundamental design challenges still exist in the synthesis and in vivo stability of heterofunctional GNS with multiple components to enable both diagnostics and therapy. GNS are typically synthesized in aqueous media with supporting surface ligands that facilitate their stability. To minimize toxicity of non-biocompatible surfactants, such as CTAB, native ligands are replaced with neutral polymers, for example PEG,252 or bioactive molecules, for example dendrimers.177 But removal of native ligands often results in the instability and agglomeration of GNS which renders them ineffective for in vitro and in vivo translation. This processing step, while essential, is often lengthy and cumbersome and results in lower GNS yield after the ligand exchange.253 Another impending challenge is the fact that GNS are often prone to aggregation in biological buffers. Surface modified GNS are typically dispersed in a biological buffer at physiological pH (>7.8) and with an appropriate amount of salt before administration in vivo.23,175,195,223 For example 1× or 10× phosphate buffered saline is frequently used as the medium for intravenous injection of GNS in small animal models. However, a basic pH and high salt concentrations can disrupt the stability of the surface ions and charges resulting in aggregation of GNS.54,254 PEG functionalized GNS are known to be stable at high pH and salt concentrations, although the chain length and mole-fraction of PEG greatly influence the particle stability.255 While GNS coated with long chain length PEG (>10K MW) are more stable in cellular medium, increasing chain length also results in nanoparticle agglomeration due to formation of nanoparticle networks initiated by the polymer side-chains.256 Further, an additional design consideration is controlling and fine-tuning multiple functional moieties on the GNS surface specifically when synthesizing theranostic nanoparticles. Theranostic GNS are typically multilayered complex architectures with contrast agents (single- or dual-modal), therapeutic components, targeting ligands, and passivating polymers adhered on the surface.23,257 The molar concentrations of each constituent, the bioconjugation method applied, and cleaning procedures in between to remove excess molecules all play a critical role in the overall stability and performance of the multifunctional GNS. While several robust strategies have been developed and in vivo translation has been successful, scalability, yield, and long-term stability in vivo remain a challenge. It is imperative that substantial efforts are made to maximize the theranostic potential of GNS without compromising the functionality of each component of heterofunctional GNS. A final challenge that remains is the melting of GNS upon irradiation with high laser powers. As discussed in Section 2.2, following the excitation of the electron gas on the metal surface, electron–phonon coupling gives rise to thermal equilibrium between electrons and the lattice.32,58–60 When the energy of the excitation pulse is increased to several microjoules, the temperature of the lattice can then reach the melting temperature of gold resulting in irreversible changes in the shape, optical properties, and therapeutic abilities of GNS. Alper et al. demonstrated that surface ligands also control the thermal dissipation from GNS.258 Therefore to enhance the photothermal efficacy of GNS, the dosage of therapeutic GNS, the laser power, and the surface functionality have to be systematically examined to not only minimize GNS melting but also reduce any cellular damage and toxicity.
8.2 Cellular trafficking by engineered gold nanostructures
Despite the progress, fundamental understanding of the different pathways for cellular trafficking by GNS in cancer cells vs. healthy cells, cell surface permeation, and localization remains poorly understood. Further, it is essential to probe the effect of GNS on the integrity of the mitochondrial membrane which controls cellular metabolism. For example, a recent work by Wang and co-workers demonstrated that intracellular localization, not uptake pathway, determines the final fate of nanorods in cells.259 After nanorod uptake, due to enhanced permeation of the lysosomal membrane, nanorods are released into the cancer cell cytoplasm and transferred from the lysosomes to mitochondria. Here they induce decreased mitochondrial membrane potentials increasing oxidative stress and finally cell death. These distinct endocytotic pathways in cancer cells vs. normal cells are shown in Fig. 14.259 This study provides a detailed understanding of the mechanism of cell-specific cytoxicity and will ultimately advance the design of organelle-targeted GNS for cancer therapy and regenerative medicine. Further, the mechanisms of how GNS alter the biochemical and biophysical aspects of the vascular system when injected at the site of a primary tumor and how that modifies the migration of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) to form secondary tumor and metastasis remain elusive thus far.260 Rapid progression of CTCs and circulating cancer stem cells (CCSCs) is the precursor of metastasis accounting for 9 out of every 10 cancer-related deaths.249 Selective, sensitive, and quantitative detection of CTCs and CCSCs and their continuous real-time monitoring are essential to inhibit disease progression. Zharov and co-workers demonstrated that carbon nanotubes coated with an Au shell enable excellent photoacoustic contrast for CTC detection. These nanotubes simultaneously applied photothermal therapy of CTCs in the blood of the mouse model and monitored the therapeutic process with PAT in vivo.261 GNS platforms that enable diagnosis and therapy of circulating abnormal cells will ultimately allow the treatment of diseases beyond cancer such as infectious diseases (circulating bacterial cells) and cardiovascular events (circulating endothelial cells).262 Additionally, experimental results of GNS based diagnostic and therapeutic applications should be combined with physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling to assess tissue concentration–time profiles. Such models have been applied for small molecules and antibodies but have not been explored for GNS.263,264 Models mimicking experimental results of GNS uptake in tumor should be diffusion limited, and multiple pore models of extravasation will likely be more representative of leaky tumor vasculatures.
 Fig. 14  Different fates and effects of Au NRs in a cancer cell, normal cell and stem cell due to distinct pathways for cellular trafficking. Reproduced with permission from ref. 259. Copyright 2011 ACS Publications. 
8.3 Translation factors for clinical feasibility of engineered gold nanostructures
There are additional translational considerations for the rapid clinical viability of GNS, for example pharmacological and toxicity studies on the most clinically relevant animal models.265 First, when designing xenograft models to examine GNS efficacy in vivo, the vascular fenestrations that allow nanostructures to permeate to the tumor tissue should be considered. Since xenograft tumors have variably sized vascular fenestrations, it is unclear if these fenestrations will be analogous to the clinically relevant tumors in humans. Therefore, evaluating GNS efficacy in multiple xenograft models is a necessity for clinical translation. Second, detailed analysis in multiple mouse models is relevant for pharmacology analysis and long term toxicity studies.266 Third, the dosing route and regimen is also an important factor to move GNS to clinical trials. Since intravenous (i.v.) administration is the most clinically relevant relative to intraperitoneal or subcutaneous injection, GNS diagnostic and therapeutic agents should be delivered in vivo through i.v. to obtain reliable pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic information. Fourth, the examination of the biological potency of GNS is a critical factor for pre-clinical evaluation since the synthesis process of nanomaterials often generates variability in stability and surface characteristics from one batch to another. Besides standard analytical techniques, multiple biological assays and quality assurance testing should be performed to establish a gold standard, analogous to small molecule drug formulations, for each GNS to ensure consistency in biological activity and a standardized biological potency. Yet another consideration is GNS platform stability both on the shelf prior to administration and also in vivo. This becomes primarily important for theranostic GNS with multicomponents and functionalities. An unstable GNS drug/gene delivery vector may have premature release of therapeutic payload resulting in drug accumulation in healthy cells which may have toxic side effects. A highly stable GNS vehicle may not release the therapeutic cargo at all, and the drug/gene will simply remain as an inactive prodrug and accumulate in the liver and spleen. Therefore, controllable approaches must be adopted for surface modifications of the GNS, and endogenous and exogenous factors that drive drug/gene release must be effectively regulated during the pre-clinical assessment.
Finally, cost analysis of multifunctional GNS with several components and functionalities has to be performed before intensive clinical trials of these agents. The cost analysis should consider the price of the individual components that generate the GNS based diagnostic and/or therapeutic agent, the cost of the bioanalytical assays performed to evaluate the multimodal complex GNS, the cost of regulatory hurdles, and the cost per dosage of the GNS formulation. Highly efficient GNS based diagnostic probes and therapeutic agents may only require a small dosage keeping the costs down. However, it is likely that complex theranostic GNS with multiple chemical moieties on the surface may have to compromise the efficacy of one of the functionalities, for example targeting or diagnosis to achieve a higher therapeutic ability. Multiple administrations of such GNS agents will increase the cost of the dose required for effective detection and treatment.263,267
8.4 Emerging technologies: Fano resonances and nanomedicine
While much of the work focused in this review is based on GNS synthesized by bottom up approaches, complex GNS fabricated by top-down approaches have also been investigated for biomedical diagnostics.268 Recently, GNS that support Fano resonances have rapidly emerged and revolutionized the sensitivities achievable for LSPR biosensing.269–272 Fano resonances, discovered by Ugo Fano in 1961, originate from the interference of two electromagnetic modes – a subradiant or dark mode and superradiant or bright mode – giving rise to a sharp resonance with an asymmetric lineshape.273–275 Due to the narrow lineshapes of Fano resonances, a dramatic shift in the spectral position is expected even with small perturbations in the dielectric permittivity of the local environment. Fano-resonance enabled LSPR biosensing of viral and IgG proteins has been realized with ring–disk systems,271 nanoholes,272 periodic grooves,270 and asymmetric metastructures,269 and sensitivities as high as ∼667 nm/RIU have been achieved.271 While GNS based LSPR biosensing has been extensively used for diagnosis of cancer biomarkers,276–278 LSPR sensing with Fano resonant structures is currently in its infancy. Nevertheless, the high detection sensitivities achieved with Fano resonant GNS are expected to enable the analysis of complex proteins, genes, and cancer biomarkers with a similar accuracy to other clinical diagnostic methods. Much of the Fano resonant plasmonic structures designed thus far are mesoscale lithographically fabricated and self-assembled architectures. While these structural sizes are appropriate for ex vivo analysis, for in vitro diagnosis sub-150 nm aqueous-phase synthesized GNS are necessary. Recently, Halas and co-workers wet-chemically synthesized “Fanoshells”, a concentric metallodielectric nanostructure consisting of a gold core wrapped in a dielectric silica layer and a gold shell (Fig. 15).14,279 By simply modulating the thickness of the outer gold shell, the spectral position of the Fano resonance was systematically tuned across the spectrum (Fig. 15d and e).14 Single-particle measurements revealed two separate Fano resonances (Fig. 15f); the resonance at 900 nm was attributed to the interaction between the superradiant and subradiant mode (dipole–dipole), and the resonance at 650 nm was attributed to the interaction of the superradiant and quadrupole mode (dipole–quadrupole), which emerged due to the intrinsic symmetry breaking in Fanoshells.14 The symmetry breaking arises both due to the deviation of the shape of Fanoshells from a perfectly symmetric spherical structure and due to the offset gold core (Fig. 15a–c). By exciting the Fanoshells at the Fano resonance, where scattering is suppressed and hot electron generation is dominant,273 extreme light to heat conversion can be achieved making these structures ideal for photothermal drug and gene delivery, and hyperthermia. Further, Fanoshells may enable LSPR sensing with high sensitivity in cellular medium and microfluidic diagnostic devices. While Fano resonant GNS are yet to be realized in nanomedicine, we anticipate that this emerging technology will be an exciting path forward in nanomedicine. As the potential of Fano resonant GNS unfolds, a range of new GNS with controlled morphologies and optical properties will rapidly evolve enabling new and exciting diagnostic and therapeutic applications.
 Fig. 15  SEM image of (a) Fanoshells ensemble of ∼150 nm overall diameter and (b) a single Fanoshell. (c) Schematic representation of Fanoshells, where a displaced spherical nanoparticle core (by Δ nm) within a spherical core–shell nanoparticle represents the nanoparticle irregularities. (d) Experimental extinction spectra of (i) Au nanoparticles of radius r1 = 40 nm, (ii) Au/SiO2 nanoparticles, r2 = 55 nm, and Fanoshells where (iii) r3 = 65 nm, (iv) r3 = 68 nm, (v) r3 = 73 nm, and (vi) r3 = 86 nm. (e) Theoretical spectra corresponding to the experimental spectra from part d. The spectra are color-coordinated and offset for clarity. (f) Single particle scattering spectra of Fanoshells. Unpolarized (black), s-polarized (green), and p-polarized (red) spectra are shown. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 and 279. Copyright 2010 ACS Publications. 
References
J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. l. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dykman and N. Khlebtsov, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2256–2282 RSC .
A. M. Alkilany, P. K. Nagaria, C. R. Hexel, T. J. Shaw, C. J. Murphy and M. D. Wyatt, Small, 2009, 5, 701–708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Arvizo, O. R. Miranda, D. F. Moyano, C. A. Walden, K. Giri, R. Bhattacharya, J. D. Robertson, V. M. Rotello, J. M. Reid and P. Mukherjee, PLoS One, 2011, 6, e24374 CAS .
W.-H. Chen, X.-D. Xu, H.-Z. Jia, Q. Lei, G.-F. Luo, S.-X. Cheng, R.-X. Zhuo and X.-Z. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 8798–8807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. Schneider, V. Subr, K. Ulbrich and G. Decher, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Au, G. Craig, V. Longo, P. Zanzonico, M. Mason, Y. Fong and P. J. Allen, AJR, Am. J. Roentgenol., 2013, 200, 1347–13451 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Park, H. Youn, H. Kim, T. Noh, Y. H. Kook, E. T. Oh, H. J. Park and C. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2310–2315 RSC .
J.-S. Lee, J. J. Green, K. T. Love, J. Sunshine, R. Langer and D. G. Anderson, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2402–2406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Peer, J. M. Karp, S. Hong, O. C. Farokhzad, R. Margalit and R. Langer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 751–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Dreaden, M. A. Mackey, X. Huang, B. Kang and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3391–3404 RSC .
R. Bardhan, S. Lal, A. Joshi and N. J. Halas, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 936–946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bardhan, N. K. Grady, T. Ali and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6169–6179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bardhan, S. Mukherjee, N. Mirin, S. D. Levit, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7378–7383 CAS .
R. Bardhan, O. Neumann, N. Mirin, H. Wang and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 266–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, X. Kou, Z. Yang, W. Ni and J. Wang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5233–5237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Gobin, M. H. Lee, N. J. Halas, W. D. James, R. A. Drezek and J. L. West, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1929–1934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Luehmann, X. Xia, P. Brown, C. Jarreau, M. Welch and Y. Xia, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5880–5888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, P. V. Dorpe, W. V. Roy, K. Lodewijks, I. D. Vlaminck, G. Maes and G. Borghs, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3110–3115 CAS .
X. Ye, Y. Gao, J. Chen, D. C. Reifsnyder, C. Zheng and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2163–2171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Skrabalak, L. Au, X. Li and Y. Xia, Nat. Protoc., 2007, 2, 2182–2190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. McCarthy, Nanomedicine, 2009, 4, 693–695 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Bardhan, W. Chen, C. Perez-Torres, M. Bartels, R. M. Huschka, L. Zhao, E. Morosan, R. Pautler, A. Joshi and N. J. Halas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3901–3909 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, R. Bardhan, M. Bartels, C. Perez-Torres, R. G. Pautler, N. J. Halas and A. Joshi, Mol. Cancer Ther., 2010, 9, 1028–1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Myroshnychenko, J. Rodrıguez-Fernandez, I. Pastoriza-Santos, A. M. Funston, C. Novo, P. Mulvaney, L. M. Liz-Marzan and F. J. G. d. Abajo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1792–1805 RSC .
P. K. Jain, K. S. Lee, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7238–7248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Trigari, A. Rindi, G. Margheri, S. Sottini, G. Dellepiane and E. Giorgetti, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6531–6540 RSC .
M. P. Melancon, W. Lu, Z. Yang, R. Zhang, Z. Cheng, A. M. Elliot, J. Stafford, T. Olson, J. Z. Zhang and C. Li, Mol. Cancer Ther., 2008, 7, 1730–1739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Popovtzer, A. Agrawal, N. A. Kotov, A. Popovtzer, J. Balter, T. E. Carey and R. Kopelman, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4593–4596 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 19, 409–453 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ringe, M. R. Langille, K. Sohn, J. Zhang, J. Huang, C. A. Mirkin, R. P. V. Duyne and L. D. Marks, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1479–1483 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ringe, J. Zhang, M. R. Langille, C. A. Mirkin, L. D. Marks and R. P. V. Duyne, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 444005 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, K.-T. Yong, I. Roy, R. Hu, H. Ding, L. Zhao, M. T. Swihart, G. S. He, Y. Cui and P. N. Prasad, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 285106 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yuan, C. G. Khoury, C. M. Wilson, G. A. Grant, A. J. Bennett and T. Vo-Dinh, Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine, 2012, 8, 1355–1363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuan, C. G. Khoury, H. Hwang, C. M. Wilson, G.
A. Grant and T. Vo-Dinh, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 075102 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lu, M. P. Melancon, C. Xiong, Q. Huang, A. Elliott, S. Song, R. Zhang, L. G. Flores, J. G. Gelovani, L. V. Wang, G. Ku, R. J. Stafford and C. Li, Cancer Res., 2011, 71, 6116–6121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, G. Zhang, R. Zhang, L. G. Flores, Q. Huang, J. G. Gelovani and C. Li, Cancer Res., 2010, 70, 3177–3188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-R. Choi, K. J. Stanton-Maxey, C. S. Levin, R. Bardhan, D. Akin, J. Sturgis, J. P. Robinson, R. Bashir, N. J. Halas and S. E. Clare, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3759–3765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lim and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 76–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Kumar, I. Pastoriza-Santos, B. Rodrıguez-Gonzalez, F. J. d. Abajo and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 015606 CrossRef PubMed .
L. V. Brown, H. Sobhani, J. B. Lassiter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 819–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2854–2858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Romo-Herrera, R. A. Alvarez-Puebla and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1304–1315 RSC .
S. Sheikholeslami, Y.-w. Jun, P. K. Jain and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2655–2660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Ghosh and T. Pal, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4797–4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Halas, S. Lal, W.-S. Chang, S. Link and P. Nordlander, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3913–3961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Guo, Y. Xu, A. R. Ferhan, G. Chen and D.-H. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12338–12345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, X. Zuo, R. Yang, Y. Xiao, D. Kang, A. Vallée-Bélisle, X. Gong, J. D. Yuen, B. B. Y. Hsu, A. J. Heeger and K. W. Plaxco, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 10837–10841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. L. Chen, Y. Chen and D. S. Ginger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9600–9601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nam, N. Won, H. Jin, H. Chung and S. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13639–13645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. D. S. Indrasekara, B. J. Paladini, D. J. Naczynski, V. Starovoytov, P. V. Moghe and L. Fabris, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 1370–1376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Y. Lukianova-Hleb, L. J. E. Anderson, S. Lee, J. H. Hafner and D. O. Lapotko, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 12237–12244 RSC .
R. Huschka, O. Neumann, A. Barhoumi and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4117–4122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Link, C. Burda, M. B. Mohamed, B. Nikoobakht and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 1165–1170 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4212–4217 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link, C. Burda, B. Nikoobakht and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6152–6163 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tong, Q. Wei, A. Wei and J.-X. Cheng, Photochem. Photobiol., 2009, 85, 21–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Biagioni, M. Celebrano, M. Savoini, G. Grancini, D. Brida, S. Mátéfi-Tempfli, M. Mátéfi-Tempfli, L. Duo, B. Hecht, G. Cerullo and M. Finazzi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 045411 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Yu, D. J. S. Birch and Y. Chen, J. Biomed. Opt., 2010, 15, 020504 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Park, A. Estrada, J. A. Schwartz, P. Diagaradjane, S. Krishnan, A. K. Dunn and J. W. Tunnell, Lasers Surg. Med., 2010, 42, 630–639 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Xu, X. Xia, M. Yang, S. Vangveravong, J. Chen, R. H. Mach and Y. Xia, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 421–424 RSC .
J.-L. Li, L. Wang, X.-Y. Liu, Z.-P. Zhang, H.-C. Guo, W.-M. Liu and S.-H. Tang, Cancer Lett., 2009, 274, 319–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Rosman, S. Pierrat, A. Henkel, M. Tarantola, D. Schneider, E. Sunnick, A. Janshoff and C. Sönnichsen, Small, 2012, 8, 3683–3690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qian and X. Huang, J. Biomed. Opt., 2010, 15, 046025 Search PubMed .
R. Hu, K.-T. Yong, I. Roy, H. Ding, S. He and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2676–2684 CAS .
Q. Zhan, J. Qian, X. Li and S. He, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 055704 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Eghtedari, A. V. Liopo, J. A. Copland, A. A. Oraevsky and M. Motamedi, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 287–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kang, M. A. Mackey and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1517–1519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Khlebtsov and L. Dykman, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1647–1671 RSC .
Z. Wu and R. Jin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2568–2573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, X. He, K. Wang, C. Xie, B. Zhou and Z. Qing, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2244–2249 RSC .
L. Shang, R. M. Dorlich, S. Brandholt, R. Schneider, V. Trouillet, M. Bruns, D. Gerthsen and G. U. Nienhaus, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2009–2014 RSC .
L. Polavarapu, M. Manna and Q.-H. Xu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 429–434 RSC .
C.-L. Liu, H.-T. Wu, Y.-H. Hsiao, C.-W. Lai, C.-W. Shih, Y.-K. Peng, K.-C. Tang, H.-W. Chang, Y.-C. Chien, J.-K. Hsiao, J.-T. Cheng and P.-T. Chou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7056–7060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shang, L. Yang, F. Stockmar, R. Popescu, V. Trouillet, M. Bruns, D. Gerthsen and G. U. Nienhaus, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4155–4160 RSC .
R. Bardhan, N. K. Grady and N. J. Halas, Small, 2008, 4, 1716–1722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bardhan, W. Chen, M. Bartels, C. Perez-Torres, M. F. Botero, R. W. McAninch, A. Contreras, R. Schiff, R. G. Pautler, N. J. Halas and A. Joshi, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4920–4928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. M. Dam, J. H. Lee, P. N. Sisco, D. T. Co, M. Zhang, M. R. Wasielewski and T. W. Odom, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3318–3326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Luo, P. Huang, G. Gao, G. Shen, S. Fu, D. Cui, C. Zhou and Q. Ren, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 17030–17039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Quach, G. Crivat, M. A. Tarr and Z. Rosenzweig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2028–2030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hong, S. M. Tabakman, K. Welsher, Z. Chen, J. T. Robinson, H. Wang, B. Zhang and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4644–4648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin and X. Gao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 571–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, N. N. Horimoto, K. Imura, H. Okamoto, K. Matsui and R. Shigemoto, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2309–2313 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Li and M. Gu, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 9492–9498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, A. Estrada, K. Sharp, K. Sang, J. A. Schwartz, D. K. Smith, C. Coleman, J. D. Payne, B. A. Korgel, A. K. Dunn and J. W. Tunnell, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 1590–1599 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, T. J. Vadakkan and V. Nammalvar, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 365102 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Au, Q. Zhang, C. M. Cobley, M. Gidding, A. G. Schwartz, J. Chen and Y. Xia, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 35–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tong, C. M. Cobley, J. Chen, Y. Xia and J.-X. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3485–3488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Ntziachristos, Nat. Methods, 2010, 7, 603–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Loo, A. Lin, L. Hirsch, M.-H. Lee, J. Barton, N. Halas, J. West and R. Drezek, Technol. Cancer Res. Treat., 2004, 3, 33–40 CAS .
E. V. Zagaynova, M. V. Shirmanova, M. Y. Kirillin, B. N. Khlebtsov, A. G. Orlova, I. V. Balalaeva, M. A. Sirotkina, M. L. Bugrova, P. D. Agrba and V. A. Kamensky, Phys. Med. Biol., 2008, 53, 4995–5009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Oldenburg, M. N. Hansen, T. S. Ralston, A. Wei and S. A. Boppart, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6407–6411 RSC .
C. S. Kim, P. Wilder-Smith, Y.-C. Ahn, L.-H. L. Liaw, Z. Chen and Y. J. Kwon, J. Biomed. Opt., 2009, 14, 034008 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Huang, E. A. Swanson, C. P. Lin, J. S. Schuman, W. G. Stinson, W. Chang, M. R. Hee, T. Flotte, K. Gregory and C. A. Puliafito, Science, 1991, 254, 1178–1181 CAS .
M. C. Skala, M. J. Crow, A. Wax and J. A. Izatt, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3461–3467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Adler, S.-W. Huang, R. Huber and J. G. Fujimoto, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 4376–4393 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jung, R. Reif, Y. Zeng and R. K. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2938–2943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tucker-Schwartz, T. A. Meyer, C. A. Patil, C. L. Duvall and M. C. Skala, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2012, 3, 2881–2895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sebastian, S.-K. Lee, C. Zhou, M. F. Kraus, J. G. Fujimoto and K. F. Jensen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6654–6656 RSC .
S. Kim, M. T. Rinehart, H. Park, Y. Zhu and A. Wax, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2012, 3, 2579–2586 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Paranjape, R. Kuranov, S. Baranov, L. L. Ma, J. W. Villard, T. Wang, K. V. Sokolov, M. D. Feldman, K. P. Johnston and T. E. Milner, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2010, 1, 2–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. V. Wang and S. Hu, Science, 2012, 335, 1458–1462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. V. Wang, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 503–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yao and L. V. Wang, Contrast Media Mol. Imaging, 2011, 6, 332–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Xie, X. Wang, G. Ku, K. L. Gill, D. P. O'Neal, G. Stoic and L. V. Wang, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1689–1692 CrossRef CAS .
P.-C. Li, S.-W. Huang, C.-W. Wei, Y.-C. Chiou, C.-D. Chen and C.-R. C. Wang, Opt. Lett., 2005, 30, 3341–3343 CrossRef .
Z. Yuan, C. Wu, H. Zhao and H. Jiang, Opt. Lett., 2005, 30, 3054–3056 CrossRef .
X. Yang, E. W. Stein, S. Ashkenazi and L. V. Wang, WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology, 2009, 1, 360–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mallidi, T. Larson, J. Tam, P. P. Joshi, A. Karpiouk, K. Sokolov and S. Emelianov, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2825–2831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kim, E. C. Cho, J. Chen, K. H. Song, L. Au, C. Favazza, Q. Zhang, C. M. Cobley, F. Gao, Y. Xia and L. V. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4559–4564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, W. Li, C.-H. Kim, Y. Yuan, L. V. Wang and Y. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9658–9667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xia, M. Yang, L. K. Oetjen, Y. Zhang, Q. Li, J. Chen and Y. Xia, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 950–953 RSC .
C. L. Bayer, Y.-S. Chen, S. Kim, S. Mallidi, K. Sokolov and S. Emelianov, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2011, 2, 1828–1835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Taruttis, E. Herzog, D. Razansky and V. Ntziachristos, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 19592–19602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Jokerst, M. Thangaraj, P. J. Kempen, R. Sinclair and S. S. Gambhir, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5920–5930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, F. Ye and D. Xing, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 10370–10375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Karmani, D. Labar, V. Valembois, V. Bouchat, P. G. Nagaswaran, A. Bol, J. Gillart, P. Levêque, C. Bouzin, D. Bonifazi, C. Michiels, O. Feron, V. Grégoire, S. Lucas, T. V. Borght and B. Gallez, Contrast Media Mol. Imaging, 2013, 8, 402–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xie, Z. J. Wang, A. Baob, B. Goinsb and W. T. Phillips, Int. J. Pharm., 2010, 395, 324–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Mitchell, R. K. Gill, D. L. Boucher, C. Li and S. R. Cherry, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2011, 369, 4605–4619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, H. Liu and Z. Cheng, J. Nucl. Med., 2011, 52, 2009–2018 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ruggiero, J. P. Holland, J. S. Lewis and J. Grimm, J. Nucl. Med., 2010, 51, 1123–1130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Ackerman and E. E. Graves, Phys. Med. Biol., 2012, 57, 771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Beattie, D. L. J. Thorek, C. R. Schmidtlein, K. S. Pentlow, J. L. Humm and A. H. Hielscher, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e31402 CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Luehmann, X. Xia, D. Wan, C. Cutler and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 581–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, K. Cheng, S. Qi, H. Liu, Y. Jiang, H. Jiang, J. Li, K. Chen, H. Zhang and Z. Cheng, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 2796–2806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Löfblom, J. Feldwisch, V. Tolmachev, J. Carlsson, S. Ståhl and F. Y. Frejd, FEBS Lett., 2010, 584, 2670–2680 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Bhatnagar, Z. Li, Y. Choi, J. Guo, F. Li, D. Y. Lee, M. Figliola, H. Huls, D. A. Lee, T. Zal, K. C. Li and L. J. N. Cooper, Integr. Biol., 2013, 5, 231–238 RSC .
Y. Xiao, H. Hong, V. Z. Matson, A. Javadi, W. Xu, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, J.-t. W. Engle, R. J. Nickles, W. Cai, D. A. Steeber and S. Gong, Theranostics, 2012, 2, 757–768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shao, A. Agarwal, J. R. Rajian, N. A. Kotov and X. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 135102 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Hong, D. V. Myklejord and W. Ca, Small, 2011, 7, 3261–3269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Kho, C. Y. Fu, U. S. Dinish and M. Olivo, J. Biophotonics, 2011, 4, 667–684 CrossRef PubMed .
K. C. Bantz, A. F. Meyer, N. J. Wittenberg, H. Im, O. Kurtulus, S. H. Lee, N. C. Lindquist, S.-H. Oh and C. L. Haynes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11551–11567 RSC .
A. Campion and P. Kambhampati, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1998, 27, 241–250 RSC .
M. Moskovits, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2005, 36, 485–496 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chon, S. Lee, S. W. Son, C. H. Oh and J. Choo, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 3029–3034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chon, S. Lee, S.-Y. Yoon, S.-I. Chang, D. W. Lim and J. Choo, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12515–12517 RSC .
S. W. Bishnoi, Y.-j. Lin, M. Tibudan, Y. Huang, M. Nakaema, V. Swarup and T. A. Keiderling, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 4053–4060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, Z. Wang, S. Zong, H. Chen, C. Wang, S. Xu and Y. Cui, Analyst, 2013, 138, 3450–3456 RSC .
G. Wang, R. J. Lipert, M. Jain, S. Kaur, S. Chakraboty, M. P. Torres, S. K. Batra, R. E. Brand and M. D. Porter, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 2554–2561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, K. Lee, K. H. Kim, K. W. Oh and J. Choo, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 3720–3727 RSC .
H. Chon, C. Lim, S.-M. Ha, Y. Ahn, E. K. Lee, S.-I. Chang, G. H. Seong and J. Choo, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 5290–5295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, S. K. Cushing, J. Zhang, S. Suri, R. Evans, W. P. Petros, L. F. Gibson, D. Ma, Y. Liu and N. Wu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4967–4976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Zavaleta, B. R. Smith, I. Walton, W. Doering, G. Davis, B. Shojaei, M. J. Natan and S. S. Gambhir, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 13511–13516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zavaleta, K. B. Hartman, Z. Miao, M. L. James, P. Kempen, A. S. Thakor, C. H. Nielsen, R. Sinclair, Z. Cheng and S. S. Gambhir, Small, 2011, 7, 2232–2240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. v. Maltzahn, A. Centrone, J.-H. Park, R. Ramanathan, M. J. Sailor, T. A. Hatton and S. N. Bhatia, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3175–3180 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Park, S. Lee, L. Chen, E. K. Lee, S. Y. Shin, Y. H. Lee, S. W. Son, C. H. Oh, J. M. Song, S. H. Kang and J. Choo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 7444–7449 RSC .
L. Jiang, J. Qian, F. Cai and S. He, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 400, 2793–2800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Jokerst, A. J. Cole, D. V. d. Sompel and S. S. Gambhir, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10366–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Yigit, L. Zhu, M. A. Ifediba, Y. Zhang, K. Carr, A. Moore and Z. Medarova, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1056–1066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Qian, J. J. Beitler, Z. G. Chen, F. R. Khuri, M. M. Lewis, H. J. C. Shin, S. Nie and D. M. Shin, Cancer Res., 2011, 71, 1526–1532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Bernardi, A. R. Lowery, P. A. Thompson, S. M. Blaney and J. L. West, J. Neurooncol., 2008, 86, 165–172 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Huse and E. C. Holland, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2010, 10, 319–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Day, P. A. Thompson, L. Zhang, N. A. Lewinski, N. Ahmed, R. A. Drezek, S. M. Blaney and J. L. West, J. Neurooncol., 2011, 104, 55–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Diagaradjane, A. Shetty, J. C. Wang, A. M. Elliott, J. Schwartz, S. Shentu, H. C. Park, A. Deorukhkar, R. J. Stafford, S. H. Cho, J. W. Tunnell, J. D. Hazle and S. Krishnan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1492–1500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Gobin, J. J. Moon and J. L. West, Int. J. Nanomed., 2008, 3, 351–358 CAS .
A. M. Elliott, A. M. Shetty, J. Wang, J. D. Hazle and R. Jason Stafford, Int. J. Hyperthermia, 2010, 26, 434–440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Carpin, L. R. Bickford, G. Agollah, T.-K. Yu, R. Schiff, Y. Li and R. A. Drezek, Breast Cancer Res. Treat., 2011, 125, 27–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, D. Chen, L. Li, T. Liu, L. Tan, X. Wu and F. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 891–895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-R. Choi, R. Bardhan, K. J. Stanton-Maxey, S. Badve, H. Nakshatri, K. M. Stantz, N. Cao, N. J. Halas and S. E. Clare, Cancer Nanotechnol., 2012, 3, 47–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hagemann, S. C. Robinson, M. Schulz, L. Trumper, F. R. Balkwill and C. Binder, Carcinogenesis, 2004, 25, 1543–1549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goswami, E. Sahai, J. B. Wyckoff, M. Cammer, D. Cox, F. J. Pixley, E. R. Stanley, J. E. Segall and J. S. Condeelis, Cancer Res., 2005, 65, 5278–5283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kizaka-Kondoh, M. Inoue, H. Harada and M. Hiraoka, Cancer Sci., 2003, 94, 1021–1028 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Day, L. R. Bickford, J. H. Slater, N. S. Riggall, R. A. Drezek and J. L. West, Int. J. Nanomedicine, 2010, 5, 445–454 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. d. Broek, N. Devoogdt, A. D'Hollander, H.-L. Gijs, K. Jans, L. Lagae, S. Muyldermans, G. Maes and G. Borghs, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4319–4328 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shao, R. J. Griffin, E. I. Galanzha, J.-W. Kim, N. Koonce, J. Webber, T. Mustafa, A. S. Biris, D. A. Nedosekin and V. P. Zharov, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1293 Search PubMed .
H. Kang, B. Jia, J. Li, D. Morrish and M. Gu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 063702 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Kirui, S. Krishnan, A. D. Strickland and C. A. Batt, Macromol. Biosci., 2011, 11, 779–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. I. Choi, J.-Y. Kim, C. Kang, C. C. Byeon, Y. H. Kim and G. Tae, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1995–2003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Goodrich, L. Bao, K. Gill-Sharp, K. L. Sang, J. Wang and J. D. Payne, J. Biomed. Opt., 2010, 15, 018001 CrossRef PubMed .
G. v. Maltzahn, J.-H. Park, A. Agrawal, N. K. Bandaru, S. K. Das, M. J. Sailor and S. N. Bhatia, Cancer Res., 2009, 69, 3892–3900 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Yi, I.-C. Sun, J. H. Ryu, H. Koo, C. W. Park, I.-C. Youn, K. Choi, I. C. Kwon, K. Kim and C.-H. Ahn, Bioconjugate Chem., 2010, 21, 2173–2177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, B. Dong, B. Chen, Z. Jiang and H. Song, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 11134 RSC .
Z. Li, P. Huang, X. Zhang, J. Lin, S. Yang, B. Liu, F. Gao, P. Xi, Q. Ren and D. Cui, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2009, 7, 94–104 CrossRef PubMed .
E. S. Glazer and S. A. Curley, Ther. Delivery, 2011, 2, 1325–1330 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cardinal, J. R. Klune, E. Chory, G. Jeyabalan, J. S. Kanzius, M. Nalesnik and D. Geller, Surgery, 2008, 144, 125–132 CrossRef PubMed .
D. E. Kruse, D. N. Stephens, H. A. Lindfors, E. S. Ingham, E. E. Paoli and K. W. Ferrara, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2011, 58, 2002–2012 CrossRef PubMed .
D. E. Dupuy, D. Liu, D. Hartfeil, L. Hanna, J. D. Blume, K. Ahrar, R. Lopez, H. Safran and T. DiPetrillo, Cancer, 2010, 116, 989–997 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Girelli, I. Frigerio, R. Salvia, E. Barbi, P. Tinazzi Martini and C. Bassi, Br. J. Surg., 2010, 97, 220–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Glazer, K. L. Massey, C. Zhu and S. A. Curley, Surgery, 2010, 148, 319–324 CrossRef PubMed .
E. S. Glazer, C. Zhu, K. L. Massey, C. S. Thompson, W. D. Kaluarachchi, A. N. Hamir and S. A. Curley, Clin. Cancer Res., 2010, 16, 5712–5721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Gannon, C. R. Patra, R. Bhattacharya, P. Mukherjee and S. A. Curley, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2008, 6, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Moran, S. M. Wainerdi, T. K. Cherukuri, C. Kittrell, B. J. Wiley, N. W. Nicholas, S. A. Curley, J. S. Kanzius and P. Cherukuri, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 400–405 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Corr, M. Raoof, Y. Mackeyev, S. Phounsavath, M. A. Cheney, B. T. Cisneros, M. Shur, M. Gozin, P. J. McNally, L. J. Wilson and S. A. Curley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24380–24389 CAS .
E. Sassaroli, K. C. P. Li and B. E. O'Neill, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 075303 CrossRef .
R. N. Pedro, T. Thekke-Adiyat, R. Goel, M. Shenoi, J. Slaton, S. Schmechel, J. Bischof and J. K. Anderson, Urology, 2010, 76, 494–498 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Raoof, S. J. Corr, W. D. Kaluarachchi, K. L. Massey, K. Briggs, C. Zhu, M. A. Cheney, L. J. Wilson and S. A. Curley, Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine, 2012, 8, 1096–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Dreaden, S. C. Mwakwari, Q. H. Sodji, A. K. Oyelere and M. A. El-Sayed, Bioconjugate Chem., 2009, 20, 2247–2253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Patra, R. Bhattacharya and P. Mukherjee, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 547–554 RSC .
P. Podsiadlo, V. A. Sinani, J. H. Bahng, N. W. S. Kam, J. Lee and N. A. Kotov, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 568–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Yavuz, Y. Cheng, J. Chen, C. M. Cobley, Q. Zhang, M. Rycenga, J. Xie, C. Kim, K. H. Song, A. G. Schwartz, L. V. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 935–939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Agarwal, M. A. Mackey, M. A. El-Sayed and R. V. Bellamkonda, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4919–4926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Agasti, A. Chompoosor, C.-C. You, P. Ghosh, C. K. Kim and V. M. Rotello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5728–5729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shen, H. Tang, X. Zhang, J. Ren, Z. Pang, D. Wang, H. Gao, Y. Qian, X. Jiang and W. Yang, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 3150–3158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tang, S. Shen, J. Guo, B. Chang, X. Jiang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16095–16103 RSC .
L. Hosta, M. Pla-Roca, J. Arbiol, C. Lopez-Iglesias, J. Samitier, L. J. Cruz, M. J. Kogan and F. Albericio, Bioconjugate Chem., 2009, 20, 138–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Y.-C. Wang, S. Dou, M.-H. Xiong, T.-M. Sun and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3679–3692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Estrela, A. Ortega and E. Obrador, Crit. Rev. Clin. Lab. Sci., 2006, 43, 143–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dhar, W. L. Daniel, D. A. Giljohann, C. A. Mirkin and S. J. Lippard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14652–14653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Rixe, W. Ortuzar, M. Alvarez, R. Parker, E. Reed, K. Paull and T. Fojo, Biochem. Pharmacol., 1996, 52, 1855–1865 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Brown, P. Nativo, J.-A. Smith, D. Stirling, P. R. Edwards, B. Venugopal, D. J. Flint, J. A. Plumb, D. Graham and N. J. Wheate, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4678–4684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kim, G. Han, B. J. Toley, C.-k. Kim, V. M. Rotello and N. S. Forbes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 465–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, C. Yu and M. Chu, Int. J. Nanomed., 2011, 6, 807–813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bexell, S. Scheding and J. Bengzon, Mol. Ther., 2010, 18, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sangro and J. Prieto, Curr. Opin. Mol. Ther., 2010, 12, 561–569 CAS .
S. L. Ginn, I. E. Alexander, M. L. Edelstein, M. R. Abedi and J. Wixon, J. Gene Med., 2013, 15, 65–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Rosi, D. A. Giljohann, C. S. Thaxton, A. K. R. Lytton-Jean, M. S. Han and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2006, 312, 1027–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pissuwan, T. Niidome and M. B. Cortie, J. Controlled Release, 2011, 149, 65–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, K. Singha, S. Son, J. Kim, R. Namgung, C. O. Yun and W. J. Kim, Cancer Gene Ther., 2012, 19, 741–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Lee and L. P. Lee, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2010, 14, 623–633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-Y. Kim, R. Schulz, P. Swantek, K. Kunstman, M. Malim and S. M. Wolinsky, Gene Ther., 2012, 19, 347–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Ghosh, C.-K. Kim, G. Han, N. S. Forbes and V. M. Rotello, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2213–2218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Elbakry, A. Zaky, R. Liebl, R. Rachel, A. Goepferich and M. Breunig, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2059–2064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Elbakry, E.-C. Wurster, A. Zaky, R. Liebl, E. Schindler, P. Bauer-Kreisel, T. Blunk, R. Rachel, A. Goepferich and M. Breunig, Small, 2012, 8, 3847–3856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Lee, D. Y. Sasaki, T. D. Perroud, D. Yoo, K. D. Patel and L. P. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14066–14074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shan, T. Luo, C. Peng, R. Sheng, A. Cao, X. Cao, M. Shen, R. Guo, H. Tomás and X. Shi, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 3025–3035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Ryou, S. Kim, H. H. Jang, J.-H. Kim, J.-H. Yeom, M. S. Eom, J. Bae, M. S. Han and K. Lee, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2010, 398, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Barhoumi, R. Huschka, R. Bardhan, M. W. Knight and N. J. Halas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 482, 171–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Huschka, J. Zuloaga, M. W. Knight, L. V. Brown, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12247–12255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Huschka, A. Barhoumi, Q. Liu, J. A. Roth, L. Ji and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7681–7691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Huang, S. Barua, D. B. Kay and K. Rege, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2941–2952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wijaya, S. B. Schaffer, I. G. Pallares and K. Hamad-Schifferli, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 80–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Lee, G. L. Liu, F. Kim and L. P. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 562–570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Lee, D. Y. Sasaki, Y. Park, R. Xu, J. S. Brennan, M. J. Bissell and L. P. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7770–7780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Poon, W. Zandberg, D. Hsiao, Z. Erno, D. Sen, B. D. Gates and N. R. Branda, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6395–6403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lukianova-Hleb, A. P. Samaniego, J. Wen, L. Metelitsa, C.-C. Chang and D. Lapotko, J. Controlled Release, 2011, 152, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Thibaudau, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 902–907 CrossRef CAS .
C. Loo, A. Lowery, N. Halas, J. West and R. Drezek, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 709–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2115–2120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, S. Park, J. E. Lee, S. M. Jin, J. H. Lee, I. S. Lee, I. Yang, J.-S. Kim, S. K. Kim, M.-H. Cho and T. Hyeon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 118, 7918–7922 CrossRef .
X. Ji, R. Shao, A. M. Elliott, R. J. Stafford, E. Esparza-Coss, J. A. Bankson, G. Liang, Z.-P. Luo, K. Park, J. T. Markert and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6245–6251 CAS .
Z. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Wang, X. Jiang, X. Li, Z. Hu, Y. Ji, X. Wu and C. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1418–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Qian, D. Wang, Y. Wang and S. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1148–1151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Moon, S.-W. Choi, X. Cai, W. Li, E. C. Cho, U. Jeong, L. V. Wang and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4762–4765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jayagopal, M. F. Linton, S. Fazio and F. R. Haselton, Curr. Cardiovasc. Imaging Rep., 2010, 12, 209–215 CAS .
J. Tang, M. E. Lobatto, J. C. Read, A. J. Mieszawska, Z. A. Fayad and W. J. M. Mulder, Curr. Cardiovasc. Imaging Rep., 2012, 5, 19–25 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Slevin, L. Badimon, M. Grau-Olivares, M. Ramis, J. Sendra, M. Morrisonf and J. Krupinski, Mol. BioSyst., 2010, 6, 444–450 RSC .
P. Houston, J. Goodman, A. Lewis, C. J. Campbell and M. Braddock, FEBS Lett., 2001, 492, 73–77 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Lobatto, V. Fuster, Z. A. Fayad and W. J. M. Mulder, Nat. Rev., 2011, 10, 835–852 CAS .
B. Wang, E. Yantsen, T. Larson, A. B. Karpiouk, S. Sethuraman, J. L. Su, K. Sokolov and S. Y. Emelianov, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2212–2217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qin, T. Zhou, S. Yang, Q. Chen and D. Xing, Nanomedicine, 2013, 8, 1611–1624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, L. Cao, D. Shvartsman, E. A. Silva and D. J. Mooney, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 694–700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shao, H. Zhang, J. R. Rajian, D. L. Chamberland, P. S. Sherman, C. A. Quesada, A. E. Koch, N. A. Kotov and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8967–8973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Van-Assche, V. Huygelen, M. J. Crabtree and C. Antoniades, Curr. Pharm. Des., 2011, 17, 4210–4223 CrossRef CAS .
C. Antoniades, C. Psarros, D. Tousoulis, C. Bakogiannis, C. Shirodaria and C. Stefanadis, Curr. Drug Delivery, 2010, 7, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Chaffer and R. A. Weinberg, Science, 2011, 331, 1559–1564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schroeder, D. A. Heller, M. M. Winslow, J. E. Dahlman, G. W. Pratt, R. Langer, T. Jacks and D. G. Anderson, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2012, 12, 39–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Weintraub, Nature, 2013, 495, S14–S16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Niidome, M. Yamagata, Y. Okamoto, Y. Akiyama, H. Takahashi, T. Kawano, Y. Katayama and Y. Niidome, J. Controlled Release, 2006, 114, 343–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma and V. Chechik, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14432–14437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. H. Lee and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3263–3267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. K. Shipton, J. Ryan, E. D. Kaufman, S. Franzen and D. L. Feldheim, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 2221–2229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Manson, D. Kumar, B. J. Meenan and D. Dixon, Gold Bull., 2011, 44, 99–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, L. Bao, C. Zhang, J. Lin, T. Luo, D. Yang, M. He, Z. Lia, G. Gao, B. Gao, S. Fuc and D. Cui, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 9796–9809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Alper and K. Hamad-Schifferli, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3786–3789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Li, X. Jiang, Y. Ji, X. Wu, L. Xu, Y. Qiu, K. Zhao, T. Wei, Y. Li, Y. Zhao and C. Chen, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 772–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wirtz, K. Konstantopoulos and P. C. Searson, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2011, 11, 512–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. I. Galanzha, E. Shashkov, M. Sarimollaoglu, K. E. Beenken, A. G. Basnakian, M. E. Shirtliff, J.-W. Kim, M. S. Smeltzer and V. P. Zharov, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e45557 CAS .
J.-W. Kim, E. I. Galanzha, D. A. Zaharoff, R. J. Griffin and V. P. Zharov, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2013, 10, 813–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Stern, J. B. Hall, L. L. Yu, L. J. Wood, G. F. Paciotti, L. Tamarkin, S. E. Long and S. E. McNeil, J. Controlled Release, 2010, 146, 164–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Davda, M. Jain, S. K. Batra, P. R. Gwilt and D. H. Robinson, Int. Immunopharmacol., 2008, 8, 401–413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Johnson, S. Decker, D. Zaharevitz, L. V. Rubinstein, J. M. Venditti, S. Schepartz, S. Kalyandrug, M. Christian, S. Arbuck, M. Hollingshead and E. A. Sausville, Br. J. Cancer, 2001, 84, 1424–1431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Oberdorster, J. Intern. Med., 2010, 267, 89–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cheng, A. A. Zaki, J. Z. Hui, V. R. Muzykantov and A. Tsourkas, Science, 2012, 338, 903–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Brolo, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 709–713 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, A. B. Khanikaev, R. Adato, N. Arju, A. A. Yanik, H. Altug and G. Shvets, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 69–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-L. Lee, S.-H. Wu, C.-W. Lee and P.-K. Wei, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 24530–24539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Cetin and H. Altug, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9989–9995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Yanik, A. E. Cetin, M. Huang, A. Artar, S. H. Mousavi, A. Khanikaev, J. H. Connor, G. Shvets and H. Altug, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 11784–11789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lukyanchuk, N. I. Zheludev, S. A. Maier, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, H. Giessen and C. t. Chong, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 707–715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Fan, C. Wu, K. Bao, J. Bao, R. Bardhan, N. J. Halas, V. N. Manoharan, P. Nordlander, G. Shvets and F. Capasso, Science, 2010, 328, 1135–1138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Lassiter, H. Sobhani, M. W. Knight, W. S. Mielczarek, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1058–1062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Zhao, M. A. Bichelberger, D. Y. Colin, R. Robitaille, J. N. Pelletier and J.-F. Masson, Analyst, 2012, 137, 4742–4750 RSC .
W.-C. Law, K.-T. Yong, A. Baev and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4858–4864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, R. Duan, H. Yang, X. Luo and M. Xi, Int. J. Nanomed., 2012, 7, 2921–2928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, H. Sobhani, J. B. Lassitter, R. Bardhan, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2694–2701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, C. Glaus, R. Laforest, Q. Zhang, M. Yang, M. Gidding, M. J. Welch and Y. Xia, Small, 2010, 6, 811–817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xie, P. Diagaradjane, A. A. Deorukhkar, B. Goins, A. Bao, W. T. Phillips, Z. Wang, J. Schwartz and S. Krishnan, Int. J. Nanomed., 2011, 6, 259–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Melancon, A. Elliott, X. Ji, A. Shetty, Z. Yang, M. Tian, B. Taylor, R. J. Stafford and C. Li, Invest. Radiol., 2011, 46, 132–140 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ke, J. Wang, Z. Dai, Y. Jin, E. Qu, Z. Xing, C. Guo, X. Yue and J. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3017–3021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, X. Liang, S. Tong, G. Bao, Q. Ren and Z. Dai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 815–822 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Fales, H. Yuan and T. Vo-Dinh, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12186–12190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Ma, M. D. Feldman, J. M. Tam, A. S. Paranjape, K. K. Cherukuri, T. A. Larson, J. O. Tam, D. R. Ingram, V. Paramita, J. W. Villard, J. T. Jenkins, T. Wang, G. D. Clarke, R. Asmis, K. Sokolov, B. Chandrasekar, T. E. Milner and K. P. Johnston, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2686–2696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Wagner, N. A. Delk, E. Y. Lukianova-Hleb, J. H. Hafner, M. C. Farach-Carson and D. O. Lapotko, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 7567–7574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, Y. Y. Jeong and S. Jon, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3689–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jang, J.-Y. Park, C.-H. Tung, I.-H. Kim and Y. Choi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1086–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-S. Kuo, C.-N. Chang, Y.-T. Chang, M.-H. Yang, Y.-H. Chien, S.-J. Chen and C.-S. Yeh, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 2771–2775 CrossRef .
D.-W. Wang, X.-M. Zhu, S.-F. Lee, H.-M. Chan, H.-W. Li, S. K. Kong, J. C. Yu, C. H. K. Cheng, Y.-X. J. Wang and K. C.-F. Leung, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2934–2942 RSC .
R. Guo, L. Zhang, H. Qian, R. Li, X. Jiang and B. Liu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5428–5434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Maestro, P. Haro-González, M. Carmen, M. C. Iglesias-de la Cruz, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, Á. Juarranz, J. G. Solé and D. Jaque, Nanomedicine, 2013, 8, 379–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Joseph A. Webb	Joseph A. Webb received his B.S. degree in Biochemistry from Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, in 2010 and is currently pursuing a Ph.D. in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at Vanderbilt University under the guidance of Professor Rizia Bardhan. His research interests are the design of anisotropic plasmonic nanostructures and their use in theranostic nanomedicine, and paper-based biodiagnostics.
Rizia Bardhan	Rizia Bardhan is an Assistant Professor in the department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at Vanderbilt University. She received her Ph.D. in Chemistry from Rice University under the supervision of Prof. Naomi J. Halas. She joined Vanderbilt after a postdoctoral position at the Molecular Foundry in Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA. Her research interests are focused on design, characterization, and applications of plasmonic nanostructures in biodiagnostics, nanomedicine, solar energy conversion, and metamaterials. She was the recipient of the Forbes “Top 30 Under 30: Rising Stars of Science and Innovation” Award in 2011 for her work in plasmonics.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation showing the use of plasmonic nanostructures conjugated with multiple therapeutic and diagnostic agents (center) for targeting cancer cells via antibodies on the nanostructure surface (top left), for cancer cell imaging (top right),30 for cancer treatment showing complete eradication of tumor in mice after photothermal therapy (bottom left),174 and for theranostics which enables a single plasmonic entity to deliver both therapeutic and diagnostic functionalities (bottom right).280 Copyright 2008 and 2009 AACR Publishing and 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM and TEM micrographs of gold nanostructures of various shapes and sizes: (a) nanoparticles, (b) nanorods,20 (c) nanobipyramids,16 (d) hollow interior nanosemishells,19 (e) hollow interior nanocages,18 (f) hematite core/Au shell nanorice,15 (g) nanostars, (h) silica core/Au shell nanoshells, and (i) nanocubes. The nanoparticle, nanostars, nanoshells, and nanocubes were designed in our laboratory. Copyright 2008, 2013, 2009, and 2012 ACS Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 3  Tunability of plasmon resonances achieved by varying the size of (a) nanostars designed in our laboratory, (b) nanorods,35 (c) nanocages,21 and (d) nanoshells.94 Copyright 2010 IOP Publishing, 2007 Nature Publishing, and 2004 TCRT Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic describing the principle of photothermal light to heat conversion by plasmonic nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TPL image of nanostar conjugated with wheat-germ agglutinin and incubated with invasive ductal tumor. The blue and orange colors are from Hoescht 33342 and FM 1-43FX dyes respectively. The nanostars appear as bright spots. (b) The quadratic dependence of TPL intensity on the Pex from gold nanostar solutions of two different sizes. (c and d) TPL imaging through a dorsal window chamber (inset) on a nude mouse. (c) With nanostars, tissue vasculature was visible under 5% transmission with minimal background fluorescence. (d) Without nanostars, it required 20% transmission to see the vessels. The blue and green colors were from the collagen and blood. Scale bar: 100 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2012 IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 6  Representative bioluminescent images (with the excitation filter closed and emission filter open) of a mouse bearing EMT-6 tumors after tail vain injection of the PEGylated 198Au-doped AuNCs (64 μCi per mouse). The images were taken at 0, 0.25, 2, 6, 24, and 48 h post injection, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2013 ACS Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 7  GNS conjugated with SERS tags for diagnostic imaging. (a) Raman map of 10 different commercially purchased SERS nanoparticles injected in a nude mouse. Arbitrary colors have been assigned to each unique SERS nanoparticle batch injected. Adapted from ref. 147. Copyright 2009 NAS Publishing. (b) In vivo distinction of three SERS-coded nanorod populations. Athymic (nu/nu) mice were subcutaneously injected with each SERS-coded nanorods in distinct locations, and Raman spectra were recorded and compared to a region of native tissue. The Raman molecules are color coded and clearly identified. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 8  
In vivo anti-tumor effect of Au-TNF nanoparticles activated by pulsed laser at 690 nm wavelength. (a) Relative tumor volume increase after treatment with laser alone and laser with Au-TNF or Au-PEG at 8 h post i.v. injection of nanoparticles. (b) Tumor images of different mouse groups. Each group contained 5 mice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 9  Therapeutic efficacy of nanorods for drug delivery. (a) Relative tumor volume after treatment administration in different groups (n = ∼6 to 9) was measured. Mice received either liposomal DOX (2.5 mg kg−1) or saline in combination with nanorods (GNR) at 5 pmol kg−1 of rods; 48 h later, mice received NIR irradiation with 808 nm laser at 0.5 W cm−2 for 10 min. (b) Percent survival for different treatment groups (n = ∼6 to 9). Mantel–Cox analysis indicated that TSL + GNR + NIR light was significantly different from all other groups (p < 0.0001). In vivo apoptosis imaging shows higher accumulation and retention of apoptosis marker Annexin-Vivo 750. (c) Representative in vivo images 24 h after Annexin-Vivo administration for different treatment groups. (d) Different groups of tumor-bearing animals, 18 h post-NIR irradiation, were administered Annexin-Vivo 750 i.v. and imaged 24 h later. Fluorescence intensity acquired in photons/s was quantified by drawing a region of interest around the tumor. The resulting radiance flux was then normalized by each animal's tumor volume measured using calipers. TSL: thermosensitive liposomes, NTSL: nonthermosensitive liposome. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2011 ACS Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation of a nanoshell-poly-L-lysine (NS-PLL)-based therapeutic siRNA/ssDNA delivery system. The negatively charged phosphate backbone of the siRNA/ssDNA (red) is electrostatically attached to the cationic peptide (blue), which consists of 1 cysteine, 1 tyrosine, 1 serine, and 50 lysine amino acids. Upon laser irradiation, the siRNA/ssDNA is released. (b and d) Thermal and laser-triggered release of ssDNA from an NS-PLL vector. Thermal release (red circles) and light release (black squares) of (b) short ssDNA (18 bases), (c) phosphorothioate-modified short ssDNA (18 bases), and (d) long ssDNA (50 bases). (e and f) Downregulation of GFP in H1299 GFP/RFP cell line by antisense ssDNA and siRNA using NS-PLL. Percent GFP/RFP fluorescence as a function of time with and without laser treatment for NS-PLL carrying (e) antisense ssDNA and (f) siRNA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2012 ACS Publishing.	 


SiO2/Au/Fe3O4 nanoshells	MRI, NIR fluorescence	Photothermal	SKBR3 breast cancer	
23, 81

SiO2/Au nanoshells	PET	Photothermal	OVCAR3 ovarian cancer	
24

U87 human glioblastoma	
281

Fe3O4/SiO2/Au nanoshells	MRI	Photothermal	A431 human epithelial cancer	
282

Polymer/Au nanoshell	Ultrasound	Photothermal	HeLa cervical cancer	
283

Micelle/Au nanoshell	MRI	Light induced drug release	HeLa cervical cancer	
284

Hollow Au nanospheres	PAT	Photothermal	U87 human glioblastoma transfected with luciferase gene	
38

Nanostars	Two-photon fluorescence	Photothermal	SKBR3 breast cancer	
36

SERS	ROS generation	BT549 breast cancer	
285

Nanoroses	MRI, dark-field scattering	Photothermal	Primary peritoneal macrophages	
286

Au nanoparticle–nanobubbles	Dark-field scattering	Photothermal	C4-2B prostate cancer	
287

Au nanoparticles	CT imaging	Drug delivery	PC3 prostate cancer	
288

PAT	Photothermal	SCK breast carcinoma	
169

Au nanorods	SERS	Photothermal	HeLa cervical cancer	
149

NIR fluorescence	Photodynamic, photothermal	SCC7 squamous cell carcinoma	
289

Two-photon fluorescence	Drug delivery	A549 human lung cancer	
235

NIR fluorescence	Photodynamic, photothermal	A549 human lung cancer	
290

SERS, NIR fluorescence	Photodynamic	HeLa cervical cancer	
236

X-ray, CT	Radiation, photothermal	MGC803 gastric cancer	
257

MRI	Photothermal	KB human epidermoid oral carcinoma	
291

Dark field, fluorescence	Drug delivery, photothermal	LoVo human colorectal cancer	
292

Dark field	Photothermal	A375 human umbilical vein cancer	
177

Fluorescence	Photothermal	HeLa cervical cancer	
293

PET	Drug delivery	U87MG human malignant glioma	
132


 	Fig. 11  Theranostic efficacy of nanoshells conjugated with Fe3O4 nanocrystals, NIR dye ICG, and anti-HER2 antibodies. (a) MR image of HER2-positive SKBR3 breast cancer cells suspended in 0.5% agarose after incubating with theranostic nanoshell–anti-HER2 conjugates. (b) Maximum intensity projection of 64 × 128 × 64 pixel threshold T2 maps of the images corresponding to (a). (c) Fluorescence images of SKBR3 cells showing theranostic nanoshells binding on cell surface (red). The nucleus is stained with DAPI (blue), and the cytoplasm is stained with secondary antibody-Alexa-fluor 488 (green). (d) Photothermal ablation of cells incubated with theranostic nanoshells–anti-HER2 conjugates and treated with NIR laser at 808 nm. Live cells are stained green with calcein and dead cells are stained red with PI and laser spot is shown in white circle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (e) Theranostic nanoshell delivery in vivo observed with NIR fluorescence imaging of mice with HER-2 low expressing (control) MDAMB231 xenografts (top) and BT474AZ xenografts (bottom) at 0.3–72 h post-injection. (f) T2-weighted MRI images of MDAMB231 xenografts (top) and BT474AZ xenografts (bottom) pre-injection, 0 h, and 4–72 h post-injection. The tumor is marked with a red circle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2010 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of mesoporous silica-coated nanorods (Au@SiO2) as a multifunctional theranostic platform for dual modal chemo-hyperthermia cancer therapy. (b) TEM images of Au@SiO2. (c) The effects of NIR-laser irradiation on lysosomal membrane integrity determined by acridine orange staining. Human lung cancer cells (A549) are incubated with Au@SiO2-DOX and irradiated by a NIR laser (790 nm, 48 W cm−2) for 8 min resulting in lysosomal membrane disruption. (d) Differences in viability of A549 cells irradiated by NIR laser for 8 min (Au@SiO2) and for 3, 4, and 8 min (Au@SiO2–DOX), determined by CCK-8 assay. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic representation and (d) IVUS image of the tissue mimicking phantom. The dynamic ranges of IVUS and IVPA images were 50 and 17 dB, respectively. The IVPA images of the same cross-section of the phantom were taken at (b) 532 nm and (e) 680 nm wavelength. The combined IVUS and IVPA images of the phantom at (c) 532 nm wavelength and (f) 680 nm wavelength indicating the origin of the photoacoustic responses in IVPA images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2009 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 14  Different fates and effects of Au NRs in a cancer cell, normal cell and stem cell due to distinct pathways for cellular trafficking. Reproduced with permission from ref. 259. Copyright 2011 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM image of (a) Fanoshells ensemble of ∼150 nm overall diameter and (b) a single Fanoshell. (c) Schematic representation of Fanoshells, where a displaced spherical nanoparticle core (by Δ nm) within a spherical core–shell nanoparticle represents the nanoparticle irregularities. (d) Experimental extinction spectra of (i) Au nanoparticles of radius r1 = 40 nm, (ii) Au/SiO2 nanoparticles, r2 = 55 nm, and Fanoshells where (iii) r3 = 65 nm, (iv) r3 = 68 nm, (v) r3 = 73 nm, and (vi) r3 = 86 nm. (e) Theoretical spectra corresponding to the experimental spectra from part d. The spectra are color-coordinated and offset for clarity. (f) Single particle scattering spectra of Fanoshells. Unpolarized (black), s-polarized (green), and p-polarized (red) spectra are shown. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 and 279. Copyright 2010 ACS Publications.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
