Photoinduced charge-transfer dynamics simulations in noncovalently bonded molecular aggregates   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP00231E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP00231E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 14840-14849Photoinduced charge-transfer dynamics simulations in noncovalently bonded molecular aggregates†

        
          
            Carlos R. 
            Medrano
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. Belén 
            Oviedo
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Cristián G. 
            Sánchez
          
        
      *a
aDepartamento de Matemática y Física, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, INFIQC, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Ciudad Universitaria, X5000HUA, Córdoba, Argentina. E-mail: cgsanchez@fcq.unc.edu.ar
bDepartment of Chemical & Environmental Engineering and Materials, Science and Engineering Program, University of California, Riverside, California 92521, USA
Received 
      12th January 2016
    , Accepted 10th May 2016First published on 11th May 2016AbstractThe rational design of new materials as prototype systems for organic solar cells remains challenging. Perylene diimide has emerged as a promising material to replace fullerene derivatives because of its synthetic flexibility, leading to the manipulation of their optical properties. As a result of their fused aromatic core that favors π–π stacking interactions, the aggregation of these molecules can reach highly ordered nanostructures as one-dimensional nanofibers, with a fast photoinduced charge transfer mechanism. In this article, we present an atomistic description of the photoexcited exciton dynamics in noncovalently bonded perylene diimides by time integration of the electron density in the presence of external time varying electric fields. We show that our approach is able to capture and explain the physics that underlies the charge transport mechanism through perylene diimide aggregates.
1 Introduction
Over the past decades, organic semiconductor materials have received increasing technological interest in the fabrication of field effect transistors (FETs),1 organic photovoltaics (OPVs)2 and organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs).3 This interest is given by its numerous advantages such as easy and low cost of production, mechanical flexibility, tunable optical properties, among others.4
The most common design of an organic solar cell (OSC) consists of a blend (bulk heterojunction, BHJ) based on a conjugated polymer electron donor (D) mixed with an electron acceptor material (A). This type of OSC is being intensively investigated in order to increase their efficiency achieving above 10% power-conversion efficiencies (PCEs).5,6 The basic operating principle of an OSC can be schematically described by the photon absorption and the creation of an exciton (electron–hole pair); followed by the exciton diffusion to the donor/acceptor interface and its dissociation creating a charge-transfer state; finally, the dissociation of the charge-transfer complex occurs leading to the generation of free charge carriers, where these free charges are transported within the organic semiconductor to the respective electrodes.7,8 Efficient photogeneration of free charge carriers requires an efficient dissociation of the exciton at the heterojunction or at the interface between p-type and n-type organic semiconductors.
Fullerenes and their derivatives, such as [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM), have been the dominant electron acceptor materials in BHJ OSCs, due to their large electron affinity, high electron mobility and isotropy of charge transport.9,10 However, these materials have some drawbacks like their inherently low LUMO energy levels compared with those of common donors resulting in energy loss,2 weak absorption in the visible spectral breadth, and band gap variability, which are difficult to tune in fullerene systems by chemical modification.10 As an alternative to fullerene based acceptor materials, organic molecules based on non-fullerene acceptor materials have received attention in the past decades, because they can be easily modified by tailoring the photofunctional backbone in order to tune the absorption spectrum and HOMO/LUMO energies.11
3,4,9,10-Perylenetetracarboxylic acid diimides (PDIs) and their derivatives (Fig. 1) are n-type organic semiconductors with high thermal, chemical and photochemical stabilities.2 In addition, these molecules present a high molar absorption coefficient in the visible region, strong electron-accepting ability and high electron mobility. By chemical modification in the molecule, their solubility and optical properties can be modulated. Given these outstanding chemical and physical properties, PDIs are a promising class of non-fullerene acceptor materials.11 On the other hand, their rigid, fused aromatic core favours π–π intermolecular interactions imparting very ordered heterojunction structures and they are known to form one dimensional (1D) nanostructures.12 These nanofibers offer many potential advantages in developing more efficient OSCs due to their larger exciton diffusion length, ultra-large D/A interface for exciton dissociation, and the controllable nanoscale morphology compared to BHJs based on fullerene acceptors.13,14
 Fig. 1  (left) Individual molecular structures of 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic acid diimide (PDI) and carbazole derivatives. (right) A1 + D1 complex, where each component of the complex is interacting noncovalently through the hydrocarbon side chains. 
In a recent work by Zang and co-workers,15 a simple method was reported for the assembly of organic nanofibril heterojunctions based on the interfacial engineering of carbazole derivatives coating onto PDI derivatives (Fig. 1). Both derivatives have long alkyl chains where these chains have a strong hydrophobic interaction. In particular, they reported a high photoconductivity and fast photoresponse with a large on/off ratio. From the experimental data, the authors suggested that the high photocurrent is due to the presence of the alkyl groups where the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers are prevented.
In the present work, we report a detailed analysis of the charge transfer process between different dyes and PDI aggregates through fully atomistic electron dynamics simulations. These simulations are based on real-time time-dependent density functional tight-binding (RT-TDDFTB) model, which describes the system under non-equilibrium conditions. In particular, we shed light into the photoinduced charge transfer mechanism in these noncovalent bonded molecular nanostructures. We demonstrate that the alkyl side chains work as a molecular wire that tunes the interfacial electron transfer.
2 Computational methods
The description of the electronic structure of carbazole, PDI and carbazole + PDI complex were described by a self-consistent density functional tight-binding Hamiltonian.16 The method is based on the expansion of the Kohn–Sham energy functional up to second order with respect to a reference electron density for the neutral atoms. This method may be considered as an intermediate step between a full ab initio calculation, where exchange and correlation energy are accounted for in a simpler semi-empirical method. The DFTB+ code17 was used to obtain the optimization of the geometries as well as the calculations of the Hamiltonian, overlap matrix and the initial single electron density matrix. For the calculations performed here, we have used the mio-1-1 parameter set for elements H, O, N, C and S.16,18,19
This method is extended to the time-dependent SCC-DFTB (TD-DFTB)20 to obtain the excited state properties of the system by applying a perturbation in the shape of a Dirac delta pulse to the initial ground-state density matrix previously obtained. After pulse application, the density matrix evolves in time and its evolution can be calculated by time integration of the Liouville–von Neumann equation of motion in the non-orthogonal basis, according to eqn (1): (1)where  is the single electron density matrix, S−1 is the inverse of the overlap matrix and Ĥ is the SCC-DFTB Hamiltonian. Within the linear response regime, when the applied electric field is small, the response is linear and the dipole moment is given by eqn (2): (2)where α(t − τ) is the polarizability along the axis over which the external field E(τ) is applied. The absorption spectrum is proportional to the imaginary part of the frequency dependent polarizability (eqn (3)), obtained from the Fourier transform of the time-dependent dipole moment, after the deconvolution of the applied electric field. (3)
This method has been successfully used to calculate the optical properties of photosynthetic pigments,20,21 DNA intercalation complexes22 and organic molecules adsorbed onto TiO2 nanoparticles.23 In these previous reports we showed that TD-DFTB based spectra showed a remarkable agreement with experimental results.
Recently, our group has studied the charge injection mechanism in dye–nanoparticle complexes24–26 in the time domain, leading to good agreement with experimental results.26 The dynamics were triggered by application of a continuous laser-type perturbation in tune with the excitation energy of interest. The charge transfer mechanism was monitored by computing the time-dependent Mulliken atomic charges. One of the advantages of our approach, based on the density matrix formalism along with the use of a self-consistent Hamiltonian, is that the method includes the explicit description of electron–hole interactions.
For the visualization of molecular structures, movies and “coloring method” OVITO27 and VMD28,29 packages were employed.
3 Results and discussion
The simulated absorption spectra of carbazole and PDI are displayed in Fig. 2 and the values of the lowest absorption energies for each molecule are shown in Table 1. The absorption spectrum of each molecule was obtained after the deconvolution of the time-dependent dipole moment with the external field. The time-dependent dipole moments were calculated by a real-time propagation of the one-electron density matrix after the application of an initial perturbation in the shape of a delta Dirac; the intensity of this perturbation was 0.001 V Å−1 so the simulations are within the linear response regime. The time propagation of the density matrix is calculated by the numerical integration of eqn (1) with a time step of 0.0048 fs and the simulation times were extended by at least 100 fs. From Table 1 a good agreement can be observed for the absorption energies of the calculated and experimental values. This first analysis of the absorption spectra is important to check the reliability of the quantum dynamics performed by this method.
 Fig. 2  Simulated absorption spectra for carbazole (a) and PDI (b). 
Table 1 Comparison of the absorption wavelength (nm) for carbazole and PDI in vacuum obtained by RT-TDDFTB simulations with the experimental values found in the literature. The table shows the two longest-wavelength peaks for each molecule




Carbazole
PDI


Exp. value
RT-TDDFTB
Exp. value
RT-TDDFTB




33530
323
52631
532


32330
300
49131
510




Next, we build the donor + acceptor complex composed of D1 and A1 (see Fig. 1) and we optimize the full geometry using London dispersion forces32 in order to accurately describe the weak intermolecular interactions between the alkyl chains. Then, we calculate the absorption spectrum of the entire system as described above. Fig. 3 shows the optical spectrum of D1 + A1 complex and the spectra of the separate molecules. From this figure we can observe that the absorption spectrum of the complex is the sum of the donor and acceptor spectra, despite the quantum nature of this calculation, where the state of the complex is the tensor product between the states of the donor and the acceptor, instead of the sum of the individual molecular states. This is the result of the weak coupling between the alkyl chains, hence a small deviation of the absorption energies can be observed and the main optical properties of each compound are not affected in the aggregate state.
 Fig. 3  Calculated absorption spectrum of D1 + A1 (black, solid line), D1 (red, dash-dot line) and A1 (green, dashed line). 
Zang and co-workers15 proposed that the electron transfer in these aggregates via visible photostimulation is caused by the proximity between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor and acceptor molecules, where the HOMO of D1 is slightly above the HOMO of A1. When the acceptor is excited, a hole in the HOMO is generated hence an electron from the HOMO of D1 can be injected to the acceptor. To corroborate this approach, we have calculated the HOMO and LUMO energies for D1 and A1 (see Table 2). Although what can be inferred from ground state calculations correlates with experimental observations, because of the non-equilibrium nature of the charge transfer process, quantum dynamic calculations are more suitable and provide a detailed picture of the mechanism. It is worth mentioning that the charge-transfer dynamics shown in this work, as a result of the explicit interaction between the monochromatic electric field and the aggregate, does not include nuclear motion coupled to the electron dynamics. In particular, the decoherence effect inducing irreversible charge separation and a long-lived charge-transfer state is completely absent in our model. The inclusion of nuclear dynamics in order to study the charge separation processes in light-harvesting molecular triads and in dye-sensitized solar cells has been recently formulated in ref. 33 and 34. A lot of information can however be obtained from the relatively short time dynamics that can be studied without including nuclear motion. As mentioned in the methods section, our group has studied the charge injection mechanism in dye–nanoparticle complexes in the time domain, leading to good agreement with experimental results.24–26 In this context, this work sheds new light on the photoinduced charge transfer process that underpins these novel organic nanofibril heterojunctions. Fig. 4 displays the evolution of the Mulliken charge distribution in D1 and A1, upon the photoexcitation of the D1 + A1 complex with a sinusoidal time-dependent electric field perturbation at 533 nm and with an intensity of 0.01 V Å−1. At this frequency, the acceptor molecule is absorbing the energy from the field (see Fig. 3) and from Fig. 4 we observed that the A1 molecule becomes increasingly negatively charged as a function of time. It is important to note that the net charge transfer process begins after 40 fs; this can be interpreted as the A1 molecule requiring a time interval to populate the excited state (depopulate the ground state) and thereby the D1 molecule can begin to transfer charge to this state. It is worth noting that this charge behavior throughout time occurs in a noncovalent bonded system. In order to sample the complex configuration space we have used a Born–Oppenheimer molecular dynamics scheme to sample the configuration space of A1 + D1, in order to study the dependence of the aggregate geometry. The simulation was performed with the DFTB+ code,17 for 25 ps with a time step of 0.25 fs at 500 K. This choice of temperature provides better configuration sampling since the molecules are quite rigid. We have calculated the RMS of the trajectory giving an average value of 0.37 Å; this is the average atomic motion with respect to their equilibrium positions at the configurations obtained. Then we chose fifteen random configurations from an equilibrated trajectory and computed the electron dynamics for each sample. Finally, the charge dynamics were computed as an average of the results obtained for each of these configurations and the results are shown in Fig. 5. The inner lines correspond to the mean charge of the donor (red) and the mean charge of the acceptor (blue). The translucent surface represents the standard deviation of the means (as  ± σ). The charge dynamics calculation in Fig. 6 clearly shows that there is a net charge transfer from the donor to the acceptor, independently of the molecular configuration. Hence, the results shown are not due to a particular molecular configuration and are independent of the aggregates’ geometry to the extent explored by the performed sampling.
Table 2 Highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energies in eV for D1 and A1




 
HOMO
LUMO




D1
−5.32
−1.87


A1
−5.91
−4.19




 Fig. 4  Charge evolution of D1 + A1 in response to a laser illumination at 533 nm and with an intensity of 0.01 V Å−1. 
 Fig. 5  Charge evolution for an ensemble of D1 + A1 configurations in response to a laser illumination with an intensity of 0.01 V Å−1. The inner lines correspond to the mean charge of the acceptor and donor. The translucent surface represents the standard deviation of the ensemble mean (as  ± σ). 
 Fig. 6  Charge vs. t for the system donor + acceptor without hydrocarbon chains. 
Another point that was discussed in Zang and co-workers’15 article was that the alkyl chains not only enable effective adsorption of donor molecules on the acceptor molecules but they might play an important role in the efficiency of the charge transfer mechanism of these systems. For this reason we have studied the influence of the alkyl chain in the charge transfer process. First we have calculated the Mulliken charge change with respect to the ground state value in A1 and D1 without the hydrocarbon chains (R = H, see Fig. 1), the distance between the molecules is the same as for the A1 + D1 aggregate when a sinusoidal electric field is applied to the entire complex. This situation is represented in Fig. 6, where no net charge transfer occurs, implying that the hydrophobic interaction between alkyl side-chains enables an effective charge transfer process between the donor and the acceptor.
Later, we studied the influence of different substituents in the hydrocarbon chains. We began studying the variation of the charge transfer process in the A1 + D1 complex when the C7 position of the donor chain (Fig. 1) is replaced by a more electronegative substituent. In Fig. 7 the time-evolution of the Mulliken charges are represented for different D + A complexes. This figure shows that a greater charge transfer occurs in the complex without any substituents; this is A1 + D1, where the alkyl chain of the donor and the acceptor have the same chemical structure. When the C7 position is replaced by an oxygen or sulphur atom, or a double bond is inserted between positions C7 and C8 in the hydrocarbon chain, in all cases a significant decrease of the charge transfer is observed. The decrease in the value of the transferred charge of the D + A complex with substituted chains can be explained by the geometry and overlap between the atomic orbitals. Each substituent, either an oxygen (or sulphur) atom or a double bond, has a distorted tetrahedral geometry respect to the C sp3 hybridization. This distortion causes a decrease in the overlap between the atomic orbitals, resulting in a decrease of the charge transfer. Furthermore, within the complexes with a substituted chain, the ether has the greater charge transfer, followed by the thioether and finally the double bond. This trend agrees with the substituents’ electronegativity order; the oxygen atom is the most electronegative, so it attracts more electrons from the core of the donor to the alkyl chain, and consequently there is a greater proportion of charge to be transferred to the acceptor molecule.
 Fig. 7  Charge transferred as a function of time for different aggregates with different substituents in the alkyl chain of the donor. 
The same study was performed for the acceptor alkyl chain. Fig. 8 shows the variation of the charge transfer with respect to different substitutions made in the hydrocarbon chain. As in the previous case, the presence of a substituent on the alkyl chain reduces the charge transfer significantly, but we observed an inverse trend. The less electronegative substituent (double bond) has the greater charge transfer compared with oxygen and sulphur atoms. This implies that a more electronegative acceptor alkyl chain would retain the charge from the donor for a longer period of time. Based on these results, we can establish that a substituent in any chain of the donor + acceptor complex works like a resistance reducing the charge that can be transferred from the donor to the acceptor.
 Fig. 8  Charge transferred as a function of time for different aggregates with different substituents in the alkyl chain of the acceptor. 
We studied the photoinduced charge-transfer process for the A1 + D1 complex with hydrocarbon chains between 9 and 18 carbon atoms (for both acceptor and donor). Fig. 9 shows the charge of the acceptor as a function of time for all chain lengths. The figure shows that the largest chains (18 and 17 C atoms) have the lowest performance. This is reasonable since the long chains represent a large tunnel barrier for the electron to surmount. Then, as the number of carbon atoms decrease, the amount of charge transferred at longer times increases, showing a maximum for the system with 15 C atom chains. The shorter systems are more efficient than the longest but always less than the 15 carbon atom chain. Our reasoning is that this behaviour is the result of two opposing trends. On the one hand, with shorter side chains, the chromophores are closer and the coupling is larger, resulting in greater charge transfer from increased speed of formation of the electron–hole pair. On the other hand, closer distances between donor and acceptor ease electron–hole recombination, resulting in lower charge transfer. Taking this into account, the system with 15 C atoms chains appears to be the optimal chain length for the complex. The system with 11 C atoms chains is an exception to this rule.
 Fig. 9  Charge vs. t for the system A1 + D1 with different length chains (from 9 C atoms until 18 C atoms). 
With the purpose to advance the understanding of the effective charge delocalization in these types of aggregate, we extended the system to include another acceptor molecule (see Fig. 10). Fig. 10 shows the charge as a function of time for each component of the system (A1 (1), A1 (2) and D1). This figure shows that the charge transfer process begins after 50 fs; a similar behavior was found in the previous system (Fig. 4). Also, from this plot, it is possible to distinguish four steps for such a process. During the first step for 50 < t < 80 fs, the charge begins to flow from the donor (D1, green line) to the first acceptor molecule (A1 (1), black line) and there is no variation of the charge in the second acceptor molecule (A1 (2), red line). Then the second step occurs for 80 < t < 100 fs where a change in the slope of the charge function for both acceptor molecules is evidenced. The charge of A1 (1) begins to increase acquiring positive values, meanwhile A1 (2) acquires negative values indicating a net charge transfer from A1 (1) to A1 (2). For 100 < t < 118 fs, the charge dynamics A1 (1) and A1 (2) reach a maximum value and then both dynamics are reversed, A1 (1) begins to accept charge from A1 (2), where at t = 118 fs both molecule have the same charge. Finally, after t > 118 fs the charge of A1 (1) oscillates between negative values whereas the charge for A1 (2) oscillates between positive and negatives values. Also, in Fig. 10 the time variation of the Mulliken charges of the donor and the sum of the acceptors is plotted. This is another representation of the charge dynamics which clearly shows a charge injection from the donor into the nanofiber. It is important to note that the hole is located in the donor (D1) while the electron is delocalized over both acceptor molecules.
 Fig. 10  (top) Time dependent variation of the charge for A1 (1), A1 (2) and D1 interacting by London dispersion forces. (middle) The sum of the acceptor charges were performed to see the total charge injection to the nanofibril. (bottom) A1 (1) + A1 (2) + D1 complex. 
Zang and co-workers15 reported that an aggregate of acceptor molecules interacting by π-stacking forces present negligible photocurrent under photostimulation. In order to study the importance of the presence of D1 molecules in the charge transfer mechanism, we performed the same calculation as before but without the D1 molecule (Fig. 11). Fig. 11 shows the charge of A1 (1) and A1 (2) oscillating around zero and the amplitude of the oscillation increases at longer times. This increment of the oscillation amplitudes is due to the application of the continuous laser, where the energy of the entire system is always growing. Since the energy values of the frontier molecular orbitals of each molecule are similar, there is no net driving force that favors the charge transfer mechanism to one molecule or the other, this is characterized by a cyclic variation of the charge through time. It is important to point out the observation of charge recombination in this system. In contrast, the charge recombination in the previous system is reduced for the time simulation window (t = 200 fs) employed in this work. In addition, the magnitude of the charge values for this system is ten times lower than for the system with the D1 molecule. These results imply that the D1 molecule works as an electron injector to the nanofibril and promotes the charge transfer between these molecules.
 Fig. 11  (top) Time dependent variation of the charge for two PDI derivatives. (bottom) Two optimized PDI derivatives illustrating the π–π stacking. 
For a deeper understanding of the influence of the donor molecule in the charge-transfer mechanism, we calculated the full electron dynamics of a D2 molecule (Fig. 1) coupled with two A1 molecules (Fig. 12). Fig. 12 displays the time variation of the Mulliken charges for the A1 (1) + A1 (2) + D2 complex, where each molecule is interacting by London dispersion forces, and a comparison with the A1 (1) + A1 (2) + D1 complex is shown. From this figure, we can observe a net charge transfer to the A1 (2) molecule in both cases although the charge value is larger for the A1 (1) + A1 (2) + D2 complex. Also, we noticed that the mechanism of charge transfer for the A1 (1) + A1 (2) + D2 complex is slightly different from the previous system, where a concerted charge injection from the donor molecule to the second A1 molecule is observed. This can be attributed to the three alkyl chains of D2, where these chains increase the hydrophobic interaction between the A1 molecules. From the analysis of the sum of the acceptors’ charge, it follows that the donor D2 injects more charge to the nanofibril compared with D1 (0.1 a.u. compared to 0.07 a.u. respectively). This result is in accordance with the experimental results reported by Zang and co-workers.15
 Fig. 12  (left) Time dependent variation of the charge for two A1 molecules and D1 (dashed lines) and for two A1 molecules and D2 (solid lines). (middle) The sum of the acceptors’ charge were performed to see the total charge injection to the nanofibril. (right) Optimized A1 (1) + A1 (2) + D2 complex. 
By increasing the number of acceptor molecules, we can analyze the delocalization of the charge through the entire nanofibril. With this in mind, we built a nanofiber of nearly 6 nm in length containing fifteen A1 molecules coupled with a single D2 molecule; the optimized structure is shown in Fig. 13. Also in this figure, the charge dynamics of the individual D2 and the sum of the charges for the A1 acceptor molecules is displayed. As in the smaller system, there is a net charge transfer from the D2 molecule to the nanofibril, but the amount of net charge transferred is higher as a consequence of the system's size, as larger nanofibrils can accept more charge. It is important to note that the time evolution of the charge is slightly different for the largest system. From Fig. 13 we can observe a smooth behavior in the electron dynamics in comparison with the system including only two acceptor molecules (Fig. 12), which is the result of the collective electronic excitations acting in a concerted fashion between the donor and each of the acceptor molecules.
 Fig. 13  (top) Charge evolution over time for the system 15 × A1 + D1. In order to visualize the net charge injection to the nanofibril the sum of the acceptor charges is represented. (bottom) Optimized nanofibril of 15 A1 acceptors coupled with a D2 molecule. 
The charge transfer dynamics for each molecule are shown in Fig. 14 at different time values. This figure shows selected snapshots of the evolution of the Δq(t) during the quantum dynamics simulation (the complete movie can be found in the ESI†), ranging from a positive Δq(t) (blue) to a negative value (red). The green color implies Δq(t) = 0. At t = 0 fs, all molecules are colored green meaning a neutral system. As the external electric field is turned on, at 78.0 fs we can observe that a single molecule of PDI (number 10) is absorbing the energy of the electric field, where this molecule is receiving the charge from molecule number 13. This response is the result of the coupling between the incident electric field vector and the transition dipole moment vector of molecule number 10, where the variation of the charge in such a molecule indicates a larger coupling with the laser in comparison with the other molecules. After 100 fs, it can be seen that the negative charge is increasing in this molecule, where the PDIs of the right (number 13, 14 and 15) are transferring charge to this molecule, which is indicated by the light blue color. The observed asymmetry in the charge transfer can be explained by the electronic coupling between the molecules, where the distance between them is the smallest. During the application of the external field, the electron is located mostly in two PDIs (number 10 and 11), meanwhile the hole is delocalized over the D2 molecule and the PDIs of the ends. Finally, at t = 283.0 fs we can observe a transfer of the negative charge to the next PDI (number 11), where the electron is delocalized over four molecules of PDIs (number 9, 10, 11, and 12). A further observation from Fig. 14 is the large charge in the nanofiber, the electron is localized in the center and the hole is delocalized at the edges of the nanofiber, where a clear interface is created among them, by the presence of neutral molecules (green) that enclose the electron. It is important to point out that the electron transfer across the PDIs take place in a noncovalent system and the π-electrons are involved in the process.
 Fig. 14  Intensity plot of the net charge per molecule at 9 different times, in correspondence with the charge dynamics shown in Fig. 13. 
4 Conclusions
In the present work we have conducted real-time quantum dynamics simulations to describe the primary charge separation process in functionalized molecular aggregates, interacting only by London dispersion forces, in order to provide detailed insights into the experimental observations reported by Zang and co-workers.15
By directly computing the time evolution of the Mulliken charge for a donor–acceptor complex, we have obtained non trivial results for the net charge transfer from donor to acceptor molecule, even when both molecules are not covalently bonded. We analyzed the chemical structure of the alkyl side chain of both acceptor and donor molecules and we found that these alkyl groups work as molecular wires that modulate the intermolecular electron transfer. This evidence agrees with the experimental findings of Zang and co-workers.15
Moreover, it is important to mention that the chemical nature of the donor molecule can enhance the amount of charge injected to the nanofibril. Increasing the van der Waals interactions between the hydrocarbon chains, the time-dependent electron dynamics showed the generation of a stable charge-transfer complex and the recombination of the charge was reduced. By increasing the number of acceptor molecules, the quantum dynamics simulations displayed the electron transport through the nanofiber, and the localization of the hole in the donor molecule as well as in the edges of the nanofiber.
The results presented in this work and in conjunction with the experimental evidence reported by Zang and co-workers,15 contribute to the scientific understanding of the charge transport mechanism in noncovalent molecular aggregates. These results validate our computational method for the design of new photovoltaic materials.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge support by Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET) through grant PIP 112-201101-0092 and wish to thank SeCyT UNC for the funding received. CRM is grateful for studentships from CONICET.
References
S. R. Puniredd, A. Kiersnowski, G. Battagliarin, W. Zajaczkowski, W. W. H. Wong, N. Kirby, K. Müllen and W. Pisula, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 2433 RSC .
P. Sonar, J. P. Fong Lim and K. L. Chan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1558 CAS .
S. Lamansky, P. Djurovich, D. Murphy, F. Abdel-Razzaq, H. E. Lee, C. Adachi, P. E. Burrows, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4304–4312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
J. You, C.-C. Chen, Z. Hong, K. Yoshimura, K. Ohya, R. Xu, S. Ye, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3973–3978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Falke, C. A. Rozzi, D. Brida, M. Maiuri, M. Amato, E. Sommer, A. De Sio, A. Rubio, G. Cerullo, E. Molinari and C. Lienau, Science, 2014, 344, 1001–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He and Y. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 1970–1983 RSC .
Y. Lin and X. Zhan, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 470 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. Lu, L. Ye, C. Zhan, J. Hou, S. Zhang, B. Jiang, Y. Zhao, J. Huang, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Shi, Y. Liu and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5791–5797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zang, Y. Che and J. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1596–1608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. S. Kim, G. Ren and S. a. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 682–732 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hyoung Park, A. R. Carter, L. M. Mier, C.-Y. Kao, S. a. M. Lewis, R. P. Nandyala, Y. Min and A. J. Epstein, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 073301 CrossRef .
Y. Che, H. Huang, M. Xu, C. Zhang, B. R. Bunes, X. Yang and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1087–1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Elstner, D. Porezag, G. Jungnickel, J. Elsner, M. Haugk, T. Frauenheim, S. Suhai and G. Seifert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 7260–7268 CrossRef CAS .
B. Aradi, B. Hourahine and T. Frauenheim, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 5678–5684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Niehaus, M. Elstner, T. Frauenheim and S. Suhai, THEOCHEM, 2001, 541, 185–194 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gaus, Q. Cui and M. Elstner, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2011, 7, 931–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Oviedo, C. F. a. Negre and C. G. Sánchez, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 6706–6711 RSC .
M. B. Oviedo and C. G. Sánchez, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 12280–12285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. N. Primo, M. B. Oviedo, C. G. Sánchez, M. D. Rubianes and G. A. Rivas, Bioelectrochemistry, 2014, 99, 8–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. Fuertes, C. F. a. Negre, M. B. Oviedo, F. P. Bonafé, F. Y. Oliva and C. G. Sánchez, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2013, 25, 115304 CrossRef PubMed .
C. F. a. Negre, V. C. Fuertes, M. B. Oviedo, F. Y. Oliva and C. G. Sánchez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14748–14753 CAS .
M. B. Oviedo, X. Zarate, C. F. A. Negre, E. Schott, R. Arratia-Pérez and C. G. Sánchez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2548–2555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. A. Negre, K. J. Young, M. B. Oviedo, L. J. Allen, C. G. Sánchez, K. N. J. J. B. Benedict, R. H. Crabtree, P. Coppens, G. W. Brudvig and V. S. Batista, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16420–16429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stukowski, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2010, 18, 015012 CrossRef .
W. Humphrey, A. Dalke and K. Schulten, J. Mol. Graphics, 1996, 14, 33–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Stone, MSc thesis, Computer Science Department, University of Missouri-Rolla,  1998 Search PubMed .
H. Walba and G. E. K. Branch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1951, 73, 3341–3348 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Ford and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 6373–6380 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elstner, P. Hobza, T. Frauenheim, S. Suhai and E. Kaxiras, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 114, 5149–5155 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. C. Rego, B. C. Hames, K. T. Mazon and J. O. Joswig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 126–134 CAS .
A. Monti, C. F. a. Negre, V. S. Batista, L. G. C. Rego, H. J. M. de Groot and F. Buda, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2393–2398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp00231eThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (left) Individual molecular structures of 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic acid diimide (PDI) and carbazole derivatives. (right) A1 + D1 complex, where each component of the complex is interacting noncovalently through the hydrocarbon side chains.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Simulated absorption spectra for carbazole (a) and PDI (b).	 


33530	323	52631	532
32330	300	49131	510

 	Fig. 3  Calculated absorption spectrum of D1 + A1 (black, solid line), D1 (red, dash-dot line) and A1 (green, dashed line).	 

D1	−5.32	−1.87
A1	−5.91	−4.19

 	Fig. 4  Charge evolution of D1 + A1 in response to a laser illumination at 533 nm and with an intensity of 0.01 V Å−1.	 

 	Fig. 5  Charge evolution for an ensemble of D1 + A1 configurations in response to a laser illumination with an intensity of 0.01 V Å−1. The inner lines correspond to the mean charge of the acceptor and donor. The translucent surface represents the standard deviation of the ensemble mean (as  ± σ).	 

 	Fig. 6  Charge vs. t for the system donor + acceptor without hydrocarbon chains.	 

 	Fig. 7  Charge transferred as a function of time for different aggregates with different substituents in the alkyl chain of the donor.	 

 	Fig. 8  Charge transferred as a function of time for different aggregates with different substituents in the alkyl chain of the acceptor.	 

 	Fig. 9  Charge vs. t for the system A1 + D1 with different length chains (from 9 C atoms until 18 C atoms).	 

 	Fig. 10  (top) Time dependent variation of the charge for A1 (1), A1 (2) and D1 interacting by London dispersion forces. (middle) The sum of the acceptor charges were performed to see the total charge injection to the nanofibril. (bottom) A1 (1) + A1 (2) + D1 complex.	 

 	Fig. 11  (top) Time dependent variation of the charge for two PDI derivatives. (bottom) Two optimized PDI derivatives illustrating the π–π stacking.	 

 	Fig. 12  (left) Time dependent variation of the charge for two A1 molecules and D1 (dashed lines) and for two A1 molecules and D2 (solid lines). (middle) The sum of the acceptors’ charge were performed to see the total charge injection to the nanofibril. (right) Optimized A1 (1) + A1 (2) + D2 complex.	 

 	Fig. 13  (top) Charge evolution over time for the system 15 × A1 + D1. In order to visualize the net charge injection to the nanofibril the sum of the acceptor charges is represented. (bottom) Optimized nanofibril of 15 A1 acceptors coupled with a D2 molecule.	 

 	Fig. 14  Intensity plot of the net charge per molecule at 9 different times, in correspondence with the charge dynamics shown in Fig. 13.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp00231e

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
