Impact of the donor polymer on recombination via triplet excitons in a fullerene-free organic solar cell   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP03793D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP03793D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 22999-23008Impact of the donor polymer on recombination via triplet excitons in a fullerene-free organic solar cell†

        
          
            Melissa 
            Van Landeghem
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ruben 
            Lenaerts
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Jurgen 
            Kesters
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Wouter 
            Maes
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Etienne 
            Goovaerts
          
        
      *a
aPhysics Department, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium. E-mail: etienne.goovaerts@uantwerpen.be
bInstitute for Materials Research (IMO-IMOMEC), Hasselt University, Agoralaan 1, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium
cImec, Associated Laboratory IMOMEC, Wetenschapspark 1, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium
Received 
      5th July 2019
    , Accepted 3rd October 2019First published on 8th October 2019AbstractThe greater chemical tunability of non-fullerene acceptors enables fine-tuning of the donor–acceptor energy level offsets, a promising strategy towards increasing the open-circuit voltage in organic solar cells. Unfortunately, this approach could open an additional recombination channel for the charge-transfer (CT) state via a lower-lying donor or acceptor triplet level. In this work we investigate such electron and hole back-transfer mechanisms in fullerene-free solar cells incorporating the novel molecular acceptor 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz. The transition to the low-driving force regime is studied by comparing blends with well-established donor polymers P3HT and MDMO-PPV, which allows for variation of the energetic offsets at the donor–acceptor interface. Combining various optical spectroscopic techniques, the CT process and subsequent triplet formation are systematically investigated. Although both back-transfer mechanisms are found to be energetically feasible in both blends, markedly different triplet-mediated recombination processes are observed for the two systems. The kinetic suppression of electron back-transfer in the blend with P3HT suggests that energy losses due to triplet formation on the polymer can be avoided, regardless of favorable energetic alignment.
Introduction
With record efficiencies for single-junction systems now reaching over 15%,1 organic solar cells (OSCs) have demonstrated their potential for future plastic electronics applications. Unlike Si photovoltaic devices, most OSCs rely on a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) between an electron donor and electron acceptor material for photocurrent generation from the bound excitons created in both material domains upon illumination. This process occurs via an intermediate charge-transfer (CT) state or ‘polaron pair’ consisting of the spatially-separated electron and hole, which now reside on either side of the donor–acceptor interface but still experience a Coulomb attraction in the order of several tens to hundreds meV.2,3 Directly after CT, the polaron pair can either dissociate into a fully charge-separated state, for which the binding energy of the CT state has to be overcome, or be involved in a recombination process in which the charges are lost. Although near-unity internal quantum efficiencies have been achieved in several BHJ blends,4 the exact mechanism behind the free charge carrier generation process remains under debate, in particular the role of the energetic offset between the donor and acceptor energy levels. A minimal offset of 0.1–0.3 eV was long thought necessary to drive intermolecular CT,5,6 hence intrinsically limiting the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of OSCs. Yet, recent demonstrations of multiple donor–acceptor combinations with negligible electron transfer losses challenge this perspective.7
In low-driving-force systems, a new charge recombination channel opens up when a lower-lying triplet level becomes energetically accessible from the CT state. When the CT polaron pair originates from a photon absorption event, it is initially in a spin singlet state and therefore direct transition to a donor or acceptor triplet is spin forbidden. Yet, due to the small wave function overlap between the spatially-separated polarons, the associated exchange energy is small and efficient intersystem crossing (ISC) can take place between the near iso-energetic 1CT and 3CT levels.8,9 Moreover, non-geminate recombination between spin-uncorrelated charges also takes place via the CT state,3 which will then populate the 3CT level in 75% of the recombination events according to spin statistics. From the 3CT state, competition between charge dissociation and triplet formation via electron or hole back transfer (EBT/HBT) across the interface could significantly lower the charge generation efficiency of OSCs. The EBT process has already been identified as an important loss mechanism in several donor–acceptor blends.9–12 In other OSC combinations, however, it was found not to play a significant role even when energetically feasible.9,13 Hence, not only the energetic alignment determines the prevalence of triplet-mediated recombination, also the interface microstructure and degree of delocalization of CT states are likely to affect recombination rates.11,14,15 As such, a thorough understanding of the structural origins promoting or hindering triplet-mediated recombination across the donor–acceptor interface is of great importance for organic photovoltaic (OPV) material design and other optoelectronic applications involving molecular triplet excitons such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs).
Until recently, the highest OSC efficiencies were achieved using fullerene acceptors such as phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM), despite important shortcomings such as poor absorption in the visible region and limited chemical tunability. Yet, over the last few years, power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of fullerene-free OSCs have drastically increased and today several novel non-fullerene acceptors even outperform state-of-the-art polymer–fullerene devices.16 Our research interest towards non-fullerene acceptors based on the dithienylthiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole (DTTzTz) structural motif was driven by its strong electron-accepting character and efficient π–π stacking, allowing for high mobilities, as observed in donor polymers based on this unit.17 In earlier work, efficient CT in low-driving force blends of a series of DTTzTz small molecule acceptors with poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MDMO-PPV) could be established by nearly complete photoluminescence (PL) quenching.18 Nevertheless, device performance in these systems was particularly poor, with PCEs below 0.1%, even after optimization of the parameters controlling the active layer morphology. Understanding these low device efficiencies motivated our present investigation of the role of triplet-mediated recombination in blends of 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz with MDMO-PPV and poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT), both workhorse donors in the field of OPV. By comparing blends with two different donors, the energy of the CT state could be varied relative to the other excited states and triplet energies, which are well-established for all of these components. As such, the importance of triplets states in the high degree of non-radiative recombination losses in these blends could be investigated in direct relation to the corresponding excited state energetic landscape. Combining photoinduced absorption (PIA) with complementary spectroscopic techniques, we determine the dominant photophysical pathway of triplet formation from the 3CT state in both blends. Surprisingly, very different recombination pathways were observed for the two donor polymers, despite similar energetic alignment of the relevant excited states. Whereas population of the MDMO-PPV triplet via EBT turns out to be a very efficient CT recombination channel, EBT seems to be kinetically suppressed in the blend with P3HT, for which no significant polymer triplet population was observed. Possible structural causes for the difference in EBT losses for both blends will be discussed in view of recent theoretical work on the role of polymer structure and molecular packing at the donor–acceptor interface on energy losses via triplet formation.15
Materials and methods
Sample preparation
The thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole-based acceptor 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz was synthesized via a direct arylation approach.16 Full details are added in the ESI.† 2-Ethylhexyl side chains were implemented to overcome solubility issues. Donor polymers MDMO-PPV and (regioregular) P3HT were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, Missouri, USA). For the optical spectroscopy experiments, thin films were prepared by spin-coating (speed: 700 rpm, 60 s spin time) from chlorobenzene solutions. The solutions of the BHJ blends were prepared with a 1:1 donor:acceptor weight ratio, amounting to a total weight over solvent volume of 20 mg ml−1. For the pure polymer or acceptor films, solutions with a concentration of 10 mg ml−1 were used. In order to avoid photo-oxidation of the samples, the spin-coated films were dried in the dark under N2 atmosphere. Chemical doping of MDMO-PPV and P3HT with positive polarons for doping-induced absorption (DIA) experiments was achieved by exposing the pure polymer films to I2 vapour for a few minutes (in ambient conditions).
Device preparation and characterization
Devices containing blends of MDMO-PPV or P3HT and 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz as active layers were prepared using standard procedures for BHJ OSCs with a layer sequence glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/blend/Ca/Al. Tuning of the processing conditions (solvent, concentration, donor:acceptor ratio and spin-coating parameters) led to PCEs of 0.04% (VOC = 1.21 V, JSC = 0.11 mA cm−2, FF = 0.27) and 0.41% (VOC = 0.85 V, JSC = 0.88 mA cm−2, FF = 0.47) in the best cases for MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz, respectively. Current–voltage characteristics and more details on the device preparation and characterization are provided in the ESI.†
Optical spectroscopy
UV-visible (vis) absorption measurements of the films were performed in a Varian CARY 5E spectrophotometer operating in double beam mode. The spectrum of an empty glass substrate was used for appropriate background subtraction. DIA experiments were performed by recording the NIR absorption of the chemically doped polymer films in the same set-up.
Photoluminescence (PL) measurements were performed at 80 K under continuous excitation with a 447 nm (2.77 eV) diode laser (CNI lasers (Changchun, China), MDL-III-447-300mW). The spin-coated films were mounted in a cold-finger cryostat under vacuum to avoid photo-oxidation of the samples and to allow for low-temperature experiments. The laser beam was focused on the sample by an objective lens resulting in a φ ≈ 15 μm diameter illumination area and a typical laser fluence of about 50 W cm−2 in the focal plane of the lens. No bleaching of the samples due to continuous illumination was observed during the PL experiments. PL collected in backscattering mode was diffracted in a grating spectrograph (f = 25 cm) and registered by a linear CCD detector (Toshiba (Tokio, Japan), TCD1304DG). Spurious laser reflection was eliminated from the spectrum by means of 532 nm and 495 nm long-wavelength pass (LWP) filters. Electroluminescence (EL) experiments were performed using the same set-up. During EL measurements, the devices were kept at room temperature in a nitrogen-filled container to avoid sample degradation. The driving voltage over the solar cells was applied using a Keithley 2400 source meter. All PL and EL data were corrected for the spectral response of the set-up through calibration with a halogen lamp using Planck's law for black body radiation.
Quasi-steady-state photoinduced absorption (PIA) experiments were performed by detection of the probe light of a halogen lamp transmitted through the spin-coated films under excitation at 532 nm (2.33 eV) using a frequency-doubled continuous-wave Nd:YAG laser (CNI lasers (Changchun, China), MGL-III-532-100 mW) that was on/off modulated by means of an acousto-optic device (modulation frequency 384 Hz). An f = 30 cm grating monochromator allowed for wavelength-selection of the transmitted probe light before detection by a Si or InGaAs photodiode. The changes in transmission ΔT in response to the laser modulation were monitored by a phase-sensitive lock-in detector and subsequently recorded via a digital storage oscilloscope. Spectra obtained without probe light were subtracted to eliminate residual PL contributions and the detector background signal. The PIA spectrum (ΔT/T) is then obtained after normalization to the transmitted probe light intensity (T) at each wavelength. Excitation intensities of 60 W m−2 were used, in the range of typical solar irradiances. High-energy photons from the probe beam were blocked using a 495 nm LWP filter before the sample to minimize photo-oxidation. Contributions from laser scattering were eliminated by a 570 nm LWP filter before the monochromator entrance slit. All PIA experiments were performed at 80 K in a cold-finger cryostat under vacuum to avoid photo-degradation of the films.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1A and B show the chemical structures of MDMO-PPV, P3HT and the 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz acceptor and their molecular energy levels as determined from cyclic voltammetry. Both polymers form a type-II band alignment with 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz, which enables CT at the donor–acceptor interface. A rough yet instructive estimate to quantify the driving force for CT, is given by the energetic offset between the donor and acceptor lowest occupied molecular orbital (LUMO). For MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz the LUMO–LUMO offset is 0.48 eV, whereas the blend with P3HT is expected to exhibit a slightly smaller CT driving force with an offset of 0.41 eV. Yet, for a correct estimation of the driving force, the energy of the CT state (ECT) has to be determined from experiment.
 Fig. 1  (A) Chemical structure of MDMO-PPV, P3HT and 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz. (B) The corresponding HOMO–LUMO energy band diagram.3,21 (C) Normalized absorption spectra of spin-coated films of the pristine materials. 
In Fig. 1C the normalized absorption spectra of all materials under study are shown. The strong tendency for crystallization of the 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz acceptor and, to a lesser extent P3HT, in the spin-coated films resulted in long-wavelength tails due to diffuse scattering. Hence, to account for the uncertainty in the absorption onset, the optical gap of the 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz acceptor was determined from the crossing of the normalized absorption and PL spectra (see ESI†). This procedure yields a bandgap EG of 2.12 eV (585 nm) for the 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz film, markedly less than 2.42 eV (512 nm) obtained before from experiments in solution.20 As expected from previous reports on related molecules,19,21 this large difference between films and solutions of 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz is indicative of strong intermolecular interactions in the solid-state.
In the following sections, we will first apply PL and EL spectroscopy to study the interfacial CT process in blend films. The formation of polarons and triplets after successful CT is probed with PIA to investigate the dominant recombination pathways.
Indications for efficient CT: PL quenching
If the exciton diffusion length exceeds the average length scale of the phase separation in BHJ blends, interfacial CT has been shown to compete very effectively with radiative decay of singlet excitons generated in the pure donor and acceptor domains upon illumination.22 As a result, quenching of the PL in a blend film is a widely used criterion for efficient CT in a donor–acceptor system and demonstrates that the average domain size of the blend is small enough. In some cases of near-complete quenching, the blend spectrum can exhibit a weak low-energy band, distinct from the pure component spectra, arising from radiative recombination of the singlet CT state. In general, CT PL has a very low quantum yield and has been observed directly for only a number of OSC blends23 because it is often masked by the long-wavelength tail of incompletely quenched pure donor or acceptor PL.

Fig. 2 shows the PL spectra of the polymer:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blends and the pure films of each component. The PL experiments were performed at 80 K resulting in clearly resolved vibronic structure in all spectra. The films were photo-excited at 2.77 eV (447 nm), well within the absorption band of the two polymers and the DTTzTz acceptor. In contrast to many benchmark fullerene acceptors, 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz exhibits a high PL quantum yield, comparable to typical conjugated donor polymers. Hence the strong PL quenching observed here cannot be explained by energy transfer and subsequent non-radiative decay of the singlet exciton, as observed in some poor-performing polymer-fullerene systems.24 Instead, the strong suppression of both polymer and acceptor PL in the two blends has to arise from efficient forward electron transfer from polymer to 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz as well as hole transfer in the reverse direction.
 Fig. 2  PL spectra (semilogarithmic scale) of spin-coated films of blends of (A) MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and (B) P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and the corresponding pure donor and acceptor compounds. All spectra were normalized with respect to the PL intensity of the pure 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz film. 
In the MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend, the PL intensity of the individual components is reduced to about 0.1% from its original value and a distinct low-energy band due to CT emission emerges with a maximum at 1.77 eV. For the blend with P3HT, however, the PL quenching is less complete, tentatively explained by the smaller driving force for CT expected in this system. As can be seen from comparison with the pristine film spectra, the remaining PL is essentially a superposition of contributions from donor and acceptor emission and no distinct CT PL can be distinguished. The small redshift of the vibronic peaks of the TzTz acceptor in the composite PL spectrum could be ascribed to a change in relative dielectric permittivity due to different molecular packing in the blend in comparison to the pristine film.
Energy of the CT state: EL
EL in solar cells is the result of radiative recombination of electrons and holes injected into the active layer of the device when operated as a diode. In BHJ OSCs, electrons and holes are preferentially injected into the acceptor and donor domains, respectively, at moderate forward bias.25 Due to the nanoscale phase separation of the BHJ blend, opposite charges are likely to meet at a donor–acceptor interface and form a CT state as a precursor stage for recombination. Even in the best-performing OSC devices, EL emission is strongly limited by non-radiative recombination, resulting in very low EL quantum efficiencies (ηEL) typically below 10−6.26 Since ηEL is closely related to the VOC of the solar cell,27 this represents an important point of improvement in view of further efficiency gains in OSCs.

Fig. 3 shows the EL emission of OSC devices based on a blend of the TzTz acceptor with MDMO-PPV and P3HT. In the MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz device, EL emission from the polymer and acceptor domains is effectively quenched at the applied bias voltage, giving rise to a distinct EL CT band. The maximum of the EL emission at 1.77 eV correlates well with the blend PL spectrum in Fig. 2A, confirming its assignment to CT emission (see also ESI,† for a direct comparison of room-temperature PL and EL). At 2.15 eV a small contribution from direct band-to-band emission from pure polymer or acceptor domains can be distinguished. In a similar fashion, the EL spectrum of the device with P3HT in Fig. 3B reveals a distinct CT band at 1.60 eV and a smaller contribution at 1.91 eV corresponding to band-to-band emission of the polymer.
 Fig. 3  EL spectra (solid black) of devices with a 1:1 blend of (A) MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and (B) P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz as active layer. The forward voltage applied to the devices for charge injection is 6.5 V and 4.9 V, respectively. For each blend, the fit based on eqn (1) to extract ECT and λ is shown with a dashed grey line; the corresponding parameters are indicated in each panel. 
Within the framework of Marcus theory, it can be shown that the spectral shape of the EL spectrum is described by a Gaussian dependence on photon energy:28 (1)where N(E) is the emitted photon flux, kBT is the thermal energy of the material and λ is the reorganization energy as a result of electron–vibration coupling. Hence, through fitting of the high-energy tail of the EL spectra using eqn (1), ECT can be obtained for both blend systems. From the EL spectra in Fig. 3, we find an ECT of 2.02 and 1.84 eV and very similar reorganization energies of 0.26 and 0.25 eV for the MDMO-PPV and P3HT blend, respectively. The deviation of the EL spectra from the Gaussian model at the low-energy side is ascribed to the presence of a weakly resolved vibronic progression in both CT bands. Taking the smallest absorption onset of the two blend components as the (optical) bandgap EG of the solar cell, the driving force for CT can be quantified as EG–ECT. In the MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend, the optical gaps of donor and acceptor are very close in energy and we obtain a driving force of about 0.10 eV. In the blend with P3HT, the polymer is clearly the lower bandgap component and a very small offset EG–ECT of only ∼0.05 eV is found.
PIA: formation of long-lived photo-excited species after CT
Now that successful CT in both polymer:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz systems has been established by near-complete PL quenching, the severely limited photocurrent in the corresponding OSC devices seems to point towards a highly efficient charge recombination mechanism. In order to study the CT pair recombination pathways, we performed PIA experiments on spin-coated films of the two blends. PIA monitors the changes (ΔT) in optical transmission (T) in the films as a result of absorption by transient species generated by laser excitation, such as polarons and triplet excitons. In the absence of charge-extracting electrodes, all generated charges have to recombine eventually, a condition comparable to the open-circuit regime in devices. At 80 K, the temperature at which the experiment was performed, thermally-assisted hopping of carriers is effectively frozen out and polarons are expected to be rather immobilized, prolonging their average lifetimes to the μs–ms regime.29,30 Such long-lived species can be easily accessed in a quasi-steady-state implementation of the PIA experiment, which employs a modulated continuous-wave laser as excitation source instead of the more conventional pulsed laser approach.31 Moreover, quasi-steady-state PIA offers the additional advantage of probing recombination processes at moderate excitation intensities, much closer to the typical operating conditions of solar cells than the very high peak intensities encountered in pulsed laser PIA experiments.

Fig. 4A shows the quasi-steady-state PIA spectra of the MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend and of the corresponding pure donor and acceptor films. A single charge-carrier added to a conjugated polymer chain is known to induce two localized states within the HOMO–LUMO gap due to polaronic relaxation.32 Therefore polarons in organic semiconductors are expected to have two subgap optical transitions P1 and P2,33 as illustrated in Fig. 4C. The spectral sensitivity of our PIA set-up does, however, not extend far enough to the near-infrared to observe both polaron absorption bands. Therefore, distinction between triplet and polaron signatures is achieved by comparison with the PIA spectra of the pure donor and acceptor compounds, where usually triplet absorption is the predominant feature. As such, the weak PIA response of ΔT/T ∼ 0.01% in the pure MDMO-PPV and 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz films is ascribed to a small steady-state population of triplets formed via ISC. The peak position at 1.38 eV in the pure donor film corresponds nicely with T1 absorption in MDMO-PPV reported in previous PIA experiments.10,34 The intense PIA spectrum of the blend in Fig. 4A is assigned to MDMO-PPV triplets because of the close similarity to the pure donor spectrum, albeit slightly red-shifted in comparison. Hence, although CT is very efficient in this system, no significant polaron signatures are present in the PIA spectrum of the blend. In addition, the relative intensity of the triplet absorption in the blend spectrum has increased by two orders of magnitude with respect to the pure MDMO-PPV film. Although quantitative comparison of the triplet yield would require a correction of the PIA for the thickness and relative MDMO-PPV content of the two films, this correction factor is estimated to be less than a factor of two. Hence, this large difference in relative intensity clearly suggests that a mechanism, much more efficient than direct ISC from singlet excitons, is responsible for population of the MDMO-PPV T1 triplet level in the blend with the DTTzTz acceptor. The assignment of the MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend spectrum to polymer triplets is further confirmed by comparison with the near-infrared absorption spectrum of a chemically doped pure MDMO-PPV film as shown in Fig. 4D. Exposure of the pure polymer film to I2 vapour results in the reversible formation of positive MDMO-PPV polarons.35 As a consequence, the intensity of the neutral polymer absorption band in the visible region decreases as compared to the undoped film due to depletion of the ground state (S0) by polaron formation. Moreover, in the near-infrared region, two polaron absorption bands P1 and P2 emerge at markedly different photon energies than the PIA of the blend, underpinning our earlier spectral assignment.
 Fig. 4  PIA spectra of spin-coated films of the (A) MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and (B) P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend and of the corresponding pure donor and acceptor compounds. In (B) the PIA spectrum of a 1:1 P3HT:PC71BM blend film is included for reference purposes. All spectra are recorded at 80 K with a modulation frequency of 384 Hz, allowing for detection of long-lived photo-excitations with lifetimes in the μs range. (C) Scheme illustrating the subgap optical transitions P1 and P2 associated with positive polarons on the polymer chain. UV-vis and doping-induced absorption (DIA) spectra of (D) MDMO-PPV and (e) P3HT. The DIA intensity is normalized to the maximal absorbance in the corresponding UV-vis spectrum of the pristine polymer film. The PIA spectra of the blends with 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz are included, rescaled for easy comparison with the other curves. 
The PIA spectra of the blend with P3HT and of the corresponding pure donor and acceptor compounds are depicted in Fig. 4B. In addition, the PIA spectrum of a 1:1 blend of P3HT with PC71BM, a benchmark fullerene acceptor, is included for reference purposes. For the pure polymer film and the blend with PC71BM a similar, composite PIA spectrum is obtained, despite clear differences in the relative intensity of the two distinct absorption maxima at 1.25 eV and 1.80 eV, respectively, 1.29 eV and 1.91 eV. This multicomponent PIA band has been associated with absorption by two different types of polarons in P3HT.36 Due to the self-organizing nature of a BHJ blend, both disordered and semi-crystalline, lamellar regions of P3HT coexist in the film. Polarons in disordered domains are expected to be localized on a single polymer chain and can be considered largely one-dimensional in nature. These give rise to the aforementioned P1 and P2 optical transitions. Polarons in the P3HT lamellae, on the other hand, acquire two-dimensional character arising from delocalization onto adjacent polymer chains.37 The resulting interchain coupling gives rise to an additional energy splitting of the polaron states in the gap.38 Correspondingly, the allowed optical transitions for the delocalized polarons, denoted DP1 and DP2, will be shifted in energy with respect to the P1 and P2 bands. In the P3HT:PC71BM blend, we identify the absorption peak at 1.25 eV as the P2 band and the peak at 1.80 eV as DP2, based on the seminal work by Österbacka and coworkers.36 Through comparison with the P3HT:PC71BM blend spectrum, the broad PIA band of the pure polymer film is also assigned to the P3HT polaron absorption. Indeed, a study combining spin-sensitive magnetic resonance spectroscopy with PIA detection revealed that triplet–triplet absorption in P3HT features a rather narrow PIA band at 1.5 eV,39 very different from the spectrum of the pure donor obtained here. Hence, in contrast to the pure MDMO-PPV film, triplet formation via ISC is found to be insignificant compared to polaron formation in pure P3HT films, as confirmed by earlier studies on regioregular P3HT in the solid state.30,36,40
The PIA band of the P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend with its pronounced maximum at 1.17 eV is very different from the broad, two-component spectrum observed in the blend with PC71BM. It exhibits much closer similarity, both in spectral position and in shape, to the triplet–triplet absorption band of the pure 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz film. Hence we assign the P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend PIA to acceptor triplets, which is also supported by comparison with the P1 and P2 polaron bands in the DIA spectrum of P3HT shown in Fig. 4D. Although the 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz triplet yield in the blend and the pure acceptor film seem to be of the same order of magnitude, it should be noted that it is unlikely that the triplets in the blend originate from direct ISC of singlets formed in the acceptor domains. Due to weak spin–orbit coupling, ISC in organic semiconductors is a relatively slow process (≈ ns)41 compared to CT (<ps)23,42 and would be easily quenched in a BHJ donor–acceptor blend. As such, all triplets observed in the PIA spectra of the blends are assumed to be formed via the CT state. In principle, an unambiguous distinction between these two mechanisms for triplet formation could be made based on the kinetics observed in time-resolved optical spectroscopy or by means of transient electron paramagnetic resonance. The latter method offers the advantage that the spectroscopic signatures of the triplets will differ depending on the formation mechanism, as illustrated in related studies on OSC blends.43 The photo-physical pathways leading to the formation of polymer, respectively, acceptor triplets in the blends of 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz with MDMO-PPV and P3HT will be discussed in the next section.
Recombination pathways
Combining all experimental results, we find that despite highly efficient CT in both blends, charge generation is severely limited as demonstrated by the low photocurrents obtained in the corresponding solar cells and further confirmed by the absence of polaron signatures in PIA measurements. Instead, in both systems recombination of the CT pair results in the formation of long-lived triplet states. This process is expected to occur via the triplet 3CT state, which can be formed either through ISC from the initial singlet 1CT state or via non-geminate recombination of a spin-uncorrelated charge-pair. Several pathways can be envisaged for subsequent triplet formation from the 3CT state in OSC blends: (i) EBT or (ii) HBT resulting in a donor, respectively, acceptor triplet; (iii) EBT or (iv) HBT followed by triplet–triplet energy-transfer (ET) from the polymer to the molecular acceptor or vice versa. The relative importance of each pathway with respect to competing processes is determined by its transition rate, which depends not only on the energy difference but also on the electronic coupling between the initial and final states involved. Hence, even when energetically accessible, recombination of the CT state via triplets does not necessarily represent a detrimental loss mechanism in OSCs.15

Fig. 5 summarizes the energetic alignment of the relevant excited states in a Jablonski diagram for both blends. The energy of the T1 states in MDMO-PPV and P3HT are reported to be 1.4 eV above the ground state S0,5 significantly lower than the ECT of 2.02 eV, respectively, 1.84 eV obtained in the blend with 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz. For the TzTz acceptor, a T1 state energy of 1.5 eV was obtained experimentally from the thin-film phosphorescence spectrum (see ESI†). Hence, in each blend, both the polymer and the acceptor triplet are energetically accessible from the CT state. Yet, very different recombination mechanisms are at play in the two blends. In the blend with the MDMO-PPV donor, a 150-fold increase in polymer triplet yield with respect to the pure donor film strongly suggests EBT is the dominant recombination mechanism. In the P3HT-based blend, however, only DTTzTz triplets are observed. Since the T1 state lies higher in energy in the TzTz acceptor than in P3HT, EBT to P3HT followed by triplet–triplet energy-transfer, mechanism (iii), is considered rather unlikely. Instead, we conclude that the population of the acceptor triplet state occurs via HBT. Hence, in the P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend, EBT to the donor polymer seems to be kinetically suppressed in favor of the HBT mechanism. Nevertheless, compared to the large increase in polymer triplet population in the MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend, the rather small acceptor triplet yield in the blend with P3HT suggests that HBT is not a predominant loss mechanism but instead competes with efficient non-radiative recombination of the CT state.
 Fig. 5  Jablonski diagram for the (A) MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and (B) P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend illustrating the proposed triplet formation mechanisms. Solid black arrows represent the 1CT population pathways; dotted arrows indicate the possible pathways giving rise to the triplet population observed in the PIA experiments, either via direct ISC from S1 (black) or via a CT state recombination process (orange). The triplet formation pathways that were found to be kinetically suppressed are crossed. All excited state energies are derived from data presented in this work, except for the polymer triplet energies.5 Abbreviations and symbols are explained in the text. 
A number of experimental works9,13 have already established that in certain blends EBT does not present a significant recombination loss channel, even when energetically favorable. Yet, little is known about the factors effectively limiting the rate of triplet exciton formation in those systems. A recent computational study15 investigated the role of chemical structure and molecular packing on triplet formation from the 3CT state in two high-performance polymer–fullerene blends. They found that charge delocalization, in particular hole delocalization, is an important factor reducing the rate of triplet exciton formation. For both MDMO-PPV and P3HT, estimates of the polaron delocalization have been derived from the proton hyperfine couplings obtained in electron-nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) experiments. Since the magnitude of the hyperfine coupling at a certain proton site can be related to the spin density of the polaron at that position, more extended systems will have small couplings resulting in narrow ENDOR spectra and vice versa for more delocalized polarons. Hence, simulation of ENDOR spectra based on quantum-chemical calculations of the hyperfine parameters can be used to accurately determine the delocalization length of the polaron. Based on ENDOR data and supporting DFT computations on oligothiophenes of up to 18 monomers, Niklas et al.44 concluded that a positive polaron on a P3HT polymer chain extends over at least 15 units. In a similar study by Aguirre et al.,45 a delocalization length of 13 units was found for P3HT, compared to only 8 units for MDMO-PPV. Hence, in line with the findings of the theoretical study,15 the observed suppression of polymer triplet formation in P3HT correlates well with the larger spatial extent of the polaron in this polymer compared to MDMO-PPV. Although EBT rates will be strongly affected by the specific local microstructure at the donor–acceptor interface, selecting polymers with large hole delocalization might provide a way of reducing or even avoiding energy losses due to triplet formation in the polymer.
Conclusions
In this work, we determined the photo-physical pathways of triplet-mediated recombination in two low-driving force blends of the novel non-fullerene acceptor 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz with MDMO-PPV and P3HT as donor polymers. Although efficient CT in both blends was established by near-complete PL quenching, triplet exciton formation from the 3CT state was found to dominate over polaron generation using PIA spectroscopy. Yet, although the energetic alignment of the relevant excited states was qualitatively the same for both systems, markedly different triplet formation pathways were found. A 150-fold increase in polymer triplet yield via EBT in the blend with MDMO-PPV supports the identification of EBT as a dominant loss mechanism in this blend. In the P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend, however, only acceptor triplets formed via HBT were observed. Hence, although energetically favorable, EBT was found to be kinetically suppressed in this donor–acceptor combination. This work suggests that a better understanding of the factors governing the rate of triplet formation from 3CT will open up possibilities for suppressing energy losses due to triplet-mediated recombination by proper choice of the donor polymer, independently of (un)favorable energetic alignment.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors want to acknowledge the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO – Vlaanderen) for support of this work through the project G0B6715N and the PhD fellowship of M. Van Landeghem.
Notes and references
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vandewal, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 67, 113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 CrossRef CAS ; H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef .
D. Veldman, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1939 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2010, 73, 096401 CrossRef CAS ; T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736 CrossRef PubMed ; A. J. Ward, A. Ruseckas, M. M. Kareem, B. Ebenhoch, L. A. Serrano, M. Al-Eid, B. Fitzpatrick, V. M. Rotello, G. Cooke and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2496 CrossRef PubMed ; H. Ohkita, S. Cook, Y. Astuti, W. Duffy, S. Tierney, W. Zhang, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3030 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Chen, D. Qian, B. Gautam, G. Yang, J. Zhao, J. Bergqvist, F. Zhang, W. Ma, H. Ade, O. Inganäs, K. Gundogdu, F. Gao and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16089 CrossRef CAS ; N. A. Ran, J. A. Love, C. J. Takacs, A. Sadhanala, J. K. Beavers, S. D. Collins, Y. Huang, M. Wang, R. H. Friend, G. C. Bazan and T. Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1482 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Köhler and H. Bässler, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 66, 71 CrossRef .
S. D. Dimitrov, S. Wheeler, D. Niedzialek, B. C. Schroeder, H. Utzat, J. M. Frost, J. Yao, A. Gillett, P. S. Tuladhar, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1 Search PubMed .
D. Veldman, T. Offermans, J. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 333 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rao, P. C. Y. Chow, S. Gélinas, C. W. Schlenker, C.-Z. Li, H.-L. Yip, A. K.-Y. Jen, D. S. Ginger and R. H. Friend, Nature, 2013, 500, 435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Di Nuzzo, G. J. A. H. Wetzelaer, R. K.
M. Bouwer, V. S. Gevaerts, S. C. J. Meskers, J. C. Hummelen, P. W. M. Blom and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 85 CrossRef CAS ; P. C. Y. Chow, S. Gélinas, A. Rao and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3424 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kraus, M. C. Heiber, S. Väth, J. Kern, C. Deibel, A. Sperlich and V. Dyakonov, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29158 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; B. Z. Tedlla, F. Zhu, M. Cox, J. Drijkoningen, J. Manca, B. Koopmans and E. Goovaerts, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 5, 1 Search PubMed ; J. Benduhn, F. Piersimoni, G. Londi, A. Kirch, J. Widmer, C. Koerner, D. Beljonne, D. Neher, D. Spoltore and K. Vandewal, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800451 CrossRef .
S. D. Dimitrov and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 616 CrossRef CAS ; S. Few, J. M. Frost and J. Nelson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2311 RSC .
X.-K. Chen, T. Wang and J.-L. Brédas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602713 CrossRef .
J. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; S. Li, Z. Zhang, M. Shi, C.-Z. Li and H. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 3440 RSC ; S. Li, W. Liu, C.-Z. Li, M. Shi and H. Chen, Small, 2017, 1701120 CrossRef PubMed ; N. Liang, W. Jiang, J. Hou and Z. Wang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1291 RSC ; S. Zhang, Y. Qin, J. Zhu and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1 Search PubMed ; S. Li, L. Ye, W. Zhao, H. Yan, B. Yang, D. Liu, W. Li, H. Ade and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7159 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Osaka, R. Zhang, G. Sauvè, D. M. Smilgies, T. Kowalewski and R. D. McCullough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2521 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; I. Osaka, R. Zhang, J. Liu, D.-M. Smilgies, T. Kowalewski and R. D. McCullough, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4191 CrossRef ; D. Naraso and F. Wudl, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3169 CrossRef ; S. Ando, D. Kumaki, J. I. Nishida, H. Tada, Y. Inoue, S. Tokito and Y. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 553 RSC .
N. Nevil, Y. Ling, S. Van Mierloo, J. Kesters, F. Piersimoni, P. Adriaensens, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, J. Manca, W. Maes, S. Van Doorslaer and E. Goovaerts, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15774 RSC .
J. Kudrjasova, R. Herckens, H. Penxten, P. Adriaensens, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and W. Maes, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2014, 12, 4663 RSC .

          J. Kudrjasova, PhD thesis, Hasselt University,  2015 .
J. Kudrjasova, M. Van Landeghem, T. Vangerven, J. Kesters, G. H. L. Heintges, I. Cardinaletti, R. Lenaerts, H. Penxten, P. Adriaensens, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, J. Manca, E. Goovaerts and W. Maes, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 1253 CrossRef CAS .
F. Etzold, I. A. Howard, R. Mauer, M. Meister, T. D. Kim, K. S. Lee, N. S. Baek and F. Laquai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; S. Gélinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. van der Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Science, 2014, 343, 512 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, K. Tvingstedt, F. Zhang, C. Du, W.-X. Ni, M. R. Andersson and O. Inganäs, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3293 CrossRef CAS ; M. A. Loi, S. Toffanin, M. Muccini, M. Forster, U. Scherf and M. Scharber, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2111 CrossRef ; M. Hallermann, S. Haneder and E. Da Como, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 053307 CrossRef .
J. J. Benson-Smith, L. Goris, K. Vandewal, K. Haenen, J. V. Manca, D. Vanderzande, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 451 CrossRef CAS ; J. J. Benson-Smith, H. Ohkita, S. Cook, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Dalton Trans., 2009, 10000 RSC .
M. A. Faist, T. Kirchartz, W. Gong, R. S. Ashraf, I. McCulloch, J. C. De Mello, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. A. H. Wetzelaer, M. Kuik and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1232 CrossRef CAS ; K. Tvingstedt, K. Vandewal, A. Gadisa, F. Zhang, J. Manca and O. Inganäs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11819 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Rau, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 1 CrossRef ; K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. V. Manca, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 1 CrossRef .
R. A. Marcus, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 3078 CrossRef CAS ; I. R. Gould, S. Farid, D. Noukakis, J. L. Goodman and R. H. Young, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 3830 CrossRef .
X. Yang, R. Z. Wang, Y. C. Wang, C.-X. Sheng, H. Li, W. Hong, W. H. Tang, C. S. Tian and Q. Chen, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 2058 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kobayashi, K. Kinoshita, T. Nagase and H. Naito, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 7 Search PubMed .
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 729 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Campbell, A. R. Bishop and K. Fesser, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1982, 26, 6862 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fesser, A. R. Bishop and D. K. Campbell, Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys., 1983, 27, 4804 CrossRef CAS .
I. Montanari, A. F. Nogueira, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, C. Winder, M. A. Loi, N. S. Sariciftci and C. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3001 CrossRef CAS ; T. Offermans, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Org. Electron., 2007, 8, 325 CrossRef .
M. Deussen and H. Bässler, Synth. Met., 1993, 54, 49 CrossRef CAS .
R. Österbacka, C. P. An, X. M. Jiang and Z. V. Vardeny, Science, 2000, 287, 839 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Gartstein and A. A. Zakhidov, Solid State Commun., 1986, 60, 105 CrossRef CAS ; P. Vogl and D. K. Campbell, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 41, 12797 CrossRef PubMed .
O. J. Korovyanko, R. Österbacka, X. M. Jiang, Z. V. Vardeny and R. A. J. Janssen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 235122 CrossRef .
S. Cook, A. Furube and R. Katoh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 294 RSC .
B. Kraabel, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 103, 5102 CrossRef CAS ; H. D. Burrows, J. Seixas de Melo, C. Serpa, L. G. Arnaut, A. P. Monkman, I. Hamblett and S. Navaratnam, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 9601 CrossRef .
B. Kraabel, J. C. Hummelen, D. Vacar, D. Moses, N. S. Sariciftci, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 104, 4267 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kraffert, R. Steyrleuthner, S. Albrecht, D. Neher, M. C. Scharber, R. Bittl and J. Behrends, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28482 CrossRef CAS ; S. A. J. Thomson, J. Niklas, K. L. Mardis, C. Mallares, I. D. W. Samuel and O. G. Poluektov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 22707 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Niklas, K. L. Mardis, B. P. Banks, G. M. Grooms, A. Sperlich, V. Dyakonov, S. Beaupré, M. Leclerc, T. Xu, L. Yu and O. G. Poluektov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 9562 RSC .
A. Aguirre, P. Gast, S. Orlinskii, I. Akimoto, E. J. J. Groenen, H. El-Mkami, E. Goovaerts and S. Van Doorslaer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 7129 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis, characterization and 1H NMR spectrum of the 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz acceptor; processing details and current–voltage characteristics of the MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz devices; optical absorption of the blend films; determination of the optical band gap of 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz from the crossing between the normalized UV-vis absorption and PL spectra; comparison of room temperature EL and PL of the MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz device; phosphorescence spectrum of 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp03793dThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) Chemical structure of MDMO-PPV, P3HT and 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz. (B) The corresponding HOMO–LUMO energy band diagram.3,21 (C) Normalized absorption spectra of spin-coated films of the pristine materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  PL spectra (semilogarithmic scale) of spin-coated films of blends of (A) MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and (B) P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and the corresponding pure donor and acceptor compounds. All spectra were normalized with respect to the PL intensity of the pure 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz film.	 

 	Fig. 3  EL spectra (solid black) of devices with a 1:1 blend of (A) MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and (B) P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz as active layer. The forward voltage applied to the devices for charge injection is 6.5 V and 4.9 V, respectively. For each blend, the fit based on eqn (1) to extract ECT and λ is shown with a dashed grey line; the corresponding parameters are indicated in each panel.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  PIA spectra of spin-coated films of the (A) MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and (B) P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend and of the corresponding pure donor and acceptor compounds. In (B) the PIA spectrum of a 1:1 P3HT:PC71BM blend film is included for reference purposes. All spectra are recorded at 80 K with a modulation frequency of 384 Hz, allowing for detection of long-lived photo-excitations with lifetimes in the μs range. (C) Scheme illustrating the subgap optical transitions P1 and P2 associated with positive polarons on the polymer chain. UV-vis and doping-induced absorption (DIA) spectra of (D) MDMO-PPV and (e) P3HT. The DIA intensity is normalized to the maximal absorbance in the corresponding UV-vis spectrum of the pristine polymer film. The PIA spectra of the blends with 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz are included, rescaled for easy comparison with the other curves.	 

 	Fig. 5  Jablonski diagram for the (A) MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and (B) P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz blend illustrating the proposed triplet formation mechanisms. Solid black arrows represent the 1CT population pathways; dotted arrows indicate the possible pathways giving rise to the triplet population observed in the PIA experiments, either via direct ISC from S1 (black) or via a CT state recombination process (orange). The triplet formation pathways that were found to be kinetically suppressed are crossed. All excited state energies are derived from data presented in this work, except for the polymer triplet energies.5 Abbreviations and symbols are explained in the text.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis, characterization and 1H NMR spectrum of the 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz acceptor; processing details and current–voltage characteristics of the MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz and P3HT:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz devices; optical absorption of the blend films; determination of the optical band gap of 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz from the crossing between the normalized UV-vis absorption and PL spectra; comparison of room temperature EL and PL of the MDMO-PPV:2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz device; phosphorescence spectrum of 2,4-diCN-Ph-DTTzTz. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp03793d

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
