Shallow-layer pillaring of a conductive polymer in monolithic grains to drive superior zinc storage via a cascading effect   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE01531H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE01531H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3149-3163Shallow-layer pillaring of a conductive polymer in monolithic grains to drive superior zinc storage via a cascading effect†

        
          
            Zhenguo 
            Yao
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Qingping 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Keyi 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jianjun 
            Liu
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Chilin 
            Li
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructure, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 585 He Shuo Road, Shanghai 201899, China. E-mail: chilinli@mail.sic.ac.cn; jliu@mail.sic.ac.cn
bCenter of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
Received 
      14th May 2020
    , Accepted 5th August 2020First published on 5th August 2020AbstractAqueous Zn metal batteries (ZBs) have obtained increasing attention recently owing to their low-cost and environmentally friendly nature. Unfortunately, the sluggish Zn2+ de/intercalation in hosts often requires the nanostructural tailoring of cathode materials, which however degrades the tap density and accelerates the dissolution of active species. Herein, we propose a shallow-layer pillaring strategy to drive the superior zinc storage performance of V2O5 monolithic grains without the prerequisite of intentional nanoscale attenuation. The in situ polymerized 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene chains only in the near-surface V2O5 interlayers are sufficient to activate a cascading effect to successively open the deeper interlayers during Zn intercalation. This synergic interlayer expansion mechanism leads to a thorough and quick redox process of bulk phase V2O5 even with micro-sized grains as opposed to the poor reaction kinetics in the non-pillared one. In contrast to excess pillaring or cation doping, the shallow-layer hybridization with a hydrophobic conductive polymer can suppress the dissolution of active species, reinforce the conductive contact between grains, lower the Zn2+ diffusion barrier (0.39 eV) and absorption energy (0.17 eV), and upgrade the pseudocapacitance contribution (>67%) and Zn2+ diffusion coefficient (1.43 × 10−9–1.81 × 10−8 cm2 s−1). This composite cathode enables an unprecedented cycling/rate performance (e.g. 388, 367 and 351 mA h g−1 even at 5, 8 and 10 A g−1 respectively, and 269 mA h g−1 after 4500 cycles at 10 A g−1), corresponding to high energy densities of 280.2 and 205.8 W h kg−1 under ultrahigh power densities of 700.5 and 5960 W kg−1, respectively. This concept of shallow-layer pillaring activation (especially via rich organic molecules) can be extended to more electrode systems with the preservation of the grain integrity.

Broader context
Benefiting from the environmental friendliness and cost-effectiveness of aqueous electrolytes and zinc metal anodes, aqueous zinc batteries (ZBs) have obtained increasing attention as a potential candidate in large-scale grid energy storage systems. Unfortunately, the high polarity of the Zn-ion and its strong electrostatic interaction with the host lattices (or ligands) result in sluggish Zn2+ de/intercalation kinetics. In this work, we improved the zinc storage properties of V2O5 by expanding the interlayers of V2O5 monolithic grains with a conductive polymer only at the shallow-layer positions, rather than using the universal nanostructural tailoring strategy at the cost of the tap density and structural stability of active species. The expanded interlayers near the surface of the layered oxide via in situ polymerization of 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) can serve as guideways for Zn to penetrate into the deeper layers via a cascading effect. Besides, the embedding of a hydrophobic conductive polymer is prone to suppress the attenuation and dissolution of active species. These factors endow the cathode with a superior cycling/rate performance. The concept of shallow-layer pillaring activation (especially via organic molecules) and the cascading effect are expected to give substantial inspiration for electrode design with the preservation of the grain integrity.

Introduction
The pursuit of renewable and cleaner energy such as solar power, wind power and tide power, concerning environmental protection and aiming to build a low-carbon society, has been promoting the development of electrochemical energy storage systems that are required to be economical, reliable and efficient.1 Although lithium-ion batteries have witnessed success in the markets of portable devices and electric vehicles, safety and cost issues arise when they attempt to enter into the market of large-scale electrical energy storage owing to the use of flammable organic electrolytes and active lithium metal anodes.2 In this regard, much cheaper aqueous zinc batteries (ZBs), which use safer and more environmentally friendly aqueous electrolytes and zinc metal anodes, have obtained increasing attention recently.3,4 The metallic Zn anode has a relatively low redox potential (−0.76 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode) and a high volumetric capacity (5855 mA h cm−3).4 As the charge carrier in ZBs, multivalent Zn2+ allows multiple charge transfer, making batteries with potentially higher energy density.5,6 However, the Zn-ion has high polarity and therefore strong electrostatic interaction with lattices (or ligands) due to its bivalent nature. It is prone to lead to more sluggish diffusion and lower solid-state solubility in cathode hosts than monovalent cations like Li+,7,8 even though Zn2+ and Li+ possess nearly the same radius (0.74 Å vs. 0.76 Å). Besides, the electrochemical window in aqueous systems is restricted by water splitting, resulting in the limited choice of cathode candidates.9 Therefore, it is critical to search for suitable cathode hosts that can accommodate Zn-ion insertion/extraction in ZBs.
Up to now, the most investigated cathode materials for ZBs are manganese-based and vanadium-based oxides,5,6,8 Prussian blue analogs,9 and polyanion compounds,7,10 featuring open-framework structures with tunnel or layered channels. They are expected to provide enough space for Zn2+ migration. Specifically, manganese-based oxides have been widely investigated in view of their advantages of low cost, non-toxic nature, large theoretical capacity, high operating voltage and structure flexibility. They have various crystallographic phases with different types of tunnels, including α-MnO2,6 β-MnO2,11 γ-MnO2,12 δ-MnO2,13 and so on.5 The Zn2+/H+ co-insertion mechanism is thought to dominate the electrochemical process of manganese-based oxides.14 However no matter what crystallographic polymorphs these oxides are, manganese dissolution, large volumetric evolution and even conversion reactions would occur because of the electrochemically-induced phase transformation.15,16 These factors would lead to considerable capacity fading and poor rate performance. The introduction of a substantial amount of Mn2+ additive into aqueous electrolyte and embedding MnO2 nanoparticles into a long-range conductive matrix have been employed to inhibit manganese dissolution, enhance electrode conductivity and mitigate electric contact degradation during phase conversion. These solutions can improve the capacity retention to a certain degree.16,17 Prussian blue analogs and polyanion compounds (e.g. NASICON Na3V2(PO4)3 and LiV2(PO4)3) with intrinsic interconnected 3D channels and large interstitial sites can enable fast Zn2+ transportation, but the low storage capacities (e.g. 50–100 mA h g−1) hinder their further development.7,9 Benefiting from light weight and environmentally friendly features, organic cathodes (e.g. quinone) with different distributions of carbonyl functional groups also exhibit great potential in Zn-ion batteries. The accessibility of redox sites usually endows organic materials with fast Zn-storage kinetics. However, the issues of dissolution or phase evolution in aqueous electrolytes seem to be serious for most organic phases, which are prone to suffer from active species loss and evident capacity degradation.
For quite a long time, vanadium-based oxides usually with layered structures have been prevalent in lithium-ion and sodium-ion batteries in view of their potential advantages, including multiple-electron redox reactions, high theoretical capacity, and low cost.18,19 Likewise, they have been considered as potential intercalated cathodes for ZBs.20 Nevertheless, commercial vanadium oxide often underwent capacity fading in view of its relatively narrow interlayer spacing, structure instability during cycling, low conductivity, and Zn2+ ion localization in the host lattice.20,21 It was reported that the Zn-ion diffusion can be improved by expanding the interlayer spacing of vanadium-based oxides. In this regard, various metal ions (such as Zn2+,22 Na+,23 Ca2+,24 Mg2+,25 and Mn2+26), NH4+ ions and water molecules have been used as pillars in layered vanadium oxides to provide enough space for Zn2+ de/intercalation and to stabilize the structure skeleton.21,27 At the very beginning, Nazar et al. creatively pillared a vanadium oxide bronze with interlayered Zn-ions and water molecules to form a Zn0.25V2O5·nH2O (ZVO) cathode, which delivered an initial capacity of 282 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1 and an outstanding rate capability (260 mA h g−1 at 2400 mA g−1).22 Afterwards, Mai et al. reported a Na0.33V2O5 (NVO) nanowire cathode with a high capacity of 367.1 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1.23 The excellent performance was ascribed to the improvement of the conductivity and structure stability due to the intercalation of larger sodium ions. Later, Alshareef's group demonstrated that superior Zn2+ storage performance can be achieved in Ca0.25V2O5·nH2O (CVO) and MgxV2O5·nH2O (MVO) also benefiting from the larger interlayer and better conductivity.24,25 Most recently, NH4+ ions were also used to pillar vanadium oxides as reported by Zhou and Liang et al. Therein NH4V4O10 has an interplanar spacing as large as 9.8 Å, leading to an outstanding cycling performance with a capacity of 255.5 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 10 A g−1.27 Even though the metal ions serve as pillars in these systems, the “lubrication” effect of crystal water molecules in these structures cannot be neglected.21,22 When the water molecules are extracted from the interlayers of vanadium-based oxides, the corresponding electrochemical performance would degrade.21 Therefore it is still controversial which “pillar” plays the pivotal role in activating the performance of ZBs. Furthermore, it cannot be ruled out that some positively charged fillers are likely squeezed out or extracted during the Zn2+ stuffing or charging process, leading to the invalidation of the pillaring effect or collapse of the layered structure. Therefore it is highly required to explore new and robust pillaring species to maintain the high electrochemical activity of ZBs.
Organic molecules are expected to enable the “lubrication” effect like neutral water molecules as long as they can be inserted into the interlayers. They can function as immobile pillars especially when they are polymerized in the interlayers. If these built-in polymer chains are conductive, they can also serve as inner electron wires. Actually a conductive polymer is prone to form a coating effect on the outer surface of oxide grains or modulate the grain morphology into desired nanostructures, e.g. polyaniline (PANI) polymer to reinforce the Mn–O nanosheet growth for MnO2.15,28 PANI itself can also serve as a flexible cathode for Zn-ion batteries as long as the corresponding conjugated system and conductive network are well designed as demonstrated by Liu et al.29 However, reports about organic molecule or polymer intercalation into oxide lattices to boost the ZB performance are rare.30,31 The excess insertion of organics likely causes grain cracking into thinner nanostructures and is not favorable for the integrity of monolithic grains.32 Herein, we propose a strategy of shallow-layer intercalation and in situ polymerization of 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) monomers to expand the interlayers of layered V2O5 only near the grain surface in order to tremendously boost the Zn-storage performance of V2O5. The built-in poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) pillar has high electron conductivity and insolubility in aqueous electrolyte, and moreover its shallow-layer interaction does not smash the active grains into smaller fragments. The potential interaction between Zn and PEDOT can shield the charge and reduce the electrostatic force in the interlayers, therefore promoting cation diffusion in the bulk phase.33 These properties endow cathode materials with high compact density, high utilization of active species and a reinforced Zn2+/e conductive network. Benefiting from these merits, the optimized V2O5@PEDOT (VOP) cathode has an ultrahigh-rate performance with reversible capacities as high as 388, 367 and 351 mA h g−1 at 5, 8 and 10 A g−1, respectively, as well as an ultralong-cycling performance with well a preserved capacity of 269 mA h g−1 after 4500 cycles at 10 A g−1. Such a superior performance benefits from the high Zn2+ diffusion coefficient (10−9–10−8 cm2 s−1) with lowered diffusion barrier.
Results and discussion
Shallow-layer pillaring of V2O5 by PEDOT intercalation
The VOP sample was synthesized via a simple one-pot self-polymerization method by stirring V2O5 powder and the EDOT monomer together until the color of the aqueous suspension became dark green from the original orange (see the details in the Experimental section). It is assumed that EDOT can gradually transfer into the interlayers of V2O5 and therein is polymerized into PEDOT, leading to an evident expansion of the interlayer spacing (Fig. 1A). The polymerization of EDOT requires an oxidizing agent. Here, V2O5 itself can serve as an oxidizing agent because of the high valence of V (5+), even though the oxidizability of V2O5 is not as strong as some other oxidizing agents, such as ammonium persulphate. Therefore, the polymerization kinetics of EDOT in V2O5 oxidation effect is slow and it would take about one week to finish the polymerization reaction along with PEDOT impregnation into the shallow layer of V2O5. The conductivities of VOP and bulk V2O5 were measured to be 5.65 × 10−4 S cm−1 and 6.96 × 10−5 S cm−1, respectively. The higher conductivity of VOP is attributed to the intercalation of the conductive PEDOT polymer. This hypothesis is confirmed by the following structural and morphological characterizations. From the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. 1B), a new peak appears at 8.96° after EDOT insertion, while all the other peaks match well with the commercial V2O5 (JCPDS No. 41-1426). The preservation of bulk V2O5 peaks indicates the shallow-layer intercalation of PEDOT at the oxide surface. Otherwise, all these peaks belonging to V2O5 should vanish.32 The strong peak at 20.26° corresponds to the (0 0 1) plane of V2O5 with a d-spacing of 4.38 Å, while the new peak at 8.96° after embedding PEDOT indicates a larger d-spacing of 9.86 Å. The d-spacing of 9.86 Å is roughly consistent with the interlayer spacing of V2O5 layers with the monolayer intercalation of PEDOT.34 When doubling the concentration of the EDOT monomer (i.e. the excess PEDOT condition as shown in VOP-E), this 8.96° peak became more pronounced at the cost of the shrinkage of bulk V2O5 peaks (Fig. S1, ESI†). The XRD pattern of pure PEDOT is also displayed as a reference.35 Note that the diffraction peaks belonging to pure PEDOT do not appear in the XRD pattern of VOP, indicating that the confined PEDOT in the interlayers of VOP would lose the crystallinity. The successful intercalation of the PEDOT polymer is also confirmed from the appearance of four characteristic peaks at 1366, 1453, 1532, and 1562 cm−1 in the Raman spectrum (Fig. 1C), corresponding to C–C inter-ring stretching, symmetric CC stretching, asymmetric CC stretching and also asymmetric CC stretching in PEDOT, respectively.35–37 For VOP, both the Raman signals corresponding to bulk V2O5 and PEDOT are combined, further indicating the shallow-layer pillaring behavior of PEDOT. Therein the characteristic peaks at 992, 706 and 523 cm−1 correspond to the terminal oxygen (VO) stretching vibration, doubly coordinated oxygen (V2–O) stretching and triply coordinated oxygen (V3–O) stretching in bulk V2O5, respectively.38 The blue shift of the main peak (to 1453 cm−1) after compositing implies the variation of the conjugation environment because of the interaction of PEDOT with the V2O5 host.39 The content of PEDOT in VOP is estimated to be 22.1 wt% from thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) carried out in an ambient atmosphere from room temperature to 750 °C, based on the sharp weight loss around 600 °C (Fig. 1D). Given that PEDOT should be gradually burned up below 500 °C, the embedding or bonding of PEDOT in V2O5 should improve the thermostability of PEDOT and therefore delays its weight loss in TGA.40 In the case of excess PEDOT, the thermostability of the composite becomes much worse, and the weight loss occurred before 200 °C and exceeded 30 wt% at 500 °C (Fig. S2, ESI†). There is no structural water in VOP as indicated from the TGA curve of VOP. Therein the weight loss below 500 °C is negligible. Although the synthesis of VOP is performed in an aqueous solution, the mild conditions at room temperature in an ambient atmosphere would not drive the incorporation of water molecules into the V2O5 lattices. In contrast, the hydrothermal reaction in an autoclave more easily pushes the insertion of structural water into the V2O5 interlayers, where even other cation pillars have existed, e.g. in Zn0.25V2O5·nH2O, Ca0.25V2O5·nH2O and MgxV2O5·nH2O.24,25 The X-ray photoelectron spectrum (XPS) in Fig. S3 (ESI†) indicates that the vanadium component signal dominates at the VOP surface and the sulfur signal belonging to PEDOT is not evident, implying that PEDOT should dwell in the layers of V2O5 rather than simply mixing with V2O5 or covering V2O5. The molar ratio of S to C is 1:6 in PEDOT, and it is responsible for the much higher intensity of the C 1s peaks than the S 2p ones in XPS. The C contamination (e.g. CO2 adsorption when exposed to air) during sample transfer further reinforces the C signal.
 Fig. 1  (A) Schematic illustration of VOP synthesis with photos of solutions at the initial stage (yellow) and after stirring for 7 days at room temperature (dark green). (B) XRD patterns of the as-prepared VOP, commercial V2O5 and pure PEDOT. (C) Raman spectra of VOP, V2O5 and PEDOT. (D) TGA curve, (E) SEM image (inset: magnified one), (F) TEM image (inset: SAED pattern) and (G) HRTEM image of VOP powder. 
The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 1E and Fig. S4, ESI†) of VOP powder show monolithic grains of micrometer size (up to 5 μm). The high compact density is inherited from the commercial V2O5 precursor. Taking a close look at the surface, some narrow bulge textures are observable, but these bulges do not undergo evident phase segregation or peel-off from the monolithic grain surface due to lattice coherence. The shallow depth of PEDOT intercalation and the potential existence of a PEDOT concentration gradient cannot destabilize the interfaces between intercalated and undecorated interlayers. Otherwise, excess intercalation would split the monolithic grains into a loose net-type structure composed of slender fibroid grains (Fig. S5, ESI†). The energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) of VOP grains discloses a homogeneous distribution of V, O, C and S elements throughout each grain, further proving the successful insertion of PEDOT into the V2O5 surface (Fig. S6, ESI†). The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images disclose the near-surface texture of VOP (Fig. 1F and Fig. S7, ESI†). Note that the integrity of monolithic grains is well maintained, but in the thin grain edge, more domain interfaces are found. This texture evolution is caused by the near-surface intercalation of PEDOT. One can also note that there is no evident polymer coating at the surface region in view of the preferential intercalation rather than surface adsorption of organic molecules. The corresponding diffraction rings in the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (inset of Fig. 1F) indicate the typical lattice planes of (1 1 0) and (0 2 0) belonging to bulk phase V2O5, which are retained well, agreeing with the XRD result. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image (Fig. 1G) further points out the existence of a lattice fringe with an increased d-spacing of 9.86 Å, consistent with the interlayer spacing expanded by monolayer PEDOT insertion as mentioned above. This expansion depth is about 20 nm and no evident interface detachment from the bulk oxide is observed. Such an expanded interlayer is expected to serve as a guideway for Zn-ion insertion from the electrode–electrolyte interface to the bulk phase, greatly benefiting the kinetic performance of Zn/VOP batteries as discussed later.
Electrochemical performance depending on the pillaring depth and charge transfer dimensionality
In order to evaluate the electrochemistry of the VOP cathode, CR2032 coin-type cells assembled with an aqueous electrolyte containing 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 and a zinc metal anode were tested between 0.2 and 1.6 V (vs. Zn/Zn2+). Commercial V2O5 and VOP with excess PEDOT were also evaluated as comparisons under similar cycling conditions. When the electrode is pasted on planar Ti foil, the VOP grains are compactly stacked with the main conductive pathway along the thickness direction, i.e. vertical to the plane of the substrate (Fig. 2A). Fig. S8 (ESI†) displays the cyclic voltammogram (CV) curves of VOP during the first four cycles at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. There are two-stage redox peaks located around 0.95 V and 0.6 V respectively. The lower-voltage stage has three sets of coupled peaks respectively at 0.78/0.72, 0.67/0.57, and 0.56/0.44 V. This result implies a multistep Zn2+ de/intercalation mechanism. The high polarity of Zn2+ is responsible for the generation of more staged intermediates. These CV curves are highly overlapped even for the initial cathodic process, indicating the high Zn-storage reversibility of VOP. The CV curves of bare Ti foil were also measured with the same conditions used for VOP. Note that the response currents for the Ti substrate are very small. Therefore their capacity contributions are negligible compared with the total capacity of the VOP cathode. In contrast, the corresponding CV curves are irreversible for commercial V2O5 especially for the first cycle (Fig. S9, ESI†). Their current response intensity is much lower than that of VOP due to the inferior intrinsic conductivity and limited transport kinetics in unexpanded interlayers for the former. This discrepancy can be further verified by the corresponding galvanostatic charge/discharge curves. The VOP cathode displays two distinct sloping charge/discharge platforms even at a high current density of 1 A g−1 (Fig. S10, ESI†), corresponding to the two-stage redox peaks in the CV curves. The specific discharge capacity is 273 mA h g−1 in the first cycle and gradually increases to as much as 373 mA h g−1 within the beginning 60 cycles (orange plots in Fig. 2E). Such a capacity activation behavior is ascribed to the delayed acceleration of the kinetic reaction in view of the limited expansion depth of V2O5 interlayers. These already expanded interlayers at the electrode–electrolyte interface are expected to trigger the cascading effect to gradually activate the zinc impregnation in deeper interlayers during the following cycles. Similar phenomena have also been found in transition metal or crystal water pillared oxides (e.g. MgxV2O5·nH2O, Zn0.25V2O5·nH2O) even with sufficient intercalation throughout the lattices.22,25 During the following long-term cycling, the VOP electrode shows excellent cyclability with a retained capacity of 325 mA h g−1 after 320 cycles. Even when doubling the current density to 2 A g−1, the highly reversible capacity is still preserved at 332 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles (Fig. S11, ESI†). All the cycling processes show high coulombic efficiencies (CEs) very close to 100%. For the commercial V2O5, the initial discharge capacity (310 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1) is much higher than the initial charge capacity (54 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1) and the capacities during the subsequent cycles (Fig. S12, ESI†). It means that most of the Zn-ions are irreversibly trapped in the V2O5 lattices. The enrichment of “dead Zn sites” is also found in other vanadium-oxide-based cathodes such as Na0.33V2O5.23 This comparison further confirms the advantage of conductive polymer pillaring with potential charge transport to mitigate the polarity and trapping of inserted Zn2+. The PEDOT modulated open framework strategy enables a high utilization ratio of Zn bonding sites even under higher rate conditions.
 Fig. 2  (A) Schematic illustration of charge transfer situations in electrodes prepared by pasting active grains on Ti foil and CP. (B) Typical CV curves of Zn/VOP batteries using different current collectors at 0.1 mV s−1. (C) Typical charge–discharge curves of a Zn/VOP battery using a CP current collector at different current densities. (D) Rate capability (from 1.0 to 10 A g−1) and (E) cyclic performance (at 1.0 A g−1) of Zn/VOP and Zn/VOP-E batteries using different current collectors. (F) Comparison of Ragone plots between our VOP electrodes and other reported cathodes pillared by various cations for ZBs. The energy density values are calculated by integrating the voltage profiles during discharge. (G) Long-term cycling performance of Zn/VOP and Zn/VOP-E batteries using different current collectors at 10 A g−1. 
Fig. S13 (ESI†) presents the galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles at different current density (up to 10 A g−1). The basic curve profiles are well maintained even under ultrahigh rates. The Zn/VOP batteries can deliver reversible capacities as much as 360, 338, 280, 222, and 197 mA h g−1 at current densities of 1, 2, 5, 8, and 10 A g−1, respectively (orange plots in Fig. 2D). After undergoing high-rate operation, the capacity can still recover to the original value at the corresponding rate. Impressively, this VOP cathode can tolerate long-term cycling under an ultrahigh rate (orange plots in Fig. 2G). Its reversible capacity is quite stable and is still as high as 169 mA h g−1 after 4500 cycles at 10 A g−1. Note that the CE values do not degrade and are still close to 100% in the rate and long cycling measurements. We have to emphasize the performance advantage of shallow-layer intercalation of PEDOT compared with the case of deep-layer intercalation by excess PEDOT. The attenuation of VOP grains (into slender fibers) is favorable for charge transport across the much thinner grains with sufficient interlayer expansion, leading to higher capacity release during the early cycles (Fig. 2D and E and Fig. S14, ESI†). Although the sufficient pillaring of PEDOT mitigates the capacity climbing process and makes the early cycling more stable, the following capacity drops quickly after merely 40 cycles with the experience of capacity maximization. This undesired phenomenon is associated with the dissolution of highly nanostructured active species, especially after undergoing phase transformation during repeated Zn intercalation. Therefore a V-ion based sol or additive was often added into the electrolyte in order to suppress the dissolving of V-oxides.21 The cycling instability of nanofiber VOP is also reflected in its CV curves, which are not overlapped especially during the anodic process (Fig. S15, ESI†). Furthermore, one can note that the rate performance is inferior for the VOP with excess PEDOT especially when the current density exceeds 8 A g−1. In consideration of the early dissolution and further nanofiber fragmentation under a high rate, the reversible capacity of sufficiently pillared VOP is merely 75 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1, which is lower than half of the capacity of the shallowly pillared one (purple plots in Fig. 2G). The corresponding CEs for the former undergo frequent fluctuation. Our results indicate that nanostructured cathodes are not always favorable for aqueous ZBs. Our electrode design by local lattice expansion proposes a new solution to electrode activation without the sacrifice of the primary grain integrity.41
The substrate texture is expected to influence the distribution of active grains and therefore the charge transport manner. We also attempted to use commercial carbon paper (CP) of a 3D porous network structure as a substrate to displace the planar Ti foil (Fig. 2A). When pasting the electrode on CP, the active grains can be dispersed by the milling force and sink into the deep pores in the carbon framework. Therefore the charge transport pathway can be connected along the carbon skeleton direction, i.e. roughly parallel to the plane of the carbon paper. The transportation along the thickness direction still works. The 1D-to-3D conversion of the charge transfer route is expected to further promote the rate performance of Zn/VOP batteries. Note that from the comparison of CV curves, the current response for the CP substrate is stronger than for the Ti substrate at the same 0.1 mV s−1, indicating a kinetic advantage benefiting from the more multidimensional charge transfer from CP (Fig. 2B). However the staged CV peaks become less sharp in the case of CP. The better wiring effect for VOP grains surrounded by CP conductive skeletons is responsible for the higher-fraction capacitive-like contribution and therefore the smoothening of the CV peak profiles. The CV current response for bare CP (Fig. S8, ESI†) is also negligible compared with that for the CP-supported VOP cathode. The better kinetics from the CP current collector is also reflected in the much better rate performance of VOP (Fig. 3C and D). It's obvious that the voltage polarization of charge–discharge curves at higher current densities is still small with the preservation of two-stage curve profiles compared with the titanium foil current collector. The reversible capacities can be surprisingly kept at 388, 367 and 351 mA h g−1 even under 5, 8 and 10 A g−1, which are much higher than those in the case of Ti foil. To exclude the capacity contribution of CP, batteries with bare CP as a cathode were measured and the delivered capacity is negligible (<1.5 mA h g−1) (Fig. S16, ESI†). As for the cycling stability, the batteries based on CP do not show superiority even though they deliver higher initial capacities (red plots in Fig. 3E and G). The better grain dispersibility in CP likely causes the solubility increase of VOP (compared with compactly stacked grains on Ti) and therefore relatively more evident capacity degradation especially after long-term cycling. Analogously, that is why the VOP with monolithic big grains exhibits the better cycling stability than the tailored nano-particles. The better capacity retention for Ti-supported VOP leads to a capacity surpassing that of the CP-supported one after 200 cycles at 1 A g−1. The better ultrahigh-rate advantage for CP at 10 A g−1 enables much higher capacities than those for Ti foil at the corresponding cycling stages from beginning to end. The retained capacity benefiting from CP is still as high as 269 mA h g−1 even after 4500 cycles at 10 A g−1. The corresponding CE plots (with a value of ∼100%) are quite stable during the whole cycling process. The high specific surface area and high porosity of CP can facilitate intimate contact between the embedded active grains and infiltrated electrolyte, therefore shortening the charge transfer distance and extending the transport routes and interfaces. The superior rate performance reported here indicates the high power and energy density of VOP, which are further evaluated in the Ragone plots (Fig. 2F), in comparison with the previously reported vanadium-oxide-based cathode materials for ZBs such as H2V3O8,42 MgxV2O5·nH2O,25 Zn0.25V2O5·nH2O,22 Na0.33V2O5,23 LixV2O5·nH2O,20 Mn0.15V2O5·nH2O,26 and Ca0.25V2O5·nH2O.24 Our VOP cathode delivers higher energy densities than most of the cation doped/pillared ones over the corresponding power density range, and its energy/power density performance in the case of a Ti foil current collector is comparable with those of top reference objects Zn0.25V2O5·nH2O and LixV2O5·nH2O. Benefiting from the reinforced charge transfer network in the case of the CP current collector, the energy densities of VOP evidently prevail over all the reference materials at similar power densities. Specifically, the CP-supported VOP can achieve a high energy density of 280.2 W h kg−1 under a power density of 700.5 W kg−1 at 1 A g−1, and an energy density still preserved at 205.8 W h kg−1 under an ultrahigh power density of 5.96 kW kg−1 at 10 A g−1. Note that such a superior electrochemical performance is achieved without intentional nano-sized tailoring towards active grains. Like the reports mentioned in the comparison of the Ragone plots, the energy density of the cells is calculated based on the mass of active material in the cathode.
 Fig. 3  (A) Ex situ XRD patterns of cycled electrodes at different reaction stages and corresponding galvanostatic charge–discharge curves. (B) Schematic illustration of the “synergic lattice breathing” mechanism for V2O5 interlayer expansion and contraction. XPS spectra of (C) V 2p and (D) Zn 2p of VOP electrodes at the initial and fully discharged/charged states. 
Storage mechanism and texture evolution during cycling
The Ti-supported electrodes have better cycling stability than for the CP-supported electrodes. Moreover the VOP grains on the Ti-supported electrodes are more exposed and compactly stacked than on the CP-supported electrodes. Therefore the former can better disclose the reaction mechanism and intrinsic kinetic properties of VOP monolithic grains. Therefore we performed ex situ investigations and following electrochemical analysis based on the Ti-supported electrodes. To clarify the Zn2+ storage mechanism, ex situ XRD, XPS, SEM, and TEM investigations were performed to characterize the structural, valence state and morphology evolution of the cycled VOP cathodes at different reaction stages. The XRD patterns (Fig. 3A) of cycled VOP electrodes (after 60 cycles) indicate an evident phase transformation during the discharge process, and the original phase cannot be recovered after recharging. When discharged to 0.6 V, all the characteristic peaks that belong to the pristine VOP phase vanish and only a new peak appears at a lower angle region (5.60°), which corresponds to a dramatic expansion of the interlayer up to 15.77 Å with the insertion of Zn2+ around the PEDOT chains.20–22 When fully discharging the ZB to 0.2 V, another three sharp peaks of high intensity appear at 8.34°, 16.66° and 25.06°, and the lower peak at 5.60° is further intensified with the stacking of more Zn-cations at the shallow surface. The positions of the sharp peaks are close to those of the discharged Zn0.25V2O5 electrode reported by Nazar et al., indicating a successful intercalation of Zn into the bulk phase of V2O5.22 In their work, the prior pillaring of Zn-cations enables the successive stuffing of Zn-ions via a solid solution behavior under electrochemical force. With the increase of the Zn insertion content, a small contraction of the interlayer distance was observed in view of the increased screening of interlayer electrostatic repulsion. Otherwise, the non-pillared V2O5 or its hydrated phase does not lead to such a well-crystallized phase after full discharge.21,43 It is interesting to find that the shallow-layer pillaring of PEDOT in the V2O5 surface can trigger the electrochemical pillaring of Zn2+ in the deeper bulk phase of V2O5 as the Zn-doped Zn0.25V2O5 electrode did.22 The interface pre-expansion is responsible for the smoother opening of inner interlayers during Zn-ion impacting (like the cascading effect), especially when the external interlayers are expanded to 15.77 Å. The lattice coherence does not allow the intactness or contraction of bulk interlayers during Zn insertion. After recharging to 0.9 V, the sharp peaks corresponding to ZnxV2O5 are significantly weakened, but the low-position peak at 5.60° is still well preserved. This low-position peak disappears after full charge to 1.6 V. This evolution means that the Zn concentration begins to be diluted from the bulk phase during the charge process, followed by the final extraction of Zn from the shell-region interlayers. Only one sharp peak at 17.30° is found for the charged phase, indicating an irreversible phase transformation during cycling, which should not influence the short-range ordering of the structure in view of the high repeatability of the voltage profiles. Note that the well-crystalized phases do not emerge at the partial charge or discharge stages, and it may be attributed to the disordering of the Zn2+/vacancy arrangement. The substantial incorporation of water molecules in interlayers can be ruled out due to the absence of the ZnxV2O5·nH2O diffraction pattern, benefiting from the repulsion effect or steric hindrance of PEDOT chains.44 We also compared the XRD patterns of VOP after the first discharge and after 60 cycles (Fig. S17, ESI†). The characteristic sharp peaks of ZnxV2O5 become more pronounced with the progress of the cycling process. The reinforcement of structural ordering is favorable for superior cycling performance even under high rates. Herein we propose a synergic lattice breathing mechanism, which works in a manner that the expansion of outer interlayers of PEDOT-pillared shells drives the sequential expansion of inner interlayers of V2O5 cores during discharge, and the contraction of inner interlayers is initiated and spread to the outer interlayers during charge (Fig. 3B).
XPS spectra of the pristine and cycled VOP electrodes (after 60 cycles) are displayed in Fig. 3C and D. For the pristine electrode, the V 2p3/2 peak at 517.4 eV dominates, corresponding the V5+ species in V2O5.25 A small shoulder peak corresponding to V3+ is also found at 515.3 eV.32 The small amount of V3+ component in pristine VOP stems from the reduction of V2O5 during the EDOT polymerization process. When discharged to 0.2 V, the V5+ peak is significantly weakened, while the V3+ and V4+ peaks (at 516.5 eV for V4+) become pronounced.25,42 Their comparable intensities are in accordance with the delivered capacity, roughly corresponding to 1.5 Zn insertion. After charging to 1.6 V, the V5+ signal is intensified again along with the extraction of Zn-ions. The minor signal of V4+ is still residual at the electrode surface, in view of the potential trapping based on the interaction with PEDOT chains at the shallow-layer region.33 The V3+ species is fully oxidized to the higher-valence-state ones during the charge process. Correspondingly, after discharge, the Zn signal is detected with the appearance of two Zn 2p3/2 peaks at 1020.4 and 1022.6 eV, demonstrating the successful insertion of Zn2+ into the VOP lattices. The different peak positions should be associated with the environment of Zn sites, corresponding to inserted Zn in interlayers and surface adsorbed Zn from electrolyte decomposition, respectively.22,42 The existence of PEDOT and its potential charge interaction with Zn are responsible for the slight lowering of the bonding energies for both the peaks in view of the electron supply from PEDOT chains. In the charged state, the intensity of the bulk Zn signal (at 1020.4 eV) is evidently decreased, compared with the surface Zn signal (at 1022.6 eV). The pinning effect of Zn in the PEDOT-pillared interlayers leads to residual bulk Zn signal, agreeing with the residual V4+ peak after charging. The S 2p signals (e.g. 165.2 eV in the pristine electrode) are also observable due to the shallow-layer retention of PEDOT (Fig. S18a, ESI†).45 After cycling, the S 2p peaks appear at higher positions of the bonding energy, which should be caused by the coverage of residual Zn salt (–SO3 in Zn(CF3SO3)2).46 There are two O 1s peaks in the pristine sample, respectively corresponding to V5+–O at 529.8 eV and O in PEDOT at 532.2 eV (Fig. S18b, ESI†).45,47 The electrochemical reduction of V2O5 leads to the appearance of a shoulder peak at 529.26 eV, agreeing with the report by Nazar et al.22 This shoulder peak becomes more positive after electrochemical oxidation, indicating the reappearance of V5+–O bonding. Note that the O bonding in PEDOT is significantly weakened after cycling in view of the coverage of residual Zn-salt, which instead causes the appearance of a dominant peak at 531.1 eV.48 The C bonding in PEDOT is disclosed at 286.5 eV in the C 1s spectrum (Fig. S18c, ESI†).49 After cycling, two new peaks appear at 284.9 and 292.0 eV, respectively corresponding to the carbon additive in the electrode and residual Zn-salt (–CF3) on the electrode surface.50 Accordingly, the emerging F 1s peaks after cycling should also stem from the Zn-salt product (e.g. –CF3) and binder (PVDF) (Fig. S18d, ESI†).51 The residual Zn in lattices can serve as extra “pillars” to stabilize the open structure and facilitate the subsequent Zn2+ de/intercalation.
The morphology and microstructure evolution of the discharged VOP electrode (after 60 cycles) were characterized by ex situ SEM and TEM. After long-term cycling, the monolithic active grains evolve into flake-assembled aggregates still with the monolithic and micro-sized features (Fig. 4A and B). The size of these aggregates can reach up to 5 μm and the thickness of the flakes grown out is about 20 nm. These surface flakes are quite flexible and interlace with each other into a network structure. The inner region of aggregates is denser by the self-assembly of much shorter flakes or nanodomains. This hierarchical texture evolution stems from the prevailing Zn-intercalation and interlayer expansion in the deeper bulk phase, which is cut into slices along the expanded planes. The PEDOT-pillared planes with larger interlayer spacing are prone to evolve into broader flakes at the surface. Different from the excess pillaring at the initial stage, the later sufficient intercalation does not lead to fragmentation into smaller nanofiber grains (Fig. S5, ESI†). Instead the monolithic feature is well kept due to the high surface energy of flakes even after long-term cycling. Note that the big flake grain is grown in an epitaxial manner, therefore resulting in the formation of a single-crystal texture as seen from the TEM and SAED in Fig. 4C–E. The observed distribution of the diffraction plots corresponds to a d-spacing of 5.26 Å, agreeing with the XRD diffraction peak at 16.66°. On the other hand, a region of short flake self-assembly can also be found in TEM (Fig. 4F). Taking a closer look, the flake consists of numerous polycrystalline nanodomains (Fig. 4G), where lattice fringes with a d-spacing of 0.355 nm are clearly observed, matching well with the diffraction peak at 25.06° in the discharged electrode. The enrichment of lattice-incompatible interfaces between nanodomains retards the further growth of short flakes as single-crystal flakes. From the EDS element mapping in the Fig. 4A region, we find that the coloring of V element is absent in some much thicker and wider flakes, which stay beside the self-assembled aggregates (with clear coloring of V) discussed above. We deduce that these coarse flakes are the products of electrolyte decomposition, since therein the Zn, O, and S elements are uniformly distributed (Fig. 4H). This result is consistent with the XPS result with the confirmation of residual Zn-salt. In aqueous batteries, the precipitation of electrolyte derivatives was often met in previous reports.51 In our case, these side products are shaped into narrow nanostructures, which would not passivate the surface of active species and therefore not influence the cycling performance.
 Fig. 4  (A and B) SEM images of a cycled VOP electrode with different scales after 60 cycles. (C and D) TEM images of a single crystal flake-like grain in cycled VOP with different scales. (E) Corresponding SAED pattern of (C). (F) TEM image of a cycled VOP grain self-assembled with polycrystalline nanodomains. (G) HRTEM image of the corresponding polycrystalline nanodomains. (H) EDS element mapping result in the region of (A). 
Electrochemical diffusion kinetics and discussion of the shallow-layer pillaring strategy
In order to disclose the intrinsic kinetic properties of Zn/VOP batteries, we used Ti-supported electrodes for the estimation of the pseudo-capacitance contribution and diffusion coefficient. Fig. 5A shows the CV curves of VOP at different scan rates from 0.1 to 1.0 mV s−1. With increasing scan rate, the outlines of the CV curves resemble each other, while the redox peaks undergo a bit of voltage shifting and become broader. The relationship between the peak current (i) and scan rate (v) can be described as i = avb or rewritten as log(i) = log(a) + blog(v), where a and b are adjustable parameters and the b-value can range from 0.5 to 1.0.21,52 A b value of 0.5 corresponds to a diffusion-controlled behavior while a b value of 1.0 indicates a capacitive behavior. Fig. 5B displays the plots of log(i) vs.·log(v) for the marked four pairs of redox peaks, and the b-value can be determined by the slopes of the corresponding fitting lines. All the b-values for these redox peaks are more than 0.8 (even approaching 1 for peak A3 and C3), indicating the tremendous contribution of the capacitive process in Zn/VOP batteries. To quantitatively assess the capacitive contribution, the current response (i) in the CV curves can be expressed as a combination of the capacitive process (k1v) and diffusion-controlled process (k1v1/2) denoted as i = k1v + k2v1/2. Therein, the k1 and k2 parameters can be quantified by the slope and intercept of the linear relationship between i/v1/2 and v1/2 based on i/v1/2 = k1v1/2 + k2. For instance, Fig. 5C displays the capacitive current (k1v) plotted from the typical CV curve at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1, and the capacitive contribution fraction in the total capacity is estimated to be as high as 67%, based on the orange shaded area. Similarly, the capacitive currents plotted in the CV curves at other scan rates are shown in Fig. S19 (ESI†). The corresponding capacitive contribution ratios at different scan rates are exhibited in Fig. 5D, ranging from 67% to 86% with the increase of the scan rate. This result indicates that the capacitive process dominates the charge storage behavior, benefiting from the shallow-layer pillaring of PEDOT chains in layered V2O5. This result accounts for the superior rate performance and ultrastable cycling process.
 Fig. 5  (A) CV curves of a VOP electrode at various scan rates. (B) Plots of log(peak current) vs. log(scan rate) of four pairs of redox peaks in the CV curves. (C) CV curve of VOP at 0.1 mV s−1 with the capacitive current response (orange region) plotted from the total current. (D) Column graphs of capacitive contributions at various scan rates. (E) GITT curves during the charge–discharge process at a current density of 50 mA g−1. (F) Zn2+ diffusion coefficients as a function of Zn2+ composition during the charge–discharge process obtained from GITT. 
The galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT) was applied to evaluate the Zn diffusion behavior in the VOP lattice (Fig. 5E). The assembled battery was firstly discharged and charged at 0.1 A g−1 for 30 cycles to obtain a stable state before GITT measurements. Then the titration process was performed by discharge or charge for 20 min at a current density of 50 mA g−1, followed by 3 h open-circuit relaxation back to the equilibrium state. This process was repeated until the discharge or charge voltage reaches 0.2 or 1.6 V vs. Zn. The chemical diffusion coefficient (DZn2+) can be calculated for each titration step, based on the following formula:53  where τ denotes the constant current pulse time (1200 s); mB, Vm, and MB are the mass, the molar volume (54.32 cm3 mol−1), and the molar mass (182.0 g mol−1) of V2O5, respectively; S is the area of the electrode/electrolyte interface; L is the thickness of the electrode; ΔES is the change of steady-state voltages between two adjacent GITT steps, and Eτ is the transient cell voltage during the constant current pulse in a single-step GITT experiment. If sufficiently small current is applied for a short time interval, dEτ/d√τ can be considered to be linear and the coulometric titration curve can be also considered to be linear over the composition range involved in this step (Fig. S20a, ESI†), and the above equation can be simplified as follows:52,53  where ΔEτ is the total change of the cell voltage during a constant current pulse in a single-step GITT experiment (neglecting the iR-drop) as shown in Fig. S20b (ESI†). The total titration capacity is 383 mA h g−1 (Fig. 5E), roughly corresponding to the de/intercalation of 1.6 Zn2+ per V2O5 if we don’t take the mass of PEDOT into account. As shown in Fig. 5F, the estimated diffusion coefficient of Zn2+ in VOP ranges from 1.43 × 10−9 to 1.81 × 10−8 cm2 s−1, and it is higher than those (10−12–10−10 cm2 s−1) of vanadium-oxide-based cathodes (even prepared by tailored nano-engineering) reported previously.22,47,54,55 Furthermore the DZn2+ value fluctuation range is quite narrow in the whole Zn compositing process, indicating a homogeneous diffusion behvior in the whole voltage range benefiting from the cascading effect and synergic breathing mechanism of interlayer expansion mentioned above. This superior solid-state diffusion kinetics of Zn2+ is responsible for the high-rate performance of the VOP cathode.
First-principles computations based on density functional theory (DFT) were performed to further investigate the diffusion behavior of Zn2+ (Fig. 6). The interlayer-expanded V2O5 with a d-spacing of 9.86 Å was premised for this estimation, based on the existence of a diffraction peak at 8.96° in the XRD pattern (Fig. 1B). Here, the climbing-image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) method was adopted to compute the potential diffusion pathways and corresponding diffusion barriers.56 It can be identifed that there are two energetically favorable sites for Zn absorption (marked with H1 and H2, as shown in Fig. 6A), consistent with a previous report.57 The absorption energies of Zn on the H1 and H2 sites are 0.17 eV and 1.40 eV, respectively. There are three probable Zn diffusion pathways with corresponding diffusion barriers of 0.39 eV, 0.76 eV and 1.76 eV for Path 1, 2 and 3, respectively (Fig. 6B and C). As shown in Fig. S21 (ESI†), Path 1 denotes a hopping process between adjacent H1 sites; Path 2 denotes another hopping process between adjacent H2 sites; while Path 3 is the hopping route between the nearest H1 and H2 sites. This computation indicates that the hopping path between the adjacent homogeneous sites is preferable, especially for the sites with lower adsorption energy (i.e. H1 to H1). Therefore Zn prefers the Path 1 pathway with the lowest migration energy barrier (0.39 eV) in the interlayers of VOP. The weak electrostatic interaction between divalent Zn2+ and the host lattice is beneficial to the fast migration kinetics between H1 and H1, compared with that between H2 and H2.21,57 For the V2O5 without interlayer expansion, there is only one energetically favorable site for Zn absorption and the corresponding absorption energy is as high as 1.38 eV. Its migration energy barrier (0.44 eV) is higher than that of the interlayer-expanded counterpart (Fig. S22, ESI†). These results are in accordance with the worse electrochemical performance of commercial V2O5. Combining the computational results with experiment, we suggest that the existence of expanded interlayers at the V2O5 surface can guide the fast Zn2+ diffusion throughout the whole lattice. The reason why this configuration did not involve PEDOT is to simplify the computational model, since the way that PEDOT interacts with V2O5 is complicated. The incorporation of a polymer with diversified polymerization degree, structure distortion and bonding situation would lead to the complication and failing of the calculation process. A similar modeling method was also found in recent reports.31,58 The simplified modeling would not influence the simulation result.
 Fig. 6  (A) Two sites (H1 and H2) for Zn2+ insertion. (B) Possible Zn2+ diffusion pathways. (C) Diffusion energy barrier profiles of three Zn2+ diffusion pathways in expanded interlayers of VOP. 
We have to emphasize the crucial factors to activate the electrochemistry of ZB cathodes. Here we propose a new viewpoint that the intrinsic lattice expansion strategy is more important than the widely used nano-engineering methods, and the shallow-layer pillaring is enough to active the electrode performance via the cascading effect and synergic breathing mechanism of interlayer expansion under the integrity preservation of monolithic grains (Fig. 3B). The pre-pillaring of PEDOT chains at the surface in our case can trigger very fast Zn intercalation into the bulk phase through the interface between pillared and unpillared interlayers. Such a domino-like reaction enables the propagation of expanded interlayers to the deeper zones and thus the sufficient ultilization of redox grains. The earlier intercalated interlayers would dynamically open the edges of adjacent interlayers under the condition of lattice coherence in the manner of coorperative breathing. Actually the nanostructuring of active grains is not necessary, and moreover it is detrimental to the tap density of the electrode and accelerates the undesired solubility of active species. Excess interlayer expansion often results in the delamination or attenuation of electrode grains, while shallow-layer pillaring does not initiate the cracking of grains. The micro-sized morphology can be well inherited even after long-term cycling of our VOP monolithic grains. Apart from the compactness of active species, the firm pinning of insoluble uncharged PEDOT pillars can also reinforce the insolublity of the VOP electrode. The combination of pre-pillaring decoration and suppressed electrode dissolution enables an ultrahigh rate performance and ultrastable cycling performance, superior to most of the previously reported oxide cathodes with intentional nano-texture or excess cation pre-pillaring. The original layered structure is crucial for the extension of the cascading effect, like the unzipping manner. Such a layered structure is required to be robust but flexible enough against substantial interlayer expansion and contraction. It can tolerate the pillaring of diversified cations, small molecules and polymerized molecules without the serious disruption of lattice coherence. We believe that the phenomenon of the cascading effect can be extended to other material systems as long as such a layered structure is satisfied. Although the concentrations of some cations in lattices of cation-pillared oxides are not high, the cation doping is homogenous through these lattices as a consequence of sufficient pillaring. Therein the usual co-insertion of water molecules together with cations would accelerate the exfoliation of layered structures from the zones of interlayers into nano-grains. Therefore the cascading effect is not remarkable in tailored nanostructures already with substantial pillaring.
Conclusion
In summary, we propose a shallow-layer pillaring strategy to activate the cycling and rate performance of micro-sized V2O5 monolithic grains for ZBs without the requirement of intentional nanostructured tailoring, via the intercalation and in situ polymerization of PEDOT chains in the near-surface interlayers of layered V2O5. This composited VOP with expanded interlayers only at the surface can trigger a cascading effect to open the deeper interlayers during Zn intercalation. This synergic interlayer expansion enables sufficient and quick activation of bulk phase V2O5 even with thick grains as opposed to non-pillared ones. This shallow-layer pillaring of a hydrophobic conductive polymer can suppress the attenuation and dissolution of active species, compared with the cases of excess pillaring or cation doping for layered oxide electrodes. The surface pillaring of PEDOT enables not only conductive contact between grains, but also a lowered Zn2+ diffusion barrier by DFT calculations and a high Zn2+ diffusion coefficient (1.43 × 10−9–1.81 × 10−8 cm2 s−1) by GITT. The superior electrode conductive network can be further reinforced by squeezing active grains into a 3D porous carbon collector. These factors endow the optimized VOP cathode with an unprecedented cycling/rate performance (e.g. 388, 367 and 351 mA h g−1 even at 5, 8 and 10 A g−1 respectively, and 269 mA h g−1 after 4500 cycles under 10 A g−1). The CP-supported VOP can achieve a high energy density of 280.2 W h kg−1 under a power density of 700.5 W kg−1, and an energy density still preserved at 205.8 W h kg−1 under an ultrahigh power density of 5.96 kW kg−1.
Materials and method
Material synthesis
The VOP composite was synthesized as follows. Typically, 0.7 g V2O5 (99%, 3A Chemicals) was dispersed in 30 ml deionized water with ultrasonic treatment for 1 h to make a homogeneous suspension. Afterward, 0.3 ml 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene monomer (98%, Aladdin Reagent Co.) was added to the suspension dropwise, which was kept stirring for one week at room temperature until the initial orange suspension turned into a dark green one. The obtained suspension was filtered and the product was washed thoroughly with distilled water several times. Finally, the as-prepared VOP composite was dried at 80 °C in a vacuum oven overnight. For the synthesis of VOP with excess PEDOT, the procedure is similar apart from that the amount of added PEDOT was doubled (0.6 ml).
Material characterization
XRD (D8 Discover, Bruker) was implemented with Cu Kα radiation in a 2-theta range of 5–80° to study the structure and crystallinity of pure PEDOT and V2O5, pristine VOPs and cycled electrodes. TGA was performed in an alumina crucible using a TA Instruments SDT Q600 in air. The morphology and element distribution were investigated using an SEM (Magellan 400L, FEI) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) attachment. The Raman spectrum was collected on a DXR Raman microscope (Thermal Scientific Corporation, USA) using a He–Ne laser at 532 nm. The components and surface chemical state of pristine VOP and cycled electrodes were probed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCAlab-250, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an Al anode source. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern and high-resolution TEM image were obtained by transmission electron microscopy (JEOL JSM-6700F, operated at 200 kV). The electrode samples for ex situ XRD, XPS, SEM, TEM and EDS measurements were dismantled from the cycled cells and then carefully washed with deionized water to remove the residual electrolyte, followed by a subsequent drying process. When measuring the conductivities of samples before and after PEDOT pillaring, VOP and bulk V2O5 powders were first pressed into pellets (1–1.5 mm in thickness and 10 mm in diameter) under a pressure of 900 MPa for 180 s, followed by a silver pasting procedure on both sides of the pellets. The resistances of the VOP and bulk V2O5 pellets were measured using an ohmmeter. Their conductivities (denoted as σ) are calculated by the formula: , where L and S are the thickness and area of the pellets, respectively, and R is the measured resistance.
Electrochemical measurements
The working electrode was prepared by mixing the active material (VOP or V2O5), super P, and poly (vinyl difluoride) (PVDF) at a weight ratio of 6:3:1 with 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP) as a solvent (20 ml to 1 g PVDF) to make a homogeneous slurry. It was then uniformly pasted on a titanium foil current collector (or carbon paper) by blade scraping and dried in a vacuum at 80 °C overnight. In the case of carbon paper, a fraction of active grains can be loosened by the rough porous surface of CP, and they are trapped in the open pores between CP skeletons. The mass loading of active material was about 1.5 mg cm−2. Zinc foil, a glass fiber membrane (Whatman GF/B) and 3 M aqueous zinc trifluoromethane sulfonate (Aladdin, AR, 98.0%) aqueous solution were used as the anode, separator, and electrolyte, respectively. CR2032-type coin cells were assembled in an air atmosphere to evaluate the electrochemical performance in a voltage window of 0.2–1.6 V at different rates from 0.1 to 10 A g−1 on a LAND battery testing system (CT2001A). The capacity of the electrodes was calculated based on the weight of VOP composite for the VOP electrodes or based on the weight of V2O5 for the commercial V2O5 electrodes. GITT was carried out after the electrode activation process (30 cycles at 0.1 A g−1). CV curves were measured using an Autolab electrochemical workstation (PGSTAT 302N) in a voltage range from 0.2 to 1.6 V at different scan rates from 0.1 to 1 mV s−1. All of the electrochemical tests were performed at room temperature.
Computational details
First-principles computations based on density functional theory (DFT) were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) with projected augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials and the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) parametrization of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was used for the exchange–correlation functional. The GGA+U method with a Ueff value of 4.2 V was employed to take the strong correlation of the d orbital in V atoms into account.59 An energy cutoff of 500 eV and a 3 × 1 × 1 V2O5 supercell were adopted in all the calculations. The spacing of the (0 0 1) plane was fixed to 9.86 Å to simulate the PEDOT intercalated interlayer. The calculations of adsorption and diffusion were carried out with a 3 × 3 × 3 Monkhorst–Pack k-grid in the first Brillouin zone. Absorption energy Ea was defined as:Ea = Ehost+Zn − (Ehost + EZn)where Ehost+Zn and Ehost are the total energies of the host with and without Zn atom adsorption, and EZn is the energy of a single Zn atom. The activation barrier and migration pathway of Zn2+ diffusion kinetics in the interlayer were estimated with the climbing-image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) method. The energy convergence criteria were set on the order of 10−5 eV and the structures are fully relaxed until the residual force on each atom is less than 0.02 and 0.05 eV Å−1 for Zn2+ adsorption and Zn2+ diffusion, respectively.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFB0901600), National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1830113, 51772313 and 21975276), and Shanghai Science and Technology Committee (16DZ2270100).
References
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Ma, C. Han, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 550–587 CrossRef CAS .
M. Song, H. Tan, D. Chao and H. J. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802564 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, F. Cheng, Y. Liu, Q. Zhao, K. Lei, C. Chen, X. Liu and J. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12894–12901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, B. Li, H. Du and F. Kang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 933–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Z. Yang, Y. Jiang, C. Jin, W. Huang, X. Ding and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 211–217 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Alfaruqi, V. Mathew, J. Song, S. Kim, S. Islam, D. T. Pham, J. Jo, S. Kim, J. P. Baboo, Z. Xiu, K.-S. Lee, Y.-K. Sun and J. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1684–1694 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. Chen, X. Zhou and Z. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400930 CrossRef .
F. Wang, E. Hu, W. Sun, T. Gao, X. Ji, X. Fan, F. Han, X.-Q. Yang, K. Xu and C. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3168–3175 RSC .
N. Zhang, F. Cheng, J. Liu, L. Wang, X. Long, X. Liu, F. Li and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 405 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Alfaruqi, V. Mathew, J. Gim, S. Kim, J. Song, J. P. Baboo, S. H. Choi and J. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3609–3620 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Alfaruqi, J. Gim, S. Kim, J. Song, D. T. Pham, J. Jo, Z. Xiu, V. Mathew and J. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 60, 121–125 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, F. Wang, S. Hou, C. Yang, X. Fan, Z. Ma, T. Gao, F. Han, R. Hu, M. Zhu and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9775–9778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, Z. Wang, M. Hou, X. Dong, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2906 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Pan, Y. Shao, P. Yan, Y. Cheng, K. S. Han, Z. Nie, C. Wang, J. Yang, X. Li, P. Bhattacharya, K. T. Mueller and J. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16039 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wu, G. Zhang, M. Yan, T. Xiong, P. He, L. He, X. Xu and L. Mai, Small, 2018, 14, 1703850 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tepavcevic, H. Xiong, V. R. Stamenkovic, X. Zuo, M. Balasubramanian, V. B. Prakapenka, C. S. Johnson and T. Rajh, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 530–538 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yao, Y. Li, R. C. Massé, E. Uchaker and G. Cao, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 11, 205–259 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, Y. Tang, G. Fang, L. Shan, J. Guo, W. Zhang, C. Wang, L. Wang, J. Zhou and S. Liang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3157–3162 RSC .
M. Yan, P. He, Y. Chen, S. Wang, Q. Wei, K. Zhao, X. Xu, Q. An, Y. Shuang, Y. Shao, K. T. Mueller, L. Mai, J. Liu and J. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703725 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kundu, B. D. Adams, V. Duffort, S. H. Vajargah and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16119 CrossRef .
P. He, G. Zhang, X. Liao, M. Yan, X. Xu, Q. An, J. Liu and L. Mai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702463 CrossRef .
C. Xia, J. Guo, P. Li, X. Zhang and H. N. Alshareef, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3943–3948 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Ming, H. Liang, Y. Lei, S. Kandambeth, M. Eddaoudi and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2602–2609 CrossRef .
H. Geng, M. Cheng, B. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang and C. C. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1907684 CrossRef .
B. Tang, J. Zhou, G. Fang, F. Liu, C. Zhu, C. Wang, A. Pan and S. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 940–945 RSC .
Y. Zeng, X. Zhang, Y. Meng, M. Yu, J. Yi, Y. Wu, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700274 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, L. Xie, W. Zhang, Z. Dai, W. Wei, S. Luo, X. Chen, W. Chen, F. Rao, L. Wang and Y. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30943–30952 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Perera, R. B. Archer, C. A. Damin, R. Mendoza-Cruz and C. P. Rhodes, J. Power Sources, 2017, 343, 580–591 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Zhang, K. Zhang, F. Xiong, S. Tan, Q. An, Y. M. Kang, Z. Zhou and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801984 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xia, Z. Lin, Y. Zhou, C. Zhao, H. Liang, P. Rozier, Z. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803594 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Fdz De Anastro, N. Casado, X. Wang, J. Rehmen, D. Evans, D. Mecerreyes and M. Forsyth, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 278, 271–278 CrossRef .
A. V. Murugan, B. B. Kale, C.-W. Kwon, G. Campet and K. Vijayamohanan, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2470–2475 RSC .
B. Anothumakkool, R. Soni, S. N. Bhange and S. Kurungot, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1339–1347 RSC .
D. Chao, X. Xia, J. Liu, Z. Fan, C. F. Ng, J. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5794–5800 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Farah, S. A. Rutledge, A. Schaarschmidt, R. Lai, J. P. Freedman and A. S. Helmy, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 113709 CrossRef .
W. Chen, L. Mai, J. Peng, Q. Xu and Q. Zhu, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 377–379 CrossRef .
L. Wang, T. Shu, S. Guo, Y. Lu, M. Li, J. Nzabahimana and X. Hu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 150–158 CrossRef .
Z. Cui, C. Coletta, R. Rebois, S. Baiz, M. Gervais, F. Goubard, P.-H. Aubert, A. Dazzi and S. Remita, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2016, 119, 157–166 CrossRef .
J. Tian, X. Zhou, Q. Wu and C. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 22, 218–227 CrossRef .
Q. Pang, C. Sun, Y. Yu, K. Zhao, Z. Zhang, P. M. Voyles, G. Chen, Y. Wei and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800144 CrossRef .
D. Xu, H. Wang, F. Li, Z. Guan, R. Wang, B. He, Y. Gong and X. Hu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801506 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, Y. Dong, M. Jia, X. Bian, Y. Wang, M. Qiu, J. Xu, Y. Liu, L. Jiao and F. Cheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1366–1372 CrossRef .
H. Yan and H. Okuzaki, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 2225–2228 CrossRef .
M. Agostini, S. Xiong, A. Matic and J. Hassoun, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4604–4611 CrossRef .
M. Liao, J. Wang, L. Ye, H. Sun, Y. Wen, C. Wang, X. Sun, B. Wang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 59, 2273–2278 CrossRef .
D. Martin-Vosshage and B. Chowdari, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 2109–2114 CrossRef .
S. K. M. Jönsson, J. Birgerson, X. Crispin, G. Greczynski, W. Osikowicz, A. W. Denier van der Gon, W. R. Salaneck and M. Fahlman, Synth. Met., 2003, 139, 1–10 CrossRef .
S. Leijonmarck, T. Carlson, G. Lindbergh, L. E. Asp, H. Maples and A. Bismarck, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2013, 89, 149–157 CrossRef .
W. Li, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 14–21 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, K. Y. Wei, H. L. Wu, S. P. Ma, J. Li, Y. X. Cui, Z. H. Dong, Y. H. Cui and C. L. Li, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2490–2500 Search PubMed .
K. Y. Chen, Y. Zhang and C. L. Li, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12444–12455 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Q. Li, K. Ma, G. Yang and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12081–12089 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ding, Z. Du, B. Li, L. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Gong and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga and H. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 9901–9904 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, X. Zhang, D. Wu, H. Zhang, F. Ding and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16606–16611 RSC .
Y. Zhao, D. Wang, D. Yang, L. Wei, B. Liu, X. Wang, G. Chen and Y. Wei, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 749–756 CrossRef .
J.-S. Park, J. H. Jo, Y. Aniskevich, A. Bakavets, G. Ragoisha, E. Streltsov, J. Kim and S.-T. Myung, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6777–6787 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S22 are provided. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee01531hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Broader context
Benefiting from the environmental friendliness and cost-effectiveness of aqueous electrolytes and zinc metal anodes, aqueous zinc batteries (ZBs) have obtained increasing attention as a potential candidate in large-scale grid energy storage systems. Unfortunately, the high polarity of the Zn-ion and its strong electrostatic interaction with the host lattices (or ligands) result in sluggish Zn2+ de/intercalation kinetics. In this work, we improved the zinc storage properties of V2O5 by expanding the interlayers of V2O5 monolithic grains with a conductive polymer only at the shallow-layer positions, rather than using the universal nanostructural tailoring strategy at the cost of the tap density and structural stability of active species. The expanded interlayers near the surface of the layered oxide via in situ polymerization of 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) can serve as guideways for Zn to penetrate into the deeper layers via a cascading effect. Besides, the embedding of a hydrophobic conductive polymer is prone to suppress the attenuation and dissolution of active species. These factors endow the cathode with a superior cycling/rate performance. The concept of shallow-layer pillaring activation (especially via organic molecules) and the cascading effect are expected to give substantial inspiration for electrode design with the preservation of the grain integrity.


 	Fig. 1  (A) Schematic illustration of VOP synthesis with photos of solutions at the initial stage (yellow) and after stirring for 7 days at room temperature (dark green). (B) XRD patterns of the as-prepared VOP, commercial V2O5 and pure PEDOT. (C) Raman spectra of VOP, V2O5 and PEDOT. (D) TGA curve, (E) SEM image (inset: magnified one), (F) TEM image (inset: SAED pattern) and (G) HRTEM image of VOP powder.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Schematic illustration of charge transfer situations in electrodes prepared by pasting active grains on Ti foil and CP. (B) Typical CV curves of Zn/VOP batteries using different current collectors at 0.1 mV s−1. (C) Typical charge–discharge curves of a Zn/VOP battery using a CP current collector at different current densities. (D) Rate capability (from 1.0 to 10 A g−1) and (E) cyclic performance (at 1.0 A g−1) of Zn/VOP and Zn/VOP-E batteries using different current collectors. (F) Comparison of Ragone plots between our VOP electrodes and other reported cathodes pillared by various cations for ZBs. The energy density values are calculated by integrating the voltage profiles during discharge. (G) Long-term cycling performance of Zn/VOP and Zn/VOP-E batteries using different current collectors at 10 A g−1.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Ex situ XRD patterns of cycled electrodes at different reaction stages and corresponding galvanostatic charge–discharge curves. (B) Schematic illustration of the “synergic lattice breathing” mechanism for V2O5 interlayer expansion and contraction. XPS spectra of (C) V 2p and (D) Zn 2p of VOP electrodes at the initial and fully discharged/charged states.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A and B) SEM images of a cycled VOP electrode with different scales after 60 cycles. (C and D) TEM images of a single crystal flake-like grain in cycled VOP with different scales. (E) Corresponding SAED pattern of (C). (F) TEM image of a cycled VOP grain self-assembled with polycrystalline nanodomains. (G) HRTEM image of the corresponding polycrystalline nanodomains. (H) EDS element mapping result in the region of (A).	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) CV curves of a VOP electrode at various scan rates. (B) Plots of log(peak current) vs. log(scan rate) of four pairs of redox peaks in the CV curves. (C) CV curve of VOP at 0.1 mV s−1 with the capacitive current response (orange region) plotted from the total current. (D) Column graphs of capacitive contributions at various scan rates. (E) GITT curves during the charge–discharge process at a current density of 50 mA g−1. (F) Zn2+ diffusion coefficients as a function of Zn2+ composition during the charge–discharge process obtained from GITT.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Two sites (H1 and H2) for Zn2+ insertion. (B) Possible Zn2+ diffusion pathways. (C) Diffusion energy barrier profiles of three Zn2+ diffusion pathways in expanded interlayers of VOP.	 
Ea = Ehost+Zn − (Ehost + EZn)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S22 are provided. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee01531h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
