Synthesis of self-ordered Sb 2 Te 2 films with atomically aligned Te layers and the effect of phonon scattering modulation   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TC31215A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TC31215A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 7043-7053Synthesis of self-ordered Sb2Te2 films with atomically aligned Te layers and the effect of phonon scattering modulation†Hyejin Choia, Ju Heyuck Baecka, Tae-Hyeon Kima, Jae Yong Songb, Sangwoo Shinc, HyungHee Choc, Dae-Hong Kod, Jin-Sang Kime, Kwang Ho Jeonga and Mann-Ho Cho‡*aaDepartment of Physics and Applied Physics, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea. E-mail: mh.cho@yonsei.ac.krbCenter for Nanocharacterization, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science, Daejeon, 305-340, Republic of KoreacDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of KoreadDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of KoreaeElectronic Materials Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 136-701, KoreaReceived 24th June 2013, Accepted 2nd September 2013First published on 3rd September 2013AbstractIn this work, we prepared multilayered films with repeated Sb and Te layers by a thermal evaporation method. The film structure was controlled by the layer thickness ratio of Sb to Te, resulting in the formation of self-ordered superlattice structured Sb2Te2/Te films and self-ordered Sb2Te3 films. The thermoelectrical properties and the thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT) closely correlated with the structural characteristics, i.e., the superlattice structure with semiconductor–semimetal layers contributed to both electron and phonon scattering resulting in an improvement in electrical conduction and an increase in phonon scattering. In particular, phonon scattering was significantly increased to further reduce thermal conductivity in the self-ordered superlattice structure of the {Sb2Te2/Te}n sample. As a result, a thermoelectric figure of merit of ZT = 1.43 was obtained at 400 K for {Sb(4)Te(6)}n, indicating that the self-ordered superlattice structure holds great promise as an alternative layered thin film thermoelectric material.I. IntroductionThermoelectric (TE) power generation devices play an important role in the better utilization of solar and geothermal power, as well as in capturing automobile-derived heat via a noise-free and low-maintenance conversion process.1–3 However, for thermoelectric devices to become competitive with conventional refrigerators or power generators, a large increase in their efficiency is required. Thermoelectric performance has been evaluated by a dimensionless figure of merit (ZT), defined as ZT = S2σT/κ, where S = −ΔV/ΔT is the Seebeck coefficient (ΔV is the voltage difference corresponding to a given temperature difference ΔT), σ is the electrical conductivity, and κ is the thermal conductivity.4 Some recent research studies have focused on decreasing thermal conductivity to augment phonon scattering by structural modification of TE materials using superlattice nanostructuring.5 For example, nanostructured alloys such as p-type AgxTey–Sb2Te3 films, Half-Heusler compounds, and SixGe1−x showed ZT value enhancement due to an increase in phonon scattering.4–7 More promising results (ZT ∼ 2.4 for p-type materials at room temperature) were achieved with a Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 superlattice produced by low-temperature deposition.5 Another recent study reported that low-dimensional structuring of a BiSbTe alloy provided ZT enhancement to ∼1.5 at room temperature.7,8 However, still higher ZT values are needed to have a major practical impact. It has been shown that a ZT value above 3 or 4 at room temperature would be needed in order to make thermoelectric cooling or power generation competitive with conventional methods.9 Thus, in order to realize the full potential of 2D layered thin films to improve the thermoelectric figure of merit via the electron–crystal–phonon–glass, a multilayered superlattice structure with thin films and high-quality interfaces needs to be produced.10 Conventional, electrochemical, or other chemical vapor deposition techniques are not capable of producing such quality structures. Gossard et al. demonstrated that enhancement could be achieved by introducing nanoscale metals/semimetals into a semiconducting matrix.11 The interfacial barrier between a semimetal and a semiconductor is able to filter out cold carriers to enhance the Seebeck coefficient without losing mobility. Kim et al. reported that a semimetal–semiconductor superlattice, such as an ErAs/InxGa1−x As thin film, could be grown via ideal molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). This semimetal–semiconductor superlattice structure enhanced the Seebeck coefficient and improved electrical conductivity while simultaneously reducing thermal conductivity, and a high ZT value of 1.3 was obtained.12,13Herein, we report a method that produces alternately layered films grown by thermal evaporation resulting in materials with increased electrical conductivity and decreased thermal conductivity. The alternately layered thin film was grown by independently controlling each layer within the range of a few angstroms. This growth method minimizes interfacial strain from the substrate. Moreover, atomically controlling each layer allows for uniform diffusion into adjacent layers during the process, such that a well-ordered crystalline structure can be grown on various substrates.14,15 To evaluate different degrees of the atomic diffusion effect, two Sb(x) and Te(y) layers were alternatively grown with different thicknesses (x Å and y Å). A single crystal film with a self-ordered superlattice structure could be grown by controlling the inter-diffusion of the Sb and Te layers using a suitable annealing process. In this study, we analyzed the structural and thermoelectric properties and atomic vibration modes of various {Sb(x)Te(y)}n films with alternating layers of different thickness ratios. The results indicated that the {Sb(3)Te(9)}n multilayer film was transformed into a well-ordered single crystal Sb2Te3 structure. Moreover, by increasing the thickness ratio of the Te to Sb layers, the multilayer film changed to a single crystalline structure containing uniformly repeating Te layers; i.e., an {Sb(4)Te(6)}n multilayered film changed to a {Sb2Te2(80)/Te(10)}n self-ordered superlattice structure. Changes in the electrical conduction and atomic vibration mode were an indication of the effects of the reconstructed crystalline structure caused by combined atomic diffusion and crystallization processes in the alternately layered system during annealing. Using this structural effect, the phonon scattering process could be modulated, which consequently affected the thermoelectrical properties through a significant decrease in thermal conductivity. Finally, a significantly enhanced figure of merit (∼1.43) at 400 K was achieved.II. Experimental sectionSynthesis of SbTe thin filmFilm substrates were p-type Si(001) thermally grown SiO2. Substrates with an area of 2 × 2 cm were cleaned with separate wash processes using acetone and methanol. The deposition system consisted of a growth chamber and a load-lock chamber. The base pressure of the growth chamber was under 10−8 Torr. Antimony and telluride were grown in multilayer films using a K-cell. The evaporation rates of both elements were kept at 0.2 Å s−1, which was controlled using an electronic heater current controller and based on thermocouple measurements. The formation of multilayers can be controlled using individually operated source shutters connected to thickness monitors. The Z-factors and densities of materials were used to precisely calculate the growth rate. The Z-factor is the ratio of the acoustic impedance of the sensor to that of the deposited material. The shutter connected to the thickness monitor was automatically closed when a layer reached the intended thickness. Deposition consisted of alternating cycles of growth of the two source materials. The grown film was annealed in situ at 200 °C for 10 min under a vacuum of 10−8 Torr. The surface roughness and density of each deposited elemental layer were confirmed by X-ray reflectivity (XRR).Physical measurementsStructural property. In order to investigate structural changes in these multilayer films during the annealing process, we observed variations in the crystal state by X-ray diffraction using the 8C1 beam (POSCO beam line) at the Pohang light source (PLS) at a wavelength λ = 1.5402 Å. X-ray reflection (XRR) data were obtained on a Bruker D8 Discover diffractometer, using Cu Kα radiation. To observe change of crystallization of the surface during the annealing process for real-time, in situ Reflection High Energy Electron Diffraction (RHEED) was used. We also confirmed local crystal states from cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images. Lattice images obtained by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy showed that the local structure within the layered structure had nearly complete homogeneity. We analyzed the atomic bonding state and Raman vibration mode during the diffusion process for each multilayered film from Raman spectra using an Ar ion laser source with a power of 0.1 mW and a 514 nm wavelength [see ESI S1†].Electrical and thermoelectrical property. Cross-plane electrical conductivity and the charge carrier type as a function of the Sb(x)Te(y) composition ratio were investigated by Hall measurements. Hall measurements were performed using the van der Pauw method under an applied field of 0.5 T (ECOPIA: HMS-5500). Temperature-dependent Seebeck coefficient measurement data were collected from 300 K to 400 K using a steady-state technique. In this case, the Seebeck coefficient of each film was measured by using two s-type thermocouple leads. Each thermocouple was inserted into an alumina block with isolated holes for the two thermocouple leads. To maintain stable contact at high temperature, the thermocouples were fixed by using an alumina block with two alumina bolts. A side of the sample holder was heated by using a heating wire to generate a thermal gradient in the Sb(x)Te(y) film. The whole system was inserted into a tube furnace with a built-in temperature controller system and the Seebeck voltage and thermal difference were collected over a wide temperature range from 300 to 400 K. In-plane Seebeck coefficient data were collected by applying a temperature gradient along the in-plane direction while monitoring the resulting voltage. The electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient of Sb2Te3 have anisotropic characteristics, which is very similar to the case of Bi2Te3. Dennis interpreted the thermoelectric power anisotropy in Bi2Te3 in terms of two carrier scattering mechanisms: anisotropic scattering by host atoms and isotropic scattering by impurity atoms. According to the result, the anisotropic carrier–phonon scattering, concurrent with the isotropic impurity scattering, results in an anisotropic Seebeck coefficient. Similarly, a mixed mechanism of carrier scattering can be applied to the layered SbTe compound.16 Moreover, Shelimova et al. and Kanno et al. reported the cross-plane electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient to be about 12–15% higher than in-plane electrical conductivity for the whole temperature range.17–19 Based on several previous reports, we calculated the cross-plane electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient from the in-plane electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient. Thermal conductivity measurements were carried out at a rate of 1 K min−1 using the 3ω method for thin films combined with an AC modulation technique. A sinusoidal input current with a frequency of 100–1000 Hz was employed for thermal conductivity measurements. To ensure the entire diffusion of thermal heat into the sample and to minimize convective heat loss to the surrounding, measurements were conducted under vacuum conditions (∼5 × 10−5 Torr). In order to measure the 3ω thermal conductivity using the conventional hot-wire technique, a thin metal wire was employed at the top of the sample for simultaneous operation as a heater and a thermometer. Detailed 3ω thermal conductivity measurement procedures have been presented in a previous paper [see ESI S2†].20–22III. Results and discussionInitially, we investigated the crystal structures of alternately layered films after annealing at 200 °C. Fig. 1 shows cross-sectional high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of {Sb(3)Te(3)}n, Sb(4)Te(6)}n and {Sb(3)Te(9)}n layered films. The {Sb(3)Te(3)}n film had a polycrystalline phase, while {Sb(4)Te(6)}n, which has a higher Te/Sb ratio, exhibited a well-ordered single crystal Sb2Te2 hexagonal phase. Moreover, by greatly increasing the Te/Sb ratio, the crystal structure was completely transformed; i.e., the hexagonal Sb2Te2 structure changed to rhombohedral Sb2Te3 in the {Sb(3)Te(9)}n film, as shown in Fig. 1(c). The HRTEM image clearly shows well-ordered atomic layers of a single crystal Sb2Te3 structure. In particular, parallel and uniform interplanar spacing at the interface between the film and the amorphous SiO2 layer was observed. Interestingly, the HRTEM image in Fig. 1(d) shows a well-ordered Sb2Te2 crystal state containing a repeated line structure with a periodicity of 10.80 nm. Unfortunately, the crystal structure of this repeated line material cannot be exactly defined since the thickness of the layered structure is below ∼1.00 nm. The selective area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern shows that the diffraction pattern of the {Sb(4)Te(6)}n film has only a Sb2Te2 hexagonal phase. The self-ordered layered structure with periodic atomic layers, similar to a superlattice structure with two repeated layers, was investigated in more detail using HRTEM, as seen in the Fig. 1(e) lattice image of the coherent interface between the two layers. The magnified image shows that the well-ordered superlattice layers consist of a major Sb2Te2 hexagonal layer with a repeated thickness of 10.34 nm and a minor excess atomic layer 0.88 nm in thickness.23 Fig. 1  HRTEM images of (a) {Sb(3)Te(3)n, (b) {Sb(4)Te(6)}n, and (c) {Sb(3)Te(9)}n annealed samples. The inset images are the SAED pattern of each sample. (d) HRTEM images of the annealed {Sb(4)Te(6)}n film with a self-ordered superlattice structure and their fast Fourier transform patterns (inset). (e) Magnified TEM image of the rectangular region highlighted in (d) in red. (f) Line profile of the HR-TEM image of (d) representing a periodic, self-ordered superlattice structure. XRD data provide further information on the crystal structure. XRD data from the {Sb(3)Te(3)}n and {Sb(4)Te(6)}n samples indicated the presence of an Sb2Te2 hexagonal structure (a = 4.26 Å, c = 23.9 Å), while data from the {Sb(3)Te(9)}n sample were consistent with a Sb2Te3 rhombohedral structure (a = 4.24 Å, c = 29.9 Å), as shown in Fig. 2. The XRD patterns of the Sb2Te2 hexagonal and Sb2Te3 rhombohedral crystal structures in the c-axis growth direction are consistent with HRTEM atomic images of the crystal structure. Furthermore, the two peaks at diffraction angles of 2θ = 27.55° and 38.25° are at exactly the same position as the peaks from diffracted Te structures in the Te(101) and Te(012) growth directions, respectively. The crystal structures of Sb2Te2 and Te indicate that the diffraction pattern in the cross-sectional direction of the hexagonal Sb2Te2 (JCPDS 72-2183) phase overlaps with that of Te (JCPDS 86-2268). Thus, the crystal structures of Sb2Te2 and Te cannot be differentiated from the SAED pattern. Formation of the repeated Te layer was confirmed using XRR simulation, as shown in Fig. 3. Specifically, the oscillation peak shape was well fitted, with two repeating layers of Sb2Te2 and Te and a periodicity of [∼10 nm/∼0.9 nm], which was consistent with the periodic thickness observed by HRTEM. Moreover, XRR data from the as-grown films do not show any subpeaks due to an alternately layered structure, indicating that the alternate layer is inter-diffused even during the layered film growth process. The diffused layer thicknesses obtained from the XRR data are schematically depicted with the XRR data [see ESI, Table S1†]. Fig. 2  X-ray diffraction patterns: (a) crystalline state of multilayer samples after annealing. Amorphous and crystalline states of each sample are shown in (b)–(d) ((b){Sb(3)Te(3)}n, (c) {Sb(4)Te(6)}n, and (d) {Sb(3)Te(9)}n).  Fig. 3  X-ray reflectivity of the as-grown state and crystalline state: (a) {Sb(3)Te(3)}n, (b) {Sb(4)Te(6)}n, and (c) {Sb(3)Te(9)}n multilayered films. (d) Schematic illustration of the multilayered structure annealing process with inter-diffusion between the Sb and Te layers and SbTe crystallization. {Sb(3)Te(3)}n and {Sb(3)Te(9)}n have a self-ordered Sb2Te2 or Sb2Te3 structure, and {Sb(4)Te(6)}n has a self-superlattice structure. It is apparent that a single crystal Sb2Te2 phase containing repeated Te layers spontaneously forms a superlattice structure due to alternate layers of growth with specific Te/Sb ratios. The structural data show that a crystalline state is generated through the reaction kinetics of the combined diffusion of Sb and the crystallization of Te, i.e., structural evidence from XRD and HRTEM indicates that well-controlled inter-diffusion phenomena between neighboring atomic layers contribute to the crystallization process during annealing. In the crystallization process, the formation of crystalline Sb2Te2 and Sb2Te3 phases suggests a reaction pathway for the ordering process. Crystalline Sb2Te2 and Sb2Te3 which have a single-like structure, are formed in the as-grown {Sb(4)Te(6)}n and {Sb(3)Te(9)}n, respectively, as based on the XRD data shown in Fig. 2. Thus, the crystalline structure is already determined during the initial crystallization stage and persists in the final structure as can be seen in Fig. 4. Fig. 4  Raman spectra of the as-grown state and crystalline state: (a) {Sb(3)Te(3)}sn, (b) {Sb(4)Te(6)}n, and (c) {Sb(3)Te(9)}n multilayer films. A Te layer was observable only in the Sb2Te2 structure and not in the Sb2Te3 structure. Moreover, in the Sb2Te3 unit cell, the Te layers bond with adjacent Te layers via van der Waals forces, a phenomenon not observed in Sb2Te2. This structural difference may be related to the formation of a Te layer structure in the Sb2Te2 matrix. Thermodynamically, the stoichiometric Sb2Te3 structure is very stable, while the Te-rich Sb2Te3 structure is not as stable.24 Therefore, during the annealing process, excess Te, which does not participate in the Sb2Te3 structure, diffuses out from the film. Consequently, the Te-rich {Sb(3)Te(9)}n thin film changes to a stoichiometric Sb2Te3 thin film with a single phase hexagonal structure with a high c-axis orientation [see ESI S3†].Considering the stoichiometry of Sb2Te3, the {Sb(4)Te(6)}n film should transform into a crystalline Sb2Te3 structure. In order to investigate the stoichiometry of the {Sb(4)Te(6)}n film, we analyzed the film using TEM-EDX [see ESI S4 and S5†]. The resulting stoichiometry of Sb to Te was 1 to 1.42, which is insufficient for formation of a Sb2Te3 structure, i.e., the {Sb(4)Te(6)}n film does not transform into a crystalline Sb2Te3 structure due to an insufficient quantity of Te for Sb2Te3 formation. Under these conditions, formation of a Te layer incorporated into the Sb2Te2 structure would be preferable. The calculated stoichiometry of the resulting crystalline Sb2Te2 structure containing a Te layer, Sb2Te2.4, indicates that some Te diffuses out during the annealing process, which is very similar to the crystallization process of the {Sb(3)Te(9)}n film. However, diffusion in the Sb2Te2 structure is retarded due to the relatively low diffusivity of Te in Sb2Te2, resulting in regular formation of a Te layer.25Fig. 5(a) prominently exhibits superlattice domains consisting of Sb2Te2/Te with no vacancy layer. Fig. 5  (a) Magnified HRTEM image of {Sb(4)Te(6)}n films and a schematic illustration for enhancement of phonon scattering in the Sb2Te2/Te superlattice thin film. (b) EDX line profile/mapping of Sb and Te. (c) Periodic inserted metallic Te layers play a clear role in suppression of thermal conductivity resulting from the increase in interface phonon scattering. Color code: red ball, Sb2Te2; blue ball, Te; yellow arrow, non-scattered phonon transport; green arrow, scattered phonon transport. Raman spectroscopy was employed to investigate phonon scattering caused by the atomic bonding states of the film. The intensity ratio of the Eg and A1g modes gradually changed with the ratio of Sb to Te. All as-grown films had Sb2Te2 (125.82 cm−1) and Te (142.89 cm−1) vibration mode peaks. Moreover, the Sb (144 cm−1) peak intensity decreased with increasing Te composition, and the Raman vibration mode peak nearly disappeared in the {Sb(3)Te(9)}n film.26,27 After annealing at 200 °C to induce crystallization, the inter-diffusion between adjacent Sb and Te layers was enhanced, as shown in the XRR and XRD data, resulting in the formation of specific chemical bonding between Sb and Te in the crystal structures of Sb2Te2 and Sb2Te3. Therefore, the difference in the atomic bonding states of (Eg and A1g) represents crystal structural characteristics of Sb2Te2 and Sb2Te3. A previous publication reported Raman vibration mode frequencies of two Eg (112 cm−1 and 125.8 cm−1) and one A1g (165 cm−1) modes in a hexagonal Sb2Te3 structure.28 Moreover, the peak positions were almost the same in the hexagonal Sb2Te2 structure. In comparison with the peak intensity, the A1g Raman vibration mode peak was preferred in the {Sb(3)Te(3)}n sample, and the Eg Raman vibration mode peak gradually increased as the Te component increased. The A1g Raman vibration peak is caused by a perpendicular vibration mode along the c-axis in the hexagonal structure of Sb2Te2 and Sb2Te3, while the Eg peak corresponds to a parallel vibration mode. Crystal structures of Sb2Te3 show two layers composed of only Te in the unit cell of the layered hexagonal structure with layers bonded to adjacent Te layers via van der Waals forces [see ESI S6†]. However, there are no van der Waals forces in the Sb2Te2 structure. These structural differences between Sb2Te2 and Sb2Te3 critically affect the peak intensities in the perpendicular and horizontal directions, i.e., in the layered Sb2Te3 structure, the vibration mode in the horizontal direction is enhanced while the perpendicular mode is decreased. Therefore, the perpendicular mode is relatively enhanced in {Sb(3)Te(3)}n samples with a Sb2Te2 structure. For a {Sb(4)Te(6)}n crystalline film, the intensity of the peak caused by the Te–Te vibration mode (142.89 cm−1) was relatively high compared to other samples because there are Te layers in the Sb2Te2 structure. A smaller Te peak was also observed in the {Sb(3)Te(3)}n sample, which is consistent with the XRD and HRTEM data; i.e., Te layers were observed to form locally in small grains in the HRTEM, resulting in a decreased diffraction peak in the XRD.Fig. 5 is a proposed schematic illustration for enhancement of phonon scattering in the Sb2Te2/Te superlattice thin film. Because the two-dimensional superlattice structure has a clear depression in thermal conductivity resulting from the increase in interface phonon scattering, the semimetallic Te layer can affect the interface phonon scattering and carrier transport properties.29 Moreover, the semimetallic properties of the Te layer can be used to improve the electrical conductivity in a host semiconductor, and the Seebeck coefficient can be improved by engineering the Schottky barrier formed at the interface of the semimetal and semiconductor superlattice thin film. By comparing co-deposition and multilayered thin films, enhancement of the Seebeck coefficient by the semiconductor–semimetal Schottky barrier was also demonstrated for all of the multilayered thin films. (Fig. 6 and 7) To study the thermoelectric effect of self-ordered superlattice film structures, the electrical transport properties and the temperature-dependent thermoelectric properties of Sb(x)Te(y) films in the temperature range of 300 K to 400 K were measured, as presented in Fig. 6. Hall measurements revealed that crystalline (Sb(x)Te(y))n layered films have p-type characteristics, which is in good agreement with the results of previous studies.4,30 However anisotropy in thin film chalcogenide structures is an important factor that should be considered because major physical parameters are dependent on crystalline anisotropy. Yan et al. demonstrated that the ZT value improved by 22% when repelletizing oriented the nanograins in a typical crystal direction. Carle et al. also showed that the cross-plane (c-axis) electrical conductivity (1/ρ) was about 12–15% higher than in-plane electrical conductivity over the entire temperature range.19,31 Therefore, based on the reported data, we calculated the cross-plane electrical conductivity from the in-plane electrical conductivity derived from Hall measurements to obtain the thermoelectric property parameters in the same cross-plane directions [see ESI S7†]. Fig. 6  Temperature dependence of (a) electrical conductivity (b) Seebeck coefficient (c) thermal conductivity and (d) figure of merit for {Sb(3)Te(3)}n, {Sb(4)Te(6)}n and {Sb(3)Te(9)}n multilayered films after annealing.  Fig. 7  Temperature dependence of (a) electrical conductivity, (b) Seebeck coefficient, (c) thermal conductivity, and (d) figure of merit for {Sb(3)Te(3)}, {Sb(4)Te(6)} and {Sb(3)Te(9)} co-deposited films after annealing. Electrical conductivity increased with temperature, which is typical for semiconductors (Fig. 6(a)).32 The temperature dependence of the Seebeck coefficient of Sb(x)Te(y) crystalline films also showed that they are p-type thermoelectric materials, as shown in Fig. 6(b). From these data, it was noticed that the electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient of the {Sb(3)Te(9)}n film were much higher than other samples because of the well-ordered single crystalline Sb2Te3 phase, i.e., carriers can be easily transported to an adjacent layer due to the presence of fewer defect states. In contrast, {Sb(4)Te(6)}n had a lower electrical conductivity than {Sb(3)Te(9)}n and gave the lowest Seebeck coefficient over the entire temperature range. Due to the Sb2Te2/Te superlattice structure, each interface between the semiconductor and the semimetal layers can act as a charge trapping layer, as carrier transport can be interrupted as carrier trap/de-trap occurs at the interface between Sb2Te2 and Te resulting in a lower electrical conductivity than that for the Sb2Te3 single crystalline state.33 In addition, the carrier concentration, electrical mobility, and Seebeck coefficient are strongly correlated in semiconductor thin films. For metal or degenerate semiconductors, the Seebeck coefficient is given by (1)where kB is the Boltzmann constant, m* is the effective mass of an electron, T is the temperature, e is the electronic charge, and n is the carrier concentration. From this equation, the carrier concentration contribution is found to be very important in obtaining an enhanced Seebeck coefficient.As discussed earlier, the Sb2Te2/Te carrier concentration was the highest in samples because the interface charge trap/de-trap layer provides a carrier trap site. The difference in the sample carrier concentrations was a clear indication for the Seebeck coefficient of the {Sb(4)Te(6)}n film being lower than that of the {Sb(3)Te(3)}n and {Sb(3)Te(9)}n films. In addition, the low carrier mobility of the {Sb(4)Te(6)}n film results in a low Seebeck coefficient and low thermal conductivity.In order to compare the conductivity of a randomly oriented crystalline structure and a layered structure, the thermoelectric properties of Sb(x)Te(y) thin films grown by co-deposition of Sb and Te were measured (Fig. 7). The co-deposition {Sb(3)Te(3)} and {Sb(4)Te(6)} samples were hexagonal Sb2Te2, while {Sb(3)Te(9)} had a rhombohedral Sb2Te3 structure [see ESI S8†]. Moreover, no crystalline Te was observed in the polycrystalline Sb2Te2 and Sb2Te3 structures. As can be seen in Fig. 7(a), the change in electrical conductivity with sample composition was different from that of multilayered films. Similar to the multilayered structure tendency, electrical conductivity increased with the c-axis-oriented single-like phase. As shown in Fig. 7(b), the Seebeck coefficient of all samples consistently increased, which is consistent with the crystallization temperature of Sb2Te3. Therefore, the increase in the Seebeck coefficient was the result of a partial crystallization process, as the carrier concentration of the crystal structure is higher than that of the amorphous structure.34The main advantage of utilizing a thin film structure for thermoelectric applications is reduced total thermal conductivity (κ), since phonon transport is strongly dependent on structural properties and growth direction.35 In comparing the crystal structures of multilayered films with co-deposited films, phonon scattering can be a critical factor for thermal conductivity. Fig. 6(c) shows that the total thermal conductivity of the Sb2Te2/Te superlattice structure was significantly reduced (0.55 W mK−1 at 400 K) compared to that of polycrystalline Sb(x)Te(y), indicating an increase in interface phonon scattering. To analyze phonon contribution to the thermal conductivity, the lattice thermal conductivity (κL) was calculated using the relationship: κ = κL + κe. The electronic contribution to the total thermal conductivity is related to the electrical conductivity and is calculated from the Wiedemann–Franz law: κe = LσT, where L is the Lorenz factor, 2.0 × 10−8 W S K−2, σ is the electrical conductivity and T is the annealing temperature.36,37 The possibility of heat transfer by bipolar charge carriers is ruled out from the positive sign of S, which means that the majority of charge carriers are holes in the present thin film. The total thermal conductivity κ and lattice thermal conductivity κL (κL = κ − κe) contributions are separately presented in Fig. 8. The calculated lattice thermal conductivity shows similar characteristics to those of the total thermal conductivity with the annealing temperature. It is clearly seen here that κL dominates over κe for the whole temperature range, illustrating the importance of the structural aspects of thin films. Fig. 8  Temperature dependence of (a) total thermal conductivity of multilayered films, (b) co-deposited films after annealing, (c) lattice thermal conductivity of multilayered films after annealing and (d) co-deposited films after annealing. We considered in detail the lattice thermal conductivity as a function of specularity for polycrystalline phonon scattering and superlattice phonon scattering effects. Generally, small diffuse scattering tends to reduce the lattice thermal conductivity because, in the crystal structure system, diffuse scattering is always more effective at impeding phonon transport than specular scattering.However, since specularity is dependent on diffuse scattering, it is clear that lattice thermal conductivity is significantly sensitive to changes in structural properties. Considering structural properties, diffuse scattering in a polycrystalline structure is greater than that in a superlattice structure because superlattice structures have a periodic thickness and a greater interface density. Moreover, the change in lattice thermal conductivity with temperature is caused by an increase in phonon scattering. Figures 8(c) and (d) show the temperature dependence of lattice thermal conductivity of a multilayered structure and a co-deposited structure, respectively. This difference in behavior is due to the distinct scattering mechanism, which is dominated by structural interface phonon scattering. Since the co-deposited sample structure contains randomly oriented grains, grain boundary scattering is the main scattering effect. The effective mean free path (MFP) caused by grain boundary scattering is nearly independent of temperature38,39 However, in the multilayered structure, interfacial scattering significantly reduces the lattice thermal conductivity. Therefore, the increase in the interfacial scattering of the superlattice structure tends to have a strong dependence on temperature, which causes the observed lattice thermal conductivity behavior.The effect of lattice thermal conductivity in both the in-plane and cross-plane directions has been determined previously using Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) solutions.40,41 Using the BTE solution, we can take into account the measuring direction in Sb2Te2 and Sb2Te3 hexagonal materials, which exhibit significant anisotropy between the a–b plane and c-axis directions. Considering structural properties, it is expected that c-axis thermal conductivity should always be smaller than a–b plane thermal conductivity. From the XRD data, the Sb2Te3 single crystal and Sb2Te2/Te structures have almost the same c-axis growth direction. However, in our estimation, anisotropic thermal conductivity effects in the self-ordered superlattice system can be even stronger because the periodically inserted Te layer is also aligned in the z-direction. Moreover, kinetic theory can be used to calculate the average phonon mean free path (lmfp) using eqn (2)–(4).3 (2) (3) (4)where c is the specific heat, ρ is the density, and 〈vt〉 is the average phonon velocity. wcut-off, kcut-off, and λcut-off represent the cut-off frequency, cut-off thermal conductivity, and cut-off phonon wavelength, respectively.42 To calculate lmfp in a thin film, both c and ρ were extracted from the weighted XRR fitting data (Fig. 3). The specific heat according to the constituents of the self-ordered superlattice should be comparable to their bulk values, which are independent of the propagation of low-frequency heat-conducting phonons for T/θD > 1. An average velocity 〈vt〉 of ∼2.4 × 105 cm s−1 was used in the calculation of lmfp for samples of varying stoichiometries. Using the above constant, the physical significance of the calculated lmfp for the different structural crystallinities mentioned above was evaluated. Table 1 shows the wcut-off, kcut-off, and lmfp of each sample at room temperature. In the annealed {Sb(3)Te(9)}n film, the lmfp of the Sb2Te3 structure was ∼1.4 nm. The value of ∼1.00 nm is close to 0.96 nm, which corresponds to the repeated spacing of van der Waals bonding in the unit cell of the Sb2Te3 crystal structure. The bonding states preferentially form the layer-to-layer structure, resulting in the creation of a potential anharmonicity along the c-axis of heat flow.
Table 1 Calculated wcut-off, kcut-off, λcut-off, and lmfp at room temperature

 κL (300 K)ρ (density)lmfpwcut-offΛcut-off{Sb(3)Te(3)}n0.925.861.76 nm0.90 × 1012/s1.55{Sb(4)Te(6)}n0.395.861.26 nm1.27 × 1012/s0.74{Sb(3)Te(9)}n0.526.101.46 nm1.09 × 1012/s1.18Te3.006.243.00 nm0.53 × 1012/s2.54In the Sb2Te2/Te superlattice structure generated in the annealed {Sb(4)Te(6)}n film, the lmfp of the Te layer (∼3.00 nm) was longer than the inserted Te layer thickness (0.90 nm). Thus, the ultra-thin Te layer does not affect phonon scattering, and the periodic phonon transport barrier of the structure with repeated layers of Te and Sb2Te2 substantially decreases lmfp, resulting in the enhancement of phonon scattering as different covalent bonding component interface trap/de-trap sites act as scattering points. As a result, the annealed {Sb(4)Te(6)}n sample showed a significant reduction in thermal conductivity compared to the {Sb(3)Te(3)}n and {Sb(3)Te(9)}n samples. Finally, the figure-of-merit (ZT) of the self-ordered superlattice structured crystalline film reached 1.43, which is higher than that of the single crystalline state thin film in this study. This enhancement in ZT is caused by low thermal conductivity of the thin film through enhancement of interface phonon scattering, i.e., the high ZT value indicates that the self-ordered superlattice structure effectively improved the thermoelectric performance.IV. ConclusionIn summary, Sb(x)Te(y) films were fabricated using a thermal evaporation method. The self-ordered superlattice structure of {Sb(4)Te(6)}n thin films showed an enhanced figure of merit. In particular, the value at 400 K was 1.43, which is higher than that of single-phase Sb2Te3 (annealed {Sb(3)Te(9)}n). The self-ordered superlattice thin film result shows that a reduction in thermal conductivity caused by interface phonon scattering can be effectively achieved for thermoelectric applications in the low temperature range. Importantly, a self-ordered superlattice structure with a largely single-phase crystalline structure can be controlled by the layer-over-layer thickness ratio.AcknowledgementsThis research was supported by the National Research Project for Next Generation MLC PRAM Development by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy (MKE) of Korea. The study was also supported by the Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science project of the Metrology Research Center. The authors thank the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory for providing the synchrotron radiation sources at 8C1 beam lines used in this study.Notes and referencesY. Lan, B. Poudel, Y. Ma, D. Wang, M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen, M. Y. Tang, R. Yang, H. Lee, D. Wang, Z. Ren, J. P. Fleurial and P. Gogna, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1043 CrossRef CAS .C. Kittel and P. McEuen, Introduction to Solid State Physics, Wiley, New York, vol. 8,  2004 Search PubMed.Y. Zhang, M. L. Snedaker, C. S. Birkel, S. Mubeen, X. Ji, Y. Shi, D. Liu, X. Liu, M. Moskovits and G. D. Stucky, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1075–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Venkatasubramanian, E. Siivola, T. Colpitts and B. O'Quinn, Nature, 2001, 413, 597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Yan, G. Joshi, W. Liu, Y. Lan, H. Wang, S. Lee, J. W. Simonson, S. J. Poon, T. M. Tritt, G. Chen and Z. F. Ren, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Poudel, Q. Hao, Y. Ma, Y. Lan, A. Minnich, B. Yu, X. Yan, D. Wang, A. Muto, D. Vashaee, X. Chen, J. Liu, M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Science, 2008, 320, 634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Goldsmid and R. Douglas, Br. J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 5, 386 CrossRef .F. J. DiSalvo, Science, 1999, 285, 703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Teweldebrhan, V. Goyal and A. A. Balandin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Zide, D. Klenov, S. Stemmer, A. Gossard, G. Zeng, J. Bowers, D. Vashaee and A. Shakouri, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 112102 CrossRef .W. Kim, J. Zide, A. Gossard, D. Klenov, S. Stemmer, A. Shakouri and A. Majumdar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 45901 CrossRef PubMed .J. Zide, J. H. Bahk, R. Singh, M. Zebarjadi, G. Zeng, H. Lu, J. Feser, D. Xu, S. Singer and Z. Bian, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 123702 CrossRef .T. H. Kim, J. H. Baeck, H. Choi, K. H. Jeong, M. H. Cho, B. Kim and K. Jeong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3737 CAS .R. Atkins, J. Wilson, P. Zschack, C. Grosse, W. Neumann and D. C. Johnson, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4594 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Dennis, Adv. Energy Convers., 1961, 1, 99 CrossRef CAS .T. Kanno, S. Yotsuhashi and H. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 739 CrossRef CAS .L. Shelimova, T. Svechnikova, P. Konstantinov, O. Karpinskii, E. Avilov, M. Kretova and V. Zemskov, Inorg. Mater., 2007, 43, 125 CrossRef CAS .X. Yan, B. Poudel, Y. Ma, W. Liu, G. Joshi, H. Wang, Y. Lan, D. Wang, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Shin, H. N. Cho, B. S. Kim and H. H. Cho, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 517, 933–936 CrossRef CAS .D. G. Cahill, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1990, 61, 802–808 CrossRef CAS .S. Shin, T.-J. Ha, H.-H. Park and H. H. Cho, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 125404 CrossRef .J. C. Caylor, K. Coonley, J. Stuart, T. Colpitts and R. Venkatasubramanian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 023105 CrossRef .T. B. Massalski, ASM Internatioanl, 2nd edn, vol. 8,  2009 Search PubMed .M. Winkler, X. Liu, J. D. Konig, S. Buller, U. Schurmann, L. Kienle, W. Bensch and H. Bottner, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11323 RSC .U. Rossow, U. Frotscher, N. Esser, U. Resch, T. Müller, W. Richter, D. Woolf and R. Williams, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1993, 63, 35–39 CrossRef CAS .M. Hünermann, J. Geurts and W. Richter, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 640–643 CrossRef PubMed .G. Sosso, S. Caravati and M. Bernasconi, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 095410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. G. Wang, C. Liebig, X. F. Xu and R. Venkatasubramanian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97 Search PubMed .H. Chang, M. J. Kao, C. H. Peng, C. G. Kuo and K. D. Huang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 7491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Carle, P. Pierrat, C. Lahalle-Gravier, S. Scherrer and H. Scherrer, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1995, 56, 201 CrossRef CAS .L. Goncalves, P. Alpuim, A. G. Rolo and J. Correia, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 4152 CrossRef CAS .M. Kastner, D. Adler and H. Fritzsche, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1976, 37, 1504 CrossRef CAS .H. K. Lyeo, D. G. Cahill, B. S. Lee, J. R. Abelson, M. H. Kwon, K. B. Kim, S. G. Bishop and B. Cheong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 151904 CrossRef .I.-J. Yoo, Y. Song, D. C. Lim, N. V. Myung, K. H. Lee, M. Oh, D. Lee, Y. Do Kim, S. Kim and Y. Choa, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5430 CAS .A. Soni, Z. Yanyuan, Y. Ligen, M. K. K. Aik, M. S. Dresselhaus and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wang, H. Lee, Y. Lan, G. Zhu, G. Joshi, D. Wang, J. Yang, A. Muto, M. Tang and J. Klatsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 193121 CrossRef .Q. Zhang, B. Cao, X. Zhang, M. Fujii and K. Takahashi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 134109 CrossRef .Z. Wang, J. E. Alaniz, W. Jang, J. E. Garay and C. Dames, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Yang, T. Ikeda, G. J. Snyder and C. Dames, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 034310 CrossRef .M. Hu and D. Poulikakos, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Venkatasubramanian, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 3091 CrossRef CAS .Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Sample preparation details and structures of the Sb2Te2 hexagonal unit cell and Sb2Te3 rhombohedral unit cell. XRD patterns of each co-deposited sample, SEM images of the amorphous and crystal phases, and an image of the in situ RHEED pattern are also provided. An XRD pattern of a single crystal Sb2Te3 rhombohedral structure from an annealed {Sb(3)Te(9)}n sample is shown, where the intensity (y-axis) scale (linear scale and log scale) shows that no Te crystal phase exists. Hall measurement data and Seebeck coefficients obtained at room temperature are included as well. XRR fitting data for each sample in the as-grown and crystal phases are provided. Thermal conductivity measurement schematics and the sample structure are provided. A HAADF STEM image and EDX spectrum of the {Sb(4)Te(6)}n sample are included. See DOI: 10.1039/c3tc31215a‡ Present address: Department of Physics, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  HRTEM images of (a) {Sb(3)Te(3)n, (b) {Sb(4)Te(6)}n, and (c) {Sb(3)Te(9)}n annealed samples. The inset images are the SAED pattern of each sample. (d) HRTEM images of the annealed {Sb(4)Te(6)}n film with a self-ordered superlattice structure and their fast Fourier transform patterns (inset). (e) Magnified TEM image of the rectangular region highlighted in (d) in red. (f) Line profile of the HR-TEM image of (d) representing a periodic, self-ordered superlattice structure.	 

 	Fig. 2  X-ray diffraction patterns: (a) crystalline state of multilayer samples after annealing. Amorphous and crystalline states of each sample are shown in (b)–(d) ((b){Sb(3)Te(3)}n, (c) {Sb(4)Te(6)}n, and (d) {Sb(3)Te(9)}n).	 

 	Fig. 3  X-ray reflectivity of the as-grown state and crystalline state: (a) {Sb(3)Te(3)}n, (b) {Sb(4)Te(6)}n, and (c) {Sb(3)Te(9)}n multilayered films. (d) Schematic illustration of the multilayered structure annealing process with inter-diffusion between the Sb and Te layers and SbTe crystallization. {Sb(3)Te(3)}n and {Sb(3)Te(9)}n have a self-ordered Sb2Te2 or Sb2Te3 structure, and {Sb(4)Te(6)}n has a self-superlattice structure.	 

 	Fig. 4  Raman spectra of the as-grown state and crystalline state: (a) {Sb(3)Te(3)}sn, (b) {Sb(4)Te(6)}n, and (c) {Sb(3)Te(9)}n multilayer films.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Magnified HRTEM image of {Sb(4)Te(6)}n films and a schematic illustration for enhancement of phonon scattering in the Sb2Te2/Te superlattice thin film. (b) EDX line profile/mapping of Sb and Te. (c) Periodic inserted metallic Te layers play a clear role in suppression of thermal conductivity resulting from the increase in interface phonon scattering. Color code: red ball, Sb2Te2; blue ball, Te; yellow arrow, non-scattered phonon transport; green arrow, scattered phonon transport.	 

 	Fig. 6  Temperature dependence of (a) electrical conductivity (b) Seebeck coefficient (c) thermal conductivity and (d) figure of merit for {Sb(3)Te(3)}n, {Sb(4)Te(6)}n and {Sb(3)Te(9)}n multilayered films after annealing.	 

 	Fig. 7  Temperature dependence of (a) electrical conductivity, (b) Seebeck coefficient, (c) thermal conductivity, and (d) figure of merit for {Sb(3)Te(3)}, {Sb(4)Te(6)} and {Sb(3)Te(9)} co-deposited films after annealing.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 8  Temperature dependence of (a) total thermal conductivity of multilayered films, (b) co-deposited films after annealing, (c) lattice thermal conductivity of multilayered films after annealing and (d) co-deposited films after annealing.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

{Sb(3)Te(3)}n	0.92	5.86	1.76 nm	0.90 × 1012/s	1.55
{Sb(4)Te(6)}n	0.39	5.86	1.26 nm	1.27 × 1012/s	0.74
{Sb(3)Te(9)}n	0.52	6.10	1.46 nm	1.09 × 1012/s	1.18
Te	3.00	6.24	3.00 nm	0.53 × 1012/s	2.54
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Sample preparation details and structures of the Sb2Te2 hexagonal unit cell and Sb2Te3 rhombohedral unit cell. XRD patterns of each co-deposited sample, SEM images of the amorphous and crystal phases, and an image of the in situ RHEED pattern are also provided. An XRD pattern of a single crystal Sb2Te3 rhombohedral structure from an annealed {Sb(3)Te(9)}n sample is shown, where the intensity (y-axis) scale (linear scale and log scale) shows that no Te crystal phase exists. Hall measurement data and Seebeck coefficients obtained at room temperature are included as well. XRR fitting data for each sample in the as-grown and crystal phases are provided. Thermal conductivity measurement schematics and the sample structure are provided. A HAADF STEM image and EDX spectrum of the {Sb(4)Te(6)}n sample are included. See DOI: 10.1039/c3tc31215a
‡ Present address: Department of Physics, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
