Plasmonic metal oxides and their biological applications  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2MH00263A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2MH00263A
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 2288-2324Plasmonic metal oxides and their biological applications

        
          
            Yihong 
            Hu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bao Yue 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Farjana 
            Haque
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guanghui 
            Ren
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jian Zhen 
            Ou
          
          
        
      *ac
aSchool of Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia. E-mail: jianzhen.ou@rmit.edu.au; baoyue.zhang@rmit.edu.au
bSchool of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China
Received 
      2nd March 2022
    , Accepted 8th June 2022First published on 8th June 2022AbstractMetal oxides modified with dopants and defects are an emerging class of novel materials supporting the localized surface plasmon resonance across a wide range of optical wavelengths, which have attracted tremendous research interest particularly in biological applications in the past decade. Compared to conventional noble metal-based plasmonic materials, plasmonic metal oxides are particularly favored for their cost efficiency, flexible plasmonic properties, and improved biocompatibility, which can be important to accelerate their practical implementation. In this review, we first explicate the origin of plasmonics in dopant/defect-enabled metal oxides and their associated tunable localized surface plasmon resonance through the conventional Mie–Gans model. The research progress of dopant incorporation and defect generation in metal oxide hosts, including both in situ and ex situ approaches, is critically discussed. The implementation of plasmonic metal oxides in biological applications in terms of therapy, imaging, and sensing is summarized, in which the uniqueness of dopant/defect-driven plasmonics for inducing novel functionalities is particularly emphasized. This review may provide insightful guidance for developing next-generation plasmonic devices for human health monitoring, diagnosis and therapy.
Yihong Hu
Yihong Hu received her BSc degree (2013) and MEng degree in electrical (2015) at the University of Melbourne. She is currently a PhD candidate in the School of Engineering at RMIT University. Yihong's research focuses on various transition metal oxides, such as molybdenum oxide and tungsten oxide. Her studies cover from the synthesis of 2D metal oxide nanomaterials to their applications including novel high-speed, low-energy electronics, optoelectronics, biosensors, etc.
Bao Yue Zhang
Dr Bao Yue Zhang is currently a Vice-Chancellor's Research Fellow at RMIT University, and a Research Fellow at the ARC Center of Excellence in FLEET. She completed her PhD at RMIT University in 2020. Her main research fields include the development of biosensors based on functional materials, as well as optoelectronic devices. She also leads the research in novel 2D materials, especially the self-occurring oxide films from a solid metal surface.
Farjana Haque
Farjana Haque received BSc (2010) and MSc (2013) degrees from the Department of Physics, University of Dhaka. She is pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Dr Jian Zhen Ou in the Centre for Advanced Electronics and Sensors, RMIT University. Her major research interests are material development and device design for photocatalytic, electrocatalytic and photoelectrochemical applications using solar energy as well as kinetic assessments of electrocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry based on two-dimensional nanomaterials.
Guanghui Ren
Dr Guanghui Ren is now a research fellow in the School of Engineering at RMIT University and the Fabrication team leader in the Integrated Photonics and Applications Centre (InPAC). He received his PhD from RMIT University in 2016. His research is focused on integrated optics, such as silicon photonics, silicon nitride photonics and thin-film lithium niobate (LNOI). He used photonic integrated circuits (PICs) as a platform to integrate different functional materials, such as 2D materials, chalcogenides, and plasmonic materials, to expand the capabilities of PICs in the aspect of sensing, nonlinearity, modulation, etc.
Jian Zhen Ou
Dr Jian Zhen Ou received his PhD in Electrical and Electronic engineering in 2012 from RMIT University, Australia. His current research interests include functional nanoscale materials, nanotechnology-enabled smart sensors, as well as nanoelectronic and nanophotonic devices. He has published more than 160 peer-reviewed articles in high-profile journals including Science, Nature Materials, and Nature Communications.
1. Introduction
A surface plasmon originates from smooth noble metal particles smaller than the incident light wavelength in which the free charge carriers from the metal are subsequently excited and oscillate collectively at a specific resonant frequency.1,2 The nanoparticles absorb the light and generate an impressively strong scattering compared with the fluorescence cross-section of a fluorescein molecule.3 This phenomenon, called localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), can be utilized to tailor a wide variety of applications, especially in bio-related fields such as effective labels in immunoassays,3–5 biomedical sensors,6–8 surface-enhanced optical spectroscopies, etc.,9–11 owing to the distinct response from the material to the collective light-induced electronic excitations and dielectric environment.12,13 Furthermore, some pioneering clinical trials have been performed, demonstrating high-throughput, label-free quantification of bioconjugates in a complex serum matrix, including an on-chip microfluidic biosensor14 and a portable complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) sensing system.15 Nevertheless, the plasmonic magnitude and phase of noble metals are usually confined by their size and shape, as the inherent free charge carrier concentration is less likely to be manipulated via an external approach. Such inflexibility causes difficulties in on-chip optimizing their biomedical performances, such as the on-demand tuning of the LSPR properties of noble metals to avoid spectral interference and overheating in biofluids.16 In addition, the costly nature and intrinsic high loss at optical frequencies restrict the scalable practical utilization of noble metal nanostructures (NSs) in the biochemical sensing field.17–20 Furthermore, noble metal NSs exhibit cytotoxicity to living cells,16,18,21 causing cellular uptake or generating reactive oxygen species (ROS). Although biocompatibility can be improved through elaborating surface functionalization, additional synthesis steps, poor long-term stability, and increased production cost are expected to occur. Therefore, the exploration of alternative plasmonic materials to overcome the limitations of noble metals is urgently needed.1
The emerging concept of “tunable plasmonics” presents a possible pathway to tackle the above challenges, given that the proposed plasmonic properties can be reversibly manipulated on-demand through creating intrinsic atomic vacancies (noted as “intrinsic doping”) and/or doping heterovalent atoms/ions (noted as “extrinsic doping”) in host materials.22–24 So far, metal oxides (MOs) and metal chalcogenides (MCs) have been the main categories of the host for enabling tunable plasmonics with improved biocompatibility over those of noble metals.23,25–28 In particular, pure MOs are mostly wide-bandgap semiconductors or insulators lacking sufficient free charge carriers to generate strong LSPR in the visible and near-infrared (NIR) region. However, through the doping strategy, the corresponding charge carrier concentrations are boosted to reach above the threshold of generating the LSPR effect.29,30 Such a phenomenon has been widely observed in various types of MOs including the oxides of Mo,31 W,32 In,33,34 Ti,35,36 V,37 Zn,38,39 Cd,40,41 and Re.42,43
Since being recognized as an emerging class of plasmonic materials, plasmonic MOs are expected to exhibit commonly seen LSPR features, including enhanced near-field optics,44,45 hot charge carriers,46,47 and the ambient refractive index-driven plasmonic absorption.48,49 Given the strengthened biocompatibility of plasmonic MOs over those of conventional noble metal NSs, plasmonic MOs stand out as alternatives in bio-applications including bioimaging,50,51 bio-thermal therapy,50,52,53 surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) spectroscopy,54,55 and biomolecule sensing.56,57 Furthermore, it is noted that the plasmonic features of MOs are enabled by the structural vacancies or external dopants which can be inserted or extracted through reaction with the ambient environment.56,58 In addition, for MOs with a two-dimensional (2D) morphology, immobilization of biomolecules on the material surface induces interfacial charge exchange and significantly disturbs the collective oscillation of the free charge carriers along the ultra-thin body.57 Consequently, this would lead to the manipulation of plasmonic properties of MOs in both magnitude and frequency aspects,48,59 providing a novel transducing approach to biosensing in addition to those solely based on the variation of the ambient refractive index.29,60–62 This article aims to provide a thorough review on the recent advances of the rapidly emerging field of plasmonic MOs and their particular implementation in biological applications in the last decade. We first briefly introduce the basic theoretical understanding of the LSPR in nanomaterials and elucidate the types of plasmonic MOs based on their synthesis routes. The corresponding LSPR properties are then collectively summarized. Furthermore, we look through the current plasmonic MOs and their applications in the biological field, and critically discuss the present challenges. Finally, a future perspective for the research and development of plasmonic MOs is provided.
2. The fundamentals of localized surface plasmon resonance
Free charge carrier and excitation are the core to enable LSPR in materials. In particular, when the incident light reaches the interface of two materials with negative and positive permittivity, respectively, the coherent delocalized charge carriers oscillate at the interface which is known as the surface plasmons.7,63 The surface plasmon phenomena are greatly influenced by the geometrical parameters of NSs such as size, shape, and interparticle distance, dielectric constants of both NSs and the surrounding environment, and temperature.8,64,65 If such a light–matter interaction is spatially limited within the dimensions of NSs, the surface plasmon is confined with no propagating behavior, which is considered as localized.66 As illustrated in Fig. 1a, the free electrons in MO nanoparticles are provided by either dopants or oxygen vacancies. Under the irradiation of light, the electrons confined in the nanoparticles start to oscillate collectively and produce a highly localized electromagnetic field accordingly. This phenomenon is also known as localized surface plasmon, and the wavelength at which the oscillation resonance occurs is called the LSPR wavelength. LSPR can be represented by the extinction coefficient (A), which is expressed using the following formula; according to Mie–Gans theory the extinction coefficient is as follows:67–69 (1)where ω is the angular frequency of the incident light; εm is the dielectric constant of the medium; and ε1 and ε2 are the real and imaginary terms of the dielectric function of the material, respectively. And the pj are the depolarization factors for three axes (e.g. a, b and c). For a spherical NS, the depolarization factors of three axes (e.g. PA along the a-axis, PB along the b-axis, and PC along the c-axis) are all equal to .
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of localized surface plasmon resonance. Left: light irradiation of free electrons in MO nanoparticles. Right: resonance oscillation of electron cloud in MO nanoparticles. Adapted with permission.2 Copyright © 2011, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Illustration of LSPR variation against the change of free charge carrier concentration in doped metal oxides. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright © 2017, Elsevier. (c) Simulated electric field intensity enhancement contour map of Au nanoparticles with the same volume and different shapes. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright © 2014, Wiley. 
According to the Drude–Lorentz model, the optical response of a nanoparticle can be determined by the collective motion of its free electrons, which is described by the Lorentz dielectric function as: (2)in which ωp is the bulk plasma frequency, ε∞ is the high-frequency relative dielectric constant which is equal to 1 for noble metals and mostly >10 for degenerate semiconductors,70,71 and γ is the damping coefficient of the resonance. (3)where τ is the scattering time of a charge carrier, e is the elementary charge, σ is the conductivity of the material, and me is the effective mass of a charge carrier. The conductivity σ can be further expanded into σ = Neμ(4)where μ is the electron mobility.72 The quality factor (Q-factor) of LSPR is defined as: (5)where λ0 is the peak wavelength and λfwhm is the full width at half maxima (FWHM) of the LSPR band.
The bulk plasma frequency is related to the free charge carrier concentration, which is defined as: (6)where N is the free charge carrier concentration and ε0 is the permittivity of free space. This model is valid for metals and all the other materials with free carriers. Based on this model, the essential condition for a material to support the LSPR (i.e. display metallic optical properties) is to have a negative real part of its permittivity (ε1 < 0). And the resonance conditions for a small spherical nanoparticle can be found in its dipole electric polarization: (7)at ε1(ω) = −2εm, where εm is the dielectric permittivity of the surrounding medium. This value is defined as the LSPR energy.
The cross-over frequency ωc at which ε1 = 0 can be found for all conductive materials that ε1 is negative below this frequency. From above equations, ωc is positively correlated with the free charge carrier concentration N. When N is above a certain value, the higher the value of N, the wider the frequency range of a material that behaves optically metallic (Fig. 1b).
Since LSPR frequency is proportionally related to the number of free charge carriers, tuning of LSPR can be achieved through manipulating the free charger carrier density of the host material. Introducing intrinsic vacancies and external ions concurrently elevates the free charge carrier concentration of MOs and pushes their LSPR to higher frequency ranges (i.e. blue-shift). Hence, doped MOs can support higher LSPR energy than those of their intrinsic counterparts.
In noble metal-based conventional plasmonic materials, the loss is one of the major phenomena due to the decay of surface plasmons known as electron damping in the material. Among all the internal damping of LSPR in noble metals, the resistive loss contributes significantly to the total loss. It can be written as follows: (8)where σ0 is the conductivity at zero-frequency.73 The resistive loss in metal is proportional to the number of free electrons and will dramatically increase as the frequency decreases. Therefore, though noble metals have sufficient free electrons to support a strong LSPR, their high free electron density brings excessive resistive loss at visible and longer wavelengths.73,74 Besides, due to the prefixed free electron concentration, there is limited space for further manipulating it, leading to a relatively poor plasmonic tunability. Some researchers demonstrate the tuning of noble metal plasmonic properties though adjusting the aspect ratio of nanoparticles.63,64 However, those changes in morphology were pre-engineered and non-reversible.
The LSPR in MOs is distinctly different from that of noble metal-based plasmonic materials in which the free charge carrier concentration is pre-fixed. More importantly, the tunable plasmonic properties in MOs add a new dimension in developing plasmonic biosensors. Apart from the conventional transducing approach based on the variation of the ambient environment refractive index, the LSPR frequency and intensity can be tuned by the charge transfer that occurred in bio-redox reactions between surface adsorbed biomolecules and embedded dopants in the MO host.58
According to Mie–Gans theory, LSPR splits into the longitudinal and transverse modes which oscillate along and perpendicular to the long axis, respectively. The depolarization factors along three axes (e.g., PA, PB, and PC) are no longer identical, therefore affecting the LSPR properties according to eqn (1). The depolarization factors are dependent on the shape of NSs. For 2D NSs, the length (a) is assumed to be equal to the width (b), representing the long axis:75 (9) (10)in which the g factor is: (11)For one-dimensional (1D) NSs, the width (b) is assumed to be equal to the thickness (c), representing the short axis: (12) (13)The co-existence of multiple LSPR modes along different directions in low-dimensional NSs also leads to the condensation of the electromagnetic field in certain locations of NSs (Fig. 1c), creating “hot spots” which enable ultra-sensitive biosensing platforms such as SERS. In addition, a large number of energetic charge carriers are accumulated within such “hot spots” in the presence of an enhanced electromagnetic field, allowing high-performance photothermal imaging and therapeutic applications.
3. Doping strategy and synthesis of plasmonic metal oxides
In the past decades, extensive efforts were dedicated to the synthesis of non-classic noble metal materials that support LSPR in a wide light range.26,76–79 MOs are the most studied candidates due to their abundance and bio-sensitivity. However, intrinsic MOs rarely support LSPR in the visible light or even NIR range compared with that of noble metals. This is owing to the relatively low free charge carrier concentration that is insufficient to induce coherent oscillation by the optical excitation at such a wavelength. However, manipulating dopants or creating atomic vacancies in the oxide host has been demonstrated as a successful strategy to introduce an appreciable free charge carrier concentration that sustains the surface plasmon at a more preferable light region.30,48,80 First, the atomic vacancies will free the electrons bonded with oxygen atoms into the crystal lattice, leading to sub-stoichiometry in the host MOs. Secondly, the atoms with one or more higher valency than that of the original metal element in the host MOs are usually suitable dopant candidates as they can add free electrons to the electronic band structure. Various doped plasmonic MO NSs have been reported, including, but not limit to, the degenerately doped zinc oxide,38,39,81 titanium oxide,36,82 tungsten oxide,32,83–85 molybdenum oxide,31,49 indium oxide,33,86,87 and cadmium oxide.41,88
3.1 Doping strategy
Due to the relatively small number of free carriers, most of the MOs have intrinsic LSPR located deeply in the infrared (IR) region. This greatly hinders their potential in biological applications since the operation of devices in the visible or NIR light regions is much more preferred for commercial use. To blue shift the LSPR wavelength to the Vis-NIR wavelength, doping is considered the most popular strategy, as the externally induced ions or intrinsic atomic vacancies will concurrently bring additional free charge carriers. This could lead to an energy shift at which the optical excitation of the plasmonic nanoparticles corresponds to their LSPR. Doping, intentionally creating impurities in the crystal lattice (Fig. 2a), can change the stoichiometry of MO by introducing either electrons or holes into the host MO crystals and thereby tuning the hosts’ optoelectronic properties. Doping can be generated either via combining extra precursors during the formation of the nanomaterial or by providing external stimulations, light irradiation, electromagnetic field, etc., to the nanomaterial. A high ionic vacancy or extrinsic dopant level can meet the requirement of shifting the LSPR in the NIR or even visible light range. However, along with the benefits brought by an elevated number of free carriers, doping MOs faces several limitations. One is the lattice distortion caused by the difference in the ionic radii of native and alien ions. Another issue is that dopants in nanocrystals are no longer distributed homogeneously when the doping level reaches a relatively high level.87 Besides, as the number of dopants incorporated increases, carrier damping caused by ionized impurity scattering becomes considerable. These factors all affect the LSPR's line shape and quality of MO NSs. The Q-factor of LSPR is defined as the ratio between peak intensity and the FWHM of the LSPR band.89 A high Q-factor represents better near-field enhancement (NFE) and lower electronic damping.40,90 However, in the degenerately doped MOs, the dopants act as the electron donors and ionized scattering centers at the same time when being substituted in the lattice.91 Upon the increase of the free charge carrier density, electrostatic interaction between doping atoms and free electrons causes ionized impurity scattering inside the nanocrystals, which dominantly contributes to damping of free electrons.92 Since μ is proportional to  (eqn (3) and (4)), the damping of free electrons will result in the decrease of electron mobility. In the meantime, as the line shape of LSPR is closely related to the damping coefficient, the increase of damping further broadens the LSPR linewidth (i.e. known as FWHM), subsequently leading to the diminished Q-factor (eqn (5)). Therefore, selecting suitable dopants and an appropriate synthesis method according to intended applications would be critical factors in the success of the final product.
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of different doping strategies. Adapted with permission.29 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Scanning transmission electron microscope – high-angle annular dark field (STEM-HAADF) and EDS mapping images of Ga doped ZnO nanoparticles. Adapted with permission.93 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) 1H MAS NMR spectra of samples hydrothermally synthesized at pH 1, 1.5, 2, and 2.5. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright © 2018, Wiley. (d) STEM-HAADAF of CsWO3. Adapted with permission.94 Copyright © 2013, AIP Publishing LLC. (e) HRTEM showing oxygen and tungsten vacancies in the crystal. Adapted with permission.97 Copyright © 2016, Wiley. 
Doping schematic for MOs can be divided into three major categories: aliovalent doping, interstitial doping, and vacancy doping as shown in the schematic in Fig. 2a, where dopants generated in the host's crystal structure can be characterized through multiple methods. In aliovalent doping, sometimes also called substitution doping, alien cations with extra free electrons are introduced to substitute original metal atoms. Several transparent MOs, such as In2O333,34 and ZnO,93 can be doped via this approach. Fig. 2b shows the energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) mapping of Ga-doped ZnO and the corresponding electron image. It illustrates different elements consisting of Ga:ZnO NSs, allowing a visual evaluation of the dopant composition.93 Interstitial doping refers to the intercalation of external ions, such as H+ and alkali metal ions, into the host oxide lattice. In Fig. 2c and d, different characterization methods of dopants in two typical examples of interstitial doped MOs are presented. The solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy can detect H+ intercalation which is not achievable using the EDS technique. The bonding formed between H and other atoms can be depicted from the energy spectrum, allowing the observation of the variation of H+ doping levels in molybdenum bronze.58 In some cases, the doped materials can retain their highly crystalline nature, and this enables the direct observation of doped atoms via high-resolution imaging. Taking CsxWO3 as an example (Fig. 2d), the doped Cs ions can be observed via the scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) imaging.94 The vacancy doping appertains atom defects that are formed in the host lattice with no external atoms being introduced, thus this is also called “intrinsic doping”. For MOs, usually oxygen vacancies are formed and sub-stoichiometric oxide compounds are produced, such as WO3−x32,95 and MoO3−x.49,96 The atomic vacancies can also be observed directly using high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) as shown in Fig. 2e.97 Due to the strong correlation between the doping strategy and the LSPR tuning of MOs, we summarize the tunable plasmonic MOs based on their synthesis routes later in this article.
In the last decade, we have witnessed rapid development in the synthesis techniques of MO NSs. Based on the methodology of introducing dopants in oxides that generates LSPR phenomena, the synthesis of plasmonic MOs usually follows two pathways: “in situ synthesis” and “ex situ synthesis”. When doping is created along with the formation of nanocrystals, it is considered as generated in place, which is noted as “in situ synthesis” in this review. On the other hand, when additional treatment is involved after the nanocrystals are formed or removed from the original reactor, it is noted as “ex situ synthesis”. In this pathway, nanomaterials with their intrinsic crystal structure are prepared and collected at first. The process of introducing the dopants is finalized through an additional catalyst reaction or extra energy induction. For instance, wet-chemical and vapor-phase approaches are widely adopted in situ synthesis pathways to produce plasmonic MO nanomaterials while techniques including photoactivation and H-spillover are defined as ex situ synthesis. The following sections will briefly review the recent advances of dopant-driven plasmonic MOs according to their synthesis route.
3.2 Plasmonic metal oxides synthesized via in situ methods
In the in situ synthesis of plasmonic MO NSs, the precursors, surfactants, and solvents are carefully chosen to control the type, concentration, and distribution of dopants in the host materials. Following the requirement of reaction conditions, the NSs are fabricated flexibly with desired chemical and optoelectronic properties. The as-synthesized nanomaterials can support an LSPR without further treatment since the dopants are generated concurrently during the synthesis. The colloidal and physical vapor deposition synthesis approaches are the most commonly seen routes for fabricating plasmonic MOs in an in situ manner.

3.2.1 Wet chemical synthesis. 
One of the most adopted in situ doping synthesis approaches for producing plasmonic oxides is the wet chemical synthesis, which includes the colloidal method and the sol–gel method. The process usually involves the thermal decomposition of precursors in a solvent environment at an elevated temperature. Fig. 3a and b illustrate the schematic of a laboratory-scale colloidal synthesis using a three-neck flask and the corresponding theoretical model describes different stages of nanocrystal formation. Generally, the formation of colloidal NSs consists of three stages as described in the LaMer–Dinegar curve in Fig. 3b. In stage I, the concentration of free atoms/monomers generated from the decomposition of precursors steadily increases to a critical value of Cnumin, which leads to a burst nucleation reaction then enters the second stage. In stage II, the monomers are at a supersaturation level high enough to overcome the energy barrier for nucleation. As being consumed in the self-nucleation progress, the monomer concentration starts to drop during stage II until the value is below the critical value Cnumin, after which the burst nucleation transits into stage III: a slow growth process. In stage III, the monomer concentration approaches its solubility (saturation concentration Csol) along with the formation of colloidal sub-stoichiometric MO NSs. As the synthesis process highly depends on the choice of precursors, surfactants, and the reaction environment, the morphology and optoelectronic properties of the final products are tunable through modifying these parameters. This eventually empowers the MO NSs with a desired doping level and LSPR features. Moreover, the wet-chemical synthesis is also favored for its great scalability and high yield, which offers the possibility for future large-scale production.
 Fig. 3  Typical synthesis methods of plasmonic metal oxides. (a) ‘Hot injection’ colloidal synthesis using a glass flask under an oxygen-free environment. (b) The LaMer–Dinegar model of colloidal nanocrystal formation. Adapted with permission.29 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) The hydrothermal synthesis method using an autoclave with a stainless-steel shell and Teflon liner. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright © 2002, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Illustration of plasmonic MoxW1−xO3−y nanocrystal formation under the solvothermal approach. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) Physical vapor deposition using sputtering of atoms. Adapted with permission.132 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (f) Synthesis of TiOx using the femtosecond-LAL (fs-LAL) method. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright © 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Colloidal synthesis. 
Colloidal synthesis is a major category of wet-chemical synthesis. It has been widely employed in the synthesis of various plasmonic nanocrystals including copper chalcogenides,98–101 indium oxides,47,56,87,89,102–104 zinc oxides,39,105–108 cadmium oxides,40,88,109–111 and tungsten oxides.32,45,51,83,112 The typical synthesis method involves the process of heating up precursors of inorganic salts or organometallic compounds in an organic solvent at a high boiling point using a flask under a degassed environment.113 The reaction follows nucleation growth theory to form the target colloid nanocrystals, which highly depends on the thermodynamics of the ingredients. As a result, by optimizing the reaction conditions, the obtained plasmonic NSs can achieve a monodispersed morphology with a relatively uniform size distribution and high-quality crystalline nature.113
In the meantime, by controlling the solvent type, precursor ratio or reaction conditions, the morphology and doping concentration of the product can be varied, leading to the splitting or shifting of the LSPR line shape as shown in Fig. 4a. As shown in Fig. 4b, the changes in both shape and size of the Nb-doped titanium dioxide nanoparticles can be clearly observed as the doping ratio varies, and their LSPR absorption shifts accordingly as shown in Fig. 4c. Kanehara et al. achieved Sn-doped indium oxide (ITO) with Sn doping level from 0 to 30% by altering the molar ratio of In/Sn in the precursors (indium(III) acetate and tin(II) 2-ethylhexanoate).33 Since Sn has one valency higher than that of In, each Sn dopant can provide one extra free electron in ITO. Therefore, increasing the doping level by 10% will blue shift the LSPR wavelength of ITO. Co-doped MO NSs such as Cr–Sn:In2O389 or doped complex MO NSs Snx:Zn1−(x+y)CdyO114 have also been reported. In addition, Bounsanti et al. showed a simultaneous control of size and doping level of aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO) NSs via adjusting the coordinating ligands and growth temperature.105 Injecting an aluminum precursor with oleic acid (OlAc) at 230–260 °C was proved to result in a more uniform size dispersion than heating up all reagents together. The authors achieved an impressive outcome of a high doping concentration of Al together with a large lateral dimension at an elevated temperature. Mattox et al. reported another type of interstitial doped CsxWO3 NSs of three distinctive shapes derived via varying the amount of oleylamine (OlAm) and OlAc (Fig. 4d) and their shape-dependent LSPR behaviors (Fig. 4e). Interestingly, the variation in the molar ratio between WCl4 and CsCl precursors did not lead to the qualitative difference of the product. Meanwhile, the colloidal tungsten oxide with oxygen defects in different crystal phases can be synthesized through this method as well.112 Moreover, it was reported that WO2.72 nanorods were produced from WCl4 precursor, while the product became WO2.83 NSs when replacing the WCl4 with tungsten(V) ethoxide.32,115
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of major tuning approaches during in situ synthesis of MO NSs. (b) TEM images of NbxTiO2 nanocrystals with x = 0.09, 0.12, and 0.155. (c) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of TiO2 and NbxTiO2 chloroform dispersions. Inset shows the color change of the plasmonic NbxTiO2 upon doping. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright © 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) TEM figure of WO2.72 rods (left); hexagonal prisms CsxWO3 (mid) and truncated cubes (right) with illustrated shape (insets). (e) Absorption spectra of CsxWO3 hexagonal prisms (red), truncated cubes (blue), and WO2.72 rods (grey), respectively. Adapted with permission.112 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) HRTEM images of H0.3MoO3 (left), H0.91MoO3 (mid), and H1.55MoO3 (right) with corresponding low resolution TEM images (insets); (g) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of all three types of H0.3MoO3, H0.91MoO3, and H1.55MoO3, respectively. The inset shows the color of all three samples as labeled; Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright © 2018, Wiley. 
Other morphology- and temperature-based modifications of plasmonic MO synthesis were also discovered as ways of tuning their LSPR performances. Gordon et al. introduced the synthesis of indium-doped cadmium oxide (ICO) which exhibited a tunable LSPR in the IR region (1.8–3.5 μm). ICO NSs with different morphologies were obtained via controlling the temperature and OLAc, which accordingly brought about dramatic changes in the line shape of their LSPR.40 Besides, the plasmonic CdOx with oxygen vacancies was produced by introducing the reduced agent bis(trimethylsilyl)amine (HMDS) which can facilitate fast nucleation during crystal formation. When the concentration of HMDS was gradually increased, CdOx NSs are formed with a reduced size and an enhanced LSPR energy.111 Interestingly, Trizio et al. revealed that the crystallization and uniformity of the final product are closely related to the surfactant used during colloidal synthesis using Nb:TiO2 as an example. Furthermore, the elevated reaction temperature from 260 °C to 290 °C drives an increased IR absorption.82 Prusty et al. also showed the approach to achieve the tunability of LSPR in WO3−x nanoplatelets through temperature manipulation. The peak blue-shifted from 1600 to 1250 nm along with an increased temperature. The reaction temperature also affected the morphology of obtained WO3−x nanoplatelets as well, in which the samples appeared with a higher aspect ratio when being synthesized at a higher temperature.47 Remarkably, although the size of nanoplatelets can be controlled by the ratio of the primary and tertiary amines, and growth time, the extinction spectra did not show a noticeable variation for different-sized colloidal samples. This further explicates that the carrier density is a more important factor in tuning LSPR rather than the morphology of NSs.
The hydrothermal/solvothermal method is a sub-category of the colloidal method which usually involves more intense reaction conditions than other colloidal approaches discussed before. When water is employed as the solvent, the method is usually named hydrothermal; otherwise, it is more considered as the solvothermal approach. Instead of using a glass flask, the hydro/solvothermal synthesis is often carried out in an autoclave which consists of a stainless-steel shell with a Teflon liner inside (Fig. 3c).116 As a result, moderate temperature (usually below 200 °C) and high-pressure conditions for extended reaction time are applied. These elevated reaction conditions can greatly promote the reactivity and solubility of precursors, enabling efficient in situ dopant incorporation into the oxide host, and accordingly produce high-yield plasmonic oxide nanomaterials.113 Similar to the colloidal synthesis, by adjusting the precursor and reaction conditions, the desired plasmonic properties of the materials could be obtained with a relatively large amount. However, the synthesis process heavily relies on the preparation of the reacting solution and the environment, and it is hard to be visually monitored in real-time as that of the colloidal method. This might pose some difficulties in the control over the uncertainties during the synthesis.117
Being free from complex surfactants, the simplicity of the hydro/solvothermal method is attractive for upscaling the production of plasmonic oxides. In the past decade, this approach has gained popularity in the synthesis of sub-stoichiometric tungsten oxide and molybdenum oxide NSs specifically. Several research based on the hydro/solvothermal synthesized plasmonic WO3−x has been reported using just ethanol as the solvent with either WCl6 or W(CO)6 as the precursor.118–120 Different morphologies varying from nanowires119 to spherical particles121 were achieved via modifying the precursor concentration, reaction temperature, and time, accompanied by the changes in their LSPR absorption band from visible to NIR.
The hydro/solvothermal synthesis of a plasmonic MoO3−x nanomaterial can be realized using commercial Mo powders as the precursor with only hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and ethanol.122,123 Different temperatures, solvents, and amounts of H2O2 have been applied to produce distinctive plasmonic Mo oxide NSs. Cheng et al. found that the nanosheets obtained under 160 °C exhibits more oxygen vacancies than their counterparts synthesized under 140 °C, leading to the concomitant shift of plasmon peaks from 950 to 650 nm. While a further elevated temperature (180 °C) could result in a permanent crystal structure change into monoclinic MoO2.122 Furthermore, changing the reaction solvent can serve as an additional approach for tuning the plasmonic properties of the materials. Researchers explored using other types of alcohol beyond ethanol as the solvent, such as 1-butanol and 2-propanol, achieving a red-shifted LSPR using an even less reducible solvent. Liu et al. demonstrated that more H2O2 leads to more surface oxygen vacancies in MoO3−x nanosheets.123 In addition, a more complex plasmonic MO compound MoxW1−xO3−y has been achieved using the solvothermal approach. A well-crystallized NS was obtained via modifying the precursor and solvent used as illustrated in Fig. 3d, which shows a much more intensive plasmon absorption behavior compared to either WO3−x or MoO3−x.124
For the hydro/solvothermal method, recent progress indicated that water-soluble precursors such as ammonium molybdate50,58 and ammonium tungstate125 have been adopted in the synthesis of plasmonic Mo oxide and W oxide NSs. For instance, Zhang et al. reported the degenerated doped hydrogen molybdenum bronze (HxMoO3) nanodisks using ammonium molybdate tetrahydrate ((NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O) and tartaric acid (C4H6O6) as the source of H+. By adjusting the pH value of the precursor solutions, the authors could precisely control the H+ level within the Mo oxide crystals, and therefore enable the formation of slightly doped to heavily doped HxMoO3 with their plasmon absorption tuned across the NIR to the visible light range. Fig. 4f shows these HxMoO3 NSs with different morphologies. Particularly, less crystallinity was retained as the doping level increased. In the meantime, their corresponding LSPR shifted to higher energy as shown in Fig. 4g, indicating more free charge carriers in the NSs.
Sol–gel method. 
Complementary to the commonly adopted synthesis pathways discussed above, the “sol–gel” method is another popular approach for transparent MO thin film synthesis and optoelectronics,126,127 though it is rarely reported in plasmonic MO fabrication. The “sol–gel” method describes the approach of the formation of a liquid-phase network (gel) from colloidal suspension (sol), which usually features arbitrary architectures while maintaining the unique properties of nano-sized materials.128 ITO synthesized by the “sol–gel” approach was reported to sustain its LSPR.129,130 Cabezas et al. developed a novel gelation process of plasmonic ITO which allows a reliable control over LSPR of the gel network as ITO nanocrystals remain discrete within the network.130 By adjusting the concentration of surfactant used, the proposed method can achieve a stable and transparent gel with responsive LSPR. The approach showed exciting potential to be applied to a range of nanocrystal building blocks, enabling preservation of their nanoscale optical properties while applied to optical fiber or other large-scale devices.


3.2.2 Vapor phase synthesis. 
Physical vapor deposition (PVD). 
In addition to wet chemical methods, vapor phase syntheses are another major category for nanomaterial fabrication. Within the scope, the PVD method is highly popular. It consists of three major stages: (1) evaporating a solid source material via heating or sputtering; (2) vapor transition from source to the substrate; and (3) deposition of the source material on a cooler substrate.131Fig. 3e depicts a typical setup of PVD via the sputtering mechanism in which the magnetrons bombard and evaporate the solid target material into atom vapor, then the vapor deposits on the substrate at the other side.132 The process is normally carried out under ultra-high vacuum conditions. By adjusting the deposition rate, this method can achieve accurate control over the thickness of the obtained samples and can retain good crystallinity of products at the same time. Therefore, the PVD method is a highly suitable approach for thin film synthesis.
Several types of PVD techniques, including molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), magnetron sputtering, and cluster beam deposition, have been successfully applied in the fabrication of plasmonic MO thin films. Among these methods, MBE is conducted under an ultra-high vacuum environment, using an effusion cell with a dopant cell containing the solid source of the target and the dopant, respectively. The flux being excited flows out the cell in a well-controlled manner, thus the pace of deposition is precisely adjustable even at the molecule level. Sachet et al. reported a reliable synthesis of Dy-doped CdO (Dy:CdO) through reactive MBE on a MgO substrate.41 It was found that employing aliovalent dopant Dy as the electron donor in replacement of oxygen vacancies will give rise to a narrow LSPR band. Researchers later successfully demonstrated another fluorine-doped and indium-doped CdO (In:CdO) with mid-IR (MIR) plasmon through high-power impulse magnetron sputtering (HiPIMS).133,134 In this type of PVD, the target material is sputtered onto a substrate by short plasma pulses with high power. It produces the ionized deposition flux which enables better film adhesion and more uniform film on complex-shaped substrates.135 Doping of F and In in CdO was realized through introducing reactive gas CF4 and co-sputtering with metallic In target, respectively. By adjusting the dopant material and the deposition time, the film's thickness and the doping level can be well controlled. Though the obtained plasmonic thin film on substrates exhibits extremely uniform surface and ideal crystallinity, such PVD-based methods suffer from relatively low yield due to its working principle.
Gas-phase pulsed laser ablation is another commonly seen synthesis method of MOs. Keshavarz reported the synthesis of TiO2−x NS using pulsed laser ablation in an oxygen-deprived environment.136 The research has shown that the physiochemical properties of the produced NSs depend on the nucleation and growth during the atom condensation process. For instance, variation in the laser pulse duration would affect the particle size, in which shorter pulses lead to smaller particle radii. Laser intensity and target ion density within the laser plasma plume are other factors that will influence the properties of the final product.
Low energy cluster beam deposition (LECBD) is another vapor phase-based route to fabricate nanocomposite thin films. Atoms of target materials aggregate to form clusters and are subsequently deposited on the substrate via the supersonic expansion of the carrier plasma. LECBD shows better manipulation of the physical or chemical properties and positioning of nanomaterials compared with MBE.137 Ga doped ZnO (Ga:ZnO) nanoparticle assembled films synthesized using the LECBD method is a typical example. Hamza et al. pre-annealed the mixture of ZnO and Ga2O3 powder as precursors and deposited few-hundred nanometer thick nanoparticles with high porosity on silicon substrates. The authors successfully tuned the MIR plasmonic absorption from 4 to 3 μm via varying the concentration of the Ga dopant from 3% to 9%.81
Other vapor-phase synthesis methods. 
Nonthermal-plasma synthesis is a novel type of vapor-phase method which utilizes partially ionized plasma (i.e., only electrons) as the carrier vapor. Recent research found that this method has been applied to produce plasmonic TiN138 and AZO.106 Greenberg et al. presented the AZO synthesized using diethylzinc (DEZ) and trimethylaluminum (TMA) as precursors.106 It was found that the AZO nanoparticles enjoy a highly uniform distribution of dopants within the structure, which is distinctly different from the colloidal approach in which dopants usually segregate on the host oxide's surface. Besides, nonthermal plasma synthesis allows the simultaneous control of particle size and doping level. Higher dopant concentration and dopant activation fraction could be achieved when the size is reduced without compromising the LSPR energy. As a result, blue-shifted plasmonic IR absorption was observed for increased doping level, as well as reduced particle size.
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is another type of chemical vapor deposition, in which the substrates are alternately exposed to the pulses of two or more vapor-phase precursors, allowing a thin film to be formed on the surface. The ALD approach can produce conformal thin films which makes it favorable for fabricating semiconductor devices. AZO thin films with tunable plasmon resonance were fabricated successfully using DEZ, TMA, and water as the source of zinc, aluminum, and oxygen, respectively.139 The Al dopant concentration can be controlled by adjusting the Zn:Al chemical pulse ratio with ease. Other factors, including thermal processing time and deposition temperature, also play important roles in producing LSPR properties. The improved plasmon resonance in the NIR light region of ALD-deposited AZO allows the synthesis of ultra-conformal plasmonic materials, which has a strong implication on thin film electronics.


3.2.3 Other in situ synthesis pathways. 
Liquid phase exfoliation is a facile approach to synthesize 2D nanomaterials from their bulk counterparts. It mainly refers to the separation of layered compounds by chemical intercalation and subsequent external forces such as sonication. The van der Waals bonds between the interlayers are expanded by the introduced ionic groups and eventually broken mechanically. The 2D-morphology oxide layers are produced. This method is widely adopted for transition MOs with a naturally layered structure, especially tungsten oxide140 and molybdenum oxide.141 Nevertheless, oxide nanosheets that are synthesized directly through liquid phase exfoliation rarely exhibit LSPR, and sometimes merely exhibit even “weak” plasmon effect. This might be because of the limited formation of oxygen vacancies during the liquid exfoliation process. A few reports have revealed the possibility of fabricating plasmonic MoO3−x by exfoliating the mixture of MoO3 and MoO2.142 By manipulating the precursors’ ratio, researchers have also found that the oxygen vacancy level is tunable and the portion of Mo5+ can reach 20% when the ratio of MoO3 and MoO2 is 1:4, which is much higher than the value of 4% when the amount of MoO3 and MoO2 is 4:1.
The laser ablation in liquid (LAL) method has also been utilized in creating oxygen-deficient MO nanoparticles, thus initializing the LSPR behaviors of oxides. In LAL synthesis, a bulk target material in a liquid host is exposed to an intensive femtosecond pulsed laser (Fig. 3f). The solid target evaporates under laser excitation and interacts with the liquid host. Thus, the selection of the liquid host is a critical factor for both surface functionalization and colloidal nanomaterial synthesis. The LAL method was reported to produce TiO2 with high oxygen vacancies by Yang's group.143 TiO2−x nanoparticles with a size distribution from 100 nm to 300 nm were obtained. However, this approach suffers from less control over the synthesis process, which limits the manipulation over size, dopant concentration, and the optical properties of the product.

3.3 Plasmonic metal oxides synthesized via ex situ methods
In some cases, doping may not be generated concurrently during the “one-step” synthesis as introduced above. The plasmon effect can be generated using a stepwise synthetic process of post-fabrication of the synthesized MO NSs. For instance, further reduction of the synthesized nanomaterial with pure H2 gas is a common method to induce external H+ into the structure. Applying additional energy such as light irradiation can lead to the formation of atomic vacancies as well. Such methods are noted as “ex situ” syntheses which complement the “in situ” approaches and significantly expand the variety of plasmonic MOs.


            3.3.1
           Photoactivation. 
Other than tuning the LSPR during synthesis, irradiation using external light of the synthesized nanomaterials has shown the capability to further induce the dopants, providing the controllability on LSPR intensity and wavelength. Photoactivation of MoO3 suspensions in water for a certain duration can produce H+ and oxygen from H2O molecules of which H+ ions can intercalate into the MoO3 structure (Fig. 5a), forming molybdenum bronze (HxMoO3) with extra free electrons.31 This strategy has also been applied to produce WO3−x nanospheres121 and fluorine-indium co-doped CdO nanocrystals.110 Interestingly, Liu et al. reported that a slight redshift in the LSPR of hydrogen-doped MoO3 occurred as the irradiation duration prolonged,144 which is opposite to the observation reported by Alsaif et al.31 This finding indicates that the principle of ex situ synthesis of MO LSPR is still unclear and requires further investigations.
 Fig. 5  (a) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of MoO3−x after different solar light irradiation durations; inset: scheme of photodoping and color change of MoO3−x. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright © 2014, Wiley. (b) Schematic of hydrogen spillover synthesis of HxMoO3−y coupled with Pt nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Illustration of selective cation-exchange reaction. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright © 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 



            3.2.2
           Two-step hydrogen reduction. 
In addition to photoactivation, a two-step synthetic process can facilitate the reduction of the material NSs by introducing dopants, especially H+ protons. Hydrogen reduction was reported to generate oxygen vacancies in MoO3 nanosheets at ambient pressure (1 bar) using pure H2 gas.96 The reduction performance highly depends on the reaction conditions such as temperature. The as-obtained MoO3−x nanoparticles generated an increasing amount of oxygen vacancies when the reduction temperature increased from 100 °C to 200 °C, while the crystal phase also transited from orthorhombic MoO3−x to amorphous MoO2 nanoparticles at 300 °C. With the increased temperature, the strong LSPR absorption peak blue-shifts as well, indicating an increased free charge carrier concentration.
Beyond exposing the target material solely to H2 gas, the hydrogen spillover method involves metal species as a support and is widely used to attract H+ in the host materials. Hydrogen atoms migrate from a metal catalyst to a non-metal nanomaterial surface and are adsorbed as the dopants. Heavily doped hydrogen molybdenum bronze hybrids (X/HxMoO3, x ≤ 1.68) and hydrogen tungsten bronze hybrids (X/HxWO3) have been successfully synthesized utilizing gold (Au), palladium (Pd),28,145 platinum (Pt)146 and ruthenium (Ru)147 as the catalyst (Fig. 5b). It is worth mentioning that the as-obtained hydrogen-doped semiconductor hybrids all exhibit strong plasmon resonance in the visible range, which is highly desirable for many types of applications. Compared to the reduction process in the absence of metal species, the reduction in the H-spillover method can be achieved under mild reaction conditions, not only at ambient pressure but also at room temperature.


3.2.3 Cation-exchange. 
Cation exchange is a method to incorporate cationic dopants into the preformed MOs. In the cation-exchange reaction, p-type dopants can be embedded into n-type MOs through substitutional doping by taking the place of original cationic atoms.148 Liu et al. performed the exchange reaction between the CuCl2 metal salt and either unintentionally doped ZnO, In2O3 or doped CdO, In2O3 nanoparticles. Cu+ was successfully doped into those MO nanoparticles (Fig. 5c).149 Through manipulating precursor concentration and reaction time, the as-synthesized MO nanocrystals can achieve a doping level that exceeds the existing limits and displays an impressively wide LSPR absorption wavelength range. In addition to Cu+, the researchers also showed the capability of other cationic ions, including Ag+ and Fe2+ as p-type dopants to replace the initial dopants in In:CdO and Sn:In2O3, respectively.149 More importantly, reversible properties can be realized by optimizing the design of sequential cation-exchange reactions to enhance the product's semiconducting character. For example, ideally, exchanging Cd2+ ions with Cu+ ions selectively after doping CdO with In3+ can result in a larger number of free carriers inside the NS lattice. Attractively, taking the original nanomaterial as a template, the cation exchange method produces little alternation on the morphology of the original material as well as crystal structure, which offers another degree of control over MOs’ LSPR properties.
In summary, most of the synthesis methods are ideal for large-scale and highly uniform production of plasmonic MOs, while the PVD method is specifically suitable for large-area thin film synthesis of plasmonic MOs. Generally, all these methods can achieve uniform nanocrystals under optimized reaction conditions. We also observed that the LSPR properties of liquid exfoliated MOs are relatively less stable under the ambient environment due to degradation when exposed to solar light, compared to those synthesized by other methods. A detailed comparison of characteristics is shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Comparison of synthesis methods of plasmonic MOs




Name
Large area thin film synthesis
Large scale synthesis
Uniformity of nanocrystals
Stability in the ambient environment





In situ methods


Wet chemical synthesis
Colloidal method


√
√
√


“Sol–gel” method
√


√
√


Vapor phase synthesis
Physical vapor deposition (PVD)
√


√
√


Nonthermal-plasma synthesis


√
√
√


Atomic layer deposition (ALD)
√


√
√


Other methods
Liquid exfoliation


√
√




Laser ablation in liquid (LAL)


√
√
√



Ex situ methods


Photoactivation


√
√




Two-step hydrogen reduction


√
√
√


Cation-exchange


√
√
√





4. LSPR in metal oxide nanostructures
In the past decade, plasmonic technologies have attracted tremendous research efforts; different types of materials have been proved to exhibit LSPR at various wavelengths. As introduced in Section 2, conventional noble metals (i.e. Au, Ag) appear with strong intrinsic loss and poor plasmonic tunability due to the high electron density and pre-engineered morphology. To overcome these limitations, the rise of novel plasmonic MOs beyond the conventional noble metals opens the door to a broader arena for cutting-edge plasmonic nanomaterial applications. Some transition MOs are popular in LSPR studies because their unique characteristics originate from their outer-d valence electrons.32,37,150,151 To date, the reported LSPR of MOs covers most of the solar spectrum region across visible to MIR (Fig. 6). Studies have shown that doped molybdenum oxide, tungsten oxide, and titanium oxide exhibit broadband Vis-NIR LSPR which is especially desired for biochemical and bioimaging applications such as photoacoustic (PA) imaging and photothermal therapy (PTT), which will be further discussed in Section 5. In addition, doped indium oxide and doped zinc oxide are found to support LSPR from the NIR to MIR region. Researchers have been pursuing high-quality LSPR response with smaller FWHM and less ionic scattering for better adoption in applications including smart window, switching, and sensing technologies with these nanomaterials. Moreover, doped cadmium oxide, which has been demonstrated with a highly tunable LSPR and dielectric permittivity in the IR region, enjoys extreme low loss and extraordinary nonlinearity at the telecommunication wavelength and is suitable for ultrafast optical switching and modulation. The next key step could be the exploration of the plasmonic CdO with higher LSPR energy and carrier mobility. Fig. 6 illustrates an overview of current plasmonic MOs and their LSPR region reported.
 Fig. 6  Summary of doped plasmonic metal oxides with different LSRP wavelength ranges. 
4.1 Doped molybdenum oxide
Molybdenum trioxide is an n-type semiconductor with a bandgap about 3.2 eV.152 MoO3 is mostly seen in three types of crystalline phases as presented in Fig. 7a, including thermal dynamically stable orthorhombic α-MoO3, metastable monoclinic β-MoO3 and hexagonal h-MoO3, which are composed of MoO6 octahedra with different configurations. α-MoO3 has a special double-layer structure, and the bulk material is formed by these double-layer planes that stack together through van der Waals force, facilitating interlayer ion intercalation,153 while h-MoO3 is constructed by zigzag MoO6 octahedral chains in a highly ordered tunnel-like structure which can accommodate extrinsic ions in all plane directions.154 The unique crystal structure makes MoO3 a competitive candidate in degenerated doped 2D nanofabrication and optoelectronics.155–157 It has been increasingly reported in the last decade that MoO3−x exhibits strong LSPR in the visible to NIR region through promoting oxygen vacancies in the lattice to increase the amount of free charge carriers.50,122,150,158–161 Besides the self-doped MoO3−x, intercalating extrinsic ions (i.e., H+) into the structure can also enhance the free electron concentration and initialize the LSPR performance.55,59,162
 Fig. 7  (a) Crystal structure of MoO6 octahedra unit cell (top left), α-MoO3 (top right), β-MoO3 (bottom left), and h-MoO3 (bottom right). Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright © 2017, Wiley. (b) Photograph of MoO3−x in ethanol dispersion. (c) TEM image of MoO3−x. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright © 2014, Wiley. (d) The Mo3d XPS spectra of h-MoO3. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright © 2021, Wiley. (e) Crystal structures of oxygen deficient WO2.72 and CsWO3. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) UV-vis-NIR absorbance spectra of WO3−x nanocrystals in different solvents. Inset: SEM of the WO3−x nanocrystals Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright © 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Photograph of TiO2 nanocrystals dispersed in toluene. (j) XRD patterns of TiO2 nanocrystals synthesized using M-OLAM (top), F-OLAM (mid), and M-ODOL (bottom) as precursors. Insets show atomistic models with [001] and [101] facets. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic showing a change in the shape of Nb-doped TiO2 nanocrystals with increasing Nb precursor, shown in indicative colors of nanocrystals. (i) SEM of an NTO film cross-section deposited on silicon. (k) UV-vis-NIR transmittance spectrum of an NTO film deposited on glass. The inset is a photograph of a deposited sample. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Plasmonic MoO3 nanomaterials have become popular after Huang reported the NIR LSPR absorption band of sub-stoichiometric MoO3−x in 2012.49 These atomically thin nanosheets exhibit a distinct blue color (Fig. 7b and c) and a broad adsorption from 600 to 1200 nm. Their special blue color originates from the transition of Mo6+ to Mo5+ due to intervalence charge transfer. The co-existence of Mo6+ and Mo5+ and the appearance of oxygen vacancies in MoO3−x with the NIR LSPR wavelength have been confirmed by later research.31,142,163 Lee et al. presented a solid-state cell made using nanostructured MoO3−x which exhibits LSPR in the NIR region.164 The molybdenum oxide layer grown over tin-doped indium oxide has an LSPR wavelength at ∼850 nm which leads to the plasmon-induced charge separation (PICS) effect under NIR light irradiation.
The layered structure of MoO3 favors the accommodation of various types of ions (i.e. H+, alkali ion) in the van der Waals gap.141,165 Therefore, converting commercial MoO3 to sub-stoichiometric MoO3−x through intercalating extrinsic ions is a widely used strategy. It is worth noting that the alkali ions are highly reductive, and intercalation may cause irreversible structure transformation, leading to a poorly controllable LSPR. This phenomenon has been observed in NaBH4 reduced MoO3−x reported by Li.150 In this regard, H+ is more favorable in producing plasmonic doped Mo oxide, which is known as hydrogen molybdenum bronze (HxMoO3). HxMoO3 with an ultrahigh doping level has been synthesized by Zhang et al.58 The free electron concentration can reach up to ≈1022 cm−3 and thus facilitates a tunable LSPR across a wide wavelength range from terahertz to the visible light region. The researchers focused on highly doped HxMoO3 that when 0.23 < x < 0.40, the HxMoO3 shows an orthorhombic crystal phase with LSPR in the NIR region, while its counterparts with 0.85 < x < 1.04 and 1.55 < x < 1.72 are monoclinic crystal structures with LSPR in the NIR-visible region. Wei's group demonstrated another H+ doped MoO3 that supports tunable LSPR via facilely manipulating the H+ doping level.166 After the hydrogen reduction process, a strong optical absorption band appeared in the visible region and sub-stochiometric Mo signals were detected using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). A 3D plasmonic oxide framework (POF) incorporated with ultrathin h-MoO3 nanoflakes has been reported by Alsaif recently.167 The study utilized a relatively large number of oxygen vacancies and great H+ accommodation capability of h-MoO3 to elevate its free carrier concentration and successfully demonstrated an LSPR band across the visible and NIR region. The sub-stoichiometric Mo5+ in h-MoO3 can be distinguished clearly from the XPS spectra (Fig. 7d). The high doping concentration, as well as the high activity in redox reaction, made plasmonic molybdenum bronze and its hybrid favorable in many applications such as phototherapy, charge storage and photocatalysis.142,160,168
Beyond the advantages of plasmonic MoO3−x, it suffers from lacking long term stability.169 It can be easily oxidized under an ambient environment,142 hence leading to a decrease in the number of free charge carriers because of the recombination of oxygen vacancies. Similarly, the doped H+ ions in HxMoO3 are highly reactive in detaching from the host oxide which makes HxMoO3 dissociate into MoO3−x and water molecules under continuous irradiation.170 Thus, long term maintenance of H+ concentration could be challenging. Moreover, sometimes plasmonic MoO3−x nanosheets tend to aggregate due to the electrostatic force under certain environments and cause the plasmonic peak to be suppressed.159 To overcome this challenge, several studies have been carried out. Sun's group has found that 2D MoO3 nanosheets obtained through liquid exfoliation using pure commercial MoO3 are more likely to retain a stronger LSPR for a prolonged period compared with those exfoliated from a mixer of MoO3 and MoO2.142 Zhang et al. demonstrated that thermodynamically stable HxMoO3 in three different phases can be synthesized via a hydrothermal approach.58 Wang et al. developed highly stable MoO3−x nanosheets by coating a polydopamine (PDA) protection layer.169 The technique equipped MoO3−x with high tunability and strong antioxidant capability at the same time.
4.2 Doped tungsten oxide
Tungsten trioxide is an n-type semiconductor normally with a bandgap of ∼2.6 to 3 eV.171 Typical WO3 crystals are formed by WO6 octahedra in layered coordination (Fig. 7e).172 The lattice of WO3 can hold a large number of oxygen vacancies, and form into different crystal structured WO3−x (0.08 < x < 0.375).173 Different from stoichiometric WO3, WO3−x is known for its stronger NIR absorption. Manthiram and Alivisatos first reported that this strong absorption was due to LSPR performance at the NIR wavelength yielded from oxygen vacancies in non-stoichiometric WO3−x.32 Blue color WO2.83 (W24O68) nanorods showed an LSPR peak centered at 900 nm which belonged to short-axis LSPR absorption. On the other hand, the long-axis mode exhibited a relatively weaker and broader LSPR response compared with the short-axis mode. The experimental observation confirmed that the LSPR wavelength moves according to changes in the solvent refractive index as expected. When the medium refractive index increased, the LSPR shifted towards lower energy with a high sensitivity of 280 nm/RIU for the short-axis mode plasmon resonance, which is comparable to those of noble metals.174,175 Similar results were obtained in later research by Balitskii et al., who demonstrated WO2.72 (W18O49) nanosphere dispersion in ethanol with an LSPR peak at 556 nm,121 and an approximately linear shift of the peak position corresponding to the solvent refractive index change was observed (Fig. 7f). Recently, Sardar and colleagues reported novel plasmonic 2D WO3−x nanoplatelets (NPLs) which can hold a significant amount of oxygen vacancies.115 The obtained ultrathin WO3−x NPLs consist of different stoichiometries and the overall NS held 27.7% oxygen deficiency which gives stoichiometric composition as WO2.17. The proposed WO3−x NSs exhibit a well-defined LSPR band with a peak at ∼1470 nm. By describing the peak position as a function of solvent refractive index, WO3−x NPLs present a notable LSPR sensitivity of 330 nm/RIU, which is higher than that of previously reported WO3−x or CsxWO3 NSs.
Adachi and Asahi have explored cesium tungsten bronze (CsxWO3) and discovered that its known NIR absorption originates from LSPR.85 The study revealed that the Cs ions will fill up the vacancies of the WO6 octahedra structure (Fig. 7e) after being heated under a reductive environment with x = 0.33. Hence, the abundant free electrons brought by Cs+ doping produce LSPR. The research group later gained a more insightful view on the mechanism of CsxWO3 LSPR by deconvoluting the optical absorption spectrum into three peaks: two anisotropic plasmon peaks and one polaron peak.176 The observation concluded that both Cs dopants and oxygen vacancies play significant roles in the collective plasmon resonance. This mechanism may be extended to other similar doped plasmonic MOs.
4.3 Doped titanium oxide
Titanium dioxide is a wide bandgap semiconductor whose bandgap is about 3.2 eV.177 TiO2 is widely studied because of its high chemical stability, non-toxicity, and relative earth abundance.178 It was discovered that titanium dioxide synthesized using titanium fluoride (TiF4) exhibited a broad absorbance resulting from LSPR across the visible to IR wavelength with a peak at around 3400 nm.36 The plasmonic titanium oxide displays bluish color other than the white color of ordinary TiO2 (Fig. 7g), which is caused by oxygen vacancies formed during synthesis. Ti3+ was introduced in the presence of fluorine to form sub-stoichiometric titanium dioxide (TiO2−x). Another plasmonic self-doped TiO2−x (TiO1.67) nanosphere material was synthesized by Yan et al. It exhibited an LSPR band from 300 to 2000 nm with significantly enhanced absorption.143
Later studies demonstrated that titanium dioxide doped with niobium can support a broadband LSPR tailing from the red side of visible towards the IR region beyond 1500 nm (Fig. 7i and k).82 The enhanced absorption band was due to extra free electrons introduced by the aliovalent doping of Nb5+. Along with the increasing dopant concentration, the intensity of the absorption peak was also enhanced while shifting to higher energy.52,82 Similar to oxygen-deficient TiO2−x, Nb-doped TiO2 nanocrystals also exhibit deep blue color as Ti3+ was introduced by Nb5+ ions. Barawi et al. reported the highest LSPR energy at 2300 nm of Nb-TiO2 with a Nb5+ concentration of ∼10%.35 When the doping level was further increased to over 10%, no obvious increase in the free electron density was observed. The excessive Nb doping will turn the product into niobium oxide.82 The dopant concentration would affect the morphology of the nanocrystals obtained. For instance, TiO2 would transfer from tetragonal bipyramidal crystal to stretched peanut-like shape as Ti4+ ions were substituted by larger Nb5+ ions (Fig. 7h and j).52 Nevertheless, despite the modest shifts of the LSPR wavelength caused by variation in the morphology of nanocrystals, free charge carrier concentration dominates the surface plasmon behavior of Nb-doped TiO2.82
4.4 Doped indium oxide
Indium oxide is a wide bandgap (3.7 eV) semiconductor.179 It is known for the popular transparent conducting oxide (TCO) – the highly degenerate n-type semiconductor ITO.180 ITO has been proved to display LSPR in MIR for the first time in 2009.33 This work pioneered in proving that the LSPR energy could be tuned easily through modifying the dopant concentration, which opened the potential in various applications for later researchers. The LSPR wavelength of ITO underwent a gradual blue shift from >2200 nm to 1618 nm when the percentage of Sn dopants increased from 3% to 10%. A similar phenomenon was observed in later research conducted by Lounis,34 that the LSPR wavelength blue-shifted as the Sn concentration increases to 7% accompanied by an enhanced intensity of its extinction spectrum. Interestingly, a further increase of the doping level over 10% would lead to a gradual redshift of the LSPR peak. Researchers have revealed the possible reason for surface segregation of Sn dopants at higher doping levels and suggested that this difference in the dopant profile of each sample would affect the LSPR response strongly.34 In other words, the LSPR exhibits a more symmetric shape for the samples with more uniformly distributed dopants. This is due to less ionized impurities scattering inside the nanoparticles. The study of the effect on the line shape of LSPR response provides additional paths in tuning a material for different needs.
Later, efforts have been focusing on how to achieve better LSPR quality (Q-factor) through varying the dopant choices of indium oxide. Tandon et al. reported that the Sn and Cr co-doped indium oxide exhibits higher Q-factor and reduced damping of LSPR compared with ITO solely doped with Sn.89 When the Sn concentration remains constant, the carrier density is increased as the Cr doping level increases, accompanied by a larger crystal size (Fig. 8a and b). So, a higher doping rate of Cr leads to a larger dielectric constant, decreasing the ionic impurity scattering and grain boundary-related carrier scattering (Fig. 8c). The group also demonstrated Zr, Sn co-doped In2O3 which enjoys high LSPR energy and low LSPR FWHM.87 Similar to Cr+, Zr4+ dopants also tend to segregate on the surface and reduce the impurity scattering. Moreover, Zr4+ has a similar ionic radius than In3+, so Zr4+ ions are adopted as aliovalent cationic dopants with minimum lattice distortion to the host In2O3. However, Zr4+ dopants suffer from low solubility in In2O3 and are difficult to reach the desired doping level. Thus, introducing Zr4+ into intermediate doped Sn:In2O3 would be a favorable choice for applications requiring high Q-factor, such as PTT and sensing. In addition, indium oxide can accommodate anionic fluorine dopants to produce the LSPR feature. In F,Sn co-doped In2O3 nanocrystals, introduction of the facet-directing agent F selectively produces cubic nanocrystals with tunable LSPR.181 The proposed nanoparticles exhibit sphere-to-cube transition as the Sn concentration decreases while shape-induced LSPR modes start to dominate in the resulting nanocubes. Meanwhile, a narrow LSPR response was observed and a subsequent NFE effect can be observed at the corner, edge, and between interparticle gaps. This strategy shows new paths for synthetically manipulating nanoparticles’ LSPR with a high Q-factor.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic model illustrating the change in the shape of Cr–Sn co-doped In2O3 nanocrystals when Cr concentration increases. (b) HRTEM image, (c) LSPR spectra of Sn, and Cr–Sn-co-doped In2O3 NSs. Adapted with permission.89 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) HRTEM of AZO nanocrystals oriented along the [110] zone axis. Inset: the corresponding FFT image. (e) UV-vis-NIR absorbance spectra of equimolar dispersions of AZO nanocrystals with varying Al doping levels. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. (f) TEM image of self-assembled spherical ICO. Inset: a unit cell of ICO octahedra. (g) Absorption spectra of spherical, small octahedral, and large octahedral of nanocrystals with similar levels of In doping in CCl4, respectively, with the corresponding TEM image on top. Scale bar: 50 nm. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright © 2013. American Chemical Society. 
4.5 Other transition metal oxides

4.5.1 Doped zinc oxide. 
Like indium oxide, zinc oxide is a popular TCO with a wide bandgap of ∼3.34 eV. Since doped zinc oxide has lower toxicity and costs less than doped indium oxide, it is a popular alternative for conventional plasmonic material. Buonsanti et al. first reported the surface plasmon resonance of AZO nanocrystals synthesized via the colloidal method (Fig. 8d).105 This doped AZO exhibited an absorption band in the IR region induced by LSPR. The IR absorption band shifted to a higher energy along with the increase of the aluminum doping level, due to the free electrons introduced when Al3+ ions substituted Zn sites (Fig. 8e). AZO has the lowest optical losses (imaginary permittivity ε′′) in the IR region compared with noble metals, ITO, and Ga doped ZnO.182 This property makes it an attractive candidate for applications that operate in the IR light region. Just like most MOs, AZO usually exhibits a broad LSPR spectrum with an asymmetric shape due to frequency-dependent damping, which may hinder its usage in various aspects, especially in sensing. Milliron and other researchers worked on factors that influence the spectral heterogeneity in the LSPR of AZO.39 The group pointed out that besides the shape of nanocrystals, the uniformity of dopant distribution plays a major role in achieving a narrow linewidth and high Q-factor of the LSPR spectrum. In another case, Greenberg et al. synthesized AZO with spatially uniformly distributed dopants.106 When the dopant donor concentration increased from 0 to 3.2%, the LSPR energy increased from 0.2 to 0.4 eV, indicating that the free electron density was increased. When the doping level was fixed, reducing the size of the nanocrystals blueshifts the LSPR, illustrating the quantum confinement effect of semiconductor nanocrystals’ LSPR. This study has demonstrated the possibility to achieve a high doping level in the host MO with reduced-sized nanocrystals.
Other dopants for ZnO that have been reported to support LSPR are gallium and indium. Degenerate Ga-doped zinc oxide (GZO) is commonly studied because of its wide-range feasible doping levels. GZO exhibits MIR LSPR which is tunable from 4–3 μm as dopant concentration increases. Hamza et al. observed a large damping when the doping level is over 6% due to the heterogeneous distribution of Ga dopants.81 The researchers pointed out that the organization of nanocrystals also affects optical damping in addition to dopant segregation since the nanocrystal arrangement in an aluminum matrix can overcome nanocrystal self-organization. Another high-quality GZO thin film with MIR LSPR was reported by Sturaro et al.107 The LSPR peak would facilely blue-shift upon exposure to reducing gas while red-shift towards oxidizing gas, showing promising capability in selective gas sensing. In-doped ZnO (IZO) also exhibits MIR LSPR at about 3 μm.108 Optimal LSPR was obtained at a 5% doping level, as free electrons may be scattered or trapped by In when more dopants were incorporated, which eventually leads to suppressed LSPR.


4.5.2 Doped cadmium oxide. 
Cadmium oxide (CdO) is an intrinsic n-type semiconductor with a direct bandgap of 2.27 eV.183 Its low electrical resistivity and high carrier mobility make CdO particularly attractive for low-loss ultrafast optical modulator and MIR plasmonics.184,185 Oxygen deficient CdO can support MIR LSPR originated from free carriers provided by excess Cd2+.111 However, the corresponding LSPR wavelength can only be tuned via its morphological size. To further explore its optoelectronic properties, researchers have developed various types of doped CdOs. For instance, dysprosium, indium, and yttrium doped CdOs exhibit tunable plasmonic features in the IR regime.40,41,134,186 ICO has been proved to support LSPR for the first time by Thomas R. Gordon in 2011.40 By varying the indium concentration, the peak resonance wavelength can be tuned from 1.8 to 3.5 μm (Fig. 8f and g). Besides, the fluorine-doped cadmium oxide (FCO) expanded the possibilities to tailor the LSPR characteristics of CdO. F− has an ionic radius close to that of O2− and can substitute O2− sites as an anionic dopant. Such ion exchange can extend the LSPR spectrum range without introducing much lattice strain.133 Maria and colleagues demonstrated that FCO can achieve a nearly-perfect LSPR with tunability across the entire MIR region.133 Moreover, fluorine–indium co-doped CdO (FICO) and fluorine–tin co-doped CdO (FSCO) as typical cation–anion co-doped oxides have further promoted the free carrier density and reached higher LSPR energy at 1.5 μm in NIR.88,110 Giannuzzi et al. demonstrated that the LSPR frequency of the FICO thin film can be dynamically and reversibly tuned across the NIR region through electrochemical doping.109 Fine control over doping level opens pathways to dynamic modulation of optical absorption and transmission of doped CdO and hence practices on electrochromic devices.
Maria's group has reported dysprosium doped CdO (DyCdO) as an ideal plasmonic material in MIR with high carrier density and high mobility.41 As Dy has a similar ionic radius to that of Cd, the replacement of Cd with Dy brings little distortion on the lattice and can even reduce the lattice strain. However, Dy is a relatively expensive and reactive element. Similar to dysprosium, yttrium also enjoys the lattice matching ionic radius of Cd. Employing Y in doping can suppress oxygen vacancy formation, hence reducing carrier scattering and elevating carrier mobility.187 Recently, Boltasseva and the group demonstrated Y-doped CdO with a highly tunable plasmonic feature in MIR.186 The study showed that the point at which dielectric permittivity crosses zero blue shifts as the Y doping level increases and all-optical switch could be achieved from the NIR to MIR region. The above strategies broaden the way of doped CdO and other doped MOs in practical optical and plasmonic devices.


4.5.3 Rhenium trioxide. 
Rhenium trioxide is a naturally metallic MO. Its crystal structure leaves an extra d-electron per unit lattice which contributes to its free electron density. As a result, crystalline ReO3 nanoparticles enjoy an LSPR band in the visible range which is comparable to that of gold nanoparticles.42 Due to its natural metallic conductivity, ReO3 nanocrystals exhibit a “size-dependent” LSPR band, in which the LSPR blue shifts with decreased particle size. For ReO3 nanocrystals with a diameter of 32.5 nm, the LSPR wavelength locates at 543 nm, while it will shift to 507 nm when the nanocrystal diameter reduces to 12 nm.42 Chong and Fan have observed the LSPR of single-crystal ReO3 nanocubes. These nanocubes with an average size of ∼60 nm display an NIR LSPR band at 860 nm which locates at lower energy compared with previously reported ones.188 In addition to size, doping would effectively modify the LSPR features as indicated in the above sections. Liu et al. demonstrated hydrogen rhenium bronze (HxReO3) nanocrystals with an intense LSPR band across the visible to NIR region.189 Through dissolving mixed-valence rhenium oxide in an aqueous solution, hydrogen ions insert into the lattice to form HxReO3 nanosheets with a wide LSPR band. As the amount of intercalated H+ increases, the LSPR wavelength redshifts to ∼800 nm with enhanced intensity at the same time. Other dopant elements, for example Li+, have been shown to execute similar effects in both LSPR wavelength and intensity of ReO3.190 These studies on ReO3 have broadened the choice of plasmonic TMOs for potential applications in catalyst, biochemical, and sensing domains.


4.5.4 Vanadium dioxide. 
Vanadium dioxide (VO2) exhibits a special phase transition characteristic between insulator and metal that can be triggered by external fields, allowing it to be an ideal candidate in optoelectronics.191 Metallic phase VO2 supports LSPR at IR frequency. Matsui et al. revealed the temperature-dependent LSPR at the MIR region using a periodic 2D array made of metallic VO2 nanosquares.191 The integration of metallic and insulating VO2 shows the possibility to modulate the LSPR properties on-demand as demonstrated in rewritable waveguides, spatial modulators, and reconfigurable wire-grid polarizers.192 VO2 nanomaterials exhibit a great potential to be employed in many applications such as smart windows, on-chip nanophotonic devices, etc., and their unique optical properties are valuable to be further exploited.
The following Table 2 summarizes the majority of doped MOs and their synthesis routes, LSPR properties, morphologies, and bio-applications. It is shown that most plasmonic MOs are mainly in the transition or post-transition metal categories. As illustrated in Fig. 6 as well, compounds such as doped TiOx, MoOx, and WOx support LSPR in the Vis-NIR region while doped InOx, ZnOx, and CdOx demonstrate LSPR in the MIR region. Doping strategies are strongly correlated with LSPR performances. In general, increasing the doping or vacancy level in MO NSs pushes LSPR to shift to higher energy, but may decrease the Q-factor of LSPR simultaneously as a result of increased damping. In substitutional doped MOs, such as doped InOx and CdOx, aliovalent dopants with similar ionic radii are preferable because alien atoms mismatching in radii cause a higher degree of lattice distortion and therefore bring larger damping to LSPR. Similarly, deformation of nanocrystals may occur in MO NSs in the presence of a high concentration level of vacancies or interstitial dopants. In the meantime, MOs such as MoOx, TiOx, and WOx are reported to accommodate a larger number of small ions (e.g. H+), hence tuning their LSPR towards the Vis-NIR light region. Current popular synthesis methods are mostly “in situ” approaches that produce plasmonic doped MOs during the synthesis. In comparison, “ex situ” methods employ post-synthetic steps to create doping or vacancies in the host oxides. The synthesis routes also greatly influence the morphologies of the product. For instance, the colloidal wet-chemistry synthesis normally results in the production of low-dimensional NSs (e.g. 0D nanoparticles, 1D nanowires, and 2D nanosheets), while the vapor-phase deposition approaches produce thin films with a large lateral dimension. Subsequently, the change in shape influences the LSPR response of MO NSs. The small spherical structures usually exhibit a single narrow LSPR peak while the peaks of arbitrary nanocrystals are significantly broadened and convoluted. Bio-applications of such doped MOs are still underway to be fully explored. Depending on the application areas, properties such as broad LSPR wavelengths in the NIR region with large heat conversion efficiencies are suitable for PA imaging and PTT, while sensitive LSPR peaks with a small FWHM are preferred in sensing and SERS applications.
Table 2 Overview on plasmonic metal oxides and their dopants, SPR range, synthesis methods, and related biochemical applications




Material
Doping
Synthesis
Morphology
Plasmon wavelength (nm)
Bio-related application
Ref.




TiO2
Oxygen vacancies
Colloidal synthesis
Tetragonal bipyramidal
∼3400



36



TiO2
Oxygen vacancies
fs-LAL
Spherical nanoparticles
∼450



143



TiO2
Oxygen vacancies
Pulsed laser irradiation
Quantum dots
200–1000
SERS

136



TiO2
Nb5+
Colloidal synthesis
Tetragonal bipyramidal/peanut-like nanorods
NIR



82



TiO2
Nb5+
Colloidal synthesis
Nanocrystals
∼2300



35



TiO2
Nb5+
Colloidal synthesis
Tetragonal bipyramidal/peanut-like nanorods
420 → 1500
PA & PTT

52



WO3
Oxygen vacancies
Colloidal synthesis
Nanorods
900



32



WO3
Cs+
Colloidal synthesis
Hexagonal prisms/truncated cubes/pseudosphere
860 & 1602



112



WO3
Cs+
Colloidal synthesis
Hexagonal nanoplatelets/nanorods
707 & 1543



45



WO3
Oxygen vacancies & Cs+
Thermal reduction method
Hexagonal nanoparticles
850–2500



176



WO3
Na+
Thermal reduction method
Needles interspersed/truncated cubes/tetrahedrons
∼750



193



WO3
Oxygen vacancies
Solvothermal synthesis
Nanoparticles
>1000
PTT

194



WO3
Oxygen vacancies
Liquid phase exfoliation
Nanosheets
1520/1450



95



WO3
Oxygen vacancies
Solvothermal synthesis
Nanowires
>520 to NIR



118



WO3
Oxygen vacancies
Solvothermal synthesis
Nanospheres
556



121



WO3
Oxygen vacancies
Colloidal synthesis
Nanodots
>900
PA & PTT

51



WO3
H2O
Hydrothermal synthesis
Nanoflowers
∼1100



195



WO3
H+
H-spillover
Nanosheets
∼660



28



WO3
Oxygen vacancies
Hydrothermal synthesis
Nanowire bundles
561
SERS

119



WO3
Oxygen vacancies & Li+
Colloidal synthesis
Nanowires
>1000



196



WO3
Oxygen vacancies
Solvothermal synthesis
Nanowire bundles
>1000



120



WO3
Oxygen vacancies
Solid-phase reduction
Nanocrystals
600–760
Bovine serum albumin (BSA) sensing

197



WO3
NH4+
Solvothermal synthesis
Nanoribbons
NIR
PA & PTT

125



WO3
Oxygen vacancies
Colloidal synthesis
2D nanoplatelets
1470



115



WO3
Oxygen vacancies
Colloidal synthesis
Nanorods
900



32



WO3
Cs+
Colloidal synthesis
Hexagonal prisms/truncated cubes/pseudosphere
860 & 1602



112



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies
Hydrothermal synthesis
Nanosheets
900



49



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies
Hydrothermal synthesis
Nanosheets
680–950



122



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies& H+
Liquid phase exfoliation
Nanoflakes
760



31



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies
Hydrothermal synthesis
Nanoribbons
500–1000
PTT

158



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies
Hydrothermal synthesis
Hollow nanospheres
∼800
PTT

50



MoO3
H+
H-spillover
Nanosheets
∼565



28



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies & H+
Liquid phase exfoliation
Nanoflakes
630 & 900
BSA sensing

159



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies
Template synthesis & hydrogen reduction
Nanosheets
623–920



96



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies
Hydrogen reduction
Nanodots
830–880



150



MoO3
H+


Nanosheets
710 & 1030
BSA sensing

144



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies
Liquid exfoliation & hydrogen reduction
Nanosheets
∼820



198



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies
Photoactivation
Quantum dots
500–800
PTT & glucose sensing

199



MoO3
H+
Hydrothermal synthesis
2D nano-disks
425 & 650
Glucose sensing

58



MoO3
H+
Liquid phase exfoliation
Nanosheets
700 & 1000



200



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies & H+
Liquid phase exfoliation & reduction
Nanoflakes
∼735
BSA sensing

57



MoO3
H+
Hydrothermal synthesis
Amorphous quantum dots
720 & 1050
SERS

54



MoO3
H+
H-spillover


∼556



146



MoO3
H+
Hydrothermal synthesis
2D planar flakes
900 & 1460
pH sensing

59



MoO3
NH4+
Hydrothermal synthesis
Intracrystalline porous structures





154



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies
Liquid phase exfoliation
Few-layer nanosheets
600–1200



142



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies & H+
Liquid phase exfoliation
Nanoflakes
663 & 871



170



MoO3
H+
H-spillover
Nanosheets
∼690



147



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies
Liquid phase reduction
Nanosheets
361–809
SERS

169



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies
Solvothermal synthesis
Nanosheets
∼680



123



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies
Solvothermal synthesis
Nanosheets
∼900



162



MoO3
Oxygen vacancies & N
Hydrothermal synthesis
Quantum dots
700–816
pH sensing

201



MoO3
NH4+
Hydrothermal synthesis
Angstrom-scale-porous structures
780 & 1340
Ion sensing

202



MoO3
NH4+
Hydrothermal synthesis
Nanoflakes
500 & 800
SERS

203



MoO3
H+
Hydrothermal synthesis
Nanoflakes
400–500/800–900
SERS

55



MoxW1−xO3−y
W, Mo, & O vacancies
Solvothermal synthesis
Nanowires
∼630



124



In2O3
Sn


Nanoparticles
1626 → 2200



33



In2O3
Sn
Colloidal synthesis
Spherical nanoparticles
∼1700



34



In2O3
Sn


Nanocrystals
∼2000
Remote plasmonic nano-electrometers

56



In2O3
Cr & Sn
Colloidal synthesis
Spherical nanocrystals
1750–2200



89



In2O3
F & Sn
Colloidal synthesis
Nano-cubes
∼4000



47



In2O3
Ti/Sb
Colloidal synthesis
Nanocrystals
∼5000



102



In2O3
Sn
Colloidal synthesis
Spherical nanocrystals
2500–4000



104



In2O3
Sn
Colloidal synthesis
Nanocrystals
2083–3480



103



In2O3
Sn
Sol–gel synthesis
Thin film coating
1700–2000
Gas sensing

129



In2O3
Zr & Sn
Colloidal synthesis
Nanocrystals
2857–5000



87



In2O3
F & Sn
Colloidal synthesis
Nano-cubes
1700–3000



181



ZnO
Al
Colloidal synthesis
Nanocrystals
>2500



105



ZnO
Ga
E-beam lithography
Nano-disk arrays
1600–2000



204



ZnO
Al
Nonthermal plasma synthesis
Nanocrystals
>3000



106



ZnO
Ga
Plasma expansion
Nanoparticles
3000–4000



81



ZnO
Al
ALD
Thin films
∼1700



139



ZnO
Al


Nanocrystals
MIR



39



ZnO
Ga
Colloidal synthesis
Nanocrystals
3500–5500
Gas sensing

107



ZnO
In
Colloidal synthesis
Nanocrystals
∼3000



108



ZnO
Al
Colloidal synthesis
Nanocrystals
>2500



182



CdO
In
Colloidal synthesis
Octahedral/spherical nanocrystals
1800–3500



40



CdO
F & In
Hydrothermal synthesis
Spherical/Rounded cubes nanocrystals
1500–3300



88



CdO
Dy
MBE
Epitaxial layer on substrates
2500–4000



41



CdO
F & In
Hydrothermal synthesis
Nanocrystals
1550 & 1625



110



CdO
F
HiPIMS deposition
Thin film on substrates
NIR to MIR
ENZ

133



CdO
F & In
Colloidal synthesis
Nanocrystals/thin film on substrates
∼1900



109



CdO
In
Reactive HiPIMS deposition
Thin films
∼4000
ENZ

134



CdO
Cu & In
Thermal decomposition and cation exchange
Nanocrystals
>2200



149



CdO
Oxygen vacancies
Thermal decomposition
Nanocrystals
2400–6000



111



Zn1−xCdxO
Sn
Colloidal synthesis
Nanocrystals
∼725



114



ReO3
N/A
Colloidal synthesis
Nanocrystals
∼590



190



ReO3
N/A
Solvothermal synthesis
Nanoparticles
∼520



42



ReO3
N/A
Solvothermal synthesis
Nanoparticles
∼520
SERS

205



ReO3
N/A
Space-confined growth & reduction
Nano-cubes
∼860



188



ReO3
H+ (aqueous dispersion)
Space-confined growth
Nano-cubes
∼520 (solid)/750–850 (aqueous dispersion)
PTT/PA

43



ReO3
H+ (aqueous dispersion)
Solvothermal synthesis
Spherical nanoparticles/nanosheets
Vis to NIR



189



VO2
N/A
Epitaxially grown & lithography
Nano-square arrays
2000 & 3500



191



VO2
N/A
MBE
Thin films
MIR



192






5. Biochemical applications of plasmonic metal oxides
Plasmonic MOs have been used in biochemical applications since a decade ago. Extensive research progress has been achieved in diverse plasmonic oxides and related nano-enabled technologies. Some MOs benefit from the strong LSPR absorption at the desired light region, promoted biocompatibility, and flexibility in integrating with other platforms. As promising alternatives to conventional noble metals, oxide-based plasmonic materials have broadened the way towards sensing, thermal therapy, and in vivo bioimaging applications. In this section, we are going to dig into the characteristics and properties of the plasmonic oxide-based biochemical applications.
5.1 Phototherapy and bio-imaging

5.1.1 Photothermal and photodynamic therapy. 
Plasmonic MOs with LSPR enhanced light absorption can be employed in cancer ablation via PTT, in which the oxide is irradiated by a laser and experiences a high photothermal conversion to de-activate the cancer cells.206 PTT has gained an increasing amount of interest as a complementary cancer treatment in addition to traditional approaches because of its minimum invasiveness and high selectivity nature.206,207Fig. 9a illustrates the typical schematic of PTT using plasmonic MO NSs. Although gold NSs with strong LSPR have been widely adopted in PTT owing to their good heat conversion efficiency,208–210 the possible long-term toxicity and high cost hinder their potential for clinical use.211,212 For the non-invasive PTT or PA applications, the light penetration depth is a critical factor that impacts the efficacy of treatment. As a result, PTT and PA technologies are required to operate in the two biological windows (i.e. 750–950 nm and 1000–1350 nm) as the light suffers less from scattering and absorption by the living body tissues to allow the beam to reach deeper beneath the skin at such wavelengths. Compared to noble metals which normally exhibit LSPR in the visible spectrum, plasmonic MOs with broadband LSPR extended towards the NIR region are favorable for phototherapy and PA imaging because of their flexibility in adapting to NIR laser wavelengths. More importantly, plasmonic MOs exhibit excellent heat conversion rates only under the excitation of selected laser sources, avoiding overheating the surrounding tissues213,214 and improving the quality of PA images as the PA imaging contrast is proportional to the optical energy absorbed.215 In addition to this, the tunable plasmonic properties of MOs provide a degree of flexibility in the shape and size of the nanomaterial incorporated as PTT agents. Plasmonic MO nanoparticles made in smaller diameters enjoy better biocompatibility as they are less likely to accumulate in major organs and could be discharged from the acceptor's body more easily.51,160,216 Therefore, plasmonic MOs are promising alternatives of noble metal nanoparticles as PTT agents.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of PEG-TONW nanorods in photothermal therapy application, PA, and thermal imaging. Adapted with permission.125 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of PA imaging of a tumor-bearing mouse with MO NSs as contrast agents. (c) In vivo PA imaging at different time points post-injection of WO3−x nanodots. Adapted with permission.51 Copyright © 2016, Wiley. (d) In vivo IR thermal imaging of the tumor-bearing mice under NIR irradiation after injection of (i) PBS, (ii) PEG-MoO3−x, and (iii) PEG-MoO3−x@CPT. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright © 2015, Elsevier. (e) Fluorescence microscopy images of the DCFH-DA probe-loaded cells with different treatments showing the generation of ROS. H2O2 is taken as the positive control group; scale bar: 200 μm. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright © 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recent breakthroughs in NIR laser-induced PTT have been increasingly reported using novel plasmonic materials, especially in oxides. Non-stoichiometric transition MOs, such as tungsten oxide51,53,194,217 and molybdenum oxide,50,158,216 are ideal PTT candidates favored over many other candidates in the cases of self-doped copper chalcogenides and carbon-based NSs.218–220 This is because of their high thermal conversion efficiency and appreciable performance either in the first or second biological window. Ultrathin WO3−x nanowires in conjunction with poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) are very hydrophilic and have demonstrated strong LSPR absorption under 980 nm laser excitation. The subsequent dramatic in vivo temperature increases by 20 °C within 20s in the tumor were observed, and a clear sign of thermal damage in the cancer tissue was detected.53 Later, the capability of PEG-MoO3−x for in vitro photothermal ablation of cancer cells under 980 nm laser irradiation was investigated by Song et al.158 The temperature of cancer cells incubated with MoO3−x elevated to 53.0 from 37.3 °C and 81.27% of cell apoptosis was detected after 5 minutes of laser exposure. No obvious temperature change or variation in cell vitality was observed in the control groups in the absence of the nanomaterial or laser exposure, respectively. Lately, Nb-doped TiO2 nanocrystals coated with PEG were capable for PTT applications in the second biological window with a remarkable photothermal conversion efficiency of 40.6%.52 The study introduced a dopant concentration-dependent heat conversion capability of Nbx:TiO2. The increased doping level leads to a higher NIR laser-induced temperature increase, revealing the potential of tunable photothermal performance; when being irradiated by a 1064 nm laser for 300 s, a temperature increase of 22.4 °C was aroused by plasmonic Nb0.155:TiO2 whereas the Nb0.09:TiO2 recorded a temperature increase by 11.8 °C.
These reports have shown the promising potential of using plasmonic MOs as a heavy-metal-free photothermal agent. However, the possible long-term toxicity of MOs on the acceptor still requires a more comprehensive study. Despite the advances achieved, it is still challenging to obtain satisfactory efficacy of PTT in clinical practice. To address this challenge, synergistic treatment with other approaches is worth further investigation.
Plasmonic MOs also play a role in photodynamic therapy (PDT).194,216,221,222 PDT utilizes photosensitizers that generate ROS under light irradiation at certain wavelengths, to induce the ablation of cancer cells. Its minimum invasive nature has earned dramatic attention in recent research. This light-triggered cytotoxicity can constrain the treatment effect inside the target tissue without damaging the surrounding healthy cells. This unique property makes it a preferable approach for cancer treatment. Plasmonic MO nanocrystals have been demonstrated to promote the PDT efficacy by enhancing the ROS signal while at the same time expanding its triggering wavelength from the ultraviolet (UV) to visible-NIR light range. Deng et al. constructed a successful dual-modal PDT and PTT system for cancer cell ablation using plasmonic WO3−x nanorods assisted with indocyanine green (ICG), an organic dye that can produce ROS under NIR irradiation.194 Under the excitation of an 808 nm laser, this WO@ICG NS exhibits an improved “tumor growth inhibition performance” compared with the sole treatment of either ICG or WO3−x by monitoring the tumor volume and weight. The prompt synergistic PTT and PDT treatment only requires a low dose of the therapeutic agent to achieve considerable effectiveness and avoids the potential side effects from the overdose of the nanomaterial. However, organic photosensitizers such as ICG suffer from less photothermal stability than the inorganic ones.223 So, there is a demand to find more stable photosensitizers.
A recent study discovered that doped semiconductors with LSPR can support PTT and PDT at the same time under NIR light irradiation,99 showing the possibility of achieving dual-functional of NIR PTT and PDT in a single material. Sub-stoichiometric molybdenum oxide can generate ROS under NIR light,216,221 because of high affinity for O2 from oxygen vacancies.160 Under NIR irradiation, the energy transferred from MoO3−x induced surface O2 to generate singlet oxygen 1O2 which is cytotoxic to several types of cancer cells. Odda et al. have reported plasmonic MoO3−x nanoparticles incorporated with Prussian blue (PB) which realized dual function phototherapy.222 Under 808 nm laser excitation, intracellular ROS were detected in 4T1 cancer cells treated with this hybrid NSs while no ROS were detected in the control groups as presented in Fig. 9e. ROS generation was further proved to be induced by MoO3−x NSs. The hybrid NSs exhibited an impressive photothermal efficiency both in vitro and in vivo, giving rise to an enhanced phototherapeutic efficacy by combined treatment of PTT and PDT. Though the research shows that plasmonic MOs can simultaneously act as PTT and PDT agents in the NIR region and demonstrates the potential in clinical phototherapy,125 the effect from circulation of plasmonic MOs in the body and the possible immunological reaction are critical to be addressed in the future.


5.1.2 Photoacoustic imaging. 
In addition to PTT and PDT, plasmonic MOs could be utilized as PA imaging contrast agents in theragnostic treatment.43,50–52,125,216 When induced by a pulsed laser, the biological tissues will either scatter or absorb the energy, and then produce heat that increases the temperature of the irradiated area. Accordingly, a thermoelastic expansion takes place, generating ultrasound waves known as acoustic waves which can then be detected with a transducer. The target area with injected plasmonic MO NSs can produce an extra amount of heat that helps generate more intense PA waves. The spatial information of the target area will be further reconstructed from the recorded time for acoustic waves traveling to the transducer via the processor as a PA image (Fig. 9b), which provides visual guidance for medical treatments and disease diagnosis by detecting abnormal tissue morphologies.215,224 PA imaging benefits from higher spatial resolution and deeper penetration depth in soft tissues compared with pure optical signals while conserving the strong spectral discrimination raised from the difference in the target's optical properties. This technique is minimum invasive and can avoid the inherent toxicity or radiative hazard to tissues or cells caused by conventional fluorescence or computed tomography imaging techniques.51 As the result, PA imaging is ideal for visualizing anatomical structures and has attracted tremendous interest as an emerging biomedical imaging approach. As the PA signal strength is closely related to the absorption spectra, MOs with LSPR-enhanced NIR absorption in the biological windows show intrinsic advantages for PA imaging of cells and tissues. Research has proved that injection of PEG-MoO3−x NSs into in vitro tumor tissue leads to a dramatically enhanced PA signal. In addition, a brighter PA signal was detected in tumor-bearing mice injected with PEG-MoO3−x as time passed.50 Later, plasmonic tungsten oxide and doped rhenium oxide NSs have been reported to generate elevated acoustic signals under NIR laser excitation and adopted as PA contrast agents.43,51 Weng et al. demonstrated that PEGylated ultrasmall WO3−x nanodots can work as a PA and PTT contrast agent at the same time.51 Under the exposure of an 808 nm laser, the PA imaging intensity at the tumor site gradually increased and reached its maximum in the first 2 hours after the injection of WO3−x as shown in Fig. 9c. Research has also shown that single-crystalline hydrogen-doped ReO3 nano-cubes could be ideal for PTT and PA contrast agent since they exhibit a strong NIR LSPR absorption band induced by intercalated H+ ions.43 Recently, an MO hybrid material was also explored for its application in photothermal cancer ablation and PA diagnosis as well. Cheng et al. reported the ultrathin tellurium oxide/ammonium tungsten bronze (TeO2/(NH4)xWO3) nanoribbons (TONW NRs) as an in vitro and in vivo nano PA imaging contrast agent with strong NIR absorption as illustrated in Fig. 9a.125 The introduction of ammonium doping and tellurium oxide both lead to stronger LSPR. Accordingly, the enhanced NIR absorption gives rise to improved PA signal intensity in the tumor tissue of mice intravenously injected with TONW NRs.
PA image guidance has critical advantages for monitoring the treatment efficacy in real-time. Benefiting from its great photothermal conversion efficiency, utilizing plasmonic MOs as a PA contrast agent in PTT along with the IR thermal imaging (Fig. 9d) reduces the complexity of the treatment process as no additional imaging techniques is required. PA imaging could trace the movement of the injected MO NSs while performing as a PTT agent simultaneously. As indicated in Fig. 9c, the PA signal intensity dropped at the tumor site after 2 hours of injection while raised in other major organs such as the liver, spleen, and kidneys, from which we could tell the transportation of the nanoparticles within the target's body. In another study, PA imaging was used for monitoring the life process of degradable HxReO3 nano-cubes in mice bodies after intratumoral and intramuscular injection in real-time.43 The result illustrated a much longer existence period of HxReO3 nano-cubes at the tumor site rather than in muscle. Besides, sharper drops in PA signal intensity indicated the degradation of HxReO3 nano-cubes inside the mice bodies.
As discussed above, plasmonic MOs show the capability of “all-in-one” imaging-guided phototherapy for cancer treatment with great biocompatibility and flexibility. Benefiting from tunable LSPR, the treatment can operate in preferred biological windows. As a result, it is possible to choose laser sources with relatively mild power to reduce possible thermal damage to the surrounding tissues during treatment and achieve a better spatial resolution in imaging. Moreover, current research shows that there is no obvious disorder in major organs or adverse effects observed on acceptors for up to 1 month after MO nanoparticles are injected.160 These observations further validated the good biocompatibility of the plasmonic MO nanomaterial as phototherapy and bioimaging agents. In most of the recent studies, MO nanoparticles are introduced through either intratumoral or intravenous injection approaches, which are both passive targeting approaches. These approaches utilize the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect of MO NSs, in which the ultrasmall-sized particles are more likely to accumulate in tumor tissues rather than in muscle.225,226 As a result, phototherapies using MO NSs are suitable for commonly seen types of cancer.226 In addition, nanofabrication techniques enable functioning plasmonic MOs with various surfactants. For instance, PEG, a common biological macromolecule covalent modifier,227 has been widely adopted in the synthesis to gain hydrophilicity and other preferred properties for biochemical applications.50,158,228 Hence, surface modification and bioconjugation of MO NSs would be feasible for more general use. Recently, several novel material-enabled PA imaging systems have already demonstrated their ability in human breast imaging,229,230 and skin disease diagnosis in clinic,231,232 while a great number of pre-clinical stage studies on tumor diagnosis and whole-body imaging using plasmonic MO NSs in small animals are reported. Nonetheless, to translate PA imaging with plasmonic MO NSs towards the clinical stage, the major challenges are the long-term safety concern and the penetration depth in the human body. Although adopting plasmonic MO NSs as contrast agents expands the choice of laser to NIR wavelengths, exploring materials that are compatible with the laser source in the second biological window (1000–1350 nm) to reach the target deeper beneath could be a promising direction. In the meantime, considering the reliability of reconstructed imaging, the development of algorithms that can quantitatively rebuild the spatial imaging of the target tissue from PA signals is urgently needed.

5.2 Colorimetric bio-sensing applications
Plasmonic MOs, in which their LSPR wavelengths can be controlled by tuning the concentration of dopants, are promising candidates in the colorimetry-based biosensing technology.233 These free charge carriers, either doped ions or vacancies, are found to be closely related to their plasmonic behavior. Comparing with the conventional noble metals, the relatively lower density of charge carriers inside plasmonic oxides is more sensitive to the perturbations of ambient refractive index change, which enables a facile plasmon wavelength change.62,234 This unique property of plasmonic oxide is particularly suitable in detecting the subtle charge exchange/transfer in bio-redox events in a label-free manner, potentially initiating an ultrasensitive revealing of the biochemical process in a colorimetric aspect.
However, most of the plasmonic oxides show poor performances of sensing capability owing to the embedded “non-migrating” dopants inside their structures. These oxides are less likely to accommodate enough dopants and result in a plasmonic absorption wavelength in MIR or even further that is unfavorable in practical sensing applications,33,39,235,236 such as doped zinc oxides and doped indium oxides. Some self-doped oxide compounds (e.g. tungsten and molybdenum oxides) showed tunable plasmonic features at more commercially viable NIR-visible light spectrum. Their coloration change led by subtle perturbance in plasmonic response can be seen by naked eyes upon detection of targets.
In the past decade, researchers successfully implemented dopant-driven plasmonic MO nanomaterials with different sensing platforms which have achieved ultrasensitive, selective, and label-free detection of various types of biomolecules in a relatively short time frame.57–59,144 Sensors based on heavily doped MO NSs, providing both refractive index and absorption/transmission changes as outputs, have shown their capability of not only qualitative but also quantitative real-time sensing. Furthermore, plasmonic MO NSs are chemically stable to detect ions and charge transfer events reversibly, which makes them competitive candidates for reusable low-cost on-chip ion sensors.56,59,201 In this section, we will look at several sensing applications reported with plasmonic metal oxides adopted as functional materials. Categorized by the target analyte type, sensors of biomolecule detection will be discussed first. After this, we will expand the discussion to sensing of biochemical-related events, including sensing pH value and redox events in the bio-environment, etc.

5.2.1 Sensing of biomolecules. 
Several studies have shown the capability of plasmonic MOs in detecting bovine serum albumin (BSA), a popular protein for biosensing development.31,144,197 BSA is a negatively charged protein and exhibits highly affinity to positively charged MO particles such as sub-stoichiometric WOx and MoOx.156,197 After incubation with the nanocomposite, BSA can be immobilized onto the surface of nanoflakes via electrostatic interactions or collective van der Waals’ forces.237,238 Upon immobilization, the excessive electrons brought by BSA will then affect the charging status of plasmonic MOs and hence lead to changes in their LSPR features. Xu and researchers assessed the sensitivity of an optical biosensing system consisting of ultra-doped 2D amorphous MoO3−x nanosheets in detecting BSA molecules.144 For the MoO3−x nanosheets incubated with BSA concentrations up to 20 mg mL−1, a red-shift in the LSPR wavelength was observed for all samples after BSA incubation. Interestingly, the optical absorption intensity becomes more dynamic under different BSA concentrations. When the BSA concentration increased to 5 mg mL−1, the experiment results showed a rise in the absorption intensity, while further increasing the BSA concentration over 5 mg mL−1, continuous dropped absorption was detected. The group obtained a similar “rise-and-drop” phenomenon in an optical biosensing system functionalized with amorphous WO3−x NSs as well.197 The sensing mechanism is that the negative charges of BSA repel the free electrons originally from doping on the surface of plasmonic MO NSs, while oxygen vacancies cause a drop in the free carrier concentration near the surface.31 Hence, the LSPR intensity experiences stronger attenuation as BSA concentration gets increased. However, the researchers suggested that at a very low concentration, the presence of BSA may enrich the oxygen vacancies in amorphous NSs, which pushes up electron density and causes the increase in LSPR at the very beginning. Nevertheless, the charge repulsion effect still dominates at higher BSA concentrations.
Later, Wei and researchers demonstrated a fiber-optic biosensing platform functionalized with MoO3−x nanoflakes heavily doped via H+ intercalation as illustrated in Fig. 10a.57 Taking BSA as the model analyte, a distinctive limit of detection (LOD) of 1 pg mL−1 was achieved by the proposed highly integrated microfiber sensor. When BSA molecules were immobilized successfully as shown in the fluorescence image (Fig. 10b), an obvious drop in the LSPR peak was observed because the surface electrons were repelled by BSA. And as the BSA concentration increased, the plasmon resonance gradually decreased due to further reduced free charge carriers (Fig. 10c). The change in peak plasmon resonance detected by the proposed biosensor in transmission minimum can be concluded in the linear response of the log-scale increment of BSA concentration ranging from 1 pg mL−1 to 100 ng mL−1 (Fig. 10d and e). This impressive result may benefit from fully utilizing the large surface-to-volume ratio of 2D nanoflakes and improved interaction length and extended active sensing area of the microfiber platform. These studies proved the feasibility to fabricate cost-effective integrated optical sensing platforms based on dopant-driven plasmonic MO NSs to achieve highly sensitive biomolecule identification and quantitative analysis. Besides the charged protein molecules, recent studies have also explored the sensing capability of heavily doped MO NSs to glucose molecules.58,199 As a major energy source for cell metabolism and a critical health indicator of human beings, glucose plays a crucial role in bioassays and disease diagnosis, i.e., diabetes.239,240 One of the widely employed approaches to detect glucose is the enzymatic strategy enabled by glucose oxidase (GOx).241 The sensing mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 10g. Under the catalysis by GOx, H2O2 and gluconic acid are formed where the hydroxyl radical (OH˙) would dissociate from the extremely reactive H2O2. Upon the attachment of the OH˙ group, charge transfer occurred on the surface of the plasmonic oxide. In the case of HxMoO3, doping concentration was reduced as the H+ ions detached from terminal O sites, leading to a subsequent drop in the LSPR intensity.241,242 This change in LSPR response could be visually detected through a colorimetric approach.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the integrated fiber-optic BSA sensor with heavily doped MoO3−x nanoflakes. (b) Fluorescence microscopic image of fibers coated with MoO3−x nanoflakes under different concentrations of BSA molecules labeled by Cy3 dyes. (c) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of MoO3−x nanoflakes at various concentrations of BSA. (d) Transmission spectra and (e) response factor of the proposed biosensor detecting increasing concentrations of BSA. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) A prototype sensing platform of glucose sensor based on HxMoO3 nanoflakes and (g) the corresponding detection schematic. (h) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of H1.55MoO3–GOx suspensions after adding different concentrations of glucose. Inset: the corresponding optical images of the suspensions. (i) The fitted response ratio of H1.55MoO3vs. glucose concentration. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright © 2018, Wiley. (j) Reversible electron exchange of doped plasmonic MOs with redox-active different biomolecules and live bacteria, leading to changes in plasmonic properties. (k) Experimental and fitted absorption spectra of o-CytC and r-CytC. (l) LSPR modulation in pre-oxidized RPN buffered solutions by addition of r-CytC. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright © 2015, Wiley. 
Zu et al. tested the MoO3−x quantum dots with different concentrations of glucose and found that the MoO3−x dispersion turned from blue to almost faint color.199 From the XPS analysis of MoO3−x quantum dots before and after glucose interaction, it was found that Mo5+ was converted into Mo6+, which matched well with the sensing mechanism. Further analysis on the spectrum revealed a linear decrease of LSPR absorption intensity at 737 nm wavelength from the concentration of 5 μM to 1 mM with an LOD of 10 μM. Zhang et al. exploited another ultra-doped molybdenum oxide in a practical glucose sensing platform.58 The group implemented a hand-held LED-photodetector biosensor setup based on degenerately doped hydrogen molybdenum bronze (H1.55MoO3) nanoflakes (Fig. 10f). Compared to oxygen vacancies, H+ intercalated in the lattice is relatively more reactive in the charge/discharge from the host MO, which could lead to higher sensitivity and better kinetics.234,243 The absorption spectra indicated that H1.55MoO3 exhibits a linear response to glucose in the concentration range from 0.5 μM to 50 mM for both fitted plasmonic peaks at 425 and 650 nm (Fig. 10h and i). The hand-held prototype biosensor developed showed an extraordinary LOD calculated down to 2 nM for glucose under 410 nm irradiation with a response time of within 10s. This appreciable performance exceeded that of all the reported GOx based plasmonic glucose sensors.


5.2.2 Sensing of ionic groups. 
In addition to detecting specific biomolecules, sensing the change of the bio-environment is essential as biochemical events are often accompanied by changes in the surroundings. Different from conventional non-plasmonic MO-enabled irreversible colorimetric sensors,244 the extraordinary ability of doped plasmonic MOs in accommodating extra ions within their lattice reversibly offers them the capability to continuously monitor redox events in a complex biological environment.145,245,246 Like glucose, pH value is also an important indicator of disease diagnosis247,248 and bio-systems status monitoring.249–251 Plasmonic MO-based pH sensing has been realized through integration with other sensing platforms, providing both qualitative and quantitative analysis.59,201 Cao et al. presented a dual-modal biosensing probe based on MoOx quantum dots which can detect the extreme acidity in bacterial cells.201 The plasmonic absorption of MoOx was concurrently enhanced along with the decrease of the pH value from 5.0 to 1.5, providing a complementary signal to photoluminescence output for pH sensing. Ren and researchers further expanded the pH detection range to 1.0–13.0 by integrating 2D plasmonic HxMoO3 nanoflakes with a silicon-based micro-ring resonator (MRR).59 H0.3MoO3 nanoflakes deposited onto the MMR enjoy high sensitivity to changes of H+ in the environment and hence enable the shift in resonant wavelength of the MRR induced by variation in the refractive index of the nanoflakes towards solutions with different pH values. Compared to other reported optical pH sensors, this work attained impressive progress by achieving a linear range response to pH 1.0 to 6.0, and 7-order higher sensitivity per unit area of the sensor. In the meantime, the strong NIR absorption of plasmonic H0.3MoO3 layer leads to a continuous decrease in MRR transmission power as pH value decreases, facilitating a complementary sensing mechanism for pH values from 7.0 to 10.0 where no obvious shift in resonant wavelength was observed. This ultrasensitive ion-responsive sensor overcame the limitation in detecting the ultralow concentration of ions solely using current silicon photonic biosensors. The overall device showed the feasibility of on-chip plasmonic MO sensors in more advanced biosensing applications.
Besides pH value determination, the sensitive nature of LSPR towards charge density alteration in the presence of facile optical response is ideal for redox process detection. Reversible exchange of electrons between doped plasmonic MOs and various bio-oxidants/reductants will cause changes in LSPR performance as shown in Fig. 10j. Mendelsberg et al. utilized the resulting responsive plasmonic absorption for quantitative analysis of electron transfer events in an organic system outside the redox equilibrium, even living cells.56 Researchers used ITO nanocrystals as remote plasmonic nano-electrometers (RPNs) and modeled their NIR plasmonic absorption changes with single- and multi-electron transfer agents.56 In practice, the reductase horse heart cytochrome C (r-CytC), a single-electron transfer (SET) protein, was added to fully oxidized RPN to generate an observable rise in the LSPR response while the LSPR intensity decreased when oxidase-CytC (o-CytC) was added (Fig. 10k and l). The fitted result of the absorption spectrum showed 65% counting efficiency. In addition, the RPNs’ capability to monitor electron transfer in the bacterial population was also demonstrated. This study indicates that ITO can achieve rapid screening of driven redox activity down to single-electron sensitivity in biological systems, which could be employed in convenient, contactless health assays in the future.
The highly switchable LSPR of MO NSs makes them attractive candidates for novel molecular computing. Huang et al. designed and implemented a set of all six logic gates (AND, OR, NAND, NOR, XOR, and XNOR) and an INH gate based on label-free plasmonic molybdenum oxide nanomaterials.252 The proposed logic gates can perform Boolean operations by switching MoO3 between the colorless stoichiometric state (as ‘0’) and the blue plasmonic state (as ‘1’) when interacting with several reductants and oxidants. The researcher developed a more complex operator – 1:2 demultiplexer using these logic gates and realized a convenient colorimetric visual readout. The group also built up a chemical negative feedback loop based on plasmonic MoO3−x nanosheets,253 which can monitor the Cu2+ level using the reductive bio-thiol glutathione (GSH). When the concentration of Cu2+ is below the threshold, the reaction between Cu2+ and GSH is too weak to initiate the reduction of MoO3 nanosheets. Once the level of Cu2+ turns over the setpoint, H+ produced during the conversion of Cu2+ to Cu+ will drive the redox reaction between MoO3 and GSH and produce plasmonic MoO3−x nanosheets. This proton-driven LSPR can be identified from the ultraviolet-to-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopy measurement. Meanwhile, the system dominated by the reaction between GSH and MoO3−x will consume up the protons shortly, while the concentration of Cu2+ remains unchanged after exceeding the threshold. Moreover, the threshold of the system can be set by changing the concentration of MoO3 nanosheets. These studies succeeded in reversibly manipulating the LSPR of doped MOs and paving the way to controllable biosensing, intelligent imaging domains.
The above studies have demonstrated the bright prospect of novel plasmonic MOs in different bio-applications. When integrated with conventional sensing techniques, such as optical fiber or waveguide, plasmonic MO NSs can provide a quicker and more reliable response with enhanced sensitivity. They can be adopted in diagnosis devices under complicated living systems without making inevitable perturbation of the system. Some of the plasmonic MOs even show potential in molecular computing. These results no doubt widen the applicability of the currently existing biosensors.

5.3 SERS based biosensing
SERS spectroscopy is a vibrational spectroscopy technique that can magnify the Raman signal of molecules and achieve the sensitivity down to the single-molecule level that provides fine molecular fingerprints, allowing for direct identification of target analytes.254 SERS technique has been widely adopted in materials characterization, biomolecule sensing, and analysis. When an analyte is located within a very short range (<10 nm) of the substrate, the Raman signal could be enhanced by several orders by the functional agent.10 It is widely agreed that strong enhancement of the electromagnetic field (EM) and charge transfer (CT) between the enhancing material and analytes are the two major mechanisms for the increase in the SERS signal strength.255–259 The CT mechanism enabled by electronic interaction between analytes and substrate usually enhances the signal in the order of ∼103–104,256 while the EM mechanism is primarily led by a highly localized EM field. Excited surface plasmons are highly localized and resonant in spatially narrow regions, inducing an intense EM field within those regions called “hot spots”. These “hot spots” exercise strong enhancement on the analytes located near them. These Raman signals amplified by well-engineered local field hot spots can reach an enhancement factor (EF) of up to 1011,257,258 enabling single-molecule leveled detection.260,261
SERS benefits from its extraordinary sensitivity and analytical nature of the spectral signature. However, the Raman signal of organic analytes is of relatively poor signal-to-noise ratio and challenging to extract useful information. As a result, the NFE of LSPR can complement the limitation of weak signal intensity, making the plasmonic material the first choice for SERS substrates. Although gold and silver exhibit strong LSPR in the visible light range, they suffer from limitations in selectivity, reversibility, and high cost.262 Therefore, the demand for inexpensive, sensitive, and reusable SERS substrates is emerging. Thanks to the rapid development in nanotechnology, non-metallic materials such as MOs have been demonstrated as novel SERS materials.263–265
MOs exhibit several advantages compared to metal as SERS substrates. First, their highly tunable electronic and optical properties exercise control over the absorption or band structure to optimize signal enhancement. Compared to noble metals, the lower carrier density of MOs leads to less heat dissipation and less possibility to damage analytes. Moreover, MOs can conjugate with vast surface functional groups for customized sensing. Therefore, enormous studies on MOs as an alternative SERS substrate of noble metals have been carried out since 1982.266 In the early years, the reported EFs were usually tens to hundreds only, possibly due to the relatively low free carrier concentration in MO crystals.267–269 Later, some MOs with intrinsic metallic properties have been exploited as SERS substrates. In the case of ReO3, it has an LSPR band at 520 nm close to that of Au, which shows a strong SERS effect on pyridine with an EF of 105–106.205 In the past decade, the doping technique has boosted the research on MOs as SERS substrates since it can introduce more free carriers to MO nanocrystals. Various doped MO NSs, including titanium oxide, tungsten oxide, and molybdenum oxide, etc., have been demonstrated in the SERS effect using different Raman probes.54,55,119,136,169,270–277 Cong et al. firstly reported the SERS effect of semiconductor materials – oxygen-deficient WO2.72 (W18O49) nanowires.270 The urchin-shaped WO2.72 with rich surface oxygen vacancies gave rise to an EF of 3.4 × 105 and an LOD of 10−7 M. Doped molybdenum oxide has been explored as a SERS substrate as well. Li et al. designed a SERS system based on hydrogen molybdenum bronze quantum dots showing LSPR at 700 nm and demonstrated to probe methyl blue (MB) and other dyes. The system achieved an EF of 9.5 × 105 and an LOD down to 10−9 M. Besides this, several studies exploited various oxygen-defective MoO3−x NSs with various morphology, including nanospheres, nanosheets, etc., and their remarkable SERS performance.169,274–277 Among different sub-stoichiometric MoO3−x, MoO2 nanoparticles showed intense Vis-NIR LSPR absorption and capability to detect typical Raman probes. Zhan et al. demonstrated MoO2 nanoparticles as SERS substrate to detect dyes including rhodamine 6G (R6G) and biomolecules. The highly tunable LSPR effect of these MoO2 nanoparticles resulted in an LOD of 5 × 10−8 M with an EF up to 107 at the top level among all reports.276 Soon after, this number was overwritten by PDA-coated MoO3−x nanosheets reported by Wang et al.169 MoO3−x nanosheets with a tunable LSPR ranging from UV to NIR were applied in the SERS system probing with R6G. In this study, an extraordinary Raman EF of 1010 was obtained along with an ultralow LOD of 0.3 fM.
In addition to dyes, researchers have validated the detection of other bioactive molecules and cells using plasmonic MO-based SERS.55,136,277 To examine the potential to detect multiple components simultaneously,274 researchers have explored MO SERS in non-destructive cancer cell detection. Recently, quantum scale structured TiOx with oxygen vacancies has been applied as a SERS substrate which achieved an LOD of 1 nM and a maximum EF of 3.4 × 107.136 Compared with stoichiometric TiO2, an increased plasmonic absorption band between 200 to 1000 nm was observed for TiOx nanoparticles with a better EF than that of TiO2. In this study, a TiOx SERS template with a breast cancer cell biomarker – Epidermal Growth Factor Receptors (EGFR) – was synthesized and examined for detecting three different cell lines: breast cancer cells, cervical cancer cells HeLa and non-cancerous dermal fibroblast cells. Breast cancer cells can be identified from fibroblast cells with distinct Raman signatures apart from other spectral components, while HeLa cells still required further work to be detected accurately. Zhang et al. further pushed up the sensitivity and accuracy of cancer cell detection at the single-cell level using plasmonic MO NSs.55 The team revealed the SERS effect of hydrogen molybdenum bronze on Rhodamine B (RhB) as a Raman probe, reaching an EF up to an order of 106. Two groups of individual cells, human leukemia cell line THP-1 vs. peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC), and human embryonic kidney cell line HEK 293 vs. human macrophage cell line U937 were incubated with plasmonic oxide (PO)-HxMoO3 for cellular SERS evaluation. The POs attached on cell surfaces will generate “hot spots” under laser excitation driven by the localized EM field from POs (Fig. 11a). Raman spectra were then obtained from each isolated live cell using a microfluidic chip. Aided by the principal components analysis (PCA) algorithm, highly reproducible SERS detection of THP-1 cells over PBMC has been carried out with accuracy above 90%, consistent high accuracy was further demonstrated in using HEK 293 cells and U937 cells as well. The authors also investigated the high biocompatibility of the plasmonic hydrogen molybdenum bronze towards cells, which possibly maintained the majority of cell signatures during Raman signal extraction and lead to high accuracy in determining the cell type. Though this work showcased an efficient single cancer cell discrimination method, the detection of cells in the real and complex environment still needs further exploration. Nonetheless, the above studies have plotted the future of cost-effective “point-of-care” diagnosis with plasmonic MO-based SERS detection.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of plasmonic oxide (PO) SERS- and colorimetric-based single-cell detection. (b) RhB SERS spectra enabled by NIR-PO and (c) Vis-PO at different concentrations. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright © 2021, Elsevier. (d) EM (left) & CT (right) SERS enhancement mechanism of WO3−x. Raman spectrum of R6G on different substrates under (e) 532 nm and (f) 785 nm laser excitation. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Comparing to noble metals, MO SERS substrates exhibit appreciable stability and reusability as well. Several studies have shown that the stable oxygen vacancies in defective molybdenum oxide can withstand oxidation in the air for several months, some can further resist corrosion by strong alkali and or acid solution.169,274 Some TiO2 with oxygen vacancies can sustain high-power laser exposure. Therefore, the characteristic Raman peaks remain even after hundreds of laser irradiation cycles.136 Meanwhile, studies have proved their reversibility. For example, R6G would be fully degraded on WO3−x while no significant degradation in the Raman signal could be observed after 5 cycles of detection.119 Furthermore, some 2D planar structured MO-based SERS substrates show good thermal stability and analytes can be removed from the surface with ease. Guo and researchers demonstrated a reusable SERS substrate consisting of large-area, ultrathin MoO2 nanosheets with R6G as the probe. The trace of R6G was completely removed by annealing the used substrate at 360 °C under vacuum conditions for half-hour while the SERS substrate performs all well. The distinct Raman signal can still be observed even after 10 cleaning cycles.275 Moreover, Xi and colleagues have proved the reversibility of defective tungsten oxide-based SERS substrates. The study showed that R6G would be fully degraded upon photocatalytic WO3−x in 20 minutes under 420 nm visible light irradiation. No significant degradation in the Raman signal was observed after 5 cycles and an LOD of 10−7 M was retained as well.119 The group also overcame the trade-off between stability and EF of other 2D materials. In addition to this, MOs as a SERS substrate show good repeatability and can achieve highly uniform SERS signals.277 These reproducible outcomes proved that MOs can be implemented in highly sensitive and reusable SERS-based applications in various scenarios.
Till now, research on SERS with plasmonic MOs has not been fully developed, and the mechanism of the non-metallic SERS effect is still under debate and requires further study. Some reports pointed out that the rich surface defective state of sub-stoichiometric MOs offers good enhancement from the CT mechanism.265,270–272 For instance, oxygen deficiency created in WO2.72 (W18O49) nanowires was considered to promote the charge transfer, hence the Raman signal enhancement as surface vacancies lead to stronger vibronic coupling between substrate and probe molecules.119,270 However, researchers pointed out that EM can also involve in SERS using MO substrate in addition to CT. Another bundled WO2.72 (W18O49) nanowires showed higher LSPR energy in the visible light region compared with the dispersed counterpart due to field oscillation coupling between nanowires.119 And the corresponding plasmonic WO2.72 nanowire bundles provided better SERS enhancement under 532 nm excitation wavelength compared with the 785 nm one (Fig. 11e and f). This observation indicates that LSPR is mainly driven by the EM mechanism of SERS as 532 nm laser is closer to the plasmon resonance wavelength. Besides, the study also indicated that defective surfaces would promote the charge transfer between WO2.72 NSs and the analyte target, together resulting in an appreciable EF of 2.8 × 107 (Fig. 11d). A similar conclusion can be reached in other studies. By comparing the SERS enhancement performance under different laser wavelength excitations, a slightly higher EF was obtained under 785 nm excitation than under 532 nm laser as the absorption band of the presented TiOx is located at a longer wavelength.136 Recently, Zhang et al. evaluated SERS enhancement of plasmonic HxMoO3 with different doping levels.55 Under 532 nm laser excitation, POs with visible LSPR have a higher EF than those with NIR LSPR, which resulted from stronger EM enhancement (Fig. 11b and c). However, Wang et al. argued that nanosheets with LSPR at higher energy did not exhibit better enhancement.169 Furthermore, the nano-size effect also contributes to the MO SERS effect since smaller particle size gives a better EF in molybdenum oxides and titanium oxides,54,136 which may be due to quantum confinement of near field or better charge interaction between the analyte and substrate. All in all, the origin of the MO based SERS phenomenon could not be concluded into one single mechanism and still needs further investigation.
6. Conclusions and outlook
In this review, we summarized the development of plasmonic MOs and their implementations in biological applications during the last decade. As promising alternatives to conventional noble metals, plasmonic MOs demonstrated tunable LSPR properties through controlling the doping and defect levels of the host, leading to novel functionalities of biological applications, particularly the field of biosensing. To explicit the associated fundamentals, we utilized the conventional Mie–Gans theory as the base and emphasized how the doping/defect-driven variation of the free charge carrier concentration influenced the LSPR properties in the systems of 0D, 1D, and 2D. The doping and defect generation strategies, including both in situ and ex situ approaches, were critically discussed. In particular, in situ synthesis mainly included colloidal and vapor phase deposition approaches, while the photoirradiation, hydrogen spillover, and cation-exchange were adopted as the ex situ methods for the pre-synthesized MO hosts. The implementation of plasmonic MOs in phototherapy, PA imaging, as well as the colorimetric- and SERS-based detection of biomolecules was summarized.
Plasmonic MO is a relatively new and rapid-expanding research topic. Although current studies continue the search for better-performing candidates and have achieved impressive progress in overcoming many limitations of conventional noble metals including confined LSPR tuning wavelength, costly substance, and poor biocompatibility, there are still several challenges for further investigation. For example, (1) most of the plasmonic MOs are produced in the form of 0D colloidal nanoparticles and 1D rod/wire-like structures, while the progress on the research of 2D plasmonic MOs currently lags although the potentials of 2D configuration have confirmed the wider LSPR tunable wavelength compared to other low-dimensional counterparts.31 This is mainly due to the limited candidates with the intrinsic layered crystal structure in MOs. A recent report revealed the possibility of obtaining peculiar planar hexagonal MOs from controlled oxidation of various metal surfaces. The mono- and few-layered MOs can be mechanically exfoliated with ease.278 Further exploration of the plasmonic properties of 2D hexagonal MOs upon the incorporation of dopants and defects presents a timely research area in the field of plasmonic MOs. (2) The dopants are considered key enablers for tunable plasmonics in MOs. Small ions, including H+, Li+, Na+, K+, and NH4+, are particularly favorable as their facile insertion in and extraction out of the host can realize the on-demand tunability. However, there are only limited studies regarding the utilization of H+, Na+, and NH4+ in several MO hosts so far, while the cases of Li+ and K+ are completely lacking. Therefore, the expansion of the exploration scope of small ions and the associated investigation of the interaction between various small ions and the host towards structural and plasmonic properties, are critical tasks for enriching the family of plasmonic MOs. (3) Noble metal-based ordered arrays have been proven to exhibit superior sensitivity (i.e., single-molecule detection capability) in biosensing applications, owing to the engineered electromagnetic “hot” spots and well-designed light–matter interaction. While the current investigation of plasmonic MOs still relies on the randomly stacked NSs, there is a strong demand to produce ordered assemblies from individual MO NS or fabricate plasmonic arrays within the large-scale low-dimensional oxide materials for further improving the performances of biomolecule detection. (4) Although the in situ manipulation of plasmonic properties of MOs during the biological applications has been hypothesized to achieve the ambitious goal of on-chip tuning of the tunable plasmonic devices, this is yet to be realized in the current reports. Among those of doping and defect generation strategies, the light-driven, temperature-driven, and electrochemistry-driven approaches seem to be suitable in situ and even possibly reversible control means to be integrated into the chip functionalities. (5) The composition of plasmonic MOs with other functional porous compounds could be an important strategy to improve the sensitivity and selectivity of therapy, imaging, and sensing applications. Researchers incorporate plasmonic molybdenum oxides with organic ligands to form 3D Fe-based metal-organic framework (MOF) nanocomposites to achieve improved exposed surface area and light absorption properties.279 Therefore, it is interesting to explore the domain of other highly-porous compounds with the possible composition of plasmonic MOs. (6) Some major challenges require to be addressed before translating plasmonic MOs into clinical use. First of all, long-term biocompatibility serves as the key concern in phototherapy and bioimaging. Though current studies indicate no obvious organ disorder in living acceptors during the treatment period, more systematic research is required to evaluate the possible long-term side effects for each material. Second, standardized treatment procedures are essential to realize clinical applications as the plasmonic MOs are highly tunable and offer wide wavelength windows for laser selection. Comprehensive studies are required to avoid the potential damage caused by the overdose of nanomaterials or high-power laser exposure. Third, the efficacy of phototherapy using plasmonic MOs still requires improvements and careful verification. A recent report shows the appreciable in vivo elimination of tumor using the plasmonic MO-based photothermal treatment and there is no reoccurrence observed.125 Nevertheless, considering the standard requirements of clinical practices, the effectiveness of phototherapy should be above 95% before adopting it for future clinical trials.
Conflicts of interest
The authors state that there are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the support from ARC Future Low Energy Electronics Technologies (FLEET) center of excellence (CE170100039).
References
A. Boltasseva and H. A. Atwater, Science, 2011, 331, 290–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Juan, M. Righini and R. Quidant, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 349 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schultz, D. R. Smith, J. J. Mock and D. A. Schultz, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2000, 97, 996–1001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yguerabide and E. E. Yguerabide, Anal. Biochem., 1998, 262, 157–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Nam, C. S. Thaxton and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2003, 301, 1884–1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Schultz, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol, 2003, 14, 13–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Khlebtsov and L. A. Dykman, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2010, 111, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Pallares, N. T. K. Thanh and X. Su, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22152–22171 RSC .
K. Kneipp, H. Kneipp and J. Kneipp, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 443–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fleischmann, P. J. Hendra and A. J. McQuillan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1974, 26, 163–166 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Etchegoin and E. Le Ru, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 6079–6089 RSC .
A. G. Brolo, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 709–713 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, M. T. Chung, W. McHugh, R. Nidetz, Y. Li, J. Fu, T. T. Cornell, T. P. Shanley and K. Kurabayashi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4173–4181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cappi, F. M. Spiga, Y. Moncada, A. Ferretti, M. Beyeler, M. Bianchessi, L. Decosterd, T. Buclin and C. Guiducci, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 5278–5285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-F. Masson, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 16–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, W. Lu, O. Tovmachenko, U. S. Rai, H. Yu and P. C. Ray, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 463, 145–149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Murphy, A. M. Gole, J. W. Stone, P. N. Sisco, A. M. Alkilany, E. C. Goldsmith and S. C. Baxter, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1721–1730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M.-C. Cheng, G. Cuda, Y. L. Bunimovich, M. Gaspari, J. R. Heath, H. D. Hill, C. A. Mirkin, A. J. Nijdam, R. Terracciano and T. Thundat, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2006, 10, 11–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain, K. S. Lee, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7238–7248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Lewinski, V. Colvin and R. Drezek, Small, 2008, 4, 26–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Thill, O. Zeyons, O. Spalla, F. Chauvat, J. Rose, M. Auffan and A. M. Flank, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 6151–6156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Solanki, A. Kaushik, V. V. Agrawal and B. D. Malhotra, NPG Asia Mater., 2011, 3, 17–24 CrossRef .
M. Premanathan, K. Karthikeyan, K. Jeyasubramanian and G. Manivannan, Nanomedicine, 2011, 7, 184–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, L. Carbone, C. Nobile, V. Grillo, S. D’Agostino, F. Della Sala, C. Giannini, D. Altamura, C. Oelsner and C. Kryschi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7352–7369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Z. Ou, A. F. Chrimes, B. J. Carey, T. Daeneke, M. M. Alsaif, M. Mortazavi, S. Zhuiykov, N. Medhekar and M. Bhaskaran, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 883–890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cudazzo, M. Gatti and A. Rubio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 075121 CrossRef .
H. Cheng, M. Wen, X. Ma, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, Y. Dai, B. Huang and H. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9316–9324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Agrawal, S. H. Cho, O. Zandi, S. Ghosh, R. W. Johns and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3121–3207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3908–3920 RSC .
M. M. Alsaif, K. Latham, M. R. Field, D. D. Yao, N. V. Medehkar, G. A. Beane, R. B. Kaner, S. P. Russo, J. Z. Ou and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3931–3937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Manthiram and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3995–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kanehara, H. Koike, T. Yoshinaga and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17736–17737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Lounis, E. L. Runnerstrom, A. Bergerud, D. Nordlund and D. J. Milliron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7110–7116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barawi, L. De Trizio, R. Giannuzzi, G. Veramonti, L. Manna and M. Manca, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3576–3584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Gordon, M. Cargnello, T. Paik, F. Mangolini, R. T. Weber, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6751–6761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, A. Huang, Y. Li, S. Ji, Y. Gao and P. Jin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9208–9213 RSC .
A. M. Schimpf, N. Thakkar, C. E. Gunthardt, D. J. Masiello and D. R. Gamelin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1065–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Johns, H. A. Bechtel, E. L. Runnerstrom, A. Agrawal, S. D. Lounis and D. J. Milliron, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–6 Search PubMed .
T. R. Gordon, T. Paik, D. R. Klein, G. V. Naik, H. Caglayan, A. Boltasseva and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2857–2863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Sachet, C. T. Shelton, J. S. Harris, B. E. Gaddy, D. L. Irving, S. Curtarolo, B. F. Donovan, P. E. Hopkins, P. A. Sharma and A. L. Sharma, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 414–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Biswas and C. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 842–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, G. Deng, B. Li, X. Zhao, T. Ji, G. Song, Z. Xiao, Q. Cao, J. Xiao and X. Huang, Biomaterials, 2018, 159, 68–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Boriskina, J. K. Tong, Y. Huang, J. Zhou, V. Chiloyan and G. Chen, Photonics, 2015, 2, 659–683 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, A. Agrawal, F. Krieg, A. Bergerud and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3879–3884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Agrawal, I. Kriegel and D. J. Milliron, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6227–6238 CrossRef CAS .
A. Agrawal, A. Singh, S. Yazdi, A. Singh, G. K. Ong, K. Bustillo, R. W. Johns, E. Ringe and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2611–2620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Agrawal, R. W. Johns and D. J. Milliron, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2017, 47, 1–31 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, S. Hu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 15283–15287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bao, W. Yin, X. Zheng, X. Zhang, J. Yu, X. Dong, Y. Yong, F. Gao, L. Yan and Z. Gu, Biomaterials, 2016, 76, 11–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wen, L. Chen, S. Zheng, J. Zeng, G. Duan, Y. Wang, G. Wang, Z. Chai, Z. Li and M. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5072–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yu, Y. Hu, X. Wang, G. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Q. Tian, M. Zhu, X. Shi and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9148–9159 RSC .
Z. Chen, Q. Wang, H. Wang, L. Zhang, G. Song, L. Song, J. Hu, H. Wang, J. Liu, M. Zhu and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2095–2100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Xu, X. Wang and W. Liu, Small, 2018, 14, 1801523 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Y. Zhang, P. Yin, Y. Hu, C. Szydzik, M. W. Khan, K. Xu, P. Thurgood, N. Mahmood, C. Dekiwadia, S. Afrin, Y. Yang, Q. Ma, C. F. McConville, K. Khoshmanesh, A. Mitchell, B. Hu, S. Baratchi and J. Z. Ou, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 113814 Search PubMed .
R. J. Mendelsberg, P. M. McBride, J. T. Duong, M. J. Bailey, A. Llordes, D. J. Milliron and B. A. Helms, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1293–1300 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Y. Zhang, K. Li, T. Zhang, P. Shum, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, N. Zhang, J. Zhang, T. Wu and L. Wei, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 347–352 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Zhang, A. Zavabeti, A. F. Chrimes, F. Haque, L. A. O'Dell, H. Khan, N. Syed, R. Datta, Y. Wang, A. S. Chesman, T. Daeneke, K. Kalantar-zadeh and J. Z. Ou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706006 CrossRef .
G. Ren, B. Y. Zhang, Q. Yao, A. Zavabeti, C. S. Huertas, R. Brkljača, M. W. Khan, H. Nili, R. S. Datta, H. Khan, A. Jannat, S. Walia, F. Haque, L. A. O'Dell, Y. Wang, L. Zhu, A. Mitchell and J. Z. Ou, Small, 2019, 15, 1805251 CrossRef PubMed .
A. P. Litvin, I. V. Martynenko, F. Purcell-Milton, A. V. Baranov, A. V. Fedorov and Y. K. Gun'ko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13252–13275 RSC .
C. L. Tan and H. Mohseni, Nanophotonics, 2018, 7, 169–197 Search PubMed .
I. Kriegel, F. Scotognella and L. Manna, Phys. Rep., 2017, 674, 1–52 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jiang, B. Li, C. Fang and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5274–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 209–217 RSC .
X. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Adv. Res., 2010, 1, 13–28 CrossRef .

          S. A. Maier, Plasmonics: fundamentals and applications, Springer Science & Business Media, New York, NY, USA,  2007 Search PubMed .
G. Mie, Ann. Phys., 1976, 25, 377–445 Search PubMed .
M. Hu, J. Chen, Z.-Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. Li, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1084–1094 RSC .
R. Gans, Ann. Phys., 1912, 342, 881–900 CrossRef .
P. Drude, Ann. Phys., 1900, 306, 566–613 CrossRef .

          N. Ashcroft and N. Mermin, Solid State Physics, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, California, USA,  1976 Search PubMed .
R. Clanget, Appl. Phys., 1973, 2, 247–256 Search PubMed .
A. M. Brown, R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, W. A. Goddard and H. A. Atwater, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 957–966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Maier, M. L. Brongersma, P. G. Kik, S. Meltzer, A. A. G. Requicha and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1501–1505 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link, M. B. Mohamed and M. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3073–3077 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Garcia de Abajo, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 135–152 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, C. Yang, T. Lin, H. Yin, P. Chen, D. Wan, F. Xu, F. Huang, J. Lin, X. Xie and M. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5444–5450 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. West, S. Ishii, G. V. Naik, N. K. Emani, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Laser Photonics Rev., 2010, 4, 795–808 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, R. Zhang, K. S. Schramke, N. M. Bedford, K. Hunter, U. R. Kortshagen and P. Nordlander, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 963–970 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Norris, A. L. Efros and S. C. Erwin, Science, 2008, 319, 1776–1779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hamza, J.-M. Bluet, K. Masenelli-Varlot, B. Canut, O. Boisron, P. Melinon and B. Masenelli, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12030–12037 RSC .
L. De Trizio, R. Buonsanti, A. M. Schimpf, A. Llordes, D. R. Gamelin, R. Simonutti and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3383–3390 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, N. Li, Y. Xin, X. Cao, S. Ji and P. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6251–6258 RSC .
X. Chang, S. Sun, Y. Zhou, L. Dong and Y. Yin, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 265603 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Adachi and T. Asahi, J. Mater. Res., 2012, 27, 965–970 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Runnerstrom, A. Bergerud, A. Agrawal, R. W. Johns, C. J. Dahlman, A. Singh, S. M. Selbach and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3390–3398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tandon, S. Ghosh and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7752–7760 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, J. Fei, B. T. Diroll, T. Paik and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11680–11686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tandon, A. Yadav, D. Khurana, P. Reddy, P. K. Santra and A. Nag, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9360–9368 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Lounis, E. L. Runnerstrom, A. Llordes and D. J. Milliron, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1564–1574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Lee and O. Ok Park, Vacuum, 2004, 75, 275–282 CrossRef CAS .
E. Conwell and V. F. Weisskopf, Phys. Rev., 1950, 77, 388–390 CrossRef .
Y. Nishi, Y. Kasai, R. Suzuki, M. Matsubara, A. Muramatsu and K. Kanie, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 9622–9632 CrossRef CAS .
K. Adachi, Y. Ota, H. Tanaka, M. Okada, N. Oshimura and A. Tofuku, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 194304 CrossRef .
J. Yan, T. Wang, G. Wu, W. Dai, N. Guan, L. Li and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1580–1586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, H. Cheng, M. Wen and H. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8946–8953 RSC .
M. Ma, K. Zhang, P. Li, M. S. Jung, M. J. Jeong and J. H. Park, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 11998–12002 CrossRef .
S. Q. Lie, D. M. Wang, M. X. Gao and C. Z. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10289–10296 RSC .
S. Wang, A. Riedinger, H. Li, C. Fu, H. Liu, L. Li, T. Liu, L. Tan, M. J. Barthel, G. Pugliese, F. D. Donato, M. S. D’Abbusco, X. Meng, L. Manna, H. Meng and T. Pellegrino, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1788–1800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. van der Stam, A. C. Berends and C. de Mello Donega, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 559–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, X. Wang, B. Zhou, W. C. Law, A. N. Cartwright and M. T. Swihart, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1256–1264 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, M. Hegde, P. Yin and P. V. Radovanovic, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4970–4979 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xi and B. r M. Reinhard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5698–5704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Zandi, A. Agrawal, A. B. Shearer, L. C. Reimnitz, C. J. Dahlman, C. M. Staller and D. J. Milliron, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 710–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Buonsanti, A. Llordes, S. Aloni, B. A. Helms and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4706–4710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Greenberg, S. Ganguly, J. T. Held, N. J. Kramer, K. A. Mkhoyan, E. S. Aydil and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 8162–8169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sturaro, E. Della Gaspera, N. Michieli, C. Cantalini, S. M. Emamjomeh, M. Guglielmi and A. Martucci, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30440–30448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yibi, J. Chen, J. Xue, J. Song and H. Zeng, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 693–699 CrossRef CAS .
R. Giannuzzi, F. De Donato, L. De Trizio, A. G. Monteduro, G. Maruccio, R. Scarfiello, A. Qualtieri and L. Manna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 39921–39929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kriegel, C. Urso, D. Viola, L. De Trizio, F. Scotognella, G. Cerullo and L. Manna, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3873–3881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Zhong, I. Shafei, S. Jeong, L. Wang, H. T. Nguyen, C.-J. Sun, T. Li, J. Chen and L. Chen, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2821–2828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Mattox, A. Bergerud, A. Agrawal and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1779–1784 CrossRef CAS .
C. Coughlan, M. Ibanez, O. Dobrozhan, A. Singh, A. Cabot and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5865–6109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, M. Saha, V. Dev Ashok, B. Dalal and S. De, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1180–1187 CrossRef CAS .
G. Prusty, J. T. Lee, S. Seifert, B. B. Muhoberac and R. Sardar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5938–5942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. I. Walton, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 230–238 RSC .
B. Ren, Y. Wang and J. Z. Ou, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 1108–1127 RSC .
Z. Lou, Q. Gu, Y. Liao, S. Yu and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 184, 258–263 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, H. Bai, X. Li, W. Li, J. Zhai, J. Li and G. Xi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4096–4100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, W. Zhang, C. Lu, Z. Lou and B. Li, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 999–1005 RSC .
O. A. Balitskii, D. Moszyński and Z. Abbas, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 59050–59054 RSC .
H. Cheng, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 2954–2958 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, Y. Wu, J. Zhang, K. Chen, C. Huang, H. Chen and X. Qiu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 490, 395–402 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, H. Cheng, M. Wen, Y. Huo and H. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 23531–23540 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, F. Yang, G. Xiang, K. Zhang, Y. Cao, D. Wang, H. Dong and X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1179–1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, Y. Liang, J. Yong, T. Li, M. S. Hossain, Y. Liu, Y. Hu, K. Ganesan and E. Skafidas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2106387 Search PubMed .
Y.-H. Kim, J.-S. Heo, T.-H. Kim, S. Park, M.-H. Yoon, J. Kim, M. S. Oh, G.-R. Yi, Y.-Y. Noh and S. K. Park, Nature, 2012, 489, 128–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Karatutlu, A. Barhoum and A. Sapelkin, in Emerging Applications of Nanoparticles and Architecture Nanostructures, ed. A. Barhoum and A. S. H. Makhlouf, Elsevier, Cambridge, MA, USA,  2018, pp. 1–28 Search PubMed .
Y. Jee, Y. Yu, H. W. Abernathy, S. Lee, T. L. Kalapos, G. A. Hackett and P. R. Ohodnicki, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42552–42563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. S. Cabezas, G. K. Ong, R. B. Jadrich, B. A. Lindquist, A. Agrawal, T. M. Truskett and D. J. Milliron, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 8925–8930 CrossRef PubMed .

          Y. K. Yap, in Encyclopedia of Nanotechnology, ed. B. Bhushan, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,  2012, pp. 2069–2075 Search PubMed .

          G. Faraji, H. S. Kim and H. T. Kashi, Severe Plastic Deformation: Methods, Processing and Properties, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  2018 Search PubMed .
E. L. Runnerstrom, K. P. Kelley, E. Sachet, C. T. Shelton and J.-P. Maria, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1885–1892 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Runnerstrom, K. P. Kelley, T. G. Folland, J. R. Nolen, N. Engheta, J. D. Caldwell and J.-P. Maria, Nano Lett., 2018, 19, 948–957 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lundin and K. Sarakinos, J. Mater. Res., 2012, 27, 780–792 CrossRef CAS .
M. Keshavarz, P. Kassanos, B. Tan and K. Venkatakrishnan, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 294–307 RSC .
K. Wegner, P. Piseri, H. V. Tafreshi and P. Milani, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, R439 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alvarez Barragan, N. V. Ilawe, L. Zhong, B. M. Wong and L. Mangolini, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2316–2322 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Riley, J. S. Smalley, K. W. Post, D. N. Basov, Y. Fainman, D. Wang, Z. Liu and D. J. Sirbuly, Small, 2016, 12, 892–901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, J. Z. Ou, M. S. Strano, R. B. Kaner, A. Mitchell and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2175–2196 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. de Castro, R. S. Datta, J. Z. Ou, A. Castellanos-Gomez, S. Sriram, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701619 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Etman, L. Wang, K. Edström, L. Nyholm and J. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806699 CrossRef .
J. Yan, P. Liu, C. Ma, Z. Lin and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8826–8838 RSC .
W. Liu, Q. Xu, W. Cui, C. Zhu and Y. Qi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1600–1604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, X. Qian, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4616–4621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuwahara, Y. Yoshimura, K. Haematsu and H. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9203–9210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, M. Che and H. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3783–3789 RSC .
J. Zhang, Q. Di, J. Liu, B. Bai, J. Liu, M. Xu and J. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4943–4953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Zhong, I. Shafei, R. Borman, S. Jeong, J. Chen, Y. Losovyj, X. Gao, N. Li, Y. Du, E. Sarnello, T. Li, D. Su, W. Ma and X. Ye, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Cheng, Y. Liu, P. Liu, W. Cao, T. He, R. Chen and Z. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 5208–5214 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1971, 5, 145–399 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khademi, R. Azimirad, A. A. Zavarian and A. Z. Moshfegh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19298–19304 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, J. Z. Ou, S. Zhuiykov, R. B. Kaner, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3952–3970 CrossRef CAS .
F. Haque, A. Zavabeti, B. Y. Zhang, R. S. Datta, Y. Yin, Z. Yi, Y. Wang, N. Mahmood, N. Pillai, N. Syed, H. Khan, A. Jannat, N. Wang, N. Medhekar, K. Kalantar-zadeh and J. Z. Ou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 257–268 RSC .
M. M. Alsaif, S. Balendhran, M. R. Field, K. Latham, W. Wlodarski, J. Z. Ou and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 192, 196–204 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, M. Alsaif, E. P. Nguyen, J. Z. Ou, S. Zhuiykov, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9753–9760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Zhang, E. Haque, B. Y. Zhang, J. Z. Ou, J. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Li, W. Gao, F. Haque, K. Xu, H. Wang, D. Cahill, L. X. Kong and W. Yang, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 16, 185–192 CrossRef .
G. Song, J. Shen, F. Jiang, R. Hu, W. Li, L. An, R. Zou, Z. Chen, Z. Qin and J. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3915–3922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Alsaif, M. R. Field, T. Daeneke, A. F. Chrimes, W. Zhang, B. J. Carey, K. J. Berean, S. Walia, J. van Embden, B. Zhang, K. Latham, K. Kalantar-zadeh and J. Z. Ou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3482–3493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Wang, W.-L. Wang, X.-C. Shen, B. Zhou, T. Chen, Z.-X. Guo, C.-C. Wen, B.-P. Jiang and H. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42088–42101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, Y. Long, H. Yi, Z. Yang, L. Pang, Z. Jin, Q. Liao, L. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, H. Cui, J. Lu, X. Peng, H. Liang, S. Ruan and Y.-J. Zeng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 491, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, X. Huang and H. Yu, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 101, 614–618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Ye, L. Ye, F. Su, Z. Ma, J. Huang, H. Xie, D. E. Doronkin, A. Zimina, J.-D. Grunwaldt and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2821–2830 RSC .
S. H. Lee, H. Nishi and T. Tatsuma, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2841–2847 RSC .
S. Hariharan, K. Saravanan and P. Balaya, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 31, 5–9 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, X. Li, X. Ren, L. Yang, J. Zhu and B. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802567 CrossRef .
M. M. Alsaif, F. Haque, T. Alkathiri, V. Krishnamurthi, S. Walia, Y. Hu, A. Jannat, M. Mohiuddin, K. Xu, M. W. Khan, Q. Ma, Y. Wang, N. Pillai, B. J. Murdoch, M. D. Dickey, B. Y. Zhang and J. Z. Ou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2106397 CrossRef CAS .
F. Haque, T. Daeneke, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and J. Z. Ou, Nanomicro Lett., 2018, 10, 1–27 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Yang, H. Li, J. Gao, P. He, L. Bian, F. Dong and Y. He, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6330–6335 RSC .
S. Razmyar, T. Sheng, M. Akter and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 4180–4192 CrossRef CAS .
P. González-Borrero, F. Sato, A. Medina, M. L. Baesso, A. C. Bento, G. Baldissera, C. Persson, G. A. Niklasson, C. G. Granqvist and A. Ferreira da Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 061909 CrossRef .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Z. Ou, T. Daeneke, A. Mitchell, T. Sasaki and M. S. Fuhrer, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 73–89 CrossRef .
S. Cong, F. Geng and Z. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10518–10528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Malinsky, K. L. Kelly, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1471–1482 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Jain and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17451–17454 CrossRef CAS .
K. Machida, M. Okada and K. Adachi, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 125, 103103 CrossRef .
N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24287–24293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Umebayashi, T. Yamaki, H. Itoh and K. Asai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 454–456 CrossRef CAS .
R. Weiher and R. Ley, J. Appl. Phys., 1966, 37, 299–302 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, T. Yang, J. Liu, Y. Xin, Y. Li and S. Han, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 7061–7064 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Cho, K. M. Roccapriore, C. K. Dass, S. Ghosh, J. Choi, J. Noh, L. C. Reimnitz, S. Heo, K. Kim, K. Xie, B. A. Korgel, X. Li, J. R. Hendrickson, J. A. Hachtel and D. J. Milliron, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 014709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tian, H. Luo, R. Wei, M. Liu, Z. Yang, Z. Luo, H. Zhu, J. Li and J. Qiu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 13988–13995 RSC .
X. Liu, C. Li, S. Han, J. Han and C. Zhou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 1950–1952 CrossRef CAS .
C. Aydın, H. El-Nasser, F. Yakuphanoglu, I. Yahia and M. Aksoy, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 854–858 CrossRef .
R. K. Gupta, K. Ghosh, R. Patel and P. K. Kahol, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255, 2414–2418 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha, B. T. Diroll, J. Shank, Z. Kudyshev, A. Dutta, S. N. Chowdhury, T. S. Luk, S. Campione, R. D. Schaller, V. M. Shalaev, A. Boltasseva and M. G. Wood, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908377 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kelley, E. Sachet, C. T. Shelton and J.-P. Maria, APL Mater., 2017, 5, 076105 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Chong and W. Y. Fan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 397, 18–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Ma, K. Chen, W. Wang, P.-F. Wang, L. Zhou and Q.-Q. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 855, 157254 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, H.-C. Lu, S. H. Cho, T. Maruvada, M. C. Price and D. J. Milliron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16331–16343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Matsui, Y. L. Ho, T. Kanki, H. Tanaka, J. J. Delaunay and H. Tabata, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1759–1767 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schrecongost, Y. Xiang, J. Chen, C. Ying, H.-T. Zhang, M. Yang, P. Gajurel, W. Dai, R. Engel-Herbert and C. Cen, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 7760–7766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tegg, D. Cuskelly and V. J. Keast, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4, 065703 CrossRef .
K. Deng, Z. Hou, X. Deng, P. Yang, C. Li and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7280–7290 CrossRef CAS .
X. N. Song, C. Y. Wang, W. K. Wang, X. Zhang, N. N. Hou and H. Q. Yu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500417 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, S. Cao, T. Zhang, Q. Yao, A. Fisher and J. Y. Lee, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 291–297 RSC .
J. Chen, Y. Ren, T. Hu, T. Xu and Q. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 465, 517–525 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, H. An, W. Huang and Y. He, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 259, 59–63 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zu, Y. Guo, H. Yang, D. Huang, Z. Liu, Y. Liu and C. Hu, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 18533–18540 RSC .
W. Wang, W. Yue, Z. Liu, T. Shi, J. Du, Y. Leng, R. Wei, Y. Ye, C. Liu and X. Liu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1700948 CrossRef .
H. Cao, X. Hu, W. Shi, S. Li and Y. Huang, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 18, 100516 CrossRef .
C. Shangguan, M. Dong, G. Ren, L. Lu, B. Y. Zhang, Q. Ma, K. Xu, Y. Hu, T. Alkathiri, R. You, C. F. McConville, L. Zhu and J. Z. Ou, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 349, 130740 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yin, G. Li, B. Zhang, H. Farjana, L. Zhao, H. Qin, B. Hu, J. Ou and J. Tian, Analyst, 2021, 146, 1949–1955 RSC .
J. Kim, G. V. Naik, N. K. Emani, U. Guler and A. Boltasseva, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2013, 19, 4601907 Search PubMed .
K. Biswas, S. Bhat and C. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5689–5693 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, P. Bhattarai, Z. Dai and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2053–2108 RSC .
S. Gai, G. Yang, P. Yang, F. He, J. Lin, D. Jin and B. Xing, Nano Today, 2018, 19, 146–187 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2115–2120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pérez-Hernández, P. Del Pino, S. G. Mitchell, M. Moros, G. Stepien, B. Pelaz, W. J. Parak, E. M. Gálvez, J. Pardo and J. M. de la Fuente, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 52–61 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Mackey, M. R. Ali, L. A. Austin, R. D. Near and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 1319–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Riley and E. S. Day, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2017, 9, e1449 Search PubMed .
M. R. Ali, Y. Wu and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 15375–15393 CrossRef CAS .
R. Weissleder, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 316–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bashkatov, E. Genina, V. Kochubey and V. Tuchin, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 2543 CrossRef CAS .
P. Beard, Interface Focus, 2011, 1, 602–631 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ding, W. Guo, C. Guo, J. Sun, N. Zheng, F. Wang, M. Yan and S. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2020–2029 RSC .
J. Liu, J. Han, Z. Kang, R. Golamaully, N. Xu, H. Li and X. Han, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5770–5776 RSC .
M. Zhou, M. Tian and C. Li, Bioconjugate Chem., 2016, 27, 1188–1199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Markovic, L. M. Harhaji-Trajkovic, B. M. Todorovic-Markovic, D. P. Kepić, K. M. Arsikin, S. P. Jovanović, A. C. Pantovic, M. D. Dramićanin and V. S. Trajkovic, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 1121–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Moon, S. H. Lee and H. C. Choi, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3707–3713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Anh Tran, K. Krishnamoorthy, Y. W. Song, S. K. Cho and S. J. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2980–2986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Odda, Y. Xu, J. Lin, G. Wang, N. Ullah, A. Zeb, K. Liang, L.-P. Wen and A.-W. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 2032–2042 RSC .
N. Zhou, V. López-Puente, Q. Wang, L. Polavarapu, I. Pastoriza-Santos and Q.-H. Xu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 29076–29097 RSC .
C. L. Bayer, S. Y. Nam, Y.-S. Chen and S. Y. Emelianov, J. Biomed. Opt., 2013, 18, 016001 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gao, K. Chen, R. Xie, J. Xie, S. Lee, Z. Cheng, X. Peng and X. Chen, Small, 2010, 6, 256–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, C. Wang, L. Feng, K. Yang and Z. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10869–10939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zalipsky, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 1995, 16, 157–182 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, D. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Liu and W. Wang, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 3025–3032 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Goh, G. Balasundaram, M. Moothanchery, A. Attia, X. Li, H. Q. Lim, N. Burton, Y. Qiu, T. C. Putti, C. W. Chan, P. Iau, S. W. Tang, C. W. Q. Ng, F. J. Pool, P. Pillay, W. Chua, E. Sterling, S. T. Quek and M. Olivo, Clin. Breast Cancer, 2018, 18, e1247–e1250 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lin, P. Hu, J. Shi, C. M. Appleton, K. Maslov, L. Li, R. Zhang and L. V. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2352 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, S. V. Tripathi, I. Rosman, J. Ma, P. Hai, G. P. Linette, M. L. Council, R. C. Fields, L. V. Wang and L. A. Cornelius, J. Invest. Dermatol., 2017, 137, 1370–1372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Aguirre, M. Schwarz, N. Garzorz, M. Omar, A. Buehler, K. Eyerich and V. Ntziachristos, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 1, 0068 CrossRef .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain, K. Manthiram, J. H. Engel, S. L. White, J. A. Faucheaux and A. P. Alivisatos, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 13916–13920 CrossRef .
A. Kristensen, J. K. Yang, S. I. Bozhevolnyi, S. Link, P. Nordlander, N. J. Halas and N. A. Mortensen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 2, 1–14 Search PubMed .
P. Guo, R. D. Schaller, J. B. Ketterson and R. P. Chang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 267–273 CrossRef CAS .
L. Song, K. Yang, W. Jiang, P. Du and B. Xing, Colloids Surf., B, 2012, 94, 341–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Silva-Bermudez, S. Rodil and S. Muhl, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 258, 1711–1718 CrossRef CAS .
N. Poolsup, N. Suksomboon and S. Rattanasookchit, Diabetes Technol. Ther., 2009, 11, 775–784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-S. Zhang, S. A. Hawley, Y. Zong, M. Li, Z. Wang, A. Gray, T. Ma, J. Cui, J.-W. Feng and M. Zhu, Nature, 2017, 548, 112–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Bankar, M. V. Bule, R. S. Singhal and L. Ananthanarayan, Biotechnol. Adv., 2009, 27, 489–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Weibel and H. J. Bright, J. Biol. Chem., 1971, 246, 2734–2744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhuiykov, L. Hyde, Z. Hai, M. K. Akbari, E. Kats, C. Detavernier, C. Xue and H. Xu, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 6, 44–53 CrossRef .
A. Hayat, G. Bulbul and S. Andreescu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 56, 334–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. E. Williams, C. M. Chang, E. L. Rosen, G. Garcia, E. L. Runnerstrom, B. L. Williams, B. Koo, R. Buonsanti, D. J. Milliron and B. A. Helms, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3328–3335 RSC .
G. Garcia, R. Buonsanti, E. L. Runnerstrom, R. J. Mendelsberg, A. Llordes, A. Anders, T. J. Richardson and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4415–4420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Damaghi, J. W. Wojtkowiak and R. J. Gillies, Front. Physiol., 2013, 4, 370 Search PubMed .
C. R. Justus, L. Dong and L. V. Yang, Front. Physiol., 2013, 4, 354 Search PubMed .
C. He, K. Lu and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12253–12256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Krulwich, G. Sachs and E. Padan, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2011, 9, 330–343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Fan, D. Li, C. Sun, Z. Lei, L. Lu, T. Wang and F. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Huang, Y. Zhou, J. Du, Y. Deng and Y. He, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 2384–2388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, Y. Zhou, Y. Deng and Y. He, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 4347–4350 RSC .

          R. L. McCreery, Raman Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis, John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, USA,  2005, ch. 2, pp. 15–33 Search PubMed .
M. G. Albrecht and J. A. Creighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 5215–5217 CrossRef CAS .
A. Otto, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2005, 36, 497–509 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Ding, E.-M. You, Z.-Q. Tian and M. Moskovits, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4042–4076 RSC .

          E. Le Ru and P. Etchegoin, Principles of Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy: and related plasmonic effects, Elsevier, Oxford, UK,  2008 Search PubMed .
D. L. Jeanmaire and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1977, 84, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science, 1997, 275, 1102–1106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Zrimsek, N. L. Wong and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 5133–5142 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pilot, R. Signorini, C. Durante, L. Orian, M. Bhamidipati and L. Fabris, Biosensors, 2019, 9, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xue, W. Ruan, L. Yang, W. Ji, Y. Xie, L. Chen, W. Song, B. Zhao and J. R. Lombardi, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2012, 43, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qi, L. Lu, L. Wang and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9886–9889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Haldavnekar, K. Venkatakrishnan and B. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yamada, Y. Yamamoto and N. Tani, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1982, 86, 397–400 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xue, W. Ji, Z. Mao, H. Mao, Y. Wang, X. Wang, W. Ruan, B. Zhao and J. R. Lombardi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8792–8797 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Han, C. Köhler, J. Kozuch, U. Kuhlmann, L. Paasche, A. Sivanesan, I. M. Weidinger and P. Hildebrandt, Small, 2013, 9, 4175–4181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Ruan, J. Zhang, B. Yang, W. Xu, B. Zhao and J. R. Lombardi, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1072–1077 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cong, Y. Yuan, Z. Chen, J. Hou, M. Yang, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, L. Li, Q. Li, F. Geng and Z. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
L.-J. Gu, C.-L. Ma, X.-H. Zhang, W. Zhang, S. Cong and Z.-G. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6332–6335 RSC .
L. Yang, X. Jiang, W. Ruan, B. Zhao, W. Xu and J. R. Lombardi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 20095–20098 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan, L. Wang, C. Cheng, X. Yan, B. Shen and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2893–2896 RSC .
Q. Zhang, X. Li, W. Yi, W. Li, H. Bai, J. Liu and G. Xi, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 11765–11771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, X. Zhou, J. Li, X. Li, B. Li, W. Fei, J. Zhou, J. Yin and W. Guo, Small, 2018, 14, 1802276 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhan, Y. Liu, H. Zu, Y. Guo, S. Wu, H. Yang, Z. Liu, B. Lei, J. Zhuang, X. Zhang, D. Huang and C. Hu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5997–6004 RSC .
H. Yu, Z. Zhuang, D. Li, Y. Guo, Y. Li, H. Zhong, H. Xiong, Z. Liu and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 1040–1048 RSC .
B. Y. Zhang, K. Xu, Q. Yao, A. Jannat, G. Ren, M. R. Field, X. Wen, C. Zhou, A. Zavabeti and J. Z. Ou, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1073–1078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Khan, B. Y. Zhang, K. Xu, M. Mohiuddin, A. Jannat, F. Haque, T. Alkathiri, N. Pillai, Y. Wang, S. Z. Reza, J. Li, X. Mulet, R. Babarao, N. Mahmood and J. Z. Ou, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 588, 305–314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Yihong Hu
	Yihong Hu received her BSc degree (2013) and MEng degree in electrical (2015) at the University of Melbourne. She is currently a PhD candidate in the School of Engineering at RMIT University. Yihong's research focuses on various transition metal oxides, such as molybdenum oxide and tungsten oxide. Her studies cover from the synthesis of 2D metal oxide nanomaterials to their applications including novel high-speed, low-energy electronics, optoelectronics, biosensors, etc.

Bao Yue Zhang
	Dr Bao Yue Zhang is currently a Vice-Chancellor's Research Fellow at RMIT University, and a Research Fellow at the ARC Center of Excellence in FLEET. She completed her PhD at RMIT University in 2020. Her main research fields include the development of biosensors based on functional materials, as well as optoelectronic devices. She also leads the research in novel 2D materials, especially the self-occurring oxide films from a solid metal surface.

Farjana Haque
	Farjana Haque received BSc (2010) and MSc (2013) degrees from the Department of Physics, University of Dhaka. She is pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Dr Jian Zhen Ou in the Centre for Advanced Electronics and Sensors, RMIT University. Her major research interests are material development and device design for photocatalytic, electrocatalytic and photoelectrochemical applications using solar energy as well as kinetic assessments of electrocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry based on two-dimensional nanomaterials.

Guanghui Ren
	Dr Guanghui Ren is now a research fellow in the School of Engineering at RMIT University and the Fabrication team leader in the Integrated Photonics and Applications Centre (InPAC). He received his PhD from RMIT University in 2016. His research is focused on integrated optics, such as silicon photonics, silicon nitride photonics and thin-film lithium niobate (LNOI). He used photonic integrated circuits (PICs) as a platform to integrate different functional materials, such as 2D materials, chalcogenides, and plasmonic materials, to expand the capabilities of PICs in the aspect of sensing, nonlinearity, modulation, etc.

Jian Zhen Ou
	Dr Jian Zhen Ou received his PhD in Electrical and Electronic engineering in 2012 from RMIT University, Australia. His current research interests include functional nanoscale materials, nanotechnology-enabled smart sensors, as well as nanoelectronic and nanophotonic devices. He has published more than 160 peer-reviewed articles in high-profile journals including Science, Nature Materials, and Nature Communications.
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of localized surface plasmon resonance. Left: light irradiation of free electrons in MO nanoparticles. Right: resonance oscillation of electron cloud in MO nanoparticles. Adapted with permission.2 Copyright © 2011, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Illustration of LSPR variation against the change of free charge carrier concentration in doped metal oxides. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright © 2017, Elsevier. (c) Simulated electric field intensity enhancement contour map of Au nanoparticles with the same volume and different shapes. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright © 2014, Wiley.	 
	(2)
	(3)
σ = Neμ	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of different doping strategies. Adapted with permission.29 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Scanning transmission electron microscope – high-angle annular dark field (STEM-HAADF) and EDS mapping images of Ga doped ZnO nanoparticles. Adapted with permission.93 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) 1H MAS NMR spectra of samples hydrothermally synthesized at pH 1, 1.5, 2, and 2.5. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright © 2018, Wiley. (d) STEM-HAADAF of CsWO3. Adapted with permission.94 Copyright © 2013, AIP Publishing LLC. (e) HRTEM showing oxygen and tungsten vacancies in the crystal. Adapted with permission.97 Copyright © 2016, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 3  Typical synthesis methods of plasmonic metal oxides. (a) ‘Hot injection’ colloidal synthesis using a glass flask under an oxygen-free environment. (b) The LaMer–Dinegar model of colloidal nanocrystal formation. Adapted with permission.29 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) The hydrothermal synthesis method using an autoclave with a stainless-steel shell and Teflon liner. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright © 2002, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Illustration of plasmonic MoxW1−xO3−y nanocrystal formation under the solvothermal approach. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) Physical vapor deposition using sputtering of atoms. Adapted with permission.132 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (f) Synthesis of TiOx using the femtosecond-LAL (fs-LAL) method. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright © 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of major tuning approaches during in situ synthesis of MO NSs. (b) TEM images of NbxTiO2 nanocrystals with x = 0.09, 0.12, and 0.155. (c) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of TiO2 and NbxTiO2 chloroform dispersions. Inset shows the color change of the plasmonic NbxTiO2 upon doping. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright © 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) TEM figure of WO2.72 rods (left); hexagonal prisms CsxWO3 (mid) and truncated cubes (right) with illustrated shape (insets). (e) Absorption spectra of CsxWO3 hexagonal prisms (red), truncated cubes (blue), and WO2.72 rods (grey), respectively. Adapted with permission.112 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) HRTEM images of H0.3MoO3 (left), H0.91MoO3 (mid), and H1.55MoO3 (right) with corresponding low resolution TEM images (insets); (g) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of all three types of H0.3MoO3, H0.91MoO3, and H1.55MoO3, respectively. The inset shows the color of all three samples as labeled; Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright © 2018, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of MoO3−x after different solar light irradiation durations; inset: scheme of photodoping and color change of MoO3−x. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright © 2014, Wiley. (b) Schematic of hydrogen spillover synthesis of HxMoO3−y coupled with Pt nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Illustration of selective cation-exchange reaction. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright © 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 


In situ methods
Wet chemical synthesis	Colloidal method	
	√	√	√
“Sol–gel” method	√	
	√	√
Vapor phase synthesis	Physical vapor deposition (PVD)	√	
	√	√
Nonthermal-plasma synthesis	
	√	√	√
Atomic layer deposition (ALD)	√	
	√	√
Other methods	Liquid exfoliation	
	√	√	

Laser ablation in liquid (LAL)	
	√	√	√

Ex situ methods
Photoactivation	
	√	√	

Two-step hydrogen reduction	
	√	√	√
Cation-exchange	
	√	√	√

 	Fig. 6  Summary of doped plasmonic metal oxides with different LSRP wavelength ranges.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Crystal structure of MoO6 octahedra unit cell (top left), α-MoO3 (top right), β-MoO3 (bottom left), and h-MoO3 (bottom right). Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright © 2017, Wiley. (b) Photograph of MoO3−x in ethanol dispersion. (c) TEM image of MoO3−x. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright © 2014, Wiley. (d) The Mo3d XPS spectra of h-MoO3. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright © 2021, Wiley. (e) Crystal structures of oxygen deficient WO2.72 and CsWO3. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) UV-vis-NIR absorbance spectra of WO3−x nanocrystals in different solvents. Inset: SEM of the WO3−x nanocrystals Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright © 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Photograph of TiO2 nanocrystals dispersed in toluene. (j) XRD patterns of TiO2 nanocrystals synthesized using M-OLAM (top), F-OLAM (mid), and M-ODOL (bottom) as precursors. Insets show atomistic models with [001] and [101] facets. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic showing a change in the shape of Nb-doped TiO2 nanocrystals with increasing Nb precursor, shown in indicative colors of nanocrystals. (i) SEM of an NTO film cross-section deposited on silicon. (k) UV-vis-NIR transmittance spectrum of an NTO film deposited on glass. The inset is a photograph of a deposited sample. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic model illustrating the change in the shape of Cr–Sn co-doped In2O3 nanocrystals when Cr concentration increases. (b) HRTEM image, (c) LSPR spectra of Sn, and Cr–Sn-co-doped In2O3 NSs. Adapted with permission.89 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) HRTEM of AZO nanocrystals oriented along the [110] zone axis. Inset: the corresponding FFT image. (e) UV-vis-NIR absorbance spectra of equimolar dispersions of AZO nanocrystals with varying Al doping levels. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. (f) TEM image of self-assembled spherical ICO. Inset: a unit cell of ICO octahedra. (g) Absorption spectra of spherical, small octahedral, and large octahedral of nanocrystals with similar levels of In doping in CCl4, respectively, with the corresponding TEM image on top. Scale bar: 50 nm. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright © 2013. American Chemical Society.	 

TiO2	Oxygen vacancies	Colloidal synthesis	Tetragonal bipyramidal	∼3400	
	
36

TiO2	Oxygen vacancies	fs-LAL	Spherical nanoparticles	∼450	
	
143

TiO2	Oxygen vacancies	Pulsed laser irradiation	Quantum dots	200–1000	SERS	
136

TiO2	Nb5+	Colloidal synthesis	Tetragonal bipyramidal/peanut-like nanorods	NIR	
	
82

TiO2	Nb5+	Colloidal synthesis	Nanocrystals	∼2300	
	
35

TiO2	Nb5+	Colloidal synthesis	Tetragonal bipyramidal/peanut-like nanorods	420 → 1500	PA & PTT	
52

WO3	Oxygen vacancies	Colloidal synthesis	Nanorods	900	
	
32

WO3	Cs+	Colloidal synthesis	Hexagonal prisms/truncated cubes/pseudosphere	860 & 1602	
	
112

WO3	Cs+	Colloidal synthesis	Hexagonal nanoplatelets/nanorods	707 & 1543	
	
45

WO3	Oxygen vacancies & Cs+	Thermal reduction method	Hexagonal nanoparticles	850–2500	
	
176

WO3	Na+	Thermal reduction method	Needles interspersed/truncated cubes/tetrahedrons	∼750	
	
193

WO3	Oxygen vacancies	Solvothermal synthesis	Nanoparticles	>1000	PTT	
194

WO3	Oxygen vacancies	Liquid phase exfoliation	Nanosheets	1520/1450	
	
95

WO3	Oxygen vacancies	Solvothermal synthesis	Nanowires	>520 to NIR	
	
118

WO3	Oxygen vacancies	Solvothermal synthesis	Nanospheres	556	
	
121

WO3	Oxygen vacancies	Colloidal synthesis	Nanodots	>900	PA & PTT	
51

WO3	H2O	Hydrothermal synthesis	Nanoflowers	∼1100	
	
195

WO3	H+	H-spillover	Nanosheets	∼660	
	
28

WO3	Oxygen vacancies	Hydrothermal synthesis	Nanowire bundles	561	SERS	
119

WO3	Oxygen vacancies & Li+	Colloidal synthesis	Nanowires	>1000	
	
196

WO3	Oxygen vacancies	Solvothermal synthesis	Nanowire bundles	>1000	
	
120

WO3	Oxygen vacancies	Solid-phase reduction	Nanocrystals	600–760	Bovine serum albumin (BSA) sensing	
197

WO3	NH4+	Solvothermal synthesis	Nanoribbons	NIR	PA & PTT	
125

WO3	Oxygen vacancies	Colloidal synthesis	2D nanoplatelets	1470	
	
115

WO3	Oxygen vacancies	Colloidal synthesis	Nanorods	900	
	
32

WO3	Cs+	Colloidal synthesis	Hexagonal prisms/truncated cubes/pseudosphere	860 & 1602	
	
112

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies	Hydrothermal synthesis	Nanosheets	900	
	
49

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies	Hydrothermal synthesis	Nanosheets	680–950	
	
122

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies& H+	Liquid phase exfoliation	Nanoflakes	760	
	
31

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies	Hydrothermal synthesis	Nanoribbons	500–1000	PTT	
158

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies	Hydrothermal synthesis	Hollow nanospheres	∼800	PTT	
50

MoO3	H+	H-spillover	Nanosheets	∼565	
	
28

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies & H+	Liquid phase exfoliation	Nanoflakes	630 & 900	BSA sensing	
159

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies	Template synthesis & hydrogen reduction	Nanosheets	623–920	
	
96

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies	Hydrogen reduction	Nanodots	830–880	
	
150

MoO3	H+	
	Nanosheets	710 & 1030	BSA sensing	
144

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies	Liquid exfoliation & hydrogen reduction	Nanosheets	∼820	
	
198

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies	Photoactivation	Quantum dots	500–800	PTT & glucose sensing	
199

MoO3	H+	Hydrothermal synthesis	2D nano-disks	425 & 650	Glucose sensing	
58

MoO3	H+	Liquid phase exfoliation	Nanosheets	700 & 1000	
	
200

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies & H+	Liquid phase exfoliation & reduction	Nanoflakes	∼735	BSA sensing	
57

MoO3	H+	Hydrothermal synthesis	Amorphous quantum dots	720 & 1050	SERS	
54

MoO3	H+	H-spillover	
	∼556	
	
146

MoO3	H+	Hydrothermal synthesis	2D planar flakes	900 & 1460	pH sensing	
59

MoO3	NH4+	Hydrothermal synthesis	Intracrystalline porous structures	
	
	
154

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies	Liquid phase exfoliation	Few-layer nanosheets	600–1200	
	
142

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies & H+	Liquid phase exfoliation	Nanoflakes	663 & 871	
	
170

MoO3	H+	H-spillover	Nanosheets	∼690	
	
147

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies	Liquid phase reduction	Nanosheets	361–809	SERS	
169

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies	Solvothermal synthesis	Nanosheets	∼680	
	
123

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies	Solvothermal synthesis	Nanosheets	∼900	
	
162

MoO3	Oxygen vacancies & N	Hydrothermal synthesis	Quantum dots	700–816	pH sensing	
201

MoO3	NH4+	Hydrothermal synthesis	Angstrom-scale-porous structures	780 & 1340	Ion sensing	
202

MoO3	NH4+	Hydrothermal synthesis	Nanoflakes	500 & 800	SERS	
203

MoO3	H+	Hydrothermal synthesis	Nanoflakes	400–500/800–900	SERS	
55

MoxW1−xO3−y	W, Mo, & O vacancies	Solvothermal synthesis	Nanowires	∼630	
	
124

In2O3	Sn	
	Nanoparticles	1626 → 2200	
	
33

In2O3	Sn	Colloidal synthesis	Spherical nanoparticles	∼1700	
	
34

In2O3	Sn	
	Nanocrystals	∼2000	Remote plasmonic nano-electrometers	
56

In2O3	Cr & Sn	Colloidal synthesis	Spherical nanocrystals	1750–2200	
	
89

In2O3	F & Sn	Colloidal synthesis	Nano-cubes	∼4000	
	
47

In2O3	Ti/Sb	Colloidal synthesis	Nanocrystals	∼5000	
	
102

In2O3	Sn	Colloidal synthesis	Spherical nanocrystals	2500–4000	
	
104

In2O3	Sn	Colloidal synthesis	Nanocrystals	2083–3480	
	
103

In2O3	Sn	Sol–gel synthesis	Thin film coating	1700–2000	Gas sensing	
129

In2O3	Zr & Sn	Colloidal synthesis	Nanocrystals	2857–5000	
	
87

In2O3	F & Sn	Colloidal synthesis	Nano-cubes	1700–3000	
	
181

ZnO	Al	Colloidal synthesis	Nanocrystals	>2500	
	
105

ZnO	Ga	E-beam lithography	Nano-disk arrays	1600–2000	
	
204

ZnO	Al	Nonthermal plasma synthesis	Nanocrystals	>3000	
	
106

ZnO	Ga	Plasma expansion	Nanoparticles	3000–4000	
	
81

ZnO	Al	ALD	Thin films	∼1700	
	
139

ZnO	Al	
	Nanocrystals	MIR	
	
39

ZnO	Ga	Colloidal synthesis	Nanocrystals	3500–5500	Gas sensing	
107

ZnO	In	Colloidal synthesis	Nanocrystals	∼3000	
	
108

ZnO	Al	Colloidal synthesis	Nanocrystals	>2500	
	
182

CdO	In	Colloidal synthesis	Octahedral/spherical nanocrystals	1800–3500	
	
40

CdO	F & In	Hydrothermal synthesis	Spherical/Rounded cubes nanocrystals	1500–3300	
	
88

CdO	Dy	MBE	Epitaxial layer on substrates	2500–4000	
	
41

CdO	F & In	Hydrothermal synthesis	Nanocrystals	1550 & 1625	
	
110

CdO	F	HiPIMS deposition	Thin film on substrates	NIR to MIR	ENZ	
133

CdO	F & In	Colloidal synthesis	Nanocrystals/thin film on substrates	∼1900	
	
109

CdO	In	Reactive HiPIMS deposition	Thin films	∼4000	ENZ	
134

CdO	Cu & In	Thermal decomposition and cation exchange	Nanocrystals	>2200	
	
149

CdO	Oxygen vacancies	Thermal decomposition	Nanocrystals	2400–6000	
	
111

Zn1−xCdxO	Sn	Colloidal synthesis	Nanocrystals	∼725	
	
114

ReO3	N/A	Colloidal synthesis	Nanocrystals	∼590	
	
190

ReO3	N/A	Solvothermal synthesis	Nanoparticles	∼520	
	
42

ReO3	N/A	Solvothermal synthesis	Nanoparticles	∼520	SERS	
205

ReO3	N/A	Space-confined growth & reduction	Nano-cubes	∼860	
	
188

ReO3	H+ (aqueous dispersion)	Space-confined growth	Nano-cubes	∼520 (solid)/750–850 (aqueous dispersion)	PTT/PA	
43

ReO3	H+ (aqueous dispersion)	Solvothermal synthesis	Spherical nanoparticles/nanosheets	Vis to NIR	
	
189

VO2	N/A	Epitaxially grown & lithography	Nano-square arrays	2000 & 3500	
	
191

VO2	N/A	MBE	Thin films	MIR	
	
192


 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of PEG-TONW nanorods in photothermal therapy application, PA, and thermal imaging. Adapted with permission.125 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of PA imaging of a tumor-bearing mouse with MO NSs as contrast agents. (c) In vivo PA imaging at different time points post-injection of WO3−x nanodots. Adapted with permission.51 Copyright © 2016, Wiley. (d) In vivo IR thermal imaging of the tumor-bearing mice under NIR irradiation after injection of (i) PBS, (ii) PEG-MoO3−x, and (iii) PEG-MoO3−x@CPT. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright © 2015, Elsevier. (e) Fluorescence microscopy images of the DCFH-DA probe-loaded cells with different treatments showing the generation of ROS. H2O2 is taken as the positive control group; scale bar: 200 μm. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright © 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the integrated fiber-optic BSA sensor with heavily doped MoO3−x nanoflakes. (b) Fluorescence microscopic image of fibers coated with MoO3−x nanoflakes under different concentrations of BSA molecules labeled by Cy3 dyes. (c) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of MoO3−x nanoflakes at various concentrations of BSA. (d) Transmission spectra and (e) response factor of the proposed biosensor detecting increasing concentrations of BSA. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) A prototype sensing platform of glucose sensor based on HxMoO3 nanoflakes and (g) the corresponding detection schematic. (h) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of H1.55MoO3–GOx suspensions after adding different concentrations of glucose. Inset: the corresponding optical images of the suspensions. (i) The fitted response ratio of H1.55MoO3vs. glucose concentration. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright © 2018, Wiley. (j) Reversible electron exchange of doped plasmonic MOs with redox-active different biomolecules and live bacteria, leading to changes in plasmonic properties. (k) Experimental and fitted absorption spectra of o-CytC and r-CytC. (l) LSPR modulation in pre-oxidized RPN buffered solutions by addition of r-CytC. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright © 2015, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of plasmonic oxide (PO) SERS- and colorimetric-based single-cell detection. (b) RhB SERS spectra enabled by NIR-PO and (c) Vis-PO at different concentrations. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright © 2021, Elsevier. (d) EM (left) & CT (right) SERS enhancement mechanism of WO3−x. Raman spectrum of R6G on different substrates under (e) 532 nm and (f) 785 nm laser excitation. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
