Engineering graphitic carbon nitride (g-C 3 N 4 ) for catalytic reduction of CO 2 to fuels and chemicals: strategy and mechanism  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC01303C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC01303C
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 5394-5428Engineering graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) for catalytic reduction of CO2 to fuels and chemicals: strategy and mechanism

        
          
            Qingqing 
            Lu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kamel 
            Eid
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Wenpeng 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Aboubakr M. 
            Abdullah
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Guobao 
            Xu
          
        
      *de and 

        
          
            Rajender S. 
            Varma
          
        
      *f
aEngineering &Technology Center of Electrochemistry, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan 250353, China
bGas Processing Center (GPC), College of Engineering, Qatar University, Doha 2713, Qatar. E-mail: kamel.eid@qu.edu.qa
cCenter for advanced materials, Qatar University, Doha 2713, Qatar
dState Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, China
eUniversity of Science and Technology of China, Anhui 230026, China
fRegional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Palacky University, Slechtitelu 27, 783 71 Olomouc, Czech Republic. E-mail: varma.rajender@epa.gov
Received 
      14th April 2021
    , Accepted 18th June 2021First published on 18th June 2021AbstractThe reduction of carbon dioxide to useful fuels/chemicals, such as methane, formic, and methanol, is an innovative way to address looming energy and environmental issues. Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), as a greener and low-cost catalyst for the electrocatalytic and photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR) to provide usable fuels, is endowed with numerous appealing attributes, e.g., Earth-abundant resources, facile synthesis, metal-free nature, catalytic properties, and unique thermal-physical–chemical stability. Articles on the use of g-C3N4 for CO2 transformation have increased significantly in the past decade, and it is important to provide timely updates in this emerging and active research area. This review emphasizes the rational structural engineering of g-C3N4, including doping (i.e., metal, non-metal, and molecular) and heterojunction formation (i.e., metal, metal oxide, metal phosphide, metal hydroxide, metal complex, Ag-halides, and carbon materials) for electrocatalytic, photoelectrocatalytic, and photocatalytic CO2RR. Besides, an in-depth deciphering of the CO2RR mechanism from experimental, theoretical, and fundamental concepts is provided, including deliberation on the sources/emission and strategies to avoid/reduce CO2 emission. Lastly, a brief conclusion and outlook on the challenges and future prospects are highlighted to assist further in the rational design of the g-C3N4-based catalyst as a selective and efficient catalyst for the CO2RR.
1. Introduction
Continued global energy consumption and industrialization have led to the emission of huge amounts of greenhouse gases (GHGs) that have a substantial negative effect on the climate and life on planet Earth; meanwhile, CO2 contributes ∼20% to the GHG effect that can lead to catastrophic and irreversible climate changes affecting human health.1–3 Global CO2 emissions have reached over 30 billion tons, with over 15% increase in the last decade, however, only 1% of this amount is being removed annually.1–3 CO2 is a vital micromolecular resource for various industries, and its conversion into usable chemicals and fuels (i.e., methanol, formic acid, and methane) could be a valuable green and sustainable energy resource.1–7 The catalytic (i.e., electrocatalytic, photoelectrocatalytic, and photocatalytic) CO2RR is deemed as a feasible, cost-effective, and effective way to reduce CO2 emissions and produce usable chemicals.1–6 Numerous metals (i.e., Cu, Pt, Ru, Ir, and Rh), metal oxides (i.e., TiO2, SnO2, and CeO2), metal chalcogenides (i.e., ZnTe, SnS2, and CdS), and carbon materials (i.e., graphene, carbon nanotubes, metal–organic framework) have been developed for the CO2RR.2,8–11 Unlike these catalysts, graphitic carbon nitrides (g-C3N4) are considered to be greener, sustainable, effective, and low-cost catalysts for the CO2RR due to their inherent metal-free nature, physiochemical stability in various solvents (i.e., water, ethanol, ether, toluene, and tetrahydrofuran), thermally stability up to 600 °C, and unique catalytic merits.12–20 Furthermore, g-C3N4 could be easily prepared in high yield (i.e., gram scale) from Earth-abundant and inexpensive resources (i.e., melamine, urea, cyanuric acid, cyanamide, and pyridine) to meet the requirements for practical and large-scale applications.12–17,20 Meanwhile, g-C3N4, with its large accessible surface area, abundant uncoordinated surface atoms, surface defects, and active sites, can provide various means for tethering gas molecules (i.e., CO2 and CO) along with allowing the adsorption of reaction intermediates or products during the CO2RR.12–17,20 Intriguingly, g-C3N4 is a semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.7 eV, suitable electronic structure, and great adsorption of blue-violet light with a wavelength (<475 nm) that can promote photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic CO2RR.12–17,20 g-C3N4 was used for the first time for the photoreduction of CO2 in 2013 to C2H5OH and CH3OH.21 Subsequently, various efforts have been dedicated to tailoring the structure and composition of g-C3N4 for the CO2RR, as its catalytic activity could be easily enhanced by doping with a metal (i.e., Pt, Pd, Ru, Au, and Ti) or traces of non-metal (i.e., B, P, and O2) and functionalization with metal oxide nanoparticles (i.e., TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2) and carbon-based materials (i.e., graphene oxide and carbon nanotubes).12,16,21–25 Although the catalytic CO2RR on g-C3N4 still lacks practical requirements, focus on the structural engineering of g-C3N4 for various appliances in the last decade has resulted in over 16445 articles with ∼3384 papers on catalytic applications, with 589 exclusively dedicated to the CO2RR (Fig. 1a). Thus, it is important to provide a timely update on this topic of CO2RR executed on g-C3N4. To this end, various efforts have reported the controlled fabrication of g-C3N4 for various catalytic, energy, and CO2 reductions; however, most of them focused on CO2 reduction from the photocatalytic perspective.18,23,25,26
 Fig. 1  (a) Chart of the number of articles on carbon nitride between 2010 and 2021, obtained from the Scopus database on 5th January 2021 using the keywords carbon nitride, carbon nitride catalyst, and g-C3N4 CO2 reduction. (b) Comparing the band structure of g-C3N4 for the redox potentials of different products at pH 7. (c) Assorted cells for the CO2RR designed based on data from ref. 27. RE in (c) refers to the reference electrode. 
In contrast, the present review highlights the structural and compositional engineering of g-C3N4 for photoelectrocatalytic, electrocatalytic, and photocatalytic CO2RR, encompassing the engineering of g-C3N4 by doping (i.e., metal, non-metal, and molecule) and heterojunction formation (i.e., metal, metal oxide, metal phosphide, metal hydroxide, metal complex, Ag-halides, and carbon materials). The CO2RR mechanism from experimental, fundamental, and theoretical viewpoints are also profoundly emphasized. The sources of CO2 and strategies to avoid or reduce CO2 emission are underscored as well. This cutting-edge research field's current challenges and outlook are deliberated to provide a clear roadmap for the rational fabrication of more efficient and durable g-C3N4-based catalysts for facilitating the selective reduction of CO2 to produce usable fuels and chemicals.
1.1 CO2 sources and emissions
There are two primary origins of CO2 emissions, namely, human activities and natural sources. The natural causes entail the decomposition of organic matter, ocean release, animal/plant respiration, forest fires, and volcanic eruptions. Meanwhile, human sources comprise various industrial activities (i.e., cement, the oil/gas industry, chemical, metallurgical, fuel extraction, and mineral refining/transformation), transportation (i.e., road, rail, air, and marine), buildings (i.e., energy generation, cooking, and heating), agriculture (i.e., forestry, crops cultivation, livestock, and deforestation), and metabolism. Especially, 87% of CO2 originates from the burning of fossil fuels (i.e., coal, gas, and oil) for diverse purposes, and the remainder arises from the clearing of forests and other land-use changes (∼9%), and the cement industry (∼4%) according to the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Interestingly, 40% of CO2 emanates from the electricity and heat production sectors, and hence it is critical to find an efficient way to produce electricity without using fossil fuels to reduce CO2 emission. The worldwide atmospheric CO2 level reached 414 ppm in 2020 compared with 409.8 ± 0.1 ppm in 2019, with an average annual growth of more than 2.5 ppm per year. Likewise, global CO2 emission has reached over 35 billion tons per year with over 15% increase in the last decade alone.1–3 On the other hand, CO2 is an important material for various industries that can possibly replace huge amounts of feedstock used in the fossil-based industries. Nowadays, the average global consumption of CO2 ranges from 0.3 to 0.7 GT per year, with high expectations to increase this amount soon; CO2 has been used to produce assorted chemicals, such as polymeric materials via the simple insertion of CO2 into epoxides. Furthermore, CO2 can be used directly without any conversion process, as CO2 can act as a beneficial working media instead of N2 to enhance the generating efficiency of gas turbines.
1.2 Avoiding CO2 emission
There are numerous approaches explored for reducing fossil-fuel consumption and reducing or avoiding CO2 emissions. This includes the integrated coal gasification combined cycle that can enhance electrical energy production by 15% and reduce CO2 related to the traditional coal-fired thermal system. However, its higher costs are still a great challenge. Promoting sustainability awareness is another effective solution, such as the insulation of new buildings (i.e., naturally cooled without air conditioning systems and less heated using fuels) and minimizing electrical appliance usage. Also, promoting the conscious personal attitude towards energy consumption (i.e., turning off unnecessary lights, keeping heating/cooling at the correct temperature, and using bicycles instead of cars) would help.1 Besides, using natural gas instead of coal for electricity generation can reduce CO2 emissions by 1.9-fold, as coal emits ca. 950 g kW−1 h−1 of CO2 compared with 497 g kW−1 h−1 for gas; however, this approach is not feasible for countries such as China, India or Australia, due to their insufficient gas resources compared with coal.1 The use of sustainable energy sources (i.e., sun, wind, geothermal) is also an efficient option. To this end, solar cells can convert solar energy into electricity and have already reached an efficiency of 20% today, with the prospective of more than 40% capacity in the future. Likewise, using biomass fuel in the transport sector could reduce fossil fuel consumption by 20% by the end of 2020 (nearly achieving the target of the 2020 plan), with expectations to increase this by two-fold soon.
However, the production cost, food-energy competitiveness, and land use are the main barriers.1 CO2 capture and storage (CCS), started in the early 2000s, is a promising way to store 4.7 Mt CO2 per year in five global exploratory projects.1,30–32 Noticeably, CO2 capture includes several drawbacks like exorbitant costs, highly advanced technologies, and intensive energy requirements (i.e., separation, pumping, and housing of CO2), which indirectly enhances fossil fuel usage by 20 to 60%.33 Additionally, the effect of stored CO2 on nature and its unknown permanence time at sites are two reasons for it being banned by several countries, such as Germany, Austria, and Denmark. Thus, the conversion of CO2 into usable fuels becomes the most promising pathway for reducing CO2 emission, reducing usage or the extraction of nonrenewable fossil fuels.
2. Carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR)
With the increase of energy shortage and environmental problems, realizing the green conversion of CO2 into useful products has become a hot research topic to alleviate global warming and energy crises.34–37 Assorted methods are available for the CO2RR to produce hydrocarbon fuels and chemicals, including but not limited to thermal, chemical (i.e., radiochemical, biochemical), photochemical, electrochemical, and photoelectrochemical strategies, in which heat, radiation, light, or electricity are used to supply the reaction energy.38 The thermal CO2RR is usually accompanied by the consumption of H2 to lower the thermodynamic reaction barrier for deploying specific reactors (i.e., fixed-bed and slurry); this entails higher catalyst consumption and high energy costs (i.e., overheating and pressure). Currently, thermal methods are most commonly used in the industry, but high cost, low product selectivity, and complicated reactions are crucial obstacles. Biochemical CO2RRs like natural photosynthesis, enzymatic reactions, microorganisms (i.e., autotrophs, heterotrophic), and microbes (i.e., bacteria and methanogenic archaea, cyanobacteria, and micro-algal species) are facile, green, sustainable, and highly efficient. However, the biochemical CO2RR is accompanied by a higher level of impurities and is limited by climatic conditions, the instability of enzymes, and the unselectivity of microorganisms, which are essential barriers. Mimicking natural photosynthesis in the laboratory could be the best solution in the future. The catalytic CO2RR (i.e., electro-, photo- and photoelectrocatalytic) is more appealing in view of its renewable, economical, safe, and clean characteristics and ambient operation conditions (i.e., room temperature, atmospheric pressure, and without the need for special equipment). However, finding durable, efficient, low-cost, and selective catalysts for the CO2RR remains a daunting challenge, precluding industrialization of the process.
2.1 Fundamentals of photocatalytic CO2 reduction
Photocatalytic CO2 reduction comprises using light energy as the input energy, and products can be controlled by changing the reaction conditions/parameters, types of catalysts, and category of electrolytes. There are several requirements for the ideal photocatalysts or g-C3N4 materials toward the CO2RR, including an appropriate bandgap of 2.0–3.0 eV for visible light absorption, delaying formation of the photogenerated electron–hole pair, and subsequently, maximum utilization of the solar-light.39–41 Meanwhile, the photocatalyst should have a high enough surface area and sufficient active sites to enhance CO2 adsorption. The photocatalysts should facilitate the migration of photogenerated electrons to anticipate the CO2RR, accompanied by weakening the adsorption of intermediates and rapid release of the product to avoid catalyst poisoning and accelerate the conversion rate.39 Mainly, the principles of the photo-/photoelectrocatalytic CO2RR on g-C3N4 or other catalysts involve five main steps: light absorption, charge separation, adsorption of CO2, surface redox reaction, and product desorption.40,41 Particularly, under light illumination, the light is absorbed (i.e., the light source should have an energy at least equal to the bandgap of g-C3N4 or another photocatalyst used) to permit isolation of the photogenerated electron–hole.40,41 Then, the CO2 molecule is adsorbed on the g-C3N4 catalyst's surface. The surface redox reaction occurs over the g-C3N4 surface to reduce CO2 to various valuable chemicals, such as CO, CH4, HCOOH, and CH3OH.40,41 The photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic CO2RR performance on g-C3N4 depends on various operational factors (i.e., cell type, electrode potential, light source, and type, composition, and concentration of the electrolyte), g-C3N4 parameters (i.e., shape, composition, bandgap, light absorption, surface area, electrical conductivity, and electrochemically active sites), and reaction process (i.e., available protons, pathway, electron-/proton-transfer rate, and thermodynamic barrier).27

2.1.1 Effect of electrolytes. 
There are two main electrolytes, comprising aqueous and non-aqueous phases, which vary in their ability to adsorb/dissolve CO2 molecules during the CO2RR, thus enhancing the production rate/yield. Aqueous electrolytes include but are not limited to carbonate-based (i.e., KHCO3, H2CO3, and Na2CO3), phosphate-based (i.e., KH2PO4, H3PO4, KH2PO4, and K3PO4), and others such as K2SO4, KClO4, and KCl.27,42 The addition of anions (Br, I, Cl) or cations (Na+, K+, Li+, and Rb+ buffers) also affects the CO2RR.42 Carbonate-based electrolytes have a higher ability to store/dissolve CO2 and a high level of proton donation; however, a greater faradaic efficiency and production rate in K2HPO4 solution than in K2SO4, KClO4, and KCl have been reported.27,42 In aqueous electrolytes, H2O donates and generates OH− or receives protons and forms the hydronium structure.27,42 However, the effect of the electrolytes on the CO2RR is still ambiguous and not well resolved. Various non-aqueous electrolytes, like organic solvents (i.e., acetonitrile, dimethylformamide, methanol, and aprotic) and ionic liquids, vary in their CO2RR performances.27 Organic solvents promote a significantly higher solubility of CO2 and additives than that of aqueous solutions, and enable the production of liquid products on g-C3N4 catalysts. Organic solvents, especially aprotic solvents, suppress the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) compared with aqueous solvents.27 Methanol is the most preferred electrolyte among organic solvents due to the high solubility of CO2 at room or lower temperature and production of a higher yield of hydrocarbon products.27 The reaction selectivity is related to the band gap of g-C3N4-based composites, which largely depends on the composition and shape of the composite. Besides, more surface active sites lead to more CO2 molecules being adsorbed on the catalyst surface, and hence, an excellent photocatalytic performance. For the CO2RR, there are two mechanisms: single and multiple proton-coupled electron transfer processes. As the band structure of pure g-C3N4 cannot meet the requirements of the single electron transfer process, it is thermodynamically unfavourable.


2.1.2 Thermodynamics and kinetics of the CO2RR. 
The CO2RR to produce hydrocarbon chemicals and fuels from H2O is a thermodynamically uphill reaction (ΔG > 0), owing to the stability of the CO2 molecule, which needs an energy of around 750 kJ mol−1 to break the CO bond. Also, a sufficiently high negative redox potential is needed for the one-electron transfer reaction (CO2/CO2˙−-1.90 V vs. NHE, pH = 7) due to the great high energy gap of ∼13.7 eV between the CB and VB of CO2 with an electron affinity of −0.6 ± 0.2 eV. The requirements of a high energy input preclude the generation of active species for CO2 reduction. The linear geometry of the CO2 molecule leads to the accumulation of electrons in the empty antibonding π* orbital of the VB and induces the transformation of the geometry from linear to bent over the surface of g-C3N4, circumventing kinetic barriers and facilitating the CO2RR. The single-electron transfer process requires a substantially higher potential value, and thus, alternatively, the proton-supported multiple-electron reduction pathway is more feasible, owing to the lower reduction potential requirement. Different products are generated in the multiple proton-coupled electron transfer process, according to the number of transferred electrons and protons.40,41


2.1.3 Effect of bandgap structure. 
The bandgap energy of g-C3N4 is the main factor that determines electronic accumulation and the CO2RR products. The conduction band (CB) edge should be more negative than the redox potential of CO2 and its counterpart to ensure a sufficient driving force for the CO2RR.39–41 The electrons must have a redox potential (energy level at the bottom of the CB of the photooriginated electrons) greater than that of the thermodynamic potentials of the CO2RR products (Table 1). Thus, g-C3N4-based catalysts should have great reduction potential values to permit photocatalytic reactions. Fig. 1b shows a comparison of the band structure of g-C3N with respect to the redox potentials of different products at pH 7. The appropriate bandgap energy of g-C3N4 is preferred for enhancing the CO2RR activity and the formation of liquid products. Notably, the effect of the bandgap energy is still not fully optimized, but generally, a lower bandgap is preferred to permit more light-harvesting and effective delay of electron–hole recombination. Engineering of the band structure of g-C3N4 could be achieved by doping with a metal (i.e., Pt, Cu, Fe, and Co) or non-metal (i.e., N, O, and P), functionalization with metal/oxides (i.e., CuO, CeO2, and TiO2), and the formation of heterojunction structures (i.e., carbon, MXenes, and metal–organic framework). To date, doping with non-metal elements is the most effective and promising way to reduce the bandgap energy of g-C3N4. This is attributed to the low cost and Earth abundance of non-metals and their easy integration with g-C3N4. Also, using co-catalysts with g-C3N4 in the form of heterostructures is the most effective and promising way for an effective CO2RR. The CO2RR performance of g-C3N4 is still restricted by the quick recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and the low specific surface areas for harvesting sunlight. Therefore, several strategies have been executed to explore highly efficient g-C3N4-based photocatalysts, including structural engineering, elemental molecular doping, and heterojunction construction.
Table 1 Electrode potentials (E) vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) of selected CO2RRs in aqueous solutions at pH = 7 and 25 °C based on data from ref. 28 and 29




Half reactions of CO2R

E°/V vs. SHE




CO2 + e− → CO2˙−
−1.90


CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH
−0.61


CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O
−0.53


CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O
−0.48


CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O
−0.38


CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
−0.24


2CO2(g) + 10H2O(l) + 14e− → C2H6(g) + 14OH−
−0.270


3CO2(g) + 13H2O(l) + 18e− → C3H7OH(l) + 18OH−
−0.320


2CO2(g) + 9H2O(l) + 12e− → C2H5OH(l) + 12OH−
−0.33


2CO2(g) + 8H2O(l) + 12e− → C2H4(g) + 12OH−
−0.34






2.1.4 Effect of cell designs. 
Different cell designs for the CO2RR include H-type, microfluidic, liquid-phase, and gas-phase cells (Fig. 1c) or modifications thereof.27 The cell design can be modulated to permit the CO2RR in different phases like the gas–liquid phase.27 The main CO2RR cells comprise H-cell, microfluidic, gas-phase, and liquid-phase cells. In a typical H-cell, the working (WE) and reference electrodes (RE) are situated in the cathode, while the counter electrode (CE) is placed in the anode chamber (Fig. 1c). The isolator between the two chambers promotes ion conductivity but decreases the diffusion of reaction products to the anode, where they otherwise could be oxidized. The design and position of the RE are essential to attain accurate CO2RR measurements of the cathode potential vs. the RE. The H-type cell is the most preferred design and is highly promising for the rapid investigation of the CO2RR activity or fundamental issues (i.e., catalyst–electrolyte interactions, experimental/theoretical mechanism, reaction conditions, and production rate/yield) due to its low-cost and simple use.27


2.1.5 Effect of shape. 
Engineering the shape of g-C3N4 is among the most effective ways to enhance the CO2RR performance. Annealing or hydrothermal treatment of nitrogen–carbon precursors (i.e., melamine, urea, pyridine, cyanimide) to form g-C3N4 as 2D nanosheets is ubiquitous; they possess lower electrical conductivity, undesired defects, inferior surface area, and subsequently low CO2RR activity. Alteration of the morphologies of g-C3N4 into porous structures via template-based, hydrothermal polymerization, self-assembly, and chemical etching can be achieved to form porous nanowires, nanotubes, nanorods, and hierarchical structures with great surface area to volume ratio, lower density, great electrical conductivity, high electrolyte–electrode interactions, and quick charge mobility. Also, porous g-C3N4 nanostructures provide accessible active sites and abundant adsorption sites for CO2 molecules, resulting in enhancement of the adsorption of CO2, reducing the activation energy, and subsequently facilitating breaking of the CO bond at lower applied potential; these nanostructures also produce a high current density, accelerate the electron–proton-transfer rate and tolerate the adsorption of CO2RR intermediates and products. To date, porous g-C3N4 nanostructures remain the most active and durable catalysts for the CO2RR. The following sections contain several examples of the effect of shape on the CO2RR.

2.2 The reaction pathway of the CO2RR

Table 2 presents the proposed CO2RR pathways and their reported intermediates, which determine the final products.29In situ Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Operando Raman spectroscopy, X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra, as well as gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy (GC-MS), high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), are among the most effective tools for investigating the CO2RR intermediates. The CO2RR can occur through several reactive pathways via various stepwise reactions and intermediates.29 There are four main pathways proposed for the CO2RR, namely, formaldehyde, carbine, glyoxal, and enol-like entities; all of them are named after investigation of their reaction intermediates.29 The CO2RR pathway largely depends on the binding mode of CO2 at active sites and the subsequent protonation of CO2 molecules by the H2 atom. The formaldehyde pathway occurs through single coordination of oxygen from CO2 to the surface site, and the carbene pathway is preferred when CO2 is bonded to active sites through its carbon atom, whereas CO2 forms two-coordinate oxygen binding with the active site in the glyoxal pathway, while H+ binds to the C atom. The enol-like pathway is commonly found in the formation of multi-carbon (C2–C3) products and ensues when C–C coupling arises from the dimerization of two adjacent CO molecules. The shape, bandgap energy, and composition of g-C3N4-based catalysts are the main factors determining the CO2RR pathway and subsequent CO2RR products. Although great advancements have been made in determining the CO2RR pathways, they still remain ambiguous and elusive, and various experimental and theoretical studies are needed to decipher the CO2RR pathways and their mechanisms.43 Both computational calculations (i.e., DFT and machine learning) and in situ experimental (i.e., FTIR, NMR, EXAFS, XANES) studies should be combined to understand further the CO2RR pathways and mechanisms based on the shape and composition of the g-C3N4-based catalyst.
Table 2 CO2RR pathways and their related reactions and products based on data from ref. 28 and 29




Pathway
CO2RR and its products
Products




Formaldehyde



C1


Carbene



C1 >C3


Glyoxal



C1–C2C1


Enol-like



C2C2C3




2.3 Measurements and calculations of the CO2RR
The catalytic CO2RR performance is estimated by using various potentiostatic tests like cyclic voltammetry (CV), linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), and chronoamperometry (I–T) under light in the case of photocatalytic reactions or under dark conditions in the case of electrochemical reactions.2 The potential range for CV and LSV depends on the type of electrolyte; I–T time ranges from a few minutes to several hours, depending on the catalyst's stability in the electrolyte solution. The CO2RR products could be analyzed using in situ or ex situ FTIR measurements, Raman spectroscopy, GC-MS, HPLC, and NMR. Meanwhile, several calculations should be carried out to estimate the CO2RR performance.2
The quantum efficiency (QE) is calculated using eqn (1) {QE (%) = [number of reacted electrons/number of incident photons] × 100(1)
The total consumed electron number (TCEN) is calculated using eqn (2) TCEN = Σ[(Cproduct × nelectrons) × Vreactor]/[Mcatalyst × Tirr](2)Vreactor, Tirr, Mcatalyst, Cproduct, and nelectrons are the reactor volume, irradiation time, catalyst mass, the concentration of CO2RR product, and corresponding consumed electrons per mole of a certain product, respectively.
The current density (j) is calculated using eqn (3). j = I/A(3)where I is the measured current, and A is the geometric surface area of the working electrode. The best catalysts should deliver a high current density at a lower applied potential.
The faradaic efficiency (Efaradaic) is calculated using eqn (4). Efaradaic = αnF/Q(4)α, n, F, and Q are the number of electrons transferred, the amount of “desired product” in moles, a Faraday constant of 96485 C mol−1, and the total amount of charge passed, correspondingly. Efaradaic is important to estimate the selectivity and the amount of product cross-over of the CO2RR. Efaradaic mainly depends on the catalyst activity and type of electrolyte. The additives (i.e., anions, cations) also affect Efaradaic.
The overpotential (η) is calculated by eqn (5). η = E − Eeq(5)E is the actual electrode potential, and Eeq is the target product's standard equilibrium potential. The most active catalyst should provide a low overpotential and high current density.
The turnover frequency (TOF) is calculated viaeqn (6) TOF = Np/Nc(6)Np is the number of moles of the desired product obtained with time, and Nc is the maximum number of moles of catalyst active sites. An efficient catalyst should possess a high TOF that is directly related to the abundance of active sites.
The energy efficiency (Eefficiency) is calculated by eqn (7) Eefficiency = [Eeq/Eeq + η] × Efaradaic(7)(7)where Eeq and η are the equilibrium potential and overpotential, respectively. The energetically efficient catalyst should permit the CO2RR at a lower η and with a high Efaradaic.
The quantum yield (QY) is calculated from eqn (8) QY = [2·nx·NA·h·c/tirr·I·A·λ](8)where nx is moles of product; NA is Avogadro's constant (6.022 × 1023 mol−1); h is Planck's constant (6.626 × 10−34 J s−1); c is the speed of light (3 × 108 m s−1); tirr is the irradiation time; I is the incident intensity (W cm−2); λ is the wavelength of light (nm); and A is the irradiated area of the cell (cm2).
The electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) is calculated from eqn (9) ECSA = Q/mc(9)where Q is the Coulomb charge obtained from integration of the Hupd adsorption/desorption area of the cyclic voltammogram obtained after the double-layer correction, m is the catalyst mass of the working electrode surface, and c is a constant (420 μC cm−2) that denotes the charge required for the monolayer adsorption of H2 on the catalyst. A catalyst with a larger surface area is required for providing numerous catalytic active sites. The ECSA could also be estimated from the double capacitance layer or the stripping of adsorbed CO.
The incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) is calculated utilizing eqn (10) IPCE (%) = [(1240 × j)/(λ × I0)] × 100(10)where λ is the wavelength of incident light, j is the photocurrent density, and I0 is the incident light intensity.
Higher IPCEs refer to maximizing the utilization of light during the CO2RR.
The standard cell potential (E°) of the redox reaction is determined from the equation belowE° = ΔG°/nFwhere ΔG°, n, and F are the Gibb's free energy change, the number of transferred electrons, and Faraday's constant, respectively.
The Tafel constants are obtained from Tafel plots by plotting the overpotential (η) against the current density logarithm. The Tafel plot determines the CO2RR's kinetics and mechanism, where a high Tafel slope indicates fast kinetics and high activity. For example, a Tafel slope of 118 mV dec−1 infers generation of the CO2˙− intermediate, which is the rate-determining step for the CO2RR through an initial one-electron transfer.2
2.4 Theoretical calculation of g-C3N4-based catalysts for the CO2RR
During the long-term research process for the CO2RR, both experimental investigations and theoretical calculations are indispensable, among which density functional theory (DFT) is the most important calculation method. DFT was used to illustrate the ground-state properties of the multi-particle system in the early stage, which Hohenberg and Kohn first proposed in 1964.44 For the CO2RR, it can uncover exact information about the electronic excitation process, energy band structure, adsorption energy, and defect sites. Also, a possible reaction pathway can be established by calculating individual elementary steps.
DFT calculations contribute to building the relationship between the structure of g-C3N4 and its performance. For example, Su's group used DFT to investigate the enhanced mechanism of S-doped g-C3N4.45 There were three possible doping sites for S atoms, namely, NCen, NAro, and NTet. Among them, NTet sites are linked to the three nearest heptazine rings and can be neglected.
The S doping site was further evaluated from the formation energies (Eform) of S-doped g-C3N4. The Eform values of NCen and NAro were −1.59 and −2.98 eV, respectively, and the S doping of NAro is confirmed to be a stable mode. In addition, DFT can be used to clarify the band structure and partial density of states (PDOS). The calculated band gap of S-doped g-C3N4 is 2.42 eV, which is smaller than that of g-C3N4 (2.70 eV), thereby extending its visible light adsorption range. As shown in the PDOS of g-C3N4 and S-doped g-C3N4 (Fig. 2a), the VB and CB of g-C3N4 comprise N atoms and C atoms, respectively. For S-doped g-C3N4, the VB is composed of C, N, and S atoms, whereas the CB contains C and N atoms. In contrast, the Fermi level shifts to the CB after S doping, suggesting that S-doped g-C3N4 has a high reduction ability. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of g-C3N4 and S-doped g-C3N4 in Fig. 2b affirm that the orbital distributions of g-C3N4 change after doping, and the effective separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pair, thereby improving the photocatalytic efficiency. DFT can also be used to study the effect of various vacancies. The calculated PDOS of g-C3N4 nanosheets with nitrogen vacancies and bulk g-C3N4 are exhibited in Fig. 2c.46 Clearly, new midgap states appear near the bottom of the CB in the presence of nitrogen vacancies, and electrons can be more easily excited during the photoreduction process. DFT can identify the CO2RR pathway on different catalyst surfaces. For example, Du et al. calculated the reaction barrier of the CO2RR on Pd/g-C3N4 to yield HCOOH and CH3OH (Fig. 2c);47 the rate-determining steps for the CH3OH and HCHO pathways are the hydrogenation of CH2OH* and HCOO*, respectively. Due to the much smaller energy barrier for the HCCOH pathway and desired HCOOH desorption, Pd/g-C3N4 prefers to reduce CO2 to HCOOH. In short, DFT calculations provide a powerful tool for the design of high-performance catalysts and illustrate enhanced mechanisms.
 Fig. 2  (a) The PDOS of g-C3N4 (left) and S-doped g-C3N4 (right). (b) The LUMOs and HOMOs of g-C3N4 and S-doped g-C3N4. Copyright, 2018, ACS.45 (c) Calculated PDOS of bulk g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 with nitrogen vacancies. Copyright, 2017, ACS.46 (d) Reaction pathways for the CO2RR on Pd/g-C3N4 catalyst to yield HCOOH and CH3OH. Copyright, 2016, ACS.47 
3. Graphitic carbon nitride for the photocatalytic CO2RR
Graphitic carbon nitride (gCN) is a class of polymeric material derived from nitrogen–carbon precursors that is composed mainly of carbon and nitrogen. There are various phases of gCN materials, such as C6N7, C2N3H, C3N3, C3N4, C2N3H, C6N7(NH2)3, and C6N9H3, depending on the deployed precursors, reaction conditions, and preparation method.20,48 Although the long history of carbon nitride (gCN) goes back to 1834, g-C3N4, a kind of π-conjugated polymer, is the most studied phase for catalytic CO2 reduction.20,48 In this context, g-C3N4 is the most stable allotrope of gCN with molecular chemical structures based on the condensation of triazine-based or polyheptazine (tri-s-triazine)-based precursors (Fig. 3).20,48 g-C3N4 is thermally stable up to 600 °C in air, is hydrothermally/chemically stable in different acidic, neutral, or basic solvents, and could be easily functionalized in liquid or gaseous environments at elevated temperatures. Additionally, g-C3N4 is enriched with various surface properties (i.e., great basic surface sites, defects, electron-rich properties, Lewis-base function, Brønsted basics, and H-bonding motifs). Fig. 3 shows various adsorption sites for the reactant molecules and induces electron relocation on the surface toward metal-free coordination.20,48 Porosity, surface features, defects, alkaline additives, other surfaces/bulk modifiers, and co-catalysts can enhance the surface area of gCN and accelerate the charge migration rate.39–41
 Fig. 3  Molecular structures and surface properties of g-C3N4 designed based on data from ref. 20. 
3.1 Structural engineering of g-C3N4
Given that pristine carbon nitride possesses a small surface area, structural tuning is expected to expose more active sites and improve the charge transfer efficiency for the CO2RR.21,49,50 For example, by replacing the melamine precursor with melamine hydrochloride, the resulting porous graphitic carbon nitride (p-g-C3N4) exhibits a laminar structure with abundant mesopores and a specific surface area 39 times larger than that of pure g-C3N4.51 However, the amount of CO on p-g-C3N4 is much lower due to the enlarged bandgap, resulting in difficult electron excitation from the VB to the CB of p-g-C3N4. Moreover, the creation of numerous defects can prevent photogenerated electrons from participating in the CO2RR. Xia and co-workers realized simultaneous delamination and amino functionalization by directly exfoliating bulk g-C3N4 under an NH3 atmosphere.52 The base–acid interactions are favorable for CO2 adsorption, and the negatively shifted CB level could endow photogenerated electrons with a stronger reduction ability. As a result, a significantly enhanced photocatalytic activity has been observed on hierarchical g-C3N4 nanosheets compared with bulk g-C3N4. Niu et al. demonstrated that the photocatalytic selectivity of g-C3N4 in water vapor was highly dependent on its band structure.53 The major product for pristine g-C3N4 with a bandgap of 2.77 eV is CH3CHO, while g-C3N4 nanosheets with a 0.2 eV larger bandgap only generate CH4. It is well-known that templating approaches are powerful for preparing porous g-C3N4.54–56 Typically, porous nitrogen-rich g-C3N4 nanotubes (TCN(NH3)) have been prepared through a supramolecular assembly strategy.57 As exhibited in Fig. 4a, the precursor, hydroxylammonium chloride, can provide rich amino and hydroxyl groups to form a rod-like supramolecular intermediate with amino groups during the hydrothermal reaction of melamine via hydrogen bonds. The supramolecular intermediate has an average diameter of 200 nm (Fig. 4b).57 After calcination under an NH3 atmosphere, supramolecular nanorods finally evolve into tubular g-C3N4 with a diameter of 30–60 nm and a length of 2–3 μm (Fig. 4c and d). The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image in Fig. 4e reveals abundant pores around the nanotube, which are favorable for CO2 adsorption/transfer and light utilization. Elemental mapping images display the distribution and co-existence of elements N and C, while a higher edge concentration further verifies the tubular morphology (Fig. 4f–h).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the formation process for TCN(NH3), (b, c) scanning electron microscopy images, (d, e) transmission electron microscopy images, (f) scanning tunneling electron microscopy image, and (g, h) energy dispersive X-ray mapping images of TCN(NH3), (i, j) the photocatalytic activity of different samples toward the CO2RR, (k) the photocatalytic activity under different conditions toward CO2RR, (l) the stability test of TCN(NH3) over different cycles, (m) the comparison of CO yield over different catalysts under visible light illumination for 3 h, and (n) the adsorption energies of CO2 and desorption energies of CO on various TCN catalysts. Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd.57 
To evaluate the effect of porous nanotubes and rich amino groups on the photocatalytic CO2RR, bulk g-C3N4 and nitrogen-enriched g-C3N4 samples obtained under different atmospheres have been assessed under identical conditions. Notably, bulk g-C3N4 yields a negligible amount of CO and 6.1 μmol g−1 h−1 H2, whereas the CO2 reduction performance is significantly improved on TCN samples because of the enlarged surface areas (Fig. 4i).57 The CO generation rates are 103.6, 37.3, 38.8, 58.1, and 6 μmol g−1 h−1 for TCN(NH3), TCN(N2), TCN(Ar), TCN(air), and bulk g-C3N4, respectively. The photocatalytic performance of TCN(NH3) surpassed those of reported g-C3N4 catalysts (Table 3). The QE of TCN(NH3) is 0.43, 0.26, 0.00013, and 0% at 400, 420, 435, and 450 nm, respectively. Furthermore, the flow rate of NH3 was adjusted to investigate the photocatalytic activity. As seen from Fig. 4j, the CO generation rates first rise and then fall with the increased flow rate. The TCN(NH3) calcined under 200 mL min−1 of NH3 exhibits the highest CO generation rate. Control experiments reveal that no CO is detected without TCN(NH3) or light (Fig. 4k, columns 2 and 3), suggesting their crucial role in facilitating the CO2RR. Once CO2 was replaced with Ar, only a little H2 is detected, indicating that CO2 is the sole carbon source of CO (Fig. 4k, column 4). There is no obvious decrease in CO generation rate over five cycles, demonstrating the robust stability of TCN(NH3) (Fig. 4l). More importantly, the CO yield of 338.5 μmol g−1 could be attained on TCN(NH3) after visible light illumination for 3 h, which remarkably exceeded those of reported catalysts, such as P-25, BP, BN, and carbon (Fig. 4m).57 DFT was adopted to calculate the adsorption energy of CO2 and the desorption energy of CO to clarify the effect of amino groups (Fig. 4n).
Table 3 The photoreduction CO2 performance of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts




Photocatalysts
Reaction conditions
Main product (μmol g−1 h−1)
QE (%)
Ref.




Porous nitrogen-rich g-C3N4 nanotubes (TCN(NH3)
300 W Xe lamp, 4 μmol CoCl2, 2,2-bipyridine, TEOA and MeCN
103.6 (CO)
0.43%

57



g-C3N4 ultrathin nanosheets
300 W Xe lamp, NaHCO3, H2SO4
1.9 (CH3OH)



52



1.4 (CH4)


Helical g-C3N4 nanorods
300 W Xe lamp, 0.5 wt% Pt/0.5 wt% MnOX, CO2 and H2O vapor
89.0 (CO)



58



g-C3N4 with nitrogen vacancies
300 W Xe lamp, CoCl2, bipyridine, triethanolamine, and acetonitrile
56.9 (CO)



59



3D macro-/meso-/nanoscopic morphology-tunable g-C3N4
300 W Xe lamp, TEDA
22.0 (CO)



60



g-C3N4 nanosheet/UiO-66
300 W Xe lamp, MeCN/TEOA (4:1)
9.9 (CO)



61



g-C3N4 nanosheet with B–H bonding decorated metal–organic framework (BIF-20@g-C3N4)
300 W Xe lamp, MeCN/TEOA (4:1)
15.5 (CH4)



62



53.9 (CO)




As expected, the energy for CO2 adsorption on TCN(NH3) (−0.358 eV) is larger than that on TCN without amino modification (−0.298 eV), which is likely to be due to the formation of hydrogen bonds. Meanwhile, the CO desorption energy on TCN(NH3) is much lower than that on TCN, i.e., the amino groups favor CO2 adsorption and promote desorption of the CO product, which synergistically enhances the photocatalytic CO2 performance. The selective CO2RR, to yield CO, on porous g-C3N4 nanotubes enriched with nitrogen and g-C3N4 1D nanorods is preferred to that on solid 2D nanosheets with nitrogen or MOF, or metal oxides (Table 3). This is attributed to the unique features of porous and 1D morphologies, like high surface areas, accessible active sites, abundant adsorption sites, and quick charge mobility. Notably, the utilization of 1D g-C3N4 in the CO2RR is rarely reported compared with 2D g-C3N4. 1D g-C3N4 nanostructures, with their aspect ratio, short electron path, fast electron mobility, and stability against aggregation, can lead to a breakthrough in CO2RR research. Also, nitrogen, oxygen, and phosphorus vacancies may enhance the CO2RR of g-C3N4. A series of porous g-C3N4 catalysts have been developed to boost the photocatalytic activity of CO2 reduction by using mesoporous silica or mesoporous cellular foam as a hard template.56,58,60 The template-based method (i.e., soft, hard, and hybrid template) remains the best approach for the rational synthesis of 1D and 3D g-C3N4 due to its feasibility and accuracy. However, high costs, multiple reaction steps, and the deployment of hazardous etchants to erode the template remain crucial barriers that preclude the use of template-based methods in industrial applications. Thus, the development of facile, one-pot, or one-step template-free approaches is highly desirable to enable the large-scale utilization of g-C3N4 in the CO2RR. Zhang's group systematically studied the effect of pyrolysis temperature on the photocatalytic CO2 activity of g-C3N4.63 The lower crystallinity and degree of polymerization at low temperature could induce more edge defects in g-C3N4, which are beneficial for enhancing the CO2 conversion efficiency. Inspired by this, several groups have devoted intensive efforts to engineer defects in g-C3N4.59,64–67 As a typical example, tunable nitrogen vacancies have been introduced into g-C3N4 nanosheets by Tu et al. via heating bulk g-C3N4 at different temperatures under a H2 atmosphere.46 Photocatalytic measurements combined with DFT calculations reveal the formation of a midgap state below the CB edge, and its position becomes deeper with increased nitrogen vacancies. As displayed in Fig. 5a, the photogenerated electrons can be excited into the CB and midgap states by absorbing visible light with a longer wavelength (Path 1). Moreover, suitable mid-gap states could temporarily trap photogenerated electrons and promote charge separation (Path 2). It should be noted that, although a deeper midgap state can extend the wavelength range and generate more charge carriers, it may serve as a recombination site for photogenerated electron–hole pairs, which reduces the photoactivity (Path 3). The g-C3N4 nanosheets with optimal nitrogen vacancies exhibited a QE of 4.2% at 420 nm and achieved four-fold higher activity toward the CO2RR than that of bulk g-C3N4. Afterward, Tang et al. realized synchronous morphology and nitrogen-vacancy control over g-C3N4via thermal polymerization of melamine and NH4Cl.68 It is believed that the introduction of a gas template, NH4Cl, can diminish π–π interactions between neighboring g-C3N4 layers and finally evolve into a three-dimensional bubbly architecture. As expected, the photocatalytic CO2-to-CH4 conversion yield increased by 5.14- and 3.16-fold compared with pristine ultrathin nanosheets and bulk g-C3N4, respectively. Shen and co-workers successfully introduced carbon vacancies into g-C3N4via heat treatment under a flow of NH3.69 The resultant catalysts exhibit strong CO2 affinity/activation ability based on both experimental and theoretical results. Meanwhile, the creation of carbon vacancies can alter the band structure and endow the photogenerated electrons with higher reducibility. Modified g-C3N4 can also accelerate photogenerated charge carrier production and inhibit their recombination (Fig. 5b). Consequently, more than twice the CO2-to-CO conversion rate was acquired compared with that attained on pristine g-C3N4. Annealing g-C3N4 under ammonia or in the presence of precursors containing O, P, or N is the main method for the integration of non-metal dopants inside g-C3N4 to create defects or vacancies for enhancement of the CO2RR. The quantification of defects and vacancies, as well as their type, inside g-C3N4 samples using positron annihilation spectroscopy can open up new opportunities for understanding the defect–vacancy–CO2RR relationship.
 Fig. 5  (a) The proposed photocatalytic CO2RR mechanism on g-C3N4 with nitrogen vacancies. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society (ACS).46 (b) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism on g-C3N4 with carbon vacancies. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC).69 
3.2 Elemental and molecular doping of g-C3N4
In recent years, doping has been widely applied to improve the photochemical properties of g-C3N4 by optimizing the bandgap, which is expected to extend the visible light response and facilitate the separation/migration of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.70,71 Generally, it can be categorized as metal, non-metal, and molecular doping.

3.2.1 Metal doping. 
Metal doping is usually accomplished by uniformly mixing the corresponding soluble salt with a nitrogen-rich precursor, followed by high-temperature pyrolysis. Due to the electrostatic interaction between metal cations and negatively charged nitrogen atoms, the metal doping process can be readily achieved. Finally, the metal atoms tend to be located within the vacancy between three tri-s-triazines units of the g-C3N4 basal plane. Up to now, various metal ions, including alkali metals (e.g., K, Na, and Mg) and transition metals (e.g., Cu, Co, Fe, and Pt), have been intercalated into the framework of g-C3N4.72–74 Notably, most explorations of metal-doped g-C3N4 with enhanced photocatalytic performance have focused on the degradation of organic pollutants, and reports in the literature related to the CO2RR are limited. It is well documented that the coordination of metal atoms to g-C3N4 can induce a spatial separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and enhance the photocatalytic activity.75–77 Tang et al. confirmed that Mg-doped g-C3N4, which was synthesized by in situ hydrothermal deposition, could broaden the visible light absorption and prolong the lifetime of charge carriers.78 It is speculated that magnesium atoms act as the transfer sites for photogenerated electrons to retard the recombination of electron–hole pairs. Moreover, the degree of crystallization of g-C3N4 is alleviated and characterized by more structural defects and smaller crystalline size, enabling more accessible active sites for CO2 adsorption and activation. As a result, the optimal Mg/g-C3N4 could produce 17.09 μmol g−1 of CH4 and 4.13 μmol g−1 of CO after 6 h irradiation, which is nearly 1.96 and 2.8 times higher than that of pure g-C3N4. Similar work to dope Mo, Cu, and K into g-C3N4 has also been documented.79–81 For the first time, Huang and co-workers reported the deposition of single Co2+ sites on g-C3N4 by microwave heating of a mixture comprising CoCl2, g-C3N4, acetonitrile, and trimethylamine.82 It turns out that the N atoms in the C3N4 framework could coordinate with and activate Co2+ sites via the formation of Co–N bonds (Fig. 6a and b). The effect of the amount of cobalt on the photocatalytic selectivity of Co2+@C3N4 was further examined for the CO2RR. There is obvious CO production, even at a lower Co2+ concentration, but inert cobalt oxides appear with increased Co loading, resulting in a decrease of CO yield (Fig. 6c). Interestingly, the turnover numbers for CO formation could reach 100 after 2 h, whereas that for H2 remained unchanged (Fig. 6d). The turnover numbers of CO decline as the cobalt concentration increases, implying typical single-site catalysis at low Co content (Fig. 6e). Meanwhile, at a higher Co content, Co tends to exist in the form of inactive Co oxide. The CO production selectivity of Co2+@C3N4 is not related to the cobalt concentration (Fig. 6f); thereby, the existence of cobalt oxides in Co2+@C3N4 does not lead to any undesired side reactions, like H2 production. The quantum yield increases with increasing Co2+ concentration to attain a maximum value of 0.40% at 10 mg Co2+. The nature of the Co–N bond and CoOx phase is not emphasized using EXAFS or XANES to understand their effect on the CO2RR. However, the coordination between Co and N atoms of g-C3N4 enhances adsorption of the CO2 molecule and facilitates splitting of the CO bond, thus suppressing the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Beyond that, Gao et al. demonstrated that g-C3N4 supported single Pt/Pd atoms, i.e., Pd/g-C3N4 and Pt/g-C3N4, and exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity toward the CO2RR based on DFT calculations.47 The noble metal atom functions as an active site during the process, while g-C3N4 is afforded a hydrogen source through the HER. The differential charge density reveals the strong interaction between noble atoms and g-C3N4, which is beneficial for activating CO2 molecules. As determined from the reaction barriers, the Pd/g-C3N4 catalyst prefers to reduce CO2 to HCOOH, whereas the major product for the Pt/g-C3N4 catalyst is CH4. It can be seen from Fig. 6g–i that the deposition of Pd and Pt atoms on g-C3N4 remarkably reduces the bandgap from 2.98 eV to 0.64 and 0.72 eV due to orbital overlap, resulting in a redshift of the optical absorption spectra and thus broadening visible-light harvesting (Fig. 6j). Both Pt and Pd have similar Fermi-level band structures and catalytic properties, but give different CO2 products; this is an unexplained phenomenon.
 Fig. 6  (a) The CO2RR mechanism on a single Co2+ site of decorated g-C3N4. (b) The molecular structure of the macrocyclic cobalt catalyst (c) CO yield under visible light irradiation for 2 h for different Co2+@C3N4 catalysts. (d) Turnover number (TOF) of CO and H2 for different reaction times. (e) TOF and (f) selectivity of CO production with different cobalt loadings after 2 h. Copyright, 2018, ACS.82 (g–i) Band structure and (j) optical absorption spectra of g-C3N4, Pd/g-C3N4, and Pt/g-C3N4. Copyright, 2016, ACS.47 

Table 4 summarizes the photocatalytic CO2RR on metal/g-C3N4 photocatalysts measured under different conditions. Using noble metal nanoparticles (i.e., Pt, Pd, Ru, and Ag) with g-C3N4 can increase formic acid, formaldehyde, ethanol, and methanol liquid production; Pd is superior to Ru, Pt, and Ag. The CO2RR on Pd produces ethanol; Pt forms methanol; Ru-based catalysts form mainly formic acid; and Co-based catalysts yield CO and H2. The high water reduction ability of Pt and Pd possibly enhances the protonation of CO2 molecules, thus inducing the formaldehyde pathway to form formic acid and an enol-like pathway to produce ethanol. Ru-based catalyst nanoparticles are best for the selective production of formic acid with a high yield in different electrolytes, and the formic acid yield could be increased using Pt, Ag, and Ru co-catalysts. It seems that non-metal traces are preferred for augmenting the production yield of formic acid on Ru over other metal nanoparticles. However, various systematic studies on the effect of shape (i.e., porosity, branches, size, and dimension) and composition metals (i.e., amount, ratio, and using metal/non-metal traces) of noble metals and the reaction conditions or parameters (i.e., electrolyte type, cell type, pressure, temperature, and using prompters) should be performed to fully optimize their CO2RR activity and selectivity.
Table 4 The photocatalytic CO2RR on metal/g-C3N4




Sample
Working mechanism of metal
Reactant
Products (μmol g−1 h−1)
QE/QY
Ref.




Pt/g-C3N4
Cocatalysts
Water
CH4 generation: 6.51



83



Pd/g-C3N4
Cocatalysts
Water
CO generation: 14.9



84



C2H5OH generation: 17.2


CH4 generation: 6.5


Pt/g-C3N4
Cocatalysts
Water
CO generation: 0.05



85



CH3COH generation: 1.0


CH4 generation: 0.025


Pd/g-C3N4
Schottky junction
Water
HCHO generation: 0.875



47



CH3OH generation: 0.25


CH4 generation: 0.3


Co2+/g-C3N4
Active site
Water
CO generation: 30
QY = 0.4% at 10 mg Co2+

82



Ru complex/g-C3N4
Active site
Acetonitrile
CO generation: 0.074
QY of HCOOH = −1.5% at 30 mg Ru/mpg-C3N4

86



HCOOH generation: 0.48


Ru(II) complex/g-C3N4
Active site
Acetonitrile
HCOOH generation: 8



87



RuP/g-C3N4
Active site

N,N-Dimethylacetamide
HCOOH generation: 110
AQY = 5.7% at 400 nm

88



RuRu/Ag g-C3N4
Z scheme

N,N-Dimethylacetamide
HCOOH generation: 42.3
QY HCOOH = 0.2% at 400 nm

89



CO generation: 11.1


Co-porphyrin/g-C3N4
Active site
Acetonitrile
CO generation: 17
QE = 0.8% at 420 nm

90



[Co(bpy)n]2+/g-C3N4
Active site
Acetonitrile/H2O with triethanolamine (TEOA)
CO generation: 460
AQY CO = 1.6% at 400 nm

91



H2 generation: 138






3.2.2 Non-metal doping. 
Distinct from metal doping, the non-metal atoms usually replace carbon or nitrogen atoms in the g-C3N4 heterocycle and change the doped atoms’ electron state density. Benefiting from the optimized band structure, various non-metal dopants, such as P, S, B, O, and halogens, have been introduced into g-C3N4 to promote the photocatalytic performance.80,93–95 Amongst these, sulfur doping has been extensively studied for improving the photoreactivity of g-C3N4.96,97 Wang and co-authors proposed a simple thermolysis strategy to prepare S-doped g-C3N4 (TCN) using thiourea precursor.92 For comparison, un-doped g-C3N4 (MCN) was obtained by using melamine as a precursor. The formation of C–S and N–S bonds in TCN resulting from S-doping was confirmed by the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The S-doped TCN exhibits a redshift of the absorption wavelength and high absorption in the ultraviolet region compared with the un-doped MCN, implying that S-doping can increase the light-harvesting utilization, and thus, produce more photogenerated electrons and holes. The calculated partial and total density of states for S-doped g-C3N4 and pure g-C3N4 are displayed in Fig. 7a, and the CB and VB mainly contain C 2p and N 2p states. For pure g-C3N4, the bandgap (Eg) between the top of the VB (TVB) and the bottom of the CB (BCB) is in line with the maximum energy band (Emax). Nevertheless, for S-doped g-C3N4, an intermediate energy level, consisting of C 2p, N 2p, and S 3p states, emerges below the BCB, leading to a decrease of Emax. In this case, the transition probability of photogenerated electrons is greatly improved. Moreover, sulfur doping can create more defects in g-C3N4, which is beneficial for charge transfer/separation and prolonging the lifetime of charge carriers. The CH3OH yield of TCN (1.12 μmol g−1) was greater than that of sulphur-free MCN (0.81 μmol g−1) under UV-vis light irradiation for 3 h (Fig. 7b). However, the effect of sulfur content on the CO2RR activity and products has not been studied. Thus, sulfur dopant enhances the CH3OH yield, which may open new avenues to use inexpensive rare-Earth elements (S, P, N) to increase the CO2RR activity and selectivity. A similar mechanism has been reported by Raziq et al., as they prepared S-doped g-C3N4 by employing the ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium thiocyanate as a sulfur source;98 S-doped g-C3N4 has also been prepared by pretreating melamine precursor with sulfuric acid.99 The resulting composite exhibited a high specific surface area due to smaller particle size and enhanced absorption intensity compared with that of g-C3N4, which is conducive to the high-yield production of acetaldehyde and methane. Phosphorus-doped g-C3N4 has been synthesized by a facile poly-condensation of melamine and sodium hypophosphite monohydrate (NaH2PO2·H2O).100Fig. 8a is a schematic illustration of the formation process for P-g-C3N4. Unlike the commonly reported sheet-like morphology, phosphine gas released from the decomposition of NaH2PO2·H2O can induce the rolling of ultrathin layers to form g-C3N4 nanotubes, thereby exposing larger surface areas and amino-enriched surface. As confirmed from the P 2p, core-level XPS spectra for P-g-C3N4, phosphorus is intercalated interstitially into g-C3N4 in the form of PO43− rather than replacing C or N atoms, which contributes to weakening of the in-plane copolymerization and creates more surface amino groups.
 Fig. 7  (a) Band structure of pure C3N4 and S-doped C3N4. (b) The CH3OH yield with TCN and MCN under UV-vis light irradiation for 3 h. Copyright 2015, Elsevier Ltd.92 
 Fig. 8  (a) The proposed formation process for P-g-C3N4. The yields of (b) CO and (c) CH4 for g-C3N4 and P-g-C3N4 at different times. (d) The generation rate of CO and CH4 for g-C3N4 and P-g-C3N4. (e) The hydrogen yield for g-C3N4 and P-g-C3N4 under visible-light irradiation. Copyright, 2018, ACS.100 
Also, the band absorption edge of g-C3N4 shifts to the red region after phosphorus doping, implying improved visible light absorption. The photoluminescence (PL) intensity of P-g-C3N4 decreased significantly, inferring efficient photogenerated electron–hole separation. Consequently, the CO and CH4 outputs for the P-g-C3N4 sample attain 9.48 and 7.24 μmol g−1 after visible light irradiation for 4 h, which is 3.12 and 13.9 times higher than that for g-C3N4 (Fig. 8b and c). As indicated by the reduced CO/CH4 ratio from 6.02 to 1.30 (Fig. 8d), phosphorus doping can selectively promote the generation of CH4. Moreover, the photocatalytic hydrogen production of P-g-C3N4 could also be improved compared with that of g-C3N4 (Fig. 8e). It is not clear that the rolling up of g-C3N4 nanosheets to form nanotubes occurs during pyrolysis or copolymerization with the assistance of NaH2PO2·H2O. Such a mechanism is important for the rational synthesis of porous 1D g-C3N4 nanostructures with and without elemental/non-elemental dopants. Meanwhile, the effect of the P amount on the CO2RR product has not been studied. Like sulfur doping, oxygen atoms prefer to substitute bi-coordinated N atoms in aromatic heterocycles of g-C3N4, as reported by Yu and co-authors.101 In their study, hierarchical porous O-doped g-C3N4 nanotubes (OCN-Tube) were obtained through thermal delamination and curling–condensation of bulk g-C3N4 in a high-temperature oxidation process under a flow of air (Fig. 9a); XPS spectra of O 1s revealed the successful doping of g-C3N4 with O. The type IV N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm with H3-type hysteresis loops suggests the presence of both mesopores and macropores in bulk g-C3N4.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the hierarchical porous O-doped g-C3N4 nanotube (OCN-Tube) preparation process. (b) Band structure of OCN-Tube and g-C3N4. (c) The CH3OH yield and stability of bulk g-C3N4 and OCN-Tube under UV-vis irradiation for 3 h. Copyright, 2017, WILEY.101 
The larger BET-specific surface area for OCN-Tube (36 m2 g−1) than that for bulk g-C3N4 (9 m2 g−1) can provide more surface-active sites for CO2 adsorption and promote charge transfer.
Compared with bulk g-C3N4, the bandgap for OCN-Tube changes from 2.75 eV to 2.61 eV (Fig. 9b), which is beneficial for harvesting visible light and generating more photogenerated charge carriers. The average CH3OH generation rate of OCN-Tube (0.88 μmol g−1 h−1) is nearly five-fold higher than that of bulk g-C3N4 (Fig. 9c). Besides, OCN-Tube displays excellent durability with a persistent CH3OH generation rate over three cycles. Boron-doped g-C3N4 was recently synthesized by Fu et al. via heat treatment of boric acid and urea.102 The B atoms tend to intercalate into the large cavity between adjacent tri-s-triazine units and bond to two-coordinated N atoms. According to DFT calculations, electron excitation from N (2px, 2py) to B (2px, 2py) in B-doped g-C3N4 is much easier than that from N (2px, 2py) to C (2Pz) in pure g-C3N4, demonstrating improved charge transfer after doping. Moreover, B doping can influence the photocatalytic selectivity towards the CO2RR to CH4. The position of B in the skeleton of g-C3N4 is not addressed, which is important for the compositional alteration of g-C3N4. Also, the insertion of B may form boron nitride with g-C3N4, which should be clarified to permit the synthesis of novel boron nitride g-C3N4 for the CO2RR; the effect of the B amount on the CO2RR is not assessed. To facilitate charge transfer between tri-s-triazine conjugated planes, Liu et al. pyrolyzed excess NH4Cl and melamine to intercalate chlorine atoms into the spaces between g-C3N4 layers.103 It should be noted that NH4Cl serves as a doping source and generates a soft gas template to induce the formation of the porous structure. Optical characterization studies and DFT analysis revealed facile charge transfer, extended visible light absorption, and negatively shifted CB level in Cl-doped g-C3N4, synergistically promoting the photocatalytic reaction. The dual doping of g-C3N4 is expected to combine each dopant's advantage and generate an exceptional photocatalytic performance.104–106 For example, C, O co-doped g-C3N4 was reported by Samanta et al. via high-temperature calcination of 2-methyl imidazole with urea and thiourea.107 Except for extended light-harvesting and suppressed electron–hole recombination, the new carbon and oxygen functionalities introduced by 2-methyl imidazole can greatly facilitate CO2 adsorption, as revealed by both the CO2 binding energy and CO2 take up measurements. Consequently, the CH3OH yield increased from 2.8 to 4.18 mmol g−1 after 6 h illumination. Recently, P and F co-doped porous carbon nitride (PFCN) has been prepared by thermal condensation of dicyandiamide and 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate (BminPF6) in the presence of hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) at 550 °C.108 Control experiments have proved that TEOS and CTAB are beneficial for P, F co-doping, and are responsible for the higher specific area in PFCN. It is believed that the doping of fluorine atoms can change the electronic structure and then reduce the bandgap. Moreover, the induced π-conjugation can increase the HOMO energy level's charge density and shorten the transfer barrier. Meanwhile, P doping can generate midgap states to trap photogenerated electrons and prolong the electron–hole pair's lifetime. Besides, the rich defect sites in PFCN can accelerate charge separation. Therefore, the methanol yield for PFCN can reach up to 119.56 μmol g−1 h−1, which is obviously higher than that for un-doped carbon nitride.


3.2.3 Molecular doping. 
Owing to the sp2 hybridization of carbon and nitrogen atoms, the photocatalytic property of g-C3N4 is mainly derived from the π-conjugated structure. However, the pristine aromatic π system suffers from a limited visible light response, fast recombination of charge carriers, and low surface area, which greatly restrict its potential applications.110,111 From this point of view, the copolymerization of g-C3N4 with structurally symmetrical aromatic groups or organic additives is a promising approach for extending the delocalization of π electrons and adjusting the intrinsic properties of g-C3N4.112–114 Wang's group realized the simultaneous molecular doping and nanostructural engineering of g-C3N4via the urea precursor's copolymerization with barbituric acid (BA).109 The weight-in amount of BA was tuned from 0.01 to 0.3. The absorption edge in the UV-vis DRS spectra of BA-modified g-C3N4 displays a significant redshift compared with that of the pristine sample, indicating the improved light absorption ability. The peak intensity of PL spectra gradually declines with increasing amounts of BA; meanwhile, the peak position shifts to a longer wavelength. This phenomenon verifies that restrained electron–hole recombination is due to extension of the π-conjugation structure. Besides, photocurrent (Iph) measurements reflect the remarkable enhancement of charge transfer efficiency for BA-modified g-C3N4 (Fig. 10a). Subsequently, g-C3N4 modified with different amounts of BA was examined in the photocatalytic CO2-to-CO reaction. As revealed in Fig. 10b, the BA-modified samples exhibit a significantly improved photoactivity toward the CO2RR, and the optimal catalyst presents a CO2-to-CO conversion rate of 31.1 μmol h−1, which is 15 times higher than that of un-modified g-C3N4. It should be noted that excess BA doping might destroy the conjugated structure, resulting in lower catalytic efficiency. Moreover, there are no significant yield differences of CO and H2 among five repeated tests, demonstrating its robust stability (Fig. 10c). In this way, various comonomers have been conjugated with urea to effectively improve the photocatalytic performance, including 2-aminothiophene-3-carbonitrile (ATCN), 2-aminobenzonitrile (ABN), and diaminomaleonitrile (DAMN) (Fig. 10d). In another study, Vidyasagar et al. demonstrated that the co-pyrolysis of aromatic π-deficient phenyl urea with melamine precursor to form phenyl-grafted g-C3N4 could alter the bandgap, facilitate charge separation, and thus enhance the photoreactivity of g-C3N4.115 Phenyl-grafted g-C3N4 reduced CO2 to mainly methane and formic acid in high yields. In short, molecular copolymerization offers a useful strategy to modulate π-electron delocalization. Thus, this study is important for integrating organic molecules into the tri-s-triazine framework of g-C3N4 to maximize its photocatalytic CO2RR performance.
 Fig. 10  (a) Photoelectrochemical properties of CNU and CNU-BA0.03 in 0.2 M Na2SO4 solution. (b) CO and H2 yield for CNU modified without and with different amounts of BA. (c) The stability test of the CNU-BA0.03 composite. (d) A comparison of CO and H2 yields on various comonomer modified CNU samples under visible light. Copyright 2015, Elsevier Ltd.109 

3.3 g-C3N4-based heterojunction photocatalysts
Besides the structural engineering and doping of g-C3N4, the coupling of a co-catalyst with g-C3N4 to construct a heterojunction has been used to facilitate the CO2RR. The enhanced mechanism was mainly based on two points: (i) the co-catalyst could trap photogenerated electron–hole pairs and extend the lifetime of charge carriers; and (ii) the co-catalyst could lower the reaction energy level through activating CO2 molecules or providing active intermediates.18,23,25,26,28,29,116 Interestingly, g-C3N4 could be simply doped or functionalized with different co-catalysts in liquid or gaseous environments at elevated temperatures. So, g-C3N4 is an appealing platform to construct composite heterojunctions with various semiconductors with suitable bandgaps (e.g., metal oxide, metal phosphide, and metal hydroxide), carbon material, and so on.117–120 The heterojunction structure facilitates the spatial separation of electron–hole pairs and endows them with novel photochemical properties due to the synergistic effect.25,26,28,116 g-C3N4-based heterojunctions, including the type II and Z schemes, a configuration of two photocatalysts, and an anisotropic electron mediator. Both type II and Z schemes vary in charge transfer pathways and performance (Fig. 11a).25,26,28,116 In type II heterostructures, the photogenerated electrons accumulate in the CB with a lower reduction power, and holes settle in the VB of the semiconductor with an oxidation ability.25,26,28,116 However, electrostatic repulsion between electrons transferring from the CB of the migrating semiconductor and existing electrons in the CB of the receiving semiconductor delay the electron transfer process in the type II heterostructure.25,26,28,116 In contrast, in the Z scheme, both electrons and holes have a small redox potential in either semiconductor combination, retaining electrons and holes with superior redox potentials, greater light harvesting ability, and concomitantly greater charge carrier separation ability than those of the type II heterostructure. This is attributed to the incorporation of an electron-relaying channel in the Z scheme. However, there are unavoidable charge-transfer routes in the Z scheme, which deteriorate the redox ability of electrons and holes. The direct Z scheme heterostructure has been developed to solve these limitations, where the two semiconductors are indirectly brought into contact without any electron mediator. Thus, the S scheme heterostructure comprising one reduction and one oxidation photocatalyst with a staggered band structure has been proposed to solve the Z scheme's limitations.23,25,26,116 In the S scheme, effective electron/holes are retained, and those that are ineffective are excluded, resulting in boosting of the charge separation, a stronger redox ability, and greater light absorption. However, the g-C3N4-based S scheme is rarely reported for the CO2RR to the best of our knowledge.23,25,26,116 Currently, the g-C3N4-based Z-scheme is the most reported and promising for the CO2RR, but the S-scheme is supposed to be the best heterojunction structure of the future.
 Fig. 11  (a) Heterojunction structures of g-C3N4 designed based on data from ref. 28. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of C3N4–PtCu NCs and C3N4–PtCu CNCs. (c) The production rate of CO and CH4, and selectivity for C3N4–PtCu CNCs under visible light irradiation over successive cycles. (d) The evolution rate of CO, CH4, and H2 for C3N4, C3N4–PtCu NCs and C3N4–PtCu CNCs. (e–g) The most stable configuration of CO2 and adsorption energies on Pt (100), PtCu (100), Pt (730), and PtCu (730) facets. Copyright, 2017, RSC.126 

3.3.1 Metal/g-C3N4. 
For metal/g-C3N4 heterojunctions, a Schottky barrier can be formed at the interface between the metal and g-C3N4, which is advantageous for electron migration from g-C3N4 to the metal and thereby spatially separating the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. At present, some noble metals, namely, Pt, Pd, Ag, and Au, are the most widely studied hybrid materials with g-C3N4.121–125 For example, Yu and co-authors have deposited Pt nanoparticles on g-C3N4 to study its photocatalytic activity and selectivity for CO2 reduction.85 They found that the Pt content had a noticeable effect on the yield of CH4, CH3OH, and HCHO. As the Pt content increases from 0 to 0.75 wt%, the evolution of all products increases accordingly due to the enlarged contact areas between Pt and g-C3N4, and thus, more electrons will transfer and accumulate on the surface of Pt nanoparticles to participate in the CO2RR. However, the yield starts to decline when the Pt content reaches 1.0 wt% due to Pt catalyzing CH3OH oxidation and HCHO decomposition. The facet selectivity of Pd co-catalysts was examined by Bai et al. in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2.84 It turns out that the CO2RR occurs preferentially on Pd (111) facets, whereas H2 is a dominant product on Pd (100) facets. Subsequently, the same group further demonstrated that introducing a high-index facet enclosed co-catalyst into C3N4 nanosheets could promote the photocatalytic activity and selectivity in CH4 production compared with a low-index faceted co-catalyst.126 As displayed in Fig. 11b, bulk C3N4 was first exfoliated into ultrathin nanosheets under ultrasonic treatment. It is believed that the low thickness can shorten the electron transfer distance and thus facilitate the photocatalytic reaction. Subsequently, PtCu alloy concave nanocubes (CNCs) enclosed by (730) facets and PtCu nanocubes (NCs) covered with (100) facets were in situ grown on the surface of C3N4 nanosheets by adjusting the amount of HCl. Control experiments revealed that the alloying of Cu with Pt could inhibit the reduction of H2O to H2 and improve the conversion ratio of CO2-to-CH4. Fig. 11c compares the production rate of CO and CH4 for three samples; C3N4–PtCu CNCs show the highest activity. The types of CO2RR products and their selectivity on C3N4–PtCu CNC catalysts remain without any significant changes over four photocatalytic cycles (Fig. 11d). Thus, the introduction of PtCu alloy co-catalyst and high-index facets is beneficial for improving the activity and stability of the CO2RR. Cu itself has a high CO2RR affinity to produce CO and CH4, so the integration of highly expensive Pt metal has no effect. The intrinsic mechanism of the facet-dependent photocatalytic performance was analyzed by DFT calculations. Fig. 11e shows the most stable configuration of CO2 molecules on various nanocrystals. Because of the synergistic effect between Pt and Cu, the calculated CO2 adsorption energies of 0.03 eV on PtCu (100) facets are lower than that of 0.08 eV on Pt (100), indicating relatively facile adsorption of CO2 molecules on PtCu (100) facets. In contrast, the CO2 adsorption energies increased to −0.36 and −0.61 eV on Pt (730) and PtCu (730), respectively, which was likely to be due to the existence of more low coordinated Pt atoms. Therefore, the high photocatalytic CO2RR performance for PtCu CNCs originates from great synergism and electronic interactions between Pt/Cu and g-C3N4, thus enhancing CO2 adsorption. Notably, this study has been carried out on PtCu with h-index facets that are not easily obtained experimentally, as Pt-based catalysts prefer to grow as low index facets mainly (111) to reduce the total surface free energy during the nucleation step.
The surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of some noble metals, namely, Au and Ag, could be hybridized with g-C3N4 to improve the CO2RR photocatalytic properties further. Li et al. prepared a series of Au–g-C3N4 catalysts through the NaBH4-reduction method for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2.127 The CO and CH4 yields on various catalysts are shown in Fig. 12a. It can be seen that the loading of Au nanoparticles on g-C3N4 contributes to CO and CH4 production. In particular, Au–g-C3N4 composite with a Au/g-C3N4 ratio of 2 exhibits the best photoactivity, with 9.1 times enhanced CH4 output compared with g-C3N4 after UV-Vis light illumination for 2 h. The proposed photocatalytic mechanism for Au–g-C3N4 is shown in Fig. 12b. On one hand, electrons can be excited to the CB of g-C3N4 under UV-Vis light exposure followed by the transfer to Au nanoparticles through the Schottky barrier, which then participate in the CO2RR, ensuring spatial separation of charge carriers. Meanwhile, photogenerated holes of the VB could oxidize H2O to O2 and H+. On the other hand, Au nanoparticles could absorb visible light, and the generated photoexcited electrons may be injected into the CB of g-C3N4 to participate in the photocatalytic CO2RR. Au nanoparticles behave as electron collectors to prevent the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, promote visible light harvesting, and generate more hot electrons to enhance the photocatalytic activity. A lower Au loading could not provide enough trapping sites to suppress the recombination of electron–hole pairs. In contrast, a higher Au content could lead to the formation of charge recombination centers or block active sites of g-C3N4. Thus, highly expensive Au metal did not enhance the CO2RR activity significantly. In recent research, bimetallic Pd–Ag nanoparticles have been decorated on g-C3N4 nanosheets to synergistically promote the CO2RR.128 Thus, the photocatalytic rate and selectivity are strongly associated with the Pd/Ag ratio, among which a higher Pd content is beneficial for obtaining CH4, and a higher Ag content tends to generate CO.
 Fig. 12  (a) CO and CH4 produced on different catalysts under UV-vis light irradiation for 2 h, (b) the proposed photocatalytic mechanism toward the CO2RR on Au–CN catalyst. Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd.127 


3.3.2 Metal oxide/g-C3N4. 
In the semiconductor/g-C3N4 heterojunction, different band structures can induce the spatial migration of charge carriers between the semiconductor and g-C3N4, thereby effectively restraining the recombination of electron–hole pairs and promoting the photocatalytic performance.129 Generally, there are two possible mechanisms in the semiconductor/g-C3N4 system: a type II heterojunction and direct Z-scheme heterojunction.
TiO2 is the most popular co-catalyst among various metal oxides coupled with g-C3N4.130–132 For example, a series of composites of g-C3N4 with nitrogen-doped TiO2 (g-C3N4–N-TiO2) have been constructed by Zhou et al. through the simultaneous thermolysis of urea and Ti(OH)4.133 It was found that the combination of g-C3N4 with N-TiO2 could facilitate the production rate of CO and prevent the formation of CH4. It is speculated that the g-C3N4–N-TiO2 hybrid follows a conventional type II photocatalytic mechanism, in which electrons in the CB can transfer from g-C3N4 to N-TiO2. Meanwhile, holes that remain in g-C3N4 and migrate from N-TiO2 could participate in the water oxidation reaction (Fig. 13a). Protons are easily trapped in electron-rich aromatic heterocycles of g-C3N4 and fixed on the conjugated system, thus preventing participation in the CO2RR. In contrast, protons can be readily reacted with CO2 to produce CO and CH4 on a bare N-TiO2 photocatalyst (Fig. 13b). Furthermore, the photoreduction activity of TiO2/g-C3N4 can be further boosted through microstructural engineering, in which g-C3N4 nanodots are uniformly decorated on brookite TiO2 quasi-nanocube surfaces; thus, more defects and accessible adsorption sites are generated.134 The interfacial connection has been modified by constructing a phosphate–oxygen (P–O) bridged TiO2/g-C3N4 composite, which proved to accelerate electron transfer from g-C3N4 to TiO2.135
 Fig. 13  The proposed photocatalytic mechanism for (a) g-C3N4 and N-TiO2 composite and (b) N-TiO2. Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd.133 
Unlike TiO2, single metal oxides, such as In2O3, CeO2, and ZnO, and multiplex metal oxides, such as NaNbO3 and CdMoO4, have also been coupled with g-C3N4 to form type II heterojunctions to improve the CO2RR.137–141 Although the conventional type II heterojunction can effectively suppress charge carrier recombination, electron transfer from the CB of g-C3N4 with a more negative energy level to the CB of another semiconductor usually results in weaker electron reducibility. Meanwhile, hole transfer could lead to a weaker hole oxidizing ability. Therefore, it is highly anticipated that the spatial separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and high electron reducibility could be achieved simultaneously in a direct Z-scheme heterojunction. In another example, Yu and co-workers successfully prepared g-C3N4/ZnO composite (G10) by a one-step high-temperature calcination process.136 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of ZnO, g-C3N4, and G10 are depicted in Fig. 14a–e. The ZnO microcrystals have an average particle size of tens of micrometers (Fig. 14a). The porous surface of g-C3N4 is seen from Fig. 14b and c. In contrast, G10 possesses a much more compact surface than that of g-C3N4 due to the insertion of ZnO into g-C3N4 (Fig. 14d and e). This results in an intimate contact interface and thus enhanced charge transfer. The fact is further revealed by the high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of Fig. 14f, in which g-C3N4 surrounds the ZnO phase. The measured lattice distance of 0.26 nm belongs to the (002) crystal plane of hexagonal wurtzite ZnO (Fig. 14f). Fig. 14i presents the CH3OH production rate of commercial ZnO, pure ZnO, pure g-C3N4, and G10. It can be concluded that the coupling of ZnO with g-C3N4 significantly enhances the photocatalytic conversion rate of CO2-to-CH3OH by 2.3 times in comparison with that of g-C3N4. As seen from the band edge levels of g-C3N4 and ZnO alongside the standard redox potential of their relevant counterparts (Fig. 14j), the energy potentials of the CBs of both g-C3N4 and ZnO are more negative than that of CO2/CH3OH, while the energy potentials of the VBs of both g-C3N4 and ZnO are more positive than that of O2/H2O. In this case, both photocatalytic mechanisms are possible. According to the determined electronic band structures of g-C3N4 and ZnO (Fig. 14g and h), ZnO's photogenerated electrons and charge separation efficiency are much higher than those of g-C3N4, indicating that electron transfer across the interface proceeds from ZnO to g-C3N4 instead of in the opposite direction. Therefore, the g-C3N4/ZnO composite follows a direct Z-scheme photocatalytic mechanism, shown in Fig. 14l, rather than the conventional type II photocatalytic process shown in Fig. 14k. More specifically, the photogenerated electrons in the CB of ZnO can combine with the photogenerated holes in the VB of g-C3N4, so, electrons in the CB of g-C3N4 and holes in the VB of ZnO can be retained. Similarly, a series of direct Z-scheme photocatalysts, including g-C3N4/WO3, g-C3N4/Fe2O3, g-C3N4/BiVO4, and g-C3N4/Bi2VO6, have been documented.142–145
 Fig. 14  SEM images of (a) ZnO, (b, c) g-C3N4 and (d, e) G10 and (f) HRTEM image of G10. The calculated electronic band structures of (g) g-C3N4 and (h) ZnO. (i) The CH3OH evolution rates of cm-ZnO, ZnO, G10, and g-C3N4. (j) Band edge positions of g-C3N4 and ZnO as well as standard redox potentials. Two different photocatalytic mechanisms toward the CO2RR: (k) conventional heterojunction-type and (l) direct Z-scheme mechanism. Copyright, 2015, RSC.136 

Table 5 presents the rational design of g-C3N4–metal oxide based heterostructures using various approaches, e.g., hydrothermal, ball-milling, deposition–precipitation, in situ redox reaction, solvent evaporation, impregnation, electrostatic self-assembly, photodeposition, solid sublimation, calcination, solid-state, and microwave-assisted. However, the hydrothermal method is more extensively used than other methods. The majority of metal oxides are formed in the type II scheme and Z-scheme, but WO3/g-C3N4 mainly is formed through the Z-scheme structure, and SnO2 forms through the type II scheme. Photocatalytic CO2 reduction using g-C3N4/metal oxide usually produces CO and CH4 gaseous products; however, g-C3N4/ZnO, SnO2−x/g-C3N4, Cu–g-C3N4/TiO2, g-C3N4/ZnO, P–O linked g-C3N4/TiO2-nanotubes, g-C3N4@CeO2, Al–O linked g-C3N4/TiO2, and Nb–TiO2/g-C3N4 generate liquid products of methanol, formic acid, methanol, and acetic acid. Thus, the use of transition metal oxides is preferred for the CO2RR to generate liquid chemicals; Sn-based oxides are the most preferred. However, the effects of the shape and composition of reported metal oxides on the CO2RR selectivity and stability are not examined adequately. Also, there are not enough studies to compare the CO2RR performance on the same metal oxide/g-C3N4 with different heterojunction structures. The metal oxide/g-C3N4 Z-scheme has been slightly more investigated compared with the type II scheme for the CO2RR. The Z-scheme is preferred to the type II scheme, as inferred by the higher light-harvesting and better charge carrier separation ability, which result in greater CO2RR product yields of CO, CH4, and liquids. Assessing the effect of the electrolytes, promoters, and cell types on the CO2RR of g-C3N4–metal oxide heterojunctions can improve the selectivity and mass production of the CO2RR products.
Table 5 g-C3N4–metal oxide-based heterojunctions prepared using various methods for the CO2RR and its products




Catalyst
Type
Synthesis route
Reaction conditions
Product yield
QE (%)
Ref.




WO3/g-C3N4
Direct Z scheme
Planetary milling method; agate mortar method, and sonication method
Light-emitting diode (LED; Epitex, 30M32 L)
CH3OH



142



Defect engineered WO3−x/g-C3N4
Direct Z scheme
Hydrothermal method and deposition precipitation
500 W xenon lamp
CO (6.46 μmol g−1 h−1)



151



WO3/g-C3N4
Direct Z scheme
Solid state synthesis
Photoreduction of CO2 with H2O under UV irradiation
CO and CH4



152



In2O3–g-C3N4
Type II
Hydrothermal method
500 W xenon lamp
CH4 (159.2 ppm)
0.62

153



g-C3N4/ZnO
Direct Z scheme
One-step facile calcination method
300 W simulated solar xenon arc lamp
CH3OH (0.6 μmol g−1 h−1)



136



PNS-ZnO@g-C3N4 porous core/shell structure
Type II
Solid state synthesis
300 W xenon lamp equipped with a 420 nm cutoff filter
CO (16.8 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (30.5 μmol g−1 h−1)



154



g-C3N4/ZnO microspheres
Direct Z scheme
Electrostatic self-assembly
350 W xenon lamp
CH3OH (1.32 μmol g−1 h−1)



155



SnO2−x/g-C3N4
Direct Z scheme
Deposition precipitation and calcination
500 W xenon lamp, 0.3 MPa CO2 pressure
CO, CH3OH, and CH4



156



Sb doped SnO2/g-C3N4
Type II
Hydrothermal and post-annealing
5 mL of solution (MeCN/TEOA = 4:1); 300 W xenon arc lamp with a UV cutoff filter
CH4 (0.6 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (4.49 μmol g−1 h−1)



157



SnO2/Ag/g-C3N4
Type II
Microwave-assisted hydrothermal method
300 W xenon lamp
CH4 (0.6 μmol g−1); CO (8 μmol g−1)



158



SnFe2O4/g-C3N4 ferromagnetic; oxygen vacancy
Direct Z scheme
Hydrothermal method
300 W iodine tungsten lamp
CO (7.56 μmol g−1 h−1)



159



m-CeO2/g-C3N4
Type II
Hard-template method
300 W xenon arc lamp
CH4 (13.88 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (11.8 μmol g−1 h−1)



141



g-C3N4@CeO2 hollow structure with oxygen vacancies
Type II
Solid state synthesis
300 W xenon lamp with a 420 nm cutoff filter, water vapor was used as a hole scavenger
CH3OH (5.2 μmol g−1); CH4 (3.5 μmol g−1); CO (16.8 μmol g−1)
17.1

160



Cu2O/g-C3N4 0D/3D morphology
Type II
Photodeposition
Photocatalytic activity evaluation system (CEL-SPH2N-D9, Beijing)
CH4 (0.0805 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (8.182 μmol g−1 h−1)



161



g-C3N4/Ag–TiO2
Type II
Solvent evaporation followed by calcination
300 W xenon lamp; CO2 flow rate mL min−1; water vapor was used as hole scavenger
CH4 (9.33 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (6.33 μmol g−1 h−1)



162



Phosphate–oxygen (P–O) bridged TiO2/g-C3N4
Type II
Impregnation–solid state synthesis
300 W xenon lamp; water vapor was used as a hole scavenger
CH4 (40 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (15 μmol g−1 h−1)



135



P–O linked g-C3N4/TiO2-nanotubes
Direct Z scheme
Solid sublimation and conversion mean, followed by an impregnation method
150 W xenon lamp
Acetic acid (28 mg L−1 h−1); methanol (25.4 mg L−1 h−1); formic acid (22.8 mg L−1 h−1)



163



Cu–g-C3N4/TiO2
Type II
Solid state synthesis
1 M NaOH; 500 W, 22 cm long arc xenon lamp tube
CH3OH (450 μmol g−1 h−1); HCOOH (3500 μmol g−1 h−1)



164



Nb–TiO2/g-C3N4
Direct Z scheme
Solid state synthesis
Two 30 W white bulbs; CO2 flow rate: 20 mL min−1; water vapor was used as hole scavenger
CO (420 μmol g−1 h−1); HCOOH (698 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (562 μmol g−1 h−1)



165



(Au/A-TiO2)@g-C3N4
All-solid-state Z scheme
Deft method
300 W xenon lamp (≥420 nm); water vapor was used as hole scavenger
CH4 (37.4 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (21.7 μmol g−1 h−1)
1.91

166



TiO2−x/g-C3N4
Type II
Solid state synthesis
300 W xenon lamp; 4 mL of methyl cyanide solvent, 1 mL of triethanolamine (TEOA), bipyridine (bpy) (10 mmol L−1) and 25 μL of 20 mmol L−1 CoCl2 aqueous solution
CO (77.8 μmol g−1 h−1)



167



Al–O linked g-C3N4/TiO2
Direct Z scheme
Solid state synthesis
150 W xenon lamp; Na2SO4 solution (0.1 M, 60 mL)
CH3COOH (54.9 mg L−1 h−1); HCOOH (42.7 mg L−1 h−1); CH3OH (45.4 mg L−1 h−1)



168



Al–O bridged g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3
Direct Z scheme
Wet chemical method followed by calcination
300 W xenon arc lamp; ambient pressure
CH4 (3.1 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (15.8 μmol g−1 h−1)



169



α-Fe2O3/g-C3N4
Direct Z scheme
Impregnation–hydrothermal
300 W xenon lamp; CO2 pressure of 1 atm
CO (27.2 μmol g−1 h−1)
0.963

170



MnO2/g-C3N4 2D/2D shape
Direct Z scheme

In situ redox reaction
300 W xenon lamp; water vapor was used as a hole scavenger
CO (9.6 μmol g−1 h−1)



171



NiO/g-C3N4 ball flower
Type II
Hydrothermal deposition method combined with subsequent calcination route
300 W xenon arc lamp; water vapour was used as a hole scavenger
CO (4.17 μmol g−1 h−1)



172



Bi2O3/g-C3N4
Direct Z scheme
High temperature calcination combined with a hydrothermal method
300 W xenon lamp
CO (2.81 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (1.34 μmol g−1 h−1)



173







3.3.3 Metal phosphide/g-C3N4. 
In recent years, transition metal phosphides, such as NiP, CuP, CoP, and MoP, have garnered much interest as electro- and photocatalysts in the HER.147–150 However, related studies on the CO2RR are still limited. Tang et al. reported MoP loaded g-C3N4 (MoP/CN) as an efficient photocatalyst to reduce CO2.146 The MoP/CN with varying MoP amounts showed a better visible light absorption compared with that of the bare CN, implying the effective separation of electron–hole pairs in the presence of MoP. MoP/CN-15% showed the weakest PL intensity and better visible light absorption. The stable and high photocurrent response for MoP/CN-15% suggests improved charge transfer compared with that of CN (Fig. 15a). As expected, the CO yield for the MoP/g-C3N4 catalyst is remarkably enhanced after the anchoring of MoP, whereas pure CN possesses a relatively low activity (Fig. 15b). The optimum MoP/g-C3N4 catalyst can generate 110.23 μmol CO and 6.75 μmol H2, which are 5.5- and 2.0-fold higher than bare g-C3N4 (Fig. 15c). The QEs for CO2 reduction and H2 evolution are 3.5 and 18.3% at 420 nm, respectively; these values significantly surpass the hydrogen evolution rate over 0.5 wt% Pt/CN. Based on DFT analysis, MoP could behave as an electron acceptor in the MoP/g-C3N4 composite. The proposed photocatalytic mechanism for MoP/g-C3N4 is illustrated in Fig. 15d. Meanwhile, MoP can induce electron transfer from the CB of g-C3N4 to MoP and inhibit the recombination of electron–hole pairs; the introduction of MoP can broaden visible light harvesting and generate more charge carriers. Moreover, the creation of additional active sites after MoP doping contributes to the enhancement of the CO2 adsorption capability. Currently, DFT is an accurate, fast, and effective calculation method for estimating the CO2RR performance and mechanism on g-C3N4. However, machine learning and artificial intelligence are promising for developing novel g-C3N4 materials and predicting their CO2RR performances.
 Fig. 15  (a) Photocurrents of CN and MoP/CN-15%. (b) CO yield of photocatalytic CO2 reduction on CN and MoP/CN composites within 6 h illumination. (c) The total yield after 6 h irradiation. (d) Proposed photocatalytic mechanism of MoP/CN composites. Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd.146 


3.3.4 Metal hydroxide/g-C3N4. 
The surface modification of TiO2 with alkaline NaOH could benefit CO2 adsorption, activation, and the photocatalytic conversion of CO2-to-CH4.174 Inspired by this thought, Wang's group deposited different amounts of KOH on g-C3N4 (KOH–CN) to evaluate the effect on the photocatalytic CO2RR.175 The introduction of KOH co-catalyst has little influence on the light-harvesting and electron–hole recombination of g-C3N4. However, the CO2 adsorption amounts of KOH–CN catalyst drastically increased compared with bare CN, although they possessed similar surface areas. Fig. 16a compares the yields for all products after 5 h UV-vis light illumination. Notably, the addition of KOH promotes CO2 conversion significantly, and the 0.1 KOH–CN catalyst displays the highest activity. To clarify the effect of KOH, the photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4 decorated with KOH, KCl, K2CO3, and KHCO3 was determined for comparison purposes (Fig. 16b). The results reveal that single K+, KHCO3, and K2CO3 cannot promote the photocatalytic reaction. Combined with DFT, it can be deduced that the alkali metal not only serves as a photogenerated hole scavenger but also contributes to maintaining the most stable form of reductive CO2. Different amounts of NaOH have been loaded on g-C3N4 to elucidate the effect of cations (Fig. 16c). It was found that the positive effect of NaOH co-catalyst, even at a higher loading amount, was not as obvious as that of KOH. Featuring unique physicochemical properties, such as large surface areas, adjustable compositions, and positively charged surfaces, layered double hydroxides (LDHs) have shown great promise in the field of catalysis in comparison with single hydroxides.176 In this context, it is anticipated that the combination of LDHs with g-C3N4 could afford exceptional photocatalytic performances.177 For example, the Mg–Al-LDH/g-C3N4 catalyst has been prepared via electrostatic interactions and displays a high CO2-to-CH4 conversion rate in the presence of Pd co-catalyst.178 This is because CO2 can be enriched in the interlayers of LDHs and then converted into CO32−via anion exchange to participate in the photoreduction reaction readily.
 Fig. 16  The yields of CO, CH4, and CH3CHO, and CO2 conversion on (a) CN and CN modified with different amounts of KOH, as well as (b) CN loaded with KCl, K2CO3, and KHCO3 together with (c) CN modified with different amounts of NaOH after 5 h irradiation. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. 


3.3.5 Metal complex/g-C3N4. 
Some molecular complexes have been known to be effective homogeneous photocatalysts for the photoconversion of CO2 into CO or HCOOH with high selectivity and turnover numbers (TONs). However, they still suffer from inherent low stability and non-recyclability.179 Thus, the integration of a metal complex with g-C3N4 is expected to overcome these disadvantages, in which g-C3N4 and the metal complex work as a light adsorption unit and catalytic site, respectively. Maeda et al. reported on ruthenium complex-modified mesoporous g-C3N4 (Ru/mpg-C3N4) for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to HCOOH with a high turnover number (>200 for 20 hours) and selectivity (>80%) under visible light irradiation (λ > 400 nm) in acetonitrile/triethanolamine electrolyte.86 The QY of formic acid increased with increasing catalyst amounts to reach a maximum value of 1.5% at 30 mg Ru/mpg-C3N4. Later the same group studied the effect of surface area on the CO2RR using mesoporous g-C3N4 with a Ru complex of trans(Cl)-[Ru{4,4′-(CH2PO3H2)2-2,2′-bipyridine}(CO)2Cl2] in triethanolamine.180 The samples were denoted as CN-X-r, where X refers to the size of colloidal SiO2, and r indicates the cyanamide content. As displayed in Table 6, the surface area, pore size, and pore volume of the as-obtained CN samples increased with increasing cyanamide content to reach a maximum for CN-12-1.5, but the highest CO2RR to formic acid was achieved with CN-12-1.0 (1561 nmol). That indicates that a higher pore volume and suitable pore diameter are preferred for enhancing the CO2RR rather than surface area. The higher surface area, ensuing from using SiO2 with a larger particle size, decreases the crystallinity, creates undesired defects and decreases protonation of the CO2˙− intermediates to form formic acid. However, to make an accurate comparison, the effect of Ru content should be examined clearly, as it is the main catalyst, while CN is the support, as shown in the electrochemical measurements. Cyclic voltammograms were recorded to reveal the catalytic activity of the Ru complex (Fig. 17a).180 An obvious peak at −1.57 V (vs. Ag/AgNO3) in the cyclic voltammogram under an Ar atmosphere is related to reducing the bipyridine ligand, while a higher current density occurred at around −1.9 V in CO2-saturated electrolyte. Thus, the enhancement of the CO2RR activity results from the Ru complex, although it has no absorption in the visible light region. For this system, a schematic illustration of the reaction process is displayed in Fig. 17b.180 Under visible light irradiation, mpg-C3N4 would generate photoexcited electrons and holes in the CB and VB, respectively. Electrons prefer to transfer from mpg-C3N4 to adsorbed Ru molecules and participate in the CO2RR, while holes remaining in the VB would react with the electron donator, triethanolamine. The same group systematically studied the effect of reaction solvent and ruthenium complex type on the product selectivity and activity.181,182 Furthermore, the Co–quaterpyridine complex and tetra(4-carboxylphenyl)porphyrin–iron(III)chloride were also integrated with g-C3N4 to promote the reduction of CO2 to CO.183,184 Porous g-C3N4 combined with metal nanoparticles is considered to be the most active catalyst nowadays and leads to highly promising materials for active, durable, and selective CO2RR performances, especially in organic electrolytes. Table 7 summarises recent advances in the rational synthesis of g-C3N4 coupled with metals (i.e., Au, Sn, Cu, Cd, Bi, and Mo) as a heterostructure for the photocatalytic CO2RR. g-C3N4-based heterostructures include type II and Z-schemes, but the Z-scheme has been most reported. Various methods, like the hydrothermal method, hard template-based, and solid-state, were used for the fabrication of heterostructures. The hydrothermal method is the most common approach due to its simplicity, productivity, and feasibility for large-scale applications. The photocatalytic CO2RR was mainly studied on g-C3N4/metal-based heterostructures under 300 W light irradiation (wavelength ≥400 nm). The CO2RR products were mainly CO and CH4, with lean production of methanol, especially using Sn metal. Most documented g-C3N4/metal-based heterostructures were in the form of two-dimensional sheets without some reports on porous or multidimensional nanostructures that possessed various unique properties, like high surface area and accessible activate sites. Also, the hydrothermal method is the most common approach for the fabrication of heterostructures, which allow metal segregation over g-C3N4 that devalues their catalytic performance.
 Fig. 17  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of Ru in a solution of DMF/TEOA (4/1 v/v) in the presence of 0.1 M Et4NBF4 under Ar or CO2 atmospheres. (b) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic CO2RR on Ru/C3N4 composite. Copyright, 2014, RSC.180 
Table 6 Results of the photocatalytic CO2RR using various C3N4 materials as a function of surface area




Sample
Specific surface area/m2 g−1
Pore volume/cm3 g−1
Pore diameter/nm
Produced formic acid amount/nmol




g-CN
6.1
—
—
Trace


CN-12-0.2
54
0.20
12.2
1127


CN-12-0.5
105
0.37
12.2
1854


CN-12-1.0
200
0.64
10.7
1561


CN-12-1.5
240
0.74
10.7
Trace


CN-7-1.0
241
0.51
7.2
Trace


CN-24-1.0
130
0.70
24.4
1223




Table 7 Summary of recent progress in g-C3N4–metal-based heterostructures for the CO2RR




Heterostructure
Composite type
Synthesis route
Reaction conditions
Product (efficiency)
QE/QY (%)
Ref.




g-C3N4/SnS2 QDs amine functionalized
Direct Z-scheme
Hydrothermal method
300 W Xe light with a cutoff filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)
CH3OH (2.3 μmol g−1); CH4(0.64 μmol g−1)



185



Au@void@g-C3N4/SnS yolk–shell structure; amine-functionalized
All solid-state Z-scheme
Hydrothermal method
300 W xenon lamp with a 420 nm cutoff filter
CH3OH (5.3 μmol g−1); CH4(3.8 μmol g−1); CO (17.1 μmol g−1)
17.2

120



Porous g-C3N4/Sn2S3-DETA
Direct Z-scheme
Hydrothermal method
300 W xenon lamp
CH3OH (1.35 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (4.84 μmol g−1 h−1)
2.8

186



Bi2S3 QDs/g-C3N4
Direct Z-scheme
Hydrothermal method
300 W xenon arc lamp
CH4 (12.52 μmol g−1); CO (54.74 μmol g−1)
2.31

187



MoS2/g-C3N4
Direct Z-scheme
Solid state synthesis
300 W xenon arc lamp; 100 kPa CO2 pressure
CO (8.37 μmol g−1 h−1)



188



C–Cu2−xS/g-C3N4


Hydrothermal method
Reduction with water under visible light
CO (1062.6 μmol g−1)



189



g-C3N4/Au/ZnIn2S4 surface plasmon resonance effect
Z-Scheme
Hydrothermal method
Visible light irradiation
CO (242.3 μmol g−1 h−1)



190



CuInS2/Au/g-C3N4
Z-Scheme
Hydrothermal method
300 W xenon lamp with 400 nm cutoff filter
CO (2.433 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (0.148 μmol g−1 h−1)



191



CdIn2S4/mpg-C3N4
Type II
Hard template combined with hydrothermal method
300 W xenon lamp combined with a 420 nm cutoff filter
(0.64 μmol g−1) CH3OH (42.7 μmol g−1 h−1)
0.14

192





Other advances have been achieved in the preparation of g-C3N4-based heterostructures via the formation of a complex with a metal–organic framework (MOF), MXenes, layered double hydroxide (LDH), perovskites, metal halide, metal vanadate, metal phosphate, and metal chromates for photocatalytic CO2 reduction (Table 8). Metal vanadates and MOFs form Z-scheme structures; perovskites form type II scheme structures; LDHs form type II or Z-scheme structures, but type II is predominantly reported; Ti3C2 MXenes mainly form S-scheme structures. These heterojunction structures are usually prepared using the hydrothermal, ball-milling, deposition–precipitation, hard template-based, and solid-state methods; however, the hydrothermal method is the most common approach. Photocatalytic CO2 reduction using g-C3N4/LDH, g-C3N4/MXene, and g-C3N4/perovskite generated CO and CH4. g-C3N4/MOF mainly reduces CO2 to CO and CH4; however, there are a few reports on the production of HCOOH and CH3CH2OH. g-C3N4/vanadate with Cu, Bi, and Co mainly generate CO and CH4, but g-C3N4/vanadate with Zn is preferred for the production of CH3OH. g-C3N4/phosphate and halide produce CO and CH4; however, AgCl halide produces CH3COOH (Table 8). Thus, AgCl, Zn–V2O5, and MOF showed the highest selectivity for producing the liquid products formic acid, methanol, and acetic acid. To date, the hydrothermal method is the most common approach for engineering g-C3N4-based heterojunctions with newly developed materials (e.g., MXenes, MOFs), owing to its simplicity and productivity, but it also permits metal segregation over g-C3N4 instead of mixing at the atomic level, which devalues the CO2RR performance.
Table 8 g-C3N4with MOFs, MXenes, LDHs, perovskites, halides, vanadates, phosphates, and chromates for the CO2RR




Heterostructure
Cocatalyst
Type
Synthesis route
Reaction conditions
Product yield
QE/QY (%)
Ref.




UiO-66/g-C3N4
MOF
Type II
Self-assembly
300 W xenon arc lamp with a UV cutoff filter
CO (9.9 μmol g−1 h−1)



61



BIF-20@g-C3N4
MOF
Type II
Self-assembly
MeCN/TEOA = 4:1; 300 W xenon arc lamp with light filters (400 nm UV cutoff and 800 nm IR cutoff filter
CO (53.869 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (15.524 μmol g−1 h−1)



62



NH2-UiO-66/g-C3N4
MOF


Hydrothermal method
300 W xenon arc lamp equipped with a 400 nm cutoff filter; 1 mL of triethanolamine (TEOA)
CO (31.67 μmol g−1 h−1)



193



NH2-UiO-66/g-C3N4/CdTe
MOF
Type II
Hydrothermal method
300 W xenon lamp (λ > 420 nm); 4 mL of acetonitrile and 1 mL of ethanol
HCOOH (24.6 μmol g−1 h−1)
3.01

194



g-C3N4/ZIF-67
MOF
Direct Z-scheme
Aging at room temperature
300 W Xe lamp (λ > 420 nm)
CH3CH2OH (325.5 μmol g−1 h−1)



195



Ti3C2/g-C3N4 2D/2D
MXene


Solid state synthesis
300 W xenon lamp (PLS-SXE300) with a 420 nm cutoff filter
CH4 (0.044 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (5.19 μmol g−1 h−1)



196



Alkalinized Ti3C2/g-C3N4 2D/2D/0D
MXene


Deposition
300 W xenon lamp with a 420 nm cutoff filter
CH4 (0.269 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (11.21 μmol g−1 h−1)
0.0019

197



TiO2/C3N4/Ti3C2
MXene
S-Scheme
Electrostatic self-assembly
350 W xenon lamp
CH4 (1.20 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (4.39 μmol g−1 h−1)



198



g-C3N4/NiAl-LDH 2D/2D
LDH
Type II
Hydrothermal method
300 W xenon arc lamp; water vapor was used
CO (8.2 μmol g−1 h−1)
0.39

177



CoZnAl-LDH/RGO/g-C3N4
LDH
Z-Scheme
Hydrothermal method
300 W xenon arc lamp
CO (10.11 μmol g−1 h−1)
0.45

199



N-Doped C dot/CoAl-LDH/g-C3N4
LDH
Type II
Hydrothermal method
300 W xenon arc lamp
CH4 (25.69 μmol g−1 h−1)
0.6

200



g-C3N4/NiAl-LDH
LDH
Type II
Self-sacrificing template process and hydrothermal process
300 W xenon lamp
CO (27.02 μmol g−1 h−1)



201



g-C3N4/NaNbO3
Perovskite
Type II
Solid state synthesis
300 W xenon arc lamp with a UV cutoff filter (λ > 420 nm)
CH4 (6.4 μmol g−1 h−1)



139



g-C3N4/Bi2WO6
Perovskite
Direct Z-scheme
Hydrothermal method
300 W xenon arc lamp with a 420 nm cutoff filter
CO (5.19 μmol g−1 h−1)



145



Bi2WO6/RGO/g-C3N4 2D/2D/2D
Perovskite
Z-Scheme
Hydrothermal method


CH4 (2.51 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (15.96 μmol g−1 h−1)



202



CsPbBr3@g-C3N4
Perovskite


Deposition
Ethyl acetate; 300 W xenon lamp with an AM 1.5 cutoff filter
CH4 (15.524 μmol g−1 h−1)



203



Bi4NbO8Cl/g-C3N4 2D/2D
Perovskite
Type II
High-energy ball-milling and post-sintering
300 W xenon lamp
CO (2.26 μmol g−1 h−1)



204



AgX/pCN; X = Cl, Br; protonated g-C3N4
Halide
Type II
Sonication-assisted deposition–precipitation technique
Low-power 15 W energy-saving daylight lamp
CH4 (10.92 μmol g−1)



205



BiOI/g-C3N4
Halide
Direct Z-scheme
Deposition
300 W xenon arc lamp with a UV cutoff filter (λ > 400 nm)
CO (4.86 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (0.18 μmol g−1 h−1)



206



g-C3N4/FeTCPP
Halide


Self-assembly approach
300 W xenon lamp (420 nm < λ < 780 nm)
CO (6.52 mmol g−1 in 6 h)



184



AgCl@g-C3N4
Halide
Direct Z-scheme
Deposition-precipitation
11 W compact fluorescent lamp, 0.1 M TEA
HCOOH (2.51 μmol g−1); CH3COOH (6.01 μmol g−1); CH4 (53.03 μmol g−1)
0.211

207



Cu2V2O7/g-C3N4
Vanadate
Direct Z-scheme
Solid state synthesis
Two 20 W white bulbs (400–700 nm)
CH4 (305 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (166 μmol g−1 h−1)



208



g-C3N4/Ag/AgCl/BiVO4
Vanadate
Z-Scheme
Hydrothermal method
8 fluorescent lamps, 8 W each; NaOH medium
CH4 (205 μmol g−1 h−1)



209



ZnV2O6/RGO/g-C3N4
Vanadate
Z-Scheme
One-step solvothermal process
35 W Xe lamp; 0.1 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH) aqueous
CH3OH (542.92 μmol g−1 h−1)
0.2830

210



g-C3N4/BiVO4 2D/2D
Vanadate
Direct Z-scheme
Thermal polymerization and subsequent hydrothermal method
300 W Xe lamp with a UV cutoff filter (420 nm)
CH4 (4.57 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (5.19 μmol g−1 h−1)



144



Ag3PO4/g-C3N4
Phosphate
Direct Z-scheme
Deposition
500 W Xe lamp
CO2 conversion (57.5 μmol g−1 h−1)



211



LaPO4/g-C3N4
Phosphate
Type II
Hydrothermal method
300 W Xe arc lamp
CO (14.43 μmol g−1 h−1)



212



Ag2CrO4/g-C3N4/GO
Chromate
Direct Z-scheme
Deposition
300 W Xe arc lamp
(CH3OH) and (CH4)



213







3.3.6 AgX/g-C3N4. 
It is well-documented that silver halides, AgX (X = Cl, Br, I), can be partly reduced to Ag during the photocatalytic reaction. AgX is considered to be a potential candidate for the photocatalytic reaction due to the Schottky barrier between AgX and Ag, besides the SPR effect of Ag. Based on this premise, a series of AgX/g-C3N4 composites with various morphologies have been developed thus far.214–216 For example, Ong and co-authors proposed a sonication-assisted deposition–precipitation approach to grow AgCl and AgBr nanoparticles on the protonated graphitic carbon nitride (pCN) surface.205 The CH4 yield on the optimal AgBr/pCN could reach 10.92 μmol g−1, which was higher than that of individual AgBr and pCN, by 34.1 and 4.2 times, respectively. In comparison, the photocatalytic activity of AgCl/pCN is much weaker. This can be ascribed to the different photocatalytic mechanisms depicted in Fig. 18a and b. Under light illumination, both AgX and pCN can generate photoelectrons and holes and then transfer them across the interface of AgX/pCN. Based on the different CB and VB edges, the heterojunctions Ag/AgCl/pCN and Ag/AgBr/pCN are assigned as the type I heterojunction (Fig. 18a) and type II heterojunction (Fig. 18b), respectively. For the former, photogenerated electrons tend to move from Ag and AgCl to the CB of pCN. At the same time, the photogenerated holes would transfer from AgCl to pCN to produce H+. Because the CB potential of pCN is more negative than the redox potential of CO2/CH4, electrons in the CB of pCN can easily reduce CO2 to CH4 with the assistance of H+. In this regard, both photogenerated electrons and holes accumulate on the pCN, resulting in a fast recombination rate and decreased photocatalytic activity. For the Ag/AgBr/pCN hybrid, electrons migrate from Ag and the CB of pCN to the CB of AgBr, while photogenerated holes transfer from the VB of AgBr to that of pCN, thereby improving the separation efficiency of charge carriers. More importantly, electrons in the CB of AgBr have a high enough reducibility to convert CO2 to CH4 in the presence of H+. In another example, a direct Z-scheme AgCl@g-C3N4 composite was constructed to markedly enhance the photocatalytic CO2RR activity of g-C3N4 to produce the liquid products formic and acetic acid, besides methane.207 Although AgCl is the most reported and promising catalyst for use with g-C3N4, using other Ag-based halides, namely, AgI, AgBr, and AgF, with g-C3N4 can enhance the CO2RR significantly to generate liquid products, but the structure should be in the direct Z-scheme or S-scheme forms to permit more effective light-harvesting, quick charge transfer, and better electron–hole separation.
 Fig. 18  The photocatalytic mechanism toward the CO2RR for (a) Ag/AgCl/pCN and (b) Ag/AgBr/pCN catalysts. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd.205 (c) The plausible photocatalytic mechanism toward the CO2RR for H-g-C3N4/C catalyst. Copyright, 2016, ACS.221 


3.3.7 Carbon/g-C3N4. 
Currently, carbon materials (e.g., graphene oxide, carbon nanotubes, mesoporous carbon) are coupled with g-C3N4 to increase light harvesting and improve the separation efficiency of the charge carriers in space.217–220 For example, Wang et al. reported a novel hybrid (H-g-C3N4/C) composed of g-C3N4 and carbon, which was prepared through the one-step pyrolysis of melamine and natural soybean oil.221 Notably, the best H-g-C3N4/C catalyst can produce 22.60 μmol g−1 CH4 and 12.5 μmol g−1 CO; these values are two times higher than that of bulk g-C3N4. While the introduction of carbon can broaden the light absorption range and improve the electrical conductivity, well-dispersed carbon helps with the transfer and spatial separation of charge carriers, as shown in Fig. 18c. However, excess carbon would block the light absorption sites and limit interfacial charge transfer, thus reducing the photocatalytic activity. The same group further adjusted the structure of H-g-C3N4/C to maximize the photoreactivity.222 Furthermore, Tang's group demonstrated that microwave-synthesized carbon dots could accept photogenerated holes from the VB of g-C3N4, which was beneficial for prolonging the charge carrier lifetime and generating CH3OH instead of CO.223 The insertion of some functionalities, like O2, OH, and COOH, into carbon-based materials can enhance their catalytic performance;224,225 graphene oxide is the most promising material for enhancing the CO2RR of g-C3N4. Graphene oxide is usually prepared by the Hummers methods or “bottom-up” synthesis method (Tang-Lau method), both of which are highly complicated and need further improvement.

4. g-C3N4-based electrocatalysts for the CO2RR
The electrochemical reduction of CO2 has a long history, going back to the early twentieth century. Ever since, various electrocatalysts have been reported, including noble metals (oxide), transition metals, and conductive polymers.226–229 The electrochemical CO2RR is a series of proton-assisted electron transfer processes that occur at the interface of the electrode/electrolyte. This entails proton-assisted electron transfer processes, including the initial adsorption of CO2 on the gCN surface, followed by the transfer of at least two protons and electrons to split one of the OCO bonds to form H2O, and subsequent protonation process to form various products that desorb from the electrode surface.27 Several parameters affect the CO2RR activity and selectivity on the gCN catalyst during operation (i.e., cell type, electrode potential, and type, composition, and concentration of the electrolyte), besides the parameters of gCN itself (i.e., morphology, composition, surface area, electrical conductivity, and active electrochemical sites) and those of the reaction (i.e., available protons, pathway, electron–proton-transfer process, and thermodynamic barrier).27 The ambiguous CO2RR mechanism, complex kinetics, relatively high over-potential, low selectivity, electrocatalytic degradation, insufficient electrochemically active surface area, competing HER, and low production yield are the main barriers to scaling up of the CO2RR on gCN for large-scale application.18,23,25,26,28,29,116,230 These hurdles could be overcome by altering the morphology/composition of gCN and improving its physicochemical properties.18,23,25,26,28,29,116,230 This would facilitate the successful CO2RR to various products, such as CO, HCOOH, and CH3OH, through numerous pathways. Although great progress has been achieved for g-C3N4 as a catalyst for the CO2RR, the electrochemical CO2RR has not been studied sufficiently compared with the photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical CO2RR;18,23,25,26,28,29,116 this can be presumably attributed to the lower electrical conductivity of g-C3N4. Engineering porosity and defects and the crystallinity of g-C3N4 can enhance its CO2RR significantly. For example, Zhang et al. demonstrated that two-dimensional porous g-C3N4 (2D-pg-C3N4) nanosheets could function as a highly efficient electrocatalyst for the selective reduction of CO2 to CO at a lower overpotential.231 As-synthesized 2D-pg-C3N4 presents a density of 5.5 mg cm−3 and an obvious porous structure (Fig. 19a and b). Besides, the TEM and AFM images reveal its ultrathin characteristic with a thickness of 1 nm (Fig. 19c–e). The ultrathin layers can induce changes to the electronic structure of g-C3N4 and endow polarized surfaces with enriched electrons to participate in the reduction reaction. As seen from the LSV curves shown in Fig. 19f and g, the remarkably increased current density for 2D-pg-C3N4 suggests its superior electrocatalytic activity compared with other control samples. The faradaic efficiency for generating CO on 2D-pg-C3N4 increases from 15.7 to 80%, with the potential window ranging from −0.9 to −1.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl (Fig. 19h). The current density for 2D-pg-C3N4 at −1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl is 3.05 mA cm−2, which is almost 30 times higher than that of bulk g-C3N4 (Fig. 19i). By modifying hydroxyl and amino groups on the surface of polymeric carbon nitride, the CO yield rate could be increased 17.1-fold compared with its bare counterparts due to synergistic CO2 activation.232 Introducing nitrogen vacancies into g-C3N4 has been identified as a way to reduce the energy barrier of CO2-to-CH4 and boost the production of CH4.233 Qiao's group revealed that g-C3N4 could act as a molecular scaffold to regulate the electronic structure of Cu, and thus, dual active centers were obtained in the Cu–g-C3N4 complex.234 Increasing the electron density on Au nanoparticles, by adjusting the interaction between Au and g-C3N4, contributes to adsorbing the *COOH intermediate and thus enhancing the CO2RR.235 Other than metal nanoparticles, multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) have been covalently coupled with g-C3N4 for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2.236 Benefiting from the high specific area, increased electrical conductivity, and active carbon–nitrogen bonds, the composite can selectively reduce CO2 to CO with robust stability, whereas the catalytic activity for pristine g-C3N4 is almost negligible. Porous g-C3N4 is usually prepared by the template-based method, which is highly promising for the rational design of well-ordered porous structures. However, the prerequisite need for template removal and specific precautions to fill the template with precursors are critical barriers that should be addressed to allow practical applications of the CO2RR. Meanwhile, using porous multimetallic nanocrystals with some non-metal dopants (i.e., P, O, and N) can enhance the electrochemical CO2RR selectivity and activity of g-C3N4.
 Fig. 19  (a) Photograph, (b) SEM image, (c) TEM image, (d) HRTEM image and (e) AFM image of 2D-pg-C3N4. (f) LSV curves of 2D-pg-C3N4 in N2- and CO2-saturated 2 M KHCO3 solution, (g) LSV curves of 2D-pg-C3N4 and control samples in CO2-saturated 2 M KHCO3 solution. (h) Faradaic efficiency of 2D-pg-C3N4 at different voltages for 12 h and (i) current densities of 2D-pg-C3N4 and control samples at −1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Copyright Springer Nature.231 
5. g-C3N4-based photoelectrocatalysts for the CO2RR
In theory, the photoelectrocatalytic process can reduce the electrical energy input and suppress the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, which are deemed to be the most promising approaches to reduce CO2.60,237,238 Jiang et al. reported on CuO/g-C3N4/carbon paper photocathode catalysts for the CO2RR.239 The effect of light illumination on g-C3N4/carbon paper and CuO/g-C3N4/carbon paper is evaluated by recording LSV curves (Fig. 20a).239 All samples afford a negligible reducing current under light-off (Loff) conditions under a N2 atmosphere, while the reducing current is slightly higher at −0.4 to −1.0 V in the light-on (Lon) state due to water/proton reduction.239 The reducing current in the Loff state increases drastically for g-C3N4/carbon paper and CuO/g-C3N4/carbon paper. Their reducing currents could be enhanced under Lon conditions because of the synergistic effect of photo- and electroreduction. The current density of the CuO/g-C3N4/carbon paper catalyst at −1.0 V is about −13.0 mA cm−2, which is almost 4-fold higher than that of g-C3N4/carbon paper.239
 Fig. 20  (a) LSV curves of as-synthesized samples in N2 and CO2 and under light-on (Lon) and light-off (Loff) conditions. (b) IPCE at −0.4 V (vs. NHE) for different samples. (c) The CH3OH yield from PEC reduction of CO2 for different photocatalysts. (d) The CH3OH yield of PC, EC, and PEC for CO2 reduction using CuO/g-C3N4/carbon paper electrode. (e) Quantum and faradaic efficiencies for the PEC reduction of CO2. Copyright 2020, Elsevier Ltd.239 
The IPCEs of all samples under different wavelengths are plotted in Fig. 20c. The highest IPCEs are determined to be 2.5, 5.7, and 13.3% under 470 nm for g-C3N4/carbon paper, CuO/carbon paper, and CuO/g-C3N4/carbon paper, respectively (Fig. 20b). This suggests that the CuO/g-C3N4/carbon paper can greatly improve light harvesting. As shown in Fig. 20c, the CH3OH yield on CuO/g-C3N4/carbon paper is 25.1 μmol L−1 cm−2, which is 4.1 and 2.6-fold higher than that on g-C3N4/carbon paper and CuO/carbon paper, respectively. Owing to the synergistic effect, CuO/g-C3N4/carbon paper displays the largest methanol production level under photoelectrochemical (PEC) reduction conditions in comparison with photochemical (PC) and electrochemical (EC) reactions (Fig. 20d). The best QE and Efaradaic were achieved on CuO/g-C3N4/carbon paper (Fig. 20e). Currently, CuO is used extensively in the CO2RR with promise for large-scale applications. However, its structural engineering (i.e., porosity, dimensional, and surface features) should be further studied. The combination of CuO and carbon paper is possibly the main reason behind the enhancement of the CO2RR performance on g-C3N4. Carbon paper can provide active sites for the adsorption of CuO, and g-C3N4 can be used directly as a working electrode with high electrical conductivity. In another study, nonpolar carbon quantum dot (CQD) doped g-C3N4 catalyst was confirmed to reduce CO2 to CO and CH4 with 6-fold selectivity under PEC conditions, whereas g-C3N4 could only generate CO and H2.240 Therefore, incorporating nonpolar CQDs could increase light absorption, improve reaction kinetics, and change the reaction pathway. Using carbon-based paper (i.e. carbon and graphene) as a substrate for the growth of metal oxide with g-C3N4 is highly promising for industrial CO2RR applications. Carbon papers can be easily prepared commercially with different dimensions (up to the meter scale) and can be easily modified with various surface functionalities to facilitate the adsorption of metal precursors, enabling tuneable metal/g-C3N4 loading.
6. Conclusion
In summary, this review accentuates the cutting-edge research field of carbon nitride (gCN) for photoelectrocatalytic, electrocatalytic, and photocatalytic CO2RRs. This includes the structural engineering of carbon nitride doped with metals, non-metals, and molecules and the formation of carbon nitride heterojunctions by combining it with metals, metal oxides, metal phosphides, metal hydroxides, metal complexes, Ag halides, and carbon materials. The factors and conditions affecting the CO2RR mechanism and pathways are also explained experimentally and theoretically. Mainly, the insertion of various metal (i.e., noble, plasmonic, and transition metals or their oxides) nanoparticles or trace amounts of non-metals (N, O, S, and P) and molecular doping during the synthesis procedure enhance the surface area, active sites, defects, CO2 adsorption, and CO2 activation, culminating in a significant enhancement in the catalytic CO2RR. Furthermore, a photocatalyst's surface area significantly influences the photoreduction efficiency by boosting CO2 adsorption and providing a higher number of reaction sites. The photo-/photoelectrocatalytic CO2RRs on gCNs comprise three main steps: the adsorption of CO2, followed by subsequent activation and reduction. However, the photo-/photoelectrocatalytic CO2RRs on pristine gCNs remain insufficient to meet the requirements of large-scale applications due to the quick recombination of electron–hole pairs and lower visible light absorption capacity over 460 nm.18,23,25,26,116 The rational fabrication of gCN-based heterojunctions via combination with various nanoparticles, especially metals, metal oxides, metal phosphides, metal hydroxides, metal complexes, Ag halides, and carbon materials, facilitates the spontaneous isolation of photogenerated charge carriers and enhances the activity, stability, and selectivity of the CO2RR performances.118–120 Such materials still exhibit relatively inferior utilization of light and dampen the photocatalytic efficiency. There are various approaches for engineering g-C3N4 nanostructures, such as solid-state, hydrothermal, self-assembly, ball milling, deposition–precipitation, template-based, and microwave-assisted processes.18,23,25,26,116 These methods still involve slow and multistep reaction steps, energy consumption, and permit metal segregation with g-C3N4 instead of mixing at the atomic level, which devalues their catalytic activity in practical applications. Notably, the hydrothermal method is the most common and promising for preparing g-C3N4-based heterojunction structures, as it is relatively simple, productive, and can be easily coupled with other methods. g-C3N4-based Z-scheme heterojunctions can be prepared with various metals, metal oxides, non-metal elements, perovskites, and MXenes. g-C3N4-based catalysts are most commonly reported and achieve quick charge transfer via interface contacts, enhanced reaction efficiency, and decreased overall cost of the catalyst. The fabrication of the g-C3N4 S-scheme structure for CO2 reduction is rarely reported, and it is expected to enhance the photocatalytic CO2 reduction significantly compared with the Z-scheme structure. The majority of g-C3N4-based catalysts produce gaseous products, including CO and CH4, but coupling with ZnO, SnOX, CeO2, Nb–TiO2, Al–O/TiO2, Cu/TiO2, P–O/TiO2 nanotubes, Al–O linked g-C3N4/TiO2, AgCl, and mixed metal oxides, can produce liquid products of methanol, formic, methanol, and acetic acid, and ethanol. Sn metal showed the highest affinity for CO2 reduction to liquid products.
7. Future perspectives
CO2 reduction depends on the shape, atomic composition, crystal facets, and defect types of g-C3N4-based catalysts as well as CO2 operating conditions. We envisage that further engineering of g-C3N4-based catalysts will enable large-scale CO2 reduction applications. Porous g-C3N4 nanostructures (i.e., flower, dendrites, yolk–shell) with specific unique characteristics (i.e., great electrical conductivity, porosity, multicomponent cocatalysts, cavities, tuneable defects, good crystallinity, branches, and multi-dimension) are rarely reported. These qualities can enhance the high surface area, maximize the atomic utilization of components, provide accessible active sites for CO2, and tolerate the desorption of reaction intermediates or products.18,23,25,26,116 This could be achieved by changing the type of precursors or using multiple precursors (i.e., melamine, urea, and cyanamide) and preparation conditions (i.e., annealing temperatures, annealing environment, templates, irradiation, solvent type, and type of reaction). The reported powder form of g-C3N4 requires additional steps for deposition on the working electrode to prepare a thin-film-based device for large-scale CO2 reduction.
Using multiple precursors, like thiourea with melamine, cyanuric acid, or urea, can in situ produce g-C3N4 with abundant functionalities like C, N, O, and S, which can boost solar light harnessing, promote charge carrier separation, and enhance the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction activity. Special attention should be paid to developing facile, one-step, and eco-friendly methods to prepare g-C3N4 with various morphologies. Recently, our group developed a simple, template-free, one-pot approach for the fabrication of porous one-dimensional gCN nanostructures (i.e., wires, fibers, tubes, and rods) in situ doped with various metals (i.e., Au, Pd, Pt, Cu, and their combinations) with high surface areas and outstanding catalytic properties for CO oxidation.14–17 The same tactics can be extended to prepare other gCN structures with various single-atom metals, dopants, and nanoparticles for CO2 reduction. The single-atom/g-C3N4 catalyst for CO2 reduction has not been studied adequately. g-C3N4 comprising triazine or heptazine skeletons can accommodate various single-metal atoms to maximize atom utilization, minimize attrition, reduce deactivation, and enhance CO2 activity, selectivity, and durability.
Theoretical calculations (i.e., DFT and artificial intelligence) combined with experimental studies are important and precise ways to attain clarity for CO2RR pathways, charge carrier kinetics, and the CO2 adsorption mechanism. Also, theoretical calculations can permit the exploration of novel g-C3N4 materials and provide an understanding of their CO2RR activity and mechanisms as a function of composition, morphology, defects, and functional groups. Besides, in situ characterization techniques involving X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) and diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform (DRIFT), and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) techniques are perfect ways to identify the CO2 intermediates generated, as well as the origin of active species, and thus, determine the CO2 reaction pathway and mechanism. The relatively high overpotential, low current densities, and low redox-tunability are the main drawbacks of electrochemical CO2 reduction, which should be considered in future investigations. Meanwhile, the CO2 reduction affinity to liquid chemicals, such as methanol, ethanol, formic acid, and hydrocarbons ≥C2 products, are limited and with low mass production. This could be achieved using multicomponent systems (i.e., binary and ternary metal nanoparticles) with a great affinity for liquid products to enhance the product selectivity and productivity, thus overcoming the financial constraints for industrial-scale implementation. The use of novel MXenes, MOFs, graphdiyne, graphone, and graphane materials with g-C3N4 to augment the CO2 reduction selectivity and productivity could help to realize this objective.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Qatar National Research Fund (QNRF, a member of the Qatar Foundation) through the National Priority Research Program Grant (NPRP) NPRP13S-0117-200095, project ZR2020QB070 supported by Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation, the Introduction and Cultivation Plan of Young Innovative Talents in Colleges and Universities of Shandong Province, and the Key Technology Research and Development Program of Shandong Province (2019GSF111014). Statements made herein are solely the responsibility of the authors.
Notes and references
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1709–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Zhu, J. L. Liu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3423–3452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Jacobson, J. S. Kler, M. T. Hernke, R. K. Braun, K. C. Meyer and W. E. Funk, Nat. Sustain., 2019, 2, 691–701 CrossRef .
K. J. Boniface, R. R. Dykeman, A. Cormier, H.-B. Wang, S. M. Mercer, G. Liu, M. F. Cunningham and P. G. Jessop, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 208–213 RSC .
A. Modak, P. Bhanja, S. Dutta, B. Chowdhury and A. Bhaumik, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 4002–4033 RSC .
C. I. Shaughnessy, D. J. Sconyers, H.-J. Lee, B. Subramaniam, J. D. Blakemore and K. C. Leonard, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 2434–2442 RSC .
H. Guzmán, N. Russo and S. Hernández, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 1896–1920 RSC .
Q.-W. Song, Z.-H. Zhou and L.-N. He, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 3707–3728 RSC .
F. Franco, C. Rettenmaier, H. S. Jeon and B. Roldan Cuenya, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6884–6946 RSC .
W. Niu, Z. Li, K. Marcus, L. Zhou, Y. Li, R. Ye, K. Liang and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701642 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, S. Cao, J. Hou, Z. Li, B. Zhang, P. Zhai, Y. Zhang and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000588 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Thomas, A. Fischer, F. Goettmann, M. Antonietti, J.-O. Müller, R. Schlögl and J. M. Carlsson, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4893–4908 RSC .
K. Eid, M. H. Sliem, K. Jlassi, A. S. Eldesoky, G. G. Abdo, S. Y. Al-Qaradawi, M. A. Sharaf, A. M. Abdullah and A. A. Elzatahry, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2019, 107, 107460 CrossRef CAS .
K. Eid, M. H. Sliem, H. Al-Kandari, M. A. Sharaf and A. M. Abdullah, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 3421–3431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Eid, M. H. Sliem and A. M. Abdullah, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 11755–11764 RSC .
K. Eid, M. H. Sliem, A. S. Eldesoky, H. Al-Kandari and A. M. Abdullah, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 17943–17953 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, H. Wang, Z. Wu and L. Wang, Catal. Today, 2018, 300, 160–172 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Shi, Q. Shen, C. Guo and G. Zhao, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 5900–5910 RSC .
J. Zhu, P. Xiao, H. Li and S. A. Carabineiro, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16449–16465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mao, T. Peng, X. Zhang, K. Li, L. Ye and L. Zan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1253–1260 RSC .
S. Cao, J. Low, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2150–2176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Samanta and R. Srivastava, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1, 1506–1545 RSC .
K. Li, B. Peng and T. Peng, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7485–7527 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Kong and S. Shen, Small, 2019, 15, 1900772 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Starukh and P. Praus, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 1119 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Tufa, D. Chanda, M. Ma, D. Aili, T. B. Demissie, J. Vaes, Q. Li, S. Liu and D. Pant, Appl. Energy, 2020, 277, 115557 CrossRef CAS .
U. Ghosh, A. Majumdar and A. Pal, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 104631 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L. K. Putri and A. R. Mohamed, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 9710–9748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Gao, B. Louis, Q. Wang and W. Lin, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 33, 81–89 CrossRef .
J. Arredondo, P. G. Jessop, P. Champagne, J. Bouchard and M. F. Cunningham, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 4141–4152 RSC .
D. J. Heldebrant, C. R. Yonker, P. G. Jessop and L. Phan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 487–493 RSC .
W. Gao, T. Zhou, Y. Gao, B. Louis, D. O'Hare and Q. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 830–838 CrossRef .
D. Cheng, Z.-J. Zhao, G. Zhang, P. Yang, L. Li, H. Gao, S. Liu, X. Chang, S. Chen and T. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, T. Wang, B. Liu, D. Cheng, C. Hu, G. Zhang, W. Zhu, H. Wang, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6878–6883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang and J. Gong, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 642–643 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, C. Pei, R. Luo, S. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19523–19531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Yaashikaa, P. Senthil Kumar, S. J. Varjani and A. Saravanan, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 33, 131–147 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, X. Huang, X. Wang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21625–21649 RSC .
J. Wen, J. Xie, X. Chen and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 72–123 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S. T. Yong and S. P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kortlever, K. Tan, Y. Kwon and M. Koper, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 1843–1849 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S.-X. Guo, X. Zhang, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, Nano Today, 2020, 31, 100835 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev., 1964, 136, B864 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Tian, L. Yan and Z. Su, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 7712–7719 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tu, Y. Xu, J. Wang, B. Zhang, T. Zhou, S. Yin, S. Wu, C. Li, Y. Huang, Y. Zhou, Z. Zou, J. Robertson, M. Kraft and R. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7260–7268 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Miller, A. B. Jorge, T. Suter, A. Sella, F. Corà and P. McMillan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 15613–15638 RSC .
J. Xiong, P. Song, J. Di and H. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117788 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Z. Wang, X. Xu and J. Wang, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1956–1969 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dong and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1160–1166 RSC .
P. Xia, B. Zhu, J. Yu, S. Cao and M. Jaroniec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3230–3238 RSC .
P. Niu, Y. Yang, J. C. Yu, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10837–10840 RSC .
Z. Yang, Y. Zhang and Z. Schnepp, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14081–14092 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Li, H. Zhang and Q. Xiang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 765–786 RSC .
M. Ovcharov, N. Shcherban, S. Filonenko, A. Mishura, M. Skoryk, V. Shvalagin and V. Granchak, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2015, 202, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mo, X. Zhu, Z. Jiang, Y. Song, D. Liu, H. Li, X. Yang, Y. She, Y. Lei, S. Yuan, H. Li, L. Song, Q. Yan and H. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117854 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, L. Lin, X. Ye, F. Guo and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11926–11930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, S. Long, J. Hou, L. Ye, Y. Sun, W. Ni, C. Song, K. Li, G. G. Gurzadyan and X. Guo, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 5028–5035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, H. Zhou, K. Shi, R. Yan, Y. Tang, J. Liu, J. Ye, D. Zhang and T. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2195–2203 RSC .
L. Shi, T. Wang, H. Zhang, K. Chang and J. Ye, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5360–5367 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, H. Zhang, J. Wei, H.-X. Zhang, X. Wu, Y. Li, C. Li, J. Zhang and J. Ye, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5333–5340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Su, J. Sun, J. Wang, Z. Yang, W. Cheng and S. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1556–1562 RSC .
C. Xie, D. Yan, H. Li, S. Du, W. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Zou, R. Chen and S. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11082–11098 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Kwon, S.-J. Shin, X. Jin, Y. Jung, G.-S. Hwang, H. Kim and S.-J. Hwang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 277, 119191 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liang, Z. Li, Z.-H. Huang, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6885–6892 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shiraishi, Y. Kofuji, H. Sakamoto, S. Tanaka, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3058–3066 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Tang, X. Y. Kong, B.-J. Ng, Y.-H. Chew, A. R. Mohamed and S.-P. Chai, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 2335–2343 RSC .
M. Shen, L. Zhang, M. Wang, J. Tian, X. Jin, L. Guo, L. Wang and J. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1556–1563 RSC .
L. Jiang, X. Yuan, Y. Pan, J. Liang, G. Zeng, Z. Wu and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 388–406 CrossRef CAS .
F. Raziq, Y. Qu, M. Humayun, A. Zada, H. Yu and L. Jing, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 486–494 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, L. Lin, S. Gim, S. Lee, H. Kim, X. Wang and W. Choi, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4241–4256 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tonda, S. Kumar, S. Kandula and V. Shanker, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6772–6780 RSC .
P. Sharma, S. Kumar, O. Tomanec, M. Petr, J. Zhu Chen, J. T. Miller, R. S. Varma, M. B. Gawande and R. Zbořil, Small, 2021, 2006478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, X. Bai, D. Liu, J. Wang and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 77–81 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xiong, W. Cen, Y. Zhang and F. Dong, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2462–2472 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, J. M. Yan, X. N. Tang, M. Zhao and Q. Jiang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2654–2658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Tang, W.-G. Zhou, R.-T. Guo, C.-Y. Huang and W.-G. Pan, Catal. Commun., 2018, 107, 92–95 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Wang, H. Qin, X. Li, Y. Zuo, S. Kang and L. Cui, Catal. Commun., 2016, 74, 75–79 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tahir, M. Tahir and N. A. S. Amin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 419, 875–885 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, S. Wang, Q. Li, M. Lyu, T. Butburee, B. Luo, H. Wang, J. M. T. A. Fischer, C. Zhang, Z. Wu and L. Wang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1700003 CrossRef .
P. Huang, J. Huang, S. A. Pantovich, A. D. Carl, T. G. Fenton, C. A. Caputo, R. L. Grimm, A. I. Frenkel and G. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16042–16047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ni, F. Dong, H. Huang and Y. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 6448–6458 RSC .
S. Bai, X. Wang, C. Hu, M. Xie, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6094–6097 RSC .
J. Yu, K. Wang, W. Xiao and B. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11492–11501 RSC .
K. Maeda, K. Sekizawa and O. Ishitani, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10127–10129 RSC .
K. Maeda, R. Kuriki and O. Ishitani, Chem. Lett., 2016, 45, 182–184 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kuriki, K. Sekizawa, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2406–2409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kuriki, M. Yamamoto, K. Higuchi, Y. Yamamoto, M. Akatsuka, D. Lu, S. Yagi, T. Yoshida, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 4945–4949 CrossRef .
G. Zhao, H. Pang, G. Liu, P. Li, H. Liu, H. Zhang, L. Shi and J. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 141–149 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Walsh, C. Jiang, J. Tang and A. J. Cowan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 24825–24829 RSC .
K. Wang, Q. Li, B. Liu, B. Cheng, W. Ho and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176–177, 44–52 CAS .
L. Zhou, H. Zhang, H. Sun, S. Liu, M. O. Tade, S. Wang and W. Jin, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7002–7023 RSC .
Q. Fan, J. Liu, Y. Yu and S. Zuo, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 61877–61883 RSC .
G. Zhang, M. Zhang, X. Ye, X. Qiu, S. Lin and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 805–809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Xing, C. Zhang, B. Han, Y. Zhang, T. Wen, R. Leng, Z. Jiang, Y. Ai and X. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10606–10615 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fan, J. Liu, Y. Yu, S. Zuo and B. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 360–368 CrossRef CAS .
F. Raziq, M. Humayun, A. Ali, T. Wang, A. Khan, Q. Fu, W. Luo, H. Zeng, Z. Zheng, B. Khan, H. Shen, X. Zu, S. Li and L. Qiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 1082–1090 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, Y. Zhang, J. Fang, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, W. Chen and C. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 8291–8299 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, L. Ye, R. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, R. Guan, L. Tian and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4001–4009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, B. Zhu, C. Jiang, B. Cheng, W. You and J. Yu, Small, 2017, 13, 1603938 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fu, K. Liu, K. Jiang, H. Li, P. An, W. Li, N. Zhang, H. Li, X. Xu, H. Zhou, D. Tang, X. Wang, X. Qiu and M. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, Y. Zhang, F. Dong, A. H. Reshak, L. Ye, N. Pinna, C. Zeng, T. Zhang and H. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 465–474 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xing, Q. Liu, M. Song and C. Huang, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 5270–5279 CrossRef CAS .
P. Babu, S. Mohanty, B. Naik and K. Parida, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5936–5947 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Lu, J. Chen, A.-J. Wang, N. Bao, J.-J. Feng, W. Wang and L. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 73–78 RSC .
S. Samanta, R. Yadav, A. Kumar, A. Kumar Sinha and R. Srivastava, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118054 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, M. B. Gawande, J. Kopp, S. Kment, R. S. Varma and R. Zboril, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 5231–5238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qin, S. Wang, H. Ren, Y. Hou and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zeng and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10119–10126 RSC .
W. Iqbal, B. Yang, X. Zhao, M. Waqas, M. Rauf, C. Guo, J. Zhang and Y. Mao, Appl. Catal., A, 2019, 573, 13–21 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chu, Y. Wang, Y. Guo, J. Feng, C. Wang, W. Luo, X. Fan and Z. Zou, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 912–919 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, L. Zhang, R. Cheng, M. Wang, M. Li, Y. Zhou and J. Shi, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5008–5015 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xing, G. Chen, C. Li, Z. Han, Y. Hu and Q. Meng, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5239–5245 RSC .
D. Vidyasagar, N. Manwar, A. Gupta, S. G. Ghugal, S. S. Umare and R. Boukherroub, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 822–832 RSC .
M. Shen, L. Zhang and J. Shi, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 412001 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fu, J. Yu, C. Jiang and B. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701503 CrossRef .
S. Ma, S. Zhan, Y. Jia, Q. Shi and Q. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 186, 77–87 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Liu, W. He, Y. Zhao, Y. Wei, J. Xiong, J. Liu, J. Li, W. Song, X. Zhang and Z. Zhao, J. Catal., 2020, 389, 440–449 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liang, T. Borjigin, Y. Zhang, H. Liu, B. Liu and H. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34123–34131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bai, R. Zong, C. Li, D. Liu, Y. Liu and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 82–91 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fina, H. Menard and J. T. Irvine, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 13929–13936 RSC .
N. Cheng, J. Tian, Q. Liu, C. Ge, A. H. Qusti, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6815–6819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and S. T. Yong, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1249–1257 RSC .
S. Cao, Y. Li, B. Zhu, M. Jaroniec and J. Yu, J. Catal., 2017, 349, 208–217 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhu, W. Hu, W. Jiang, S. Zhong, P. Gong, B. Teng, L. Zhao and S. Bai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6686–6694 RSC .
H. Li, Y. Gao, Z. Xiong, C. Liao and K. Shih, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 439, 552–559 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Lee, J. Chen, M. Wu, D. Y. C. Leung, C. A. Grimes, Z. Lu, Z. Xu and S.-P. Feng, J. Power Sources, 2020, 466, 228306 CrossRef CAS .
B.-C. He, C. Zhang, P.-P. Luo, Y. Li and T.-B. Lu, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 7552–7559 RSC .
M. Reli, P. Huo, M. Sihor, N. Ambrozova, I. Troppova, L. Matejova, J. Lang, L. Svoboda, P. Kustrowski, M. Ritz, P. Praus and K. Koci, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 8564–8573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, C. Xie, H. Jiu, Y. Meng, Q. Zhang and Y. Gao, Catal. Lett., 2018, 148, 2812–2821 CrossRef CAS .
A. Banitalebi Dehkordi, A. Ziarati, J. B. Ghasemi and A. Badiei, Sol. Energy, 2020, 205, 465–473 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, Y. Liu, J. Li, Y. Wang, G. Jiang, Z. Zhao, D. Wang, A. Duan, J. Liu and Y. Wei, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158–159, 20–29 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, B. Peng, J. Jin, L. Zan and T. Peng, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 910–916 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, F. Raziq, Z. Li, Y. Qu, A. Zada and L. Jing, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1072–1078 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, D. Xu and T. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19936–19947 RSC .
S.-W. Cao, X.-F. Liu, Y.-P. Yuan, Z.-Y. Zhang, Y.-S. Liao, J. Fang, S. C. J. Loo, T. C. Sum and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 940–946 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, B. Teng and M. Fan, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 168–169, 1–8 CAS .
H. Shi, G. Chen, C. Zhang and Z. Zou, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3637–3643 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, L. Zhang, H. Lin, Q. Nong, M. Cui, Y. Wu and Y. He, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 299, 333–342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, L. Zhang, M. Wu, Y. Du, X. Fan, M. Wang, L. Zhang, Q. Kong and J. Shi, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 145–155 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohno, N. Murakami, T. Koyanagi and Y. Yang, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 6, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
B. Duan and L. Mei, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 575, 265–273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, Q. Li, C. Zhang, X. Fan, L. Li, Y. Dong, G. Chen and H. Shi, Carbon, 2020, 160, 342–352 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, L. Zhang, X. Fan, Y. Zhou, M. Wu and J. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5189–5196 RSC .
J.-Y. Tang, D. Yang, W.-G. Zhou, R.-T. Guo, W.-G. Pan and C.-Y. Huang, J. Catal., 2019, 370, 79–87 CrossRef CAS .
A. Indra, A. Acharjya, P. W. Menezes, C. Merschjann, D. Hollmann, M. Schwarze, M. Aktas, A. Friedrich, S. Lochbrunner, A. Thomas and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1653–1657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-S. Yi, J.-M. Yan, B.-R. Wulan, S.-J. Li, K.-H. Liu and Q. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 477–483 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, X. Zhao, Y. Cao, Z. Yan, R. Zhu, Y. Tao, X. Chen, D. Zhang, G. Li and D. L. Phillips, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 16527–16537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pu, T. Liu, I. S. Amiinu, R. Cheng, P. Wang, C. Zhang, P. Ji, W. Hu, J. Liu and S. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004009 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, Y. Long, S. Ruan and Y.-J. Zeng, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 15593–15599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Song, C. Ma, Y. Cheng, D. Shen, S. Zhang, W. Liu, P. Huo and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 1298–1306 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Cao, X.-F. Liu, Y.-P. Yuan, Z.-Y. Zhang, J. Fang, S. C. J. Loo, J. Barber, T. C. Sum and C. Xue, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18363–18366 RSC .
Q. Guo, L. Fu, T. Yan, W. Tian, D. Ma, J. Li, Y. Jiang and X. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 509, 144773 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nie, L. Zhang, J. Fu, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 441, 12–22 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, L. Zhang, M. Fan, X. Wang, M. L. Walbridge, Q. Nong, Y. Wu and L. Zhao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 137, 175–184 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, J. Huang, L. Shi, L. Cao, H. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Li, H. Song, Y. Jie and J. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 670–680 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ali, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Ali, L. Zhao, S. Shaheen and L. Jing, Mater. Res. Bull., 2020, 122, 110676 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, H. Ma, W. Zhang, G. Zhu, W. Yang, N. Son, M. Kang and C. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123172 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liang, T. Borjigin, Y. Zhang, B. Liu, H. Liu and H. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 566–575 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, W. Fang, L. Zhao, H. Chen, X. He, W. Li, P. Tian and Z. Huang, Environ. Int., 2019, 130, 104898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Gao, X. Wu, P.-H. Lee and K. Shih, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 402, 198–207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Y. Feng, D. Li, X. Han and J. Liu, Energy, 2019, 178, 168–175 CrossRef .
D. O. Adekoya, M. Tahir and N. A. S. Amin, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 18, 261–274 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. T. Truc, L. G. Bach, N. T. Hanh, T.-D. Pham, N. T. P. Le Chi, D. T. Tran and M. V. Nguyen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 540, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Xu, Y. Li, Y. Wei, J. Liu and Z. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118314 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, S. Long, S. Hu, J. Hou, W. Ni, C. Song, K. Li, G. G. Gurzadyan and X. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 760–769 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Y. Feng, B. E. Logan, C. Dai, X. Han, D. Li and J. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 15289–15296 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, C. Qin, H. Wang, M. Chu, A. Zada, X. Zhang, J. Li, F. Raziq, Y. Qu and L. Jing, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 459–466 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, W. Wan, H. Li, S. Yuan, H. Zhao and P. K. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706108 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, M. Shen, L. Zhang, J. Tian, X. Jin, Y. Zhou and J. Shi, Carbon, 2017, 120, 23–31 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Tang, R.-T. Guo, W.-G. Zhou, C.-Y. Huang and W.-G. Pan, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 802–810 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, R.-T. Guo, H. Lin and X.-Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 37162–37170 RSC .
X. Meng, S. Ouyang, T. Kako, P. Li, Q. Yu, T. Wang and J. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11517–11519 RSC .
Z. Sun, J. M. T. A. Fischer, Q. Li, J. Hu, Q. Tang, H. Wang, Z. Wu, M. Hankel, D. J. Searles and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 216, 146–155 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Q. Shao, Y. Pi, J. Guo and X. Huang, Small, 2017, 13, 1700355 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tonda, S. Kumar, M. Bhardwaj, P. Yadav and S. Ogale, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2667–2678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Zhou and R. Xu, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 2315–2321 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, S. Cheng, C. Cometto, E. Anxolabehere-Mallart, S. M. Ng, C. C. Ko, G. Liu, L. Chen, M. Robert and T. C. Lau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9413–9416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, R. Kuriki, M. Zhang, X. Wang and O. Ishitani, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15146–15151 RSC .
R. Kuriki, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6011–6018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kuriki, C. S. K. Ranasinghe, Y. Yamazaki, A. Yamakata, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16795–16802 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ma, G. Chen, C. Fave, L. Chen, R. Kuriki, K. Maeda, O. Ishitani, T. C. Lau, J. Bonin and M. Robert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6188–6195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, C. Hou, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Chen and T. He, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 312–319 CrossRef CAS .
T. Di, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu and J. Xu, J. Catal., 2017, 352, 532–541 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huo, J. Zhang, K. Dai, Q. Li, J. Lv, G. Zhu and C. Liang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 528–538 CrossRef CAS .
R.-T. Guo, X.-Y. Liu, H. Qin, Z.-Y. Wang, X. Shi, W.-G. Pan, Z.-G. Fu, J.-Y. Tang, P.-Y. Jia and Y.-F. Miao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 500, 144059 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hao, J. Zhou, Z. Cui, Y. Wang, Y. Wang and Z. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 229, 41–51 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Hu, J. Zhou, C. Y. Sun, M. M. Chen, X. L. Wang and Z. M. Su, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 379–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, X. Zhu, D. Chen, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He, H. Xu and J. Lu, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2020, 7, 676–687 RSC .
W. Ye, J. Hu, X. Hu, W. Zhang, X. Ma and H. Wang, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6372–6383 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Zhang, J. Meng and J. Zhang, Mol. Catal., 2017, 430, 9–19 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Guo, Y. Zeng, H. Guo, S. Wan, M. Ou, S. Zhang and Q. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30673–30681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yu, L. Chen, X. Shen, X. Li and C. Duan, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 101101 CrossRef .
Y. Meng, L. Zhang, H. Jiu, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, W. Ren, Y. Sun and D. Li, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2019, 95, 35–41 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Q. Tan, Q. Li, J. Zhou, J. Fan, B. Li, J. Sun and K. Lv, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118738 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, Z. Sun, S. Deng, H. Wang and Z. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 564, 406–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. He, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu, W. Ho and W. Macyk, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 119006 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Wu, T. Xiao, Z. Tang, J. Shen, H. Li, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 255, 117771 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Jo, S. Kumar and S. Tonda, Composites, Part B, 2019, 176, 107212 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, J. Huang, Y. Yang, J. Wu, J. Shen, X. Liu, A. Sun and Z. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2020, 268, 127560 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Jo, S. Kumar, S. Eslava and S. Tonda, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 586–598 CrossRef CAS .
S. You, S. Guo, X. Zhao, M. Sun, C. Sun, Z. Su and X. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 14115–14121 RSC .
Y. Xu, Y. You, H. Huang, Y. Guo and Y. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 381, 121159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L. K. Putri, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 530–543 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Wang, H.-C. Yao, Z.-Y. Fan, L. Zhang, J.-S. Wang, S.-Q. Zang and Z.-J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3765–3775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Murugesan, S. Narayanan, M. Manickam, P. K. Murugesan and R. Subbiah, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 450, 516–526 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. T. Truc, N. T. Hanh, M. V. Nguyen, N. T. P. Le Chi, N. Van Noi, D. T. Tran, M. N. Ha and T.-D. Pham, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 457, 968–974 CrossRef .
R. A. Rather, M. Khan and I. M. Lo, J. Catal., 2018, 366, 28–36 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bafaqeer, M. Tahir, A. Ali Khan and N. A. Saidina Amin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 8612–8624 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, L. Zhang, B. Teng and M. Fan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 649–656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, L. Zhang, X. Fan, M. Wu, M. Wang, R. Cheng, L. Zhang, H. Yao and J. Shi, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 629–635 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, B. Cheng, W. Wang, C. Jiang and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 231, 368–380 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Putri, W.-J. Ong, W. S. Chang and S.-P. Chai, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 744–754 RSC .
S. Kang, Y. Fang, Y. Huang, L.-F. Cui, Y. Wang, H. Qin, Y. Zhang, X. Li and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 168–169, 472–482 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zeng and J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22116–22125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-X. Zhou, X.-Y. Tao, J. Ma, L.-T. Guo, Y.-B. Zhu, H.-L. Fan, Z.-S. Liu and X.-Y. Wei, Vacuum, 2018, 149, 175–179 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and S. T. Yong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 858–861 RSC .
Z. Xu, C. Zhuang, Z. Zou, J. Wang, X. Xu and T. Peng, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2193–2209 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai, S.-T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 757–770 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Bai, H. Qin, F. Wang, Y. Li, X. Li, S. Kang, Y. Zuo and L. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17212–17219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Q. Xia, X. Bai, Z. Ge, Q. Yang, C. Yin, S. Kang, M. Dong and X. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 196–203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Liu, X. Han, R. Godin, J. Chen, W. Zhou, C. Jiang, J. F. Thompson, K. B. Mustafa, S. A. Shevlin, J. R. Durrant, Z. Guo and J. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. I. Abdu, K. Eid, A. M. Abdullah, M. H. Sliem, A. Elzatahry and X. Lu, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 5437–5446 RSC .
H. I. Abdu, K. Eid, A. M. Abdullah, Z. Han, M. H. Ibrahim, D. Shan, J. Chen, A. A. Elzatahry and X. Lu, Renewable Energy, 2020, 153, 998–1004 CrossRef CAS .
M. Karamad, H. A. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4075–4081 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, J. Rosen, Y. Zhou, G. S. Hutchings, Y. C. Kimmel, J. G. Chen and F. Jiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3242 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhu, Y. J. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Lv, Q. Li, R. Michalsky, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16132–16135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Reske, H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, B. Roldan Cuenya and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6978–6986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Li, P. Guo, H. Ma and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8497–8511 RSC .
B. Zhang, T.-J. Zhao, W.-J. Feng, Y.-X. Liu, H.-H. Wang, H. Su, L.-B. Lv, X.-H. Li and J.-S. Chen, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2450–2459 CrossRef CAS .
N. Meng, W. Zhou, Y. Yu, Y. Liu and B. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10983–10989 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, M.-R. Gao, Y.-Q. Zhang, N. Duan, T. Fan, J. Xiao, J. Zhang, Y. Dong, J. Li, X. Yi and J.-L. Luo, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104833 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, P. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18093–18100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, F. Mao, L. R. Zheng, H. F. Wang, X. H. Yang and H. G. Yang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11035–11041 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, T. H. Tan, Y. H. Ng and R. Amal, Chemistry, 2016, 22, 11991–11996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Nobuhiro Sagara, T. Tsubota and T. Ohno, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 192, 193–198 CrossRef .
S. Das and R. Cauwenbergh, Green Chem., 2021, 2553–2574 Search PubMed .
X. X. Jiang, X. De Hu, M. Tarek, P. Saravanan, R. Alqadhi, S. Y. Chin and M. M. Rahman Khan, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 40, 101222 CrossRef CAS .
H. Feng, Q. Guo, Y. Xu, T. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, M. Wang and D. Shen, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 4256–4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chart of the number of articles on carbon nitride between 2010 and 2021, obtained from the Scopus database on 5th January 2021 using the keywords carbon nitride, carbon nitride catalyst, and g-C3N4 CO2 reduction. (b) Comparing the band structure of g-C3N4 for the redox potentials of different products at pH 7. (c) Assorted cells for the CO2RR designed based on data from ref. 27. RE in (c) refers to the reference electrode.	 

CO2 + e− → CO2˙−	−1.90
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH	−0.61
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	−0.53
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O	−0.48
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O	−0.38
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	−0.24
2CO2(g) + 10H2O(l) + 14e− → C2H6(g) + 14OH−	−0.270
3CO2(g) + 13H2O(l) + 18e− → C3H7OH(l) + 18OH−	−0.320
2CO2(g) + 9H2O(l) + 12e− → C2H5OH(l) + 12OH−	−0.33
2CO2(g) + 8H2O(l) + 12e− → C2H4(g) + 12OH−	−0.34

Formaldehyde	

	C1
Carbene	

	C1 >C3
Glyoxal	

	C1–C2C1
Enol-like	

	C2C2C3
{QE (%) = [number of reacted electrons/number of incident photons] × 100	(1)
TCEN = Σ[(Cproduct × nelectrons) × Vreactor]/[Mcatalyst × Tirr]	(2)
j = I/A	(3)
Efaradaic = αnF/Q	(4)
η = E − Eeq	(5)
TOF = Np/Nc	(6)
Eefficiency = [Eeq/Eeq + η] × Efaradaic(7)	(7)
QY = [2·nx·NA·h·c/tirr·I·A·λ]	(8)
ECSA = Q/mc	(9)
IPCE (%) = [(1240 × j)/(λ × I0)] × 100	(10)
E° = ΔG°/nF

 	Fig. 2  (a) The PDOS of g-C3N4 (left) and S-doped g-C3N4 (right). (b) The LUMOs and HOMOs of g-C3N4 and S-doped g-C3N4. Copyright, 2018, ACS.45 (c) Calculated PDOS of bulk g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 with nitrogen vacancies. Copyright, 2017, ACS.46 (d) Reaction pathways for the CO2RR on Pd/g-C3N4 catalyst to yield HCOOH and CH3OH. Copyright, 2016, ACS.47	 

 	Fig. 3  Molecular structures and surface properties of g-C3N4 designed based on data from ref. 20.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the formation process for TCN(NH3), (b, c) scanning electron microscopy images, (d, e) transmission electron microscopy images, (f) scanning tunneling electron microscopy image, and (g, h) energy dispersive X-ray mapping images of TCN(NH3), (i, j) the photocatalytic activity of different samples toward the CO2RR, (k) the photocatalytic activity under different conditions toward CO2RR, (l) the stability test of TCN(NH3) over different cycles, (m) the comparison of CO yield over different catalysts under visible light illumination for 3 h, and (n) the adsorption energies of CO2 and desorption energies of CO on various TCN catalysts. Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd.57	 

Porous nitrogen-rich g-C3N4 nanotubes (TCN(NH3)	300 W Xe lamp, 4 μmol CoCl2, 2,2-bipyridine, TEOA and MeCN	103.6 (CO)	0.43%	
57

g-C3N4 ultrathin nanosheets	300 W Xe lamp, NaHCO3, H2SO4	1.9 (CH3OH)	
	
52

1.4 (CH4)
Helical g-C3N4 nanorods	300 W Xe lamp, 0.5 wt% Pt/0.5 wt% MnOX, CO2 and H2O vapor	89.0 (CO)	
	
58

g-C3N4 with nitrogen vacancies	300 W Xe lamp, CoCl2, bipyridine, triethanolamine, and acetonitrile	56.9 (CO)	
	
59

3D macro-/meso-/nanoscopic morphology-tunable g-C3N4	300 W Xe lamp, TEDA	22.0 (CO)	
	
60

g-C3N4 nanosheet/UiO-66	300 W Xe lamp, MeCN/TEOA (4:1)	9.9 (CO)	
	
61

g-C3N4 nanosheet with B–H bonding decorated metal–organic framework (BIF-20@g-C3N4)	300 W Xe lamp, MeCN/TEOA (4:1)	15.5 (CH4)	
	
62

53.9 (CO)

 	Fig. 5  (a) The proposed photocatalytic CO2RR mechanism on g-C3N4 with nitrogen vacancies. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society (ACS).46 (b) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism on g-C3N4 with carbon vacancies. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC).69	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The CO2RR mechanism on a single Co2+ site of decorated g-C3N4. (b) The molecular structure of the macrocyclic cobalt catalyst (c) CO yield under visible light irradiation for 2 h for different Co2+@C3N4 catalysts. (d) Turnover number (TOF) of CO and H2 for different reaction times. (e) TOF and (f) selectivity of CO production with different cobalt loadings after 2 h. Copyright, 2018, ACS.82 (g–i) Band structure and (j) optical absorption spectra of g-C3N4, Pd/g-C3N4, and Pt/g-C3N4. Copyright, 2016, ACS.47	 

Pt/g-C3N4	Cocatalysts	Water	CH4 generation: 6.51	
	
83

Pd/g-C3N4	Cocatalysts	Water	CO generation: 14.9	
	
84

C2H5OH generation: 17.2
CH4 generation: 6.5
Pt/g-C3N4	Cocatalysts	Water	CO generation: 0.05	
	
85

CH3COH generation: 1.0
CH4 generation: 0.025
Pd/g-C3N4	Schottky junction	Water	HCHO generation: 0.875	
	
47

CH3OH generation: 0.25
CH4 generation: 0.3
Co2+/g-C3N4	Active site	Water	CO generation: 30	QY = 0.4% at 10 mg Co2+	
82

Ru complex/g-C3N4	Active site	Acetonitrile	CO generation: 0.074	QY of HCOOH = −1.5% at 30 mg Ru/mpg-C3N4	
86

HCOOH generation: 0.48
Ru(II) complex/g-C3N4	Active site	Acetonitrile	HCOOH generation: 8	
	
87

RuP/g-C3N4	Active site	
N,N-Dimethylacetamide	HCOOH generation: 110	AQY = 5.7% at 400 nm	
88

RuRu/Ag g-C3N4	Z scheme	
N,N-Dimethylacetamide	HCOOH generation: 42.3	QY HCOOH = 0.2% at 400 nm	
89

CO generation: 11.1
Co-porphyrin/g-C3N4	Active site	Acetonitrile	CO generation: 17	QE = 0.8% at 420 nm	
90

[Co(bpy)n]2+/g-C3N4	Active site	Acetonitrile/H2O with triethanolamine (TEOA)	CO generation: 460	AQY CO = 1.6% at 400 nm	
91

H2 generation: 138

 	Fig. 7  (a) Band structure of pure C3N4 and S-doped C3N4. (b) The CH3OH yield with TCN and MCN under UV-vis light irradiation for 3 h. Copyright 2015, Elsevier Ltd.92	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The proposed formation process for P-g-C3N4. The yields of (b) CO and (c) CH4 for g-C3N4 and P-g-C3N4 at different times. (d) The generation rate of CO and CH4 for g-C3N4 and P-g-C3N4. (e) The hydrogen yield for g-C3N4 and P-g-C3N4 under visible-light irradiation. Copyright, 2018, ACS.100	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the hierarchical porous O-doped g-C3N4 nanotube (OCN-Tube) preparation process. (b) Band structure of OCN-Tube and g-C3N4. (c) The CH3OH yield and stability of bulk g-C3N4 and OCN-Tube under UV-vis irradiation for 3 h. Copyright, 2017, WILEY.101	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photoelectrochemical properties of CNU and CNU-BA0.03 in 0.2 M Na2SO4 solution. (b) CO and H2 yield for CNU modified without and with different amounts of BA. (c) The stability test of the CNU-BA0.03 composite. (d) A comparison of CO and H2 yields on various comonomer modified CNU samples under visible light. Copyright 2015, Elsevier Ltd.109	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Heterojunction structures of g-C3N4 designed based on data from ref. 28. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of C3N4–PtCu NCs and C3N4–PtCu CNCs. (c) The production rate of CO and CH4, and selectivity for C3N4–PtCu CNCs under visible light irradiation over successive cycles. (d) The evolution rate of CO, CH4, and H2 for C3N4, C3N4–PtCu NCs and C3N4–PtCu CNCs. (e–g) The most stable configuration of CO2 and adsorption energies on Pt (100), PtCu (100), Pt (730), and PtCu (730) facets. Copyright, 2017, RSC.126	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) CO and CH4 produced on different catalysts under UV-vis light irradiation for 2 h, (b) the proposed photocatalytic mechanism toward the CO2RR on Au–CN catalyst. Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd.127	 

 	Fig. 13  The proposed photocatalytic mechanism for (a) g-C3N4 and N-TiO2 composite and (b) N-TiO2. Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd.133	 

 	Fig. 14  SEM images of (a) ZnO, (b, c) g-C3N4 and (d, e) G10 and (f) HRTEM image of G10. The calculated electronic band structures of (g) g-C3N4 and (h) ZnO. (i) The CH3OH evolution rates of cm-ZnO, ZnO, G10, and g-C3N4. (j) Band edge positions of g-C3N4 and ZnO as well as standard redox potentials. Two different photocatalytic mechanisms toward the CO2RR: (k) conventional heterojunction-type and (l) direct Z-scheme mechanism. Copyright, 2015, RSC.136	 

WO3/g-C3N4	Direct Z scheme	Planetary milling method; agate mortar method, and sonication method	Light-emitting diode (LED; Epitex, 30M32 L)	CH3OH	
	
142

Defect engineered WO3−x/g-C3N4	Direct Z scheme	Hydrothermal method and deposition precipitation	500 W xenon lamp	CO (6.46 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
151

WO3/g-C3N4	Direct Z scheme	Solid state synthesis	Photoreduction of CO2 with H2O under UV irradiation	CO and CH4	
	
152

In2O3–g-C3N4	Type II	Hydrothermal method	500 W xenon lamp	CH4 (159.2 ppm)	0.62	
153

g-C3N4/ZnO	Direct Z scheme	One-step facile calcination method	300 W simulated solar xenon arc lamp	CH3OH (0.6 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
136

PNS-ZnO@g-C3N4 porous core/shell structure	Type II	Solid state synthesis	300 W xenon lamp equipped with a 420 nm cutoff filter	CO (16.8 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (30.5 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
154

g-C3N4/ZnO microspheres	Direct Z scheme	Electrostatic self-assembly	350 W xenon lamp	CH3OH (1.32 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
155

SnO2−x/g-C3N4	Direct Z scheme	Deposition precipitation and calcination	500 W xenon lamp, 0.3 MPa CO2 pressure	CO, CH3OH, and CH4	
	
156

Sb doped SnO2/g-C3N4	Type II	Hydrothermal and post-annealing	5 mL of solution (MeCN/TEOA = 4:1); 300 W xenon arc lamp with a UV cutoff filter	CH4 (0.6 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (4.49 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
157

SnO2/Ag/g-C3N4	Type II	Microwave-assisted hydrothermal method	300 W xenon lamp	CH4 (0.6 μmol g−1); CO (8 μmol g−1)	
	
158

SnFe2O4/g-C3N4 ferromagnetic; oxygen vacancy	Direct Z scheme	Hydrothermal method	300 W iodine tungsten lamp	CO (7.56 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
159

m-CeO2/g-C3N4	Type II	Hard-template method	300 W xenon arc lamp	CH4 (13.88 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (11.8 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
141

g-C3N4@CeO2 hollow structure with oxygen vacancies	Type II	Solid state synthesis	300 W xenon lamp with a 420 nm cutoff filter, water vapor was used as a hole scavenger	CH3OH (5.2 μmol g−1); CH4 (3.5 μmol g−1); CO (16.8 μmol g−1)	17.1	
160

Cu2O/g-C3N4 0D/3D morphology	Type II	Photodeposition	Photocatalytic activity evaluation system (CEL-SPH2N-D9, Beijing)	CH4 (0.0805 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (8.182 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
161

g-C3N4/Ag–TiO2	Type II	Solvent evaporation followed by calcination	300 W xenon lamp; CO2 flow rate mL min−1; water vapor was used as hole scavenger	CH4 (9.33 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (6.33 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
162

Phosphate–oxygen (P–O) bridged TiO2/g-C3N4	Type II	Impregnation–solid state synthesis	300 W xenon lamp; water vapor was used as a hole scavenger	CH4 (40 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (15 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
135

P–O linked g-C3N4/TiO2-nanotubes	Direct Z scheme	Solid sublimation and conversion mean, followed by an impregnation method	150 W xenon lamp	Acetic acid (28 mg L−1 h−1); methanol (25.4 mg L−1 h−1); formic acid (22.8 mg L−1 h−1)	
	
163

Cu–g-C3N4/TiO2	Type II	Solid state synthesis	1 M NaOH; 500 W, 22 cm long arc xenon lamp tube	CH3OH (450 μmol g−1 h−1); HCOOH (3500 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
164

Nb–TiO2/g-C3N4	Direct Z scheme	Solid state synthesis	Two 30 W white bulbs; CO2 flow rate: 20 mL min−1; water vapor was used as hole scavenger	CO (420 μmol g−1 h−1); HCOOH (698 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (562 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
165

(Au/A-TiO2)@g-C3N4	All-solid-state Z scheme	Deft method	300 W xenon lamp (≥420 nm); water vapor was used as hole scavenger	CH4 (37.4 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (21.7 μmol g−1 h−1)	1.91	
166

TiO2−x/g-C3N4	Type II	Solid state synthesis	300 W xenon lamp; 4 mL of methyl cyanide solvent, 1 mL of triethanolamine (TEOA), bipyridine (bpy) (10 mmol L−1) and 25 μL of 20 mmol L−1 CoCl2 aqueous solution	CO (77.8 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
167

Al–O linked g-C3N4/TiO2	Direct Z scheme	Solid state synthesis	150 W xenon lamp; Na2SO4 solution (0.1 M, 60 mL)	CH3COOH (54.9 mg L−1 h−1); HCOOH (42.7 mg L−1 h−1); CH3OH (45.4 mg L−1 h−1)	
	
168

Al–O bridged g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3	Direct Z scheme	Wet chemical method followed by calcination	300 W xenon arc lamp; ambient pressure	CH4 (3.1 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (15.8 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
169

α-Fe2O3/g-C3N4	Direct Z scheme	Impregnation–hydrothermal	300 W xenon lamp; CO2 pressure of 1 atm	CO (27.2 μmol g−1 h−1)	0.963	
170

MnO2/g-C3N4 2D/2D shape	Direct Z scheme	
In situ redox reaction	300 W xenon lamp; water vapor was used as a hole scavenger	CO (9.6 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
171

NiO/g-C3N4 ball flower	Type II	Hydrothermal deposition method combined with subsequent calcination route	300 W xenon arc lamp; water vapour was used as a hole scavenger	CO (4.17 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
172

Bi2O3/g-C3N4	Direct Z scheme	High temperature calcination combined with a hydrothermal method	300 W xenon lamp	CO (2.81 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (1.34 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
173


 	Fig. 15  (a) Photocurrents of CN and MoP/CN-15%. (b) CO yield of photocatalytic CO2 reduction on CN and MoP/CN composites within 6 h illumination. (c) The total yield after 6 h irradiation. (d) Proposed photocatalytic mechanism of MoP/CN composites. Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd.146	 

 	Fig. 16  The yields of CO, CH4, and CH3CHO, and CO2 conversion on (a) CN and CN modified with different amounts of KOH, as well as (b) CN loaded with KCl, K2CO3, and KHCO3 together with (c) CN modified with different amounts of NaOH after 5 h irradiation. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of Ru in a solution of DMF/TEOA (4/1 v/v) in the presence of 0.1 M Et4NBF4 under Ar or CO2 atmospheres. (b) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic CO2RR on Ru/C3N4 composite. Copyright, 2014, RSC.180	 

g-CN	6.1	—	—	Trace
CN-12-0.2	54	0.20	12.2	1127
CN-12-0.5	105	0.37	12.2	1854
CN-12-1.0	200	0.64	10.7	1561
CN-12-1.5	240	0.74	10.7	Trace
CN-7-1.0	241	0.51	7.2	Trace
CN-24-1.0	130	0.70	24.4	1223

g-C3N4/SnS2 QDs amine functionalized	Direct Z-scheme	Hydrothermal method	300 W Xe light with a cutoff filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)	CH3OH (2.3 μmol g−1); CH4(0.64 μmol g−1)	
	
185

Au@void@g-C3N4/SnS yolk–shell structure; amine-functionalized	All solid-state Z-scheme	Hydrothermal method	300 W xenon lamp with a 420 nm cutoff filter	CH3OH (5.3 μmol g−1); CH4(3.8 μmol g−1); CO (17.1 μmol g−1)	17.2	
120

Porous g-C3N4/Sn2S3-DETA	Direct Z-scheme	Hydrothermal method	300 W xenon lamp	CH3OH (1.35 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (4.84 μmol g−1 h−1)	2.8	
186

Bi2S3 QDs/g-C3N4	Direct Z-scheme	Hydrothermal method	300 W xenon arc lamp	CH4 (12.52 μmol g−1); CO (54.74 μmol g−1)	2.31	
187

MoS2/g-C3N4	Direct Z-scheme	Solid state synthesis	300 W xenon arc lamp; 100 kPa CO2 pressure	CO (8.37 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
188

C–Cu2−xS/g-C3N4	
	Hydrothermal method	Reduction with water under visible light	CO (1062.6 μmol g−1)	
	
189

g-C3N4/Au/ZnIn2S4 surface plasmon resonance effect	Z-Scheme	Hydrothermal method	Visible light irradiation	CO (242.3 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
190

CuInS2/Au/g-C3N4	Z-Scheme	Hydrothermal method	300 W xenon lamp with 400 nm cutoff filter	CO (2.433 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (0.148 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
191

CdIn2S4/mpg-C3N4	Type II	Hard template combined with hydrothermal method	300 W xenon lamp combined with a 420 nm cutoff filter	(0.64 μmol g−1) CH3OH (42.7 μmol g−1 h−1)	0.14	
192


UiO-66/g-C3N4	MOF	Type II	Self-assembly	300 W xenon arc lamp with a UV cutoff filter	CO (9.9 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
61

BIF-20@g-C3N4	MOF	Type II	Self-assembly	MeCN/TEOA = 4:1; 300 W xenon arc lamp with light filters (400 nm UV cutoff and 800 nm IR cutoff filter	CO (53.869 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (15.524 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
62

NH2-UiO-66/g-C3N4	MOF	
	Hydrothermal method	300 W xenon arc lamp equipped with a 400 nm cutoff filter; 1 mL of triethanolamine (TEOA)	CO (31.67 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
193

NH2-UiO-66/g-C3N4/CdTe	MOF	Type II	Hydrothermal method	300 W xenon lamp (λ > 420 nm); 4 mL of acetonitrile and 1 mL of ethanol	HCOOH (24.6 μmol g−1 h−1)	3.01	
194

g-C3N4/ZIF-67	MOF	Direct Z-scheme	Aging at room temperature	300 W Xe lamp (λ > 420 nm)	CH3CH2OH (325.5 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
195

Ti3C2/g-C3N4 2D/2D	MXene	
	Solid state synthesis	300 W xenon lamp (PLS-SXE300) with a 420 nm cutoff filter	CH4 (0.044 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (5.19 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
196

Alkalinized Ti3C2/g-C3N4 2D/2D/0D	MXene	
	Deposition	300 W xenon lamp with a 420 nm cutoff filter	CH4 (0.269 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (11.21 μmol g−1 h−1)	0.0019	
197

TiO2/C3N4/Ti3C2	MXene	S-Scheme	Electrostatic self-assembly	350 W xenon lamp	CH4 (1.20 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (4.39 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
198

g-C3N4/NiAl-LDH 2D/2D	LDH	Type II	Hydrothermal method	300 W xenon arc lamp; water vapor was used	CO (8.2 μmol g−1 h−1)	0.39	
177

CoZnAl-LDH/RGO/g-C3N4	LDH	Z-Scheme	Hydrothermal method	300 W xenon arc lamp	CO (10.11 μmol g−1 h−1)	0.45	
199

N-Doped C dot/CoAl-LDH/g-C3N4	LDH	Type II	Hydrothermal method	300 W xenon arc lamp	CH4 (25.69 μmol g−1 h−1)	0.6	
200

g-C3N4/NiAl-LDH	LDH	Type II	Self-sacrificing template process and hydrothermal process	300 W xenon lamp	CO (27.02 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
201

g-C3N4/NaNbO3	Perovskite	Type II	Solid state synthesis	300 W xenon arc lamp with a UV cutoff filter (λ > 420 nm)	CH4 (6.4 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
139

g-C3N4/Bi2WO6	Perovskite	Direct Z-scheme	Hydrothermal method	300 W xenon arc lamp with a 420 nm cutoff filter	CO (5.19 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
145

Bi2WO6/RGO/g-C3N4 2D/2D/2D	Perovskite	Z-Scheme	Hydrothermal method	
	CH4 (2.51 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (15.96 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
202

CsPbBr3@g-C3N4	Perovskite	
	Deposition	Ethyl acetate; 300 W xenon lamp with an AM 1.5 cutoff filter	CH4 (15.524 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
203

Bi4NbO8Cl/g-C3N4 2D/2D	Perovskite	Type II	High-energy ball-milling and post-sintering	300 W xenon lamp	CO (2.26 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
204

AgX/pCN; X = Cl, Br; protonated g-C3N4	Halide	Type II	Sonication-assisted deposition–precipitation technique	Low-power 15 W energy-saving daylight lamp	CH4 (10.92 μmol g−1)	
	
205

BiOI/g-C3N4	Halide	Direct Z-scheme	Deposition	300 W xenon arc lamp with a UV cutoff filter (λ > 400 nm)	CO (4.86 μmol g−1 h−1); CH4 (0.18 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
206

g-C3N4/FeTCPP	Halide	
	Self-assembly approach	300 W xenon lamp (420 nm < λ < 780 nm)	CO (6.52 mmol g−1 in 6 h)	
	
184

AgCl@g-C3N4	Halide	Direct Z-scheme	Deposition-precipitation	11 W compact fluorescent lamp, 0.1 M TEA	HCOOH (2.51 μmol g−1); CH3COOH (6.01 μmol g−1); CH4 (53.03 μmol g−1)	0.211	
207

Cu2V2O7/g-C3N4	Vanadate	Direct Z-scheme	Solid state synthesis	Two 20 W white bulbs (400–700 nm)	CH4 (305 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (166 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
208

g-C3N4/Ag/AgCl/BiVO4	Vanadate	Z-Scheme	Hydrothermal method	8 fluorescent lamps, 8 W each; NaOH medium	CH4 (205 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
209

ZnV2O6/RGO/g-C3N4	Vanadate	Z-Scheme	One-step solvothermal process	35 W Xe lamp; 0.1 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH) aqueous	CH3OH (542.92 μmol g−1 h−1)	0.2830	
210

g-C3N4/BiVO4 2D/2D	Vanadate	Direct Z-scheme	Thermal polymerization and subsequent hydrothermal method	300 W Xe lamp with a UV cutoff filter (420 nm)	CH4 (4.57 μmol g−1 h−1); CO (5.19 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
144

Ag3PO4/g-C3N4	Phosphate	Direct Z-scheme	Deposition	500 W Xe lamp	CO2 conversion (57.5 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
211

LaPO4/g-C3N4	Phosphate	Type II	Hydrothermal method	300 W Xe arc lamp	CO (14.43 μmol g−1 h−1)	
	
212

Ag2CrO4/g-C3N4/GO	Chromate	Direct Z-scheme	Deposition	300 W Xe arc lamp	(CH3OH) and (CH4)	
	
213


 	Fig. 18  The photocatalytic mechanism toward the CO2RR for (a) Ag/AgCl/pCN and (b) Ag/AgBr/pCN catalysts. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd.205 (c) The plausible photocatalytic mechanism toward the CO2RR for H-g-C3N4/C catalyst. Copyright, 2016, ACS.221	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Photograph, (b) SEM image, (c) TEM image, (d) HRTEM image and (e) AFM image of 2D-pg-C3N4. (f) LSV curves of 2D-pg-C3N4 in N2- and CO2-saturated 2 M KHCO3 solution, (g) LSV curves of 2D-pg-C3N4 and control samples in CO2-saturated 2 M KHCO3 solution. (h) Faradaic efficiency of 2D-pg-C3N4 at different voltages for 12 h and (i) current densities of 2D-pg-C3N4 and control samples at −1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Copyright Springer Nature.231	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) LSV curves of as-synthesized samples in N2 and CO2 and under light-on (Lon) and light-off (Loff) conditions. (b) IPCE at −0.4 V (vs. NHE) for different samples. (c) The CH3OH yield from PEC reduction of CO2 for different photocatalysts. (d) The CH3OH yield of PC, EC, and PEC for CO2 reduction using CuO/g-C3N4/carbon paper electrode. (e) Quantum and faradaic efficiencies for the PEC reduction of CO2. Copyright 2020, Elsevier Ltd.239	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
