Slow photons in the fast lane in chemistry  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B708474A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B708474A
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 369-373Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSlow photons in the fast lane in chemistry

        
          
            Jennifer I. L. 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Georg 
            von Freymann
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sung Yeun 
            Choi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Vladimir 
            Kitaev
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Geoffrey A. 
            Ozin
          
          
        
      *a
aMaterials Chemistry Research Group, Chemistry Department, University of Toronto, 80 St George St., Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3H6. E-mail: gozin@chem.utoronto.ca
bInstitut für Nanotechnologie, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany
cChemistry Department, Wilfrid Laurier University, 75 University Avenue West, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 3C5
Received 
      5th June 2007
    , Accepted 5th September 2007First published on 21st September 2007AbstractA driving force in the rapidly developing field of photonic crystals has been the photonic bandgap, a range of energies where the propagation of light is completely forbidden. The photonic bandgap allows the design of photonic lattices that localize, guide and bend light at sub-micron length scales, providing opportunities for the creation of miniature optical devices and integrated optical circuits to help drive the revolution in photonics. A less well known attribute of photonic crystals is their theoretical ability to slow light to a velocity of zero. This phenomenon can be achieved at the high and low energy edges of photonic stopgaps where the photonic bands are flat and light exists as a standing wave commensurate with the photonic lattice and travels at a group velocity of zero, referred to as “slow photons” herein. It has been shown theoretically that the probability of harvesting slow photons scales inversely with their group velocity. This means that a number of well known photon driven processes and devices in chemistry and physics can be enhanced by capturing this unique property of slow photons. In this paper we will look at slow photons mainly through the eye of chemistry and highlight some recent developments in this exciting and emerging field that demonstrate the potential of slow photons in materials chemistry and nanochemistry.Jennifer I. L. ChenJennifer Chen received her BSc in Chemistry from Simon Fraser University and subsequently joined the Materials Chemistry Research Group at the University of Toronto. She is working on her PhD degree with research interests in optically amplified photochemical processes using photonic crystals.Georg von FreymannGeorg von Freymann received his Diplom in physics in 1998 and his Dr rer. nat. in 2001 from the Universität Karlsruhe (TH) in Germany. He then joined the Institute of Nanotechnology at the Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe in 2001, spent the years 2003–2004 at University of Toronto, Canada, and returned in 2005 to Germany, where he heads a DFG Emmy Noether young investigators group at the Institute of Nanotechnology. His research focuses on the fabrication and characterization of complex three-dimensional nanostructures for photonics.Geoffrey A. OzinGeoffrey Ozin studied at King's College London and Oriel College Oxford University, before completing an ICI Postdoctoral Fellowship at Southampton University. Currently he is the Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Materials Chemistry, Distinguished University Professor at the University of Toronto, and a Founding Fellow of the Nanoscience Team at the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. Internationally he is an Honorary Professor at The Royal Institution Great Britain and University College London, and External Advisor for the London Centre for Nanotechnology. He is a Humboldt Fellow and Guest Professor at the Centre for Functional Nanostructures at the University of Karlsruhe. Over a four decade career he has made important scientific and technological advances in nanochemistry, which have helped shape the course of nanotechnology.
As a wealth of chemical processes in nature and industry rely on the interaction of light with matter, from photosynthesis to photovoltaic devices, enhancing this interaction via increasing the path length of light is of great importance. Some well-established methods of utilizing multiple paths or the resonance of light to increase the efficiency of a process include surface-enhanced spectroscopy1 and cavity ring-down spectroscopy2 in molecular detection and characterization, and textured substrates or the incorporation of light scattering centers in photovoltaic cells.3,4 In the past two decades following the inception of photonic crystals, the phenomenon of slow photons has generated great excitement in the optical and photonics communities. Slow photons, or light with reduced group velocity, can significantly increase the effective optical path length of light thereby enhancing the interaction of light with matter. Emerging from optical physics, the applicability of slow photons had focused on optical devices such as low threshold lasers and the dramatic gain-enhancements in light emitting devices until recently, when several materials chemistry research groups demonstrated the use of slow photons and other photonic properties to enhance photochemical reactions based on nanocrystalline titanium dioxide, TiO2.5–9 Below we discuss the basic principles and factors underpinning slow photon enhancement and conclude with perspective future opportunities for exploiting the unique properties of slow photons for harvesting light and optically amplifying the efficiency of a range of other photochemical and photophysical processes.
Slow photons exist in periodic photonic structures at energies just above and below the photonic stop-band10 and also at higher photonic bands. Since photonic crystals have periodic dielectric contrast modulation in the length scale of the wavelength of light, coherent Bragg diffraction forbids light with certain energies to propagate through the material along a particular crystallographic direction. This gives rise to stop-band reflection, and the range of energies that is reflected back depends on the periodicity and dielectric contrast of the photonic crystal. At the wavelengths corresponding to the edges of these stop-bands, photons propagate with strongly reduced group velocity; hence they are called “slow photons”.
The group velocity vg of light is the velocity at which the envelope of the light wave propagates through space and is defined by vg = ∂ω/∂k where ω is the angular frequency of the wave and k is the wavevector equal to 2π/λ where λ is the wavelength. A plot of ωvs. k is known as the dispersion relation, which in the context of photonic crystals is referred to as the photonic band diagram to bring out the analogy with electron waves propagating in atomic crystals. The group velocity of light in theory follows the slope of a band in the dispersion curve, ∂ω/∂k, just as that in an electronic band diagram is the electron group velocity. For photons, the degree of attenuation in group velocity in real crystals depends on the dielectric contrast between the high- and low-refractive index materials, the thickness and the structural quality of the photonic crystal. At the band edges where the slope ∂ω/∂k can approach zero, light propagation can be described as a standing wave (Fig. 1a). The group velocity has recently been measured in colloidal crystals using white-light interferometry11,12 and is found to decrease with increasing thickness up to 30 close-packed layers. In general, slow photons at the red-edge (dielectric band) of the photonic stop-band have an associated electromagnetic field predominantly localized on the high-dielectric material while that at the blue-edge (air band) is mainly localized on the low-dielectric material (Fig. 1b).13 The degree of localization, however, depends on the refractive index contrast with a larger contrast giving a higher confinement factor.14 Together, the group velocity of light and the degree of light confinement govern the amount of optical enhancement. In what follows we briefly expand upon some key optical physics concepts behind this statement and then proceed with some experimental examples of the exploitation of slow photons that have recently appeared in the literature.
 Fig. 1  Simplified photonic band diagram of a photonic crystal (a). As the group velocity of light is proportional to ∂ω/∂k the flattening of the bands near the photonic stop-band indicates a reduction in the group velocity. The position of the slow photons, indicated by the circles, with respect to the stop-band reflection is shown in (b). At the blue-edge of the stop-band the electromagnetic field is predominantly localized in air while it is more localized on the high-dielectric material at the red-edge. Adapted in part from ref. 5. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society. 
The possibility of amplifying the optical absorption of a particular range of frequencies in a material fashioned as a photonic crystal arises from the extremely low group velocities associated with some propagation modes in the photonic lattice.15 The effective refractive index of the photonic crystal can be evaluated from the expression:    where neff, Im is the effective imaginary part of the refractive index, c is the velocity of light in a vacuum, vg(k) is the group velocity and σ is a function of the wavevector k given by:   σ may be considered as an average of the imaginary part of the dielectric constant of the photonic crystal weighted by the spatial distribution of electromagnetic energy. Vcell is the volume of the unit cell of the photonic lattice and εC(r) is the imaginary part of the dielectric constant of the materials that form the photonic crystal. The function εC(r) contains information about the losses (absorption) of the materials and even when its value is very small, the corresponding imaginary part of the effective refractive index of the photonic crystal, ñeff,Im, can be extremely large if the group velocity is very low. Therefore, the slow propagation of photons through the photonic lattice could give rise to an enhancement of the optical absorption that can lead to important scientific discoveries and technological applications of materials and nanomaterials as described below.
A significant amount of research has focused on taking advantage of the benefits of slow photons for enhancing dye absorption or emission.16–18 Low threshold and high efficiency lasing has been demonstrated, including the simultaneous lasing of various colors in different directions of the photonic crystal,19 and lasing at the band edge of a cholesteric liquid crystal.20,21 The emission enhancement arises as a result of the reduced photon group velocity and increased photon density of states at the band edge, combined with the inhibition of emission at the photonic stop gap. Slow photons have also been employed to drastically enhance the electro-optic response of lithium niobate, where an observed enhancement of 312 times at the band edge of the photonic crystal suggested the possibility of micron sized nonlinear devices with very low power requirements.22 While the main applications of slow photons have centered on optical devices, the field of amplified photochemistry with slow photons is beginning to emerge. The idea of increasing the population of electrons and holes in the excited state of a molecule or material in order to perform a chemical reaction presents exciting opportunities in areas like photocatalysis.
To demonstrate the slow photon effect on a photochemical reaction, the photocatalytic degradation of adsorbed methylene blue on nanocrystalline TiO2 inverse opals was investigated.7 Experimentally TiO2 inverse opals with different stop-band energy were fabricated from different polystyrene template sizes, thus allowing the tuning of the slow photons in-and-out of the anatase absorption and enabling a systematic study of the relation of slow photon energy and photocatalytic efficiency. Fig. 2 outlines the experimental methods and shows the scanning electron microscope images of the inverse opals employed in this study. Irradiation with monochromatic light (370 nm) demonstrated that a twofold enhancement was achieved only for inverse opals with the red-edge of the photonic stop-band at 370 nm. This observation was the first evidence of slow-photon amplified photocatalysis. The practical aspects of TiO2 inverse opals as photocatalysts were further evaluated under white-light irradiation and the optimal template sphere size was found to be 150 nm such that the stop-band reflection, determined to be around 300 nm, was completely suppressed by the anatase absorption while the slow photon effect dominated. Fig. 3 shows the position of the photonic stop-band with respect to the absorption of anatase TiO2 and the corresponding enhancement factor in photocatalytic efficiency under real world white-light irradiation. By increasing the interaction of light with TiO2via reduced group velocity, a higher probability of absorption and a larger population of electron-hole pairs were achieved, thereby doubling the rate of photo-degradation. In addition, a subsequent study on the effect of controlled structural disorder showed that a significant amount of imperfection in the anatase inverse opal can be tolerated while maintaining half of the original enhancement, an important result in terms of the practical implementation of catalytic reactions enhanced by slow photons.9
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic showing the fabrication of a TiO2 inverse opal and the subsequent solid-state photodegradation experiments using methylene blue as the probe molecule. (b) Scanning and transmission electron microscopy images and powder X-ray diffraction pattern of the inverse opal structure that is comprised of nanocrystalline TiO2 in the anatase phase. Adapted in part from ref. 7. Copyright 2006, Wiley InterScience. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Reflectance spectra of TiO2 inverse opals with photonic stop-band maxima at 500, 430, 370, 345, 325, 300 and 280 nm (solid lines), and extinction spectra of nanocrystalline TiO2 (black dashed line) and methylene blue (grey dashed line). (b) Enhancement factor in the photocatalytic efficiency for inverse opals with different stop-band energies, under white-light irradiation at 0° and 45° normal to the films. An increase in enhancement is observed as the stop-band shifts from 370 nm to 300 nm due to the suppression of stop-band reflection by the anatase absorption, while the slow photon effect dominates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2006, Wiley InterScience. 
Concurrently, a similar study looked at the degradation of crystal violet on TiO2 hollow spheres.8 Since crystal violet degrades viasensitization where an excited electron of the dye charge transfers to TiO2 the energy of the slow photon was optimized with respect to the absorption of crystal violet. As the stop-band reflection was not suppressed in this study in contrast with the one described above, there was a competition between slow photon enhancement and reflectivity loss. When the dye absorption overlaps with the red-edge of the photonic stop-band, an overall enhancement of 22% was achieved. In comparison, it may be more beneficial to increase the absorption of TiO2 at the electronic band edge (where only a few percent of solar photons can be absorbed) than increasing that of the degrading molecule, as most photocatalytic degradations of technological interest arise from the UV induced charge transfer of electron–hole pairs of TiO2 to the molecules and not vice versa. Several other studies explored macroporous TiO2 as a photocatalyst in solution and in the gas phase and have all reported significant increases in the heterogeneous photocatalytic efficiency.23–25 However, it is important to point out that various factors, including surface area and diffusion rate, can strongly influence the rate of the reaction. Hence one must be careful in standardizing the findings before proclaiming the effect of photonic properties.
Aside from the slow photon effect, photonic crystals can also be used as a three-dimensional mirror to create localized states in a non-structured surface layer. This bilayer architecture, consisting of an inverse opal on the back of a photoactive layer like TiO2 has been demonstrated by Mallouk and coworkers5,6 and modeled by Mihi and Miguez26 for a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC). The bilayer DSSC showed a 26% increase in overall efficiency when illuminated from the rear side, with the enhancement in photocurrent spanning from 550 to 750 nm when the photonic stop-band was centered at 610 nm (Fig. 4). Interestingly, the inverse opal alone did not bring an overall increase in efficiency. It is suggested that the strong reflectivity of the photonic stop-band outweighs the narrow wavelength window of slow photon enhancement so that the overall effect is a decrease in the light-harvesting efficiency. Therefore for applications where enhancement over a broad spectral range is desired, in particular when the stop-band reflectivity cannot be suppressed, the bilayer architecture utilizing the opal photonic crystal mirror effect may be more advantageous than the photonic crystal alone. Since this pioneering work by Mallouk and coworkers5 and Mihi and Miguez26 there is a great deal of interest of incorporating photonic crystals in solar cells, with pilot silicon solar cells now underway.
 Fig. 4  A bilayer structure (left), consisting of a nanocrystalline TiO2 layer on top of nanocrystalline TiO2 inverse opals. When illuminated from the rear, as shown by the arrow, the photonic crystal localizes light in the nanocrystalline layer, giving rise to an enhancement in photocurrent over a broad range of wavelengths (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 5 and 26. Copyright 2003 and 2005, American Chemical Society. 
In this context, it is worth noting that early reports imagined how photonic crystals could be utilized to enhance the performance of silicon photovoltaics beyond the absorption limit of 4n2, where n is the refractive index, achievable in principle by structuring the absorbing medium in the form of a photonic crystal.27,28 In exactly this vein, O'Brien et al. have recently integrated a photonic crystal with a thin film silicon photovoltaic that enhances the absorption and boosts the resulting photoconductivity by as much as 138% at the weakly absorbing spectral range of Si.29 Briefly, it demonstrated that an opal coupled to a silicon thin film creates partially localized resonant modes within the silicon whose absorption is greatly amplified compared to the film backed by a perfect mirror over a range of frequencies. These observations have far reaching implications not only for thin film semiconductor photovoltaics but for a range of optoelectronic and photonic devices like organic and inorganic light emitting diodes and lasers.
Described so far are examples of slow photon amplified photochemistry based on TiO2 owing to the straightforward fabrication of TiO2 photonic crystals and well-established photoactivity mechanisms. The system can be easily extended to incorporate noble-metal clusters on the surface of the TiO2 inverse opal for chemical conversions of hydrocarbons or H2 generation from water. Aside from TiO2-based photonic crystals, slow photon amplification can be generalized to many different photochemical reactions by anchoring the photoactive molecules on the surface of a pre-formed photonic crystal. For example, organometallic complexes can be immobilized on a SiO2 inverse opal, which has slow photons at the energy of interest, to carry out photo-assisted oxidation, reduction and C–H bond activation of olefins.30 Organic photochemical reactions driven by UV light, like the conversion of trans-molecules to the cis configuration, can be accelerated by designing a flow-through reactor with an inverse opal that has slow photons at ca. 350 nm as the membrane. Parallel to the search for more efficient photocatalysts through chemical modifications, the molding of these photoactive materials into photonic structures for optical amplification should present exciting and challenging future opportunities.
With increasing numbers of experimental demonstrations of optically amplified chemical and catalytic reactions now emerging, there is a need to provide a more-sound theoretical basis through numerical modeling in order to understand the underlying photonic effects (e.g. slow, localized and multiple scattered photons) and determine the extent of optical enhancement. Such calculations can provide guidance in the design of optimized photonic architectures to maximize and elucidate the origin of the enhancement. The union of optical amplification and chemical modification of a material fashioned as a photonic crystal should push the efficiency of photochemical reactions and photophysical processes beyond current achievements. The future of this new field looks bright!
Acknowledgements
G.A.O. is Government of Canada Research Chair in Materials Chemistry. J.I.L.C. and G.A.O. thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and University of Toronto for financial support. G.v.F. acknowledges support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft under projects FR 1671/2-1 and FR 1671/4-3 (Emmy-Noether program) and V.K. thanks Wilfrid Laurier University. The authors are grateful to H. Miguez, A. Mihi, E. Vekris, A. Chutinan, P. O'Brien, N. Kherani and S. John for their technical advice and theoretical assistance.
References
M. Moskovits, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1985, 57, 783 CrossRef CAS .
G. Berden, R. Peeters and G. Meijer, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 19, 565 CrossRef CAS .

          H. C. van de Hulst, Light scattering by small particles,  1981, Dover Publications, New York Search PubMed .
J. Ferber and J. Luther, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 54, 265 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Benkstein, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306 CrossRef CAS .
L. I. Halaoui, N. M. Abrams and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6334 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. L. Chen, G. von Freymann, S. Y. Choi, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1915 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Kunitake and S. Fujikawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13000 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. L. Chen, G. von Freymann, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Imhof, W. L. Vos, R. Sprik and A. Lagendijk, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 2942 CrossRef CAS .
G. von Freymann, S. John, S. Wong, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 053108 CrossRef .
J. F. Galisteo-López, M. Galli, M. Patrini, A. Balestreri, L. C. Andreani and C. López, Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 73, 125103 CrossRef .
R. D. Meade, A. M. Rappe, K. D. Brommer and J. D. Joannopoulos, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1993, 10, 328 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nojima, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 545 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. R. Bhat and J. E. Sipe, Phys. Rev. E., 2001, 64, 056604 Search PubMed .
K. Yoshino, S. B. Lee, S. Tatsuhara, Y. Kawagishi, M. Ozaki and A. A. Zakhidov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 3506 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoshino, S. Tatsuhara, Y. Kawagishi, M. Ozaki, A. A. Zakhidov and Z. V. Vardeny, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1648 CrossRef .
L. Bechger, P. Lodahl and W. L. Vos, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9980 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Shkunov, Z. V. Vardeny, M. C. DeLong, R. C. Polson, A. A. Zakhidov and R. H. Baughman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 21 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cao, A. Munoz, P. Palffy-Muhoray and B. Taheri, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 111 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsuhisa, Y. Huang, Y. Zhou, S.-T. Wu, R. Ozaki, Y. Takao, A. Fujii and M. Ozaki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 091114 CrossRef .
M. Roussey, M.-P. Bernal, N. Courjal, D. Van Labeke, F. I. Baida and R. Salut, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 241110 CrossRef .
F. Iskandar, A. B. D. Nandiyanto, K. M. Yun, C. J. Hogan, Jr., K. Okuyama and P. Biswas, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1408 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Jo, B. J. Ahn, M. S. Gang, S.-B. Ko and W. Chang, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2006, 12, 689 Search PubMed .
M. Ren, R. Ravikrishna and K. T. Valsaraj, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 7029 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mihi and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15968 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yablonovitch, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1982, 72, 899 Search PubMed .
J. M. Gee, Conf. Rec. IEEE Photovoltaic Spec. Conf. 29th, 2002, 150 Search PubMed .
P. O'Brien, N. Kherani, S. Zukotynski, G. A. Ozin, E. Vekris, N. Tetreault, A. Chutinan, S. John, A. Mihi and H. Miguez, Adv. Mater. DOI:10.1002/adma.200700564 .
S. Rau, D. Walther and J. G. Vos, Dalton Trans., 2007, 915 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
Table Content:
Jennifer I. L. Chen	Jennifer Chen received her BSc in Chemistry from Simon Fraser University and subsequently joined the Materials Chemistry Research Group at the University of Toronto. She is working on her PhD degree with research interests in optically amplified photochemical processes using photonic crystals.
Georg von Freymann	Georg von Freymann received his Diplom in physics in 1998 and his Dr rer. nat. in 2001 from the Universität Karlsruhe (TH) in Germany. He then joined the Institute of Nanotechnology at the Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe in 2001, spent the years 2003–2004 at University of Toronto, Canada, and returned in 2005 to Germany, where he heads a DFG Emmy Noether young investigators group at the Institute of Nanotechnology. His research focuses on the fabrication and characterization of complex three-dimensional nanostructures for photonics.
Geoffrey A. Ozin	Geoffrey Ozin studied at King's College London and Oriel College Oxford University, before completing an ICI Postdoctoral Fellowship at Southampton University. Currently he is the Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Materials Chemistry, Distinguished University Professor at the University of Toronto, and a Founding Fellow of the Nanoscience Team at the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. Internationally he is an Honorary Professor at The Royal Institution Great Britain and University College London, and External Advisor for the London Centre for Nanotechnology. He is a Humboldt Fellow and Guest Professor at the Centre for Functional Nanostructures at the University of Karlsruhe. Over a four decade career he has made important scientific and technological advances in nanochemistry, which have helped shape the course of nanotechnology.

 	Fig. 1  Simplified photonic band diagram of a photonic crystal (a). As the group velocity of light is proportional to ∂ω/∂k the flattening of the bands near the photonic stop-band indicates a reduction in the group velocity. The position of the slow photons, indicated by the circles, with respect to the stop-band reflection is shown in (b). At the blue-edge of the stop-band the electromagnetic field is predominantly localized in air while it is more localized on the high-dielectric material at the red-edge. Adapted in part from ref. 5. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic showing the fabrication of a TiO2 inverse opal and the subsequent solid-state photodegradation experiments using methylene blue as the probe molecule. (b) Scanning and transmission electron microscopy images and powder X-ray diffraction pattern of the inverse opal structure that is comprised of nanocrystalline TiO2 in the anatase phase. Adapted in part from ref. 7. Copyright 2006, Wiley InterScience.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Reflectance spectra of TiO2 inverse opals with photonic stop-band maxima at 500, 430, 370, 345, 325, 300 and 280 nm (solid lines), and extinction spectra of nanocrystalline TiO2 (black dashed line) and methylene blue (grey dashed line). (b) Enhancement factor in the photocatalytic efficiency for inverse opals with different stop-band energies, under white-light irradiation at 0° and 45° normal to the films. An increase in enhancement is observed as the stop-band shifts from 370 nm to 300 nm due to the suppression of stop-band reflection by the anatase absorption, while the slow photon effect dominates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2006, Wiley InterScience.	 

 	Fig. 4  A bilayer structure (left), consisting of a nanocrystalline TiO2 layer on top of nanocrystalline TiO2 inverse opals. When illuminated from the rear, as shown by the arrow, the photonic crystal localizes light in the nanocrystalline layer, giving rise to an enhancement in photocurrent over a broad range of wavelengths (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 5 and 26. Copyright 2003 and 2005, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
