Multifunctional materials for photo-electrochemical water splitting  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA01869A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA01869A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 15906-15931Multifunctional materials for photo-electrochemical water splitting

        
          
            P. Mary 
            Rajaitha
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sugato 
            Hajra
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Krystian 
            Mistewicz
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Swati 
            Panda
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Manisha 
            Sahu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Deepak 
            Dubal
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yusuke 
            Yamauchi
          
          
        
      *de and 

        
          
            Hoe Joon 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *af
aDepartment of Robotics and Mechatronics Engineering, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), Daegu-42988, Republic of Korea. E-mail: joonkim@dgist.ac.kr
bSilesian University of Technology, Institute of Physics—Centre for Science and Education, Katowice 40-019, Poland
cCentre for Materials Science, School of Chemistry and Physics, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), 2 George Street, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia
dAustralian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia. E-mail: y.yamauchi@uq.edu.au
eInternational Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (WPI-MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan
fRobotics and Mechatronics Research Center, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), Daegu-42988, South Korea
Received 
      9th March 2022
    , Accepted 27th June 2022First published on 30th June 2022AbstractThe energy crisis and depletion of non-renewable energy resources have been aggravated due to the drastic rise in world pollution and the energy demand. Facile hydrogen production through water splitting has become a popular alternative source of energy owing to the numerous environmentally friendly and economic benefits it provides. Additionally, it is preferred due to the depletion of non-renewable energy resources, pollution caused by the burning of non-renewable energy resources, and climate change. Hydrogen is generated from water and acts as a clean energy without contributing to carbon emissions. Various water-splitting methods such as electrolysis, thermochemical, mechanocatalysis, plasmolysis, photocatalysis, and photoelectrocatalysis can be applied to obtain hydrogen and oxygen. This review highlights the multifunctional materials used in photo-electrochemical water splitting and their superior properties for producing carbon-free energy from water. Multifunctional materials help reduce aqueous protons to hydrogen and oxidize water to oxygen during the splitting of water. This paper discusses a wide class of materials such as carbon materials, metal–organic frameworks, perovskites, and semiconducting oxides for efficient hydrogen production. Different types of water-splitting methods and multifunctional materials with varying properties can lead to improved results. The review sheds light upon the hydrogen economy and future prospects, elucidating the selection of multifunctional materials for efficient hydrogen production.P. Mary RajaithaMs Mary Rajaitha is currently a doctoral student at the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology. She received her integrated Bachelor's and Master's degrees from the Karunya Institute of Technology and Sciences, India with a specialization in nanoscience in 2019. Her research interests focus on electrochemical sensors.Sugato HajraMr Sugato Hajra is currently a doctoral student at the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology. He received a Bachelor in Technology degree from Siksha O Anusandhan University, India, in 2017. He perused his M.Tech. degree with a specialization in VLSI and Embedded systems at Siksha O Anusandhan University and also served as a joint researcher in the Advanced Multifunctional and Materials Laboratory at the Institute of Technical Education and Research, Bhubaneswar, India in 2019. His research interests mainly include lead-free piezoelectric/multiferroic materials, metal–organic frameworks, solid-state electronic devices, and hybrid energy harvesters.Krystian MistewiczDr Krystian Mistewicz received MSc in physics with honors from the Mathematics and Physics Faculty at the Silesian University of Technology (Gliwice, Poland) in 2010, and a PhD in physics with distinction from the University of Silesia (Katowice, Poland) in 2015. He is currently an assistant professor at the Institute of Physics at the Silesian University of Technology. He was a visiting research scholar at the University of Wisconsin–Madison (USA). His research interests are focused on nanotechnology, sonochemistry, ferroelectric nanomaterials for gas sensors, photovoltaic devices, and pyroelectric and piezoelectric generators.Swati PandaMs Swati Panda is currently a doctoral student at the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology. She received her Bachelor's degree from Utkal University, Orissa in 2018. She pursued her Master's degree from Siksha O Anusandhan University with a specialization in biotechnology in 2020. Her research interests focus on self-powered biosensors and piezoelectric energy harvesters.Manisha SahuMs Manisha Sahu is currently a doctoral student at the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology. She received her B.Tech degree from Siksha O Anusandhan University, India, in 2017. She perused her M.Tech degree with a specialization in VLSI and Embedded systems at Siksha O Anusandhan University in 2019. Her research focus is on the development of ferroelectric, piezoelectric, and triboelectric energy harvesters.Deepak DubalDr Deepak P. Dubal is currently working as Associate Professor at the Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Australia. He is a prolific, well-cited and multiple-fellowship-winning scientist. His achievements are honoured by several prestigious fellowships such as Brain of Korea-21 (South Korea-2011), Alexander von Humboldt (Germany-2012), Marie Curie (Spain-2014) and Australian Future Fellowship (Australia-2018). His research expertise is in the design and development of multifunctional hybrid materials for clean energy conversion and storage technologies with special focus on supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries, Li-ion capacitors and electrochemical flow cells.Yusuke YamauchiDr Yusuke Yamauchi received his Bachelor's degree (2003), Master's degree (2004), and PhD degree (2007) from Waseda University, Japan. Presently, he is a senior group leader at AIBN and a full professor at the School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Queensland. He concurrently serves as an ERATO Research Director at JST-ERATO Yamauchi Materials Space-Tectonics, a Group Leader at National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), a guest professor at Waseda University, and an associate editor of the Journal of Materials Chemistry A published by the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) and Chemical Engineering Journal (Elsevier). He has published more than 1000 papers in international refereed journals with >60000 citations (h-index > 130). He is selected as one of the Highly-Cited Researchers in Chemistry (2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021) and in Materials Science (2020 and 2021). He was also selected as one of Australia's Top 40 Researchers of Research Report (The Australian) in 2019, 2020 and 2021.Hoe Joon KimDr Hoe Joon Kim is currently an Associate Professor in Robotics Engineering at the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGST), Daegu, South Korea, and also holds a courtesy appointment in the Information and Communication Engineering Department. He received the B.S. degree from Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA, in 2009, and the M. S. and PhD degrees from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA, in 2011 and 2015, respectively, all in mechanical engineering. He held a post-doctoral position at the Micro and Nano Systems Laboratory, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, where he was involved in the development of low-power low-noise piezoelectric MEMS resonators for sensing and frequency control applications. His research interests focus on piezoelectric MEMS resonators for RF wireless communication, chemical/physical sensing, environmental monitoring and emerging nanomaterials.
1. Introduction
Energy has become an essential part of our daily lives, and some of its uses include consumer electronics and means of transportation. Fossil fuels such as coal, natural gas, and oil provide 81% of the primary energy supply and account for 61% of the electricity we use. The continuous rise in the human population and the growth of various industrial sectors around the globe keep increasing the demand for energy.1,2 The ever-increasing demand for more energy is directly related to the use of fossil fuels and the degradation of the environment. The continuous surge in the human population and the desire to improve living standards from 1950 onwards have resulted in increased energy demands. It is estimated that the current fossil fuel reserves can support the global economy for a limited time: petroleum for 40 years, natural gas for 60 years, and coal for 156 years.3–5 The rapid depletion of these non-renewable energy resources poses a great danger to the economy worldwide. In addition, fossil fuels also pose a great threat to the environment, as they are not environmentally friendly due to the release of greenhouse gases and other pollutants. The release of these gases into the environment leads to several consequences, such as global warming and air pollution. The burning of fossil fuels increases the release of CO2 into the environment, destroying the air we breathe. It is estimated that almost 100% of CO2 released into the environment is due to burning fossil fuels or energy. The continuous release of these greenhouse gases into the environment leads to climate change and air pollution.6–8 Therefore, it is necessary to find an alternative sustainable energy source. Thus, various studies have been conducted to find an alternative energy source due to economic and environmental concerns.9–11
Hydrogen can be a promising alternative energy source but does not exist freely in nature. It is a secondary source of energy that can be generated from nature and bioresources. Hydrogen can play a great role in the future energy sector, thus fulfilling the global energy requirements and lowering CO2 emissions. Hydrogen is a clean fuel and does not emit toxic by-products. It is considered the cleanest fuel and is eco-benign.12,13 Among many technologies to generate hydrogen, photo-electrochemical (PEC) water splitting uses solar energy to split water into hydrogen and oxygen. Solar energy is a clean and inexhaustible source of energy. Fig. 1 overviews different types of water splitting processes and multifunctional materials used in water splitting.
 Fig. 1  Overview of the multifunctional materials used for water splitting and types of water splitting. 
This review elucidates various water-splitting methods and, most importantly, focuses on multifunctional materials for PEC water splitting. Broadly, oxide semiconductors, perovskites, metal–organic frameworks, carbon materials, and 2-dimensional materials are used for effectively harvesting sunlight and generating hydrogen with high efficiency by PEC water splitting.
2. Types of water-splitting technologies
2.1. Electrolytic water splitting
Electrolytic water splitting is a process that uses two electrodes – a cathode for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and an anode for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), an electrolyte, and a power supply to produce hydrogen and oxygen gases from water.14 The electrodes and electrolytes used in the system are studied to increase the efficiency of electrolytic water splitting. Earth's abundant metals are studied as catalysts for electrolytic water splitting, IrO2 and RuO2 are used for the anode, and Pt is used for the cathode. These electrodes were studied at a low pH of 1.6, and the voltage across the cell was 2 V; they showed water-splitting activity for 24 h. The catalysts were metastable and even acted as a short-time buffer by dissolving into an acidic medium without an applied bias to continue the gas evolution.15 To increase the efficiency of overall water splitting, the surface composite and morphology of a binary sulfide were studied. Here, a binary Fe–Ni sulfide was prepared on nickel foam by facile one-step electrodeposition, assisted by a liquid-crystal template (LCT). It was prepared with different morphologies and various composition ratios of Fe/Ni. The above study showed that the binary sulfide had improved activity and conductivity compared to the single metal sulfide. The sample with a 3/1 ratio showed the best activity and excellent stability for overall water electrolysis,16 which is confirmed by the experimental data shown in Fig. 2. The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves (Fig. 2a), the overpotential (Fig. 2b), the Tafel plots (Fig. 2c), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data (Fig. 2d) were recorded for all materials electrodeposited in water solution and LCT. A comparison of LSV curves for FeNi–S-3/NF deposited in water solution and LCT is presented in Fig. 2e. During electrolytic water-splitting, hydrogen is produced along with oxygen gas and may suffer from gas mixing. To avoid the mixing of gases a low-cost conducting polymer material polyaniline (PANI) as a solid-state redox mediator for decoupling the OER and HER in acidic media was incorporated.17 An electron-coupled proton buffer can also be used to separate the hydrogen and oxygen gases during electrolytic water splitting. Potassium hydroquinone sulfonate18 and phosphomolybdic acid19 were used as electron-coupled proton buffers to separate the gases during electrolytic water splitting. Different electrolyzers such as a polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) electrolyzer, alkaline electrolyzer, acid electrolyzer, and solid oxide electrolyzer are used in electrolytic water splitting systems.
 Fig. 2  Electrochemical investigations of binary Fe–Ni sulfides supported on nickel foam (FeNi–S/NF) with different composition ratios of Fe/Ni for the HER in 1.0 M KOH. The labels FeNi–S-1/NF, FeNi–S-2/NF, FeNi–S-3/NF, FeNi–S-4/NF, and FeNi–S-5/NF refer to the Fe–Ni sulfides with the Fe/Ni molar ratios of 1/3, 1/1, 3/1, 6/1, and 9/1, respectively. (a) Linear sweep voltammogram curves of the samples electrodeposited in (a-1) water solution and the LCT (a-2). (b) A comparison of overpotential at 10 and 100 mA cm−2: electrodeposition in (b-1) water solution and (b-2) LCT; (c) Tafel plots of all samples electrodeposited in (c-1) water solution and LCT (c-2). (d) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of the samples electrodeposited in (d-1) water solution and (d-2) LCT. (e) Comparison of LSV of FeNi–S-3/NF deposited in water solution and LCT. Reprinted from ref. 16 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. 

2.1.1. Polymer electrolyte membrane electrolyzer. 
General Electric first developed the PEM electrolyzer in the 1960s to overcome the drawback of the alkaline electrolyzer. The main advantage of PEM electrolyzers is a fast dynamic response time, reduced operational cost, large operational ranges, high efficiencies, and very high gas purities with greater safety and reliability.20,21 The reactions, which take place at the PEM electrolyzer's cathode and anode, are described by the following equations.
Cathode:2H+ + 2e− → H2
Anode:H2O → 2H+ + ½O2 + 2e−
An anode and a cathode electrode are separated by solid plastic, which is responsible for the conduction of protons, the separation of gaseous products, and electrical insulation between the electrodes. Pt/Pd and IrO2/RuO2 metals are present at the cathode and anode, respectively.22–25 Water is pumped to the anode, where it is split into oxygen, electrons, and protons. The electrons move towards the external circuit, which is used as the driving force for the reaction. The protons move toward the cathode side through a proton-conducting membrane. At the cathode electrode, hydrogen is produced through the recombination of protons and electrons. This method is expensive, and the main challenge is to make it cost-efficient and maintain its efficiency.26,27


2.1.2. Alkaline electrolyzer. 
The alkaline electrolyzer is a well-established technology used in chemical industries for hydrogen production. Troostwijk and Diemann first introduced it in 1789. At the cathode, the two molecules, KOH and NaOH, are reduced to hydrogen and hydroxyl ions.20,28 The reactions given below occur in the alkaline electrolyzer.
Cathode:2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2
Anode:2OH → H2O + ½O2 + 2e−
A difference in the operating principle of alkaline and PEM water electrolysis cells is presented in Fig. 3. In the case of an alkaline electrolyzer, hydrogen is eliminated from the cathode surface to a gaseous form, while hydroxyl ions are transferred to the anode through a porous diaphragm. In the anode, the 2-hydroxyl molecule is discharged to a half oxygen molecule and one water molecule. The oxygen escapes like hydrogen. The operating temperature of the alkaline electrolyzer is 30–80 °C, and the electrolyte used is an aqueous solution of KOH and NaOH with a concentration of ∼20–30%.29,30 The diaphragm in the middle of the cell separates the anode and cathode. It is also responsible for preventing the gases from mixing. The material used to construct the diaphragm, anode, and cathode is NiO, Ni/Co/Fe, and Ni/C–Pt, respectively. For the generation of one cubic hydrogen, the minimum energy required is 2.948 W K h−1. A few disadvantages of this process are limited current density, low operating pressure, and low energy efficiency.31,32
 Fig. 3  A comparison of the working principles of two different types of electrolyzers: alkaline (on the left) and PEM (on the right). A detailed description is provided in the text. Reprinted from ref. 20 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2013) Elsevier. 


2.1.3. Acid electrolyzer. 
The PEM electrolyzer follows the reverse reaction of acid electrolyzer, where the only difference is the catalytic material. An acid electrolyzer can be a potential corridor for hydrogen production. Citric, butyric, sulfuric, and phosphoric acids are used as electrolytes, and a Pt wire is used as a cathode electrode.33 The H+ ions in the acid electrolyzer have formed the acids used as electrolytes.
Cathode:2H+ + 2e− → H2
Anode:H2O → ½O2 + 2e− + 2H+
Many studies have been conducted with various acid electrolyzers, and photocatalytic materials as an anode and platinum, steel, or silver as a cathode for water splitting. First-row transition materials were also studied for an acid electrolyzer water-splitting system.15,34


2.1.4. Solid oxide electrolyzer. 
Dönitz and Erdle introduced a solid oxide electrolyzer in 1980.35 A solid ceramic material is used as an electrolyte to selectively conduct negatively charged oxygen ions at higher temperatures in a solid oxide electrolyzer. The electrolyzer should be sufficiently thick to prevent the exchange of steam and hydrogen gas, which causes the recombination of H2 and O2−.
Cathode:2H2O + 4e− → 2O2− + 2H2
Anode:2O2− → O2 + 4e−
Y2O3-doped ZrO2 is an example of a solid oxide electrolyzer. ZrO2 has unique properties such as high strength, high melting temperature, and excellent corrosion resistance. On fast cooling, Y2O3 minimizes the change in the phase from tetragonal to monoclinic to prevent the formation of cracks, which can reduce the conductivity of the electrolyte. Scandia-stabilized and ceria-based electrolytes, lanthanum gallate materials, and scandium-doped chromate are other commonly used solid oxide electrolyzers.36 A few interesting cathode materials that have been studied are Ni-doped Y2O3-doped ZrO2, perovskite-type lanthanum strontium manganese, scandium-doped lanthanum strontium manganese, lanthanum strontium manganese chromate, and scandium-doped lanthanum strontium manganese chromate.37,38 The main advantage of a solid oxide electrolyzer is that it can use the heat energy present at a higher temperature to produce hydrogen from water. Oxygen ions and hydrogen are produced at the cathode when water molecules react with the electron. These oxygen ions pass through the solid ceramic membrane, react with the anode from oxygen gas, and generate electrons for the external circuit.39 The advantages of a solid oxide electrolyzer system are high storage capacity, minimal waste material disposal, high efficiency, long-term stability, fuel flexibility, low emission, and low operating costs. Despite this, a few disadvantages faced by this system are high operating temperature, leading to long start-up times, short lifetime and mechanical compatibility issues, and chemical instability caused by the diffusion between the layers of the material.40

2.2. Thermochemical water splitting
A thermochemical water splitting or thermochemical cycle is a process that involves the dissociation of the water molecule into hydrogen and oxygen through a repeated series of chemical reactions.41 This process is not catalyst-dependent, and it only uses thermal energy. The thermochemical cycle driven only by thermal energy is called the pure thermochemical cycle. The thermochemical cycle uses other forms of energy sources, such as electrical, photonic, and solar, called hybrid thermochemical cycles.42 In thermochemical water splitting, water is decomposed into hydrogen and oxygen through repetitive reactions below 2000 °C to avoid the very high temperature required for a single-step-thermochemical cycle.43 In a two-step thermochemical cycle process, a metal oxide is reduced to release oxygen, which is an endothermic step. In the exothermic step, this oxygen reacts with water to produce hydrogen and pure oxygen, which is recycled in the first step.44 The two-step thermochemical cycle requires a temperature of about 2000–3300 °C.45 The main drawback of this process is that it shows a relatively low efficiency compared to electrolysis and requires a high temperature.46,47 A three-step thermochemical cycle process can be established from a two-step process, in which the reaction with a higher temperature is replaced by a two-step process.48 The most well-known cycle in the process is the sulfur–iodine cycle. Its process consists of (1) a Bunsen reaction, exothermic sulfuric acid production in the presence of water; (2) endothermic decomposition of sulfuric acid; (3) slightly endothermic decomposition of hydriodic acid.49 The main drawback of this three-step thermochemical process is that it requires high temperature, and the reagents are harmful and corrosive.50 The four-step thermochemical cycle consists of a hydrolysis reaction, a hydrogen-evolution reaction, an oxygen-evolution reaction, and a reagent-recycling reaction. The main advantage of this process is that it can work at a lower maximum operating temperature.51 The hybrid thermochemical cycle is a process that uses both heat and other energy sources; the main advantage of this process is that the two-step process can work at lower temperatures.42 The two-step hybrid sulfur (HyS) cycle is the most well-known hybrid process. It involves a two-step reaction, one step with thermal decomposition of sulfuric acid where heat is consumed and oxygen is produced and one electrochemical step for SO2 electrolysis where electricity is consumed, and hydrogen is produced.52
2.3. Mechanocatalytic water splitting
Mechanocatalytic water splitting is a process in which water is decomposed into hydrogen and oxygen using mechanical energy. The mechanical energy is converted to electrical energy and then to chemical energy. In the process, metal oxide powders such as NiO, Co3O4, Cu2O, and Fe3O4 are dispersed in distilled water.53 A Teflon-coated magnetic stirring rod is used to agitate the dispersed powder. The dispersed power rubbing between the stirring rod and bottom wall creates a frictional force along with the catalytic activity of the oxide material, which is responsible for water splitting. The rate of the evolution of gases is influenced by the stirring parameters, size, and material of the rod and the reaction vessel. The water splitting is due to the charge separation due to the friction generated between the catalytic particle and the bottom of the vessel, in which the catalytic powder and the reaction vessel get a negative and positive charge, respectively. This finding was challenged by much research, and an alternative explanation was provided.54 There is no general agreement on the mechanism to date. A theory on the mechanism was proposed based on the experimental finding. The catalytic powder develops microcrevices because of the friction between the Teflon-coated rod and the surface of the glass vessel, leading to the development of a positive charge on the surface of the rod due to the loss of electrons and a negative charge on the glass vessel. The oxide particles in microcrevices are subjected to a high electric field. Negatively charged oxygen atoms are formed by the oxygen trapped in the interstitials of the oxide particles, which are negatively charged due to obtaining electrons and leaving the neighboring metal ions with positive holes. These electrons and holes are responsible for water splitting. The electrons are transferred to the rod and then to the glass surface. The protons combine with these electrons to form hydrogen at the bottom of the glass vessel. These holes oxidize water and generate oxygen and protons at the rod. The rod and the glass vessel act as an anode and cathode, respectively.55
2.4. Plasmolytic water splitting
Plasmolytic water splitting is a process that uses the electric discharge of plasma without acquiring high temperatures. In this process, the electric energy is converted into kinetic energy of the electron and then to the kinetic energy of the heavy particles. Hot and cold discharge are two types of plasma discharge.56 Water plasmolysis and CO2 plasma/CO + H2O are the two mechanisms used for water splitting. In water splitting through water plasmolysis, water is decomposed through a vibrationally excited state and dissociative attachment route.57 The main disadvantage of this method is that it requires a high ionization degree, which is hard to attain. In the CO2 plasma/CO + H2O method for hydrogen production from water, CO2 acts as a cocatalyst because it reduces the need for high degrees of ionization and decreases the concentration of OH free radicals. Without the CO2 catalyst, the efficiency was only 50%, but with the CO2 catalyst, the efficiency increased to 80%, and it also needs a lower degree of ionization. This process has an additional advantage after separation as it produces hydrogen and can form methanol and many other substances depending on the conditions. A few limitations of this process are a low hydrogen production rate, costly large-scale hydrogen production, and utilization of electric power.57
2.5. Photocatalytic water splitting
Photocatalytic water splitting has been widely studied to produce hydrogen and oxygen cost-effectively.58–61 It can produce renewable energy and has no CO2 emissions. An oxidation–reduction reaction takes place at the interface when a photocatalytic material is introduced into the water without any electrical work. To split the water, the valence and conduction bands of the material should match with the oxygen and hydrogen evolution potential.62–65 There are two primary approaches to splitting water in a photocatalytic system. In one approach, a single material is used to split water into hydrogen and oxygen. The material used should have a sufficiently narrow bandgap, a suitable thermodynamic potential, and stability against corrosion.66 Another approach is to use two different photocatalytic materials with a two-step excitation mechanism. The main advantages of this process are that it has a low process cost and the ability to separate hydrogen and oxygen during the reaction. In addition, it requires a small reactor system and a reasonable solar-to-hydrogen efficiency.67,68
2.6. Photo-electrochemical (PEC) water splitting
Solar energy is the most abundant, clean, and renewable energy source. A promising technology to utilize this solar energy is hydrogen fuel production through PEC water splitting.69–71 Henri Becquerel first observed this phenomenon; he reported that sunlight acting on a silver chloride coated platinum electrode produced photocurrent and photovoltage in different electrolytes. The photochemical reaction cannot be stimulated in pure water as it only absorbs the infrared region, and the photon energy is low to stimulate a photochemical reaction. Therefore, to decompose water, a semiconductor with a small bandgap or a wide bandgap semiconductor with a sensitizer or cocatalyst in the presence of sunlight and electric energy is used. In this process, hydrogen and oxygen are generated through the decomposition of water because of the photochemical reaction started by the semiconductor after the adsorption of sunlight.72–77 The PEC water splitting process is one of the most promising methods to convert light energy into chemical energy. The main challenge in the PEC system is to find a suitable material with absorption in a broad range of the solar spectrum, high photochemical stability, a suitable band edge position, low overpotential, efficient use in photogenerated electron–hole pairs, and low cost. It is difficult to achieve everything in a single semiconductor. Therefore, extensive research is going on to combine different semiconductors to achieve a suitable material with high efficiency.78–80 Various materials such as semiconductors, perovskites, metal–organic frameworks, and 2-dimensional materials have been studied.
3. Fundamental understanding of the PEC mechanisms
PEC water splitting is a process in which the water is split into hydrogen and oxygen in the presence of sunlight and bias, as depicted in Fig. 4a. In this process, the hydrogen is produced by exploiting the solar irradiation that hits the Earth's surface.81 The light energy is converted into chemical energy, and water undergoes a reduction and oxidation reaction when hydrogen and oxygen are split. A photocatalytic material consists of a conduction band and a valence band separated by a bandgap.13,82 When the material absorbs light energy greater than its bandgap energy, the electron from the valence bands gets excited into the conduction band, creating a hole in the valence band, as depicted in Fig. 4b. These photogenerated electron and hole pairs take part in an oxidation–reduction reaction that splits water into hydrogen and oxygen. In the oxidation reaction, water is split to form H+ ions, and in the reduction reaction, these H+ ions gain an electron and become H2. For the redox reaction to occur, the reduction and oxidation potential should be above and below the conduction band and valence band.83–85 There are two types of water splitting systems: a single-component system and a multi-component system. In a single-component system, the oxidation and reduction reactions occur in the same semiconductor particle, and the conduction and valence bands of this semiconductor must have thermodynamical potential for the oxidation and reduction reactions to occur. In the multi-component system, two semiconductors form a heterojunction. When the semiconductor absorbs enough photon energy, the electron from the valence band gets excited to the conduction band of the reduction cocatalyst, where the reduction reaction occurs. The excited electron leaves behind a hole that diffuses in the valence band of the oxidation cocatalyst, where the oxidation reaction occurs. The redox-mediated reaction in the dual particle system relaxes the constraints, as the voltages of both particles sum up to provide the driving force for overall water splitting.10,72
 Fig. 4  The schematic illustrations of (a) a photo-electrochemical (PEC) cell and (b) PEC water splitting using TiO2 as a photoanode. A detailed description is provided in the text. Reprinted from ref. 62 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2011) Elsevier. 
3.1. Factor affecting the efficiency of the PEC

3.1.1. Photocurrent. 
The bandgap energy of the semiconductor is used to determine the photocurrent density of the photoelectrode. A low photocurrent is due to electrical losses, because of which the photogenerated charges are unable to contribute to the electrochemical reaction. Few methods to enhance the photocurrent of the material are heteroatom doping, adjusting morphologies and orientations, thickness control, one-dimensional nanostructuring, reducing reflection, and reducing resistance. The doping method can enhance the optical and electrical properties of various materials. Mo and W doped BiVO4 showed that as the donor concentration increases, there was an increase in the conductivity of the material.86 Hydrogen and nitrogen doping in BiVO4 increased the photocurrent of the material, and Mo and nitrogen doping in BiVO4 increased the photocurrent density.87,88 These are confirmed by the experimental data shown in Fig. 5. An increase in photocurrent density for water oxidation at 0.6 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) was observed due to the nitrogen treatment of BiVO4 (Fig. 5a). The J–V curve was recorded for N2-treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH (Fig. 5b) using a two-electrode cell to determine the applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE), which attained a high value of 2.2% at 0.58 V (Fig. 5c). The ratio of hydrogen to oxygen generation was 1.81:1 (Fig. 5d), which was attributed to the leak of H2 during its manual sampling for gas chromatography analysis.88 The time dependence of photocurrent density was determined at 0.6 V versus RHE to compare the long-term stability of N2-treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH for water and sulfite oxidation (Fig. 5e). Similarly, Co and Sn co-doped Fe2O3 showed an enhanced photocurrent density compared with pure Fe2O3.89 WO3 doped with Bi also showed an increase in the photocurrent.90 The morphology and the crystalline orientation can affect the photocurrent density. The photocurrent density of BiVO4, which has an [010] orientation, was found to be higher than the [001] orientation due to the significant increase in the charge transport.91 Sb2Se3 prepared in three different mixing ratios of thioglycolic acid to ethanolamine by solution processing showed a different photocurrent density. The high photocurrent density was seen in well-aligned short Sb2Se3 nanorods along the vertical [001] direction.92 The thickness of the material determines the number of photons absorbed. To fully absorb the solar spectrum, the thickness should be large than the penetration depth of the incident light. If the diffusion length of the minority carrier is shorter than the thickness of the semiconductor, the photo-excited charge carriers recombine. Vertically aligned Ta3N5 nanorods showed a photocurrent density 3.2 times higher than planar Ta3N5 because of the short charge carrier diffusion length.93 Reducing surface reflection by multiple scattering enhances light absorption. Nanoporous black Si prepared by metal-assisted etching showed a high photocurrent density of 1.2 times higher than polished Si as it reduces the reflectivity.94 The undesirable resistance in the PEC system can reduce the photocurrent density. In a CdS/CIGS photoelectrode and Pt catalyst system, a thin Mo/Ti metallic layer between the CdS/CIGS photoelectrode and Pt catalyst increased the photocurrent by approximately 20%. The Ti layer made an intimate contact with the CdS/CIGS photoelectrode, and Mo assisted in the uniform deposition of the Pt catalyst.95
 Fig. 5  PEC water-splitting performance of pristine and nitrogen doped nanoporous bismuth vanadate electrodes. (a) J–V plots of BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH (black solid curve), N2-treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH (red solid curve), BiVO4 (black dashed line), and N2-treated BiVO4 (red dashed line) determined in a 0.5 M phosphate buffer under AM 1.5 G illumination using a three-electrode cell. Grey dashed lines represent the dark current of N2-treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH. (b) J–V plot and (c) applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) of N2-treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH obtained using a two-electrode cell for solar water splitting (CE: counter electrode). (d) Detection of hydrogen (blue points) and oxygen (red points) produced by N2-treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH at 0.6 V versus the counter electrode. The red dashed line shows the amount of oxygen calculated assuming 100% faradaic efficiency. (e) J–t plots of N2-treated BiVO4 for sulfite oxidation (blue curve) and N2-treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH for water oxidation (red curve) at 0.6 V versus RHE. Reprinted from ref. 88 under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Copyright (2015) Springer Nature. 


3.1.2. Photovoltage. 
The difference in the Fermi level between the two solid-state materials gives rise to photovoltage. In the case of photoanode, the onset potential shifts towards the negative voltage, and in the case of the photocathode, it shifts towards positive voltage. The passivation of the surface state, improving band alignment, and depositing catalytic overlayers are a few methods to improve the photovoltage of PEC materials. An example of surface-state-induced photovoltage loss is Fe2O3. The onset was decreased as much as 100 mV upon the deposition of the ultrathin ALD layer, while the deposition of TiO2 with the same thickness showed no improvement. The deposition of Co2+ ions decreases the onset potential even more.96 Further studies stated that the deposition of the passive layer was responsible for the decrease in the onset potential. To achieve high photovoltage, it is important to choose an appropriate heterojunction layer. One of the well-studied photocatalytic materials is Cu2O, which showed an enhancement in photovoltage when it formed a composite with Ga2O3 compared to the composite formed with AZO. The increase in the photovoltage is 5 times higher than that of the AZO/Cu2O-based photocathode.97 Another way to increase the photovoltage is by depositing catalytic overlayers.


3.1.3. Material stability. 
One of the main challenges of the PEC system is the stability of the material. The cause of instability is the photo-corrosion of the semiconductor material, which occurs when the photogenerated charge carrier drives self-oxidation rather than water splitting. The use of materials that are stable against corrosion can achieve stability. Another cause of instability is the poor interfaces of the semiconductor, catalysts, and electrolytes. To increase the stability, a protective layer that can separate the semiconductor from the electrolyte is used. ALD-TiO2 layers were studied by various groups, which showed that the ALD-TiO2 used in Cu(In, Ga)(S, Se)2 (CIGS) photocathodes (NiMo/TiO2/CdS/CIGS) was stable under various pH conditions.98 TiO2 on top of a p-type semiconductor increases the photocurrent and onset potential, as it acts as a protective layer and n-type overlayer. Many materials other than TiO2 have been studied to be used as a protective layer. An Al2O3 layer was used as a protective layer for a GaN photoelectrode, which showed a slight decrease in the photocurrent due to high resistance after the deposition of Al2O3. However, the photocurrent density of the Al2O3 coated sample maintained a constant value, while bare GaN showed a rapid decrease in the photocurrent density.99 Electrolytes can also affect the stability of the material. It can be reduced by tuning the composition of the electrolyte and controlling the dissolution reaction. In the BiVO4 photoanode system, V5+ was added to the electrolyte in the form of V2O5 for long-term stability. It was noted that after the addition of V2O5, it showed a stable photocurrent density without a noticeable decrease for 60 h. X-ray diffraction (XRD) showed no change after the stability test. Without the addition of V2O5, there was a decrease in the XRD peak after the stability test.100

4. Oxide semiconductor for PEC water splitting
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) has been widely studied for its application in PEC water splitting due to its stability against photo-corrosion and chemical corrosion; additionally, it incurs low cost and is photoactive.101–103 The bandgap of TiO2 is 3.2 eV limiting its photoactivity to ultraviolet (UV) energy, and it has a high recombination rate of photogenerated current carriers, reducing its efficiency. Various methods such as doping and semiconductor coupling have been employed to improve the bandgap and efficiency of TiO2.104,105 A Ni-doped TiO2 nanotube was prepared by anodizing different Ti–Ni alloys and further annealing them at a high temperature. The prepared Ni-doped TiO2 showed a photoconversion efficiency of 0.67%, which was 3.35 times higher than the photoconversion efficiency of pure TiO2. The 3d state of Ni was introduced into the forbidden band and acted as a trapping site preventing the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers; as a result, it increased the photoconversion activity of TiO2. The UV spectra of the prepared sample showed that the optical absorption of TiO2 increased upon the doping of Ni, and a redshift was absorbed with the increase of Ni doping. From the PL spectra, it was observed that the PL intensity of the Ni-doped samples showed less intensity compared to undoped TiO2; this is due to the longer electron lifetime induced by Ni doping.106 TiO2 nanocavity arrays107 were prepared by anodization, and the Al film was deposited in the nanocavity array, followed by thermal dewetting, as shown in Fig. 6. The generated electron–hole pair separates at the Al/TiO2 interface, and then the electron is injected into the conduction band, and the holes are utilized in the oxidation of water. Al/TiO2 showed an enhanced photocatalytic water splitting activity compared to pure TiO2. The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images showed the formation of heterostructured Al@TiO2. The UV spectra of the prepared sample showed a plasmonic absorption peak, which attributes to the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect and electromagnetic field polarization.107
 Fig. 6  (a) A scheme presenting the fabrication of plasmonic Al@TiO2 heterostructures. (b) SEM, (c) TEM, (d) HRTEM, (e) cross-sectional STEM, and (f) STEM and EDS mapping of Al@TiO2. The inset in (e) presents the linear EDS profile captured from the red dashed line. Reprinted from ref. 107 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. 
Tungsten trioxide (WO3) is an n-type semiconductor with a bandgap of about 2.5–2.8 eV, which is approximately 2% of the solar spectrum. They are earth-abundant, highly tunable and chemically stable, and have excellent electrical conductivity.108,109 Bi-doped WO3, prepared using a hydrothermal method, was studied for its PEC water splitting capabilities. Bi-doped WO3 showed four times enhanced performance when compared to undoped WO3. The doping of Bi showed a downward shift in the Fermi level and increased the bandgap. The downward shift observed in the valence band is expected to increase the PEC efficiency, which was observed in UV spectra. The TEM study observed that the Bi doping did not induce any structural change and showed a homogeneous embedding of Bi.90 The hydrothermal method was used to prepare Sn-doped WO3 for PEC water splitting.110 The Sn-doped material showed enhanced photocatalytic activity (Fig. 7) due to the increase in oxygen vacancies and reduction in the bandgap. The increase in the oxygen vacancies increased the donor density levels in WO3, which increased the PEC performance. The TEM results showed evenly distributed Sn ions in WO3 lattices. A redshift was absorbed in the UV spectra, and the doping of Sn caused a tailing of absorbance onset into the visible region, indicating the increase in oxygen vacancies.110 The hydrothermal method was used to grow Mo-doped WO3 on a fluoride-doped tin oxide glass substrate. The prepared material showed an enhanced PEC activity compared to pure WO3, which can be attributed to the reduction in the bandgap upon introducing Mo and the increase in charge carrier density. The UV spectra showed a decrease in the bandgap position upon the addition of MO.111
 Fig. 7  (a) The transient voltammograms of undoped and Sn-doped WO3 thin films recorded under AM 1.5 G illumination at a bias potential of 1.23 V RHE. (b) The evolution of oxygen gas at the photoanode for undoped and Sn-doped WO3 under AM 1.5 G illumination measured at a bias potential of 1.23 V RHE. Reprinted from ref. 110 under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Copyright (2019) MDPI. 
Cuprous oxide (Cu2O) has been extensively studied for its application in PEC water splitting due to its conductivity, which is dominated by copper vacancies. It has a bandgap of about 2.0 eV, and it is nontoxic. However, the poor stability and low migration rate of Cu2O affect its PEC efficiency.112–114 The electrochemical deposition method was used to grow Cu2O films on the fluorine tin oxide substrate, and g-C3N4 was deposited on the Cu2O film by an electrophoretic deposition process. The PEC water-splitting study shows that the PEC performance of the Cu2O/g-C3N4 heterojunction was better than that of pure Cu2O and g-C3N4. It showed a photocurrent density and PEC hydrogen evolution efficiency of −1.38 mA cm−2 and 0.48 mL h−1 cm−2, respectively. The XRD results showed the formation of a heterojunction between g-C3N4 and Cu2O, which is ideal for charge transfer, and it reduces the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and enhances the PEC efficiency.115 Electrodeposition was used to grow a Cu2O film in an aqueous solution of varying pH and its PEC water splitting ability was studied (Fig. 8). The film grown at pH 12 showed the highest PEC efficiency.116 A Cu2O micro/nanostructure film was synthesized on copper foil by a facile and cost-effective template route through the transformation of a lotus-like CuO/Cu(OH)2 nanosheet/nanowire structure. The prepared material showed a photocurrent of −1.6 mA cm−2 at a potential of −0.6 V and a solar conversion efficiency of 1.97%.117
 Fig. 8  SEM micrographs of Cu2O photoelectrodes prepared at various pH values: (a) pH = 8; (b) pH = 10; (c) pH = 12; (d) pH = 14. Reprinted from ref. 116 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2015) Elsevier. 
Zinc oxide (ZnO) is a direct wide bandgap semiconductor with a bandgap of about 3.37 eV. ZnO materials have been studied for their PEC water splitting ability owing to their excellent electron mobility and transfer efficiency, intrinsic stability, and favorable environmental compatibility.118,119 A chemical route was used to grow ZnO nanoparticles on a multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) surface. ZnO/MWCNT showed 5 times more photocurrent density when compared to pure ZnO (Fig. 9a), and this increase in photocurrent is attributed to the decrease in band-bending and effective interfacial electron transfer. Moreover, a smaller arc radius of ZnO/MWCNT was observed in the EIS Nyquist plot as compared to that of pristine ZnO (Fig. 9b). It proved that MWCNT is beneficial for the separation of photogenerated charge carriers. It was confirmed from the TEM and SEM images that ZnO nanoparticles were uniformly dispersed on the surface of MWCNT without any aggregation of ZnO.120 A ZnO/Au heterostructure was prepared through a heterostructure and photoreduction combined method. The prepared heterostructure showed a photocurrent density of about 9.11 mA cm−2 and a hydrogen conversion efficiency of 0.48%, which are much higher than those of pure ZnO. The enhanced performance is due to a defined interface between ZnO and Au. It was observed from SEM and TEM images that the tip of the ZnO nanorods was covered with Au nanoparticles. The UV spectra of the heterostructure showed that the bandgap of ZnO extended to visible light after the deposition of Au. The bandgap transition of ZnO strengthened the absorption intensity. A great decrease in the PL intensity was observed after the deposition of Au due to the electron trapping effect.121 ZnO/CdS/Au nanotube arrays were prepared through the chemical bath deposition method, followed by sulfuric acid corrosion. The prepared nanotube arrays showed a photocurrent density of 21.53 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V and a photoconversion efficiency of about 3.45% under visible light irradiation. The type II bandgap structure between ZnO and CdS increases the photocatalytic activity by decreasing the recombination rate of photoinduced electron–hole pairs. The formation of a hexagonal nanotube hollow structure was observed from SEM and TEM imagining.122
 Fig. 9  (a) The linear sweep voltammograms recorded at applied potentials from −0.8 to +1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) for pristine ZnO and ZnO/MWCNT in the dark (hollow spheres) and under the illumination of 100 mW cm−2 (solid spheres). (b) EIS spectra of pristine ZnO and ZnO/MWCNT photoanodes. The inset in (b) represents a zoomed-in view of the low impedance region. Reprinted from ref. 120 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. 
Ferric oxide (Fe2O3) is an n-type semiconductor with a bandgap of about 2 to 2.2 eV. It depicts high stability in an aqueous solution. It is non-toxic, environmentally friendly, and abundant.123,124 Its photocatalytic efficiency has been limited due to low electron mobility, short hole diffusion length, and short lifetime of charge carriers.125,126 Ultrathin NiMn-layered double hydroxide nanosheets coupled with α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays were prepared through a hydrothermal method. The prepared photocatalytic material showed a photocurrent density of 1.98 mA cm2, which is 11 times higher than that of pure Fe2O3. The enhanced PEC efficiency is due to the improved interfacial charge separation and electron transportation observed in PL and electrochemical impedance studies. It was seen in the TEM image that the α-Fe2O3 nanorod was fully covered by a thin layer of NiMn.127 α-Fe2O3 nanoflowers were prepared by an aerosol-assisted chemical vapor deposition method. The prepared nanostructure showed a photocurrent density of up to 585 μA cm−2. The nanoflower showed an efficient charge carrier separation and lower charge transfer resistance at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. SEM and TEM studies revealed that the nanoflower structure was formed by the stacking of nanoflakes.128 The electrodeposition method was used to deposit a nanostructured α-Fe2O3 thin film. The thin film showed a photocurrent density of 0.67 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) under standard illumination conditions.129
5. Perovskite materials for PEC water splitting
Lanthanum iron oxide (LaFeO3) has a bandgap of 2.1–2.6 eV and is a visible light response material.130,131 It has been studied for its application in water splitting, dye decomposition, and CO2 reduction due to its photocatalytic capability, optical characteristics, and good stability in water.132–134 The magnetron sputtering method was used to prepare LaFeO3 on the surface of g-C3N4. The hydrogen production of the prepared material was found to be 10.8 μmol h−1 cm−2 under visible light irradiation, which was 70% higher than that of pure LaFeO3 and g-C3N4. The enhanced PEC performance resulted from efficient charge separation due to the formation of the heterostructure. The XRD study confirmed the formation of the heterostructure; it showed both the peaks corresponding to LaFeO3 and g-C3N4.135 The BiVO4/Co–LaFeO3 composite was electrodeposited on FTO glass by the electrodeposition method and studied for its PEC performance. The prepared composite showed a photocurrent of about 3.4 mA cm−2. The enhanced PEC performance of the prepared composite was due to the reduced recombination rate of the prepared material and the surface passivation effect of Co-substituted LaFeO3. The deposition of Co–LaFeO3 clusters on the surface of BiVO4 was observed from the SEM image. The HR-TEM image also confirmed that the surface of BiVO4 is packed with Co–LaFeO3 clusters.136
Calcium titanate (CaTiO3) is an orthorhombic structure perovskite with a wide bandgap range of 3.6 eV. The one-pot hydrothermal method was used to prepare a hierarchical architecture of CoTiO3 constructed from a single crystal nanowire.137 The hydrogen generation rate of the prepared material was 14.19 μmol h−1 g−1 (Fig. 10). The enhanced PEC performance of the prepared material is due to the formation of oxygen vacancies that acted as electron donors and increased the separation of photogenerated charge carriers. The SEM image showed that the prepared material had a higher specific surface area with more active sites, thus increasing the PEC performance.137 A g-C3N4/CaTiO3 heterojunction was prepared through the hydrothermal co-deposition method. The prepared material showed an enhanced PEC performance that was 18 times higher compared to unmodified materials. The increase in the PEC performance is due to the formation of a nano-heterojunction between g-C3N4 and CaTiO3, which is responsible for promoting the transfer of photoinduced electrons and holes, providing efficient charge separation, and increasing the lifetime of charge carriers. An increase in the visible light absorption after the formation of the heterojunction was observed from the UV spectra. The deposition of g-C3N4 on the surface of CaTiO3 was seen in the SEM image, indicating the heterojunction formation.138
 Fig. 10  (a) Hydrogen generation rate and (b) cycling performance measured for CaTiO3 nanoparticles synthesized with a polyvinyl alcohol concentration of (i) 8 g L−1 and (ii) 0 g L−1. Reprinted from ref. 137 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
Tin zinc oxide (ZnSnO3) has a wide bandgap of 3.25 eV with high visible transmittance and electron mobility.139,140 The electrophoretic deposition method was used to prepare the ZnSnO3/MoS2 heterostructure. The photocurrent density of this electrode is 2.3 times and 27.3 times higher than that of pure ZnSnO3 and pure MoS2, respectively. The enhancement in the PEC performance is due to the formation of a type II heterostructure, which improved the separation of photogenerated charge carriers and reduced the recombination rate. The SEM image showed that the MoS2 nanosheet was randomly dispersed on the surface of the ZnSnO3 layer. The formation of the heterostructure was confirmed from the XRD spectra.141 Cu(In, Ga)S2/In2S3 on ZnO/ZnSnO3 was prepared using spray pyrolysis. The prepared heterojunction showed a photocurrent density of about 6.4 mA cm−2, which was 3 times higher than that of the ZnO/Cu(In, Ga)S2/In2S3 electrode. The formation of the heterostructure reduced the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes, increasing the PEC performance. The SEM image showed nanosheet structure formation.142
Sodium tantalate (NaTaO3) has proved to be an excellent candidate for PEC water splitting under UV light irradiation with a bandgap of about 4 eV.143,144 The chronopotentiometry method was used to incorporate RuO2 on a NaTaO3 film. The prepared sample showed an enhanced PEC performance. Under visible light irradiation, it achieves a maximum hydrogen production of 15.7 mmol h−1 g−1 and a solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 4.29%. The enhanced performance is due to the efficient charge separation of photogenerated electrons and holes and the low recombination rate of charge carriers. Two different morphologies were observed for the RuO2–NaTaO3 electrode in SEM imaging. It was observed from the UV spectra that the visible light absorption increased with an increase in the RuO2 content.145 The solid-state method was used to create NaTaO3 and BaBiO3, and the NaTaO3/BaBiO3 heterojunction was formed through the wet impregnation method. The prepared heterojunction showed the highest hydrogen production of 54 μmol g−1, which was 1.4 times higher than that of pure NaTaO3. The increase in the PEC performance was due to the formation of the heterojunction, which enhanced the transfer of photoinduced charge carriers and reduced the recombination of charge carriers. The SEM image showed the formation of a heterostructure between NaTaO3 and BaBiO3. It clearly depicted the presence of two different particles in the composite. A redshift was observed in the UV spectra, which showed the enhancement in visible light harvesting.146
Silver vanadium oxide (AgVO3) has a narrow bandgap of 2.3 eV, and it has been studied for various applications like photocatalysis, lithium batteries, and photoluminescence materials.147,148 The co-precipitation method was used to prepare the MoS2/Ag–AgVO3 heterostructure. The prepared heterostructure showed a hydrogen generation of 38.6 mmol g−1, which was 4 times higher than that of Ag–AgVO3 and 20 times higher than that of MoS2. The enhanced PEC performance was due to the increased separation and transfer of photoinduced charge carriers. An interconnected architecture was observed for the heterostructure in the TEM image. It showed that the Ag–AgVO3 nanorods were dispersed on the surface of the MoS2 nanosheet. The UV spectra showed that the absorption edge of the heterostructure shifted to the IR region after the formation of the heterostructure.149 It was found in ref. 149 that the type-II heterojunction charge-transfer mechanism may not be possible for MoS2/Ag–AgVO3 heterostructures (Fig. 11a). The band structures, calculated from the Mott–Schottky study, demonstrated a Z-scheme interfacial charge-transfer mechanism (Fig. 11b). The AgVO3/Mo–BiVO4 heterostructure was prepared through a simple successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction method. The prepared heterostructure showed a photocurrent density 7 times higher than that of pure BiVO4. The charge injection efficiency was increased to 49%, which was 5 times higher than that of pure BiVO4. The increase in the performance is due to the formation of the heterostructure, which increased the charge separation and increased the oxygen vacancies on the surface. The TEM and HRTEM images of the heterostructure showed that AgVO3 was loaded on Mo–BiVO4 successfully and present as overlapped small nanoparticles. The UV spectra showed that the formation of the heterostructure improved the absorption edge.150
 Fig. 11  Possible interfacial charge-transfer mechanisms of (a) a type II heterostructure and (b) a Z-scheme heterostructure of MoS2/Ag–AgVO3 for photocatalytic H2 generation under visible light irradiation. Detailed description is provided in the text. Reprinted from ref. 149 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2020) Elsevier. 
6. Metal–organic frameworks for PEC water splitting
ZnO@ZIF-8/67 was prepared from ZIF-8 bridging ZnO and ZIF-67 through the hydrothermal method. The prepared material showed a photocurrent density of 0.11 mA cm−2, which was 9.2 times higher than that of pure ZnO. The enhanced performance exhibited by the material is due to the fast one-dimensional electron transfer on the ZnO nanorods and the high visible light absorption of ZIF-67. The SEM image of ZnO@ZIF-8/67 was shorter than that of pristine ZnO, which indicates an etching effect to form ZIF-8/67 as a linker between ZnO and ZIF-64. A core–shell structure of ZnO@ZIF-8/67 was seen in the TEM image. A short absorption peak was observed in UV spectra.151 The solvothermal method was used to prepare a ZnO nanotube with nitrogen-doped carbon dots embedded in ZIF-8. The prepared material showed enhanced photocurrent density compared to the pure material due to the increase in several photogenerated electrons and holes from the enhanced visible light absorption of nitrogen-doped carbon dots. The formation of the ZnO nanotube with nitrogen-doped carbon dot embedded ZIF-8 was confirmed through TEM and SEM images. The UV spectra showed that the prepared material had a redshift towards the visible light region.152
A MIL-53(Fe) catalyst-modified Mo:BiVO4 film was prepared through spin coating. The prepared material showed a photocurrent density of 2.2 mA cm−2, which was 4 times higher than that of the pure material. The enhanced PEC performance is due to the formation of a heterojunction between Mo:BiVO4 and MIL-53, which prevented the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes. The photoconversion efficiency increases with a reduced recombination rate. The SEM and TEM images showed the formation of MIL-53 on the surface of Mo:BiVO4. The UV spectra showed that the absorption edge of the prepared material was higher than that of pure MIL-53.153 Fe-doped BiVO4 modified with MIL-53(Fe) was prepared by spin coating. The prepared material showed a photocurrent of 1.15 mA cm−2, which was much higher than that of the pure material. The enhanced PEC performance is due to MIL-53, which facilitates the charge separation efficiency and enhances the performance. The SEM study revealed the formation of MIL-53 on Mo:BiVO4. A redshift was observed for the prepared material in UV spectra.154
The chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method was used to decorate Fe2O3 nanorod arrays with MIL-101. The prepared material showed a photocurrent density of 1 mA cm−2, which was 2.5 times higher than that of pure Fe2O3. The exciton lifetime and the electrochemically active surface area were also 14 and 1.3 times higher than that of the pure material. The increase in the PEC performance is due to the reduced recombination of charge carriers in the MIL-101 layer. The SEM and TEM images showed the formation of MIL-101 on top of Fe2O3.155 An Fe2O3/MIL-101 heterostructure film (Fig. 12) was prepared through a one-drop method under hydrothermal conditions.156 The photocurrent density exhibited by the prepared material was 20 μA cm−2, which was 2 times higher than that of pure Fe2O3. The enhanced PEC performance is due to the formation of a type II heterostructure, which reduced the recombination rate of the photogenerated charge carriers. The heterostructure formation was confirmed by the SEM image and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) elemental mapping. The UV spectra showed that the absorption edge of the heterostructure moved towards about 490 nm.156 The EIS studies of Fe2O3 (Fig. 13a) indicated that the mass transfer process determined the surface reaction kinetics. Therefore, PEC water oxidation efficiency was limited. In the case of the Fe2O3/MIL-101 film, an increased slope of the straight line was observed in the EIS Nyquist plot (Fig. 13a). It suggested an enhanced reactant diffusion rate and water oxidation kinetics. The transient photocurrent responses of Fe2O3 and Fe2O3/MIL-101 at 0.6 V under continuous illumination were measured to examine the stability of the samples (Fig. 13b). It was noted that the photocurrent density of Fe2O3/MIL-101 decreased gradually after 500 s. It was attributed to the insufficient quality of the connection between the Fe2O3 film and the layer of the metal–organic framework. Fe2O3/MIL-101 was further investigated using XRD (Fig. 13c), Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 13d), SEM, and EDX (Fig. 13e) to characterize the structural modification after the completion of all PEC experiments. No significant changes in the crystal structure and composition of Fe2O3/MIL-101 were observed when the PEC studies were completed.
 Fig. 12  The schematic representations of the energy band structure and electron transfer path of the Fe2O3/MIL-101 heterojunction. Reprinted from ref. 156 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
 Fig. 13  (a) EIS Nyquist plots, (b) time dependence of photocurrent measured for Fe2O3 and Fe2O3/MIL-101 under continuous illumination at 0.6 V, (c) XRD patterns of Fe2O3/MIL-101 before and after PEC experiments, (d) Raman spectra of Fe2O3/MIL-101 before and after all PEC experiments, and (e) SEM micrographs and EDX mapping images of Fe2O3/MIL-101 before (inset) and after PEC experiments. Reprinted from ref. 156 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
The hydrothermal method was used to prepare NH2-MIL-125(Ti) incorporated TiO2. The photocurrent density of the prepared material is 3.04 mA cm−2, which is higher than that of pure materials. The prepared material showed the highest hydrogen production rate of 132.86 μmol h−1 cm−2. The enhanced PEC performance was due to the excellent light utilization, and it promoted charge separation and long-term photostability because of the heterostructure formation. The formation of the heterostructure was seen in the TEM image.157 NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/TiO2 was prepared by the hydrothermal method and showed a high photocurrent density of 1.63 mA cm−2, which was 2.7 times higher than that of pure TiO2. The photon-electron conversion efficiency was about 84.4%. The enhanced PEC performance was due to the formation of a type II heterostructure, which promotes efficient light absorption and charge separation. Perpendicular growth of the sample was observed in the SEM image.158
UiO-66/Pd/S, N graphene quantum dots were prepared for the PEC water-splitting study. The prepared material showed a photocurrent density of about 297 μA cm−2, a photon-to-current efficiency of 0.66%, and an absorbed photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of 19.7%. The enhanced PEC performance is due to the higher separation and low recombination rates of electrons and holes. It was observed from the SEM image that the surface of UiO-66 was covered with quantum dots indicating the formation of the composite. The TEM and HRTEM images showed that Pd nanoparticles were grown on the UiO-66 surface, and S, N graphene quantum dots covered both surface deposited Pd nanoparticles and UiO-66.159 UiO-66@ZnIn2S4 nanocomposites with UiO-66 nanoparticles being encapsulated by ZnIn2S4 nanosheets were fabricated. The prepared hybrid material generated hydrogen at a rate of 3061.61 μmol h−1 g−1 and had a quantum efficiency of 9.84%. It was observed from the FESEM image that the nanosheet was uniformly dispersed on UiO-66 nanoparticles. The TEM image also showed that the UiO-66 nanoparticle was encapsulated by the nanosheet.160
A ZnO@ZIF-8/67 encapsulated ZnO nanorod array was synthesized on a FTO glass substrate and was investigated for its PEC water splitting. The prepared material showed a photocurrent density of 0.11 mA cm−2. The photocurrent density exhibited by ZnO@ZIF-8/67 was 9.2 times higher than that of pristine ZnO nanoarrays. The enhanced PEC activity is due to the fast electron transportation in one dimension and the intense visible light absorption of ZIF-67.161 Direct sulfurization of the ZnO@ZIF composite was used to acquire ZnO@ZnS, ZnO@CoS, and ZnO@ZnS/CoS heterostructures. The prepared heterostructures were investigated for their PEC activity, and the ZnO@ZnS/CoS heterostructure exhibited the highest photocurrent density of 2.46 mA cm−2 with a photoconversion efficiency of 0.65%. The enhanced PEC activity is due to the special cellular structure, which increases the number of active sites and elongates the incident photon transport pathway.162 The hydrothermal method was used to prepare zeolite-type chalcogenide CPM-121 integrated with TiO2 nanowires. The PEC investigation of the prepared heterostructure showed a 3 fold increase in the photocurrent under visible light irradiation. The increase in the photocurrent is due to the formation of a heterostructure, which facilitates electron transport.163
7. 2D materials for PEC water splitting
Graphene oxide is a 2-dimensional material that has gained attention because of its unique properties for PEC water splitting.164 The solvothermal method was used to prepare sulfur-doped titanium oxide on the surface of a sulfur-doped reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanocomposite. The photocurrent density exhibited by S-TiO2/S-rGO was 3.36 mA cm−2, which was 3 times higher than that of bare TiO2. The enhanced PEC performance of S-TiO2/S-rGO is due to efficient visible light harvesting and the reduced recombination rate of photogenerated hole and electron pairs. It was observed from the HR-TEM image that a strong coupling was present between S-TiO2 and S-RGO, which during the PEC water splitting process enabled the transfer of electrons from S-TiO2 to S-rGO.165 The hydrothermal process was used to synthesize a graphene oxide/ZnO hybrid structure. The prepared hybrid material showed a photocurrent density of about 1.517 mA cm−2. This enhanced PEC performance is due to the increased oxygen vacancies from the formation of the graphene oxide/ZnO hybrid.166 The wet impregnation method was used to prepare Mo–BiVO4@rGO.167 The SEM image showed the porous sheet structure of rGO in which the BiVO4 particle was embedded. The prepared material showed a hydrogen conversion efficiency of 2.45% at 0.6 V versus RHE, which was higher than that of BiVO4.167 To investigate the hydrogen evolution further, water-splitting reactions at zero potential were performed using a xenon lamp and aqueous solutions of 1 M Na2S and 1 M Na2SO3. Fig. 14 shows a comparison of the hydrogen generation yield obtained for pure BiVO4, Mo–BiVO4, and Mo–BiVO4@rGO nanocomposites after three hours of the experiment. Among all the examined materials, the Mo–BiVO4@rGO nanocomposite exhibited the highest rate of hydrogen evolution. The enhanced PEC performance resulted from the improved charge carrier density, enhanced electronic conductivity from the doping of Mo, and increased carrier transport and collection efficiency due to rGO.
 Fig. 14  Hydrogen evolution was achieved for pure BiVO4, molybdenum-doped BiVO4 (Mo–BiVO4), the nanocomposite of molybdenum-doped BiVO4, and reduced graphene oxide (Mo–BiVO4@rGO) under solar light irradiation at zero potential after 3 hours of the experiment. Reprinted from ref. 167 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
Hexagonal boron nitride has a wide bandgap of 5.2 eV. It has gained considerable attention due to its unique properties like high chemical stability and thermal conductivity. It was depicted in recent studies that it shows semiconducting and electronic transport similar to that of metals and metal oxides.168,169 Calcium copper titanium with different amounts of exfoliated hexagonal boron nitride was prepared through a solid-state reaction method. The prepared material showed an enhanced photocurrent generation, which was 16 times higher than that of the pure material. The enhancement in the activity is due to the formation of new bonds after the insertion of B and N elements and the generated oxygen vacancy. It was seen from the SEM image that the grain boundary thickness increased and the grain size reduced, which is due to the increase in the amount of CuO phase after adding the nanosheet.170 A low-temperature plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition method was used to prepare a vertically aligned carbon-doped boron nitride on a conductive substrate. The carbon-doped boron nitride showed a photocurrent density of 120 μA cm−2, which was 60 times higher than that of carbon-doped boron nitride achieved by the traditional deposition method. The enhanced PEC activity is due to the doping of carbon; it was observed that as the content of carbon increased, there was an increase in visible light absorption. The TEM image showed a separated nanofilm of carbon-doped boron nitrite, and highly ordered layered structures were observed in the HR-TEM image. Few additional peaks were observed in the UV spectra, which indicates a minor increase in the light absorption in the visible light range.171 The solvothermal method was used to prepare CdSe quantum dots coupled with different weight percentages of ultra-thin layered hexagonal porous boron nitride sheets functionalized with 3-mercaptopropionic acid. The prepared heterostructure showed an H2 evolution of 25128 μmol g−1 h−1. The performance of the prepared heterostructure was 18.6 times higher than that of functionalized boron nitride sheets. The enhanced performance is due to the high specific area of the boron nitride sheet, which allows the uniform deposition of the quantum dots, increasing the absorption sites and the thiol group of 3-mercaptopropionic acid strongly tethers the quantum dots to the nanosheet. Such a high specific area reduces the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers, electrons, and holes. The heterostructure showed a photocurrent density of 1.2 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, and it was 4.13 and 2.56 times higher than that of pure boron nitride and CdSe quantum dots, respectively. The deposition of CdSe quantum dots on the nanosheet was seen in the TEM image.172
Graphitic carbon nitrite (g-C3N4) has gained attention as a photoanode material due to its unique properties like a tunable electronic structure and visible absorption range. They are non-toxic and cheap, and exhibit high physicochemical stability while requiring a simple fabrication route.173,174 The disadvantage of this material is that it tends to have a high recombination rate of photogenerated electron and hole pairs, poor electronic conductivity, slow hole transfer, and a limited visible light absorption range of 460 to 760 nm.175,176 These materials have been studied for various applications like photoelectronic devices,177 PEC biosensing,178 electrochemiluminescence,179 and photocurrent generation.180 Karjule et al. have shown the PEC properties, electropolymerization ability, and photoswitching properties of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons as a base for new photoelectronic devices. Yang et al. have tailored C atoms in graphene, forming an intriguing electronic structure leading to efficient photoelectron interconversion. The PEC activities and excellent biocompatibility of carbon nitrides help analyze non-transparent biosamples, creating a versatile platform for diagnosing various diseases.178 Zhao et al. developed carbon nitride-based electrodes for boosting photocurrent and electrochemiluminescence. They claimed that the cathodic efficiency of electrochemiluminescence reached 7 times as compared to Ru(bpy)3Cl2 in an aqueous solution.179 Zhang et al. have synthesized polymeric g-C3N4, which shows a photovoltaic effect and, as a photoactive material, produces electricity from solar light.180 The template-free hydrothermal method was used to prepare the SnO2–g-C3N4 nanostructure. The prepared nanostructure showed 8 times higher PEC performance compared to pure SnO2. The enhanced PEC performance is due to the improved charge separation of photogenerated electron and hole pairs and improved visible light absorption. The formation of a heterojunction between SnO2 and g-C3N4 improved the charge separation of electrons and holes, improving the PEC performance of the heterostructure. The UV spectra indicated that SnO2–g-C3N4 showed an absorption edge in between SnO2 and g-C3N4 and much closer to g-C3N4. It was observed that the absorption intensity increased in the visible light region after the addition of SnO2.181 Vanadium doped g-C3N4 was prepared by direct calcination of urea and ammonium metavanadate. The vanadium doped g-C3N4 showed a photocurrent density of 0.80 mA cm−2, which is 40 times higher than that of pure g-C3N4. The improvement in the PEC performance is due to the prolonged light absorption, improved transfer of electrons and holes, and extra active catalytic sites. A densely crumpled nanosheet structure was seen for vanadium-doped g-C3N4 under TEM. The EDAX mapping of vanadium doped g-C3N4 showed the presence of C, N, and V. It shows that the vanadium is evenly distributed. The UV spectra of the vanadium doped g-C3N4 showed that the optical band gap decreased with an increase in V concentration. The decrease in the optical band gap indicated an improvement in the charge mobility and light absorption, which improves the PEC performance.182
Transition metal dichalcogenides is a 2-dimensional material with a MeX2 structure, where Me is a transition metal atom like Mo, W, etc. and X is a chalcogenide atom like S, Se, or Te.119,183 The Me atom is sandwiched between two X atom layers and bonds to other layers by weak van der Waals's interaction. These materials can easily be exfoliated to a few single layers and have high conductivity, strength, and stability.184,185 These materials have been studied for various applications such as photovoltaics, organic light-emitting diodes, transistors, photodetectors, and gas sensors.186,187
Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) is a 2-dimensional transition metal chalcogenide and has gained considerable attention for various applications due to its mechanical, electrical, and optical properties.188 Ag embedded MoS2/BiVO4 was prepared through an electrophoretic deposition method on an FTO glass substrate. The prepared heterostructure showed a photocurrent density of 2.72 mA cm−2, which is 2.44 times higher than that of pure material. The enhanced PEC performance is due to the formation of a heterostructure between MoS2 and BiVO4, delaying the recombination of electron–hole pairs. The formation of Ag embedded MoS2/BiVO4 was confirmed from the TEM image. The sharp peak on the XRD pattern indicates the formation of a nanoporous monoclinic scheelite structure.189 TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNAs) were prepared by the anodization method, and MoS2 was prepared by the hydrothermal method. MoS2@PVA/TNA was prepared by coating MoS2 dispersed in PVA solution. The prepared material showed a photocurrent of 65 μA cm−2 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The enhanced PEC activity is due to the formation of a type II heterostructure, which promotes the migration of electrons and holes under excitation. The XRD spectra confirmed the formation of MoS2@PVA/TNA.190 ZnO/MoS2 nano-cable arrays were prepared on an FTO glass through the solvothermal method and showed an improved photocurrent of 1.39 mA cm−2 compared to the pure materials. The enhancement in the PEC performance is due to the enhanced light-harvesting capability and fast charge separation and transport through the nano-cable structure. The TEM image conformed to the formation of the ZnO/MoS2 nano-cable. In the UV spectra, it was observed that ZnO/MoS2 showed a redshift, indicating an expanded absorption.191
Tungsten disulfide (WS2) is a 2-dimensional material, whose electrical and optoelectronic properties can be tuned by adjusting the number of layers and crystal sites. It has a high specific area, leading to the presence of high active sites. It is non-toxic, inexpensive, and resistant to corrosion, which makes it a suitable material for PEC water splitting. The disadvantage of this material is that it has a high recombination rate of photogenerated electron and hole pairs and low charge transfer efficiency.192–195 A WS2 nanosheet doped with Ti and Mo was prepared at a relatively low temperature through the CVD process. The WS2 nanosheet doped with both Ti and Mo showed increased PEC performance, while the Ti-doped WS2 nanosheet exhibited the highest photocurrent density of 10.44 mA cm−2. Ti-doped WS2 showed a charge transfer resistance of 6.3 kΩ, which was two times less than that of pure WS2 nanosheets. This enhancement in the PEC performance is due to the increase in the donor density and improvement in the electrical conductivity. The FESEM image confirmed the doping of Ti and Mo in the WS2 nanosheet. The concentration of atoms calculated from the EDS spectrum also confirmed that Ti and Mo were doped in the WS2 nanosheet. The DRS spectra showed bandgap reduction after doping Ti and Mo, indicating an increase in the light absorption, which will improve the PEC performance.196 A WS2 nanosheet was prepared by liquid-phase exfoliation by ultrasonication. WO3 was prepared by ultrasonication followed by calcination. A WO3/WS2 photoanode was prepared by the drop casting method. It was seen that the photocurrent density of the WO3/WS2 photoanode increased considerably. It showed a photocurrent density of 5.6 mA cm−2, which was 7.2 times higher than that of the pure material. The enhancement in the photocurrent density is due to the increase in the donor concentration, reduced space charge layer, and decreased flat band potential. The SEM and TEM images confirmed the formation of a 2-dimensional plate-like structure of the WO3/WS2 photoanode.197
8. Molecular dynamics for water splitting
Molecular dynamics (MD) is a powerful computational tool for simulating and evaluating the dynamics of molecular systems. Newtonian laws of motion are the main principle of molecular dynamics. The statistical ensembles of MD usually control the number of particles, temperature, and pressure. Parameters of force field must be inserted, update configuration algorithm, and post-processing are important to design global MD algorithm.198 PEC depends on catalyzed charge transfer reactions at solid–liquid interfaces. The charge transfer process, formed products, and the distribution of electronic charge carriers and ions play a vital role in the evaluation of the PEC system. The performance of PEC can be optimized by knowing the transport of ionic species within the liquid bulk phase. The evaluation of PEC and reactions by using numerical aspects in water splitting applications can be simplified by MD. Quantum chemical ab initio-based MD models help to inspect chemical surface processes during water splitting. The alignment of the valence and conduction band edges to the water redox potential can provide insight into the properties of semiconductor materials used for water splitting applications. Zunger et al. have given some approaches to understanding interfacial reactions and vacuum calculations.199 Cheng et al. showed the alignment of the conduction band edge with the normal hydrogen electrode quite similar to the experimental value.200 The vital role of surface adsorbates in the position of conduction and valence band edges was investigated by Zhou et al. using DFT MD approaches.201 Molecular dynamics simulation was used to quantify water dissociation over TiO2 surfaces at various water coverages. The extent of water dissociation predicted by using the ReaxFF reactive force field was in general agreement with previous density-functional theory studies and experiments.202 Here, they have simulated potential-dependent OH and O adsorption on Pt(111) and Pt3Ni. The simulations are performed employing DFT calculated interaction and formation energies as input to Monte Carlo simulations.203
9. Prospects and conclusions
The application of PEC water splitting is an eco-friendly route for hydrogen production. Hydrogen is one of the most abundant materials seen in almost 95% of the visible matter on earth while being the lightest and smallest element. It exhibits some unique properties, which act as a benefit and a challenge to use hydrogen as a fuel. It is odorless, invisible, nontoxic, noncarcinogenic, nonpoisonous, smoke-free, and highly buoyant.204–206 Hydrogen tends to combine with other elements like carbon and oxygen, and it is present naturally in the Earth's crust in a very small amount. Hydrogen showed unique properties like high diffusivity, low viscosity, inimitable chemical nature, combustibility, and electrochemical properties that make it a better fuel. Hydrogen is a type of alternative, non-conventional or advanced fuel.207–209 Hydrogen has a high heating value compared to other fuels.2,3
Hydrogen can be sorted, and the storage of hydrogen is one of the most important technologies needed for the long-term use of hydrogen. Hydrogen from salt caverns can be used on a cloudy day when solar and wind are not active.210–212 Hydrogen is stored in the liquid form as cryogenic liquid. The density of the liquid to be stored is too high, 71 g L−1, and it has a boiling point of 20 K. To store hydrogen, special double-walled vessels with a good insulation system are needed to prevent heat leakage.213–215 In a solid-state system, hydrogen is stored by physisorption or chemisorption. In physisorption, carbon-based materials such as carbon nanotubes, fibers, fullerenes, activated carbon, zeolites, metal–organic frameworks, covalent organic frameworks, and polymers of intrinsic microporosity are used to absorb molecular hydrogen on the surface by van der Waals force. The few drawbacks of this system are that they have low hydrogen storage capacity and require extremely low temperature for high hydrogen storage. In chemisorption, the hydrogen atom chemically reacts with solids to form hydrides. These chemical hydrides can release hydrogen under relatively moderate operating conditions.216,217
PEC water splitting is a clean source for producing hydrogen. Many possible factors affecting water splitting are being highlighted in this review. Multifunctional materials with superior properties such as perovskites, semiconductor oxides, carbon materials, metal–organic frameworks, and 2D materials have immense potential to enhance PEC water splitting, generating a clean and renewable energy source. Table 1 shows various materials, their light source, current density, and electrolyte for PEC water splitting. PEC systems need to be progressed at a commercialized industrial level in the near future to produce valuable fuels to develop a sustainable economy. Many processes such as photocatalysis, PEC catalysis, and photovoltaic-driven electrocatalysis are employed to optimize the performance of these systems. The usage of PEC in the industrial sector can be achieved by more understandings of the working mechanisms, prototype design, enhancing the current density, measurement capabilities, exploration of new efficient materials, and durable interfaces. Looking deeply into the above parameters, at first the facility needs to get ready to test the prototype and component performance, which is of broad interest to customers showing their peak efficiency, spectral response, and stability. This approach can attract investor attention to industry efforts in designing efficient prototypes of PEC. Secondly, industry needs to set up test beds for PEC systems with access to adequate light replicating solar illumination, gas outlets linked to flowmeters, and a gas chromatography device. A device's performance can be evaluated by knowing its solar-to-fuel efficiency, degradation rate, faradaic efficiency, and spectral response. Thirdly, at the industrial level, distinguishing and reducing artifacts (chemical corrosion, calibration of light and photodiodes, and various illumination devices) in PEC systems are vital to improve performance. Hence the best practices in design and investigation can lead to desired results in improving the efficiency of PEC in the industrial sector.
Table 1 Comparison of various multifunctional materials, their light source, current density, and electrolyte for photoelectrochemical water splitting




Material
Synthesis method
Electrolyte
Light source
Current density
Reference




Ti–Ni–O nanotubes
Annealing
KOH
100 mW cm−2
0.93 mA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl

106



Bi doped WO3
Hydrothermal
0.1 M Na2SO4
AM 1.5 G
1.511 mA cm−2vs. RHE

90



Cu2O/g-C3N4
Electrophoretic deposition
5.0 mol NaOH
100 mW cm−2
−1.38 mA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl

115



ZnO/Au
Hydrothermal and photoreduction combined approach
0.1 M Na2SO4
100 mW cm−2
9.11 mA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl

121



α-Fe2O3/NiMn LDH
Solvent exfoliation
1 M NaOH
AM 1.5 G
1.98 mA cm−2vs. RHE

127



LaFeO3/g-C3N4
Magnetron sputtering
0.1 M Na2SO4
AM 1.5 G
4 mA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl

135



ZnSnO3/MoS2
Electrophoretic deposition method
1 mol Na2SO4
Xenon lamp
21.9 mA cm−2vs. Hg/HgCl

141



RuO2–NaTaO3
Chronopotentiometry technique
0.5 M Na2SO4
AM 1.5 G
1.9 mA cm−2vs. RHE

145



MoS2/Ag–AgVO3
Co-precipitation method
0.5 M Na2SO4
100 mW cm−2
519 μA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl

149



ZnO@ZIF-8/67
Hydrothermal
0.5 M Na2SO4
AM 1.5 G
0.11 mA cm−2vs. RHE

151



Mo:BiVO4-MIL-53(Fe)
Spin coating
0.2 M Na2SO4
AM 1.5 G
1.67 mA cm−2vs. RHE

153



Fe2O3/MIL-101
One-drop method under hydrothermal conditions
0.01 M Na2SO4
AM 1.5 G
0.9 mA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl

156



NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/TiO2
Hydrothermal
1 M NaOH
AM 1.5 G
1.63 mA cm−2vs. RHE

158



UiO-66/Pd/S, N GQDs
Hydrothermal
0.2 M Na2SO4
AM 1.5 G
300 μA cm−2vs. RHE

159



S-TiO2/S-RGO
Solvothermal
1 M KOH
100 mW cm−2
3.36 mA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl

165



2D carbon doped boron nitride
Plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition
1.0 M NaOH
Sunlight spectrum
120 μA cm−2vs. REH

155



SnO2–g-C3N4
Calcination
0.1 M KOH
100 mW cm−2
0.80 mA cm−2vs. RHE

196



MoS2/BiVO4
Electrochemical deposition and annealing
1 M Na2SO3
100 mW cm−2
2.72 mA cm−2vs. RHE

196



Ti and Mo doped WS2
Chemical vapor deposition
0.05 M Na2S
AM 1.5 G
10.44 mA cm−2vs. RHE

196





The exploration of new efficient materials for PEC bearing superior electro-optical properties can ensure high-efficiency energy conversion. Some computational techniques such as kinetic growth simulations and density functional theory may help shed light on interfacial reactions, vapor-phase synthesis optimization, and nucleation. Moreover, large-area handling of high-performance materials needs to be developed to extend the use of PEC in industries. One of the important considerations that also need to be focused upon is the corrosion of the active material in the electrolyte environment. Industrial level measurement capabilities such as overlayer technology or surface passivation can help to reduce such decay in performance. These focus on the perspective of utilizing lab-scale PEC in efficient industrial systems for efficient fuel generation.
Hydrogen generation from water splitting was discussed in this paper considering the electrolytic, thermochemical, mechanocatalytic, plasmolytic, photocatalytic, and PEC methods. Despite the plenty of these technologies, many still encounter serious problems. For instance, one of the major challenges of photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic systems is to find an appropriate material that absorbs solar radiation in a broad range of wavelengths. Furthermore, a catalyst should have suitable band edge positions and exhibit a high yield of photogenerated carrier separation. The stability of the catalyst and its cost of production are also important factors that determine the range of its possible applications. Till now, different approaches have been recognized as promising for overcoming the challenges listed above. An interesting strategy for increasing the water splitting efficiency is the development of binary materials, in which morphologies and surface compositions can be tuned in a facile way. Furthermore, semiconductor heterojunctions can improve charge transfer and reduce the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Similar effects can be obtained through doping the semiconductor, which changes the local electronic structure of the material and enriches the accessible catalytically active sites. Further studies in PEC hydrogen evolution should focus on combining various catalytic materials into metal–organic frameworks or binary and even ternary nanocomposites. The specific surface area of the catalyst plays a key role in exposing the active sites and reducing the path for mass and charge transport. Therefore, new structural engineering strategies have been developed to design and fabricate efficient catalysts with cutting-edge morphologies, including aligned nanorods, nanocavity arrays, nanotube hollow structures, interwoven nanosheets, nanoflowers formed by nanoflake stacking, and nanoparticles encapsulated into nanosheets. It is expected that future improvement of the stability of the materials reviewed and the optimization of costs of their production will result in large-scale industrial production of hydrogen.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study is supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT of Korea (2021R1C1C1011588). KM would like to thank the Silesian University of Technology (Gliwice, Poland) for the Rector's pro-quality grant (14/010/RGJ21/0006) and Rector's habilitation grant (14/010/RGH21/0008) in the area of scientific research and development. This study was also supported by the JST-ERATO Yamauchi Materials Space-Tectonics Project (Grant Number: JPMJER2003). This work was performed in part at the Queensland node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility, a company established under the National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy to provide nano- and micro-fabrication facilities for Australia's researchers.
References
T. N. Veziroǧlu and S. Şahin, Energy Convers. Manage., 2008, 49, 1820–1831 CrossRef .
T. Nejat Veziroglu, Energy Procedia, 2012, 29, 654–656 CrossRef .
I. Iordache, A. V. Gheorghe and M. Iordache, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 12231–12240 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, J. Wang, M. Dooner and J. Clarke, Appl. Energy, 2014, 137, 511–536 CrossRef .
P. Mary Rajaitha, K. Shamsa, C. Murugan, K. B. Bhojanaa, S. Ravichandran, K. Jothivenkatachalam and A. Pandikumar, SN Appl. Sci., 2020, 2, 572 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mueller-langer, E. Tzimas, M. Kaltschmitt and S. Peteves, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3797–3810 CrossRef CAS .
G. Marbán and T. Valdés-Solís, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 1625–1637 CrossRef .
A. Midilli, M. Ay, I. Dincer and M. A. Rosen, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2005, 9, 255–271 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, J. Tang, Z. Wang, Y. Sugahara and Y. Yamauchi, Small, 2018, 14, 1802442 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Bhanja, Y. Kim, B. Paul, T. Debnath and J. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 396, 125245 CrossRef CAS .
V. Veeramani, B. M. Matsagar, Y. Yamauchi, A. Yacine, M. Naushad, M. Habila, S. Wabaidur, Z. A. Alothman, Z. Wang and K. C. Wu, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2019, 96, 634–638 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sørensen, Energy Policy, 1991, 19, 386–391 CrossRef .
I. Dincer and C. Acar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 40, 11094–11111 CrossRef .
B. You and Y. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1571–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Bloor, P. I. Molina, M. D. Symes and L. Cronin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3304–3311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shang, J. Qin, J. Lin, B. Dong, J. Chi, Z. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Chai and C. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 523, 121–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Ji, X. Teng, Y. Liu, L. Guo and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13149–13153 RSC .
B. Rausch, M. D. Symes and L. Cronin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13656–13659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Symes and L. Cronin, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 403–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schalenbach, M. Carmo and D. L. Fritz, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 8, 14921–14933 CrossRef .
S. A. Grigoriev, V. I. Porembsky and V. N. Fateev, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 171–175 CrossRef CAS .
P. Millet, R. Ngameni, S. A. Grigoriev, N. Mbemba, F. Brisset and A. Ranjbari, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 5043–5052 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, C. Wang and Y. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 264, 350–357 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kumar, S. U. B. Ramakrishna, B. R. Devi and V. Himabindu, S. Afr. J. Chem. Eng., 2018, 25, 1 Search PubMed .
W. Xu and K. Scott, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 12029–12037 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kumar and V. Himabindu, Mater. Sci. Energy Technol., 2019, 2, 442–454 Search PubMed .
A. Ursua, L. M. Gandia and P. Sanchis, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 410–426 CAS .
S. Seetharaman, R. Balaji, K. Ramya and K. S. Dhathathreyan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14934–14942 CrossRef CAS .
D. Burnat, M. Schlupp, A. Wichser, B. Lothenbach, M. Gorbar, A. Züttel and U. F. Vogt, J. Power Sources, 2015, 291, 163–172 CrossRef CAS .
S. Marini, P. Salvi, P. Nelli, R. Pesenti, M. Villa, M. Berrettoni, G. Zangari and Y. Kiros, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 384–391 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 307–326 CrossRef CAS .
V. Marinović and A. R. Despić, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 44, 4073–4077 CrossRef .
L. De Silva Muñoz, A. Bergel, D. Féron and R. Basséguy, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 8561–8568 CrossRef .
W. Dönitz and E. Erdle, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1985, 10, 291–295 CrossRef .
L. Bi, S. P. Shafi and E. Traversa, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5815–5819 RSC .
M. A. Laguna-Bercero, J. Power Sources, 2012, 203, 4–16 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yue, A. Yan, M. Zhang, L. Liu, Y. Dong and M. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 691–697 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, M. K. H Leung and D. Y. C. Leung, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 2337–2354 CrossRef CAS .
P. Moçoteguy and A. Brisse, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 15887–15902 CrossRef .
A. T-Raissi, Encycl. Inorg. Bioinorg. Chem., 2011, 1–9 CAS .
F. Safari and I. Dincer, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 205, 112182 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Funk, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 185–190 CrossRef CAS .
G. Naterer, S. Suppiah, M. Lewis, K. Gabriel, I. Dincer, M. A. Rosen, M. Fowler, G. Rizvi, E. B. Easton, B. M. Ikeda, M. H. Kaye, L. Lu, I. Pioro, P. Spekkens, P. Tremaine, J. Mostaghimi, J. Avsec and J. Jiang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 2901–2917 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Navas, R. Alcántara, C. Fernández-Lorenzo and J. Martín, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2009, 80, 063102 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Bulfin, J. Vieten, C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18951–18966 RSC .
C. Jarrett, W. Chueh, C. Yuan, Y. Kawajiri, K. H. Sandhage and A. Henry, Sol. Energy, 2016, 123, 57–73 CrossRef CAS .
X. Vitart, A. Le Duigou and P. Carles, Energy Convers. Manage., 2006, 47, 2740–2747 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cerri, C. Salvini, C. Corgnale, A. Giovannelli, D. De Lorenzo Manzano, A. O. Martinez, A. Le Duigou, J. M. Borgard and C. Mansilla, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 4002–4014 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Norman, K. J. Mysels, R. Sharp and D. Williamson, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1982, 7, 545–556 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ishaq, I. Dincer and G. F. Naterer, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 171, 384–397 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Jeong and M. S. Kazimi, Nucl. Technol., 2017, 159, 147–157 CrossRef .
S. Ikeda, T. Takata, T. Kondo, G. Hitoki, M. Hara, J. N. Kondo, K. Domen, H. Hosono, H. Kawazoe and A. Tanaka, Chem. Commun., 1998, 2, 2185–2186 RSC .
M. Hara, M. Komoda, H. Hasei, M. Yashima, S. Ikeda, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 780–785 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohta, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 401 CrossRef CAS .
V. Givotov, A. Fridman, M. Krotov, E. Krasheninnikov, B. Patrushev, V. Rusanov and G. Sholin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1981, 6, 441–449 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. L. Suib, Y. Hayashi and H. Matsumoto, J. Catal., 2001, 201, 198–205 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lv, Y. V Geletii, C. Zhao, J. W. Vickers, G. Zhu and C. L. Hill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7572–7589 RSC .
Z. Han and R. Eisenberg, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2537–2544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109–2125 RSC .
K. Maeda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 237–268 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berardi, S. Drouet, L. Franca, C. Gimbert-surin, M. Guttentag, C. Richmond, T. Stoll and A. Llobet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 7501–7519 RSC .
L. Jiao, Y. Dong, X. Xin, L. Qin and H. Lv, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 291, 120091 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, H. Li, J. Zhang, H. Lv and G. Y. Yang, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 855–871 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7851–7861 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh and B. A. Parkinson, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rajeshwar, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 765–787 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
W. Yang, R. R. Prabhakar, J. Tan, S. D. Tilley and J. Moon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4979–5015 RSC .
S. Vinoth, P. M. Rajaitha and A. Pandikumar, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 2010–2018 RSC .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Glanz, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 27, 991–1022 Search PubMed .
X. Li, Z. Xin, S. Xia, X. Gao, C. Tung and L. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 9028–9056 RSC .
H. Lv, C. Wang, G. Li, R. Burke, T. D. Krauss, Y. Gao and R. Eisenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 11297–11302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, X. Li, Y. Wang, S. Zhou, Y. Chen, X. He, C. Tung and L. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 26098–26104 RSC .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Dong, C. Bai, Y. Feng, L. Jiao and H. Lv, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 1347–1354 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nowotny, C. C. Sorrell, L. R. Sheppard and T. Bak, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 521–544 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cesar, A. Kay, J. A. Gonzalez Martinez and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4582–4583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Clarizia, D. Spasiano, I. Di Somma, R. Marotta, R. Andreozzi and D. D. Dionysiou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 16812–16831 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 179–209 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu and R. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 351, 779–793 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wen, J. Xie, X. Chen and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 72–123 CrossRef CAS .
V. Etacheri, C. Di Valentin, J. Schneider, D. Bahnemann and S. C. Pillai, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2015, 25, 1–29 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. S. Parmar, H. J. Kang, A. Bist, P. Dua, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1926–1934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, Y. Jo, J. H. Kim, J. W. Jang, H. J. Kang, Y. H. Lee, D. S. Kim, Y. Jun and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11820–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Kim, Y. Ping, G. A. Galli and K. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Du, Q. Peng, J. Yang, Y. Wen, B. Shan and R. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 1–10 Search PubMed .
S. S. Kalanur, I. H. Yoo, K. Eom and H. Seo, J. Catal., 2018, 357, 127–137 CrossRef .
W. Zhang and M. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 834–843 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, J. Ahn, Y. Oh, J. Tan, H. Lee, J. Park, H. Kwon, J. Kim, W. Jo, J. Kim and J. Moon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702888 CrossRef .
Y. Li, T. Takata, D. Cha, K. Takanabe, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 125–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Oh, T. G. Deutsch, H. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1690–1694 RSC .
H. Kumagai, T. Minegishi, N. Sato, T. Yamada, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8300–8307 RSC .
F. Le Formal, N. Tétreault, M. Cornuz, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 737–743 RSC .
Y. S. Lee, D. Chua, R. E. Brandt, S. C. Siah, J. V. Li, J. P. Mailoa, S. W. Lee, R. G. Gordon and T. Buonassisi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4704–4710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Baek, M. Zafar, S. Kim, D. H. Kim, C. W. Jeon, J. Lee and K. Yong, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3679–3688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, H. Bae, S. W. Bang, S. Kim, S. H. Lee, S.-W. Ryu and J.-S. Ha, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, A206–A215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Lee and K. S. Choi, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hussain, I. Majeed, M. A. Nadaem, A. Badshah, Y. Chen, M. A. Nadeem and R. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17205–17213 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, X. Liu, H. Liu, D. Tong, J. Yang and J. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12619–12626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Pu, G. Wang, K. Der Chang, Y. Ling, Y. K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C. M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y. J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2011–2075 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hamadanian, A. Reisi-Vanani and A. Majedi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 1837–1844 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dong, D. Ding, T. Li and C. Ning, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 443, 321–328 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Shi, D. Franklin, S. Koul, A. Kushima and Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 400–407 CrossRef CAS .
C. Di Valentin and G. Pacchioni, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3233–3241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, P. Da, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Lin, X. Gong and G. Zheng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11770–11777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Kalanur, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 456 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kalanur and H. Seo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 509, 440–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, Y. Wei, X. Chang, C. Li, A. Li, S. Liu, J. Zhang and J. Gong, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 226, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, J. H. Kim, M. T. Mayer, M. Son, A. Ummadisingu, J. S. Lee, A. Hagfeldt, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 412–420 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Yan, S. Yang, Y. Xu, X. Cai, X. Li, X. Zhang, F. Peng and Y. Fang, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 365–371 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ma, J. P. Hofmann, A. Litke and E. J. M. Hensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 178–186 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Hsu, C. H. Yu, Y. C. Chen and Y. G. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 105, 62–68 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Kaidashev, M. Lorenz, H. Von Wenckstern, A. Rahm, H. C. Semmelhack, K. H. Han, G. Benndorf, C. Bundesmann, H. Hochmuth and M. Grundmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 3901–3903 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chaudhary, S. Singh, V. D. Vankar and N. Khare, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 351, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, W. Chen, Y. Shen, F. Huang, C.-H. Li and S. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15052–15060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wei, P. Kuang, H. Cheng, Y. Chen, J. Long, M. Zhang and Z. Q. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4249–4257 CrossRef CAS .
R. Van De Krol, Y. Liang and J. Schoonman, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2311–2320 RSC .
F. Le Formal, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1099–1107 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Tahir, K. G. U. Wijayantha, S. Saremi-Yarahmadi, M. Mazhar and V. McKee, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3763–3772 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Joly, J. R. Williams, S. A. Chambers, G. Xiong, W. P. Hess and D. M. Laman, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 053521 CrossRef .
X. Yu, J. Liu, W. Yin, T. Wang, L. Quan, Y. Ran, J. Cui, L. Wang and Y. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 492, 264–271 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Arzaee, M. F. Mohamad Noh, A. Ab Halim, M. A. F. Abdul Rahim, N. A. Mohamed, J. Safaei, A. Aadenan, S. N. Syed Nasir, A. F. Ismail and M. A. Mat Teridi, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 16797–16802 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rahman and O. S. Joo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 13989–13997 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Tijare, M. V. Joshi, P. S. Padole, P. A. Mangrulkar, S. S. Rayalu and N. K. Labhsetwar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 10451–10456 CrossRef CAS .
K. Peng, L. Fu, H. Yang and J. Ouyang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–10 CrossRef .
M. Humayun, Y. Qu, F. Raziq, R. Yan, Z. Li, X. Zhang and L. Jing, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 13600–13610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Gaikwad, J. R. Sheikh and S. A. Acharya, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2015, 76, 27–35 CrossRef CAS .
V. Celorrio, K. Bradley, O. J. Weber, S. R. Hall and D. J. Fermín, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1667–1671 CrossRef CAS .
V. Guigoz, L. Balan, A. Aboulaich, R. Schneider and T. Gries, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 17468–17479 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, G. Yang, Y. Dai, X. Li, J. Gao, N. Li, P. Qiu and L. Ge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 17364–17375 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pei, J. Meng, S. Wu, Q. Lin, J. Li, X. Wei, G. Han and Z. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 806, 889–896 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, Z. Jiang, S. Feng, C. Zhao, Z. Dong, B. Wang, J. Wang, C. Song, Y. Zheng and C. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 19019–19028 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Liu, B. Ding, H. Li, X. Zhu, M. Xia and H. Fu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 276, 211–221 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, A. Piyadasa, M. Piech, S. Dardona, Z. Ren and P. X. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6176–6184 RSC .
J. Ma, C. Lu, C. Liu, M. Qi, X. Xu, D. Yang and X. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 810, 151845 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tuc Altaf, N. S. Sahsuvar, N. Abdullayeva, O. Coskun, A. Kumtepe, E. Karagoz, M. Sankir and N. Demirci Sankir, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 15209–15222 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, G. Liu, D. Zhang, Y. Chen, S. Wen and S. Ruan, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 602, 322–325 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, T. Watanabe, T. Takata, M. Hara, M. Yoshimura and K. Domen, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2007, 80, 423–428 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gómez-Solís, J. C. Ballesteros, L. M. Torres-Martínez and I. Juárez-Ramírez, Fuel, 2016, 166, 36–41 CrossRef .
J. M. Mora-Hernandez, A. M. Huerta-Flores and L. M. Torres-Martínez, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 391, 112363 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, Z. Li and J. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 27515–27521 RSC .
K. Wang, X. Wu, G. Zhang, J. Li and Y. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6682–6692 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bera, S. Ghosh and R. N. Basu, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 830, 154527 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, X. Long, S. Wei, C. Wang, T. Wang, F. Li, Y. Hu, J. Ma and J. Jin, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 378, 122193 CrossRef .
G. Jia, L. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Cui and W. Zheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 448, 254–260 CrossRef CAS .
H. Han, F. Karlicky, S. Pitchaimuthu, S. H. R. Shin and A. Chen, Small, 2019, 15, 1902771 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhang, G. Dong, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Ding and Y. Bi, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4971–4976 RSC .
G. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Xiao, D. Jia, C. Li, J. Zheng and X. Liu, Catal. Lett., 2019, 149, 870–875 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. He, W. Li, H. Chen, W. Fang, P. Tian, F. Xiao and L. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 11382–11385 RSC .
H. Wang, X. He, L. Zhao, W. Li, H. Chen, W. Fang, P. Tian, Z. Huang and Z. Sun, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2019, 384, 111992 CrossRef .
H. Song, Z. Sun, Y. Xu, Y. Han, J. Xu, J. Wu, T. Sun, H. Meng and X. Zhang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 228, 115764 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Yoon, D. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, H. W. Jang and J. H. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zargazi and M. H. Entezari, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 391, 138926 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, L. Ye, Y. Ding, L. Yi, C. Zhang and Z. Wen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118152 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jia, L. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Cui and W. Zheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 448, 254–260 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, A. Zhou, L. Shu, M. Liu, Y. Dou and J. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 226, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mao, Y. Wang, W. Jiao, X. Chen, Q. Lin, M. Deng, Y. Ling, Y. Zhou, X. Bu and P. Feng, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 13634–13639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Y. J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5792–5813 RSC .
M. H. Elbakkay, W. M. A. El Rouby, S. I. El-Dek and A. A. Farghali, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 439, 1088–1102 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chandrasekaran, J. S. Chung, E. J. Kim and S. H. Hur, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 290, 465–476 CrossRef CAS .
P. Subramanyam, T. Vinodkumar, D. Nepak, M. Deepa and C. Subrahmanyam, Catal. Today, 2019, 325, 73–80 CrossRef CAS .
V. Thangaraj, J. Bussiere, J. Janot, M. Bechelany, M. Jaber, S. Subramanian, P. Miele and S. Balme, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2016, 2016, 2125–2130 CrossRef CAS .
M. Öner, A. A. Çöl, C. Pochat-Bohatier and M. Bechelany, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 90973–90981 RSC .
S. Kawrani, A. A. Nada, M. F. Bekheet, M. Boulos, R. Viter, S. Roualdes, P. Miele, D. Cornu and M. Bechelany, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124326 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, I. S. Merenkov, X. Li, J. Xu, S. Lin, M. L. Kosinova and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13059–13064 RSC .
S. Raheman A. R., R. S. Mane, H. M. Wilson and N. Jha, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 8524–8536 RSC .
J. Safaei, N. A. Mohamed, M. F. Mohamad Noh, M. F. Soh, N. A. Ludin, M. A. Ibrahim, W. N. Roslam Wan Isahak and M. A. Mat Teridi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22346–22380 RSC .
S. Kumar, S. Karthikeyan and A. F. Lee, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 74 CrossRef .
L. Wang, W. Si, Y. Tong, F. Hou, D. Pergolesi, J. Hou, T. Lippert, S. X. Dou and J. Liang, Carbon Energy, 2020, 2, 223–250 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lei, J. Li, Q. Song and Z. Liang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 10498–10507 CrossRef CAS .
N. Karjule, R. Phatake, M. Volokh, I. Hod and M. Shalom, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900401 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Q. Zhou, Z. Fang, W. Li, Y. Zheng, J. Ma, Z. Wang, L. Zhao, S. Liu, Y. Shen and Y. Zhang, Chem, 2021, 7, 2708–2721 CAS .
T. Zhao, Q. Zhou, Y. Lv, D. Han, K. Wu, L. Zhao, Y. Shen, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1139–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang and M. Antonietti, Chem.–Asian J., 2010, 5, 1307 CAS .
A. Mohammad, M. Ehtisham, R. Karim and M. Hwan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 495, 143432 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Reddy, L. V. Reddy, N. Jayashree, C. V. Reddy, M. Cho, D. Kim and J. Shim, Chemosphere, 2021, 264, 128593 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
Z. Yin, H. Li, H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Shi, Y. Sun, G. Lu, Q. Zhang, X. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 74–80 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Kim, Y. H. Kim, S. Y. Park, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Chemosensors, 2017, 5, 15 CrossRef .
K. C. Kwon, C. Kim, Q. Van Le, S. Gim, J.-M. Jeon, J. Y. Ham, J.-L. Lee, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4146–4155 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, B. Chen, M. Bosman, X. Cao, J. Chen and B. Zheng, Small, 2014, 10, 3537–3543 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pan, C. Zhang, Y. Xiong, Q. Mi, D. Li, L. Zou, Q. Huang, Z. Zou and H. Yang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6378–6387 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Nguyen, T. M. Cao, N. O. Balayeva and V. Van Pham, Catalysts, 2021, 11, 857 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jian, X. Cheng, Y. Huang, Y. You, R. Zhou, T. Sun and J. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 328, 474–483 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Xia, F. Gong, X. Pei, W. Wang, H. Li, W. Zeng, M. Wu and D. V Papavassiliou, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 348, 908–928 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sang, Z. Zhao, M. Zhao, P. Hao, Y. Leng and H. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 27, 363–369 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wen, Y. Xia and S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 593–598 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Thiehmed, A. Shakoor and T. Altahtamouni, Catalysts, 2021, 11, 1283 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ahmadi and M. Zargar Shoushtari, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 849, 113361 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tayebi, Z. Masoumi and B. Lee, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2021, 70, 105339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Van Der Spoel, E. Lindahl, B. Hess, G. Groenhof, A. E. Mark and H. J. C. Berendsen, J. Comput. Chem., 2005, 26, 1701–1718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Stevanović, S. Lany, D. S. Ginley, W. Tumas and A. Zunger, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 3706–3714 RSC .
J. Cheng and M. Sprik, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 1–4 Search PubMed .
P. Zhou, H. Zhang, H. Ji, W. Ma, C. Chen and J. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 787–790 RSC .
M. Raju, S. Y. Kim, A. C. T. Van Duin and K. A. Fichthorn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10558–10572 CrossRef CAS .
V. Viswanathan, H. A. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, T. F. Jaramillo, H. Pitsch and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4698–4704 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. A. Rusman and M. Dahari, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 1–19 Search PubMed .
P. Prachi R., W. Mahesh M. and G. Aneesh C., Advances in Energy and Power, 2016, 4, 11–22 Search PubMed .
D. A. J. Rand, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 1579–1622 CrossRef CAS .
U. Sahaym and E. M. G. Norton, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 5395–5429 CrossRef CAS .
S. Atilhan, S. Park, M. M. Halwagi, M. Atilhan, M. Moore and R. B. Nielsen, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2021, 31, 100668 CrossRef .
S. Niaz, T. Manzoor and A. H. Pandith, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 50, 457–469 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Hwang and A. Varma, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2014, 5, 42–48 CrossRef .
S. W. Jorgensen, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2011, 15, 39–43 CrossRef CAS .
R. Janot, M. Latroche and A. Percheron-Guégan, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2005, 123, 187–193 CrossRef .
D. Schitea, M. Deveci and M. Iordache, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 8585–8600 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mazloomi and C. Gomes, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 3024–3033 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Webb, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2014, 118, 1240–1247 Search PubMed .
Q. Lai, M. Paskevicius, D. A. Sheppard, C. E. Buckley, A. W. Thornton, M. R. Hill, Q. Gu, J. Mao, Z. Huang, H. K. Liu, Z. Guo, A. Banerjee, S. Chakraborty, R. Ahuja and K. F. Aguey-Zinsou, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2789–2825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Jia, Z. Yuan, T. Yang, Y. Qi and D. Zhao, J. Iron Steel Res. Int., 2015, 22, 757–770 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
P. Mary Rajaitha	Ms Mary Rajaitha is currently a doctoral student at the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology. She received her integrated Bachelor's and Master's degrees from the Karunya Institute of Technology and Sciences, India with a specialization in nanoscience in 2019. Her research interests focus on electrochemical sensors.
Sugato Hajra	Mr Sugato Hajra is currently a doctoral student at the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology. He received a Bachelor in Technology degree from Siksha O Anusandhan University, India, in 2017. He perused his M.Tech. degree with a specialization in VLSI and Embedded systems at Siksha O Anusandhan University and also served as a joint researcher in the Advanced Multifunctional and Materials Laboratory at the Institute of Technical Education and Research, Bhubaneswar, India in 2019. His research interests mainly include lead-free piezoelectric/multiferroic materials, metal–organic frameworks, solid-state electronic devices, and hybrid energy harvesters.
Krystian Mistewicz	Dr Krystian Mistewicz received MSc in physics with honors from the Mathematics and Physics Faculty at the Silesian University of Technology (Gliwice, Poland) in 2010, and a PhD in physics with distinction from the University of Silesia (Katowice, Poland) in 2015. He is currently an assistant professor at the Institute of Physics at the Silesian University of Technology. He was a visiting research scholar at the University of Wisconsin–Madison (USA). His research interests are focused on nanotechnology, sonochemistry, ferroelectric nanomaterials for gas sensors, photovoltaic devices, and pyroelectric and piezoelectric generators.
Swati Panda	Ms Swati Panda is currently a doctoral student at the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology. She received her Bachelor's degree from Utkal University, Orissa in 2018. She pursued her Master's degree from Siksha O Anusandhan University with a specialization in biotechnology in 2020. Her research interests focus on self-powered biosensors and piezoelectric energy harvesters.
Manisha Sahu	Ms Manisha Sahu is currently a doctoral student at the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology. She received her B.Tech degree from Siksha O Anusandhan University, India, in 2017. She perused her M.Tech degree with a specialization in VLSI and Embedded systems at Siksha O Anusandhan University in 2019. Her research focus is on the development of ferroelectric, piezoelectric, and triboelectric energy harvesters.
Deepak Dubal	Dr Deepak P. Dubal is currently working as Associate Professor at the Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Australia. He is a prolific, well-cited and multiple-fellowship-winning scientist. His achievements are honoured by several prestigious fellowships such as Brain of Korea-21 (South Korea-2011), Alexander von Humboldt (Germany-2012), Marie Curie (Spain-2014) and Australian Future Fellowship (Australia-2018). His research expertise is in the design and development of multifunctional hybrid materials for clean energy conversion and storage technologies with special focus on supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries, Li-ion capacitors and electrochemical flow cells.
Yusuke Yamauchi	Dr Yusuke Yamauchi received his Bachelor's degree (2003), Master's degree (2004), and PhD degree (2007) from Waseda University, Japan. Presently, he is a senior group leader at AIBN and a full professor at the School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Queensland. He concurrently serves as an ERATO Research Director at JST-ERATO Yamauchi Materials Space-Tectonics, a Group Leader at National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), a guest professor at Waseda University, and an associate editor of the Journal of Materials Chemistry A published by the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) and Chemical Engineering Journal (Elsevier). He has published more than 1000 papers in international refereed journals with >60000 citations (h-index > 130). He is selected as one of the Highly-Cited Researchers in Chemistry (2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021) and in Materials Science (2020 and 2021). He was also selected as one of Australia's Top 40 Researchers of Research Report (The Australian) in 2019, 2020 and 2021.
Hoe Joon Kim	Dr Hoe Joon Kim is currently an Associate Professor in Robotics Engineering at the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGST), Daegu, South Korea, and also holds a courtesy appointment in the Information and Communication Engineering Department. He received the B.S. degree from Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA, in 2009, and the M. S. and PhD degrees from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA, in 2011 and 2015, respectively, all in mechanical engineering. He held a post-doctoral position at the Micro and Nano Systems Laboratory, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, where he was involved in the development of low-power low-noise piezoelectric MEMS resonators for sensing and frequency control applications. His research interests focus on piezoelectric MEMS resonators for RF wireless communication, chemical/physical sensing, environmental monitoring and emerging nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of the multifunctional materials used for water splitting and types of water splitting.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electrochemical investigations of binary Fe–Ni sulfides supported on nickel foam (FeNi–S/NF) with different composition ratios of Fe/Ni for the HER in 1.0 M KOH. The labels FeNi–S-1/NF, FeNi–S-2/NF, FeNi–S-3/NF, FeNi–S-4/NF, and FeNi–S-5/NF refer to the Fe–Ni sulfides with the Fe/Ni molar ratios of 1/3, 1/1, 3/1, 6/1, and 9/1, respectively. (a) Linear sweep voltammogram curves of the samples electrodeposited in (a-1) water solution and the LCT (a-2). (b) A comparison of overpotential at 10 and 100 mA cm−2: electrodeposition in (b-1) water solution and (b-2) LCT; (c) Tafel plots of all samples electrodeposited in (c-1) water solution and LCT (c-2). (d) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of the samples electrodeposited in (d-1) water solution and (d-2) LCT. (e) Comparison of LSV of FeNi–S-3/NF deposited in water solution and LCT. Reprinted from ref. 16 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2018) Elsevier.	 
2H+ + 2e− → H2
H2O → 2H+ + ½O2 + 2e−
2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2
2OH → H2O + ½O2 + 2e−

 	Fig. 3  A comparison of the working principles of two different types of electrolyzers: alkaline (on the left) and PEM (on the right). A detailed description is provided in the text. Reprinted from ref. 20 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2013) Elsevier.	 
2H+ + 2e− → H2
H2O → ½O2 + 2e− + 2H+
2H2O + 4e− → 2O2− + 2H2
2O2− → O2 + 4e−

 	Fig. 4  The schematic illustrations of (a) a photo-electrochemical (PEC) cell and (b) PEC water splitting using TiO2 as a photoanode. A detailed description is provided in the text. Reprinted from ref. 62 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2011) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  PEC water-splitting performance of pristine and nitrogen doped nanoporous bismuth vanadate electrodes. (a) J–V plots of BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH (black solid curve), N2-treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH (red solid curve), BiVO4 (black dashed line), and N2-treated BiVO4 (red dashed line) determined in a 0.5 M phosphate buffer under AM 1.5 G illumination using a three-electrode cell. Grey dashed lines represent the dark current of N2-treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH. (b) J–V plot and (c) applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) of N2-treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH obtained using a two-electrode cell for solar water splitting (CE: counter electrode). (d) Detection of hydrogen (blue points) and oxygen (red points) produced by N2-treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH at 0.6 V versus the counter electrode. The red dashed line shows the amount of oxygen calculated assuming 100% faradaic efficiency. (e) J–t plots of N2-treated BiVO4 for sulfite oxidation (blue curve) and N2-treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH for water oxidation (red curve) at 0.6 V versus RHE. Reprinted from ref. 88 under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Copyright (2015) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A scheme presenting the fabrication of plasmonic Al@TiO2 heterostructures. (b) SEM, (c) TEM, (d) HRTEM, (e) cross-sectional STEM, and (f) STEM and EDS mapping of Al@TiO2. The inset in (e) presents the linear EDS profile captured from the red dashed line. Reprinted from ref. 107 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2018) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The transient voltammograms of undoped and Sn-doped WO3 thin films recorded under AM 1.5 G illumination at a bias potential of 1.23 V RHE. (b) The evolution of oxygen gas at the photoanode for undoped and Sn-doped WO3 under AM 1.5 G illumination measured at a bias potential of 1.23 V RHE. Reprinted from ref. 110 under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Copyright (2019) MDPI.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM micrographs of Cu2O photoelectrodes prepared at various pH values: (a) pH = 8; (b) pH = 10; (c) pH = 12; (d) pH = 14. Reprinted from ref. 116 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2015) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The linear sweep voltammograms recorded at applied potentials from −0.8 to +1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) for pristine ZnO and ZnO/MWCNT in the dark (hollow spheres) and under the illumination of 100 mW cm−2 (solid spheres). (b) EIS spectra of pristine ZnO and ZnO/MWCNT photoanodes. The inset in (b) represents a zoomed-in view of the low impedance region. Reprinted from ref. 120 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2018) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Hydrogen generation rate and (b) cycling performance measured for CaTiO3 nanoparticles synthesized with a polyvinyl alcohol concentration of (i) 8 g L−1 and (ii) 0 g L−1. Reprinted from ref. 137 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Possible interfacial charge-transfer mechanisms of (a) a type II heterostructure and (b) a Z-scheme heterostructure of MoS2/Ag–AgVO3 for photocatalytic H2 generation under visible light irradiation. Detailed description is provided in the text. Reprinted from ref. 149 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2020) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  The schematic representations of the energy band structure and electron transfer path of the Fe2O3/MIL-101 heterojunction. Reprinted from ref. 156 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) EIS Nyquist plots, (b) time dependence of photocurrent measured for Fe2O3 and Fe2O3/MIL-101 under continuous illumination at 0.6 V, (c) XRD patterns of Fe2O3/MIL-101 before and after PEC experiments, (d) Raman spectra of Fe2O3/MIL-101 before and after all PEC experiments, and (e) SEM micrographs and EDX mapping images of Fe2O3/MIL-101 before (inset) and after PEC experiments. Reprinted from ref. 156 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Hydrogen evolution was achieved for pure BiVO4, molybdenum-doped BiVO4 (Mo–BiVO4), the nanocomposite of molybdenum-doped BiVO4, and reduced graphene oxide (Mo–BiVO4@rGO) under solar light irradiation at zero potential after 3 hours of the experiment. Reprinted from ref. 167 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

Ti–Ni–O nanotubes	Annealing	KOH	100 mW cm−2	0.93 mA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl	
106

Bi doped WO3	Hydrothermal	0.1 M Na2SO4	AM 1.5 G	1.511 mA cm−2vs. RHE	
90

Cu2O/g-C3N4	Electrophoretic deposition	5.0 mol NaOH	100 mW cm−2	−1.38 mA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl	
115

ZnO/Au	Hydrothermal and photoreduction combined approach	0.1 M Na2SO4	100 mW cm−2	9.11 mA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl	
121

α-Fe2O3/NiMn LDH	Solvent exfoliation	1 M NaOH	AM 1.5 G	1.98 mA cm−2vs. RHE	
127

LaFeO3/g-C3N4	Magnetron sputtering	0.1 M Na2SO4	AM 1.5 G	4 mA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl	
135

ZnSnO3/MoS2	Electrophoretic deposition method	1 mol Na2SO4	Xenon lamp	21.9 mA cm−2vs. Hg/HgCl	
141

RuO2–NaTaO3	Chronopotentiometry technique	0.5 M Na2SO4	AM 1.5 G	1.9 mA cm−2vs. RHE	
145

MoS2/Ag–AgVO3	Co-precipitation method	0.5 M Na2SO4	100 mW cm−2	519 μA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl	
149

ZnO@ZIF-8/67	Hydrothermal	0.5 M Na2SO4	AM 1.5 G	0.11 mA cm−2vs. RHE	
151

Mo:BiVO4-MIL-53(Fe)	Spin coating	0.2 M Na2SO4	AM 1.5 G	1.67 mA cm−2vs. RHE	
153

Fe2O3/MIL-101	One-drop method under hydrothermal conditions	0.01 M Na2SO4	AM 1.5 G	0.9 mA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl	
156

NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/TiO2	Hydrothermal	1 M NaOH	AM 1.5 G	1.63 mA cm−2vs. RHE	
158

UiO-66/Pd/S, N GQDs	Hydrothermal	0.2 M Na2SO4	AM 1.5 G	300 μA cm−2vs. RHE	
159

S-TiO2/S-RGO	Solvothermal	1 M KOH	100 mW cm−2	3.36 mA cm−2vs. Ag/AgCl	
165

2D carbon doped boron nitride	Plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition	1.0 M NaOH	Sunlight spectrum	120 μA cm−2vs. REH	
155

SnO2–g-C3N4	Calcination	0.1 M KOH	100 mW cm−2	0.80 mA cm−2vs. RHE	
196

MoS2/BiVO4	Electrochemical deposition and annealing	1 M Na2SO3	100 mW cm−2	2.72 mA cm−2vs. RHE	
196

Ti and Mo doped WS2	Chemical vapor deposition	0.05 M Na2S	AM 1.5 G	10.44 mA cm−2vs. RHE	
196


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
