Recent developments in fabrication and applications of colloid based composite particles  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM02631J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM02631J
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 615-627Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRecent developments in fabrication and applications of colloid based composite particles

        
          
            Mukesh 
            Agrawal
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Smrati 
            Gupta†
 and 

        
          
            Manfred 
            Stamm
          
          
        
      *
      Leibniz-Institut für Polymerforschung Dresden e.V., Hohe Strasse 6, 01069, Dresden, Germany. E-mail: agrawal@ipfdd.de; stamm@ipfdd.de
Received 
      11th August 2010
    , Accepted 30th September 2010First published on 20th October 2010AbstractIn recent years, a variety of nano-(micro) scale organic–inorganic composite particles with well defined chemical composition, size and morphology have been fabricated and their applications in wide spectrum of cutting-edge technological areas have been explored. This review is focused on recent developments towards various fabrication methodologies and applications of such colloid based composite particles. Strategies for preparation of nano and micro scale composite materials are presented by choosing as examples hard core based composite particles having core–shell and raspberry-like morphologies and soft core based composite microgels. Applications of these materials in wide range of potential areas are discussed including the fabrication of colloidal crystal arrays, hollow spheres, superhydrophobic surfaces, filler carriers and smart nanomaterials.Mukesh AgrawalDr. Mukesh Agrawal is a postdoctoral researcher in Nanostructured Materials Department at Leibniz-Institute of Polymer Research Dresden, Germany. He received his PhD from Technical University Dresden, Germany in 2008 under the supervision of Prof. Dr. Manfred Stamm. After completing his PhD, he worked for SABIC Innovative Plastics (formerly GE plastics) as a research scientist. He has developed a wide spectrum of organic–inorganic composite particles and explored their applications in various facets of nanotechnology. His research interests include polymer synthesis, inorganic synthesis, Organic–inorganic nanocomposites, colloidal chemistry and advanced functional materials.Smrati GuptaDr. Smrati Gupta is an assistant researcher in the group of Prof. Dr. Rainer Jordan at Institute for Macromolecular Chemistry, Technical University Dresden, Germany. She obtained her PhD from Leibniz-Institute of Polymer Research Dresden, Germany in the group of Prof. Dr. Manfred Stamm in 2008. She has developed a variety of hybrid polymer brushes for nanosensing, surface enhanced Raman Spectroscopy and photocatalytic applications. Her research areas encompass polymer brushes, inorganic nanoparticles and external stimuli responsive organic-inorganic nanoassemblies.Manfred StammProf. Dr. Manfred Stamm graduated in physics at Frankfurt/Main University in 1974, followed by PhD-studies at Mainz University. He spent three years for research at CNRS/Max-Planck Institute of Solid State Physics in Grenoble and started working with polymer surfaces and interfaces, polymer nanostructures and their characterisation techniques. He held several positions at Forschungszentrum Jülich, Max Planck Institute of Polymer Research Mainz and Brookhaven National Laboratory, before he became professor of physical chemistry of polymeric materials at Technische Universität Dresden and head of the Institute of Physical Chemistry and Physics of Polymers at Leibniz Institute of Polymer Research Dresden.
Introduction
In last two decades, a great deal of research has been devoted to the design and fabrication of organic–inorganic composite particles with tailored physical and chemical properties.1 Recent studies have shown that intimate mixing of polymeric materials with inorganic particles on a nanoscale may result in the unusual properties, which cannot be realized simply by mixing the polymeric component with the inorganic phase at the macroscopic level.2 Colloid based composite particles represent a class of the nanocomposite materials, which are composed of organic core coated or encapsulated with inorganic nanoparticles. The quest for the fabrication of novel functional materials with interesting morphologies and tailored properties is the key driving force for the development of such nano-microscale composite particles. Additionally, these materials offer an effective route for the stabilization of inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) and allow to access their fascinating physical and chemical properties in a simple and facile way. Recently, a wide range of templates including polymer brushes,3 biological macromolecules,4 mesoporous inorganic materials,5dendrimers,6 and ion-exchange resins7 have been successfully employed for the stabilization of inorganic NPs. However, in comparison to these systems, colloidal particles offer a number of crucial advantages such as simple synthesis, easy functionalization and a possibility of tuning the particle dimensions from few nanometres to several micrometres. Facile and flexible strategies that can afford fine control over the synthesis composite particles have been found of paramount importance in building new classes of materials.8 Organic–inorganic composite particles with unique combination of chemical and physical properties have found to be suitable for a wide range of applications such as surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS),9 catalysis,10 biochemistry,11 nonlinear optics, bioanalysis, nanoengineering optical resonance,12 self assembled mesoscopic wires13 and building blocks for photonic crystals.14 In this review, we addressed fabrication methodologies to a variety of colloid based composite particles with the special emphasis on the ones with core–shell and raspberry-like morphologies. In addition, some recent developments in preparation of composite microgels have also been described. Finally, some of the potential application areas of these composite particles have been discussed.

Composite Particles

(1) Hard core based composite particles

(a) Core–shell particles. 
These nanostructured materials are composed of the organic core coated with a uniform, smooth and complete inorganic shell and hence called as core–shell particles. Fabrication and characterization of such composite materials have been extensively explored by a number of research groups.8,15 It has been realized that a precise control of the employed reaction parameters allows modulation in thickness of deposited shell in a tailored way to modulate their magnetic, catalytic, mechanical and electro-optical properties over broader range.16 So far, a number of approaches have been employed for the fabrication of these nanostructured materials. In most of the cases, polystyrene (PS) beads have been used as a core because of their easy synthesis, modulation in size and surface functionalization.17 For example, a variety of inorganic materials including CdS and CdSe/CdS,18TiO2,19SiO2,,20Fe3O4,21 ZnS,22zeolites23 and zirconium compounds24 have been coated on PS beads to achieve the organic–inorganic composite particles. The first protocol involves direct precipitation of the desired coating material onto the template surface. For example, Zhang et al25 reported a versatile and facile way of coating the PS colloidal particles with a uniform layer of the Ag and Au NPs. Interestingly, no additional surface modification of the colloidal cores was required to coat the inorganic layer. Authors demonstrated that resulting core–shell composite particles can potentially be used in fabrication of the long range colloidal crystal arrays with fascinating optical properties. Recently, we demonstrated fabrication of PS-ZnO composite particles with controlled morphology and ceramic shell thickness. The employed process involved capturing of the Zn+2 ions formed in reaction media during synthesis of ZnO NPs, on the surface of PS beads by means of physical interaction with beta diketone groups.26Figure 1 shows SEM images of bare PS beads and PS-ZnO core–shell particles prepared at different concentrations of Zn(CH3COO)2.2H2O salt. A controlled variation in employed concentration of this precursor salt from 0.5 mM to 2 mM in reaction media made it possible to tune the thickness and texture of the precipitated ZnO shell.
 Fig. 1  
              SEM images of (a) PS beads and PS-ZnO core–shell composite particles prepared at different Zn(CH3COO)2.2H2O concentrations: (b) 0.5 mM; (c) 1 mM and (d) 2 mM. Reprinted with permission from M. Agrawal, A. Pich, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, Smrati Gupta, J. Pionteck, F. Simon and M. Stamm, PS-ZnO Composite Particles with Controlled Morphology, Chem. Mater. 2007, 19, 1845. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. 
Tian et al.27 reported a versatile approach for coating the surfaces of a wide range of cores including polymer colloids (PS), dielectric inorganic spheres (SiO2) and semiconductor material (ZnO) with silver (Ag) and gold (Au) NPs. The employed approach involves heating of the mixture of core material, precursor of metal nanoparticles and poly(ethylenimine), resulting into the preparation core shell particles. Authors reported that poly(ethylenimine) plays an important role by facilitating the linkage of metal ions on colloidal surfaces as well as working as the reducing agent for metal ions into the metal NPs. Interestingly, they found that optical plasmon resonance of the resulting composite particles can be modulated by controlling the metal coverage of the core surfaces. In another study, Dionigi et al28 reported coating of a conductive shell of single walled carbon nantubes (SWCNTs) on the surfaces of 400 nm sized PS beads by exploiting the hydrophobic interactions. Authors demonstrated fabrication of conductive network with controlled porosity by self assembling the resulting PS-SWCNT composite particles in closed packed arrays and subsequently removing the PS templates by solvent treatment.
Apart from direct coating, polyelectrolytes have also been used to facilitate the deposition of inorganic NPs on colloidal beads.29 As shown in Figure 2, the employed process involves the sequential deposition of NPs on a colloidal template by exploiting the electrostatic interaction between oppositely charged polyelectrolyte layers and thus it is called as layer by layer (LBL) approach. The beauty of this approach lies in the fact that it allows to control the size, composition, shell thickness, permeability and loaded amount of inorganic content of resulting composite particles by modulating the number of polyelectrolyte layers. Caruso's group has extensively worked on this approach and demonstrated the fabrication of a wide spectrum of nanostructured materials.30 For example, they described coating of the PS colloidal particles with silica coated gold (Au@SiO2) and silica coated silver (Ag@SiO2) NPs by means of LBL approach and demonstrated that optical properties of coated metal NPs can easily be tuned by modulating the number of polyelectrolyte layers in the shell of composite particles.31 Authors claimed that resulting particles possess unique optical properties and hence can be used as novel building blocks for integration into advanced materials. In another set of studies,13,32 they reported fabrication of electrically conductive and magnetic shell on PS beads by LBL approach and demonstrated that these composite particles can be aligned in the form of mesoscopic self assembled wires by means of the microcontact printing on underlined substrates and external magnetic filed, respectively. Spasova and coworkers33 demonstrated fabrication of magnetically and optically active multifunctional core shell composite particles consisting of 640 nm PS beads coated with magnetite and silica coated Au NPs by exploiting the LBL approach. Authors claimed that variation in shell thickness and chemical composition of coated layers allows modulation in magnetic and optical properties of composite particles.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of core–shell composite particles by layer by layer (LBL) method. [Reference: F. Caruso, Nanoengineering of Particle Surfaces, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 11.] Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
Alternatively, Pickering Polymerization has recently been employed for the fabrication of organic–inorganic core shell composite particles. An interesting phenomenon called “Pickering stabilization” was first described by Ramsden and Pickering in early 1990s.34 In this approach, a monomer of interest is emulsified in water using the inorganic NPs as stabilizer. The liquid-liquid interface is exploited as the template to capture the inorganic NPs from solution resulting into the formation of Pickering emulsions.35 Subsequently, emulsion polymerization of the stabilized emulsion droplets in the presence of a suitable initiator results into the formation of core–shell particles. For example, Herk et al.36 demonstrated fabrication of 700–980 nm polymer–clay core–shell particles by inverse Pickering emulsion polymerization method. Firstly, colloidally stable inverse Pickering emulsions of aqueous acrylamide or 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate were prepared in the presence of hydrophobic montmorillonite clay flakes in cyclohexane. Subsequently, polymerization of resulting emulsion droplets was carried out in the presence of both oil-soluble and water-soluble initiators. In another study, Bon et al.37 reported fabrication of laponite clay coated PS composite particles by exploiting the Pickering polymerization approach.
Apart from above mentioned pioneering works, some alternative approaches such as hydrothermal process and sonochemistry have also been reported in literature for the fabrication of core–shell composite particles. To quote an example, Liet al.15c reported fabrication of organic–inorganic composite structures based on the carbon colloids and metal (Ag, Au Pd and Pt) NPs. A hydrothermal process was employed to prepare 200 nm and 1500 nm sized carbon colloidal particles from glucose at 160–180 °C. Interestingly, prior to the hydrothermal reaction, in-situ synthesis of Au and Ag NPs in precursor glucose solution resulted into the fabrication of Ag and Au encapsulated carbon nanospheres. Ultrasonification of these carbon templates with AgNO3 solution at room temperature resulted into coating of 15 nm sized Ag NPs. Alternatively, they showed loading of the palladium and platinum NPs by refluxing the aqueous dispersion of carbon colloidal particles in the presence of respective salts. On the other hand, Pich and coworkers22 reported the sonochemistry as an alternative method for the synthesis of ZnS semiconductor NPs on sub-micrometer sized PS beads by ultrasound irradiation.


(b) Raspberry-like particles. 
This class of the composite materials is consisted of the organic cores coated with inorganic NPs in raspberry-like fashion. Unlike to the core–shell particles, these materials can be characterized by a discontinuous or rough inorganic shell on organic colloidal beads as schematically illustrated in Figure 3. Recently, considerable efforts have been devoted to the deposition of inorganic nanoparticles on organic colloidal beads in raspberry-like fashion and resulting composite particles have been used in wide range of applications such as substrates for surface-enhanced Raman scattering, functional fine particles, super hydrophobic materials, absorption/separation supporting materials as well as heterogeneous catalysts.8 For example, Qian et al.38 demonstrated decoration of silica NPs on carboxylic acid functionalized PS beads (280–300 nm). Interestingly, size of the deposited silica NPs has been found to decrease from 124 nm to 36 nm by increasing the poly(acrylic acid) content on the surface of PS core from the 11 wt% to 20 wt%. In another study, Chen et al.39 described that a free radical polymerization of the methyl methacrylate with 1-vinylimidazole in the presence of ultra fine aqueous silica sols results into the fabrication of waterborne raspberry like poly(methylmethacrylate) PMMA/silica composite particles. Modulation in employed reaction parameters allowed to tune the average particle size and inorganic contents of these particles in the range of 120 to 350 nm and 5 to 47%, respectively. In a recent study, we demonstrated that a controlled hydrolysis of zinc acetate with sodium hydroxide in the presence of PS colloidal particles results into the PS-ZnO composite particles with raspberry-like morphology.26 An increase in employed reaction parameters such as NaOH concentration and temperature led to the shift in morphology of PS-ZnO composite particles from core–shell to raspberry-like resulting into the deposition of ZnO NPs in small islands on the surface of PS core. In another study, we demonstrated controlled precipitation of the In(OH)3 NPs on PS colloidal cores resulting into the formation of PS-In(OH)3 composite particles.40 Interestingly, as shown in Figure 3, an increase in employed concentration of the indium isopropoxide salt in reaction media from 0.08 mM to 0.17 mM and 0.34 mM resulted into shift in morphology of resulting PS-In(OH)3 composite particles from core–shell to raspberry-like. Figure 4 shows SEM images of PS-In(OH)3 composite particles prepared at different concentrations of In(OC3H7)3 salt. A controlled hydrolysis rate at lower In(OC3H7)3 salt concentration led to the slow nucleation of the In(OH)3 NPs followed by a controlled growth process resulting in formation of a well-defined, complete, and smooth In(OH)3 shell on the template surface. On the contrary, a fast and uncontrolled hydrolysis at higher In(OC3H7)3 salt concentration results into the enhanced nucleation and growth rate leading to the deposition of In(OH)3 aggregates on PS beads and rendering a raspberry-like morphology to the resulting composite particles.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PS-In(OH)3 composite particles with controlled morphologies. Reprinted with permission from M. Agrawal, A. Pich, S. Gupta, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, P. Formanek, D. Jehnichen and M. Stamm, Tailored Growth of In(OH)3 Shell on Functionalized PS Beads, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 526. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 4  
              SEM images of (a) PS template particles (540 nm size) and PS-In(OH)3 composite particles prepared at (b) 0.08 mM (700 nm size), (c) 0.17 mM (730 nm size) and (d) 0.34 mM (750 nm size) concentrations of In(OC3H7)3 salt. Reprinted with permission from M. Agrawal, A. Pich, S. Gupta, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, P. Formanek, D. Jehnichen and M. Stamm, Tailored Growth of In(OH)3 Shell on Functionalized PS Beads, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 526. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Pich et al.22 discussed deposition of ZnS NPs on the monodisperse PS cores in a tailored fashion in terms of the morphology. They demonstrated that variation in surface functionalization agent for the PS cores from poly(ethylene glycol methacrylate) to poly(acetoacetoxyethyl methacrylate) causes the change in the morphology of resulting PS-ZnS composite particles from raspberry-like to the core shell one. A parametric study of the employed reaction parameters onto the properties of PS-ZnS particles has been discussed. Du et al.41 presented fabrication of monodisperse raspberry-like PS-silica composite NPs by employing a single-step sol-gel method. The diameter of silica NPs and surface coverage of PS spheres have been modulated by tuning the tetraethoxysilane concentration in reaction media. Fabricated raspberry like PS-silica composite particles have been exploited as building blocks for the fabrication of superhydrophilic and antifogging coatings.

(2) Soft core based composite particles

Composite microgels. 
Microgels represent a sub-class of the polymer colloids consisting of chemically cross-linked three-dimensional polymer networks, which show shrinkage or swelling by expelling or absorbing large amounts of water in response to external stimuli.42 Due to the stimuli responsive properties, these polymeric particles have been seen as promising materials for a number of cutting edge applications including drug delivery, chemical separation systems, chemical and bio-sensors, micro-mechanical and optical devices and photonic crystals.43 A detailed description of the various synthetic methods and potential applications of a variety of microgel particles can be found in a review by Nayak and Lyon.44 Recently, these polymer particles have attracted a great deal of the attention of the researcher as a potential template for generating the hierarchical composite structures with stimuli responsive properties. A unique combination of the stimuli responsive properties of the microgels templates coupled with fascinating optical, magnetic, catalytic and electro-optical properties of the loaded inorganic NPs can be exploited in wide range of applications as described in following section. A number of studies have been reported in the literature on the synthesis of hybrid microgels containing a variety of metal NPs (Au,45Ag,46Pd,47 and Pt48) or metal oxides (Fe3O4,49Fe2O3,50SiO251), sulfides and other inorganic materials (CdS,52 ZnS,53CdTe54CdSe and PbS,55CdSe/CdS56 and CaCO3).57 For example, Kumacheva and coworkers58 demonstrated a versatile approach the fabrication of fascinating composite microgels by exploiting the poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM)-co-acrylic acid-co-2-hydroxyethyl acrylate particles as polymeric templates. Three different types of inorganic NPs, semiconductor (CdS), metal (Ag) and metal oxide (Fe3O4) were loaded into the microgel templates by an elegant selection of the employed reaction parameters. The loading of inorganic NPs was realized by deprotonation of the acid groups of microgels templates and subsequently introducing the different precursor cations for inorganic NPs (Cd+2, Ag+2 and Fe+2) into the reaction media. Size and polydispersity of the loaded NPs have been controlled by modulating the employed reaction conditions and composition and the structure of the microgel particles. Recently, we reported a versatile approach for incorporation of ZnO NPs in temperature sensitive poly(vinylcaprolactum) based copolymer microgel templates. The employed process involved in-situ synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles by hydrolyzing Zn(CH3COO)2.2H2O salt in the presence of microgel beads in aqueous media.59 A systematic variation in employed reaction parameters allowed us to tune the ZnO content of the composite microgels. Modulation in physical properties of these materials as a function of the loaded amount of the ZnO NPs has been investigated. Akamatsu et al.60 described fabrication of composite microgels by carrying out the in-situ synthesis of Au NPs through wet chemical reduction method in the presence of poly(2vinylpyridine) microgel particles. Authors reported that resulting particles preserved both pH sensitivity of poly(2vinylpyridine) templates and optical properties of Au NPs. The degree of plasmon coupling, originating from dipole interactions among the deposited Au NPs, was found to be dependent on the size of the NPs and could be reversibly controlled by varying the pH of the aqueous solution.
In another approach, Liz-Marzan and coworkers61 demonstrated fabrication of composite microgels by attaching preformed Au nanorods on negatively charged PNIPAM colloidal beads. In order to facilitate the binding, Au nanorods were modified with polyelectrolyte layers. As shown in Figure 5, a systematic variation in employed reaction conditions allowed them to control the Au content of composite microgels. Interestingly, optical properties of immobilized Au nanorods have been found to be modulated by temperature induced swelling–deswelling of PNIPAM colloidal particles. Similarly, Winnik et al.62 reported inclusion of europium doped lanthanum fluoride NPs in thermo responsive poly(N-vinylcaprolactam-co-glycidyl methacrylate) (PVCL/PGMA) copolymer templates. The binding between organic and inorganic phases was realized by reacting the 2-aminoethyl phosphate surface ligands of NPs with epoxy groups of microgel templates. Wang et al.63 described deposition of amino functionalized Fe3O4@SiO2 NPs on the surface of PS/PNIPAM-AA core–shell templates. The coupling between organic core and inorganic NPs was carried out by amidation reaction between carboxylic groups of polymer templates and amino groups of NPs in the presence of of 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide and N-hydroxysuccinimide (EDC-NHS) catalyst. Interestingly, dissolution of the PS core from resulting hybrid structures resulted into the micro containers with superparamagnetism and pH and temperature sensitivity.
 Fig. 5  
              TEM images of PNIPAM microgels covered with different amounts of Au nanorods. Insets show magnified views of single composite microgel loaded with Au nanorods. [Reference: M. Karg, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-Juste, T. Hellweg, L. M. Liz-Marzan, Nanorod-Coated PNIPAM Microgels: Thermoresponsive Optical Properties, Small, 2007, 3, 1222.] Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 

Applications
Owing to the combination of the characteristics properties of organic and inorganic components, unique morphologies, nano to micro scale range, easy and facile synthesis and versatility of investigated fabrication approaches, these composite particles have been used in a variety of potential applications. For example, exploiting the smooth surfaces and easy modulation in refractive indices and size, core–shell particles have been employed as building blocks for the fabrication of colloidal crystals and precursors for porous and hollow inorganic structures. On the other hand, rough surfaces of raspberry like particles have been used in imparting the superhydrophobic nature to the macroscopic surfaces. In addition, they have been exploited as filler career in host polymer matrix using the interaction between core and targeted matrix. Microgel based composite particles have been explored in biomedical, nanosensing and smart catalytic applications by leveraging the external stimuli properties of templates and fascinating physical properties of inorganic NPs. In this section, some of the recently explored applications of these composite materials have been reviewed.
(1) Building blocks for colloidal crystal assemblies
Colloidal crystals are the three dimensional periodic assemblies that affect the behaviour of photons in much the same way as crystalline semiconductor affect the properties of electrons. They can generate a periodic modulation in the refractive index and diffract the light of wavelengths commensurate to their periodicity. This results in the localisation of the photons, thus providing a mechanism for controlling and inhibiting spontaneous light emission that can be exploited for the photonic device fabrication.64 These materials have been investigated not only for the purpose of creating materials that possess unique properties such as omni directional photonic band gaps,65 but also for understanding the fundamental condensed matter aspects and optical physics of such structures.66 A wide range of the colloidal particles ranging from hard spheres such as PS and silica beads to soft polymer microgels have been used as building blocks to fabricate such colloidal crystal assemblies.67 It has been realized that modulation in structural parameters of these building blocks results into the precise control of the optical properties of resulting colloidal crystal assemblies.
For example: Caruso and coworkers14b described fabrication of three dimensional colloidal crystal arrays by employing the PS-polyelectrolyte and PS–Au core–shell composite particles as building blocks and demonstrated the variation in optical properties of resulting arrays by controlling the structural parameters such as size and shell thickness of employed composite particles. Figure 6 shows SEM images of colloidal crystal arrays fabricated from different types of colloidal particles as building blocks. PS-electrolyte core–shell particles were prepared by coating oppositively charged polyelectrolyte layers on 640 nm sized PS beads and colloidal crystals were fabricated by gravity sedimentation method. A precise control over the variation in size of colloidal building blocks by modulating the number of polyelectrolyte layers allowed to control the stop band position of resulting colloidal crystals. A red shift in stop band position was observed from 1358 nm for bare PS colloidal crystals to 1409 nm for PS coated with 8 polyelectrolyte layers. In the same study, authors demonstrated fabrication of metallodielectric colloidal crystal arrays by exploiting PS–Au core–shell particles as building blocks. Alternatively, Au NPs were infiltrated into the colloidal crystal templates of the polyelectrolyte modified PS beads to achieve metallodielectric colloidal crystal assemblies. Optical characterization of resulting self assembled structures (shown in Figure 7) revealed that stop band position and shape can readily be controlled by modulating the lattice constant via varying the coating thickness and simultaneously, by changing the effective refractive index. In another study,68 they described a systematic red shift in stop band position of the composite colloidal crystal arrays by modulating the size and refractive index of HgTe@PS building blocks. An increase in the number of HgTe layers on PS core by means of LBL approach resulted in the increase in size and refractive index of the HgTe@PS composite particles. Interestingly, photoluminescence properties of the HgTe nanocrystals deposited around PS core have been found to be affected by the stop band of the colloidal crystals arrays. In recent study, we demonstrated that PS–TiO2 core shell particles can be exploited in fabrication of colloidal crystal arrays exhibiting a wide stop band in near infra red region with a band width of (Δλ/λ) as 54–61%.69 Interestingly, we observed that stop band position and band width can readily be modulated by controlling the size and thickness of TiO2 shell of employed building blocks. Furthermore, stop band position was found to be independent of the incidence angle of the light. A good agreement between ttheoretical calculations from the simulation studies of colloidal crystal arrays and experimental findings has been reported. Asher et al.70 employed charged PS colloidal particles containing superparamagnetic iron oxide inclusions for fabrication the magnetically responsive colloidal arrays in deionized water by exploiting the electrostatic repulsion between individual building blocks. Interestingly, when an inhomogeneous magnetic filed was applied to these colloidal assemblies, a blue shift in the diffraction peak wavelength has been observed due to the compression of colloidal arrays along the applied magnetic filed gradient.
 Fig. 6  
            SEM images of colloidal crystal arrays composed of PS beads coated with (a) 4 and (b) 8 layers of polyelectrolytes. SEM images of metallodielectric colloidal crystals composed of (c) PS beads coated with Au NPs by LBL method and (d) PS colloidal crystal templates infiltrated with Au NPs. Scale bar 3 µm. [Reference: Z. Liang, A.S. Susha and F. Caruso, Metallodielectric Opals of Layer-by-Layer Processed Coated Colloids, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1160] Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
 Fig. 7  (a) Normalized reflectance spectra of colloidal crystal arrays composed of uncoated (solid line) and polyelectrolyte coated (dashed line) PS beads. (b) Normalized reflectance spectra of colloidal crystal arrays composed of uncoated (solid line) and polyelectrolytes assisted Au layer coated PS beads (dashed line; left to right building blocks with 4, 6 and 8 layers of polyelectrolytes). (c) Normalized reflectance spectra of colloidal crystal arrays composed of uncoated PS beads and metallodielectric colloidal crystals composed of polyelectrolyte coated PS opal templates infiltrated with Au NPs (dashed line; left to right building blocks with 4, 6 and 8 layers of polyelectrolytes). [Reference: Z. Liang, A.S. Susha and F. Caruso, Metallodielectric Opals of Layer-by-Layer Processed Coated Colloids, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1160.] Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
(2) Precursor for hollow spheres
Hollow spheres represent a sub class of the materials, which have attracted an immense interest of the researchers owing to the fascinating properties applicable in a wide range of areas including protection of light-sensitive components and biologically active agents (proteins, enzymes, or DNA), composites and fillers, coatings, waste removal, catalysis, nanoreactors, chromatography and large biomolecular release systems.30e, 71 So far, a variety of chemical and physicochemical strategies, including heterophase polymerization combined with a sol–gel process,72 nozzle-reactor systems,73 emulsion or interfacial polymerization strategies,74 surface living polymerization process,75 and self-assembly techniques76 have been used to fabricate polymeric or ceramic hollow spheres. However, underlining the simplicity and ease of control over size and shell thickness, a well-known template assisted approach has been widely explored to fabricate these fascinating materials. In this approach, the desired material is coated as a uniform shell on an organic/inorganic sacrificial template to prepare the core–shell particles as described earlier. Subsequently, these particles are used as precursors and turned into the hollow spheres via removing the inner template particles by either thermal treatment or core dissolution method. The inner diameter of hollow spheres can be controlled by the dimensions of the template. For example, Caruso et al.77 demonstrated the applicability of the LBL approach in fabrication of silica, titania and laponite hollow spheres. PS colloidal particles have been coated with multilayer shells of the preformed inorganic NPs by means of the polyelectrolyte layers and resulting core–shell structures have been turned into the hollow spheres by means of the calcination at elevated temperature. The employed approach allows control over the void size and shell thickness of the hollow spheres by modulating the size of the PS template particles and number of polyelectrolyte layers in coated shell, respectively. In another study,30c they used the same approach for preparation of hollow and intact magnetic spheres composed of the Fe3O4 NPs. Recently, we demonstrated fabrication of tantala (Ta2O5) hollow spheres by exploiting the template assisted approach.78 Firstly, PS-tantala core–shell particles were prepared by in-situ synthesis of tantala NPs in the presence of beta diketone functionalized PS cores. The physical interaction between Ta+2 ions formed in reaction media with beta-diketone groups resulted into the precipitation of a tantala shell on PS cores. As shown in Figure 8, core dissolution or calcination of PS-tantala composite particles resulted into the fabrication of hollow tantala spheres. An effective control over the tantalum oxide shell thickness has been demonstrated by modulating the employed concentration of tantalum-ethoxide salt in reaction media.
 Fig. 8  
            SEM images of tantala hollow spheres obtained after chemical dissolution of PS cores from PS-tantala core shell composite particles prepared at (a) 0.2 mM; (b) 0.3 mM; (c) 0.5 mM tantalum ethoixde concentrations. (d) SEM micrograph of tantala hollow spheres prepared by calcination of PS-tantala core shell composite particles. Reprinted with permission from M. Agrawal, A. Pich, S. Gupta, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, P. Simon and M. Stamm, Synthesis of Novel Tantalum Oxide Sub-micrometer Hollow Spheres with Tailored Shell Thickness, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 1013. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the single ceramic hollow spheres, a great deal of research efforts have been devoted to the fabrication of hollow structures composed of the mixed metal and/or metal oxide NPs.79 With the motivation of accessing synergetic effect of the mixing of ZnO and TiO2 on photocatalytic activities, we explored fabrication of ZnO-TiO2 mixed metal oxide hollow spheres by following the template assisted protocol.80 Firstly, PS beads were coated with ZnO and TiO2 layers successively and subsequently, PS-ZnO/TiO2 core shell particles were calcinated at elevated temperature resulting in the formation of intact and closed hollow spheres with ceramic shell of mixed metal oxides. Figure 9a and 9b show TEM images of PS/ZnO-TiO2 core–shell composite particles and ZnO-TiO2 hollow spheres, respectively. A significant difference in grey scale of the TEM images of these particles in Figure 9a and 9b confirms that calcination resulted into the removal of PS core from composite particles leaving behind closed and intact hollow structures. Figure 9c and 9d illustrates “Zn” and “Ti” element mapping images of hollow spheres, evidencing the presence of both ZnO and TiO2 metal oxides in the shell of these ceramic structures. As shown in Figure 9e, we found that resulting hollow spheres show better photocatalytic activities as compared to the ZnO and TiO2 hollow structures for the photodegradation of an organic pollutant.
 Fig. 9  
            TEM images of (a) PS/ZnO-TiO2 composite particles and (b) ZnO-TiO2 hollow spheres. Electron energy loss (c) “Zn” and (d) “Ti” element mapping images of ZnO-TiO2 hollow spheres. In Figure 9c and 9d, red areas indicate “Zn” and “Ti” enriched parts of hollow spheres, respectively. (e) Photodegradation of the rhodamine 6G dye in the absence of the catalyst and presence of TiO2, ZnO and mixed ZnO-TiO2 hollow spheres. Reprinted with permission from M. Agrawal, S. Gupta, A. Pich, N. E. Zafeiropoulos and M. Stamm, A Facile Approach to Fabrication of ZnO-TiO2 Hollow Spheres, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5343. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, numerous studies have been reported on the exploitation of hollow spheres in fabrication of dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).81 Multiple light diffraction and reflection due to the unique morphology as well as high surface area and lower density make these hollow structures promising materials for DSSCs applications.81a Recently Koo et al.81b demonstrated application of 1–3 µm sized TiO2 hollow spheres composed of about 18 nm sized individual NPs in fabrication of high efficiency DSSCs. Authors reported that employed hollow structures offer an efficient generation of photo-excited electrons as well as good light-scattering property resulting an increase in efficiency of the DSSCs. In another study, Yang et al.81c employed quasi ordered hollow TiO2 hemispheres for dye sensitized solar energy applications and found that the unique morphologies of the employed building blocks resulted in an enhanced photo-conversion efficiency of 3.49%. He et al.82 reported that use of hierarchical hollow ZnO spheres as photoanode in DSSCs, results into the power conversion efficiency of 4.33%, which is significantly higher than the one obtained with ZnO NPs. Authors attributed this enhancement in efficiency to the efficient light scattering from hollow structures.
(3) Superhydrophobic surfaces
The wettability of surfaces has been realized to play a vital role in numerous industrial applications such as self-cleaning traffic indicators, metal refining, prevention of the adhesion of snow to antennae and windows, stain-resistant textiles and reduction of frictional drag on ship hulls etc.83 In addition to the chemical nature, surface topography is an important factor in deciding the hydrophobicity of the surfaces. Imparting a specific dual sized roughness, surface topography with micro or nano-scale hierarchical structures have proven to be a promising way of creating superhydrophobic surfaces. Recently, some studies have been reported on modification of the hydrophobicity of macroscopic surfaces by means of the dual-size hierarchical structures, originating from well-defined raspberry-like composite particles. For example, Qian et al.38 demonstrated application of PS–SiO2 raspberry-like composite particles in generating superhydrophobic surfaces. As shown in Figure 10, superhydrophobic film was fabricated by repetitive dip coatings of the glass substrate in alcoholic solution of the composite particles followed by the chemical modification of resulting film in 1 wt% dodecyltrichlorosilane in hexane for 30 minutes. Authors reported that static water contact angle of the particulate films composed of the raspberry composite particles has been found to increase with a decrease in size of the silica particles on PS cores, indicating the effect of surface roughness on the hydrophobicity. A decrease in size of deposited silica particles from 124.5 nm to 74.4 nm and 26.1 nm resulted in an increase in water contact angle from 144.1° to 157° and 162°, respectively.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PS-PNIPAM colloidal particles decorated with SiO2 NPs in raspberry-like fashion and their application in fabrication of superhydrophobic surfaces. [Reference: Z. Qian, Z. Zhang, L. Song and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1297.] Reproduced by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another study, Du et al.41 employed PS–SiO2 raspberry particles to fabricate the superhydrophobic and antifogging coating of the porous silica hollow sphere on glass substrates. Firstly, PS–SiO2 composite particles with well defined morphology and dual size surface roughness were coated onto the glass substrate by means of layer by layer approach and subsequently, resulting films was calcinated at elevated temperature to generate the superhydrophobic and porous coatings of silica particles. Ming et al.84 described preparation of superhydrophobic hybrid films with as high advancing contact angle for water at about 165° and the roll-off angle of a 10 µL water droplet as 3 ± 1°. The beauty of this approach lies in the fact that chemical bonding between nano-size corona of silica particles and macro-size silica cores as well as introduction of epoxy films during the assembly of resulting raspberry particles on underlined substrates render the robustness to these super hydrophobic surfaces.
(4) Filler carrier
Organic–inorganic nanocomposites consisting of inorganic nanofillers distributed into an organic polymeric material have proven to be an interesting class of materials for a wide range of potential applications. A number of studies have been reported on the preparation of nanocomposite materials, which possess special mechanical,85 electrical,86 optical,87 and magnetic88 properties, usually superior to those of the parent polymer or inorganic species. The most vital problem associated with preparation of nanocomposites is to achieve a homogeneous distribution of the nanofillers into the polymer matrix. Owing to the high surface energy, filler particles tend to aggregate in polymer matrix and consequently, resulting nanocomposites do not possess the expected properties. A variety of chemical and physical approaches86,89,90 have been introduced to avoid the aggregation of filler particles in polymer matrices.
Recently, we described a novel and versatile approach for the mixing of nanofillers in a polymer matrix by employing the raspberry-like organic–inorganic composite particles as filler carriers.91 We demonstrated this approach by decorating the ZnO NPs on PS colloidal beads in raspberry like fashion and subsequently mixing the resulting PS–ZnO composite particles into the poly(ethylmethacrylate) (PEMA) matrix as shown in Figure 11. The employed approach allowed us to transform the nano scale mixing of the tiny ZnO NPs (4–5 nm) into the micro scale mixing of PS/ZnO composite particles (0.1 µm) reducing the possibilities of the aggregation of ZnO NPs in polymer matrix. Additionally, good compatibility of low molecular weight PS with PEMA matrix helped us in achieving the homogenous distribution of ZnO filler into the PEMA matrix.92 As a result, a dramatic increase of about 215% in flexural strength of PEMA matrix has been observed after mixing of 2.5 wt% PS–ZnO composite particles.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the preparation of raspberry-like PS-ZnO composite particles and their application as filler carrier into a polymer matrix. [Reference: M. Agrawal, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, S. Gupta, E. Svetushkina, A. Pich and M. Stamm, A Novel Approach for Mixing ZnO NPs into Poly(ethyl methacrylate), Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 405.] Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
(5) Smart nanomaterials
Composite microgels has been explored for the a wide range of the potential applications owing to the external stimuli sensitivity and fascinating physical properties, originating from organic templates and coated or encapsulated inorganic NPs, respectively.93 For example: Kondo et al.94 reported fabrication of multifunctional materials with interesting thermal and magnetic properties by immobilizing the magnetic NPs inside the microgels. In another study, Rubio et al.50 reported coating of the PNIPAM microgels with 6 nm sized γ-Fe2O3 NPs. Owing to the biocompatibility of employed microgel templates and magnetic NPs as well as low amount of the loaded NPs, these hybrid nanostructures can be considered as promising materials for biomedical applications such as drug delivery systems.95 Moreover, the outer localization of the NPs shifts the volume phase transition temperature of the microgel templates to temperatures close to 40 °C, which further makes these materials suitable for drug delivery. Additionally, the location of these materials inside the body can readily be manipulated by an external magnetic field.
Recently, we found that hybrid microgels can be used in fabrication of temperature nanosensors by exploiting the thermo-sensitivity of the microgel templates and modulated optical properties of the incorporated quantum dots.96 PNIPAM colloidal templates were prepared by emulsion polymerization and functionalized at surfaces with carboxylic groups by adding a small amount of the sodium acrylate at the end of the polymerization process. Subsequently, 3.2 nm sized and amino functionalized CdTe quantum dots were chemically immobilized on the surface of PNIPAM beads as schematically shown in Figure 12a. The application of resulting hybrid microgels as temperature nanosensors was demonstrated by modulating the chemical environment around immobilized CdTe nanocrystalsvia inducing the volume phase transition of microgel templates. As illustrated in Figure 12b and 12c, this change provoked a steep and reversible variation in the fluorescence intensity of quantum dots. When the temperature of surrounding media was set below the LCST of PNIPAM template, fluorescence of nanocrystals was strongly quenched. On the other hand, above the LCST, it was found to be restored reversibly.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the immobilization of CdTe quantum dots on the surface of PNIPAM microgel templates. (b) Fluorescence intensity of the PNIPAM-CdTe composite microgels at 620 nm as a function of temperature and (c) modulation in fluorescence intensity during repeated heating (40 °C) and cooling (25 °C) cycles. Reprinted with permission from M. Agrawal, J. Rubio-Retama, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, N. Gaponik, S. Gupta, V. Cimrova, V. Lesnyak, E. Lopez-Cabarcos, S. Tzavalas, R. Rojas-Reyna, A. Eychmüller and M. Stamm, Switchable Photoluminescence of CdTe Nanocrystals by Temperature-Responsive Microgels, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9820. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
In another study, we demonstrated that poly(N-vinylcaprolactam)-microgel particles encapsulated with ZnO NPs can readily be used in fabrication of transparent UV absorbing filters.59 The employed procedure involves preparation of a thin film on glass substrates by solution casting of the aqueous dispersion of hybrid microgels. Lyon et al.97 demonstrated fabrication of fast-responding, reversible and photo-switchable arrays of micro-lenses composed of the poly (NIPAM-acrylic acid) copolymers loaded with Au NPs. A reversible shrinkage and swelling of the microgel template was afforded by local heating of the embedded Au NPs with laser light.
In addition, a great deal of the efforts has also been devoted on the stabilization of inorganic NPs through the microgel templates in order to access the high surface area for catalytic applications. For example: Ballauff et al.98 demonstrated loading of the Ag NPs into the temperature responsive polymeric template and discussed the modulation in catalytic activities of the immobilized Ag NPs as a function of the temperature. A polymeric template composed of the PS core and PNIPAM shell was used as nanoreactors for in-situ generation of the Ag NPs through the reduction of Ag2+ ions. The NPs have been found to be localized in temperature responsive PNIPAM shell. Temperature modulated accessibility of loaded Ag NPs, induced by the volume phase transition of PNIPAM shell, has been exploited to demonstrate the controlled catalytic activity of these composite particles. In another study,99 they exploited same approach for the loading of catalytically active metal NPs such as Au, Rh and Pt into microgel templates and demonstrated the application of resulting hybrid structures in catalytic oxidation of alcohols.
Summary and outlook
This review addresses recent developments in the fabrication and potential applications of organic–inorganic composite particles. A wide range of reported protocols for fabrication of these nano (micro) structured materials have been presented. Modulation in the structural parameters of composite particles such as size, morphology, shell thickness, inorganic content and chemical composition by controlling the employed reaction parameters has been discussed. Finally, a number of potential applications of these fascinating materials have been described by choosing some specific examples. Future research can be extended in the direction of the fabrication of colloidal composite particles with novel chemical compositions by exploiting a variety of synthetic protocols for inorganic NPs in presence of fascinating organic colloidal templates. Similarly, the family of the hollow spheres or capsules can be extended by exploring the fabrication of mixed metal oxide hollow structures. For example, SnO2-TiO2, SnO2-Al2O3 and SnO2-ZnO mixed metal oxide hollow spheres can be fabricated by template assisted approach and may be used as photocatalyst100 and novel electrodes for super capacitor applications.101 Moreover, preparation of metal oxide hollow spheres doped with metal NPs such TiO2-Au, TiO2-Ag, ZrO2-Au or ZrO2-Ag can also be studied by the successive or co-deposition of metal and metal oxide NPs on PS beads followed by the calcination or core dissolution and their photocatalytic activities can be investigated for a number of environmental pollutants. The doping of a small amount of metal NPs into the metal oxides has been found to increase their photocatalytic activity.102 In addition, mixing of a variety of the semiconductor and metal NPs such as TiO2, Fe3O4, Au, Ag and Pt into a host matrix can be explored by exploiting the colloidal particles as filler carriers. Research work in these directions is going on in our lab.
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to Leibniz-Institute of Polymer Research Dresden, Germany for providing the financial support and infra structure for experimental work. Authors also acknowledge help from DFG for funding a part of this work.
References

  (a) 
            E. Matijevic, In Fine Particle Science and Technology; E. Pelizetti, Ed.; Kluwer Academic Publishers: Dordrecht,  1996; pp 1–16 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J. A. Balmer, A. Schmid and S. P. Armes, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5722 RSC ; 
  (c) E. Bourgeat-Lami, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2002, 2, 1 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) 
            R. Partch, In Materials Synthesis and Characterization; D. Perry, Ed.; Plenum Press: New York,  1997; pp 1–17 Search PubMed .

  (a) S. M. Marinakos, D. A. Shultz and D. L. Feldheim, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 34 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. L. Beecroft and C. K. Ober, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1302 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. A. C. Stuart, W. T. S. Huck, J. Genzer, M. Mueller, C. Ober, M. Stamm, G. B. Sukhorukov, I. Szleifer, V. V. Tsukruk, M. Urban, F. Winnik, S. Zauscher, I. Luzinov and S. Minko, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 101 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. Gupta, M. Agrawal, P. Uhlmann, F. Simon and M. Stamm, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 504 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Gupta, P. Uhlmann, M. Agrawal, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, F. Simon, M. Stamm and A. Eychmüller, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 214 RSC ; 
  (d) S. Gupta, P. Uhlmann, M. Agrawal, S. Chapuis, U. Oertel and M. Stamm, Macromolecules, 2008, 41(8), 2874 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. Gupta, M. Agrawal, P. Uhlmann, F. Simon, U. Oertel and M. Stamm, Macromolecules, 2008, 41(21), 8152 CrossRef CAS .
S. Behrens, W. Habicht, K. Wagner and E. Unger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 284 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghosh, C. R. Patra, P. Mukherjee, M. Sastry and R. Kumar, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2003, 58, 201 CrossRef .
K. Esumi, A. Suzuki, A. Yamahira and K. Torigoe, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 2604 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Ziolo, E. P. Giannelis, B. A. Weinstein, M. O'Horo, B. N. Ganguly, V. Mehrotra, M. W. Russell and D. R. Huffman, Science, 1992, 257, 219 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 11 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cheng, S. Dong and E. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19146 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Chen, T. Serizawa and M. Akashi, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 1381 CrossRef CAS .
O. Siiman and A. Burshteyn, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 9795 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. J. Oldenburg, R. D. Averitt, S. L. Westcott and N. J. Halas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 288, 243 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. B. Jackson and N. J. Halas, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2743 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kaltenpoth, M. Himmelhaus, L. Slansky, F. Caruso and M. Grunze, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1113 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Wang, V. Salgueiriño-Maceira, L. M. Liz-Marzán and F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 908 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Liang, A. S. Susha and F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1160 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Graf and A. van Blaaderen, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 524 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Caruso, R. Caruso and H. Möhwald, Science, 1998, 282, 1111 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) U. Jeong, Y. Wang, M. Ibisate and Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1907 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Sun and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 597 CrossRef ; 
  (d) Y. Lu, Y. Mei, M. Schrinner, M. Ballauff and M. W. Moeller, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7676 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) T. Ji, V. G. Lirtsman, Y. Avny and D. Davidov, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1253 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Walsh and S. Mann, Nature, 1995, 377, 320 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Y. Chang, L. Liu and S. A. Asher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 6739 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. P. Philipse, M. P. B. Van Bruggen and C. Pathmamanoharan, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 92 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S.-W. Kim, M. Kim, W. Y. Lee and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7642 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. P. Velikov and A. van Blaaderen, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 4779 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. H. Rhodes, S. A. Davis, F. Caruso, B. Zhang and S. Mann, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2832 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. L. Breen, A. D. Donsmore, R. H. Pink, S. Q. Qadri and B. R. Ratna, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 903 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Sherman and W. T. Ford, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5218 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Agrawal, A. Pich, N. E. Zafeiropoulos and M. Stamm, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2008, 286, 593 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Wang, T. Sasaki, Y. Ebina, K. Kurashima and M. Watanabe, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4827 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hotta, P. C. A. Alberius and L. Bergström, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 496 RSC .
Z. Huang, F. Tang and L. Zhang, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 471, 105 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pich, J. Hain, Y. Prots and H.-J. P. Adler, Polymer, 2005, 46, 7931 CrossRef CAS .
V. Valtchev, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 956 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kawahashi, C. Persson and E. Matijevic, J. Mater. Chem., 1991, 1, 577 RSC .
J. Zhang, J. Liu, S. Wang, P. Zhan, Z. Wang and N. Ming, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1089 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agrawal, A. Pich, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, Smrati Gupta, J. Pionteck, F. Simon and M. Stamm, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1845 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tian, B. Mao, E. Wang, Z. Kang, Y. Song, C. Wang and S. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 3651 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dionigi, P. Stoliar, G. Ruani, S. D. Quiroga, M. Facchini and F. Biscarini, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3681 RSC .
X. Y. Shi, M. W. Shen and H. M. öhwald, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2004, 29, 987 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Wang, A. S. Angelatos and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 848 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Caruso, R. A. Caruso and H. Möhwald, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3309 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) F. Caruso, M. Spasova, A. Susha, M. Giersig and R. A. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 109 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) F. Caruso, H. Lichtenfeld, H. Möhwald and M. Giersig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 8523 CrossRef CAS .
V. Salgueirino-Maceira, F. Caruso and L. M. Liz-Marzán, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 10990 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, A. S. Susha, M. Giersig and H. Möhwald, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 950 CrossRef CAS .
M. Spasova, V. Salgueiriño-Maceira, A. Schlachter, M. Hilgendorff, M. Giersig, L. M. Liz-Marzán and M. Farle, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2095 RSC .

  (a) W. Ramsden, Proc. R. Soc. London, 1903, 72, 156 CAS ; 
  (b) S. U. Pickering, J. Chem. Soc., 1907, 91, 2001 RSC .
S. Fujii, M. Okada, H. Sawa, T. Furuzono and Y. Nakamura, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 9759 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Voorn, W. Ming and A. M. van Herk, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 2137 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cauvin, P. J. Colver and S. A. F. Bon, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 7887 CrossRef .
Z. Qian, Z. Zhang, L. Song and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1297 RSC .
M. Chen, L. Wu, S. Zhou and B. You, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 9613 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agrawal, A. Pich, S. Gupta, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, P. Formanek, D. Jehnichen and M. Stamm, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 526 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, X. Liu, H. Chen and J. He, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9063 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Karg, I. Pastoriza-Santos, B. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, R. von Klitzing, S. Wellert and T. Hellweg, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 6300 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) V. Nerapusri, J. L. Keddie, B. Vincent and I. A. Bushnak, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5036 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Bradley, J. Ramos and B. Vincent, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 1209 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Das, H. Zhang and E. Kumacheva, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2006, 36, 117 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) B. Jeong, Y. H. Bae, D. S. Lee and S. W. Kim, Nature, 1997, 388, 860 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. L. Kraft and J. S. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12921 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nayak and L. A. Lyon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7686 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Mossmer, J. P. Spatz, M. Moller, T. Aberle, J. Schmidt and W. Burchard, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 4791 CrossRef ; 
  (b) M. Das, N. Sanson, D. Fava and E. Kumacheva, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pich, A. Karak, Y. Lu, A. K. Ghosh and H.-J. P. Adler, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mei, Y. Lu, F. Polzer, M. Ballauff and M. Drechsler, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1062 CrossRef CAS .
D. Palioura, S. P. Armes, S. H. Anastasiadis and M. Vamvakaki, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 5761 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. L. Rogach, D. Nagesha, J. W. Ostrander, M. Giersig and N. A. Kotov, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2676 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Bhattacharya, F. Eckert, V. Boyko and A. Pich, Small, 2007, 3, 650 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rubio-Retama, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, C. Serafinelli, R. Rojas-Reyna, B. Voit, E. Lopez Cabarcos and M. Stamm, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10280 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Hu, Y. Fang, C. Bai and H. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4902 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, J. Zhang, C. Paquet, Y. Lin and E. Kumacheva, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 468 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pich, J. Hain, Y. Lu, V. Boyko, Y. Prots and H.-J. P. Adler, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 6610 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang and J. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4042 RSC .
L. Shen, A. Pich, D. Fava, M. Wang, S. Kumar, C. Wu, G. D. Scholes and M. A. Winnik, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 763 RSC .
A. Salcher, M. S. Nikolic, S. Casado, M. Vélez, H. Weller and B. H. Juarez, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1367 RSC .
F. Wehnert and A. Pich, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 1865 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Zhang, S. Q. Xu and E. Kumacheva, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7908 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agrawal, A. Pich, S. Gupta, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, J. R. Retama and M. Stamm, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2581 RSC .
K. Akamatsu, M. Shimada, T. Tsuruoka, H. Nawafune, S. Fujii and Y. Nakamura, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1254 CrossRef CAS .
M. Karg, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-Juste, T. Hellweg and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Small, 2007, 3, 1222 CrossRef CAS .
N. Häntzschel, F. Zhang, F. Eckert, A. Pich and M. A. Winnik, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10793 CrossRef .
F. Zhang and C. C. Wang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 8255 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. S. Wiersma, P. Bartolini, A. Lagendijk and R. Righini, Nature, 1997, 390, 671 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 53, 2169 CrossRef ; 
  (c) S. John, Phys. Today, 1991, 44, 32 ; 
  (d) P. W. Anderson, Philos. Mag. B, 1985, 52, 505 CAS .

  (a) A. Blanco, E. Chomski, S. Grabtchak, M. Ibisate, S. Jone, S. W. Leonard, C. Lopez, F. Meseguer, H. Miguez, J. P. Mondia, G. A. Ozin, O. Toader and H. M. van Driel, Nature, 2000, 405, 437 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. A. Vlasov, X. Z. Bo, J. C. Sturm and D. J. Norris, Nature, 2001, 414, 289 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) U. Gasser, E. R. Weeks, A. Schofield and D. A. Weiz, Science, 2001, 292, 258 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. van Blaaderen, R. Ruel and P. Wiltzius, Nature, 1997, 385, 321 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. M. Weissman, H. B. Sunkara, A. S. Tse and S. A. Asher, Science, 1996, 274, 959 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. E. Reese, A. V. Mikhonin, M. Kamenjicki, A. Tikhonov and S. A. Asher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1493 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Z. Hu, X. Lu and J. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1708 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. D. Jones and L. A. Lyon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 460 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. D. Jones, M. J. Serpe, L. Schroeder and L. A. Lyon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5292 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, A. L. Rogach and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2724 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agrawal, D. Fischer, S. Gupta, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, A. Pich, E. Lidorikis and M. Stamm, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16389 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, G. Friedman, K. D. Humfeld, S. A. Majetich and S. A. Asher, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1681 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. Jiang, J. F. Bertone and V. L. Colvin, Science, 2001, 291, 453 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            D. L. Wilcox, M. Berg, T. Bernat, D. Kellerman and J. K. Cochran, (eds) ( 1995) In: Materials Research Society Proceedings, Pittsburgh, vol. 372 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) A. H. Lu, W. C. Li, G. P. Hao, B. Spliethoff, H. J. Bongard, B. B. Schaack and F. Schuth, Angew. Chem. Int. Edit., 2010, 49, 1615 CAS ; 
  (d) D. G. Shchukin, G. B. Sukhorukov and H. Möhwald, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4472 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) G. B. Sukhorukov, D. V. Volodkin, A. M. Gunther, A. I. Petrov, D. B. Shenoy and H. Möhwald, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2073 RSC ; 
  (f) X. Wang, X. L. Wu, Y. G. Guo, Y. Zhong, X. Cao, Y. Ma and J. Yao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1680 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) S. Yang, X. Feng, L. Zhi, Q. Cao, J. Maier and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 838 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) J. Zhang, X. Liu, S. Wu, M. Xu, X. Guo and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6453 RSC ; 
  (i) B. Luo, S. Xu, W. F. Ma, W. R. Wang, S. L. Wang, J. Guo, W. L. Yang, J. H. Hu and C. C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7107 RSC ; 
  (j) Z. Chen, Z. M. Cui, F. Niu, L. Jiang and W. G. Song, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6524 RSC ; 
  (k) Y. Huo, Y. Cheng, T. Hobson and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2727 CrossRef .
A. Imhof, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 3579 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, H. Fan, A. Stump, T. L. Ward, T. Rieker and C. J. Brinker, Nature, 1999, 398, 223 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Fowler, D. Khushalani and S. Mann, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2028 RSC .
T. von Werne and T. E. Patten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7497 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Discher, Y. Y. Won, D. S. Ege, J. C. M. Lee, F. S. Battes, D. E. Discher and D. A. Hammer, Science, 1999, 284, 1143 CrossRef .
R. A. Caruso, A. Susha and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 400 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agrawal, A. Pich, S. Gupta, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, P. Simon and M. Stamm, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 1013 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W.-W. Wang, Y.-J. Zhu and L.-X. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 59 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Zheng, J. Pang, G. Tan, J. He, G. L. McPherson, Y. Lu, V. T. John and J. Zhan, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 5143 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Arruebo, M. Galan, N. Navascues, C. Tellez, C. Marquina, M. R. Ibarra and J. Santamaria, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1911 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agrawal, S. Gupta, A. Pich, N. E. Zafeiropoulos and M. Stamm, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5343 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Kondo, H. Yoshikawa, K. Awaga, M. Murayama, T. Mori, K. Sunada, S. Bandow and S. Iijima, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 547 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. J. Koo, Y. J. Kim, Y. H. Lee, W. I. Lee, K. Kim and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 195 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. C. Yang, D. J. Yang, J. Kim, J. M. Hong, H. G. Kim, I. D. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1059 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) X. X. Li, Y. J. Xiong, L. F. Zou, M. T. Wang and Y. Xie, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 112, 641 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, P. Wang, G. Yang, Q. Sun, J. Zheng and Y. Zhu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 123, 595 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) J. Yu, J. Fan and L. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 597 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) J. H. Park, S. Y. Jung, R. Kim, N. G. Park, J. Kim and S. S. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 574 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. He, B. X. Lei, Y. F. Wang, C. Y. Su, Y. P. Fang and D. B. Kuang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8757 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Nakajima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, Monatsh. Chem., 2001, 132, 31 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. R. Coulson, I. Woodward, J. P. S. Badyal, S. A. Brewer and C. Willis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8836 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ming, D. Wu, R. van Benthem and G. de With, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2298 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Z. Zhang, K. Friedrich and A. K. Schlarb, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 955 CrossRef CAS .
F. Croce, G. B. Appetecchi, L. Persi and B. Scrosati, Nature, 1998, 394, 456 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, X. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 923 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Dresco, V. S. Zaitsev, R. J. Gambino and B. Chu, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 1945 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, V. C. Sundar, J. R. Heine, M. G. Bawendi and K. F. Jensen, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1102 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Aberg, M. A. Seyam, S. A. Lassell, L. M. Bronstein and R. J. Spontak, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 1926 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agrawal, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, S. Gupta, E. Svetushkina, A. Pich and M. Stamm, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 405 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Schubert, M. Pannek and A. H. E. Müller, Phys. B, 2000, 276–278, 365 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nayak and L. A. Lyon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7686 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kondo and H. Fukuda, J. Ferment. Bioeng., 1997, 84, 337 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schmaljohann, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2006, 58, 1655 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agrawal, J. Rubio-Retama, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, N. Gaponik, S. Gupta, V. Cimrova, V. Lesnyak, E. Lopez-Cabarcos, S. Tzavalas, R. Rojas-Reyna, A. Eychmüller and M. Stamm, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9820 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, M. J. Serpe and L. A. Lyon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1333 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Y. Mei, M. Drechsler and M. Ballauff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 813 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, S. Proch, M. Schrinner, M. Drechsler, R. Kempe and M. Ballauff, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3955 RSC .
K. Vinodgopal, I. Bedja and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 2180 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jayalakshmi, N. Venugopal, K. P. Raja and M. M. Rao, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 1538 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stathatos, T. Petrova and P. Lianos, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 5025 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Current address: Institut für Makromolekulare Chemie, Technische Universität Dresden, Zellescher Weg 19, Dresden, Germany.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Mukesh Agrawal	Dr. Mukesh Agrawal is a postdoctoral researcher in Nanostructured Materials Department at Leibniz-Institute of Polymer Research Dresden, Germany. He received his PhD from Technical University Dresden, Germany in 2008 under the supervision of Prof. Dr. Manfred Stamm. After completing his PhD, he worked for SABIC Innovative Plastics (formerly GE plastics) as a research scientist. He has developed a wide spectrum of organic–inorganic composite particles and explored their applications in various facets of nanotechnology. His research interests include polymer synthesis, inorganic synthesis, Organic–inorganic nanocomposites, colloidal chemistry and advanced functional materials.
Smrati Gupta	Dr. Smrati Gupta is an assistant researcher in the group of Prof. Dr. Rainer Jordan at Institute for Macromolecular Chemistry, Technical University Dresden, Germany. She obtained her PhD from Leibniz-Institute of Polymer Research Dresden, Germany in the group of Prof. Dr. Manfred Stamm in 2008. She has developed a variety of hybrid polymer brushes for nanosensing, surface enhanced Raman Spectroscopy and photocatalytic applications. Her research areas encompass polymer brushes, inorganic nanoparticles and external stimuli responsive organic-inorganic nanoassemblies.
Manfred Stamm	Prof. Dr. Manfred Stamm graduated in physics at Frankfurt/Main University in 1974, followed by PhD-studies at Mainz University. He spent three years for research at CNRS/Max-Planck Institute of Solid State Physics in Grenoble and started working with polymer surfaces and interfaces, polymer nanostructures and their characterisation techniques. He held several positions at Forschungszentrum Jülich, Max Planck Institute of Polymer Research Mainz and Brookhaven National Laboratory, before he became professor of physical chemistry of polymeric materials at Technische Universität Dresden and head of the Institute of Physical Chemistry and Physics of Polymers at Leibniz Institute of Polymer Research Dresden.

 	Fig. 1  
              SEM images of (a) PS beads and PS-ZnO core–shell composite particles prepared at different Zn(CH3COO)2.2H2O concentrations: (b) 0.5 mM; (c) 1 mM and (d) 2 mM. Reprinted with permission from M. Agrawal, A. Pich, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, Smrati Gupta, J. Pionteck, F. Simon and M. Stamm, PS-ZnO Composite Particles with Controlled Morphology, Chem. Mater. 2007, 19, 1845. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of core–shell composite particles by layer by layer (LBL) method. [Reference: F. Caruso, Nanoengineering of Particle Surfaces, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 11.] Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PS-In(OH)3 composite particles with controlled morphologies. Reprinted with permission from M. Agrawal, A. Pich, S. Gupta, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, P. Formanek, D. Jehnichen and M. Stamm, Tailored Growth of In(OH)3 Shell on Functionalized PS Beads, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 526. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  
              SEM images of (a) PS template particles (540 nm size) and PS-In(OH)3 composite particles prepared at (b) 0.08 mM (700 nm size), (c) 0.17 mM (730 nm size) and (d) 0.34 mM (750 nm size) concentrations of In(OC3H7)3 salt. Reprinted with permission from M. Agrawal, A. Pich, S. Gupta, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, P. Formanek, D. Jehnichen and M. Stamm, Tailored Growth of In(OH)3 Shell on Functionalized PS Beads, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 526. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  
              TEM images of PNIPAM microgels covered with different amounts of Au nanorods. Insets show magnified views of single composite microgel loaded with Au nanorods. [Reference: M. Karg, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-Juste, T. Hellweg, L. M. Liz-Marzan, Nanorod-Coated PNIPAM Microgels: Thermoresponsive Optical Properties, Small, 2007, 3, 1222.] Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 6  
            SEM images of colloidal crystal arrays composed of PS beads coated with (a) 4 and (b) 8 layers of polyelectrolytes. SEM images of metallodielectric colloidal crystals composed of (c) PS beads coated with Au NPs by LBL method and (d) PS colloidal crystal templates infiltrated with Au NPs. Scale bar 3 µm. [Reference: Z. Liang, A.S. Susha and F. Caruso, Metallodielectric Opals of Layer-by-Layer Processed Coated Colloids, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1160] Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Normalized reflectance spectra of colloidal crystal arrays composed of uncoated (solid line) and polyelectrolyte coated (dashed line) PS beads. (b) Normalized reflectance spectra of colloidal crystal arrays composed of uncoated (solid line) and polyelectrolytes assisted Au layer coated PS beads (dashed line; left to right building blocks with 4, 6 and 8 layers of polyelectrolytes). (c) Normalized reflectance spectra of colloidal crystal arrays composed of uncoated PS beads and metallodielectric colloidal crystals composed of polyelectrolyte coated PS opal templates infiltrated with Au NPs (dashed line; left to right building blocks with 4, 6 and 8 layers of polyelectrolytes). [Reference: Z. Liang, A.S. Susha and F. Caruso, Metallodielectric Opals of Layer-by-Layer Processed Coated Colloids, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1160.] Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 8  
            SEM images of tantala hollow spheres obtained after chemical dissolution of PS cores from PS-tantala core shell composite particles prepared at (a) 0.2 mM; (b) 0.3 mM; (c) 0.5 mM tantalum ethoixde concentrations. (d) SEM micrograph of tantala hollow spheres prepared by calcination of PS-tantala core shell composite particles. Reprinted with permission from M. Agrawal, A. Pich, S. Gupta, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, P. Simon and M. Stamm, Synthesis of Novel Tantalum Oxide Sub-micrometer Hollow Spheres with Tailored Shell Thickness, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 1013. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  
            TEM images of (a) PS/ZnO-TiO2 composite particles and (b) ZnO-TiO2 hollow spheres. Electron energy loss (c) “Zn” and (d) “Ti” element mapping images of ZnO-TiO2 hollow spheres. In Figure 9c and 9d, red areas indicate “Zn” and “Ti” enriched parts of hollow spheres, respectively. (e) Photodegradation of the rhodamine 6G dye in the absence of the catalyst and presence of TiO2, ZnO and mixed ZnO-TiO2 hollow spheres. Reprinted with permission from M. Agrawal, S. Gupta, A. Pich, N. E. Zafeiropoulos and M. Stamm, A Facile Approach to Fabrication of ZnO-TiO2 Hollow Spheres, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5343. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PS-PNIPAM colloidal particles decorated with SiO2 NPs in raspberry-like fashion and their application in fabrication of superhydrophobic surfaces. [Reference: Z. Qian, Z. Zhang, L. Song and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1297.] Reproduced by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the preparation of raspberry-like PS-ZnO composite particles and their application as filler carrier into a polymer matrix. [Reference: M. Agrawal, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, S. Gupta, E. Svetushkina, A. Pich and M. Stamm, A Novel Approach for Mixing ZnO NPs into Poly(ethyl methacrylate), Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 405.] Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the immobilization of CdTe quantum dots on the surface of PNIPAM microgel templates. (b) Fluorescence intensity of the PNIPAM-CdTe composite microgels at 620 nm as a function of temperature and (c) modulation in fluorescence intensity during repeated heating (40 °C) and cooling (25 °C) cycles. Reprinted with permission from M. Agrawal, J. Rubio-Retama, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, N. Gaponik, S. Gupta, V. Cimrova, V. Lesnyak, E. Lopez-Cabarcos, S. Tzavalas, R. Rojas-Reyna, A. Eychmüller and M. Stamm, Switchable Photoluminescence of CdTe Nanocrystals by Temperature-Responsive Microgels, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9820. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Current address: Institut für Makromolekulare Chemie, Technische Universität Dresden, Zellescher Weg 19, Dresden, Germany.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
