Hydrogen-bonded rosettes comprising π-conjugated systems as building blocks for functional one-dimensional assemblies  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CC04172A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CC04172A
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 9663-9683Hydrogen-bonded rosettes comprising π-conjugated systems as building blocks for functional one-dimensional assemblies

        
          
            Bimalendu 
            Adhikari
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xu 
            Lin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mitsuaki 
            Yamauchi
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Hayato 
            Ouchi
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Keisuke 
            Aratsu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Shiki 
            Yagai
          
          
        
      *ad
aDepartment of Applied Chemistry and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Chiba University, 1-33 Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8522, Japan
bDepartment of Chemical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Mohali, Knowledge City, Sector 81, S. A. S. Nagar, Manauli PO, Punjab 140306, India
cDepartment of Applied Chemistry for Environment, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuin University, 2-1 Gakuen, Sanda, Hyogo 669-1337, Japan
dInstitute for Global Prominent Research (IGPR), Chiba University, 1-33 Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8522, Japan. E-mail: yagai@faculty.chiba-u.jp
Received 
      30th May 2017
    , Accepted 8th August 2017First published on 16th August 2017AbstractHydrogen-bonded supermacrocycles (rosettes) are attractive disk-shaped noncovalent synthons for extended functional columnar nanoassemblies. They can serve not only as noncovalent monomer units for supramolecular polymers and discrete oligomers in a dilute solution but also as constituent entities for soft matters such as gels and lyotropic/thermotropic liquid crystals. However, what are the merits of using supramolecular rosettes instead of using expanded π-conjugated covalent molecules? This review covers the self-assembly of photochemically and electrochemically active π-conjugated molecules through the formation of supramolecular rosettes via directional complementary multiple hydrogen-bonding interactions. These rosettes comprising π-conjugated covalent functional units stack into columnar nanoassemblies with unique structures and properties. By overviewing the design principle, characterization, and properties and functionalities of various examples, we illustrate the merits of utilizing rosette motifs. Basically, one can easily access a well-defined expanded π-surface composed of multi-chromophoric systems, which can ultimately afford stable extended nanoassemblies even in a dilute solution due to the higher association constants of supermacrocyclized π-systems. Importantly, these columnar nanoassemblies exhibit unique features in self-assembly processes, chiroptical, photophysical and electrochemical properties, nanoscale morphologies, and bulk properties. Moreover, the stimuli responsiveness of individual building blocks can be amplified to a greater extent by exploiting rosette intermediates to organize them into one-dimensional columnar structures. In the latter parts of the review, we also highlight the application of rosettes in supramolecular polymer systems, photovoltaic devices, and others.
Bimalendu Adhikari
Dr Bimalendu Adhikari was born in India in 1983. He received his PhD in 2012 under the supervision of Professor Arindam Banerjee at the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, India. He then moved to the University of Toronto, Canada for postdoctoral research with Professor Bernie Kraatz. In 2015, he received the JSPS Postdoctoral Fellowship and moved to the research group of Professor Shiki Yagai at Chiba University, Japan. Currently, he is a faculty member at IISER-Mohali, India. His research interests include supramolecular polymers, gels, peptides and nanomaterials.
Xu Lin
Xu Lin was born in 1981 in Jilin Province, China. He studied organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) under the guidance of Prof. Takashi Karatsu at Chiba University and received his PhD in 2012. Then he joined the research group of Prof. Shiki Yagai as a postdoctoral fellow of CREST, JST. His research interests include the synthesis and properties of supramolecular and molecular materials for organic solar cells.
Mitsuaki Yamauchi
Mitsuaki Yamauchi was born in 1990 in Tochigi, Japan. He studied helical supramolecular polymers under the guidance of Prof. Shiki Yagai at Chiba University and received his PhD in 2017. He then moved to Kwansei Gakuin University and is currently an Assistant Professor of Department of Applied Chemistry for Environment, School of Science and Technology. His research interests are the supramolecular polymerization mechanisms of π-conjugated molecules and the creation of stimuli-responsive supramolecular materials.
Hayato Ouchi
Hayato Ouchi was born in 1992 in Ibaraki, Japan. He received his BE and ME degrees in 2015 and 2017, respectively, and is currently a PhD student under the guidance of Prof. Shiki Yagai at Chiba University. His research interests are self-assemblies of functional dyes and their applications to organic photovoltaics.
Keisuke Aratsu
Keisuke Aratsu was born in 1992 in Fukuoka, Japan. He received his BE and ME degrees in chemistry from Chiba University (Chiba, Japan) in 2015 and 2017, respectively, and is currently a PhD student under the guidance of Prof. Shiki Yagai at Chiba University. His current research interests are the construction of supramolecular polymers via hydrogen-bond-directed self-assembly.
Shiki Yagai
Shiki Yagai was born in 1975 in Yamanashi, Japan. He studied self-aggregation of synthetic chlorophylls under the guidance of Prof. Hitoshi Tamiaki at Ritsumeikan University and received his PhD in 2002. Then he directly became an assistant professor at Chiba University, and became an associate professor in 2010. During 2006–2009, he pursued self-organized dye assemblies as a PRESTO researcher of Japan Science and Technology Agency. In July 2017, he became a full professor in Chiba University. His research interests include supramolecular polymers, gels and liquid crystals of functional dyes and π-conjugated systems, photoresponsive molecular assemblies, organic solar cells and mechanochromic luminescence materials.
1. Introduction
One-dimensional (1D) nanoassemblies consisting of functional π-conjugated molecules offer attractive features that can be exploited in various research fields from organic electronics to biomaterials.1–5 There are two ways to produce such 1D-nanoassemblies: unimolecular or hierarchical construction approaches. Nature often utilizes the hierarchical strategy using biomacromolecular building blocks, i.e. proteins, wherein specific oligomeric forms of primary components are required for 1D hierarchical organization.6 In synthetic supramolecular chemistry, similar supramolecular building blocks can be constructed by using directional hydrogen bonds. Construction of 1D-columnar assemblies based on noncovalently formed macrocycles through hydrogen-bonds (henceforth referred to as rosettes or supermacrocycles) is a promising strategy to assemble and amplify the intrinsic optical and electronic properties of small functional building blocks (Fig. 1).7–10 Proper functionalization of π-conjugated molecules with multiple hydrogen-bonding units provides supermacrocyclic π-systems that subsequently stack to form columnar nanoassemblies. In this review, we discuss the 1D nanoassemblies obtained by the columnar stacking of noncovalent supermacrocycles. Such columnar nanoassemblies are often responsible for affording supramolecular polymers,11–13 discrete one-dimensional nanoobjects like rods, cylinders, worms or tubes, and the constituents of soft materials such as gels and liquid crystals. Simply, noncovalent expansion of the π-surface in a rosette motif can cooperatively enhance the aggregation propensity of individual building blocks, allowing the formation of highly stable columnar aggregates that can be formed even in a dilute solution or at an elevated temperature in the bulk state. Beyond this merit, these columnar nanoassemblies show unique features that include their facile preparation and functionalization, cooperative self-assembly processes, controllable morphologies and structures, adjustable performance in devices, and so on.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of hydrogen-bond-directed (noncovalent) super-macrocyclization and subsequent stacking of macrocycles into one-dimensional aggregates. 
Although the self-assembly of rosettes has been already known for 20 years since the seminal report by Kimizuka et al. in 1995,14 it is timely to organize and review diverse examples from the past few decades because great advances in 1D-supramolecular polymers based on rosettes have recently been achieved. Here, the complex architectures of rosettes bestow higher levels of internal order into the resulting supramolecular polymer chains through synergetic interactions of oligomerized macrocyclized components. In the following sections, we first overview the fundamental properties of noncovalently formed supermacrocyclic assemblies including their design, characterization, and media wherein they can form and stack. Next, we critically describe how hierarchical organization of rosettes and synergetic or competing interactions of oligomerized molecular components have an impact on the resulting columnar nanoassemblies with respect to supramolecular chirality, stimuli-responsiveness, nanoscale morphology, as well as optoelectronic device properties.
2. Fundamentals of hydrogen-bonded rosettes
Design and characterization of hydrogen-bonded rosettes
Since several reviews15–21 have already described the basics of multiply hydrogen-bonded rosettes, we briefly discuss them here. Supramolecular rosettes are mainly based on either complementarily hydrogen bonding pairs of two heterocyclic motifs or a self-complementarily hydrogen bonding single heterocyclic motif. As they can be found as template structures of a chemical structure-drawing software, melamine (M) and cyanuric acid (CA)/barbituric acid (BA) derivatives are the most well-known ditopic complementary pairs that provide 6-membered rosettes (Fig. 2a). They have complementary centrosymmetric hydrogen-bonding arrays, DAD and ADA (A = hydrogen bond acceptor, D = hydrogen bond donor), respectively, and the rosettes are held together by 18 hydrogen bonds. The supramolecular chemistry of M3·CA3 and M3·BA3 rosettes has been extensively investigated by Whitesides et al.15 and Reinhoudt et al.18 Whitesides and coworkers prepared covalently preorganized melamine and cyanurate based exclusive rosettes in chloroform, and characterized them by 1H NMR and vapour pressure osmometry (VPO).22,23 Colligative properties obtained by VPO measurements can predict the average molecular weight of a hydrogen-bonded rosette (with high stability) semi-quantitatively, with respect to a reference system. Gel permeation chromatographic (GPC) studies in solution are also useful to determine the molecular weights of rosettes, although the success of this technique depends on their thermodynamic stability.23 Although an individual technique gives incomplete information, they can make a stronger one collectively. Lehn et al. reported successful detection of M3·BA3 rosettes by means of electrospray ionization (ESI) mass spectrometry (MS), wherein the individual rosettes are derivatized with [18]crown-6 moieties by using K+ ions.24 Reinhoudt and coworkers utilized matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) MS to identify single, double, and tetra-rosettes using an Ag+ ion-labeling technique.25 Discrete rosettes are also characterized by X-ray crystallography in individual studies by Whitesides and Reinhoudt groups.26,27
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of three rosettes: (a) M3·CA3, (b) M6 and (c) BA6 (R = alkyl group, Ar = aryl group). 
Apart from the complexation of M and BA, the individual components are also able to form hexameric single component rosettes (i.e., M6 and BA6) by means of 12 hydrogen bonds exploiting only four hydrogen-bonding sites of each motif (Fig. 2b and c). The resulting rosettes are relatively less stable compared to the two-component systems and can transform into two-component rosettes upon addition of an appropriate amount of the complementary components in an appropriate solvent. Although M3–CA3 or M3–BA3 rosettes have not been directly visualized by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), the one-component rosettes M6 and BA6 have been confirmed by STM.28,29
A preliminary but important observation for aggregate formation is the solubility change. A two-component rosette often shows a much higher solubility compared to the individual components, which is considered as a clue for the coaggregation among rosette motifs in solution. For example, N,N′-substituted M without long aliphatic chains is poorly soluble in chloroform.30 Moreover, complementary BA and N-substituted CA with simple shorter alkyl substituents are also separately sparingly soluble in chloroform. However, mixing of equivalent amounts of these complementary ditopic components results in an increase in solubility, suggesting the formation of discrete rosettes. If one observes subsequent precipitation, it presumably indicates the transition from kinetically formed rosettes to thermodynamically stable tape-like polymeric aggregates, or hierarchical organization of rosettes into extended assemblies. Excess BA or CA in the solution of rosettes does not get dissolved. Thus, quantitative dissolution might be a preliminary clue for the stoichiometric complexation of the two components.
Chloroform is usually used as a solvent to study the formation of discrete rosettes because it can dissolve heterocyclic rosette motifs, while moderately allowing the formation of complementary hydrogen bonds at the millimolar regime, which is convenient for NMR studies. However, as a drawback, chloroform requires a high concentration of solutes to afford completely higher-order aggregated states due to its high polarity. The high concentration (condition) is not suitable for studying the assembly through optical spectroscopies and microscopic techniques such as atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM).
On the other hand, nonpolar solvents like methylcyclohexane (MCH) are often used to maximize hydrogen-bonding interactions and induce extended aggregation of the resulting rosettes via π–π stacking interactions.31 However, the use of aliphatic nonpolar solvents requires the introduction of hydrophobic alkyl chains as solubilizing groups. Commonly useful solubilizing groups are 3,4,5-trialkoxypheyl units, so-called dendritic wedges or minidendrons: these act not only as solubilizing auxiliaries but also as strong aggregation-directing units via van der Waals interactions particularly in the bulk state.32
In the case of rosette based supramolecular building blocks, one of the important issues is the formation of competing tape-like polymeric aggregates. For example, complexation between M and BA/CA is able to form noncyclic tape-like polymers (infinite chain structure) as a downside,26,33 depending on the substituents introduced and assembly conditions employed.30 Steric demands of the substituents often play a decisive role if the components form a rosette or tape-like structure. In practice, one may be able to avoid the formation of unfavorable tape-like species by increasing the solubility of the components through the introduction of long aliphatic tails such as bulky wedge groups.32 Mechanistic background underpinning this strategy is beyond the scope of this review.33 The drawback can be absolutely avoided by programming the molecules to assemble exclusively into a cyclic motif through elegant synthetic studies as represented by Mascal and Fenniri separately.34,35 Mascal et al. first invented a programmed hydrogen-bonding code for a guaranteed 6-membered rosette with 18 hydrogen bonds. They synthesized a pyrido[4,3-d]pyrimidine motif which possesses a spacial disposition of noncentrosymmetric hydrogen-bonding arrays of guanine (DDA) and cytosine (AAD) at an angle of 60°.34 Later, Fenniri and coworkers reported similar guanine–cytosine hybrid modules as building blocks for extended columnar assemblies of rosettes.35
How to introduce π-conjugated systems

Fig. 3 represents the molecular design to incorporate π-conjugated functional units into hydrogen-bonded rosettes. As already discussed previously, we can construct rosettes mainly in two ways, i.e., by using two complementary components, or one self-complementary component. These systems may be further divided into two subcategories in terms of how to introduce π-conjugated units. In type I and III systems, π-conjugated units are the main parts of the rosette structures. Examples of type I systems are 12-membered rosettes composed of diimide chromophores such as naphthalenediimide (NDI) and perylene bisimide (PBI) as ditopic ADA components and ditopic DAD components such as N,N′-substituted M.14 In practice, this design should overcome a large entropic penalty upon association.36 Alternatively, one can design the one-component system as type III by designing π-conjugated molecules with two self-complementary hydrogen-bonding units.37 In type II and IV systems, the π-conjugated units are pendent from the supermacrocyclic core. Conjugation of π-conjugated units with heterocyclic units is the most reliable way to produce type II or IV rosettes.7M and BA/CA are frequently utilized heterocyclic units as they can form rosettes with complementary hydrogen bonding units.
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of hydrogen-bonded single and two component rosettes where π-chromophores are introduced in different ways. For the one-component rosette system, the hexameric rosette (A6) is the most common example, while homomeric trimers (A3) and tetramers (A4) have also been reported (vide infra). Similarly, in the case of a two-component system, the heteromeric hexamer (A3B3) is the most common, although trimeric rosettes (A3B) are also known (vide infra). 
3. Supramolecular chirality
Due to the intrinsic nature of electronic interactions between π-conjugated units as well as steric demands of the substituents,38 supramolecular rosettes usually do not stack ideally in a face-to-face arrangement, but rather prefer to stack with rotational offset, leading to the formation of a helical assembly. Without introducing a chiral auxiliary, both right-handed (P-type) and left-handed (M-type) helical columns are formed, making the overall system racemic.39 The interplay between the chiral substituents and helicity of rosette columns is an interesting topic and has been discussed for many systems as follows.
Kato et al. reported hierarchical chiral columnar structures formed by dendritic oligo(L)- or (D)-glutamic acid-conjugated folic acid derivatives (1, Fig. 4a) that induce supramolecular chirality.40 These functionalized folic acids first self-assemble into tetrameric disks by hydrogen bonds between the pterin rings (Fig. 4b). In the bulk state, the tetrameric disks stack to form thermotropic hexagonal columnar mesophases over a wide temperature window. In dodecane, the folic acid derivatives form achiral self-assembled columnar structures. Upon adding sodium triflate, transformation of the achiral into chiral columnar assemblies was observed, wherein supramolecular helicity was regulated by the molecular chirality of oligo(glutamic acid) segments (Fig. 4c).
 Fig. 4  (a) Tetrameric rosette structure (14) of folic acid derivative 1. (b) Schematic representation of self-assembled 1/NaOSO2CF3 in hexagonal columnar phases. (c) Schematic representation of self-assembled 1/NaOSO2CF3 in chloroform solution. (d) CD spectra of 1 (broken line) and 1/NaOSO2CF3 (solid line; mole ratio = 0.25) in chloroform (c = 5.0 × 10−3 M) at 20 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Guanine and folic acid derivatives provide not only discrete supermacrocyclic assemblies but also infinite tape-like assemblies. The selective formation of either hydrogen-bonded pattern is one of the interesting and challenging topics in the field of supramolecular research.34,41,42 Fenniri and co-workers invented guanine–cytosine hybrid molecule 2 with a much better functionalizability (Fig. 5a).35 Due to their strong supermacrocyclization capability (Fig. 5b) derived from DDA–AAD triple hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions between the rosettes, molecules with ionic side chains can form stable columnar assemblies (RNTs: rosette nanotubes) in water (Fig. 5c). In their first designed molecule, a methyl group was introduced at the amino group of the DDA array to prevent water molecules from accessing the polar hydrogen-bonding atoms. The formation of an intramolecular ionic hydrogen bond between the side chain secondary ammonium and the neighbouring ring carbonyl was also believed to play the same role. Importantly, chiral centres were introduced on the periphery of the rosette by attaching a chiral amino acid lysine that could dictate the supramolecular chirality of RNTs, where the point chirality of the amino acid biased the handedness of the helical stacks of rosettes. Furthermore, the very rigid cylindrical scaffold of RNTs allowed host–guest events at the periphery without breaking the rosette architectures (vide infra).
 Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structure of 2 and its hydrogen-bonding motif. (b) Molecular model of rosette 26. The thin yellow lines show the hydrogen-bonding network, while the thick yellow lines highlight the observed intermolecular nuclear Overhauser effects (NOEs). (c) Molecular model of rosette nanotubes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society. 
In the foregoing RNT system, the inversion of helical handedness was achieved by applying the opposite point chirality (R/S) in the covalently attached unit (Fig. 5).35 Interestingly, the slightly modified molecule 3 (Fig. 6a), wherein the methyl group was replaced with hydrogen, formed helical RNTs in methanol, but experienced inversion of supramolecular chirality upon addition of minute amounts of water (<1% v/v).43 Extensive physical (kinetic and thermodynamic analyses via spectroscopy) and computational studies revealed that the mirror-image RNTs (chiromers) are solvent-stabilized supramolecular conformational isomers. The solvation models revealed unique arrangements of solvent molecules around the chiromers (Fig. 6b). They are involved in an extensive network of hydrogen bonds with the exocyclic amino group and/or the pyrimidinic nitrogen of the hybrid GC base (G = guanine base, C = cytosine base). On the basis of these interactions, a mechanism was proposed for the observed water induced inversion of supramolecular chirality.
 Fig. 6  (a) Structural modification of 2 to 3. (b) Upon dissolution of compound 3 in water or methanol, both chiromers can form during the early stages of self-assembly. However, depending on the solvent and thermodynamic conditions used, only one chiromer grows preferentially. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
Fenniri and co-workers further succeeded in increasing the chiroptical output in RNT formation by designing a new GC hybrid molecule 4 with a π-conjugated surface greater than previous molecules (Fig. 7a).44 Molecule 4 self-assembled into RNTs and exhibited a very sharp red-shifted band that is characteristic of J-aggregates with a remarkably strong Cotton effect in circular dichroism (CD) spectra. These results suggest exciton coupling of stronger transition dipoles of 4 between stacked molecules with an offset fashion in the RNTs. The time-dependent changes in UV-vis and CD spectra (Fig. 7b and c) indicate that the construction of J-aggregated RNTs proceeds in two stages: very rapid stacking of rosettes into less-helically biased RNTs as kinetic products, which are followed by favourable supramolecular rearrangement of stacked rosettes to afford thermodynamically stable chiral RNTs.
 Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 46 and (b) its hierarchical self-assembly into RNT. Time-dependent (c) UV-vis and (d) CD studies on the assembly process (c = 2 × 10−5 M in water). Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
De Feyter, Schenning, Meijer and co-workers found that oligo(p-phenylenevinylene)s (OPVs) functionalized with a diamino triazine unit self-assemble into hexameric rosettes utilizing intermolecular double hydrogen-bonding interactions (Fig. 8).28 They directly visualized chiral hexameric rosettes by STM measurements on the solid–liquid interface. Although 5a [for ter-(p-phenylenevinylene)] and 5b [for quarter-(p-phenylenevinylene)] possess the same point chirality but differ in conjugated lengths, they unexpectedly form rosette structures with opposite handedness, clockwise (CW) and counterclockwise (CCW), respectively (Fig. 8b and c). In alkane solvents, these rosettes further assemble to show opposite CD signals (Fig. 8d and e). However, 5b experienced a reversal of CD signals with time, and ultimately the two molecules display similar CD signals in their thermodynamically stable states. The observed CD signals in a nonpolar medium are attributed to the helical stacking of rosettes into extended supramolecular tubules, which were visualized by AFM (Fig. 8f).
 Fig. 8  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 5b6. (b and c) STM images of 5a6 and 5b6 monolayers at the solid–liquid interface using graphite as the substrate and 1-phenyloctane as the solvent. Red arrows indicate the “rotation direction” of the rosette; (d and e) CD spectra of (d) 5a (c = 2.5 × 10−4 M) and (e) 5b (c = 5 × 10−5 M) in annealed heptane solutions recorded after maintaining at 293 K for 10 min (●) and for 24 h (○). (f) AFM image of 5b in heptane (c = 5 × 10−5 M) on graphite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Not only the covalent introduction of chiral centers, but also external addition of chiral sources can induce supramolecular chirality into RNTs constructed by achiral 6 with a crown ether recognition unit. The chirality of amino acid guests (chiral promoters) is transferred to the columnar structures of the RNTs via electrostatic interactions with crown ether moieties (Fig. 9).45 For example, external addition of L-alanine and D-alanine successfully imparted helical RNTs with opposite handedness, i.e., P-type and M-type helicities, respectively (Fig. 9b and c). Furthermore, the degree of chirality induction was found to depend on the chemical structures of the chiral promoters due to the difference in their binding affinities with the prochiral crown ether unit (Fig. 9a). Importantly, the chiral promoters induced supramolecular chirality in an ‘all-or-nothing’-type fashion, unlike the frequently observed ‘sergeants and soldiers’-type response. From these results, it was proposed that amino acids are able to transfer their chirality to the assembly only when they occupy all the crown ether sites.
 Fig. 9  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 66. (b) Rosette nanotubes. (c) CD spectra of 6 (c = 4 × 10−5 M) with L-Ala (c = 4 × 10−4 M) and D-Ala (c = 4 × 10−4 M) separately. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society. 
Yagai and coworkers explored the columnar assemblies of PBI dyes based on supramolecular 3:1 complexation between monotopic melamines 7 (7R and 7S) and unsubstituted tritopic CA (Fig. 10).46 Chiral substituents attached to the PBI-appended melamines allowed them to study the complexation process using CD spectroscopy. Although the UV-vis absorption and fluorescence spectra of 7 in methylcyclohexane changed slightly upon titration with CA, CD titration experiments revealed the emergence of a pronounced Cotton effect, which is indicative of the formation of chiral assemblies by helical stacking of 3 + 1 rosettes (Fig. 10b and c). The remarkably high anisotropy factors (g = 1.5 × 10−3) of the columnar assemblies (with respect to the presence of only one chiral handle per PBI chromophore) suggest that the columnar structures possess a strongly biased helical sense, which is most likely due to the presence of chiral centers inside the discotic complexes rather than their peripheries. Ternary mixtures of 7S, 7R, and CA showed a majority-rules chiral-amplification effect (Fig. 10c), which was the first report on supramolecular assemblies of PBI dyes.
 Fig. 10  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 7S3·CA and 7R3·CA. (b) CD spectra of ternary mixtures of 7S, 7R ([7S] + [7R] = 3.0 × 10−4 M), and CA (c = 1.0 × 10−4 M) in MCH. Arrows indicate the changes upon increasing the percentage of 7R (0 to 100%). (c) Plots of Δε at 465 nm as a function of enantiomeric excess (ee). Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Circularly polarized luminescence (CPL) is presently receiving increasing attention owing to its promising applications such as in sensors, displays and optical storage devices.47,48 One of the useful strategies to achieve strong CPL activity is the use of supramolecular chirality.49,50 By using a phthalhydrazide moiety,51 Takeuchi et al. successfully organized helicene molecules into one-dimensional columnar stacks through the formation of trimeric hydrogen-bonded disks (Fig. 11).521H NMR measurements of 8 in CDCl3 showed the formation of trimeric disks through complementary hydrogen-bonding interactions between phthalhydrazide units. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) studies showed an average aggregate size of 2.5 nm in chloroform, which is well consistent with the diameter of the trimeric disk as estimated by molecular modelling. AFM studies revealed the formation of chiral helical nanofibres with a height of 2.5 nm in toluene, which is in line with the size of the trimeric disk (Fig. 11b). As a result of the extended stacking of trimeric chiral helicenes, nanofibre solutions showed CPL with |glum| = 0.035 (Fig. 11d).
 Fig. 11  (a) Chemical structure of trimeric rosette 83. (b) AFM images of self-assembled 8. (c) CD, (d) CPL, (e) UV-vis absorption, and (f) fluorescence spectra of (M)-8 and (P)-8 in chloroform. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4. Stimuli-responsive properties
Dynamic control over the morphologies and functionalities of assemblies through external stimuli, such as temperature, solvents, ions, light, redox, pH, etc. is a key to develop dynamic soft-matter devices. In this context, supermacrocyclic assemblies are promising as stimuli responsive platforms because of the possibility of dynamically rearranging hydrogen-bonded patterns. As a pioneering example of stimuli-induced formation of rosette stacks, Kato and coworkers reported liquid crystalline folic acid derivatives 9a/9b/9c with dendritic mesogens (Fig. 12).53 These folic acid derivatives exhibited alkyl chain-length dependence on their mesophase structures. Derivatives 9a and 9b with shorter alkyl chains show smectic phases, whereas discotic phases are noticed for derivative 9c with longer alkyl chains. The formation of polymeric ribbon-like assemblies and discrete tetrameric disk structures was responsible for the smectic and discotic phases, respectively. Interestingly, the folic acid derivative 9b showed a phase change from the smectic to a hexagonal columnar phase in the presence of alkali metal ions. The phase change is attributed to the change in the hydrogen-bonded patterns from ribbon to disk triggered by the ion–dipolar interactions (Fig. 12b).
 Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structure of tetrameric rosette 94. (b) Structural changes of supramolecular liquid crystals based on folic acid derivatives 9b: the presence of an ion induces a change in the hydrogen-bonding pattern, and as a result the ribbon structure changes to a disk structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2001 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In a collaborative work, Samorí and Spada reported metal-ion triggered transformation of hydrogen-bonded patterns of N9-alkylguanine on a solid–liquid 2D interface, which was studied using STM.54 The versatile hydrogen-bonded motif of an octadecyl guanine derivative was reversibly interconverted on the solid–liquid interface between two highly ordered supramolecular motifs, namely open-ended ribbon and cyclic G-quartet, upon subsequent addition of [2.2.2]cryptand, potassium picrate, and trifluoromethanesulfonic acid. The direct visualization of such reversible supramolecular transformation at the solid–liquid interface represents the first step towards the generation of nanopatterned responsive architectures. This concept can be extended for the columnar stacking of G-quartets in a solution phase.
The heating-induced unusual transformation from columnar to lamellar assemblies of PBI-functionalized melamine-cyanurate assemblies was explored by Yagai and coworkers.55 The PBI dye 10 connected with cyanurate coassembled with melamine derivatives 11 with long alkyl chains to form oligomeric stacks of rosettes in chloroform (Fig. 13). The bicomponent mixture is very soluble in nonpolar solvent MCH, where the π–π stacking interaction is maximized and well-defined cylindrical supramolecular polymers were visualized using TEM and AFM. The formation of extended one-dimensional nanostructures in MCH resulted in the formation of lyotropic mesophases. In the film state, supramolecular polymers further organize into a hexagonal lattice, as shown by WAXD analysis (Fig. 13b). An extraordinary property of this hexagonally packed supramolecular polymer is a sharp structural transition upon heating the solid material at 200 °C. X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies revealed that this transition is due to the change of the packing structures from hexagonal columnar (Colh) to lamellar (Lam) structures, and AFM analysis of thin films directly visualized a morphology transition from fibrous to terraced structures (Fig. 13c and d). Because the majority of functional liquid crystals with aliphatic chains usually show lamellar-to-columnar structural transition due to the melting of aliphatic chains, the reported opposite structural transition should be attributed to the rearrangement of hydrogen-bonding patterns from a rosette to tape-like structure (Fig. 13a).
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of thermal Colh → Lam transition induced by the alteration of the hydrogen-bonding pattern from rosette (based on 10 and 11) to tape. (b) Change in the XRD patterns of a self-assembled rosette upon heating. (c and d) AFM images of the thin film of the self-assembled rosette before (Colh structure) and after heating (Lam structure). Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Not only the rearrangement of hydrogen-bonding patterns, but also the amplification of the responsive properties of building blocks might be a strong motivation to employ rosette motifs for the construction of stimuli-responsive materials. Among various external stimuli, light is arguably the most sophisticated stimulus in terms of its dynamic controllability of the molecular shape as well as non-invasive, clean and remote-controlling properties. Moreover, high spatial and temporal resolution, and tunability of wavelength to selectively excite specific chromophores make this stimulus quite attractive in practical molecular switches. Almost a decade ago, Yagai et al. designed photoresponsive rosettes composed of an azobenzene functionalized melamine derivative and barbiturate/cyanurate.30,56,57 Among them, a hetero-rosette composed of melamine 12 and dodecylated cyanurate 13 forms gel-forming supramolecular polymers in nonpolar media (Fig. 14a). When gels prepared at millimolar concentrations were irradiated with UV-light, a phase transition into a solution was observed even though the photoisomerization efficiency was not high (20–40% cis-isomer; Fig. 14b). This result illustrates the advantage of the supermacrocyclization of photochromic molecules to amplify the structural change accompanying photoisomerization. In this example, the rosette loses its stacking capability even when only one or two of the six azobenzene arms adopt the cis-conformation, as the π–π stacking propensity of discotics is vulnerable to their planarity and steric hindrance. The resulting solution phase could be recuperated to the original gel state upon exposure to visible light and subsequent aging.
 Fig. 14  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 123·133. (b) Schematic representation of the photoresponsive hierarchical association of the rosettes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
Spada and coworkers applied a similar strategy to photochemically control the self-assembly of G-quadruplexes. They introduced a photoactive phenylvinyl group into a guanosine unit (14 in Fig. 15).581H NMR and CD studies revealed that the trans-isomer of 14 self-assembles in the presence of K+ ions to form a D4-symmetric octamer composed of a dimeric stack of G-quadruplexes (Fig. 15b). The decomposition of the octameric complex took place upon irradiation with 365 nm UV light, due to the formation of the bent shaped cis-14. The complex was reconstructed when the cis-containing monomeric solution was irradiated with 254 nm UV light reproducing the trans-isomer.
 Fig. 15  (a) Chemical structure of tetrameric rosette 144 and photochemical isomerization. (b) Phototriggering of guanosine self-assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Rivera et al. utilized a photocycloaddition reaction to transform supramolecular stacks of G-quadruplexes (Fig. 16).59 Compound 15 forms a hexadecameric complex 1516 comprising tetrameric stacks of G-quadruplexes in the presence of potassium ions in CD3CN. UV irradiation of 1516 at 365 nm caused a diastereoselective [2+2] photocycloaddition between two G-quadruplex subunits, resulting in a covalent dimer 16 while UV irradiation of monomeric 15 in the absence of potassium ions yielded only monomeric cis-15. Although this photoproduct does not form a discrete assembly by itself, it can integratively self-sort with the G-quadruplex of 15 to form a heteromeric octamer 154·164. This system is the first example of a photoresponsive supramolecular complex that is capable of affording an alternative discrete assembly after photoreaction.
 Fig. 16  (a) Chemical structure of tetrameric rosette 154 complexing with K+. (b) Photoresponsive assembly from hexadecamer (1516) to heteromeric octamer (154·164). Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
5. Exotic supramolecular polymers
As already described in the Introduction, one of the advantages of exploiting supermacrocyclization to construct functional 1D nanoassemblies is that we can embed functional chromogenic entities into a one-dimensional nanostructure with high levels of internal order.60 Due to the synergetic or competing interplay of quasi-one-dimensional association of entire discotics and local aggregation of π-conjugated moieties, unique internal order can be encoded within the supramolecular polymer backbone, which often endows the quasi 1D nanoaggregates with unique topology.
In one of their collaborative works, Yagai and Ajayaghosh et al. serendipitously obtained toroidal nanostructures by the self-assembly of rosettes composed of oligo(p-phenylene ethynylene) (OPE)-functionalized melamine 17 and cyanurate 13 (Fig. 17a).61 Toroidal nanostructures with diameters of around 40 nm were confirmed by AFM and TEM measurements for assemblies spin-coated from decane solutions of a 1:1 mixture of 17 and 13 (Fig. 17b). Fluorescence measurements showed a significant red shift of OPE fluorescence suggesting stacking of rosettes. In this work, they proposed that rosettes stack with a small inclination angle between the adjacent rosette disks due to their unique geometry with a windmill shape of OPE wings (“biased stacking”) (Fig. 17c). However, the mechanical fragility of the toroidal aggregates made further detailed investigation difficult.
 Fig. 17  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 173·133. (b) AFM images of toroidal nanostructures (nanorings) formed by the rosette. Inset: TEM image. (c) Schematic representation of the toroidal nanostructure and tilted (or, biased) stacking of rosettes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Although they also found that similar toroidal nanostructures could be obtained by a 1 + 3 rosette of CA and melamine-OPE derivative,62 the design of rosettes that could form mechanically stable toroidal nanostructures remained challenging. Again accidentally, they found that OPV-functionalized barbituric acid 18a (n = 2) self-assembles into supramolecular nanofibres that can transform into toroidal nanostructures.63 AFM and TEM revealed that under very dilute conditions (c < 2 × 10−5 M) compound 18a in MCH self-assembles into very uniform toroidal nanostructures (nanorings). The diameter and thickness of the nanorings are 38 and 2.6 nm, respectively. Interestingly, at higher concentrations (2 × 10−5 M < c < 4 × 10−5 M), compound 18a self-assembles into open-ended curved nanofibres (Fig. 18).63 The formation of these open-ended polymeric nanostructures can be explained by the increase in degree of supramolecular polymerization at higher concentrations. The uniform curvature was observed for all open-ended nanofibres, which suggests the presence of spontaneous curvature in the self-assembly of 18a. More interestingly, they found rod-like nanostructures with a diameter of 25 nm from solutions with much higher concentrations of around 1 × 10−4 M. They attributed these rod-like nanostructures to helically coiled supramolecular nanofibres (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  (a) Chemical structures of 18a, 18b and 18c and a representative CPK modelled hexameric rosette 18a6. Rosettes of these compounds organize into nanorings, open-ended nanofibres, and nanocoils. (b) Concentration-dependent nanostructures visualized by AFM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society and ref. 64. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
An interesting observation was made when the π-conjugated core of 18a is reduced to stilbene (18b; n = 1) and benzene (18c; n = 0). For stilbene derivative 18b, nanorings with a diameter of 36 nm were observed at a submillimolar concentration (5 × 10−4 M) as a major product (Fig. 18b).64 Owing to the formation of a large number of nanorings at higher concentrations, roughly 2% of nanorings were observed as an interlocked (catenated) state. The formation of the catenated nanorings suggests that nanorings are already formed in the solution phase and rules out the possibility of nanoring formation via the evaporation process of the solvent. The benzene derivative 18c also yielded nanorings with reduced diameters of ca. 25 nm at a millimolar concentration (1 × 10−3 M). However, the yield of nanorings was apparently lowered compared to 18b, and ill-defined particulate aggregates were observed considerably. Different impacts of concentration on nanostructures upon changing the π-conjugated core from 18a to 18b and then to 18c are most likely ascribable to the reduction in the cohesive force of the molecules. At this stage, the authors could not fully characterize the molecular packing within curved nanofibres including nanorings. However, they proposed the intermediation of hexameric rosettes on the basis of XRD studies in their mesophases as well as the dimensions of the nanofibres.
Based on the results of benzene derivative 18c which provides uniform nanorings but with lower yield, the research group of Yagai expanded the π-conjugated core from benzene to naphthalene.65 They synthesized regioisomeric naphthalene compounds 19 and 20 (Fig. 19). Surprisingly, AFM and TEM studies revealed that these two regioisomers self-assemble into distinctly different nanostructures in MCH. Compound 19 whose naphthalene ring is functionalized at the 2- and 6-positions self-assembled into nanorings with a surprisingly uniform diameter of 24 nm almost quantitatively. In striking contrast, compound 20 whose naphthalene unit is functionalized at the 1- and 4-positions self-assembled into cylindrical nanorods with widths of ca. 4.6 nm without any curvature. Reflecting these different self-assembled nanostructures, 19 and 20 showed contrastive aggregation-induced changes in the absorption and emission spectra, all of which can be rationalized in terms of the stacking arrangement of hexameric rosettes with different geometrical features suggested by molecular modelling. Molecular mechanics calculations showed that naphthalene moieties of the rosette of 19 take planar conformations with respect to the rosette plane, which could allow a stacking of the rosette with both translational and rotational displacements. The occurrence of a translational offset is in line with the spectral features that show a J-type stacking arrangement of naphthalene moieties. On the other hand, the naphthalene moieties of the calculated rosette of 20 took twisted conformations with respect to the rosette plane. This rosette geometry does not allow any translational displacement upon stacking, but a rotational displacement is allowed by which six naphthalene chromophores can form helical H-aggregates, which is further supported by the spectroscopic features.
 Fig. 19  (a) Chemical structures of rosettes 196 and 206 composed of regioisomeric naphthalene-functionalized barbiturate compounds 19 and 20. (b and c) Schematic presentation of the hierarchical organization of rosettes of 19 and 20 into nanorings and nanorods, respectively. (d and e) AFM images of nanostructures formed by 19 and 20. Inset: TEM images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The unique geometrical features of the rosettes of 19 and 20 enabled their narcissistic self-sorting66–68 from their heteromeric rosettes by changing the solvent polarity.69 In a polar solvent CHCl3, the two regioisomers coassemble to form heteromeric rosettes as shown by concentration-dependent 1H NMR measurements. Upon injecting CHCl3 solutions into nonpolar MCH, the heteromeric rosettes kinetically form amorphous aggregates, which over time differentiate themselves into thermodynamically stable distinct nanostructures, which are nanorings and nanorods through self-sorting (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  Chemical structures and CPK models of regioisomeric naphthalene compounds. The schematic representation of heteromeric and homomeric rosettes in CHCl3. AFM images of the nanostructures formed by injecting a CHCl3 solution of the 1:1 mixture into MCH showing co-assembly and time-dependent self-sorting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Although significantly different nanostructures were obtained by regioisomeric alteration of the naphthalene chromophores, more fine change of the nanostructures, i.e., from cylindrical to helical fibres, has been achieved by changing the linkage between the naphthalene and wedge units of 20 from the ether to ester group (21, Fig. 21).70 UV-vis and fluorescence studies revealed that this small structural difference also induces a change in the stacking arrangement of their naphthalene units from H-type to J-type, suggesting that the similar translational offset of rosettes occurs by changing the linkage unit. 2D XRD analyses of the aligned fibres revealed that this change is caused by the conformational difference of the 3,4,5-tri(dodecyloxy)phenyl wedge unit between 20 and 21 (Fig. 21). The morphological difference was also reflected in the properties when they were supramolecularly polymerized at the millimolar concentration regime: 20 forms a suspension whereas 21 affords a gel upon cooling hot MCH solutions. From the kinetic studies, it has also been revealed that this structural difference between 20 and 21 can be reflected in their supramolecular polymerization processes. The more flexible ether linkage in 20, on the one hand, induces pathway complexity in the supramolecular polymerization process due to the formation of off-pathway ill-defined kinetic aggregates. The ester-wedged 21, on the other hand, can directly aggregate into helical fibres under the applied conditions. These results demonstrate the outstanding merit of the supermacrocyclization of functional π-conjugated molecules, wherein a small structural difference between the monomers can be translated into crucial differences not only in the nanoscopic morphologies but also in the macroscopic properties of the bulk materials and the aggregation process.
 Fig. 21  (a and b) Chemical structures and CPK models of 20 and 21. Subsequent stacking (hierarchical organization) of the corresponding rosettes into cylindrical and helically modulated nanofibres. (c and d) AFM images of nanostructures formed by 20 and 21. (e and f) Cartoon representation of the nanofibres of 20 and 21 on a highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Although the toroidal nanostructures of 19 have been visualized by AFM for dried samples, one may wonder if such exotic aggregates are already formed in solution or formed upon drying the solution. It is a challenging task to characterize such unprecedented nanostructures in the solution phase. Recently, Hollamby and Yagai et al. succeeded in characterization of the toroidal nanostructure of 19 and a homologous compound featuring two naphthalene moieties in solution by simultaneous measurements of small-angle neutron and X-ray scattering (SANS and SAXS, respectively) in [D14]MCH.71 The SAXS signal arises from the higher-electron-density region consisting of barbituric acid, naphthalene and benzyl parts, while the SANS signal originates from 1H-rich domains of alkyl chains. In the middle of the Q-range (Qmax = 0.05 Å−1), the decay occurs more steeply in the case of SANS than for SAXS, which suggests a core–shell structure (Fig. 22). The core–shell structure is in good agreement with the proposed model of toroidal fibres formed by rosettes composed of interior π-conjugated cores and exterior alkyl shells. The dimensions of toroids simulated from the fitting analysis agreed very well with those estimated from AFM. An ellipsoidal cross-section with a core–shell structure indicates that the toroidal nanostructures are formed by the stacking of rosettes in a tilted fashion with tilt angles (θ) with respect to the toroid axis of 44°.
 Fig. 22  (a) CPK model of naphthalene barbiturate compound 19. The schematic representation of the hierarchical self-assembly process of 19 into a toroidal structure via hexameric rosettes formed by hydrogen bonds, their cartoon representations in core (orange)-shell (white) morphology, and an AFM image of the toroidal nanostructure formed from 19. (b) SANS (red triangles) and SAXS (open circles) data of 19 in [D14]MCH. Blue solid line is fit to the data, using a toroid form factor and a flat background. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
As an interesting departure from the formation of toroidal nanostructures by the rosette of barbiturated naphthalene 19 (Fig. 23a),65 Yagai and co-workers recently reported supramolecular polymers with unprecedented morphologies and photo-responsiveness (Fig. 23b).72,73 Since the shape persistency of the toroidal nanostructures and the uniformity in their diameters (ca. 14 nm) suggest that the spontaneous curvature happens by highly unique internal order within the continuous rosette stacking, they expected that the introduction of extra aromatic moieties into 19 should strengthen the cohesive forces between the hexamers. The strengthened cohesive forces could prevent the growing polymer from closing into discrete shorter assemblies (toroidal nanostructures), instead yielding extended supramolecular polymers with well-defined conformations (higher-order structures) arising from their spontaneous curvature (Fig. 23d). On the other hand, the photoisomerization of azobenzene moieties (Fig. 23b and c) embedded in the supramolecular polymer chains should greatly affect internal order, and could destroy the spontaneous curvature (Fig. 23d).
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic representation of the formation of a toroidal nanostructure with spontaneous curvature by the unique stacking of planar hexamers of 19 (by molecular models: CPK models as well as electron cloud models). (b) Chemical structure of trans-22, featuring a central trans-azobenzene unit, which causes a large change in its molecular shape by photoisomerization as shown by the electron cloud model of trans-22 (grey) and cis-22 (blue). (c) Molecular models (CPK models as well as electron cloud models) of hexamers of six trans-22, as well as of five trans-22 and one cis-22. For electron cloud models, side views highlight the change of planarity of the hexamers by partial photoisomerization of the azobenzene moiety. (d) Schematic representation of the formation of an extended helical coil (SPhelical) with photo-switchable spontaneous curvature, wherein the loss and recovery of the curvature are controlled by UV and Vis light, respectively, in a reversible manner. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. 
Based on this notion, they designed molecule 22 (trans-22), where the planar trans-isomer of the azobenzene moiety as an additional π-surface should strengthen the cohesive forces between the rosettes (Fig. 23).74 From AFM and TEM studies, it was revealed that the stacking of rosette of 22 causes an idiosyncratic internal order that results in spontaneous curvature, which allowed conformations that range from randomly folded (SPrandom) to helically folded supramolecular polymers (SPhelical) to be accessed (Fig. 24). Through AFM and SAXS studies, it was further demonstrated that SPhelical could be unfolded upon UV irradiation to form extended supramolecular polymers (SPextend). The subsequent visible light-irradiation partially refolded SPextend to form SPrandom. As a mixing experiment of SPhelical and SPextend did not show homogenization of morphologies, the authors concluded that unfolding and partial refolding occur directly without forming monomeric species (“on-pathway transformation”). Therefore, the reversible photoisomerization of the azobenzene moiety destroys and recovers the spontaneous curvature of the supramolecular polymer main chain, which manifests unprecedented levels of external control over its conformation. This study elegantly shows that unlike classical covalent polymers, the high degree of internal order of supramolecular polymers can be exploited to generate and dynamically control well-defined higher-order secondary conformations of the supramolecular polymer backbone, which may introduce functionality that is comparable to protein folding/unfolding.
 Fig. 24  Light-induced unfolding of helical SP fibres (SPhelical) and refolding of the resulting straight fibres into randomly coiled fibres (SPrandom): (a–c) AFM images showing a gradual unfolding: SPhelical to SPrandom to SPlinear by increasing the cis-22 content by irradiation with UV light. Inset: Schematic representation of the corresponding single fibre with a clear view. (d) AFM image of SPrandom obtained by recovering spontaneous curvature upon exposure to weak Vis light on SPlinear. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. 
6. Photovoltaic applications
One of the most promising real applications of 1D stacks of π-conjugated rosettes is conducting nanomaterials. From a different viewpoint, stacked rosettes can be regarded as precisely bundled one-dimensional stacks of individual molecules through hydrogen bonding, and they are further packaged by alkyl chains. Due to the complex geometrical features of rosettes, high levels of internal order could be provided by synergetic stacking of multiple π-conjugated moieties, which are expected to show superior performance compared to unimolecular stacks. For example, Yagai, Seki and coworkers revealed that cylindrical aggregates formed by barbiturate rosettes of quarterthiophene 23 (Fig. 25) exhibit a remarkably high one-dimensional hole mobility of 1.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 as evaluated by flash-photolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity (FP-TRMC).75 The absorption spectrum of the nanorods dispersed in MCH showed a prominent blue shift of the π–π transition band of oligothiophene moieties compared to the molecularly dissolved state upon heating, suggesting a considerable face-to-face overlap of the π-conjugated moieties that enables the high internal charge carrier mobility.
 Fig. 25  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 236. (b) Schematic representation of photoresponsive hierarchical association of the rosette. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Despite the intrinsically high charge carrier mobility of the oligothiophene nanorods of 23, solution-processed thin film blends of the nanorods with PC61BM ([6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) showed negligible photovoltaic responses (power conversion efficiency, PCE < 0.1%) in bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells.29 The long aliphatic chains surrounding the semiconducting stacks of π-conjugated moieties are most likely responsible for the poor device performance, because they essentially hamper the photoinduced charge separation with the acceptor PC61BM and charge carrier migration between nanorods. Although, long alkyl chains generally endow small molecular building blocks with high solubility (hence solution processability) and self-organization capability (through van der Waals interactions), they make application of the resulting assemblies to practical devices difficult.
Yagai and coworkers circumvented the above drawback by a molecular design strategy shown in Fig. 26, wherein solubilizing alkyl chains are grafted onto the oligothiophene backbone.29 For the oligothiophenes 24a, 24b and 24c (n = 3,4 and 5, respectively), they succeeded by means of STM in the visualization of hexameric rosettes that are two-dimensionally packed at a solid–liquid interface. The best dissolved STM images of 24c revealed a chiral windmill-shaped arrangement of oligothiophene molecules (Fig. 27a and b). Although the fraction of rosettes is only minor in chloroform or toluene at the millimolar concentration regime as shown by 1H NMR, casting these solutions afforded well-defined nanorods as visualized by AFM (Fig. 27d).
 Fig. 26  Design concept of oligothiophene rosettes with and without long aliphatic chains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 27  (a and b) STM images of 24c at the HOPG–1-phenyloctane interface, domain of (a) CCW and (b) CW rosettes. (c) Packing model of the CCW rosette of 24c. (d) AFM image of the thin film prepared by drop-casting a toluene solution of 24c onto HOPG and the cross-sectional analysis along the white line. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In the presence of PC61BM as an acceptor material, the formation of nanorods of 24b by solution casting was hampered probably due to electronic interactions between the donor and acceptor materials (Fig. 28a). However, thermal annealing of the resulting blend film at 80 °C induced the growth of nanorods to provide a reasonably phase-separated p–n heterojunction structure at the nanoscale (Fig. 28b). The growth of supramolecular nanorods in the p–n blended films was reflected as the improvement of performance of the corresponding BHJ solar cell devices from PCE = 1.0% for the as-cast film to PCE = 2.1% for the thermally annealed films at 80 °C. The reproducible solar cell performance of around 2% is remarkable with respect to device performance of other hydrogen-bonding supramolecular materials. A further improvement of the device performance of 24b was achieved by using PC71BM as an acceptor, wherein PCE = 3.01% was recorded.
 Fig. 28  (a and b) AFM topography images of the 1:1 (w:w) blend films of 24b and PC61BM (a) before and (b) after annealing at 80 °C. (c) Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of BHJ solar cells using 1:1 (w:w) blend films of 24a and PC61BM (black lines), 24b and PC61BM (red lines), and 24c and PC61BM (blue lines) before (dotted lines) and after annealing at 80 °C (solid lines). Inset: Schematic representation of the device structure of the BHJ solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
To improve the solar cell device performance, the same group functionalized a barbiturated oligo(hexylthiophene) core with a benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) moiety (25 in Fig. 29a), which is a promising electron donating unit for organic photovoltaics due to its excellent charge carrier transporting properties arising from a large and planar π-conjugated structure.76 Compound 25 was also found to be capable of forming rosettes at a solid–liquid interface and nanorods upon solution-casting (Fig. 29b and c). However, the compound did not show superior BHJ solar cell device performance with PC61BM compared to the original molecules 24b in terms of thermally annealed films. However, it exhibited PCEs over 3% for as-cast film devices due to its higher charge carrier mobility realized by the BDT unit (Fig. 29d).
 Fig. 29  (a) Oligothiophene rosette with BDT units. (b) STM image of 25 at the HOPG–1-phenyloctane interface. The different rosettes have been coloured in green, red, blue and yellow as a guide for the eye. Isolated molecules are shown in grey. (c) AFM image of the thin film prepared by drop-casting a toluene solution (c = 1 × 10−4 M) of 25 onto HOPG. Inset: Cross-sectional analysis along the yellow line. (d) J–V characteristics of BHJ solar cells using a 1:1 (w:w) blend film of 25:PC61BM prepared by spin-coating a chloroform solution (10 mg mL−1) without thermal annealing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In a very recent study, the same group of authors demonstrated that a subtle structural variation in the aforementioned oligo(hexylthiophene) building blocks can precisely control their self-assembly pathways on a wide range of assembly hierarchies, namely, the solution phase, solid–liquid interface, bulk phase, and BHJ phase with PC61BM (Fig. 30). They synthesized oligo(hexylthiophene) 26 whose hexyl chains are introduced regioisomerically with respect to 24b.42 These regioisomers adopt different molecular conformations due to steric demand of hexyl chains, which result in a thermodynamic preference for either discrete rosette or polymeric tape-like hydrogen-bonding motifs. Rosette 24b and tape-like aggregates 26 further organize into the expected columnar and lamellar higher-order architectures, respectively, via solution processing in thin films and bulk state. These contrasting organized structures of the regioisomers are well reflected in photovoltaic performance, although they have almost identical, intrinsic optoelectronic properties. The device performance of 24b and 26 showed a diametral, bell-shaped dependency on the annealing temperature while the devices with as-cast films exhibited a comparable PCE of 0.8%. The device based on 24b showed an increase in performance upon annealing at 80 °C (PCE: 0.8 → 1.5%), while the device of 26 exhibited a decrease in performance (PCE: from 0.8 → 0.3%). Such a distinct temperature-dependent device performance was not observed for devices based on the non-aggregating N,N′-dimethylated derivatives 24b-Me and 26-Me. Accordingly, the phase-separation between donor and acceptor materials could be controlled through a supramolecular approach that guarantees high-fidelity self-assembly pathways, expanding from the molecular to the bulk level.
 Fig. 30  Hierarchical self-assembly of 24b and 26 in different phases. (a) Chemical structures of monomers (left), chemical structures of hydrogen-bonded patterns (centre), and molecular models of hydrogen-bonded patterns (right). (b) Schematic representation of the hierarchical organization of 24b and 26 from solution (left) to bulk (centre) and BHJ states with PC61BM (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. 
7. Biomaterials
There is a promising possibility to exploit one dimensional columnar aggregates as biomaterials if stable rosettes are formed in water and the resulting columnar assemblies are biocompatible. The formation of this kind of columnar assembly is possible either by incorporating biological molecules into rosettes or designing a direct columnar assembly from biopolymers. For example, in a collaborative work, Fenniri and coworkers developed such a biocompatible rosette nanotube by attaching bioactive oligopeptide Arg–Gly–Asp–Ser–Lys into the known rosette-forming unit. They obtained a nanotubular soft material that shows favourable cytocompatibility properties for bone repair.77
Very recently, Sleiman and coworkers reported a strategy to make supramolecular polymers of poly(adenine) DNA, RNA, and PNA strands by means of rosette formation between adenine and CA. In this system, the rosette supermacrocycles are covalently arranged in a helical manner, resulting in one dimensional biocompatible fibres that may have interesting applications in tissue engineering and drug delivery (Fig. 31).78 In the near future, there is huge room to use the rosette chemistry for making biomaterials with a well-defined structure and conformation by proper functionalization and we think that this is one of the areas that needs to be explored further.
 Fig. 31  (a) The proposed hexameric rosette structure by the complexation of polyadenine d(An) and CA which results in a triplex formation. (b) AFM image showing extensive nanofibre formation for d(A15) in the presence of CA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
8. Conclusions and perspectives
Herein, we demonstrated fruitful research studies that show a high fidelity output of rosette79 building blocks into unique one-dimensional self-assemblies with the high degree of internal order and interesting properties. Stimuli responsiveness can be not only realized but also amplified to a great extent in the rosette assemblies that show pH, ion and light-induced changes. Applying external stimuli, we can achieve changes in the shape, dimension, size, and properties of the assemblies in a much smarter and controlled way, which are highly demanding properties for developing ‘smart’ materials.
The versatility of this rosette platform, in terms of controlling different chromophoric composition and stacking of the rosettes into columnar nanoassemblies, enables us to develop a variety of supramolecular nanomaterials with exotic structures, properties and functions. The control over the supramolecular columnar structure has a profound role in the improvement of the performance of existing materials and to create new materials with tunable optical and electronic properties. Compared to frequently reported usual unimolecular assembly systems, the rosette must have relatively larger planar π-surfaces and they can potentially interact through solvophobic and π–π interactions with a much higher association constant.
Another virtue of rosettes can be found in a strikingly important and growing area, that is, supramolecular polymer chemistry, in which a high degree of internal order could be achieved. Rosette chemistry has come to play an important role in supramolecular polymerization where rosettes act as “supramonomers”, which upon stacking form a much robust supramolecular polymer compared to those obtained by unimolecular stacking. Furthermore, we would like to emphasize that such rosette-based supramolecular polymer chains are easier to visualize directly by microscopic techniques compared to unimolecular stacks, due to the greater size of the supramonomer, which may allow the supramolecular polymerization process to be studied by means of various visual methods.
We can superbly control the dimensionality of the growth of supramolecularly polymerized chains by the subtle variation in the geometry of rosette disks. By altering the geometry of rosette disks, we can control translation (lateral), rotational (angular) and tilting (inclining) displacements in the stacking of rosettes, which provide quasi-one-dimensional supramolecular polymer chains with various nanoscale morphologies that are rarely achieved through other self-organization strategies. All these are the manifestation of synergetic interplay between the stacking of central hydrogen-bonded planar disks and the stacking of peripheral π-chromophores, where the translational, rotational and tilting displacements are parameters to generate the high degree of internal order. The origin of this internal order is believed to be derived from the complex geometry of the rosettes.
Our group has been systematically studying the above issues of stacking of rosettes and several papers have already been published.70,74 In addition, some interesting projects are currently underway in this line, and we look forward to sharing our intriguing findings in the very near future. Using the above controlling tools in rosette-based supramolecular polymerization, there is huge scope to mimic naturally occurring functional structures, such as protein and DNA in a flask.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by KAKENHI (no. 26102010), and a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas “π-Figuration” (no. 26102001) of The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, Japan. B. A. thanks the International Research Fellowship of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science as well as the Department of Science and Technology, India (INSPIRE Grant: DST/INSPIRE/04/2015/002499) for financial assistance. M. Y. thanks the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) for a research fellowship for young scientists (26 7715). K. A. thanks the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) for a research fellowship for young scientists (17J02520).
Notes and references
F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, E. W. Meijer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1491–1546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Palmer and S. I. Stupp, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1674–1684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Babu, S. Prasanthkumar and A. Ajayaghosh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1766–1776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. H. J. Schenning, P. Jonkheijm, F. J. M. Hoeben, J. Van Herrikhuyzen, S. C. J. Meskers, E. W. Meijer, L. M. Herz, C. Daniel, C. Silva, R. T. Phillips, R. H. Friend, D. Beljonne, A. Miura, S. De Feyter, M. Zdanowska, H. Uji-I, F. C. De Schryver, Z. Chen, F. Würthner, M. Mas-Torrent, D. Den Boer, M. Durkut and P. Hadley, Synth. Met., 2004, 147, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Lee, C. Grenier, E. W. Meijer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 671–683 RSC .
A. Klug, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1983, 22, 565–582 CrossRef .
S. Yagai, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2015, 88, 28–58 CrossRef .
D. González-Rodríguez and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 310–325 CrossRef .
S. Yagai, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2006, 7, 164–182 CrossRef CAS .
T. Seki, X. Lin and S. Yagai, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2013, 2, 708–724 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brunsveld, B. J. B. Folmer, E. W. Meijer and R. P. Sijbesma, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 4071–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Lehn, Polym. Int., 2002, 51, 825–839 CrossRef CAS .

Supramolecular Polymers, ed. A. Ciferri (Duke University and University of Genoa), CRC Press (an imprint of Taylor and Francis Group), Boca Raton, FL, 2nd edn, 2005.
N. Kimizuka, T. Kawasaki, K. Hirata and T. Kunitake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 6360–6361 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Whitesides, E. E. Simanek, J. P. Mathias, C. T. Seto, D. N. Chin, M. Mammen and D. M. Gordo, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 37–44 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Lawrence, T. Jiang and M. Levett, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 2229–2260 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Sherrington and K. A. Taskinen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2001, 30, 83–93 RSC .
L. J. Prins, D. N. Reinhoudt and P. Timmerman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2382–2426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Sessler and J. Jayawickramarajah, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1939–1949 RSC .
J. T. Davis and G. P. Spada, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 296–313 RSC .
R. L. Beingessner, Y. Fan and H. Fenniri, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 75820–75838 RSC .
C. T. Seto, J. P. Mathias and G. M. Whitesides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 1321–1329 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Mathias, E. E. Simanek, J. A. Zerkowski, C. T. Seto and G. M. Whitesides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 4316–4325 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Drain, R. Fischer, E. G. Nolen and J.-M. Lehn, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 243–245 RSC .
P. Timmerman, K. A. Jolliffe, M. Crego Calama, J.-L. Weidmann, L. J. Prins, F. Cardullo, B. H. M. Snellink-Ruël, R. H. Fokkens, N. M. M. Nibbering, S. Shinkai and D. N. Reinhoudt, Chem. – Eur. J., 2000, 6, 4104–4115 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Zerkowski, C. T. Seto and G. M. Whitesides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 5473–5475 CrossRef CAS .
P. Timmerman, R. H. Vreekamp, R. Hulst, W. Verboom, D. N. Reinhoudt, K. Rissanen, K. A. Udachin and J. Ripmeester, Chem. – Eur. J., 1997, 3, 1823–1832 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jonkheijm, A. Miura, M. Zdanowska, F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheim, S. De Feyter, A. P. H. J. Schenning, F. C. De Schryver and E. W. Meijer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 74–78 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yagai, M. Suzuki, X. Lin, M. Gushiken, T. Noguchi, T. Karatsu, A. Kitamura, A. Saeki, S. Seki, Y. Kikkawa, Y. Tani and K. Nakayama, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 16128–16137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, T. Karatsu and A. Kitamura, Chem. Commun., 2003, 1844–1845 RSC .
F. Würthner, C. Thalacker, A. Sautter, W. Schärtl, W. Ibach and O. Hollricher, Chem. – Eur. J., 2000, 6, 3871–3886 CrossRef .
H.-J. Sun, S. Zhang and V. Percec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3900–3923 RSC .
A. G. Bielejewska, C. E. Marjo, L. J. Prins, P. Timmerman, F. de Jong and D. N. Reinhoudt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7518–7533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mascal, N. M. Hext, R. Warmuth, M. H. Moore and J. P. Turkenburg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1996, 35, 2204–2206 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fenniri, P. Mathivanan, K. L. Vidale, D. M. Sherman, K. Hallenga, K. V. Wood and J. G. Stowell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 3854–3855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. M. Hoeben, J. Zhang, C. C. Lee, M. J. Pouderoijen, M. Wolffs, F. Würthner, A. P. H. J. Schenning, E. W. Meijer and S. De Feyter, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8579–8589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Sinks, B. Rybtchinski, M. Iimura, B. A. Jones, A. J. Goshe, X. Zuo, D. M. Tiede, X. Li and M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6295–6303 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Hunter and J. K. M. Sanders, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 5525–5534 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, X. Chai, L. Chi, X. Liu, Y. Cao, R. Lu, Y. Jiang, X. Tang, H. Fuchs and T. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 1999, 5, 1144–1149 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kamikawa, M. Nishii and T. Kato, Chem. – Eur. J., 2004, 10, 5942–5951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, T. Iwashima, T. Karatsu and A. Kitamura, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1114–1115 RSC .
X. Lin, M. Suzuki, M. Gushiken, M. Yamauchi, T. Karatsu, T. Kizaki, Y. Tani, K. Nakayama, M. Suzuki, H. Yamada, T. Kajitani, T. Fukushima, Y. Kikkawa and S. Yagai, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Johnson, T. Yamazaki, A. Kovalenko and H. Fenniri, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5735–5743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Borzsonyi, R. L. Beingessner, T. Yamazaki, J.-Y. Cho, A. J. Myles, M. Malac, R. Egerton, M. Kawasaki, K. Ishizuka, A. Kovalenko and H. Fenniri, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15136–15139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fenniri, B.-L. Deng and A. E. Ribbe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11064–11072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Seki, A. Asano, S. Seki, Y. Kikkawa, H. Murayama, T. Karatsu, A. Kitamura and S. Yagai, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3598–3608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Riehl and F. S. Richardson, Chem. Rev., 1986, 86, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kumar, T. Nakashima and T. Kawai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3445–3452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Maeda, Y. Bando, K. Shimomura, I. Yamada, M. Naito, K. Nobusawa, H. Tsumatori and T. Kawai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9266–9269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Maeda and Y. Bando, Pure Appl. Chem., 2013, 85, 1967–1978 CrossRef CAS .
M. Suárez, J.-M. Lehn, S. C. Zimmerman, A. Skoulios and B. Heinrich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 9526–9532 CrossRef .
T. Kaseyama, S. Furumi, X. Zhang, K. Tanaka and M. Takeuchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3684–3687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kanie, M. Nishii, T. Yasuda, T. Taki, S. Ujiie and T. Kato, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2875–2886 RSC .
A. Ciesielski, S. Lena, S. Masiero, G. P. Spada and P. Samorì, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1963–1966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, M. Usui, T. Seki, H. Murayama, Y. Kikkawa, S. Uemura, T. Karatsu, A. Kitamura, A. Asano and S. Seki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7983–7994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, T. Nakajima, T. Karatsu, K. Saitow and A. Kitamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11500–11508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, T. Nakajima, K. Kishikawa, S. Kohmoto, T. Karatsu and A. Kitamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11134–11139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lena, P. Neviani, S. Masiero, S. Pieraccini and G. P. Spada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3657–3660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Rivera and D. Silva-Brenes, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 2350–2353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Aida, E. W. Meijer and S. I. Stupp, Science, 2012, 335, 813–817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, S. Mahesh, Y. Kikkawa, K. Unoike, T. Karatsu, A. Kitamura and A. Ajayaghosh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4691–4694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, H. Aonuma, Y. Kikkawa, S. Kubota, T. Karatsu, A. Kitamura, S. Mahesh and A. Ajayaghosh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8652–8661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, S. Kubota, H. Saito, K. Unoike, T. Karatsu, A. Kitamura, A. Ajayaghosh, M. Kanesato and Y. Kikkawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5408–5410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, Y. Goto, T. Karatsu, A. Kitamura and Y. Kikkawa, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13657–13660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, Y. Goto, X. Lin, T. Karatsu, A. Kitamura, D. Kuzuhara, H. Yamada, Y. Kikkawa, A. Saeki and S. Seki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6643–6647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wu, A. Chakraborty, J. C. Fettinger, R. A. Flowers II and L. Isaacs, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4028–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wu and L. Isaacs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4831–4835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Safont-Sempere, G. Fernández and F. Würthner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 5784–5814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aratsu, D. D. Prabhu, H. Iwawaki, X. Lin, M. Yamauchi, T. Karatsu and S. Yagai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8211–8214 RSC .
M. Yamauchi, B. Adhikari, D. D. Prabhu, X. Lin, T. Karatsu, T. Ohba, N. Shimizu, H. Takagi, R. Haruki, S. Adachi, T. Kajitani, T. Fukushima and S. Yagai, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 5270–5280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Hollamby, K. Aratsu, B. R. Pauw, S. E. Rogers, A. J. Smith, M. Yamauchi, X. Lin and S. Yagai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9890–9893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai and A. Kitamura, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1520–1529 RSC .
S. Yagai, T. Karatsu and A. Kitamura, Chem. – Eur. J., 2005, 11, 4054–4063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Adhikari, Y. Yamada, M. Yamauchi, K. Wakita, X. Lin, K. Aratsu, T. Ohba, T. Karatsu, M. Hollamby, N. shimizu, H. Takagi, R. Haruki, S. Adachi and S. Yagai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15254 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yagai, T. Kinoshita, Y. Kikkawa, T. Karatsu, A. Kitamura, Y. Honsho and S. Seki, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 9320–9324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ouchi, X. Lin, T. Kizaki, D. D. Prabhu, F. Silly, T. Kajitani, T. Fukushima, K.-i. Nakayama and S. Yagai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 7874–7877 RSC .
L. Zhang, F. Rakotondradany, A. J. Myles, H. Fenniri and T. J. Webster, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 1309–1320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Avakyan, A. A. Greschner, F. Aldaye, C. J. Serpell, V. Toader, A. Petitjean and H. F. Sleiman, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 368–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Mayoral, N. Bilbao and D. González-Rodríguez, ChemistryOpen, 2016, 5, 10–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Bimalendu Adhikari
	Dr Bimalendu Adhikari was born in India in 1983. He received his PhD in 2012 under the supervision of Professor Arindam Banerjee at the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, India. He then moved to the University of Toronto, Canada for postdoctoral research with Professor Bernie Kraatz. In 2015, he received the JSPS Postdoctoral Fellowship and moved to the research group of Professor Shiki Yagai at Chiba University, Japan. Currently, he is a faculty member at IISER-Mohali, India. His research interests include supramolecular polymers, gels, peptides and nanomaterials.

Xu Lin
	Xu Lin was born in 1981 in Jilin Province, China. He studied organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) under the guidance of Prof. Takashi Karatsu at Chiba University and received his PhD in 2012. Then he joined the research group of Prof. Shiki Yagai as a postdoctoral fellow of CREST, JST. His research interests include the synthesis and properties of supramolecular and molecular materials for organic solar cells.

Mitsuaki Yamauchi
	Mitsuaki Yamauchi was born in 1990 in Tochigi, Japan. He studied helical supramolecular polymers under the guidance of Prof. Shiki Yagai at Chiba University and received his PhD in 2017. He then moved to Kwansei Gakuin University and is currently an Assistant Professor of Department of Applied Chemistry for Environment, School of Science and Technology. His research interests are the supramolecular polymerization mechanisms of π-conjugated molecules and the creation of stimuli-responsive supramolecular materials.

Hayato Ouchi
	Hayato Ouchi was born in 1992 in Ibaraki, Japan. He received his BE and ME degrees in 2015 and 2017, respectively, and is currently a PhD student under the guidance of Prof. Shiki Yagai at Chiba University. His research interests are self-assemblies of functional dyes and their applications to organic photovoltaics.

Keisuke Aratsu
	Keisuke Aratsu was born in 1992 in Fukuoka, Japan. He received his BE and ME degrees in chemistry from Chiba University (Chiba, Japan) in 2015 and 2017, respectively, and is currently a PhD student under the guidance of Prof. Shiki Yagai at Chiba University. His current research interests are the construction of supramolecular polymers via hydrogen-bond-directed self-assembly.

Shiki Yagai
	Shiki Yagai was born in 1975 in Yamanashi, Japan. He studied self-aggregation of synthetic chlorophylls under the guidance of Prof. Hitoshi Tamiaki at Ritsumeikan University and received his PhD in 2002. Then he directly became an assistant professor at Chiba University, and became an associate professor in 2010. During 2006–2009, he pursued self-organized dye assemblies as a PRESTO researcher of Japan Science and Technology Agency. In July 2017, he became a full professor in Chiba University. His research interests include supramolecular polymers, gels and liquid crystals of functional dyes and π-conjugated systems, photoresponsive molecular assemblies, organic solar cells and mechanochromic luminescence materials.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of hydrogen-bond-directed (noncovalent) super-macrocyclization and subsequent stacking of macrocycles into one-dimensional aggregates.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of three rosettes: (a) M3·CA3, (b) M6 and (c) BA6 (R = alkyl group, Ar = aryl group).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of hydrogen-bonded single and two component rosettes where π-chromophores are introduced in different ways. For the one-component rosette system, the hexameric rosette (A6) is the most common example, while homomeric trimers (A3) and tetramers (A4) have also been reported (vide infra). Similarly, in the case of a two-component system, the heteromeric hexamer (A3B3) is the most common, although trimeric rosettes (A3B) are also known (vide infra).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Tetrameric rosette structure (14) of folic acid derivative 1. (b) Schematic representation of self-assembled 1/NaOSO2CF3 in hexagonal columnar phases. (c) Schematic representation of self-assembled 1/NaOSO2CF3 in chloroform solution. (d) CD spectra of 1 (broken line) and 1/NaOSO2CF3 (solid line; mole ratio = 0.25) in chloroform (c = 5.0 × 10−3 M) at 20 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structure of 2 and its hydrogen-bonding motif. (b) Molecular model of rosette 26. The thin yellow lines show the hydrogen-bonding network, while the thick yellow lines highlight the observed intermolecular nuclear Overhauser effects (NOEs). (c) Molecular model of rosette nanotubes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Structural modification of 2 to 3. (b) Upon dissolution of compound 3 in water or methanol, both chiromers can form during the early stages of self-assembly. However, depending on the solvent and thermodynamic conditions used, only one chiromer grows preferentially. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 46 and (b) its hierarchical self-assembly into RNT. Time-dependent (c) UV-vis and (d) CD studies on the assembly process (c = 2 × 10−5 M in water). Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 5b6. (b and c) STM images of 5a6 and 5b6 monolayers at the solid–liquid interface using graphite as the substrate and 1-phenyloctane as the solvent. Red arrows indicate the “rotation direction” of the rosette; (d and e) CD spectra of (d) 5a (c = 2.5 × 10−4 M) and (e) 5b (c = 5 × 10−5 M) in annealed heptane solutions recorded after maintaining at 293 K for 10 min (●) and for 24 h (○). (f) AFM image of 5b in heptane (c = 5 × 10−5 M) on graphite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 66. (b) Rosette nanotubes. (c) CD spectra of 6 (c = 4 × 10−5 M) with L-Ala (c = 4 × 10−4 M) and D-Ala (c = 4 × 10−4 M) separately. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 7S3·CA and 7R3·CA. (b) CD spectra of ternary mixtures of 7S, 7R ([7S] + [7R] = 3.0 × 10−4 M), and CA (c = 1.0 × 10−4 M) in MCH. Arrows indicate the changes upon increasing the percentage of 7R (0 to 100%). (c) Plots of Δε at 465 nm as a function of enantiomeric excess (ee). Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Chemical structure of trimeric rosette 83. (b) AFM images of self-assembled 8. (c) CD, (d) CPL, (e) UV-vis absorption, and (f) fluorescence spectra of (M)-8 and (P)-8 in chloroform. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structure of tetrameric rosette 94. (b) Structural changes of supramolecular liquid crystals based on folic acid derivatives 9b: the presence of an ion induces a change in the hydrogen-bonding pattern, and as a result the ribbon structure changes to a disk structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2001 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of thermal Colh → Lam transition induced by the alteration of the hydrogen-bonding pattern from rosette (based on 10 and 11) to tape. (b) Change in the XRD patterns of a self-assembled rosette upon heating. (c and d) AFM images of the thin film of the self-assembled rosette before (Colh structure) and after heating (Lam structure). Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 123·133. (b) Schematic representation of the photoresponsive hierarchical association of the rosettes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Chemical structure of tetrameric rosette 144 and photochemical isomerization. (b) Phototriggering of guanosine self-assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Chemical structure of tetrameric rosette 154 complexing with K+. (b) Photoresponsive assembly from hexadecamer (1516) to heteromeric octamer (154·164). Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 173·133. (b) AFM images of toroidal nanostructures (nanorings) formed by the rosette. Inset: TEM image. (c) Schematic representation of the toroidal nanostructure and tilted (or, biased) stacking of rosettes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Chemical structures of 18a, 18b and 18c and a representative CPK modelled hexameric rosette 18a6. Rosettes of these compounds organize into nanorings, open-ended nanofibres, and nanocoils. (b) Concentration-dependent nanostructures visualized by AFM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society and ref. 64. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Chemical structures of rosettes 196 and 206 composed of regioisomeric naphthalene-functionalized barbiturate compounds 19 and 20. (b and c) Schematic presentation of the hierarchical organization of rosettes of 19 and 20 into nanorings and nanorods, respectively. (d and e) AFM images of nanostructures formed by 19 and 20. Inset: TEM images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 20  Chemical structures and CPK models of regioisomeric naphthalene compounds. The schematic representation of heteromeric and homomeric rosettes in CHCl3. AFM images of the nanostructures formed by injecting a CHCl3 solution of the 1:1 mixture into MCH showing co-assembly and time-dependent self-sorting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a and b) Chemical structures and CPK models of 20 and 21. Subsequent stacking (hierarchical organization) of the corresponding rosettes into cylindrical and helically modulated nanofibres. (c and d) AFM images of nanostructures formed by 20 and 21. (e and f) Cartoon representation of the nanofibres of 20 and 21 on a highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) CPK model of naphthalene barbiturate compound 19. The schematic representation of the hierarchical self-assembly process of 19 into a toroidal structure via hexameric rosettes formed by hydrogen bonds, their cartoon representations in core (orange)-shell (white) morphology, and an AFM image of the toroidal nanostructure formed from 19. (b) SANS (red triangles) and SAXS (open circles) data of 19 in [D14]MCH. Blue solid line is fit to the data, using a toroid form factor and a flat background. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic representation of the formation of a toroidal nanostructure with spontaneous curvature by the unique stacking of planar hexamers of 19 (by molecular models: CPK models as well as electron cloud models). (b) Chemical structure of trans-22, featuring a central trans-azobenzene unit, which causes a large change in its molecular shape by photoisomerization as shown by the electron cloud model of trans-22 (grey) and cis-22 (blue). (c) Molecular models (CPK models as well as electron cloud models) of hexamers of six trans-22, as well as of five trans-22 and one cis-22. For electron cloud models, side views highlight the change of planarity of the hexamers by partial photoisomerization of the azobenzene moiety. (d) Schematic representation of the formation of an extended helical coil (SPhelical) with photo-switchable spontaneous curvature, wherein the loss and recovery of the curvature are controlled by UV and Vis light, respectively, in a reversible manner. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 24  Light-induced unfolding of helical SP fibres (SPhelical) and refolding of the resulting straight fibres into randomly coiled fibres (SPrandom): (a–c) AFM images showing a gradual unfolding: SPhelical to SPrandom to SPlinear by increasing the cis-22 content by irradiation with UV light. Inset: Schematic representation of the corresponding single fibre with a clear view. (d) AFM image of SPrandom obtained by recovering spontaneous curvature upon exposure to weak Vis light on SPlinear. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Chemical structure of rosette 236. (b) Schematic representation of photoresponsive hierarchical association of the rosette. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 26  Design concept of oligothiophene rosettes with and without long aliphatic chains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a and b) STM images of 24c at the HOPG–1-phenyloctane interface, domain of (a) CCW and (b) CW rosettes. (c) Packing model of the CCW rosette of 24c. (d) AFM image of the thin film prepared by drop-casting a toluene solution of 24c onto HOPG and the cross-sectional analysis along the white line. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a and b) AFM topography images of the 1:1 (w:w) blend films of 24b and PC61BM (a) before and (b) after annealing at 80 °C. (c) Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of BHJ solar cells using 1:1 (w:w) blend films of 24a and PC61BM (black lines), 24b and PC61BM (red lines), and 24c and PC61BM (blue lines) before (dotted lines) and after annealing at 80 °C (solid lines). Inset: Schematic representation of the device structure of the BHJ solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Oligothiophene rosette with BDT units. (b) STM image of 25 at the HOPG–1-phenyloctane interface. The different rosettes have been coloured in green, red, blue and yellow as a guide for the eye. Isolated molecules are shown in grey. (c) AFM image of the thin film prepared by drop-casting a toluene solution (c = 1 × 10−4 M) of 25 onto HOPG. Inset: Cross-sectional analysis along the yellow line. (d) J–V characteristics of BHJ solar cells using a 1:1 (w:w) blend film of 25:PC61BM prepared by spin-coating a chloroform solution (10 mg mL−1) without thermal annealing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  Hierarchical self-assembly of 24b and 26 in different phases. (a) Chemical structures of monomers (left), chemical structures of hydrogen-bonded patterns (centre), and molecular models of hydrogen-bonded patterns (right). (b) Schematic representation of the hierarchical organization of 24b and 26 from solution (left) to bulk (centre) and BHJ states with PC61BM (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) The proposed hexameric rosette structure by the complexation of polyadenine d(An) and CA which results in a triplex formation. (b) AFM image showing extensive nanofibre formation for d(A15) in the presence of CA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
