Metallic single-atoms confined in carbon nanomaterials for the electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution, and hydrogen evolution reaction ...  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CY01408G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CY01408G
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 6420-6448Metallic single-atoms confined in carbon nanomaterials for the electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution, and hydrogen evolution reactions

        
          
            Mohd. 
            Khalid
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Prerna A. 
            Bhardwaj
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ana M. B. 
            Honorato
          
          
        
      *cd and 

        
          
            Hamilton 
            Varela
          
          
        
      a
aInstitute of Chemistry of São Carlos, University of São Paulo, PO Box 780, 13560-970, São Carlos, SP, Brazil. E-mail: mkansarister@gmail.com
bInstitute of Chemistry, University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, 70599, Germany
cDepartment of Macromolecular Science and Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. E-mail: abh70@case.edu
dDepartment of Materials Engineering, Federal University of São Carlos, Washington Luiz Rd Km 235, BR13565905 São Carlos, SP, Brazil
Received 
      13th July 2020
    , Accepted 13th August 2020First published on 13th August 2020AbstractCarbon nanomaterials confined with metallic single-atoms have shown great potential in electrocatalysis because of their unique physicochemical properties such as high-efficiency, high mass activity and maximum atom-utilization for reactions involved in electrochemical energy conversion and storage, such as oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution, and hydrogen evolution reactions. In principle, metal single-atoms dispersed on appropriate carbon support ideally possess tunable coordination environment and unique electronic properties that result in excellent activity and selectivity toward catalytic reactions as compared to nanoparticles/or bulk form of noble and non-noble metals. This article reviews the recent advances of metal single-atom confined carbon nanomaterials, following their rational design strategies and correlation between metal–support combinations for the electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution, and hydrogen evolution reactions, including bifunctional activities for metal–air batteries and water electrolysis. A perspective on emerging fields of single-atom catalysis is also provided in this study.Mohd. KhalidMohd. Khalid obtained his Ph.D. in Applied Chemistry in 2010 from Aligarh Muslim University, India. In 2011, he was awarded the Dr. D. S. Kothari postdoctoral fellowship from UGC, Govt. of India, at Panjab University Chandigarh. Later he moved to the Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianopolis, Brazil and Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland OH, USA, where he worked as a postdoctoral fellow. Currently, he is a postdoc at the Institute of Chemistry of São Carlos, University of São Paulo. His research interests focus on carbon nanostructured materials for energy conversion and storage.Prerna A. BhardwajPrerna A. Bhardwaj received her M.Sc. honors (2008) and Ph.D. (2014) in Chemistry from Panjab University, India. She worked at the University of Hohenheim, Germany as a Research Assistant. Her research mainly focuses on conducting polymers and their sensor applications, along with carbon nanomaterials as superconductors.Ana M. B. HonoratoAna M. B. Honorato obtained her Bachelor degree in Physics in 2011 and a Master degree in Mechanical Engineering in 2013 from the Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianopolis, Brazil. Currently, she is a Ph.D. student at Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland OH, USA, and Federal University São Carlos, Brazil, under the research program of CWRU–CAPES. Her research interests are carbon-based nanomaterials and conducting polymers for energy conversion and storage.Hamilton VarelaHamilton Varela (1973) obtained his Bachelors degree in Chemical Engineering at Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Natal, in 1997, and obtained his Masters degree in Physical Chemistry at the Institute of Chemistry of São Carlos of the University of São Paulo (ICSC/USP), São Carlos, in 2000. From 2000 to 2003 he did his Ph.D. with Professor K. Krischer at the Physical Chemistry Department (headed by Prof. G. Ertl, Nobel Laureate in Chemistry, 2007) – Fritz Haber Institut der Max Planck Gesellschaft, Berlin. His thesis was entitled “Spatiotemporal Pattern Formation during Electrochemical Oxidation of Hydrogen on Platinum”, and was presented in 2003 at the Freie Universität Berlin, and he obtained the final mark magna cum laude. After spending eight months as a postdoctoral Max Planck Fellow at the Physics Department of the Technical University Munich, he returned to Brazil. Between 2005 and 2007 he worked as a Group Leader (Jovem Pesquisador FAPESP) at ICSC/USP, and in 2007 was appointed Assistant Professor in the Physical Chemistry Department of the same Institution. In 2012 he became Associate Professor and in 2017, he became a Full Professor of Physical Chemistry at ICSC/USP. From the scientific point of view, Dr. Varela is currently interested in the following topics: electrochemical energy conversion, electrocatalysis, and self-organization in physical–chemical systems. Dr. Varela helped to establish the Ertl Center for Electrochemistry and Catalysis, at the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST, Gwangju, Republic of Korea), where he is also Adjunct Professor at the School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Engineering.
1. Introduction
The ever-growing demand for clean energy and environmental pollution issues induced by burning fossil fuels have become serious global challenges due to population growth and industrial dissemination. Researchers have devoted significant efforts in recent years on the development of efficient and eco-friendly techniques for harvesting clean renewable energy. Among the prevailing renewable energy systems, fuel cells, metal–air batteries, and water splitters have been regarded as competent and efficient ways to produce clean energy.1,2 However, the practical applications of these systems rely on the sluggish kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) that are greatly limited by unfavored large thermodynamic overpotentials and multistep proton-coupled electron transfers, and hence significant energy inputs are required to drive these reactions. To increase the efficiency and reduce kinetic limitations of these reactions, efficient electrocatalysts need to be exploited. Historically, the field of electrocatalysis has been dominated by both noble metals and metal oxides (e.g., Pt, Au, Rh, Pd, RuO2, and IrO2) due to their unique set of properties that play an integral role in lowering the kinetic energy barriers of reactions.3–5 One major and inherent drawback of precious-metal-based catalysts, however, is their scarcity in the Earth's crust. To make sustainable use of limited resources, finding alternative strategies for electrocatalysis is an imperative driving force in current research. Reducing the amount of noble metals in the support without compromising on the catalytic activity is the main objective of the fast-developing field of single-atom catalysis.
The term single-atom catalysis came to spotlight in the year 2011 by Zhang and co-workers6 and added a new dimension to the heterogeneous catalysis. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and his group7 published some results based on the effect on catalysis of leaching the metal (Au and Pt) at different rates from the surface of ceria–lanthanum (CeO2–La) nanoparticle support in 2003, but at that time, it was not clear that the active catalytic site after metal leaching was a single atom. They concluded their observations by stating that these sites were not nanoparticles and small clusters; however, it was not comprehended that it was a small single atom. Due to lack of proper instrumentation techniques such as aberration-corrected transmission electron microscopy, single-atom active sites could not be fully characterized. Consequently, understanding the mechanism of catalysis or the interaction of single atoms with the reactant molecules was difficult. This challenge further invoked various researchers around the world to get a deeper understanding of the interaction mechanism and has led to extensive research in this field.8,9 To improve the activity of electrocatalysts and minimize the use of precious metal atoms such as Pt, Pd, Ru, Ir, and Au, a variety of supports have been reported, such as metal-(hydro)oxides, metal-carbides, metal-sulfides, and metal-phosphides, which have demonstrated significant effects in the phases and interfaces of catalyst systems, resulting in apparent catalytic activity towards diverse catalytic reactions, as summarized in several review articles.10–18 However, metal-(hydro)oxides/-carbides/-sulfides/-phosphides supports usually result in complicated atomic structures and coordination, making it difficult to study and understand the possible catalytic active sites. In this context, carbon nanomaterials have recently been of particular interest as supports for metal single-atoms featuring low-cost, large surface area, high electrical conductivity, and outstanding chemical stability, which provide great possibilities for tuning the electronic structures, while containing relatively simple atomic coordination for the identification of actual active sites.19,20 More importantly, the surfaces of carbon materials can be easily regulated by doping or creating defects, while promoting the homogeneous atomic dispersion of metal atoms to maximize efficiency. The incorporation of heteroatoms supports the anchoring of individual metal atoms and also tailors the distribution of spin and charge density on neighboring carbon atoms via atomic modulation.21–23 This interaction increases the affinity between the active sites and reactant intermediates by enabling the intrinsic binding strength for boosting catalytic performance.24–26 In recent years, special attention has been paid to the regulation of the local structures of carbon nanomaterials by introducing noble and non-noble metal single-atoms and carefully investigating them via density functional theory (DFT), X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), and aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (AC-HAADF-STEM).19,20,27–30 These techniques allow detailed structural models to be obtained, and probe the interaction of single-atoms with carbon supports, yielding fundamental insights that are critical to the design of high-performance catalysts for a wide range of electrocatalytic reactions.
Although the rational approach has served a large body of research in the design of single-atom catalysts (SACs) worldwide, some challenges remain concerning the development of a facile approach to controlling the design of SACs and their mechanistic understanding. In this review article, a comprehensive overview of metal single-atom (including both noble and non-noble metals) confined carbon nanomaterials composed of isolated single-atom active sites is presented, following their design strategies and electrocatalysis for the ORR, OER, and HER, with emphasis on their bifunctional activities in metal–air batteries and water electrolysis (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Schematic demonstration of metal single-atom confined carbon nanomaterials for the electrocatalysis of the ORR, OER, HER and bifunctional ORR/OER and OER/HER activities. 
2. Design principles for metal single-atom confined carbon nanomaterials
SACs have emerged as a new frontier for electrocatalysis. For the enhancement of the electrocatalytic activity of SACs, a rationally designed catalyst should have four main features: i) a large number of active sites, ii) support that typically has a high surface area, which benefits high mass transport, iii) a highly porous structure that ideally suits binding metal atoms, and iv) good conductivity of the support, which benefits the rapid electron transfer. These features provide catalyst materials with inherent catalytic activity and stability against harsh electrolytic conditions.31–33 As the reactions take place on the surface of the catalyst, the performance is directly related to the unit activity of each active site. To populate the active sites on the catalyst surface, the morphology of the support is generally tuned by introducing metal atoms. The generated active centers involve unsaturated coordination configurations, which are correlated with the local environment of the metal center and the supporting materials.6,32 Thus, the performance of the catalyst can be synergistically enhanced by developed intrinsic active centers in the carbon network. Numerous articles have recently been comprehensibly reviewed, giving various synthetic approaches to SACs,34–44 rather than repeating the synthesis methods. Herein, we only aim to highlight the cutting-edge recent research progress on metal single-atom confined carbon nanomaterials for electrocatalysis.
3. Carbon nanomaterials as supports
The support can be defined as a material that facilitates a common ground for the reactants and catalyst. An ideal support should be able to provide a large number of active sites and should also possess desired properties such as high abundance, low cost, high electrical conductivity, structural tunability, good selectivity, and strong stability in harsh electrolyte conditions.45 The interaction energy with the foreign metal atom should also be high and provide a smooth flow of reactants during the catalytic reaction. However, due to the lack of lone pairs of electrons in carbon atoms, they show low binding energies with metals, featuring a low loading of the amount of metal on the carbon substrate. This can be mitigated by introducing heteroatoms into the carbon network, especially with nitrogen atoms, which provide an additional electron in the valence shell for high binding energy.46,47 Another important feature to be considered is that the cohesive energy of the metal bond should be inferior to the adsorption binding energy with the supporting material, which is crucial for promoting high dispersion and stabilizing the metal atoms on the support. Therefore, the choice of support plays an important role in catalytic performance. Generally, the metal atom with the support of carbon tends to form planar M–N4 moieties by coordinating four pyridinic or pyrrolic nitrogens upon pyrolysis, as represented in Fig. 1a and b,48 and changes the adsorption capacity of reactants on the metal center, thus influencing the catalytic performance.22 The heteroatoms such as N, P, S, and O are introduced into the carbon lattice and play a crucial role in trapping the isolated metal atoms via chemical bonding with neighboring carbon atoms by modulating the local coordination environment.47–50 This facilitates the adsorption of OOH* and H* reactant intermediates for catalyzing the ORR and HER51–54 and also regulates the electronic structure by endowing positive charges on the carbon atom for the adsorption of OH− to facilitate the OER.55,56 However, the variations in the coordination structures between metal atoms and doped carbon may influence the binding energies of the reaction intermediates.57 Therefore, the activity and selectivity of SACs are highly dependent on the electronic and geometric interactions of the catalyst, where, the electrons are transferred from metal atoms to neighboring carbon atoms and significantly affect the charge density and distribution of the active metal site, inducing the catalytic properties of the catalyst materials.58–61 From this perspective, owing to the great regioselectivity, carbon nanomaterials offer ideal support for single-atom catalysts. In light of the above observations, we will investigate the single-atoms of noble and non-noble metals anchored on various carbon supports.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of a single metal atom supported on graphene with a) four pyridine nitrogen atoms (pyridine-N4) and b) four pyrrole nitrogen atoms (pyrrole-N4). The green, blue, and grey colors represent M, N, and C atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission;48 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. 
3.1 Metal single-atom confined graphene nanomaterials
Possessing unique sp2-bonded carbon in a honeycomb network structure, graphene 2D-sheets show interesting electronic, magnetic, electrocatalytic, and mechanical properties that are promising for a wide range of applications.62,63 Due to their ultrahigh theoretical surface area (2630 m2 g−1), graphene nanomaterials are considered good supports for the uniform dispersion of metal atoms.62–66 However, pristine graphene has a very low binding energy that leads to cluster formation when metals are incorporated, even at room temperature.36 To resolve this issue, graphene nanomaterials are tailored by introducing defects, functionalization, and doping, as detailed below.67

Defect assisted. 
The surface modification of graphene by creating defects disrupts the π-conjugation and exerts great influence on the electronic structure of the carbon network and stabilizes isolated metal atoms, acting as traps to capture metal precursors on the support surface and thus inhibits agglomeration during post-treatment.68,69 In general, defects result in vacancies, voids, dislocations, and grain boundaries, which have been widely demonstrated to alter the local densities of π-electrons.70 For example, Chu et al.71 reported a strategy for modifying the interface and mechanical properties of graphene/Cu composites. They created nanopores on the graphene surface of 5–10 nm size by plasma treatment without damaging its entire structure. The CuxOy oxides were then introduced in situ during the sintering process of plasma-treated graphene, which resulted in the anchoring of Cu metal atoms to the nano-pore sites. They observed that composites with plasma-treated graphene displayed better interface stability, enhanced strength and better response to thermal stress. This type of defect engineering of graphene exhibits properties that are important for their end-applications72 such as the fabrication of biosensors, polymer nanocomposites, transistor devices, drug delivery systems, solar cells, super-capacitors, memory devices, etc. The additional advantage of this flattish material is to have sp2-hybridized carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice, which provides an easier method for imaging at the atomic level to know the exact coordination configuration of metal sites. Bao and co-workers73 created defects in graphene by the ball milling technique and anchored Fe atoms, which achieved high catalytic activities for benzene oxidation, methane conversion, and the ORR. Qu et al.74 demonstrated a different approach to attaching single atoms on the defects of graphene by involving a very high temperature to generate atomically dispersed platinum. In this process dicyandiamide, bulk platinum, and graphene oxide were introduced into the same porcelain container and heated to 1100 °C. The ammonia gas produced during the pyrolysis coordinated to Pt to give volatile Pt(NH3)x. This active species was then anchored to the defective surface of graphene, as represented in Fig. 2a. The as-prepared Pt catalyst displayed high activity for the electrochemical HER and selective oxidation of various organosilanes. The creation of a wide variety of defects and more diverse metal–carbon moieties is expected to be employed in a range of catalytic applications.
 Fig. 2  Graphene nanomaterial-based-single-atom catalysts. a) The proposed reaction mechanism for the preparation of Pt SAs/DG. Reproduced with permission;74 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. b) Schematic illustration of the ball-milling-driven doping of antimony to the edges of graphene nanoplatelets. Reproduced with permission;75 Copyright © 2015, Springer Nature. c) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of pyrolysis free f-CoNC. Reproduced with permission;98 Copyright © 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Edge-assisted. 
The edge-assisted strategy was designed for trapping metal single-atoms on the edge of the graphene support. For example, Baek and co-workers75 prepared selectively edge-decorated semi-metal antimony (Sb) single-atoms on graphene nanoplatelets (GnPs), as shown in Fig. 2b. The HAAD-STEM confirmed the existence of the single Sb atoms that were attached at the edge of the armchair configuration of graphene. The enhanced electrocatalytic activity of the selectively edge-decorated graphene nanoplates was further confirmed by precise measurements of the ORR activity. The SbGnPs displayed superior performance to that of the pristine graphite. The ball milling technique was used to prepare the sample, which usually creates defects in graphene nanomaterials and can be used for synthesizing edge-assisted SACs on a range of carbon supports. However, the morphologies of catalyst materials always show the non-uniform and low confinement of metal atom in carbon supports.


Dangling bond assisted. 
Wu and co-workers76 developed a facile dangling bond trapping strategy to prepare SACs by using Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu metals mixed with graphene oxide slurry, where metal transfers the electrons to the dangling oxygen groups of graphene oxide to obtain M–O bonds, resulting in the generation of many atomically dispersed Fe species with partially positive charges. Considering the versatility of the single Fe atom, it formed a coordination effect between Feδ+ and the surface O dangling bond (Fe–O4) of graphene oxide; after pyrolysis, it was realized that the Fe–O was transformed into Fe–N. It is worth mentioning that such a coordination design strategy with spatial confinement is not straightforward and requires a complex synthetic process.


Dopant assisted. 
This strategy involves pyrolysis, usually >700 °C, and often treatment under N2 H2, NH3, Ar, or their mixed environment. This method has been exploited for the fabrication of a wide range of single-atom catalysts anchored on graphene supports. This strategy provides the opportunity to choose the metal and heteroatom sources that provide strong interfacial interactions, high electrical conductivity, and could significantly increase the concentration of the metal single-atom within the graphene layers. This has been considered an excellent strategy for anchoring various isolated metal species on doped carbon materials.77,78 In a typical synthesis process, precursors always contain coordinated heteroatoms (N, O, P, S), a carbon source, and metals. For example, Ramaswamy et al.79 prepared covalently integrated Fe–Nx active sites in the π-conjugated carbon basal-plane using iron(III) meso-tetraphenylporphine chloride (FeTPPCl) upon pyrolysis. They further described the relationship between the catalytic ORR activity with atomic Fe–Nx moieties and the basicity of the π-conjugated carbon network. It was suggested that the electron-donating or withdrawing capability of the doped graphene support, resulting from its delocalized π-electrons, regulates the d-orbital configuration of the metal center and enhances the chemisorption strength of O2 and reaction intermediates on active sites. The neighboring nitrogen atoms not only strongly coordinate with isolated metal atoms upon pyrolysis, they also contribute to decreasing the activation energy, giving rise to mechanical, electronic, and conducting properties.
Apart from the N-dopant, O- and S-doped graphene were also employed to immobilize the isolated metal atom. For example, Tang et al.80 showed a strategy involving O and S-dual coordination with a high loading (>10 wt%) of Mo single atoms by fabricating a new kind of SACs using MgO templated via the pyrolysis of mixed precursors. Thus, the obtained SAC had the unique coordination of Mo atoms with the dual oxygen and sulfur heteroatom-doping of graphene, which was confirmed by a series of electrochemical experiments and theoretical calculations. In addition, even uncoordinated heteroatom dopants could accelerate the kinetic process of the catalytic reaction on the metal center because of the optimized charge distribution. Similarly, Xiong and co-workers,81 prepared single Co atoms tightly grasped by partially oxidized graphene nanosheets involving unsaturated coordination configuration, and tested for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. The catalyst showed much greater performance by suppressing the previously reported state-of-the-art photocatalysts for CO2 reduction. The preparation of the catalyst was processed by utilizing a homogeneous photosensitizer for enhancing the large absorption coefficient for visible light and the Ru complex was used to accelerate the electron transfer to promote the reaction kinetics.


Thin layer growth assisted. 
Since metal atoms usually demonstrate higher surface energy than the graphene support, the uniform deposition of single atoms can be achieved on the graphene surface. Sun et al. systematically prepared Pt single-atom layers on nitrogen-doped graphene using the atomic layer deposition (ALD) method for the methanol oxidation reaction (MOR), ORR, and HER. The activities of the as-prepared catalyst were 10 and 37 times higher than the commercial Pt/C in the MOR and HER, respectively.82,83 According to the theoretical calculation and X-ray absorption fine structure analysis, authors claimed that the high catalytic activity was due to the low-coordination environment achieving the ultimate specific activity per metal atom and partly unoccupied densities of states of the 5d orbitals of the Pt single atom. This was attributed to the high binding energy between Pt single-atoms and carbon/oxygen atoms of the graphene substrate.84 Following the same procedure, Yan et al.85 deposited a high loading of Co atoms on graphene, which allowed the precise tuning of the density of isolated Co atoms on the graphene support, forming a positively charged catalytically active center (Co–O–C). Later, they treated graphene with ozone to eliminate undesirable ligands and regenerate the active sites for tuning the density of Co atoms. Likewise, Stambula et al.86 deposited single Pt atoms on nitrogen-doped graphene using N2 as the purge gas, O2 and (methylcyclopentadienyl)trimethylplatinum (MeCpPtMe3) as precursors. Based on their observations they concluded that nitrogen-doped graphene, in combination with ALD, provides a controlled atomic deposition of Pt while avoiding the formation of the nanostructure of Pt even after 150 ALD cycles. In an alternative work, Cheng et al.87 fabricated single Pt atoms/clusters on nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets (NGNs). They also proved that the resulting catalyst was able to use nearly all the Pt atoms for the HER and it was highly stable.


Functionalization assisted. 
The functionalization of graphene is also an attractive method for preparing efficient graphene supports since it favors flexible surface properties and provides active anchoring sites with easy tuning options. It also provides a way to control the number of active sites by binding metal ions through typical coordination chemistry methods, although low metal atom contents are achieved. Some of the common methods include the oxidation of graphene to graphene oxide,88 or the addition of nitrogen-containing compounds89 and in some cases, the addition of cyano groups or sulfur atoms.90 For instance, Xu et al.91 adsorbed Ni and Fe on the oxygen-functionalized graphene surface (Ni, Fe–O-G SACs). Analytical characterization revealed that Ni and Fe atoms were individually anchored on the oxygen-containing sites of graphene in single-atomic form. The catalyst demonstrated high selectivity with excellent activity and stability for the ORR. It is also worth noting that the combination of different metal elements could greatly improve the catalytic activity. In another recent work, cyano-functionalities on graphene (G-CN) were used to decorate strong and selective ligands on single copper ions,92 where, G-CN was mixed with CuCl2 to immobilize Cu(II) on the G-CN sheets. The spots of Cu single atoms were verified by STEM analysis. Many researchers have reported graphene-based SACs in which metals are single-atom-functionalized by tetra-coordination in porphyrinic-like vacancies.93–96


Pyrolysis-free assisted. 
More recently, a pyrolysis-free process97 was reported to develop SAC, unlike randomly created single Fe–N atom sites by a general pyrolysis method, using an iron phthalocyanine (FePc)-rich covalent organic framework (COF) via intermolecular interactions between the π-conjugated COF and graphene matrix with certain mass ratios. At first, they assembled benzene-1,2,4,5-tetracarbonitrile with Fe centers in the COF, then dispersed in glycol solution and ground in the presence of graphene, followed by drying at 250 °C under an argon atmosphere to remove the glycol solvent. HAADF-STEM identified that the coordinated Fe atoms were exclusively in the single-atom formation and uniformly anchored throughout the graphene matrix in the form of Fe–N–C moieties.
Using the same concept, Dai and co-workers98 used a pyrolysis-free method to develop seven types of atomically dispersed single-metallic (Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, Zn, Mo, and Ir), one bi-metallic (Fe/Co), and one tri-metallic (ZnFeCo) in nitrogen-doped carbon by condensing metals with formamide as both the carbon and nitrogen sources. As shown in Fig. 2c under solvothermal treatment, with the presence of metal ions, the cross-linking of the as-formed C/N chains promoted by the chelated metal cations, resulting in atomically dispersed f-MNC moiety (M = transition metal atoms). The coordination numbers of Co–N, Co–Fe, Fe–N, and Fe–Co were found to be 2.8, 0.7, 3.2, and 1.1, respectively with the investigation of XNES and EXAFS and thus the can be represented as FeN3–CoN3.


Freeze-drying assisted. 
The loading of metals inevitably faces the problem of the migration of metal species. To realize the atomic dispersion of metal species, the emphasis is to prevent the migration of metal atoms, and some researchers proposed the strategy of freezing solutions of precursors at low temperatures to restrict the migration of metal atoms. For example, Zhou et al.99 reported the freeze-drying assisted method, where they stabilized Pd single-atoms in nitrogen-doped graphene (Pd1/N-graphene) at freezing temperatures. In contrast, agglomerated Pd particles were detected when the sample was synthesized without applying the freezing step. The uniformly anchored Pd single atoms on nitrogen-doped graphene were coordinated with four N atoms and also showed excellent long term stability, even at a high temperature of 125 °C.
From the design strategies of graphene with metal single-atoms as presented above, one can see that the graphene nanomaterials can be regulated and fine-tuned with isolated metal atoms by bonding in diverse forms, giving rise to an important platform for electrocatalysis.

3.2 Metal single-atom confined carbon nanomaterials
Carbonaceous materials, including graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), carbon black, carbon nanotubes (CNT), carbon nanofibers, mesoporous carbon, and activated carbon, are commonly inactive for electrocatalytic reactions but can improve the catalytic performance to a certain extent by enhancing the interfacial conductivity between the support and single atoms.

g-C3N4. 
This is a typical example of a carbonaceous material and has always been inert for electrocatalysis due to its inadequate electrical conductivity and inappropriate adsorption of H- and O-relevant intermediates.100 However, when coupled with single-site Pd species, they offer the first stable single-site heterogeneous catalyst for the hydrogenation of alkynes and nitroarenes.101 More recently, rare-earth metal erbium (Er) single-atoms were anchored to carbon nitride nanotubes that had a very similar heterocycle structure to g-C3N4. The atomic dispersion of Er on carbon nitride nanotubes was confirmed by HAADF-STEM analysis and exhibited remarkable performance for photocatalytic CO2RR.102 Such carbon nitride structures intrinsically possess abundant and uniformly distributed cavities that allow more metal coordination sites to form robust SACs for photo/electrocatalysis.103 In another study, the single Pt atoms loaded on g-C3N4 provided an induced intrinsic change in the surface trap states, resulting in highly efficient photocatalytic H2 generation.104 A series of single-atom catalysts using Cu, Mo, Ru, Rh, Rd, Re, Ir, and Pt metal atoms anchored on g-C3N4 was made for the nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR).105 It was found that the single Pt atoms anchored to g-C3N4 rendered superior NRR activity as compared to the counterpart transition metal-based SACs, due to the predominant adsorption of N2 on Pt/g-C3N4. Similarly, Wu et al.106 investigated a series of single transition metal atoms (V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Mo) decorated g-C3N4 through density functional theory (DFT) calculations and found that the single Cu atom-decorated g-C3N4 harbored the lowest limiting potential of 0.371 V for nitric oxide reduction for ammonia synthesis, as represented in Fig. 3a and b. In one study, Co single-atoms were coordinated to the void center of C3N4, anchoring anthraquinone at the edges of C3N4 nanosheets. Such a spatial arrangement was found to be critical for enhancing the surface charge separation and achieving efficient electrochemical production of H2O2.107 Liu et at.108 prepared SAC by the single-step pyrolysis of glucose, dicyandiamide, and inorganic metal salts. During the process, dicyandiamide was coated on layered g-C3N4 at low temperature (550–750 °C), glucose was calcinated between carbon layers and metal atoms were dispersed and trapped in the framework thus created. The nitrogen present in g-C3N4 provided ideal sites for metal inclusion due to the strong chemical coupling with nitrogen lone-pair electrons. HAADF-STEM and X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (XAFS) proved that metal atoms were assisted by nitrogen atoms in generating a metal–Nx coordination structure. The strong metal anchoring resulted in a high mass loading of 4 wt%. Thus, g-C3N4 emerged as a unique support for SACs due to the N-rich macro-heterocycles in the network, providing strong interactions with the metal atoms.109
 Fig. 3  Carbon nanomaterials-based single-atom catalysts. Top and side views of transition metal-atom-decorated g-C3N4 with a) end-on, b) side-on NO adsorption configurations (grey, blue, pink, and red balls represent C, N, TM, and O atoms, respectively). Reproduced with permission,106 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. c) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the CNT@Fe–N-PC catalyst. Reproduced with permission,111 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. d) Schematic illustration for the preparation of the CoN5/HNPCSs catalyst. Reproduced with permission,113 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. e) Adsorption of single metal atoms on graphdiyne (left: possible adsorption site; right: optimized configuration). f) Electrostatic potential maps of pristine graphdiyne, Ni/graphdiyne, and Fe/graphdiyne, respectively. Reproduced with permission,121 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. 


CNT. 
CNTs have been widely researched in many fields where they not only served as conductive supports but were also used for functionalization for certain reactions. Tsukuda et al.110 prepared a Pd1Au24 SAC supported on CNT followed by calcination, and investigated its catalytic performance in the aerobic oxidation of benzyl alcohol. Compared with the monometallic Au25/CNT, the single-Pd-atom-doped Pd1Au24/CNT exhibited the significantly enhanced conversion of benzyl alcohol (from 22 to 74%). The synergistic effect between Au and Pd was attributed to electron transfer from Pd to Au, which promoted the activation of O2. However, the selectivity of the catalyst was unsatisfactory, and aldehyde, acid and ester products were produced with similar yields. Cheng and co-workers et al.111 established a novel route to generate the CNT@Fe–N–PC electrocatalyst with the atomic dispersion of the Fe–Nx species on hierarchical CNT layers. It was achieved by the pyrolysis of CNTs coated with pyrrole in the presence of Fe and Zn salts at 900 °C under a N2 atmosphere, followed by acid leaching. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the CNT@Fe–N–PC hybrid material showed a unique hierarchical structure that supported faster electron transfer, hence increased ORR catalytic activity, as represented in Fig. 3c. Notably, no nanoparticles were observed, suggesting that atomically dispersed Fe atoms might be confined in the carbon layers, which also suggested that it may be a good route for SAC synthesis and it showed excellent ORR catalysis as compared to the benchmark Pt/C. In another study, Cheng et al.112 developed a facile multistep pyrolysis method to atomically disperse transition metals (Ni, Co, NiCo, CoFe, and NiPt) in nitrogen-doped CNTs with exceptionally high metal loading. Among them, the Ni-based single-atom catalyst (NiSA-N-CNTs) showed a high loading of about 20 wt%, with uniform distribution across the tubular structure. The catalyst also showed excellent selectivity and activity towards the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO, which was much higher than the counterpart Ni nanoparticles-supported CNTs.


Porous carbon. 
The porous structure of the catalyst offers superior electrochemical accessibility and overall enhanced activity, selectivity, and stability. Recently, polymer precursors have been used to synthesize high surface area porous SACs, mainly due to their inexpensive and widely tunable surface and structural properties, to boost electrocatalytic properties. For instance, Li and co-workers113 constructed polymer-derived hollow N-doped porous carbon spheres anchored with atomically dispersed Co species, which were coordinated by five N (Co–N5) and showed large surface area, as represented in Fig. 3d. The single-atom Co–N5 site was the dominant active center, which exhibited high selectivity for CO2 reduction reaction, with nearly 100% CO selectivity. Zhang et al.114 synthesized SACs based on single Pt atoms confined in a porous carbon matrix (PCM) using the combination of Pt and polydopamine/diblock copolymer (PDA/PS-b-PEO). The carbonization of the product and removal of PS-b-PEO produced isolated Pt single atoms on a mesoporous carbon matrix. Similarly, Chen and co-workers115 showed a single active site (Fe–N–C) in a graphene-like carbon structure prepared by using phen and polyaniline, in which phen was used for providing additional sources of N dopant but also acted as a sacrificial pore-forming agent during the pyrolysis process. The Zelenay group116 also synthesized SACs, creating Fe–N4 moieties embedded in a graphitic carbon matrix with dual nitrogen precursors of polyaniline following the carbonization process. It is commonly accepted that there are M–Nx active sites but it is not yet clear if the heteroatom-doped carbon with metal coordination features a common ligand with metal atoms for the catalytic active site. For example, in recent studies, the catalysts Co–M–N (ref. 117) and Fe–N–C (ref. 118) were prepared to identify the M–Nx sites using common phen and pyrolysis procedures. In the resulting Co–M–N and Fe–N–C catalysts, the structures of M–Nx were found to be very different from each other. In the Co–N–C SAC, the single Co2+ was coordinated to four N atoms in non-planar CoN4 units. In contrast, the single Fe–N–C center featured Fe–Nx with different numbers of N donor atoms (x = 4, 5, and 6) with oxidation states of Fe2+/3+. Therefore, this provides a complementary method for identifying the structure of M–Nx site-doped carbon-based SACs. Silica has also been utilized as a template to develop hollow carbon spheres anchored with Fe single atoms.119


Graphdiyne. 
Graphdiyne, a unique two-dimensional carbon material, was also reported as a support for metal single-atoms. It is a layered type carbon structure made up of benzene rings with sp2 hybrid carbon bonding with butadiyne, forming a π-conjugated structure. Cai and co-workers120 synthesized isolated Fe atoms decorated on graphdiyne for the ORR catalysis. They dispersed graphdiyne in a solution of ferric chloride in an Ar atmosphere, which adsorbed Fe3+ ions on graphdiyne and was reduced by sodium borohydride, followed by refluxing with H2SO4 overnight at 110 °C to produce the single-atom Fe–graphdiyne catalyst. AC HAADF-STEM image and EXAFS spectra showed the isolated Fe atoms anchored on graphdiyne. Similarly, Xue et al. anchored zero valence single atoms of Ni and Fe on graphdiyne. The Ni single-atom anchored graphdiyne showed electrocatalytic performance towards HER in acid medium. EXAFS results revealed that the sp-hybridized orbitals of graphdiyne overlapped with the d-orbitals of Ni, which was responsible for the reduction of Ni2+ to Ni0, forming the Ni–C moiety due to mutual charge overlap. The theoretical calculation of hydrogen adsorption suggested that the nearby carbon atoms were the active sites for efficient HER, as shown in Fig. 3e and f.121
In summary, from the above discussion, the rich regioselectivity of carbon nanomaterials opened up great opportunities for the design and engineering of single-atom catalysts for electrocatalysis. Efficient strategies for catalyst design and nanostructured catalyst materials are in great demand for meeting the requirements of practical applications.

3.3 Metal single-atom confined carbon nanomaterials derived from metal–organic frameworks
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a class of materials in which metal atoms are coordinated with electron-donating organic ligands and provide exceptional tunable functionality, structural flexibility, and porosity.122–126 MOFs have two main advantages: i) single-step procedures with easy tuning options, and ii) the choice of both transition metal and precious metal atoms. During pyrolysis, the MOF structure collapses and metal nodes tend to be encapsulated in heteroatom-doped carbon, which favors the formation of atomically disperse active sites; as such, they have been considered as excellent supports for SACs.127,128
For instance, recently, an interesting strategy was developed using a binary MOF containing Zn and Co metal nodes in which Zn was evaporated by applying 800 °C due to the low boiling point of 907 °C, resulting in the formation of a single Co atom on nitrogen-doped carbon.129 Thus, the evaporation of Zn left behind Co–N–C, where isolated Co sites were strongly bound to nitrogen atoms (M–Nx). In related work, Chen et al.130 used the combination of zinc-based ZIF-8 and Fe(acac)3 to prepare atomically dispersed Fe atoms on nitrogen-doped carbon, and atomic dispersion was confirmed by HAADF-STEM and EXAFS characterizations, revealing the Fe–N4 active sites. Both methods afforded a high loading of single atoms, up to 4 wt% for Co–N–C and 2 wt% for Fe–N–C. Han et al.131 generated Co single atoms on carbon polyhedra using pyrolysis and leaching of binary ZnCo-MOFs by varying the ratio of Zn/Co (0:1, 2:1, and 8:1). They found different forms of Co on carbon polyhedra such as nanoparticles, atomic clusters, and single atoms. In another work, the single atoms of tungsten (W) on carbon polyhedra were decorated via the pyrolysis of MOF at 950 °C in an Ar environment following hydrofluoric acid etching. Where, W5+, Zr4+, and 2-amino terephthalic acid were solvothermally treated to obtain Zr-based UiO-66-NH2 with W ions coordinated to amine groups in the linkers.132 It was suggested that the uncoordinated amine groups in the UiO-66-NH2 were crucial for avoiding the aggregation of W species, while without amine groups, the W atoms tend to agglomerate into nanoclusters or even large nanoparticles.
Jiang et al.133 prepared Fe single atoms on carbon with iron(II)phthalocyanine (FePc) and ZIF-8 as precursors followed by pyrolysis. The FePc encapsulated in ZIF-8 was transformed into Fe2O3, which was washed away by acid after pyrolysis and produced Fe–N4 single sites. Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance investigation suggested that the ratio of sp3 to sp2 carbon increased gradually with the increasing pore size and enhanced the cleavage of the C–N bonds, altering the electronic properties of the Fe–N4 moiety and thus improving the ORR activity. A versatile strategy of gas-transportation using ZIF-8 was also applied to synthesize isolated single-atom copper sites embedded in nitrogen-doped carbon (Cu ISAS/NC) at the gram level, as presented in Fig. 4a.134 In the process, the commercial copper(I) oxide powder was sublimated as the vapor phase at nearly melting temperature (1500 K), which was trapped and reduced by the nitrogen-rich carbon support to form isolated copper site catalysts. Zhao et al. synthesized single-atomic Ni sites dispersed on N-doped carbon through ion exchange between Zn nodes and adsorbed Ni ions within the cavities of the ZIF-8, followed by high-temperature pyrolysis. During pyrolysis, Zn was evaporated, forming a large number of defects with the N-doped carbon lattice, which effectively served to atomically disperse single Ni active sites.135 An interesting strategy was explored by Fan et al.136 in which, firstly, the Ni-based MOF was pyrolyzed to develop Ni nanoparticles-encapsulated graphene layers (Ni@C) and then leached by acid (HCl) to remove most of the Ni particles. Thereafter, the remaining Ni was converted into isolated Ni sites via the electrochemical activation method.
 Fig. 4  Metal–organic framework-derived carbon-based single-atom catalysts. a) Scheme showing the formation of isolated copper sites (Cu ISAS/N–C). Reproduced with permission,134 Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature. b) Illustration of the preparation process of single iron atomic sites supported on the nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur co-doped hollow carbon polyhedron (Fe-SAs/NPS-HC). Reproduced with permission,141 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. c) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Fe-g-C3N4/HPNCP catalyst. Reproduced with permission,143 Copyright © 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It has also been shown that bimetal atoms with individual active sites can also be developed through MOFs. For example, Wang et al.137 successfully prepared atomically dispersed Fe and Co in carbon via the one-step pyrolysis of a Zn-based MOF with Fe sources incorporated in the pores and Co sources in the metal nodes without post-treatment. The Fe sources were uniformly introduced into the pores of the binary Zn/Co MOF through a double solvent method. Qu et al.51 utilized the metal precursor by using a gas-migration strategy to access a series of Cu, Co, and Ni via direct thermal emission from the bulk metals and subsequent trapping on MOF-derived nitrogen-doped carbon with the assistance of NH3. This strategy was general and developed different types of atomic metals avoiding complex synthetic approaches.
In another study, Sun and co-workers138 showed a metallorganic gaseous doping method to prepare single Fe atoms by evaporating the organic iron compound ferrocene and trapping in ZIF-8 precursors placed downstream during thermal activation. Yang et al.139 adopted another strategy where they used the thermal diffusion mechanism to transform Ni single atoms. During the process, Ni nanoparticles broke C–C bonds to generate pores in the carbon support and, at the same time split, into single Ni atoms coordinating with nitrogen-doped carbon. It was also observed that the noble metals (Ru, Pt, Pd, and Au) were not often used in MOF to synthesize SACs. To circumvent this limitation, Li and co-workers140 used Pd, Pt, and Au nanoparticles in ZIF-8, which can be transformed into single atoms embedded with nitrogen-doped carbon as an anchoring substrate upon pyrolysis in an inert atmosphere. For example, in the case of Pd, they first grew ZIF-8 nanocrystals on Pd nanoparticles simply by mixing Pd nanoparticles, Zn(NO)3 solution with 2-methylimidazole solution made of Pd-NPs@ZIF-8 composites. Upon heating at 900 °C in an inert atmosphere for 3 h, the Pd-NPs disappeared. In another study, Li et al.141 used the monomers of poly(cyclotriphospazane-co-4,4′-sulfonyldiphenol) (PZS) and iron precursors to mix with ZIF-8 to form the ZIF-8/Fe@PZS core–shell composite by polymerization, as presented in Fig. 4b. Upon heat treatment, the ZIF-8/Fe@PZS core–shell composite transformed into a hollow structure with a single-atomic site Fe catalyst through the Kirkendall effect, improving the ORR kinetics in both alkaline and acid media. Similarly, He et al.142 designed a core–shell structured Co–N–C electrocatalyst with isolated Co–Nx sites using surfactant-coated Co-doped ZIF-8 crystals followed by pyrolysis. During pyrolysis, the interface that developed between the surfactant and Co-doped ZIF-8 simultaneously prohibited the agglomeration of metal active sites as well as the collapse of the carbon microporous structure of ZIF-8. The prepared catalyst possessed a higher density of atomic CoN4 active sites for the ORR via the 4-electron pathway as compared to the surfactant-free catalyst. Enhancing the catalytic activity by increasing active site density while avoiding the agglomeration of metal atoms is of great importance. Sun et al.143 synthesized Fe single atoms coordinated to g-C3N4 supported on hierarchical porous N-doped carbon polyhedra (Fe-g-C3N4/HPNCPs) using meso-SiO2 coated ZIF-8, followed by thermal treatment under an argon atmosphere and etching away the SiO2 particles with dilute HF solution (Fig. 4c). The as-obtained catalyst showed a high surface area to afford high exposure of catalytic active sites and promoted high mass transport and increased accessibility of the active sites for the ORR.
MOFs have emerged as promising platforms for the preparation of single-atom catalysts. Compared with conventional carbon materials, MOFs offer versatile compositional and structural advantages by virtue of the tunable metal nodes and organic linkers and provide a hierarchical structure with high porosity after pyrolysis. However, despite the availability of thousands of MOFs, only a few have been reported for the preparation of single-atom catalysts. More MOFs need to be explored for electrocatalysis.
4. ORR
ORR is the limiting half-reaction for fuel cells and other oxygen-involving energy conversion devices (e.g., metal–air batteries and certain electrolyzers) with an equilibrium potential of 1.23 V vs. RHE (reversible hydrogen electrode).144–146 It is a multistep sluggish kinetic reaction that proceeds by oxygen-containing intermediates adsorbed on the active sites of the electrocatalyst. Therefore, the ORR performance of an electrocatalyst greatly depends on the interaction strength between active sites and oxygen intermediates, i.e., the adsorption energy of the intermediates on the active sites. The adsorption energy depends on the electronic structure of the active sites, which is regulated by the compositional design of the catalyst. For an ideal ORR electrocatalyst, the following parameters are usually considered as essential for lowering the kinetic energy barrier of the reaction: i) high catalytic activity, ii) high electrical conductivity, iii) high electrochemical stability in acid and base electrolytes not being oxidized by proton and oxygen, iv) optimal composition together with unique morphological structure, including high surface area, high porosity, small particle size, and v) strong interaction between catalyst particle and support.147 It is almost impossible for an electrocatalyst to fulfil all these requirements at the same time. The electrocatalytic test for the ORR is operated in O2 saturated acid/base electrolytes and analyzed by the onset potential and half-wave potential (E1/2) through linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) under a rotating disk electrode (RDE). The ORR mechanism involves either a four- or two-electron transfer process, following the conversion of O2 into H2O in acidic medium:O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O,  E° = 1.229 V (via the four-electron pathway)O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2,  E° = 0.695 V (via the two-electron pathway)
The equation in aqueous alkaline medium for the ORR is as follows:O2 + 2H2O + 4e → 4OH− (via the four-electron pathway)O2 + H2O + 2e− → HO2− + OH−HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH− (via the two-electron pathway)Therefore, calculating the electron transfer number is an important parameter for evaluating the pathway of the ORR, which is either measured by a rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) or via the Koutecky–Levich (K–L) equation derived from LSV curves on different rotating speeds of the RDE. The four-electron pathway is preferred in the electrocatalytic ORR for fuel cell applications due to the faster reduction rate of oxygen.148 The two-electron pathway is not always unfavorable, since H2O2 is a key oxidizing agent in green chemistry and environmental applications and can be directly produced by the electrochemical reduction of O2. Therefore, the electron transfer number is an important descriptor for evaluating the performance of ORR electrocatalysts. In this section, the ORR of carbon nanomaterials-supported metal single-atom catalysts will be presented.
As described above, carbon nanomaterials-supported metal single-sites have been widely accepted as an effective approach for the ORR by taking advantage of highly conductive doped carbon supports.149–152 Upon pyrolysis, the nitrogen species in the carbon network such as pyridinic-N, pyrrolic-N, graphitic-N, and oxidized-N species themselves take part in catalytic activity and improve the stability of the catalyst.153 This has been unveiled in many studies involving noble and non-noble metals for the ORR. Some researchers have argued that the pyridinic-N is an active site for the ORR in acid media154 and for the OER in alkaline media,155 while some have ascribed graphitic-N for the ORR in alkaline media and the HER in acid media.155 For these considerations, the local carbon structure must be taken into account along with the metal active center for ORR electrocatalysis; for instance, bulk Fe does not show ORR properties. Lee et al.156 synthesized CNTs-modified Fe–Nx moieties by the plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition method. As compared with pristine CNTs, Fe coordinated with N-doped carbon was considered the main active site. Theoretical calculations of band structure suggested that the Fe–N4 moiety incorporates CNTs to develop a new state above the Fermi level (≈0.3 eV), which facilitates the adsorption of oxygen intermediates while improving electrical conductivity. In another work, Liu et al.157 prepared Pt1–N/BP catalyst material with a Pt loading of 0.4 wt% and N 2.7 wt% using carbon black as a support, with precursors of urea and H2PtCl6.H2O as the sources of N and Pt, respectively. The as-prepared catalyst, Pt1–N/BP, showed much higher catalytic activity with E1/2 of 0.76 V vs. RHE as compared to N/BP (0.51 V vs. RHE) and Pt1/BP (0.44 V vs. RHE) in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (Fig. 5a), indicating that the intrinsic catalytic activity of Pt single-atoms could be exploited by the synergistic effect between N-doped carbon and Pt single-atoms. The catalyst was not only responsible for high catalytic performance but also showed a high tolerance for the adsorption of CO/methanol on the active sites of Pt1–N/BP (Fig. 5b). Theoretical calculations have exhibited that the pyridinic nitrogens coordinated to single Pt atoms are the main active sites in the Pt1–N/BP catalyst (Fig. 5c). Similarly, Chisholm and co-workers158 synthesized single Nb atoms confined in an onion-like carbon shell (denoted as Nb-in-C). The resulting Nb-in-C exhibited much better ORR activity than that of the pristine niobium carbide particles. DFT calculations suggested that the O2 molecules preferred absorbing on the site of the single Nb atoms embedded in defective graphitic carbon, facilitating excellent ORR performance.
 Fig. 5  Single-atom-based carbon nanomaterials for ORR electrocatalysis. a) LSV polarization curves with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 at 1600 rpm. b) The toleration of Pt1–N/BP to CO (saturated) and methanol (0.5 M) in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. c) Top view of the proposed reaction pathways for the complete ORR on the g-P–N1–Pt1 catalyst. Reproduced with permission,157 Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature. d) Fitting results of EXAFS data and active site models of FeNC-300/500/1000. Reproduced with permission,160 Copyright © 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. e) LSV curves of the atomic Co catalyst (Co/NMC-LT900), Co clusters, or nanoparticles catalyst (Co/NMC-RT900) and Pt/C in 0.1 M KOH at 1600 rpm. f) Kinetic current density values for different potential values. g) Tafel plots. Reproduced with permission,176 Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature. 
In another report, it has been shown that the catalytic activities of SACs based on transition metals follow the order of Fe > Co > Mn > Cu > Ni in both acid and alkaline media.159 It should also be noted that the isolated Fe atom-based catalysts prepared from the heat treatment processes inevitably demonstrate various Fe–CxNy configurations, leading to different roles for the ORR activity. For instance, Li et al.160 synthesized a series of Fe–CxN4−x samples (x = 1, 3, 4 as measured by EXAFS, Fig. 5d) and investigated the ORR performance. Experimentally, they found the order of Fe–N4 > Fe–C1N3 > Fe–C3N1 for the ORR in both acidic and basic solutions. Theoretical calculations suggested that the least active moiety was Fe–N5, following the order of Fe–N4 > Fe–C1N3 > Fe–C2N2 > Fe–C3N1 > Fe–N5 for the ORR. However, some recent experimental results have suggested that the moiety of Fe–N5 may be a good active site for the catalytic reaction.161,162 On the other hand, Fe-based SACs have been reported to yield large amounts of H2O2, which is technically an unwanted product for fuel cell systems.163,164 To mitigate this issue, Wang et al.165 prepared a nitrogen-coordinated single Co atom-based catalyst derived from MOF through a one-step thermal activation. The optimal composition achieved the high ORR activity with E1/2 of 0.80 V vs. RHE in acidic medium, generating the lowest H2O2 yield of 5% via four-electron pathways, as compared with Fe-based catalysts. HAADF-STEM and XAFS investigations confirmed the existence of homogeneously dispersed Co/Fe atoms and verified their coordination with the surrounding N atoms. Zhang et al.166 reported a general NaCl template-assisted strategy for rationally designing isolated single atoms of Fe, Co, and Ni on a honeycomb-like nitrogen-doped carbon. The resulting electrocatalyst Fe1-HNC-500-850 with active sites of M–N4 exhibited superior ORR activity, showing the E1/2 order of Fe1-HNC-500-850 (0.831 V) > Co1-HNC-500-850 (0.827 V) > Ni1-HNC-500-850 (0.782). The RRDE experiment further explained that the ORR mechanism of Fe1-HNC-500-850, which exhibited a typical four-electron transfer process with low H2O2 yield. Theoretical calculations revealed that the p–d-coupled electronic orbital of Fe–N4 demonstrated a large range of distribution, which played a dominant role in modifying the surface electronic activities. A similar structure was further investigated theoretically in the work of Wang et al.,167 using iron-phthalocyanine (Fe-Pc) as a precursor for developing Fe–N4 for the ORR in an acidic environment. They found that the O2 molecule could readily bind to the Fe center with charge transfer from Fe to O2 and  reduction and was identified to be the rate-determining step. The results showed that the four-electron transfer was favored on Fe-Pc with activity between the N-doped carbon and Pt. He et al.142 used the surfactant-assisted confinement strategy to develop the core–shell structure of the atomically dispersed single-atom active site Co–N4 from ZIF-8. The obtained catalyst, Co–N–C/surfactant (F127), showed an onset potential of 0.93 V and E1/2 of 0.84 V vs. RHE. It also demonstrated extremely high durability up to 100 h of the ORR without obvious potential attenuation. This suggests that in metal and nitrogen-doped carbon, the M–N4 moiety plays a crucial role in ORR electrocatalysis; however, the coordination number may vary due to different synthetic procedures.
Hollow carbon doped with nitrogen, phosphorous, and sulfur heteroatoms was anchored with single Fe atoms (Fe-SAs/NPS-HC) based on a ZIF-18@polymer composite using the Kirkendall effect. Benefitting from the functionalized hollow structure and the electronic tuning of the single Fe center coordinating with neighboring N atoms and interacting with S and P, the catalyst Fe-SAs/NPS-HC showed excellent ORR performance by achieving E1/2 of 0.912 V vs. RHE and a large kinetic current density of 71.9 mA cm−2 at 0.85 V in alkaline medium. The catalyst also showed superior performance in an acidic electrolyte with E1/2 of 0.79 V comparable to the benchmark Pt/C.141 Moreover, the Fe-SAs/NPS-HC revealed outstanding performance in the Zn–air battery and H2/air fuel cell, suggesting the great potential in both energy conversion and storage applications. Wan et al.168 synthesized a concave-shaped single site of the Fe–N–C catalyst with high surface area and rich mesoporosity by pyrolyzing mesoporous SiO2-coated ZIF-8. Taking advantage of the high mesoporosity, the catalyst afforded a large number of active sites for the ORR.
It is noteworthy that to improve the utilization efficiency of active sites, high degrees of mesoporosity and macroporosity introduced by the metal coordination with nitrogen-doped carbon are highly desirable. For example, Fu et al.169 studied four types of moieties, namely, Fe–N4 bulk, Fe–N4 defective bulk, Fe–N4 zigzag edge, and Fe–N4 defective zigzag edge by employing theoretical calculations. They suggested that the thermodynamic limiting potential of Fe on the single Fe–N4 center increased by changing the location from bulk to edge, and then it increased further when pores were introduced near to the moiety of Fe–N4, achieving a half-wave potential of 0.80 V for the ORR as compared with the nonporous catalyst (0.78 V) in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. In another study, Gao et al.170 prepared nitrogen-doped porous carbon with single Co atoms. The ORR test on this SAC was highly selective for H2O2 and produced over 90% in acidic electrolyte. This performance could be sustained for 10 h without obvious deterioration. The generated H2O2 can be released within a relatively short contact time, leading to extremely high H2O2 selectivity. In contrast, the binding energy of O2 on the Mn and Fe-based SACs is very strong that it causes a greater decrease in the free energy for *OOH reduction to *O; therefore, the four-electron pathway is dominant over the two-electron pathway in Mn and Fe-based SACs, leading to lower H2O2 production. In a similar but independent study, Jiang et al.171 prepared the series of transition metal single-atoms based on CNT (Fe-CNT, Pd-CNT, Co-CNT, and Mn-CNT) with the tuning of neighboring C, O, or N coordination and tested for H2O2 production. Among the different samples, Fe-CNT presented state-of-the-art performance towards H2O2 production in terms of activity and selectivity by showing an onset potential of 0.822 V vs. RHE to reach the current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, maximizing the selectivity greater than 95% in alkaline and neutral pH. This indicates that the molecular understanding of the fundamental reactions provides the guidelines for designing ORR catalysts for different pathways, and opens a new avenue toward adjusting the selectivity of other important chemicals. The key to finding an efficient ORR catalyst depends on the proper binding strength between the reaction sites and O species.172,173 Besides the Fe and Co metal single-atom, Cu metal-based single-atom catalysts have also received significant attention. Recently, Sun and co-workers174 prepared highly loaded (5.4 wt%) single Cu atoms on graphene for ORR electrocatalysis. The ORR test on this SAC presented very high oxygen reduction activity, even outperforming the benchmark Pt/C. The obtained results suggested that the highly dispersed Cu atoms on graphene promoted higher ORR activity as investigated by DFT theory. Later they performed the rotating ring disc electrode test to calculate the electron transfer number, which was found to be 3.96 at 0.8 V, revealing the four-electron pathway on Cu/G SAC. In another study, Wu and co-workers76 described an ambient strategy for preparing SACs from Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu metal foam by strong bonding with the dangling bonds of the graphene oxide support. Considering the versatility of the single Fe atom, it formed a coordination effect between Feδ+ and the surface O dangling bond (Fe–O4) of graphene oxide and was transformed into the Fe–N moiety after pyrolysis. The as-obtained catalyst Fe SAs/N-G exhibited the E1/2 of 0.92 V, which was 80 mV higher than that of Pt/C. Additionally, the catalyst showed excellent stability after 10000 cycles, ascribed to the robust Fe–N4 sites whose atomic dispersion remained after the durability test. Such remarkable durability has also been observed in several other studies in both alkaline and acidic electrolytes, although some work did not give detailed structural characterization after the cycling test.175,165,130
Temperature also plays a critical role in governing the morphology, structure, and aggregation of metal particles during the synthesis of materials due to the thermodynamics and kinetics of the nuclei formation. An interesting effort was made to prepare highly dispersed Co atoms on nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon by applying a very low temperature (−60 °C) to the mixture of the cobalt precursor and water/alcohol solvent.176 Thus, atomically dispersed Co on nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon (Co/NMC-LT900) showed an ORR performance superior to that of the counterpart Co clusters/nanoparticles (Co/NMC-RT900) and commercial Pt/C catalyst. As shown in Fig. 5e, the LSV curves demonstrated the onset and half-wave potential values of 1.03 and 0.897 V for Co/NMC-LT900, which were 62 and 39 mV more positive as compared to the Pt/C in 0.1 M KOH solution. The higher kinetic current densities at 0.85 V (46.8 mA cm−2) and 0.80 V (10.7 mA cm−2) (Fig. 5f), as well as the lower Tafel slope of 80.6 mV dec−1, further confirmed the superior ORR activity of Co/NMC-LT900 (Fig. 5g). The overall high performance was attributed to the high loading of Co atoms (4.66%) by coordinating with nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon (Co–Nx).
In summary, many metal single-atom confined carbon nanomaterials have been prepared to target ORR electrocatalysis. From the results presented above, one can see that the identified parameters such as the coordination number, geometric shape of the moiety, porosity, and heteroatom doping can largely impact the ORR performance of the electrocatalysts. The common key factor for the above-described metal single-atom catalysts is that they are coordinated to electronegative heteroatoms (N, P, S, O) and become active centers.
5. OER
The oxygen evolution reaction is an important anodic reaction for several types of energy conversion and storage systems, such as water splitting, fuel cells, rechargeable metal–air batteries, and so on. The reaction equations of the OER in alkaline and acidic media are as follows:
In alkaline conditions,4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−
In acid conditions,2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−The OER is a four-electron-proton coupled reaction that involves O–H bond breaking and O–O bond formation via four steps: i) adsorption of OH− on the catalytic site and its conversion into *OH; ii) *OH forms *O; iii) *O combines with OH− and forms *OOH; and iv) *OOH cleaves into O2 and desorbs from the surface of the catalyst, which requires higher energy levels, resulting in a large overpotential to overcome the kinetic energy barrier of each step.177–179 The OER is considered the reverse process of the ORR with the same equilibrium potential of 1.23 V, but it may have different rate-determining-steps. The OER mechanism of an electrocatalyst can be determined by the onset potential at which the current density 10 mA cm−2 is achieved and the corresponding Tafel slope value. The Tafel slope is directly related to the electron transfer coefficient and determines the rate of the reaction. Therefore, the development of a highly efficient and cost-effective OER electrocatalyst is a central challenge to the oxygen-related energy conversion and storage devices. Currently, the leading OER anodic catalysts are based on RuO2 and IrO2, since they exhibit the lowest overpotential for catalyzing the OER at a practical current density (10 mA cm−2); due to their high cost and low natural abundance, they render widespread commercial utilization impractical. Since the OER is strongly dependent on a material's properties, the SACs have a great opportunity to achieve high performance in the OER.
For example, Jiang et al.180 proposed theoretical calculations and found that the isolated metal atoms of Pt, Pd, Co, Ni, and Cu supported with g-C3N4 could be used as promising high-performance electrocatalysts. Later, Qiao and co-workers103 synthesized a range of graphitic g-C3N4 coordinated with transition metal atoms and found that the Co–C3N4 catalyst exhibited comparable electrocatalytic activity to that of precious metals for the OER in alkaline media. The OER performance of the catalyst was evaluated by theoretically computing the free energy diagram for the OER under a certain overpotential of 0.35 V, where every reaction step was downhill on the Co–C3N4 catalyst surface except for the OOH* formation step (rate-determining-step, rds) that was 0.53 eV uphill, as represented in Fig. 6a. The commercial IrO2 had the energy difference towards the rds of 0.26 eV smaller than that of Co–C3N4, following the identical mechanism. The correlation of the experimental and computational results confirmed that the Co was connected to the adjacent pyridinic-N atoms from two separate triazine units forming a Co–N3C2 (Fig. 6b–d). The acid-leached sample (Co–C3N4/CNT) was identified as the best OER catalyst, achieving the onset potential of ∼1.5 V to deliver an anodic current density of 10 mA cm−2 in N2-saturated 1 M KOH as compared to the unleached CoOx–Co–C3N4/CNT (Fig. 6e). Recently, Han et al.181 showed isolated binary Co–Ni sites embedded in nitrogen-doped hollow carbon nanocubes (CoNi-SAs/NC) as an oxygen electrocatalyst. Thus, the obtained isolated binary Co–Ni system decreased the energetic limiting barrier, accelerating the reaction kinetics in comparison to the individual monometallic Ni–N and CoNi nanoparticle counterparts. Guo et al.182 displayed atomically dispersed boron-doped Co–N–C sites embedded in porous carbon sheets, which required 430 mV to deliver 10 mA cm−2 current density in alkaline solution. Theoretical calculations suggested that the introduction of the boron heteroatom provided an electron-deficient site that could strengthen the interaction with oxygenated species, facilitating the fast reaction kinetics. In another work, Hou et al.183 demonstrated S and N coordinated Ni atoms dispersed in porous carbon nanosheets as a highly active and stable OER catalyst with a low overpotential of 1.51 V at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, and a Tafel slope of 45 mV dec−1 in alkaline media. DFT calculations based on such a coordination environment revealed that the high catalytic activity of S and N-coordinated Ni atoms dispersed in porous carbon nanosheets resulted from the optimized density of states distribution and the improved electron transfer ability of the active sites. Following the same procedure, Huang and co-workers184 prepared a series of atomic dispersions of transition metals (Fe, Co, Ni) in nitrogen-doped graphene and investigated the influence of the metal center in determining the OER activities. Theoretical calculations suggested that the OER activity and reaction pathways were strongly dependent on the number of d electrons (Nd) of the metal, with Fe (Nd = 6) and Co (Nd = 7) following the single and dual-site mechanism, respectively, and for Ni, Nd = 8. The OER tests for the catalysts showed the trend of activity of Ni > Co > Fe, exhibiting the overpotentials of 331, 402, and 488 mV at 10 mA cm−2, respectively, and the Tafel slopes were determined to be 63, 80 and 164 mV dec−1, respectively. N, P, and S heteroatoms-doped carbon substantially regulated the coordination number and spatial structure of the coordinated metal atom, and oxygen (O) could also remarkably regulate the electronic properties of SAC due to its superior electronegativity,185,186 accelerating the electron transfer and modulating the adsorption of oxygen groups (H2O and OH*), consequently improving the OER activity and durability. To this end, Ni single-atoms coordinated to oxygen sites on graphene-like carbon (denoted as Ni–O-G SAC) were designed.187 The catalyst demonstrated excellent OER activity with a small overpotential of 224 mV at 10 mA cm−2, two times lower than its counterpart NiO nanoparticles anchored on graphene (450 mV) (Fig. 6f). The catalyst also showed a low Tafel slope (42 mV dec−1) with outstanding long-term stability (Fig. 6g and h). The catalyst site was assumed to be the Ni atom in the Ni–O4(OH)2 configuration, as shown in the model structures (Fig. 6i and j). The XPS and EXAFS results showed that the nickel atom was more positive with a high theoretical oxidation state (+2.34). DFT calculations confirmed that the high binding energy of single Ni atoms led to the efficient and durable OER performance of the Ni–O-G SAC (Fig. 6k). It was a first of its kind study, which showed highly durable OER activity; in general, the coordination of a single atom with O is considered much weaker as compared to N and leads to less stable catalysts.188,189
 Fig. 6  Single-atom-based carbon nanomaterials for OER electrocatalysis. a) Free-energy diagram for the OER under certain overpotentials. b–d) A Co atom connected to two N atoms acts as the active center for the intermediate adsorption and charge transfer. e) LSV curves for the OER of different Co-based catalysts, as well as the stability test for Co–C3N4/CNT after 3000 cycles. Reproduced with permission,103 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. f) LSV curves for the OER, g) the corresponding Tafel plots. h) The chronoamperometric curve of Ni–O-G SACs (inset: the HAADF-STEM image of Ni–O-G SACs after 50 h durability testing). i) Optimized geometric model of Ni sites in the Ni–O-G SACs structure, j) the corresponding map of the DFT ESP surface of the Ni–O-G SACs structure (blue color indicates positive charge and red color indicates negative charge). k) Free-energy diagrams of the OER pathways and OER theoretical overpotential of the Ni–O-G SACs structure (red), Ni–N-G SACs (pink), and NiO nanoparticles (blue). Reproduced with permission,187 Copyright © 2020, WILEY-VCH GmbH & Co. 
In summary, the OER requires a high oxidation potential, which leads to the oxidation of carbon materials; therefore, highly dispersed metal atoms in a carbon matrix with a high graphitization degree are very important. Through rational design with a porous morphological structure, SACs with a high loading of metal atoms can achieve the OER activity with 10 mA cm−2 current density at less than 300 mV.
6. HER
Hydrogen is a clean energy carrier; it possesses a high energy density value per mass and can be used directly as a fuel.190 Electrochemical water reduction is a sustainable approach to generating molecular hydrogen. The HER in water electrolysis is as follows:2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH− (basic medium)2H+ + 2e− → H2 (acidic medium)In contrast to the ORR and OER, where oxygen atoms as intermediates are adsorbed on the active sites of the catalyst, in the HER, the hydrogen intermediates (H*) are adsorbed. The most active catalysts for the HER are based on Pt with a near-zero onset potential, because the active sites of the catalyst afford zero free energy (ΔGH*) on adsorption of the H* intermediate.191 Thus, the free energy of H adsorption (ΔGH*) is one of the key descriptors, which is mainly related to the electronic structure of the catalyst surface192 and theoretical calculations examine the adsorption strength of H species on active sites. An ideal catalyst is supposed to have a moderate ΔGH* value for the adsorption and desorption steps. The kinetics of HER is facile and can achieve a practical current density of ≈1 A cm−2 at millivolts of overpotential with a negligible Pt loading of catalyst material.193–195 Along with rapid advances in the variety of carbon-based HER electrocatalysts, several SACs have been reported that show HER performances that are comparable to or even better than Pt-nanoparticle-based catalysts. For example, Yao and co-workers196 prepared atomically dispersed Pt on a MOF-(Uio-66-NH2)-derived N–C framework via the atomic layer deposition method. The HAAD-STEM image showed that most Pt species are isolated and uniformly dispersed on the N–C sites (Fig. 7a). According to the EXAFS fitting models, there were two possible and stable coordinate configurations constructed, i.e., Pt1–C2 and Pt1–C1N1 for simulating the varied Pt local structure under realistic conditions, as shown in (Fig. 7b). Combining DFT calculations and EXAFS results revealed that the Pt atom tends to be a free metallic atom, weakening the interaction and charge transfer between Pt and N–C leading to a near-free state of Pt, which energetically facilitated H2O adsorption in alkaline electrolyte, followed by a more optimized H* adsorption that resulted in superior HER activity (Fig. 7c). Therefore, the obtained catalyst Pt1-NC delivered very small overpotentials of 46 and 19 mV at the current density of 10 mV cm−2 in alkaline and acidic solution, respectively, superior to those of Pt/C (57 and 25 mV) (Fig. 7d). The Tafel slope of Pt1-NC in 1 M KOH was 36.8 mV dec−1, lower than that of Pt/C 39.8 mV dec−1, indicating the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism for HER (Fig. 7e). The catalyst also showed high durability in both acid and alkaline solutions with an almost negligible current loss for 20 h of operation (Fig. 7f). In another attempt, Cheng et al.87 fabricated single Pt atoms and clusters on nitrogen-doped graphene using the atomic layer deposition method, where the framework of N–C provides a strong interaction between Pt atoms and the support, resulting in a negligible onset overpotential and higher activity than the commercial Pt/C catalyst. The improvement in the HER performance was ascribed to the partially unoccupied density of states in the 5d orbitals of the Pt atom. Lu et al.197 synthesized an HER catalyst by atomically dispersing Ru on carbon nanowires. According to the theoretical calculations, the superior HER performance was ascribed to the individual Ru atoms embedded within the carbon matrix, where RuCxNy moieties were found to show much lower hydrogen binding energy than Ru nanoparticles, and a lower kinetic barrier for water dissociation than Pt (Fig. 7g). As a result, the obtained catalyst (Ru-NC-700) showed an overpotential of only −12 mV to reach a current density of 10 mV cm−2 in 1 M KOH and −47 mV in 0.1 M KOH, much better than the commercial Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 7h and i).
 Fig. 7  Single atom-based carbon nanomaterials for HER electrocatalysis. a) HAADF-STEM image of the Pt single atoms dispersion in the N–C framework. b) Computational models of the Pt1–C3N1 and two Pt1–C2 and two Pt1–C1N1 moieties, c) calculated adsorption energies of H2O and H on the Pt1–C3N1, Pt1–C2, and Pt1–C1N1. d) LSV curves of Pt1/N–C, Pt/C and N–C framework in acid and base electrolytes. e) Tafel plots for Pt1/N–C and Pt/C. f) Durability test of Pt1/N–C in acidic and basic electrolytes. Reproduced with permission,196 Copyright © 2020, Springer Nature. g) Energy diagram of different RuCxNy structures from first-principles calculations. h) LSV curves of Ru-NC-T and Pt/C (20 wt%) in 0.1 M KOH. i) LSV curves of Ru-NC-700 and Pt/C (20 wt%) in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission,197 Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature. j) HER activity of M–N–C and N–C catalysts at pH 13. k) HER activity of M–N–C and N–C catalysts at pH 1. Reproduced with permission,198 Copyright © 2015, Electrochemical Society. 
It is desirable that Pt and other precious-metal-based catalysts, which are regarded as the most active materials for the HER, are replaced by earth-abundant metals, which, however, are also not free from setbacks since they suffer from dissolution in strongly acidic and basic electrolytes. As mentioned above, the strong coordination of metal atoms to the support can greatly enhance their chemical stability. In this regard, Jaouen and co-workers,198 systematically prepared M–N–C catalysts for the HER using various transition metal salts (e.g.; W, Mo, Cu, Zn, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni) and Zn-based MOFs, followed by pyrolysis. The obtained catalysts were tested for HER activities and they found that the Co-, Ni-, and Fe–N–C catalysts were highly active for the HER at pH 13 (Fig. 7j), while Co–N–C and Cr–N–C were the most active at pH 1, as represented in (Fig. 7k). In another study, Fan et al.136 reported atomically dispersed nonprecious Ni species in MOF-derived carbon; the as prepared A-Ni–C catalyst exhibited excellent HER performance with an overpotential of −34 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 41 mV dec−1, which were comparable to the commercial Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4. Following the same procedure, Yao and co-workers,199 atomically dispersed Ni on defective graphene (A-Ni@DG) catalyst and the origin of the HER activity was studied. The as-obtained catalyst material showed a porous 2D structure with uniformly distributed Ni atoms on graphene layers occupying the di-vacancy of the graphene lattice. By calculating the formation energy, they identified several stable Ni–C coordination structures. The obtained catalyst A-Ni@DG displayed an overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 as low as 70 mV and a Tafel slope of 31 mV dec−1 in acidic solution, comparable to that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst. A MOF-derived carbon with single-atom tungsten (W) was reported (W-SAC), which was applied as an HER electrocatalyst and showed an overpotential of 85 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, comparable to the Pt/C (78 mV) in alkaline medium,132 showing outstanding stability with almost no degradation after 10000 CV cycles between 0 and −0.15 V. The computational study showed that the most favorable active site of W-SAC was the coordinated C atom being close to the N atom with a very low ΔGH* value of 0.033 eV.
Various types of metal single-atom embedded carbon nanomaterials have been proposed for HER electrocatalysis. The interesting studies above displayed the importance of the local structure and morphology of the SACs in modulating the catalytic HER performance. The SACs can achieve the current density of 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential less than 100 mV. However, more attention is needed to improve the HER in alkaline medium due to the higher activation barrier for the Volmer reaction.200
7. Bifunctional electrocatalysis activities of metal single-atom catalysts
The electrocatalysts that show bifunctionality are desirable for developing energy conversion and storage devices. For example, the integration of the ORR–OER, with a bifunctional electrocatalyst for metal–air batteries, and the OER–HER for water splitting is essential. However, in practice, each reaction requires different catalyst materials and electrolyte environments,201,202 which make the development of electrochemical energy systems difficult. Pt-based electrocatalysts are good for the ORR but poor for the OER203 similarly, RuO2/IrO2 is good for the OER but inactive for the ORR.204 Thus, the requirement of bifunctionality from a single material is narrow. In this section, SACs for integrated energy conversion reactions corresponding to energy devices are overviewed.
7.1 ORR–OER for metal–air batteries
Over the past decade, the research interest in metal–air batteries has been rapidly growing. Highly efficient and stable ORR and OER bifunctional electrocatalyst are urgently needed to realize the implementation of metal–air batteries. In particular, Zn–air batteries are of significant interest as they show high theoretical energy density (1086 W h kg−1) and cell voltage (1.66 V), including high stability in alkaline solution.205 The Zn–air battery consists of four major components: i) Zn anode; ii) air cathode; iii) electrolyte and iv) separator. In the air electrode, during the discharging and charging processes, the ORR and OER take places, which determine the power density, energy density, and energy efficiency of the batteries.206–209 The evaluation of an electrocatalyst for ORR–OER bifunctional activity can be based on the potential gap between the overpotential (η10) of the OER and the halfwave potential (E1/2) of the ORR. However, its generalization is limited by various setbacks, leaving the poor ORR activity of existing electrocatalysts based on metal oxides.210–213 The more critical issue is that after the deep discharge of the air-electrode, a thick layer of side products cover the surface of the electrode, which prevents the OER, leading to long charging time and the permanent loss of capacity. Additionally, the cycling stability of bifunctional electrodes, in general, is far from satisfactory, and degradation usually starts within a few cycles.214–216
Therefore, the development of highly active and stable bifunctional (ORR–OER) electrocatalysts is essential to reduce the overpotentials for the discharging/charging processes and long life metal–air batteries.217–222 For the simultaneous electrocatalysis of the ORR and OER, the electrodes are supposed to have channels for providing the smooth transportation of oxygen and liquid, as well as enough spaces for the deposition of discharge products.223,224 Carbon nanomaterials confined with single atoms provide a potential solution for this issue. For example, Tavakkoli et al.225 demonstrated a mesoporous high surface area SAC (named N–Co–Mo-GF/CNT) based on graphene nanoflakes, carbon nanotubes, and single atoms of Co and Mo. When the catalyst was deposited on the Ni substrate it showed advanced bifunctional ORR–OER activities. This was presumably because of the high surface area and mesoporous structure of the catalyst that consists of porous channels to facilitate rapid O2 diffusion, providing a high density of reactive sites for ORR–OER bifunctional activities. The Co single-atom electrocatalyst with an urchin-like nano-tube hierarchical structure (UNT Co SAs/N–C) was derived from ZIF-67 for ORR–OER bifunctional activities (Fig. 8a and b). Regarding the bifunctional activity, the UNT Co SAs/N–C achieved a potential difference (ΔE) between the ORR and OER as low as 0.72 V by adjusting the overpotential (η10) of the OER and the halfwave potential (E1/2) of the ORR, suggesting the high bifunctionality of the catalyst as compared with the commercial IrO2 and Pt/C catalysts (Fig. 8c). The superior performance was ascribed to the synergistic effect of the single-atom features and the unique superstructure that further improved the absorption of the hydroxide ions and the efficient transport reaction intermediates.226 Single-coordinated Co atoms in g-C3N5 with enhanced active surface area and electron/electrolyte conductivity have also been reported as an air cathode. In this case, the Co–N2 coordinated moiety in the g-C3N5 was determined as an active site for bifunctional ORR–OER activity in 0.1 M KOH, according to the experimental and theoretical calculations.103
 Fig. 8  ORR–OER bifunctional electrocatalysis for metal–air batteries. a and b) SEM images of UNT CoSAs/N–C catalyst. c) Overall overpotential of the ORR and OER for UNT CoSAs/N–C, UNT CoS-NPs/N–C, UNT Co NPs/N–C, and Pt/C–IrO2. Reproduced with permission,226 Copyright © 2019, Elsevier. d) A schematic diagram of the homemade Zn–air battery. e) OCP of the Zn–air battery with pfSAC-Fe-0.2 as the catalyst. f) Comparison of the polarization and power density curves of Pt/C and pfSAC-Fe-0.2 as the catalyst. g) Comparison of the specific capacities of the Zn–air batteries. h) Long-term discharge/charge cycling performance of Zn–air batteries with Pt/C and pfSAC-Fe-0.2 as the ORR catalyst and IrO2 as the OER catalyst at a current density of 5 mA m−2 (inset: voltage efficiency of the Zn–air batteries based on pfSAC-Fe-0.2 during the cycling test). Reproduced with permission,97 Copyright © 2019, AAAS i) discharge profiles at 10 mA cm−2. j) Polarization and power density curves. k) Galvanostatic discharge curves of the Zn–air battery at different current densities for FeCo-IA/NC and Pt/C. l) Digital photograph of the LED driven by two FeCo-IA/NC-based Zn–air batteries. Reproduced with permission,227 Copyright © 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another interesting report97 demonstrated a nitrogen coordinated single-atom site (Fe–N–C) based on a pyrolysis-free method using an iron phthalocyanine-rich covalent organic framework (catalyst expressed as pfSAC-Fe), which showed excellent ORR activity. The home-made Zn–air battery is shown in Fig. 8d, where the catalyst pfSAC-Fe as an air cathode showed an open circuit potential as high as 1.41 V (Fig. 8e). Compared with the battery using commercial Pt/C as the electrocatalyst, the as-fabricated Zn–air battery delivered similar discharge behavior, higher power density (123.43 mW cm−2 as compared to 113.81 mW cm−2, the power density of the battery-driven by Pt/C), and larger specific capacity (732 mAh gZn−1 at 100 mA cm−2 with a zinc utilization of 89.3%) at the same loading (0.2 mg cm−2) (Fig. 8f and g). Apart from the high performance in the home-made Zn–air battery, the catalyst pfSAC-Fe presented a long life span as shown in the galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves obtained by alternatively applying constant discharge and charge current densities. The catalyst pfSAC-Fe showed only a 0.1% decrease in performance after 300 h, indicating the considerable stability of the catalyst, while the discharge voltage of the commercial Pt/C-based system markedly decreased within 20 h under the same conditions (Fig. 8h). As represented above, the SACs with hierarchical carbon support can demonstrate excellent ORR–OER bifunctional activity for Zn–air batteries. The synergy of two isolated active sites embedded in hierarchical carbon could result in a low overpotential for the oxygen electrode.
Very recently,227 two isolated Fe–N4 and Co–N4 active sites on microporous nitrogen-doped carbon derived from the ZIF-8 framework (expressed as FeCo-IA/NC) showed an open circuit voltage 1.472 V higher than Pt/C (1.385 V). When it was used in a Zn–air battery for practical application, it generated a specific capacity of 635.3 mAh g−1 (corresponding to the energy density of 725.6 W h kgZn−1), which was found to be larger than that of the Pt/C-based battery (585.7 mAh g−1), as shown by discharge curves at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 8i). As shown in Fig. 8j, the peak power density of the FeCo-IA/NC battery was calculated to be 115.6 mW cm−2 at 130.0 mA cm−2, which was 1.9 times that of the Pt/C-based battery (61.3 mW cm−2 at 100.0 mA cm−2). The synergistic effect between Fe–N4 and Co–N4 was demonstrated as the origin for the superior oxygen electrode according to the experimental results and DFT calculations. Fig. 8k represents the galvanostatic discharge processes at different current densities (from 2 to 25 mA cm−2) markedly suggesting that the voltage plateaus of the FeCo-IA/NC catalyst were larger than those from the Pt–C-based catalyst, showing an almost constant capacity. The FeCo-IA/NC-based Zn–air battery was able to light a light-emitting diode (LED) device for more than 2 h (Fig. 8l).
Along with the advancement of nitrogen-doped carbon supports for single-atom bifunctional catalysts for the ORR–OER, co-doping the carbon support with other heteroatoms (e.g., P or S) can further enhance their performance by increasing the number of dopant heteroatoms and the electronic interactions, generating a synergistic effect. Using pyrrole and phytic acid as the nitrogen and phosphorous precursors, respectively, Yuan et al. developed dual-coordinated Fe active sites embedded in carbon nanosheets (denoted Fe–N/P–C) as electrodes for the Zn–air battery, which showed an impressive open-circuit voltage of 1.42 V and a maximum power density of 133.2 mW cm−2 at a current density of 219.6 mA cm−2, much higher than that of the Pt/C-based Zn–air battery (74.3 mW cm−2). The specific capacity of the air cathode in the device at 100 mA cm−2 was observed as high as 723.6 mAh g−1, which was larger than the value obtained for the commercial Pt/C (68.7 mAh g−1).228 The experimental and theoretical results suggested that the N and P dual-coordination Fe sites were highly favorable for oxygen intermediate adsorption/desorption, resulting in accelerated reaction kinetics for the oxygen reduction. Another interesting study was carried out by Shang et al.,229 where they prepared MnSAC through the pyrolysis method and implemented a bifunctional electrocatalyst for simultaneously catalyzing the ORR and OER in alkaline conditions. The operando X-ray absorption fine structure measurements and density functional theory revealed that the bond-length-extended Mn2+–N2C2 atomic interface sites acted as an active center for the ORR, while the bond-length-shortened high-valency Mn2+–N2C2 served the OER. When the catalyst was applied in the Zn–air battery, it displayed a power density of 258 mW cm−2, outperforming that of the benchmark Pt/C (182 mW cm−2). At 5 mA cm−2, the battery showed a specific capacity of 675 mAh g−1. The catalyst also showed outstanding stability when the device was cycled over 100 h at 5 mA cm−2, with no obvious decay in discharge voltage.
The rapid development of flexible and wearable electronics requires flexible power sources. In this context, a quasi-solid state Zn–air battery was reported.181 The binary atomic Co–Ni sites in the nitrogen-doped hollow carbon (CoNi-SAs/NC) bifunctional oxygen electrode showed stable discharge–charge curves even after 400 min with 10 min per cycle, affording enhanced reversibility. An LED screen can be lit up by two cells connected in series, which exhibited extremely stable discharge and charge performance under different angles, demonstrating excellent flexibility. It has also been documented in a couple of recent studies on Co-based single-atom catalysts.230,231 The results clearly show that the performance of an electrode for bifunctionality can be regulated by using rational design and the unique well-defined hierarchical structures of the catalyst for an efficient air cathode.
7.2 OER–HER for water electrolyzers
Water splitting relies on two elementary reactions that involve water reduction to evolve hydrogen at the negative electrode, and water oxidation to evolve oxygen at the positive electrode. Low-cost bifunctional electrocatalysts are highly desired to increase the kinetics of these reactions to meet practical demand. An efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst can effectively reduce the energy consumption of the whole cycling process. The difference between the overpotential achieved at 10 mA cm−2 for both the anodic (positive) OER and cathodic (negative) HER is a key factor for evaluating the bifunctionality of an electrocatalyst for a water electrolyzer. Usually, the overall efficiency is determined by the slow kinetics of the anodic OER. Thus, the development of a more active and durable anodic catalyst has a direct impact on the device efficiency. In the past few years, substantial research efforts have been devoted to the development of anodic catalysts based on transition metals and their oxides.232–241 However, their bifunctional properties are often not attractive, especially for two reasons: 1) the undesirable changes in the morphology/crystalline structure and uncontrolled agglomeration/dissolution, even with short cycling time;242 2) most OER electrocatalysts only function in alkaline or neutral conditions, this poses a potential problem when the HER is coupled with the OER in an overall water splitting system because the HER performance of these electrocatalysts is significantly worse in alkaline solution due to the inefficient dissociation of water to initiate the Volmer reaction. Thus, a simultaneously functional electrocatalyst for the OER and HER is highly desirable and can only be achieved by the regulation of the geometric and electronic structure of the catalyst at the atomic level.
Only a few reports have focused on OER–HER bifunctional electrocatalysts based on single-atoms confined in carbon nanomaterials. A robust OER–HER bifunctional electrocatalyst based on single Ir atoms, Fe nanoparticles, and nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (named as Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT) was recently pursued for water splitting by virtue of its exceptionally high atom utilization efficiency, well-defined active sites, and high selectivity.243 On using it in a laboratory-made water electrolyzer as shown in Fig. 9a, it required only 1.51 V to achieve a water-splitting anodic current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4. In contrast, the commercial Pt/C–IrO2 required 1.6 V to reach the same current density. The catalyst Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT exhibited excellent stability at 10 and 100 mA cm−2 current density as compared to the Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 9b and c). After the chronoamperometry test, the catalyst showed high durability with almost no degradation in activity as compared to Pt/C–IrO2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte (Fig. 9d). The reason for the high stability of the catalyst in acidic electrolyte was explored by XANES characterizations, where oxidation and/or dissolution of Ir single atoms were inhibited by dispersing them in/onto Fe nanoparticles, and both Ir and Fe were strongly encapsulated in the CNTs and thus protected from oxidation and/or dissolution in the acid electrolyte. According to DFT calculations, a lower uphill free energy (2.96 eV) was required for Fe–Ir coordination than Ir–N (4.04 eV) to carry out the OER in an acid electrolyte. The HER calculation was done according to the Gibbs free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH*) on the surface of the electrocatalyst, which was 0.05 eV for Ir–Fe coordination and was much closer to 0 eV than Ir–N (−0.15 eV) and Pt (−0.10 eV), implying a more moderate hydrogen adsorption and desorption strength on Ir–Fe species, resulting in a high HER activity. Overall, the high bifunctionality of catalyst Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT was endowed by the interplay of nitrogen-doped CNT, the coordination of single Ir atoms and Fe nanoparticles, and the encapsulation of the active Ir–Fe sites in CNTs. Some first-principle calculations predicted that the C9N4 monolayer showed nodal-line semi-metallic properties and energetically more stability than the experimentally synthesized C2N and g-C3N4, which was beneficial for use as the OER–HER bifunctional catalytic material upon the introduction of a range of metal single-atoms.244–247 For instance, Zhou et al.248 screened various transition metal atoms (Pt, Ir, Ru, Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, and Cu) supported by the C9N4 monolayer, and plotted volcano curves using the exchange current (jo) density as a function of the ΔGH* to compare the HER activity (Fig. 9e). The closer the location of the value to the volcano peak, the better the HER performance of the catalyst.249 As can be seen from (Fig. 9f), the values of ΔGH* (N) for Co, Ni, and Pt are close to zero and are thus located close to the peak of the volcano curve. Among them, they found that only Ni@C9N4 performed as a promising bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting with N and Ni atoms as the catalytic active sites for the HER and OER with Gibbs free energy (ΔGH*) of −0.04 eV and OER overpotential of 0.31 V, respectively (Fig. 9g). It is worth noting that compared to the ORR–OER bifunctional single-atom catalysts, there are few reports on the OER–HER bifunctional single-atom catalysts for water splitting. The continued progress in carbon nanomaterials-based single-atom catalysts for bifunctional OER–HER would be of great value for the new generation of water electrolyzers.
 Fig. 9  OER–HER bifunctional electrocatalysis for water electrolyzers. a) LSV curves of Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT for water splitting in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. b and c) Chronoamperometric tests of Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT and Pt/C–IrO2 at 10 and 100 mA cm−2 (pink line: Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT; orange line Pt/C–IrO2). d) LSV curves of the water-splitting test in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte of Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT before (black line) and after (red line) the chronoamperometric test. Reproduced with permission,243 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. e) The HER volcano curve of the exchange current (jo) related to the Gibbs free energy of hydrogen (ΔGH*) adsorbed on the different active sites of TM@C9N4 catalysts. f) Calculated ΔGH* for the TM and N atoms in the TM@C9N4 catalysts. g) Free energy diagram for the OER on Ni@C9N4 at 0 V. Reproduced with permission,248 Copyright © 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
8. Concluding remarks, challenges, and outlook
Metal single-atom catalysts with the support of carbon nanomaterials play a critical role in electrocatalysis, especially benefiting from the unique physicochemical properties of the carbon nanostructures, in particular, owing to the large surface area, good electrical conductivity, and excellent chemical stability that greatly promote the catalytic performance and lifespan of catalyst materials. The research of carbon nanomaterials as a platform for single atoms has encouraged the emergence of various SACs with novel nanostructure design and excellent electrochemical properties. In this review article, we first discussed the essential requirements of the supports for the single-atom dispersion and their unique interactions between heteroatoms and the carbon network. Then, we described the importance of the graphene support for the atomic dispersion of metals by different confinement strategies, following other carbon supports such as g-C3N4, CNT, porous carbon, graphdiyne, and MOF-derived carbons. Since the SACs based on carbon nanomaterials can be produced by a variety of synthetic methods, there are significant differences in their physicochemical and electrocatalytic properties. Within this context, it is desirable to establish a unified preparation method for SACs that maintains continuous progress in this field.
Another challenge is to obtain high metal loading (>1% w/w) without aggregation in the support to achieve excellent selectivity and activity. To alleviate the metal loading concern, various hard or soft templates with the rational design of a hierarchical porous structure and suitable pore-size distribution, including a highly doped carbon network, can be an intelligent strategy for obtaining the high loading of isolated metal atoms while providing strong binding affinity. In short, a suitable porous template with a 3D nanostructure could mitigate this limitation associated with the loading quantity.
We comprehensibly summarized the current advancement of single-atom-based carbon nanomaterials in the electrocatalysis of the ORR, OER, and HER, including their bifunctional activities in Zn–air batteries and water electrolysis. As the nitrogen species restrain the electronic structure of carbon nanomaterial-based SACs, which facilitates the adsorption/desorption states, it requires maximum nitrogen centers to bind a greater number of single atoms to boost the ORR, OER, and HER. Although the metal–air battery concept has been revived in the past decade, the advancement is still not competitive enough to realize widespread adoption for practical use because of the poor simultaneous work function, low efficiency, and stability issues of the air-electrode. Some impressive studies have been done in the preparation of metal single-atom based bifunctional electrodes due to their more distinguished properties as compared to their nanostructured counterparts, but in a real sense, they failed to show ideal performance for both the ORR and OER, which urges further exploration, especially in their careful design with suitable metals, loading optimization and controlled active centers bypassing the disadvantages of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis. Most ORR–OER bifunctional electrocatalysts are based on Fe and Co single atoms, and future research will be certainly related to the development of bifunctional electrocatalysts with more different active single-atom sites.
In order to realize the reasonable design of bifunctional single-atom catalysts, it is highly recommended that insight be gained into the chemical state and atomic structure of active centers in realistic operation conditions. Due to the very complex nature of the active sites, it is challenging to grasp a mechanistic understanding. As presented in the above studies, combining the first-principles calculations with physical characterizations (XAFS and HAADF-STEM) is a good descriptor for predicting active sites explaining the direct relation to the reaction process of the catalyst. In view of this, the underlying mechanism relative to theory and catalysis is highly important for developing new state-of-the-art catalysts, giving rise to the elucidation of the interaction between the atomic metal center and mechanistic investigation. Thus, greater efforts should go toward designing operando characterization techniques combined with theoretical calculations. As such, it would be more helpful if in situ structural investigations, such as X-ray absorption spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS), etc., were established to accurately identify active sites for providing the guidelines for future catalyst design. The atomically dispersed metals are not truly isolated with zero valence state, rather, it is the interfacial connectivity of carbon with single-atoms and heteroatoms in the form of an isolated single-active moiety located deeply inside the catalyst. The overall improvement of the catalytic performance can be considered by featuring the intrinsic nature of the active site, metal loading, conductivity, and synergistic effects of the doping/co-doping/defects.
The stability concerns must also be noted, especially in the case of the OER, which usually takes place at high overpotential (>1.3 V vs. RHE), and carbon materials are susceptible to corrosion at high overpotentials and hinder the long term stability of SACs. In this context, the carbon material should be highly graphitized with a stable doping configuration.250–252 Despite the significant progress in the development of SACs for the ORR, OER, and HER electrocatalysis, there is still a lacuna, especially for their bifunctional properties, as each energy conversion reaction demands a different environment. Thus, finding an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst that can be integrated into devices and work over a wide range of pH is a difficult task. The research field of SACs is still in the nascent stage with respect to the noble/non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts but it is certainly a promising field and we hope that the continued research efforts will surely bring breakthrough in clean renewable energy technologies in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The author M. K. is grateful to the São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) for financial support under the project No. 2017/00433-5. This study was also financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior – Brasil (CAPES) – Finance Code 001. H. V. acknowledges São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) for financial support (#2013/16930-7). H. V. acknowledges Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Technológico (CNPq) for financial support (#306060/2017-5).
Notes and references
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0003 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, W. Cui, Q. Liu, Z. Xing, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. B. Wu and X. W. D. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaap9252 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Hu, Q. Ma, S.-F. Hung, Z.-N. Chen, D. Ou, B. Ren, H. M. Chen, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Chem, 2017, 3, 122 CrossRef CAS .
B. Han, R. Lang, H. Tang, J. Xu, X. K. Gu, B. Qiao and J. J. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2019, 40, 1847–1853 CrossRef .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fu, H. Saltsburg and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Science, 2003, 301, 935–938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Sun, Y. Qin, W. Zhang, L. Wang, M. Luo, H. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903120 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, T. Fan, N. Xie, G. Nie and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Bi, L. Zhang, S. Tao, W. Chu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2427–2431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
J. Jones, H. Xiong, A. T. DeLaRiva, E. J. Peterson, H. Pham, S. R. Challa, G. Qi, S. Oh, M. H. Wiebenga, X. I. P. Hernández, Y. Wang and A. K. Datye, Science, 2016, 353, 150–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, H. Asakura, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhou, Y. Han, T. Tanaka, A. Wang, T. Zhang and N. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wan, W. Chen, C. Jia, L. Zheng, J. Dong, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, W. Yan, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705369 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lin, W. Zhou, R. Gao, S. Yao, X. Zhang, W. Xu, S. Zheng, Z. Jiang, Q. Yu, Y. Li, C. Shi, X. Wen and D. Ma, Nature, 2017, 544, 80–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, H. Liu and J. Ye, Nano Today, 2018, 19, 108–125 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Shi and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. Liang, C. Hao and Y. Shi, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2559–2567 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Catal. Today, 2017, 298, 216–225 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Zhao, M. Cheng, A. Li and J. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 1–7 CrossRef .
J. Guao, X. Yan, Q. Liu, Q. Li, X. Xu, L. Kang, Z. Cao, G. Chai, J. Chen, Y. Wang and J. Yao, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 347–355 CrossRef .
M. B. Gawande, P. Fornasiero and R. Zbořil, ACS Catal., 2020, 3, 2231–2259 CrossRef .
Z. Lu, B. Wang, Y. Hu, W. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Yang, Z. Li, J. Luo, B. Chi, Z. Jiang, M. Li, S. Mu, S. Liao, J. Zhang and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2622–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Higgins, P. Zamani, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 357–390 RSC .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, J. Song, Q. Shi, D. Su, M. H. Engelhard, X. Li, D. Xiao, D. Li, L. Estevez, D. Du and Y. Lin, Small, 2017, 13, 1603407 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Wei, J. Dong, G. Liu, L. Shi, P. An, G. Zhao, J. Kong, X. Wang, X. Meng, J. Zhang and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xing, S. Guo and L. Guo, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2018, 137, 18 Search PubMed .
Z. Jiang, W. Sun, H. Shang, W. Chen, T. Sun, H. Li, J. Dong, J. Zhou, Z. Li, Y. Wang, R. Cao, R. Sarangi, Z. Yang, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3508–3514 RSC .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, T. Zheng, Y. Hu, S. Hwang, E. Stavitski, Y. Peng, J. Dynes, M. Gangisetty, D. Su, K. Attenkofer and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 893–903 RSC .
F. Yang, D. Deng, X. Pan, Q. Fu and X. Bao, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2015, 2, 183–201 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, Q. Shi, D. Du and Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13944–13960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Hou, H.-F. Wang, C. Li and O. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1658–1693 RSC .
L. Zhang, M. Zhou, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 683–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, Z. Zhuang, X. Cao, C. Zhang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2215–2264 RSC .
H. Fei, J. Dong, D. Chen, T. Hu, X. Duan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5207–5241 RSC .
A. Alarawi, V. Ramalingam and J. He, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 11, 1–23 CrossRef .
H. Li, H. Zhu, Z. Zhuang, S. Lu, F. Duan and M. Du, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 996–1011 RSC .
W. Liu, H. Zhang, C. Li, X. Wang, J. Liu and X. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 47, 333–345 CrossRef .
N. Cheng, L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis and X. Sun, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 539–573 CrossRef .
C. Rivera-Cárcamo and P. Serp, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 5058–5091 CrossRef .
M. Khalid, A. M. B. Honorato, G. T. Filho and H. Varela, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 921–931 RSC .
C. Lu, R. Fang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1906548 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ji, Y. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Rev., 2020 DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00818 .
C. Choi, M. Kim, H. C. Kwon, S. J. Cho, S. Yun, H. Kim, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, H. Kim and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. Rong, J. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1842–1855 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, C. X. Guao, S. Tian, J. Zhang, W. Chen, W.-C. Cheong, L. Gu, L. Zheng, J. Xiao, Q. Liu, B. Li, D. Wang and Y. Li, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 972–981 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, D. Cheng, D. Cao and X. C. Zeng, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 339–348 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, B. Li, E. Sarnello, S. Hwang, Y. Gang, X. Feng, X. Xiang, N. M. Adli, T. Li, D. Su, G. Wu, G. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104384 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, K. Ye, L. Xu, W. Hu, Y. Lei, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, K. Zhou, J. Jiang, J. M. Basset, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14801–14806 RSC .
Y. Qu, Z. Li, W. Chen, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, X. Wang, F. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 781–786 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, S. Brüller, R. Dong, J. Zhang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Jiang, Y. Zhu, X. Yang and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1694–1701 RSC .
H. Wu, H. Li, X. Zhao, Q. Liu, J. Wang, J. Xiao, S. Xie, R. Si, F. Yang, S. Miao, X. Guo, G. Wang and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3736–3745 RSC .
Y. Yang, Z. Lin, S. Gao, J. Su, Z. Lun, G. Xia, J. Chen, R. Zhang and Q. Chen, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 469–479 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, K. Li, H. X. Zhong, D. Xu, Z. L. Wang, Z. Jiang, Z. J. Wu and X. B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10530–10534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Li, S. Maurya, Y. S. Kim, T. Li, L. Wang, Q. Shi, D. Liu, S. Feng, Y. Lin and M. Shao, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2452–2458 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. O'Connor, A. S. M. Jonayat, M. J. Janik and T. P. Senftle, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 531–539 CrossRef .
H. Li, L. Wang, Y. Dai, Z. Pu, Z. Lao, Y. Chen, M. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, W. Zhang, R. Si, C. Ma and J. Zeng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 411–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Dong, C. He, H. Yin, P. An, K. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Gao, L. Zhang, J. Lv, J. Wang, J. Zhang, A. M. Khattak, N. A. Khan, Z. Wei, J. Zhang, S. Liu, H. Zhao and Z. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16184 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, X. Zheng, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Bajdich, M. García-Melchor, L. Han, J. Xu, M. Liu, L. Zheng, F. Arquer, C. Dinh, F. Fan, M. Yuan, E. Yassitepe, N. Chen, T. Regier, P. Liu, Y. Li, P. Luna, A. Janmohamed, H. L. Xin, H. Yang, A. Vojvodic and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2016, 352, 333–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. R. Li, Z. W. Wang, T. Xia, H. X. Ju, K. Zhang, R. Long, Q. Xu, C. M. Wang, L. Song, J. F. Zhu, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6959–6965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, C. Huang and X. Wang, Small, 2015, 11, 1215–1221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Chen, A. Thomas, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1609–1612 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, L. Zhou, K. Ma, H. Zhou and Y. Xin, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 226, 278–285 CrossRef CAS .
H. Terrones, R. Lv, M. Terrones and M. Dresselhaus, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2012, 75, 062501 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. Krasheninnikov, P. O. Lehtinen, A. S. Foster, P. Pyykkö and R. M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 126807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lang, W. Xi, J. C. Liu, Y. T. Cui, T. Li, A. F. Lee, F. Chen, Y. Chen, L. Li, L. Li, J. Lin, S. Miao, X. Liu, A. Q. Wang, X. Wang, J. Luo, B. Qiao, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 234 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604103–1604111 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chu, J. Wang, Y. Liu and Z. Geng, Carbon, 2018, 140, 112–123 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, W. Wei, M. Zhang, S. Jiao, Y. Shi and S. Ding, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2169–2177 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1443–1453 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, B. Chen, Z. Li, X. Duan, L. Wang, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, F. Zhou, Y. Hu, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Hu, G. Wu, Q. Zhang, Q. Xu, B. Liu, P. Gao, R. You, W. Huang, L. Zheng, L. Gu, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4505–4509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jeon, M. Choi, H. Choi, S. Jung, M. Kim, J. Seo, S. Bae, S. Yoo, G. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, N. Park and J. Baek, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7123 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qu, L. Wang, Z. Li, P. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Lin, F. Zhou, H. Wang, Z. Yang, Y. Hu, M. Zhu, X. Zhao, X. Han, C. Wang, Q. Xu, L. Gu, J. Luo, L. Zheng and Y. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1904496 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ye, F. Luo, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, T. Xu, Q. Wang, D. Wang, D. He, L. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. He, X. O. Yang, M. Gu, J. Liu and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 2, 1000–1007 RSC .
Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Zhou, C. Chen, Z. Han, B. Zhang, Q. Wu, L. Yang, L. Du, Y. Bu, P. Wang, X. Wang, H. Yang and Z. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1657 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Ramaswamy, U. Tylus, Q. Jia and S. Mukerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15443–15449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, Y. Jiao, B. Shi, J. Liu, Z. Xie, X. Chen, Q. Zhang and S. Qiao, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 9256–9261 CrossRef .
C. Gao, S. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, L. Song, W. Zhang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704624 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sun, G. Zhang, N. Gauquelin, N. Chen, J. Zhou, S. Yang, W. Chen, X. Meng, D. Geng, M. N. Banis, R. Li, S. Ye, S. Knights, G. A. Botton, T. K. Sham and X. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1775–1783 CrossRef .
S. A. Wella, Y. Hamamoto, Suprijadi, Y. Morikawa and I. Hamada, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1165–1174 RSC .
H. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Cheng, K. Li, Y. Yao, Q. Zhang, C. Dong, P. Wang, U. Schwingenschlögl, W. Yang and X. X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 141–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, X. Zhao, N. Guo, Z. Lyu, Y. Du, S. Xi, R. Guo, C. Chen, Z. Chen, W. Liu, C. Yao, J. Li, S. J. Pennycook, W. Chen, C. Su, C. Zhang and J. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3197 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Stambula, N. Gauquelin, M. Bugnet, S. Gorantla, S. Turner, S. Sun, J. Liu, G. Zhang, X. Sun and G. A. Botton, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3890–3900 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, L.-M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 31–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. K. Moon, J. Lee, R. S. Ruoff and H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 73 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bagri, C. Mattevi, M. Acik, Y. J. Chabal, M. Chhowalla and V. B. Shenoy, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 581–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, W. Zhang, Y. Li, P. Lu, Y. Wang and Z.-S. Wu, Front. Mater., 2019, 6, 271 CrossRef .
A. Bakandritsos, R. G. Kadam, P. Kumar, G. Zoppellaro, M. Medved, J. Tuček, T. Montini, O. Tomanec, P. Andrýsková, B. Drahoš, R. S. Varma, M. Otyepka, M. B. Gawande, P. Fornasiero and R. Zbořil, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1900323 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fei, J. Dong, C. Wan, Z. Zhao, X. Xu, Z. Lin, Y. Wang, H. Liu, K. Zang, J. Luo, S. Zhao, W. Hu, W. Yan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802146 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cui, W. Li, P. Ryabchuk, K. Junge and M. Beller, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 385–397 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, A. J. Akey, Y. Li, Z. Lu, J. Lattimer, Y. Hu, C. Stokes, M. Gangishetty, G. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Hill, W.-B. Cai, D. Bell, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov, Y. Cui and H. Wang, Chem, 2017, 3, 950–960 CAS .
A. Zitolo, N. Ranjbar-Sahraie, T. Mineva, J. Li, Q. Jia, S. Stamatin, G. F. Harrington, S. M. Lyth, P. Krtil, S. Mukerjee, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 957 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Peng, L. Shi, F. Huo, C. Mi, X. Wu, S. Zhang and Z. Xiang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Y. Jia, C. Zhang, X. Xiong, K. Sun, R. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Kuang, L. Zheng, H. Tang, W. Liu, J. Liu, X. Sun, W.-F. Lin and H. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1317–1325 RSC .
S. Zhou, L. Shang, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse, Y. C. Huang, L. Zheng and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900509 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717–6731 RSC .
Y. Zhao, M. Zhu and L. Kang, Catal. Lett., 2018, 148, 2992–3002 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ji, Y. Qu, T. Wang, Y. Chen, G. Wang, X. Li, J. Dong, Q. Y. Chen, W. Zhang, Z. Zhang, S. Liang, R. Yu, Y. Wang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10651–10657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, Q. Cai, A. Vasileff, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3336–3339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ou, S. Wan, Q. Zhong, S. Zhang and Y. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 27043–27054 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, S.-L. Li, L.-Y. Gan and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11908–11914 RSC .
Q. Wu, W. Wei, X. Lv, Y. Wang, B. Huang and Y. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 31043–31049 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chu, Q. Zhu, Z. Pan, S. Gupta, D. Huang, Y. Du, S. Weon, Y. Wu, C. Muhich, E. Stavitski, K. Domen and J.-H. Kim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 6376–6382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, C. Wu, S. Chen, S. Ding, Y. Xie, C. Wang, T. Wang, Y. A. Haleem, Z. Rehman, Y. Sang, Q. Liu, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, B. Ge, H. Xu and L. Song, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2217–2228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, H. Tsunoyama, W. Kurashige, Y. Negishi and T. Tsukuda, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1519–1523 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Z. Yang, D. Tang, L. Zhang, P. Hou, S. Zhao, C. Liu, M. Cheng, G. Li, F. Zhang and H. Cheng, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, e461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, S. Zhao, B. Johannessen, J. Veder, M. Saunders, M. R. Rowles, M. Cheng, C. Liu, M. F. Chisholm, R. D. Marco, H.-M. Cheng, S.-Z. Yang and S. P. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706287 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. Chen, K. Wu, W. C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, J. Li, Q. Lu, X. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, P. An, W. Zhou, B. Y. Guan, P. Zhang, J. Dong and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaao6657 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fu, P. Zamani, J. Y. Choi, F. M. Hassan, G. Jiang, D. C. Higgins, Y. Zhang, M. A. Hoque and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604456 CrossRef PubMed .
H. T. Chung, D. A. Cullen, D. Higgins, B. T. Sneed, E. F. Holby, K. L. More and P. Zelenay, Science, 2017, 357, 479–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, L. Zhang, W. Yan, X. Liu, X. Yang, S. Miao, W. Wang, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 5758–5764 RSC .
W. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Liu, X. Yang, S. Miao, W. Wang, A. Wang and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10790–10798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, E. Gracia-Espino, J. Ma, H. Tang, X. Mamat, T. Wagberg, G. Hu and S. Guo, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 9–16 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Z. Cai, X. Wu, Z. Lv, P. Wu and C. Cai, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10364–10374 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Xue, B. L. Huang, Y. P. Yi, Y. Guo, Z. C. Zuo, Y. J. Li, Z. Y. Jia, H. B. Liu and Y. L. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1460 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mahmood, W. Guo, H. Tabassum and R. Q. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600423 CrossRef .
T. Sun, L. Xu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2067–2080 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, X. Li, Y. Li, R. Zhu and H. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804740 Search PubMed .
M. Khalid, A. M. B. Honorato, E. A. Ticianelli and H. Varela, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12106–12114 RSC .
Z. Liang, R. Zhao, T. Qiu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100001 CrossRef .
T. Li, J. Liu, Y. Song and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8450–8458 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, B. Chen, X. Liu, W. Liu, Z. Li, J. Dong, W. Chen, W. Yan, T. Yao, X. Duan, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9495–9500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yin, T. Yao, Y. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Lin, W. Liu, H. Ju, J. Zhu, X. Hong, Z. Deng, G. Zhou, S. Wei and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10800–10805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, Z. Li, R. Shen, L. Zheng, Z. Zhuang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6937–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. P. Han, X. F. Ling, Y. Wang, T. Y. Ma, C. Zhong, W. B. Hu and Y. D. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5359–5364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. X. Chen, J. J. Pei, C. T. He, J. W. Wan, H. L. Ren, Y. Wang, J. C. Dong, K. L. Wu, W. C. Cheong, J. J. Mao, X. S. Zheng, W. S. Yan, Z. B. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. S. Wang and Y. D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800396 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Jiang, L. Li, T. Sheng, G. F. Hu, Y. G. Chen and L. Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11594–11598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, B. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Qu, F. Zhou, C. Zhao, Q. Xu, Q. Zhang, X. Duan and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3734 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhao, X. Dai, T. Yao, W. Chen, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8078–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan, P. F. Liu, X. Yan, L. Gu, Z. Z. Yang, H. G. Yang, S. Qiu and X. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Huang, W. Liu, C. Chang, H. Tang, Z. Li, W. Chen, C. Jia, T. Yao, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17281–17284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, B. Chi, J. Li, G. Wang, L. Zheng, X. Shi, Z. Cui, L. Du, S. Liao, K. Zang, J. Luo, Y. Hu and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802856 CrossRef .
J. Yang, Z. Qiu, C. Zhao, W. Wei, W. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Qu, J. Dong, J. Luo, Z. Li and Y. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14095–14100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wei, A. Li, J. Liu, Z. Li, W. Chen, Y. Gong, Q. Zhang, W. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, H. Xiao, C. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, L. Gu, X. Han, J. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 856–861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, S. Zhao, W. Chen, J. Dong, W. C. Cheong, R. Shen, X. Wen, L. Zheng, A. I. Rykov, S. Cai, H. Tang, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, S. Hwang, D. A. Cullen, M. A. Uddin, L. Langhorst, B. Li, S. Karakalos, A. J. Kropf, E. C. Wegener, J. Sokolowski, M. Chen, D. Myers, D. Su, K. L. More, G. Wang, S. Litster and G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 250–260 RSC .
T. Sun, P. Zhang, W. Chen, K. Wang, X. Fu, T. Zheng and J. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 798–801 RSC .
A. Zitolo, V. Goellner, V. Armel, M. T. Sougrati, T. Mineva, L. Stievano, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 937–942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. B. Honorato, M. Khalid, Q. Dai and L. A. Pessan, Synth. Met., 2020, 264, 116383 CrossRef .
W. J. Jiang, L. Gu, L. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. J. Zhang, J. Q. Wang, J. S. Hu, Z. Wei and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3570–3578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Feng, X. Sun, S. Yao, C. Liu, W. Xing and J. Zhang, Chapter 3-Eelectrocatalysts and catalyst layers for oxygen reduction reaction, Rotating Electrode Methods and Oxygen Reduction Electrocatalysts,  2014, pp. 67–132 Search PubMed .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, Q. Shi, D. Du and Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, L. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. Niu and Z. Xia, J. Catal., 2014, 314, 66–72 CrossRef CAS .
S. Back, J. Lim, N. Kim, Y. Kim and Y. Jung, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 1090–1096 RSC .
V. Viswanathan, H. A. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1654–1660 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lu, T. Smart, D. Qin, J. Lu, N. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Peng, Y. Ping and S. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5617–5628 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu and L. Dai, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16064 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yang, J. Miao, S. Hung, J. Chen, H. B. Tao, X. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Chen, J. Gao, H. M. Chen, L. Dai and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501122 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Lee, W. J. Lee, S. O. Kim and Y. H. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 175502 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, L. Lu, H. M. Barkholtz, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Jiang, Z. Wu, D. J. Liu, L. Zhuang, C. Ma, J. Zeng, B. Zhang, D. Su, P. Song, W. Xing, W. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang and G. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15938 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Guo, P. Guan, C. Liu, H. Huang, F. Xue, X. Dong, S. J. Pennycook and M. F. Chisholm, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
H. Peng, F. Liu, X. Liu, S. Liao, C. You, X. Tian, H. Nan, F. Luo, H. Song, Z. Fu and P. Huang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3797 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Li, X. F. Liu, L. R. Zheng, J. X. Shang, X. Wan, R. M. Hu, X. Guo, S. Hong and J. Shui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26147–26153 RSC .
Q. X. Lai, L. R. Zheng, Y. Y. Liang, J. P. He, J. X. Zhao and J. H. Chen, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1655–1663 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Zhao, P. C. Zhang, C. Xu, X. Y. Zhou, L. M. Liao, P. J. Wei, E. Liu, H. Q. Chen, Q. G. He and J. G. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 17334–17342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Strickland, E. Miner, Q. Jia, U. Tylus, N. Ramaswamy, W. Liang, M.-T. Sougrati, F. Jaouen and S. Mukerjee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Sun, F. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9038–9043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Wang, D. A. Cullen, Y. Pan, S. Hwang, M. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, H. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Shao, D. Su, K. L. More, J. S. Spendelow and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706758 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Yang, L. Wang, Z. Mu, H. Zhu, X. Zhu, H. Xing, H. Xia, B. Huang, J. Li, S. Guo and E. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Yuan, Y. Li and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11633–11641 RSC .
X. Wan, X. Liu, Y. Li, R. Yu, L. Zheng, W. Yan, H. Wang, M. Xu and J. Shui, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 259–268 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Fu, N. Li, B. H. Ren, G. P. Jiang, Y. R. Liu, F. M. Hassan, D. Su, J. B. Zhu, L. Yang, Z. Y. Bai, Z. P. Cano, A. P. Yu and Z. W. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803737 CrossRef .
J. Gao, H. B. Yang, X. Huang, S. Hung, W. Cai, C. Jia, S. Miao, H. M. Chen, X. Yang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Chem, 2020, 6, 658–674 CAS .
K. Jiang, S. Back, A. J. Akey, C. Xia, Y. Hu, W. Liang, D. Schaak, E. Stavitski, J. K. Nørskov, S. Siahrostami and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3997 CrossRef .
Z. Lu, G. Chen, S. Siahrostami, Z. Chen, K. Liu, J. Xie, L. Liao, T. Wu, D. Lin, Y. Liu, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and Y. Cui, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 156–162 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Z. Chen, S. Siahrostami, D. Higgins, D. Nordlund, D. Sokaras, T. R. Kim, Y. Liu, X. Yan, E. Nilsson, R. Sinclair, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7851–7859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Han, Y. Zheng, X. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Gong, C. Du, M. N. Banis, Y. Yiu, T. Sham, L. Gu, Y. Sun, Y. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Gao, G. Yin and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104088 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, Y. G. Wang, W. Chen, R. Xu, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, J. Luo, R. A. Shen, Y. Zhu, W. C. Cheong, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17269–17272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, X. Ling, D. Yu, D. Xie, L. Li, S. Peng, C. Zhong, N. Zhao, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 606 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, J. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Lin, H. Wang, X. Shen, W. Zhang, W. Liu, Z. Qi, Z. Jiang, J. Yang and T. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4849 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Li, X. Duan, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, G. Zhang, W. Liu and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703341 CrossRef .
X. Li, P. Cui, W. Zhong, J. Li, X. Wang, Z. Wang and J. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13233–13236 RSC .
X. Han, X. Ling, D. Yu, D. Xie, L. Li, S. Peng, C. Zhong, N. Zhao, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, P. Yuan, J. Zhang, Y. Hu, I. S. Amiinu, X. Wang, J. Zhou, H. Xia, Z. Song, Q. Xu and S. Mu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1894–1901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, M. G. Kim, P. Liu, G. Nam, T. Zhang, X. Zhuang, B. Yang, J. Cho, M. Chen, C. Yuan, L. Lei and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1392 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fei, J. Dong, Y. Feng, C. S. Allen, C. Wan, B. Volosskiy, M. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, H. Sun, P. An, W. Chen, Z. Guo, C. Lee, D. Chen, I. Shakir, M. Liu, T. Hu, Y. Li, A. I. Kirkland, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
X. Su, Y. Wang, J. Zhou, S. Gu, J. Li and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11286–11292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Song, J. Zhou, X. Su, Y. Wang, J. Li, L. Zhang, G. Xiao, C. Guan, R. Liu, S. Chen, H. J. Lin, S. Zhang and J. Q. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2945 RSC .
Y. Li, Z. Wu, P. Lu, X. Wang, W. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Ma, W. Ren, Z. Jiang and X. Bao, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Acik, G. Lee, C. Mattevi, M. Chhowalla, K. Cho and Y. J. Chabal, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 840–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, E. Vorobyeva, S. Mitchell, E. Fako, M. A. Ortuno, N. Lopez, S. M. Collins, P. A. Midgley, S. Richard, G. Vile and J. Perez-Ramirez, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 52–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Gasteiger, S. S. Kocha, B. Sompalli and F. T. Wagner, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56, 9–35 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Neyerlin, W. Gu, J. Jorne and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B631 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Zalitis, D. Kramer and A. R. Kucernak, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4329 RSC .
S. Fang, X. Zhu, X. Liu, J. Gu, W. Liu, D. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Lin, J. Lu, S. Wei, Y. Li and T. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1029 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lu, L. Guo, F. Wu, Y. Peng, J. Lu, T. J. Smart, N. Wang, Y. Z. Finfrock, D. Morris, P. Zhang, N. Li, P. Gao, Y. Ping and S. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Morozan, V. Goellner, Y. Nedellec, J. Hannauer and F. Jaouen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, H719–H726 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, G. Gao, X. Yan, N. Chen, J. Chen, M. T. Soo, B. Wood, D. Yang, A. Du and X. Yao, Chem, 2018, 4, 285–297 CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao and A. Vasileff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7568–7579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, Y. Xue, L. Qu, H. Choi and J. Baek, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4823–4892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Cui, Q. Liu, Z. Xing, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 215–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Guo, S. Zhang and S. H. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8526–8544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jörissen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 23–32 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Z. Zhou, H. E. Karahan, Q. Shao, L. Wei and Y. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1801929 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. Xu, J. Xu and X. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7746–7786 RSC .
R. R. Mitchell, B. M. Gallant, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2952–2958 RSC .
Y. Lu, Z. Xu, H. A. Gasteiger, S. Chen, K. Hamad-Schifferli and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12170–12171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, R. Cao, J. Cho and G. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13568–13582 RSC .
W. Gan, D. Zhou, L. Zhou, Z. Zhang and J. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 430–436 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hwang, E.-S. Oh and K. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 216, 484–489 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cheng, J. Shen, B. Peng, Y. Pan, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 79–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, A. Yu, R. Ahmed, H. Wang, H. Li and Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 69, 295–300 CrossRef CAS .
G. Du, X. Liu, Y. Zong, T. S. A. Hor, A. Yu and Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4657–4661 RSC .
M. Prabu, K. Ketpangand and S. Shanmugam, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 41, 59–63 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, T. Han, C. Lin, W. Xiang, Y. Zhao, P. Gao, F. Du, X. Li and Y. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700041 CrossRef .
L. Li, C. Liu, G. He, D. Fan and A. Manthiram, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3274–3282 RSC .
C. Lin, S. S. Shinde, Z. Jiang, X. Song, Y. Sun, L. Guo, H. Zhang, J. Jung, X. Li and J. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13994–14002 RSC .
C. Lin, S. S. Shinde, Y. Wang, Y. Sun, S. Chen, H. Zhang, X. Li and J.-H. Lee, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1909–1914 RSC .
S. S. Shinde, C. H. Lee, J.-Y. Yu, D.-H. Kim, S. U. Lee and J.-H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 596–608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shinde, J.-Y. Yu, J.-W. Song, Y.-H. Nam, D.-H. Kim and J.-H. Lee, Nanoscale Horiz., 2017, 2, 333–341 RSC .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 172 CrossRef CAS .
R. Black, S. H. Oh, J. H. Lee, T. Yim, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(6), 2902–2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tavakkoli, E. Flahaut, P. Peljo, J. Sainio, F. Davodi, E. V. Lobiak, K. Mustonen and E. I. Kauppinen, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4647–4658 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, S. Sun, S. Gu, Z. Liang, J. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z. Deng, P. Wei, J. Penga, Y. Xu, C. Fang, Q. Li, J. Han, Z. Jiang and Y. Huanga, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 245–250 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Zhang, L. Dong, W. Yang, X. Liu, L. Long, C. Liu, S. Dong and J. Jia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4369–4375 RSC .
K. Yuan, D. Lützenkirchen-Hecht, L. Li, L. Shuai, Y. Li, R. Cao, M. Qiu, X. Zhuang, Y. Chen, M. K. H. Leung and U. Scherf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(5), 2404–2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shang, W. Sun, R. Sui, J. Pei, L. Zheng, J. Dong, Z. Jiang, D. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, W. Chen, J. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5443–5450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, A. Sumboja, Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. Wu, H. Wu, Z. Liu, C. Guan, J. Wang and S. J. Pennycook, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8961–8969 CrossRef .
L. Yang, L. Shi, D. Wang, Y. Lv and D. Cao, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 691–698 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, S. Gao, F. Lei, J. Liu, L. Liang and Y. Xie, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3976–3982 RSC .
A. Grimaud, K. J. May, C. E. Carlton, Y. L. Lee, M. Risch, W. T. Hong, J. Zhou and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2439 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Peng, D. Jia, A. Al-Enizi, A. Elzatahry and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402031 CrossRef .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K. C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Wee, B. D. Sherman, D. Gust, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore, Y. Liu and J. C. Scaiano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16742–16745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rosen, G. S. Hutchings and F. Jiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4516–4521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ryu, N. Jung, J. H. Jang, H. J. Kim and S. J. Yoo, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4066–4074 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, M. Gao, Q. Gao, H. H. Li, J. Xu, Z. Y. Wu and S. H. Yu, Small, 2015, 11, 182–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Wu, Q. Li, C. H. Wu, H. Y. Zhu, A. Mendoza-Garcia, B. Shen, J. H. Guo and S. H. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7071–7074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Artero, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 7376–7405 CrossRef .
M. Gao, X. Cao, Q. Gao, Y. F. Xu, Y. R. Zheng, J. Jiang and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3970–3978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Luo, H. Hu, X. Zhao, Z. Yang, Q. Zhang, J. Xu, T. Kaneko, Y. Yoshida, C. Zhu and W. Cai, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2120–2128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Chen, S. H. Zhang, W. Jiang, C. X. Zhang, H. Guo, Z. Liu, Z. M. Wang, F. Liu and X. B. Niu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11252–11259 RSC .
X. Zhang, A. Chen, Z. Zhang, M. Jiao and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11446–11452 RSC .
Y. Zhou, G. Gao, Y. Li, W. Chu and L. Wan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 3024–3032 RSC .
X. Gao, L. Mei, Y. Zhou and Z. Shen, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7814–7821 RSC .
Y. Zhou, G. Gao, J. Kang, W. Chu and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18169–18175 RSC .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. R. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov and U. Stimming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, J23–J26 CrossRef .
B. Liu, S. Han, K. Tanaka, H. Shioyama and Q. Xu, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2009, 82, 1052–1054 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, X. B. Zhang, H. Shioyama, T. Mukai, T. Sakai and Q. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 857–861 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Yang, H. Xue, H. Pang and Q. Xu, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100027 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Mohd. Khalid	Mohd. Khalid obtained his Ph.D. in Applied Chemistry in 2010 from Aligarh Muslim University, India. In 2011, he was awarded the Dr. D. S. Kothari postdoctoral fellowship from UGC, Govt. of India, at Panjab University Chandigarh. Later he moved to the Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianopolis, Brazil and Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland OH, USA, where he worked as a postdoctoral fellow. Currently, he is a postdoc at the Institute of Chemistry of São Carlos, University of São Paulo. His research interests focus on carbon nanostructured materials for energy conversion and storage.
Prerna A. Bhardwaj	Prerna A. Bhardwaj received her M.Sc. honors (2008) and Ph.D. (2014) in Chemistry from Panjab University, India. She worked at the University of Hohenheim, Germany as a Research Assistant. Her research mainly focuses on conducting polymers and their sensor applications, along with carbon nanomaterials as superconductors.
Ana M. B. Honorato	Ana M. B. Honorato obtained her Bachelor degree in Physics in 2011 and a Master degree in Mechanical Engineering in 2013 from the Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianopolis, Brazil. Currently, she is a Ph.D. student at Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland OH, USA, and Federal University São Carlos, Brazil, under the research program of CWRU–CAPES. Her research interests are carbon-based nanomaterials and conducting polymers for energy conversion and storage.
Hamilton Varela	Hamilton Varela (1973) obtained his Bachelors degree in Chemical Engineering at Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Natal, in 1997, and obtained his Masters degree in Physical Chemistry at the Institute of Chemistry of São Carlos of the University of São Paulo (ICSC/USP), São Carlos, in 2000. From 2000 to 2003 he did his Ph.D. with Professor K. Krischer at the Physical Chemistry Department (headed by Prof. G. Ertl, Nobel Laureate in Chemistry, 2007) – Fritz Haber Institut der Max Planck Gesellschaft, Berlin. His thesis was entitled “Spatiotemporal Pattern Formation during Electrochemical Oxidation of Hydrogen on Platinum”, and was presented in 2003 at the Freie Universität Berlin, and he obtained the final mark magna cum laude. After spending eight months as a postdoctoral Max Planck Fellow at the Physics Department of the Technical University Munich, he returned to Brazil. Between 2005 and 2007 he worked as a Group Leader (Jovem Pesquisador FAPESP) at ICSC/USP, and in 2007 was appointed Assistant Professor in the Physical Chemistry Department of the same Institution. In 2012 he became Associate Professor and in 2017, he became a Full Professor of Physical Chemistry at ICSC/USP. From the scientific point of view, Dr. Varela is currently interested in the following topics: electrochemical energy conversion, electrocatalysis, and self-organization in physical–chemical systems. Dr. Varela helped to establish the Ertl Center for Electrochemistry and Catalysis, at the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST, Gwangju, Republic of Korea), where he is also Adjunct Professor at the School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Engineering.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic demonstration of metal single-atom confined carbon nanomaterials for the electrocatalysis of the ORR, OER, HER and bifunctional ORR/OER and OER/HER activities.	 

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of a single metal atom supported on graphene with a) four pyridine nitrogen atoms (pyridine-N4) and b) four pyrrole nitrogen atoms (pyrrole-N4). The green, blue, and grey colors represent M, N, and C atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission;48 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 2  Graphene nanomaterial-based-single-atom catalysts. a) The proposed reaction mechanism for the preparation of Pt SAs/DG. Reproduced with permission;74 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. b) Schematic illustration of the ball-milling-driven doping of antimony to the edges of graphene nanoplatelets. Reproduced with permission;75 Copyright © 2015, Springer Nature. c) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of pyrolysis free f-CoNC. Reproduced with permission;98 Copyright © 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Carbon nanomaterials-based single-atom catalysts. Top and side views of transition metal-atom-decorated g-C3N4 with a) end-on, b) side-on NO adsorption configurations (grey, blue, pink, and red balls represent C, N, TM, and O atoms, respectively). Reproduced with permission,106 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. c) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the CNT@Fe–N-PC catalyst. Reproduced with permission,111 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. d) Schematic illustration for the preparation of the CoN5/HNPCSs catalyst. Reproduced with permission,113 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. e) Adsorption of single metal atoms on graphdiyne (left: possible adsorption site; right: optimized configuration). f) Electrostatic potential maps of pristine graphdiyne, Ni/graphdiyne, and Fe/graphdiyne, respectively. Reproduced with permission,121 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 4  Metal–organic framework-derived carbon-based single-atom catalysts. a) Scheme showing the formation of isolated copper sites (Cu ISAS/N–C). Reproduced with permission,134 Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature. b) Illustration of the preparation process of single iron atomic sites supported on the nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur co-doped hollow carbon polyhedron (Fe-SAs/NPS-HC). Reproduced with permission,141 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. c) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Fe-g-C3N4/HPNCP catalyst. Reproduced with permission,143 Copyright © 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O,  E° = 1.229 V (via the four-electron pathway)
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2,  E° = 0.695 V (via the two-electron pathway)
O2 + 2H2O + 4e → 4OH− (via the four-electron pathway)
O2 + H2O + 2e− → HO2− + OH−
HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH− (via the two-electron pathway)

 	Fig. 5  Single-atom-based carbon nanomaterials for ORR electrocatalysis. a) LSV polarization curves with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 at 1600 rpm. b) The toleration of Pt1–N/BP to CO (saturated) and methanol (0.5 M) in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. c) Top view of the proposed reaction pathways for the complete ORR on the g-P–N1–Pt1 catalyst. Reproduced with permission,157 Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature. d) Fitting results of EXAFS data and active site models of FeNC-300/500/1000. Reproduced with permission,160 Copyright © 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. e) LSV curves of the atomic Co catalyst (Co/NMC-LT900), Co clusters, or nanoparticles catalyst (Co/NMC-RT900) and Pt/C in 0.1 M KOH at 1600 rpm. f) Kinetic current density values for different potential values. g) Tafel plots. Reproduced with permission,176 Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature.	 
4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−
2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−

 	Fig. 6  Single-atom-based carbon nanomaterials for OER electrocatalysis. a) Free-energy diagram for the OER under certain overpotentials. b–d) A Co atom connected to two N atoms acts as the active center for the intermediate adsorption and charge transfer. e) LSV curves for the OER of different Co-based catalysts, as well as the stability test for Co–C3N4/CNT after 3000 cycles. Reproduced with permission,103 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. f) LSV curves for the OER, g) the corresponding Tafel plots. h) The chronoamperometric curve of Ni–O-G SACs (inset: the HAADF-STEM image of Ni–O-G SACs after 50 h durability testing). i) Optimized geometric model of Ni sites in the Ni–O-G SACs structure, j) the corresponding map of the DFT ESP surface of the Ni–O-G SACs structure (blue color indicates positive charge and red color indicates negative charge). k) Free-energy diagrams of the OER pathways and OER theoretical overpotential of the Ni–O-G SACs structure (red), Ni–N-G SACs (pink), and NiO nanoparticles (blue). Reproduced with permission,187 Copyright © 2020, WILEY-VCH GmbH & Co.	 
2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH− (basic medium)
2H+ + 2e− → H2 (acidic medium)

 	Fig. 7  Single atom-based carbon nanomaterials for HER electrocatalysis. a) HAADF-STEM image of the Pt single atoms dispersion in the N–C framework. b) Computational models of the Pt1–C3N1 and two Pt1–C2 and two Pt1–C1N1 moieties, c) calculated adsorption energies of H2O and H on the Pt1–C3N1, Pt1–C2, and Pt1–C1N1. d) LSV curves of Pt1/N–C, Pt/C and N–C framework in acid and base electrolytes. e) Tafel plots for Pt1/N–C and Pt/C. f) Durability test of Pt1/N–C in acidic and basic electrolytes. Reproduced with permission,196 Copyright © 2020, Springer Nature. g) Energy diagram of different RuCxNy structures from first-principles calculations. h) LSV curves of Ru-NC-T and Pt/C (20 wt%) in 0.1 M KOH. i) LSV curves of Ru-NC-700 and Pt/C (20 wt%) in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission,197 Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature. j) HER activity of M–N–C and N–C catalysts at pH 13. k) HER activity of M–N–C and N–C catalysts at pH 1. Reproduced with permission,198 Copyright © 2015, Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  ORR–OER bifunctional electrocatalysis for metal–air batteries. a and b) SEM images of UNT CoSAs/N–C catalyst. c) Overall overpotential of the ORR and OER for UNT CoSAs/N–C, UNT CoS-NPs/N–C, UNT Co NPs/N–C, and Pt/C–IrO2. Reproduced with permission,226 Copyright © 2019, Elsevier. d) A schematic diagram of the homemade Zn–air battery. e) OCP of the Zn–air battery with pfSAC-Fe-0.2 as the catalyst. f) Comparison of the polarization and power density curves of Pt/C and pfSAC-Fe-0.2 as the catalyst. g) Comparison of the specific capacities of the Zn–air batteries. h) Long-term discharge/charge cycling performance of Zn–air batteries with Pt/C and pfSAC-Fe-0.2 as the ORR catalyst and IrO2 as the OER catalyst at a current density of 5 mA m−2 (inset: voltage efficiency of the Zn–air batteries based on pfSAC-Fe-0.2 during the cycling test). Reproduced with permission,97 Copyright © 2019, AAAS i) discharge profiles at 10 mA cm−2. j) Polarization and power density curves. k) Galvanostatic discharge curves of the Zn–air battery at different current densities for FeCo-IA/NC and Pt/C. l) Digital photograph of the LED driven by two FeCo-IA/NC-based Zn–air batteries. Reproduced with permission,227 Copyright © 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  OER–HER bifunctional electrocatalysis for water electrolyzers. a) LSV curves of Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT for water splitting in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. b and c) Chronoamperometric tests of Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT and Pt/C–IrO2 at 10 and 100 mA cm−2 (pink line: Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT; orange line Pt/C–IrO2). d) LSV curves of the water-splitting test in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte of Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT before (black line) and after (red line) the chronoamperometric test. Reproduced with permission,243 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. e) The HER volcano curve of the exchange current (jo) related to the Gibbs free energy of hydrogen (ΔGH*) adsorbed on the different active sites of TM@C9N4 catalysts. f) Calculated ΔGH* for the TM and N atoms in the TM@C9N4 catalysts. g) Free energy diagram for the OER on Ni@C9N4 at 0 V. Reproduced with permission,248 Copyright © 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
