Key scientific challenges in current rechargeable non-aqueous Li–O 2 batteries: experiment and theory  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CP01309C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CP01309C
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12093-12130Key scientific challenges in current rechargeable non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries: experiment and theory

        
          
            Mahesh Datt 
            Bhatt†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Hugh 
            Geaney†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Nolan
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Colm 
            O'Dwyer
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. E-mail: c.odwyer@ucc.ie;  Fax: +353 21 4274097;   Tel: +353 21 4902732
bTyndall National Institute, Lee Maltings, Cork, Ireland
Received 
      26th March 2014
    , Accepted 7th May 2014First published on 7th May 2014AbstractRechargeable Li–air (henceforth referred to as Li–O2) batteries provide theoretical capacities that are ten times higher than that of current Li-ion batteries, which could enable the driving range of an electric vehicle to be comparable to that of gasoline vehicles. These high energy densities in Li–O2 batteries result from the atypical battery architecture which consists of an air (O2) cathode and a pure lithium metal anode. However, hurdles to their widespread use abound with issues at the cathode (relating to electrocatalysis and cathode decomposition), lithium metal anode (high reactivity towards moisture) and due to electrolyte decomposition. This review focuses on the key scientific challenges in the development of rechargeable non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries from both experimental and theoretical findings. This dual approach allows insight into future research directions to be provided and highlights the importance of combining theoretical and experimental approaches in the optimization of Li–O2 battery systems.
Mahesh Datt Bhatt
Mahesh Bhatt received his MSc Degree in Physics in 1997 from Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu, Nepal and PhD degree in Engineering in 2010 from University of Tsukuba in Japan. Postdoctoral positions in Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, and University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom focused on interaction of Li+ ions with non-aqueous electrolytes in Li-ion batteries, and the origin of band-bending in donor–acceptor interfaces in organic solar cells. His current research work uses density functional theory calculations of ORR/OER kinetics in Li–air batteries.
Hugh Geaney
Hugh Geaney received a BSc in Industrial Chemistry and PhD in Chemistry from the University of Limerick in 2008 and 2012 respectively. His PhD focused on the growth of silicon and germanium nanowires aimed at energy storage applications. Since 2012 he has been a postdoctoral researcher in the Applied Nanoscience Group at University College Cork. His current research focus is on the development of novel catalyst materials for Li–air battery cathodes.
Michael Nolan
Michael Nolan received a BSc in Chemistry with German in 1997 and a Masters and PhD in Microelectronic Engineering from University College Cork in 1999 and 2004. He was a postdoctoral fellow at Trinity College Dublin with Prof. Graeme Watson and has been at Tyndall National Institute since 2005, and a staff researcher since 2009. Dr Nolan's interests are first principles simulations of metal oxide surfaces, interfaces and nanoparticles with applications in reactivity, catalysis and photocatalysis.
Colm O'Dwyer
Colm O'Dwyer received his BS degree in applied physics and PhD degree in physics from the University of Limerick, Ireland in 1999 and 2003, respectively. After postdoctoral research in nanotechnology and nanolithography using ultracold atoms beams at the University Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, he conducted work on nanoelectronics/photonics at Tyndall National Institute, Cork, Ireland. From 2008 to 2012, he was a Science Foundation Ireland Stokes Lecturer on nanomaterials at the University of Limerick. He is currently at the Department of Chemistry, University College Cork and at Tyndall National Institute, leading the Applied Nanoscience Group.
1 Introduction
The increasing demand for fossil fuel energy worldwide is straining the resource capacity of conventional fuels and raising their prices. Most importantly, conventional fuels predominantly used in vehicles for transportation are considered a major contributor to global warming due to increased emission of CO2 into the atmosphere. Ultimately, for these and other reasons, it is necessary to develop electrical energy storage and conversion systems to balance supply with demand as renewable sources are intermittent, and to power upcoming plug-in electric vehicles by the effective utilization of renewable energy sources in future smart grids and power supply systems. Currently, the electrification of transportation and large scale of deployment of renewable energy have been considered an important strategy.1 However, such a transformation is ultimately limited by the poor performance of current electrical energy storage systems.
Rechargeable battery systems may be a good choice for such energy applications. However, current rechargeable non-aqueous Li-ion batteries have limited energy storage capacities which are far below the requirements for electric vehicles and grid energy storage applications, exacerbating range anxiety (driving distance per charge). For example, the driving distance of electric vehicles with current lithium-ion batteries is limited to less than 100 miles per charge, but a battery system that extends the distance of electric vehicles per charge to 300 miles would be a considerable advance for the electrification of the industry. The ragone plot shown in Fig. 1 plots the ranges of power density (W kg−1) against energy density (W h kg−1) for various battery systems compared to the internal combustion (IC) engine.2 A recent material-to-systems analysis of the lithium–oxygen chemistry with comparison to more established Li-ion technologies has shown that the theoretical specific energy of a Li–air battery is not a wholly reliable indicator of the cost, volume, and mass considerations that must be factored into the systems-level manufacture.3
 Fig. 1  Ragone plot of energy density vs. power density for various battery systems compared with internal combustion engines. Reprinted from ref. 2. Copyright 2011, with permission of Elsevier. 
The discovery and initial development of the rechargeable non-aqueous Li–O2 battery system promised extremely high theoretical energy densities exceeding the maximum energy densities of any Li-ion battery.4–10 A further expected benefit of the initially proposed Li–O2 architecture was that the cathode active material (oxygen) could be readily accessed directly from the environment. The Li–O2 battery has a theoretical energy density approximately equal to 11680 W h kg−1, nearly equivalent to gasoline.11 Therefore, significant effort has been devoted to Li–O2 battery research.7,11–13 A wide range of battery technologies available or currently under development, and comparison of their respective energy densities to gasoline are listed in Table 1.11
Table 1 Approximate gravimetric energy densities (W h kg−1) for various types of rechargeable batteries compared to gasoline. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society




Types
Theoretical energy density
Practical energy density




Lead–acid
Less than 2000
40


Ni–Cd
Less than 2000
40


Ni–MH
Less than 2000
50


Li-ion
Less than 2000
160


Zn–air
Less than 2000
350


Li–S
Less than 2000
370


Li–O2
≈11680
1700


Gasoline
More than 12000
1700




The representative applications of rechargeable batteries are shown in Fig. 2.10
 Fig. 2  Representative applications of rechargeable batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., KGaA, Weinheim. 
Based on the types of electrolytes used, Li–O2 batteries are divided into four types: aprotic (non-aqueous), aqueous, hybrid (mixture of aprotic and aqueous), and solid state.6,14–34 These four chemical architectures are outlined in Fig. 3.35
 Fig. 3  Four chemical architectures of Li–O2 batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., KGaA, Weinheim. 
All four types of Li–O2 batteries consist of a lithium metal anode and O2 (air) cathode. Their basic electrochemical reaction mechanisms depend on the types of electrolytes used as given in Table 2.36 As the reduction product of oxygen such as Li2O2 can be reversed into the original reagents of the oxygen reduction reaction in non-aqueous Li–O2 system, it seems to be more advantageous as compared to the other three architectures of Li–O2 batteries. This non-aqueous Li–O2 system is the current focus of research worldwide37 owing to its prospects as a rechargeable high capacity metal–O2 system and will be the primary focus of this review.
Table 2 Types of Li–O2 batteries with their cell reactions, advantages, and disadvantages. Adapted from ref. 36. Copyright 2013, with permission of Elsevier




Types
Cell reactions
Advantages
Disadvantages




Non-aqueous (aprotic)
2Li+ + 2e− + O2 = Li2O2 (2.96 V)
High theoretical energy density, rechargeability
Insoluble discharge products, material challenges








Aqueous

4Li+ + 4e− + O2 = 2Li2O (2.90 V)
4Li + O2 + 2H2O = 4LiOH (alkaline electrolyte)
4Li + O2 + 4H+ = 4Li+ + 2H2O (acidic electrolyte)

No pore clogging, no moisture effects as discharge products are soluble in aqueous system
Lack of Li-ion conducting membrane, undetermined charging behaviour








Hybrid

4Li + O2 + 2H2O = 4LiOH (alkaline electrolyte)
4Li + O2 + 4H+ = 4Li+ + 2H2O (acidic electrolyte)

No pore clogging, no moisture effects, natural SEI formation on Li anode in aprotic electrolyte
Lack of solid Li-ion conducting membrane, undetermined charging behaviour








Solid state
2Li+ + 2e− + O2 = Li2O2 (3.10 V)
Good stability, may use air, rechargeability, avoids dendrite formation
Low conductivity, capacity and energy density




A typical rechargeable non-aqueous Li–O2 battery consists of a metallic Li anode, porous O2 cathode with high surface area carbons (with or without catalyst) bound to a metal current collector, and an electrolyte containing lithium salt and aprotic solvent. Despite the high theoretical specific energy of aprotic rechargeable Li–O2 batteries, their practical specific energy is significantly lower than expected due to several factors. Electrical passivation at the cathode is the dominant capacity-limiting mechanism in Li–O2 batteries due to pore clogging because of the formation of discharge products while the low conductivity of the same discharge products and their high electronic resistance is also a big challenge for aprotic Li–O2 batteries.38–41
Therefore, the design of functional porous cathode structures with O2 diffusion channels is paramount in overcoming issues related to pore clogging and its influence on discharge performance.8,42–45 Moreover, the mechanisms underlying the basic electrochemical reactions in the Li–O2 battery system such as oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) occurred during discharge and charge at the oxygen cathode, and the materials and chemistries that influence them, are as yet not fully understood. In order to improve the ORR/OER kinetics in an aprotic Li–O2 battery system, intensive research efforts have been devoted to various aspects including cathodes,46–49 anodes,50 electrolytes,51 and discharge products.52–55 A large body of research has reported higher specific capacity for Li–O2 batteries than other battery systems, but their rate capability, cycle life and power performance are not still satisfactory for practical applications.56 A porous electrode with high porosity and effective catalytic site distribution is required, which may be a novel porous electrode for Li–O2 battery system.57 Williford et al.58 simulated several air electrodes with a single pore system, double pore system in 2D, and dual pore system with multiple time-release catalysts along with some important parameters such as porosity distribution, pore connectivity, the tortuosity of the pore system and the catalyst spatial distribution.
One of the big challenges for Li–O2 battery system is the limited electrical efficiency due to the overpotential or polarization losses at the cathode during discharge and charge processes. The large voltage gap between these two processes leads to a low efficiency. Such challenges can be overcome by applying effective catalysts, particularly those with bifunctionality towards improved ORR and OER kinetics. Many literature reports demonstrate that catalysts can be beneficial for both ORR during discharge and OER during charge, resulting in dramatic increases in overall efficiency of Li–O2 system.59
There are other challenges in practical applications of Li–O2 batteries such as safety issues, moisture issues and their fast degradation due to decomposition. A pure Li metal anode is the first choice as anode material in Li–O2 cells because of its extremely high energy density compared to common Li-intercalated carbon anodes. It is well known that Li metal anodes are susceptible to dendrite formation and electrolyte incompatibility, which affect the cycle life and safety of Li-batteries.60 Major challenges are related to the prevention of water and O2 access to the Li anode. The issue is exacerbated by the fact that most Li-battery electrolytes easily absorb a substantial amount of water and Li–O2 batteries using such electrolytes will have a poor cyclability even if pure dry O2 is used.4 Electrolyte vapor pressure also plays a crucial role in Li–O2 battery degradation and is a key consideration in the choice of potential electrolytes.51
It is well known that it is quite difficult to perfectly exclude H2O from the air electrode, particularly if ambient air is used rather than pure O2. Therefore, the stability of Li metal anodes in electrolytes containing trace water does not facilitate long periods of operation. Density functional Theory (DFT) calculations provide efficient methods to better understand anode properties61 as well as cathode effects during Li–O2 battery operation, and as will be reviewed here in details, constitute a critical high-throughput method for the identification of optimum electrode materials for various Li–O2 chemistries.
The electrolyte formulation has a major influence on ORR kinetic and discharge capacity in Li–O2 batteries.62 The cations in the electrolyte solutions of lithium salts strongly affect the reduction mechanism of O2. Organic carbonate-based solvents (which have dominated Li-ion systems) have been found not to be useful electrolytes in Li–O2 batteries due to their undesired decomposition during discharge forming unwanted products. Instead of organic carbonates, other organic species (ethers, sulfones etc.), ionic liquids and solid state electrolytes have been proposed as alternative solvents for electrolytes used in Li–O2 batteries due to their unique properties such as hydrophobic nature, low flammability, low vapour pressure, wide potential stability window, and high thermal stability. Some additives for electrolytes may be helpful for ORR kinetic in Li–O2 batteries since these additives may increase the solubility and diffusivity of oxygen in an aprotic electrolyte, which is another limitation for Li–O2 batteries. The main limiting factors that affect the overall performance of Li–O2 batteries are summarized in Fig. 4.2
 Fig. 4  Limiting factors that affect the overall performance of Li–O2 batteries. Reprinted from ref. 2. Copyright 2011, with permission of Elsevier. 
There are other ways to improve the ORR/OER kinetics. Recently, Mo et al.63 performed DFT calculations to study the OER of Li2O2 in Li–O2 batteries and found that OER processes are kinetically limited by the high energy barrier for the evolution of O2 molecules and that the rate of OER processes strongly depends on the surface orientation of Li2O2. The kinetics of OER were found slow on abundant surfaces such as the (11−20) and (0001) surfaces rather than on the high energy surfaces. Therefore, the formation of Li2O2 with high energy surfaces is desirable to improve the sluggish kinetics of OER in Li–O2 batteries.64 Some of these general challenges are diagrammatically reproduced in Fig. 5.7
 Fig. 5  Diagrammatic representation of general challenges in current Li–O2 batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2011 Materials Research Society. 
While a number of reviews on the topic of Li–O2 batteries have been conducted1,47,50,51,65,66 here we present an in-depth critical review based on a combination of experimental and theoretical results. By combining insights from the two approaches, we are able to identify areas for consideration for future research directions. Furthermore, we focus on some recently emerging topics of importance in the experimental section including the formation of Li2O2 on Li–O2 cathodes, crucial operating considerations and the possibility of carbon free cathodes with enhanced stability.
2 Working principles of the aprotic Li–O2 system
The concept of Li–O2 chemistry was first introduced by Littauer and Tsai at Lockheed in 1976,67 but it received little attention until the Li–O2 battery system with non-aqueous electrolytes was presented in 1996 by Abraham et al.68 Such a Li–O2 battery is comprised of a Li metal anode, a non-aqueous electrolyte and an air (O2) cathode. The two possible electrochemical reactions are:55,69 2Li(s) + O2(g) → Li2O2 (2.96 V)(1) 4Li(s) + O2(g) → 2Li2O (2.91 V)(2)

Eqn (1) and (2) are thought to be reversible at much higher applied potentials. However, Abraham et al.68 and Bruce et al.4 proposed that Li2O2 is the dominant discharge product with more rechargeability than the electrochemically irreversible product Li2O. Moreover, a recent study remarked that stable Li2O2 surfaces are half metallic and those of Li2O are non-metallic and non-magnetic.70 In this way, Li2O2 is considered as a more desirable discharge product in Li–O2 batteries. The discharge–charge reaction in non-aqueous Li–O2 battery is the oxidation–reduction involving of Li2O2 as: 2Li+ + 2e− + O2 → Li2O2 (discharge)(3) Li2O2 → 2Li+ + 2e− + O2 (charge)(4)
In a real Li–O2 battery, the electrochemical reactions break down into anode and cathode as: Li(s) ↔ Li+ + e− (anode reaction)(5) 2Li+ + 2e− + O2 ↔ Li2O2 (cathode reaction)(6a) 4Li+ + 4e− + O2 ↔ 2Li2O (cathode reaction)(6b)
Various mechanisms for O2 reduction in Li+ electrolytes have already proposed62,71–75 and Bruce4 suggested a possible mechanism reaction occur at the cathode during discharge as: O2 + e− → O2−(7a) Li+ + O2− → LiO2(7b) 2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2(7c)
Here, LiO2 is an intermediate and unstable, thus decomposes to the more stable Li2O2 and releases O2. Bruce also suggested the charging process mechanism in which oxidation occurs by decomposition as given in eqn (4).76 The schematic operation mechanism of a non-aqueous Li–O2 battery is shown in Fig. 6.77
 Fig. 6  Schematic operation mechanism of a non-aqueous Li–O2 battery system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2013 The Electrochemical Society. 
The precipitation of reactants in the oxygen cathode of the non-aqueous Li–O2 cell designs is another degradation issue, which limits the capacity of the battery. In such non-aqueous Li–O2 cell design, the insoluble reaction products formed at the cathode are responsible for passivation of the electrode and cathode pore clogging. Li–O2 electrochemical reactions get stopped, once the pores are blocked and/or the surface is covered with the reaction products. Thus, the depth of discharge for the non-aqueous Li–O2 cell is limited by the utilization of cathode. A schematic presentation of the proposed chemistry at the air cathode is shown in Fig. 7.11
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the air cathode and proposed chemistry at the air cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
3 State of the art in experimental Li–O2 battery research
3.1 Cathode materials
More attention has been devoted to the development of cathodes materials for Li–O2 batteries than any other component in the system.2,13,35,36,46–49,66,78–82 From a practical perspective, the ideal material for Li–O2 cathodes is particulate carbon such as KB, Super P etc. due to its low cost, high surface area, extremely low density and ease of preparation.5,83,84 The light weight of carbon has also afforded some of the highest capacities (per gram) recorded to date. However, the mechanism of Li–O2 battery operation using pure carbon cathodes has come under intense scrutiny due to poor round trip efficiency and large overpotentials for both discharge and charge (while concerns are also mounting about the stability of carbon),85 stimulating a wave of research into catalyst materials for carbon based (and also carbon free) systems.46,49,59,86,87 Despite this surge of interest, the role of the various catalysts investigated to date (metal oxides, noble metals etc.) remains contentious. The various catalyst materials investigated to date have been the sole focus of a number of reviews.46–49,79,80 The intent of this section is to critically assess the feasibility of each type of cathode material and shed light on the state of the art understanding of the processes occurring at the cathode surfaces. The main focus here will be on insight provided by the various reports in terms of O2 reduction/evolution catalysis, cycle life improvement and cathode stability. Some issues which are common to every cathode system such as the choice of current collector substrate and the formation of Li2O2 on the cathode surface will also be discussed.

(a) Li2O2 formation on cathodes. 
While the underpinning operating principle of Li–O2 batteries has long been established, much recent research has been devoted to developing a greater understanding of the Li–O2 battery operation in practice through in-depth characterization of batteries under different operating conditions.41,52,54,88–99 As the formation and decomposition of Li2O2 on any cathode surface is fundamentally important with respect to both the capacity and cycle life of Li–O2 batteries, this has been a central focus of these investigations. The nature of Li2O2 (morphology,40,93,94 crystallinity100 and location on the cathode38) formed during discharge has been probed in several studies with the most commonly noted morphologies for Li2O2 as sub-micron spheres/toroids.41,56,101–104 These common morphologies have been noted for a number of different cathode types (pure carbon,56,105–109 carbon with catalysts,43,56,101,103 carbon free110) and with different electrolytes (ether based,56,101,105,107,109 sulfur containing102,106etc.). An example of a typical Li2O2 toroid formed on carbon nanofibers is shown in Fig. 8a,105 while smaller spherical Li2O2 particles formed directly on a carbon free, cobalt oxide array can be seen in Fig. 8b.
 Fig. 8  SEM images of the some of the various morphologies of Li2O2 formed on different cathode systems. (a) Commonly noted Li2O2 toroids formed on carbon nanofiber cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Spherical Li2O2 particles formed on Ni foam supported free-standing catalyst cobalt oxide array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Porous balls of Li2O2 deposited on NiCo2O4 nanowire array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (d) Layered Li2O2 formed on TiC composite electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
It has been found that these at low discharge rates, Li2O2 toroids are typically composed of multiple thin layers which splay to form the characteristic ‘donut’ shape.96 Given the propensity for Li2O2 formation as a layered material, it is unsurprising that more unusual layered morphologies (Fig. 8c111 and d112) have also been reported for Li2O2 formed on Li–O2 battery cathodes. More unusual porous balls (Fig. 8c) and layered sheets (Fig. 8d) of Li2O2 have been reported as the primary discharge products for NiCo2O4 and TiC composite electrodes respectively. Additional examples of layered discharge products (suggested to be Li2O2 but not necessarily confirmed in each case) similar to those presented in Fig. 8c have also been noted for cathodes based on MnCo2O4 catalysts,113 Pd/Cu alloy catalyst114 and MnO2 nanowires.115 The role of these catalyst materials in determining the morphology of Li2O2 and its implications for decomposition during charge have not been fully investigated and is of interest given the central role played by Li2O2 formation in determining Li–O2 battery capacity and cycle life.
A further investigation into the role of Li2O2 in Li–O2 battery operation was reported recently by Nazar et al. who showed for a given system (Super P carbon on gas diffusion layer cathode and LiTFSI/TEGDME electrolyte) that the morphology and crystallinity of Li2O2 formed on the surface of the cathode can be strongly influenced by the applied discharge current. Their results indicated that low applied currents favoured the formation of characteristic, crystalline Li2O2 toroids outlined above. Conversely, high applied currents were found to lead to formation of quasi-amorphous thin films of Li2O2 on the underlying carbon (depicted schematically in Fig. 9). The importance of these observations was further emphasised by the fact that the charge behaviour for the system was found to differ based on the morphology of the Li2O2 formed on discharge. It was noted that the large Li2O2 toroids, while favouring high capacity compared to the quasi-amorphous films, also led to increased charging overpotentials and inhibited recharge (due to difficulty in decomposition).
 Fig. 9  Schematic showing the importance of applied current on the morphology of Li2O2 formed on Super P carbon cathodes as reported by Nazar et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The influence of Li2O2 particle size on the recharge behaviour of Li–O2 batteries was probed by Hu et al. By simply changing the average size of preloaded Li2O2 particle on a Super P carbon cathode from 600 nm down to 160 nm, the average charge potential was reduced from 4.45 V to just 4.05 V while the capacity of the cathode was also markedly increased. The impact of catalysts and applied currents on the size, morphology and crystallinity of Li2O2 formed upon discharge (and its subsequent decomposition upon charging) is an extremely important research topic given its potential for influencing the capacity and rechargeability of Li–O2 batteries and warrants further study for promising material systems.91,112,116,117


(b) Porous carbon. 
Porous carbon (with and without various catalysts) has been ubiquitous in use as the cathode material since the start of the Li–O2 battery movement.68,77,118,119 Pure porous carbon cathodes (containing Super P, KB carbon etc.) plus binders as shown in Fig. 10a have typically shown excellent initial discharge capacities but have been hampered by poor cycle life.87 One such example is shown in Fig. 10c where the initial discharge capacity of a KB based carbon electrode (almost 3000 mA h g−1) rapidly deteriorated upon cycling (down to under 500 mA h g−1 at the third discharge cycle). While electrolyte decomposition (which will be discussed in Section 3) is certainly an issue which hampers Li–O2 battery cycle life, carbon cathodes have also been found to be extremely unstable over extended discharge–charge cycles.85,120 By constructing carbon based cathodes using 13C powder, Thotiyl et al. were able to distinguish between the formation of Li2CO3 due to decomposition of the electrolyte (standard 12C TEGDME or DMSO) and the 13C carbon cathodes. As can be seen from Fig. 10b, the amount of Li213CO3 formed due to the decomposition of the carbon electrode is initially lower than the Li212CO3 formed due to electrolyte decomposition, however, this trend rapidly reverses with Li213CO3 present at 10% of the weight of the desired product Li2O2 after just 5 discharge–charge cycles. The authors also showed that the main source of carbon electrode decomposition occurs on charging above ≈3.5 V (with smaller amounts of decomposition noted during charge which is consistent with a previous report121), meaning that any charging process above 3.5 V is likely to incur the formation of Li2CO3 on the cathode surface.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM image showing the typical Super P/KB composite cathode morphology. Reprinted from ref. 84. Copyright 2013, with permission of Elsevier. (b) Amount of Li2CO3 formed as a percentage of Li2O2 in the cathode due to the carbon cathode (Li213CO3) and electrolyte (Li212CO3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) Example voltage profile of complete discharge–charge cycle conducted between 2.2 and 4.7 V with inset showing the dramatic capacity fading typical for carbon based cathodes under full discharge–charge conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Cyclic voltammetry of carbon free cathode (i.e. just Li anode, TEGDME based electrolyte and Ni current collector showing the region of electrolyte decomposition.122 
Given the aforementioned issues with carbon cathode stability, several approaches have been explored in an attempt to circumvent (or at least minimize) Li2CO3 formation and thus make carbon cathodes more stable. The most simple approach is to operate at a controlled depth of discharge by restricting the discharge to a set capacity figure such as 1000 mA g−1 or by reducing the voltage window for discharge and charge (e.g. between 2.4–4.2 V). The benefits of this approach are twofold. Firstly, by avoiding a deep discharge, the cathode is not completely passivated by the insulating Li2O2 formed upon discharge. Additionally, due to the fact that the amount of Li2O2 formed on the cathode is limited, the cell does not need to be subjected to high voltages during charging and electrolyte decomposition is reduced (Fig. 10b).122 However, given the fact that Li2CO3 is likely to form at even moderate charging voltages (Fig. 10d),85 a shift to catalysed carbon cathodes (or the more drastic option of removing carbon from the electrode altogether as will be discussed in Section 3.1(f)) must be considered. By-product formation that can include Li2CO3 is also influenced by the stability of the electrolyte, which stems from the lithium salt's compatibility with it solvent.123 Specific solvent effects are detailed later in Section 3.2.


(c) Carbon – nanotubes and graphene. 
Aside from particulate carbons, various other carbon structures (again with and without catalysts) such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs),92,94,124–135 honeycomb-like carbon,45,136 mesoporous carbon,42,44,137,138 microfibers,139,140 graphene and its derivatives8,26,108,141–147 and carbon thin films148 have been investigated as cathode materials for Li–O2 batteries. The primary aim of the use of these structures is to increase the surface area of the carbon structure to improve O2 diffusion while also allowing easier accommodation of Li2O2 formed upon discharge.
CNTs are a particularly attractive material for Li–O2 battery cathodes due to the possibility of making freestanding cathodes composed solely of CNTs, which can eliminate the requirement for weight adding binders.105,107,128,149 An example of a free standing CNT based fibril electrode produced by Lim et al. is presented in Fig. 11a and b. The SEM images show an example of the interwoven mesh of CNTs which was formed by alternatively layering sheets of CNTS orthogonal to each other to create a high surface area, free standing structure. The electrochemical behaviour of these woven CNTs was found to be far superior to cathodes formed using standard KB carbon and disordered CNT powder. This superior electrochemical performance manifested as much improved capacity retention when operated in full discharge conditions (cycled between 2.0 V and 4.7 V), while the CNT based electrode could also deliver an impressive capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 over 60 discharge–charge cycles when operated at a limited depth of discharge. Similarly impressive capacity retention figures at limited depth of discharge were presented by Chen et al. for multi-walled CNT papers formed using a floating catalyst method employing ferrocene as the Fe catalyst precursor.128 While the formation of Li2O2 on CNT based cathodes has been confirmed through the use of XRD analysis,128,149 additional analyses are required to fully gauge the stability of CNT based cathodes in similar manner to that discussed for particulate carbon. Furthermore, the extremely low mass loadings common for CNT based cathodes (e.g. 0.016 mg cm−2)107 may be insufficient to power practical devices. Nevertheless, CNTs represent an exciting class of possible cathode materials which can massively outperform standard particulate carbons. An addition benefit of CNTs is that, due to their high aspect ratios, CNTs represent a far more practical platform than particulate carbon for studying the formation and disappearance of Li2O2 on discharge and charge of Li–O2 batteries using both ex situ96,150 and in situ88,99 methods as they allow clearer visualization of the discharge product morphology.
 Fig. 11  (a, b) SEM images of hierarchical-fibril CNT electrode produced by Lim et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., KGaA, Weinheim. (c) SEM image of honeycomb like carbon. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Discharge curves of Li–O2 battery cathodes composed of mesoporous–macroporous carbon sphere arrays (MMCSAs) at varying weight% x (with the remainder composed of Super P 80-x%) and PVDF 20%) (a) x = 0 (b) x = 5 (c) x = 10 (d) x = 30 (e) x = 50 (f) x = 80. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., KGaA, Weinheim. 
Mesoporous carbons have also fostered interest as Li–O2 battery cathode materials due to their high degree of porosity which can facilitate effective electrolyte immersion and accommodation of Li2O2 within the pores (Fig. 11c).42,44,137,138,151 Park et al. compared the performance of mesoporous carbon cathodes with those composed of pure Super P carbon and found that the charge voltage was substantially reduced for the former. While crystalline Li2O2 was confirmed post-discharge on the Super P cathode as expected, the mesoporous carbon cathodes showed no evidence for crystalline Li2O2 leading the authors to propose that the primary discharge product was in fact amorphous Li2O2 (formed within the pores of the mesoporous carbon) which facilitated lower charge voltages.137 The possible formation of amorphous Li2O2 as the primary discharge product has been proposed in the presence of RuO2 nanoparticle catalysts,100 however, its formation by simply constraining the Li2O2 product within the pores of a carbon host (and the associated reduction in overpotentials for both charge and discharge processes) would be beneficial.
Similarly, Guo et al. showed that a mesoporous–macroporous composite facilitated much higher discharge capacities than standard Super P carbon cathodes.44 In Fig. 11d it can be seen that a maximum initial discharge capacity was achieved when the cathode was composed of 50% mesoporous carbon and 30% Super P carbon (the remaining 20% was a fixed percentage of binder) which was over three times higher than the pure Super P cathode. In comparison, the pure mesoporous carbon sample (sample f) showed reduced capacity compared to the optimum composition which was attributed to decreased mechanical strength (and associated delamination) of the pure mesoporous carbon cathode. Unfortunately the crystallinity and morphology of the Li2O2 formed in these tests was not probed. Likewise, another report detailing the use of a honeycomb like carbon as the cathode material used a carbonate based electrolyte which (as will be discussed in Section 3) led to the formation of Li2CO3 as the primary discharge product rather than the desired Li2O2. High surface area, mesoporous carbons could prove to be a particularly useful class of cathode material for Li–O2 batteries given the initial promising results discussed here, however, the stability of the carbon in the electrodes and the nature and reversibility of Li2O2 formation needs further investigation.


(d) Carbon based metal oxides. 
Various metal oxides materials (MnO2,4,14,115,124,126,131,152–169 Co3O4,110,170–177 CoO,178,179 Fe3O4,180 mixed Co/Mn oxides,113,181,182 perovskites,183–188 NiCo2O4,111 Na0.44MnO2,103 LaFeO3189etc.) have been investigated for use in Li–O2 battery cathodes with the vast majority probed as carbon based composites. Despite their widespread usage, the actual mechanism for operation is not fully understood. In fact, it has been suggested that the enhanced capacities noted for the most common metal oxide catalyst MnO2 may actually be due to enhanced decomposition of the electrolyte/carbon host.190 Another issue which complicates elucidation of the contribution of the catalyst material to both discharge and charge capacities comes from the fact that the vast majority of reports express capacity in terms of mA h g−1carbon even when a significant portion of the cathode mass is composed of the metal oxide catalyst. Due to the presence of both carbon and metal oxides in these cathodes, these systems are extremely complicated and to date, the enhanced formation and decomposition of Li2O2 (compared to pure carbon cathodes) has not been conclusively shown.
Despite these issues, reduced overpotentials (particularly on charging) have been regularly reported for metal oxide–carbon cathodes when compared to their pure carbon analogues. Two examples of reduced overpotentials on charge can be seen for Co3O4/reduced graphene oxide101 (Fig. 12a) and MnCo2O4113 microspheres (Fig. 12b). It is worth noting that the discharge potentials in each case are very similar to the pure carbon cathodes, suggesting limited ORR activity by the metal oxides. In future, research should ideally aim to assess the reversible formation of Li2O2 and the level of byproduct formation (e.g. Li2CO3 and LiOH) for mixed metal oxide–carbon cathode systems. A characteristic fingerprint of the electrochemical performance of the pure metal oxide materials (through either constant current or CV measurements) would also be useful for gauging ORR and OER activity and possible byproduct formation. As non-precious metal catalysts for Li–O2 batteries have been the sole focus of other review articles, they will not be dwelled on in this section.46,49,65,80 Metal oxide catalysts are well places as lower cost alternatives to precious metals and the well-established synthetic strategies for the formation of metal oxides in high yields165,191–194 suggest that they will continue to be investigated as catalysts for Li–O2 battery cathodes. Reports into the true stability of electrolytes in the presence of metal oxide catalysts and the role of the catalysts in facilitating Li2O2 formation and decomposition are urgently required.
 Fig. 12  The initial discharge–charge cycle shown for cathodes composed of (a) Co3O4/RGO cathode compared to KB. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Initial discharge–charge for MnCo2O4/Super P compared with pure Super P. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 


(e) Carbon based noble metals. 
Noble metal catalysts (Au,86,195–197 Pd,40,132,195,198–200 Pt55,195,200–204 Ag,55,200,205,206 and noble metal alloys59,207,208) have also been the subject of attention as catalysts for Li–O2 batteries. As was the case for metal oxide catalysts, the majority of reports detailing the catalytic activity of noble metals for Li–O2 cathodes have been investigated as carbon composite electrodes. Given the propensity for carbon cathode decomposition discussed above and the possibility of misleading electrochemical responses due to catalyst driven electrolyte decomposition, the use of noble metal–carbon cathodes requires careful study.
Harding et al. investigated the effect of the addition of noble metal catalysts (40 weight% of 50 nm nanoparticles composed of Au, Pt or Ru) on the charging behaviour of carbon based cathodes preloaded with Li2O2 particles.86 It should be noted that the morphology and surface chemistry of the Li2O2 in this study may vary from electrochemically formed Li2O2, however, their results indicated that Ru/C and Pt/C cathodes exhibited much higher catalytic activities than Au/C cathodes which were in fact only comparable with pure C cathodes (Fig. 13a).
 Fig. 13  (a) OER activity vs. potential for the charging of Pt/C, Ru/C, Au/C and VC cathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Impact of Al2O3 passivation and Pd nanoparticle catalysts on the discharge and charge voltages of Super P carbon cathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Discharge and charge curves for CNT electrode and Pt nanoparticle embedded CNT cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Comparison of the discharge–charge processes for pure carbon and Pt/Au nanoparticle catalyst containing carbon cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
The inactivity of Au as an OER catalyst is consistent with the results presented by McCloskey et al. in their study which used DEMS analysis to quantify gas evolution during the charge of different catalyst materials (MnO2, Au and Pt).190 In fact, Au has been found to be a far more effective ORR catalyst which can improve the discharge behaviour of cathodes (rate capability, reducing discharge overpotentials etc.),56 however, these benefits may be negated in a practical system when considering the cost of Au and the real capacity improvement of the cathode once the mass of Au is taken into account. The impact of ORR catalysts in determining the morphology and crystallinity of Li2O2 formed on cathodes during Li–O2 battery operation has not been widely studied and is critically important given its central role as discussed in this review.
Pd has been highlighted as a particularly effective ORR catalyst material.200 In light of this, Lu et al. investigated the impact of atomic layer deposition formed Pd nanoparticles (in conjunction with Al2O3 passivation) on the discharge and charge voltages of Super P carbon based cathodes. Their results (Fig. 13b) showed that while Al2O3 passivation alone actually increased the overpotential on both discharge and charge, the subsequent addition of Pd nanoparticles resulted in a marked reduction in the charge voltage (to below 3.25 V from above 4 V). Unlike in the case of Au catalyzed cathodes where decreased overpotentials were noted for discharge,56 the Pd decorated cathodes showed nearly identical discharge voltages to the pristine carbon cathodes. While the authors confirmed the presence of characteristic crystalline Li2O2 toroids on the cathode surface after discharge, the role of Pd in facilitating such dramatic reductions in the charge voltage was not made clear. Additionally, the authors claimed that Al2O3 was capable of suppressing electrolyte decomposition but characterization techniques to verify this were not included. The charge behaviour of pure Pd nanoparticle catalyzed cathodes in this study showed markedly higher potentials suggesting a strong interplay between the Al2O3 and Pd nanoparticles. Additional investigations into this cathode system are required to ensure that the extremely low charge voltage was in fact due to the catalyzed decomposition of Li2O2 on the cathode rather than just electrolyte decomposition or byproduct formation. The behaviour of this cathode system (in terms of byproduct minimization) over extended discharge–charge cycles would also be of interest.
The use of Pt as a catalyst material for CNT based cathodes was investigated by Lim et al. (Fig. 13c).202 Their Pt nanoparticle embedded CNTs showed strongly reduced charging potentials (circa 500 mV reduction) compared to pure CNTs with this reduction consistent with the catalytic activity of Pt suggested in Fig. 13a. Their Pt/CNT cathodes showed a stable capacity of 1000 mA g−1 for over 120 discharge–charge cycles. More importantly, when the cathodes were cycled within a wide electrochemical window (i.e. full discharge conditions) between 2.0 V and 4.7 V, good capacity retention was noted with the discharge capacity above 1500 mA g−1 after 80 cycles. Caution must be exercised to ensure that the perceived catalytic activity of Pt catalysts presented in Fig. 13c202 is solely due to enhanced Li2O2 decomposition rather than largely due to electrolyte decomposition as shown in the report by McCloskey et al. where significant CO2 was evolved for a Pt catalyzed cathode during the charging process.190 However, the authors did show that the formation and decomposition of Li2O2 were the dominant electrochemical processes for at least the early discharge–charge cycles.
The concept of using alloyed nanoparticle catalysts has been more sparingly studied than their single element counterparts.59,207,208 However, this approach has immense potential as it allows OER properties from one material to be combined with ORR properties of another. This concept was confirmed by Lu et al. who showed that alloyed Pt/Au nanoparticles could act as bifunctional catalysts with ORR activity due to the Au and OER activity coming from the Pt.59 These effects were manifested in the lowering of overpotentials for both the charge and discharge processes as shown in Fig. 13d with the marked reduction in charge potential of particular importance. It should be noted that this study of Pt/Au nanoparticle catalysts was conducted using a carbonate based electrolyte system with the apparent catalytic effect likely due to unwanted side reactions. In future, it is crucial that the true catalytic nature of these alloyed nanoparticle catalysts is ascertained (i.e. enhanced Li2O2 formation and decomposition on charge and discharge respectively).
Noble metal catalysts within carbon matrices are an ideal platform for investigating the fundamental electrochemical processes involved in Li–O2 battery operation. Noble metal nanoparticles can easily be formed using solution based growth methods209–211 and then embedded on particulate (Fig. 14a–c) or CNF (Fig. 14d and e) type supports. While these materials may be prohibitively expensive from a practical viewpoint in terms of scale up (considering that they may account for e.g. 40% of the cathode mass), much information can still be garnered from future studies using noble metal catalysts and their alloys. These could take the form of investigations on catalyst bifunctionality, the impact of ORR catalysts on Li2O2 morphology and catalyst driven electrolyte decomposition.
 Fig. 14  (a–c) TEM images of Au, Pt and Ru nanoparticle catalysts supported on Vulcan carbon. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–g) SEM (d) and TEM (e and f) images of Pt nanoparticle catalysts embedded on CNTs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


(f) Carbon-free cathodes. 
Recently, several reports have investigated the use of carbon-free cathodes for Li–O2 battery applications. While these materials (nanoporous Au,197 TiC,112 Ru–ITO,212 Co3O4 on Ni110,172) are inescapably more dense than carbon (reducing gravimetric capacity), they have exhibited the most promising stabilities of any systems to date and perhaps represent the most promising material set for truly rechargeable Li–O2 battery cathodes. The primary challenge for carbon-free cathodes is to create inexpensive, lightweight electrochemically active materials with a high degree of porosity to accommodate Li2O2 formed during operation.
The first carbon-free cathode architecture examined by Cui et al. (depicted schematically in Fig. 15a) consisted of Co3O4 nanorods grown directly on a Ni foam current collector using CVD. Electrochemical analysis of the cathode showed a dramatic reduction in the charge potential, with the majority of charging occurring at circa 3.75 V (at a current density of 0.1 mA cm2). XRD and FTIR analysis suggested that the primary electrochemical process occurring during the single discharge–charge cycles investigated involved the formation–decomposition of Li2O2 as desired.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic depiction of the carbon free cathode architecture developed by Cui et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Cycling performance of Ru–ITO cathode compared with that of a reference pure Super P cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Cycling behaviour of TiC cathode in DMSO based electrolyte showing capacity retention over 100 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
The next carbon-free system investigated was a nanoporous Au cathode developed by Peng et al.197 This report gave clear insight into the benefit of carbon-free cathodes and was in effect the first truly rechargeable Li–O2 system. As the role of this cathode in circumventing electrolyte decomposition was crucial to its outstanding performance, it will be discussed in more detail in Section 3.2 which deals with electrolyte stability. An ITO supported Ru nanoparticle cathode recently developed by Li et al. exhibited excellent capacity retention for up to 50 discharge–charge cycles and charging voltages below 4 V. This capacity retention compared extremely favourably with a common Super P carbon cathode also investigated in the study (Fig. 15b). XPS and IR analysis also confirmed the dominant formation–decomposition of Li2O2 and limited formation of Li2CO3 which is central to a rechargeable system. While this catalyst system showed excellent stability, its gravimetric capacity was not detailed and the cost of Ru may be a hurdle to widespread use.
In an effort to identify a more cost effective alternative cathode material to NPG, Thotiyl et al. examined the use of TiC based cathodes.112 Along with greatly reduced cost in comparison to Au, TiC is also less dense and was shown to exhibit similarly excellent stability for up to 100 cycles (Fig. 15c). The TiC cathode was able to deliver a reversible capacity of 350 mA h gTiC−1 with the reversible formation–decomposition of Li2O2 verified when using a DMSO based electrolyte. The authors also stressed that the TiC material investigated was not an optimized morphology (i.e. the cathode did not boast high surface area, high porosity etc.) suggesting that there is room to further enhance the performance of TiC based cathode systems.
As the morphology of carbon-free cathodes is likely to be hugely important in maximizing their gravimetric energy density, SEM and TEM images of the various carbon-free cathodes examined to date are shown in Fig. 16. The highly porous Co3O4 nanorod/Ni foam cathode architecture developed by Cui et al. (Fig. 16a and b) shows highly dense Co3O4 nanorods grown on the supporting Ni current collector and large spaces for O2 diffusion.110 The two carbon-free cathode systems developed by researchers in the Bruce group are shown in Fig. 16c and d (NPG197 and TiC respectively112). While pores are evident in the structure of the NPG cathode, the TiC cathode material appears in large clumps of particles consistent with the non-optimized morphology mentioned in the previous paragraph. Likewise, the Ru–ITO composite shown in Fig. 16e and f is composed of large particles agglomerated together and may benefit from being formed in a more optimal geometry (for example like that shown in Fig. 16a in future). The nanoneedles shown in Fig. 16g–i are actually only one example of the morphologies of the Co3O4 catalysts formed on Ni foam by Riaz et al. In this report, nanosheets and nanoflowers were also formed by varying the synthetic process with the enhanced capacities reported for the nanoneedles attributed to more active sites for ORR and better accommodation of Li2O2. The promising stability of carbon-free cathodes warrants further investigation.213 Ideally these cathodes should be investigated as hierarchically porous structures such as those presented by Cui et al. to ensure maximization of the gravimetric energy density.
 Fig. 16  SEM and TEM images of various carbon-free Li–O2 battery cathode systems. (a, b) Co3O4 nanorods on Ni mesh. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) NPG cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2012 AAAS publication. (d) SEM image of TiC cathode material. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (e, f) TEM images of Ru–ITO cathode system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (g–i) SEM images of Co3O4 nanoneedle arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


(g) Operational considerations. 
Outside of the active materials discussed in the previous section, several considerations are required in the design of any practical Li–O2 battery. These include whether the system is operated in an open (i.e. using air)198,215–218 or closed (using pure O2) geometry, the impact of the operational temperature and the current collector being used. These considerations are likely to play a key role in the future success of the Li–O2 battery and warrant discussion and further study.
The vast majority of Li–O2 batteries to date have been operated in a closed geometry to avoid the ingress of moisture and atmospheric contaminants (most notably CO2).219,220 It is widely accepted that a closed geometry is the most promising option for Li–O2 design in the short-term as no membranes have been shown to prevent H2O and CO2 ingress to the desired degree.66 While the use of a closed geometry for Li–O2 batteries may necessitate the use of a bulky O2 tank (which may lead to a decrease in the gravimetric capacity for vehicular applications), it also allows operation at O2 pressures greater than 1 atm to be probed. In separate reports, Yang221 and Nemanick222 showed that initial discharge capacity and rate capability of carbon based cathodes could be dramatically increased by merely increasing the O2 pressure. In the former report, at a high applied current of 1000 μA cm2, the discharge capacity could be increased by a factor of 6 (Fig. 17a) by merely increasing the O2 pressure from 1 atm to 10 atm. The rechargeability of these increased pressure systems was not probed and warrants investigation as the removal of the Li2O2 from cathodes discharged at higher pressures may not be a trivial issue. Nevertheless, this approach may be a means of offsetting the capacity losses due to the increased weight of the device due to the likely requirement of operating in a closed system configuration.
 Fig. 17  (a) Impact of O2 pressure as reported by Yang et al. showing the discharge curves at pressures of (a) 1 atm, (b) 3 atm, (c) 5 atm, and (d) 10 atm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2012 Springer Publishing Company. (b) Influence of temperature on Li–O2 battery charge and discharge voltages. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The impact of temperature on the operation of Li–O2 batteries has not received much attention to date which is surprising given that the ultimate goal is to incorporate these devices in automotive applications where temperatures may fluctuate substantially (depending on the geographic location, time of year etc.).223–225 One report by Park et al. investigated the discharge and charge of carbon based cathodes at a limited depth of discharge–charge (1000 mA h g−1) and found substantially different discharge and charge voltages (Fig. 17b) at different temperatures. For the discharge voltages, a 0.4 V difference was noted for a cathode discharged at −10 °C (≈2.4 V) compared to that the cathode discharged at 70 °C (≈2.8 V). More strikingly, the charge voltages in the same temperature range showed a massive difference of approximately 1.2 V, with lower temperatures leading to increased charge overpotentials. This observation has major implications for the practical adoption of Li–O2 batteries as such high charging potentials at low temperatures will likely lead to substantial cathode and electrolyte degradation and may greatly impact the cycle life of the battery. The authors used H-NMR to investigate possible side product formation in this system and while their results suggest minimal electrolyte decomposition, only the cathodes discharged at 25 °C and 70 °C were investigated. They also suggest that low discharge temperatures (25 °C) favour the formation of crystalline Li2O2 while higher operating temperatures (50 °C and 70 °C) resulted in mostly amorphous Li2O2 being formed. Such a profound influence on the operation of Li–O2 warrants significant further investigations. Additionally, because the authors did not investigate the cycle life and operated at a controlled depth of discharge, the influence of temperature on the full discharge capacity of Li–O2 batteries and capacity retention over extended cycles remain open issues.
A key and only sparingly acknowledging issue is the importance of the cathode current collector substrate.226 Given the requirement for a high surface area cathode to allow O2 diffusion and discharge product formation and accommodation, a wide range of current collectors have been examined. These have primarily taken the form of carbon paper/gas diffusion layers (GDLs)127,173,227–230 and metal meshes and foams (e.g. stainless steel,85,112,129,197 Ni5,106,116,172,231,232 and Al87,233). The concept of inert versus active current collector substrates has not been widely discussed in the literature to date. From the perspective of a final device, active cathodes (which participate in ORR and OER) such as GDLs and carbon papers are attractive as they minimize dead-weight in the device and are lighter than their metal counterparts, however, the contribution to these cathodes to the discharge time is often ignored, which can lead to overstated capacities. While the capacity of the current collectors may be low (i.e. mA h gcurrent collector−1) it is the additional time added to the overall discharge time of the cell that should be factored in to the calculation. Furthermore, the instability of nominally inactive current collectors (e.g. Ni226) in certain electrolytes must be considered as this factor can hamper cycle life. Other issues do surround reports on Li–O2 batteries cathodes. Many studies do not take into account the weight of catalyst materials and auxiliary materials such as binders when quoting capacities which again can lead to inflated capacity values. Similarly, the vast majority of studies to date have considered only cathodes with extremely low mass loadings of active material (often of the order of 1 mg cm2) in an effort to maintain porosity and maximize capacity figures which may not be suitable for real world applications. In considering capacities, total cathode mass (including current collector) or at least total cathode mass (all material on the current collector) should be considered for clarity.


(h) Cathodes-conclusions. 
This section has discussed some of the major considerations for each of the main types of cathode systems currently under investigation in Li–O2 batteries. Outside of these materials, a wide range of other catalysts have also been investigated to a lesser extent (Ru based,234–238 nitrides,140,239–241 selenides242 cobalt phthalocyanine,243 CuFe catalyzed carbon,244 lead ruthenate pyrochlore,245 mesoporous NiCo2O4 nanoflakes,246 metal organic frameworks247etc.), yet mechanistic insight for these materials remain elusive. The role of the various catalyst materials in the reversible formation and decomposition of Li2O2 and prevention of byproduct formation is a key issue which warrants further study. Another possible concept to improve the charging efficiency of Li–O2 batteries is to incorporate a redox mediator such as tetrathiafulvalene9 into the electrolyte to aid in the decomposition of Li2O2. Redox mediators function by being oxidized during the charging process and in turn aid oxidation of Li2O2.
As it stands, very few cathode systems have been shown to be truly stable over extended discharge–charge cycles and typically used carbon cathodes have been found to be highly reactive in the presence of Li2O2 and its intermediates. It is now clear that the stability of any promising cathode–electrolyte system must be verified using a wide range of techniques (Raman,112,197,248,249 FTIR,112,197,248 NMR,52,54 Mass-spectrometry,98,112,197,249–251 XPS,90,157,248,252–256 Nonresonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering53etc.). Relying on solely XRD to confirm Li2O2 formation–decomposition is not sufficient given the wide range of amorphous byproducts which can be formed upon cycling and possibility that Li2O2 may be amorphous.257 The most stable cathode systems are those which do not contain particulate carbon (the stability of CNTs and other carbon related materials remains an open issue), and optimization of the morphology of these materials seems a promising route to improving their limited gravimetric capacities.
In the next section, the role of the electrolyte in Li–O2 battery operation will be probed. It will be shown that the identification of a stable electrolyte is just as important as the development of novel cathode systems. It should also be stressed that electrolytes cannot be examined in isolation and that a wide range of electrolyte/salt combinations must be assessed for each promising cathode system.

3.2 Electrolytes
A wide range of electrolytes have been examined for use in Li–O2 battery applications. Initially, carbonate based electrolytes were investigated, however, these were found not to facilitate rechargeable systems due to their propensity for decomposition and associated Li2CO3 formation. The discovery of stable electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries is absolutely paramount if they are to reach the required cycle life (i.e. hundreds of cycles) required for real world applications. The following section will examine the more prevalent electrolytes used to date in Li–O2 batteries with particular emphasis on electrolyte stability with respect to decomposition (and associated byproduct formation). The reports highlighted here illustrate the importance of using multiple analytical techniques to examine the true stability of electrolytes. It will also be clear from this section that electrolytes cannot be considered in isolation, i.e. the electrolyte must be considered with the cathode system it is being coupled with as this determines the reactivity of the electrolyte. Readers are directed to the review by Balaish51 for further insight and discussion into some alternative electrolyte solvents such as nitriles,62,258 amides,233,259,260 silanes261 and esters.

(a) Carbonates. 
Given the position of Li–O2 batteries as a ‘beyond Li-ion’ technology, it is unsurprising that initial investigations into Li–O2 batteries focused primarily on organic carbonate electrolytes given their widespread use in Li-ion batteries.262–265 In fact, the first report of a Li–O2 battery reported by Abraham et al. in 1996 used a solid electrolyte composed of ethylene carbonate, propylene carbonate, polyacrylonitrile and LiPF6 (40:40:12:8 weight respectively).68 Their initial breakthrough gave insight into the potential high capacities achievable for Li–O2 batteries while preliminary results suggested the formation of Li2O2 rather than Li2O as the dominant discharge product. Read et al. subsequently examined the performance of liquid electrolytes consisting of various different carbonate mixtures in 2002.14 This study showed the importance of electrolyte in determining the performance of Li–O2 batteries while an additional study from the same author in 2003 showed that O2 transport within electrolytes also played a major role in determining capacity.266 Carbonate based electrolytes continued to be the widely used4,5,57,74,87,152,217,231,267–270 until their instability was identified by several research groups through the use of various analytical techniques.248,271–275 The first report confirming this was by Mizuno et al. who showed using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy that the primary discharge products formed using carbonate based electrolytes even after a single discharge were actually Li2CO3 and lithium alkylcarbonates rather than the expected product Li2O2.272
The instability of carbonate electrolytes was unequivocally illustrated by McCloskey et al. by combining a variety of techniques for the characterization of cathodes under discharged and charged states.249 By combining X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy and differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) the authors were able to probe the operation of Li–O2 batteries in much greater depth than previously achievable. The use of isotope labelled, in situ DEMS analysis (Fig. 18) allowed quantification of the O2 and CO2 evolved during the first charge for three electrolyte systems ((a) DME, (b) EC/DMC and (c) PC/2DME).
 Fig. 18  Gas evolution profiles (O2 and CO2 upper and lower respectively) for cathodes charged using DME (a), EC/DMC (b), PC/DMC (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 249. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
When examining the gas evolution profiles for the three electrolytes, it can be clearly seen that there is major O2 evolution for the cathode discharged in DME (Fig. 18a) which is consistent with the desired decomposition of Li2O2. The gas evolution is also broken in to four distinct sections which relate to different portions of the charge ((I) initial charge, (II) rapid voltage increase from 4–4.5 V (III), 4.5 V plateau and (IV) 4.5–4.6). It can also be seen that significant CO2 is only evolved at stage IV (i.e. above 4.5 V). These results for DME contrast entirely with the carbonate based electrolytes EC/DMC (Fig. 18b) and PC/DME (Fig. 18c) where negligible O2 was evolved and instead CO2 was the dominant gas produced upon charge. These results conclusively showed that carbonate based electrolytes are not suitable electrolytes for rechargeable Li–O2 systems and stimulated interest in the development of more stable electrolyte systems.


(b) Ethers. 
Ethers have been at the forefront of the Li–O2 research field since the instability of carbonate electrolytes was established.39,75,76,112,118,150,254,259,275–283 In particular, dimethoxyethane (DME) and tetraethyleneglycoldimethyl ether (tetraglyme/TEGDME) have attracted significant interest owing to their increased stabilities in the Li–O2 system. The increased stability of ethers compared to carbonate electrolytes in succinctly illustrated in Fig. 18 where the dominant gas evolved after the first charge (using a DME electrolyte) is O2 liberated by the decomposition of the desired discharge product Li2O2. In fact, DME had been incorporated into Li–O2 electrolytes as early as 2003, however, it was initially combined with carbonates which likely negated its increased stability.266 In 2006 Read et al. used DME in a 1:1 weight ratio with 1,3-dioxolane as electrolyte.118 They highlighted the higher dielectric constant and lower viscosities of this mixed electrolyte compared to carbonate based electrolytes while also acknowledging their increased stability.
Despite the enhanced stability of ether based electrolytes in comparison to carbonates (exemplified by the formation of Li2O2 as the dominant discharge product for the first cycle), it has been found that TEGDME does not allow the formation of crystalline Li2O2 upon repeated cycling.76 Recently it has been shown through the use of gas chromatography that TEGDME decomposition occurs even from the first discharge cycle as confirmed by the presence of shorter chain ethers (including DME) and alcohols.284 The fundamental instability of ether electrolytes was further emphasized by the finding that TEGDME can be consumed in the ‘charging’ process of a Li–O2 architecture run within an Ar atmosphere (i.e. even without the presence of Li2O2).276 Other reports have highlighted auto-oxidation of ether based electrolytes in the presence of excess oxygen which can lead to further reactions with cathode components such as binders.253,259,279
While ether based electrolytes are certainly a useful medium for studying the fundamental processes associated with Li–O2 battery operation, further efforts will likely be required to make them sufficiently stable to allow long term cycling. It has been proposed that functionalization of the β-carbon position may improve stability.51,259 Alternatively, the identification of suitable catalysts which allow the charge voltage to be lowered substantially may allow the formation of by-products within ether based electrolytes to be minimized, thus improving cycle life.


(c) Sulfur containing electrolytes. 
An interesting category of electrolytes for Li–O2 battery are those containing sulphur atoms such as DMSO and sulfolane. These electrolytes have been recently been suggested to exhibit enhanced stability compared to conventional ether based solvents with high capacities and cycle lives of up to 100 (or even 100s) of cycles reported in some cases.102,106,197,213,227,285–287 DMSO was the electrolyte solvent used for the previously mentioned report by Peng et al. which showed that the reversible formation–decomposition of Li2O2 was achievable over 100 discharge–charge cycles.197 The study involved the use of the NPG cathode along with a 0.1 M LiClO4–DMSO electrolyte. Crucially, the formation and disappearance of Li2O2 (during discharge–charge respectively) and almost complete minimization of byproduct formation due to side reactions was confirmed through the use of FTIR (Fig. 19A) and Raman analysis (Fig. 19B). These results were also augmented through the use of DEMS analysis to monitor gas evolution during discharge and charge. The reversible formation and decomposition of Li2O2 was further illustrated by the strong O2 signal during discharge and negligible CO2 signal present.
 Fig. 19  (A) FTIR and (B) Raman analysis performed on NPG cathode cycled in 0.1 M LiClO4–DMSO electrolyte showing the overwhelming formation of Li2O2 upon discharge and its disappearance upon charge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2012 AAAS publication. 
These results showed conclusively that DMSO is a stable electrolyte solvent in the presence of a pure Au cathode. However, when the authors repeated the FTIR and Raman analysis for a carbon based cathode discharged in the same electrolyte, significant electrolyte decomposition was identified even from the first discharge which suggests that it is not a suitable electrolyte solvent for carbon based cathodes. Additional studies using DMSO based electrolytes with carbon based cathodes have presented the formation of LiOH as a major crystalline byproduct.102,288,289 While the relative ratios of Li2O2: LiOH were not elucidated in these studies, it was shown by Trahan et al. that the LiOH present could not solely be accounted for by water contamination of the electrolyte. Instead they proposed the formation of LiOH was caused by water generated via a side reaction between the lithium superoxide and the DMSO electrolyte solvent.288 Given the detrimental impact of H2O within the electrolyte on the cycle life of Li–O2 batteries (and the possibility for over-estimating initial discharge capacities),290 this issue requires further study. These results suggest that DMSO may not be a practical electrolyte solvent for carbon based solvents,95 however, more stable cathodes may alleviate these issues.112,197 Another study by Black et al. illustrated that reactions between PVDF binders, MnO2 catalysts and Li2O2 discharge products can lead to the formation of LiOH as a byproduct on the cathode surface. Lithium superoxides readily dehydrofluorinate polyvinylidene to give byproducts such as H2O2 that react with good peroxide decomposition catalysts to produce LiOH within the electrolyte by reaction of water and Li2O2.109
More recently Dan et al. investigated the use of sulfolane based electrolytes for carbon based cathodes. They initially showed that sulfolane was quite stable over a wide electrochemical window before reporting high capacities (7735 mA h g−1 and 6305 mA h g−1 at an applied current of 0.1 mA cm2 for the first discharge and charge respectively). While XRD analysis showed Li2O2 as the dominant discharge product (with the formation of LiOH and LiOH·H2O also noted) it must be acknowledged that this analysis would not account for the formation of any of any amorphous byproducts, suggesting that additional characterization is required in future. Furthermore, the formation of LiOH type species even from the first discharge is not indicative of a stable electrolyte–cathode system. Two further reports have investigated the long term cycling behaviour of carbon based cathodes using a sulfolane based electrolyte. The first report showed that a Ketjen black carbon cathode could be cycled at limited depth of discharge (1000 mA h g−1) for 110 cycles in a 1 M LiPF6/sulfolane electrolyte.285 In the more recent article, a 1 M LiTSFI/sulfolane electrolyte was investigated as the electrolyte solvent. A consistent capacity of 1000 mA g−1 was achieved for 800 cycles which suggests a remarkable stability.227 Unfortunately, in these two reports, the stability of the electrolyte and degree of byproduct formation as cycling proceeded was not discussed. It was also not established what the dominant discharge product was in the system. It should be noted that these tests were both conducted using a carbon paper/gas diffusion layer type current collector which can significantly add to capacity if the mass of the active cathode is omitted when determining the capacity.227,285 Sulfolane appears to be a promising electrolyte solvent but additional studies are required to investigate the degree of solvent decomposition during cycling and determine if Li2O2 can be reversibly formed and decomposed when carbon cathodes are used.


(d) Ionic liquids. 
The concept of using ionic liquids was introduced early in the search for suitable electrolyte solvents for Li–O2 batteries by Kuboki et al. in 2005.291 The initial report investigated several different ionic liquids as electrolytes, citing the benefits of their hydrophobicity, low volatility and low flammability. The discharge capacities presented were impressive (up to 5360 mA g−1) however, the tests were conducted within air and as a result it is unclear what the discharge products were. More recently, the mechanism of ORR and OER reactions in ionic liquid electrolytes has been probed by Abraham and co-workers.292,293 Building on these investigations, Zhang et al. investigated the formation of a cross-linked network gel (CNG) composed of an ionic liquid ([C2C1im][NTf2]) and single walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) as a means of improving the properties of pure SWNT cathodes.127 Their results showed a dramatic increase in discharge capacity compared to pure SWNT cathodes which was attributed to the improved transport of electrons, Li ions and crucially, diffusion of O2 through the interlinked CNG. While crystalline Li2O2 was noted after discharge through the use of XRD analysis in this study, the long term stability of the ionic liquid was not fully established. To this end, the ionic liquid PP13TFSI was used in conjunction with LiClO4 as electrolyte for CNT based cathodes by Cui et al. in an attempt to investigate Li2O2 and Li2CO3 formation during cell cycling.129
Through a combination of XPS and XRD analysis, they found that crystalline Li2O2 is the dominant discharge product formed in this system during the first discharge. Despite this promising finding, Li2CO3 accumulation occurred from the first charge cycle. Unfortunately, the source of the Li2CO3 formed in this study was not identified (i.e. whether it was due to decomposition of the electrolyte, the cathode, or a combination of the two) however it does highlight that ionic liquids do not eliminate the issue of Li2CO3 formation. A few other reports detailing the use of pure ionic liquids and mixtures of ionic liquids and organic solvents as electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries have been reported,97,159,293–299 however, the identification of stable ionic liquid–cathode systems remains an open issue and should be prioritized given their attractive properties.


(e) Electrolyte salts. 
In comparison to the many studies examining the stability of various electrolyte solvents for Li–O2 batteries detailed above, the stabilities of electrolyte salts and their influence on Li–O2 battery operation (by-product formation, capacities, cycle life etc.) have been more sparingly discussed.254,260,300–303 Because electrolytes are composed of both a salt and a solvent, it is important that both components are stable independently but also when combined. As a result, systematic studies which assess the stability of various possible electrolyte salts within a given electrolyte solvent medium are particularly of interest.
A systematic study investigating the impact of the electrolyte salt this was presented by Nasybulin et al. who examined the performance and decomposition of various common electrolyte salts (LiTf, LiTFSI, LiPF6, LiBF4, LiBOB, LiClO4) at a fixed 1 M concentration in TEGDME (Fig. 20).300 In this study, where all other parameters were kept fixed (cathode composition, test conditions etc.), dramatically different performances were noted even among the most commonly used Li–O2 battery salts (LiClO4, LiPF6 and LiTFSI). Post-mortem analyses were conducted using XRD and XPS analysis. After a single discharge, the authors noted that LiPF6 and LiTFSI were both partially decomposed to form LiF while LiClO4 was found to be more stable. However, upon extended cycling, LiClO4 based measurements showed quicker capacity fading with the most impressive capacity retention noted by systems based on LiTF, LiPF6 and LiTFSI. In a similar study, Elia et al. compared the performance of electrolytes containing LiPF6, LiN(SO2CF3)2, LiCF3SO3 or LiClO4 salts within a TEGDME solvent.301 The authors found that the electrolyte salt strongly influenced both the discharge and charge voltage with the smallest voltage gap noted for the LiCF3SO3 based electrolyte. This preliminary study highlighted a wide range of complex factors including the electrolyte conductivity, interfacial resistance, diffusion rates, electrolyte viscosity, oxygen solubility and lithium solvation–desolvation as playing important roles in determining the suitability of a given electrolyte. Li et al. also illustrated that the concentration of the electrolyte salt within the electrolyte is key to ensuring good cycle life.302
 Fig. 20  Effect of electrolyte salt on the cycling performance of TEGDME based electrolytes. The main decomposition products for each electrolyte salt are also shown. Reprinted with permission from ref. 300. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Additional systematic studies using other promising electrolyte systems (for example more stable ethers, DMSO, sulfones etc.) would be extremely useful given that the stability of the common electrolyte salts may vary in the different electrolyte media. It must also be realized that certain ‘catalytic’ cathode systems may exacerbate electrolyte salt decomposition in a similar manner to that illustrated for electrolyte solvents.190 The identification of stable salt/electrolyte solvent pairings will thus likely be highly dependent upon whether a carbon based cathode is under examination.


(f) Electrolyte conclusions. 
The identification of stable electrolyte solvent–salt combinations is an extremely important hurdle if a rechargeable Li–O2 battery system is to be realized. However, electrolytes cannot be considered in isolation and the stability of electrolytes will likely be strongly dependent upon the cathode with which the electrolyte is combined.197 The use of carbonate electrolytes can be completely discounted for Li–O2 batteries with electrolyte solvents composed of ethers and DMSO confirmed as showing acceptable stability in combination with certain cathode systems. The challenge moving forward is to identify more stable electrolyte/cathode pairings which can facilitate the reversible formation of Li2O2 at the expense of parasitic by-products.

3.3 Anode

(a) Lithium metal anode. 
The anode is the least widely studied portion of the Li–O2 battery. Practically all of the research to date has involved the use of metallic lithium foil as the anode material. The high energy density envisaged for Li–O2 batteries is strongly dependent on the development of safe, lightweight Li based anodes. Despite the dearth of research on Li anodes for Li–O2 applications, much is known about the operation of secondary Li-ion batteries with metallic electrodes.60,304,305 This section will discuss the reports which have investigated the operation of pure Li metal anodes for Li–O2 batteries (focussing on surface reactions like the formation of LiOH and SEI) and possible alternatives to pure Li anodes. The section is focused on systems involving non-aqueous electrolyte media as discussed in Section 2. Much research has been devoted to the development of Li-ion conducting ceramics such as LISICON and NASICON aimed at protecting the anode from moisture ingress, however, these are of particular relevance to aqueous and solid state electrolyte systems which are outside of the scope of this report.19,20,24,50,306–311 These Li-ion conducting membranes have been discussed in other review articles to which the reader is directed.312,313
The stability of lithium metal anodes during operation in Li–O2 batteries has been sparingly studied, however, a timely recent report by Shui et al. investigated the reactions occurring at the Li anode during cycling through the use of in operando XRD analysis.314 This technique provided depth-resolved characterization of the anode at various stages in the discharge–charge process. The voltage profiles for two discharge–charge cycles are shown in Fig. 21a and are separated into various sections i–ix. In Fig. 21b the corresponding compositional data from XRD is presented which shows a continual accumulation of LiOH at the surface of the anode and only partial recovery of metallic lithium during the charging process (stages iii–v and vii–ix).
 Fig. 21  (a) Voltage profile showing the discharge–charge cycles analysed with various portions highlighted i–ix. (b) Normalized amount of Li and LiOH at the anode interface as a function of cycle time with the points i–ix corresponding to the points highlighted in (a). Reprinted with permission from ref. 314. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
The authors were also able to use X-ray tomography of the Li anodes to show the formation of pores within the LiOH coating on the anode surface which facilitated transport of Li ions from the underlying pure Li portion of the anode and facilitated continued operation of the cells until the anode was exhausted. The main source of the LiOH was proposed to be due to the decomposition of the ether based electrolyte along established reaction pathways,76,314 due to the low initial water content of the electrolyte investigated (8 ppm). While the formation of LiOH on the anode surface is undesirable as it reduces the total discharge capacity, it was also suggested that this layer acted as a barrier to Li dendrite formation. This commonly encountered issue for batteries utilizing metallic lithium electrodes can lead to thermal runaways and ultimately explosions and would be particularly hazardous given that Li–O2 batteries will likely be operating with a pure O2 atmosphere.50 Thus, there may be a trade-off between LiOH formation on the anode surface and battery safety with the possible reduction in discharge capacity perhaps being offset by increased anode stability. While this study provides crucial insights into the formation of LiOH on the surface of the Li anode during operation, it cannot account for any amorphous product formation due to electrolyte (salt and solvent) decomposition on the anode surface. It also remains to be seen if the formation of LiOH in the manner reported is consistent for other promising electrolyte systems. Additional efforts are required to further characterize the behaviour of metallic lithium anodes during cycling with particular emphasis on safety.
The formation of a solid electrolyte interphase with the Li anode with specific focus on Li–O2 applications has been explored in a number of studies.252,315,316 The issue of SEI formation is complicated in the case of the Li–O2 battery compared to standard Li-ion batteries by the presence of dissolved O2 in the electrolyte. Younesi et al. examined SEI formation in two separate reports.252,316 While carbonate based electrolytes were used in both studies (which have been established to be unsuitable Li–O2 battery electrolytes as discussed above), detailed information on the complexity of the SEI layers formed was provided. The studies showed the formation of hydrocarbons, ethers, carboxylates and carbonates at the Li surface (presumably due to decomposition of the electrolyte) and also F signal deemed to be due to the transport of kynar binder from the cathode to the anode. The formation of LiOH at the cathode surface was not detailed. The possible interaction of mobile species (particularly binders) from the cathode with the anode is an important observation which warrants further investigation in more stable electrolyte systems.
SEI formation for a Li–O2 system based on an amide electrolyte system was investigated by Bryantsev et al.315 This investigation was stimulated by the inability of DMA based electrolytes (which had previously been shown to exhibit superior stability at the cathode compared to carbonate and ether based electrolytes233,258) to form a stable SEI layer at the Li surface. The authors showed that the addition of 2% DMTFA to LITFSI/DMA electrolyte aided in the formation of a more stable SEI layer due to the formation of LiF. However, they also illustrated instability of this system at the cathode suggesting that further investigations are required to develop an electrolyte system which is stable with respect to both the anode and cathode.


(b) Lithium silicon-alloy anode. 
Given the stability issues associated with lithium anodes under typical Li–O2 battery conditions, it may be necessary to completely replace the metallic lithium anode with a more stable anode system should a stable electrolyte (i.e. one which leads to the formation of a stable SEI layer and does not cause accumulation of LiOH on the anode) not be identified. Progress in this area is limited, however, Hassoun et al. recently demonstrated that a Li–Si–C composite electrode could be used to successfully replace the typically used Li anode. Their anode was created through mechanical lithiation of a Si–C composite by directly contacting the electrode with metallic lithium in the presence of a LiPF6/carbonate electrolyte under pressure (1 kg cm−2). The composition of the lithium alloy formed within the composite anode was found to be Li2.6Si rather than the fully lithiated phase Li4.4Si, yet, the anode was still capable of operating a Li–O2 cell which exhibited a stable capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 over 15 discharge–charge cycles. This preliminary approach showed that the metallic lithium-free Li–O2 cells could be successfully operated and also hinted at room for further improvement. For example, 70% of the weight of this composite was composed of carbon (presumably as a conductive additive), which added significantly less capacity to the anode than the Si. In future, nanostructured anodes composed of solely lithiated Si (or even just fully lithiated Si as part of a C–Si composite) may allow for increased capacities and minimization of the energy penalty due to the exclusion of metallic Li as the anode. However, further investigation into the reversibility of lithiation and delithiation of the anode upon cycling is required.


(c) Anode conclusions. 
Future investigations into the true stability of Li metal based anodes are key to the development of successful Li–O2 batteries using organic solvent based electrolytes. Just as the electrolyte and cathode cannot be considered in isolation, the lithium anode and the electrolyte must be considered in conjunction. It seems likely that the central role of the electrolyte in facilitating a reversible discharge–charge process at the cathode (by minimizing byproduct formation), is likely mirrored in importance at the anode as any suitable electrolyte must be capable of producing a stable SEI layer with metallic Li. Future studies should focus on the reversibility of the Li anode and the formation of LiOH on the anode surface. These studies are particularly relevant given that LiOH may actually act as an Li-ion permeable buffer at the surface which prevents Li dendrite formation.314 Parallel investigations into the use of Li–X alloy anodes (where X is Si,262,317–319 Ge,320–322 Sn323–325etc.) are also of interest. Ideally, the energy penalty associated with the removal of pure metal and replacement with Li alloy composites should be quantified while the repeated cycling behaviour and the influence of O2 dissolved in the electrolyte should also be assessed.

4 Theoretical modeling and density functional theory results
In order to address the scientific issues associated with Li–O2 battery operation, many theoretical studies based on density functional theory methods have been reported. Zheng et al.31 developed a model for prediction of the gravimetric and volumetric energy densities of non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries. An issue with previous modeling for computing the capacities of non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries is the assumption that the active materials and electrolyte are perfectly balanced according to the electrochemical reaction pathways. Ideally, the Li metal efficiently replaces Li ions from electrolyte salts, solid discharge products fill the available pore volume in the air cathode, and the amount of electrolyte permeates this pore volume prior to discharge. Thus, previous models are limited to estimating of the upper limits of the gravimetric and volumetric capacities as well as the mass and volume change ratios of batteries for given amounts of the Li metal, electrolyte and a defined porosity of the cathode electrode. A model is still missing in which we can compute the key quantities of non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries for the practical applications, in such a way that the Li metal is partially oxidized, the cathode void volume is partially occupied by discharge products, and excess electrolyte is required.
The objective of this section of review, therefore, is summarize the previous theoretical investigations, to address the issues associated with previous modeling, and to suggest possible robust models for predicting the theoretical capacities of non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries regarding their different components: cathodes, anodes, and electrolytes.
4.1 Cathode materials
The Li–O2 electrochemical interaction causes, in principle, a dramatic increase in theoretical energy density compared to Li-ion batteries, creating the development of high energy density systems.8,69,265,268 The theoretical specific energy of Li–O2 cell was estimated about 3400 W h kg−1. The cathode active material (oxygen) is not stored internally in the battery. Oxygen enters into a porous carbon cathode from the air for the ORR similar to polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) cathodes. Li and O2 react to form metal oxides Li2O2 and/or Li2O during discharge process and the oxides decompose to release Li+ ions and O2 again due to charge process.
The basic design of Li–O2 batteries consists of ion conducting electrolyte sandwiched between a dense Li anode, and a porous carbon based cathode with O2 from the air entering on one side and interfacing with non-aqueous electrolyte on other side. The performance degradation of Li–O2 cell over multiple charge–discharge cycles can lead to an important issue, such as safety issue, which arises due to instability of materials, incomplete reversibility of electrochemical reactions, and the loss of electrolyte solvent due to evaporation and reactions with the electrodes.

(a) Li2O2 and Li2O surfaces. 
With regard to the discharge products at the cathode of a rechargeable non-aqueous Li–O2 battery system due to the oxygen reduction, the formation of both Li2O2 and Li2O were reported in many early studies.14,126,153,270,326–328 For example, Read et al.14 found the proportion of Li2O2 and Li2O varied with the current density during oxygen volume measurements and Zhang et al.270 reported that the battery exhibit two discharge voltage plateaus at low discharge currents, and the second one indicates the formation of Li2O2 into Li2O.
In a real rechargeable non-aqueous Li–O2 battery system, mainly the following electrochemical reactions take place at the cathode: 2Li+ + 2e− + O2 → Li2O2(1) 4Li+ + 4e− + O2 → 2Li2O(2)
It is assumed that eqn (2) is not reversible, only eqn (1) takes place at the cathode for rechargeability. Radin et al.70,329,330 reported in their DFT calculations that lithium peroxide (Li2O2) surfaces are metallic, while lithium oxide (Li2O) surfaces are not. The authors systematically characterized the stability and electronic structure of 40 distinct surfaces of Li2O2 and Li2O in this article. They found several new oxygen-rich (0001) and (1−100) facets for Li2O2 and a single stoichiometric (111) surface for Li2O most stable, consistent with the previous study.331 Their surface state analyses revealed that Li2O2 surfaces are metallic and magnetic, while Li2O surfaces are insulating and nonmagnetic. Such distinct surface properties are useful to explain the origin of differing rechargeability of discharge products Li2O2 and Li2O in Li–O2 batteries. The structures for low energy surfaces for both Li2O2 and Li2O are shown in Fig. 22.70
 Fig. 22  Unit cell for (left) bulk Li2O2 and (right) bulk LiO. Gray and black spheres represent O and Li atoms, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Kang et al.332 investigated a facile mechanism for recharging Li2O2 in Li–O2 batteries using DFT methods. The overall reaction in a Li–O2 system is the oxidation of lithium to Li2O2 upon discharge and its subsequent reduction upon charge5,12,56,63,66,86,327,333 (3)
The authors confirmed a facile path for Li2O2 charging that requires overpotential of 370 mV, consistent with experimental results. They found that at the relatively small overpotentials, Li2O2 is delithiated topotactically to form off-stoichiometric Li2−xO2 compounds that are energetically stable and exhibit faster kinetics for delithiation processes. The previously reported electronic and ionic conductivity332,334–338 in these off-stoichiometric states enhance the delithiation to dissociate into Li+ and O2 or O2− species with possible dissolution in the electrolyte.56,69,109,339 Such investigations clearly show that the oxidation reaction with delithiated particles proceeds locally in the electrode, and causes an increase in the measured current. This localization of current is found to be a key factor in the rate capability of Li–O2 batteries.
Recent theoretical studies indicated that stoichiometric Li2O2 is a wide band gap insulator, and that charge transport takes place through polaron hopping.335,336,340 In their density functional theory studies, Kang et al.332 proposed that an electron injected into Li2O2 becomes trapped by the formation of a small polaron due to the molecular nature of the Li2O2 conduction band, whereby an injected electron is localized at an O–O site possessing an elongated oxygen pair. The calculated hopping rate of a small polaron found directly correlated to the extremely low electronic mobility of Li. At the same time, Hummelshøj et al.335 argued that Li vacancies, which are likely to be created during the discharge process, may induce delocalized hole states in the valence band of Li2O2, therefore improving Li charge transport through hole conduction. However, Ong et al.336 reported that hole states may also become localized through the formation of hole polarons. Although the migration barriers of hole polarons was estimated to be lower than electronic polarons, the resulting conductivity of Li2O2 was still found to be smaller than compared to experimental result. Zhao et al.338 suggested that growing Li2O2 on a graphene layer induces hole-type conducting channels in Li2O2. However, this approach is limited by the short penetration depth of surface states into Li2O2 layers. Such states penetrate only a few LiO2 layers inside the Li2O2 crystal, thus limiting conduction enhancement to only a thin surface layer. Moreover, Timoshevskii et al.341 proposed an alternative way of improving the conductivity of Li2O2 by means of ab initio calculations and showed that the substitution of a small fraction (1.6%) of Li atoms by Si impurities leads to the creation of additional conducting states in Li2O2. These states were shown to originate from the partial occupation of oxygen anti-bonding orbitals by electrons, being donated by impurity Si atoms. The elongated oxygen pairs, generating these states, are bound to Si impurities, and are not subject to polaron-induced deformations. The polaron preemption mechanism was supposed to enhance the electron mobility of Li2O2. Furthermore, the nature and concentrations of charge carriers and intrinsic point defects in Li2O2 have not been reported. Such information is important because the concentrations of these species, when combined with mobilities, relates to the conductivity of bulk Li2O2, and thus ties directly to the performance of the battery. In order to elucidate the mechanism of charge transport in Li–O2 cells, the authors in Radin et al.342 employed first-principles calculations to predict the conductivity of crystalline Li2O2. More specifically, the concentrations of all chemically-relevant intrinsic (point) defects in Li2O2 were evaluated as a function of cell voltage; subsequent calculations were used to assess the mobilities of the dominant charge carriers. The crystal structure of Li2O2 with alternating layers of trigonal prisms and octahedra/tetrahedral, with oxygen sites lying on the vertices of the polyhedra; the mechanism of oxygen reduction reaction at the cathode; and proposed two-stage recharge mechanism for a Li–O2 cell are shown in Fig. 23i–iii respectively.342 The authors calculated point defect formation energies for 23 unique species, including vacancies, divacancies, interestitials, polarons, and bipolarons using first-principles calculations. Under discharge condition, the bulk electronic conductivity was found to be far less than the target value and thus, failed to supply significant charge transport. The fairly high capacities and discharge products obtained in experiments13,81 suggested two possibilities: (i) morphological features may locally enhance the conductivity of the discharge product, and (ii) the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) does not occurred at the Li2O2 surface, but rather at the carbon cathode or catalyst. Fig. 23ii summarizes the possible discharge mechanisms graphically. The recharge conditions were found to be more conducive to charge transport compared to discharge. Fig. 23iii shows the two-stage recharge process linking charge transport, particles morphology, and overpotentials during recharge. Charging was initiated at low potentials due to the dissolution of thin Li2O2 deposits or decomposition at or near the Li2O2/electrolyte/carbon three-phase boundary. Charging was then concluded at high potentials where thick deposits decomposed through polaron hopping. However, it should be noted that side reactions involving electrolyte or carbon electrode decomposition might introduce further complications.56,79,343
 Fig. 23  (i) Crystal structure of Li2O2 with alternating layers of trigonal prisms and octahedra/tetrahedral, with oxygen sites lying on the vertices of the polyhedral, (ii) proposed two-stage recharge mechanism, and (iii) mechanism of oxygen reduction reaction at the cathode for a Li–O2 cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 342. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Gaining a better understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of the cathode reactions, such as the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) during discharge and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) during charge, is essential to guide the experimental efforts in improving the performance of the Li–O2 battery system. The power density of current Li–O2 batteries have been found to be very low with current densities of about 0.1–1 mA cm−2 typically reported25,55,69,74 which are at least one order of magnitude lower than the requirements for electric vehicle applications.12 Recent ab initio modeling has provided the energy profile and reaction path for the ORR mechanism of Li2O2335 as well as the ORR on catalytic metal surfaces, such as Au and Pt.344 Mo et al.63 performed DFT calculations to study the mechanisms of OER of Li2O2 in Li–O2 battery by calculating the surface energies of infinite slabs of Li2O2 with vacuum regions.345–352 The authors considered the various surfaces of Li2O2 such as (0001), (11−20), (11−21), (1−100), (1−101), and Wulff shape to investigate the mechanism of OER process in Li–O2 system. They calculated reaction paths for oxygen release and concluded that all the surfaces of Li2O2 first decompose into a superoxide like LiO2 structure via the removal of Li atoms. These findings supported experimental findings in which LiO2 was proposed as an intermediate in the formation of Li2O2 in the ORR process.69,74,75 Oxygen evolution typically takes place following the formation of a surface that approximates a superoxide. The most predominant peroxide surface terminations [the (0001) and (11−20) surfaces] have some of the highest energy barrier for oxygen evolution. The surfaces with the most strongly bonded O2 have been postulated to gain their low surface energy from strong oxygen binding. The energy barriers found for the oxygen evolution steps were significantly higher than those for Li desorption on the most surfaces under consideration, and this reaction barrier of O2 is a rate-limiting step in the OER. The lowest energy surfaces of Li2O2 surfaces are shown in Fig. 24.70
 Fig. 24  Structures of low-energy Li2O2 surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Besides the two-electron transfer process i.e. the formation and decomposition of Li2O2 and Li2O, Hummelshøj et al.335 have recently suggested that oxygen can be reduced by Li metal through a one-electron transfer process forming an adsorbed Li2O2 species on the surface by applying first-principles calculations. Moreover, the metastable product LiO2 is formed due to the formation of superoxide (O2−)69,75 with a finite lifetime as a preferred pathway for oxygen reduction in one-electron process during charge–discharge cycles of Li–O2 cells, before disproportionation into Li2O2 and O2 chemically as LiO2 is not stable. In general, the electrochemical response of the O2/O2− redox couple on a particular electrode dependents on the solvent and nature of the counter ion152,352 together with the nature of the electrode catalysts.14,55,87,152,160 The formation and reduction of both Li2O2 and Li2O is poorly understood yet, thus hindering the progress of this new technology.
Li2O2 and Li2O are both thermodynamically stable within the typical potential range of Li–O2 batteries due to their similar equilibrium potentials. Thus, it is quite important to develop a correct qualitative understanding of the electrochemical reactions, chemical reversibility and thermodynamic properties for Li–O2 electrochemical couples to develop the Li–O2 cells. This may even lead to the study of different bulk stoichiometries of discharge products such as lithium superoxide (LiO2) for example, which remains unexplored by both experimentalists and theorists.353 In experimental systems, the discharge products may depend substantially on the oxygen pressure, which is not well understood yet.221 Theoretically the determination of the Gibbs free energy of formation for the bulk oxides of lithium (LixOy) as a function of oxygen pressure is a useful baseline study for understanding the products of Li–O2 electrochemical reactions needed for the development of effective catalysts and electrolytes for rechargeable Li–O2 cells. Lau et al.354 presented a DFT study of the thermodynamics of bulk crystalline LiO2, Li2O, and Li2O2 at different oxygen chemical potentials. The authors proposed that LiO2 and Li2O2 are likely to be stable only under O2-rich conditions with high oxygen partial pressures, whereas Li2O is the most stable at ambient conditions; the bulk LiO2 is an ionic molecular solid and it is not an electrochemical reaction product in Li–O2 cells.


(b) Porous carbon. 
Porous carbon has attracted much interest as a cathode material (as outlined in Section 3.1(b)) with or without the inclusion of catalysts materials. Porous carbons are generally considered as defective crystallites of graphite.355 To date, various carbons such as activated carbon, carbon nanotubes, Super P, Ketjen Black, Vulcan XC-724,5,59,124,216,244,356,357 have been used in Li–O2 batteries. Yang et al.358 reported a the comparison of the physical parameters and specific capacities of various carbons as listed in Table 3.
Table 3 Comparison of surface area, pore diameter, and specific capacity of various carbons. Adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2013 The Electrochemical Society




Carbon material
Surface area (m2 g−1)
Pore diameter (nm)
Specific capacity (mA h g−1)




Super P
62
50
1736


Vulcan XC-72
250
2
762


Activated Carbon (AC)
2100
2
414


Carbon Nano Tube (CNT)
40
10
583


Graphite
6
—
560


Ball-milled graphite
480
—
1136


Mesocellular carbon foam-C
824
30
2500




Due to small pore size, Active carbon (AC) has the lowest reported specific capacity with the largest surface area. In contrast, Super P has a high specific capacity due to its large pore diameter, with the relatively small surface area. Mirzaeian and Hall83,359,360 first reported the synthesis and use of porous carbon aerogels as cathodes in Li–O2 batteries with remarks that the discharge capacity increases with increase in pore volume and average pore diameter of carbon aerogels. Li et al.144 used graphene nanosheets as cathodes in Li–O2 batteries with the formation a three-phase interface. Park et al.326 reported the comparison of the performance of some carbon families. From all these review studies, we conclude that both high surface areas and high pore volumes are essential for the high discharge capacity of Li–O2 batteries. The micro- to nano-structures of carbonaceous materials356 are important factors related to the performance of Li–O2 batteries. In practical, Li–O2 batteries suffer from poor cyclability and reversibility during multiple charge–discharge processes.5,87,105,126,152,327 There is lack of theoretical research on carbonaceous materials used as active cathode materials in Li–O2 batteries. In order to enhance the performance, safety and lifetime of Li–O2 batteries, the structure and morphology of carbonaceous materials should be optimized with their utilization in the porous cathodes. Additionally, further insight into the instability of carbon as a cathode material requires urgent theoretical investigation given the observed decomposition in recent experimental studies.85 As high surface energy lithium peroxides can promote decomposition of carbonate electrolytes, tabulating energies associated with unwanted electrolyte decomposition for non-carbonate-based aprotic solvent–salt systems at various carbon surfaces would be quite useful.


(c) Hierarchically porous graphene. 
The precipitation of reaction products such as Li2O2 on the carbonaceous electrode ultimately blocks oxygen pathways and limits the capacity of Li–O2 batteries. Therefore, it is essential to develop an optimum air electrode with micrometer sized pores for rapid oxygen diffusion to catalyze Li–O2 electrochemical reactions and to prevent the excess growth of discharge products from blocking their chemical pathways. Xiao et al.8 suggested the design of hierarchically porous air electrodes with functionalized graphene sheets with lattice defects and hydroxyl, epoxy, and carboxyl groups.361 The authors performed DFT calculations to investigate the fact that only weak interaction exists between Li2O2 monomer and graphene substrate similar to a physical adsorption mechanism, stressing the importance of functional group rather than lattice effects. The top and side views of optimized structures of Li2O2 and (Li2O2)6 clusters on perfect graphene, the 5-8-5 defect graphene, and 5-8-5 graphene with COOH group is shown in Fig. 25.8
 Fig. 25  Top and side views of optimized structures of Li2O2 and (Li2O2)6 clusters on perfect graphene, the 5-8-5 defect graphene, and 5-8-5 graphene with COOH group. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
The calculated free-energy change as a function of (Li2O2)n cluster size is shown in Fig. 26.8 For a pristine graphene surface, the aggregation of adsorbed Li2O2 monomers was shown to be energetically favorable until it reaches a cluster size of n = 5. Monomers are easily mobile and can aggregate on pristine graphene, but this process becomes self-limiting. Clusters greater than n = 5 are not energetically favourable. These investigations show how important the carbon structure is for the deposition of the reaction products. The calculated changes in free energy as a function of the size of peroxide clusters at large sizes on graphene demonstrate that such clusters remain as isolated islands that are immobile, preventing clogging of the oxygen diffusion pathways during the discharge process at least. This graphene structure mediated limitation reported by the authors does have a trade-off: while preventing continuous peroxide formation and ensuring better gas flow and allow controlled discharge product formation and a limitation in unwanted internal resistance, it formally limits the density of discharge product formation per unit volume. The calculations are important since they demonstrate the sensitivity of peroxide nucleation mechanisms to the structure and defect density in ordered carbon surfaces.
 Fig. 26  Calculated free-energy change as a function of (Li2O2)n cluster size. The negative value of ΔG indicates an energetically more favorable aggregating process. On the perfect graphene surface, the aggregation of adsorbed Li2O2 monomer is energetically favorable up to (Li2O2)5, while it is energetically unfavorable from the beginning on the 5-8-5 defect graphene surface with or without a functional group (COOH). Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Graphene and graphene composites have been studied as electrode materials in supercapacitors,362 Li-ion batteries,363 and proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFC).364 In all studies, the graphene sheets readily restacked due to either van der Waals or capillary forces and caused the formation of two dimensional structures that hinder rapid gas diffusion, which is essential for the effective operation of Li–O2 batteries.26 As there is lack of theoretical research works on graphene and grapheme-based materials as active cathodes in Li–O2 batteries, more DFT calculations should be devoted to investigate the mechanisms of ORR and OER.


(d) Au/Li2O2 and Pt/Li2O2 model cathode surfaces. 
Catalysts such as MnO2,4 Au,365 and Pt,59 have been ubiquitous in Li–O2 batteries since their inception as previously discussed in this review, however, more efficient catalytic systems and understanding of the role of catalysts is required.33,59,87,118,266,327,365–367 The Li–O2 cell has limited electrical efficiency due to overpotential/polarization loss at the cathode during charge and discharge,4 and limited power and current densities.221 The overpotential is the energy loss in the process as (Ucharge − U0) and (U0 − Udischarge) respectively, where U0 = 2.96 V for Li/Li2O2, is equilibrium potential, Ucharge and Udischarge represent the equilibrium potentials under charge and discharge conditions respectively. In case of porous carbon cathode in Li–O2 cell, a large asymmetry is observed in the overpotentials for charge and discharge, for example, Ucharge = 4.5 V (approx.) and Udischarge = 2.5 V (approx.),55 indicating the charging overpotential as the most important issue to be solved. Renner et al.365 reported low overpotential for discharge with Au catalyst and Lu et al.55 reported low overpotential for charging with a Pt catalyst at the cost of reduction in capacity of the battery system. At the same time, Lu et al.59 demonstrated a bifunctional PtAu/C catalyst to retain the properties of the two catalysts Pt and Au on charge and discharge respectively. The authors obtained these results by optimizing O2-conditions at low current densities, which showed that overpotential grows significantly with increase in currents. Such observations are important to understand the electronic conduction mechanisms at insulator-catalyst surface. The authors in Chen et al.334 applied non-equilibrium Green's function calculations368 along with DFT methods to investigate the electronic transport through Li2O2 as well as Li2O2 deposited on the two catalysts Pt and Au. They investigated transport through Li2O2 grown on the close packed metal (111) surface for the defect free interfaces and for lithium vacancies and showed that the transport depends on the alignment of O22− peroxide ions in Li2O2 to the metal surface; bulk Li vacancies were found to pin the Fermi level at the top of antibonding peroxide π*(2px) and π*(2py) levels in the valence band during the charging process; and the electronic transport is reduced during charging under an applied bias condition. Such findings are important to explain the asymmetry observed in the overpotentials for battery charge and discharge. Moreover, Lu et al.199 performed DFT calculations on amorphous Li2O2 that is likely present in the grain boundaries and showed that amorphous Li2O2 may have a metal-like density of states. The authors investigated all cathodes with the same TEGDME:LiCF3SO3 electrolyte. The two cathodes C and Al2O3/C have much higher charge potentials (4.2–4.4 V). The coating in the cathode Pd/Al2O3/C has a key role in lowering the charge potential in Li–O2 batteries. This coating may also prevent decomposition of the TEGDME electrolyte by blocking reaction of the TEGDME solvent molecule with the defect sides on the carbon surface. Electrolyte decomposition on carbon defect sites may result in the deposition of contaminants such as carbonates on Li2O2 or on the carbon surface and likely increase the charge potential.255 Moreover, a low charge potential less than 3.5 V found for Pd/Al2O3/C may prevent side reactions including the carbon surface and Li2O2 may occur on charge85,255 however, decomposition reactions on Li2O2 surface may still occur.255,280
The DFT-calculated structure of the Li2O2/Pd55O21/C interface, projected density of states at the Li2O2/Pd55O21 interface and Pd55O21/C interface, DFT calculations of a TGDME solvent molecule binding on a carbon defect site on a bare graphitized carbon surface, and weakly bound TEGDME molecule on an Al2O3-coated carbon surface are shown in Fig. 27.199
 Fig. 27  (a) Density functional theory (DFT)-calculated structure of the Li2O2/Pd55O21/C interface, where Pd55O21 represents a partially oxidized palladium nanoparticle. Colour code: palladium (blue), aluminium (purple), oxygen (red), lithium (green), hydrogen (yellow) and carbon (grey). Lithium peroxide (Li2O2) is represented by a cluster containing three Li2O2 monomers. The carbon electrode (C) is represented by two stacked graphene layers. The average Pd–C bond length is 2.4 Å and the average Pd–O bond length with lithium peroxide is 2.0 Å. (b) Projected density of states at the Li2O2/Pd55O21 interface (top) and Pd55O21/C interface (bottom). In both cases, only the interface atoms that are in direct contact with each other have been considered. The up and down spin electron densities are represented by dark and light colours, respectively. (c) DFT calculations of a TEGDME solvent molecule binding on a carbon defect site on a bare graphitized carbon surface. The TEGDME molecule decomposes and forms new C–O and C–H bonds on these sites. (d) Weakly bound TEDGME molecule (0.1 eV) on an Al2O3-coated carbon surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 


(e) Li and O2 reactions with transition metal oxide catalysts. 
Although organic solvents have been shown to be unstable on discharge in Li–O2 batteries, it is still interesting to investigate the mechanisms of electrochemical reactions with various catalysts that can enhance the 2-electron and 4-electron reduction of oxygen to Li2O2 and Li2O respectively. Therefore, our focus in this topic is to explore the design of new electrode/electrocatalytic materials with more promising electrolytes249,261,282 for the oxygen electrode to overcome the key challenges in current Li–O2 batteries. As alternatives to noble metals, transition metal oxides represent a widely explored group electrocatalysts with many advantages such as low cost, high abundance, ease of fabrication and being environmentally benign etc.
Trahey et al.158 demonstrated the role of α-MnO2/ramsedellite (R)-MnO2 catalyst in the formation of discharge products Li2O2 and Li2O in Li–O2 batteries using DFT methods. The authors performed DFT calculations to investigate the structure and energetics of Li–O2 discharge products in α- and R-MnO2 tunnels. The Li2O units were accommodated into the 2 × 2 tunnels of α-MnO2369 and both α- and R-MnO2 can intercalate Li+ ions with continuous reduction of MnO2.369–371 The α-MnO2 framework provided a sufficient space for readily reversible LixOy storage within the 2 × 2 tunnels, with LixOy–MnO2 intermediate structure during discharge and charge reactions. The manganese ions in both α- and R-MnO2 were found in a mixed valence Mn4+/3+ state during Li–O2 reactions. Such mixed valence states of manganese ions were found to assist in O2 redox reaction kinetics.372 Moreover, the intercalation of Li+ ions into tunnels could enhance the formation of oxygen-rich surfaces with Li–O2 products having lower oxygen evolution reaction overpotentials.63 Such findings are important in the sense that α- and R-MnO2 structure can act as a dual functioning electrode/electrocatalyst in Li–O2 batteries.
Mellan et al.373 performed DFT calculations for the adsorption and co-adsorption of lithium and oxygen at the surface of rutile-like manganese dioxide (β-MnO2) and found that the (110) surface is the most stable surface in the absence of lithium and it absorbs oxygen in the form of peroxo groups bridging between two manganese cations; however, lithium atoms adsorb in two different sites on the (110) surface with tri-coordination to surface oxygen anions in the absence of excess oxygen probably due to transfer of one electron from the adatom to one of the five-coordinated manganese cations at the surface with generation of Li+ and Mn3+ species. The co-adsorption of Li and O2 leads to the formation of a surface oxide with dissociation of O2 molecule due to binding of O adatoms to Li adatoms as well as O adatoms saturate the coordination of surface Mn cations. Such type of process was found by the authors to be energetically more favorable than the formation of gas-phase Li2O2 monomers, but less favorable than the formation of Li2O2 bulk. It clearly suggests that MnO2 is capable of lowering the energy during initial reduction of oxygen in the discharge process. The rutile unit cell of MnO2, adsorption of Li on MnO2(110) surface and adsorption of two oxygen atoms at the Li/MnO2(110) surface are shown in Fig. 28i–iii respectively.373
 Fig. 28  (i) The rutile unit cell of MnO2, (ii) Li adsorption on MnO2(110) surface, and (iii) adsorption of two oxygen atoms at the Li/MnO2(110) surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 373. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4.2 Anode materials
The anode is an important part of all Li-batteries. As Li metal has a high energy density, it is the primary choice as the anode material in Li–O2 batteries; however, it has also disadvantages such as safety issues and degradation during operation (as highlighted in Section 3.3(b)). Therefore, research needs to be devoted to the development of possible new anode materials in Li–O2 batteries aided by theoretical investigations and predictions.

(a) Lithium metal anode. 
Electrolyte decomposition results in anode degradation due to oxygen crossover (diffusion of oxygen) to the anode and safety issues due to the presence of traces of water in the electrolyte solvent. These are critical problems for a long period of operation of the cell. Therefore, many efforts have been made to prevent Li metal anodes from moisture corrosion by separating the lithium anode from the liquid electrolyte with the protective layers comprised of Li-ion conducting polymers, ceramics or glasses coated on the metallic lithium. Assary et al.374 performed both experimental and DFT investigations for possible reactions occurred at the Li anode with electrolyte based on TEGDME. The authors found in their DFT calculations that the binding energy between O2 and TEGDME anion is 3.3 eV (exothermic) due to larger electron affinity of TEGDME resulting the electron transfer to O2. Such types of investigation support the need to control reactions of electrolytes at the Li anode through suitable membranes or passivation films to achieve optimal performance of Li–O2 batteries. The electrolyte vapor pressure also plays a crucial role in Li–O2 battery degradation. The development of hydrophobic electrolytes with low volatility is essential to address the above issue. As alternatives, various water-stable solid state electrolytes such as LISICON type Li metals and their composites with PEO-based polymers and lithium phosphorous oxynitride (LIPON) have been used to improve stability in electrolytes containing water;20,374,375 the lithium conductivity in solid state electrolytes, however, is very low. Hydrophobic ionic liquid electrolytes such as 1-ethyl-3-methyl imidazolium bisfluoromethyl sulfonylamide can prevent electrolyte vaporization and anode hydrolysis.291 Truong et al.376 reported the development of single crystal silicon membranes with high Li conductivity and found that Li+ ion conductivity supported a high current density of 1 mA cm−2. However, the conductivity of the Si membrane was found too small compared to the LISICON-type Li conducting membranes.
Theoretical studies of Li anodes (and indeed other anodes systems) for Li–O2 batteries are at an infancy stage and require further investigation given the important role played by the anode in determining the cycle life of the battery.

4.3 Electrolyte (solvent and salt) materials
There is increasing evidence that electrolytes such as organic carbonates and ethers are unstable in Li–O2 batteries (as outlined in Section 3.2). The reason is the formation of Li2CO3 and other alkyl species along with Li2O2 during discharge of the cell because of the decomposition of electrolyte, which is a major challenge in Li–O2 batteries. Therefore, a detailed understanding of related decomposition mechanisms may provide an important basis for the selection and design of stable electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries. As a result, alternative electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries such as ionic liquids, solid-state electrolytes, oligoether-functionalized silane electrolytes, polysiloxanes, etc. have been examined.

(a) Organic carbonates. 
Theoretical investigations have confirmed the instability of organic carbonates e.g. ethylene carbonate (EC), propylene carbonate (PC), and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) commonly used in Li-ion batteries in Li–O2 batteries (as illustrated in experimental reports) due to the formation of Li2CO3 and other organic species due to decomposition during the discharge process.255,271 In this way, the electrolyte decomposition in the discharge process is one of the major challenges in Li–O2 batteries. Many of the theoretical works to date have focussed on investigating the reaction mechanisms through which the reactive oxygen species attack various electrolytes. Zhang et al.261 Bryantsev et al.377 and other groups249,278 have used density functional theory (DFT) calculations with an implicit solvent model to compute the reactivity of a series of electrolytes towards nucleophilic substitutions by superoxide and showed that the decomposition of PC occurs during the discharge process due to breaking of C–O bond, yielding Li2CO3 and other lithium alkyl carbonates with the authors concluding that PC is unstable to oxygen reduction species in Li–O2 batteries.
Moreover, Zhang et al.261 illustrated that a new silicon-containing oligo (ethylene oxide) solvent namely tri (ethylene glycol)-substituted methyltrimethyl silane (1NM3) is more stable to the highly active oxygen reduction species compared to PC by performing DFT calculations. The comparison of the computed barriers (enthalpies) for activation of PC decomposition and 1NM3 decomposition by O2 anion radical (O2−), Li2O radical, Li2O anion radical (Li2O−), and Li2O2 are shown in Fig. 29a and b respectively.261
 Fig. 29  Comparison of the computed barriers (enthalpies) for activation of (a) PC decomposition and (b) 1NM3 decomposition by O2 anion radical (O2−), Li2O radical, Li2O anion radical (Li2O−), and Li2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 261. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 


(b) Ethers. 
Recent experimental findings on electrolytes showing that a tetra (ethylene) glycol dimethyl ether-lithium triflate (TEGDME-LiCF3SO3) electrolyte377 and LiClO4 in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)278 can support highly reversible formation-decomposition of Li2O2 at the cathode on cycling, represent a useful platform for further investigation on non-aqueous Li–O2 battery electrolytes by theoretical methods. Assary et al.280 performed DFT calculations to investigate the interactions of dimethoxyethane (DME) with Li2O2 clusters as shown in Fig. 30280 and found the energetically favourable chemical mechanisms for DME decomposition at the Li2O2-electrolyte during discharge or charge in Li–O2 cells due to a hydrogen abstraction mechanism.
 Fig. 30  Optimized structures of (a) (Li2O2)16–DME cluster and (b) transition state structure for the abstraction of a primary hydrogen from the DME at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory. Reprinted with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Therefore, as highlighted above, neither carbonate nor ether electrolyte represent long term solutions as the electrolyte solvent for Li–O2 batteries and identification of solvents resistant to attack by reduced O2 species remains an issue.


(c) Ionic liquids. 
Hydrophobic room temperature ionic liquids are attractive electrolyte solvents for Li–O2 batteries mainly due to their unique properties such as hydrophobic nature, low flammability, low vapor pressure, wide potential window, and high thermal stability. Due to their hydrophobic properties, these can better protect the Li metal anode from moisture compared to other aprotic solvents. The hydrophobicity and negligible vapor pressure make the ionic liquid as a promising electrolyte for Li–O2 battery system.378–380 Some researchers have already considered ionic liquids as electrolyte systems in Li–O2 batteries291,381 for example, Kuboki et al.291 utilized 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (EMITFSI) in Li–O2 batteries. Allen et al.292 also investigated the oxygen electrode rechargeability in a room temperature ionic liquid EMITFSI and found that the nature of the electrode affects the reaction mechanism, for example, gold showed the ability for high efficiency recharging of the oxygen without electrode passivation. Therefore, ionic liquids can be considered as promising electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries with Li metal and oxygen electrodes for future research.292
In fact, current Li–O2 batteries utilizing ionic liquid electrolytes have lower discharge capacity compared to carbonate-based electrolytes due to their high viscosity and hence inferior wetting of the oxygen electrode. Ionic liquids with high electrochemical stability and low viscosity are currently the electrolyte component of choice. Moreover, more research work should be devoted to investigate the side-reactions due to electrolyte decomposition for ionic liquid electrolytes in Li–O2 batteries.


(d) Oligoether-functionalized silane electrolytes. 
Zhang et al.261 performed combined experimental and DFT investigations on electrolyte based on 1NM3 and oligoether-functionalized silane and reported that ethers are more stable towards oxygen reduction discharge species than PC. Such type of investigations provides a new research direction to improve the stability of new alternative electrolytes by functionalization and modifications.


(e) Polysiloxanes. 
Assary et al.382 performed quantum chemical calculations to investigate the polysiloxanes oxidation potential and decomposition reactions and suggested that Si–O group gives enhanced stability than their carbon analogs and they were found to be more resistant to thermal decomposition than carbonates. In this way, polysiloxanes may be more suitable as electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries compared to organic carbonates and ethers, however, this requires further study.

5 Future research directions
There are many scientific challenges to be addressed with regard to Li–O2 battery operation if stable systems with energy densities which are close to their immense theoretical capacities are to be realized. As highlighted in this review article, such challenges are frequently rooted in materials discovery and optimization. Future research should emphasize the development of (i) high efficiency Li metal anodes to overcome the degradation and safety issues, (ii) new air cathode support materials (be they based on carbon or carbon-free) with increased stability which allow optimization of the transport of reactants such as O2, Li+, and electrons to the active catalyst surface, (iii) cost-effective catalysts to reduce the overpotentials for the discharge and charge processes, and (iv) oxidation-resistant electrolytes and cathodes that can withstand high oxidation potentials in the presence of oxygen.
Unfortunately, the development of the various portions of the Li–O2 battery cannot be considered in isolation and it is clear that optimal systems will require the marrying of compatible anode–electrolyte–cathode choices. Recent studies have shown that carbon free cathode materials (in combination with DMSO based electrolytes) are the most stable cathode–electrolyte systems and the challenge becomes the optimization of electrolyte–cathode systems such that the modest (but crucially reversible) capacities exhibited by these materials can be improved.112,197 Ideally, this goal would be achieved using cheap, lightweight carbon based materials with increased stability and compatibility with simple electrolytes. Future research must confirm that all of observed electrochemical response in a given Li–O2 cell is due to the formation and decomposition of Li2O2 rather than unwanted side reactions. Furthermore, scalable systems with higher mass loadings must be investigated. While mass loadings of circa 1 mg cm2 may deliver high gravimetric capacities, they are likely to be insufficient to power real world devices.
Additional modelling efforts are required to both supplement and guide experimental studies. In addition, accurate modelling of the interfacial reactions that combine the chemistry with diffusion of radicals and formation of lithium carbonates and the discharge products that clog the cathode pores as well as the lithium metal anode degradation, which is largely unaddressed. Computational approaches that involve large-scale screening of various materials in the spirit of the Materials Genome Project, would also be extremely beneficial. DFT-based approaches can successfully describe the potentials, energetics and facet-dependent reactivities and pathways for lithium oxides and metal-oxides. Developing a ‘genome’ for the energetics of peroxide formation on various surfaces could provide a route to materials design and choice for a given electrolyte. Knowing which carbons, which catalytic surfaces and their effect on ORR and OER, together with details on the mechanism of peroxide formation (nucleation, deposition and density; delithiation and decomposition processes) might help optimize cathode, catalyst and electrolyte components in conjunction with experimental evidence of high performance cells under real-world loading in applications such as EV batteries.
6 Conclusions
In this review, the major progress to date in the field of Li–O2 batteries has been presented from both an experimental and DFT background. The various components (cathode, anode, and electrolyte materials) of rechargeable non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries have been examined and we have tried to provide a combined perspective to better understand the operation of the various materials in Li–O2 batteries. The experimental results highlight the immense potential for Li–O2 systems but also the many hurdles which must be overcome if this is to become a viable next-generation energy storage system.
With the help of advanced theory and computational techniques, effective design and in-depth exploration of promising Li–O2 battery materials can be accelerated. Starting from fundamental DFT methods and input configuration, DFT calculations can provide the detailed electronic structures of the specific applied component materials in Li–O2 batteries. Such theoretical investigations could facilitate the understanding of the elementary kinetics in ORR and OER during discharge and charge processes respectively as well as the electronic conductivity properties of the formation–decomposition of the lithium oxide layers. Physical modelling also has a major role to play in the clarification of the impact of the electrolyte composition on the performance and durability of Li–O2 batteries. Another level of modelling concerns the end user application for an optimized Li–air system, whatever chemistry and design is eventually chosen. This involves the full loading requirements for various applications, and the associated drive-train for power delivery under different conditions. Even the most promising Li–O2 battery has not been fully tested at EV scale, under real-world driving conditions. Important parameters such as energy density, price per capacity, C-rate, and cycle life are paramount. The latter has been the primary focus, and the materials and chemistry are still under development. However, it is advisable for systems that do offer cycle life approaching several hundred cycles (irrespective of true specific capacity) that various C-rate testing be benchmarked. Such information is lacking in the literature and critical for various loading conditions demanded by real world applications.
The future development of functional electrode and electrolyte materials for Li–O2 batteries are best investigated through a combination of experimental and advanced computational approaches. If the hurdles to Li–O2 batteries outlined in this review can be overcome, then the benefits for electrification of transport, static energy storage, and hence reduction in CO2 emissions would be transformational.
Acknowledgements
This research has received funding from the Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2013 (Project STABLE) under grant agreement no. 314508.
References
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Padbury and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4436–4444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Gallagher, S. Goebel, T. Greszler, M. Mathias, W. Oelerich, D. Erogluab and V. Srinivasan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1555–1563 CAS .
T. Ogasawara, A. Débart, M. Holzapfel, P. Novák and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1390–1393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Beattie, D. Manolescu and S. Blair, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A44–A47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6305–6307 RSC .
P. G. Bruce, L. J. Hardwick and K. Abraham, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 506–512 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, D. Mei, X. Li, W. Xu, D. Wang, G. L. Graff, W. D. Bennett, Z. Nie, L. V. Saraf, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5071–5078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, O. Fontaine and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 489–494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cheng, J. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1695–1715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 19–29 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 886–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Read, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1190–A1195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 668–673 CrossRef CAS .

          E. N. S. J. Visco, B. Katz, L. Jonghe and M. Y. Chu, 12th International Meeting on Lithium Batteries, Nara, Japan, 27 June–2 July, 2004.

          E. N. S. J. Visco, B. Katz, L. Jonghe and M. Y. Chu, Electrochem. Soc. Meeting, Cancun, Mexico, 29 October–3 November, 2006.

          S. J. Visco, Y. S. Nimon and B. D. Katz, U.S. Pat., 7,282,296,  2007 Search PubMed .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, S. Hasegawa, A. Hirano, J. Xie, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A965–A969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, S. Hasegawa, A. Hirano, J. Xie, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, A132–A135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Imanishi, S. Hasegawa, T. Zhang, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 1392–1397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hasegawa, N. Imanishi, T. Zhang, J. Xie, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 371–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shimonishi, T. Zhang, P. Johnson, N. Imanishi, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6187–6191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, Y. Shimonishi, A. Hirano, J. Xie, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A214–A218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, X. Zhao and A. Manthiram, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yoo and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3020–3026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4994–4999 CAS .
P. He, Y. Wang and H. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1686–1689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. He, Y. Wang and H. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5611–5616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and H. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 358–361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, R. Liang, M. Hendrickson and E. Plichta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A432–A437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. He, Y. Wang and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10701–10703 RSC .
B. Kumar, J. Kumar, R. Leese, J. P. Fellner, S. J. Rodrigues and K. Abraham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A50–A54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kumar and J. Kumar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A611–A616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, S. Tai Kim, R. Cao, N.-S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Li and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 443–467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, R. Cao, J. Cho and G. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014 10.1039/C4CP00225C .
J. Nanda, H. Bilheux, S. Voisin, G. M. Veith, R. Archibald, L. Walker, S. Allu, N. J. Dudney and S. Pannala, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8401–8408 CAS .
N. Tsiouvaras, S. Meini, K. U. Schwenke, M. Piana, H. Beyer, L. Lange and H. A. Gasteiger, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11478–11493 RSC .
J.-J. Xu, Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, L.-L. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2438 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, D. Zhai, H.-H. Wang, K. C. Lau, J. A. Schlueter, P. Du, D. J. Myers, Y.-K. Sun, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3764–3771 RSC .
P. Kichambare, J. Kumar, S. Rodrigues and B. Kumar, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3310–3316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Oh, R. Black, E. Pomerantseva, J.-H. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 1004–1010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, D. Zhou, X. Dong, Z. Qiu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5668–5672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4647–4651 RSC .
R. Cao, J.-S. Lee, M. Liu and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 816–829 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172–2192 RSC .
F. Li, T. Zhang and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1125–1141 CAS .
Y. Shao, S. Park, J. Xiao, J.-G. Zhang, Y. Wang and J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 844–857 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, G. Jeong, Y.-U. Kim, J.-H. Kim, C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9011–9034 RSC .
M. Balaish, A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 16, 2801–2822 RSC .
L. A. Huff, J. L. Rapp, L. Zhu and A. A. Gewirth, J. Power Sources, 2013, 235, 87–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Karan, M. Balasubramanian, T. T. Fister, A. K. Burrell and P. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18132–18138 CAS .
M. Leskes, N. E. Drewett, L. J. Hardwick, P. G. Bruce, G. R. Goward and C. P. Grey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8560–8563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lu, H. A. Gasteiger, M. C. Parent, V. Chiloyan and Y. Shao-Horn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A69–A72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lu, D. G. Kwabi, K. P. C. Yao, J. R. Harding, J. Zhou, L. Zuin and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2999–3007 CAS .
S. R. Younesi, S. Urbonaite, F. Björefors and K. Edström, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9835–9838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Williford and J.-G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1164–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lu, Z. Xu, H. A. Gasteiger, S. Chen, K. Hamad-Schifferli and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12170–12171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Wu and Z. Zhou, Front. Phys., 2011, 6, 197–203 CrossRef .
C. O. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, K. M. Abraham, E. J. Plichta and M. A. Hendrickson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20127–20134 CAS .
Y. Mo, S. P. Ong and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205446 CrossRef .
A. Kumar, F. Ciucci, A. N. Morozovska, S. V. Kalinin and S. Jesse, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 707–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu and X.-B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014 10.1039/C3CS60248F .
J. Christensen, P. Albertus, R. S. Sanchez-Carrera, T. Lohmann, B. Kozinsky, R. Liedtke, J. Ahmed and A. Kojic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 159, R1–R30 CrossRef PubMed .
E. L. Littauer and K. C. Tsai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 771–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Abraham and Z. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1–5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Chase, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Monogr., 1998, 1506–1510 Search PubMed .
M. D. Radin, J. F. Rodriguez, F. Tian and D. J. Siegel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 134, 1093–1103 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Fujinaga and S. Sakura, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1974, 47, 2781–2786 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, M. Daroux, P. Faguy and E. Yeager, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1991, 297, 225–244 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Sawyer, G. Chiericato Jr, C. T. Angelis, E. J. Nanni Jr and T. Tsuchiya, Anal. Chem., 1982, 54, 1720–1724 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, H. A. Gasteiger, E. Crumlin, R. McGuire and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A1016–A1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. O. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, K. M. Abraham, E. J. Plichta and M. A. Hendrickson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9178–9186 CAS .
S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen, N. E. Drewett, L. J. Hardwick, F. Bardé and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8609–8613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Franco and K.-H. Xue, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2013, 2, M3084–M3100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-K. Song, S. Park, F. M. Alamgir, J. Cho and M. Liu, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2011, 72, 203–252 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Hardwick and P. G. Bruce, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2012, 16, 178–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, F. Ding, J. Xiao, J. Zhang, W. Xu, S. Park, J.-G. Zhang, Y. Wang and J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 987–1004 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, B. M. Gallant, D. G. Kwabi, J. R. Harding, R. R. Mitchell, M. S. Whittingham and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 750–768 CAS .
J. Hou, M. Yang, M. W. Ellis, R. B. Moore and B. Yi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13487–13501 RSC .
M. Mirzaeian and P. J. Hall, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 7444–7451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Li, M. Wang, H. Nie and F. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 390–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Ottakam Thotiyl, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 494–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Harding, Y.-C. Lu, Y. Tsukada and Y. Shao-Horn, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10540–10546 RSC .
A. Débart, J. Bao, G. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1177–1182 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-G. Jung, H.-S. Kim, J.-B. Park, I.-H. Oh, J. Hassoun, C. S. Yoon, B. Scrosati and Y.-K. Sun, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4333–4335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lu and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 93–99 Search PubMed .
R. Younesi, S. Urbonaite, K. Edström and M. Hahlin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20673–20680 CAS .
B. D. Adams, C. Radtke, R. Black, M. L. Trudeau, K. Zaghib and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1772–1778 CAS .
W. Fan, Z. Cui and X. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2623–2627 CAS .
B. M. Gallant, D. G. Kwabi, R. R. Mitchell, J. Zhou, C. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2518–2528 CAS .
B. Horstmann, B. Gallant, R. Mitchell, W. G. Bessler, Y. Shao-Horn and M. Z. Bazant, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4217–4222 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. McCloskey, A. Valery, A. C. Luntz, S. R. Gowda, G. M. Wallraff, J. M. Garcia, T. Mori and L. E. Krupp, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 2989–2993 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Mitchell, B. M. Gallant, Y. Shao-Horn and C. V. Thompson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 1060–1064 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mizuno, K. Takechi, S. Higashi, T. Shiga, T. Shiotsuki, N. Takazawa, Y. Sakurabayashi, S. Okazaki, I. Nitta, T. Kodama, H. Nakamoto, H. Nishikoori, S. Nakanishi, Y. Kotani and H. Iba, J. Power Sources, 2013, 228, 47–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tsiouvaras, S. Meini, I. Buchberger and H. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A471–A477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhong, R. R. Mitchell, Y. Liu, B. M. Gallant, C. V. Thompson, J. Y. Huang, S. X. Mao and Y. Shao-Horn, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2209–2214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yilmaz, C. Yogi, K. Yamanaka, T. Ohta and H. R. Byon, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4679–4684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Black, J.-H. Lee, B. Adams, C. A. Mims and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 392–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xu, Z.-l. Wang, J.-j. Xu, L.-l. Zhang and X.-b. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6948–6950 RSC .
J.-H. Lee, R. Black, G. Popov, E. Pomerantseva, F. Nan, G. A. Botton and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9558–9565 CAS .
D. Zhai, H.-H. Wang, J. Yang, K. C. Lau, K. Li, K. Amine and L. A. Curtiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15364–15372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Mitchell, B. M. Gallant, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2952–2958 CAS .
D. Xu, Z.-l. Wang, J.-j. Xu, L.-l. Zhang, L.-m. Wang and X.-b. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11674–11676 RSC .
H.-D. Lim, K.-Y. Park, H. Song, E. Y. Jang, H. Gwon, J. Kim, Y. H. Kim, M. D. Lima, R. O. Robles, X. Lepró, R. H. Baughman and K. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1348–1352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, D. Xu, J. J. Xu, L. L. Zhang and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3699–3705 CrossRef CAS .
R. Black, S. H. Oh, J.-H. Lee, T. Yim, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2902–2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, Z. Wen and Y. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4727–4734 CAS .
Z.-W. Fu, W.-M. Liu, T.-T. Gao, Y. Yang and Q. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 15806–15810 RSC .
M. M. O. Thotiyl, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, Y. Chen, Z. Liu and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1050–1056 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ma, L. Sun, L. Cong, X. Gao, C. Yao, X. Guo, L. Tai, P. Mei, Y. Zeng, H. Xie and R. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25890–25897 CAS .
R. Choi, J. Jung, G.-B. Kim, K.-S. Song, Y. Kim, S. C. Jung, Y.-K. Han, H. Song and Y. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1362–1368 CAS .
K.-S. Song, J. Jung, Y. U. Heo, Y. C. Lee, K. Cho and Y. Kang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20075–20079 RSC .
Y. Hu, X. Han, F. Cheng, Q. Zhao, Z. Hu and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 177–180 RSC .
H. Beyer, S. Meini, N. Tsiouvaras, M. Piana and H. A. Gasteiger, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11025–11037 RSC .
J. Read, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A96–A100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Elia, J.-B. Park, B. Scrosati, Y.-K. Sun and J. Hassoun, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 34, 250–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Itkis, D. A. Semenenko, E. Y. Kataev, A. I. Belova, V. S. Neudachina, A. P. Sirotina, M. Hävecker, D. Teschner, A. Knop-Gericke, P. Dudin, A. Barinov, E. A. Goodilin, Y. Shao-Horn and L. V. Yashina, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4697–4701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, J. Hu, M. H. Engelhard, S. A. Towne, J. S. Hardy, J. Xiao, J. Feng, M. Y. Hu, J. Zhang, F. Ding, M. E. Gross and J.-G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 240–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-D. Lim, K.-Y. Park, H. Gwon, J. Hong, H. Kim and K. Kang, Chem.
Commun., 2012, 48, 8374–8376 RSC .
P. Du, J. Lu, K. C. Lau, X. Luo, J. Bareno, X. Zhang, Y. Ren, Z. Zhang, L. A. Curtiss, Y.-K. Sun and K. Amine, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 5572–5581 RSC .
J. Li, N. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Ding and L. Guan, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 698–700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Wang, X. Li, J. Liu, D. Geng, J. Yang, R. Li and X. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 668–672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, J. Zheng, R. Liang, C. Zhang, B. Wang, M. Au, M. Hendrickson and E. Plichta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A822–A827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 11224–11229 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, F. Li, D.-M. Tang, Z. Jian, C. Liu, D. Golberg, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13076–13081 CAS .
Z. H. Cui, W. G. Fan and X. X. Guo, J. Power Sources, 2013, 235, 251–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Huang, K. Huang, D. Carnahan and Y. Xing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3339–3345 CAS .
H. W. Park, D. U. Lee, L. F. Nazar and Z. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A344–A350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shen, D. Sun, L. Yu, W. Zhang, Y. Shang, H. Tang, J. Wu, A. Cao and Y. Huang, Carbon, 2013, 62, 288–295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, S. Dong, J. Wang, L. Zhang, P. Han, C. Zhang, X. Wang, K. Zhang, Z. Lan and G. Cui, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21051–21056 RSC .
G. Zhang, J. Zheng, R. Liang, C. Zhang, B. Wang, M. Hendrickson and E. Plichta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A953–A956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shui, F. Du, C. Xue, Q. Li and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3015–3022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, L. Zhou, T. Huang and A. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1239–1245 CAS .
J.-B. Park, J. Lee, C. S. Yoon and Y.-K. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13426–13431 CAS .
P. Kichambare, S. Rodrigues and J. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 4, 49–52 Search PubMed .
V. Etacheri, D. Sharon, A. Garsuch, M. Afri, A. A. Frimer and D. Aurbach, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5021–5030 CAS .
J. Park, Y.-S. Jun, W.-r. Lee, J. A. Gerbec, K. A. See and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3779–3781 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Zhu, H. Ang, Y. Zeng, N. Xiao, Y. Gao, W. Liu, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9651–9658 RSC .
B. Sun, B. Wang, D. Su, L. Xiao, H. Ahn and G. Wang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 727–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Wang, X. Li, D. Geng, M. N. Banis, R. Li and X. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 18, 12–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Wang, X. Li, D. Geng, R. Li and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9438–9440 RSC .
Y. Wang and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1704–1707 CAS .
G. Wu, N. H. Mack, W. Gao, S. Ma, R. Zhong, J. Han, J. K. Baldwin and P. Zelenay, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9764–9776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Selvaraj, S. Kumar, N. Munichandraiah and L. Scanlon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A554–A560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Q. Sun, Y.-S. Li, H. Li and Z.-W. Fu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B1211–B1216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, Z. Wang, C. Yu, Z. Zhao, X. Fan, Z. Ling and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12033–12037 CAS .
B. M. Gallant, R. R. Mitchell, D. G. Kwabi, J. Zhou, L. Zuin, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20800–20805 CAS .
G. O. Shitta-Bey, M. Mirzaeian and P. J. Hall, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A315–A320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Débart, A. J. Paterson, J. Bao and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., 2008, 120, 4597–4600 CrossRef .
A. K. Thapa, K. Saimen and T. Ishihara, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A165–A167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Thapa and T. Ishihara, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7016–7020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, Z. Wei, J. He, J. Zang, Q. Zhang, M. Zheng and Q. Dong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9765–9768 CAS .
T. T. Truong, Y. Liu, Y. Ren, L. Trahey and Y. Sun, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8067–8077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, J. Lu, P. Du, Z. Chen, Y. Ren, T. Wu, J. T. Miller, J. Wen, D. J. Miller, Z. Zhang and K. Amine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 519–531 CAS .
L. Trahey, N. K. Karan, M. K. Chan, J. Lu, Y. Ren, J. Greeley, M. Balasubramanian, A. K. Burrell, L. A. Curtiss and M. M. Thackeray, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 75–84 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zeng, J. R. Nair, C. Francia, S. Bodoardo and N. Penazzi, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2013, 8, 3912–3927 CAS .
H. Cheng and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1370–1374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Benbow, S. P. Kelly, L. Zhao, J. W. Reutenauer and S. L. Suib, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22009–22017 CAS .
J.-S. Lee, G. S. Park, H. I. Lee, S. T. Kim, R. Cao, M. Liu and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5362–5366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Kalubarme, C.-H. Ahn and C.-J. Park, Scr. Mater., 2013, 68, 619–622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, C. X. Guo, L. Zhang and C. M. Li, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6334–6336 RSC .
V. M. B. Crisostomo, J. K. Ngala, S. Alia, A. Dobley, C. Morein, C.-H. Chen, X. Shen and S. L. Suib, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1832–1839 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, L. Xu, C. Morein, C. h. Chen, M. Lai, S. Dharmarathna, A. Dobley and S. L. Suib, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3373–3382 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ida, A. K. Thapa, Y. Hidaka, Y. Okamoto, M. Matsuka, H. Hagiwara and T. Ishihara, J. Power Sources, 2012, 203, 159–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, B. Zhang, Y.-B. He, Z.-D. Huang, S.-W. Oh and J.-K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1163–1170 CAS .
X. Hu, X. Han, Y. Hu, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3522–3525 RSC .
C. S. Park, K. S. Kim and Y. J. Park, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 72–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ren, Y. Guo, Z. Zhang, C. Liu and P.-X. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9897–9906 CAS .
A. Riaz, K.-N. Jung, W. Chang, S.-B. Lee, T.-H. Lim, S.-J. Park, R.-H. Song, S. Yoon, K.-H. Shin and J.-W. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5984–5986 RSC .
Q.-c. Liu, J.-j. Xu, Z.-w. Chang and X.-b. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6081–6085 CAS .
Y. Cui, Z. Wen, S. Sun, Y. Lu and J. Jin, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 225, 598–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, J. Salim, C. Ma, Z. Ma, C. Sun, J. Li, L. Chen and Y. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 28, 13–16 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Kong, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 68, 198–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ming, Y. Wu, J.-B. Park, J. K. Lee, F. Zhao and Y.-K. Sun, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10390–10396 RSC .
B. Sun, H. Liu, P. Munroe, H. Ahn and G. Wang, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 460–469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Q. Sun, Y.-S. Li, H. Li and Z.-W. Fu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 223, 312–318 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lu, Y. Qin, P. Du, X. Luo, T. Wu, Y. Ren, J. Wen, D. J. Miller, J. T. Miller and K. Amine, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 8276–8285 RSC .
L. Wang, X. Zhao, Y. Lu, M. Xu, D. Zhang, R. S. Ruoff, K. J. Stevenson and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1379–A1382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, G. Zheng, Y. Li, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7931–7935 CAS .
Y. Zhao, L. Xu, L. Mai, C. Han, Q. An, X. Xu, X. Liu and Q. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 19569–19574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, X. Han, Y. Hu, J. Yang and F. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1497–1499 RSC .
W. G. Hardin, D. A. Slanac, X. Wang, S. Dai, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 1254–1259 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Xu, D. Xu, Z.-L. Wang, H.-G. Wang, L.-L. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3887–3890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fu, X. Lin, T. Huang and A. Yu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 1447–1452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, J. Salim, S. Li, C. Sun, L. Chen, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18902–18907 RSC .
J.-J. Xu, Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, F.-Z. Meng and X.-B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014 10.1039/C3EE42934B .
B. D. McCloskey, R. Scheffler, A. Speidel, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby and A. C. Luntz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18038–18041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Armstrong, C. O'Dwyer, W. J. Macklin and J. D. Holmes, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1–62 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Lu, P. Chang and Z. Fan, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2006, 52, 49–91 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang and Y. D. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2880–2881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. S. Gittleson, R. C. Sekol, G. Doubek, M. Linardi and A. Taylor, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 16, 3230–3237 RSC .
Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick, Y. Chen, V. Giordani, F. Bardé, P. Novák, D. Graham, J.-M. Tarascon and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6351–6355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen and P. G. Bruce, Science, 2012, 337, 563–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhu, L. Zhang, M. Song, X. Wang and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9573–9575 RSC .
J. Lu, Y. Lei, K. C. Lau, X. Luo, P. Du, J. Wen, R. S. Assary, U. Das, D. J. Miller and J. W. Elam, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2383 Search PubMed .
Y.-C. Lu, H. A. Gasteiger and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19048–19051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Shi, Q.-F. Zhou, Y.-S. Li and Z.-W. Fu, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 20, 11–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-D. Lim, H. Song, H. Gwon, K.-Y. Park, J. Kim, Y. Bae, H. Kim, S.-K. Jung, T. Kim, Y. H. Kim, X. Lepro, R. Ovalle-Robles, R. H. Baughman and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3570–3575 CAS .
L. Wang, M. Ara, K. Wadumesthrige, S. Salley and K. Y. S. Ng, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 8–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, Z. Wen, J. Jin, Y. Cui, M. Wu and S. Sun, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 1863–1868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, S. Zhu, C. C. Milleville, C.-Y. Lee, P. Chen, K. J. Takeuchi, E. S. Takeuchi and A. C. Marschilok, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A162–A164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Marschilok, S. Zhu, C. C. Milleville, S. H. Lee, E. S. Takeuchi and K. J. Takeuchi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A223–A226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 891–898 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, G. Chen, M. An and P. Wang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 11957–11965 CAS .
G. Collins, M. Blömker, M. Osiak, J. D. Holmes, M. Bredol and C. O'Dwyer, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4312–4320 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Sau, A. L. Rogach, F. Jäckel, T. A. Klar and J. Feldmann, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1805–1825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Sau and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1781–1804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, D.-M. Tang, Y. Chen, D. Golberg, H. Kitaura, T. Zhang, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4702–4707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, F. Li, C. Ma, Y. Wang, Y. Ren, W. Yang, Z. Ma, J. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Kim and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7188–7196 CAS .
F. Li, D.-M. Tang, Y. Chen, D. Golberg, H. Kitaura, T. Zhang, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4702–4707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1817 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Zhang, D. Wang, W. Xu, J. Xiao and R. E. Williford, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4332–4337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, J. Xiao, J. Zhang, D. Wang and J.-G. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A773–A779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, J. Xiao, W. Xu and J.-G. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A760–A764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Gowda, A. Brunet, G. M. Wallraff and B. D. McCloskey, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 276–279 Search PubMed .
H.-K. Lim, H.-D. Lim, K.-Y. Park, D.-H. Seo, H. Gwon, J. Hong, W. A. Goddard III, H. Kim and K. Kang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9733–9742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-h. Yang and Y.-y. Xia, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 109–114 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Nemanick and R. P. Hickey, J. Power Sources, 2014, 252, 248–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Song, D. Zhu, L. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Huang, Q. Shi, R. Mi, H. Liu, J. Mei and L. W. Lau, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Song, D. Zhu, L. Zhang, X. Wang, R. Mi, H. Liu, J. Mei, L. W. Lau and Y. Chen, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-B. Park, J. Hassoun, H.-G. Jung, H.-S. Kim, C. S. Yoon, I. Oh, B. Scrosati and Y.-K. Sun, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2971–2975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Veith and N. J. Dudney, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A658–A663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-K. Luo, C.-S. Liang, F. Wang, Y.-H. Xu, J. Chen, D. Liu, H.-Y. Sun, H. Yang and X.-P. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2101–2105 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tran, J. Kafle, X.-Q. Yang and D. Qu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1266–1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tran, X.-Q. Yang and D. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2057–2063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, Y. Shimonishi, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1661–1663 RSC .
W. Xu, J. Xiao, D. Wang, J. Zhang and J.-G. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A219–A224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, H.-x. Zhong, Y.-l. Qin and X.-b. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5248–5253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Walker, V. Giordani, J. Uddin, V. S. Bryantsev, G. V. Chase and D. Addison, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2076–2079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-G. Jung, Y. S. Jeong, J.-B. Park, Y.-K. Sun, B. Scrosati and Y. J. Lee, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3532–3539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jian, P. Liu, F. Li, P. He, X. Guo, M. Chen and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 442–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Guo, Y. Li, J. Yang, Z. Zou, X. Xue, X. Li and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1509–1514 CAS .
B. Sun, P. Munroe and G. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2247 Search PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Chen, D.-M. Tang, L. Z. Jian, C. Liu, D. Golberg, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1648–1652 CAS .
S. Dong, X. Chen, K. Zhang, L. Gu, L. Zhang, X. Zhou, L. Li, Z. Liu, P. Han, H. Xu, J. Yao, C. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. Shang, G. Cui and L. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11291–11293 RSC .
K. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Chen, X. He, X. Wang, S. Dong, L. Gu, Z. Liu, C. Huang and G. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3677–3682 CAS .
K. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Chen, X. He, X. Wang, S. Dong, P. Han, C. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Gu and G. Cui, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 858–865 CAS .
S. Dong, S. Wang, J. Guan, S. Li, Z. Lan, C. Chen, C. Shang, L. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Gu, G. Cui and L. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 615–621 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Trahan, Q. Jia, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. Abraham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1577–A1586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, S. S. Zhang, D. T. Tran and J. Read, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10118–10125 RSC .
S. H. Oh and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 903–910 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, S. Zhang, K. Zhang, G. Xu, X. He, S. Dong, Z. Liu, C. Huang, L. Gu and G. Cui, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3540–3542 RSC .
D. Wu, Z. Guo, X. Yin, Q. Pang, B. Tu, L. Zhang, Y.-G. Wang and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014 DOI:10.1002/adma.201305492 .
G. M. Veith, N. J. Dudney, J. Howe and J. Nanda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14325–14333 CAS .
B. D. McCloskey, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby, G. Girishkumar and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1161–1166 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. McCloskey, R. Scheffler, A. Speidel, G. Girishkumar and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23897–23905 CAS .
B. D. McCloskey, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby, T. Mori, R. Scheffler, A. Speidel, M. Sherwood and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3043–3047 CrossRef CAS .
R. Younesi, M. Hahlin and K. Edström, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1333–1341 CAS .
R. Younesi, M. Hahlin, F. Björefors, P. Johansson and K. Edström, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Veith, J. Nanda, L. H. Delmau and N. J. Dudney, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1242–1247 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. McCloskey, A. Speidel, R. Scheffler, D. C. Miller, V. Viswanathan, J. S. Hummelshøj, J. K. Nørskov and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 997–1001 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, E. J. Crumlin, G. M. Veith, J. R. Harding, E. Mutoro, L. Baggetto, N. J. Dudney, Z. Liu and Y. Shao-Horn, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 715 Search PubMed .
H. Lim, E. Yilmaz and H. R. Byon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3210–3215 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Bryantsev, J. Uddin, V. Giordani, W. Walker, D. Addison and G. V. Chase, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A160–A171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Bryantsev and F. Faglioni, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 7128–7138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, F. Bardé and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7952–7957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Lu, R. S. Assary, P. Du, H.-H. Wang, Y.-K. Sun, Y. Qin, K. C. Lau, J. Greeley, P. C. Redfern, H. Iddir, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25535–25542 CAS .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 3, 31–35 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Park, M. G. Kim, J. Joo, K. Kim, J. Kim, S. Ahn, Y. Cui and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3844–3847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kowalczk, J. Read and M. Salomon, Pure Appl. Chem., 2007, 79, 851–860 CrossRef CAS .
J. Read, K. Mutolo, M. Ervin, W. Behl, J. Wolfenstine, A. Driedger and D. Foster, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1351–A1356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Eswaran, N. Munichandraiah and L. Scanlon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A121–A124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Albertus, G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, R. S. Sánchez-Carrera, B. Kozinsky, J. Christensen and A. Luntz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A343–A351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, K. Xu, V. V. Viswanathan, S. A. Towne, J. S. Hardy, J. Xiao, Z. Nie, D. Hu, D. Wang and J.-G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9631–9639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Zhang, D. Foster and J. Read, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1235–1240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen, Z. Peng, J. M. Griffin, L. J. Hardwick, F. Bardé, P. Novák and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8040–8047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mizuno, S. Nakanishi, Y. Kotani, S. Yokoishi and H. Iba, Electrochemistry, 2010, 78, 403–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Bryantsev, V. Giordani, W. Walker, M. Blanco, S. Zecevic, K. Sasaki, J. Uddin, D. Addison and G. V. Chase, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 12399–12409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, K. Xu, V. V. Viswanathan, S. A. Towne, J. S. Hardy, J. Xiao, Z. Nie, D. Hu, D. Wang and J.-G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9631–9639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang and K. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 64, 29–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Ryan, L. Trahey, B. J. Ingram and A. K. Burrell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19724–19728 CAS .
D. Sharon, V. Etacheri, A. Garsuch, M. Afri, A. A. Frimer and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 127–131 Search PubMed .
H.-G. Jung, J. Hassoun, J.-B. Park, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 579–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhu, L. Zhang, M. Song, X. Wang, J. Mei, L. W. Lau and Y. Chen, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 2865–2870 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Assary, K. C. Lau, K. Amine, Y.-K. Sun and L. A. Curtiss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8041–8049 CAS .
Y. Cui, Z. Wen, X. Liang, Y. Lu, J. Jin, M. Wu and X. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7893–7897 CAS .
C. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. Abraham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A302–A308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. U. Schwenke, S. Meini, X. Wu, H. A. Gasteiger and M. Piana, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11830–11839 RSC .
M. Marinaro, S. Theil, L. Jörissen and M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 108, 795–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liang, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 2568–2572 RSC .
Y. Wang, L. Xing, W. Li and D. Bedrov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3992–3999 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, X. Huang, J. Zhang, S. Chen and G. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 11115–11120 RSC .
M. J. Trahan, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. Abraham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A259–A267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sharon, M. Afri, M. Noked, A. Garsuch, A. A. Frimer and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3115–3119 CrossRef CAS .
S. Meini, M. Piana, N. Tsiouvaras, A. Garsuch and H. A. Gasteiger, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2012, 15, A45–A48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kuboki, T. Okuyama, T. Ohsaki and N. Takami, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 766–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Allen, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. M. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2420–2424 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Allen, J. Hwang, R. Kautz, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. M. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20755–20764 CAS .
F. Soavi, S. Monaco and M. Mastragostino, J. Power Sources, 2013, 224, 115–119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mizuno, S. Nakanishi, A. Shirasawa, K. Takechi, T. Shiga, H. Nishikoori and H. Iba, Electrochemistry, 2011, 79, 876–881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X.-Z. Liao, L. Li, H. Chen, Q.-Z. Jiang, Y.-S. He and Z.-F. Ma, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1874–A1879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cecchetto, M. Salomon, B. Scrosati and F. Croce, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 233–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Herranz, A. Garsuch and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19084–19094 CAS .
S. Higashi, Y. Kato, K. Takechi, H. Nakamoto, F. Mizuno, H. Nishikoori, H. Iba and T. Asaoka, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 14–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Nasybulin, W. Xu, M. H. Engelhard, Z. Nie, S. D. Burton, L. Cosimbescu, M. E. Gross and J.-G. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2635–2645 CAS .
G. A. Elia, J.-B. Park, Y.-K. Sun, B. Scrosati and J. Hassoun, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 47–50 CrossRef .
F. Li, T. Zhang, Y. Yamada, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 532–538 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chalasani and B. L. Lucht, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2012, 1, A38–A42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Huggins, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81, 13–19 CrossRef .
R. Bhattacharyya, B. Key, H. Chen, A. S. Best, A. F. Hollenkamp and C. P. Grey, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 504–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu Aleshin, D. A. Semenenko, A. I. Belova, T. K. Zakharchenko, D. M. Itkis, E. A. Goodilin and Y. D. Tretyakov, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 184, 62–64 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hassoun, F. Croce, M. Armand and B. Scrosati, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2999–3002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Inaguma and M. Nakashima, J. Power Sources, 2013, 228, 250–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Katoh, Y. Inda, K. Nakajima, R. Ye and M. Baba, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6877–6880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Ding, W. Xu, Y. Shao, X. Chen, J. Xiao, L. Xingjiang and J.-G. Zhang, Meeting Abstracts, 2011.
C. R. Mariappan, M. Gellert, C. Yada, F. Rosciano and B. Roling, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 25–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 801–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, H. Kitaura and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2302–2311 CAS .
J.-L. Shui, J. S. Okasinski, P. Kenesei, H. A. Dobbs, D. Zhao, J. D. Almer and D.-J. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2255 Search PubMed .
V. S. Bryantsev, V. Giordani, W. Walker, J. Uddin, I. Lee, A. C. T. van Duin, G. V. Chase and D. Addison, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11977–11988 CAS .
R. Younesi, M. Hahlin, M. Roberts and K. Edström, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 40–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Chan, R. N. Patel, M. J. O'Connell, B. A. Korgel and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1443–1450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Chockla, J. T. Harris, V. A. Akhavan, T. D. Bogart, V. C. Holmberg, C. Steinhagen, C. B. Mullins, K. J. Stevenson and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20914–20921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mullane, T. Kennedy, H. Geaney, C. Dickinson and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1816–1822 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, X. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2007, 8, 307–309 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kennedy, E. Mullane, H. Geaney, M. Osiak, C. O'Dwyer and K. M. Ryan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 716–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-W. Yuan, H.-J. Yang and H.-Y. Tuan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9932–9942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Idota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa and T. Miyasaka, Science, 1997, 276, 1395–1397 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Im, Y. J. Cho, Y. R. Lim, C. S. Jung, D. M. Jang, J. Park, F. Shojaei and H. S. Kang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11103–11111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Osiak, E. Armstrong, T. Kennedy, C. M. Sotomayor Torres, K. M. Ryan and C. O'Dwyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8195–8202 CAS .
C. Park, S. Park, S. Lee, H. Lee, H. Jang and W. Cho, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2010, 31, 3221–3224 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Thapa, Y. Hidaka, H. Hagiwara, S. Ida and T. Ishihara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1483–A1489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, Z. Fu, Z. Wei, T. Huang and A. Yu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A362–A365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Radin, F. Tian and D. J. Siegel, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 7564–7570 CrossRef CAS .

          M. D. Radin, J. F. Rodriguez and D. J. Siegel, Proceedings of the Battery Congress, 2011.
N. Seriani, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 445703 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kang, Y. Mo, S. P. Ong and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3328–3336 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, V. V. Viswanathan, D. Wang, S. A. Towne, J. Xiao, Z. Nie, D. Hu and J.-G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3894–3899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. S. Hummelshøj, K. S. Thygesen, J. S. Myrdal, J. K. Nørskov and T. Vegge, Catal. Today, 2011, 165, 2–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Hummelshøj, J. Blomqvist, S. Datta, T. Vegge, J. Rossmeisl, K. S. Thygesen, A. Luntz, K. W. Jacobsen and J. K. Nørskov, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 071101 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Ong, Y. Mo and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 081105 CrossRef .
V. Viswanathan, K. S. Thygesen, J. Hummelshøj, J. K. Nørskov, G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey and A. Luntz, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 214704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Ban, J. Kang, S. Santhanagopalan, G.-H. Kim, S.-H. Wei and A. C. Dillon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 023903 CrossRef PubMed .
V. S. Bryantsev, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2012, 131, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, Y. S. Jung, S.-H. Wei and A. C. Dillon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 035210 CrossRef .
V. Timoshevskii, Z. Feng, K. H. Bevan, J. Goodenough and K. Zaghib, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 073901 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Radin and D. J. Siegel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2370–2379 CAS .
D. Capsoni, M. Bini, S. Ferrari, E. Quartarone and P. Mustarelli, J. Power Sources, 2012, 220, 253–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu and W. A. Shelton, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 024703 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Christensen and E. A. Carter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 8050 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kramer and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3799–3809 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ramamoorthy, D. Vanderbilt and R. King-Smith, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 49, 16721 CrossRef CAS .
K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 65, 035406 CrossRef .
K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 046103 CrossRef .
L. Wang, F. Zhou and G. Ceder, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, A94–A96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, F. Zhou, Y. Meng and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 165435 CrossRef .
X.-G. Wang, A. Chaka and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 3650 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sangster and A. Pelton, J. Phase Equilib., 1992, 13, 296–299 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Lau, L. A. Curtiss and J. Greeley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23625–23633 CAS .
B. McEnaney, Carbon, 1988, 26, 267–274 CrossRef CAS .
O. Crowther, B. Meyer, M. Morgan and M. Salomon, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1498–1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dai, T. Kogut, L. Jin and D. Reisner, ECS Trans., 2008, 6, 381–387 CAS .
X.-h. Yang, P. He and Y.-y. Xia, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1127–1130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mirzaeian and P. J. Hall, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6817–6824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mirzaeian and P. J. Hall, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 7444–7451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Punckt, M. A. Pope, J. Liu, Y. Lin and I. A. Aksay, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 2834–2841 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, D. Choi, J. Li, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, R. Kou, D. Hu, C. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907–914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kou, Y. Shao, D. Mei, Z. Nie, D. Wang, C. Wang, V. V. Viswanathan, S. Park, I. A. Aksay and Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2541–2547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Renner, H. Kageyama, Z. Siroma, M. Shikano, S. Schöder, Y. Gründer and O. Sakata, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 6064–6069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Debart, J. Bao, G. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, ECS Trans., 2007, 3, 225–232 CAS .
M. Brandbyge, J.-L. Mozos, P. Ordejón, J. Taylor and K. Stokbro, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 165401 CrossRef .
C. Johnson and M. Thackeray, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97, 437–442 CrossRef .
M. Thackeray, M. Rossouw, A. De Kock, A. De la Harpe, R. Gummow, K. Pearce and D. Liles, J. Power Sources, 1993, 43, 289–300 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thackeray, M. Rossouw, R. Gummow, D. Liles, K. Pearce, A. De Kock, W. David and S. Hull, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 1259–1267 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Rophael, N. S. Petro and L. B. Khalil, J. Power Sources, 1988, 22, 149–161 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Mellan, K. P. Maenetja, P. E. Ngoepe, S. M. Woodley, C. R. A. Catlow and R. Grau-Crespo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14879–14887 CAS .
R. S. Assary, J. Lu, P. Du, X. Luo, X. Zhang, Y. Ren, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Padhi, K. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. d. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188–1194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Truong, Y. Qin, Y. Ren, Z. Chen, M. K. Chan, J. P. Greeley, K. Amine and Y. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4947–4952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Bryantsev and M. Blanco, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 379–383 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nanjundiah, S. McDevitt and V. Koch, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 3392–3397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Wilkes and M. J. Zaworotko, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1992, 965–967 RSC .
J. Fuller, R. T. Carlin and R. A. Osteryoung, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 3881–3886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, R. Li, T. Huang and A. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1202–1206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Assary, L. A. Curtiss, P. C. Redfern, Z. Zhang and K. Amine, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12216–12223 CAS .

Footnote† Both authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:

Mahesh Datt Bhatt
	Mahesh Bhatt received his MSc Degree in Physics in 1997 from Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu, Nepal and PhD degree in Engineering in 2010 from University of Tsukuba in Japan. Postdoctoral positions in Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, and University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom focused on interaction of Li+ ions with non-aqueous electrolytes in Li-ion batteries, and the origin of band-bending in donor–acceptor interfaces in organic solar cells. His current research work uses density functional theory calculations of ORR/OER kinetics in Li–air batteries.

Hugh Geaney
	Hugh Geaney received a BSc in Industrial Chemistry and PhD in Chemistry from the University of Limerick in 2008 and 2012 respectively. His PhD focused on the growth of silicon and germanium nanowires aimed at energy storage applications. Since 2012 he has been a postdoctoral researcher in the Applied Nanoscience Group at University College Cork. His current research focus is on the development of novel catalyst materials for Li–air battery cathodes.

Michael Nolan
	Michael Nolan received a BSc in Chemistry with German in 1997 and a Masters and PhD in Microelectronic Engineering from University College Cork in 1999 and 2004. He was a postdoctoral fellow at Trinity College Dublin with Prof. Graeme Watson and has been at Tyndall National Institute since 2005, and a staff researcher since 2009. Dr Nolan's interests are first principles simulations of metal oxide surfaces, interfaces and nanoparticles with applications in reactivity, catalysis and photocatalysis.

Colm O'Dwyer
	Colm O'Dwyer received his BS degree in applied physics and PhD degree in physics from the University of Limerick, Ireland in 1999 and 2003, respectively. After postdoctoral research in nanotechnology and nanolithography using ultracold atoms beams at the University Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, he conducted work on nanoelectronics/photonics at Tyndall National Institute, Cork, Ireland. From 2008 to 2012, he was a Science Foundation Ireland Stokes Lecturer on nanomaterials at the University of Limerick. He is currently at the Department of Chemistry, University College Cork and at Tyndall National Institute, leading the Applied Nanoscience Group.

 	Fig. 1  Ragone plot of energy density vs. power density for various battery systems compared with internal combustion engines. Reprinted from ref. 2. Copyright 2011, with permission of Elsevier.	 

Lead–acid	Less than 2000	40
Ni–Cd	Less than 2000	40
Ni–MH	Less than 2000	50
Li-ion	Less than 2000	160
Zn–air	Less than 2000	350
Li–S	Less than 2000	370
Li–O2	≈11680	1700
Gasoline	More than 12000	1700

 	Fig. 2  Representative applications of rechargeable batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  Four chemical architectures of Li–O2 batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Non-aqueous (aprotic)	2Li+ + 2e− + O2 = Li2O2 (2.96 V)	High theoretical energy density, rechargeability	Insoluble discharge products, material challenges

	

Aqueous	
4Li+ + 4e− + O2 = 2Li2O (2.90 V)
4Li + O2 + 2H2O = 4LiOH (alkaline electrolyte)
4Li + O2 + 4H+ = 4Li+ + 2H2O (acidic electrolyte)
	No pore clogging, no moisture effects as discharge products are soluble in aqueous system	Lack of Li-ion conducting membrane, undetermined charging behaviour

	

Hybrid	
4Li + O2 + 2H2O = 4LiOH (alkaline electrolyte)
4Li + O2 + 4H+ = 4Li+ + 2H2O (acidic electrolyte)
	No pore clogging, no moisture effects, natural SEI formation on Li anode in aprotic electrolyte	Lack of solid Li-ion conducting membrane, undetermined charging behaviour

	

Solid state	2Li+ + 2e− + O2 = Li2O2 (3.10 V)	Good stability, may use air, rechargeability, avoids dendrite formation	Low conductivity, capacity and energy density

 	Fig. 4  Limiting factors that affect the overall performance of Li–O2 batteries. Reprinted from ref. 2. Copyright 2011, with permission of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  Diagrammatic representation of general challenges in current Li–O2 batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2011 Materials Research Society.	 
2Li(s) + O2(g) → Li2O2 (2.96 V)	(1)
4Li(s) + O2(g) → 2Li2O (2.91 V)	(2)
2Li+ + 2e− + O2 → Li2O2 (discharge)	(3)
Li2O2 → 2Li+ + 2e− + O2 (charge)	(4)
Li(s) ↔ Li+ + e− (anode reaction)	(5)
2Li+ + 2e− + O2 ↔ Li2O2 (cathode reaction)	(6a)
4Li+ + 4e− + O2 ↔ 2Li2O (cathode reaction)	(6b)
O2 + e− → O2−	(7a)
Li+ + O2− → LiO2	(7b)
2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2	(7c)

 	Fig. 6  Schematic operation mechanism of a non-aqueous Li–O2 battery system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2013 The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the air cathode and proposed chemistry at the air cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of the some of the various morphologies of Li2O2 formed on different cathode systems. (a) Commonly noted Li2O2 toroids formed on carbon nanofiber cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Spherical Li2O2 particles formed on Ni foam supported free-standing catalyst cobalt oxide array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Porous balls of Li2O2 deposited on NiCo2O4 nanowire array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (d) Layered Li2O2 formed on TiC composite electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic showing the importance of applied current on the morphology of Li2O2 formed on Super P carbon cathodes as reported by Nazar et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM image showing the typical Super P/KB composite cathode morphology. Reprinted from ref. 84. Copyright 2013, with permission of Elsevier. (b) Amount of Li2CO3 formed as a percentage of Li2O2 in the cathode due to the carbon cathode (Li213CO3) and electrolyte (Li212CO3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) Example voltage profile of complete discharge–charge cycle conducted between 2.2 and 4.7 V with inset showing the dramatic capacity fading typical for carbon based cathodes under full discharge–charge conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Cyclic voltammetry of carbon free cathode (i.e. just Li anode, TEGDME based electrolyte and Ni current collector showing the region of electrolyte decomposition.122	 

 	Fig. 11  (a, b) SEM images of hierarchical-fibril CNT electrode produced by Lim et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., KGaA, Weinheim. (c) SEM image of honeycomb like carbon. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Discharge curves of Li–O2 battery cathodes composed of mesoporous–macroporous carbon sphere arrays (MMCSAs) at varying weight% x (with the remainder composed of Super P 80-x%) and PVDF 20%) (a) x = 0 (b) x = 5 (c) x = 10 (d) x = 30 (e) x = 50 (f) x = 80. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  The initial discharge–charge cycle shown for cathodes composed of (a) Co3O4/RGO cathode compared to KB. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Initial discharge–charge for MnCo2O4/Super P compared with pure Super P. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) OER activity vs. potential for the charging of Pt/C, Ru/C, Au/C and VC cathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Impact of Al2O3 passivation and Pd nanoparticle catalysts on the discharge and charge voltages of Super P carbon cathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Discharge and charge curves for CNT electrode and Pt nanoparticle embedded CNT cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Comparison of the discharge–charge processes for pure carbon and Pt/Au nanoparticle catalyst containing carbon cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a–c) TEM images of Au, Pt and Ru nanoparticle catalysts supported on Vulcan carbon. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–g) SEM (d) and TEM (e and f) images of Pt nanoparticle catalysts embedded on CNTs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic depiction of the carbon free cathode architecture developed by Cui et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Cycling performance of Ru–ITO cathode compared with that of a reference pure Super P cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Cycling behaviour of TiC cathode in DMSO based electrolyte showing capacity retention over 100 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM and TEM images of various carbon-free Li–O2 battery cathode systems. (a, b) Co3O4 nanorods on Ni mesh. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) NPG cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2012 AAAS publication. (d) SEM image of TiC cathode material. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (e, f) TEM images of Ru–ITO cathode system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (g–i) SEM images of Co3O4 nanoneedle arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Impact of O2 pressure as reported by Yang et al. showing the discharge curves at pressures of (a) 1 atm, (b) 3 atm, (c) 5 atm, and (d) 10 atm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2012 Springer Publishing Company. (b) Influence of temperature on Li–O2 battery charge and discharge voltages. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Gas evolution profiles (O2 and CO2 upper and lower respectively) for cathodes charged using DME (a), EC/DMC (b), PC/DMC (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 249. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) FTIR and (B) Raman analysis performed on NPG cathode cycled in 0.1 M LiClO4–DMSO electrolyte showing the overwhelming formation of Li2O2 upon discharge and its disappearance upon charge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2012 AAAS publication.	 

 	Fig. 20  Effect of electrolyte salt on the cycling performance of TEGDME based electrolytes. The main decomposition products for each electrolyte salt are also shown. Reprinted with permission from ref. 300. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Voltage profile showing the discharge–charge cycles analysed with various portions highlighted i–ix. (b) Normalized amount of Li and LiOH at the anode interface as a function of cycle time with the points i–ix corresponding to the points highlighted in (a). Reprinted with permission from ref. 314. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 
2Li+ + 2e− + O2 → Li2O2	(1)
4Li+ + 4e− + O2 → 2Li2O	(2)

 	Fig. 22  Unit cell for (left) bulk Li2O2 and (right) bulk LiO. Gray and black spheres represent O and Li atoms, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 23  (i) Crystal structure of Li2O2 with alternating layers of trigonal prisms and octahedra/tetrahedral, with oxygen sites lying on the vertices of the polyhedral, (ii) proposed two-stage recharge mechanism, and (iii) mechanism of oxygen reduction reaction at the cathode for a Li–O2 cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 342. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  Structures of low-energy Li2O2 surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

Super P	62	50	1736
Vulcan XC-72	250	2	762
Activated Carbon (AC)	2100	2	414
Carbon Nano Tube (CNT)	40	10	583
Graphite	6	—	560
Ball-milled graphite	480	—	1136
Mesocellular carbon foam-C	824	30	2500

 	Fig. 25  Top and side views of optimized structures of Li2O2 and (Li2O2)6 clusters on perfect graphene, the 5-8-5 defect graphene, and 5-8-5 graphene with COOH group. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Calculated free-energy change as a function of (Li2O2)n cluster size. The negative value of ΔG indicates an energetically more favorable aggregating process. On the perfect graphene surface, the aggregation of adsorbed Li2O2 monomer is energetically favorable up to (Li2O2)5, while it is energetically unfavorable from the beginning on the 5-8-5 defect graphene surface with or without a functional group (COOH). Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Density functional theory (DFT)-calculated structure of the Li2O2/Pd55O21/C interface, where Pd55O21 represents a partially oxidized palladium nanoparticle. Colour code: palladium (blue), aluminium (purple), oxygen (red), lithium (green), hydrogen (yellow) and carbon (grey). Lithium peroxide (Li2O2) is represented by a cluster containing three Li2O2 monomers. The carbon electrode (C) is represented by two stacked graphene layers. The average Pd–C bond length is 2.4 Å and the average Pd–O bond length with lithium peroxide is 2.0 Å. (b) Projected density of states at the Li2O2/Pd55O21 interface (top) and Pd55O21/C interface (bottom). In both cases, only the interface atoms that are in direct contact with each other have been considered. The up and down spin electron densities are represented by dark and light colours, respectively. (c) DFT calculations of a TEGDME solvent molecule binding on a carbon defect site on a bare graphitized carbon surface. The TEGDME molecule decomposes and forms new C–O and C–H bonds on these sites. (d) Weakly bound TEDGME molecule (0.1 eV) on an Al2O3-coated carbon surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 28  (i) The rutile unit cell of MnO2, (ii) Li adsorption on MnO2(110) surface, and (iii) adsorption of two oxygen atoms at the Li/MnO2(110) surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 373. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 29  Comparison of the computed barriers (enthalpies) for activation of (a) PC decomposition and (b) 1NM3 decomposition by O2 anion radical (O2−), Li2O radical, Li2O anion radical (Li2O−), and Li2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 261. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  Optimized structures of (a) (Li2O2)16–DME cluster and (b) transition state structure for the abstraction of a primary hydrogen from the DME at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory. Reprinted with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Both authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
