Inkjet printing for scalable and patterned fabrication of halide perovskite-based optoelectronic devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC02553A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02553A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 14379-14398Inkjet printing for scalable and patterned fabrication of halide perovskite-based optoelectronic devices

        
          
            Yongqing 
            Duan
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Guannan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Yu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hanyuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guangda 
            Niu
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            YongAn 
            Huang
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Zhouping 
            Yin
          
          
        
      ab
aState Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacture Equipment and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: duanyongqing@hust.edu.cn
bFlexible Electronics Research Center, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
cWuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: guangda_niu@hust.edu.cn
Received 
      18th June 2022
    , Accepted 5th September 2022First published on 11th September 2022AbstractThe emergence of halide perovskites (HPs) has attracted significant research interest due to their fascinating optoelectronic properties, such as superior absorption coefficient, tunable emission, and high color purity. With the laboratory scale perovskite solar cell or display efficiency rapidly approaching the commercial application level, there is an urgent need for scalable and patterned fabrication suitable for future commercialization. Inkjet printing (IJP), a maskless, noncontact, and material-effective technique, is the most promising candidate, and remarkable results have been achieved although IJP has only been recently employed in the fabrication of perovskite optoelectronic devices. Herein, we discuss different IJP techniques and analyze the four factors required to achieve stable printing, high resolution and good morphology of perovskites: ink design, droplet formation, evaporation, and nucleation/crystallization control. Then we summarize the recent progress in printed perovskite optoelectronic devices, including solar cells, light emitting diodes, and visible/X-ray photodetectors. Finally, a brief summary and an outlook on device performance improvement, industrial-scale fabrication, and broader application are presented as future research efforts.
Yongqing Duan
Yongqing Duan received her BS and PhD degrees from HUST, Wuhan, China, in 2010 and 2015, respectively. She is now an associate professor in the State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing Equipment and Technology, School of Mechanical Science and Engineering in HUST. Her research interests include flexible electronics manufacturing, printed display, and electrohydrodynamic printing.
Guannan Zhang
Guannan Zhang received her BS and MS degrees from Wuhan University of Technology and HUST, Wuhan, China, in 2019 and 2022, respectively. She is now a PhD candidate at the School of Engineering in the University of Hong Kong. Her research interests include electrohydrodynamic printing, printed display, and optoelectronic devices.
Rui Yu
Rui Yu received his BS degree from Wuhan University in 2021. He is now an MS candidate in the State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing Equipment and Technology, School of Mechanical Science and Engineering in HUST. His research is focused on electrohydrodynamic printing and its application in optoelectronics.
Guangda Niu
Guangda Niu received his PhD in Science from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2016. He is now a professor of Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics in HUST. His research interests include metal halide X-ray detectors and imaging technology. He is the Chief Scientist of the National Key Research and Development Program, a recipient of the Young Talent Program of the Ten Thousand People Program, and a member of Elsevier's “China's Highly Cited Scholars” list.
YongAn Huang
YongAn Huang received his PhD in Engineering Mechanics from Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in 2007. Currently, he is a professor of Mechanical Engineering in HUST, vice director of State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing Equipment and Technology, and a winner of The National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars. His research interests include design and manufacturing for flexible electronics, curved electronics, printed display, and metamaterials. To date, he has published 3 monographs and more than 100 papers in international peer-reviewed journals.
Zhouping Yin
Zhouping Yin is a Distinguished Professor, the Head of the State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing Equipment and Technology, and Dean of School of Mechanical Science & Engineering of HUST. He has made contributions in the areas of digital modeling of complex geometric surface, flip-chip electronics packaging, and packaging of radio-frequency identification (RFID). He leads a research group with a focus on the development of electronics manufacturing processes and equipment, including flexible displays, machine vision, and RFID packaging.
1. Introduction
Metal halide perovskites (MHPs) have a general formula of ABX3, where A, B, and X are monovalent cations (e.g., Cs+, MA+, and FA+), divalent cations (e.g., Pb2+ and Sn2+), and halide ions (e.g., Cl−, Br−, and I−), respectively. This large family of materials shows fascinating optoelectronic properties, such as low trap density, high charge carrier mobility, superior absorption coefficient, high color purity, and tunable emission wavelengths, as well as excellent solution-processability, making them ideal for a wide range of optoelectronic applications including solar cells,1–4 light-emitting diodes (LEDs),5–7 photodetectors,8,9etc. Within just ten years of research, the efficiency of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has increased to over 25%,1 and the external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of perovskite LEDs (PeLEDs) boosted from 0.76% to more than 20%.5,6 This encouraging progress promises a bright future for perovskite optoelectronic devices.
There are two major challenges to be addressed in terms of their practical applications, i.e. device stability and up-scalable fabrication. Recently, there have been many studies and reviews focusing on the material and device stability of perovskites;10–15 but there has rarely been a review regarding the potential scalable and patterned fabrication process of perovskite optoelectronic devices.16–18 In the laboratory, scientists typically utilized the convenient spin-coating method to fabricate films. Nevertheless, this process is intrinsically unsuitable for continuous and scalable fabrication. Although blade coating19,20 and slot-die coating21 are used, both these methods cannot directly produce patterned films, which are highly important for all kinds of optoelectronic devices.
Among the potential fabrication strategies, inkjet printing22,23 that directly deposits functional materials onto desired substrates exhibits advanced prospects due to its advantages of excellent material utilization, maskless pattern manufacturing, and cost-effectiveness. By preparing perovskite precursor solutions or quantum dots as the ink, employing an inkjet printer to control the droplet size/trajectory, and carefully manipulating the droplet evaporation and crystallization process, various perovskite patterns and high-performance devices have been reported, for example, high resolution perovskite patterns (<1 μm),24 size-tunable single crystals,25 full color and pixelized PeLEDs,26 high efficiency and stable PSCs,27,28 and flexible photodetectors covering the entire visible range.24,29,30 Although IJP has only been recently employed in the fabrication of perovskite optoelectronic devices, significant progress and very broad applications have been reported, demonstrating its promising bright future. While previous reviews31,32 have covered droplet manipulation and crystallization regulation in piezoelectric inkjet printed MHP films, this review focuses on patterning of MHPs by using different IJP technologies to achieve a higher resolution, a wider ink applicability, and a better film morphology. Meanwhile, the prospects for future development and industrial commercialization challenges of IJP in the fabrication of various MHP devices are discussed.
In this review, we highlight the various possibilities of IJP for HP-based devices and applications. First, IJP techniques for ink design and droplet formation are discussed, followed by morphology control via ink–substrate–environment interactions. The elimination of the coffee ring effect and crystalline control are discussed to enable further optimization of IJP as a process technique for the deposition of MHP semiconductors. Then we summarize the recent progress in printed perovskite optoelectronic devices, including solar cells, LEDs, photodetectors, and other sensors. In each application field, the trends, challenges, and possible solutions are discussed. In the last section, a brief summary of the progress of inkjet printing fabrication of HP-based optoelectronic devices is presented, and an outlook for future research efforts including device performance improvement, industrial-scale fabrication, and broader applications is provided.
2. Principles of inkjet printing technology
For inkjet printing of perovskite optoelectronic devices, four processes are considered as the key steps to be addressed: ink preparation, droplet ejection, evaporation, and crystallization,31 as shown in Fig. 1. Ink preparation is the primary step; its components not only determine the specific functionality of the device but also influence whether the following printing and film forming process can be implemented smoothly. At present, perovskite inks are under rapid development because of the progress in the synthesis of new materials and innovation in printing technologies. Droplet ejection through inkjet printing techniques enables precise control of the pattern size, location, or film thickness, whereas the ink properties (e.g., viscosity, surface tension, and boiling point) are the key to jetting. In the solvent evaporation and film drying process, the difference in the evaporation rate between the droplet edge and center induces uneven flow inside the wet film, which may cause defects like coffee ring, and this should be carefully avoided to ensure the latter crystallization behavior. Different from other electronic or optoelectronic materials, such as metal nanoparticles, metal–organic precursors, or conjugated polymers, in which the drying of the film depends essentially on solvent evaporation, the nucleation and crystallization process from precursor inks is of utmost importance for functional perovskite thin films and later applications. These four parts are inextricably linked; they synergistically determine the resulting semiconductor morphology and the corresponding optoelectronic properties, and the key insights into the ink preparation criterion, droplet ejection process control, droplet evaporation, and crystallization manipulation will be discussed in detail in this section.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the key steps involved in inkjet printing of perovskite microdroplets/thin films. 
2.1. Ink composition
Generally, perovskite inks contain three main components, i.e., perovskite composition, solvents, and additives. These three components are combined to regulate the ink's physical parameters (e.g., surface tension and viscosity) or chemical interactions.
The composition of the perovskite is directly associated with the film formation process, the color/bandgap, and thus the device performance. It can be tuned from pure, such as MAPbI3, FAPbI3 or CsPbI3, to mixed, such as (FAxMAyCsz)Pb(IaBrbClc)3 (where x + y + z = 1 and a + b + c = 1). In the early years, MAPbI3 was the principal material because of its relatively simple nucleation and crystal growth processes. Nevertheless, its low reversible phase transition temperature and low moisture resistance have urged researchers to search for more stable perovskites. FAPbI3 is an appropriate candidate as it exhibits better thermal stability and a more ideal bandgap; however, pure FAPbI3 is not stable in the cubic structure and tends to transform into a hexagonal structure and become non-photoactive. Alloying FA+ with smaller cations (for example, MA+, Cs+ or Rb+), partial replacement of the I− in APbI3 with Cl−33 or Br−,34,35 or changing the precursor stoichiometry36–38 has proven to be effective in improving film quality and device performance. Many variations of A-, B-, and X-site anions are possible, with only two general requirements that should be fulfilled: charge neutrality in the ABX3 unit and the ionic radii of the chosen composition must allow the above coordination.
Solvents determine the precursor solubility of perovskite components, the type of lead-complexes and also the printing/drying behavior in the IJP process. Polar solvents, such as dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), γ-butyrolactone (GBL), N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMA), 2-methoxyethanol (2-ME), N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and acetonitrile (ACN), are the common solvents used for perovskite inks. Besides, some ionic liquid based solvents, such as methylammonium acetate (MAAc), methylammonium formate (MAFa), and butylammonium acetate (BAAc), have been shown to be beneficial for the production of smooth and continuous perovskite thin films with improved phase stability, lower toxicity, and ambient air printing compatibility.39 Generally, solvents with high dielectric constants or Gutmann's donor number (DN)40 will have good solubility for the perovskite precursors.
Incorporating additives into the precursor ink is an effective way to print high-quality perovskite films. Many chemicals, such as Lewis acids/bases,41,42 ammonium43,44 or inorganic salts,45 and polymers,46,47 have been introduced into the perovskite ink to tune its physical parameters (e.g., surface tension and viscosity) or chemical interactions (through hydrogen bonds, coordinate covalent bonds or forming an intermediate complex with perovskite components).
The composition of ink is very flexible and changeable. First, it should satisfy the printing requirements; this part will be discussed in section 2.2. Generally, good printability of the ink is expected for an Ohnesorge (Oh) number ranging from 0.1 to 1,48 and a high-boiling-point solvent or mixture (e.g., >150 °C) is preferred to prevent nozzle clogging. Second, when the droplet is printed onto the substrate, its spreading and evaporation on the substrate under a specific atmosphere need to be carefully designed and controlled. To minimize the coffee ring effect for uniform film formation, adding polymers or other additives, and adopting a mixed solvent to tune the ink's viscosity or surface tension are the common methods. As for nucleation and crystallization, the interaction between the solute and solvent, the formation and evolution of the supersaturated state are the core elements. These parts will be discussed in Section 2.3 and Section 2.4.
2.2. Inkjet printing process
To realize patterning and scaling-up of perovskite materials/devices, the IJP technique has been recently extensively studied and utilized. IJP is a maskless, noncontact, and material-effective technique; it has evolved from graphics printing into reliable and versatile electronics printing based on a drop-by-drop deposition fashion. Generally, the droplets ejected by a nozzle in the printhead can be categorized into a continuous inkjet (CIJ) mode or a drop-on-demand (DOD) manner. The former continuous mode generates a stream of liquid droplets per nozzle and the droplets that pass through an electric field are charged and deflected according to the image information. The CIJ technology is commonly used for high-volume and relatively low-quality fabrication, such as label printing, packaging, or personalized advertising applications.
Nowadays, the DOD system is more widely employed because it offers higher controllability and accuracy of droplet displacement. In a DOD system, the droplets are ejected from the nozzle actuated by a piezoelectric transducer or a thermal resistor only when they are demanded (as shown in Fig. 2(a)). A thermal printhead uses a thin film resistive heater to locally vaporize the ink within a few microseconds, thus forming a fast-expanding bubble which pressurizes the ink to eject from the nozzle. This heat triggered process features simple design and low costs; however, it is restricted to vaporizable inks due to the requirement of bubble formation, making it inappropriate for organic solvent-based inks. The piezoelectric DOD system has been widely employed to bypass this limitation, where a piezoceramic transducer is electrically stimulated to induce mechanical actuation and force the ink to eject from the nozzle. Compared to thermal inkjet, piezoelectric inkjet allows the use of a wider variety of inks as there are no strict requirements regarding the need for a volatile component, temperature stability, and kogation (build-up of dried ink residue at the heating element); thus, recent approaches in inkjet-printed optoelectronics almost exclusively rely on piezoelectric printing, although it is much more expensive than thermal inkjet. The rapid development of inkjet printing technologies provides precise and digital control of the droplet size and trajectory, thus offering accurate deposition of multi-materials at predesigned positions in sequences. This technological breakthrough is emerging in the display industry, where the expertise of inkjet printer manufacturers, such as Kateeva Inc., light emitting materials, such as Merck and DuPont, and display producers, such as JOLED, Samsung, and BOE, are pulled together to realize the next-generation inkjet-printed displays.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of piezoelectric inkjet printing and thermal inkjet printing.49,50 Copyright 2010, Elsevier. Copyright 2011, Institute of Physics. (b) The operating regime for stable operation of drop-on-demand inkjet printing.48 Copyright 2011, American Institute of Physics. (c) Schematic diagram of the EHD printing technology.51 Copyright 2019, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. (d) Full color and flexible perovskite images printed through EHD printing.52,53 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In DOD printing, a droplet is created by applying a short pulse voltage to the piezoelectric printhead when needed. The resulting deformation creates a pressure wave inside the ink channel, and a droplet forms starting from the liquid jet ejection and stretching, pinching off from the nozzle, breaking up into main drops and satellites, and finally merging into the main drop. In order to print high quality images and devices, it is highly important to achieve one single round-shaped droplet per actuation pulse, as any imperfection like satellite droplets or tails could easily lead to the failure of the whole device. For successful drop formation, the physical properties of the inks, such as viscosity, density, and surface tension, have to be within distinct processing windows. The printability of the ink formulation is quantified by the Ohnesorge number (Oh), which accounts for rheological ink properties such as density (ρ), viscosity (η), surface tension (σ), and a given nozzle diameter (d). These parameters are often visualized in the dimensionless Reynolds number (Re) and Weber number (We), derived from the Navier–Stokes flow equation. (1) (2) (3)
Good printability is expected for an Oh number ranging from 0.1 to 1 (or 1 < Z < 10, where Z = 1/Oh48). Oh values that are too high (generally correspond to very high viscosity) will prevent the separation of droplets, while those that are too low more easily form a large number of satellites, as shown in Fig. 2(b). For a typical nozzle with a diameter of 20 μm, the ink viscosity should be within 1–25 mPa s and the surface tension is supposed to be 20–50 mN m−1. Besides, high-boiling-point solvents or mixtures (generally >150 °C), and small particle size (in the order of 1% of the orifice diameter) are preferred to prevent nozzle clogging. In addition to ink printability, the voltage waveform should be carefully chosen (via printhead parameters like rise time, fall time, pulse width, pulse voltage, printing frequency, printhead temperature, etc.) to realize successful droplet ejection. By tuning the ink's physical properties, together with the printing waveform, substrate speed, and number of layers printed, perovskite patterns or films with precise size and thickness can be achieved, and this technique has been widely employed. For example, Chen et al.27 reported a high-throughput, multi-channel drop-on-demand inkjet printer and mixed four solutions in different proportions to screen out the best ratio of the four ions (MA+, FA+, I−, and Br−) for PSCs. Schackmar et al.28 reported the development of PSCs with all-inkjet-printed absorber and charge transport layers, demonstrating PCEs above 17% with low hysteresis. Wang et al.26 printed red, green, and blue (RGB) uniform quasi-2D perovskite films with high photoluminescence quantum yields, and achieved a full-color perovskite matrix device with a 120 pixel-per-inch (PPI) resolution.
Although piezoelectric inkjet printing technology has been extensively utilized in perovskite droplet ejection, it faces challenges in ink viscosity (generally within the range of 1–25 mPa s) and droplet resolution (generally >20 μm, larger than the nozzle diameter). Heating the ink to reduce ink viscosity and using a smaller nozzle to decrease the droplet volume have solved the above problems to some extent, but the promotion is limited.
Recently, electrohydrodynamic (EHD) printing, which utilizes high electric field force to pull the fluids rather than push them like a piezoelectric transducer to form small droplets, offers an attractive solution to micro/nano manufacturing.24,53 The voltage applied between nozzle and substrate leads to the accumulation of mobile ions near the pendent meniscus liquid–air surface, thereby deforming the meniscus into a conical shape known as the Taylor cone, from which a very thin jet can be emitted when the electrostatic stresses overcome the surface tension, and the jet resolution can be even smaller than one thousandth of the nozzle diameter54 (Fig. 2(c)). EHD printing that has unique advantages of high resolution (<1 μm) and flexibility of ink formulation (viscosity 1–25000 cp55) is opening up new ways toward nanotechnology, and it has been recently utilized in micro/nanoscale perovskite pattering. By applying an appropriate pulse voltage to ensure stable drop-on-demand printing, high-resolution and full-color perovskite structures (dots, lines, films) have been successfully printed on rigid or flexible substrates.24,52,56 For example, Zhu et al.52 introduced EHD printing to fabricate in situ crystallized perovskite patterns with high resolution (5 μm), strong PL, and full color via simple precursor mixing perovskite inks without adding an antisolvent (Fig. 2(d)). Later, by using a smaller nozzle, sub-micro scale perovskite patterns have been achieved.57

Table 1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of these three IJP methods. Thermal and piezoelectric printing are industrially efficient technologies with mature printheads (e.g., one printhead has >1024 nozzles); in particular, the application of piezoelectric printing in the display industry is facing technological breakthroughs. However, both the methods have limitations in ink compatibility (viscosity <25 mPa s) and printing resolution (droplet volume ≥1 pL). EHD printing has advantages in ink compatibility and printing resolution; however, its printing efficiency is poor, thus high density, addressable nozzle arrays are urgently needed for mass production.
Table 1 Comparison of different IJP methods




IJP techniques
Inks
Droplet volume
Printing efficiency
Cost
Ref.




Thermal IJP
Vaporizable inks
≥1 pL
High
Low

58



Piezoelectric IJP
Solution with low viscosity
≥1 pL
High
High

58



Electrohydrodynamic IJP
Solution, polymer, melt
<0.01 pL
Low
Low

59





2.3. Coffee-ring elimination during the evaporation process
When the droplet is printed onto the substrate, the droplet–substrate–environment interactions determine the droplet spreading, evaporation, and crystallization process, which is a phase transition that involves a complex process. During droplet evaporation, the elimination of the coffee-ring effect is very important to obtain a uniform thin film. This phenomenon is caused by the higher evaporation rate at a droplet's pinning three-phase line than at its center which induces relative ink movement from the droplet center toward the droplet edge, resulting in a higher material deposition at the droplet's boundary line. The outward capillary flow caused by the uneven evaporation is the indispensable condition for coffee ring formation. Meanwhile, during the evaporation process, the component and temperature difference between the center and the edge will produce a surface tension gradient, which will induce the inward Marangoni flow. Balancing the outward capillary flow and the inward Marangoni flow is the key to eliminating the coffee ring effect. Generally, the coffee-ring effect can be suppressed through one of the three physical strategies: suppressing the capillary flow inside the droplet, increasing the Marangoni flow inward, and controlling the three-phase line slip. Increasing the capillary flow resistance,53,60 adjusting the evaporation conditions of the solution,61,62 and changing the interaction between particles63 can achieve the purpose of inhibiting capillary flow. Meanwhile, adding surfactants64,65 and varying the solvent composition56,66 to change the surface tension of the droplets are the two mainstream methods to increase the inward Marangoni flow. For the control of the three-phase line slip, increasing the hydrophobicity of substrates by chemical or physical modification,67 adopting electrowetting,68 and changing the viscous effect between particles and the substrate69 are the general ways. Based on the above series of optimizations and improvements, uniformly solidified films can be basically achieved.
As for the printing of perovskites, changing the ink formula or the external conditions is the commonly used strategy to suppress the coffee-ring effect. As shown in Fig. 3(a), Li et al.70 added a long chain polymer polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) to the ink to increase its viscosity, finding that a moderate concentration of PVP leads to a higher resistance for particles to flow out, which is beneficial to form a uniform film. However, a too high PVP concentration can more easily form nozzle clogging. Similarly, Duan et al.71 used a UV-curable acrylic resin to restrict the relative movement inside the CsPbBr3 QDs wet film (Fig. 3(b)). Gao et al.72 and Peng et al.73 regulated the ratio of the two different solvents in the ink to change the surface tension, viscosity, and evaporation rate of the ink so as to adjust the inward Marangoni flow. Peng et al.26 optimized the wetting properties of substrates by O2 plasma treatment to change the contact angle of PVK films and achieved full-color and uniform perovskite films with excellent photoluminescence (Fig. 3(c)). Li et al. suppressed the coffee-ring effect via optimizing the thickness of the PVP layer and the temperature of the printing stage.74 Zhang et al.75 utilized EHD printing to achieve perovskite droplets of different sizes and viscosities, and revealed a critical size/viscosity under which the coffee-ring effect can be inhibited. There are so many ways to suppress the coffee-ring effect; finding an appropriate one that satisfies with the printing process and device architecture/performance requirement is crucial.
 Fig. 3  (a) Fluorescence images and the corresponding surface profiles of the printed microdroplet where the DOE volume ratios of the ink are 20 vol%, 30 vol%, 40 vol%, 60 vol%, 70 vol%, and 80 vol%, respectively.72 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the film forming process using thermal-curing and UV-curing inks, respectively. The inset: cross-sectional SEM images of the PeQD films prepared by thermal-curing and UV-curing inks, respectively.71 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (c) PL images and thickness profiles of different drops printed on the PVK substrate with or without surface treatment.26 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
2.4. Nucleation and crystallization control
Compared to conventional solution-processed electronic materials (e.g., organic small-molecules or conjugated polymers), the droplet ejection, spreading, and evaporation processes are similar, while the nucleation and crystallization from the perovskite precursor are unique. In most cases, such as solar cells, the desirable morphology of the perovskite thin-film features a large grain size, a dense film (exhibiting as few pinholes as possible), and a low surface roughness. However, sometimes uniform films with a small grain size or single-crystal perovskite arrays are preferred in lighting or sensing applications. Understanding the inside mechanism of nucleation/crystallization and knowing the regulating methods are important for practical application.
Nucleation is the most important initial phenomenon in thin-film formation; it occurs either in a heterogeneous or a homogeneous manner (Fig. 4(a)). Homogeneous nucleation forms uniform nuclei throughout the parent phase without preferential nucleation sites, while heterogeneous nucleation normally occurs much easier at nucleation sites (i.e., suspended particle or substrate) on surfaces contacting the liquid.76 In the case of perovskite crystal formation, heterogeneous nucleation is likely to dominate the growth mechanism, as nucleation generally occurs on foreign surfaces or via nuclei. The overall nucleation and crystal growth processes of perovskites are generally depicted using the LaMer graph77 (Fig. 4(b)), which describes the change of the concentration of the perovskite precursor as a function of time at a constant and isothermal evaporation rate of the solvent.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation.76 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) LaMer model describing the nucleation and growth of nanocrystals as a function of the reaction time and concentration of precursor atoms.77 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Effects of solvent on the crystallization of inkjet-printed layers. Scale bar 10 μm.78 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) The left column explicitly shows the difference between grain nucleation and growth on wetting and nonwetting HTLs; the right column represents the contact angle of the solution on the substrate and final MAPbI3 film after drying at 105 °C. Scale bar 1 μm.87 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (e) Change of MAPbBr3 crystals on substrates with varying adhesion forces/wetting. The inset images are schematic of perovskite crystallization on high adhesion and low adhesion substrates.25 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons. 
The ink composition and saturation play a critical role in perovskite nucleation and growth, as they can alter the physical/chemical properties of the ink, thus affecting the formation of complexes/colloids and the crystallization quality of the final film. For example, Liu et al. successfully printed MAPbI3 nanowires, microwires, microgrids, and island crystals on a substrate by choosing an appropriate solvent and adjusting the temperature of the substrate (Fig. 4(c)).78 Jeon et al.79 introduced a small amount of N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP) with a high boiling point and extremely low vapor pressure to form homogeneous nucleation sites and slow crystallization growth, thus finally enabling complete coverage of highly smooth film morphologies similar to that obtained by the vacuum deposition method. Corzo et al.80 proposed a universal cosolvent evaporation strategy to convert a wide variety of MHP compounds into single crystals directly on substrates by drying droplets at room temperature. The cosolvent with a low solubility allows the primary process solvent to evaporate first, leading to supersaturation in the bulk solution. Upon nucleation, rapid growth depletes the solute and prevents additional nucleation from occurring, ensuring that each droplet yields a single crystal. Im et al.81 spin-coated MAI with different concentrations on PbI2, revealing that higher concentrations of MAI lead to a slow nucleation rate and the formation of large and few cubes. Additives such as polymers,70,82 excess organometallic halides,83,84 and acids22,85,86 are widely used in inks that have been developed and tested.
The substrate wetting behavior, surface roughness, temperature, and adhesion strongly influence the nucleation and crystallization process. Better wetting would promote heterogeneous nucleation and accelerate the nucleation of the perovskite. However, it is argued that dense nucleation on a wetting surface would limit grain growth, i.e., crystal growth terminates once the grains collide with each other, thus confining the perovskite grain size. Bi et al.87 showed the difference in the nucleation and grain growth process on a wetting and a nonwetting surface as shown in Fig. 4(d). The surface tension dragging force dramatically diminishes if the substrate is nonwetting and smooth, yielding a higher grain boundary mobility, which enables the growth of larger grains. The substrate with a rougher surface favors heterogeneous nucleation on the surface, as it increases the local supersaturation in the solution thus leading to an enhanced nucleation rate.88,89 The substrate temperature also has a big influence on crystallization as it not only improves the wetting of the substrate but also largely increases the rate of solvent evaporation. Liu et al.78 applied in situ heat treatment to control the morphology of the perovskite crystallites by tuning the temperature of the substrate from 25 °C to 75 °C during the printing process. Lower temperatures favor large and sporadic distribution of nano- or micro-dendritic networks, as the precursor has enough time to crystallize and self-assemble at low drying temperatures, whereas island growth is observed at higher temperatures.
Recently, Gu et al.25 printed perovskite precursors on various substrates with different chemical surface modifications and physical roughness regulation at a low temperature of 10 °C, finding that with the reduction of the adhesive force, multiple crystals turned into a single crystal (Fig. 4(e)). For substrates with high adhesion, heterogeneous nucleation started from multiple seed crystals within the deposited droplet, and finally multiple crystals formed within the droplet as the contact line was long-time pinned and no obvious droplet retraction happened. Oppositely, for low adhesion substrates, a receding of the printed droplet is visible as the evaporation proceeds, thus the perovskite molecules inside the droplets gather and form single crystals with a regular shape. This provides a facile, cost-effective, and highly selective patterning method for various kinds of perovskite single crystal arrays.
The IJP process prefers high-boiling-point solvents to prevent nozzle clogging, and it is incompatible with antisolvents. To achieve high-quality and pinhole-free perovskite films, thermal annealing90,91 and vacuum drying92 are generally required to promote the perovskite precursor reaction, perovskite crystallization and grain growth. Humidity control over the perovskite growth kinetics is also a hot topic as hybrid perovskites are extremely moisture sensitive. Yet more and more studies have manifested the positive influence of moisture on the initial growth of perovskite crystals.93
3. Applications
3.1. Solar cells
In a short period of time, perovskite solar cells have shown tremendous potential to be a future dominant photovoltaic technology in the market. They offer high efficiency (>25%4) owing to the ideal material properties (e.g., high ambipolar mobilities, efficient light absorptions, and long charge-carrier diffusion lengths) combined with simple and low-cost solution based fabrication. At present, the main methods for preparing functional layers of solar cells include doctor-blade coating,94 slot-die coating,95 spray coating,96 and inkjet printing.97 Among them, drop-on-demand inkjet printing allows for the direct patterning of functional layers from single droplets to homogenous and compact layers. It is an easily scalable and rapid digital deposition technique that allows for thin film formation with a high material utilization rate.
IJP allows printing of complex PSC systems by one-step or two-step methods. Back in 2014, Yang et al. first reported an inkjet printed PSC using a sequential two-step approach.98 The MAPbI3 perovskite layer was fabricated by first spin-coating of a thin PbI2 layer on top of a compact TiO2 layer, followed by printing of a carbon containing MAI ink, where the carbon serves both as the hole-extraction layer and the counter electrode in the bilayer solar cell. After an annealing step at 100 °C, the PSC showed a high PCE of 11.6%. Later, the first one-step process was introduced by Li et al.99 who printed MAPbI3 precursors prepared with GBL as the solvent onto mesoscopic TiO2. MACl as an additive in the printing solution was found to have a critical impact on the morphology and structure of the perovskite films. The optimized solar cell exhibited a best PCE of 12.3%. After that, inkjet printing of PSCs rapidly gained great attention all over the world.
One of the biggest challenges in inkjet printing of PSCs is to induce fast homogeneous nucleation while delaying the crystal growth of thermodynamically favorable orientation and larger grains. Unlike spin coating which offers centrifugal forces to quickly remove the solvent, inkjet printing generally uses slowly drying solvents to achieve good process stability, and this may be detrimental to perovskite crystallization. In this regard, using functionalized or heated substrates, together with a vacuum annealing process is the common solution. Mathies et al.92 introduced a vacuum annealing step to obtain crystalline, pinhole-free, and smooth perovskite layers, together with a multi-pass printing approach to adjust the film thickness by printing several perovskite layers on top of each other; the recrystallization by redissolving already printed layers benefits large grain size (Fig. 5(a)). As a result, a PCE of 11.3% was achieved by inkjet printing the active perovskite layer, close to that of the spin-coated reference devices of 12.8%. They also studied the increase of the perovskite grain size with decreasing drop spacing and increasing perovskite layer thickness, as illustrated in Fig. 5(b). As the drop spacing was reduced, more solvent had to degas from the wet film in the vacuum chamber, which is expected to lead to an increase in the grain sizes. In 2018, Liang et al. obtained a pure-phase and high-quality inkjet printed MAPbI3 perovskite layer. They used a vacuum-assisted thermal annealing process, resulting in devices with PCEs of 17.04% and 13.37% for active area sizes of 0.04 and 4 cm2, respectively.102 Song et al. introduced an inkjet manipulated approach to control the thin-film perovskite growth in a mesoporous solar cell device structure.100 They systematically studied the wetting behavior of ink droplets on the mesoporous substrate and obtained a large-area PbI2 liquid membrane via exquisite droplet-array design. After the reaction process that transforms PbI2 to MAPbI3, uniform and dense perovskite films with micro-scale large crystal grains have been achieved (Fig. 5(c)), which enables PSCs to high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of 18.64% for a small area (0.04 cm2) and 17.74% for a large area (2.02 cm2). In 2020, the Helge Eggers research group demonstrated high-quality inkjet-printed triple-cation perovskite layers with exceptional thicknesses of >1 μm. The layer thickness increases approximately quadratic with the printing resolution, and the films exhibit columnar perovskite crystal structures over the entire thickness without horizontal grain boundaries (Fig. 5(d)). The inkjet-printed PSCs demonstrated unprecedentedly high PCEs > 21% and stabilized power output efficiencies >18%; so far, this is the highest value of inkjet printed perovskite solar devices101 (Fig. 5(e)).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the presented inkjet printing process with multipass printing, followed by vacuum annealing and thermal annealing.92 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM cross-sectional images of inkjet-printed triple cation perovskite solar cells. The perovskite layer thickness varies with drop spacing.92 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The diagram of large-area PSCs, their typical extracted PV parameters with different active areas (2.02, 1.01, 0.09, and 0.04 cm2), and the changes in efficiency at different locations.100 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Cross-sections of perovskite solar cells, where the perovskite absorber layers were printed with different resolutions.101 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. (e) Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of a champion solar cell with an inkjet-printed triple-cation perovskite absorber layer.101 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. 
A major benefit of IJP is the utilization of multi-head systems to print different perovskite combinatorial compositions wet-in-wet. Therefore, a large number of halide or cation mixtures can be investigated by simply printing different ratios from inks loaded in different printheads. In 2016, Bag et al.103 used a multi-channel inkjet printer to print different ratios of MAI and FAI on top of a spin-coated PbI2 film. This approach gives the possibility of in situ mixing and combinatorial screening of different reagents which is not limited to the physical number of ink cartridges. The combinatorial approach yields a maximum PCE of 11.1% when mixing MA with FA in a ratio of 2:1. Similarly, in 2019, Yang et al.27 reported a high-throughput, multi-channel drop-on-demand printing approach that can automatically fabricate perovskite films with various compositions. They printed four precursors in sequence to form 25 mixed perovskite films and screened out the most suitable composition for PSC applications (Fig. 6(a)–(c)), where the MA-based device was found to exhibit a much higher efficiency (19.0%) than (15.3%) the FA0.75MA0.25 counterpart.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the four-channel non-parallel DOD inkjet printer.27 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (b) Photograph of the four-channel DOD inkjet printer (Jetlab 4, MicroFab Technologies).27 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (c) The compositional matrix with different I/Br and FA/MA ratios; the film samples with different colors and compositions are marked with numbers from 1 to 25.27 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (d) Schematic of the p–i–n-perovskite solar cell architecture with printed absorber and extraction layers.28 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. (e) SEM image of a cross-section through the device (TCP printed with 1000 dots per inch (dpi)).28 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. (f) Maximum power point (MPP) tracking at 25 °C with a stabilized PCE (SPCE) of ≈17%.28 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. 
Several approaches were developed toward fully printed PSCs, where the major issue is the choice of orthogonal solvents that do not dissolve the other layers. In 2021, Schackmar et al. presented PSCs in a p–i–n architecture with all-inkjet-printed absorber and extraction layers,28 which allowed for a scalable and material-efficient deposition (Fig. 6(d) and (e)). They carefully optimized the ink properties, substrate wetting behavior, inkjet parameters, and annealing procedure for each layer. PSCs with such inkjet-printed absorbers and charge carrier extraction layers demonstrate an efficiency of >17% with low hysteresis (Fig. 6(f)). Although printed in ambient atmosphere, the devices showed excellent short-term stability (40 h) even under an elevated temperature (85 °C). As of now, there are only a few reports on inkjet-printed large lab PSCs because there are still challenges to achieve precise control over nozzle jetting and good liquid-membrane transformation. Gao et al.97 successfully realized a large area, all inkjet printed CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells, including the PEN/AgNW bottom electrode, the AgNW top electrode, the PEDOT:PSS hole transport layer, etc. After carefully optimizing the printing speed, substrate temperature, and ethyl acetate steam annealing process, the printed perovskite solar cells with large and uniform grain showed a high energy conversion efficiency of 16.78% with an effective area of 120 cm2. Table 2 summarizes the structure and performance of PSC devices based on inkjet printed perovskite functional layers. Although significant progress has been made, how to achieve larger module sizes with decent efficiency values is still challenging and needs further research.
Table 2 Recent progress of IJP perovskite solar cells




Year
Structure
Solution
PCE/%
Area/cm2
Ref.




2014
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3/C
IPA
11.6
0.15

98



2015
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
GBL
12.3
0.04

99



2016
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PbI/MAI:FAI/PCBM/Ca/Al
IPA
11.1
–

103



2017
ITO/c-TiO2/PbI2/MAI/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
IPA:cyclohexanol:HPA
6.8
0.09

104



2017
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/m-ZrO2/C/MAPbI3-5-AVAI
GBL
9.53
0.16

105



2018
FTO/c-TiO2/Cs0.1(MA0.17FA0.83)0.9 Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
DMF:DMSO
15.3
0.09

106



2018
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
DMF:DMSO
17.74
2.02

100



2018
FTO/c-TiO2/C60/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
DMSO:GBL
17.04
0.04

102



2019
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbBr0.75I2.25/PCBM/BCP/Ag
DMF:DMSO
19
–

27



2019
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/Cs0.1Gua0.05FA0.83MA0.17PbI2.63Br0.37/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
DMF:DMSO:GBL:NMP
14.11
0.064

107



2019
ITO/NiOx/Cs0.11(FA0.83MA0.17)0.89Pb(Br0.15I0.85)3/C60/BCP/Au
DMF:DMSO:GBL
20.7
0.105

108



2020
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/(FA,MA)Pb(I,Br)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
TAA:IPA
13.7
3.5

109



2020
ITO/NiOx/TCP/PCBM/BCP/Au
DMF:DMSO:GBL
17.2
1.21

28



2021
FTO/TiO2/NVC-ink/perovskite/HTM/Au (transparent structure)
DMF:DMSO:GBL
11.2
0.088

110



2021
Panasonic Corporation (Osaka)
—
17.9
804

111



2022
ITO/PTAA/4F-PEA2MA4Pb5I16/BCP/Ag
DMF:DMSO
10.6
1

112





3.2. Lighting or displaying

3.2.1. PeLEDs. 
The narrow emission width of MHPs (≈20nm), compared with those of typical QDs (≈30nm) and organic emitters (>40nm), makes them especially attractive for high-color purity next-generation display applications. Perovskite light emitting diodes (PeLEDs), similar to OLEDs, have a multi-layer structure, which needs different light-emitting materials with uniform, dense thin films in sub-pixels. The key challenge in implementing PeLED matrix devices is the comprehensive optimization of the ink–substrate–environment conditions to achieve high quality perovskite films with a favorable emission structure.
Peng's group73 introduced a trace amount of long-chain ligand of oleylamine (OAm) during the quantum dot purification process to obtain a stable FA0.3Cs0.7PbBr3 perovskite quantum dot ink with optimized octane:dodecane cosolvent. A green electroluminescent matrix device with 120 pixels per inch (PPI) was realized from the ink by using IJP, exhibiting a luminance of 1233 cd m−2, a peak current efficiency of 10.3 cd A−1, and an external quantum efficiency of 2.8%. Furthermore, they26 obtained a narrow phase distribution, high-quality quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D) perovskite film without a “coffee ring” via the introduction of a phenylbutylammonium cation into the perovskite and the use of a vacuum-assisted quick-drying process. Relatively efficient emissions of red, green, and blue (RGB) uniform quasi-2D perovskite films with high photoluminescence quantum yields were achieved as shown in Fig. 7(a). The RGB monochrome perovskite matrix devices with a 120 PPI resolution exhibited maximum external quantum efficiencies of 3.5, 3.4, and 1.0% (for red, green, and blue light emissions, respectively) and a full-color perovskite matrix device with a color gamut of 102% (NTSC 1931). They also obtained a high quality PeQD matrix film by introducing small amounts of polybutene (PB) into PeQDs to improve the printing process.113 The EQE reached 9.6% from the matrix device with 120 PPI. Li et al.74 introduced a PVP layer to tune the perovskite droplet evaporation/crystallization process; meanwhile, the insulating PVP layer suppressed the detrimental leakage current in inkjet-printed PeLEDs. Through dedicatedly optimizing the PVP thickness and substrate temperature, uniform and high-quality perovskite patterns without coffee ring were achieved (Fig. 7(b)). The inkjet-printed PeLEDs (200 PPI) exhibit a brightness of 3640 cd m−2, and an EQE of 9.0%, which is among the best performance of inkjet-printed PeLEDs.
 Fig. 7  (a) Process of inkjet printing, vacuum film drying, and EL image of full-color PeLEDs at 5 V. The scale bar is 100 μm.26 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) Left: schematic diagram of the formation principle of the coffee-ring effect; middle: EQE distribution histogram; and right: original digital photo and EL display of a pine tree.74 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. 


3.2.2 Color conversion. 
Color conversion display applications are mainly based on the photoluminescence properties of quantum dot materials. Generally, complete color conversion takes blue light OLED or blue light LED display as the excitation source, then a green/red light quantum dot color conversion layer is integrated into the display panel. Perovskite materials have recently attracted great attention as a potential color conversion material in the display field. However, how to achieve rarely available color conversion materials, prepare a large film with thick and uniform patterns, and avoid severe crosstalk effects among adjacent pixels are still challenging. In particular, color conversion applications require a much higher requirement of film thickness, which is difficult using traditional IJP as QD ink is mainly composed of volatile solvents, and it inevitably becomes thin and nonuniform (coffee ring) during the solvent removal process.
Duan et al.71 prepared a patterned CsPbBr3 quantum dot color conversion layer by using inkjet-printing and UV-curing methods. The inkjet-printed film with a 6 μm thickness exhibits very uniform morphology without the coffee-ring effect and highly efficient blue-to-green photoconversion performance. They also demonstrated a 6.6 in. active matrix perovskite quantum dot display prototype by using the blue OLED backlight with a 384 × 300 resolution for the first time. Subsequently, Yin et al.114 were the first to report a full-color micro-LED display prototype by combining rationally designed blue micro-LED backlight with CsPbBr3 perovskite and CdSe QDs as green and red CCLs, respectively (Fig. 8). By adopting a bottom-emitting backlight design, the risk of crosstalk among various pixels was effectively eliminated. Meanwhile, the color gamut of the fabricated display can reach as high as 129% of the National Television Standards Committee (NTSC). This full-color display utilized the potential of perovskite materials with high color purity and LEDs with high efficiency and stability, demonstrating the great potential of perovskites as CCLs for full-color display applications.
 Fig. 8  Schematic structure and display performance of the fabricated prototype. (a) and (b) Schematic illustration and cross-section structure diagram of the prototype. (c)–(e) Red, green, and blue images of the Peking University logo. (f) Strawberry image manifested by this CCL-incorporated micro-LED display. (g) The color gamut of BT.2020, NTSC standard, the demonstrated module, and conventional micro-LED display purely based on RGB LED chips.114 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. 


3.2.3. Anti-counterfeiting. 
Recently, the growing demand for optical anticounterfeiting technology has motivated intensive research on newly emerging halide perovskite QDs. However, how to improve the material stability, fluorescence efficiency and patterning flexibility of perovskite inks is still a great challenge. Wu et al.116 doped manganese ions into CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) PeQDs to enhance their stability in the ambient air and thermal stability. The inks could be printed on paper, PET, and banknotes to obtain various designable patterns, which emitted strong fluorescence under both 365 and 254 nm UV lights, providing dual-modal anticounterfeiting. Zhang et al.115 synthesized core–shell CsPbBr3/LP/SiO2 QDs by adding surfactants phosphatidylcholine and tetramethoxysilane into the CsPbBr3 PeQDs ink to prevent water vapor erosion (Fig. 9(a)). Interestingly, even after being crudely treated with water-soaking, heating/cooling cycling, and reversible UV light switching, the anticounterfeiting effect of CsPbBr3/LP/SiO2 QD composites can be efficiently sustained (Fig. 9(b)). Yakunin et al.57 presented an electrohydrodynamically printed unicolour multi-fluorescent-lifetime security tag system composed of lifetime-tunable lead-halide perovskite nanocrystals that can be deciphered with both the existing time-correlated single-photon counting fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy and a novel time-of-flight prototype (Fig. 9(c)). It is worth mentioning that they have realized the printing of submicron dot matrix via EHD technology.
 Fig. 9  (a) Flow chart of the preparation of CsPbBr3/LP/SiO2 QD composites.115 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Luminescent patterns made using the QD composites via an inkjet printer, and their fascinating performance with reversible UV light switching, water-soaking, and heating/cooling cycling.115 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Left: the EHD printing setup; middle: an example of the high-resolution printed pattern (∼12000 dpi, the distance between dots is 2 μm, the scale bar is 20 μm); right: lifetime pseudo-colour map of FLQR as recorded by the ToF-FLI imager, and black-and-white machine-readable QR code after binary-discretization.57 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 


3.2.4. Laser. 
In the last two decades, the development of solution processed lasers was centered around gain materials made of conjugated polymers and colloidal quantum dots. However, they suffer from continuous wave operation, direct electrical pumping and long term stability. Metal halide perovskites have emerged as a new class of high-performance solution processed semiconductors which gives hope to solve the above challenges. In 2018, Mathies et al.117 demonstrated for the first time inkjet-printed perovskite lasers. By controlling the GBL/DMSO ratio, together with printing distance and vacuum drying conditions, a smooth and structured CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer with 180 nm thickness and 7 nm surface roughness was printed on a patterned PET substrate with nanoimprinted polymer gratings (Fig. 10(a)–(c)). The optimized perovskite gain layer emits laser light on a PET substrate with a line width of 0.4 nm and a laser threshold of 270 kW cm−2. Song et al.25 systematically examined the influence of different substrates and temperatures on the crystallization of the perovskite and the prepared perovskite single crystal arrays on different substrates with high throughput. The single crystal perovskite prepared by IJP has excellent laser performance with a threshold of 15.6 μJ cm−2 and a quality factor of up to 863. Furthermore, they combined the inkjet-printed perovskite seeds on substrates together with a vapor-phase strategy to inhibit random nucleation, and monolithically integrated CsPbBr3 microplate arrays on substrates for the fabrication of high-performance lasers and photodetectors.118 As schematically presented in Fig. 10(d), a femtosecond laser beam (400 nm, 1 kHz) was focused on the entire microplate to ensure a homogeneous excitation. When the excitation fluences exceeded the threshold (p > 4.0 μJ cm−2), strong laser emissions developed as a set of sharp peaks (Fig. 10(e)). Simultaneously, the FWHM narrowed down significantly to approximately 0.08 nm at ≈545 nm with a Q factor of up to 6806 (Fig. 10(f)). This strategy provided a facile approach to fabricating high-quality perovskite single crystal array with controllable size and location, which offered new opportunities for the scalable production of integrated optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the inkjet printing process on a patterned substrate.117 Copyright 2018, Optica Publishing Group. (b) Image of a printed perovskite layer on a structured PET substrate.117 Copyright 2018, Optica Publishing Group. (c) Surface roughness of the printed CH3NH3PbI3 film on a rigid glass substrate with different ink concentrations, ink compositions, and vacuum drying times.117 Copyright 2018, Optica Publishing Group. (d) Schematic of CsPbBr3 microplates on silicon with 400 nm femtosecond laser excitation.118 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. (e) Emission intensity and FWHM as a function of pump fluence.118 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. (f) Lorentz fitting of the lasing peak.118 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. 

3.3. Photodetectors
Photodetectors can convert light signals into electrical signals like photocurrent or photovoltage, and are of great importance in various kinds of scientific and industrial application scenarios such as imaging, environmental monitoring, optical communications, and space exploration. Traditional photodetectors are mainly made from Si, Si/Ge heterojunctions, and III–V alloys, requiring thick bulk crystals to realize considerable responsivities, thus having some disadvantages of being frangible and costly, and having processing difficulties in flexible applications. Excellent properties peculiar to perovskites including broad-band absorption, fast response, high charge carrier mobility, and solution-process compatibility have attracted the interest of researchers all over the world in photodetectors.

3.3.1. Visible light photodetectors. 
Visible light photodetectors play a vital role in artificial vision, fluorescence biomedical imaging, optical communication, spectrum analysis, etc. Alamri et al.29 realized fully inkjet-printed photodetectors using a graphene/perovskite/graphene heterostructure. By sequentially printing graphene electrodes and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films on a substrate, under appropriate annealing conditions, the as-printed photodetector exhibited a high responsivity and detectivity (0.53 A W−1, 3.4 × 1010 Jones) over the whole visible range (400 nm to 700 nm). Liu et al.78 successfully printed MAPbI3 nanowires, microwires, microgrids, and island crystals on the substrate by choosing an appropriate solvent and adjusting the temperature of the substrate. The as-fabricated microwire-based photodetectors exhibited a switching ratio of 16000%, a responsivity of 1.2 A W−1, and a normalized detectivity of 2.39 × 1012 Jones at a light power density of 0.1 mW cm−2. Gu et al.119 reported a facile seed printing approach to selectively create millimeter-sized perovskite single crystal films on various substrates. The thickness and size of the perovskite single crystal films could be easily tuned; moreover, they can be directly printed for scalable fabrication of photodetectors and effective image sensors as shown in Fig. 11(a). Furthermore, to satisfy the requirements of flexible application scenarios, Kaul et al.30 printed 2D layered perovskites (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 2, 3, and 4) on polyimide (PI) substrates. The inkjet-printed PD (n = 4) on flexible PI substrates exhibited a high responsivity and detection rate (0.17 A W−1 and 3.7 × 1012 Jones) at low light intensity (0.6 mW cm−2); meanwhile, the strain-dependent tests were carried out to validate its mechanical durability. To realize high-resolution, flexible, and full-color imaging, Wang et al.24 first utilized EHD printing to directly integrate various spectral-response perovskite films MAPbIxBryCl3−x into a pixelized full-color photodetector (Fig. 11(b)). EHD printing, together with ionic liquid methylammonium acetate (MAAc) as a solvent, enables high resolution micro/nanopatterning of 1 μm perovskite dot arrays. Furthermore, the printed photodetector showed excellent R and D* values (14.97 A W−1 and 1.41 × 1012 Jones, respectively), superior flexibility under wide bending angles (0–150°), and clear current mapping for full-color imaging.
 Fig. 11  (a) Image sensor based on the perovskite single-crystal film. Upper: optical image of electrode arrays on the perovskite single-crystal film; middle: optical image of number 10; below: photocurrent intensity profile of optical image 10.119 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Schematic illustration and photographs of a flexible, full-color perovskite image photodetector, and its normalized current mapping result with patterned illumination through a shadow mask.24 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. 


3.2.2. X-Ray photodetectors. 
X-Ray photodetectors are essential for a large variety of practical applications such as medical imaging, diagnostic radiology, security inspection system, non-destructive testing, and nuclear research. There are currently two methods to detect X-rays,120,121 one is utilizing scintillators to convert X-ray photons to lower-energy photons, and then detect them using a matching photodetector. The other one uses semiconductors to convert X-ray photons to electrical signals directly. Recently, perovskites have been revealed as a promising candidate for the detection of X-rays in both forms,122,123 owing to their big X-ray stopping power,124 high carrier mobility,125 and low-cost fabrication.
Liu et al.126 demonstrated high performance and flexible X-ray detector arrays fabricated by inkjet printing of CsPbBr3 perovskite QDs (Fig. 12(a) and (b)). The CsPbBr3 QDs printed with a thickness of only 20 nm and surface roughness of around 4 nm in an Au/CsPbBr3/Au structure can sense a very low X-ray dose rate (17.2 μGyair s−1) with a high sensitivity of 1450 μC Gyair−1 cm−2 under a low bias voltage of only 0.1 V (Fig. 12(c) and (d)). Meanwhile, a flexible X-ray detector on the PET substrate shows only a current degradation of 12% after 200 bending cycles. This method enables the scalable production of large-area detector arrays with excellent soft X-ray detection capabilities. Subsequently, Mescher et al.127 used IJP technology to deposit Cs0.1(FA0.83 MA0.17)0.9 Pb (Br0.17I0.83)3 MHP films with a thickness of around 3.7 μm to prepare a flexible X-ray detector (Fig. 12(e)). Under a low working voltage of 0.1 V, the X-ray sensitivity is 59.9 μC (Gyair cm2)−1 when exposed to 70 kVp X-rays. Furthermore, the device demonstrates X-ray imaging capability as shown in Fig. 12(f).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the key fabrication procedures for perovskite-based devices via inkjet printing.126 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (b) Photography of the flexible device under bending.126 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (c) X-Ray photocurrents and sensitivity as a function of the dose rate with a 0.1 V bias voltage.126 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (d) I–V curve under X-rays with different dose rates with a 0.1 V bias voltage.126 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (e) Photograph of a flexible inkjet-printed TCP X-ray detector.127 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) Photograph of a pneumatic connector and a screw fixed to a sample stage and the corresponding X-ray image that is measured with a flexible triple cation perovskite X-ray detector.127 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
More and more application scenarios put forward requirements for photodetectors with a high resolution, a broad range of spectral detection,128–130 and excellent performances such as detectivity,87,131 stability,132,133 and response speed.126,131 Scientific breakthroughs in printed perovskite photodetectors are continuing, and lots of urgent problems are supposed to be addressed in the next-generation printed perovskite photodetectors with miniaturization, flexibility, and large-area fabrication, while with high-performance materials, novel structures, excellent device performance, and new applications.

4. Summary and outlook
In this review, we highlight the whole process of ink preparation–droplet ejection–evaporation–nucleation/crystallization and summarize the recent advances of the IJP techniques in the fabrication of MHP optoelectronic devices, including solar cells, LEDs, and photodetectors. By preparing perovskite precursor solutions or quantum dots as the ink, employing an inkjet printer to control the droplet size/trajectory, and carefully manipulating the droplet evaporation and crystallization process, a wide range of 2D and 3D structures with different crystal structures and defined optoelectronic properties have been reported. This ranges from large-area uniform and pinhole-free layers utilized for photovoltaic devices, high resolution micro/nano patterns for light-emitting devices, and single crystal arrays for photo detective sensors, even multicolor devices, band-gradient patterns, nano level structures, and complex 3D structures are within reach. IJP offers a new opportunity for complex pattern formation; meanwhile, it is competitive with other industrially relevant deposition techniques such as flexo printing and slot die coating by using a high density nozzle array, proving that IJP is a rather facile, cheap, fast, and efficient technique and has great potential in the manufacturing of various MHP optoelectronic devices. In spite of the considerable advantages, future advances still need to be further promoted.
(1) Further investigation of the combinational effect of ink–substrate–environment on the final MHP film morphology: unlike spin coating, which provides centrifugal force for rapid solvent removal, IJP typically uses slowly drying solvents to achieve good process stability, which may be detrimental to uniform crystallization. To date, the PCE of inkjet-printed solar cells has gradually caught up with that fabricated by spin coating (∼21%101vs. ∼25%4); however, the EQE of inkjet-printed PeLEDs is still far behind (<10%74,113vs. >20%5). To improve the device efficiency, systematic studies that establish the relationship between the film morphologies and the ink–substrate–environment conditions would be of great value. As this process is very complex and contains many variables (e.g., ink composition/viscosity/surface tension/boiling point, substrate wettability/roughness, temperature/humidity/vacuum degree, as we discussed in Section 2), orthogonal experimental design, online/offline observation/characterization and theoretical verification are important to help us better understand this problem, particularly the online observation and simulation verification, which have not been widely used in MHP device fabrication. In situ observation using a high-speed microscope or a white light interferometry, together with advanced image processing algorithm, is an efficient way to characterize the evaporation/crystallization process of the patterned liquid films, and evaluate the uniformity or 3D morphological changes within/between pixels during the evaporation process. Based on the experimental observations, theoretical calculations or simulation models about the evaporation/nucleation/crystallization mechanism can be revised, thus giving more guidance to the experimental design, like the coordination of solvents and precursor content, the substrate wetting/adhesion, and the annealing post-treatment.
(2) Upscaling fabrication of MHP devices with high performance: IJP has shown technological breakthroughs in the OLED display industry; however, its research in MHP optoelectronic devices has just begun. How to achieve module sizes beyond 100 cm2 or even larger with decent efficiency values is still challenging. First, large area deposition needs large scale nozzle array to enhance the printing efficiency. For example, for flat panel displays in generation 6 (G6, 185 cm × 150 cm), the time taken for IJP of one layer in the production line is less than 120 s; this requires over thousands of nozzles, and over one billion droplets printed onto the substrate. How to deposit these droplets on the desired location with high precision and efficiency put forward strict requirements for the movement platform, printhead array and drive control system. Second, manufacturing errors inevitably exist among these thousands of nozzles, which will lead to ejection volume difference; how to compensate the volume deviation to ensure the film uniformity in the whole panel (e.g., >95%) is a very difficult task. Some companies tried to detect the ejection volume of each nozzle and utilize smart hybrid printing algorithms (i.e., a pixel pit is composed of large/small droplets with different volumes from different nozzles) to improve the uniformity, but this technology has not yet achieved industrial application; how to reconcile the efficiency and precision in printing is still challenging. Third, how to avoid defects (e.g., coffee ring and mura) in the process of droplet drying and film formation is a challenging task. Heating and vacuum drying are often used in perovskite film formation. Evaporation/crystallization occurs quickly/first at the pattern edge, or the area printed earlier; this nonuniformity leads to defects that are unacceptable in practical manufacturing. Guarantee the environment uniformity in the large chamber is critical.
(3) Broaden the applications of IJP in MHP device fabrication: as we discussed above, within over 10 years of research, a wide range of 2D/3D structures and various optoelectronic devices have been reported. To further broaden the applications of IJP, the following aspects can be considered: 1. EHD printing is capable of patterning conductive nanoparticles or polymer nanofibers with a resolution of lower than 50 nm,134,135 but the highest resolution for printed MHP is still in the sub-micro range.57 Further improvement of the printing resolution from sub-micro to nanoscale will provide more possibilities for the fabrication of nano-optoelectronic devices. Meanwhile, printing MHP devices with arbitrary complex 3D structures (rather than a simple pillar) is also promising. 2. IJP has been reported in the fabrication of mm-level single crystal films,119 how to achieve larger films with precisely controlled crystal orientation is essential for high-performance detection devices. 3. Some new applications of IJP need to be explored in UV/NIR detections, or implantable bioelectronics. Until now, IJP printed photodetectors are all in the range of visible light or X-rays, and IJP-based MHP devices have not been explored in implantable bioelectronics (like implantable artificial retina) due to its poor biocompatibility and stability in biological tissue environment.
Author contributions
Yongqing Duan: conceptualization, investigation, methodology, formal analysis, data curation, and writing – original draft. Guannan Zhang: investigation, validation, and writing – review & editing. Rui Yu: investigation, validation, and writing – review & editing. Hanyuan Zhang: investigation, validation, and writing – review & editing. Guangda Niu: investigation, validation, supervision, and writing – review & editing. YongAn Huang: investigation, validation, and supervision. Zhouping Yin: investigation, validation, and supervision.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2018YFA0703200), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52075209), the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (2020CFA028), and the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by China Association for Science and Technology (2021QNRC001). The authors would also like to thank Flexible Electronics Manufacturing Laboratory in Comprehensive Experiment Center for advanced manufacturing and equipment technology.
References
F. Sahli, J. Werner, B. A. Kamino, M. Bräuninger, R. Monnard, B. Paviet-Salomon, L. Barraud, L. Ding, J. J. Diaz Leon and D. Sacchetto, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 820–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Chua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu, F. Rotermund, Y.-K. Kim, C. S. Moon, N. J. Jeon and J.-P. Correa-Baena, Nature, 2021, 590, 587–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, D. Walter, Y. Ren, M. Tebyetekerwa, Y. Wu, T. Duong, Q. Lin, J. Li, T. Lu and M. A. Mahmud, Science, 2021, 371, 390–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Seo, H. Lu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, Y. Yang, M. A. Hope, F. T. Eickemeyer and M. Kim, Nature, 2021, 592, 381–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Kim, S. Kim, A. Kakekhani, J. Park, J. Park, Y.-H. Lee, H. Xu, S. Nagane, R. B. Wexler and D.-H. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lin, J. Xing, L. N. Quan, F. De Arquer, X. Gong, J. Lu, L. Xie, W. Zhao, D. Zhang and C. Yan, Nature, 2018, 562, 245–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, N. Wang, H. Tian, J. Guo, Y. Wei, H. Chen, Y. Miao, W. Zou, K. Pan and Y. He, Nature, 2018, 562, 249–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, C. Gong, H. Gao, W. Wen, Y. Gong, X. Jiang, B. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Wu and H. Fu, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 404–410 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, S. N. Obaid and L. Lu, Opt. Mater. Express, 2019, 9, 3843–3856 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kaiser, D. Ricciarelli, E. Mosconi, A. A. Alothman, F. Ambrosio and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 13, 2321–2329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hieulle, X. Wang, C. Stecker, D.-Y. Son, L. Qiu, R. Ohmann, L. K. Ono, A. Mugarza, Y. Yan and Y. Qi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3515–3523 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Mahmud, T. Duong, J. Peng, Y. Wu, H. Shen, D. Walter, H. T. Nguyen, N. Mozaffari, G. D. Tabi and K. R. Catchpole, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2009164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lv, W. Gao, Y. Liu, H. Dong, N. Sun, T. Niu, Y. Xia, Z. Wu, L. Song and C. Ran, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 65, 371–404 CrossRef .
M. K. Rao, D. Sangeetha, M. Selvakumar, Y. Sudhakar and M. Mahesha, Sol. Energy, 2021, 218, 469–491 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, L. Lei, J. Mendes and F. So, J. Phys.: Mater., 2020, 3, 012002 CAS .
Z. Li, T. R. Klein, D. H. Kim, M. Yang, J. J. Berry, M. F. Van Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jeong, H. Han and C. Park, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Wu, T. Liu and R. Zhu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800110 CrossRef .
S. Chu, W. Chen, Z. Fang, X. Xiao, Y. Liu, J. Chen, J. Huang and Z. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–9 CrossRef .
C. Li, J. Yin, R. Chen, X. Lv, X. Feng, Y. Wu and J. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6345–6351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Whitaker, D. H. Kim, B. W. Larson, F. Zhang, J. J. Berry, M. F. Van Hest and K. Zhu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2442–2449 RSC .
F. Mathies, E. J. List-Kratochvil and E. L. Unger, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 1900991 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nayak, S. Mohanty, S. K. Nayak and A. Ramadoss, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8771–8795 RSC .
Q. Wang, G. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Duan, Z. Yin and Y. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100857 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gu, K. Wang, H. Li, M. Gao, L. Li, M. Kuang, Y. S. Zhao, M. Li and Y. Song, Small, 2017, 13, 1603217 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, D. Li, L. Mu, M. Li, Y. Luo, B. Zhang, C. Mai, B. Guo, L. Lan and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 41773–41781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, L. Zhang, L. Yan, X. Xiang, X. Zhao, S. Yang and B. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905487 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schackmar, H. Eggers, M. Frericks, B. S. Richards, U. Lemmer, G. Hernandez-Sosa and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 6, 2000271 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Alamri, S. Leung, M. Vaseem, A. Shamim and J.-H. He, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2019, 66, 2657–2661 CAS .
M. Min, R. F. Hossain, N. Adhikari and A. B. Kaul, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10809–10819 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, H. Wu, J. Ma, P. Li, Z. Gu, S. Zang, L. Han, Y. Zhang and Y. Song, CCS Chem., 2022, 4, 1465–1485 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, J. Yuan, S. Shen, M. Gao, A. S. Chesman, H. Yin, J. Cheng, Q. Zhang and D. Angmo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703704 CrossRef .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS .
L. Atourki, M. Bernabé, M. Makha, K. Bouabid, M. Regragui, A. Ihlal, M. Abd-lefdil and M. Mollar, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 1440–1449 RSC .
A. Swarnkar, W. J. Mir and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 286–289 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, J. Seo, J. S. Yun, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, M. A. Green and J. Seidel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502104 CrossRef .
B.-w Park, N. Kedem, M. Kulbak, D. Y. Lee, W. S. Yang, N. J. Jeon, J. Seo, G. Kim, K. J. Kim and T. J. Shin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, Q. Dong, M. K. Wong, A. B. Djurišić, A. Ng, Z. Ren, Q. Shen, C. Surya, W. K. Chan and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502206 CrossRef .
L. Chao, T. Niu, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 1059–1070 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hamill Jr, J. Schwartz and Y.-L. Loo, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 92–97 CrossRef .
B. Wilk, S. Öz, E. Radicchi, F. Ünlü, T. Ahmad, A. P. Herman, F. Nunzi, S. Mathur, R. Kudrawiec and K. Wojciechowski, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 3920–3930 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, A. Wang, X. Deng, L. Xie, A. Xiao, C. Li, Y. Xiang, T. Li, L. Ding and F. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12201–12225 RSC .
X. Li, M. Ibrahim Dar, C. Yi, J. Luo, M. Tschumi, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, H. Han and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 703–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, Q. Tai, P. You, G. Tang, T. Wang, N. Wang and F. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26580–26585 RSC .
Z. Xu, R. Chen, Y. Wu, R. He, J. Yin, W. Lin, B. Wu, J. Li and N. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26849–26857 RSC .
J. E. Kim, S. S. Kim, C. Zuo, M. Gao, D. Vak and D. Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1809194 CrossRef .
A. Giuri, S. Masi, A. Listorti, G. Gigli, S. Colella, C. E. Corcione and A. Rizzo, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 400–408 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. McKinley and M. Renardy, Phys. Fluids, 2011, 23, 127101 CrossRef .
H. Wijshoff, Phys. Rep., 2010, 491, 77–177 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, R. Shen, B. Qian, L. Li, W. Wang, G. Lin, X. Zhang, P. Li and Y. Xie, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 135302 CrossRef .
Y. Pan and L. Zeng, Micromachines, 2019, 10, 94 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhu, Y. Duan, N. Liu, H. Li, J. Li, P. Du, Z. Tan, G. Niu, L. Gao and Y. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903294 CrossRef .
H. Li, N. Liu, Z. Shao, H. Li, L. Xiao, J. Bian, J. Li, Z. Tan, M. Zhu and Y. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 14867–14873 RSC .
L. Jiang, Y. Wang, X. Wang, F. Ning, S. Wen, Y. Zhou, S. Chen, A. Betts, S. Jerrams and F.-L. Zhou, Composites, Part A, 2021, 147, 106461 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, W. Yang, Y. Duan, Q. Nie, Z. Shao, Z. Yin and Y. Huang, Phys. Fluids, 2021, 33, 081704 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Duan, Z. Shao, G. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Huang and Z. Yin, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000401 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yakunin, J. Chaaban, B. M. Benin, I. Cherniukh, C. Bernasconi, A. Landuyt, Y. Shynkarenko, S. Bolat, C. Hofer and Y. E. Romanyuk, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-S. Kwon, M. K. Rahman, T. H. Phung, S. D. Hoath, S. Jeong and J. S. Kim, Flexible Printed Electron., 2020, 5, 043003 CAS .
M. S. Onses, E. Sutanto, P. M. Ferreira, A. G. Alleyne and J. A. Rogers, Small, 2015, 11, 4237–4266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Bigioni, X.-M. Lin, T. T. Nguyen, E. I. Corwin, T. A. Witten and H. M. Jaeger, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 265–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Keseroğlu and M. Çulha, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 360, 8–14 CrossRef .
D. Soltman and V. Subramanian, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2224–2231 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Yunker, T. Still, M. A. Lohr and A. Yodh, Nature, 2011, 476, 308–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sempels, R. De Dier, H. Mizuno, J. Hofkens and J. Vermant, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
T. Still, P. J. Yunker and A. G. Yodh, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 4984–4988 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, S. Jeong, B. K. Park and J. Moon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 264101 CrossRef .
Y.-F. Li, Y.-J. Sheng and H.-K. Tsao, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 7802–7811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Eral, D. M. Augustine, M. H. Duits and F. Mugele, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 4954–4958 RSC .
H.-Y. Ko, J. Park, H. Shin and J. Moon, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4212–4215 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, F. Li, L. Qiu, K. Yang, Q. Li, X. Zheng, H. Hu, T. Guo, C. Wu and T. W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2042–2049 CAS .
M. Duan, Z. Feng, Y. Wu, Y. Yin, Z. Hu, W. Peng, D. Li, S. j Chen, C. Y. Lee and A. Lien, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900779 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gao, J. Yan, Z. Wang, P. Liu, D. Wu, X. Tang, F. Fang, S. Ding, X. Li and J. Sun, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 2569–2577 RSC .
D. Li, J. Wang, M. Li, G. Xie, B. Guo, L. Mu, H. Li, J. Wang, H. L. Yip and J. Peng, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000099 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Chen, D. Liang, J. Zang, Z. Song, L. Cai, Y. Zou, X. Wang, Y. Wang and P. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2100553 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, H. Zhang, R. Yu, Y. Duan, Y. Huang and Z. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 14712–14720 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, O. S. Game, S. Pang and N. P. Padture, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4827–4839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jung, S.-G. Ji, G. Kim and S. I. Seok, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2011–2038 RSC .
Y. Liu, F. Li, C. Perumal Veeramalai, W. Chen, T. Guo, C. Wu and T. W. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11662–11668 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Jeon, S. Lee, R. Kang, J.-E. Kim, J.-S. Yeo, S.-H. Lee, S.-S. Kim, J.-M. Yun and D.-Y. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
D. Corzo, T. Wang, M. Gedda, E. Yengel, J. I. Khan, R. Li, M. R. Niazi, Z. Huang, T. Kim and D. Baran, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2109862 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-H. Im, I.-H. Jang, N. Pellet, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 927–932 CrossRef CAS .
E. Parvazian, A. Abdollah-zadeh, M. Dehghani and N. Taghavinia, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6209–6217 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dagar, K. Hirselandt, A. Merdasa, A. Czudek, R. Munir, F. Zu, N. Koch, T. Dittrich and E. L. Unger, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900088 CrossRef .
K. M. Boopathi, R. Mohan, T.-Y. Huang, W. Budiawan, M.-Y. Lin, C.-H. Lee, K.-C. Ho and C.-W. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1591–1597 RSC .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Song and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8179–8183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
P. Grosfils and J. F. Lutsko, Crystals, 2021, 11, 4 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, B. Ding, Q.-Q. Chu, G.-J. Yang, M. Wang, C.-X. Li and C.-J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, K. S. Oh, Y. Jo, H. Yoon, K.-H. Kim, H. Lee, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6057–6064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, Z. Hu, J. Xu, K. Zhang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 377–382 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mathies, T. Abzieher, A. Hochstuhl, K. Glaser, A. Colsmann, U. W. Paetzold, G. Hernandez-Sosa, U. Lemmer and A. Quintilla, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 19207–19213 RSC .
K. K. Bass, R. E. McAnally, S. Zhou, P. I. Djurovich, M. E. Thompson and B. C. Melot, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15819–15822 RSC .
Y. Lao, W. Luo, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Wang, B. Qu, L. Xiao and Z. Chen, Org. Electron., 2022, 100, 106374 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Dagar, O. Shargaieva, M. A. Flatken, H. Köbler, M. Fenske, C. Schultz, B. Stegemann, J. Just and D. M. Többens, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003460 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, F. Zhang, C. Xiao, S. J. Heo, J. K. Park, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu and S. H. Im, Joule, 2021, 5, 481–494 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gao and J. Meng, Sol. Energy, 2021, 230, 598–604 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13239–13243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-G. Li, K.-J. Jiang, M.-J. Su, X.-P. Cui, J.-H. Huang, Q.-Q. Zhang, X.-Q. Zhou, L.-M. Yang and Y.-L. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9092–9097 RSC .
P. Li, C. Liang, B. Bao, Y. Li, X. Hu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, F. Li, G. Shao and Y. Song, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
H. Eggers, F. Schackmar, T. Abzieher, Q. Sun, U. Lemmer, Y. Vaynzof, B. S. Richards, G. Hernandez-Sosa and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903184 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, P. Li, H. Gu, Y. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Song, G. Shao, N. Mathews and G. Xing, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700217 CrossRef .
M. Bag, Z. Jiang, L. A. Renna, S. P. Jeong, V. M. Rotello and D. Venkataraman, Mater. Lett., 2016, 164, 472–475 CrossRef CAS .
T. Abzieher, F. Mathies, M. Hetterich, A. Welle, D. Gerthsen, U. Lemmer, U. W. Paetzold and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2017, 214, 1700509 CrossRef .
S. G. Hashmi, D. Martineau, X. Li, M. Ozkan, A. Tiihonen, M. I. Dar, T. Sarikka, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Paltakari and P. D. Lund, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1600183 CrossRef .
F. Mathies, H. Eggers, B. S. Richards, G. Hernandez-Sosa, U. Lemmer and U. W. Paetzold, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1834–1839 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Huckaba, Y. Lee, R. Xia, S. Paek, V. C. Bassetto, E. Oveisi, A. Lesch, S. Kinge, P. J. Dyson and H. Girault, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 317–324 CrossRef CAS .
T. Abzieher, S. Moghadamzadeh, F. Schackmar, H. Eggers, F. Sutterlüti, A. Farooq, D. Kojda, K. Habicht, R. Schmager and A. Mertens, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802995 CrossRef .
M. Buffiere, K. Ali, E. Fares, A. Samara, A. R. Shetty, O. Al Hassan and A. Belaidi, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 2000330 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Pendyala, S. Magdassi and L. Etgar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 30524–30532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, D. Zhang, K. S. Lim, Y. Hu, Y. Rong, A. Mei, N. G. Park and H. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008621 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wilk, S. Sahayaraj, M. Ziółek, V. Babu, R. Kudrawiec and K. Wojciechowski, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2022, 2200606 CrossRef .
D. Li, J. Wang, M. Li, B. Guo, L. Mu, Y. Luo, Y. Xiao, C. Mai, J. Wang and J. Peng, Materials Futures, 2022, 1, 015301 CrossRef .
Y. Yin, Z. Hu, M. U. Ali, M. Duan, L. Gao, M. Liu, W. Peng, J. Geng, S. Pan and Y. Wu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000251 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Z. Shi, S. Li, Z. Ma, Y. Li, L. Wang, D. Wu, Y. Tian, G. Du and X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28013–28022 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, W. Yao, Q. Tian, M. Li, B. Tian, L. Liu, Z. Wu and W. Wu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800150 CrossRef .
F. Mathies, P. Brenner, G. Hernandez-Sosa, I. A. Howard, U. W. Paetzold and U. Lemmer, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, A144–A152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gu, Z. Zhou, Z. Huang, K. Wang, Z. Cai, X. Hu, L. Li, M. Li, Y. S. Zhao and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908006 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gu, Z. Huang, C. Li, M. Li and Y. Song, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat2390 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhou, Z. Li, W. Lan, Q. Wang, L. Ding and Z. Jin, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000506 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Heiss and C. Brabec, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 288–289 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhuang, X. Wang, W. Ma, Y. Wu, X. Chen, L. Tang, H. Zhu, J. Liu, L. Wu and W. Zhou, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 602–608 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Kim, K. H. Kim, D.-Y. Son, D.-N. Jeong, J.-Y. Seo, Y. S. Choi, I. T. Han, S. Y. Lee and N.-G. Park, Nature, 2017, 550, 87–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, J. Wu, X. Ou, B. Huang, J. Almutlaq, A. A. Zhumekenov, X. Guan, S. Han, L. Liang and Z. Yi, Nature, 2018, 561, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, B. Shabbir, C. Wang, T. Wan, Q. Ou, P. Yu, A. Tadich, X. Jiao, D. Chu and D. Qi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901644 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Mescher, F. Schackmar, H. Eggers, T. Abzieher, M. Zuber, E. Hamann, T. Baumbach, B. S. Richards, G. Hernandez-Sosa and U. W. Paetzold, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 15774–15784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shen, Y. Lin, C. Bao, Y. Bai, Y. Deng, M. Wang, T. Li, Y. Lu, A. Gruverman and W. Li, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 242–248 RSC .
C. Zuo and L. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9063–9066 RSC .
S. Dong, Y. Liu, Z. Hong, E. Yao, P. Sun, L. Meng, Y. Lin, J. Huang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5140–5147 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, Y. Fang, D. Wang, Y. Bai, Y. Deng, M. Wang, Y. Lu and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10794–10800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, W. Tian, F. Cao, Y. Ma, B. Gu and L. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1296–1302 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zeng, H. Zhou, R. Liu and H. Wang, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 62, 65–73 CrossRef CAS .
P. Galliker, J. Schneider, H. Eghlidi, S. Kress, V. Sandoghdar and D. Poulikakos, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1–9 Search PubMed .
X.-X. He, J. Zheng, G.-F. Yu, M.-H. You, M. Yu, X. Ning and Y.-Z. Long, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 8663–8678 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Yongqing Duan
	Yongqing Duan received her BS and PhD degrees from HUST, Wuhan, China, in 2010 and 2015, respectively. She is now an associate professor in the State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing Equipment and Technology, School of Mechanical Science and Engineering in HUST. Her research interests include flexible electronics manufacturing, printed display, and electrohydrodynamic printing.

Guannan Zhang
	Guannan Zhang received her BS and MS degrees from Wuhan University of Technology and HUST, Wuhan, China, in 2019 and 2022, respectively. She is now a PhD candidate at the School of Engineering in the University of Hong Kong. Her research interests include electrohydrodynamic printing, printed display, and optoelectronic devices.

Rui Yu
	Rui Yu received his BS degree from Wuhan University in 2021. He is now an MS candidate in the State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing Equipment and Technology, School of Mechanical Science and Engineering in HUST. His research is focused on electrohydrodynamic printing and its application in optoelectronics.

Guangda Niu
	Guangda Niu received his PhD in Science from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2016. He is now a professor of Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics in HUST. His research interests include metal halide X-ray detectors and imaging technology. He is the Chief Scientist of the National Key Research and Development Program, a recipient of the Young Talent Program of the Ten Thousand People Program, and a member of Elsevier's “China's Highly Cited Scholars” list.

YongAn Huang
	YongAn Huang received his PhD in Engineering Mechanics from Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in 2007. Currently, he is a professor of Mechanical Engineering in HUST, vice director of State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing Equipment and Technology, and a winner of The National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars. His research interests include design and manufacturing for flexible electronics, curved electronics, printed display, and metamaterials. To date, he has published 3 monographs and more than 100 papers in international peer-reviewed journals.

Zhouping Yin
	Zhouping Yin is a Distinguished Professor, the Head of the State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing Equipment and Technology, and Dean of School of Mechanical Science & Engineering of HUST. He has made contributions in the areas of digital modeling of complex geometric surface, flip-chip electronics packaging, and packaging of radio-frequency identification (RFID). He leads a research group with a focus on the development of electronics manufacturing processes and equipment, including flexible displays, machine vision, and RFID packaging.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the key steps involved in inkjet printing of perovskite microdroplets/thin films.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of piezoelectric inkjet printing and thermal inkjet printing.49,50 Copyright 2010, Elsevier. Copyright 2011, Institute of Physics. (b) The operating regime for stable operation of drop-on-demand inkjet printing.48 Copyright 2011, American Institute of Physics. (c) Schematic diagram of the EHD printing technology.51 Copyright 2019, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. (d) Full color and flexible perovskite images printed through EHD printing.52,53 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

Thermal IJP	Vaporizable inks	≥1 pL	High	Low	
58

Piezoelectric IJP	Solution with low viscosity	≥1 pL	High	High	
58

Electrohydrodynamic IJP	Solution, polymer, melt	<0.01 pL	Low	Low	
59


 	Fig. 3  (a) Fluorescence images and the corresponding surface profiles of the printed microdroplet where the DOE volume ratios of the ink are 20 vol%, 30 vol%, 40 vol%, 60 vol%, 70 vol%, and 80 vol%, respectively.72 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the film forming process using thermal-curing and UV-curing inks, respectively. The inset: cross-sectional SEM images of the PeQD films prepared by thermal-curing and UV-curing inks, respectively.71 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (c) PL images and thickness profiles of different drops printed on the PVK substrate with or without surface treatment.26 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation.76 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) LaMer model describing the nucleation and growth of nanocrystals as a function of the reaction time and concentration of precursor atoms.77 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Effects of solvent on the crystallization of inkjet-printed layers. Scale bar 10 μm.78 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) The left column explicitly shows the difference between grain nucleation and growth on wetting and nonwetting HTLs; the right column represents the contact angle of the solution on the substrate and final MAPbI3 film after drying at 105 °C. Scale bar 1 μm.87 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (e) Change of MAPbBr3 crystals on substrates with varying adhesion forces/wetting. The inset images are schematic of perovskite crystallization on high adhesion and low adhesion substrates.25 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the presented inkjet printing process with multipass printing, followed by vacuum annealing and thermal annealing.92 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM cross-sectional images of inkjet-printed triple cation perovskite solar cells. The perovskite layer thickness varies with drop spacing.92 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The diagram of large-area PSCs, their typical extracted PV parameters with different active areas (2.02, 1.01, 0.09, and 0.04 cm2), and the changes in efficiency at different locations.100 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Cross-sections of perovskite solar cells, where the perovskite absorber layers were printed with different resolutions.101 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. (e) Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of a champion solar cell with an inkjet-printed triple-cation perovskite absorber layer.101 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the four-channel non-parallel DOD inkjet printer.27 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (b) Photograph of the four-channel DOD inkjet printer (Jetlab 4, MicroFab Technologies).27 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (c) The compositional matrix with different I/Br and FA/MA ratios; the film samples with different colors and compositions are marked with numbers from 1 to 25.27 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (d) Schematic of the p–i–n-perovskite solar cell architecture with printed absorber and extraction layers.28 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. (e) SEM image of a cross-section through the device (TCP printed with 1000 dots per inch (dpi)).28 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. (f) Maximum power point (MPP) tracking at 25 °C with a stabilized PCE (SPCE) of ≈17%.28 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons.	 

2014	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3/C	IPA	11.6	0.15	
98

2015	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	GBL	12.3	0.04	
99

2016	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PbI/MAI:FAI/PCBM/Ca/Al	IPA	11.1	–	
103

2017	ITO/c-TiO2/PbI2/MAI/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	IPA:cyclohexanol:HPA	6.8	0.09	
104

2017	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/m-ZrO2/C/MAPbI3-5-AVAI	GBL	9.53	0.16	
105

2018	FTO/c-TiO2/Cs0.1(MA0.17FA0.83)0.9 Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	DMF:DMSO	15.3	0.09	
106

2018	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	DMF:DMSO	17.74	2.02	
100

2018	FTO/c-TiO2/C60/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	DMSO:GBL	17.04	0.04	
102

2019	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbBr0.75I2.25/PCBM/BCP/Ag	DMF:DMSO	19	–	
27

2019	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/Cs0.1Gua0.05FA0.83MA0.17PbI2.63Br0.37/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	DMF:DMSO:GBL:NMP	14.11	0.064	
107

2019	ITO/NiOx/Cs0.11(FA0.83MA0.17)0.89Pb(Br0.15I0.85)3/C60/BCP/Au	DMF:DMSO:GBL	20.7	0.105	
108

2020	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/(FA,MA)Pb(I,Br)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	TAA:IPA	13.7	3.5	
109

2020	ITO/NiOx/TCP/PCBM/BCP/Au	DMF:DMSO:GBL	17.2	1.21	
28

2021	FTO/TiO2/NVC-ink/perovskite/HTM/Au (transparent structure)	DMF:DMSO:GBL	11.2	0.088	
110

2021	Panasonic Corporation (Osaka)	—	17.9	804	
111

2022	ITO/PTAA/4F-PEA2MA4Pb5I16/BCP/Ag	DMF:DMSO	10.6	1	
112


 	Fig. 7  (a) Process of inkjet printing, vacuum film drying, and EL image of full-color PeLEDs at 5 V. The scale bar is 100 μm.26 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) Left: schematic diagram of the formation principle of the coffee-ring effect; middle: EQE distribution histogram; and right: original digital photo and EL display of a pine tree.74 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic structure and display performance of the fabricated prototype. (a) and (b) Schematic illustration and cross-section structure diagram of the prototype. (c)–(e) Red, green, and blue images of the Peking University logo. (f) Strawberry image manifested by this CCL-incorporated micro-LED display. (g) The color gamut of BT.2020, NTSC standard, the demonstrated module, and conventional micro-LED display purely based on RGB LED chips.114 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Flow chart of the preparation of CsPbBr3/LP/SiO2 QD composites.115 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Luminescent patterns made using the QD composites via an inkjet printer, and their fascinating performance with reversible UV light switching, water-soaking, and heating/cooling cycling.115 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Left: the EHD printing setup; middle: an example of the high-resolution printed pattern (∼12000 dpi, the distance between dots is 2 μm, the scale bar is 20 μm); right: lifetime pseudo-colour map of FLQR as recorded by the ToF-FLI imager, and black-and-white machine-readable QR code after binary-discretization.57 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the inkjet printing process on a patterned substrate.117 Copyright 2018, Optica Publishing Group. (b) Image of a printed perovskite layer on a structured PET substrate.117 Copyright 2018, Optica Publishing Group. (c) Surface roughness of the printed CH3NH3PbI3 film on a rigid glass substrate with different ink concentrations, ink compositions, and vacuum drying times.117 Copyright 2018, Optica Publishing Group. (d) Schematic of CsPbBr3 microplates on silicon with 400 nm femtosecond laser excitation.118 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. (e) Emission intensity and FWHM as a function of pump fluence.118 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. (f) Lorentz fitting of the lasing peak.118 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Image sensor based on the perovskite single-crystal film. Upper: optical image of electrode arrays on the perovskite single-crystal film; middle: optical image of number 10; below: photocurrent intensity profile of optical image 10.119 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Schematic illustration and photographs of a flexible, full-color perovskite image photodetector, and its normalized current mapping result with patterned illumination through a shadow mask.24 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the key fabrication procedures for perovskite-based devices via inkjet printing.126 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (b) Photography of the flexible device under bending.126 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (c) X-Ray photocurrents and sensitivity as a function of the dose rate with a 0.1 V bias voltage.126 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (d) I–V curve under X-rays with different dose rates with a 0.1 V bias voltage.126 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. (e) Photograph of a flexible inkjet-printed TCP X-ray detector.127 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) Photograph of a pneumatic connector and a screw fixed to a sample stage and the corresponding X-ray image that is measured with a flexible triple cation perovskite X-ray detector.127 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
