Proof-of-concept for facile perovskite solar cell recycling   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE02013E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE02013E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3172-3179Proof-of-concept for facile perovskite solar cell recycling†

        
          
            Jeannette M. 
            Kadro‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Norman 
            Pellet‡
bc, 
      
        
          
            Fabrizio 
            Giordano
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Alexey 
            Ulianov
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Othmar 
            Müntener
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Joachim 
            Maier
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Grätzel
          
        
      *bc and 

        
          
            Anders 
            Hagfeldt
          
        
      *a
aLaboratory for Photomolecular Science, Ecole Polytechnique Fédédale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: anders.hagfeldt@epfl.ch
bLaboratory for Photonics and Interfaces, Ecole Polytechnique Fédédale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: michael.graetzel@epfl.ch
cMax Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstraße 1, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
dInstitut des Sciences de la Terre, Université de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
Received 
      1st May 2016
    , Accepted 10th August 2016First published on 10th August 2016AbstractPerovskite solar cells based on CH3NH3PbI3 and related materials have reached impressive efficiencies that, on a lab scale, can compete with established solar cell technologies, at least in short-term observations. Despite frequently voiced concerns about the solubility of the lead salts that make up the absorber material, several life cycle analyses have come to overall positive conclusions regarding the environmental impact of perovskite solar cell (PSC) production. Their particularly short energy payback time (EBPT) in comparison to other established PV technologies makes them truly competitive. Several studies have identified valuable components such as FTO, gold and high temperature processes as the most significant contributors to the environmental impact of PSCs. Considering these findings, we have developed a rapid dismantling process allowing the recovery of all major components, saving raw materials, energy and production time in the fabrication of recycled PSCs. We demonstrate that the performance of PSCs fabricated from recycled substrates can compete with that of devices fabricated from virgin materials.

Broader context
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite based solar cells have achieved increases in efficiencies unprecedented by any other PV technology. Ease and flexibility of fabrication as well as extraordinary fundamental material properties have rapidly led to perovskite PVs, as well as other applications such as LEDs, receiving attention from a remarkably broad scientific audience. Concerns about potential risks associated with the controversial lead-based active material have been frequently risen since the early stages of research in this area. Recently, publications addressing the overall environmental impact of PSCs have shown that other embedded materials, including noble metals, as well as some fabrication steps, contribute strongly to PSCs’ environmental impact. Such findings as well as the increased demand for ease of recycling of novel technologies have led us to explore possibilities and challenges in recycling lab-scale PSCs. We present a simple dismantling process and show that the most valuable components of our high-efficiency devices can be re-used without a significant loss in solar cell performance.

Introduction
Despite an unprecedented increase of reported energy conversion efficiencies for any type of novel solar energy harvesting technology, perovskite photovoltaics still come with significant challenges that require urgent addressing.1 The tight regulation of hazardous substances in consumer products is one of them. The European Union is implementing policies phasing out hazardous substances – including lead – in consumer electronics, due to concerns about their long-term exposure effects on humans and environment. Even so, stationary photovoltaic installations have been exempted from those regulations.2 As a consequence, PSC solar farms or rooftop installations should be exempted from compliance with the RoHS. The challenges towards the realization of perovskite solar farms remain therefore mostly technical: long-term stability, encapsulation, fabrication of large-area modules and end-of-life processing.
The highest efficiencies for PSCs today are achieved with multi-layer devices comprised of a number of highly valuable components, such as gold, fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) and mesoporous TiO2.3 Their production not only contributes to the deprivation of important elements, but also is responsible for severe environmental impacts at the exploitation sites. In addition, the gold value is subject to strong price fluctuations due to market speculation and is not directly linked to production volumes or scarcity factors.
Recently published studies have come to varying conclusions regarding the environmental impact of the production and disposal of PSCs.4–7 Some indicate that solvents (including chlorobenzene, diethyl ether, dimethyl sulfoxide and N,N-dimethylformamide), the synthesis of CH3NH3I and some of the other components used in the fabrication of the PSCs are among the main concerns.7 Others argue that the overall impact is dominated by the gold and the transparent conductive oxide, used as the back and front contact, respectively.6
It is, however, of common consensus that the lead content in the perovskite layer is not the main issue in terms of the environmental impact of PSC production.3,6–8 Pb2+ content, in the form of perovskite APbX3, in the operational device can vary based on the device architecture but based on today's most efficient cells with perovskite layers of around 300–400 nm thickness would amount to less than 1000 mg m−2. Recently published estimates on the potential of environmental pollution from damaged PSC panels have shown that the direct impact of lead leaking from damaged panels would be modest compared to potential damage from other anthropogenic lead sources, such as the use of lead paint or lead smelting for car batteries.9,10 Calculations based on lab scale device efficiencies have shown that potential lead pollution from leaking PSCs would still be low compared to the amount of lead released from other energy conversion methods. For example, lead emissions from 1 GW coal-power plants vary considerably based on the lead content and quality of the coal burned but commonly range from 0.1 t to 1 t per year, and usually are not sequestered.11 Hailegnaw et al. have estimated that a 1 GW solar field of PSCs would contain up to 30 t of Pb.10 If lead contained in PSC solar panels is retrieved and recycled safely, PSC solar farms would allow a reduction of direct lead emissions. Certainly, measures to prevent large amounts of lead from damaged panels, for example as a consequence of natural disasters such as earthquakes, floods or wildfires, should still be considered and installations of large numbers of PSC panels in areas prone to such natural disasters or within the vicinity of important groundwater reserves might require special regulations.
Aside from reliable encapsulation, development of safe recovery processes of the slightly water soluble lead salts (Ksp 10−8 for PbI2 as opposed to 10−27 for CdTe12) from PSC modules together with successful implementation of take-back-systems, such as those already in place for CdTe solar panels, will be key to successfully bringing perovskite PVs to the market.13
Substitution of lead by tin in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites has been realized14–16 and solar cells with power conversion efficiencies exceeding 6% have been reported,17 but several studies have come to the conclusion that tin substitution is not advisable for numerous reasons. Leaving aside lower attained conversion efficiencies and the inherent instability of its 2+ oxidation state in air, organic tin compounds have also been found to be more environmentally harmful than their lead analogues.4,17 Tin based perovskite solar cells have been found to score higher in all environmental impact categories investigated as compared to their lead analogues in a recent study presenting an LCA including end-of-life scenarios of incineration or landfills, and thus will not be considered in this study.4
Tin is a strategically highly critical metal as it is indispensable in a very broad range of applications in technology today, particularly in solders, alloys and coatings and it is used in sizable quantities as fluorine-doped tin oxide in PSCs. A small number of countries including China, Indonesia and Peru control more than 4/5 of the global production with no significant exploitation sites in Western Europe and North America.18
Due to the limited technological substitutability of tin, its strongly geographically concentrated supply and the risks associated with political instabilities in its main production countries and growing global tin demand the metal has been assigned with a high material security index in a recent report.19 Tin has recently been added to the European Commision's report on critical materials.20
So far, published LCAs confirm lead-based PSCs as environmentally friendly alternatives to other PV technologies, particularly emphasizing their short energy payback time (EPBT) calculated based on lab-scale device efficiencies.6 Based on such considerations, we developed a rapid and highly selective process allowing full recycling and/or recovery of the most precious components of a standard PSC device. We demonstrate that PSC devices can be easily dismantled in the reverse order of fabrication and that materials can be extracted with high purity for direct reuse or further recycling. The process we introduce eliminates energy intensive processing steps such as sintering of TiO2 in the fabrication of recycled devices, significantly reducing both fabrication time and energy input. Furthermore, sequestration of the lead salts contained in devices is achieved with a remarkable degree of segregation. Most importantly, we demonstrate that our high efficiency PSCs can be recycled at least twice without a significant loss in performance.
The recovery and reuse of FTO-coated glass substrates with mesoporous TiO2 is desirable. From calculations based on devices of similar architecture as we use in this study the FTO substrate alone has been shown to contribute 40% to the overall carbon footprint of all materials embedded. Its manufacturing consumes 36% of all the primary energy of embedded materials.6 In addition, the prolonged, high temperature associated with the fabrication of the TiO2 layers has been shown to contribute significantly to both the carbon footprint and the primary energy consumption of PSC fabrication.21 Using a simple process, we show that FTO glass with mesoporous TiO2 layers can be reused with little loss in performance.
Gold being a scarce but technologically and economically highly valuable metal makes its recovery and recycling from used appliances particularly desirable. Its production and refining can have significant environmental impacts at exploitation and refining sites.
Among normalized cradle-to-gate contributions of production of important metals, gold ranges second behind rhodium in terms of release of greenhouse gas emissions and toxic substances.22,23 Aside from mitigating severe detrimental effects at the exploitation sites on eutrophication, acidification and land use, employing recycled gold can save up to 98% in energy required as opposed to the use of newly mined materials.22,24
Gong et al. have shown in their recently published LCA that the extraction, refining and processing of the gold alone contributes up to 53% to the overall carbon footprint of all embedded materials.6 During the review process of this publication, a paper describing a similar process to the one we are introducing here has been published using solar cells without mesoscopic layers.25 We find it highly encouraging to see that sustainability and recycling of PSCs are receiving attention from many in the field.
The entire dismantling process was carried out at room temperature under ambient conditions. A schematic outline is presented in Fig. 1. To remove the gold counter electrode, fully assembled (non-sealed) PSC devices were fully immersed into chlorobenzene in a round-bottom-flask with the gold cathode facing upwards. Due to the dissolution of the organic, doped hole transport layer a slight colour change of the solvent can be observed while the counter electrode eventually peels off from the substrate completely. Gold removal was typically completed within 2–5 min. The collected gold was separated by decanting from the solvent and washed briefly with acetone, an aqueous solution of 20% HCl, and distilled water, successively.
 Fig. 1  Schematic process outline: fully assembled PSCs are immersed into chlorobenzene, after complete dissolution of the HTM and cathode removal, EtOH is used to dissolve MAI, and small amounts of DMF are used to completely remove PbI2. 
After complete removal of the gold cathode and the organic HTM, the hybrid perovskite absorber layers were removed in two steps, inverting the process for sequential deposition of CH3NH3PbI3 reported elsewhere.26
Substrates were fully immersed into EtOH immediately following the chlorobenzene treatment. A vivid colour change from black to bright yellow can be observed as CH3NH3I dissolves into the solvent, leaving PbI2 behind. Upon completion, PbI2 was removed from the films by carefully dropping small amounts of DMF onto the surface of the substrate.
As-treated substrates were carefully washed with EtOH to remove any remaining solvent and left to dry naturally. The entire dismantling process could typically be completed in less than 10 min. The TiO2 coated FTO substrates were then treated for 10 minutes by UV/O3 and reused without further heat treatment. The recycled substrates were processed again within 4–5 hours of the previous depositions. The same fabrication protocol described above and the same stock solutions were employed.
Results and discussion
The selectivity and completion of each of the three recycling steps were assessed by scanning electron microscopy, thin film X-ray diffraction, ICP-MS, mass spectrometry and X-ray fluorescence.
Photoanode

Fig. 2 shows top-view and cross-sectional SEM micrographs of the full device and after each recycling step and confirms the selectivity of each step. It can clearly be seen that the perovskite absorber layer remains intact after cathode and HTM removal in chlorobenzene. Upon MAI dissolution in EtOH (Fig. 2c and g), hexagonal structures typical of PbI2 are formed on the mesoporous TiO2 layer and appear to be completely absent after DMF treatment as shown in Fig. 2d and h. Fig. 2d shows a top-view image of the mesoporous TiO2 layer after the removal of PbI2 in DMF. No indications for detrimental effects of the dismantling process such as delamination or scratching of the photoanode were observed; the TiO2 layer appears to remain completely intact.
 Fig. 2  Top-view and cross-sectional secondary electron micrographs of devices at all recycling stages: (a and e) before recycling treatment, (b and f) after chlorobenzene treatment, (c and g) after MAI dissolution and (d and h) after PbI2 removal. 
Structural characterization by X-ray diffraction was carried out on twin samples analogous to those presented in Fig. 2. The diffraction patterns presented in Fig. 3 confirm the purity of each expected phase after the sequential solvent treatment steps.
 Fig. 3  XRD patterns of substrates after each processing step. In blue, the original device stripped from gold and the HTM layer. In green, the device stripped from gold, the HTM layer and CH3NH3I. In red, the FTO substrate covered with the compact and mesoporous TiO2 layers. Characteristic peaks originating from the crystalline FTO substrate are denoted by #, PbI2 by * and CH3NH3PbI3 by ‡. 
Back contact
The purity of the recovered gold was confirmed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF). No traces of lead were found in the material recovered from the chlorobenzene bath (see the ESI†). The possibility of slight organic contaminations on the surface stemming from dissolved organic HTM cannot be completely excluded, due to the detection limitations of XRF, although we deem such remaining organic contaminations improbable as the recovered material is washed in acetone and HCl. As no foreign metal traces were found, it can be assumed that the recovered gold can be reused without extensive energy-intensive refining.
Although all gold deposited on the HTM could be successfully recovered with high purity, the recovered material could not be used for the fabrication of recycled devices for purely practical reasons. Firstly, the amount of gold that is required to deposit a ca. 100 nm thick layer (see Experimental procedures) exceeds the amount of gold actually deposited (ca. 0.4 mg) on each device by several orders of magnitude in our evaporator. This is due to an unfavourable geometry of the experimental setup used and could be optimized on a larger scale. Collecting sufficient material for one single evaporation would require processing of at least 900 devices.
Secondly, gold recovered in the recycling process remains in its original shape, that is, ca. 100 nm thick, freestanding films. Due to the low mass of these films, they would not withstand the suction produced in the evaporator during pumping and would be removed from the evaporation boat in the process of evacuating the machine. Again, this is a specific limitation of the experimental set-up in our laboratory, which will be possible to be solved in a tailored scaled-up process.
Lead in solvents
Methanol, ethanol, 2-propanol, ethyl acetate and deionized water were used for the dissolution of methylammonium iodide. The fastest observed conversion from CH3NH3PbI3 to PbI2 was achieved using MeOH, followed by deionized water, EtOH and isopropanol. Complete MAI dissolution in ethyl acetate could be achieved only after several hours, which was found too impractical for further consideration.
EtOH was chosen for device recycling over MeOH, despite the slower dissolution, considering its lower toxicity to workers and the environment and reduced processing times due to higher drying rates as compared to water.
The remaining lead content in each solvent was assessed by ICP-MS to evaluate the process selectivity with respect to lead sequestering. Lead quantities are shown in Table 1 relative to the total lead content in chlorobenzene, ethanol (water, isopropanol or methanol) and DMF. They underline the relative selectivity of each recycling step. Among the four solvents we have tested, water seems to perform with the highest selectivity. Only 0.14% of the total Pb amount could be detected, which is similar to the selectivity of chlorobenzene. After purification in Amberlite 120 IR, contents in the water dropped down to 0.03%, but in this case, lead sequestration by the resin may be limited by the slower uptake at extremely low concentrations (0.2 ppm). To confirm this, we prepared a saturated solution of PbI2 in water with a 30-fold molar excess of MAI. Following decanting and filtering, analysis by ICP-MS showed a concentration of 43.5 ppm mL−1, which we believe is close to the upper dissolution limit of PbI2, in particular since the large excess of I− anions can help solubilize PbI2 by producing the soluble (PbI4)2− complex, soluble in water. After lead removal by the resin for 16 h (1 g/30 mL), concentrations of lead down to 0.44 ppm mL−1 were recorded, which corresponds to a sequestration of 99%.
Table 1 Segregation efficiency of the solvents used in the recycling process. Lead content is reported with respect to the total amount of extracted lead. Solvent volumes were 5 mL for chlorobenzene, 5 mL for ethanol, methanol, water and isopropanol, and 0.5 mL for DMF




Sample
Relative lead content (%)




Chlorobenzene
0.09






Ethanol


EtOH
3.4


DMF
96.5






Methanol


MeOH
7.1


DMF
92.9






2-Propanol


2-Propanol
0.35


DMF
99.6






Water


H2O
0.14


DMF
99.8


H2O (after purification)
0.03




2-Propanol showed the second best selectivity after water, with only 0.35% lead content in the solution. The slow dissolution of MAI in 2-propanol (about 20 minutes) makes this solvent less appropriate. Then follows ethanol, with up to 3.4% Pb with respect to all extracted lead from the device. Finally, methanol showed the poorest performance, with up to 7% Pb in the solvent with respect to the total Pb quantity.
Ion exchange resins such as Amberlite IR 120 can be used for the purification of a range of organic solvents as well, including MeOH and IPA.27,28 An efficient, electrochemical process for lead recovery from PSC devices via electrodeposition of lead on lead using ethylene glycol with choline chloride as solvent has been demonstrated recently in a model experiment by Poll et al.29
Fate of spiro-MeOTAD, dopants and additives
ESI-TOF mass spectrometry in positive and negative mode was carried out on samples of chlorobenzene, EtOH and DMF collected directly from each recycling step and the resulting spectra are available in the ESI.† Formic acid was used for protonation in the positive mode. Spiro-MeOTAD+ could neither be found in ethanol nor in DMF, confirming the high selectivity of the process towards spiro-MeOTAD extraction. TFSI− and what could possibly be (LiTFSI)H+ was found in chlorobenzene as well. Similar peaks were found in EtOH and DMF, pointing at the rather poor selectivity of LiTFSI segregation. No iodide peak was found in chlorobenzene, but an iodide peak appeared in ethanol and DMF (negative mode). FK209 and TBP could not be found. It is possible that they appear as aggregates, such as the peak at m/z 217.1 observed in ethanol and DMF, which is possibly (TBP)2H+.
Device performance

Table 2 shows the device performances for the recycled FTO/TiO2 substrates reused in new solar cells. Efficiencies of 15–16% were obtained for recycled devices with short-circuit currents ranging between 19.7 and 21.5 mA cm−2. Values for recycled devices as well as reference cells are given in Table 2. Open circuit voltages did not vary significantly between all of the tested devices. No significant drop in performance after recycling the substrates twice was observed, upon comparison to respective references (using fresh substrates) but overall small but noticeable drops in Jsc can be observed for recycled cells, possibly due to the perovskite crystallization being affected by residual solvents. All PV characteristics fall within the expected statistical deviation occurring within a batch of devices. Fig. 4 shows the associated J–V curves scaled artificially to 100 mW cm−2 illumination intensity to allow for a fair comparison of the photocurrent density.
Table 2 
I–V characteristics of a typical device before and after recycling




Sample description

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Sun intensity (mW cm−2)
Fill factor (—)
Efficiency (%)




Reference initial
1.07
22.1
100
0.67
16.1


Recycled once
1.06
19.7
96.6
0.73
16.0


Reference 1st round
1.07
20.6
98
0.65
14.9


Recycled twice
1.07
21.5
99.6
0.67
15.0


Reference 2nd round
1.06
21.1
99.6
0.64
14.3




 Fig. 4  (A) Open circuit voltages, short circuit currents, fill factors and power conversion efficiencies for a 30 sample batch of perovskite solar cells before (red) and after (blue) recycling. Green bars represent the mean values of the reference cells assembled together with the recycled cells. (B) Typical I–V characteristics of a device before and after recycling, reference devices are prepared from new materials. 
Efficiencies obtained fall within the expected range for CH3NH3PbI3 based cells with a mesoporous TiO2 scaffold, higher efficiencies are typically achieved with mixed-cation, mixed-halide perovskites.
Encapsulation
With perovskite PVs still in the R&D stage, it is difficult to predict how perovskite PV modules will be designed for large-area applications if they meet the market. The geometry of the wiring as well as the use and design of rigid frames will greatly determine the design and success of dismantling processes.
To the best of our knowledge, there are no universally applied recycling processes for any type of PV module today, but several processes have been developed on the lab scale and life-cycle analyses of silicon panel recycling including end-of-life stages have been undertaken.30–34
Common encapsulation used in silicon PV panels, for example, relies on laminates of glass and ethylene vinyl acetate sheets (EVA) with aluminium frames for added stability.
Frame and wiring can be detached manually and sealed edges could be cut off mechanically. The possibility of direct deposition of the working electrode on sturdy glass substrates could prove an advantage in mechanical processing as the devices can themselves provide considerable structural integrity, other than, for example, brittle silicon wafers.
If scratches on the electrode surface are avoided in the dismantling process, it is unlikely for encapsulation to have a negative impact on the performance of recycled working electrodes as TiO2 is both thermally and chemically highly stable, offering the possibility of both thermal as well as wet-chemical processing for removal of encapsulation residues.
Overall, it will be imperative to develop encapsulation techniques specifically for PSC devices that not only protect the active materials from moisture, air and dust but also meet strict requirements for mechanical stability (e.g., those defined in ASTM E1830-15 Standard Test Methods for Determining Mechanical Integrity of Photovoltaic Modules) but at the same time offer ease of dismantling.
Conclusion
We have developed a rapid, highly selective recycling process for PSC devices. Valuable components could be extracted and collected for recycling into new PSCs or valued in other applications. By repeating the sequential recycling process, it was demonstrated that efficiencies rivalling those obtained using fresh substrates can be easily attained from reused substrates. Fabricating solar cells from recycled materials can drastically reduce the fabrication cost, time and environmental impact. The use of recovered materials will have a positive impact on the environmental assessment of PSC technology and may make this technology even more competitive.
Methods and materials
Device fabrication
All chemicals were used as received without further purification or treatment unless explicitly stated.
Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass NSG10 (Nippon Sheet Glass 10 Ohm square) was cleaned in a sonication bath of water with the addition of 2% in weight of Hellmanex for 30 minutes. The substrates were rinsed in water and ethanol.
30 nm TiO2 compact layer was deposited on FTO via spray pyrolysis at 450 °C from a precursor solution of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in anhydrous ethanol. After the spray, the substrates were left to cool down to room temperature. A mesoporous TiO2 layer was deposited by spin coating for 20 s at 4000 rpm with a ramp of 2000 rpm s−1 using a 30 nm particle paste (Dyesol 30 NR-D) diluted in ethanol to achieve a 150 to 200 nm-thick layer. After spin coating, the substrates were sintered again at 450 °C for 30 min under dry air flow. After cooling down to 150 °C, the substrates were transferred to a dry box for the deposition of the perovskite films.
The perovskite films were deposited from 1.22 M precursor solution of MAPbI3 in anhydrous dimethylsuphoxide. The perovskite solution was spin coated in a two-step program at 1000 and 6000 rpm for 10 and 30 s, respectively. During the second step, 100 μl of chlorobenzene was poured on the spinning substrate 10 s prior to the end of the program. The substrates were then annealed at 100 °C for 1 h in a dry air-filled glove box.
After perovskite annealing, the substrates were cooled down and a spirofluorene-linked methoxy triphenylamine (spiro-OMeTAD, from Merck) solution (70 mM in chlorobenzene) was spun at 4000 rpm for 20 s.
Spiro-OMeTAD was doped with bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide lithium salt (Li-TFSI, from Aldrich), tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)-cobalt(III) tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) (FK209, from Dyenamo) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, from Aldrich). The molar ratio of additives for spiro-OMeTAD was: 0.5, 0.03 and 3.3 for Li-TFSI, FK209 and TBP, respectively. Finally, 70–80 nm of a gold top electrode was thermally evaporated under vacuum using ca. 360 mg of gold tears.
Water purification
A commercial ion-exchange resin was used to remove remaining lead contamination from H2O used for MAI dissolution. Amberlite IR 120 in hydrogen form (Sigma Aldrich) was washed repeatedly in deionized water and EtOH and dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 16 h. 1 g dried resin was added per 30 mL solvent in a round-bottom flask and stirred at room temperature for 16 h. The water was filtered using hydrophilized 0.2 μm PTFE syringe filters to remove Amberlite residues for analytical purposes.
ICP-MS
All lead assays were performed using an aqueous solution of tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (1 wt%), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt (NaEDTA, 1.25 wt%) and bismuth nitrate (0.3 ppm or 0.6 ppm Bi) to provide an internal calibration. All lead contents were extracted from the integrated signal of 208Pb and 209Bi, calibrated using solutions of 0.05 ppm, 0.15 ppm and 0.3 ppm Pb and 0.3 ppm Bi. The lead source for the calibration standards was the same PbI2 as the one used for the devices, to avoid fluctuations in isotopic distributions. All measurements were done on an Agilent 7700× ICP-MS system and the same matrix was used for all the samples.
Devices (2.5 × 1.5 cm) were immersed into 10 mL of anhydrous chlorobenzene in a round bottom flask, until the gold was removed and the HTM layer was dissolved. 5 mL of the resulting solution was pipetted out and dried by rotavapory evaporation. The remainder was dissolved into 0.5 mL of N,N-dimethylformamide and 10 mL of the aqueous solution described above. The same process was repeated for the dissolution of the organic component using ethanol, water, isopropanol or methanol. PbI2 was removed from the substrate by dropping 0.5 mL of N,N-dimethylformamide onto the substrate followed by dilution into 10 mL of the matrix. The resulting solution was further diluted 100 fold for ICP-MS measurements.
Structural characterization
Thin film X-ray diffraction patterns were collected on a PANaltytical MPD Pro diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation at 40 mA and 45 kV.
PV device testing
The solar cells were measured using a 450 W xenon light source (Oriel). The spectral mismatch between AM1.5 G and the simulated illumination was reduced by the use of a Schott K113 Tempax filter (Präzisions Glas & Optik GmbH). The light intensity was calibrated using a Si photodiode equipped with an IR-cutoff filter (KG3, Schott) and it was recorded during each measurement. Current–voltage characteristics of the cells were obtained by applying an external voltage bias while measuring the current response using a digital source meter (Keithley 2400). The cells were masked with a black metal mask (0.1225 cm2).
X-ray fluorescence
XRF spectra were collected on a Fischerscope X-ray XAN with a tungsten nickel anticathode.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Stéphane Thonney and Dr Christophe Roussel for XRF measurements, Dr Kurt Schenk for support of the XRD and Dr Dongqin Bi for providing some of the solar cells analysed in ESI-QTOF mass spectrometry. M. G. thanks the Max Planck Society for a Max Planck Fellowship at the MPI for Solid State Research in Stuttgart, Germany. MG and NP acknowledge financial support from the European Union Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement name “GLOBASOL”.
References

          M. Grätzel, The light and shade of perovskite solar cells, Nat. Mater. [Internet]. Nature Publishing Group; 2014, 13(9), 838–842. Available from: http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/nmat4065.
European Parliament. Directive 2011/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment (RoHS). Off J Eur Union [Internet]. 2011, 54(July 1), 88–110. Available from: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:174:0088:0110:EN:PDF.

          D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, et al. Efficient luminescent solar cells based on tailored mixed-cation perovskites, Sci. Adv. [Internet]. 2016, 2(1), e1501170. Available from: http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/2/1/e1501170.abstract\nhttp://advances.science mag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/sciadv.1501170.
L. Serrano-Lujan, N. Espinosa, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, J. Abad, A. Urbina and F. C. Krebs, Tin-lead-based perovskite solar cells under scrutiny: an environmental perspective, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(20), 1–5 CrossRef .

          N. Espinosa, L. Serrano-Lujan, A. Urbina and F. C. Krebs, Solution and vapour deposited lead perovskite solar cells: Ecotoxicity from a life cycle assessment perspective, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells [Internet]. Elsevier, 2015, 137, 303–310. Available from: DOI: http://10.1016/j.solmat.2015.02.013.

          J. Gong, S. B. Darling, Perovskite photovoltaics: life-cycle assessment of energy and environmental impacts. Energy Environ. Sci. [Internet]. Royal Society of Chemistry; 2015, 8, 1953–1968. Available from: DOI: 10.1039/C5EE00615E.
J. Zhang, X. Gao, Y. Deng, B. Li and C. Yuan, Life Cycle Assessment of Titania Perovskite Solar Cell Technology for Sustainable Design and Manufacturing, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8(22), 3882–3891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Babayigit, D. Duy Thanh, A. Ethirajan, J. Manca, M. Muller, H.-G. Boyen, et al. Assessing the toxicity of Pb- and Sn-based perovskite solar cells in model organism Danio rerio, Sci. Rep. [Internet]. 2016, 6, 18721. Available from: http://www.nature.com/articles/srep18721.
D. Fabini, Quantifying the Potential for Lead Pollution from Halide Perovskite Photovoltaics, J. Phys., 2015, 6, 3546–3548 CAS .
B. Hailegnaw, S. Kirmayer, E. Edri, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Rain on methylammonium lead iodide based perovskites: possible environmental effects of perovskite solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(9), 1543–1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
United States Environmental Protection Agency. Technical Note – Estimating Lead (Pb) Emissions from Coal Combustion Sources, 2011.

CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, ed. D. R. Lide, 84th edn,  2003, vol. 84 Search PubMed .
Photovoltaic Solar Energy Department-National Renewable Energy Centre Fundacion Chile. First Solar CdTe Photovoltaic Technology: Environmental, Health and Safety Assessment Final Report, 2013.

          C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Semiconducting Tin and Lead Iodide Perovskites with Organic Cations: Phase Transitions, High Mobilities, and Near-Infrared Photoluminescent Properties. Inorg. Chem. [Internet]. 2013, Jul 8, 52(15), 9019–38. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23834108.

          Y. Takahashi, R. Obara, Z.-Z. Lin, Y. Takahashi, T. Naito, T. Inabe, et al. Charge-transport in tin-iodide perovskite CH3NH3SnI3: origin of high conductivity, Dalton Trans. [Internet]. 2011 May 28 [cited 2013 Mar 4], 40(20), 5563–5568. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21494720.

          J. L. Knutson, J. D. Martin and D. B. Mitzi, Tuning the band gap in hybrid tin iodide perovskite semiconductors using structural templating, Inorg. Chem. [Internet]. 2005, Jun 27, 44(13), 4699–4705. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15962978.

          N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A. Haghighirad, et al. Lead-free organic–inorganic tin halide perovskites for photovoltaic applications, Energy Environ. Sci. [Internet]. Royal Society of Chemistry, 2014, 7, 3061–3068. Available from: DOI: 10.1039/C4EE01076K.

          R. L. Moss, E. Tzimas, H. Kara, P. Willis and J. Kooroshy, European Commission-Critical Metals in Strategic Energy Technologies: Assessing Rare Metals as Supply-Chain Botlenecks in Low-Carbon Energy Technologies, 2011.
Oakdene Hollins. Material Security, 2008.
European Commission: Ad hoc working group on defining critical raw materials. Report on critical raw materials for the EU, 2014.
J. Gong, B. Darling and F. You, Perovskite Photovoltaics: Life-Cycle Assessment of Energy and Environmental Impacts ESI,†Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, (847), 1–22.
UNEP. Environmental Risks and Challenges of Anthropogenic Metals Flows and Cycles, 2013.
UNEP. Assessing the Environmental Impacts of Consumption and Production, 2010.

          R. Frischknecht, N. Jungbluth, H.-J. Althaus, G. Doka, R. Dones, T. Heck, S. Hellweg, R. Hischier, T. Nemecek, G. Rebitzer and M. Spielmann, The ecoinvent database: Overview and methodological framework, ecoinvent Version 2, International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 10,  2005, 3–9.
A. Binek, M. L. Petrus, N. Huber, H. Bristow, Y. Hu and T. Bein, 
            et al. Recycling Perovskite Solar Cells To Avoid Lead Waste, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12881–12886 CAS .

          J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, et al. Sequential deposition as a route to high-performance perovskite-sensitized solar cells, Nature [Internet]. 2013, 499(7458), 316–320. Available from: http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.0-84880507645&partnerID=tZOtx3y1.

          G. W. Bodamer, R. Kunin and H. Co, Behavior of Ion Exchange Resins in Solvents Other Than Water-Swelling and Exchange Characteristics, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1953, 45(11).

          Z. Hubicki and D. Kołodyńska, Selective Removal of Heavy Metal Ions from Waters and Waste Waters Using Ion Exchange Methods, In 2012. Available from: DOI: http://10.5772/51040.
C. G. Poll, G. W. Nelson, D. M. Pickup, A. V. Chadwick, D. J. Riley and D. J. Payne, Electrochemical Recycling of Lead from Hybrid Organic–Inorganic Perovskites using Deep Eutectic Solvents, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2946–2955,  10.1039/C5GC02734A .

          C. E. L. Latunussa, F. Ardente, G. Andrea and L. Mancini, Life Cycle Assessment of an innovative recycling process for crystalline silicon photovoltaic panels, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells [Internet]. Elsevier, 2016, 1–11. Available from: DOI: http://10.1016/j.solmat.2016.03.020.

          S. Kang, S. Yoo, J. Lee, B. Boo and H. Ryu, Experimental investigations for recycling of silicon and glass from waste photovoltaic modules, Renew Energy [Internet]. Elsevier Ltd, 2012, 47, 152–159. Available from: DOI: http://10.1016/j.renene.2012.04.030.

          V. M. Fthenakis, End-of-life management and recycling of PV modules,  2000, vol. 28, pp. 1051–1058 Search PubMed .

          T. Doi, I. Tsuda, H. Unagida, A. Murata, K. Sakuta and K. Kurokawa, Experimental study on PV module recycling with organic solvent method,  2001, vol. 67 Search PubMed .

          W. Berger, F. Simon, K. Weimann and E. A. Alsema, Resources, Conservation and Recycling A novel approach for the recycling of thin film photovoltaic modules, Resources, Conserv. Recycl. [Internet]. Elsevier B.V.; 2010, 54(10), 711–718. Available from: DOI: http://10.1016/j.resconrec.2009.12.001.

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee02013e‡ These authors have contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Broader context
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite based solar cells have achieved increases in efficiencies unprecedented by any other PV technology. Ease and flexibility of fabrication as well as extraordinary fundamental material properties have rapidly led to perovskite PVs, as well as other applications such as LEDs, receiving attention from a remarkably broad scientific audience. Concerns about potential risks associated with the controversial lead-based active material have been frequently risen since the early stages of research in this area. Recently, publications addressing the overall environmental impact of PSCs have shown that other embedded materials, including noble metals, as well as some fabrication steps, contribute strongly to PSCs’ environmental impact. Such findings as well as the increased demand for ease of recycling of novel technologies have led us to explore possibilities and challenges in recycling lab-scale PSCs. We present a simple dismantling process and show that the most valuable components of our high-efficiency devices can be re-used without a significant loss in solar cell performance.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic process outline: fully assembled PSCs are immersed into chlorobenzene, after complete dissolution of the HTM and cathode removal, EtOH is used to dissolve MAI, and small amounts of DMF are used to completely remove PbI2.	 

 	Fig. 2  Top-view and cross-sectional secondary electron micrographs of devices at all recycling stages: (a and e) before recycling treatment, (b and f) after chlorobenzene treatment, (c and g) after MAI dissolution and (d and h) after PbI2 removal.	 

 	Fig. 3  XRD patterns of substrates after each processing step. In blue, the original device stripped from gold and the HTM layer. In green, the device stripped from gold, the HTM layer and CH3NH3I. In red, the FTO substrate covered with the compact and mesoporous TiO2 layers. Characteristic peaks originating from the crystalline FTO substrate are denoted by #, PbI2 by * and CH3NH3PbI3 by ‡.	 

Chlorobenzene	0.09


Ethanol
EtOH	3.4
DMF	96.5


Methanol
MeOH	7.1
DMF	92.9


2-Propanol
2-Propanol	0.35
DMF	99.6


Water
H2O	0.14
DMF	99.8
H2O (after purification)	0.03

Reference initial	1.07	22.1	100	0.67	16.1
Recycled once	1.06	19.7	96.6	0.73	16.0
Reference 1st round	1.07	20.6	98	0.65	14.9
Recycled twice	1.07	21.5	99.6	0.67	15.0
Reference 2nd round	1.06	21.1	99.6	0.64	14.3

 	Fig. 4  (A) Open circuit voltages, short circuit currents, fill factors and power conversion efficiencies for a 30 sample batch of perovskite solar cells before (red) and after (blue) recycling. Green bars represent the mean values of the reference cells assembled together with the recycled cells. (B) Typical I–V characteristics of a device before and after recycling, reference devices are prepared from new materials.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee02013e
‡ These authors have contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
