Electrospun composite nanofibers and their multifaceted applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM30966A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM30966A
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12953-12971Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsElectrospun composite nanofibers and their multifaceted applications

        
          
            R. 
            Sahay
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            P. Suresh 
            Kumar
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            R. 
            Sridhar
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Sundaramurthy
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Venugopal
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            S. G. 
            Mhaisalkar
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            S. 
            Ramakrishna
          
        
      *ab
aCenter for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology, National University of Singapore, Singapore. E-mail: nnijrv@nus.edu.sg; seeram@nus.edu.sg;  Fax: +65 6773 0339;   Tel: +65 6516 4272
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Received 
      16th February 2012
    , Accepted 16th April 2012First published on 18th April 2012AbstractThe re-exploration of the nanostructure production technique known as electrospinning was carried out in the past decade due to its simplicity and uniqueness of producing nanostructures. As nanotechnology is one of the most promising and growing technologies today, a large amount of work is being carried out in an extensive area and shows an extremely huge potential for miraculous works in the fields of medicine and biotechnology. These nanostructures were found to be of great significance because of their inherent properties such as large surface area to volume ratio and the engineered properties such as porosity, stability and permeability. The functionality and applicability of these nanostructures were further improved by incorporating secondary phases either during electrospinning or in the post-processing resulting in the composite nanostructures. These secondary phases may include metal oxides, carbon nanotubes, precious metals, gold nanoparticles and hydroxyapatite. Nanofibrous materials that mimic the native extracellular matrix (ECM) and promote the adhesion of various cells are being developed as tissue-engineered scaffolds for the skin, bone, vasculature, heart, cornea, nervous system and other tissues. The article discusses in detail the applicability of these composite fibers in energy, sensors, filters, biotechnology and details the technological issues, research challenges and future trends.
1. Introduction
During the past few decades, nanomaterials have attracted immense interest in research/industrial applications because of their unique properties such as large surface area and engineered properties such as high porosity.1–5 At the nanoscale, these nanomaterials provide abundant opportunities to create unique material combinations by accessing new properties through the exploitation of the unique synergy between these materials. Nanocomposites are considered as one of the most highly researched areas in nanomaterials by the virtue of their improved mechanical properties, dimensional stability, thermal/chemical stability, and electrical conductivity. Nanocomposites usually comprise two or more phases of different chemical constituents or structures, with at least one of the chemical and/or structural phases having nanometric dimensions. These nanocomposites, due to their improved physical/chemical properties, establish applications ranging from energy, sensors, biotechnology, smart materials, filtration, and regenerative medicine. These nanocomposites contribute to producing light/efficient batteries,6–9 fuel cells,10–13 fabricating structural components with high strength-to-weight ratio,14,15 lightweight sensors,16 as well as magnetic and fluorescent nanocomposites for efficient viewing/removing of the tumors.17,18
The categorization in Fig. 1 is designed to cover future/ongoing research/industrial trends pertaining to nanofiber based nanocomposites. Comprehensive study of properties in nanoscale dimensions relating to their respective large scale counterparts were performed to achieve a clear understanding of the synergistic advantage of nanoscale dimensions. It is well-known that understanding the change in properties as the fiber dimensions decrease to the nanoscale is important to optimize the resultant properties of nanocomposites. As one/both of the components of the composites are electrospun nanofibers, emphasis is given to compare/summarize the enhancement or shortcomings of the nanofiber based nanocomposites with respect to the nanoparticle based nanocomposites.
 Fig. 1  Fabrication and characterization of electrospun nanocomposites on the basis of their applications. 
Nanofibrous scaffolds are ideal for the purpose of tissue regeneration because their dimensions are similar to the components of the extra cellular matrix (ECM) and mimic its fibrillar structure, providing essential signals for cellular assembly and proliferation. There are several scaffold fabrication techniques namely, electrospinning (random, aligned, core shell and vertical nanofibers), self-assembly, phase separation, melt-blown and template synthesis. Electrospinning is one of the most promising techniques for designing natural/polymer nanofibrous scaffolds for tissue engineering applications. ECM is a complex arrangement of proteins and polysaccharides such as collagen, gelatin, chitosan, hyaluronic acid, proteoglycans, glycosaminoglycans and elastin, fabricated nanocomposites are also possess such adhesion factors, chemical functionalities and mechanical properties. Though drug molecules have significant potency against the disease for their release or the delivery of drugs at the desired site, without loss of their activity makes the difference. Thus drug delivery finds its importance and the use of biodegradable polymers for this purpose is inevitable.
Recently, the synthesis and design of composite materials by blending nano-sized inorganic and organic materials have generated great interests in the fields of material sciences due to their improved and enhanced properties and applicability. Simple technique used for the production of these composites, due to their distinction from the conventional polymer nanocomposites (film or bulky fiber) in the physical size of host polymer matrix and embedded particles of these inorganic–organic hybrid materials and details of electrospinning/electrospraying set-up presented in Fig. 2. The electrospun composite nanofibers are found to possess both the advantages of organic polymers such as lightweight, flexibility and moldability, and special functionality of inorganic species such as high strength and thermal stability. Through electrospinning, the nanocomposite can be fabricated by any of the methodologies shown in Fig. 3 and is explained as follows:
• Employing two or more precursor solution for the electrospinning to achieve multi-component nanofibers such as bi-component and core/shell nanofibers.19–21
• Electrospinning of polymer solutions with dispersed inorganic nanoparticles such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs).22,23
• Surface treatment of the electrospun nanofibers to achieve composite nanofibers.24,25
 Fig. 2  Schematic of electrospinning and electrospraying set-up with composite fibers. 
 Fig. 3  Mechanism pertaining to composites through electrospinning. 
2. Energy applications
2.1. Catalysis
The degradation of organic pollutants such as dyes and pesticides in aqueous solution by photocatalysis, using semiconductor metal oxides such as titanium oxide, zinc oxide, tin oxide and copper oxide (TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, CuO) has been the subject of great research due to their size-tunable physicochemical properties, high activities, durability and low cost. However, the fast recombination rate of photo-generated electron/hole pairs in the bulk semiconductor materials lowers their photo-catalytic efficiency.26 To overcome these drawbacks, composite materials are being fabricated in order to extend the light absorption spectrum as well as suppressing the recombination of photo-generated electrons by virtue of the different Fermi levels of the ingredients in the composite materials. Due to their very large aspect ratios, photo-catalyst materials with fibrous morphology are superior to particles as far as the recycling and aggregation are concerned. Titanium dioxide is widely used as a photo-catalyst due to its ability to oxidize toxic substances into nontoxic substances such as carbon dioxide and water. TiO2 is one of the photo-catalysts widely used for fabricating composites such as TiO2/ZnO composite nanofibers having ZnTiO3 in addition to ZnO and TiO2 crystallites.27 It was observed that nearly 100% Rhodamine-B and 85% phenol was decomposed in the presence of a TiO2/ZnO composite catalyst. The results demonstrated that the incorporation of ZnO in the composite nanofibers improved the photocatalytic efficiency with the best result obtained for 15.76 wt% ZnO. It was inferred that slow charge recombination on the TiO2/ZnO composite catalyst lead to higher degradation rates. Kim et al. fabricated TiO2/poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS) composite nanofibers and observed that the tensile strength and modulus of TiO2/PDMS composite fibers increased gradually with the increase in PDMS content.28 These composite nanofibers showed an improved photo-degradation activity against methylene blue, with the strong dependence on the TiO2 content. Nakata et al. on the other hand, fabricated Al2O3/TiO2 composite nanofibers, which displayed appreciable photocatalytic decomposition of acetaldehyde under UV irradiation.29
Due to the large band-gap of titanium dioxide, research is being focused on shifting the optical response of titanium dioxide from the UV to visible spectral range. Lm et al. took a new approach by immobilizing TiO2 particles in/on hydrogel fibers for the degradation of dye.30 The dye degradation capacity of the composite fibers was investigated using both anionic and cationic dyes under visible sunlight. The swelling behaviour of the hydrogel confirmed that both anionic and cationic water pollutants/dyes were effectively absorbed on the surface, improving their surface area and rapid degradation of the dye by TiO2. Lm et al. fabricated again uniformly dispersed TiO2 particles on the wall of polyacrylonitrile (PAN)-based nanofibers.31 The composite nanofibrous mat was employed for the photo-decomposition of Rhodamine-B dye under UV light. Wang et al. fabricated Y3+ and Nd3+ doped TiO2 nanofibers and investigated their photo-degradation performance against Rhodamine-B and phenol.32 They observed that the degradation rate of 1.5 mol% Y/TiO2 nanofibers was higher for Rhodamine-B, while the degradation rate of 1.0 mol% Nd/TiO2 nanofibers was higher for phenol.
Pan et al. fabricated Au/TiO2 composite nanofibers by sputtering Au particle on TiO2 nanofibers and then observed the morphologies of Au deposited TiO2 nanofibers can be controlled by controlling the sputtering time.33 They found that the composite fiber achieved better photocatalytic degradation of acetaldehyde under UV irradiation in comparison to pure TiO2. Teng et al. fabricated an Au/CNF composite with high conductivity and facile electron transfer kinetics.34 This Au/CNF composite exhibited highly electrocatalytic activity for the oxidation of dopamine, ascorbic acid and uric acid compared to pure CNT. Others widely used semiconductor oxide for photocatalysis as ZnO. Ye et al. fabricated ZnO nanocrystallites embedded in cellulose nanofibers and tested its photo-catalytic properties toward Rhodamine-B under the irradiation of visible light.35 They observed that as compared to pure ZnO nanoparticles, the composite nanofibers were highly elastic, dimensionally stable, and durable as well as easily recyclable. He et al. dispersed ZnS particles on the surface of poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVDF) mixing methacrylic acid (MAA)-trifluoroethyl acrylate (TFA) copolymer nanofibers.36 The degradation of methylene blue by ZnS–fluoropolymer composite was found to be considerably higher than ZnS nanopowder under UV irradiation. This may be due to the adsorption–migration–photodegradation of methylene blue in the case of ZnS–fluoropolymer composite nanofibers as compared to pure ZnS nanopowder. Research is in process to fabricate highly efficient/stable nanocomposites employing electrospun nanofibers having extended light absorption spectrum with suppressed recombination of photo-generated electrons. Electrospun nanofibers are one of the ingredients of the composite to avoid coagulation usually suffered by nanoparticles, thus improving recyclability of the nanofibrous composites.
2.2. Batteries
Among various energy storage devices available, rechargeable lithium-ion batteries with their high-energy density, long cycle lives, and flexible design, are considered as the effective solution to the ever-increasing demand for high-energy density electrochemical power sources. This demand has promoted research efforts towards the developing high-capacity alternative electrode materials with long life cycle, improved safety, reduced carbon-footprint, and low cost. In this regard, Ji et al. fabricated a variety of composite materials through electrospinning and observed improved performance with regard to their pure counterparts.37 The composite material included nickel particles dispersed in carbon nanofibers, copper/carbon composite and polyacrylonitrile/polypyrrole composite nanofibers. They observed that the anode performance improved from the incorporation of a Li-inactive nickel. Ji et al. also fabricated copper-loaded carbon nanofibers through post annealing of electrospun Cu(CH3OO)2/polyacrylonitrile nanofibers able to attain relatively high capacity and good cycling performance in comparison to their pure counterparts.38 This improved performance of the composite nanofibers may be due to the synergy effect of metallic copper and disordered carbon. Ji et al. fabricated carbon nanofibers employing the blended mixture of polyacrylonitrile and polypyrrole.39 This particular anode material achieved high reversible capacity, improved cycle performance, and was able to retain its fibrous morphology after 50 cycles. The improved electrochemical performance of these composite nanofibers can be attributed to their unusual surface properties and unique structural features, which amplify both surface area and extensive intermingling between electrode and electrolyte phases over small length scales, thereby leading to fast kinetics and short pathways for both Li ions and electrons.
Composite electrolytes based on porous polymer membranes have been widely used in lithium ion batteries due to its good compatibility, no leakage, low self-discharge, etc. Though composite electrolytes are being fabricated through a variety of techniques such as solvent-casting, phase inversion, and additive extraction. Nevertheless, these electrolytes show low-rate capabilities at high discharge rates because of low order pore size, low porosity, and poor channel in ionic conduction. Recently, electrospinning was applied for preparing the ultrafine fibers for polymer electrolyte membranes from polyvinylidene fluoride (PVdF), polyvinylidenefluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene, and polyacrylonitrile. However, electrospun fibers prepared from pure polymers have limited capability in stabilizing the battery at high discharge rate due to polymer degradation and the leakage of organic liquid electrolyte since these polymer nanofiber membranes only exhibit macro-porous structures. In order to overcome this shortcoming, Jung et al. fabricated silica (SiO2)/polyacrylonitrile (PAN) three-dimensional composite electrolyte membranes.40 The processing parameters were optimized to obtain nanofiber membrane having very small fiber diameter, highest porosity, and large specific surface area. Composite electrolyte membranes were prepared by soaking these porous nanofiber membranes in 1 M lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) in ethylene carbonate (EC)/dimethyl carbonate (DMC) (1:1 vol%). It was noted that composite membrane delivered the discharge capacity 139 mA h g−1 as 98% of the theoretical value, and retained a high value 127 mA h g−1 as 89% at 150th cycle, which was significantly higher than pure PAN nanofiber-based electrolyte membranes. Jung et al. fabricated Si/carbon fibers by employing 25 wt% poly(amide imide) (PAI) nanofibers containing various silicon content ratios.41 They observed that the electrochemical activity of Si/CFs gradually improved due to buffering effect of large Si volume expansion and shrinkage. In addition, the nanofibers exhibited large accessible surface area, high reversible capacity, and relatively good cycling performance at high current densities compared to pure carbon nanofibers.
Jeong et al. fabricated poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF)/organo-modified clay (OC)/tripropylene-glycol-diacrylate (TPGDA) composite nanofibers as the electrolyte membranes.42 Compared with pure PVDF film-based electrolyte membranes, the composite electrolyte membranes exhibited improved mechanical and electrochemical performance. This improved performance may be due to the ultraviolet photo-polymerization of electrospun PVDF/OC/TPGDA nanofibers generated chemically cross-linked TPGDA-grafted PVDF/OC nanofibers exhibiting robust mechanical and electrochemical properties. For grafting and cross-linking between electrospun nanofibers, a membrane was immersed in a solution of methyl-ethyl-ketone containing 1 wt% photo-initiator (2-benzyl-2-(dimethylamino)-4-morpholinobutylrophenone), and irradiated with ultraviolet light (360 nm) for 12 h as shown in Fig. 4.42 DSC analysis showed that the percentage of the amorphous region in the semi-crystalline PVDF gradually increased by 10% by the incorporation of OC and TPGDA. It was also noted that compared with pure PVDF film-based electrolyte, composite electrolyte membranes exhibited superior ionic conductivity, cyclability as well as improved mechanical stability.
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of grafting of TPGDA on PVDF fibers.42 
Ju et al. compared composite polypyrrole (PPy)/sulfonated-poly(styrene-ethylene-butylenes-styrene) (S-SEBS) nanofibers with PPy/poly(styrene-ethylene-butylenes-styrene) (SEBS) nanofibers prepared by casting method.43 The electrospun PPy/S-SEBS (E-PSS) fibers resulted in higher electrochemical capacity due to the increased doping level, high electrical conductivity, low interfacial resistance, and high reversibility by easy intercalation of Li ion compared to composites (C-PS) prepared by casting. Due to the ever-increasing growth of integrated circuit and micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), demand of compact batteries has increased exponentially. In order to enlarge the contact area between cathode and anode for the capacity enhancement of the compact batteries, 3D structure electrodes with high specific surface area have been fabricated. Lu et al. fabricated 3D network structures of NiO-SWNTs fibers with diameter smaller than 50 nm having relatively high reversible capacity compared to NiO at the charge and discharge current density of 2 C.6
2.3. Fuel cells
The fuel cells work on the same principle as batteries for converting chemical energy into electricity with the difference that the batteries are standalone devices whereas chemicals are constantly supplied into the fuel cell. The majority of fuel cells used hydrogen and oxygen as the main fuel source for producing electricity. Fuel cells are usually classified based on the operating temperature or the type of electrolyte used. On the basis of operating temperatures, the fuel cells can be classified as polymer exchange membrane fuel cell (low temperature 60 to 80 °C i.e. low warm-up time), solid oxide fuel cell (high temperature 700 to 1000 °C, low reliability with high stability in continuous use) and molten-carbonate fuel cell (600 °C). The proton exchange membrane fuel cell converts chemical energy into electrical energy with high efficiency and low pollutants and thus making it one of the most promising power sources for portable and automotive applications. The focus is on developing membranes that are able to achieve appreciably high proton conductivity, low gas permeability into the fuel and oxidant, high thermal stability, and durability. The perfluorosulfonated membranes such as Nafion have been widely used because of their excellent oxidative and chemical stability as well as high-proton conductivity. For instance, Molla et al. synthesized ultrathin Nafion/PVA composite ion-exchange membranes for fuel cells.44 It was found that PVA increased the mechanical strength of membranes but reduced the conductivity of composite membranes as compared to pure Nafion nanofibers. It was noted that the high performance was exhibited by 19 μm thick composite membranes carried out in a single cell fed with H2/air owing to its low ionic resistance. Lee et al., on the other hand, fabricated SiO2 nanoparticle-coated polyimide (PI) nonwoven substrate having a low thickness, high porosity, and strong affinity for Nafion.45 SiO2 nanoparticles were introduced for the purpose of improving mechanical strength and hydrophilicity of the electrospun polyimide nonwoven mat. It was observed that with the increase in dimensional stability, the composite membrane is effective in retarding the steep decline of proton conductivity at low humidity owing to the presence of SiO2/PEI-coated PI nonwoven substrate.
The perfluorosulfonated membranes have limitations such as low thermal stability and high gas permeability resulting in the development of sulfonated aromatic hydrocarbon based polymer electrolyte membranes. However, due to the presence of a large number of sulfonic acid groups results in swelling of membranes and reduction in their mechanical properties. Tamura et al. synthesized composite membranes from sulfonated polyimide nanofibers to improve the proton transportation.46 They found that during electrospinning, the hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains in the polymer were separated to the outside at the air surface and inside of the polymer solution, respectively resulting in phase separation shown in Fig. 5 leading to the rapid proton transport.46 It was clear that the polyimides within the aligned nanofibers were significantly oriented resulting in highly stable composite membranes. It was also noted that the composite membrane was able to achieve high proton conductivity, low gas permeability into the fuel and good chemical and thermal stabilities. However, the measurement of proton conductivity for the composite membrane was conducted only in the axial direction; research is on-going to perform precise measurements in the radial direction as it is needed for the actual use of electrolyte membranes in fuel cells.
 Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structure of NTDA-BDSA-r-APPF, (b) schematic representation of sulfonated copolyimide nanofiber, (c) TEM image of cross-sectional aligned nanofiber in radial direction, (d) TEM image of cross-sectional aligned nanofiber in axial direction, (d) SEM image of aligned nanofiber electrospun on specially designed collector.46 
Direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) have recently attracted much attention as they can provide green power for electric vehicles and electronic portable devices by direct conversion of methanol fuel. The methanol conversion is carried out in the membrane electrode assembly, which consists of a polymer electrolyte membrane and two catalyst-loaded porous electrodes for methanol oxidation at the anode and oxygen reduction at the cathode. To improve the efficiency, Lin et al. fabricated composite nanofibers by depositing Pt–Ru nanoparticles onto electrospun carbon nanofibers using a polyol processing technique.47 The morphology and size of Pt–Ru nanoparticles were controlled by 1-aminopyrene functionalization of carbon nanofibers. The Pt–Ru/carbon composite nanofibers with 1-aminopyrene functionalization were found to have uniform distribution of smaller nanoparticles compared with those pre-treated with conventional acids found to show improved performance towards the electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol. Lin et al. prepared cross-linked poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) nanofiber with glutaraldehyde vapours, then impregnated with Nafion solution to prepare Nafion/PVA composite membranes.48 The incorporation of cross-linked PVA nanofibers in the Nafion membrane allowed reducing the thickness of composite membrane to ∼50 μm without causing a large increment of methanol cross-over across the membrane resulting in better DMFC performance. Choi et al. fabricated three-dimensional composite nanofibrous membranes by impregnating Nafion into the pores of electrospun PVDF.49 Although the composite membranes exhibit lower proton conductivity than Nafion 115, the composite membrane exhibits better performance than pure Nafion 115 in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) due to the smaller thickness and suppressed methanol cross-over from the anode to cathode through the membrane.
Glucose fuel cells are of increasing interest due to the advantages of employing glucose as a fuel, as it is nontoxic, non-explosive and non-volatile, and has relatively high energy content. However, glucose results in partial oxidation involving only 2 electrons per molecule, requiring metal catalyst such as platinum to improve the oxidation of glucose.50 Prilutsky et al. synthesized carbonized polyacrylonitryle (cPAN) nanofibers, with(out) embedded MWCNTs as anodes for glucose fuel cells.51 The anodes showed improved activity with the incorporation of MWCNTs. The orientation of graphitic layers along the carbon fiber axis and the coherence of layer packing were shown to be important for enhanced electrode activity. The maximum values of open circuit voltage and peak power density for composite anodes were found to be 0.4 V and 30 μW cm−2. They found silver metallization of the composite electrodes leads to the improvement of open circuit voltage and peak power density to 0.9 V and 400 μW cm−2, respectively. Zhi et al. fabricated solid oxide fuel cell cathode using the yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) nanofiber scaffold with the infiltrated La(1−x)SrxMnO3 (LSM) showing an enhanced catalytic activity towards oxygen reduction.52 The cathode was found to show a continuous path for charge transport and an increased number of triple-phase boundary sites. Jeong et al. fabricated FeCo–CNF composite electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction in alkaline fuel cells via electrospinning and the subsequent pyrolysis of a mixture of a nitrogen-containing polymer and organo-metallic compounds.53 The electrochemical analysis showed that the resultant FeCo–CNFs catalysts was comparable to commercial carbon-supported platinum (Pt/C) with better ethanol tolerance than Pt/C in an alkaline electrolyte. It was also noted that the metal inclusion resulted in the increment in oxygen-related active site and enhancement of electrical conductivity.
2.4. Solar cells
Grätzel was the first person to fabricate dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) in 1991.54 Within the past decade, DSCs have gained considerable attention as a potential technique for harnessing sunlight, a largely abundant renewable-energy source. In DSCs, a sensitizer is anchored to the surface of a wide-band semiconductor oxide to absorb the sunlight. Charge separation takes place at the interface via photo-induced electron injection from the sensitizer to the conduction band of the semiconductor oxide. Later, these electrons are collected at the charge collector. The use of broad absorption band sensitizers in conjunction with nanocrystalline semiconductor oxides are employed to harvest a large fraction of sunlight. Benefits of these DSCs include simple non-vacuum fabrication resulting in potential large-scale production.55 The wide-band semiconductor oxides usually employed are TiO2, SnO2 and ZnO, etc. TiO2 nanostructures are extensively used as photoelectrodes for DSCs by virtue of their low production cost and chemically stable nature. Overall energy conversion efficiencies (conversion of solar to electrical energy) over 10% have been achieved. Nevertheless, novel steps are being employed to improve the overall energy conversion efficiency of DSCs. They include incorporation of hole/electron blocking layers, nanosized scattering layer, avoiding leakage of the electrolyte and fabrication of composite nanomaterial as photoelectrode, etc. For instance, Feng et al. fabricated a composite photoelectrode by depositing TiO2 nanofibers onto the TiO2 nanoparticles as a light scattering layer.56 It was argued that the efficiency of the cells with nanofibrous scattering layer improved in comparison to nanoparticles due to improved scattering effect observed in case of nanofibers as compared to nanoparticles. On the other hand, Lee et al. prepared poly(vinylidenefluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) nanofibers containing nanosized inorganic BaTiO3 to suppress the leakage of the electrolyte in DSCs.57 They also showed that PVDF-HFP nanofibers containing inorganic filler have better ionic conductivity resulting in better efficiency than those of without filler. Whereas, Joshi et al. fabricated composite from electrospun TiO2 nanofibers and TiO2 nanoparticles, which was found to improve the harvesting of light.58
A variety of TiO2 based composite materials are being designed as photoelectrodes for DSCs, such as TiO2–MWCNT and TiO2–graphene.59,60 Functionalized CNTs or graphene was introduced into the precursor solution usually employed for the production of rice-grain TiO2 nanostructures.61 Later, these precursor solutions was electrospun and subsequently heat-treated to fabricate single crystalline nanostructures applicable as photoelectrode for DSCs. In case of TiO2–MWCNT nanostructures, the rice grain morphology was retained at low MWCNT loadings of the order of 0.1–0.3 wt% of TiO2. The optimum MWCNT loading for best performance was found to be 0.2 wt%, which showed 32% enhancement in the energy conversion efficiency due to the improved charge transfer and collection by the incorporation of CNTs into the rice grain-shaped TiO2 network. Similarly, 0.25–0.75 wt% loading of graphene with respect to TiO2 was employed to fabricate composite nanostructures to evaluate their effect on the performance of DSCs. For, TiO2–graphene nanostructures, 0.5 wt% loading were found to be the optimum concentration enhancing the overall energy conversion efficiency by 33%. The other approach employed is replacing liquid sanitizer (Ru-based dyes) by a solid sanitizer to enhance the stability of the solar cells. Shengyuan et al. synthesized MSA-capped CdS, chemically conjugated to the surfaces of TiO2 photoelectrode. These composite was assembled into a Quantum dot solar cell (QDSC) by sandwiching against a Pt counter electrode in presence of parafilm spacer and polysulfide electrolyte.62 The best energy conversion efficiency for QDSC was 0.07%. Extensive work is in process at NUS-Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology to further improve the efficiency of the solar cells.
3. Filters
Air filtration technologies have traditionally found numerous applications such as in semiconductor and the health-care industry. One of the key elements for effective air filtration is the filter media, usually made of nonwoven fabrics, such as glass fibers, electrospun fibers, etc. The usual criteria for high performance air filters are high filtration efficiency with low pressure drop. Kim et al. fabricated poly(acrylonitrile) nano-web on a commercial melt-blown poly(propylene) (PP) filter medium to generate composite filter media as shown in Fig. 6.63 Structural characterization performed on the composite filter showed that a thin layer of electrospun nano-web can improve the overall performance by increasing filtration efficiency without significantly increasing the pressure drop of the composite membrane.
 Fig. 6  A structural diagram of the filter media used by Kim et al.. A nano-web of PAN was electrospun on top of the melt-blown web.63 
3.1. Gaseous filters
Patanaik et al. fabricated composite air filters by sandwiching polyethylene oxide (PEO) nanofibrous membranes between another nonwoven mat.64 The increase in diameter of polyethylene oxide nanofibers with the increased concentration was found to improve the filtration efficiency and decrease the pressure drop. They observed that the cyclic compression employed during the working cycle plays an important role in defining the longevity of the filter media. A composite filter media was found to be more stable against cyclic compression as compared to membranes deposited over nonwoven mats. Improved filter efficiency and longevity was observed for composite filter media as compared to membranes deposited over nonwoven mats. This may be due to relatively no increase in pore sizes after cyclic compression due to relatively less pressure drop in the case of composite filter media. Sundarrajan et al. combined electrospinning and electrospraying for the deposition of inorganic nanoparticles over polymeric nanofibers resulting in filter media for protective clothing.65 They observed by the precisely controlling process parameters, it was possible to achieve well dispersed nanoparticle in polymer matrix. It was claimed that these composite media will be able to detoxify chemical warfare agents and will have the potential to replace the existing charcoal based protection suits wherein the warfare agents are not detoxified rather adsorbed. Uyar et al. fabricated beta-cyclodextrin (beta-CD) doped polystyrene (PS) fibers as a filter medium against organic compounds such as phenolphthalein, etc.66 The filter media was based on the principle that the beta-CD molecules from inclusion complexes with organic compounds, resulting in their separation from the fluid.
3.2. Liquid filters
One of the generally used materials for water filtration is Nylon-6 nanofibers. Park et al. fabricated Nylon-6 nanofibers containing well dispersed silver nanoparticles.67 They observed that the composite nanofibers showed better antibacterial activity in comparison to its single phase Nylon-6, thus making them a potential material for water filtration. The other approach employed is the fabrication of nanofibrous support material for nanocomposites. Pant et al. synthesized composite electrospun Nylon-6 mats incorporating TiO2 nanoparticles.68 The presence of a small amount of TiO2 nanoparticles in Nylon-6 solution was found to improve the hydrophilicity, mechanical strength, antimicrobial and UV protecting ability of electrospun mats. The resultant Nylon-6/TiO2 antimicrobial spider-net like composite mat with antifouling effect can be considered as a potential candidate for future water filter applications. One of the possible nano-fibrous support materials can be silicon carbide (SiC) due to its unique properties such as high mechanical robustness, chemical inertness, and thermal stability. Liu et al. fabricated beta-SiC through the technique of concentric electrospinning with the diameter ranging from 1 to 2 nm.69 The other support material employed was poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) non-woven mat to impart high mechanical strength to polyethersulfone (PES) electrospun nanofibers.70 It was noted that the heat treatment of PES/PET mat enhanced the interfacial stability, thus preserving the structure of nanofibrous layer and its effective porosity. It was also noted that the filtration performance was directly proportional to the size distribution of the suspended particles.
Wang et al. fabricated high flux thin film nanofibrous composite membrane containing a hydrophilic barrier layer and a nanofibrous substrate.71 PVA/PAN nanofibrous composite membranes were prepared having a very thin micrometre PVA nanofibrous layer on the electrospun PAN nanofibrous substrate, followed by re-melting of PVA nanofibrous layer to form a barrier PVA film by water vapor treatment and chemical cross-linking in glutaraldehyde water/acetone solution. The depositing time during PVA electrospinning and the water content of the cross-linking solution were utilized to control the thickness and swelling degree of the PVA barrier layer. The highest permeate flux of 210 l m−2 h−1 was achieved with the rejection of 99.5% for the composite membrane under the operating pressure of 0.3 MPa.
3.3. Aerosol filters
The most common method of filtration is via fibrous membrane filters consisting of a single or multi-components are predominately employed due to their high collection efficiency and durability. Five mechanisms for the deposition of aerosol particles on a fiber in a fibrous filter are interception, inertial impaction, diffusion, gravitational force and electrostatic attraction. The cumulative particle removal efficiency of a filter is the result of combination for all these mechanisms. For most particle sizes, the filtering contribution of the gravitational force is appeared to be minimal. Brownian diffusion, which is the dominant filtration mechanism for fine particles, is of negligible importance when dealing with coarse particles. In case of sub-micron particulates, Brownian diffusion, interception and inertial impaction as well as the electrostatic capture gets significance. Electrostatic attraction is widely used in many different types of aerosol filtration devices against sub-micron particulates. Yeom et al. fabricated composite nano-fibrous mat consisting of Nylon-6 nanofibers with boehmite nanoparticles, these nanoparticles act as an electrostatic charging agent.72 These composite fibers showed significant improvement in the submicron aerosol capture efficiency without appreciable change in the air flow resistance. This improved performance of the filter was found to be due to the improved surface potential of the fibrous mat fabricated through electrospinning as well as the incorporation of boehmite nanoparticles. Work is also in the process to employ a variety of composite fibers electrospinning as aerosol filters.73
4. Smart materials
In the recent times, the research pertaining to the fabrication of reinforced polymer nano-composites has increased drastically due to their potential application in defence and industrial sectors. These materials can be employed not only for reinforcing applications but also in multifunctional applications where the properties of the nanoparticles can be combined with mechanical reinforcement to offer significant advances in material design and function. There are reasons for this approach as the conventional laminates suffer from drawbacks such as (a) aggregation of particles in the polymer matrices, (b) reduction of mechanical strength due to the addition of particles, (c) negative effect of surface modification of carbon fibers on the mechanical strength. A possible remedy to the above mentioned drawbacks is the addition of non-woven nanofibrous sheets in the inter-laminar interface of two adjacent laminates resulting in improved structural and functional properties of laminates. The benefits are (a) high surface area/volume ratio resulting in increased bonding area between the nanofibers and the base material, (b) mixing of nanoparticles with a polymer solution prior to electrospinning to achieve its uniform distribution in the nanofibrous membrane, (c) porous, thin and lightweight membrane resulting in no appreciable increase in the weight of the laminate. Sihn et al. investigated improvement of the damage resistance in laminated composites with the incorporation of nanofibers as the interleave material.74 A composite nanofibrous web was fabricated from polycarbonate, poly(phenylene oxide) and polystyrene with(out) CNTs. Uniaxial tensile tests were carried out with a delamination-prone layup [30/−30/90/90/−30/30] by placing the nanofibril mats at the interface between each ply. The stress levels at the first micro-cracking damage, delamination damage and ultimate load-drop increased by 8.4%, 8.1% and 9.8%, respectively, with the addition of nano-interlayers as compared with pristine specimens. The number of micro-cracks decreased significantly with the addition of nano-interlayers.
Yoon et al. fabricated layered fabric systems having varying levels of electrospun nanofibers web density, different substrates as well as different layered structures for the breathability and waterproofing applications.75 The electrospun waterproof breathable materials provided different levels of breathability and waterproof to meet diverse end uses and consumer needs. It was noted that composite structure design influences the breathability and waterproof devising a way to achieve a combination of high barrier and comfort performance, thus enhancing thermal comfort for adequate protection. The comparison with traditional waterproof breathable materials revealed that the layered structures based on nanofiber webs provide better resistance to water penetration than densely woven fabrics and better moisture vapor and air permeability than micro-porous membrane laminates and coated fabrics. On the similar lines, Lee et al. fabricated an polyurethane nanofibrous layered fabric system as protective textile material protecting against liquid pollutants.76 Air permeability and water vapor transmission of fabrics were evaluated against a pesticide mixture evaluating its thermal comfort performance. Protection performance and air/moisture vapor transport properties were compared against the existing commercial materials, the fabric achieved barrier performance between micro-porous materials and nonwovens used for protective clothing. Akangah et al. tested the impact resistance of electrospun Nylon-6 interleaved laminate against the base material and observed an improvement in the threshold impact as well as the reduction in the impact damage growth rate with impact height and impact force.77 Interleaved panels consist of one layer of polymer nanofabric in-between two consecutive AS4/3501-6 are shown in Fig. 7. Sixteen-ply of these quasi-isotropic composite laminates impacts were tested. The impact velocity, force, and energy were varied from 2.0 to 4 m s−1, 900 to 2100 N and 0.46 to 1.8 J, respectively. The author concluded that the incorporation of nanofibrous layer marginally increased the laminate thickness with the increase in threshold impact force by about 60% compared to the pure laminate. Polymer nanofabric also reduced the impact damage growth rate to one-half with height impact. The damage growth rate was also found to reduce from 0.115 to 0.105 mm2 N−1 with the impact force.
 Fig. 7  Fabrication of interleaved test panel (upper half of the panel).77 
5. Sensors
In recent years, the development of composite based gas sensor technology has received considerable attention in many areas such as agriculture, medicine, meteorology, aerospace application on board space vehicles and other industrial facilities. Polymer and metal oxide composites have been extensively investigated as sensitive materials, which exhibited better sensing properties, such as shorter response time, smaller hysteresis, higher sensitivity and improved stability.78,79 Many strategies have been developed to fabricate composite sensors with high sensitivity and excellent reproducibility. Enhancement of sensor performance can be achieve through (i) an accurate control of the morphology in the nanometre range of composition and of the surface state of the sensing materials, (ii) the integration of the sensor components (iii) the optimization of the working temperature of sensitive layer, the operating mode, and the signal processing, and (iv) the use of filters exhibiting selective gas retention or conversion properties. All these rely on new, highly sensitive materials and good fabrication technology.
Many researchers expect to obtain composite nanofiber sensors with high sensitivity, rapid response, reversibility at room temperature and convenient operation. Conducting polymers such as polyaniline, polypyrrole, and polythiophene have been widely investigated as effective materials for chemical sensors.80 Among the family of conducting polymers, polyaniline (PANI) has been one of the most extensively studied because of its stability and reversible acid–base doping/dedoping chemistry.81 These composite conducting polymer/metal oxides for gas-sensing application have attracted particular interest because the hybridization and synergic effect of the pure organic and inorganic materials could enhance the sensing performance. In recent years a large number of nanomaterials synthesis and fabrication methods have been proposed and demonstrated by using both physical and chemical methods such as the sol–gel method82 sputtering83 layer by layer (LbL) adsorption84 and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PEVCD).85 Among these methods, electrospinning is one of the simplest and most cost-effective techniques to produce organic/inorganic nanofibers. Various composite nanofibers have been prepared by the heat treatment of electrospun composite nanofibers comprising a matrix polymer and target-material precursors. Electrospinning, nanofibers with a variety of morphologies, including dense, hollow, porous, and core-sheath structures for specific applications, have been achieved by varying the process parameters.86–89 Among different nanostructures, composite nanofibers have attracted more attention recently due to their inherent large specific surface area and highly porous structure, which facilitate the adsorption/desorption process and minimize the diffusion resistance of molecules to the surface of materials.
Li et al. have synthesized polyaniline/titanium dioxide (PANI/TiO2) composite nanofibers via polymerization of aniline with electrospun Mn3O4/TiO2 nanofibers.90 The PANI/TiO2 composite nanofibers with ammonia concentration ranging from 25 ppb to 200 ppb showed better sensing performance, depending on the constituent content, than that of pure PANI sensor. When the ratio of PANI/TiO2 is below the optimal value (TiO2 of around 40.74 wt%), the sensitivity increases with TiO2 content in the composite, when the ratio is above the optimal value, the sensitivity decreases with the TiO2 content in the composites. Sadek et al. developed a polyaniline/In2O3 nanofiber composite sensor for H2, CO and NO2 gas sensing application.91 The polyaniline/WO3 nanofiber composite was deposited onto a layered ZnO/64° YXLiNbO3 based surface acoustic wave (SAW) gas sensor has been investigated towards hydrogen (H2). The average thickness of the polyaniline/WO3 nanofiber layer on the substrate measured by profile-meter is 0.4 μm with average diameter of the fibers around 90 nm. With hydrogen exposure, the conductivity of polyaniline/WO3 nanofiber composite layer increases resulting in a decrease in the acoustic wave velocity, thereby decreasing the resonant frequency. These changes in frequency were related to the concentration of H2 present in the environment. The measured sensor response was approximately 7 kHz towards 1% of H2 in synthetic air. The 90% response time of 40 s and recovery time of 100 s with good repeatability were observed at room temperature.92 Wang et al. successfully fabricated Pd(IV)-doped CuO oxide composite nanofibers (PCNFs) via electrospinning and then employed to construct an amperometric non-enzymatic glucose sensor.93 The PCNFs based glucose sensors display distinctly enhanced electro-catalytic activity towards the oxidation of glucose, shows significantly lower overvoltage (0.32 V) and ultrafast (1 s) and ultrasensitive current (1061.4 μA mM−1 cm−2) response with a lower detection limit of 1.9 × 10−8 M (S/N = 3). When the sensor is stored in air at 4 °C, it retains 94% of its initial response current after 50 days which shows good reproducibility and stability.
Li et al. fabricated PANI/Ag composite nanotubes using a suitable fiber as template in the presence of H4SiW12O40 (SiW12) and silver nitrate (AgNO3) as a dopant and an oxidant.94 They observed the nanotubes with average outer and inner diameters are 200 and 170 nm, respectively and length of the nanotubes is several thousand nanometres. The resistance of PANI/Ag composite nanotubes increases gradually with the increase in the concentration of NH3. These composite films have a small increase in resistance when exposed to 5 ppm of NH3, which indicates PANI/Ag composite nanotubes synthesized by this method have superior gas sensing performance even to very low concentration of NH3 gas, comparison with conventional PANI. Li et al. synthesized composite nanofibers of Si containing polyelectrolyte, polyethylene oxide and polyaniline (PANI) by electrospinning.95 The nanofibers showed a smooth fiber surface with the diameters of the fibers ranged from 250 to 500 nm. Heating of the composite nanofibers lead to joining of the intersected fibers, but the nanofibers in general maintained a three-dimensional configuration. Therefore, the electrospun non-woven nanofiber mat of the composite exhibited much higher surface to volume ratio and larger porosity compared with the composite film. Polymer composite nanofibers showed impedance change from 6.3 × 106 to 2.5 × 104 Ω with the increment of relative humidity (RH) from 22 to 97% at room temperature, exhibiting high sensitivity and good linearity on a semi-logarithmic scale. In addition, they exhibited fast and highly reversible response characterized by very small hysteresis of ∼2% RH and short response time (t90%: 7 s and 19 s for adsorption and desorption between 33 and 97% RH, respectively).
Solid-state gas sensors are particularly attractive because of their low expenditure and wide range of applications used to control air pollution and to detect volatile, combustible and toxic gases in air and in the field of domestic, laboratories and industrial applications. Because of their wide direct band gap and high surface to volume ratio, many 1D metal oxides such as SnO2 and ZnO demonstrate to be excellent candidates for ultrasensitive gas sensors.96 In particular, the coupled oxide nanocomposites such as SnO2/TiO2 or ZnO/SnO2 have received great attention and investigations to improve the gas-sensitive properties of the sensors. Khorami et al. have demonstrated electrospun SnO2/ZnO composite nanofibers which attributed to various diffraction plans of SnO2 with tetragonal rutile structure and ZnO with hexagonal wurtzite structure.97 Surface analysis of SnO2/ZnO composite nanofibers shows good distribution of uniform nanofibers with an average diameter size of about 75 nm. The ethanol sensor based on these composite nanofibers showed a good and desirable sensing behavior such as high sensitivity, quick response and recovery times at optimum temperature of 360 °C. Ji et al. synthesized polyacrylonitrile (PAN)/zinc(II) chloride (ZnCl2) composite nanofibers and the response of these nanofibers to hydrogen sulfide (H2S).98 The authors observed that increasing ZnCl2 concentration in the spinning solution reduces the fiber diameter, most likely due to the increased solution conductivity. Exposing PAN/ZnCl2 fibers to H2S leads to the formation of PAN/zinc sulfide (ZnS) composite nanofibers that contain ZnS crystals on the surface. These results indicate that PAN/ZnCl2 composite nanofibers could find applications in H2S sensing.
Wang et al. demonstrated the preparation and improved hydrogen monitoring properties based on p-NiO/n-SnO2 hetero-junction composite nanofibers via electrospinning technique.99 The pure SnO2 nanofibers and as-prepared p-NiO/n-SnO2 composite nanofibers (NSNFs) with different molar ratio contents of NiO, shows an average diameter of nanofibers ranging from 100 to 200 nm and with many interconnected grains of around 20 nm in size. The geometry and dimension of the sensor device structure and the corresponding TEM image of 4.11 mol% NSNFs are shown in Fig. 8(a). In contrast to the pure SnO2 nanofibers, the introduction of NiO has enhanced the sensitivity to 100 ppm H2 at 320 °C dramatically. When the intermingled quantity of NiO is 4.11 mol%, its response is more than three times that of pure SnO2 nanofibers are shown in Fig. 8(b). The response–recovery behaviors of 4.11 mol% NSNFs sensor, the sensor were sequentially exposed to 5, 50, 100, 500, and 1000 ppm H2 at 320 °C. Author has observed extremely fast response–recovery behavior (∼3 s) has been obtained at the operable temperature of 320 °C, with the detection limit of approximate 5 ppm H2 concentration (Fig. 8(c)). The role of the addition of NiO into SnO2 nanofibers is to form p–n heterojunction in which the electrons associated with these charged species are drawn from the conduction band of the bulk material, leading to an increase in resistance. H2 increases the number of electrons in SnO2 and decreases the concentration of holes in NiO; therefore, the thinner depletion layer thickness leads to lower resistance. The addition of p-type NiO enhanced the hydrogen adsorption kinetics thereby increasing the sensitivity of the hetero-contact sensor.
 Fig. 8  SEM images of (a) 4.11 mol% NiO–SnO2 composite nanofibers, (b) responses of the sensors to 100 ppm H2 at 320 °C, (c) response and recovery characteristic curves of the sensor based on 4.11 mol% NSNFs to H2 in the range of 5–1000 ppm at 320 °C.99 
Hwang et al. reported on LaOCl–NiO based composite nanofiber mats for p-type gas sensors which were prepared via electrospinning of LaNiO3 precursor/poly(vinyl acetate) composite fibers are shown in Fig. 9(a).100 The crystallite sizes within the nanofibers were found to be 150 and 200 nm by increasing the calcinations temperatures and more porous microstructures were developed in specimens calcined at the higher temperature (950 °C) are shown in Fig. 9(b). The LaOCl–NiO composite fiber mats calcined at 550 °C and 650 °C exhibit unique p-type semiconducting gas sensing properties increasing the resistance in the presence of reducing gases (CO, H2, NH3, and C2H5OH) and decreasing in the presence of an oxidizing gas (NO2) are shown in Fig. 9(c). The enhanced gas sensing characteristics of LaOCl–NiO composite fiber mats are attributed to their highly porous fibrillar structure with a high surface area that facilitates fast gas transport and effective surface reaction. Composite fiber mats calcined at ≤650 °C showed p-type gas sensing behavior, in which the exact carrier type for composite fibers through hole measurement was difficult due to the very porous and rough surface. The LaOCl–NiO composite fiber mats calcined at 550 °C shows the detection limit of C2H5OH was <20 ppm which is far below the general requirements (∼200 ppm, 0.5 g C2H5OH per litre of blood). Ding et al. developed a nanostructured complex, polyethyleneimine (PEI) functionalized polyamide 6 (PA 6) (PEI-PA 6) nanofiber/nets (NFN), as a novel sensor coating on quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) for highly sensitive formaldehyde detection.101 The PA 6 composite NFN membranes formed with different voltages, indicating that the resultant nanofibers were randomly oriented as 3D porous membranes with a diameter of several hundred nanometres between 180 and 500 nm with BET measurements are found to be around 19 to 34 surface area/m2 g−1. When exposed to 100 ppm of formaldehyde, the maximum frequency shifts of QCM sensors coated with PEI flat film, PEI-PA 6 NFN (20 kV) and PEI-PA 6 NFN (30 kV) were 19.0, 25.6, and 52.8 Hz, respectively. The PEI-PA 6 NFN nanostructure based sensor showed excellent sensing performance towards formaldehyde in terms of higher response, fast response, good selectivity and reproducibility. Liao et al. have synthesized single-walled carbon nanotube/polyaniline composite nanofibers for use as high-performance chemosensors.102 Interestingly, composites loaded with single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) up to 5 wt% possess widely tunable conductivities of about 10−4 to 102 S cm−1. Chemosensors fabricated from the composite nanofibers synthesized with a 1.0 wt% SWCNT loading respond much more rapidly to low concentrations (100 ppb) of HCl and NH3 vapors compared to polyaniline nanofibers alone (120 s vs. 1000 s). Gas chemosensors made from SWCNT/PANi composite nanofibers demonstrate large improvements in sensitivity (120 s vs. 1000 s) compared to devices fabricated from only pristine PANi nanofibers. Thus the combinations of these new classes of composite nanofiber materials can lead to exciting opportunities in advance sensors applications.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM images of as-electrospun LaNiO3 precursor/PVAc composite nanofibers, (b) nanofibers calcined at 950 °C (Inset: magnified image) (c) bar graphs represent the gas sensitivities to 100 ppm CO, H2, NH3, NO2, and C2H5OH operated at 400 °C. (Insets in display the dynamic gas sensing responses of LaOCl–NiO nanofiber mats calcined at 550 °C.)100 
6. Electrospun composite nanofibrous scaffolds for biomedical applications
The principle of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine is the application of biomaterial scaffolds to produce living structures with sufficient size and function to improve human lives. Multiple technologies and strategies have evolved and it was only with the application of nanotechnology that the field improved tremendously. Tissue engineering, the multidisciplinary area of research aims to repair, replace or regenerate cells, tissues or organs to restore impaired function owing to defects and ageing. Nanotechnology for tissue engineering application focuses on the role of extracellular matrix (ECM) with a biomimetic migration, proliferation and differentiation.103 Tissue growth or regeneration is achieved with a stimulation assisted by cells or drug or growth factor loaded matrix at the damage tissue sites. The requirement for such a matrix to induce tissue regeneration is that it has to be physically stable within implanted injury site, to direct and control tissue growth, biodegradable in vivo after the process and should not produce toxic metabolic byproducts. These biomimetic tissue regeneration scaffolds are made by natural and synthetic polymers with certain optimal mechanical strength and form that include sponge type or fibrous matrix or hydrogel types. To engineer such a complex and multifunctional scaffolds numerous nanotechnology techniques were evolved that can fabricate porous, nanometre sized nanofiber scaffolds with surface properties that influence cell fate determination, allow regulation of specific protein expression patterns and encourage cell-specific scaffold remodeling. These nanotechniques can modulate surface topography down to submicron/nanometre range and include nanoscale surface pattern fabrication, electrospinning and self-assembly fabrication.104 Incorporating biological signals in the form of growth factors, angiogenic factors, cell surface receptors, drug entities, reactive oxygen species and spatial cues can further influence cellular proliferation, migration, differentiation and 3D organization of tissues.
Drug delivery is viable with nanofibrous systems incorporating drug within the nanofibrous matrices and release them slowly according to the need of organs. Herein, we classify (Fig. 10) the nanofiber composites according to their specific biomedical applications, namely; (i) tissue engineering or regenerative medicine and (ii) drug delivery. Electrospinning has been recognized as an efficient and well established technique capable of producing nanofibers by electrically charging a suspended droplet of polymer melt or solution.105–110 Various polymers including synthetic ones such as poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL), poly(lactic acid) (PLA), poly(glycolic acid) (PGA), poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), polystyrene, polyurethane (PU), polyethyelene terephthalate (PET), poly(L-lactic acid)-co-poly(ε-caprolactone) (PLACL) and biological materials such as collagen, gelatin, chitosan have been successfully electrospun to obtain fibers with diameters ranging from 3 nm to 5 μm.111–113 Co-axial electrospinning is a modification or extension of traditional electrospinning technique with a major difference being a compound spinneret used. Using the spinneret, two components are fed through different co-axial capillary channels and are integrated into core–shell structured composite fibers to fulfil different application purposes.114 For example; bioactive composite scaffolds are fabricated using collagen (imparting bioactivity) as the shell and PCL (synthetic polymer) as the core. Core–shell structured nanofibers (360–400 nm) prepared by co-axial electrospinning, have the advantages of being able to control the shell thickness and manipulate overall mechanical strength and degradation properties of resulting composite nanofibers, without changing its biocompatibility. Alternatively, core–shell structured composite nanofibers are functionalized for potential use in drug or growth factor encapsulation and release, and development of highly sensitive sensors and tissue engineering applications.
 Fig. 10  Schematic representation nanofiber composites for biomedical applications. 
6.1. Applications of composite nanofibrous scaffolds in tissue engineering
Tissue engineering is the application of knowledge and expertise from a multidisciplinary field, to develop and manufacture therapeutic products that utilize the combination of matrix scaffolds with viable human cell systems or cell responsive biomolecules derived from such cells, for the repair, restoration or regeneration of cells or tissue damaged by injury, disease or congenital defects. Tissue engineering (TE) involve scaffolds or matrices to provide support for cells in order to express new ECM. The biocompatibility of scaffold materials actively participates in the signaling process for the requirement of safe degradation and also provides a substratum for cell migration into the defect sites of the tissue. TE is one of the most promising techniques for the regeneration of tissues by autologous, allogeneic cells and tissue transplantation. However, autografts are associated with limitations such as donor site morbidity and limited availability. An alternative to autografts is allografts, which have potential to cause an immune response and also carry the risk of disease transfer. Potential applications of electrospun composite nanofibers for TE are envisioned mainly in the hard tissue engineering, especially bone.

6.1.1. ECM proteins (collagen and gelatin). 
Collagen is a fibrous protein found in animals, especially in the flesh and connective tissues of mammals. It is the most abundant protein in mammals, containing up to 35% of the whole-body protein content commonly created by fibroblast cells. Collagen is mostly found as elongated fibrils in fibrous tissues such as tendon, ligament and skin, and is also abundant in cornea, cartilage, bone, blood vessels, gut, and intervertebral disc. Collagen is a major ECM component possesses fibrous structure with fibrils of varying diameters (50–500 nm). This fibrils influence cell behavior by allowing cell attachment to the nano-featured collagen matrix. Cells seeded on this nanofibrous matrix tend to maintain their normal phenotype and guided growth along the fiber orientation. The motif behind the biomimetic nano-strategies is to dictate, control and fabricate the morphology and composition of developed biomaterials, in which the nano-crystallites of inorganic hydroxyapatite (HAp) are being dispersed with preferential orientation to enhance bone tissue regeneration. Because of potential biomedical application, many studies report fabrication of bone-mimicking bio-composites of HAp and bioactive organic components such as collagen, gelatin, chondroitin sulfate, chitosan and amphiphilic peptide by direct precipitation methods,115,116 poly(lactic acid) through a solvent-cast technique,117 and polyamide by solution method.118 HAp has inorganic crystalline nature that of natural bone and is biocompatible, bioactive and osteoconductive in nature. High levels of type I collagen and several non-collagenous proteins (such as osteopontin, bone sialoprotein and osteocalcin) constitute bone tissue. The dimension of bone mineral is around 50 nm of length, 25 nm of width, and 2–5 nm of thickness.119 These bio-minerals have their long crystallographic c-axis oriented in parallel to each other and as well aligned with collagen tropocollagen molecules.120 Collagen is easily biodegradable and resorbed by the body and facilitates excellent attachment to cells. However, its mechanical properties are relatively low (E ≈ 100 MPa) especially with respect to bone (E ≈ 2–5 GPa)121 and it is therefore highly cross-linked or found in composites, such as collagen–glycosaminoglycans for skin regeneration122 or Col/HAp for bone remodeling.123 The advantage of collagen and HAp devices in comparison with the synthetic PLGA124 devices is that the biocomposite significantly inhibited the growth of bacterial pathogens, which is often associated with prosthesis. Electrostatic co-spinning nanoHAp and collagen improved the mechanical properties of scaffold to mimic the complex nanostructured architecture. When collagen supports cell adhesion, proliferation and HAp acts as a seed for biomineralization of osteoblasts in bone tissue regeneration.125 The bio-composites of collagen and nanoHAp is bioactive, osteoconductive, osteoinductive and is a natural choice for bone grafting as it mimics the bone components.126,127 Bone like orientation of c-axes of HAp nanocrystals with regular alignment along collagen fibrils was fabricated and demonstrated.128 The HAp/Col composite, designed to simulate bone tissue, is produced using atelocollagen to reduce antigenicity by condensing Ca(OH)2/H3PO4 suspension.129 It was noted that the biomineralisation on Coll/HAp composite nanofibrous scaffolds cultured with human foetal osteoblasts was significantly higher than on collagen nanofibrous scaffolds during 10 days of culture period. It was found that mineral deposition was significantly lower up to 56% in collagen nanofibrous scaffolds without inorganic HAp. Thus it was demonstrated that Col/HAp composite nanofibrous scaffold provided a space for cell adhesion, growth, and also stimulated mineralization, the functional activity of osteoblasts for bone tissue engineering.129


6.1.2. Gelatin. 
As the main practical problem associated with collagen is its cost, and poor definition of commercial sources the alternative gelatin is used for designing tissue engineering scaffolds. Gelatin (Gel), is a protein obtained from partial hydrolysis of collagen extracted from skin, bone, cartilage, ligaments etc. The composite of gelatin with other biodegradable synthetic polymers, known as bioartificial polymeric materials, has been well adopted by researchers. This approach of blending gelatin with synthetic polymers reduces cytotoxicity by means of cross-linking agents. Furthermore, this new biomaterial with excellent biocompatibility and improved mechanical and physical/chemical properties overcomes the obstacle associated with the use of single natural polymer.130 Interaction between cells and the scaffold material depends on various physical-chemical properties of the material and particle size, and surface properties which include topography, roughness, surface energy and wettability. Chandrasekaran et al. demonstrated better fibroblast cell density and morphology in PLACL/gelatin scaffold after plasma treatment compared to nanofibrous PLACL scaffolds.131 Furthermore, they observed the secretion of collagen on fibroblasts grown on PLACL and PLACL–gelatin nanofibrous scaffolds. But the plasma treated PLACL–gelatin nanofibrous scaffolds have sufficient porous structures, hydrophilicity, mechanical stability and the loose peripheral regions favorable for cell infiltration. It also provided enough space for fibroblast in-growth and thus resulted in the development of dermal substitute in skin tissue regeneration. Liu et al. fabricated 3D nanofiber-gelatin/apatite composite scaffolds that mimic both nanoscale architecture and chemical composition of natural bone ECM.132 With a new thermally induced phase separation and porogen leaching technique these 3D nanofibrous gelatin scaffolds with well-defined macrospores were designed. The inorganic HAp was deposited all along the 3D porous structure is ideal for controlling surface topography and chemistry within complex nanostructures. And it was shown that these scaffolds have excellent biocompatibility and mechanical properties with enhanced osteoblast adhesion, proliferation and differentiation suitable for bone tissue engineering.


6.1.3. Silk protein–silk fibroin. 
Silk fibroin is considered as the most promising natural fibrous protein replacement for collagen in bone tissue engineering due to their biocompatibility, slow biodegradation, and excellent mechanical properties. In the past few years, two natural silk sources (e.g., silkworm silk Bombyx mori and spider dragline silk Nephila clavipes) have been processed for making nanofibers via electrospinning. In order to improve electrospinnability of silk protein solutions and to avoid potential influences of polar hazardous organic solvents such as hexafluoroisopropanol,133 hexafluoroacetone,134 and formic acid135 on scaffold's biocompatibility, Jin et al. used an all-aqueous electrospinning by blending silk fibroin with a fiber forming agent PEO at a ratio from ¼ to ⅔.136 Methanol treatment of the electrospun scaffold renders water insolubility of the scaffold because of the structural conformational change into native β-sheet structure. Silk-based biocomposite nanofibers of HAp and bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) as growth factor were fabricated by Li et al. to realize enhanced bone formation outcomes by culturing with human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs).137 It was observed that the inclusion of BMP-2 and HAp with electrospun silk fibroin nanofibers resulted in the highest calcium deposition and up regulation of BMP-2 transcript levels compared to other electrospun silk-based scaffolds.


6.1.4. Amino polysaccharide chitosan composites (calcium–carbohydrate composites). 
Chitosan, an amino polysaccharide, derived from the structural biopolymer chitin, exists abundantly in crustacean shells (e.g., crabs) and plays a key role as that of collagen in higher vertebrates. Chitosan retains a number of salient features such as structural similarity to glucosaminoglycan found in bone, osteoconductivity, excellent biocompatibility, tailorable biodegradability, low immunogenicity, and better mechanical properties, as an alternative to collagen from a tissue engineering perspective138–140 but at cheaper cost. Chitosan is poorly electrospinnable, forms aggregates with non-electrospinnable HAp nanoparticles and formulating a robust chitosan solution is a prerequisite to generate nanofibrous HAp/chitosan biocomposite scaffolds. Because of these limitations in chitosan electrospinning.141,142 There are only a few reports on nanofibrous HA/chitosan composites for bone tissue engineering. With ultrahigh molecular weight poly(ethylene oxide) (UHMWPEO) as support polymer, Zhang et al. demonstrated that chitosan nanofibers could be prepared.143,144 After this a modified two-step approach via the in situ co-precipitation synthesis route was designed to overcome (Fig. 11) the usual problem of nanoparticles agglomeration.144 The electrospinning process was adopted for preparation of HAp/CTS nanocomposite nanofibers with a higher (30 wt%) loading of HAp nanoparticles. It was confirmed with electron diffraction and X-ray diffraction analysis that the acetic acid used for chitosan dissolution had minor or no influence on the crystallinity of HAp nanoparticle incorporated within the nanocomposite nanofibrous structure. Bone regeneration ability of the scaffold was assessed on these HAp/chitosan nanocomposite nanofibrous scaffolds by conducting MTS and ARS assays of human fetal osteoblasts cultured for up to 15 days. The results confirmed that the HAp/chitosan nanocomposite scaffolds significantly enhanced bone formation compared to the electrospun chitosan alone scaffold.
 Fig. 11  FESEM images of electrospun HAp/CTS nanocomposite nanofibers: doped with 20 wt% conventional PEO with a moderate molecular weight (A), doped with 10 wt% UHMWPEO at low magnification (B), at higher magnification (C), and after alkali treatment (D).144 


6.1.5. Synthetic polymer nanofibers for tissue engineering. 
Synthetic polymers used for tissue engineering scaffolds facilitate a higher mechanical stability compared to natural scaffolds. Furthermore, they avoid use of available cross-linking agents for slow degradation of the scaffold. And they constitute a new generation biomaterials to mimic the structure and characteristic of native ECM, such as fibrillar structure, viscoelasticity, cell addition domains, growth factor binding and proteolytic sensitivity. HAp nanoparticles were electrosprayed on PLACL/gelatin nanofibers and thus produced scaffolds with controlled morphology which were found to be suitable for bone tissue engineering. Gupta et al. used a simultaneous electrospraying and electrospinning concept and fabricated PLACL/Gel/HAp nanofibers and compared their mechanical and cellular properties (Fig. 12) with blend electrospun PLACL/Gel/HAp scaffolds.145 Electrospun PLACL/Gel/HAp (blend) nanofibers had the drawback of trapping HAp embedded inside the nanofibers (diameter 198 ± 107 nm), while the HAp nanoparticles were found to be uniformly sprayed, forming a layer of HA on the surface of the other PLACL/Gel/HAp scaffold (diameter 406 ± 155 nm). The tensile stress for HAp electrosprayed scaffold was higher than PLACL/Gel/HA (blend) scaffold and this was due to the fact that the electrospraying of HAp nanoparticles resulted in superficial dispersion of HAp nanoparticles. A significant increase in hFOB proliferation was observed on the HAp electrosprayed scaffold than on the PLACL/Gel/HAp (blend) nanofibers after 15 days of cell seeding. Further the electrosprayed scaffolds showed 50% higher biomineralization than the PLACL/Gel/HAp (blend), thus proving the versatility of the electrospraying method compared to blend technique with respect to scaffold design for bone tissue engineering.145
 Fig. 12  SEM micrographs showing morphology and mineralization of hFOB cells on nanofibrous substrates after day 15 of culture. (a) PLACL (b) PLACL/Gel (c) PLACL/Gel/HA (blend) (d) PLACL/Gel/HA (spray) nanofibers (e) TCP.145 


6.1.6. Polycaprolactone (PCL). 
Electrospun PCL nanofibrous scaffolds were fabricated by Yoshimoto et al. and MSCs from bone marrow of neonatal rats were seeded with osteogenic supplements.146 Cell penetration into the fibrous matrix was observed along with abundant ECM deposits in the cell–polymer constructs, thus favoring PCL as potential scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. PCL/HAp,147 PCL/Coll/HAp,148 PCL/Gel/HAp,130 were fabricated and tried for the suitability of the scaffold for bone tissue engineering. Electrospun PCL/HAp nanofibrous scaffold after plasma treatment found to enhance the wettability and thus accelerated the biodegradation rate of nanofibrous scaffolds. It was observed that PCL/HAp plasma treated scaffold showing the mineral formation on the surface of osteoblast cell layers within 6 days of culture. With increase in pore size from 424 to 1826.11 μm2 of PCL/HAp/Coll148 scaffolds created with sacrificial fibers of PEO it was shown to facilitate MSC infiltration in vitro and also infiltration of endogenous cells when scaffolds were placed within calvarial organ cultures. Thus the sacrificial PEO nanofiber enhances cell infiltration and hence overcomes one of the major limitations of bone-mimetic promising matrix in bone tissue regeneration.


6.1.7. Poly(lactic acid) (PLLA). 
PLLA is a thermoplastic aliphatic polyester derived from renewable resources, and can be synthesized from cyclic D,L-lactide via ring opening polymerization. Upon seeding human Fetal Osteoblasts (hFOBs) on PLLA/HAp and PLLA/Coll/HAp,117,149 the biocomposite PLLA/Coll/HAp nanofibrous scaffold was found superior than PLLA/HAp for effective bone regeneration and mineralization. In addition, the tensile strength of biocomposite scaffold was higher than the collagen fibrous matrix (1.68 MPa) and even PCL/HAp scaffolds. The ALP activity was 25% higher on biocomposite nanofibrous scaffolds compared to PLLA/HAp scaffolds after 20 days of cell culture. The bone nodule formation of hFOB cultured on different electrospun nanofibers were characterized by ARS staining, and the mineralization was found to be 57% higher on biocomposite scaffolds compared to PLLA/HAp scaffolds. Elemental analysis by EDX measurement primarily consisted of calcium and phosphorus deposition, showing that osteoblasts seeded on PLLA/Coll/HAp nanofibers formed biomineralized tissue. Scaffolds with HAp containing composites enhanced the formation of new bone tissue with increased osteoblast adhesion, osteointegration and calcium mineral deposition on its surface.150 Recently, Rajeswari et al. fabricated nanohydroxyapatite decorated PLLA/PBLG/Col nanofibers for the differentiation of adipose derived stem cells to osteogenic lineage (Fig. 13).151 Furthermore, they claim that bioactive PBLG/n-HA drives and directs the specific biological functions like adhesion, proliferation and differentiation of ADSC into bone tissue and thus providing promising scaffolds for bone tissue engineering.
 Fig. 13  Confocal microscopy images to confirm the osteogenic differentiation of ADSCs using ADSC specific marker proteins, characteristic of ADSC cells which have undergone osteogenic differentiation (c, f, I, l, o) on TCP (a–c), PLLA (d–f), PLLA/PBLG (g–i), PLLA/PBLG/Col (j–l) and PLLA/PBLG/Col/n-HA (m–o) at 60× magnification.151 

6.2. Drug loaded nanofibers (composites) for cancer chemotherapy
Drug loaded nanofibers ensure persistent degradation of nanofibers with the utilization of suitable polymer and there by continuous release of the encapsulated or entrapped drug in a controlled manner. Furthermore, the core–shell electrospinning entraps the drug inside the shell polymer which slowly degrades and releases the drug or growth factor. Also, in blend electrospinning, the release of drugs can be controlled by drug–polymer interaction which can help in the slow release of drug from the nanofiber matrix. The drug delivery through composite nanofibrous formulations are summarized in Table 1.152–159
Table 1 Composite nanofibrous scaffolds that find applications in drug delivery and skin regeneration




Polymer
Electrospinning or fabrication conditions
Material incorporated
Cells




PLLA
Titanium/PLLA nanofiber composite in the form of titanocene drug
Titanium in the form of titanocene dichloride
Sustained release of anticancer drug152


Self-assembling peptide
Self-assembling peptide amphiphile with cisplatin
Platinum drug (cis-dichlorodiammine platinum(II))
Bioresponsive anticancer drug release from the biomimetic gel153


PLA
Electrospun PLA nanofibers incorporated with cisplatin
Platinum drug (cis-dichlorodiammine platinum(II))
Continuous release of anticancer drug154


PCL
Electrospinning of a PCL solution with small amounts of silver-loaded zirconium phosphate nanoparticles
Silver-loaded zirconium phosphate nanoparticles
Yuan et al.,155 primary human dermal fibroblasts


PU
Electrospinning of polyurethane with silver nanoparticles for wound dressing material
Silver nanoparticles
Antibacterial and cytocompatibility156


Chitosan
Electrospinning chitosan and Ag nanoparticles
Silver nanoparticles
Synergistic effect between silver and chitosan by chelation mechanism157


Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-co-polystyrene
Blend with functionalized gold nanoparticles to form the new nanofiber nanocomposites
Gold nanoparticles
Synergistic enhancement effects of the gold nanocomposites on the daunorubicin drug uptake158


PU/MWNT
Polyurethane/multiwalled carbon nanotube composite nanofiber
Multiwalled carbon nanotubes
Growth and anticoagulant function of human umbilical vein endothelial cells159





6.2.1. Titanium as titanocene. 
A titanium nanofiber composite in the form of titanocene drug loaded nanofiber has been applied as a drug delivery system for cancer chemotherapy. Chen et al. have shown titanocene dichloride–PLLA nanofibers as a sustained delivery system and the drug continuously be released in an active form from the system.152 Furthermore, it was suggested that this method can control the release of anticancer drug not only to improve safety, but also to enhance the efficacy of cancer chemotherapy.


6.2.2. Platinum as cisplatin. 
Bioresponsive cisplatin, a platinum drug (cis-dichlorodiamine platinum (II) (CDDP)) as a nanofiber composite was first designed with a self-assembling peptide amphiphile (PA) comprising a cell-adhesive matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2)-sensitive GTAGLIGQRGDS and a fatty acid.153 The incorporation of the drug inside the self-assembled CDDP–PA nanofibers was confirmed with transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Bioresponsive controlled delivery of the drug from biomimetic gel was demonstrated by in vitro MMP-2-triggered CDDP release. Chen et al. fabricated PLA nanofibers incorporated with cisplatin and tested the efficacy of drug loaded nanofibers against human tumor spc-a-1 cells.154 They have demonstrated that cisplatin incorporated fibers could continuously release the drug in an active form and foreseen the potential application of the system as an implantable drug for lung tumor in the future.


6.2.3. Drug loaded nanofibers (composites) for wound healing/dressing silver nanoparticles. 
Silver (Ag) nanoparticles fight infection from bacteria, virus and fungi basically by blocking oxygen uptake to the microorganisms. Furthermore, Ag nanoparticles are long known for their usefulness in wound healing. Yuan et al. have made antimicrobial nanofibers of PCL by electrospinning of a PCL solution with small amounts of silver-loaded zirconium phosphate nanoparticles (AgZ) for potential use in wound dressing applications.155 Strong biocidal activity of Ag+ in nanoAgZ was observed from the antimicrobial tests against bacterial strains. Furthermore, the study with primary human dermal fibroblasts culturing on the nanofibrous mats has shown good cell attachment and proliferation as continuous layers on the nanoAgZ-containing nanofibers with healthier morphology of human dermal fibroblasts. Thus the nanoAgZ-containing PCL nanofibers envisaged as potential materials for wound dressing applications, based on their bacteriostatic activity and biocompatibility. The well-known wound dressing material polyurethane was electrospun with silver nanoparticles (Fig. 14) by Lakshman et al. and observed that the material exhibited good antibacterial and cytocompatibility, which are very essential criteria for wound dressing applications.156 Nguyen et al. fabricated Silver nanoparticles incorporated nanofiber in two different methods and tested their antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli.157 Furthermore, it was observed that there exists a synergistic effect between silver and chitosan by chelation mechanism, which added to the antibacterial property of the electrospun webs.
 Fig. 14  SEM images of PU fiber and silver nanoparticles incorporated PU fibers (a) PU fiber, (b) PU fiber with (0.005% Ag), (c) PU fiber (with 0.01% Ag), and (d) PU fiber (with 0.015% Ag).156 

7. Future perspectives
The global demand for energy and health care are growing even faster than the population, and the escalating demand from developing countries will further exacerbate this situation. Owing to its simplicity and adoptability of the electrospinning process yielded nanostructures of various composite metal-oxides with tunable morphologies, increased surface area and hollow/core–shell structures, effective electron transfer and interaction along the structures. The composite electrospun nanostructures such as TiO2, ZnO, Fe2O3, CuO, SnO2, MnO2 have wide variety of potential applications in dye-sensitized solar cells, batteries, magnetic materials, catalysis, fuel cells, water-splitting, thermoelectric, anti-reflective and photonic materials. These nanocomposites have good potential for scale-up and cost effectiveness in nano-electronic domain is yet to be explored.
In bone tissue engineering, synthetic hydroxyapatite has been extensively used as an implant material for bone substitute owing to its excellent osteoinductive properties. Materials that can induce specific biological activity to repair the damaged organs are called bioactive materials. Calcium phosphate ceramics have been tested for several years and are most commonly used for clinical applications. Especially HAp and β-tricalcium phosphate resemble the mineral phase of bone and are characterized as biocompatible, bioactive, osteoconductive and osteoinductive. These composites are used in dental and orthopedic surgery as fillers for bone defects and as coatings on metallic implants to improve the integration of implants in host bone. Further studies on assessing the long-term in vivo performance employing the current technologies are indispensable for attaining clinical success.
8. Conclusions
A comprehensive study of the functionality and applicability of composite nanostructures with potential for fabricating novel nanocomposite scaffolds for energy, sensors, filters and biomedical applications has been carried out. It was noted that the functionalities of these composites can be improved either by incorporating secondary phases during electrospinning or in the post-processing for fabricating the scaffolds. This article discusses in detail the applicability of these nanocomposites in energy, sensors, filters and bio-technology, critically analyzing their performance with respect to their respective parent materials. As a better understanding of the electrospinning and co-axial electrospinning process is achieved through theoretical modeling and practically fabricating nanocomposites, it is expected that all these technical problems will be solved in the near future to generate 4th generation bio-composite materials. The article also provides a first-hand detailed discussion regarding the technological issues, research challenges, and future trends in the fast-developing field of nanocomposites.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Singapore NRF-CRP grant (R-398-000-071-592), NRF-Technion (R-398-001-065-592), Ministry of Education (R-265-000-318-112) and NUSNNI, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
References
L. J. Zhang and T. J. Webster, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 66–80 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Zhang, J. Rodriguez, J. Raez, A. J. Myles, H. Fenniri and T. J. Webster, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 175101 CrossRef .
H. S. Park, B. G. Choi, S. H. Yang, W. H. Shin, J. K. Kang, D. Jung and W. H. Hong, Small, 2009, 5, 1754–1760 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Nerurkar, B. M. Baker, S. Sen, E. E. Wible, D. M. Elliott and R. L. Mauck, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 986–992 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mathews, B. Varghese, C. Sun, V. Thavasi, B. P. Andreasson, C. H. Sow, S. Ramakrishna and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1984–1998 RSC .
H. W. Lu, D. Li, K. Sun, Y. S. Li and Z. W. Fu, Solid State Sci., 2009, 11, 982–987 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Cui, Y. Yang, C. M. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3370–3374 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Ji and X. W. Zhang, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3219–3226 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goyal, A. L. M. Reddy and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2011, 7, 1709–1713 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Lee, E. W. Park and S. H. Hyun, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 145–155 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mollá and V. Compañ, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 372, 191–200 CrossRef .
Z. Z. Li, X. L. Cui, X. S. Zhang, Q. F. Wang, Y. Y. Shao and Y. H. Lin, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 2316–2323 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Choi, J. Hong, Y. C. Park, D. H. Jung, W. H. Hong, P. T. Hammond and H. Park, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5167–5174 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Z. M. Huang, C. L. He and X. J. Han, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2006, 435, 309–317 CrossRef .
S. Sihn, R. Y. Kim, W. Huh, K. H. Lee and A. K. Roy, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2008, 68, 673–683 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Dong, X. Chen, L. Gu, L. X. Zhang, X. H. Zhou, Z. H. Liu, P. X. Han, H. X. Xu, J. H. Yao, X. Y. Zhang, L. F. Li, C. Q. Shang and G. L. Cui, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 4088–4094 CrossRef CAS .
B. Khlebtsov, E. Panfilova, V. Khanadeev, O. Bibikova, G. Terentyuk, A. Ivanov, V. Rumyantseva, I. Shilov, A. Ryabova, V. Loshchenov and N. G. Khlebtsov, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7077–7089 CrossRef CAS .
L. Balogh, S. S. Nigavekar, B. M. Nair, W. Lesniak, C. Zhang, L. Y. Sung, M. S. T. Kariapper, A. El-Jawahri, M. Llanes, B. Bolton, F. Mamou, W. Tan, A. Hutson, L. Minc and M. K. Khan, Nanomed.: Nanotechnol., Biol. Med., 2007, 3, 281–296 CrossRef CAS .
L.
M. Bellan and H. G. Craighead, Trans. ASME, Ser. B, 2009, 131, 0340011–0340014 Search PubMed .
L. Nikkola, K. Vapalahti, R. Huolman, J. Seppala, A. Harlin and N. Ashammakhi, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2008, 4, 331–338 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, H. Chen, L. Lin, Y. Zhao, X. Cao, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1622–1627 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ayutsede, M. Gandhi, S. Sukiraga, H. Ye, C. M. Hsu, Y. Gogotsi and F. Ko, Biomacromolecules, 2006, 7, 208–214 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aryal, C. K. Kim, K. W. Kim, M. S. Khil and H. Y. Kim, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2008, 28, 75–79 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ayodeji, E. Graham, D. Kniss, J. Lannutti and D. Tomasko, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2007, 41, 173–178 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bianco, G. Iardino, C. Bertarelli, L. Miozzo, A. Papagni and G. Zerbi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 8360–8364 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Martin, H. Herrmann, W. Y. Choi and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1994, 90, 3315–3322 RSC .
R. L. Liu, H. Y. Ye, X. P. Xiong and H. Q. Liu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 121, 432–439 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Kim, D. Cho and W. H. Park, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 116, 449–454 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakata, N. Watanabe, Y. Yuda, D. A. Tryk, T. Ochiai, T. Murakami, Y. Koide and A. Fujishima, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2009, 117, 1203–1207 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lm, B. C. Bai, S. J. In and Y. S. Lee, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 346, 216–221 CrossRef .
J. S. Lm, M. Il Kim and Y. S. Lee, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 3652–3655 CrossRef .
J. X. Wang, Y. Q. Guo, X. T. Dong, Z. G. Li and G. X. Liu, J. Inorg. Mater., 2010, 25, 379–385 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pan, Z. Z. Gu and L. Dong, Acta Chim. Sin., 2009, 67, 1981–1986 CAS .
H. Teng, Y. Liu and T. Y. You, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2011, 27, 496–499 CAS .
S. H. Ye, D. Zhang, H. Q. Liu and J. P. Zhou, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 121, 1757–1764 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. He, H. H. Ma, Z. F. Zhou, W. B. Xu, F. M. Ren, Z. F. Shi and J. Wang, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2009, 94, 2251–2256 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Ji, Z. Lin, A. J. Medford and X. W. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 10718–10722 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Ji, Z. Lin, R. Zhou, Q. Shi, O. Toprakci, A. J. Medford, C. R. Millns and X. W. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1605–1611 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Ji, Y. F. Yao, O. Toprakci, Z. Lin, Y. Z. Liang, Q. Shi, A. J. Medford, C. R. Millns and X. W. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2050–2056 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Jung, D. H. Ju, W. J. Lee, X. W. Zhang and R. Kotek, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 3630–3637 CrossRef CAS .

          K. H. J. K. H. Jung and S. J. Park, in Multi-Functional Materials and Structures Iii, Pts 1 and 2, Trans Tech Publications Ltd, Stafa-Zurich,  2010, pp. 1087–1090 Search PubMed .
K. U. Jeong, H. D. Chae, C. Il Lim, H. K. Lee, J. H. Ahn and C. Nah, Polym. Int., 2010, 59, 249–255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Ju, J. H. Park, H. R. Jung and W. J. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 4841–4847 CrossRef CAS .
S. Molla, V. Compan, E. Gimenez, A. Blazquez and I. Urdanpilleta, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 9886–9895 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Lee, N. Y. Kim, M. S. Lee and S. Y. Lee, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 367, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tamura and H. Kawakami, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1324–1328 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, L. W. Ji, W. E. Krause and X. W. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5520–5526 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Lin, S. H. Wang, C. K. Chiu, T. L. Yu, L. C. Chen, C. C. Huang, T. H. Cheng and J. M. Lin, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 365, 114–122 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Choi, Y. Z. Fu, Y. R. Ahn, S. M. Jo and A. Manthiram, J. Power Sources, 2008, 180, 167–171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kerzenmacher, J. Ducrée, R. Zengerle and F. von Stetten, J. Power Sources, 2008, 182, 1–17 CrossRef CAS .
S. Prilutsky, P. Schechner, E. Bubis, V. Makarov, E. Zussman and Y. Cohen, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3694–3702 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhi, N. Mariani, R. Gemmen, K. Gerdes and N. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 417–420 CAS .

          B. Jeong, S. Uhm and J. Lee, Iron-Cobalt Modified Electrospun Carbon Nanofibers as Oxygen Reduction Catalysts in Alkaline Fuel Cells, Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells 10, 218th ECS Meeting, Las Vegas, NV,  2010, pp. 1757–1767 Search PubMed.
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 3–14 CrossRef .
X. M. Feng, X. W. Huang, H. Huang, P. Shen, B. Zhao and S. T. Tan, Acta Chim. Sin., 2010, 68, 1123–1129 CAS .
J. K. Lee, H. J. Choi, S. H. Park, D. H. Won, H. W. Park, J. H. Kim, C. J. Lee, S. H. Jeong and M. R. Kim, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2010, 519, 234–244 CrossRef CAS .
P. Joshi, L. Zhang, D. Davoux, Z. Zhu, D. Galipeau, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1507–1510 CAS .
Z. Peining, A. S. Nair, Y. Shengyuan, P. Shengjie, N. K. Elumalai and S. Ramakrishna, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 231, 9–18 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peining, A. S. Nair, P. Shengjie, Y. Shengyuan and S. Ramakrishna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 581–585 CAS .
Y. Shengyuan, Z. Peining, A. S. Nair and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6541–6548 RSC .
Y. Shengyuan, A. S. Nair, R. Jose and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 2010–2014 Search PubMed .
K. Kim, C. Lee, I. W. Kim and J. Kim, Fibers Polym., 2009, 10, 60–64 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patanaik, V. Jacobs and R. D. Anandjiwala, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 352, 136–142 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sundarrajan, D. Pliszka, A. Jaworek, A. Krupa, M. Lackowski and S. Ramakrishna, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 4442–4447 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uyar, R. Havelund, Y. Nur, J. Hacaloglu, F. Besenbacher and P. Kingshott, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 332, 129–137 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Park, H. S. Bae, Z. C. Xing, O. H. Kwon, M. W. Huh and I. K. Kang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 112, 2320–2326 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Pant, M. P. Bajgai, K. T. Nam, Y. A. Seo, D. R. Pandeya, S. T. Hong and H. Y. Kim, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 185, 124–130 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Liu and K. J. Balkus, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 2361–2364 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Homaeigohar, K. Buhr and K. Ebert, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 365, 68–77 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Zhang, Y. Yang, L. Wang, Z. Zhou, M. Zhu, B. S. Hsiao and B. Chu, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 356, 110–116 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Yeom, E. Shim and B. Pourdeyhimi, Macromol. Res., 2010, 18, 884–890 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Kirsh, A. K. Budyka and V. A. Kirsh, Russ. J. Gen. Chem., 2009, 79, 2045–2050 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sihn, R. Y. Kim, W. Huh, K. H. Lee and A. K. Roy, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2008, 68, 673–683 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yoon and S. Lee, Fibers Polym., 2011, 12, 57–64 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee and S. K. Obendorf, Fibers Polym., 2007, 8, 501–506 CrossRef .
P. Akangah, S. Lingaiah and K. Shivakumar, Compos. Struct., 2010, 92, 1432–1439 CrossRef .
G. J. Cadena, J. Riu and F. X. Rius, Analyst, 2007, 132, 1083–1099 RSC .
A. A. Tomchenko, G. P. Harmer, B. T. Marquis and J. W. Allen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2002, 93, 126–134 CrossRef .
J. Janata and M. Josowicz, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 19–24 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, S. Virji, B. H. Weiller and R. B. Kaner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 314–315 CrossRef CAS .
H. Karami, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2010, 5, 720–730 CAS .
H. Kawasaki, T. Ueda, Y. Suda and T. Ohshima, Sens. Actuators, B, 2004, 100, 266–269 CrossRef .
M. Ferreira, P. A. Fiorito, O. N. Oliveira Jr and S. I. C. de Torresi, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2004, 19, 1611–1615 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, C. Y. Ong, J. Guo, T. White, M. S. Tse and O. K. Tan, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1203–1207 RSC .

          S. Ramakrishna, K. Fujihara, W. E. Teo, T. C. Lim and Z. W. L. Ma, Introduction to Electrospinning and Nanofibers, World Scientific Publishers,  2005, pp. 1–382 Search PubMed.
I. S. Chronakis, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2005, 167, 283–293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dzenis, Science, 2004, 304, 1917–1919 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jayaraman, M. Kotaki, Y. Zhang, X. Mo and S. Ramakrishna, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2004, 4, 52–65 CAS .
Y. Li, J. Gong, G. He and Y. Deng, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 129, 477–482 CrossRef CAS .
A. Z. Sadek, W. Wlodarski, K. Shin, R. B. Kaner and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4488 CrossRef CAS .
A. Z. Sadek, W. Wlodarski, K. Shin, R. B. Kaner and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Synth. Met., 2008, 158, 29–32 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Z. Li, W. Zheng, J. Yang, H. Zhang and C. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1811–1814 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Gao, J. Gong, L. Zhang and L. Qu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 69–73 CAS .
P. Li, Y. Li, B. Ying and M. Yang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 141, 390–395 CrossRef .
H. Gullapalli, V. S. M. Vemuru, A. Kumar, A. B. Mendez, R. Vajtai, M. Terrones, S. Nagarajaiah and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2010, 15, 1641–1646 CrossRef .
H. A. Khorami, M. Keyanpour-Rad and M. R. Vaezi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 7988–7992 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, A. J. Medford and X. Zhang, Polymer, 2009, 50, 605–612 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Li, J. Sun, H. Zhang, W. Wang, W. Zheng and C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6100–6105 CAS .
D. K. Hwang, S. Kim, J. H. Lee, I. S. Hwang and I. D. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1959–1965 RSC .
B. Ding, X. Wang, J. Yu and M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12784–12792 RSC .
Y. Liao, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, V. Strong, J. Tang, X. G. Li, K. K. Zadeh, E. M. V. Hoek, K. L. Wang and R. B. Kaner, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 954–959 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Kelleher and J. P. Vacanti, J. R. Soc. Interface, 2010, 7, S717–S729 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Ayres, B. Jha, S. Sell, G. L. Bowlin and D. G. Simpson, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2010, 2, 20–34 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Reneker, A. L. Yarin, H. Fong and S. Koombhangse, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 87, 4531–4547 CrossRef .

          D. H. Reneker, A. L. Yarin, E. Zussman and H. Xu, Electrospinning of Nanofibers from Polymer Solutions and Melts, Advances in Applied Mechanics, Elsevier, Oxford,  2007, vol. 41, pp. 43–195 Search PubMed .
A. Frenot and I. S. Chronakis, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 8, 64–75 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Huang, Y. Z. Zhang, M. Kotaki and S. Ramakrishna, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2003, 63, 2223–2253 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dzenis, Science, 2004, 304, 1917–1919 CrossRef CAS .
G. Aleksander, S. Rahul, T. Velmurugan and S. Ramakrishna, Polym. Rev., 2011, 51, 265–287 CrossRef .
C. Y. Xu, R. Inai, M. Kotaki and S. Ramakrishna, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 877–886 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, R. Murugan, S. Wang and S. Ramakrishna, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 2603–2610 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lee, H. J. Shin, I. H. Cho, Y. M. Kang, I. A. Kim, K. D. Park and J. W. Shin, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 1261–1270 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Zhang, J. Venugopal, Z. M. Huang, C. T. Lim and S. Ramakrishna, Biomacromolecules, 2005, 6, 2583–2589 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kikuchi, S. Itoh, S. Ichinose, K. Shinomiya and J. Tanaka, Biomaterials, 2001, 22, 1705–1711 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, Z. C. Wang and C. Lin, J. Mater. Lett., 2002, 57, 658–662 Search PubMed .
S. S. Liao, F. Z. Cui and Q. L. Feng, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. B: Appl. Biomater., 2004, 69, 158–165 CAS .
J. Wei, Y. B. Li, W. Q. Chen and Y. Zuo, J. Mater. Sci., 2003, 38, 3303–3306 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sachlos, D. Gotora and J. T. Czernuszka, Tissue Eng., 2006, 12, 2479–2487 CrossRef CAS .
S. Weiner and W. Traub, Connect. Tissue Res., 1989, 21, 589–595 CrossRef .
K. I. Clarke, S. E. Graves, A. T. C. Wong, J. T. Triffit, M. J. O. Francis and J. T. Czernuszka, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 1993, 4, 107–110 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. O'Brien, B. A. Harley, I. V. Yannas and L. Gibson, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 1077–1086 CrossRef CAS .
J. Venugopal, S. Low, A. T. Choon, T. S. Sampath Kumar and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2008, 19, 2039–2046 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Carlson, J. L. Dragoo, B. Samimi, D. A. Bruckner and P. Benhaim, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2004, 321, 472–478 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Landis, M. J. Song, A. Leith, L. McEwen and B. F. McEwen, J. Struct. Biol., 1993, 110, 39–54 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wahl and J. T. Czernuszka, Eur. Cells Mater., 2006, 11, 43–56 CAS .
D. A. Wahl, E. Sachlos, C. Liu and J. T. Czernuszka, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2007, 18, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
A. Porter, N. Patel, R. Brooks and W. Bonfield, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2005, 16, 899–907 CrossRef CAS .
J. Venugopal, S. Low, A. T. Choon, T. S. Sampath Kumar and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2008, 19, 2039–2046 CrossRef CAS .
J. Venugopal, S. Low, A. T. Choon, A. Bharath Kumar and S. Ramakrishna, Artif. Organs, 2008, 32, 388–397 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Chandrasekaran, J. Venugopal, S. Sundarrajan and S. Ramakrishna, Biomed. Mater., 2011, 6, 015001 CrossRef .
X. Liu, L. A. Smith, J. Hu and P. X. Ma, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 2252–2258 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zarkoob, R. K. Eby, D. H. Reneker, S. D. Hudson, D. Ertley and W. W. Adams, Polymer, 2004, 45, 3973–3977 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, Y. S. Nam, T. S. Lee and W. H. Park, Polym. J., 2003, 35, 185–190 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ohgo, C. Zhao, M. Kobayashi and T. Asakura, Polymer, 2003, 44, 841–846 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Jin, S. V. Fridrikh, G. C. Rutledge and D. L. Kaplan, Biomacromolecules, 2002, 3, 1233–1239 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, C. Vepari, H. J. Jin, H. Kim and D. Kaplan, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 3115–3124 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yamaguchi, K. Tokuchi, H. Fukuzaki, Y. Koyama, K. Takakuda and H. Monma, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2001, 55, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
C. Muzzarelli and R. A. A. Muzzarelli, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2002, 92, 89–94 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, B. Li, M. Wang and J. Shen, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 779–785 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Rusu, C. H. Ng, M. Wilke, B. Tiersch, P. Fratzl and M. G. Peter, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 5414–5426 CrossRef CAS .
D. Z. Yang, Y. Jin, G. P. Ma, X. M. Chen, F. M. Lu and J. Nie, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2008, 110, 3328–3335 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Zhang, B. Su, S. Ramakrishna and C. T. Lim, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 136–141 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Zhang, J. R. Venugopal, A. El-Turki, S. Ramakrishna, B. Su and C. T. Lim, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 4314–4322 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gupta, J. Venugopal, S. Mitra, V. R. Giri Dev and S. Ramakrishna, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 2085–2094 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshimoto, Y. M. Shin, H. Terai and J. P. Vacanti, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 2077–2082 CrossRef CAS .
J. Venugopal, S. Low, A. T. Choon, A. B. Kumar and S. Ramakrishna, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2008, 85A, 408–417 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Phipps, W. C. Clem, J. M. Grunda, G. A. Clines and S. L. Bellis, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 524–534 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Cordeiro, Plast. Reconstr. Surg., 1989, 83, 1013–1019 CAS .
M. P. Prabhakaran, J. Venugopal and S. Ramakrishna, Acta Biomater., 2009, 5, 2884–2893 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rajeswari, J. R. Venugopal, S. Sundarrajan, M. Shayanti and S. Ramakrishna, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 846–855 CrossRef .
P. Chen, Q. S. Wu, Y. P. Ding, M. Chu, Z. M. Huang and W. Hu, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2010, 76, 413–420 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Kim, J. Anderson, H. W. Jun, M. A. Repka and S. Jo, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2009, 6, 978–985 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, Q. Shengwu, Y. P. Ding and Z. C. Zhu, NANO: Brief Reports and Reviews, 2011, 6, 325–332 CAS .
D. Y. Yuan, J. Jun, W. Shao-hai, Y. Wei, J. Lei and W. Zhong-yi, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2007, 106, 1208–1214 CrossRef .
L. R. Lakshman, K. T. Shalumon, V. N. Sreeja, R. Jayakumar and S. V. Nair, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 2010, 47, 1012–1018 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. T. Nguyen, B. Tae and J. S. Park, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 6528–6537 CrossRef CAS .
M. Song, X. Wang, C. Wang, C. Pan, D. Fu and Z. Gu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 876–879 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meng, Z. Han, H. Kong, X. Qi, C. Wang, S. Xie and H. Xu, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2010, 95, 312–320 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Fabrication and characterization of electrospun nanocomposites on the basis of their applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of electrospinning and electrospraying set-up with composite fibers.	 

 	Fig. 3  Mechanism pertaining to composites through electrospinning.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of grafting of TPGDA on PVDF fibers.42	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structure of NTDA-BDSA-r-APPF, (b) schematic representation of sulfonated copolyimide nanofiber, (c) TEM image of cross-sectional aligned nanofiber in radial direction, (d) TEM image of cross-sectional aligned nanofiber in axial direction, (d) SEM image of aligned nanofiber electrospun on specially designed collector.46	 

 	Fig. 6  A structural diagram of the filter media used by Kim et al.. A nano-web of PAN was electrospun on top of the melt-blown web.63	 

 	Fig. 7  Fabrication of interleaved test panel (upper half of the panel).77	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of (a) 4.11 mol% NiO–SnO2 composite nanofibers, (b) responses of the sensors to 100 ppm H2 at 320 °C, (c) response and recovery characteristic curves of the sensor based on 4.11 mol% NSNFs to H2 in the range of 5–1000 ppm at 320 °C.99	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM images of as-electrospun LaNiO3 precursor/PVAc composite nanofibers, (b) nanofibers calcined at 950 °C (Inset: magnified image) (c) bar graphs represent the gas sensitivities to 100 ppm CO, H2, NH3, NO2, and C2H5OH operated at 400 °C. (Insets in display the dynamic gas sensing responses of LaOCl–NiO nanofiber mats calcined at 550 °C.)100	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic representation nanofiber composites for biomedical applications.	 

 	Fig. 11  FESEM images of electrospun HAp/CTS nanocomposite nanofibers: doped with 20 wt% conventional PEO with a moderate molecular weight (A), doped with 10 wt% UHMWPEO at low magnification (B), at higher magnification (C), and after alkali treatment (D).144	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM micrographs showing morphology and mineralization of hFOB cells on nanofibrous substrates after day 15 of culture. (a) PLACL (b) PLACL/Gel (c) PLACL/Gel/HA (blend) (d) PLACL/Gel/HA (spray) nanofibers (e) TCP.145	 

 	Fig. 13  Confocal microscopy images to confirm the osteogenic differentiation of ADSCs using ADSC specific marker proteins, characteristic of ADSC cells which have undergone osteogenic differentiation (c, f, I, l, o) on TCP (a–c), PLLA (d–f), PLLA/PBLG (g–i), PLLA/PBLG/Col (j–l) and PLLA/PBLG/Col/n-HA (m–o) at 60× magnification.151	 

PLLA	Titanium/PLLA nanofiber composite in the form of titanocene drug	Titanium in the form of titanocene dichloride	Sustained release of anticancer drug152
Self-assembling peptide	Self-assembling peptide amphiphile with cisplatin	Platinum drug (cis-dichlorodiammine platinum(II))	Bioresponsive anticancer drug release from the biomimetic gel153
PLA	Electrospun PLA nanofibers incorporated with cisplatin	Platinum drug (cis-dichlorodiammine platinum(II))	Continuous release of anticancer drug154
PCL	Electrospinning of a PCL solution with small amounts of silver-loaded zirconium phosphate nanoparticles	Silver-loaded zirconium phosphate nanoparticles	Yuan et al.,155 primary human dermal fibroblasts
PU	Electrospinning of polyurethane with silver nanoparticles for wound dressing material	Silver nanoparticles	Antibacterial and cytocompatibility156
Chitosan	Electrospinning chitosan and Ag nanoparticles	Silver nanoparticles	Synergistic effect between silver and chitosan by chelation mechanism157
Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-co-polystyrene	Blend with functionalized gold nanoparticles to form the new nanofiber nanocomposites	Gold nanoparticles	Synergistic enhancement effects of the gold nanocomposites on the daunorubicin drug uptake158
PU/MWNT	Polyurethane/multiwalled carbon nanotube composite nanofiber	Multiwalled carbon nanotubes	Growth and anticoagulant function of human umbilical vein endothelial cells159

 	Fig. 14  SEM images of PU fiber and silver nanoparticles incorporated PU fibers (a) PU fiber, (b) PU fiber with (0.005% Ag), (c) PU fiber (with 0.01% Ag), and (d) PU fiber (with 0.015% Ag).156	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
