Environmental applications of single-atom catalysts based on graphdiyne  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CY00240C View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3CY00240C
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2023, Advance Article Environmental applications of single-atom catalysts based on graphdiyne
Mengdie Zhao, 
Liyun Jiang and 
Qi Yu*
School of Materials Science and Engineering, and Shaanxi Laboratory of Catalysis, Shaanxi University of Technology, Hanzhong 723001, China. E-mail: qiyu@snut.edu.cn
Received 
20th February 2023
, Accepted 28th April 2023First published on 3rd May 2023AbstractSingle-atom catalysts (SACs) have attracted significant attention because of their high atomic efficiency and unique performance in various catalytic reactions. As a two-dimensional (2D) layered structure, graphdiyne (GDY) is composed of hybridized sp and sp2 carbon atoms and has been developing rapidly in recent years. In this review, we present the environmental catalytic reactions and applications of GDY-based SACs. The current routes for the synthesis of GDY are described, and the catalytic applications of GDY-based SACs in CO oxidation, CO2 reduction reactions, hydrogenation, nitrogen reduction reactions, oxygen reduction reactions and water splitting are discussed in detail. Finally, the challenges and developments of GDY in SACs are presented.
1 Introduction
In the past few decades, the application of fossil fuels has resulted in unprecedented scientific and technological progress; however, the pollutants produced by their combustion, such as CO, CO2, NOX, and HC, are harmful to the environment and human health.1–4 With the increasing environmental pollution, one of the hot topics for relieving environmental contamination is the redox of pollutants. Catalysis, by which 90% of chemical processes and more than 60% of products are generated, promotes chemical transformations by reducing their activation energy.5–8 However, there are many shortcomings in conventional catalysis, such as the low utilization rate of metal atoms, unclear selection of active sites and poor selectivity of catalysts.9,10 Therefore, many efforts have been devoted to overcoming the deficiencies of traditional catalysts by efficiently developing new atomic-site catalysts.
Single-atom catalysts (SACs) have been proposed as a type of new heterogeneous catalysts with single atoms as the catalytic active center and have attracted increasing attention due to their maximum metal utilization and uniform active site composition. The electronic structure of isolated metal centers has a great influence on the adsorption energy of the reactants and intermediates.11,12 SACs are widely used in catalysis because of their 100% atomic efficiency, unique electronic geometry and high catalytic performance.13–15 In particular, the catalysis of fossil fuel combustion products, including the CO oxidation reaction (COOR),16 CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR),17,18 hydrogen evolution reaction (HER),19 nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR),20 oxygen reduction reaction (ORR),21,22 and water splitting23,24 (Fig. 1). Furthermore, SACs with homogeneous metal centers are more conducive for the study of catalytic mechanisms than conventional catalysts. Furthermore, supported metal catalysts are frequently used as advanced catalysts for the removal of gaseous contaminants. Therefore, the development of SACs based on precious/non-precious metals is key to the development of catalysts for sustainable use even; however, this is a challenging task.25–27
 Fig. 1  Environmental applications of graphdiyne-based SACs. 
Carbon, as one of the most abundant substances in nature, possesses different electronic structures, which have unique properties in terms of mechanics, physics, chemistry, electricity, optics and heat conduction. Carbon has three different hybrid states, i.e., sp, sp2, and sp3, which can form different bonds.28,29 The natural and artificial common carbon allotropes are summarized in Fig. 2. Due to the rich flexibility of carbon atoms, the construction of new carbon allotropes can be theoretically realized by changing the sp3-, sp2-, or sp hybrid carbon atom network.30,31 Graphdiyne (GDY) is a novel carbon allotrope composed of sp- and sp2-hybrid carbon networks.32,33 GDY has abundant carbon bonds, high π conjugation, wide plane spacing, uniform pore structure, controllable electronic structure, and atomic porosity. Because of its special structure, GDY has significant application prospects in gas separation,34,35 catalysis22,36 and energy-related fields.37–39 The application of carbon materials has promoted the progress of society and the development of other materials. The discovery and preparation of GDY have made significant contributions to the application of SACs, promoting efficient reactions.40,41 The unique triangular pores and rich carbon skeleton of GDY have a desirable function of capturing and stabilizing single metal atoms. The uniform anchoring of single metal atoms with catalytic activity on two-dimensional (2D) GDY can effectively improve the active area of the catalysts.42–44 The single atoms have a significant effect in the electrocatalysis of GDY monoatomic catalysts, leading to a significant improvement in electrocatalytic activity compared to conventional catalysts.
 Fig. 2  Diagrams of natural and man-made carbon allotropes. 
In this review, the progress and properties of GDY-based SACs in various catalytic reactions are discussed. The catalytic performance of GDY-based SACs is also investigated in different reactions, including COOR, CO2RR, HER, NRR, OER, and water splitting. Finally, the development prospects of GDY-based SACs are presented.
2 Classification of graphyne
2.1 Graphyne
Graphyne, an allotrope of carbon, was first proposed in 1987 by Baughman et al.45 As a new type of unnatural 2D carbon material, graphyne has the advantages of high conjugation and unique bandgap,46 which has potential applications in electricity, electrochemistry, energy storage, thermoelectricity and catalysis.47–49
According to the polymerization method and the number of acetylene bonds in its phenyl ring, different configurations of graphyne can be formed including GDY, α-graphyne, β-graphyne and γ-graphyne, which have potential applications in the fields of superconductivity, electronics, energy, catalysis and biomedicine.50 Meanwhile, due to the inherent adjustable bandgap of graphyne, it is widely used in the manufacture of flexible and wearable electronic devices,51,52 including optoelectronic devices,53 spintronic components,54,55 and semiconductors.56,57 In 2012, the magnetism of transition metal-modified graphyne was firstly studied via density functional theory (DFT) + U calculation, and the electron correlation was described using the linear response method.58 It was shown that V, Mn, and Co-graphyne are all magnetic and behave as spin-polarized semiconductors. Furthermore, the electron and charge transport properties of zigzag-graphyne nanoribbons have also been investigated via first principles calculation, which can be used as dual-spin filter diodes,57,59,60 molecule signal converters,61,62 and spin thermoelectric devices.63,64 Besides, graphyne can be used in a variety of electronic devices due to its controlled electrical conductivity, tunneling behavior and drain voltage.65,66
Recently, modified graphyne materials have been shown to have potential applications in the field of catalysis, such as the HER,67 OER,67,68 NRR,69 and carbon dioxide reduction reaction.70 Graphyne-based materials can be divided into metal/non-metal atom-modified catalysts in the HER/OER. In this case, methods for activating the original inert carbon atom should be developed for metal-free graphite alkynyl catalysts, either forming new heterojunction materials or doping graphyne with non-metallic atoms.71–73 For instance, tungsten (W) was doped on a β-graphyne substrate for nitrogen (N) fixation, which showed better electrical properties and higher N atom transfer efficiency than the original catalyst.74 Moreover, the layered porous graphyne is a desirable material for energy storage and film formation given that its evenly arranged porous channels provide perfect sites for metal-ion regulation.37,75,76 For example, graphyne can effectively improve the hole transport performance in perovskite cells.77,78 The photoelectric conversion efficiency of graphyne-based perovskite cells increased by 20%.79 A γ-graphyne nanocomposite material could also effectively improve the diffusion rate and catalytic performance of O2.80 Meanwhile, the selective proton conduction behavior of graphyne with an appropriate pore size implies that it is an ideal material for achieving zero-cross proton selection membranes.81
2.2 Graphdiyne
GDY, a new 2D allotrope of carbon, was firstly predicted by Haley et al. in 1997.31 It possesses two diacetyl bonds between carbon hexagonal rings and is a planar hybrid system with sp2 and sp carbon atoms, containing hexagonal rings and alkyne bonds, which can exist as nanospheres, nanotubes, and nanowires.50
Originally, it was difficult to synthesize GDY in large quantities. However, in 2018, Zhongfan Liu reported that independent three-dimensional (3D) GDY was successfully prepared using natural diatomite as a template (Fig. 3a). For the application of GDY as an anode material and 3D support,82 Yuliang Li's group synthesized GDY membranes on a Cu surface using hexaethynylbenzene as the precursor (Fig. 3b).83 GDY was successfully prepared through the metal-catalyzed cross-coupling method, which could be mass-produced with the yield of 98% (Fig. 3c).84,85
 Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis of 3D GDY using diatomite.82 (b) Typical AFM images of graphdiyne films grown on a copper substrate.83 (c) GDY preparation process by explosive method.84 
Because of the numerous C–C bonds in the structure of GDY, it has high π conjugation, wide plane spacing and uniformly dispersed pores, leading to desirable electrical conductivity and chemical stability.86,87 Consequently, these properties enable the application of GDY in electronics, energy, photovoltaic and catalysis.50,88 Compared with conventional catalysts, GDY can significantly improve the catalytic efficiency and durability of catalytic materials in redox reactions, electrocatalysis, photocatalysis and water cracking catalysis.89–91 Compared with graphene, the unique chemical structure of GDY has been adjusted by the rational design of precursor molecules and coupling reaction pathways. The acetylene bond in GDY can regulate the electronic properties of loaded single atoms, thereby improving the catalytic activity.92,93 In addition, a strong effect exists between single atoms and GDY, leading to their even distribution and preventing their aggregation, which can contribute to the long-term stability of electrocatalytic reactions. For electrocatalyst materials, GDY can effectively improve their catalytic stability with favorable conductivity and capacity, which can be used as an energy storage material in lithium batteries.94 Furthermore, GDY has significantly impacted the science of carbonization, leading to many major advances in the environmental application of carbon-based materials.
3 Types of reactions
3.1 CO oxidation
As a poisonous and harmful gas, CO is normally produced via the incomplete combustion of carbon-containing substances, typically from fuel combustion and automobile exhaust.95 Therefore, eliminating CO has become a significant environmental issue.96–98 In this case, low-temperature catalytic oxidation is an effective way to eliminate CO.99 In recent years, SACs have been widely used in the COOR. However, the experimental studies on the COOR with SACs are limited.11,100 Considering the significance of improving the durability of fuel electrocatalysts and investigating the surface properties of catalysts, efforts have been devoted to developing low-cost, high-activity COOR catalysts.101–103 Meanwhile, the COOR activity of graphite-acetylene as metal-free catalysts and graphite-acetylene supported metal-monatomic catalysts has also been discussed.104,105
Because of the challenge of doping precious metals in COOR catalysts, SACs can be necessary used due to the high catalytic activity and atomic efficiency.106–108 The addition of transition metal atoms is a promising and effective method to adjust the properties of materials, such as Sc,109,110 Ti,111 Fe,112 and Ni.113,114 For instance, Lin et al. proposed the use of monolayer GDY as a substrate for Sc and Ti for the COOR. DFT calculations implied that the C sites on the surface of GDY were the most stable points for Sc and Ti, and the adsorption atoms had high thermal stability and catalytic ability.111 The spin-polarized local DOS (LDOS) indicated a strong 2p–3d bond between C and the Sc/Ti atoms (Fig. 4a). The catalytic COOR can be performed in four steps. 
Sc/Ti + O2 → Sc/TiO2, Sc/TiO2 + CO → Sc/TiCOO2
(I) 
Sc/TiCOO2 → Sc/TiOOCO
(II) 
Sc/TiOOCO → Sc/TiO + CO2
(III) 
Sc/TiO + CO → Sc/Ti + CO2
(IV)
 Fig. 4  (a) LDOS of C, Sc and Ti below the atoms.111 (b) Top and side views of adsorption configurations of CO2, O, CO, and O2 on the Ir–GDY. (c) COOR on Ir–GDY is more inclined to the NRR mechanism among three different mechanisms.116 (d) Minimum energy distribution for the COOR via the ER mechanism.36 
The COOR on GDY doped with Ni atoms was systematically investigated. The Ni atoms tended to be embedded in the corners of the GDY to achieve the most stable embedding state. The adsorption energy of CO on Ni–GDY is −1.68 eV, and GDY has a high diffusion potential barrier, which prevents the aggregation of Ni and other doped atoms. By comparing the COOR proceeding via the Langmuir–Hinshelwood (LH) and Eley–Rideal (ER) mechanisms, CO adsorption on Ni–GDY was found to be more favorable than O2 adsorption. COOR, and therefore tends to start with the LH mechanism, which has a lower energy potential barrier and continues with the ER mechanism.114
The catalytic oxidation of CO on Fe–GDY was investigated by means of first principles calculations. The vacancies on GDY are more favorable for the adsorption of iron atoms, and the adsorption energy of CO on Fe–GDY was found to be −1.38 eV with a diffusion potential barrier (6.78 eV). Due to the strong hybridization between the 3d state of Fe and the 2p state of O2, O2 can be efficiently activated by Fe and CO can be inserted into the elongated O-O bond via the ER mechanism to form the carbonate-like intermediate state CO3 with a medium energy potential barrier. The differences between adsorbed O2 and CO were compared using the LH and the ER mechanisms, with Fe–GDY exhibiting more favorable catalytic activity for CO oxidation via the ER mechanism.115
Over the past decade, many researchers have systematically investigated the potential of precious metal-loaded GDY SACs. For example, Rh,117,118 Pt,119,120 Pd,121 Ir,122,123 and Au.124 It was found that noble metals have the highest adsorption energy at the center of the GDY triangle configuration, which facilitates the stable doping of metal atoms given that noble metals are stable and difficult to migrate when bonded to GDY after adsorption.116,125 Among them, Ir forms the shortest covalent bonds with the sp carbon of GDY, which is the most stable in terms of surface loading on GDY.122,126 Although noble metal catalysts have the advantages of wide application, good stability and selectivity, their practical application is significantly hindered by their high price and low storage capacity.127,128
An Ir single atom embedded in GDY alkyne was calculated by the first principles to investigate its reaction mechanism for the COOR, which was found to be efficient. Different from the traditional COOR, Ir–GDY was based on the new ER mechanism. The O atoms tend to be anchored on top of the Ir atoms (Fig. 4b). Compared with O2 adsorption, O− has a superior adsorption energy and activity for the COOR (Fig. 4c). Ir–GDY is more active than metal-free and Sc/Ti-embedded GDY in the COOR at room temperature 111, which will be a potential efficient catalyst for the COOR.116 Moreover, Rh-atom embedded GDY was also studied by DFT for the COOR. Both the LH and trimolecular ER (TER) mechanisms were compared. It was shown that Rh–GDY is more suitable for the COOR under the LH mechanism. This is the starting point and foundation for the development of new 2D materials for catalytic oxidation.129 Therefore, monolayer GDY alkyne loaded with non-noble metal atoms is a potentially effective COOR catalyst.
In addition, the properties of GDY as a metal-free catalyst for the COOR at low temperatures have been investigated.130–132 GDY primarily exhibits COOR activity by absorbing O2 via the ER mechanism. The oxidation process and the minimum energy pathway of CO on GDY are shown in Fig. 4d. The mechanism includes the steps of adsorbed O–O bond rupture, formation of metastable carbonate intermediates and the formation of CO2 molecules. This work paved the way for the application of GDY in environmental and energy-related fields.36
3.2 CO2 reduction
In recent years, the atmospheric CO2 content has increased significantly. Therefore, it is urgent to convert CO2 into valuable sustainable substances. In this case, capturing, storing, and converting CO2 have become effective methods its removal,133,134 where the CO2RR mainly converts CO2 into useful chemicals, such as methane,135 methanol,136 formate ester,137 and ethanol.138 To realize the diversity in the CO2RR, thermal catalysis,139 biological catalysis,140 photocatalysis141,142 and electrochemical catalysis143,144 have been investigated. In all cases, due to the extremely stable and slow reaction dynamics of CO2, highly active catalysts are required. Various transition metals have been widely investigated as CO2RR catalysts.145–148 At present, electrocatalysis and photocatalysis are considered as a promising green catalytic methods for the CO2RR.25,142,149–151
3.2.1 Electrocatalytic CO2RR. The electrochemical CO2RR is a method that is cheaper and produces a higher yield than conventional methods for the conversion of CO2 into CO, CH4, or complex hydrocarbon fuel.152–154 Although the electrocatalytic CO2RR has some disadvantages, such as slow reaction kinetics, diverse reduction products, low energy utilization rate, poor catalyst stability, and HER competition,155,156 it is still recognized as promising CO2 utilization technology. Therefore, it is critical to find efficient catalysts for the CO2RR. In this case, SACs, with unique structure and catalytic performance, have significant application in the CO2RR.157–161 With changes in the type of metal or ligand environment, the electronic structure and properties of the metal center will also change.162,163 SACs have shown excellent performances as a link between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts in the electrochemical CO2RR. GDY has significant electrocatalytic potential and can contribute to CO2 electrocatalysis. To reach the catalytic limit, the reduction of noble metals to single atoms results in a superior catalytic performance compared to conventional metal nanoparticles.164 Furthermore, the use of SACs is one of the most effective ways to reduce the cost of noble metals.The activity and selectivity of GDY in the CO2RR were investigated by DFT calculations. In the CO2RR, the reduction products are CO and HCOOH (CO2 → *COOH → *CO → CO) (CO2 → *COOH → *HCOOH → HCOOH), and the CO2RR free energy on graphene is shown in Fig. 5b. The free energy barrier on graphene is more difficult to overcome than that on GDY. The sp–sp2 hybridization in GDY is beneficial for the first reaction of CO2, and thus it has higher activity for the CO2RR. The results showed that the unique sp–sp2 hybrid structure of GDY has a strong adsorption effect on the –COOH intermediates, which is the key to improving the catalytic activity. In addition, nitrogen doping on GDY further improves the selectivity for CH3OH and CH4 and improves its activity for the CO2RR.165 Thus, carbon materials without metal doping have many advantages as catalysts.166
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of Ag/GDY structure of synthesized nanocatalyst.167 (b) Free energy diagram of CO2RR on graphene.168 (c) i XPS spectra of Ag/GDY/CC and ii XPS spectra of C1s. (d) LSV curve for stability test.167 
The transition metal silver has great potential in the electrocatalysis of the CO2RR.169,170 Based on the special electronic structure distribution of GDY, GDY can not only be used as a template for AgNP growth to effectively prevent its aggregation, but also enhance the effective conversion of active sites and electrons through the close interaction between the phase interfaces, enhancing the synergistic catalytic effect and significantly improving the electrocatalytic performance of nanocomposites.171 A novel CO2RR catalyst, Ag/GDY/CC, was designed and prepared via a simple in situ synthesis method through three steps based on GDY (Fig. 5a). The close contact maximized the Ag surface exposure and effectively enhanced the charge transfer and electrocatalytic properties. The results showed that the electrochemical reduction of CO2 → CO by Ag/GDY nanocomposites has a Faraday efficiency of 92.1% and a high current density of 25.74 mA cm−2, making Ag/GDY/CC durable for up to 24 h. In the catalytic process, Ag/GDY composites maintain excellent stability. Compared with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) pattern of pure GDY, AgNP and GDY have more active electron interactions (Fig. 5c). After 2000 cycles, Ag/GDY/CC maintained its electrochemical stability (Fig. 5d), making it favorable for electrocatalytic CO2RR.167 Silver-based electrocatalysts with high catalytic activity, high selectivity and low cost have been widely used in the field of catalysis.172
In recent years, with the use of porous 2D material coatings on metal surfaces to improve the performance of catalysts, GDY coatings on Cu surfaces have opened a new path for electrocatalysis. Gas molecules easily enter the interface between the 2D material and the metal, and the reaction occurs in a closed “nano-reactor” beneath the 2D overlay. DFT calculations revealed the advantages of GDY coatings in reducing the free energy and initial voltage of the key intermediates. Peterson et al. found that the GDY-covered Cu surface has excellent catalytic ability compared to ordinary metal surfaces.174 The structures of the CO2 reduction intermediates on the GDY-covered Cu surface were compared with that of the key intermediates COOH* and CHO* (Fig. 6a). It was found that the CO* binding exceeds the ratio of the original transition metal. Electrochemical CO2 reduction was more active below the GDY overlay. According to the DFT energy distribution on the path through the GDY triangular hole (Fig. 6b), CO2 can easily pass through GDY. GDY covers the relative free energy of CO2 reduction on the Cu (111) surface and the relative free energy of each intermediate (Fig. 6c). With the addition of Cu, the activity for the CO2RR was increased.173
 Fig. 6  (a) Structure of CO2 reduction intermediates on GDY-covered Cu surface. (b) DFT energy distributions of CO2, CO, and CH4 in the triangular hole covered by GDY. (c) Relative free energy of CO2 reduction on GDY-covered Cu(111) surface.173 
SACs loaded on GDY combined with electrochemical CO2RR can significantly change the electronic properties and atomic structure of the central metal site of SACs by changing the type of SACs or the coordination environment due to the maximum theoretical atomic utilization and unique structure, providing an opportunity to design SACs for CO2 electrocatalysis.175,176 In this case, the activity and selectivity of catalysts for the CO2RR can be modulated at the atomic level. More attention should be paid to C–C coupling on SACs and the HER as a common side reaction of the CO2RR.177,178 A combination of characterization methods and theoretical calculations should be used to further investigate the modulation of electrochemical CO2RR by SACs loaded with GDY.

3.2.2 Photocatalysis. Photocatalysis is one of the ideal ways to reduce fossil fuel consumption and mitigate the greenhouse effect by reducing CO2 to chemical superfuels through low-cost geothermal cooperative systems.179–181 With the continuous development of photocatalytic technology, solar-powered photocatalytic CO2RR can not only produce high-energy fuels and high-value-added chemicals, but also reduce CO2 emissions.182–186 Thus, it provides effective measures to address energy and environmental issues.187,188 However, although numerous semiconductors photocatalysts have been developed, they do not have the same activity for CO2 reduction due to their low conversion rates and low selectivity limitations. Thus, the development of efficient CO2 photocatalysts remains a challenge.101In recent years, the 2D nonmetallic organic semiconductor g-C3N4 has received significant attention due to its good physical and chemical properties.189–191 However, it possesses poor conductivity and low separation efficiency, which can be overcome with the addition of GDY.34 The excellent conductivity and carrier mobility of GDY offer a new approach to achieve the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. A simple self-assembly method was used to prepare composites containing g-C3N4 nanotubes (GDY@CNtb), and the mechanisms of photocatalytic CO2 reduction on GDY@CNtb were investigated. GDY@CNtb obtained by introducing GDY exhibited significantly improved brightness in the visible region. Furthermore, the addition of GDY improved the electrical conductivity of the material. Consequently, the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 was improved and the photocatalytic activity of the composite did not decrease, proving the good stability of the composite. The activity of GDY@CNtb in the photocatalytic CO2 reduction was compared with pure CNtb. After the introduction of GDY, the main products were CO and CH4, and the photocatalytic efficiency for the reduction of CO2 was significantly improved (Fig. 7a and b). According to the results, GDY@CNtb exhibited desirable photocatalytic activity.192 A GDY film coating could also be used to cover CsPbBr3 nanocrystals to create a CsPbBr3@GDY composite photocatalyst. Subsequently, the photocatalytic redox reaction was investigated (Fig. 7d). Due to the high metal loading, the activity of the catalyst doped with Co ions was almost eight-times that of pure CsPbBr3. The active sites of doped Co ions and the improved chemisorption of CO2 on GDY were the main factors for the enhanced photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO. As shown in Fig. 7c, the GDY coating promoted the aggregation of CO2 on the surface, and the adsorption capacity of CO2 was significantly improved with the participation of cobalt, which is more conducive to photocatalysis. The XPS C 1s spectrum of CsPbBr3@GDY0.3 contained six peaks (Fig. 7e), where the calculated integral ratio of sp- and sp2-carbon is close to 2, further proving that GDY was successfully coated on the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. This provides a good application method for improving metal halide perovskite nanocrystals.193 Doping TiO2, CH3NH3PbI3, or other surface modifiers or dopants on the surface of GDY increases the perovskite grain size, electron density, and solar cell stability, enabling the use of GDY in efficient and stable perovskite solar cells.78
 Fig. 7  Change in (a) CO and (b) CH4 on GDY@CNtb.192 (c) Adsorption curves of CO2 on CsPbBr3@GDY. (d) Photooxidation-reduction reactions of Co-doped compounds. (e) XPS C 1s spectrum of CsPbBr3@GDY.193 (f) Photocatalytic mechanism of Ag3PO4/GDY composite.40 
The photocatalytic activity of Ag3PO4/GDY Pickering emulsions was investigated for the photodegradation of methylene blue and the photooxidation of water under visible light irradiation. This enhanced photocatalytic activity was mainly attributed to the ability of GDY to act as a photoelectron acceptor for Ag3PO4 nanoparticles, facilitating hole transport and reducing Ag+ to Ag0. However, the Ag3PO4/GDY-based emulsion system was obviously degraded under visible light irradiation.194 Yuliang Li et al. firstly synthesized an Ag3PO4/GDY photocatalyst by combining the hydrophilic photocatalytic active semiconductor Ag3PO4 with the hydrophobic nanostructured GDY (Fig. 7f). GDY could form a Pickering solution with Ag3PO4 nanoparticles and exhibited strong photocatalytic activity in the visible light region. Thus, GDY can not only form stable nanocatalysts with other substances as a substrate, but also form Pickering solutions with nanomaterials as photocatalysts, which is helpful to design and fabricate more efficient photocatalysts.40

3.3 Hydrogenation
The benzene ring and alkyne on graphitic alkynes can be non-zero-gap systems, which are readily hydrogenated, and the amount of HER can be used to adjust their bandgap value.195 The electrochemical method used in research to break down water into hydrogen is one of the most effective ways to solve the energy and environmental problems.196,197 The HER holds significant promise for applications in renewable energy conversion and storage.198
At present, Pt is the most effective HER electrocatalyst, but its high cost significantly limits its practical application. Therefore, in recent years, more suitable catalysts have been constantly explored and research devoted to the development of non-noble metal catalysts and metal-free HER catalysts.198–201 To improve the HER performance, Yuliang Li's group successfully demonstrated a zero-valent electrocatalytic system loaded with zero-valent Pd0 atoms on GDY using many active species of zero-valent palladium complexes for catalytic conversion.202 The porosity of Pd0/GDY facilitated rapid media and gas precipitation and ensured adequate contact between the electrolyte and catalyst surface. Raman spectroscopy showed that the Pd0/GDY catalyst had more structural defects than GDY after Pd anchoring, but the number of active sites increased and the catalytic activity improved (Fig. 8a). Pd0/GDY had a lower potential at 10 mA cm−2 and superior activity than the commercially available Pt/C (20 wt%) (Fig. 8b). The spectral comparison showed that Pd0/GDY exhibited excellent HER activity.202 The Pb atoms interact with GDY, and the structural integrity of GDY is unaffected when Pb atoms are anchored on GDY.
 Fig. 8  (a) Raman spectra of Pd0/GDY and original GDY. Inset: Diacetylene signal of GDY skeleton. (b) Comparison of mass activity between Pd0/GDY and Pt/C.202 (c) Comparison of the mass activity of Ni/GDY,Fe/GDY and Pt/C. (d) Synthesis of Ni/GDY and Fe/GDY. (e) Polarization curves of Pt/C, Fe/GD, Ni/GD, GDF and CC.199 (f) Metal cluster  embedded in GDY.203 Fig. 8. (a) Raman spectra of Pd0/GDY and original GDY. Inset: Diacetylene signal of GDY skeleton. (b) Comparison of mass activity between Pd0/GDY and Pt/C.202 (c) Comparison of the mass activity of Ni/GDY,Fe/GDY and Pt/C. (d) Synthesis of Ni/GDY and Fe/GDY. (e) Polarization curves of Pt/C, Fe/GD, Ni/GD, GDF and CC.199 (f) Metal cluster  embedded in GDY.203 
The corresponding zero-valent Ni and Fe atoms were also loaded on GDY. Ni/GDY and Fe/GDY SACs were prepared in two steps (Fig. 8d), and the suitable sizes of mono-atom Ni and Fe were primarily 1.23 and 1.02 Å, respectively. Fig. 8e shows that the current increased rapidly with an increase in the cathode potential, and Fe/GDY exhibited the best HER catalytic activity with a minimum starting potential of 9 mV. Compared with commercial Pt/C, Fe/GDY had a significantly higher mass activity and could be used as a high-performance electrode for the HER (Fig. 8c).199 Yuliang Li et al. used ultra-thin GDY nanosheets in a 3D carbon fiber network (UGNS/CF) as electrocatalysts and confirmed that UGNS could efficiently generate hydrogen under acidic and alkaline conditions based on the HER principle of carbon electrocatalysts. The metal-free 3DGDY structure could also be used as a high-activity, stable HER catalyst.200 This serves as a reference for the development of highly efficient non-noble catalysts and links the catalytic activity with the structure at the atomic level.
Jun Li et al. conducted a detailed analysis of the stable anchoring of surface-isolated metal clusters in a heterogeneous catalyst and emphasized the synergistic effect between metal atoms in the clusters and atoms at the surrounding metal-supporting interfaces. DFT calculations were used to theoretically study the heterogeneous surface of a single-cluster catalyst supported by GDY. In the  (M, M′ = Ru, Os) catalyst, because of the synergistic effect between the metal atoms in the clusters and the charge buffering effect of GDY, the three-atom metal clusters could be anchored to the carbon ring of the GDY support (Fig. 8f), which could selectively hydrogenate acetylene to ethylene. Here, the catalytic acetylene HER reaction path of Os3/GDY is employed as an example (Fig. 9a). By adjusting the adsorption energy of C2H4 and H2, the selectivity and activity can be balanced. GDY also provides multiple active sites for the addition of catalysts, which synergistically activates acetylene and dihydrogen, allowing both GDY and anchor atoms to perform their corresponding activities.203
 Fig. 9  (a) HER of acetylene and ethylene in Os/GDY.203 (b) Adsorption energy of C2H4 and C2H2 on PdxMy/GDY. (c) C2H2 semi-HER on Pd1/GDY.205 (d) Free energy diagram of HER at equilibrium ground potential by DFT. (e) Linear sweep voltammetry of GDY–MoS2 NS/CF.200 
Fully atomistic molecular dynamics with a reactive force field was performed to investigate the structure and dynamics of the HER mechanism on GDY. The rate of the HER differs during the process. Initially, the first hydrogenated position may have been the carbon atom, forming a carbon triple bond. With an increase in the HER, the first hydrogenated position changes from the carbon atom of the carbon triple bond to the carbon atom of the preferentially hydrogenated carbon single bond.204 The thermodynamic stability of the HER of graphite alkynes was also investigated by DFT calculations, where the sp hybrid carbon can be hydrogenated to form extended 2D hydrocarbons. The Gibbs free energy of GDY and graphdiene HER was calculated. According to the free energy and first principles, when H2 is added to GDY, the fully hydrogenated GDY is more thermodynamically dependent on a higher temperature. The existence of a new 2D hydrocarbon graphebutane synthesized by the HER of graphene is predicted.195
Pd is a relatively efficient catalyst for C2H2 semi-HER. C2H2 semi-HER is widely used in the industry to remove the residual C2H2 in C2H4.206 In this case, there may be three reaction paths for the semi-HER of C2H2. 
(V) 
(VI) 
(VII) 
(VIII)
Regarding PdxMy (M = Pd, Cu, Ag, Au, Ni; x + y = 1–3) clusters, C2H4 was prepared via the semi-HER of C2H2 on a PdxMy/GDY catalyst. The adsorption energies of C2H4 and C2H2 on different PdxMy/GDY catalysts were investigated (Fig. 9b). In the semi-HER state, the selectivity and activity of the PdxMy/GDY catalyst for C2H2 almost depended on the size and composition of the metal clusters supported by the PdxMy/GDY catalyst. Based on DFT calculations, when the loaded metal is a single-atom, Pd1/GDY can promote the formation of C2H2 in the semi-HER (Fig. 9c). When the supported metal clusters are diatomic, Cu2/GDY and Au2/GDY are favorable for the synthesis of C2H4, providing a basis for the selective HER of alkanes in small metal clusters supported by GDY. Because of the high stability of GDY, the single-cluster catalyst on the surface also provides a reference for other catalysts. The calculation and selection of different metal clusters on the new GDY support, particularly the size and composition of the appropriately supported metal clusters, can help guide the structure and performance of metal cluster catalysts for similar semi-HER.203,205
The heterostructure of a GDY-wrapped MoS2 sodium disulfide sheet was proposed by Yuliang Li et al. Their study showed that it could be used as an efficient hydrogen-producing cathode in any acid–base environment. The optimal configuration of H atoms adsorbed on different carbon atoms in GDY significantly reduced the free energy of MoS2 when they were combined, and the optimal free energy was 0.78 eV (Fig. 9d). Continuous cycle linear sweep voltammetry experiments showed that GDY can chemically adsorb MoS2 to form strong electron hybridization and enhance its conductivity (Fig. 9e). Compared with the original MoS2, the catalytic activity transient photocurrent and HER activity and stability of the catalyst were significantly improved.200
3.4 Nitrogen reduction reaction
Ammonia (NH3) is a colorless nitrogen hydrogen compound with a strong pungent smell at room temperature. Ammonia is typically used to make fertilizers.207,208 However, the synthesis of NH3 is performed at high temperature and pressure, which requires a lot of energy and is accompanied by the generation of several greenhouse gases. Therefore, the development of green economic synthetic ammonia is necessary to solve the current environmental crisis.209,210 In particular, the NRR has been proposed in recent years to prepare nitrogen at room temperature and pressure, which provides a feasible method for the environmentally friendly and efficient conversion of N2 into NH3.211–213
The NRR is an emerging low-cost green ammonia production technology that can be used to replace the traditional Haber–Bosch process, using renewable energy to change the reaction conditions and has application potential to adjust the environment for ammonia production.214–216 The key to ammonia synthesis is the synthesis of highly active, highly selective catalysts.
The preparation of NRR catalysts using GDY has been widely discussed, such as metal-free catalysts,217–219 single-atom-doped GDY,220 polymerized carbon nitride,221,222 and GDY nanosheets and nanotubes.223 Monatomic catalysts can effectively activate the triple bond of N2 to form NH3. The conversion of the by-product H2 of the reaction is performed using the catalyst with the least side reaction. Meanwhile, the conversion of H2 is a challenging problem in the NRR.224,225
To synthesize a stable monatomic catalyst with excellent electrocatalytic activity, Yuliang Li and colleagues reported the preparation of zero-valent molybdenum atoms supported on GDY to form the first Mo0/GDY atom catalyst, which exhibited excellent activity and selectivity for the electrochemical reduction of N2 and a highly accurate chemical electronic structure. The efficient desorption of H at the carbon site determines the potential barrier as the potential-determining step for the HER of the n intermediate [NHNH] (Fig. 10a). The additional chemisorption of H shows that C1 is the best active site for adsorbed proton–electron charge exchange (Fig. 10b and c). The rate-determining step is the second hydrogen, which provides a larger initial potential (U = −0.96 V) for the NRR. The mass activity of Mo0/GDY was approximately 2.6-times that of commercial Pt/C at an overpotential of 0.20 V compared to that of Pt/C (20 wt%) (Fig. 10d). Compared with other traditional monatomic catalysts, the Mo0/GDY catalyst has outstanding performance in the HER (Fig. 10e). It is also an NRR/HER bifunctional zero-valent atom catalyst. The emergence of zero-valent atom catalysts indicates the emergence of a new generation of catalysts.226
 Fig. 10  (a) NRR energy pathway on Mo–GDY. (b) Formation energy of H adsorption on Mo0/GDY. (c) H chemisorption energy at Mo0/GDY. (d) Comparison of mass activity between Mo0/GDY and Pt/C. (e) Overpotential of Mo0/GD.226 
A simple and extendable method was used to successfully synthesize an independent GDY/Co2N catalyst (Fig. 11a). Compared with the existing nitrogen-fixing electrocatalysts, it has ultra-high selectivity and ammonia absorption. The addition of GDY changed the surface state of Co2N, effectively transferred electrons from Co2N to the GDY layer, produced more active sites, and promoted the charge transfer between the metal Co and CDY to improve the NRR performance. Thus, it provides a new way to improve the performance of the electrochemical NRR.227
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of nitriding independent Co-LDH and GDY/Co2N.227 (b) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of Pd–GDY electrocatalyst for the synthesis of ammonia. (c) Comparison of NRR performance among Pd–GDY and other catalysts. (d) Current density and scan rate diagram of Pd–GDY.228 
Zhang et al. successfully prepared Pd/GDY via the self-reduction method using a GDY zero-valent catalyst, which could activate N2 and realize NH3 production (Fig. 11b). The strong electronegativity of NRR is caused by the cooperation of orbitals formed between the Pd atoms and adjacent C sites. The average yield of NH3 reached 4.45 ± 0.30 mgNH3 mgPd−1 h−1, and the selectivity of Pd/GDY for the reaction was significantly improved compared with that of pure GDY (Fig. 11c and d). Due to strong coupling, the enhanced electron transfer promoted the reduction of the self-activated nitrogen by accurately adjusting Pd coupling and anchoring atom selection to minimize side reactions. This catalyst exhibited a significantly improved performance for the NRR and provided a scientific method for studying NH3 synthesis at room temperature and pressure.228
Generally, the HER occurs on the surface of all metal-based catalysts, while metal-doped NRR catalysts will affect the efficiency of NH3 production and conversion.229 In recent years, metal-free catalysts have become potential choices as NRR catalysts because of their rich valence electrons and weak binding ability with hydrogen.230,231 Zou et al. developed a corrosion engineering strategy for the first time, which enables heteroatom doping and corrosion of the main GDY simultaneously to dope the non-metallic halogen element Cl on ultra-thin GDY to form the Cl–GDY catalyst. This catalyst could efficiently drive the reaction of N2 to form NH3, and thus it can be applied in artificial nitrogen fixation, which significantly widens the application range of metal-free catalysts for artificial nitrogen fixation.219
3.5 Oxygen reduction reaction
With the rapidly increasing energy demand, it is necessary to use appropriate catalysts to accelerate the ORR to improve the performance of batteries.232–234 To date, Pt-based materials have been used as electrocatalysts for the ORR, but because Pt is a precious metal with a high price and limited supply, it cannot be used in large quantities. In addition, Pt-based catalysts for the ORR are easily poisoned by CO, decreasing the diffusion rate of O2 and catalytic performance or even inactivation.235–237 Therefore, it is necessary to develop non-noble metal ORR catalysts to replace Pt-based materials. In particular, carbon-based catalysts, with low cost, abundant storage and good oxidation resistance are substitutes for ORR catalysts. Pure carbon-based materials have no catalytic activity for the ORR, but the catalysts formed by doping other heteroatoms with carbon-based materials have high stability, good resistance to CO and methanol poisoning, and a good catalytic effect on the ORR.22,238,239 Because the atomic radius of the N atom is comparable to that of the C atom and the electronegativity of N atom is higher than that of C, N can be effectively doped in carbon materials and improve their stability, e.g., N-doped carbon nanotubes, graphene, graphite, and 3D carbon materials.240–242 The common types of nitrogen atoms doped in carbon materials are pyridine N, pyrrole N, and graphite N. The graphitic N content affects the limiting current density, while the pyridinic N content increases the initial potential of the ORR;22,243 however, the ORR activity is determined by the latter.244
The addition of an acetylene bond can increase the number of positively charged carbon atoms in GDY, and these carbon atoms may become active sites for the ORR.245 Nitrogen can be doped by replacing the sp-hybridized carbons, and N-doped GDY was successively synthesized using pyridine and NH3 as N sources. Consequently, at a potential above 0.8 V, it had higher electrocatalytic activity for the ORR and higher stability and corrosion resistance to methanol than conventional Pt/C catalysts.217,246 Based on the doping of pyridinic N in GDY, Yuliang Li's group designed and synthesized hydrogen-substituted GDY (HsGDY), which had a conjugated structure similar to GDY, and also conducive to electron and O2 transfer. Compared with GDY, the C atom connected with H in HsGDY is more easily replaced by an N atom, allowing the N–HsGDY ORR catalyst with higher activity to be obtained by selectively doping pyridinic N to participate in catalytic process.247
3.6 Water splitting
Electrochemical water splitting is a long-term method for the production of hydrogen from clean fuels, which involves the separation of water by a semi-reaction combining the HER and OER.248 Water splitting is a key factor in determining the performance of water decomposition and sustainable energy utilization. Converting electric energy into high-purity hydrogen molecules is helpful for efficient battery storage and alleviating the dependence on fossil fuels.249–251 In recent years, several transition metal-based materials have been widely used in water splitting catalysts, but obtaining efficient and stable water splitting catalysts remains a significant challenge. Metal-free carbon material catalysts are promising catalysts and have higher stability than metal catalysts under acid–base conditions. Also, they have some advantages in water splitting. At present, many metal-free water splitting catalysts have been reported.239,252–254 However, conventional metal-free catalysts do not exhibit activity for the HER and OER simultaneously; thus, stable and efficient bifunctional new carbon material catalysts are required.
Yuliang Li and colleagues synthesized 3D porous halothane nanostructures on GDY (p-FGDY/CC) for the first time. As a bifunctional catalyst for the HER and OER in acidic and alkaline electrolytes, the active surface area and number of active sites significantly increased. Due to the special chemical and electronic structure of FGDY, the new p-FGDY/CC electrode exhibited high activity and stability under universal pH electrochemical conditions. The selectivity of this catalyst for O adsorption and H desorption is superior to that of the metal-free catalysts reported to date. FGDY has high electron transfer capability, high conductivity, and a rich edge structure, ensuring that various O/H intermediates are adsorbed and desorbed. It also promotes overall water splitting (OWS).255
Researchers are committed to developing noble metal-free catalysts to replace noble metal catalysts. Among the various catalysts, transition metal catalysts are widely investigated in the field of bifunctional catalysts because of their unique physicochemical properties.256–258 Based on the porous structure of GDY and its advantage of free growth on any substrate,51,259 Li et al. proposed a reasonable strategy to control the growth of GDY on the surface of metal nitrides. GDY-encapsulated cobalt nitride nanosheets on Ni foam (CoNx@GDY NS/NF) were used to prepare HER/OER bifunctional electrocatalysts using GDY nanolayers coated on nickel foam (Fig. 12a). The catalyst exhibited good activity and stability for the HER and OER under alkaline conditions and could be used as an anode or cathode in alkaline electrolytic cells (Fig. 12b and c). Furthermore, a battery voltage of only 1.48 V was required to reach 10 mA cm−2 throughout the OWS process (Fig. 12d).260 In addition, a GDY film was coated with cerium/nickel-layered double-hydroxide nanosheets (CeNiLDH@GDY) to allow GDY to grow on their surface (Fig. 12f), which exhibited significantly enhanced OER activity. The optimum Ce0.6Ni0.4LDH/GDY electrocatalyst was obtained when the Ce/Ni ratio was 6:4. The current could reach 10 mA cm−2 when the crossing point was 283 mV, and the catalyst remained stable for 60 h. Under the alkaline (1.0 M KOH) condition (Fig. 12e), the electronic structure could be effectively adjusted, the electrochemically active surface area increased, and the charge transfer promoted, which improved the catalytic activity.72 This type of non-noble metal catalyst can be used as an efficient and economical non-noble metal catalyst for water splitting and similar catalytic processes.260,261
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the growth of CoNx@GDY NS/NF. (b) Free energy diagrams for the HER under alkaline conditions. (c) OER under alkaline conditions. (d) CoNx@GDYNS/NF polarization curve.260 (e) Polarization curves of Ce0.6Ni0.4LDH/GDY. (f) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process for GDY.72 
In contrast, ruthenium oxide is recognized as an effective electrocatalyst for acidic OER, but its high cost and low stability restrict its development.262 In addition, to meet the high-efficiency requirements of OWS under acidic conditions, Ru atoms are anchored in the GDY network cavity through collaborative engineering, enabling Ru atoms to have a strong coupling effect with adjacent C atoms, which are applied in the rapid redox exchange reaction and form a unique electron-mediating vehicle.263–265 Under acidic conditions, the Ru/GDY catalyst exhibited higher and more stable catalytic activity than RuO2, which improved the stability for the HER and OER.266 This discovery also advances the development of atomic catalysts and makes new contributions to the application of GDY in catalysis.
Zhang et al. successfully synthesized a new type of water splitting electrocatalyst based on the GDY@NiOx(OH)y heterostructure. They showed that the mixed-valence state and strong interaction can effectively improve the catalytic activity and stability, accelerate the reaction kinetics, and create the largest electrochemical active surface area. The porous properties of NiOx(OH)y nanosheets were confirmed by the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the GDY@NiOx(OH)y nanosheets. The high-resolution TEM images of GDY@NiOx(OH)y show the layered arrangement of heterogeneous structures. When applied to an alkaline cell, the voltage of GDY@NiOx(OH)y only reached 10 mA cm−2 at 1.54 V and it was stable for more than 100 h at 20 mA cm−2.261
GDY has a number of outstanding properties in terms of improving the catalytic performance of materials. Its unique structure allows for a non-uniform surface charge distribution, increasing the number of active sites. Furthermore, the high electrical conductivity of GDY can promote charge transfer and enhance reaction kinetics (Table 1). Besides, GDY is one of the most chemically stable carbon allotropes, and thus a GDY coating can significantly improve the long-term stability of materials. The fabricated high-porosity catalyst can significantly promote proton transport and gas precipitation in the OWS process. These advantages can not only improve the overall catalytic performance, but also provide new insights into the relationship between the catalyst composition and catalytic activity and provide basic guidance for the rational design and synthesis of high-performance electrocatalysts.
Table 1 Typical applications of GDY-loaded metals and review of their synthesis methods




Application
Doped material
Synthetic methods
Thickness of catalyst
Performance
Ref.




COOR
Ir
In situ synthetic method
Single and few layers
The new Eley–Rideal (NER) energy barrier of 0.37 eV
116


Sc/Ti
In situ synthetic method
Single layer
At T = 600 K or above energy barrier of 6.07/6.43 eV
111


CO2RR
Ag
In situ synthetic method
Single and few layers
Faraday efficiency of up to 92.1% and current density of 25.74 mA cm−2
167


CsPbBr3@GDY
Microwave synthesis method
Single layer
High yield of 27.7 μmol g−1 h−1
193


HER
Ni/Fe
Electrochemical synthesis method
Single and few layers
Ni loading of 0.278 wt%, and Fe loading of 0.680 wt%
199


NRR
Mo
In situ synthetic method
Single and few layers
High Mo atom content of 7.5 wt%
226




4 Conclusions and prospects
GDY has a wide application and prospects in terms of the environment, energy, and catalysis. The synthesis of GDY and its many properties, such as electronic, energy storage and catalytic properties have been widely investigated; however, there is still great prospect for its development and application. Significant advances have been made in the COOR, CO2RR, HER, NRR, ORR, and water splitting by SACs on GDY. Because of their maximum atomic utilization rate and excellent catalytic performance, SACs on GDY have achieved significant advancements in the fields of multiphase and catalysis. Due to the unique planar space structure of GDY, the active sites can be exposed during the catalytic process, effectively increasing the atom utilization rate. SACs can be used as an assistant to stimulate the intrinsic activity of GDY, but increasing loading of individual atoms to fully utilize the SSA remains a significant challenge. Meanwhile, the stability of SACs on GDY is one of the key indicators in industry. Although there is strong interaction between single-atoms and the GDY carrier, the oxidation and reduction reactions in the catalytic process will relatively weaken this interaction. In particular, some non-noble metals, which are easy to combine with oxygen, can easily generate the oxidation state in air, which reduces the activity of SAC/GDY catalyst and affects their large-scale application.
GDY derivatives can be used to adjust the interaction between the metal and carrier to achieve desirable electrocatalytic performances. Also, more attention should be paid to the introduction of heteroatoms coordinated with monoatomic sites to form a series of new active sites, which are expected to exhibit different catalytic effects. In addition, the adsorption behavior of the reaction intermediates on the active sites has been elaborated by theoretical calculations, but the configuration of the active sites still needs to be designed. Thus, efforts should be made to develop methods for the large-scale and low-cost preparation of GDY and its derivatives. It is believed that GDY and its derivatives will play an important role in SACs in the future.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial or non-financial interests.
AcknowledgementsThis work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 92061109), Natural Science Basic Research Program of Shaanxi (Program No. 2021JCW-20 and 2022KJXX-18). The support by the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Catalysis (No. 2020B121201002) is also acknowledged.
ReferencesL. Han, S. Cai, M. Gao, J. Y. Hasegawa and D. J. C. R. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 10916–10976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Yang, C. Zhang, P. Gao, H. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhong, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4580–4598 RSC .C. He, J. Cheng, X. Zhang, M. Douthwaite, S. Pattisson and Z. Hao, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 4471–4568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Yuan and Y.-J. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 342, 154–167 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhang, J. Li, K. Li, J. Zhao, Z. Yang, L. Zong, J. Chen, C.-X. Xie, X.-X. Zhao and X. Jia, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 3440–3446 RSC .P. Strasser, S. Koh, T. Anniyev, J. Greeley, K. More, C. Yu, Z. Liu, S. Kaya, D. Nordlund and H. Ogasawara, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. Polshettiwar and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 743–754 RSC .Z. Xie, Z. Liu, Y. Wang and Z. Jin, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2015, 2, 167–182 CrossRef CAS .J. Mao, J. Yin, J. Pei, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Today, 2020, 34, 100917 CrossRef CAS .S. Ren, Q. Yu, X. Yu, P. Rong, L. Jiang and J. Jiang, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 903–920 CrossRef CAS .B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Xu, Y. Zhao, Q. Wang, G. He and H. Chen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 451, 214261 CrossRef CAS .L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .Q. Yang, Y. Jiang, H. Zhuo, E. M. Mitchell and Q. Yu, Nano Energy, 2023, 108404 CrossRef CAS .P. Wu, P. Du, H. Zhang and C. Cai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1441–1449 RSC .W. Yuan, Y. Ma, H. Wu and L. Cheng, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 65, 254–279 CrossRef CAS .Q. Yu, Sci. China Mater., 2023, 66, 1079–1088 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Sahoo, Y. Ye, S. Lee, J. Park, H. Lee, J. Lee and J. W. Han, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 126–132 CrossRef .S. Agarwal, R. Kumar, R. Arya and A. K. Singh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 12585–12593 CrossRef CAS .J. Guan, X. Bai and T. Tang, Nano Res., 2021, 15, 818–837 CrossRef .X. Lei, Q. Tang, Y. Zheng, P. Kidkhunthod, X. Zhou, B. Ji and Y. Tang, Nat. Sustain., 2023, 1–11 Search PubMed .G. Meng, J. Zhang, X. Li, D. Wang and Y. Li, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2021, 8, 021321 CAS .Y. Zang, D.-Q. Lu, K. Wang, B. Li, P. Peng, Y.-Q. Lan and S.-Q. Zang, Nat. Commun., 2023, 14, 1792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Zhang, C. Ye, H. Yan, L. Li, H. He, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 3165–3182 CrossRef CAS .J. Yin, P. Chen, M. Lu, L. Song, R. Zhang, F. Xu, N. Wu and Y. Wang, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 1337–1344 CrossRef .L. Zhao, X. Han, W. Kong, Y. Tong, Y. Ding, J. Wang, B. Li, Y. Liu, J. Xu and W. Xing, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 530–541 RSC .F. Diederich and M. Kivala, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 803–812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. Georgakilas, J. A. Perman, J. Tucek and R. Zboril, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4744–4822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. M. Haley, Pure Appl. Chem., 2008, 80, 519–532 CrossRef CAS .M. M. Haley, S. C. Brand and J. J. Pak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 836–838 CrossRef CAS .H. Yu, Y. Xue and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Hu, J. He, J. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2023, 145, 5400–5409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Jiao, A. Du, M. Hankel, Z. Zhu, V. Rudolph and S. C. Smith, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11843–11845 RSC .S. W. Cranford and M. J. Buehler, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4587–4593 RSC .P. Wu, P. Du, H. Zhang and C. Cai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 5640–5648 RSC .K. Srinivasu and S. K. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5951–5956 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhang, Y. Xia, H. Bu, X. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Luo and M. Zhao, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 044309 CrossRef .X. Zheng, X. Gao, R. A. Vilá, Y. Jiang, J. Wang, R. Xu, R. Zhang, X. Xiao, P. Zhang and L. C. Greenburg, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2023, 18, 153–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Guo, Y. Jiang, F. Wu, P. Yu, H. Liu, Y. Li and L. Mao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2684–2691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Jin, X. Wang, X. Hao, G. Wang, X. Guo and K. Wang, 2D Mater., 2022, 9, 025014 CrossRef .M. Li, Z. Liu, T. Gao, S. Liu, H. Yu, Z. Wang and H. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 4803–4809 RSC .K. Lian, Q. Wan, R. Jiang and S. Lin, Catalysts, 2023, 13, 307 CrossRef CAS .H. Ci, Z. Shi, M. Wang, Y. He and J. Sun, Nano Res. Energy, 2023, 2, e9120054 CrossRef .R. H. Baughman, H. Eckhardt and M. Kertesz, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87, 6687–6699 CrossRef CAS .X. Li, B.-H. Li, Y.-B. He and F.-Y. Kang, New Carbon Mater., 2020, 35, 619–629 CrossRef CAS .N. Kosar, K. Shehzadi, K. Ayub and T. Mahmood, J. Mol. Graphics Modell., 2020, 97, 107573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Lei, H. Cheng, H. Liu and W. Rao, Mater. Lett., 2017, 189, 101–103 CrossRef CAS .Q. Yu, J. Jiang, L. Jiang, Q. Yang and N. Yan, Nano Res., 2021, 1–20 Search PubMed .N. Zhang, J. Wu, T. Yu, J. Lv, H. Liu and X. Xu, Front. Phys., 2021, 16, 1–36 Search PubMed .C. Huang, Y. Li, N. Wang, Y. Xue, Z. Zuo, H. Liu and Y. Li, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7744–7803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Xie, N. Wang, X. Li, G. Xu and C. Huang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 569–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Lin and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 2638–2646 CrossRef PubMed .X. Ren, J. Huang, P. Li, Y. Zhang and Z. X. Guo, Adv. Theory Simul., 2022, 5, 2100287 CrossRef CAS .C. Xu, P. Ning, C. Luo, L. Cao, X. Deng and G. Zhou, Phys. E, 2022, 136, 115003 CrossRef CAS .T. He, Y. Kong, A. R. Puente Santiago, M. A. Ahsan, H. Pan and A. Du, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 6392–6412 RSC .Y. Wu, C. Ma, Y. Chen, B. Mortazavi, Z. Lu, X. Zhang, K. Xu, H. Zhang, W. Liu and T. Rabczuk, Mater. Today Phys., 2020, 12, 100164 CrossRef .J. He, S. Y. Ma, P. Zhou, C. Zhang, C. He and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26313–26321 CrossRef CAS .Z. Lu, P. Lv, D. Ma, X. Yang, S. Li and Z. Yang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 065109 CrossRef .T. Ozaki, K. Nishio, H. Weng and H. Kino, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 075422 CrossRef .Y. Ni, X. Wang, W. Tao, S.-C. Zhu and K.-L. Yao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .R. G. Rizzo, S. Miryala, A. Calimera, E. Macii and M. Poncino, ACM Digital Library, 2015, 6, 253–258 Search PubMed .W. Yang, L.-H. Wang, Y. Geng, Q.-Q. Sun, P. Zhou, S.-J. Ding and D. Wei Zhang, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 224311 CrossRef .M. Zeng, W. Huang and G. Liang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 200–208 RSC .Z. Fan, X. Guo, M. Yang and Z. Jin, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 2708–2719 CrossRef CAS .X. Sha and C. M. Krowne, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 5853–5859 RSC .Y. Lv, B. Kang, Y. Yuan, G. Chen and J. Y. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 133126 CrossRef CAS .S. Zhou, J. Qin, X. Zhao and J. Yang, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 571–582 CrossRef CAS .W. Song, K. Xie, J. Wang, Y. Guo, C. He and L. Fu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 10418–10428 RSC .F. Lyu, W. Hua, H. Wu, H. Sun, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 1417–1432 CrossRef CAS .Q. Lv, W. Si, J. He, L. Sun, C. Zhang, N. Wang, Z. Yang, X. Li, X. Wang and W. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3376 CrossRef PubMed .S. Zhao, Y. Xue, Z. Wang, Z. Zheng, X. Luan, Y. Gao and Y. Li, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4153–4159 RSC .Y. Zhao, J. Wan, H. Yao, L. Zhang, K. Lin, L. Wang, N. Yang, D. Liu, L. Song and J. Zhu, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 924–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. He, S. K. Matta and A. Du, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 1546–1551 RSC .J. Kou, X. Zhou, H. Lu, F. Wu and J. Fan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1865–1870 RSC .Y.-T. Yan, Z.-G. Shao, C.-L. Wang and L. Yang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2022, 804, 139897 CrossRef CAS .S. O. A. Ahmad, A. Ashfaq, M. U. Akbar, M. Ikram, K. Khan, F. Wang, M. Ikram and A. Mahmood, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 14065–14092 RSC .X. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Jin, Y. Chen, H. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Li and S. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701117 CrossRef .W. Wang, S. Liu, C. Min, M. Zeng, H. Shi, R. Shao, S. Liu, Z. Xu, Y. Xia and N. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 2036–2044 CrossRef CAS .W. Wang, S. Liu, C. Min, M. Zeng, H. Shi, R. Shao, S. Liu, Z. Xu, Y. Xia and N. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 2036–2044 CrossRef CAS .L. Shi, A. Xu, D. Pan and T. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1165 CrossRef PubMed .J. Li, J. Xu, Z. Xie, X. Gao, J. Zhou, Y. Xiong, C. Chen, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800548 CrossRef PubMed .G. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3256–3258 RSC .Z. Zuo, H. Shang, Y. Chen, J. Li, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8074–8077 RSC .H. Shang, Z. Zuo, H. Zheng, K. Li, Z. Tu, Y. Yi, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 144–154 CrossRef CAS .G. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3256–3258 RSC .C. Huang, Y. Zhao and Y. Li, Journal, 2019, 31, 1904885 CAS .J. Li, X. Gao, X. Jiang, X.-B. Li, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5209–5213 CrossRef CAS .X. Gao, J. Li, R. Du, J. Zhou, M. Y. Huang, R. Liu, J. Li, Z. Xie, L. Z. Wu and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605308 CrossRef PubMed .B. Li, C. Lai, M. Zhang, G. Zeng, S. Liu, D. Huang, L. Qin, X. Liu, H. Yi and F. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000177 CrossRef CAS .H. Ren, H. Shao, L. Zhang, D. Guo, Q. Jin, R. Yu, L. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Wang and H. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 6 Search PubMed .D. Sun, Y. Chen, X. Yu, Y. Yin and G. Tian, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 462, 142084 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, L. Zhu, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Am. Ethnol., 2023, e202301384 Search PubMed .X. Gao, H. Liu, D. Wang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 908–936 RSC .V. Franco, M. Kousoulidou, M. Muntean, L. Ntziachristos, S. Hausberger and P. Dilara, Atmos. Environ., 2013, 70, 84–97 CrossRef CAS .M. A. van Spronsen, J. W. Frenken and I. M. Groot, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4347–4374 RSC .M. Jouny, G. S. Hutchings and F. Jiao, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 1062–1070 CrossRef CAS .B. Qiao, J. Liu, Y.-G. Wang, Q. Lin, X. Liu, A. Wang, J. Li, T. Zhang and J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6249–6254 CrossRef CAS .H. Kung, M. Kung and C. Costello, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 425–432 CrossRef CAS .B. Qiao, J. Lin, A. Wang, Y. Chen, T. Zhang and J. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 1505–1511 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhang, J. Tan, L. Cheng and W. Yang, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 34106–34114 CrossRef CAS .R. Lu, L. He, Y. Wang, X.-Q. Gao and W.-C. Li, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 350–356 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhao, L.-F. Yin, L.-X. Ling, R.-G. Zhang, M.-H. Fan and B.-J. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 2542–2554 RSC .Z. Chen, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3463–3468 CrossRef CAS .H. N. Tien and S. H. Hur, Mater. Lett., 2015, 161, 399–403 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Hulsey, B. Zhang, Z. Ma, H. Asakura, D. A. Do, W. Chen, T. Tanaka, P. Zhang, Z. Wu and N. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1330 CrossRef PubMed .N. Lopez, J. Catal., 2004, 223, 232–235 CrossRef CAS .H. Rongrong, Y. Cheng, X. Lanying and W. Dezheng, Chin. J. Catal., 2007, 28, 463–468 CrossRef .B. Bogdanović, M. Felderhoff, A. Pommerin, F. Schueth and N. Spielkamp, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1198–1201 CrossRef .D. Ma, W. Ju, T. Li, X. Zhang, C. He, B. Ma, Y. Tang, Z. Lu and Z. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 364, 181–189 CrossRef CAS .Z.-Z. Lin, Carbon, 2016, 108, 343–350 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, Z. Zhou, G. Yu, W. Chen and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6250–6254 CrossRef CAS .F. Luo, J. Zhu, S. Ma, M. Li, R. Xu, Q. Zhang, Z. Yang, K. Qu, W. Cai and Z. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 35, 723–730 CrossRef .X. Liu, W. Tang, S. Liu, X. Chen, Y. Li, X. Hu, L. Qiao and Y. Zeng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 539, 148287 CrossRef CAS .P. Wu, P. Du, H. Zhang and C. Cai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1441–1449 RSC .G. Xu, R. Wang, Y. Ding, Z. Lu, D. Ma and Z. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 23481–23492 CrossRef CAS .R. Lang, T. Li, D. Matsumura, S. Miao, Y. Ren, Y. T. Cui, Y. Tan, B. Qiao, L. Li and A. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 16054–16058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Shan, M. Li, L. F. Allard, S. Lee and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Nature, 2017, 551, 605–608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Lin, W. Zhou, R. Gao, S. Yao, X. Zhang, W. Xu, S. Zheng, Z. Jiang, Q. Yu and Y.-W. Li, Nature, 2017, 544, 80–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. R. Lucci, J. Liu, M. D. Marcinkowski, M. Yang, L. F. Allard, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. H. Sykes, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8550 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Chen, E. Vorobyeva, S. Mitchell, E. Fako, M. A. Ortuño, N. López, S. M. Collins, P. A. Midgley, S. Richard and G. Vilé, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Lu, S. Li, P. Lv, C. He, D. Ma and Z. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 360, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .J.-X. Liang, J. Lin, X.-F. Yang, A.-Q. Wang, B.-T. Qiao, J. Liu, T. Zhang and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21945–21951 CrossRef CAS .J.-C. Liu, Y.-G. Wang and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6190–6199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Qi, P. Yu, Y. Wang, G. Han, H. Liu, Y. Yi, Y. Li and L. Mao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5260–5263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Wang, A. Schechter and L. Feng, Nano Res. Energy, 2023, 2, e9120056 CrossRef .J. Lin, A. Wang, B. Qiao, X. Liu, X. Yang, X. Wang, J. Liang, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15314–15317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H.-Y. Su, M.-M. Yang, X.-H. Bao and W.-X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17303–17310 CrossRef CAS .G. Xu, F. Liu, Z. Lu, S. H. Talib, D. Ma and Z. Yang, Phys. E, 2021, 130, 114676 CrossRef CAS .H. Yu, L. Hui, Y. Fang, Y. Xue, F. He and Y. Li, 2D Mater., 2021, 8, 044004 CrossRef CAS .R. Krishnan, S.-Y. Wu and H.-T. Chen, Carbon, 2018, 132, 257–262 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zuo, D. Wang, J. Zhang, F. Lu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803762 CrossRef PubMed .C. Hepburn, E. Adlen, J. Beddington, E. A. Carter, S. Fuss, N. Mac Dowell, J. C. Minx, P. Smith and C. K. Williams, Nature, 2019, 575, 87–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Jiang, Y. Yang, L. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Fang, Y. Xu, B. Liu and X. Liu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 551–564 RSC .L. Xiong, X. Zhang, L. Chen, Z. Deng, S. Han, Y. Chen, J. Zhong, H. Sun, Y. Lian and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Wang, Y. Xu, T. Chen, D. Wei, X. Guo, L. Peng, N. Xue, Y. Zhu, M. Ding and W. Ding, J. Catal., 2021, 393, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .B. J. O'Neill, E. I. Gürbüz and J. A. Dumesic, J. Catal., 2012, 290, 193–201 CrossRef .C. Kim, K. M. Cho, K. Park, J. Y. Kim, G. T. Yun, F. M. Toma, I. Gereige and H. T. Jung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102142 CrossRef CAS .L.-P. Yuan, W.-J. Jiang, X.-L. Liu, Y.-H. He, C. He, T. Tang, J. Zhang and J.-S. Hu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 13227–13235 CrossRef CAS .H. Pang, X. Meng, H. Song, W. Zhou, G. Yang, H. Zhang, Y. Izumi, T. Takei, W. Jewasuwan and N. Fukata, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 1013–1020 CrossRef CAS .Y.-H. Luo, L.-Z. Dong, J. Liu, S.-L. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 390, 86–126 CrossRef CAS .R. Li, J. Batur, H. Bian, Y.-J. Wang, Z. Duan, Y. Xie and J.-R. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 8658–8668 CrossRef CAS .C. Liu, X. Mei, C. Han, X. Gong, P. Song and W. Xu, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 1618–1633 CrossRef CAS .J. T. Feaster, C. Shi, E. R. Cave, T. Hatsukade, D. N. Abram, K. P. Kuhl, C. Hahn, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4822–4827 CrossRef CAS .D. Gao, H. Zhou, J. Wang, S. Miao, F. Yang, G. Wang, J. Wang and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4288–4291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wu, Z. Jiang, X. Lu, Y. Liang and H. Wang, Nature, 2019, 575, 639–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D.-H. Nam, P. De Luna, A. Rosas-Hernández, A. Thevenon, F. Li, T. Agapie, J. C. Peters, O. Shekhah, M. Eddaoudi and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 266–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Li, I. M. ul Hasan, R. He, L. Peng, N. Xu, N. K. Niazi, J.-N. Zhang and J. Qiao, Nano Res. Energy, 2022, 1, e9120015 Search PubMed .J. Wu, J. Hao, W. Guo, J. Chen and Y. Min, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 613, 616–624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Zang, Z. Kou, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903181 CrossRef CAS .X. Jiao, Z. Chen, X. Li, Y. Sun, S. Gao, W. Yan, C. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Lin and Y. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7586–7594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Lin, C. S. Diercks, Y. B. Zhang, N. Kornienko, E. M. Nichols, Y. Zhao, A. R. Paris, D. Kim, P. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and C. J. Chang, Science, 2015, 349, 1208–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Liu, Y. Pang, B. Zhang, P. De Luna, O. Voznyy, J. Xu, X. Zheng, C. T. Dinh, F. Fan, C. Cao, F. P. de Arquer, T. S. Safaei, A. Mepham, A. Klinkova, E. Kumacheva, T. Filleter, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2016, 537, 382–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wu, S. Cao, J. Hou, Z. Li, B. Zhang, P. Zhai, Y. Zhang and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000588 CrossRef CAS .A. Bagger, W. Ju, A. S. Varela, P. Strasser and J. Rossmeisl, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7894–7899 CrossRef CAS .C. Hu, H. Liu, Y. Liu, J.-F. Chen, Y. Li and L. Dai, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103874 CrossRef CAS .Q. Sun, C. Jia, Y. Zhao and C. Zhao, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 1547–1597 CrossRef CAS .X. Hu, S. Yao, L. Chen, X. Zhang, M. Jiao, Z. Lu and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23515–23521 RSC .D. Gao, T. Liu, G. Wang and X. Bao, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 713–727 CrossRef CAS .S. Pablo-García, F. L. Veenstra, L. R. L. Ting, R. García-Muelas, F. Dattila, A. J. Martín, B. S. Yeo, J. Pérez-Ramírez and N. López, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 409–417 RSC .J.-C. Jiang, J.-C. Chen, M.-D. Zhao, Q. Yu, Y.-G. Wang and J. Li, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 7116–7123 CrossRef CAS .Z. Yao, C. Wang, J. Qin, Y. Wang, Q. Wang and H. Wei, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 27158–27162 CrossRef CAS .H. Agarwala, X. Chen, J. R. Lyonnet, B. A. Johnson, M. Ahlquist and S. Ott, Am. Ethnol., 2023, e202218728 CAS .Z. Ma, Y. Wang, J. Qin, Z. Yao, X. Cui, B. Cui, Y. Yue, Y. Wang and C. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 1625–1631 CrossRef CAS .Q. Pan, H. Liu, Y. Zhao, S. Chen, B. Xue, X. Kan, X. Huang, J. Liu and Z. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 2740–2744 CrossRef PubMed .A. Vasileff, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700759 CrossRef .W. Xie, S. Zhang, Y. Ni, G. Shi, J. Li, X. Fu, X. Chen, M. Yuan and M. Wang, Adv. Energy Sustainability Res., 2021, 2, 2100037 CrossRef CAS .T. Liu, Q. Wang, G. Wang and X. Bao, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 1212–1219 RSC .C. Kim, T. Eom, M. S. Jee, H. Jung, H. Kim, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 779–785 CrossRef CAS .D. Tan, J. Zhang, J. Shi, S. Li, B. Zhang, X. Tan, F. Zhang, L. Liu, D. Shao and B. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24516–24522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Xia, W. Dong, Z. Shen, S. Xiao, W. Chen, M. Gu and Y. Zhang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 5327–5338 RSC .M. Tahir, B. Tahir and N. A. S. Amin, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 548–560 CrossRef CAS .X. Chen, Z.-Z. Lin, M. Ju and L.-X. Guo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 479, 685–692 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .Q. Qu, S. Ji, Y. Chen, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 4201–4215 RSC .M. Sun, H. H. Wong, T. Wu, Q. Lu, L. Lu, C. H. Chan, B. Chen, A. W. Dougherty and B. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2023, 13, 2203858 CrossRef CAS .M. Zhang, Z. Hu, L. Gu, Q. Zhang, L. Zhang, Q. Song, W. Zhou and S. Hu, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 3206–3211 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Ummireddi, S. K. Sharma and R. G. S. Pala, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 519–529 RSC .H. Takeda, C. Cometto, O. Ishitani and M. Robert, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 70–88 CrossRef CAS .D. C. Grills, M. Z. Ertem, M. McKinnon, K. T. Ngo and J. Rochford, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 374, 173–217 CrossRef CAS .J. Cook, N. Oreskes, P. T. Doran, W. R. Anderegg, B. Verheggen, E. W. Maibach, J. S. Carlton, S. Lewandowsky, A. G. Skuce and S. A. Green, Environ. Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 048002 CrossRef .W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4607–4626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Lin, Z. Pan and X. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, Q. Xia, X. Bai, Z. Ge, Q. Yang, C. Yin, S. Kang, M. Dong and X. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 196–203 CrossRef CAS .K.-L. Bae, J. Kim, C. K. Lim, K. M. Nam and H. Song, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1156 CrossRef PubMed .L. Y. Wu, Y. F. Mu, X. X. Guo, W. Zhang, Z. M. Zhang, M. Zhang and T. B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9491–9495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Fu, K. Jiang, X. Qiu, J. Yu and M. Liu, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 222–243 CrossRef CAS .J. Wu, K. Li, J. Li, J. Du, X. Li, C. Song and X. Guo, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 1520–1529 RSC .B. Lin, M. Xia, B. Xu, B. Chong, Z. Chen and G. Yang, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 2141–2172 CrossRef CAS .X. Bai, L. Wang, R. Zong and Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9952–9961 CrossRef CAS .L. Chen, X.-X. He, Z.-H. Gong, J.-L. Li, Y. Liao, X.-T. Li and J. Ma, Rare Met., 2022, 41, 2429–2438 CrossRef CAS .C. Sun, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Wang, Z. Zheng, H. Cheng, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai and B. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 868, 159045 CrossRef CAS .K. Su, G.-X. Dong, W. Zhang, Z.-L. Liu, M. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 50464–50471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Dong, Y. Wang, B. Cao, S. Xin, L. Guo, J. Zhang and F. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 132, 45–53 CrossRef .G. M. Psofogiannakis and G. E. Froudakis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19211–19214 CrossRef CAS .M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Le Goff, V. Artero, B. Jousselme, P. D. Tran, N. Guillet, R. Métayé, A. Fihri, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, Science, 2009, 326, 1384–1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Bu, S. Chang, J. Li, S. Yang, W. Ma, Z. Liu, S. An, Y. Wang, Z. Li and J. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2023, 14, 1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Xue, B. Huang, Y. Yi, Y. Guo, Z. Zuo, Y. Li, Z. Jia, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1460 CrossRef PubMed .L. Hui, Y. Xue, F. He, D. Jia and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .L. Hui, Y. Xue, H. Yu, C. Zhang, B. Huang and Y. Li, ChemPhysChem, 2020, 21, 2145–2149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Yu, Y. Xue, B. Huang, L. Hui, C. Zhang, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Liu and Y. Li, iScience, 2019, 11, 31–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D.-H. Xing, C.-Q. Xu, Y.-G. Wang and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 10494–10500 CrossRef CAS .P. Autreto, J. De Sousa and D. Galvao, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2013, 1549, 59–64 CrossRef .Y. Wang, Y. Qi, M. Fan, B. Wang, L. Ling and R. Zhang, Green Energy Environ., 2022, 7, 500–511 CrossRef CAS .F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Bligaard, R. Z. Sorensen, C. H. Christensen and J. K. Norskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9299–9302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Liu, K. K. Sakimoto, B. C. Colón, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6450–6455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Kitano, Y. Inoue, Y. Yamazaki, F. Hayashi, S. Kanbara, S. Matsuishi, T. Yokoyama, S.-W. Kim, M. Hara and H. Hosono, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 934–940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wang, Y. Yu, R. Jia, C. Zhang and B. Zhang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6, 730–738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Zhang and W. An, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 2604–2617 RSC .D. Bao, Q. Zhang, F. L. Meng, H. X. Zhong, M. M. Shi, Y. Zhang, J. M. Yan, Q. Jiang and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604799 CrossRef PubMed .M. M. Shi, D. Bao, B. R. Wulan, Y. H. Li, Y. F. Zhang, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606550 CrossRef PubMed .K. A. Brown, D. F. Harris, M. B. Wilker, A. Rasmussen, N. Khadka, H. Hamby, S. Keable, G. Dukovic, J. W. Peters and L. C. Seefeldt, Science, 2016, 352, 448–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. H. Montoya, C. Tsai, A. Vojvodic and J. K. Nørskov, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Carro, J. Choi, D. R. MacFarlane, A. N. Simonov, J. M. Doña-Rodríguez and L. M. Azofra, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 2856–2864 RSC .T. He, Z. Zhao, R. Liu, X. Liu, B. Ni, Y. Wei, Y. Wu, W. Yuan, H. Peng and Z. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2023, 1456, 6057–6066 CrossRef PubMed .Q. Lv, W. Si, Z. Yang, N. Wang, Z. Tu, Y. Yi, C. Huang, L. Jiang, M. Zhang, J. He and Y. Long, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29744–29752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Liu, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Yi, X. Shang, S. Zhang, X. Yu, S. Zhang, H. Cao and G. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11336–11343 RSC .H. Zou, W. Rong, B. Long, Y. Ji and L. Duan, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10649–10655 CrossRef CAS .C. Xing, C. Wu, Y. Xue, Y. Zhao, L. Hui, H. Yu, Y. Liu, Q. Pan, Y. Fang, C. Zhang, D. Zhang, X. Chen and Y. Li, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 1274–1278 RSC .C. Lv, C. Yan, G. Chen, Y. Ding, J. Sun, Y. Zhou and G. Yu, Am. Ethnol., 2018, 130, 6181–6184 Search PubMed .G. Pan, W. Zhang, T. Liu, Q. Tan, B. Wei, K. Ye, Y. Yang, D. Han, Z. Liu and L. Niu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2023, 13, 111–118 RSC .V. Nagarajan and R. Chandiramouli, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 249, 24–32 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Azofra, C. Sun, L. Cavallo and D. R. MacFarlane, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 8275–8279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Qiu, X. Peng, F. Lü, Y. Mi, L. Zhuo, J. Ren, X. Liu and J. Luo, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 2770–2779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Hui, Y. Xue, H. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Xing, B. Huang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10677–10683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Fang, Y. Xue, Y. Li, H. Yu, L. Hui, Y. Liu, C. Xing, C. Zhang, D. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Gao, B. Huang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13021–13027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Yu, Y. Xue, L. Hui, C. Zhang, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, X. Chen, D. Zhang, B. Huang and Y. Li, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8, 213 CrossRef PubMed .X. Liu, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9664–9672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zhang, T. Wu, H. Wang, R. Zhao, H. Chen, T. Wang, P. Wei, Y. Luo, Y. Zhang and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4609–4615 CrossRef CAS .S. Zhao, X. Lu, L. Wang, J. Gale and R. Amal, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805367 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. F. Mak, T. Wang, N. Phonthammachai, M. Srinivasan, S. Mhaisalkar and Y. C. F. Boey, US Pat., US9600310,  2017 Search PubMed .S. Guo, S. Zhang and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8526–8544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu and X.-B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7746–7786 RSC .Y.-X. Liu, W.-Y. Zhang, G.-K. Han, Y.-W. Zhou, L.-F. Li, C. Kang, F.-P. Kong, Y.-Z. Gao, C.-Y. Du and J.-J. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 2929–2934 RSC .A. M. El-Sawy, I. M. Mosa, D. Su, C. J. Guild, S. Khalid, R. Joesten, J. F. Rusling and S. L. Suib, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501966 CrossRef .K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Xue, D. Yu, L. Dai, R. Wang, D. Li, A. Roy, F. Lu, H. Chen, Y. Liu and J. Qu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12220–12226 RSC .R. A. Sidik, A. B. Anderson, N. P. Subramanian, S. P. Kumaraguru and B. N. Popov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1787–1793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Geng, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Li, R. Li, X. Sun, S. Ye and S. Knights, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 760–764 RSC .L. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Shen, J. Lin and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936–7942 RSC .D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Kang and J. Y. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12035–12040 CrossRef CAS .R. Liu, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Yi, X. Shang, S. Zhang, X. Yu, S. Zhang, H. Cao and G. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11336–11343 RSC .Q. Lv, W. Si, J. He, L. Sun, C. Zhang, N. Wang, Z. Yang, X. Li, X. Wang, W. Deng, Y. Long, C. Huang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3376 CrossRef PubMed .X. Xu, C. Su, W. Zhou, Y. Zhu, Y. Chen and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500187 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Xu, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3039–3052 RSC .N.-T. Suen, S.-F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .M.-S. Balogun, W. Qiu, H. Yang, W. Fan, Y. Huang, P. Fang, G. Li, H. Ji and Y. Tong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3411–3416 RSC .H. Jiang, J. Gu, X. Zheng, M. Liu, X. Qiu, L. Wang, W. Li, Z. Chen, X. Ji and J. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 322–333 RSC .Y. Jia, L. Zhang, A. Du, G. Gao, J. Chen, X. Yan, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9532–9538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Xing, Y. Xue, B. Huang, H. Yu, L. Hui, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. Li and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13897–13903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhu, G. Chen, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700603 CrossRef PubMed .M. Kibria, F. Chowdhury, S. Zhao, B. AlOtaibi, M. Trudeau, H. Guo and Z. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Hwang, S. H. Noh and B. Han, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 471, 545–552 CrossRef CAS .Z. Jia, Y. Li, Z. Zuo, H. Liu, C. Huang and Y. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2470–2478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Fang, Y. Xue, L. Hui, H. Yu, Y. Liu, C. Xing, F. Lu, F. He, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 591–597 CrossRef CAS .C. Zhang, Y. Xue, L. Hui, Y. Fang, Y. Liu and Y. Li, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 5305–5311 RSC .Y. Lin, M. Zhang, L. Zhao, L. Wang, D. Cao and Y. Gong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 536, 147952 CrossRef CAS .D. Hu, R. Wang, P. Du, G. Li, Y. Wang, D. Fan and X. Pan, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48, 6549–6555 CrossRef CAS .P. M. Kodam, P. A. Ghadage, D. Y. Nadargi, K. Shinde, I. S. Mulla, J. Park and S. S. Suryavanshi, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48, 17923–17933 CrossRef CAS .T. Kwon, A. Yu, S.-J. Kim, M. H. Kim, C. Lee and Y. Lee, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 563, 150293 CrossRef CAS .H. Yu, L. Hui, Y. Xue, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Xing, C. Zhang, D. Zhang, X. Chen and Y. Du, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104667 CrossRef CAS .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Environmental applications of graphdiyne-based SACs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Diagrams of natural and man-made carbon allotropes.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis of 3D GDY using diatomite.82 (b) Typical AFM images of graphdiyne films grown on a copper substrate.83 (c) GDY preparation process by explosive method.84	 

Sc/Ti + O2 → Sc/TiO2, Sc/TiO2 + CO → Sc/TiCOO2
	(I)

Sc/TiCOO2 → Sc/TiOOCO
	(II)

Sc/TiOOCO → Sc/TiO + CO2
	(III)

Sc/TiO + CO → Sc/Ti + CO2
	(IV)

 	Fig. 4  (a) LDOS of C, Sc and Ti below the atoms.111 (b) Top and side views of adsorption configurations of CO2, O, CO, and O2 on the Ir–GDY. (c) COOR on Ir–GDY is more inclined to the NRR mechanism among three different mechanisms.116 (d) Minimum energy distribution for the COOR via the ER mechanism.36	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of Ag/GDY structure of synthesized nanocatalyst.167 (b) Free energy diagram of CO2RR on graphene.168 (c) i XPS spectra of Ag/GDY/CC and ii XPS spectra of C1s. (d) LSV curve for stability test.167	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Structure of CO2 reduction intermediates on GDY-covered Cu surface. (b) DFT energy distributions of CO2, CO, and CH4 in the triangular hole covered by GDY. (c) Relative free energy of CO2 reduction on GDY-covered Cu(111) surface.173	 

 	Fig. 7  Change in (a) CO and (b) CH4 on GDY@CNtb.192 (c) Adsorption curves of CO2 on CsPbBr3@GDY. (d) Photooxidation-reduction reactions of Co-doped compounds. (e) XPS C 1s spectrum of CsPbBr3@GDY.193 (f) Photocatalytic mechanism of Ag3PO4/GDY composite.40	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Raman spectra of Pd0/GDY and original GDY. Inset: Diacetylene signal of GDY skeleton. (b) Comparison of mass activity between Pd0/GDY and Pt/C.202 (c) Comparison of the mass activity of Ni/GDY,Fe/GDY and Pt/C. (d) Synthesis of Ni/GDY and Fe/GDY. (e) Polarization curves of Pt/C, Fe/GD, Ni/GD, GDF and CC.199 (f) Metal cluster  embedded in GDY.203 Fig. 8. (a) Raman spectra of Pd0/GDY and original GDY. Inset: Diacetylene signal of GDY skeleton. (b) Comparison of mass activity between Pd0/GDY and Pt/C.202 (c) Comparison of the mass activity of Ni/GDY,Fe/GDY and Pt/C. (d) Synthesis of Ni/GDY and Fe/GDY. (e) Polarization curves of Pt/C, Fe/GD, Ni/GD, GDF and CC.199 (f) Metal cluster  embedded in GDY.203	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) HER of acetylene and ethylene in Os/GDY.203 (b) Adsorption energy of C2H4 and C2H2 on PdxMy/GDY. (c) C2H2 semi-HER on Pd1/GDY.205 (d) Free energy diagram of HER at equilibrium ground potential by DFT. (e) Linear sweep voltammetry of GDY–MoS2 NS/CF.200	 

	(V)

	(VI)

	(VII)

	(VIII)

 	Fig. 10  (a) NRR energy pathway on Mo–GDY. (b) Formation energy of H adsorption on Mo0/GDY. (c) H chemisorption energy at Mo0/GDY. (d) Comparison of mass activity between Mo0/GDY and Pt/C. (e) Overpotential of Mo0/GD.226	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of nitriding independent Co-LDH and GDY/Co2N.227 (b) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of Pd–GDY electrocatalyst for the synthesis of ammonia. (c) Comparison of NRR performance among Pd–GDY and other catalysts. (d) Current density and scan rate diagram of Pd–GDY.228	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the growth of CoNx@GDY NS/NF. (b) Free energy diagrams for the HER under alkaline conditions. (c) OER under alkaline conditions. (d) CoNx@GDYNS/NF polarization curve.260 (e) Polarization curves of Ce0.6Ni0.4LDH/GDY. (f) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process for GDY.72	 

COOR	Ir	In situ synthetic method	Single and few layers	The new Eley–Rideal (NER) energy barrier of 0.37 eV	116
Sc/Ti	In situ synthetic method	Single layer	At T = 600 K or above energy barrier of 6.07/6.43 eV	111
CO2RR	Ag	In situ synthetic method	Single and few layers	Faraday efficiency of up to 92.1% and current density of 25.74 mA cm−2	167
CsPbBr3@GDY	Microwave synthesis method	Single layer	High yield of 27.7 μmol g−1 h−1	193
HER	Ni/Fe	Electrochemical synthesis method	Single and few layers	Ni loading of 0.278 wt%, and Fe loading of 0.680 wt%	199
NRR	Mo	In situ synthetic method	Single and few layers	High Mo atom content of 7.5 wt%	226

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
