Structuring materials for lithium-ion batteries: advancements in nanomaterial structure, composition, and defined assembly on cell performance  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA00534A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA00534A
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9433-9460Structuring materials for lithium-ion batteries: advancements in nanomaterial structure, composition, and defined assembly on cell performance

        
          
            Michal 
            Osiak
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hugh 
            Geaney
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Eileen 
            Armstrong
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Colm 
            O'Dwyer
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry, Tyndall National Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. E-mail: c.odwyer@ucc.ie;  Fax: +353 (0)21 4274097;   Tel: +353 (0)21 4902732
bMicro and Nanoelectronics Centre, Tyndall National Institute, Dyke Parade, Cork, Ireland
Received 
      29th January 2014
    , Accepted 3rd March 2014First published on 4th March 2014AbstractThis review outlines the developments in the structure, composition, size, and shape control of many important and emerging Li-ion battery materials on many length scales, and details very recent investigations on how the assembly and programmable order in energy storage materials have not only influenced and dramatically improved the performance of some Li-ion batteries, but offered new routes toward improved power densities. This review also describes and discusses material aspects of hybrid and multiphasic materials including silicon, germanium, a wide range of metal oxides, alloys and crystal structures, carbons and other important materials. Methods including engineered porosity that offer the energy density of Li-ion batteries and the power density of pseudocapacitors are also highlighted. Recent developments in the analytical methods, electrochemical response, and the structure, composition, size, shape and defined assembly of active materials for a wide range of Li-ion cathodes and anodes are compared and assessed with respect to cell performance. Perspectives on the future development of energy storage materials based on structure as well as chemistry are also outlined.Michal OsiakOriginally from Poland, Michal arrived in Ireland in 2005 and received a First Class Honours B.Sc. in Applied Physics from the University of Limerick in 2010. He is currently working towards his Ph.D. at the University College Cork. His research focuses on the development of porous tin oxide based Li-ion battery anodes. In particular, he is investigating inverted opal based electrodes and the influence of ordered porosity and structure on reversible Li intercalation and pseudocapacitive behaviour.Hugh GeaneyHugh Geaney received a B.Sc. in Industrial Chemistry and Ph.D. in Chemistry from the University of Limerick in 2008 and 2012 respectively. His Ph.D. focused on the growth of silicon and germanium nanowires aimed at energy storage applications. Since 2012 he has been a postdoctoral researcher in the Applied Nanoscience Group at the University College Cork. His current research focus is on the development of novel catalyst materials for Li–air battery cathodes.Eileen ArmstrongEileen Armstrong received a First Class Honours B.Sc. in Applied Physics from the University of Limerick, Ireland in 2010, and was the recipient of the Institute of Physics Earnshaw Medal in 2010. She is currently pursuing a Ph.D., funded by the Irish Research Council, at the University College Cork. Her work focuses on advanced opal-template growth methods, with the aim of developing three-dimensionally ordered macro-porous cathodes for use in lithium-ion batteries as well as optical spectroscopy techniques for structural monitoring through photonic band-gap changes in 3D porous battery materials.Colm O'DwyerColm O'Dwyer received his B.S. degree in Applied Physics and Ph.D. degree in Physics from the University of Limerick, Ireland in 1999 and 2003, respectively. After postdoctoral research in nanotechnology and nanolithography using ultracold atom beams at the University Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, he conducted work on nanoelectronics/photonics at the Tyndall National Institute, Cork, Ireland. From 2008 to 2012, he was a Science Foundation Ireland Stokes Lecturer on nanomaterials at the University of Limerick. He is currently at the Department of Chemistry, University College Cork and Principal Investigator at the Tyndall National Institute, leading the Applied Nanoscience Group.
1. Introduction
The earliest research that can be connected to lithium-ion batteries originated in a graduate thesis written by Harris,1,2 demonstrating the possibility of electrodepositing Li metal under controlled non-aqueous conditions. This converged with earlier studies on sodium ion transport in beta alumina3 where ions intercalate, or insert into a crystalline lattice, through porous one dimensional channels in some crystalline structures, or indeed between two dimensional layers in crystalline solids. In 1976, Whittingham at Exxon reported intercalation electrodes arranged into a functioning rechargeable lithium battery.2 Following that, in the 1980s Armand introduced the rocking chair concept,4 where Li ions can move repeatedly from one side of the battery to the other, i.e. diffuse from the anode to the cathode during charge and from the cathode to the anode during discharge. Development of materials that could undergo this process numerous times resulted first in commercialization of primary (single use) and subsequent widespread utilization of secondary Li-ion batteries (rechargeable LIBs).
Rechargeable Li-ion batteries are one of the most extensively researched power sources for applications in modern portable electronics, hybrid electrical vehicles and sensor networks, as highlighted by a number of recent review articles.5–8 Newer consumer electronics that are developed require power sources with higher energy density (amount of energy stored per unit mass), higher power density (time rate of energy transfer), longer lifetime (the number of cycles of battery charge–discharge) and improved safety of operation. Early secondary Li-ion batteries suffered greatly from thermal instabilities caused by dendritic depositions of Li from the metallic Li anode through to the cathodes,9 leading to the formation of short circuit connections between the electrodes and in some cases ignition of the battery package when certain electrolytes were used. This problem was overcome by replacing the metallic Li anode with various non-metal compounds,10 capable of storing and reversibly exchanging a large number of Li ions. The reduction of Li plating effects (and associated safety improvement) gave way to widespread introduction of Li-ion batteries into consumer markets.11Fig. 1 presents a schematic diagram of a secondary Li-ion battery. It consists of the following elements, from left to right in the image (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Structure and principle of operation of a Li ion battery. 
 Fig. 2  Diagram illustrating the Li ion capacity and electrochemical reduction potentials with respect to Li metal for a range of cathode and anode materials.11 
1.1 Cathode
The cathode is the positive electrode of the battery, which means it is the source of positive ions (Li+) and accepts negative ions (e−). In currently used batteries, cathodes are most commonly made of (but not limited to) layered or spinel lithiated metal oxides.
In layered cathodes, the composition is denoted by LiMO2, where M corresponds to Co,12,13 Ni,14 Mn15 or V.16,17 LiCoO2 is currently the most popular option, despite the high cost of cobalt, as it is relatively easy to prepare an electrode with a layered structure of extremely high quality. This material and its associated battery construct have also benefited from decades of research, development and real-world applications. Nickel manganese18 and vanadium19 are being extensively investigated in order to improve their structural stability, reversibility and cost-effectiveness for some applications. Spinel cathodes (e.g. LiMn2O4) offer the advantage of a robust cubic oxygen array with 3-dimensional Li ion diffusion, allowing fast insertion/removal of Li ions during discharge–charge processes.20
1.2 Electrolyte
At high operating potentials (up to 4.5–5 V vs. Li/Li+ for some advanced cathode materials) associated with operation of Li-ion batteries, aqueous solutions would electrolyze easily if used as an electrolyte for a Li cell. Thus, aprotic, non-aqueous solvents are used.21 Commonly used electrolytes for LIBs include propylene carbonate, dimethyl-carbonate, ethylene carbonate, vinylene carbonate and mixtures of these solvents.22 As liquid electrolytes do not fully prevent formation of dendrites on the surface of the anode, often solid state polymer electrolytes are used. The electrolyte needs to satisfy certain conditions:
• High Li ion conductivity, very low electronic conductivity.
• Wide temperature range of operation.
• The energy gap between the electrolyte's lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) needs to be higher than the difference between energy levels of the cathode and anode; it needs to be thermodynamically stable at the operating voltages.
• It should ideally be environmentally friendly.
In the electrolyte Li salts such as LiClO4, LiBF4, and LiPF6 are dissolved to act as a source of Li+ ions. The use of vinylene carbonate additives in some carbonate electrolytes, among others, promotes solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) formation at the anode through radical polymerization, which is beneficial for stabilizing the interface during repetitive insertion (or alloying) and removal of lithium ions.23
1.3 Separator
The separator provides a barrier which prevents short circuiting of the cathode and anode. It should be sufficiently porous to allow the electrolyte to freely connect the two electrodes. Most commonly, separators are made of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and other inert polymer membranes with defined porosity and ionic conductivity.
1.4 Anode
The anode is the negative electrode of the Li ion battery. In currently used commercial packages, the anode consists of layered graphitic carbon. The storage mechanism is based on the intercalation of Li+ ions into van der Waals spacings found between the graphitic monolayers. The theoretical specific capacity of graphitic carbon is 372 mA h g−1, based on the following reaction:LiC6 − e− ↔ 6C + Li+
Graphitic carbon electrodes allow for good cycle lifetimes, but suffer from low rate capabilities and irreversible capacity losses caused by electrolyte decomposition at low potentials, and formation of a SEI. SEI is a common name given to a passivating layer formed on the surface of the electrode due to reductive decomposition of the electrolyte.24 It forms at low potentials (typically 0.7 V vs. Li/Li+). In the initial cycle, the formation of a SEI layer contributes to the loss of reversible capacity. However, in subsequent cycles, the SEI layer prevents additional decomposition of the electrolyte, improving reversible capacity and ensuring better cycling of the battery. To optimize electrode performance, the SEI layer should be insoluble in the electrolyte and be a good electronic insulator and ionic conductor. Importantly, the SEI layer should be able to remove a thin solvation layer around the Li+ ion, to prevent the exfoliation or delamination of the layered active material that could result from co-intercalation of the solvent.25–28
Battery research is driven by the economical need to satisfy consumer demand for higher power and higher energy batteries. Every smartphone user would like to see their phone operate for a prolonged period of time under high demand usage. Global climate change makes the prospect of all-electrical cars a welcome alternative to petrol, gas or diesel-fuelled transport. The “always on, always connected society” with strong demands on wireless sensor networks will require more advanced power solutions than those currently available, in smaller volumes with long term stability for operation in remote locations. So far, many possible replacement materials have been identified for both the anode and cathode, and require even more development for any non-lithium based electrochemical power sources. Moreover, the advent of nanotechnology has facilitated battery architectures which are no longer entirely reliant on traditional bulk/thin film approaches, but with structurally engineered porous, 1, 2 or 3 dimensional designs offering improvements in performance.6,29,30 This review will describe some of the most recent findings in both the structural design and the materials chemistry of next generation battery electrodes.
2. Choosing materials for Li-ion batteries
As mentioned above, novel materials for Li-ion batteries have been extensively investigated over a number of years. Several materials have been identified as potential replacements of the cathode and anode in next generation battery anodes (summarised in Fig. 2), and have been in some cases commercialized, demonstrating great potential for currently researched materials. However, before wide-scale adaptation of new materials, a deeper and better understanding of all the factors affecting battery performance (its chemistry, upscaling, packaging and drivetrain) needs to be developed. Many excellent reviews provide details of material performance and fundamental response of materials as lithium-battery electrode materials and the reader is referred to other reviews for selected ranges of materials.5,7,8,31,32
A pioneering method for materials choice and for future development is being developed by Ceder et al. at MIT, using what they term the Materials Genome Project.33 The Materials Genome Project has a goal of applying knowledge gained from large-scale property computation on all known inorganic compounds for materials research and discovery. While applicable to many functional applications involving materials whose properties would ideally likely be predicted, it has an immediate useful application to Li-ion and emerging alternative battery chemistries. Many tens of thousands of materials have been screened in terms of Li+ intercalation voltage or chemical potential, theoretical charge capacity, electrode voltage and other parameters. Fig. 3 shows the voltage calculated using density functional theory as a function of the theoretical capacity for thousands of oxides, phosphates, borates, silicates, and sulfates. The continuing work is also focused on the safety of high voltage materials, various electrolytes and structural effects that are related to cycling behaviour and performance.34 It forms a new and extremely useful approach to Li-ion battery materials design.
 Fig. 3  Calculated lithium insertion voltage versus theoretical capacity for several thousand compounds. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Materials Research Society. 
In general, next-generation Li-ion battery materials can be divided into sub-categories based on their Li+ ion storage mechanism: intercalation electrodes, conversion electrodes and alloying electrodes.
3. Intercalation electrodes
Intercalation electrodes involve materials with a crystalline structure enabling diffusion of Li ions into the interstitial sites of the crystalline lattice. The most common crystalline structures include layered,36 olivine37,38 and spinel39 (Fig. 4). Their main appeal lies in their excellent structural stability and long cycle lifetime. Currently used cathodes consist of layered LiCoO2, LiCo1–yNiyO2 and LiMn2O4. These cathode materials have some practical limitations however. LiCoO2 can only intercalate in the LiCoO2–Li0.5CoO2 range, limiting available capacity to about 130 mA h g−1. Cheaper and more environmentally friendly LiCo1–yNiyO2 suffers from strong Li–Ni cation mixing, which affects the structure formation and subsequent ionic transport. LiMn2O4 in turn has a limited stability and may undergo phase transition at room temperature.40 Further computational investigations showed however that the addition of some nickel, to form Li(Mn0.5Ni0.5)O2, yields an almost ideal cathode material in theory, due to the stability of the closed-packed framework of Mn4+ coordinated to oxygen.41 However, the rate capability for this material was very poor and the mobility of Li ions within the framework was found to be strongly linked to the distance between the oxygen layers.
 Fig. 4  (Left) A range of different oxide, sulfide and phosphate crystal structures capable of Li intercalation into various regions of their crystal structure. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Intech Open. (Right) Common intercalation compounds as a function of decreasing calculated chemical potential of oxygen in their charged state. A lower oxygen chemical potential is deemed safer. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Materials Research Society. 
For battery safety, particularly at high deintercalation rates or under typical discharge–charge at elevated temperatures, self-catalysed exothermic reactions of the active material with the electrolyte may occur,42 leading to thermal instabilities, thermal runaway and ultimately a failure (and sometimes explosion) of the battery. Recent reports of fires caused by exploding LIBs are an example of a result of instabilities arising from the interaction of the highly charged cathode with the electrolyte, often aided and sometimes facilitated by electrical shorting from Li dendrite formation.43 Cathode materials with inherently active or unstable oxidation states can potentially be reduced by liberating oxygen, which overcomes its kinetic limitations at elevated temperatures caused by heat from surrounding environment or possibly by self-discharge and cell heating. The oxygen can vigorously react and burn the electrolyte. However, there are many materials (cathode materials) that have a large negative chemical potential (difficult to reduce in their charged state) and thus are inherently safe in this regard, LiFePO4 being cited as possibly the ideal example. Interesting, and widely known, is that the most prevalent battery chemistry employing LiCoO2 is inherently one of the least safe in its charged state, but does offer good cycling capability. Advancements in the engineering of battery packs have largely removed these issues, but several high profile accidents have reignited the issue of battery safety and raise the question of safer chemistries by choosing safer electrolytes or electrode materials.44
Layered and spinel materials however suffer from low Li ion diffusivity, and therefore can only satisfy limited power demands. In recent years, research has been mainly focused on improving the electrode kinetics.45–47 Nanostructuring active materials offers significant benefits, such as: shortened diffusion lengths, improving electrical and ionic performance/rate by placing conductive additives as a surface coating on active materials, as opposed to a random mixture of powder additives.48,49 Some of the various nanostructures formed include, but are not limited to, nanosheets,50 nanoparticles,51 nanowires52 and nanotubes.53
4. Conversion materials
A different type of Li storage mechanism is the reversible electrochemical reaction of Li with transition metal oxides.55,56 The mechanism of the energy storage is conventionally referred to as the conversion reaction, described as follows:MaXb + (bn)Li ↔ aM + bLinXwhere M = transition metal, X = anion and n is the formal oxidation state of X. Conversion reactions have been reported for some oxides, sulfides and fluorides, with different degrees of reversibility. The main focus of researchers working with conversion based electrodes is the improvement of electrode kinetics and reversibility, in particular, formation of nanoparticles of reduced metals that would be very active towards the LinX matrix in which they are interspersed. At the moment, however, conversion type electrodes are still under development, and much investigation is required into fundamental characteristics of conversion materials and electrode design.
5. Alloying materials
Reversible electrochemical alloying of metals and semi-metals with Li has been known since 1970s.57 Metals reversibly alloying with Li offer tremendous improvement in specific Li storage capacity. Silicon has a highest known theoretical Li storage capacity, higher even than that of Li (3700 mA h g−1) equal to 4400 mA h g−1.6 Other examples of alloying materials include tin and tin oxides,58 antimony,59 germanium,60 and others like phosphorus, magnesium and silver,7 each offering excellent theoretical Li storage capacity. However, these materials suffer greatly from large volumetric expansion and contraction caused by insertion and removal of a large amount of Li+ ions, as well as fast charging–discharging rates. Severe mechanical stresses and strains resulting from repeated cycles of volume changes lead to irreversible structural changes, formation of cracks in the active material causing loss of structural and electrical integrity of the electrode, pulverization and irreversible capacity fading. The most common strategies directed at the improvement of electrode performance are focused on the accommodation of volumetric expansion through providing free space around the active material5 and creating various composites61–64 aimed at protecting the active material against structural degradation or ensuring consistent and stable electrical contact between the active material and external current collector.
The scope of this section is to summarise recent advancements in the field of alloying materials research, with improved characteristics for next generation Li-ion battery anodes.
5.1. Silicon
Silicon has for a long time been investigated as a possible replacement for graphitic carbon in next generation anode materials. In terms of specific capacity, a Li–Si alloy phase can store >4000 mA h g−1, compared to 372 mA h g−1 for graphitic carbon. Silicon is also the second most abundant material in the earth's crust, making it economically viable for mass production of LIBs.65 The abundance of the element, combined with the benefits of well-developed industrial infrastructure and exceptionally high theoretical specific capacity, has made Si one of the most promising materials for next generation battery anodes. However, the large number of Li ions that can be inserted into Si cause extremely large volumetric changes: ∼Vf = 3Vi where Vf and Vi denote final and initial volumes of the material. Mechanical failure often follows, leading to irreversible capacity loss and decrease in cycle lifetime, effectively preventing successful application of Si in next generation battery anodes.
Si nanostructures such as NWs and nanoparticles have been designed and fabricated through numerous routes.6,68 Additionally, some nanostructures have been specifically engineered in order to accommodate the volume changes occurring in Si, such as core shell nanotubes66 and yolk-shell type nanoparticles.69Fig. 5 demonstrates improvements in structural stability of nanostructured Si electrode materials.
 Fig. 5  (a–c) Schematics of SEI layer formation and stable cycling of double-walled SiO2@Si nanotubes. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. Schematic changes occurring in (d) Si thin film. (e) Si nanoparticles. (f) Si nanowires. Adapted from ref. 67 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
Widespread research into formation of Si NWs and their application in electrochemical energy storage allowed better insight into the processes occurring during lithiation, and in particular structural changes caused by reversible alloying of Li with Si. In situ TEM observations indicated preferential anisotropic swelling of 〈112〉 Si NWs in the 〈110〉 direction.70 The Li+ diffusion study revealed deformation followed by a build-up of tensile stress in the nanowires, resulting in fracture.71 Numerical modelling indicated that Li+ ions prefer to diffuse along the 〈110〉 direction, where surface energy of the planes is preferable for Li+ interactions. The electrochemical lithiation of crystalline silicon leads to formation of a core–shell structure, with Li-rich amorphous LixSi alloy forming the shell and crystalline Si forming the core. The formation of the interface between the amorphous and crystalline phases is related to the stress induced Li+ diffusion retardation, and may lead to the local loss of mechanical integrity due to large stress build-up at the interface.72,73
One-dimensional (1D) nanostructures were first described for use in Li-ion anodes in a seminal paper published in 2008 by Chan et al.,67 and similar studies published around the same time period74,75 where Si NWs were applied as anodes. Chan et al. prepared Si NWs directly on a stainless steel current collector, by gold-seeded chemical vapour deposition (CVD). The nature of the synthesis resulted in excellent adhesion of the active material to the substrate and in significant porosity of the electrode. Constraining the volumetric expansion through the design of the electrode morphology (Fig. 5) resulted in significant improvements in electrochemical performance of the Si based electrodes. The Si NW arrays displayed a capacity of >2100 mA h g−1 at a C/20 rate, without large decrease in reversible capacity and change in the morphology of the nanowires.
Despite the promise of these CVD grown Si NWs for LIB applications, typically used gold catalysts have recently been shown to be detrimental to the electrochemical performance (in terms of initial capacity, capacity retention and rate capability) of NW based electrodes. Furthermore, Au is costly, shows poor lithium activity and is much denser than Si which strongly impacts the gravimetric capacity for a given total anode.76 To circumvent these issues presented by the Au catalyst, recent approaches have been developed to prepare NWs through different routes, such as high boiling point solvent syntheses using electrochemically active catalyst materials such as Sn77,78 or shifting the grown method entirely to a metal assisted chemical etching regime.79
Composite Si nanostructures have also been proposed in order to improve the electrochemical performance. By incorporating nanoscale Si inside an elastically deformable conductive host the stress changes that cause mechanical breakdown associated with electrochemical lithiation can be better accommodated, while also providing robust electronic conduction pathways.
A different approach to improving the electrochemical performance of the Si based LIBs is preparation of Si–C composites. Two strategies for preparing Si–C composites have been widely employed. Carbon structures such as nanotubes, nanosheets of graphene or carbon fibres have been used as supports for the nanoscale active material.80–83 By providing continuous electrical pathways from the active material to the current collector, the influence of the electrochemically induced agglomeration of the nanoparticles on the electrochemical performance is greatly reduced. Moreover, using a carbon support offers excellent porosity allowing for better penetration of electrolyte throughout the electrode, shortening diffusion lengths, allowing for higher rates of charge–discharge, summarised in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Constant current line-sweeps and cyclic performance for (a) carbon coated structures. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Carbon supported Si nanostructures. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
In contrast to the supported electrodes, carbon coatings are a different strategy for preparing carbon composites with Si.86–89 By applying a thin (few to few tens to at most few tens of nanometres) coating of carbon on the surface of the material, a mechanically stable layer that can provide support to the nanostructures, and thus preserve their mechanical integrity during repeated charge–discharge cycles, can be formed. Additionally, the continuous layer present on the surface of the active alloying material acts as a stable conductor from the electrode to the current collector. An extension of this strategy is the preparation of composites in which nanostructures of alloying materials are embedded in a carbonaceous matrix. Carbon forms a stable SEI layer with the species present in the electrolyte, and has been shown to provide a degree of mechanical support against rapid expansion and contraction during electrochemical cycling in randomly mixed slurries, but also in 3D ordered porous materials with electrochemically active materials embedded within the carbon matrix.90 The problems arising from this approach are mostly related to low ionic conductivity of the carbonaceous matrix and resulting low rate capability of such prepared nanostructures.
Within a vast multitude of structures prepared for Si based anodes, nanotubes seem to offer the best electrochemical performance, due to the mechanisms of Si lithiation, and free space provided for volumetric expansion of the nanostructures. To alleviate the repeated re-formation of SEI layer, an electrochemically inactive SiO2 layer was used in order to ensure SEI layer stability. The mechanical robustness of SiO2 provides buffering against stress induced cracking within the nanotubes, while ensuring formation of a stable SEI layer. To date, SiO2@Si nanotubes show one of the best electrochemical performances for Si based anodes66 (see Fig. 5). The need to commercialize Si based batteries will undoubtedly result in further improvements in the Si based LIB performance.

Table 1 presents a comparison between some of the recently prepared Si based materials for LIB anodes.
Table 1 Summary of the relative performance of different Si based electrodes




Composition
Morphology
Initial capacity (C-rate)
Final capacity (# cycles)
Reference




Si
NWs
4277 (C/20)
3500 (20)

67



Si@SiOx/C
NPs
1600
1100 (60)

91



Si@C
Mesoporous CS NWs
3163 C/5
2751 (80)

84



Si
3D porous
2820 (C/5)
2780 (100)

92



C–Si
Core–shell NWs
700 (C/15)
1600 (47)

93



Si–C
Carbon coated NWs
3344
1326 (40)

94



Si
Nanotubes
3648 (C/5)
2800 (200)

95



Si-graphene
Composite
2158 (C)
1168 (30)

96



Si-CNT
Composite
2300 (C/10)
1400 (50)

85



Si
NWs
4000 (C/10)
1600 (50)

97



Si/C
Nanocomposite
2000 (C/20)
1700 (100)

98



Si
Nanotubes
3200 (C/20)
2800 (50)

99



Cu–Si
Nanocables
1500 (C/3)
1400 (100)

100



B-doped Si
NWs
3354 (C/10)
1500 (250)

101



SiO2@Si
Nanotubes
1780 (C/5)
1600 (2000)

66





5.2 Germanium
Germanium can also store Li through similar alloying reactions to those associated with Si. Fully lithiated Li4.4Ge has a high theoretical capacity of 1600 mA h g−1.60 Similarly, large amounts of Li atoms stored in Ge cause it to expand and contract upon cycling, with volume changes reaching 370%.60 One very exciting property of Ge based anodes is the fact that Li diffusivity in Ge is 400 times greater than in Si, indicating that Ge may be an attractive material for high-power rate anodes.102,103 Additionally, the electrical conductivity of Ge is about 4 orders of magnitude higher than Si. Initial investigation into thin films of Ge showed that crystalline Ge suffers from large irreversible capacity loss during initial cycles. In contrast, amorphous and nanocrystalline films of Ge show greater capacity retention, with capacities as high as 1700 mA h g−1 reported after over 60 cycles (see Fig. 7a). Shortened diffusion lengths also allowed for much improved kinetics of the Li insertion and removal, permitting charge–discharge rates as high as 1000 C with little capacity loss102 (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  (a) Cycle life of Ge nanocrystals. (b) Cycle life of thin film Ge at 1000 C charge and 1 C discharge. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from The Electrochemical Society. 
A variety of nanostructures have been prepared in order to further improve the performance of Ge based electrodes.60,104–107 For instance, Au-seeded Ge nanowires prepared by CVD showed high capacities of over 850 mA h g−1 at C/20 rates, and were able to deliver more than 600 mA h g−1 at 2 C rates. Effects arising from incorporation of Au into the nanowires (given the aforementioned issues stated in the last section) during growth however remain a problem.76
In another example, Park et al.107 used the Kirkendall effect to prepare Ge nanotubes from core–shell Ge–Sb nanowires. Coating with antimony (Sb) acetate and polyvinyl pyrrolidone was followed by high temperature annealing. As outward diffusion of Ge atoms is much faster than inward diffusion of antimony, void formation begins in places where Ge atoms use to reside. Prolonged thermal treatment allows for the formation of amorphous nanotubular structures of Ge, with a very low concentration of Sb. The unique structure of the nanotubes permitted facile accommodation of mechanical stresses and improved cycle performance, with capacities as high as 900 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at C/5 and 600 mA h g−1 after 25 cycles at 20 C.
In composite electrode materials, the use of carbon with Ge results in more stable electrodes, which has been evidenced by an improvement in electrochemical properties. The Ge–C composite can also reduce the degree of mechanical failure arising from multiple cycling. One effective strategy is the dispersion of nanosized materials into a carbon matrix, where carbon acts as both a structural buffer and an electro-active material during Li incorporation/extraction. Cui et al.104 prepared Ge nanoparticles encapsulated with carbon, through solid state pyrolysis of PTA-Ge, thermally polymerized from tetraallylgermane (TA–Ge). Initial discharge and charge capacities of 1190 and 923 mA h g−1, and low capacity fading confirmed the effectiveness of the carbon matrix in improving the electrochemical performance of the Ge nanostructures. Carbon coating is another effective strategy to improve performance. For example, Yoon et al. prepared carbon coated Ge composites by high energy ball-milling of commercial Ge powders and poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA),108 producing carbon coated composites with good high initial capacities of up to 1600 mA h g−1 and good capacity retention for up to 50 cycles. A variety of other reports was also produced detailing preparation and characteristics of Ge–C composites, including formation of core–shell Ge@C nanoparticles,109 self-assembled Ge–C nanostructures,110 graphene-supported Ge,111 or carbon coated Ge nanowires.112
Multiple element composites are also being researched for alternative anode materials based on Ge. Ge–Cu3Ge–C composites113 were prepared by pyrolysis and high energy mechanical milling, showing improved performance compared to Ge on its own or the Ge–C composite. The improvement in electrochemical performance was attributed to the presence of inactive Cu as well as the carbon matrix. Cu was used also in core–shell nanowire arrays.114 Hierarchical structures of these types of anodes have great advantages for electrochemical performance of the battery, allowing for up to 80% Coulombic efficiencies in the initial discharge as well as over 1400 mA g−1 after 40 cycles. The excellent properties of such anodes are attributed to unperturbed electrical contact of the current collector with the electrochemically active material, as well as large porosity of the Ge–Cu anodes.
Significant efforts dedicated to improvement of Ge based anodes show that Ge is a promising candidate for next generation LIBs. Further work is however required to fully utilize its potential, in particular to improve mechanical stability of the electrode. Moreover, ensuring formation of a stable SEI layer should contribute to the overall cycling performance of Ge-based anodes in appropriate electrolytes.
5.3 Tin and tin oxide
Tin and its oxides have also attracted significant research attention due to their ability to alloy with Li. Their low cost combined with high theoretical capacities, equal to 980 mA h g−1 for tin, 864 mA h g−1 for tin(II) oxide, and 780 mA h g−1 for tin(IV) oxide, make these materials very attractive prospects for future generation Li ion batteries. However, their implementation has been hindered by the comparable volumetric expansion and contraction experienced by Sn and other alloying materials. As was the case for Si and Ge, many efforts have been undertaken in order to improve the electrochemical performance of Sn and Sn oxides based batteries.
Research on Sn and Sn oxides for application in battery anodes dates back to two papers published in 1997 by Dahn et al.115 and Idota et al.116 detailing structural changes and electrochemical properties of tin oxide based anodes. Since then, most of the research has focused on determining fundamental properties of the lithiation of tin oxide, with some interesting results, and improvement of cycle life and rate capacity. Investigations into the origin of large irreversible capacity in tin oxide anodes, causes of agglomeration of tin nanostructures upon repeated cycling as well as formation and stability of a SEI layer allowed better insight into the fundamental processes in Sn-based anodes. Relatively few studies focus on the performance of metallic Sn, rather looking at SnO2. The half-cell insertion reaction, corresponding to lithiation of SnO2, depends on electrochemical reduction of SnO2 to metallic Sn. The overall reaction can be written as follows:SnO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → Sn + 2Li2OSn + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixSn (0 < x < 4.4)
The reduction of SnO2 to metallic tin is generally considered irreversible, and leads to large capacity loss in the first cycle, when the associated charge for that process is factored into the coulometric response of an alloying system.115 Moreover, the electrode undergoes an electrochemically driven solid state amorphization process. Examination of individual nanowire-type structures, reproduced in Fig. 8, has shown that during lithiation, SnO2 nanowires elongate by about 60% axially and widen by 35% radially to accommodate the volume changes.117 These changes are associated with a wire with a certain crystal orientation, and are likely linked to the rate of insertion/alloying at different facets, or possibly from preferential and confined axial electronic transport in tandem with preferential ionic transport to the NW walls.118
 Fig. 8  
In situ TEM observation of the lithiation process of SnO2 NWs. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
These types of informative single-structure measurements serve to demonstrate that low- or confined-dimensional structures undergo anisotropic volume increases, but it has yet to be determined whether these effects are from the isotropy in the measurement and from the innate anisotropy of the structure and its crystallography with respect to Li diffusion and associated alloying processes.
Li insertion into crystalline SnO2 leads to dense dislocation zones forming at the interface, separating crystalline oxide and amorphous Li–Sn phases. The nanowire morphology allows for accommodation of large degrees of strain and stress, but repeated cycling of the nanostructures may lead to pulverization and loss of mechanical integrity.
In order to improve the electrochemical performance of Sn anodes, similar strategies to those applied in Si and Ge were employed. Both nanostructuring and preparing material composites yielded some interesting results.58,119 Tin oxide nanostructures such as nanoparticles,120 nanowires, and nanotubes all have benefits contributing to better performance of the battery electrode. In one study,121 heterostructures of indium oxide and tin oxide were prepared by thermal evaporation. Tin oxide nanowires grew with indium oxide adsorbed onto the surface of the nanowire, forming a surrounding shell. This unique concept allowed for better conductivity of SnO2 NWs and high specific capacity, compared to SnO2 and In2O3 NWs on their own. Even though nanostructuring of the electrodes has its benefits, the problem of reduced capacity due to cracking, pulverization and agglomeration of nanostructures remains. In order to further reduce the influence of physical changes on the overall performance of the battery, nanostructured composites are extensively investigated with some very exciting results. For example, core–shell tin oxide–multi walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) composites were prepared by hydrolysis of SnCl2 in the presence of HCl.122 The excellent electrochemical performance was attributed to nanostructuring resulting in shortening of diffusion lengths for Li ions, as well as the presence of MWCNTs, which greatly improved conductivity of the electrode, capacity retention and Coulombic efficiency, through increased mechanical stability and persistent conduction pathways.
Tin oxide composites with other materials are also of great interest.123–136 The benefit of using materials that are not electrochemically active or do not undergo drastic changes has been shown in numerous studies. Materials such as copper,130,133 nickel,137 sulphur,131 cobalt oxide,138 or titania were confirmed to benefit the performance of the battery. Copper and nickel are mainly used as supports for electrochemically active tin oxide. Generally, the benefits of the electrochemically inactive electrode support allow for large improvements in capacity retention, due to conserved electrical continuity between the active material and the current collector. However, addition of this “dead weight” material (which does not add to capacity but adds weight to the anode) may reduce the gravimetric capacity of the electrode below the capacities achieved in pristine films, so care needs to be taken to ensure that the gravimetric energy density is not lower than the electrodes composed of solely active materials. The overall capacity of composite batteries will be however limited by the combined performance of both positive (cathode) and negative (anode) electrodes.
At the moment, cathode chemistry can limit the maximum capacity obtainable by a battery and thus, using negative electrode materials with capacities lower than the theoretical limits may be beneficial, in particular in situations where rate capability and cycle life are important. Active–inactive composites may benefit in those situations, as the active coating thickness is usually quite low, similar to the diffusion length of Li ions and so insertion and removal of ions may be extremely fast. Materials such as CoO138 form polymer-like structures preventing agglomeration of tin oxide nanoparticles and improving diffusion kinetics of Li ions, improving capacity retention and rate performance (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  (a–d) SEM images of CoO–Sn; (e) cycle performance of the CO–Sn composite. (f) Rate performance of the CoO composite. Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In an alternative approach, active–active composites improve the performance of the batteries, without the gravimetric density reduction penalty associated with active–inactive composites. Previously mentioned carbon–tin–tin oxide composites are included in this class of battery architectures. Other materials used in conjunction with tin are titanium oxide and cobalt. Dahn et al.139 prepared a library of Sn–Co–C composites, indicating that only a narrow composition range favours amorphous phase formation, beneficial for extended electrochemical cycling. Kim et al.140 developed a method to prepare a nanocomposite of Sn and Ge, with improved capacity retention compared to pristine Sn and Ge. The improvements in capacity retention were attributed to the separation of Ge nanoparticles during lithiation/delithiation cycles and resulting in formation of conduction pathways. The nature of the nanocomposite results however in a substantial degree of surface reactions, such as electrolyte decomposition and Li carbonate formation, resulting in unwanted contributions to irreversible capacity and internal resistance, among other effects. In cases where large surface area nanostructures are used, it is particularly important to understand the reactions taking place at the SEI. It has also been suggested that tin, formed by the reduction of tin oxide during electrochemical reactions, may contribute to large capacity fading, not due to agglomeration of nanoparticles, but due to Sn-catalyzed electrolyte decomposition.141 In particular, this phenomenon is favoured at high current densities, where enough thermal energy is provided to accelerate diffusion of Sn, driven by the desire to reduce interfacial energy. Fig. 10 shows a schematic diagram of the self-catalyzed agglomeration of Sn nanoparticles.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagram detailing formation and aggregation of Sn nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Sony has commercialised its Nexelion157 range of Li-ion cells containing anodes consisting of Sn–Co–C. Such alloys have shown excellent cycling abilities attributed to the active–inactive relationship between Sn and Co.124,126 Other alloys including the active–inactive system are Sn–Ni–C and Sn–Cu. The Nexelion device demonstrates improved capacity and cycling performance compared to traditional carbon based batteries. In a study carried out by the Army Research Laboratory,158 Nexelion batteries showed good performance at elevated temperatures and stability at high discharge rates. Although, as the study notes, cycle-to-cycle capacity retention of the Nexelion is slightly worse than the standard 14430 cell, its increased initial capacity allows it to retain higher reversible capacity after 220 cycles. The commercial utilisation of Sn has demonstrated its purposeful character as a battery anode material in a cost effective and efficient manner. Table 2 details the electrochemical performance of a variety of recently prepared SnO2 nanostructures which further highlights the promise of Sn and Sn composite based materials as low cost, high performance anode materials.
Table 2 Summary of the performances of different Sn and SnO2 based electrodes. The C rate and the cycle numbers are indicated in brackets




Composition
Morphology
Initial capacity
Final capacity
Ref.




SnO2–In2O3
NWs
2000 (C/5)
780 (10)

121



SnO2-SWCNT
Composite
1399
1000 (100)

142



SnO2-MWCNT
Composite
1500 (C/10)
404 (20)

143



Sn–Co–C
Composite
451 (C/8)
486 (40)

126



Sn–C
Composite
600 (C/8)
311 (200)

144



Sn–Co
Composite
1200 (C/2)
845 (50)

138



SnO2–C
GNS–NP composite
1800 (C/15)
570 (30)

145



Sn–C
Composite
806 (C/10)
737 (200)

146



Sn–Au
Composite
1200 (C/10)
600 (150)

147



SnO2–C
CNT composite
1466 (C/5)
402 (100)

122



SnO2
Nanocrystal
2156 (C/10)
550 (20)

148



Sn–SnO2
NWs
2400 (C/8)
845 (100 (ref. 149))

149



SnO2–C
NPs
1200 (C/2)
492 (100)

150



SnO2
Mesoporous
960 (C/6)
600 (100)

151



Sn–C
Nano Sn-hard carbon
580
300 (30)

152



SnO2
Mesoporous-NW
1400 (C/5)
675 (50)

153



SnO2
Nanosheets
1860 (C/10)
593 (20)

154



Sn–C
3D porous
1425 (C/20)
638 (315)

155



Sn–C
RGO–Sn
1572 (C/8)
710 (50)

156



SnO2–C
Graphene composite
1100 (C/8)
872 (200)

62





6. Role of electrode structures on electrochemical performance
The previous section of this review dealt mainly with material chemistry considerations for next generation battery electrodes, their response to lithiation and relation to performance. One additional factor that needs to be considered while designing new electrodes is the architecture or arrangement of the active material. The majority of currently available commercial Li ion battery electrodes are formed as thin films on the order of hundreds of microns thick. These films often consist of an active-material powder, polymer-based binders and additives aimed at increasing electric conductivity of the electrode. These additives have a negative effect on the gravimetric energy density, and as such are undesirable, although necessary in current cells. The geometric considerations of the electrode design are important in the light of inherent limitations of the charge transport characteristics of the electrode, and both concentration and activation polarizations. For instance, in LiFePO4 and graphite, the Li ion conductivities are of an order of 10−10 cm2 s−1, compared to 10−6 cm2 s−1 in commonly used electrolytes.21,159 Li ions from the surface of the active material diffuse inwards, filling the vacancies in the active material's microstructure and creating bottlenecks that impede additional ion transport. The structure of the electrodes, their thickness and the length of diffusion pathways obstruct ionic mobility and limit the batteries to slower rates than could otherwise be possible.
For these reasons, 3-dimensional, porous electrode architectures have attracted a lot of attention, particularly because battery size and mass are expected to be reduced in next generation power systems, without a reduction in energy density in principle. One primary driver for power source improvement and also miniaturization is Moore's law, which empirically links the increase in the density of transistor elements on a microchip (or the reduction in the feature size for these transistors) with computational power or operations per second, which has incessantly increased since its inception. The performance of batteries in portable electronics, unfortunately has an annual improvement ‘curve’ characterized by just a 10% increase in energy density.
One analogy between electronic computation speed and improved energy storage and supply materials in battery power sources is the mobility of the charge carriers: electrons and holes for electronics; electrons and ions for batteries. The classical diffusion relation L2 ∝ Dτ shows that a reduction in length scale (L) is beneficial when considering diffusion lengths of Li (or other cations) and the associated diffusion constant (D) into (at least) the pristine active material during discharge (rate dependent). However, battery chemistries during discharge are complex, even for a very well understood bulk analog of useful or promising materials; performance improvements can be significant, however, when many factors are taken into account. Inherent transport kinetics unique to certain crystal structures are often predefined and affected by the crystal structure, orientation and chemical potential; size reduction does not automatically improve performance or rate capability. Shorter transport distances (faster times to cation insertion) and higher surface-to-volume ratios that improve redox accessibility and time for ion and electron transport can be achieved when the discharge chemistry and phase formation are well understood. By providing pathways for lithium insertion, phase formation, shorter diffusion lengths in 3D can alleviate rate limitations or improve cyclability for ‘gentler’ depths of discharge in many systems. Once at the interface of an active particle, Li ions enter from the outside inward, filling the atomic-scale vacancies in the active material's exterior microstructure and therefore creating diffusion bottlenecks that impede additional ion transport. Acting in concert, the dense nature of electrode composites, electrode thicknesses of ∼100s of mm, and micrometer-scale diffusion path lengths in active electrode particles obstruct ion mobility and limit lithium-ion batteries to slower discharging and recharging rates than are otherwise possible. These elements also add significant ‘dead weight’ to all current commercial batteries and would make it extremely difficult to assemble as an ordered smooth layered battery. This design, as will be discussed further on, also allows faster charging and discharging rates, and the possibility of strongly asymmetric charge–discharge cycles optimizing power delivery and shortening charging times. Such changes may first take place in the use of small devices, where the total amount of energy stored is small. Only 360 W is required to charge a 1 Wh cell phone battery in 10 s (at a 360 C charging rate, where the C-rate is the inverse of time in hours required to fully charge or discharge an electrode or a battery). Even at the highest charge rate tested thus far for these materials (50 C), corresponding to a time of 72 s (as opposed to 3.5 h based on the mass of active material in its bulk form) to fully discharge the capacity, the material achieves about 80% of its theoretical capacity.
Porous electrodes offer numerous important benefits that are listed below:160
• Pores provide good access of the low surface-tension electrolyte to the electrode surface ordinarily taken up with polymer binders and carbon additives that are no longer required.
• Large surface area of the porous electrode facilitates charge transfer across the electrode/electrolyte interface, reducing the impact of the activation polarization.
• Ionic diffusion path-lengths are reduced due to lower wall thickness less than the limiting solid state diffusion length of lithium for discharging and lower overpotential charging.
• The active material is used more efficiently due to better electrolyte penetration and reduced wall thickness.
• Continuous electron pathways are provided from the active material to the external load.
• The volumetric energy density is comparable with packed particle electrodes.
• In some cases no binders or conductive additives are required, reducing dead weight (better gravimetric energy density).
• Void spaces separating particles can accommodate volumetric changes of the active material.
• Porous composites can incorporate a secondary conductive phase to improve high rate performance of active phases with low intrinsic conductivity.
Depending on the electrode preparation method, porous electrodes can be divided into those that are hard-templated or soft-templated. The size of the pores allows categorization of the porous electrodes as follows: microporous (pore size <2 nm), mesoporous (pore size 2–50 nm) and macroporous (pore size >50 nm).
Soft templating usually involves surfactants as structure directing agents. The pore architecture can be controlled by the choice of surfactants, solvents and synthesis conditions. Evaporation induced self-assembly (EISA) is particularly useful for formation of thin films with precisely controlled porosity.161 It can be however difficult to obtain high crystallinity of the walls of the solid, if the temperature of the crystallization of the inorganic phase is higher than the temperature at which the surfactant block copolymer is removed. In this situation, hard templating approaches are much more successful. Templates such as aluminium anodic oxide (AAO) membranes, preformed porous solids, and assemblies of colloidal particles are used.
6.1 AAO templated nanomaterials

Fig. 11 presents a schematic of formation of porous materials using a AAO template, with isolated pores. In this case, solid products form inside the template, replicating the shape of the void space. Usually, structures such as 1D nanotubes and nanowires are formed. AAO templates are commonly used, due to ease of the preparation of the template, as well as uniform pore size.162 AAO membranes can also be used in conjunction with soft templating materials to prepare solid structures with hierarchical porosity.163 A variety of inorganic electrode materials can be prepared using this method, including metals, metal oxides and various composites.
 Fig. 11  AAO templating mechanism. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
6.2 Nanocasting of nanoscale battery materials
Nanocasting is a name given to the transformation of a porous solid into hollow replicas. In the nanocasting process, porous solids are infiltrated with the precursor of the target electrode material (see Fig. 12). After thermal treatment, the template is removed. The product is an inverted replica structure of the original hard template. The molds with bicontinuous pore structures produce mesoporous replicas, whereas templates with cylindrical mesopores in hexagonal arrangement produce nanowire arrays, which are interconnected only if the template contains secondary pores between the main cylindrical pores.
 Fig. 12  Nanocasting of mesoporous electrode materials. (a) Nanocasting process in mesoporous silica. (b) TEM image of mesoporous TiO2. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from the German Chemical Society. (c) Nanocasting process in mesoporous silica SBA-15. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (d) TEM image of mesoporous Si–C nanowire formed from the SBA-15 template. 
The most commonly used hard templates are mesoporous silica materials. To remove these template materials, simple wet etches can be carried out, either through extraction with HF, hot NaOH or KOH solutions. Mesoporous electrodes with numerous compositions have been synthesized by hard templating, including MnO2,166,167 Cr2O3,168 Co3O4,169 SnO2 (ref. 170) and NiO.171 In particular, SnO2 nanocasting allows the formation of mesoporous solids with a higher degree of crystallinity and more order compared to soft templating, due to protection from excessive grain growth by sintering present in soft-templated materials.160
6.3 Colloidal crystal templating
Colloidal crystal templating allows for the formation of porous electrodes with an excellent degree of control over the pore size and the template solid structure. Facile templating methods are compatible with a variety of precursors and allow the formation of inverted opals (IO) of many materials. The general procedure for IO preparation is demonstrated in Fig. 13, where a hard template is infiltrated by an appropriate precursor, and then removed either chemically or thermally.
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagram detailing preparation of an inverted opal electrode. Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Through various mechanisms, the arrangement of spheres dictates the periodic porosity of the resulting inverted opal structure. 
The template preparation mechanism generally involves self-assembly of template spheres, usually a hard polymer like polystyrene or poly(methyl methacrylate),173 or silica, on the surface of the substrate. This makes it possible to form inverted opal structures of a variety of metals and metal oxides160,172,174,175 and metal fluorides.176 Typically, inverted opals have wall thicknesses in the range of 10s to 100s of nanometres, and have been prepared and characterized in multiple compositions, for Li ion anodes, cathodes and solid state electrolyte materials.
IOs generally exhibit higher power densities than bulk materials, due to excellent electrolyte penetration. Although they may not be the best choice for electrodes composed of materials which undergo large volumetric expansion upon lithiation (e.g. alloying materials), using a bicontinuous approach allows for formation of IO electrodes from alloying materials as well. Excellent control over the morphology of the IOs and an extensive range of compositions make IO structures very exciting in other areas of research, ranging from catalysis,177 gas sensing, to optics and filtration.
The following section will detail the various implementations of IO structures as active materials for LIB anodes and cathodes.
7. Inverted opal structures for lithium ion battery applications
7.1 Inverted opal cathode
Vanadium oxide was the first material to be electrochemically characterized as a cathode material in an inverted opal arrangement.178 In this study, colloidal crystals consisting of polystyrene spheres were deposited on an ITO glass current collector and infiltrated with a diluted vanadyl alkoxide precursor. Subsequently, the precursor was transformed into a solid V2O5 gel network (see Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  (a–d) Schematic diagram detailing formation of V2O5 IO cathodes. (e) Rate performance of the V2O5 IO cathodes. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Chemical removal of the PS sphere template results in the formation of inverted opal structures of the V2O5 ambigel. At low discharge rates, the ambigel electrodes exhibit a reversible behaviour without significant loss of capacity. This study also demonstrated excellent rate performance of IO based electrodes, indicating that the hierarchical structure might reduce polarization via improved mass transport. Electrochromic properties of an IO prepared from V2O5 have also been demonstrated,179 showing improvements such as faster switching speed and better coloration contrast, when compared to bulk films.
In a different study, LiCoO2 was formed in an IO structure through a nanocasting route. Mixed precursors of Li and Co salts precipitate as oxalates within colloidal crystal template voids.180 At a precursor ratio of 1:1, it is possible to form LiCoO2, however, it is difficult to preserve the IO structure due to the high temperatures required for the formation of the LiCoO2 phase. None of the LiCoO2 powders formed, even with addition of PEG as a chelating agent, preserving the IO structure. However, the high interconnectivity and large porosity of the sample allow sustaining high rate cycling. At 700 mA g−1, the mesoporous structure of LiCoO2 is able to sustain a capacity of 40 mA g−1, while the corresponding bulk film fails to charge due to high polarization.
Another binary oxide formed as an IO structure (LiNiO2) was prepared through a salt precipitate procedure.181 Stoichiometric LiNiO2 has a layered structure in which Li+ ions occupy octahedral sites in alternate layers of cubic close packed (ccp) oxide ions. At high temperatures, LiNiO2 readily decomposes to Li1−xNi1+xO2 due to vapour pressure differences between Li salts and formation of Ni2+. Adding excess Li salt and introducing higher oxygen gas partial pressure to suppress reduction of Ni atoms allows formation of IO structures.
LiMn2O4 spinels were fabricated using precursors that solidify before destruction of the colloidal crystal template during annealing.182 Gradually increasing the temperature, however, during template removal, allowed for transformation of amorphous Li-rich sites within the electrode to the spinel phase with Li ions in tetrahedral and octahedral sites. LiMn2O4 showed a remarkable capacity retention, with no more than 7% capacity loss after 10000 full cycles at 9 C (full discharge in ∼7 minutes) (see Fig. 15), compared to more than 80% reduction in the charge capacity for bulk LiMn2O4.
 Fig. 15  Cycling behaviour of solid and porous LiMn2O4 electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The excellent electrochemical performance of IO electrodes can be ascribed to high crystallinity, ensuring stability during cycling, high degree of porosity, shortening diffusion lengths and a reduction of polarization.
Lithium iron(II) phosphate is an alternative cathode material that has been extensively researched since the original paper on the material application in battery electrodes in 1997.183 Iron represented a cheaper alternative to expensive cobalt and nickel materials. However it suffers from low ionic and electronic conductivity, making high power applications difficult to realize. The IO structure should improve the ionic conductivity by providing nanoscopic walls with shortened diffusion lengths and opened pore networks that facilitate electrolyte penetration. Lu et al.184 prepared LiFePO4 IOs by mixing Li, P and Fe precursors in stoichiometric ratios. Subsequent calcination under nitrogen resulted in the formation of IOs with residual carbon interspersed in the LiFePO4. The carbon content contributed to the conductivity of the IO and allowed for high charge rates, resulting in an initial capacity of 100 mA h g−1 at 5.9 C.
Recently, Doherty et al. described the preparation of LiFePO4 IOs based on PMMA colloidal templates, with sphere sizes varying from 100–270 nm.185 The templates were not filled completely, which improved the electrolyte penetration and ionic and electronic charge transfer. Sintering at 800 °C improved charge transfer resistance in the electrodes and allowed for charge rates of 10 C with capacity retention close to 100 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles. The template sphere size was also shown to have an influence on the electrochemical performance of the IO electrodes, as larger spheres created a continuous macropore network, ensuring facile flow of the electrolyte to all of the parts of the electrode. Residual amorphous carbon present after calcination in N2 also enhanced electronic conductivity of the olivine material, although a balance is necessary, as high weight percentage of C may create a Li diffusion barrier and hinder high rate performance.
8. Inverted opal anodes
8.1 Carbonaceous inverted opal anodes
Graphitic carbon is currently used in commercial LIBs as an anode electrode. It offers excellent stability and relatively long cycle life (1000s of cycles). However, its performance at high discharge rates is hindered by low Li ionic conductivity in carbon. The IO structure offers a possibility to improve the performance of carbon based electrodes, through facilitating easier electrolyte penetration and shortening Li ion diffusion lengths in the active material matrix. The first C-based IOs were prepared in 1998 by Zakhidov et al.,186via a vapour deposition technique, forming diamond, glassy carbon and graphite inverted opals. Solution based processes for carbon IO formation were then reported, using sucrose186 and phenylic resin187 as carbon precursors. In 2005, two separate articles investigating the electrochemical performance of carbon based inverted opal electrodes were published. In one approach 188 PMMA templates were infiltrated with a resorcinol–formaldehyde (RF) sol–gel precursor. This allowed the formation of IO monoliths with mesoporous walls and a surface area of 326 m2 g−1. Large surface area is associated with randomly distributed micropores between the graphene nanosheets in hard carbon solid walls.
The monoliths were found to be electronically and ionically conductive. Good conductivity, excellent electrolyte penetration related to the porosity of the IO and shortened diffusion path lengths allowed carbon IOs to experience much less polarization at current rates as high as C/2 (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  SEM image of carbon inverted opals. Carbon inverted opals experience much less polarization than bulk carbon of the same composition. Adapted from ref. 188 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
In another study, carbon IOs were prepared by CVD of benzene using silica IOs as templates.189 The resultant 10–20 nm coating of graphite on silica was electronically and ionically conductive and was suited as an anode active material. This material exhibited specific capacities as high as 260 mA h g−1 at current rates of 1000 mA g−1 (∼2.7 C), with good cycling stability (90% capacity retention over 60 cycles).
More recently, particulate inverse opal structures with mesoporous walls were prepared via solution casting of PS spheres with a phloroglucinol and formaldehyde mixture containing a F127 block copolymer.190 Incorporating soft templating methods into the IO formation procedure resulted in increased surface area (from 109 m2 g−1 to 466 m2 g−1). A large irreversible capacity was attributed to formation of a SEI layer on the electrode and inherent properties of hard carbon. The mesoporous carbon was however capable of sustaining charge rates as high as 300 mA g−1 with a reversible capacity of over 300 mA h g−1.
An interesting means of increasing the capacity of carbon based IOs is to introduce a secondary active material, usually in the form of nanoparticles embedded in the conductive matrix of carbon IOs. Materials such as SnO2 (ref. 90 and 189), Si191 or TiO2 (ref. 192) have been incorporated into the carbon based inverted opals, with significant influence on the electrochemical performance.193 One of the most recent studies demonstrated an IO electrode concept with SnO2 NPs entrapped in macroporous carbon IO prepared by infiltration of PMMA colloids by tannic acid–Sn4+ complexes.90 Optimization of infiltration and calcination parameters resulted in nanometre scale walls and improvement in the rate performance of the electrodes. They were able to sustain current rates in the range of 1–10 A g−1 (∼3–30 C) without any significant capacity loss. High porosity (including hierarchical length scale of multiple porosities) in the electrode resulted in low volumetric energy density of prepared electrodes, confirming the need for further improvements in the electrode design. With respect to inverse opals, three-dimensionally interconnected macropores facilitate the rapid flux of liquid electrolyte solutions, such that 100 m2 g−1 of electrode interfaces are simultaneously accessible to lithium or other mobile cationic charges. This degree of macropore interconnectivity is intentionally tailored into PhCs from self-assembled close-packed templates. For example, the ionic conductivity of a 1 M LiPF6 liquid electrolyte solution is only impeded by a factor of two when ion transport occurs through the interconnected macropores of monolithic carbon inverse opals (electrode thicknesses: 300 μm to 3 mm).
8.2 Three-dimensionally structured alloying anodes
The first reports of alloying electrodes in the IO form appeared in 2004.194 PMMA colloidal crystal templates were infiltrated with SnCl2 dissolved in DI water and 30 wt% H2O2. IOs of SnO2 were formed after thermal removal of the PMMA template. The morphology of the walls of IOs was influenced by the calcination temperature, becoming more granular and interrupted by grain boundaries with the increase in the calcination temperature.175 Galvanostatic cycling of the IOs resulted in significant morphological changes in the electrodes. The wall thickness increased significantly on the alloying of SnO2 with Li, with nodules appearing on the previously smooth structure (see Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  SEM images showing morphologies of SnO2 IOs at different stages of charging. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Repeated cycling caused an increase of the wall thickness, and finally loss of the IO morphology. The authors concluded that the large volumetric expansion of the IO SnO2 electrodes made them impractical for applications in LIBs. Additionally, the granular structure of the SnO2 walls caused very high polarization, caused by high resistance of the granular walls of the IO. Different approaches were used to alleviate the drawbacks caused by the properties of SnO2. Using a carbon–SnO2 composite was one of the strategies employed.189,195 A stable capacity of 300 mA h g−1 could be delivered by the carbon–SnO2 composite at 100 mA g−1. The improved cyclability was attributed to the confinement effect provided by the mesoporous carbon framework, which served as a structural buffer for volume variation of Sn nanoparticles during repeated cycling. Stability of the SEI layer also contributed to the good cyclability of the IOs.
In another approach, a Ni support was used to improve the stability of the SnO2 IO based electrode.196 In this study, a colloidal crystal template was infiltrated by electroplating. A mixture of SnCl2 and NiCl2 was deposited from an aqueous solution through electroplating and tested electrochemically. Repeated cycling caused delamination of the IO electrode from the current collector, possibly due to epitaxial mismatch of the Ni–Sn alloy and the Cu current collector. During cycling, the electrode underwent rapid morphological changes and as a result, capacity retention was poor. After 100 cycles, the reversible capacity sustained by the electrode was only about 95 mA h g−1.
Recently,197 fluorinated tin oxide (FTO) and antimonated tin oxide (ATO) IOs showed significant improvements in electrochemical performance compared to pure SnO2 IOs, in both capacity and cycling stability (see Fig. 18). The improved performance of the FTO and ATO electrodes was attributed to improved integrity of the nanoporous structure, allowing for better tolerance of large volume changes caused by repeated cycling of the electrode. Good electrochemical performance of highly conductive transparent oxides may enable their applications in solar cells, electrochromic devices or sensor applications.
 Fig. 18  (a) CV for hollow FTO. (b) CV for porous FTO. (c) Initial charge and discharge curves for porous FTO. (d) Cyclic performance for porous FTO. Reproduced from ref. 197 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Silicon is another material that has been investigated electrochemically and structurally in IO architectures. Esmanski et al.198 prepared a variety of Si based IO films: amorphous hydrogenated Si IOs (prepared through CVD), nanocrystalline Si-IOs, carbon coated nanocrystalline Si-IOs and carbon IOs with amorphous Si coating. Amorphous hydrogenated Si IOs demonstrated a good initial discharge capacity (2500 mA h g−1). The cycling stability of the IO electrodes was also satisfactory, with over 70% of the discharge capacity retained after 145 cycles. The sphere size was also shown to have an influence on the performance of the IOs, as the electrodes prepared from templates with lower diameter spheres performed poorly, due to blockage of the pore openings by the swelling electrode material. The rate performance of the IO was limited by the amorphous structure of the IO walls. In order to increase conductivity, amorphous IOs were annealed at 800 °C in an inert atmosphere resulting in the formation of nanocrystalline Si-IO. The crystalline structure of the IO walls resulted in improved Li mobility in the electrode material and better rate performance. Capacity retention however was extremely poor, reaching negligible values by the 15th cycle at best. A similar electrochemical behaviour was observed for carbon coated nanocrystalline Si IOs.
In the same study, a different approach was also presented. Carbon IOs were coated with a thin layer of amorphous Si via CVD. The initial capacity of the IOs was around 2000 mA h g−1, with the first cycle coulombic efficiency reaching around 80%, increasing to 98–99% after 5th cycle. The rate performance of the IO was poor, compared to amorphous Si samples, with the capacities reaching negligible levels at 10 C rates. The carbon support allowed for better mechanical and structural stability of the IOs, resulting in good capacity retentions of over 80% after 145 cycles. Esmanski's findings agreed well with results published by Kim et al.,92 who prepared 3D porous Si particles through deposition of sol–gel mixtures of Si and silica particles and subsequent HF etching. The 3D particles demonstrated excellent capacity retention and rate capability, delivering 2668 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 1 C rate.
In a more recent study, nanoscale Ni metal scaffold supported bicontinuous 3D IO based batteries were prepared by Paul Braun's group.199 The formation mechanism for these electrodes is shown in Fig. 19.
 Fig. 19  (a) Loss of electrical contact during cycling. (b) Good electrical contact between an Si film and Ni substrate. (c) Bicontinuous bulk anode consisting of a silicon thin film on a 3D porous Ni scaffold. (d) Fabrication procedure for the bicontinuous electrode. Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
Initially, nickel was electrodeposited in a PS template. Following thermal template removal, the Ni IO was electropolished and a thin film of Si was deposited on the surface of the Ni support through CVD. The self-supported Si anodes showed excellent electrochemical performance, delivering a stable capacity of 2660 mA h g−1 while conserving over 48% of their slow rate capacity when charged at 9.5 C.
The same bicontinuous approach was also successfully employed in an operational battery,200 where MnO2 cathodes were prepared by electrodeposition of MnSO4 on an electropolished Ni metal current collector. Superior rate performance of the bicontinuous films was attributed mainly to excellent electrolyte penetration, reduced polarization by providing a low resistivity current collector throughout the electrode and shortened diffusion lengths. Such prepared electrodes were able to deliver capacities of over 75 mA h g−1 at an exceptionally high rate of 1114 C, which corresponds to full discharge in less than 4 seconds (see Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  Ultrafast discharge of the lithiated MnO2 cathode. Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
The most recent report201 concerning 3D battery architectures describes a high power microbattery capable of delivering power densities as high as 7.4 mW cm−2 μm−1 (see Fig. 21). In this study, polystyrene spheres were deposited over gold electrodes etched on glass substrates. Subsequently, a nickel metal support was electrodeposited over the gold electrodes to form a stable current collector. A Ni–Sn alloy and MnOOH were then electrodeposited on the current collector, before submersion of the microbattery in LiNO3 and LiOH, to form a lithiated cathode. Such microbattery design allowed the authors to achieve over 2000× the power and twice the energy density observed in the best microbattery designs presented thus far. The energy densities demonstrated of up to 15 μWh cm−2 μm−1 and the power densities of up to 7.4 mW cm−2 μm−1 are comparable with the best supercapacitors. The improvements in power and energy density were attributed to shortened ionic diffusion lengths and reduced resistivity of the electrode. Successful demonstration of a high power microbattery allows compact integration of a full battery package for microelectronics applications. The versatility of this approach also permits development of different types of electrode chemistry for specific applications.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic diagram of the microbattery fabrication procedure. (b) Microbattery design. (c) SEM cross-section of the microbattery. (d) Top-down SEM image of the microbattery interdigitated electrodes. (e) Constant current line sweeps at different rates. (f) Rate performance of the microbatteries. Adapted from ref. 201 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 

Table 3 summarizes some of the developments in IO Li-ion battery electrode research.
Table 3 Summary of the performance of various types of IO based electrodes




Composition
Morphology
Initial capacity (C-rate)
Final capacity (# of cycles)
Ref.




V2O5
IO
—
—

202



LiNiO2
IO
—
—


SnO2
IO
—
—

194



C
IO
299 (15.2 mA g−1)
—

188



Sn–C
Sn@C IO
348 (15.2 mA g−1)
—


C
Graphitic C IO
326 (C/10)
320 (60)

189



Sn–C
Sn@C
415 (C/10)
375 (60)


TiO2–C
TiO2@C
158 (50 μA cm−2)
40 (15)

203



Li4Ti5O12
IO
152 (6.3μA cm−2)
145 (70)

204



Li4Ti5O12
IO
173 (C/10)
120 (100)

205



FePO4
IO
137 (C/10)
110 (50)

206



LiMn2O4–Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3
IO composite
64 (−)
—

207



LiMn2O4
IO
—
—

208



Sn–C
Sn@C
1500 (100 mA g−1)
96 (100)

195



Si–C
Si@C
3180 (−)
—

191



LiFePO4
IO
115 (5 C)
120 (50)

185



Si
a-Si:h IO
2500 (C/10)
1750 (145)

198



nc-Si IO
3000 (C/10)
0 (15)


Si–C
nc-Si–C IO
2400 (C/10)
0 (12)


a-Si–C IO
2406 (C/10)
2133 (145)


Ni–Sn
Ni–Sn composite
315 (50 mA g−1)
∼100 (100)

196



LiMn2O4
IO
—
—

182



MnO2 @ Ni
Thin film/IO bicontinuous
74 (1114 C)
—

200



FeF3
IO
540 (50 mA g−1)
190 (30)

176



Si @Ni
Bicontinuous IO
3568 (C/20)
2660 (100)

199



SnO2–C
SnO2@C
1659 (0.5 A g−1)
715 (500)

90



TiO2
IO
442 (25 mA g−1)
117 (200)

209



C
IO
359 (−)
315 (20)

190





9. Pseudocapacitors that offer good power and energy densities
Capacitive charge storage has some particular advantages compared to non-faradaic intercalation batteries. Supercapacitors can be charged within seconds, cycled hundreds of thousands of times, are stable and ideal for delivering high power, which for some uses lead preferably to a higher energy density.210 Several options exist for charge storage at the electrode–electrolyte interface, which are sensitively dependent on structure, composition, chemical potential, redox potential and many other factors. In secondary or rechargeable batteries, cations intercalate into interlayer gaps (van der Waals gaps) of layered or tunnel materials211 or form alloys with phases of other materials. The specific type of materials that permit intercalation, however, can offer under some conditions faradaic and non-faradaic processes, thereby adding energy and power density benefits of both systems.
Cations can electrochemically adsorb onto the surface of a material through charge-transfer processes facilitating non-intercalation based charge storage, similar to electrochemical double layer capacitors to some extent. This can in some cases remove the limitation of long diffusion times for ions through the van der Waals gaps, and is energetically easier. Such pseudocapacitance is observed when this form of insertion is capacitive, i.e. the electrochemical intercalation processes stem from cations that are faradaically stored and changes in the materials' structure do not occur.212 While there are many textbooks that deal with the fundamentals of capacitive and intercalation charge storage mechanisms, there are some salient features that are important for materials that ordinarily store charge through intercalation, but exhibit surface charge storage when polarised at higher rates.
Increasing the rate of a cyclic voltammogram for structured or porous energy storage materials has a large influence on the course of the electrochemical reaction of many cations. One characteristic is that the current peaks associated with many processes such as SEI formation, reduction, oxidation, alloying or intercalation, are often convoluted within the total cumulative charge and the curve resembles that of an asymmetric supercapacitor to some degree. The current response is however much larger than for the slow rate scan, suggesting that there is an additional charge storage mechanism operating at large potentials. The total stored charge for any electrochemical energy storage process can be separated into three components: the faradaic contribution from the Li+ ion insertion processes, the faradaic contribution from the charge transfer process with the surface atoms, referred to as pseudocapacitance, and the non-faradaic contribution from the double layer effect.213 When the porosity of the electrode increases, both types of capacitive contributions (pseudocapacitance and double layer charging) can be significant. The capacitive effects can be characterized by analysing data from cyclic voltammetry experiments carried out at different scan rates, according to:214 i = aνb(1)where the measured current i obeys a power law relationship with the sweep rate ν. Both a and b are adjustable parameters, with the b value determined from the slope of log(i) vs. log(ν). There are two well-defined conditions, b = 0.5 and b = 1. For b = 0.5 the current is proportional to the square root of the scan rate, according to the equation: (2)where C* is the surface concentration of the electrode material, α is the transport coefficient, D is the chemical diffusion coefficient, n is the number of electrons involved in the electrode reaction, A is the surface area, R is the molar gas constant, F is the Faraday constant, T is the temperature, and χ(bt) represents the normalized current for a completely irreversible system, as indicated by cyclic voltammetry.
The other defined condition is when b = 1, which is representative of capacitive response, as the capacitive current is proportional to the scan rate, according to: i = νCdA(3)
To obtain the b-value for a given material system, current values from cyclic voltammagrams carried out at different scan rates are recorded at specified potential values. Then, the slope of the plot of the log(i) vs. log(ν) is the b-value at that potential.
As a pertinent example of many in the literature, Brezesinski et al.215 recently showed that controlling the morphology of mesoscale porous materials such as films of iso-oriented α-MoO3 can facilitate a change from a non-faradic process to a mixture that helps increase the overall energy density of capacitor-based storage devices, using pseudocapacitive effects controlled by reaction kinetics. These properties were unique to their mesoporous crystalline materials and were superior to those of either a mesoporous amorphous material or non-porous crystalline MoO3 (see Fig. 22). The iso-oriented layered crystalline domains enabled Li-ions to be inserted into the van der Waals gaps of the α-MoO3 and importantly, this occurs on the same timescale as for the redox pseudocapacitance.
 Fig. 22  (a) Morphology of mesoporous α-MoO3 with highly oriented crystalline walls. Low-magnification bright-field TEM micrograph. Inset: a higher magnification micrograph. (b) AFM image of the top surface. Inset: a tilted AFM image with height variations in the 1–5 nm range. (c) Cyclic voltammograms for mesoporous amorphous and crystalline films of MoO3 systems at a sweep rate of 1 mV s−1. (c) Kinetic behaviour of the various mesoporous films. The total amount of charge storage (gravimetrically normalized) as a function of charging time for each film. Adapted from ref. 215 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
As electrochemically active materials approach nanoscale dimensions, pseudocapacitive effects become increasingly important.216 In a recent report, Dunn et al. established the dependence of pseudocapacitance on the particle size of anatase TiO2 nanocrystals.213 The results showed that for particles smaller than 10 nm in diameter, more than half of the total stored charge is capacitive. As anatase TiO2 has no van der Waals gap, all of its capacitance is believed to be redox pseudocapacitance. Layered crystal structure materials have also been shown to exhibit such phenomena. TiO2(B), TiS2 and H2Ti3O7 are able to take up LiC through pseudocapacitive processes.217,218 In cases where redox pseudocapacitance contributes to the overall energy density, its contribution can be established by cyclic voltammetry. By varying voltage sweep rates, a transition from faradaic to non-faradaic processes can be assessed in many forms of high surface area materials.
The performance of most advanced IO based LIBs can be compared to a different type of device that is able to simultaneously deliver high power and high energy densities as pseudocapacitors, which store energy electrochemically between two electrode plates. As the energy storage employs fast and reversible redox reactions between electrodes and the electroactive species, most pseudocapacitors use metal oxides with a high number of valence states. They are however difficult to mass produce, and suffer from energy density loss at high scan rates. A recent study by Li et al.219 demonstrated Ni(OH)2 nanospheres with excellent electrochemical performance (see Fig. 23), related to high purity of the surface of the nanospheres, large surface area and the amorphous phase of the nanospheres.
 Fig. 23  (a) CV curves of the amorphous Ni(OH)2 nanospheres at various scan rates in 1 M KOH. (b) Specific capacitance of the amorphous Ni(OH)2 nanospheres as a function of the scan rates based on the CV curves. (c) CV curves of the blank electrode at various scan rates in 1 M KOH. Reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
In a different study, graphene based supercapacitors were prepared by microfabricating electrodes and subsequent deposition of reduced graphene oxide, on both flexible and robust substrates.219 The energy density of such structures is comparable with the energy density of LIBs, while their power densities are higher than power densities of capacitors based on metal oxides. Altering carbon-based electrodes and structuring them with ordered 3D porosity have also been demonstrated recently by Huang et al.90 By creating SnO2 nanoparticles inside an inverted opal carbon matrix (Fig. 24), they demonstrated improved anode kinetics in a Li-ion battery cell. The electrodes exhibit simultaneously enhanced ion and electron transport kinetics as well as geometrically constrained active nanoparticles delivering up to 94.17% of theoretical capacity over 1000 discharge–charge cycles at a current density of 2.0 A g−1, and exhibit good rate capability in the high current density range of 1.0–10.0 A g−1. Creating hybrid materials with two or more active materials offers some potential advantages depending on whether energy density and/or cycle life are important.
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration showing the preparation of an SnO2@C inverted opal electrode. (b) Li-ion battery performances of SnO2@C inverse opal electrodes.90 
Development of such novel manufacturing techniques, optimization of the device configurations and improvement of the materials used will further enhance the performance of the supercapacitors, and we recommend recent reviews on this subject for more detailed information.216 Developments in the area of ordered porous self-supported batteries with power densities comparable to supercapacitors offer power improvement options for materials that are fundamentally limited to low intercalative or non-faradaic charge capacities. Designing bi- or multi-phasic materials with different Li insertion voltage ranges could potentially allow for a predetermined capacity without fully discharging each active material. Constraining one active material within another with high deformation plasticity could also potentially give a structurally stable matrix that better accommodated volumetric changes that are not buffered in a polymer-material slurry in standard cell electrode designs. Recent findings in dual charge storage mechanisms using SnO2 nanoparticles on Si as a hybrid anode120 and their exploitation will help optimize tailored design of many other sophisticated electrode materials in electrochemistry and energy storage materials influenced by the end application.
Choosing pseudocapacitance and supercapacitance is also possible using two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets such as graphene or transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs).220 Charge storage mechanisms here involve the insertion/extraction of protons or ions in the first few nanometers on the surface of electrode materials for pseudocapacitors and the adsorption/desorption of ions at the electrode–electrolyte interface for electrochemical double-layer capacitors.221,222 Enhancing performance is again a function of reduced lithium ion diffusion distance within the materials if the former case and within the electrolyte for the latter case. With the boost of wearable and flexible consumer electronics that have an aesthetic appeal and unique functionality, flexibility and shape versatility or adaptability is a useful property in charge storage materials and their electrochemical cells.223–225 The state-of-the-art flexible supercapacitors generally use carbon networks. Without the carbon networks pseudocapacitive materials can barely be used to fabricate the flexible electrodes, so as to assemble the flexible supercapacitors (Fig. 25). Shi et al.,226 as one example, showed that flexible asymmetric supercapacitors with excellent electrochemical performance and in the form of quasi-transparent energy storage cells could be fabricated by using two kinds of ultrathin 2D nanosheet materials (MnO2 and graphene). The MnO2 nanosheets with a thickness of ∼2 nm exhibited a high capacitance of 774 F g−1 and good rate performance. Flexible asymmetric supercapacitors using the ultrathin 2D MnO2 and graphene in aqueous Ca(NO3)2–SiO2 gel electrolyte realized excellent electrochemical performance with an energy density of up to 97.2 Wh kg−1 much higher than traditional MnO2 based supercapacitors and no more than 3% capacitance loss even after 10000 cycles.
 Fig. 25  (a) Photographs of the screen-printed asymmetric nanosheets-based supercapacitor electrodes of various designs and (b) Ragone plots of MS/GA and MS/MS supercapacitors compared with other MnO2 based asymmetric supercapacitors in the literature (based on the total mass of active materials). 
10. Summary and outlook for energy storage material design and performance
In this review, a description of some of the recent advancements in nanomaterials design, chemistry, size, shape, structure and assembly on the performance of Li-ion batteries was given. Particular focus was given to the influence of material parameters on cell performance and on emerging functional material architectures with engineered porosity as active Li-ion battery and pseudocapacitor materials. It is becoming clearer from the progress to date that the improvements associated with changes of the electrode's chemical composition, combined with developments in the electrode architecture, offer excellent opportunities for commercialization of next generation Li-ion batteries and emerging alternative chemistries.227 Various mechanisms for lithium storage combined with simple routes towards particular morphologies of active materials create a multitude of opportunities for electrode design.
However, it is important to note that to date, only a handful of modern materials and electrode architectures have been commercialized. The advancements in anode material science and design have not been followed to the same extent by improvements in the cathode chemistry and performance. A pressing challenge is the dearth of true, cell-level investigations of known and promising new materials in true Li-ion cells. Most cathode investigations resulted in lithium batteries with a lithium electrode; anode studies included half cells. While the fundamental advancements are motivating, many new materials and systems need to be thoroughly investigated using pair-matched anodes and cathodes in suitable electrodes as full Li-ion cells and classified for their optimum performance and loading conditions dictated by the end application.
Inverted opal architectures have been demonstrated to improve the performance of battery electrodes based on a variety of materials. The shortened diffusion lengths and excellent electrolyte infiltration allow for largely increased charge–discharge rates, while the void space allows for facile relaxation of strain and stress caused by repeated cycling of the electrode. Moreover, a composite approach was used, where the inverted opal current collector acts as a support for active materials. This design approach can help minimize unwanted polarization and resistances, and achievement of outstanding charge–discharge rates. Such electrodes may achieve power densities more often seen in supercapacitors, while delivering energy densities characteristic for traditional LIBs. The use of engineered or programmed porosity is potentially very useful for materials that have inherently lower Li ion diffusivity within the crystal structure of the active material. Care should be taken to ensure that the structure of the porous network does not introduce significant increases in electrical resistance through material contacts or grain boundaries for example, or variable SEI film structures at anodes. Ideal scenarios would likely involve engineered porosity of a well crystallized material that itself does not have a high kinetic barrier to Li diffusion within its structure, made porous in a manner that maximizes ambipolar (ionic and electronic) conductivity (tuned for power or energy density requirements at a prescribed rate), forms stable SEI layers at low potentials (anodes), and offers useful volumetric or gravimetric energy densities, among other attributes. Recent efforts for some materials have shown that defining the porosity or dispersion of active materials can also give extra degrees of freedom for volume expansion common for many high capacity materials.
Ultimately, the successful application of materials chemistry and electrode design will be decided by industry. Undoubtedly, the drive for better LIBs motivated by automotive and consumer electronics market will have a dominating influence on the types of batteries used. Templated materials with good ionic conductivities can allow for variants of thin film batteries, where the charge storage cell is designed around the shape of the electronic device, rather than the other way round. Although Li-ion battery packs are compact and volumetrically efficient, the ‘swiss-roll’ design strategy limits the batteries to rectangular or cylindrical shapes, which constrains the form factors of devices. While many factors need to be considered, not least a high quality, repeatable way of producing such thin film batteries and battery skins, scope exists to lay down energy storage cells in parallel with energy conversion or energy harvesting thin film technologies such as solar cells and thermoelectrics, on a single platform. Recent work on unconventional battery designs228 focused on their accommodation into devices without constraining their form factors. Battery designs such as flexible batteries,229 stretchable paper-type batteries, and even printed transparent230 batteries show that such atypical batteries are possible. The use of IO materials is one way forward, allowing for possibilities of interpenetrating networks with Li-containing polymer electrolytes and sequential layering of anode and protective encapsulating layers. Painting has proven its usefulness in applying functional materials onto almost any type of substrate for electronic devices and it may be applied to energy storage such as batteries. Printing (or generally, painting)231 is already considered a viable technique for large-area fabrication of electronic devices (circuits, photovoltaics, displays, etc.) on virtually any type of substrate. Recent work has shown the intriguing possibility of literally painting the layers of materials required for a Li-ion battery.232
For charge storage technology capable of high performance, faster charging, and stable, safe capacity retention during operation can be moulded to the device shape – this will significantly help advance portable device power technology options such as consumer devices and wireless sensor nodes for example. Consequently, there is huge interest in developing a fully paintable energy storage technology, and a seamless integration of these energy storage systems into electronic devices is still a significant hurdle. Probing how an ordered architecture is that can be assembled layer-by-layer on shaped surfaces, and new non-destructive spectroscopic methods to investigate how a new areal battery shape can be probed during its operation will be very advantageous for future thin film, moldable battery designs and material architectures.
Advancements in Li–air and Li–S designs and other ‘beyond lithium’ systems such as emerging Mg and Na-ion batteries233,234 might challenge the supremacy of the Li-ion system in the future, offering higher energy densities at reduced cost. Some investigations consider multivalent cations offering more than one electron per redox event. As summarised earlier, hybrid systems involving the power density benefits of supercapacitors and the energy density performance of batteries in the form of rate-dependent pseudocapacitors may also have niche application. However, for now, LIBs are very likely to remain the main solution for power systems, and thus drive further improvements in both electrode chemistry and architecture.235
Acknowledgements
MO and EA acknowledge the support of the Irish Research Council under awards RS/2010/2920 and RS/2010/2170. COD acknowledges support from Science Foundation Ireland under award no. 07/SK/B1232a-STTF11, the UCC Strategic Research Fund, and from the Irish Research Council New Foundations Award. This research has also received funding from the Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2013 (Project STABLE) under grant agreement no. 314508.
References

          W. S. Harris, PhD Thesis, University of California,  1958 .
M. S. Whittingham, Science, 1976, 192, 1126–1127 CAS .
M. S. Whittingham and R. A. Huggins, J. Chem. Phys., 1971, 54, 414–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 2776–2781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 13–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Teki, M. K. Datta, R. Krishnan, T. C. Parker, T.-M. Lu, P. N. Kumta and N. Koratkar, Small, 2009, 5, 2236–2242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115–3141 RSC .
X.-P. Gao and H.-X. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 174–189 CAS .
Y. S. Cohen, Y. Cohen and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 12282–12291 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2558–2563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. Shimotake, Progress in Batteries and Solar Cells, JEC Press,  1990 Search PubMed .
O. C. Compton, A. Abouimrane, Z. An, M. J. Palmeri, L. C. Brinson, K. Amine and S. T. Nguyen, Small, 2012, 8, 1110–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, J. Bates, F. Hart, B. Sales, R. Zuhr and J. Robertson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 3203–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-K. Sun, S.-T. Myung, B.-C. Park, J. Prakash, I. Belharouak and K. Amine, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 320–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Manthiram and Y. Shin, Developments in Solid Oxide Fuel Cells and Lithium Iron Batteries: Proceedings of the 106th Annual Meeting of The American Ceramic Society, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA 2004, Ceramic Transactions,  2012 Search PubMed .
L. Mai, L. Xu, C. Han, X. Xu, Y. Luo, S. Zhao and Y. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4750–4755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. O'Dwyer, V. Lavayen, D. A. Tanner, S. B. Newcomb, E. Benavente, G. Gonzalez, E. Benavente and C. M. S. Torres, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1736–1745 CrossRef .
S. Dou, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 1–16 Search PubMed .
H. Pang, P. Cheng, H. Yang, J. Lu, C. X. Guo, G. Ning and C. M. Li, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1536–1538 RSC .
M. M. Thackeray, W. I. F. David, P. G. Bruce and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1983, 18, 461–472 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4418 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Bhatt and C. O'Dwyer, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2014, 14, 349–354 CrossRef PubMed .
L. El Ouatani, R. Dedryvère, C. Siret, P. Biensan and D. Gonbeau, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A468–A477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2047–2051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Besenhard, M. Winter, J. Yang and W. Biberacher, J. Power Sources, 1995, 54, 228–231 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Haag, G. Pattanaik and M. F. Durstock, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3238–3243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 587–603 CrossRef .
L. Su, Y. Jing and Z. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3967–3983 RSC .
A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder and K. A. Persson, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 011002 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Armstrong, C. O'Dwyer, W. J. Macklin and J. D. Holmes, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1–62 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ceder, MRS Bull., 2010, 35, 693–701 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mizushima, P. C. Jones, P. J. Wiseman and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 783–789 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Chung, J. T. Bloking and Y.-M. Chiang, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 123–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hosono, T. Kudo, I. Honma, H. Matsuda and H. S. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1045–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Molenda, J. Marzec, K. Świerczek, W. Ojczyk, M. Ziemnicki, P. Wilk and M. Molenda, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 171, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dou, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 911–926 CrossRef CAS .
J. Molenda, P. Wilk and J. Marzec, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 146, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heller, Interface, 2013, 22, 35 Search PubMed .
M. Jacoby, Chem. Eng. News, 2013, 91, 7 CAS .
Y. S. Hu, L. Kienle, Y. G. Guo and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-G. Guo, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878–2887 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Ellis, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 691–714 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Wang, Y. R. Wang, E. J. Hosono, K. X. Wang and H. S. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7461–7465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Suzuki and M. Miyayama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A293–A296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Burch and M. Z. Bazant, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3795–3800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2286–2288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shimoda, B. Gao, X. P. Tang, A. Kleinhammes, L. Fleming, Y. Wu and O. Zhou, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 015502 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Molenda and M. Molenda, Composite Cathode Material for Li-Ion Batteries Based on LiFePO4 System,  2011 Search PubMed .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacín, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170–E192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Dey, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1971, 118, 1547–1549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Small, 2013, 9, 1877–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Cao, J. Qian, X. Ai and H. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15196–15201 CAS .
C. K. Chan, X. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 307–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, P. Li, Y. Fu and X. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2013, 238, 464–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. R. Prabakar, Y.-H. Hwang, E.-G. Bae, S. Shim, D. Kim, M. S. Lah, K.-S. Sohn and M. Pyo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3307–3312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kong, W. A. Yee, Y. Wei, L. Yang, J. M. Ang, S. L. Phua, S. Y. Wong, R. Zhou, Y. Dong, X. Li and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2967–2973 RSC .
Q. Guo, Z. Zheng, H. Gao, J. Ma and X. Qin, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 149–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Kasavajjula, C. Wang and A. J. Appleby, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1003–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, G. Chan, J. W. Choi, I. Ryu, Y. Yao, M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, A. Jackson, Y. Yang, L. Hu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 309–314 Search PubMed .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. McSweeney, O. Lotty, N. V. V. Mogili, C. Glynn, H. Geaney, D. Tanner, J. D. Holmes and C. O'Dwyer, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 034309 Search PubMed .
N. Liu, H. Wu, M. T. McDowell, Y. Yao, C. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3315–3321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Liu, H. Zheng, L. Zhong, S. Huan, K. Karki, L. Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, A. Kushima, W. T. Liang, J. W. Wang, J.-H. Cho, E. Epstein, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux, T. Zhu, J. Li, J. P. Sullivan, J. Cumings, C. Wang, S. X. Mao, Z. Z. Ye, S. Zhang and J. Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3312–3318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-L. Chan and J. R. Chelikowsky, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 821–825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Liu, F. Fan, H. Yang, S. Zhang, J. Y. Huang and T. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1495–1503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Wang, Y. He, F. Fan, X. H. Liu, S. Xia, Y. Liu, C. T. Harris, H. Li, J. Y. Huang, S. X. Mao and T. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 709–715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Peng, J. Jie, W. Zhang and S.-T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 033105 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Beattie, D. Larcher, M. Morcrette, B. Simon and J. M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A158–A163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Chockla, T. D. Bogart, C. M. Hessel, K. C. Klavetter, C. B. Mullins and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18079–18086 CAS .
A. M. Chockla, K. C. Klavetter, C. B. Mullins and B. A. Korgel, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3738–3745 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mullane, T. Kennedy, H. Geaney, C. Dickinson and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1816–1822 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, R. N. Patel, M. J. O'Connell, B. A. Korgel and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1443–1450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Lee, K. B. Smith, C. M. Hayner and H. H. Kung, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2025–2027 RSC .
J. Guo, A. Sun and C. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 981–984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, X. Chen and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5035–5040 RSC .
S.-L. Chou, Y. Zhao, J.-Z. Wang, Z.-X. Chen, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15862–15867 CAS .
H. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3688–3691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-F. Cui, L. Hu, J. W. Choi and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3671–3678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guan, X. Wang, S. Chen, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12098–12100 RSC .
K. Evanoff, A. Magasinski, J. Yang and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 495–498 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang and P. N. Kumta, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2233–2241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Su, Z. Zhou and M. Ren, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2590–2592 RSC .
X. Huang, J. Chen, Z. Lu, H. Yu, Q. Yan and H. H. Hng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2317 Search PubMed .
Y.-S. Hu, R. Demir-Cakan, M.-M. Titirici, J.-O. Mueller, R. Schloegl, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1645–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, B. Han, J. Choo and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 10151–10154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-F. Cui, Y. Yang, C.-M. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3370–3374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Huang, X. Fan, W. Shen and J. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 113119 Search PubMed .
M.-H. Park, M. G. Kim, J. Joo, K. Kim, J. Kim, S. Ahn, Y. Cui and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3844–3847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, M. Choucair, H.-K. Liu, J. A. Stride and S.-X. Dou, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 303–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kang, H.-S. Lee, D.-W. Han, G.-S. Kim, D. Lee, G. Lee, Y.-M. Kang and M.-H. Jo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 053110 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Song, J. Xia, J.-H. Lee, D. H. Lee, M.-S. Kwon, J.-M. Choi, J. Wu, S. K. Doo, H. Chang, W. Il Park, D. S. Zang, H. Kim, Y. Huang, K.-C. Hwang, J. A. Rogers and U. Paik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1710–1716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-F. Cao, J.-W. Deng, S. Xin, H.-X. Ji, O. G. Schmidt, L.-J. Wan and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4415–4420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ge, J. Rong, X. Fang and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2318–2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Graetz, C. C. Ahn, R. Yazami and B. Fultz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A698–A702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Chockla, J. T. Harris, V. A. Akhavan, T. D. Bogart, V. C. Holmberg, C. Steinhagen, C. B. Mullins, K. J. Stevenson and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20914–20921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cui, L. Gu, L. Zhi, N. Kaskhedikar, P. A. van Aken, K. Muellen and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3079–3083 CrossRef CAS .
B. Laforge, L. Levan-Jodin, R. Salot and A. Billard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A181–A188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Yang, Q. S. Gao, L. Li, Y. Tang and Y. P. Wu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 418–421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Park, Y. Cho, K. Kim, J. Kim, M. Liu and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9647–9650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoon, C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, A42–A45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-J. Xue, S. Xin, Y. Yan, K.-C. Jiang, Y.-X. Yin, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2512–2515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Seng, M.-H. Park, Z. P. Guo, H. K. Liu and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5657–5661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Chockla, M. G. Panthani, V. C. Holmberg, C. M. Hessel, D. K. Reid, T. D. Bogart, J. T. Harris, C. B. Mullins and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11917–11923 CAS .
M.-H. Seo, M. Park, K. T. Lee, K. Kim, J. Kim and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 425–428 CAS .
Y. Hwa, C.-M. Park, S. Yoon and H.-J. Sohn, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3324–3329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, N. Du, H. Zhang, J. Yu and D. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1511–1515 RSC .
I. A. Courtney and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 2045–2052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Idota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa and T. Miyasaka, Science, 1997, 276, 1395–1397 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liu and J. Y. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3844–3860 CAS .
M. Gu, Z. Wang, J. G. Connell, D. E. Perea, L. J. Lauhon, F. Gao and C. Wang, ACS nano, 2013, 7, 6303–6309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 246–254 CrossRef CAS .
M. Osiak, E. Armstrong, T. Kennedy, C. M. S. Torres, K. M. Ryan and C. O'Dwyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8195–8202 CAS .
D.-W. Kim, I.-S. Hwang, S. J. Kwon, H.-Y. Kang, K.-S. Park, Y.-J. Choi, K.-J. Choi and J.-G. Park, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3041–3045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Du, C. Zhong, P. Zhang, Z. Guo, Z. Chen and H. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2582–2586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. D. Ehinon, S. Naille, R. Dedryvere, P. E. Lippens, J. C. Jumas and D. Gonbeau, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5388–5398 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, P. Ochal, S. Panero, G. Mulas, C. B. Minella and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2008, 180, 568–575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Seo, J.-t. Jang, S.-W. Park, C. Kim, B. Park and J. Cheon, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4269–4273 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, J. Qian, X. Ai, Y. Cao and H. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 730–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, M. G. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 818–837 CAS .
X.-Y. Fan, F.-S. Ke, G.-Z. Wei, L. Huang and S.-G. Sun, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 476, 70–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Z. Hu, M. Q. Zeng and M. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2843–2850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Trahey, J. T. Vaughey, H. H. Kung and M. M. Thackeray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A385–A389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hassoun and B. Scrosati, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2371–2374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. Ortiz, I. Hanzu, P. Lavela, P. Knauth, J. L. Tirado and T. Djenizian, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1926–1932 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xue, Z. Fu, Y. Yao, T. Huang and A. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7310–7314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9912–9924 RSC .
J. Yan, A. Sumboja, E. Khoo and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Chen, T.-F. Hung, C.-W. Hu, C.-Y. Chiang, C.-W. Huang, H.-C. Su, R.-S. Liu, C.-H. Lee and C.-C. Chang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2254–2258 RSC .
F. S. Ke, L. Huang, H. H. Jiang, H. B. Wei, F. Z. Yang and S. G. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 228–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Zhu, Z. P. Guo, P. Zhang, G. D. Du, R. Zeng, Z. X. Chen, S. Li and H. K. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8360–8365 RSC .
J. R. Dahn, R. E. Mar and A. Abouzeid, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A361–A365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kim and J. Cho, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A277–A282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Zhang, X. H. Liu, Y.-C. Perng, J. Cho, J. P. Chang, S. X. Mao, Z. Z. Ye and J. Y. Huang, Micron, 2012, 43, 1127–1133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Chen, C.-L. Zhu, X.-Y. Xue, X.-L. Shi and M.-S. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 223101 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, G. Chen and D. Xia, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 432–436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng and J. Y. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1660–1663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Paek, E. Yoo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 72–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, L. Gu, C. Wang, A. Dhanabalan, P. A. van Aken and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6485–6489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, L. Gu, X. Lang, C. Zhu, T. Fujita, M. Chen and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2443–2447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Subramanian, W. W. Burke, H. Zhu and B. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4550–4556 CAS .
P. Meduri, C. Pendyala, V. Kumar, G. U. Sumanasekera and M. K. Sunkara, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 612–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen, Y. L. Cheah, Y. T. Chen, N. Jayaprakash, S. Madhavi, Y. H. Yang and X. W. Lou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20504–20508 CAS .
R. Demir-Cakan, Y.-S. Hu, M. Antonietti, J. Maier and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1227–1229 CrossRef CAS .
B. Guo, J. Shu, K. Tang, Y. Bai, Z. Wang and L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 205–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim and J. Cho, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 771–775 RSC .
C. Wang, Y. Zhou, M. Ge, X. Xu, Z. Zhang and J. Z. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 46–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, A. Dhanabalan, L. Gu and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 238–244 CrossRef CAS .
B. Luo, B. Wang, M. Liang, J. Ning, X. Li and L. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1405–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Sony update its Nexelion Batteries with the new 3.5Ah 18650WH1,  Accessed 8 October 2013.

          D. Foster, J. Wolfenstine, J. Read and J. L. Allen, Army Research Laboratory, 2008, ARL-TN-0319.
C. Capiglia, Y. Saito, H. Kageyama, P. Mustarelli, T. Iwamoto, T. Tabuchi and H. Tukamoto, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81–82, 859–862 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vu, Y. Qian and A. Stein, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1056–1085 CrossRef CAS .
N. Krins, J. D. Bass, D. Grosso, C. Henrist, R. Delaigle, E. M. Gaigneaux, R. Cloots, B. Vertruyen and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4124–4131 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Schneider and J. Engstler, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 2006, 1723–1736 CrossRef .
K. Wang, M. Wei, M. A. Morris, H. Zhou and J. D. Holmes, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3016–3020 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng, Z. Tao, J. Liang and J. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 667–681 CrossRef .
Y. Ren, L. J. Hardwick and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2570–2574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jiao and P. G. Bruce, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 657–660 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kim, Y. S. Huh, Y.-K. Han, M. S. Cho and H. J. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 32–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dupont, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, C. Dickinson, W. Zhou and J. M. Tarascon, J. Power Sources, 2008, 175, 502–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, H. Zou, J. Fu, X. Yang, Y. Wang, H. Guo, X. Fu, C. Liang, M. Wu, P. K. Shen and Q. Gao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 617–623 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shiva, S. Asokan and A. J. Bhattacharyya, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1501–1503 RSC .
H. Liu, G. Wang, J. Liu, S. Qiao and H. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3046–3052 RSC .
N. D. Petkovich and A. Stein, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3721–3739 RSC .
E. Armstrong, W. Khunsin, M. Osiak, M. Blömker, C. M. S. Torres and C. O'Dwyer, Small, 2014 DOI:10.1002/smll.201303616 .
A. Stein, B. E. Wilson and S. G. Rudisill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2763–2803 RSC .
M. Osiak, E. Armstrong and C. O'Dwyer, ECS Trans., 2013, 53, 85–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-l. Ma, Z.-y. Cao, H.-g. Wang, X.-l. Huang, L.-m. Wang and X.-b. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8538–8542 CAS .
G. Collins, M. Blomker, M. Osiak, J. D. Holmes, M. Bredol and C. O'Dwyer, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4312–4320 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Sakamoto and B. Dunn, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2859–2861 RSC .
L. Li, U. Steiner and S. Mahajan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7131–7134 RSC .
N. S. Ergang, J. C. Lytle, H. Yan and A. Stein, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1989–A1995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, S. Sokolov, J. C. Lytle, A. Stein, F. Zhang and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1102–A1107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qu, L. Fu, X. Zhan, D. Samuelis, J. Maier, L. Li, S. Tian, Z. Li and Y. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3985–3990 CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188–1194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, Z. Tang, Z. Zhang and W. Shen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2005, 40, 2039–2046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Doherty, R. A. Caruso, B. M. Smarsly and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2895–2903 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Zakhidov, R. H. Baughman, Z. Iqbal, C. Cui, I. Khayrullin, S. O. Dantas, J. Marti and V. G. Ralchenko, Science, 1998, 282, 897–901 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Yu, S. Kang, S. B. Yoon and G. Chai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 9382–9383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Lee, J. C. Lytle, N. S. Ergang, S. M. Oh and A. Stein, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 547–556 CrossRef CAS .
F. B. Su, X. S. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. H. Zeng, Z. C. Zhou and J. Y. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20200–20206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Y. Kang, S.-O. Kim, Y. J. Chae, J. K. Lee and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 1192–1198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, F. Li, N. S. Ergang and A. Stein, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1702–1710 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Wang, N. S. Ergang, M. A. Al-Daous and A. Stein, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6805–6813 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stein, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 262–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Lytle, H. W. Yan, N. S. Ergang, W. H. Smyrl and A. Stein, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1616–1622 RSC .
Z. Wang, M. A. Fierke and A. Stein, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A658–A663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nishikawa, K. Dokko, K. Kinoshita, S.-W. Woo and K. Kanamura, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 726–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-Q. Liu, H. Wu, T. Li, L. R. Grabstanowicz, K. Amine and T. Xu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6422–6429 RSC .
A. Esmanski and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1999–2010 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang and P. V. Braun, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2778–2783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Yu and P. V. Braun, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 277–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Pikul, H. Gang Zhang, J. Cho, P. V. Braun and W. P. King, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1732 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Long, B. Dunn, D. R. Rolison and H. S. White, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4463–4492 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bing, Y. Yuan, Y. Wang and Z. W. Fu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A101–A104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Sorensen, S. J. Barry, H. K. Jung, J. R. Rondinelli, J. T. Vaughey and K. R. Poeppelmeier, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 482–489 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Woo, K. Dokko and K. Kanamura, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 53, 79–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-j. Cui, H.-j. Liu, C.-x. Wang and Y.-y. Xia, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1587–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nakano, K. Dokko, M. Hara, Y. Isshiki and K. Kanamura, Ionics, 2008, 14, 173–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tonti, M. J. Torralvo, E. Enciso, I. Sobrados and J. Sanz, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4783–4790 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, X. Yang, C. Chen, Y. Zhu and C. Li, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 1578–1583 RSC .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Conway, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 1249–1258 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Conway, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Polleux, J. Lim and B. Dunn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14925–14931 CAS .
H. Lindström, S. Södergren, A. Solbrand, H. Rensmo, J. Hjelm, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7717–7722 CrossRef .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, S. H. Tolbert and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 146–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vu, Y. Q. Qian and A. Stein, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1056–1085 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zukalova, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1248–1255 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Li, Z. L. Tang and Z. T. Zhang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 418, 506–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Li, M. H. Yu, F. X. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Liang, J. Xiao, C. X. Wang, Y. X. Tong and G. W. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4 Search PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Toupin, T. Brousse and D. Belanger, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3184–3190 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6423–6435 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Lee, K.-H. Choi, W.-S. Choi, Y. H. Kwon, H.-R. Jung, H.-C. Shin and J. Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2414–2423 CAS .
S. Shi, C. Xu, C. Yang, Y. Chen, J. Liu and F. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2598 Search PubMed .
T. Kennedy, E. Mullane, H. Geaney, M. Osiak, C. O'Dwyer and K. M. Ryan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 716–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. L. Spare, U. S. P. Office, ed. Apple Inc., US Pat.,  2012 .
H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, Science, 2008, 319, 737–738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Jeong, L. Hu, H. Wu, S. W. Lee and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 13013–13018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Singh, C. Galande, A. Miranda, A. Mathkar, W. Gao, A. L. Mohana Reddy, A. Vlad and P. M. Ajayan, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 481 Search PubMed .
N. Singh, C. Galande, A. Miranda, A. Mathkar, W. Gao, A. L. M. Reddy, A. Vlad and P. M. Ajayan, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 481 Search PubMed .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-Gonzalez and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 CAS .
B. Liu, T. Luo, G. Mu, X. Wang, D. Chen and G. Shen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8051–8058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Scrosati and J. Garche, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2419–2430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Michal Osiak	Originally from Poland, Michal arrived in Ireland in 2005 and received a First Class Honours B.Sc. in Applied Physics from the University of Limerick in 2010. He is currently working towards his Ph.D. at the University College Cork. His research focuses on the development of porous tin oxide based Li-ion battery anodes. In particular, he is investigating inverted opal based electrodes and the influence of ordered porosity and structure on reversible Li intercalation and pseudocapacitive behaviour.
Hugh Geaney	Hugh Geaney received a B.Sc. in Industrial Chemistry and Ph.D. in Chemistry from the University of Limerick in 2008 and 2012 respectively. His Ph.D. focused on the growth of silicon and germanium nanowires aimed at energy storage applications. Since 2012 he has been a postdoctoral researcher in the Applied Nanoscience Group at the University College Cork. His current research focus is on the development of novel catalyst materials for Li–air battery cathodes.
Eileen Armstrong	Eileen Armstrong received a First Class Honours B.Sc. in Applied Physics from the University of Limerick, Ireland in 2010, and was the recipient of the Institute of Physics Earnshaw Medal in 2010. She is currently pursuing a Ph.D., funded by the Irish Research Council, at the University College Cork. Her work focuses on advanced opal-template growth methods, with the aim of developing three-dimensionally ordered macro-porous cathodes for use in lithium-ion batteries as well as optical spectroscopy techniques for structural monitoring through photonic band-gap changes in 3D porous battery materials.
Colm O'Dwyer	Colm O'Dwyer received his B.S. degree in Applied Physics and Ph.D. degree in Physics from the University of Limerick, Ireland in 1999 and 2003, respectively. After postdoctoral research in nanotechnology and nanolithography using ultracold atom beams at the University Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, he conducted work on nanoelectronics/photonics at the Tyndall National Institute, Cork, Ireland. From 2008 to 2012, he was a Science Foundation Ireland Stokes Lecturer on nanomaterials at the University of Limerick. He is currently at the Department of Chemistry, University College Cork and Principal Investigator at the Tyndall National Institute, leading the Applied Nanoscience Group.

 	Fig. 1  Structure and principle of operation of a Li ion battery.	 

 	Fig. 2  Diagram illustrating the Li ion capacity and electrochemical reduction potentials with respect to Li metal for a range of cathode and anode materials.11	 
LiC6 − e− ↔ 6C + Li+

 	Fig. 3  Calculated lithium insertion voltage versus theoretical capacity for several thousand compounds. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Materials Research Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (Left) A range of different oxide, sulfide and phosphate crystal structures capable of Li intercalation into various regions of their crystal structure. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Intech Open. (Right) Common intercalation compounds as a function of decreasing calculated chemical potential of oxygen in their charged state. A lower oxygen chemical potential is deemed safer. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Materials Research Society.	 
MaXb + (bn)Li ↔ aM + bLinX

 	Fig. 5  (a–c) Schematics of SEI layer formation and stable cycling of double-walled SiO2@Si nanotubes. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. Schematic changes occurring in (d) Si thin film. (e) Si nanoparticles. (f) Si nanowires. Adapted from ref. 67 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  Constant current line-sweeps and cyclic performance for (a) carbon coated structures. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Carbon supported Si nanostructures. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

Si	NWs	4277 (C/20)	3500 (20)	
67

Si@SiOx/C	NPs	1600	1100 (60)	
91

Si@C	Mesoporous CS NWs	3163 C/5	2751 (80)	
84

Si	3D porous	2820 (C/5)	2780 (100)	
92

C–Si	Core–shell NWs	700 (C/15)	1600 (47)	
93

Si–C	Carbon coated NWs	3344	1326 (40)	
94

Si	Nanotubes	3648 (C/5)	2800 (200)	
95

Si-graphene	Composite	2158 (C)	1168 (30)	
96

Si-CNT	Composite	2300 (C/10)	1400 (50)	
85

Si	NWs	4000 (C/10)	1600 (50)	
97

Si/C	Nanocomposite	2000 (C/20)	1700 (100)	
98

Si	Nanotubes	3200 (C/20)	2800 (50)	
99

Cu–Si	Nanocables	1500 (C/3)	1400 (100)	
100

B-doped Si	NWs	3354 (C/10)	1500 (250)	
101

SiO2@Si	Nanotubes	1780 (C/5)	1600 (2000)	
66


 	Fig. 7  (a) Cycle life of Ge nanocrystals. (b) Cycle life of thin film Ge at 1000 C charge and 1 C discharge. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from The Electrochemical Society.	 
SnO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → Sn + 2Li2O
Sn + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixSn (0 < x < 4.4)

 	Fig. 8  
In situ TEM observation of the lithiation process of SnO2 NWs. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–d) SEM images of CoO–Sn; (e) cycle performance of the CO–Sn composite. (f) Rate performance of the CoO composite. Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagram detailing formation and aggregation of Sn nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

SnO2–In2O3	NWs	2000 (C/5)	780 (10)	
121

SnO2-SWCNT	Composite	1399	1000 (100)	
142

SnO2-MWCNT	Composite	1500 (C/10)	404 (20)	
143

Sn–Co–C	Composite	451 (C/8)	486 (40)	
126

Sn–C	Composite	600 (C/8)	311 (200)	
144

Sn–Co	Composite	1200 (C/2)	845 (50)	
138

SnO2–C	GNS–NP composite	1800 (C/15)	570 (30)	
145

Sn–C	Composite	806 (C/10)	737 (200)	
146

Sn–Au	Composite	1200 (C/10)	600 (150)	
147

SnO2–C	CNT composite	1466 (C/5)	402 (100)	
122

SnO2	Nanocrystal	2156 (C/10)	550 (20)	
148

Sn–SnO2	NWs	2400 (C/8)	845 (100 (ref. 149))	
149

SnO2–C	NPs	1200 (C/2)	492 (100)	
150

SnO2	Mesoporous	960 (C/6)	600 (100)	
151

Sn–C	Nano Sn-hard carbon	580	300 (30)	
152

SnO2	Mesoporous-NW	1400 (C/5)	675 (50)	
153

SnO2	Nanosheets	1860 (C/10)	593 (20)	
154

Sn–C	3D porous	1425 (C/20)	638 (315)	
155

Sn–C	RGO–Sn	1572 (C/8)	710 (50)	
156

SnO2–C	Graphene composite	1100 (C/8)	872 (200)	
62


 	Fig. 11  AAO templating mechanism. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Nanocasting of mesoporous electrode materials. (a) Nanocasting process in mesoporous silica. (b) TEM image of mesoporous TiO2. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from the German Chemical Society. (c) Nanocasting process in mesoporous silica SBA-15. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (d) TEM image of mesoporous Si–C nanowire formed from the SBA-15 template.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagram detailing preparation of an inverted opal electrode. Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Through various mechanisms, the arrangement of spheres dictates the periodic porosity of the resulting inverted opal structure.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a–d) Schematic diagram detailing formation of V2O5 IO cathodes. (e) Rate performance of the V2O5 IO cathodes. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Cycling behaviour of solid and porous LiMn2O4 electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM image of carbon inverted opals. Carbon inverted opals experience much less polarization than bulk carbon of the same composition. Adapted from ref. 188 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  SEM images showing morphologies of SnO2 IOs at different stages of charging. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) CV for hollow FTO. (b) CV for porous FTO. (c) Initial charge and discharge curves for porous FTO. (d) Cyclic performance for porous FTO. Reproduced from ref. 197 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Loss of electrical contact during cycling. (b) Good electrical contact between an Si film and Ni substrate. (c) Bicontinuous bulk anode consisting of a silicon thin film on a 3D porous Ni scaffold. (d) Fabrication procedure for the bicontinuous electrode. Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 20  Ultrafast discharge of the lithiated MnO2 cathode. Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic diagram of the microbattery fabrication procedure. (b) Microbattery design. (c) SEM cross-section of the microbattery. (d) Top-down SEM image of the microbattery interdigitated electrodes. (e) Constant current line sweeps at different rates. (f) Rate performance of the microbatteries. Adapted from ref. 201 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

V2O5	IO	—	—	
202

LiNiO2	IO	—	—
SnO2	IO	—	—	
194

C	IO	299 (15.2 mA g−1)	—	
188

Sn–C	Sn@C IO	348 (15.2 mA g−1)	—
C	Graphitic C IO	326 (C/10)	320 (60)	
189

Sn–C	Sn@C	415 (C/10)	375 (60)
TiO2–C	TiO2@C	158 (50 μA cm−2)	40 (15)	
203

Li4Ti5O12	IO	152 (6.3μA cm−2)	145 (70)	
204

Li4Ti5O12	IO	173 (C/10)	120 (100)	
205

FePO4	IO	137 (C/10)	110 (50)	
206

LiMn2O4–Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3	IO composite	64 (−)	—	
207

LiMn2O4	IO	—	—	
208

Sn–C	Sn@C	1500 (100 mA g−1)	96 (100)	
195

Si–C	Si@C	3180 (−)	—	
191

LiFePO4	IO	115 (5 C)	120 (50)	
185

Si	a-Si:h IO	2500 (C/10)	1750 (145)	
198

nc-Si IO	3000 (C/10)	0 (15)
Si–C	nc-Si–C IO	2400 (C/10)	0 (12)
a-Si–C IO	2406 (C/10)	2133 (145)
Ni–Sn	Ni–Sn composite	315 (50 mA g−1)	∼100 (100)	
196

LiMn2O4	IO	—	—	
182

MnO2 @ Ni	Thin film/IO bicontinuous	74 (1114 C)	—	
200

FeF3	IO	540 (50 mA g−1)	190 (30)	
176

Si @Ni	Bicontinuous IO	3568 (C/20)	2660 (100)	
199

SnO2–C	SnO2@C	1659 (0.5 A g−1)	715 (500)	
90

TiO2	IO	442 (25 mA g−1)	117 (200)	
209

C	IO	359 (−)	315 (20)	
190

i = aνb	(1)
	(2)
i = νCdA	(3)

 	Fig. 22  (a) Morphology of mesoporous α-MoO3 with highly oriented crystalline walls. Low-magnification bright-field TEM micrograph. Inset: a higher magnification micrograph. (b) AFM image of the top surface. Inset: a tilted AFM image with height variations in the 1–5 nm range. (c) Cyclic voltammograms for mesoporous amorphous and crystalline films of MoO3 systems at a sweep rate of 1 mV s−1. (c) Kinetic behaviour of the various mesoporous films. The total amount of charge storage (gravimetrically normalized) as a function of charging time for each film. Adapted from ref. 215 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) CV curves of the amorphous Ni(OH)2 nanospheres at various scan rates in 1 M KOH. (b) Specific capacitance of the amorphous Ni(OH)2 nanospheres as a function of the scan rates based on the CV curves. (c) CV curves of the blank electrode at various scan rates in 1 M KOH. Reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration showing the preparation of an SnO2@C inverted opal electrode. (b) Li-ion battery performances of SnO2@C inverse opal electrodes.90	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Photographs of the screen-printed asymmetric nanosheets-based supercapacitor electrodes of various designs and (b) Ragone plots of MS/GA and MS/MS supercapacitors compared with other MnO2 based asymmetric supercapacitors in the literature (based on the total mass of active materials).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
