Hollow/porous nanostructures derived from nanoscale metal–organic frameworks towards high performance anodes for lithium-ion batteries  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR05192G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR05192G
(Feature Article)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1236-1257Hollow/porous nanostructures derived from nanoscale metal–organic frameworks towards high performance anodes for lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Lin 
            Hu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Qianwang 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *ab
aHigh Magnetic Field Laboratory, Hefei Institutes of Physical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, China
bHefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and Department of Materials Science & Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China. E-mail: cqw@ustc.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 551 63603005;   Tel: +86 551 63603005
Received 
      29th September 2013
    , Accepted 6th November 2013First published on 8th November 2013AbstractLithium-ion batteries (LIBs), owing to their high energy density, light weight, and long cycle life, have shown considerable promise for storage devices. The successful utilization of LIBs depends strongly on the preparation of nanomaterials with outstanding lithium storage properties. Recent progress has demonstrated that hollow/porous nanostructured oxides are very attractive candidates for LIBs anodes due to their high storage capacities. Here, we aim to provide an overview of nanoscale metal–organic frameworks (NMOFs)-templated synthesis of hollow/porous nanostructured oxides and their LIBs applications. By choosing some typical NMOFs as examples, we present a comprehensive summary of synthetic procedures for nanostructured oxides, such as binary, ternary and composite oxides. Hollow/porous structures are readily obtained due to volume loss and release of internally generated gas molecules during the calcination of NMOFs in air. Interestingly, the NMOFs-derived hollow/porous structures possess several special features: pores generated from gas molecules release will connect to each other, which are distinct from “dead pores”; pore size often appears to be <10 nm; in terms of surface chemistry, the pore surface is hydrophobic. These structural features are believed to be the most critical factors that determine LIBs’ performance. Indeed, it has been shown that these NMOFs-derived hollow/porous oxides exhibit excellent electrochemical performance as anode materials for LIBs, including high storage capacity, good cycle stability, and so on. For example, a high charge capacity of 1465 mA h g−1 at a rate of 300 mA g−1 was observed after 50 cycles for NMOFs-derived Co3O4 porous nanocages, which corresponds to 94.09% of the initial capacity (1557 mA h g−1), indicating excellent stability. The capacity of NMOFs-derived Co3O4 is higher than that of other Co3O4 nanostructures obtained by a conventional two-step route, including nanosheets (1450 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1), nanobelts (1400 mA h g−1 at 40 mA g−1) and nanoflowers (694 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1). The capacity is also better than Co3O4 octahedra obtained by a one-step hydrothermal method (946 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1). In this review, we will summarize the recent research advances on NMOFs-derived hollow/porous oxides as LIBs anodes. The enhanced lithium storage properties have been discussed in relation to their special structural parameters. Moreover, remarks on the current challenges and perspectives for future NMOFs applications are proposed. Through this systematic review, we aim to stress the importance of NMOFs templates for the fabrication of hollow/porous functional materials that would result in improved physicochemical properties and provide insights to guide future research for LIBs applications.Lin HuLin Hu received his BSc degree in AnQing Normal University in 2006. He received his PhD in nanochemistry under the supervision of Prof. Qian-wang Chen in the Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China. His current research interests include the synthesis of nanoscale metal–organic framework and hollow/porous nanostructured functional materials for energy conversion and storage applications. In July 2012, Dr Hu started his postdoctoral fellowship in the Hefei Institutes of Physical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.Qian-Wang ChenProfessor Qianwang Chen received his PhD degree in condensed matter physics (1995) from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) and was appointed to the faculty of USTC. Later, he worked in the Institute of Hydrothermal Chemistry, Kochi, Japan and the Solar Energy Institute of Hannover, and as a visiting researcher in the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He was appointed as a full professor in 2000 at the USTC. His current research interests focus on design and synthesis of nanostructured materials and their applications in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, catalysis.
1. Introduction
The energy issue is the most important topic in our society due to the development of the economy, which requires cost-effective, efficient and environmentally benign energy storage devices that can power energy-demanding areas.1,2 Nowadays, LIBs have been employed for large-scale applications in various fields, such as hybrid and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, solar and wind electricity generation systems and so on. To meet the requirements of these applications, further improvements in terms of energy power, densities and cycle time are required. The research on anode materials with superior capacity has been a hot field in recent years.3–13 Among various anode materials, oxides have been proven to be possible candidates because of their high theoretical capacities, widespread availability, and environmental benignity. However, the rapid capacity fading which is mainly caused by structural reorganization and volumetric variation upon charge–discharge has impeded their further development. Currently, it is suggested that the rapid capacity fading of oxides could be possibly overcome by making proper nanostructures (hollow/porous structure, suitable pore size, surface feature, and so on) with the capability to sustain structural disintegration and promote lithium storage reactions. Many previous results prove that increasing the porosity could be an effective way to improve the lithium storage properties of the materials, as the void space provided by these pores can buffer the volume variation during the charge–discharge cycles, leading to enhanced capacity. Pore size is also an important factor to determine the lithium storage capacity. If the size is too large, it is difficult to maintain inter-particle contact, resulting in a decrease of electrical conductivity. If the pore size is too small, the liquid surface tension could prevent the electrolyte diffusing into the inner region of the materials. In addition to the porosity, the hollow structure often provides a much higher specific surface area and other particular features, which is beneficial for energy devices because the reaction/interaction between the devices and the interacting media can be significantly enhanced due to the sufficient space for lattice expansion and electrolyte diffusion. Inspired by their special properties, many efforts have been dedicated to the rational design of hollow/porous structures with well-defined morphologies, and versatile synthetic strategies have been developed recently to generate such structures, including conventional templating methods, the Kirkendall effect,14 ionic exchange,15 self-template-directed growth16 and so on. Although much progress has been made in the synthesis of hollow structures, the shells of the resulting hollow architectures from these approaches are usually primarily nonporous. The obtained hollow architectures with a porous shell might be more attractive than closed hollow structures in some aspects. For example, the porous shell is more convenient for Li+ ions diffusing into the inner region of anode materials due to the large amounts of pores in their walls, which could effectively increase materials utilization. Also, pores obtained by some strategies (such as wet chemistry methods) often exhibit hydrophilic properties due to the existence of many hydrophilic groups, which could hinder electrolyte (organic phase) diffusion when the materials are used as anodes. On the other hand, some reports have shown that the cycleability of oxides is strongly influenced by their morphology. Therefore, some research efforts have prepared novel nanostructures with particular shapes, which has been proved as an effective method to improve the electrochemical properties of oxide anodes.17–22 In this regard, anisotropic hollow/porous structures with nonspherical shapes and complex hierarchical architectures are particularly interesting for many applications. However, conventional templating techniques to create nonspherical hollow structures still suffer from many difficulties, ranging from the formation of uniform coatings around high-curvature surfaces to the paucity of nonspherical templates available.23,24 Based on the above analysis, new developments in the field of synthesis hollow/porous oxides with suitable structural parameters are believed to hold the key to further breakthroughs in LIBs applications.
MOFs contain metal ions linked by coordinated ligands into an infinite array, which is described as a new class of porous materials.25–30 Bulk phase MOFs have shown promise for many applications including gas storage, catalysis, nonlinear optics, separations, sensing, and light-harvesting.31–36 However, it is found that the shape and size are important factors to fine tune the properties of the material. Therefore, nanometre sized materials of MOFs often exhibit remarkable size- and shape dependent physical and chemical properties, which cannot be observed in their bulk analogues.37,38 Precise control over the nanocrystal structure, size, shape and chemical composition not only allows one to observe unique properties of the MOFs nanostructures but also allows the tuning of their chemical and physical properties as desired. In recent years, NMOFs have been widely synthesized by various strategies, such as nanoprecipitation, solvothermal, reverse microemulsion, and surfactant-templated solvothermal reactions.39–49 In particular, M3II[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O (M = Mn, Co, Cd, Zn, Fe) particles have been obtained at room temperature in water–ethanol systems.50–52 These NMOFs not only have been explored for gas storage, biomedical imaging and drug delivery,53–59 but also employed as templates/precursors for preparation of nanomaterials.60–63 Recently, a new burgeoning direction in the field of NMOFs is their use as ‘precursors’ of new nanostructured materials, primarily via a thermolysis procedure. As compared to other templates/precursors, NMOFs offer distinct advantages because of their unique structure and porosity, which provides a tremendous opportunity to develop a series of highly tailorable functional nanomaterials for their possible applications. By choosing NMOFs with special morphologies and under suitable experimental conditions, obtaining oxides with desired morphologies will become possible. Very recently, our group and others have successfully fabricated the hollow structure with porous shells (nonspherical shapes, from cubes to polyhedron) using NMOFs as templates/precursors. This strategy has proved to be simple, inexpensive, tunable and scalable. In addition to hollow/porous features, the NMOFs-derived oxides also often demonstrate other special structural features, such as large surface area, inter-connected pores, hierarchical pore sizes and a hydrophobic surface. Most importantly, when evaluated as anode materials for LIBs, these NMOFs-derived hollow/porous oxides exhibit excellent electrochemical performance for LIBs due to the above-mentioned structural features. Despite the great progress achieved so far, the research on the synthesis of inorganic functional materials derived from NMOFs and their applications in energy conversion and storage is still at its very early stage. Moreover, up to now, no reviews have been published to focus on the high performance of NMOFs-derived hollow/porous oxides in LIBs applications. Therefore, a comprehensive review of the published literature is greatly needed to further promote LIBs development based on NMOFs-derived hollow/porous oxides. Our emphasis will be on oxides which have been receiving increasing interest. We first highlight the recent NMOFs-templated synthetic strategies towards various oxides with different nanostructures. In the following section, we will describe the high performance of these NMOFs-derived hollow/porous oxides when used as anodes for LIBs, and the underlying mechanism will be also discussed. Finally, we briefly presage the future opportunities that NMOFs face.
2. NMOFs-templated synthesis of hollow/porous oxides
Among different synthesis methods for the preparation of oxides, there is a two-step route to fabricate porous oxide nanostructures. The precursor compounds (such as hydroxide and carbonate) are synthesized in the first step, and then the precursor is calcinated to obtain oxides with the conserved morphology of the precursor. For example, cobalt hydroxide has been calcinated to prepare Co3O4 nanoplates.64 Yu et al. reported an approach to obtain porous Co3O4 particles by decomposition of CoCO3 crystals.65 Co(CO3)0.5(OH)0.11·H2O was also employed to obtain mesoporous and single-crystal Co3O4 nanobelt array.66 However, the synthesis methods of these precursors for oxide nanomaterials involve complex processes which need a high reaction temperature (hydrothermal/solvothermal methods). In particular, the composite oxides are difficult to fabricate by this strategy. NMOFs are alternative candidates for the synthesis of hollow/porous nanostructured oxides. By calcining the NMOFs in air at moderate temperature, the metal ions in the NMOFs can be transformed into metal oxides, and the C and other elements (such as N, H) are oxidized into gas molecules. Hollow/porous oxides with porous shell and inter-connected pores could be readily produced due to gas molecule release during the calcination process, as shown from Scheme 1. Several advantages should be noted as compared to the traditional two-step route. First, most NMOFs could be obtained at relatively low temperatures. In particular, some Prussian Blue Analogue (PBA) nanoparticles can be synthesized by a simple procedure at room temperature. Second, this NMOFs-templated strategy is more suitable for fabricating composite oxides at the nanoscale via using a NMOF precursor which contains two different metal ions. Third, by changing the metal ions in MOFs, various kinds of hollow/porous oxides will be obtained, indicating the versatile features. In this part, we will describe the NMOFs-templated strategy for fabrication of hollow/porous oxides listed in Table 1. The detailed mechanism and structural characteristics will be discussed deeply.
 Scheme 1  Schematic view of the direct conversion of NMOFs to oxides by heating in air. Interestingly, a hollow structure will be obtained if the NMOF contains one kind metal ion, while a porous structure can only be fabricated when the NMOF contains different metal ions. This result may be attributed to the distinct diffusion rates of different metal ions during the heating process. 
Table 1 A list of NMOFs and NMOFs-derived hollow/porous oxides




NMOFs
Calcination temperature (°C)
Oxides
Morphologies
Synthesis strategies
Ref.




Co3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes
400
Co3O4
Nanocage
Calcination

67



Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes
400
MnxCo3−xO4
Porous nanocube
Calcination

68



Fe3[Co(CN)6]2 nanospheres
400
FexCo3−xO4
Porous nanosphere
Calcination

69



Prussian blue (PB) microcubes
350–650
Fe2O3
Hierarchical microbox
Calcination

70



PB microcubes
350
Fe2O3
Porous nanocube
Calcination

71



PB hollow nanoparticles
250–650
Fe2O3
Hollow nanocube
Calcination

72



MIL-88-Fe spindles
380
α-Fe2O3
Porous spindle
Calcination

73



MOF-199-Cu
550
CuO
Porous polyhedron
Calcination

74



[Cu3(btc)2]n
350
CuO/Cu2O
Hollow polyhedron
Calcination

75



PB microcubes as the template
—
Fe2O3/SnO2etc.
Microbox
Template-engaged reactions

76



M–MSB–M (MSB = metallo Schiff base)
450–550
Co3O4/ZnO etc.
Ball in ball
Cation exchange/calcination

77



Co3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes as the template
400
SiO2
Hollow nanocube
Coating/calcination

78



MIL-101-Fe polyhedrons as the template
550
TiO2
Porous polyhedron
Coating/calcination

79





2.1. Metal oxide and binary metal oxides
The PBA of chemical formula M3II[MIII(CN)6]2·nH2O is constructed from octahedral MIII(CN)63− complexes, which are bridged into a simple cubic lattice by M2+ ions (Fig. 1). Recently, M3II[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O (M = Co, Mn, Fe, Zn, Cd) nanoparticles have been obtained at room temperature using K3[Co(CN)6] and metal salt as starting materials. Surfactants (polyethylene pyrrole and dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid sodium) and solvents (ethanol and water) are employed to adjust the growth habit of the nanocrystals. Nanoparticles with various morphologies are fabricated, including nanocubes, truncated nanocubes, octahedrons, spheres and so on. By annealing these nanoparticles in air, a series of metal oxides can be obtained, with their original shapes maintained. As can be observed (Fig. 2a), the Co3[Co(CN)6]2 nanoparticles are prepared on a large scale and show uniformity in both size and shape. Fig. 2b and the inset further reveal that the morphology of the nanoparticles can be described as truncated nanocubes. Based on a statistical evaluation of at least 20 nanoparticles, the mean particle diameter was deduced to be 100 nm. Co3O4 porous nanocages can be fabricated based on the Kirkendall effect, which involves the thermal decomposition of Co3[Co(CN)6]2 truncated nanocubes in air at 400 °C.67 As shown in Fig. 2c and d, the Co3O4 product is porous with no aggregation and still maintains the original morphology, which can be described as a nanocage structure. The Co3O4 nanocages are about 60 nm in diameter, that is, smaller than the original Co3[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O truncated nanocubes. The particle size reduction was mainly caused by removing the C–N parts by calcination. Owing to the volume loss and release of internally generated CO2 and NxOy in the process of interdiffusion, Co3O4 nanocages possess a surface area of 66 m2 g−1, higher than that of mesoporous Co3O4 nanobelts derived from α-Co(OH)2 (30 m2 g−1),80 a porous shell, small size (60 nm) and a small amount of carbon. This synthesis process is similar with a conversion from metal sulfides and selenides to their corresponding oxides, which is based on the combination of the Kirkendall effect, volume loss, and gas release.81 It is suggested that a thin intermediate shell may be formed on the surface of the Co3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes at the start of the thermal oxidation process. This thin layer acts as an interface to separate the inner Co3[Co(CN)6]2 from the outside atmospheric oxygen. However, the interface consists of an intermediate shell with lots of vacancies, which allows the outward diffusion of Co3[Co(CN)6]2 through the vacancies. Moreover, the diffusion rate of the inner Co3[Co(CN)6]2 is greater than that of atmospheric oxygen during the oxidation reactions, voids are thus generated, which eventually results in a hollow cavity (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 1  Porous framework of Co3[Co(CN)6]2. 
 Fig. 2  (a and b) SEM images of the as-prepared Co3[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O particles at different magnifications. (c and d) SEM images of the Co3O4 nanocages at different magnifications. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 67. 
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the procedure used to fabricate porous Co3O4 nanocages. (a) Co3[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O nanocubes used as solid precursors. (b) Formation of Co3O4 at the shell of Co3[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O in the thermal oxidation process. (c) continual growth of Co3O4 from Co3[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O, which involves the non-equilibrium inter-diffusion, volume loss, and release of internally born CO2 and NxOy, and eventual formation of the Co3O4 hollow architectures with a porous shell. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 67. 
Among the manganese spinels, the physicochemical properties of MnxCo3−xO4 are highly affected by the composition, structural parameters, distribution, and oxidation state of the cations, which depend greatly on the synthesis conditions, such as the synthesis temperature.82 The traditional synthesis of spinel compounds generally follows a solid-state route that involves grinding and firing of a mixture of oxides, nitrates, or carbonates, which require elevated temperatures or prolonged process times to overcome the diffusional barriers. Therefore, these methods are not consistent with the low cost idea. Chen et al. recently reported a facile and rapid methodology to prepare the nanocrystalline spinel MnxCo3−xO4 with irregular morphology at room temperature.83 On the other hand, MnxCo3−xO4 prepared by the traditional ceramic route possesses large particle size and low specific surface area, which limits its electrochemical activity. It is reported that CoMn2O4 only exhibited a capacity of 515 mA h g−1 with retention of about 64% at a current of 69 mA g−1 after 50 cycles.84 Foam-like MnxCo3−xO4 porous nanocubes have been successfully synthesized by a pyrolysis-induced transformation of Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 in air at 400 °C (Fig. 4).68 The facile solid-state diffusion and interfacial contact will be enhanced during the process of calcination because of the short distance from Mn to Co in the crystal structure and the porous framework. In addition, the uniformly arranged Mn and Co atoms in the Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 crystal structure also favor lattice construction for MnxCo3−xO4 due to enhanced reaction kinetics. These structural advantages result in the relatively low phase formation temperature. Foam-like MnxCo3−xO4 porous nanocubes possess a high surface area (129 m2 g−1) and small size (200 nm), which are different from the spinel materials with small surface area and large size (several micrometers) obtained by traditional high temperature firing methods (600–1000 °C).85 In particular, the surface area is even slightly higher than that of irregular MnxCo3−xO4 nanocrystallites obtained at room temperature (112 and 122 m2 g−1).83
 Fig. 4  SEM images of Mn3[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O nanocubes and MnxCo3−xO4 porous nanocubes at different magnifications. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 68. 
Another binary metal oxide, FexCo3−xO4 nanoporous particles, was prepared by the pyrolysis of Fe[Co(CN)6]2, which demonstrates a relatively high surface area of 81 m2 g−1.69 As can be observed from Fig. 5a and b, the Fe[Co(CN)6]2 products turn out to have a good dispersity with a large number of spherical-like nanoparticles. More interestingly, as shown in Fig. 5c and d, the FexCo3−xO4 product also consists of many nanoparticles without serious aggregation. The morphology of FexCo3−xO4 has undergone negligible change, compared to that of Fe[Co(CN)6]2. When evaluated as an adsorbent for Congo red in water, the FexCo3−xO4 nanoporous particles not only exhibit a high adsorption capacity (84 mg g−1) for dye removal, but are also feasible for fast recyclable treatment via a simple magnetic separation, suggesting their potential application in water treatment. The excellent adsorption ability of FexCo3−xO4 nanoporous particles is attributed to the beneficial features of well interconnected pores and the large surface area, which facilitates dye molecules accessing the inner regions of the materials with sufficient active sites.
 Fig. 5  SEM images of as-prepared Fe3[Co(CN)6]2 particles (a and b) and FexCo3−xO4 nanoporous particles (c and d). Reproduced with permission of Elsevier from ref. 69. 
Fe2O3 microboxes with hierarchically structured shells have been synthesized simply via annealing Prussian blue (PB) microcubes in air.70 By utilizing simultaneous oxidative decomposition of PB microcubes and crystal growth of iron oxide shells, the scalable synthesis of anisotropic hollow structures has been realized. The various shell architectures are fabricated by adjusting the decomposition temperature. This strategy for synthesizing Fe2O3 microboxes with various shell structures is schematically depicted in Fig. 6. First, an improved method for the synthesis of highly uniform PB microcubes was developed. The subsequent thermal transformation process to convert PB microcubes into Fe2O3 microboxes can be generally divided into three stages. In stage I, which occurs below 350 °C, a large temperature gradient existing along the radial direction leads to the transformation of PB into iron oxide in the near-surface region. During the thermally induced oxidative decomposition, the continuous decomposition of the PB microcubes is accompanied by outward gas flow, which eventually results in the formation of a relatively dense iron oxide shell and a large interior cavity. With an increase in the annealing temperature to 550 °C (stage II), the Fe2O3 microboxes with a relatively smooth and dense shell are transformed into highly porous microboxes constructed from enlarged Fe2O3 nanoparticles as a result of crystal growth. Interestingly, further increasing the annealing temperature to 650 °C (stage III) causes the transformation of the highly porous shell into a well-defined hierarchically structured shell consisting of Fe2O3 nanoplatelets. The Fe2O3 microboxes obtained at different temperatures with distinct morphologies and structures are displayed in Fig. 7. At a relatively low temperature of 350 °C, the Fe2O3 microboxes retained well the size and cubic shape of the PB precursor particles (Fig. 7a–c). As shown in Fig. 7d–f, Fe2O3 microboxes with highly porous shells were obtained at 550 °C. The porous microboxes were constructed of Fe2O3 nanoparticles with sizes of tens of nanometers, as shown in the magnified FESEM image, while the hollow cubic structure was perfectly retained, as shown in the TEM image. After calcination at an elevated temperature of 650 °C, the porous shell of the microboxes further evolved into a complex hierarchical structure consisting of sheetlike Fe2O3 subunits (Fig. 7g–i). It is worth noting that even after annealing at 650 °C, the cubic hollow structure still remained with no apparent breaks observed, indicating the excellent structural stability of the Fe2O3 microboxes. Also, porous Fe2O3 nanocubes composed of clustered Fe2O3 nanoparticles with sizes of several nanometers have been synthesized by decomposition of PB nanocubes at a temperature of 350 °C with a heating rate of 1 °C min−1 for 6 h in air (Fig. 8).71
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of a hollow Fe2O3 microbox formation and the evolution of the shell structure with increasing calcination temperature. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 70. 
 Fig. 7  (a, b, d, e, g and h) FESEM and (c, f and i) TEM images of hollow Fe2O3 microboxes obtained at (a–c) 350 °C, (d–f) 550 °C, and (g–i) 650 °C, respectively. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 70. 
 Fig. 8  (a and b) TEM images of porous Fe2O3 nanocubes. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 71. 
Y. Yamauchi et al. also reported iron oxides with hollow interiors obtained by calcination of PB hollow nanoparticles in air.72 Unlike the above examples, the hollow particles are employed as the precursor in this study. Two kinds of hollow PB nanocubes with different-sized internal cavities are employed as the initial precursors. For comparison, PB nanocubes without hollow structures were also used. First, large PB nanocubes (LPB), small hollow PB nanocubes (SHPB) and large hollow PB nanocubes (LHPB) are prepared under heating conditions. Nanoporous iron oxide particles were obtained after the thermal treatment. Surprisingly, the crystalline phases of the obtained iron oxides and their crystalline grain sizes can be controlled precisely by adjusting the applied calcination temperature and the volumes of internal hollow cavities of PB particles (Fig. 9 and 10). As a result, pure α-Fe2O3 and γ-Fe2O3 can be obtained, respectively. However, in previous reports, mixed phases were often obtained by calcination of microsized PB particles. In contrast, the present approach in this study can overcome these obstacles. The LHPBs precursor and optimal calcination temperatures can be employed to form pure crystalline phases. Therefore, this strategy also opens a new way to obtain pure iron oxide phases that are generally difficult to obtain in other solid-state reactions. It is very interesting that the original hollow cavities of PB nanocubes are shown to remain after crystal transformation to iron oxides. Fig. 11 is the SEM and TEM images of several products prepared by calcination of different PB precursors at different temperatures, which demonstrate the typical hollow and porous shell. It is worth noting that the obtained hollow iron oxides possess a very high surface area because of the hollow structure and porous shell. The amorphous iron oxide nanocubes by calcination of SPB at 250 °C showed a very high surface area of 440 m2 g−1. This value is so far the highest surface area among all of the unsupported iron oxides. After SPB was calcined at 400 °C, the surface area was decreased to 220 m2 g−1, which is due to fusing of nanopores at high temperatures.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustrations on thermal decomposition of SPB, SHPB, and LHPB. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 72. 
 Fig. 10  Wide-angle XRD patterns of several products prepared by calcination of different PB precursors at different temperatures. SPB_x, SHPB_x, and LHPB_x represent the products prepared from SPB, SHPB, and LHPB calcined at different temperatures, respectively (x represents the applied calcination temperatures (°C)). Standard patterns of (h) γ-Fe2O3 (JCPDS card 25-1402) and (i) α-Fe2O3 (JCPDS card 33-0664) are also shown for comparison. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 72. 
 Fig. 11  SEM and TEM images of several products prepared by calcination of different PB precursors at different temperatures. SPB, SHPB, and LHPB are used as the starting precursors. The applied calcination temperatures (°C) are noted in each image. The insets in TEM images (panels b, d, f, h, j and l) represent the corresponding ED pattern taken from a single particle. High-resolution TEM images of the particle edges are also shown as inset images of two TEM images (panels j and l). Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 72. 
Jaephil Cho et al. reported the spindle-like porous α-Fe2O3 prepared from a typical iron-based MOF template (MIL-88-Fe).73 First of all, MIL-88-Fe was synthesized by a modified solovthermal method (Fig. 12A). A two-step calcination method was utilized to prepare the spindle-like mesoporous α-Fe2O3. Briefly, MIL-88-Fe was first heated at 500 °C in N2 gas to obtain a black FeOx–C composite, and then calcinated at 380 °C in air to get the final product of dark red α-Fe2O3 (Fig. 12B). It should be noted here that the temperature of 380 °C was chosen to conduct the removal of carbon residue and the transformation from FeOx to α-Fe2O3. As compared to MIL-88-Fe, the FeOx–C composite (Fig. 13A) showed a smoother shape and its size decreased a little because of the decomposition and contraction during heating. After removal of the carbon residue and oxidation of FeOx, the resulting product of α-Fe2O3 (Fig. 13B) showed a spindle-like structure, demonstrating that the morphology of the MOF template was well retained. From Fig. 13C and D, we can see that this spindle-like structure is composed of clustered porous Fe2O3 nanoparticles with size of <20 nm. Generally, NMOFs can be directly converted into metal oxides in air. In this research, the NMOF is first heated at 500 °C in nitrogen gas before annealing of the MOF in flowing air. It is expected that the hollow spindle-like α-Fe2O3 will be obtained by directly heating the MIL-88-Fe in air .
 Fig. 12  (A) SEM image of as-prepared MIL-88-Fe. (B) Illustration of the fabrication of spindle-like porous α-Fe2O3. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 73. 
 Fig. 13  (A) SEM image of the FeOx–C composite. (B) SEM image and (C and D) TEM images of the final spindle-like α-Fe2O3. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 73. 
CuO has been widely used for catalysts, LIBs, gas sensors and photoconductive/photo-material chemical applications as it is earth-abundant, eco-friendly and inexpensive. The synthesis of CuO nanostructures from a Cu-based metal organic framework (MOF-199) has been demonstrated by Satishchandra Ogale et al.74 Spherically shaped, phase-pure CuO nanoparticles are obtained by controlled pyrolysis of a Cu-based MOF. Fig. 14 is the SEM and TEM images of MOF-derived CuO, which clearly shows the pyramidal-shaped CuO crystal, similar to the starting morphology of Cu-based MOF. A magnified image further indicates the formation of fine sub-micron sized particulates (Fig. 14b).
 Fig. 14  SEM images of MOF derived CuO at different magnifications. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier from ref. 74. 
2.2. Metal oxides composites
CuO and Cu2O, p-type semiconductors, have received much attention in recent years because of their various promising applications, such as gas sensors, in catalysis, in LIBs, as photocatalysts in H2 production and so on.86–90 Copper oxide-based composites also have been designed in various fields.91–93 In consideration of their wide applications and the merits of their hollow structure, CuO or Cu2O materials with hollow nanostructure have been prepared. However, until now, reports of synthesis protocols for CuO/Cu2O composite hollow nanostructures have been very rare. Stephen Mann et al. reported the synthesis of CuO/Cu2O composite hollow microspheres by a hydrothermal method, which demonstrate excellent photocatalytic activity.94 Novel CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons with porous shells also have been synthesized using MOF templates. One of the best characterized and widely studied copper-based MOF materials, [Cu3(btc)2]n, was chosen as the template for obtaining CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons.75 First of all, [Cu3(btc)2]n was synthesized by a improved solvothermal method based on a previous report.49 After that, the calcination technique was utilized to prepare the CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons (Fig. 15). Powder X-ray diffraction (Fig. 16) of the final sample shows that all the diffraction peaks can be assigned to CuO (JCPDS card no. 80-1917) and Cu2O (JCPDS card no. 78-2076). According to the Scherrer formula (D = 0.89λ/B cos θ) and XRD data, an average crystalline size of 21 nm of CuO and 29 nm of Cu2O are estimated from the strongest peaks of CuO and Cu2O. Based on previous studies,94 the height of the characteristic diffraction peaks of CuO (111) and Cu2O (111) planes can be used to estimate the relative content of the Cu2O phase (wt%) in the CuO/Cu2O composite. According to the relative ratio ICu2O (111)/(ICuO (111) + ICu2O (111)), the wt% of CuO is 50% approximately in the composite. It should be noted that the components of the final sample can be tuned by the calcination temperature. When the temperature was increased to 500 °C, the product was pure CuO. Fig. 17a is the SEM image of CuO/Cu2O composite at a low magnification, which displays typical hollow polyhedron-like structures with a relatively good dispersibility (Fig. 17b), demonstrating that the morphology of the NMOF template was well retained. It is interesting that the shells of the hollow polyhedra are porous and composed of many nano-sized crystallines, as shown by the inset in Fig. 17b.
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustration for the formation of CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons with a porous shell. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 75. 
 Fig. 16  PXRD pattern of CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 75. 
 Fig. 17  SEM images of CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons at different magnifications. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 75. 
Recently, a general approach toward the large-scale and facile synthesis of complex hollow microboxes has been demonstrated by Lou et al. which involves the manipulation of the template-engaged reactions between the PB template and different alkaline substances.76 The reaction between PB microcubes with NaOH solution leads to the formation of Fe(OH)3 microboxes with a controllable multishelled structure. In addition, PB microcubes will react with the conjugate bases of metal oxide based weak acids, generating multicompositional microboxes. By this strategy, many composite oxides (Fe2O3/SnO2, Fe2O3/SiO2, Fe2O3/GeO2, Fe2O3/Al2O3, and Fe2O3/B2O3) with complex hollow structures and atomically integrated multiple compositions have been successfully obtained. As shown from Fig. 18, microsized PB (Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3) crystals with a cubic shape are employed as the template. Route A illustrates the formation of hollow microboxes with different structural complexity, from single shell to multishell with hierarchical architectures. Route B describes the synthesis of multicompositional hollow microboxes consisting of uniformly dispersed oxides/hydroxides of iron and another designed element. These complex hollow structures are prepared by precisely controlling the chemical reactions between the PB microcubes template and a proper alkaline precursor. For an example, the PB-derived multicompositional Fe2O3/SnO2 displays the morphology of a well-defined microbox (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of the formation of hierarchical multishelled (route A) and multicompositional (route B) metal oxides microboxes starting with MOFs templates. Metal oxides microboxes were synthesized by manipulating the ion exchange reaction between a proper alkaline precursor (strong base or conjugate base of the weak acid) and a sacrificial PB by the following reactions. Route A: 12OH− (aq) +Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3 (s) → 3Fe(CN)64− (aq) + 4Fe(OH)3 (s). Route B (for the case Sn): 6SnO32− (aq) +Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3 (s) + 6(1 + x)H2O → 3Fe(CN)64− (aq)+ 4Fe(OH)3 (s) + 6SnO2·xH2O(s). Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 76. 
 Fig. 19  Formation of multicompositional Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes by PB templating at room temperature: FESEM (A and B) and TEM (C) images of Fe(OH)3/SnO2·xH2O microboxes; FESEM (D), TEM (E) images, and EDX-elemental mapping images (F–H) of one Fe2O3/SnO2 microbox shown in (E); FESEM (I, J) and TEM (K, L) images of SnO2 microboxes. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 76. 
A number of spherical multi ball-in-ball hybrid metal oxides with tunable compositions have been formulated using NMOFs as templates, which involves the cation exchange reaction and final calcination processing.77 As shown from Fig. 20, in general, the initial NMOFs, namely M–MSB–M (2, M = Zn2+ or Co2+, MSB = metallo-Schiff base) have been constructed from a Schiff base (1) and transition metal ions. Subsequently, these mono-metallic M–MSB–M (2) particles were mixed with a secondary metal ion (e.g., M′ = Cu2+, Co2+, or Ni2+) to effect the cation exchange and produce the requisite bi-metallic MOFs, M′–MSB–M (3). Thermal treatment of 2 and 3 at 450–550 °C then leads to the formation of multi ball-in-ball metal oxides (4) and multi ball-in-ball hybrid metal oxides (5), respectively, with compositions of M′vOw/MxOy (M and M′ = Zn (4a); M and M′ = Co (4b); M = Zn, M′ = Cu (5a); M = Zn, M′ = Co (5b); M = Co, M′ = Cu (5c); M = Co, M′ = Ni (5d)). Fig. 21 shows SEM and TEM images of Co3O4/ZnO and NiO/Co3O4 obtained by the above strategies, which display a unique multi ball-in-ball structure. These hybrid metal oxides with special multi ball-in-ball structure should facilitate their eventual use in many practical applications.
 Fig. 20  Preparation of multi ball-in-ball hybrid metal oxides. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 77. 
 Fig. 21  (a, b and c) SEM and TEM images of Co3O4/ZnO, (e and f) SEM and TEM images of NiO/Co3O4. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 77. 
2.3. Hollow/porous SiO2 and TiO2
Silica (SiO2) has been considered as an anode material for LIBs because of the analogous advantages of storing a large quantity of lithium and a low discharge potential.95 On the other hand, SiO2 is one of the most abundant materials on Earth and the major constituent of sand, therefore, the cost is cheaper than other metal-based materials. Co3[Co(CN)6]2 nanoparticles obtained at room temperature were employed as the template for formation of Co3O4@SiO2 nanorattles and hollow SiO2 nanocubes (HSNCs). Fig. 22 schematically illustrates the procedure of generating HSNCs, which can be divided into three stages. Firstly, uniform Co3[Co(CN)6]2 nanoparticles were coated with SiO2 during the sol–gel process of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), producing Co3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanoparticles with a typical core/shell structure. The next step was the calcination of the core/shell nanoparticles at 550 °C in air, Co3[Co(CN)6]2 cores were converted in situ to a large amount of monodisperse well-crystalline Co3O4 nanocrystals owing to the Ostwald ripening effect during the process of thermal decomposition. Meanwhile, the porous SiO2 shell could maintain its previous shape due to its thermal stability. When the catalytic performance was evaluated at 150 °C, Co3O4@SiO2 nanorattles exhibited a conversion rate of 100% for CO oxidation.96 Finally, the resulting Co3O4@SiO2 nanorattles can be further etched by hydrochloric acid solution and the Co3O4 nanocrystals could be removed easily.78 By the two-step hard-template approach, HSNCs with a porous shell were obtained. The advantages of using such a two-step process are as follows: the Co3[Co(CN)6]2 nanoparticle templates can hardly be removed by acid etching. As we know, Co3O4 can react with hydrochloric acid, leading to convenient etching at mild conditions. Moreover, during the process of calcination and acid etching the gaseous products generated inside silica nanocubes can escape, and the hot acid solution can enter to the interior, which is helpful to form and expand crevices on the surface of the SiO2 nanocubes. The detailed characterization of Co3O4@SiO2 nanorattles can be seen in Fig. 23, which exhibits the shape of a well-defined cube with good dispersity. The hollow structure with a porous shell of HSNCs can be clearly observed from Fig. 24.
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of the formation processes of Co3O4@SiO2 nanorattles and hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes. Reproduced with permission of Nature Publishing Group from ref. 78. 
 Fig. 23  (a) SEM, (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of Co3O4@SiO2 nanorattles, (d) HRTEM image of the interface of a nanorattle selected in image (c) with a red box, (e) HRTEM image and (f) ED pattern of Co3O4 nanocrystals in the middle of a nanorattle. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 96. 
 Fig. 24  XRD patterns of Co3O4@SiO2 nanorattles and hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes, (b) and (c) SEM images of hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes, (d) TEM image of hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes. Reproduced with permission of Nature Publishing Group from ref. 78. 
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is one of the most extensively investigated metal oxides because of its low toxicity, environmental benignity and widespread availability.97 It has been widely employed in numerous applications including photocatalysis, dye-sensitized solar cells, gas sensing and LIBs.98–101 For LIBs applications, it has been emphasized that the short diffusion length and large electrolyte/electrode contact area of the TiO2 porous structure could provide efficient Li+ transport. Recently, a simple, inexpensive, tunable, and scalable (MOF)-templated strategy for the synthesis of a porous TiO2 nanocomposite has been demonstrated by the Lin group (Fig. 25).79 NMOFs with the MIL-101 structure and the formula Fe3OCl(H2O)2(BDC)3 (BDC = benzene dicarboxylate) were selected as a precursor. First, the MIL-101 particles were coated with an amorphous shell of titania by acid-catalyzed hydrolysis and condensation of titanium(IV) bis(ammonium lactato) dihydroxide (TALH) in water. A typical sample Fe2O3@TiO2 used for photocatalysis was prepared by coating MIL-101 with titania for 2 h in 0.1 M HCl, resulting in particles that appeared similar to the original MIL-101 particles. The core–shell particles were calcined at 550°C in air for 16 h, resulting in a color change from orange to dark red, due to conversion of the MIL-101 core into iron oxide. The resulted particles appeared similar to the original MIL-101 particles and demonstrate obvious porous structures revealed by TEM (Fig. 26). The resulting Fe2O3@TiO2 porous nanocomposites exhibit interesting photophysical properties as they enables photocatalytic hydrogen production from water using visible light, indicating the desirable synergistic effect of each component. Also, it is expected that these Fe2O3@TiO2 porous nanocomposites will show a good Li+ storage property for LIBs.
 Fig. 25  NMOF-templated synthesis of Fe2O3@TiO2: Coating MIL-101 with TiO2, followed by calcination. Fe2O3@TiO2/Pt nanocomposites were then prepared by depositing Pt nanoparticles on the surface of Fe2O3@TiO2 particles, which can be used for photocatalytic hydrogen production. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 79. 
 Fig. 26  TEM images of (a) MIL-101, (b) MIL-101@TiO2, (c) a tip of MIL-101@TiO2, and (d) Fe2O3@TiO2. The scale bars represent 200 nm for a, b and d, and 20 nm for c. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 79. 
3. Applications in LIBs
The structural reorganization and volumetric variation upon charge–discharge have been identified as the main causes for the cracking of active materials and rapid capacity fading. The rapid capacity fading of oxide materials could be possibly overcome by making proper nanostructures with capabilities to sustain structural disintegration and promote lithium storage reactions. In recent years, researchers have made an active effort to pursue novel nanostructures, which has been confirmed as a promising method to improve the electrochemical properties of metallic oxide anodes. Nanomaterials with distinct structural characteristics often exhibit improved capacities. The porous structure obtained from NMOFs possesses pores, generated from gas molecule release, which will connect with each other to form inter-connected channels (active pores), which are distinct from “dead pores”; the size of the pores often appears to be <10 nm with hierarchical porosity. Generally, metal oxides synthesized by wet chemical methods are hydrophilic because of their surface hydroxyl groups. However, they can be made hydrophobic by changing the surface morphology and chemical composition.102 Surface roughness is often added to amplify the hydrophobicity of the materials. The calcination strategy is often employed to obtain NMOFs-derived hollow/porous oxides, which leads to a clean and rough surface that exhibits hydrophobic features (without any hydrophilic group, such as hydroxyl). Both the hollow/porous structure and hydrophobic pore surface affect the transport of organic electrolytes, which is critical to the electrochemical performance of these materials. As shown in Table 2, all the NMOFs-derived oxides exhibited excellent lithium storage properties, including high specific capacity and excellent cycling performance, which is attributed to their special structural characteristics. The NMOFs-derived oxides with a hydrophobic surface may easily disperse in organic electrolytes (such as ethylene carbonate or diethylene carbonate) due to the hydrophobic surface when used as anodes (Scheme 2). The active inter-connected pores with a suitable pore size (2–10 nm) are convenient for Li+ diffusing into the inner region of anode materials with little resistance, leading to a remarkable improvement in the storage capacity. If the pore size is too large (>10 nm), it is difficult to maintain inter-particle contact, leading to the decrease of the electrical conductivity and poor calendar life. The liquid surface tension could prevent the electrolyte diffusing into the inner region of the materials if the pore size is too small (<2 nm). Hollow structures could also buffer efficiently the stress caused by volume variation during the charge–discharge process, resulting in long calendar life. Moreover, one of the potential disadvantages associated with the development of a nanostructured anode is the possibility of significant sub-reactions with the electrolyte due to the high external surface area, leading to safety concerns and poor calendar life. These problems may be solved with secondary nanomaterials in which the particles are typically of micrometer dimensions but consist internally of nanometre-sized regions or domains, which could not only reduce side reactions with the electrolyte, but also have the advantage of ensuring excellent electrical properties. In this regard, the NMOFs-drevied Fe2O3 microboxes with hierarchically structured shells are promising anode materials for high performance LIBs.
Table 2 The porous parameters and electrochemical performance of typical NMOFs-derived oxides




NMOFs-derived oxides
Surface area/m2 g−1
Pore size/nm
Capacity/mA h g−1
Rate/mA g−1
Ref.




Co3O4 nanocage
66.5
2.7/10.7
1465/50th cycle
300

67



CoxMn3−xO4 nanocube
129
4/6
733/30th cycle
200

68



Spindle-like α -Fe2O3
75
<10
911/50th cycle
200

73



Fe2O3 microbox
52.2
<10
945/30th cycle
200

70



SiO2 hollow nanocube
51.13
5.5/10
919/30th cycle
100

78



Cu2O/CuO hollow polyhedron
—
—
740/210th cycle
100

74



Cuo nanostructure
—
—
500/40th cycle
100

73



Fe2O3/SnO2microbox
43
—
500/100th cycle
200

76





 Scheme 2  Illustration of the diffusion of electrolyte, electron and Li+. The hydrophobic particle/pore surface can ensure the organic electrolyte diffuse into the inner part of NMOF-derived oxides. The active inter-connected pores can ensure that Li+ and electron diffuse with little resistance. 
In this part, the electrochemical performance of several above-mentioned NMOFs-derived oxides will be discussed in detail. As we know, the Li+ storage property is one of the most important qualities of Co3O4. Fig. 27a shows the 1st, 2nd, 10th, and 20th discharge curves of the electrodes prepared from NMOFs-derived Co3O4 porous nanocages at a current density of 300 mA g−1. The first discharge voltage profile of porous Co3O4 shows the characteristics typical of Co3O4 electrodes, that is, a long flat voltage plateau at about 1 V, which then continuously decreases to 0 V. After the first discharge, the flat plateau is replaced by a sloping curve because of a heterogeneous reaction mechanism for lithium insertion and extraction. The discharge capacities of the electrode in the 1st, 2nd, 10th, and 20th cycles are 1557, 1240, 1405, and 1540 mA h g−1, respectively. Fig. 27b shows the discharge capacity versus cycle number for the electrodes prepared from NMOFs-derived Co3O4 porous nanocages. It is interesting to observe the gradual increase in the reversible capacity to an ultrahigh value of 1545 mA h g−1 over the 22 cycles. With the exception of the first cycle (about 1557 mA h g−1), the capacity of other cycles is almost constant at about 1500 mA h g−1 at a current density of 300 mA g−1. More importantly, a high charge capacity of 1465 mA h g−1 is observed after 50 cycles, which corresponds to 94.09% of the initial capacity (1557 mA h g−1), indicating excellent stability. This result is different from previous reports in which the capacity fades rapidly with increasing cycles, even at a lower current density (40–50 mA g−1).21 It was found that the measured capacities were higher than the theoretical capacity of Co3O4 (890 mA h g−1). It should be noted the capacity of NMOFs-derived Co3O4 is higher than that of other Co3O4 nanostructures obtained by the conventional two-step route, including nanosheets (1450 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1),64 nanobelts (1400 mA h g−1 at 40 mA g−1)80 and nanoflowers (694 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1).22 The capacity is also better than Co3O4 octahedra obtained by a one-step hydrothermal method (946 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1).103 The most likely interpretation is as follows. First, the relative high surface area (69 m2 g−1) could increase the number of Li+ storage sites (lattice). Second, the porous shell and suitable pore size (2–4 nm) are convenient for Li+ diffusing into the inner of anode materials, which will improve the utilization rate of Co3O4. Third, the hollow interior can buffer the severe volume change of anodes based on the conversion reaction during the repeated Li+ insertion/extraction, thus alleviating the pulverization problem and enhancing the cycling performance. The combination of these special NMOF-derived nanostructures results in the improved electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 27  (a) The 1st, 2nd, 10th and 20th discharge curves of the Co3O4 porous nanocage based anode materials at a current density of 300 mA g−1. (b) Discharge capacity versus cycle number for the Co3O4 porous nanocage based anode materials at a current density of 300 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 67. 
In developing new electrode materials for LIBs, there is much interest in replacing toxic and expensive materials by Mn-containing materials. Their environmental friendliness and low cost are appealing properties for their widespread use. In this regard, Mn-based anodes, such as MnxCo3−xO4, are more fascinating as high-capacity anodes. Fig. 28a shows the first, second, tenth, and 30th discharge curves of the electrode made from NMOFs-derived porous MnxCo3−xO4 at a current density of 200 mA g−1. The first discharge voltage profile of porous MnxCo3−xO4 shows a long, flat voltage plateau at about 0.62 V, which then continuously decreases to 0 V. After the first discharge, the flat plateau is substituted by a sloping curve because of a heterogeneous reaction mechanism of lithium insertion and extraction. The discharge capacities of the electrode in the first, second, tenth, and 30th cycles are 1395, 990, 902, and 733 mA h g−1, respectively. Fig. 28b shows the charge–discharge capacities versus cycle number for electrode. After 30 cycles, the discharge capacity can be retained at 733 mA h g−1 which reaches that of a traditional Co3O4 anode material,18 indicating its good Li+ storage capacity. This capacity is higher than that of a previous report in which the CoMn2O4 exhibits a capacity of 515mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 69 mA g−1.84 It can be deduced that the high Li+ storage capacity might be due to the particular foam-like porous structure. The high surface area (129 m2 g−1) with a suitable bimodal size distribution increases the electrolyte/MnxCo3−xO4 contact area, provides more Li+ storage sites and shortens the Li+ diffusion length, which enhances the storage capacity. Compared to CoMn2O4 obtained at high temperatures, the NMOFs-derived MnxCo3−xO4 possesses a small particle size that leads to lighter local volume alterations during the charge–discharge process.22 On the other hand, with decreasing particle size, an increasing proportion of the total number of atoms lies on the surface, increasing the structural strain for the lithium electrochemical reaction. These two factors are responsible for the good cyclic stability.
 Fig. 28  (a) The first, second, tenth, and 30th discharge curves of anode materials based on MnxCo3−xO4 porous nanocubes at a current density of 200 mA g−1. (b) Cycling performance of MnxCo3-xO4 porous nanocubes at a current density of 200 mA g−1. Red line: discharge capacity; black line: charge capacity. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 68. 
Although CuO and Cu2O have been investigated extensively as potential anode materials for LIBs, there are few reports on the Li+ storage properties of their integrated electrodes, except for the simply described properties of CuO/Cu2O hollow spheres and the poor properties of the physical mixture of CuO and Cu2O powders. The Li+ storage properties of CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons obtained from MOFs are shown in Fig. 29. Fig. 29a shows the 1st, 2nd, 100th, and 248th discharge–charge curves of the electrode made from CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons at a current density of 100 mA g−1 at room temperature in a potential window between 0.01 and 3.0 V (vs. Li+/Li). The initial discharge capacity and charge capacities are 727 and 513 mA h g−1, respectively. For 3d-metal oxide anodes, the solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) film inevitably formed during the first discharge. The large irreversible capacity loss of the first cycle can be attributed to the phenomenon that the formed SEI film cannot completely decompose during the first charge. The discharge–charge cycles of the CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons were investigated at different current densities, which showed an average discharge special capacity of 480 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, 395mA h g−1 at 200mA g−1, 324mA h g−1 at 400mA g−1, 250 mA h g−1 at 800 mA g−1 and 130 mA h g−1 at 1600 mA g−1, respectively (Fig. 29c). The special capacity was able to return to more than 440 mA h g−1 when the current density was reduced to 100 mA g−1 again. It should be noted that the capacity gradually increases from the 70th cycle and a reversible capacity of 650 mA h g−1 can be achieved at the 146th cycle. In actual applications, the charge–discharge process is not consecutive. However, in most previous studies, this issue has not been stressed. For the preliminary study of this case, the electrode was stopped from charging–discharging for one week after the 150th cycle, and then was allowed to continue. As we can see from Fig. 29b, the capacity also gradually increases from 520 mA h g−1 and maintains a relatively stable capacity of 740 mA h g−1 after the 210th cycle at 100 mA g−1. This result is better than that of CuO/Cu2O composites in the previous literature (600 mA h g−1 at 67 mA g−1 for CuO/Cu2O hollow sphere).104,105 The impedance spectrum of the measured cell after the 250th cycle has been tested to reveal the transport kinetics (Fig. 29d). The plot consists of a depressed semicircle in the high and middle frequency regions and a straight line in the low-frequency region. The semicircle at high frequency can be assigned to the SEI film and contact resistance (RSEI), while that at the mid-frequency is attributed to the charge transfer impedance at the electrode–electrolyte interface (Rct). The linear region corresponds to the semi-infinite diffusion of the Li+ in the CuO/Cu2O electrodes (Re). The relatively small (small radius of the semicircle) RSEI and Rct have been shown in the plot, which implies that the diffusion of the Li+ and electrons is also convenient after the 250th cycle. It is obvious that the CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons demonstrated superior capacity, which is attributed to the particular micro/nanostructure that may be explained as follows. Firstly, the porous shell of polyhedrons is more convenient for the intercalation of Li+ into the active materials and accelerating their diffusion velocity. Secondly, the hollow structure enhances structural integrity with sufficient void space for buffering the volume variation during the redox reaction, thus alleviating the pulverization problem and achieving a long cycling life. On the other hand, the hollow morphology also offers faster diffusion for Li+ insertion/extraction as compared with the solid nanoparticles of the same mass.
 Fig. 29  (a) Charge and discharge profiles at 100 mA g−1; (b) cycling performance of the CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons at different current densities; (c) rate performance; and (d) impedance spectra. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 75. 
The electrochemical performance of MOF-derived CuO was shown in Fig. 30. The observed reversible capacity exhibited a good cycleability for the tested 40 cycles with a Coulombic efficiency of over 99%, except for the initial few cycles. The half-cell rendered 90% of the initial reversible capacity after 40 cycles which is mainly ascribed to the morphological features of the MOF-derived CuO porous nanostructure. Moreover, rate capability studies also showed good capacity retention characteristics, even if at a high current rate. The pyramidal-shaped CuO crystallites can be also described as a “secondary nanomaterial”. Therefore, they posses the advantages of a “secondary nanomaterial” discussed above when used as an anode. Moreover, the nanometer-sized subunits make the conversion reaction more feasible, which contributes to the high specific capacity.
 Fig. 30  (a) CV traces of Li/CuO cell; (b) initial discharge–charge curves of CuO in the half-cell configuration; (c) plot of capacity vs. cycle number; and (d) rate performance. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier from ref.74. 
SiO2 is also an important anode for LIBs. Therefore, hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes obtained using Co3[Co(CN)6]2 nanoaprticles as templates have been employed for LIBs anodes. The electrochemical performance of SiO2 nanocubes was firstly evaluated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) in the 0–3.0 V voltage window (Fig. 31a). There are obviously two reduction peaks in the potential of 1.3 V and 0.55 V, which appear only in the first cycle. It is reasonable to assume that the peak at the higher potential is due to the irreversible reactions between the electrode and electrolyte. The peak at 0.55 V is associated with the electrolyte decomposition and the formation of the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) layer. Both would contribute to the large irreversible capacity of the first discharge process. The discharge and charge voltage profiles of different cycles shown in Fig. 31b are in good agreement with the CV measurements. A plateau at 0.5 V can be observed only in the first discharge voltage profile, corresponding to the peaks in CV curves. The discharge and charge capacities of the 1st cycle are 3084 and 1457 mA h g−1, respectively, with a low initial Coulombic efficiency of 47%. The discharge capacity of the 2nd cycle is 1807 mA h g−1. Such a large irreversible capacity (1277 mA h g−1) can be attributed to the formation of an SEI layer and irreversible electrochemical reactions between lithium ions and SiO2; for instance, the generation of lithium salt where some Li remained in the conducting agent. In the following discharge–charge process, the voltage profiles show a similar shape and the electrochemical performance of the SiO2 nanocubes becomes stable. The curves of capacity versus cycle number at a current density of 100 mA g−1 are shown in Fig. 31c. From the profile, it can be found that the SiO2 nanocubes exhibited a reasonable cycle performance. Despite the capacity decay in the initial five cycles, even after 30 cycles, the discharge capacity can retain a large value of 919 mA h g−1. This remarkable capacity is higher than all of the previous reports of SiO2-material based anodes, such as SiO2 film (from 416 to 510 mA h g−1), carbon-coated SiO2 nanoparticles (500 mA h g−1), hollow SiO2 nanospheres (336 mA h g−1) and milled quartz (800 mA h g−1).106–110 In addition, the initial Coulombic efficiency of 47% recovered to 73% in the second cycle, and maintained almost 95% in the subsequent cycles. The enhanced capacity is attributed to the unique hollow porous nanostructure with numerous crevices in the shell which shortens the diffusion path length of lithium ions and supplies enough Li+ to react with SiO2.
 Fig. 31  (a) Cyclic voltammetry of hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes between 3 and 0 V at a scan rate of 0.1 mVs−1; (b) galvanostatic discharge–charge voltage profiles of hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes at a rate of 100 mA g−1; (c) discharge capacities versus cycle number of hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes at the current density of 100 mA g−1 between 3 and 0 V. Reproduced with permission of Nature Publishing Group from ref. 78. 
Fe2O3 has long been regarded as a very promising anode material for LIBs due to its much higher theoretical capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 as well as its nontoxicity, high corrosion resistance, and low processing cost.111,112 Electrochemical measurements were carried out to evaluate the performance of hollow Fe2O3 with different shell structures obtained by annealing PB microboxes. The discharge–charge voltage profiles of a representative sample (porous Fe2O3 microboxes obtained at 550 °C) are shown in Fig. 32a. A distinct voltage plateau at ca. 0.75 V was clearly identified during the initial discharge process, and then it shifted to ca. 1.0 V and remained stable in the subsequent cycles. Moreover, a poorly defined plateau was observed in the charge process at ca. 1.8 V. The discharge–charge voltage profiles are in good agreement with previous reports, which correspond to the reversible reduction of Fe2O3 to Fe0 and the simultaneous formation of Li2O. To evaluate the cycling stability, the three samples (Fe2O3 microboxes, porous Fe2O3 microboxes, and hierarchical Fe2O3 microboxes) were charged and discharged at a current density of 200 mA g−1 over the voltage range 0.01–3.0 V vs. Li/Li+, and the cycling performance is depicted in Fig. 32b. Despite the initial capacity loss of ca. 20%, which is considered quite low for transition-metal oxide-based anodes, all three samples displayed excellent cycling stability with almost no fading of capacity over the first 30 cycles. In particular, the hierarchical Fe2O3 microboxes obtained at 650 °C exhibited the highest reversible capacity of 945 mA h g−1 in the 30th cycle, while comparable capacities of 802 and 871 mA h g−1 were also obtained for Fe2O3 microboxes (350 °C) and porous Fe2O3 microboxes (550 °C), respectively. From the second cycle onward, the Fe2O3 microboxes exhibited a Coulombic efficiency of 95%. Compared with the capacities of Fe2O3 reported in previous literature, such as α-Fe2O3 hollow spheres (750 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1),112 α-Fe2O3 single-crystal nanodiscs (662 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1),113 the unique hierarchical Fe2O3 microboxes manifested greatly enhanced Li+ storage properties with high reversible capacity and excellent cyclic capacity retention. The remarkable Li+ storage properties are probably related to the unique nanostructure of these Fe2O3 microboxes. Both the hollow structure and the porous hierarchical shell architecture facilitate the penetration of the electrolyte and transport of Li+ in the electrode. It is worth mentioning that the microboxes with hierarchical shell architecture could be defined as the “secondary nanomaterial” which can reduce side reactions with the electrolyte, leading to a high density and long calendar life with few safety risks.
 Fig. 32  (a) Discharge–charge voltage profiles of porous Fe2O3 microboxes obtained at 550 °C. (b) Cycling performance of Fe2O3 microboxes (350 °C), porous Fe2O3 microboxes (550 °C), and hierarchical Fe2O3 microboxes (650 °C) and Coulombic efficiency of porous Fe2O3 microboxes (550 °C) over the voltage range 0.01–3.0 V vs. Li/Li+ at the same current density of 200 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 70. 

Fig. 33 shows the representative discharge–charge voltage profiles of spindle-like mesoporous α-Fe2O3 prepared from MOF templates. The initial discharge and charge capacities are found to be 1372 and 940 mA h g−1, respectively. The low Coulombic efficiency of 69% may be caused by the irreversible capacity loss, including the inevitable formation of solid electrolyte interface (SEI) and decomposition of electrolyte. The cycling performance of the spindle-like porous α-Fe2O3 is shown in Fig. 33B at a current rate of 0.2 C between 0.01 and 3.0 V. After 50 cycles, the as-prepared spindle-like α-Fe2O3 still exhibited very high charge capacity of 911 mA h g−1, which is 97% of the initial capacity. As a comparison, the bulk Fe2O3 (<5 μm, Sigma-Aldrich) shows a quick decrease of capacity, to less than 630 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles. The capacity rise of spindle-like α-Fe2O3 at the first several cycles could be attributed to the reversible formation of a gel-like layer by electrolyte decomposition at low potentials or further lithium storage as a result of interface reaction in the process of activation and stabilization of the electrode. Such high-capacity retention of α-Fe2O3 at a current rate of 0.2 C is reported rarely. As compared to other α-Fe2O3 electrodes tested under similar conditions,112,113 NMOFs-derived spindle-like porous α-Fe2O3 reveals greatly enhanced Li storage properties with a higher reversible capacity. Such a superior performance could probably be attributed to the nanometer-sized subunits and pores. Firstly, the nanometer-sized subunits not only make the conversion reaction more feasible but also allow the reversible formation/dissolution of polymeric gel-like films at the surface of the active material, both of which contribute to the high specific capacity. Secondly, the porosity can buffer the large volume change of anodes based on the conversion reaction during the repeated Li+ insertion/extraction, thus alleviating the pulverization problem and enhancing the cycling performance.5,9,114
 Fig. 33  (A) Discharge–charge voltage profiles of the spindle-like α-Fe2O3 at a current rate of 0.2 C in a coin-type lithium cell (2016R) at 23 °C. (B) Comparative cycling performance of the final spindle-like α-Fe2O3 and bulk Fe2O3 at 0.2 C rate (1 C = 1000 mA g−1). Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 73. 
SnO2 is important functional material for LIB anodes with high specific capacities. However, the exceptional lithium storage property is accompanied by some severe drawbacks, including the huge volume variation upon lithium insertion/extraction that leads to the cracking and disintegration of the electrode film and the low electrochemical activity of large grains. Incorporating SnO2 into the microboxes further improves the electrochemical performance. The lithium storage properties of Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes are shown in Fig. 34. The prolonged sloping region at low voltage (below ∼0.6 V) in the discharge curves of Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes is mainly contributed by the Sn-based component. The initial discharge and charge capacities of Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes achieved are 1751 and 904 mA h g−1, respectively. From the second cycle onward, the Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes exhibit a high Coulombic efficiency of 95%. Obviously, the Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes deliver a much superior cycling stability compared to single-compositional Fe2O3 and SnO2 microboxes, with a reversible capacity of 500 mA h g−1 at the end of the 100th cycle. This remarkable electrochemical performance is attributed to the advantages of the hollow structure, as discussed earlier. In addition, the possible synergic effects that arise from the highly integrated Fe2O3 and SnO2 may also account for the exceptional lithium storage capability of the multicompositional microboxes.
 Fig. 34  (A) Discharge–charge voltage profiles of Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes. (B) Cycling performance of Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes and SnO2 microboxes and Coulombic effciency of Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes in the voltage window of 0.05–3.0 V vs. Li/Li+ at the same current density of 200 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 76. 
4. Summary and perspective
Hollow/porous materials represent a class of interesting and important micro/nanostructures due to their superior performance in most applications. This review focuses on the most recent progress related to NMOFs-templated synthesis of hollow/porous oxides and their potential applications as anode materials for LIBs. It is shown that NMOFs could be selected as suitable templates or precursors for the fabrication of nanoscale materials with hollow/porous structures. The process is a simple and efficient method of preparing hollow/porous structures. In particularly, shape, size, crystal structure and purity can be easily controlled by varying experimental conditions such as the shape and size of NMOFs or thermolysis temperature. The most significant feature of this method is gas molecules released during the annealing process, which is beneficial for the generation of hollow/porous structures with their surface properties different from their counterparts prepared via a solution process. When evaluated as anode materials for LIBs, the obtained products exhibit excellent electrochemical performance because of the special structural features, including porous shells, a hydrophobic particle surface and active interconnected pores with a suitable pore size (2–10 nm).
There has been a rapid growth in the development of oxides with hollow/porous structures for potential applications as LIBs, as evidenced by the dramatic increase in the number of papers published in this area, however, the oxide hollow/porous structures generated from NMOFs are still very limited. The versatile NMOF-templated synthesis procedure can be readily modified to prepare more oxides with desirable properties by varying the type of MOF (both the metal ions and coordinating moieties). Without a doubt the vast expanse of MOF chemistry has allowed us to explore new opportunities for the fabrication of hollow/porous structures of other functional materials, such as metal, alloys, porous carbon and so on (Fig. 35). Moreover, the NMOFs could be coated and modified by other materials to fabricate composites with more complex structures. For example, nitrogen-doped porous carbon/graphene, metals and alloys may be produced by decomposing M3II[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O nanoparticles in an argon atmosphere. Silicon (Si) is one of the most attractive anode materials for use in LIBs due to its higher specific capacity (4200 mA h g−1). However, up to 400% volume expansion with Li causes particle pulverization and fracture, which results in rapid capacity fading. The NMOFs-derived hollow SiO2 spheres can be employed as templates to prepare hollow Si spheres with a porous shell under a reducing atmosphere. The structure parameters of NMOFs-derived hollow Si spheres could alleviate particle pulverization and fracture during charge–discharge, thus improving its electrochemical performance. TiO2 is also a very attractive material for LIBs. However, the LIBs application of NMOFs-derived porous TiO2 has not been studied. It is valuable to investigate its Li+ storage capacity not only for further understanding the relationship between NMOFs-derived structures and their performances as anode materials for LIBs, but also for pursuing the practical applications. The annealing condition is an important factor to influence the structural parameters, including the average pore size, inter-connection between the pores, the thickness of shell, and so on. Through modifying the annealing conditions, such as atmosphere (air, nitrogen or argon), temperature or heating rate, we believe that NMOFs-derived nanostructures more suitable for LIBs applications will be achieved. The techniques for characterizing the inter-connection and surface feature of pores should be also established to further clarify the mechanism underlying the enhanced properties. The rate capability is an important parameter for many applications of batteries such as electric vehicles and portable power tools, which require fast discharge and/or charge rate. Therefore, the investigation of Li+ storage properties of NMOFs-derived oxides under high currents is necessary. Of course, the further development of a facile method for fabrication of NMOFs with various shapes and sizes is critical to obtain NMOFs-derived functional materials with desired properties. We should not only inherit the existing synthetic methods but also develop new and advanced synthetic strategies to generate NMOFs at room temperature by changing the solvents and surfactants. We need to make vigorous efforts to understand the relationship between the reaction parameters and the final structures and properties of the resulting materials. In addition to LIBs applications, many other potential applications of NMOF-derived hollow/porous oxides must be examined, including biomedical applications, supercapacitors, catalysis, and so on. Overall, the research concerning preparation of hollow/porous oxides from NMOFs has opened up an exciting avenue toward functional nanoporous materials for energy-related utilization.
 Fig. 35  (a) Number of metal–organic framework (MOF) structures reported in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) from 1978 through 2006. The bar graph illustrates the recent dramatic increase in the number of reports, while the inset shows the natural log of the number of structures as a function of time, indicating the extraordinarily short doubling time for MOF. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 115. (b) The number of small-molecule organic and MOF crystal structure reported in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD). 
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation (NSFC, 21071137, U1232211) the Foundation of National Science Base (20772188 and J1030412) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2012M521261).
References
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
M. R. Gao, Y. F. Xu, J. Jiang and S. H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2986 RSC .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2000, 407, 496 CAS .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Jiang, E. Hosono and H. S. Zhou, Nano Today, 2006, 1, 28 CrossRef .
A. S. Aricò, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. V. Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Wang, L. Zhou and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1903 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, D. Y. Zhao and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, H. B. Wu, T. Zhu and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 827 RSC .
G. Q. Zhang, L. Yu, H. B. Wu, H. E. Hoster and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, D. Y. Zhao and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Park, J. Kim, H. Kwon and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 803 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Fan, U. Göele and M. Zacharias, Small, 2007, 3, 1660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Xiong and H. C. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, W. S. Wang, J. Goebl and Y. D. Yin, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. J. Yu, X. L. Wu, F. L. Yuan, Y. G. Guo, Y. Ma and J. N. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15553 CAS .
Y. Q. Fan, H. B. Shao, J. M. Wang, L. Liu, J. Q. Zhang and C. N. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3469 RSC .
M. W. Xu, F. Wang, M. S. Zhao, S. Yang and X. P. Song, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Xia, L. Lu and J. Y. Lin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Lou, D. Deng, J. Y. Lee, J. Feng and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 258 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, T. Zhu, Q. H. Hu, J. J. Gao, F. B. Su, S. Z. Qiao and X. W. Lou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3628 CAS .
M. Hu, J. Y. Chen, Z. Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. D. Li, M. Marquez and Y. N. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1084 RSC .
O. Shchepelina, V. Kozlovskaya, S. Singamaneni, E. Kharlampieva and V. Tsukruk, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6587 RSC .
L. J. Stuart, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 276 RSC .
L. C. R. Jesse and M. Y. Omar, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2004, 73, 3 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Andrew and M. Y. Omar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17998 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. Jeffrey and M. Y. Omar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1213 RSC .
J. D. Rocca, D. Liu and W. B. Lin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 957 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. M. Mohammad and M. Ali, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2921 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Dinca and J. R. Long, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. C. Rowsell and O. M. Yaghi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, O. K. Farha, J. Roberts, K. A. Scheidt, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450 RSC .
L. Q. Ma, C. Abney and W. B. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1248 RSC .
Z. G. Xie, L. Q. Ma, K. E. deKrafft, A. Jin and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Chen, S. C. Xiang and G. D. Qian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Fernandez, S. K. Nune, R. K. Motkuri, P. K. Thallapally, C. M. Wang, J. Liu, G. J. Exarhos and B. P. McGrail, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 18591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Nune, P. K. Thallapally, A. Dohnalkova, C. M. Wang, J. Liu and G. J. Exarhos, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4878 RSC .
W. Lin, W. J. Rieter and K. M. L. Taylor, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Spokoyny, D. Kim, A. Sumrein and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1218 RSC .
M. H. Cao, X. L. Wu, X. Y. He and C. W. Hu, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2241 RSC .
D. J. Du, M. H. Cao, X. Y. He, Y. Y. Liu and C. W. Hu, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. L. Taylor, A. Jin and W. B. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Pang, A. J. Cairns, Y. L. Liu, Y. Belmabkhout, H. C. Zeng and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Pang, A. J. Cairns, Y. L. Liu, Y. Belmabkhout, H. C. Zeng and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hu, S. Furukawa, R. Ohtani, H. Sukegawa, Y. Nemoto, J. Reboul, S. Kitagawa and Y. Yamauchi, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 1008 CrossRef .
M. Hu, A. A. Belik, M. Imura and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. N. Risset, E. S. Knowles, S. Q. Ma, M. W. Meisel and D. R. Talham, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 42 CrossRef CAS .
A. Umemura, S. Diring, S. Furukawa, H. Uehara, T. Tsuruoka and S. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, P. Zhang, Q. W. Chen, N. Yan and J. Y. Mei, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 5557 RSC .
L. Hu, P. Zhang, Q. W. Chen, H. Zhong, X. Y. Hu, X. R. Zheng, Y. Wang and N. Yan, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 2257 CAS .
L. Hu, P. Zhang, Q. W. Chen, J. Y. Mei and N. Yan, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1574 RSC .
W. J. Rieter, K. M. L. Taylor, H. Y. An, W. L. Lin and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kim, W. J. Rieter, K. M. L. Taylor, H. Y. An, W. L. Lin and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. L. Taylor, W. J. Rieter and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. L. Taylor-Pashow, J. D. Rocca, Z. G. Xie, S. Tran and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. A. Malik and P. O'Brien, Organometallic and Metallo-Organic Precursors for Nanoparticles Precursor Chemistry of Advanced Materials, R. Fischer, Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg,  2005, p. 173 Search PubMed .
W. L. Leong and J. J. Vittal, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Vittal and M. T. Ng, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cho, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Lee and M. Oh, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4756 RSC .
H. Y. Shi, B. Deng, S. L. Zhong, L. Wang and A. W. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12309 RSC .
M. Hu, J. S. Jiang and Y. Zeng, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1133 RSC .
J. U. Park, H. J. Lee, W. Cho, C. Jo and M. Oh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Zhan, B. Y. Geng and Y. J. Guo, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 6169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Cong and S. H. Yu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 1 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Xia, L. Lu and J. Y. Lin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, N. Yan, Q. W. Chen, P. Zhang, H. Zhong, X. R. Zheng, Y. Li and X. Y. Hu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, P. Zhang, H. Zhong, X. R. Zheng, N. Yan and Q. W. Chen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 15049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, Y. M. Huang and Q. W. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 559, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, H. B. Wu, S. Madhavi, H. H. Hng and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, H. B. Wu, R. Xu and X. W. Lou, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 9332 RSC .
M. Hu, A. A. Belik, M. Imura, K. Mibu, Y. Tsujimoto and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2698 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Xu, R. G. Cao, S. Jeong and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Banerjeea, U. Singha, V. Aravindanc, M. Srinivasan and S. Ogale, Nano Energy, 2013, 04, 008 Search PubMed .
L. Hu, Y. M. Huang, F. P. Zhang and Q. W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4186 RSC .
L. Zhang, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cho, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Lee and M. Oh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yan, F. Wang, H. Zhong, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Hu and Q. W. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1568 CAS .
K. E. deKrafft, C. Wang and W. B. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, H. L. Zou, J. X. Fu, X. F. Yang, Y. Wang, H. L. Guo, X. H. Fu, C. L. Liang, M. M. Wu, P. K. Shen and Q. M. Gao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 617 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu and D. F. Xue, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2622 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, H. Zhong, X. R. Zheng, Y. M. Huang, P. Zhang and Q. W. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 986 Search PubMed .
F. Y. Cheng, J. Shen, B. Peng, Y. D. Pan, Z. L. Tao and J. Chen, Nat. Chem., 2010, 3, 79 CrossRef PubMed .
F. M. Courtel, H. Duncan, Y. Abu-Lebdeh and I. J. Davidson, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10206 RSC .
P. Lavela, J. L. Tirado and V. Abarca, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 7986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Zhang, J. F. Liu, Q. Peng, X. Wang and Y. D. Li, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 867 CrossRef CAS .
D. Barreca, E. Comini, A. Gasparotto, C. Maccato, C. Sada, G. Sberveglieri and E. Tondello, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 141, 270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Zhang, H. W. Che, Y. L. Wang, J. J. Gao, L. R. Zhao, X. L. She, J. Sun, P. Gunawan, Z. Y. Zhong and F. B. Su, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 1264 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Wang, H. X. Gong, C. H. Wang, D. K. Wang, K. B. Tang and Y. T. Qian, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6850 RSC .
D. Barreca, P. Fornasiero, A. Gasparotto, V. Gombac, C. Maccato, T. Montini and E. Tondello, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Barreca, G. Carraro, V. Gombac, A. Gasparotto, C. Maccato, P. Fornasiero and E. Tondello, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2611 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Simon, D. Barreca, A. Gasparotto, C. Maccato, T. Montini, V. Gombac, P. Fornasiero, O. I. Lebedev, S. Turnere and G. V. Tendelooe, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11739 RSC .
Q. Simon, D. Barreca, A. Gasparotto, C. Maccato, E. Tondello, C. Sada, E. Comini, G. Sberveglieri, M. Banerjee, K. Xu, A. Devi and R. A. Fischer, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 2342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yu, J. G. Yu, S. W. Liu and S. Mann, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4327 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyachi, H. Yamamoto, H. Kawai, T. Ohta and M. J. Shirakata, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yan, Q. W. Chen, F. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Zhong and L. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 637 CAS .
H. B. Wu, J. S. Chen, H. H. Hng and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2526 RSC .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Kumar and L. G. Devi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 13211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. S. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Wang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Shinde and K. K. Nanda, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 3647 RSC .
X. L. Xiao, X. F. Liu, H. Zhao, D. F. Chen, F. Z. Liu, J. H. Xiang, Z. B. Hu and Y. D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Zhao, H. Chen, Y. L. Wang, H. W. Che, P. Gunawan, Z. Y. Zhong, H. Li and F. B. Su, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1136 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Guan, L. P. Li, G. S. Li, Z. W. Fu, J. Zheng and T. J. Yan, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 3367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, B. Zhang and Z. W. Fu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 3774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Guo, J. Shu, Z. X. Wang, H. Yang, L. H. Shi, Y. N. Liu and L. Q. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, J. J. Zhang, L. G. Xue, T. Huang and A. S. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sasidharan, D. Liu, N. D. Gunawardhana, M. Yoshio and K. Nakashima, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13881 RSC .
W. S. Chang, C. M. Park, J. H. Kim, Y. U. Kim, G. J. Jeong and H. J. Sohn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6895 CAS .
N. Kang, J. H. Park, J. Choi, J. Jin, J. Chun, I. G. Jung, J. Jeong, J. G. Park, S. M. Lee, H. J. Kim and S. U. Son, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, J. S. Chen, H. B. Wu, Z. Y. Wang and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen, T. Zhu, X. H. Yang, H. G. Yang and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Guo, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Long and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1213 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Lin Hu	Lin Hu received his BSc degree in AnQing Normal University in 2006. He received his PhD in nanochemistry under the supervision of Prof. Qian-wang Chen in the Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China. His current research interests include the synthesis of nanoscale metal–organic framework and hollow/porous nanostructured functional materials for energy conversion and storage applications. In July 2012, Dr Hu started his postdoctoral fellowship in the Hefei Institutes of Physical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Qian-Wang Chen	Professor Qianwang Chen received his PhD degree in condensed matter physics (1995) from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) and was appointed to the faculty of USTC. Later, he worked in the Institute of Hydrothermal Chemistry, Kochi, Japan and the Solar Energy Institute of Hannover, and as a visiting researcher in the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He was appointed as a full professor in 2000 at the USTC. His current research interests focus on design and synthesis of nanostructured materials and their applications in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, catalysis.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic view of the direct conversion of NMOFs to oxides by heating in air. Interestingly, a hollow structure will be obtained if the NMOF contains one kind metal ion, while a porous structure can only be fabricated when the NMOF contains different metal ions. This result may be attributed to the distinct diffusion rates of different metal ions during the heating process.	 

Co3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes	400	Co3O4	Nanocage	Calcination	
67

Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes	400	MnxCo3−xO4	Porous nanocube	Calcination	
68

Fe3[Co(CN)6]2 nanospheres	400	FexCo3−xO4	Porous nanosphere	Calcination	
69

Prussian blue (PB) microcubes	350–650	Fe2O3	Hierarchical microbox	Calcination	
70

PB microcubes	350	Fe2O3	Porous nanocube	Calcination	
71

PB hollow nanoparticles	250–650	Fe2O3	Hollow nanocube	Calcination	
72

MIL-88-Fe spindles	380	α-Fe2O3	Porous spindle	Calcination	
73

MOF-199-Cu	550	CuO	Porous polyhedron	Calcination	
74

[Cu3(btc)2]n	350	CuO/Cu2O	Hollow polyhedron	Calcination	
75

PB microcubes as the template	—	Fe2O3/SnO2etc.	Microbox	Template-engaged reactions	
76

M–MSB–M (MSB = metallo Schiff base)	450–550	Co3O4/ZnO etc.	Ball in ball	Cation exchange/calcination	
77

Co3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes as the template	400	SiO2	Hollow nanocube	Coating/calcination	
78

MIL-101-Fe polyhedrons as the template	550	TiO2	Porous polyhedron	Coating/calcination	
79


 	Fig. 1  Porous framework of Co3[Co(CN)6]2.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) SEM images of the as-prepared Co3[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O particles at different magnifications. (c and d) SEM images of the Co3O4 nanocages at different magnifications. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 67.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the procedure used to fabricate porous Co3O4 nanocages. (a) Co3[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O nanocubes used as solid precursors. (b) Formation of Co3O4 at the shell of Co3[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O in the thermal oxidation process. (c) continual growth of Co3O4 from Co3[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O, which involves the non-equilibrium inter-diffusion, volume loss, and release of internally born CO2 and NxOy, and eventual formation of the Co3O4 hollow architectures with a porous shell. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 67.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of Mn3[Co(CN)6]2·nH2O nanocubes and MnxCo3−xO4 porous nanocubes at different magnifications. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 68.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of as-prepared Fe3[Co(CN)6]2 particles (a and b) and FexCo3−xO4 nanoporous particles (c and d). Reproduced with permission of Elsevier from ref. 69.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of a hollow Fe2O3 microbox formation and the evolution of the shell structure with increasing calcination temperature. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 70.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a, b, d, e, g and h) FESEM and (c, f and i) TEM images of hollow Fe2O3 microboxes obtained at (a–c) 350 °C, (d–f) 550 °C, and (g–i) 650 °C, respectively. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 70.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a and b) TEM images of porous Fe2O3 nanocubes. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 71.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustrations on thermal decomposition of SPB, SHPB, and LHPB. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 10  Wide-angle XRD patterns of several products prepared by calcination of different PB precursors at different temperatures. SPB_x, SHPB_x, and LHPB_x represent the products prepared from SPB, SHPB, and LHPB calcined at different temperatures, respectively (x represents the applied calcination temperatures (°C)). Standard patterns of (h) γ-Fe2O3 (JCPDS card 25-1402) and (i) α-Fe2O3 (JCPDS card 33-0664) are also shown for comparison. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 11  SEM and TEM images of several products prepared by calcination of different PB precursors at different temperatures. SPB, SHPB, and LHPB are used as the starting precursors. The applied calcination temperatures (°C) are noted in each image. The insets in TEM images (panels b, d, f, h, j and l) represent the corresponding ED pattern taken from a single particle. High-resolution TEM images of the particle edges are also shown as inset images of two TEM images (panels j and l). Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) SEM image of as-prepared MIL-88-Fe. (B) Illustration of the fabrication of spindle-like porous α-Fe2O3. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 73.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) SEM image of the FeOx–C composite. (B) SEM image and (C and D) TEM images of the final spindle-like α-Fe2O3. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 73.	 

 	Fig. 14  SEM images of MOF derived CuO at different magnifications. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier from ref. 74.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustration for the formation of CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons with a porous shell. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 75.	 

 	Fig. 16  PXRD pattern of CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 75.	 

 	Fig. 17  SEM images of CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons at different magnifications. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 75.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of the formation of hierarchical multishelled (route A) and multicompositional (route B) metal oxides microboxes starting with MOFs templates. Metal oxides microboxes were synthesized by manipulating the ion exchange reaction between a proper alkaline precursor (strong base or conjugate base of the weak acid) and a sacrificial PB by the following reactions. Route A: 12OH− (aq) +Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3 (s) → 3Fe(CN)64− (aq) + 4Fe(OH)3 (s). Route B (for the case Sn): 6SnO32− (aq) +Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3 (s) + 6(1 + x)H2O → 3Fe(CN)64− (aq)+ 4Fe(OH)3 (s) + 6SnO2·xH2O(s). Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 76.	 

 	Fig. 19  Formation of multicompositional Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes by PB templating at room temperature: FESEM (A and B) and TEM (C) images of Fe(OH)3/SnO2·xH2O microboxes; FESEM (D), TEM (E) images, and EDX-elemental mapping images (F–H) of one Fe2O3/SnO2 microbox shown in (E); FESEM (I, J) and TEM (K, L) images of SnO2 microboxes. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 76.	 

 	Fig. 20  Preparation of multi ball-in-ball hybrid metal oxides. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 77.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a, b and c) SEM and TEM images of Co3O4/ZnO, (e and f) SEM and TEM images of NiO/Co3O4. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 77.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of the formation processes of Co3O4@SiO2 nanorattles and hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes. Reproduced with permission of Nature Publishing Group from ref. 78.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) SEM, (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of Co3O4@SiO2 nanorattles, (d) HRTEM image of the interface of a nanorattle selected in image (c) with a red box, (e) HRTEM image and (f) ED pattern of Co3O4 nanocrystals in the middle of a nanorattle. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 96.	 

 	Fig. 24  XRD patterns of Co3O4@SiO2 nanorattles and hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes, (b) and (c) SEM images of hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes, (d) TEM image of hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes. Reproduced with permission of Nature Publishing Group from ref. 78.	 

 	Fig. 25  NMOF-templated synthesis of Fe2O3@TiO2: Coating MIL-101 with TiO2, followed by calcination. Fe2O3@TiO2/Pt nanocomposites were then prepared by depositing Pt nanoparticles on the surface of Fe2O3@TiO2 particles, which can be used for photocatalytic hydrogen production. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 79.	 

 	Fig. 26  TEM images of (a) MIL-101, (b) MIL-101@TiO2, (c) a tip of MIL-101@TiO2, and (d) Fe2O3@TiO2. The scale bars represent 200 nm for a, b and d, and 20 nm for c. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 79.	 

Co3O4 nanocage	66.5	2.7/10.7	1465/50th cycle	300	
67

CoxMn3−xO4 nanocube	129	4/6	733/30th cycle	200	
68

Spindle-like α -Fe2O3	75	<10	911/50th cycle	200	
73

Fe2O3 microbox	52.2	<10	945/30th cycle	200	
70

SiO2 hollow nanocube	51.13	5.5/10	919/30th cycle	100	
78

Cu2O/CuO hollow polyhedron	—	—	740/210th cycle	100	
74

Cuo nanostructure	—	—	500/40th cycle	100	
73

Fe2O3/SnO2microbox	43	—	500/100th cycle	200	
76


 	Scheme 2  Illustration of the diffusion of electrolyte, electron and Li+. The hydrophobic particle/pore surface can ensure the organic electrolyte diffuse into the inner part of NMOF-derived oxides. The active inter-connected pores can ensure that Li+ and electron diffuse with little resistance.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) The 1st, 2nd, 10th and 20th discharge curves of the Co3O4 porous nanocage based anode materials at a current density of 300 mA g−1. (b) Discharge capacity versus cycle number for the Co3O4 porous nanocage based anode materials at a current density of 300 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 67.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) The first, second, tenth, and 30th discharge curves of anode materials based on MnxCo3−xO4 porous nanocubes at a current density of 200 mA g−1. (b) Cycling performance of MnxCo3-xO4 porous nanocubes at a current density of 200 mA g−1. Red line: discharge capacity; black line: charge capacity. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 68.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Charge and discharge profiles at 100 mA g−1; (b) cycling performance of the CuO/Cu2O hollow polyhedrons at different current densities; (c) rate performance; and (d) impedance spectra. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 75.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) CV traces of Li/CuO cell; (b) initial discharge–charge curves of CuO in the half-cell configuration; (c) plot of capacity vs. cycle number; and (d) rate performance. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier from ref.74.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Cyclic voltammetry of hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes between 3 and 0 V at a scan rate of 0.1 mVs−1; (b) galvanostatic discharge–charge voltage profiles of hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes at a rate of 100 mA g−1; (c) discharge capacities versus cycle number of hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes at the current density of 100 mA g−1 between 3 and 0 V. Reproduced with permission of Nature Publishing Group from ref. 78.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Discharge–charge voltage profiles of porous Fe2O3 microboxes obtained at 550 °C. (b) Cycling performance of Fe2O3 microboxes (350 °C), porous Fe2O3 microboxes (550 °C), and hierarchical Fe2O3 microboxes (650 °C) and Coulombic efficiency of porous Fe2O3 microboxes (550 °C) over the voltage range 0.01–3.0 V vs. Li/Li+ at the same current density of 200 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 70.	 

 	Fig. 33  (A) Discharge–charge voltage profiles of the spindle-like α-Fe2O3 at a current rate of 0.2 C in a coin-type lithium cell (2016R) at 23 °C. (B) Comparative cycling performance of the final spindle-like α-Fe2O3 and bulk Fe2O3 at 0.2 C rate (1 C = 1000 mA g−1). Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 73.	 

 	Fig. 34  (A) Discharge–charge voltage profiles of Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes. (B) Cycling performance of Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes and SnO2 microboxes and Coulombic effciency of Fe2O3/SnO2 microboxes in the voltage window of 0.05–3.0 V vs. Li/Li+ at the same current density of 200 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission of the American Chemical Society from ref. 76.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Number of metal–organic framework (MOF) structures reported in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) from 1978 through 2006. The bar graph illustrates the recent dramatic increase in the number of reports, while the inset shows the natural log of the number of structures as a function of time, indicating the extraordinarily short doubling time for MOF. Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 115. (b) The number of small-molecule organic and MOF crystal structure reported in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
