Graphitic carbon nitride-based nanocomposites as visible-light driven photocatalysts for environmental purification  - Environmental Science: Nano (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EN00255F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EN00255F
(Critical Review)
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1455-1469Graphitic carbon nitride-based nanocomposites as visible-light driven photocatalysts for environmental purification

        
          
            Fei 
            Ding
          
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Dong 
            Yang
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Zhenwei 
            Tong
          
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Yanhu 
            Nan
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Yujie 
            Wang
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoyan 
            Zou
          
        
      ad and 

        
          
            Zhongyi 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      *ad
aKey Laboratory for Green Technology, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
bKey Laboratory of Systems Bioengineering of Ministry of Education, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
cSchool of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
dCollaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, P.R. China. E-mail: zhyjiang@tju.edu.cn
Received 
      27th March 2017
    , Accepted 2nd May 2017First published on 9th May 2017AbstractGraphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) has attracted enormous attention since it was first reported as a metal-free conjugated semiconductor photocatalyst that could realize the direct conversion of solar energy to chemical energy. Due to its abundant resources, facile synthesis methods, appealing electronic structure combined with a medium band gap (2.7 eV) and high physicochemical stability, g-C3N4 has quickly became a hotspot in photocatalysis fields. However, practical applications are still hindered by several obstacles, such as the high recombination rate of photo-generated electron–hole pairs, low electronic conductivity, small specific surface area and lack of visible light absorption above 460 nm. Hybridizing g-C3N4 with other components has been proved as a promising solution. On account of the great dedication and significant progress in exploitation of g-C3N4-based nanocomposites, we herein present an updated and comprehensive review on the recent advances in different dimensional g-C3N4-based nanocomposites. These specially structured nanocomposites, such as g-C3N4 nanotube-, g-C3N4 nanofiber-, g-C3N4 nanosheet- and g-C3N4 nanosphere-based nanocomposites can be applied in a number of environmentally-relevant fields such as pollutant degradation, heavy metal ions reduction, bacterial disinfection and CO2 reduction. This review primarily focuses on fabrication methods, properties, photocatalytic mechanisms and applications of different dimensional g-C3N4-based nanocomposites and ends with a brief summary and perspective.Fei DingFei Ding received her Bachelor's Degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Xiamen University in 2015. She is pursuing her master's degree under Prof. Zhongyi Jiang at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University. Her current research is focused on the development of new visible light active photocatalysts for environmental and energy applications.Dong YangDong Yang obtained his Ph.D. at the Northeast Forestry University in 2001 under the guidance of Prof. Lijia An. After a stint with Prof. Limin Qi as a Postdoctoral student at Peking University, he joined the faculty of Tianjin University in 2004, where he is currently an associate professor in biochemical engineering. His research interests encompass functional nanomaterials, membranes and membrane processes.Zhenwei TongZhenwei Tong received her Bachelor's Degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Sichuan University in 2012. She is pursuing her Ph.D. under Prof. Zhongyi Jiang at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University. Her research interests include hierarchically structured materials, biocatalysis and photocatalysis.Zhongyi JiangZhongyi Jiang is a professor at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology of Tianjin University. He obtained his Ph.D. degree from Tianjin University in 1994. He was a visiting scholar of the University of Minnesota with Prof. Edward Cussler in 1997 and California Institute of Technology with Prof. David Tirrell in 2009. He is a winner of the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in China. His research interests include biomimetic and bioinspired membranes and membrane processes, biocatalysis and photocatalysis. He has co-authored over 390 SCI papers, which were cited over 9000 times in total and he has an h-index of 49.

Environmental significance
As a metal-free conjugated semiconductor visible light photocatalyst, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) has attracted numerous research interests. However, its practical application is severely hindered by some inherent limitations, such as high recombination rate of photo-generated electron–hole pairs, small specific surface area, low electronic conductivity and low utilization rate of visible light. Combining g-C3N4 with other components to fabricate g-C3N4-based nanocomposites proves a promising solution because of the improved charge carrier separation time and transportation efficiency, enlarged surface area and adequate visible light absorption. Till now, g-C3N4-based nanocomposites have been broadly utilized in degradation of aqueous organic pollutants, reduction of heavy metal ions, disinfection of bacteria, removal of atmospheric pollutants and reduction of CO2.

1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of modern industrialization and population, environmental problems have become an increasingly severe global concern. With the growing awareness of environmental protection, people pay much attention to exploiting and utilizing clean energy, especially solar energy to solve environmental issues. Therefore, novel discoveries and explorations in materials science and engineering have been pursued to realize the direct conversion of solar energy to chemical energy.1 In addition to utilizing sunlight as a driving force, a suitable semiconductor is still necessary for photocatalytic reactions which involve degradation of aqueous organic pollutants, reduction of heavy metal ions, disinfection of bacteria, removal of atmospheric pollutants and reduction of CO2.
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) has attracted tremendous research interest since it was first reported as a metal-free conjugated semiconductor photocatalyst for H2 evolution by Wang et al. in 2009.2 Then it quickly became a hotspot in the photocatalysis field due to its earth-abundant raw materials, facile synthesis methods, appealing electronic structure combined with a medium band gap (2.7 eV) and high physicochemical stability. However, its practical application is severely hindered due to some of its inherent limitations. Thus, researchers have devoted great efforts to modify g-C3N4 with fine electronic and surface properties through morphology control3,4 and band structure engineering.5–7 Among them, morphology control of the g-C3N4 nanostructure seems to be a better way because a nanostructured material exhibits higher photocatalytic performance than bulk g-C3N4. Besides, g-C3N4 forms two-dimensional (2D) sheets, which consist of tri-s-triazines interconnected via tertiary amines.8 And this attribute makes it feasible to hybridize g-C3N4 with other components to fabricate g-C3N4-based nanocomposites. The g-C3N4-based nanocomposites have some distinct advantages over the pristine g-C3N4, such as improved charge carrier separation time and transportation efficiency, enlarged surface area and adequate visible light absorption.9
Herein, we present an updated and comprehensive review which summarized the synthesis methods and environmental applications of different dimensional g-C3N4 and g-C3N4-based nanocomposite photocatalysts, and in particular with an emphasis on the relationship between the nano-/hierarchical structure and photocatalytic properties. First, the design and preparation of 2D g-C3N4-based nanocomposites as photocatalysts are introduced, such as graphitic carbon nitride nanosheet (CNN)-based metal-free nanocomposites, metal/CNN hybrid nanocomposites, semiconductor/CNN hybrid nanocomposites and so on. Second, three-dimensional (3D) g-C3N4-based nanocomposites are discussed which encompass graphitic carbon nitride sphere (CNS)-based nanocomposites and hollow sphere of graphitic carbon nitride (HCNS)-based nanocomposites. Then, one-dimensional (1D) g-C3N4-based nanocomposites and zero-dimensional (0D) g-C3N4-based nanocomposites are discussed separately. Eventually, some concluding remarks and perspectives on the current situation and future exploration of the variety of g-C3N4-based nanocomposites as photocatalysts are concisely presented.
2. 2D g-C3N4-based nanocomposites
The development of 2D materials has experienced an evolution from graphene to metal oxide and metal chalcogenide nanosheets, and then to 2D covalent organic frameworks, such as conjugated g-C3N4 nanosheets (CNNs) and carbon nitride nanoplates. However, reports about carbon nitride nanoplates and other 2D special morphologies of g-C3N4 are rare. Therefore, we will mainly focus on CNNs in this section. There are two distinct strategies for the synthesis of 2D CNNs. One is the top–down strategy which involves the delamination of layered g-C3N4 solids into free-standing nanosheets. The other is the bottom–up strategy where CNNs can be obtained from the anisotropic assembly of organic molecules in a 2D manner (Fig. 1).10 In the top–down strategy, there are three major methods to exfoliate bulk solids with a significantly reduced dimension, namely thermal oxidation exfoliation,11 ultrasonic exfoliation12,13 and combination exfoliation.14 However, the top–down strategy is still in its infancy for CNN fabrication. The bottom–up strategy consists of three major methods, which are the template-assisted synthesis method,15 the heteroatom-mediated synthesis method16,17 and the additive-mediated synthesis method.18 And it has been verified that the bottom–up strategy favours the formation of a regular morphology with a controllable thickness, a larger lateral size, less steps and more time-saving in the synthesis of CNNs when compared with the top–down strategy. To sum up, the bottom–up strategy could strongly alter the polymerization route due to the involvement of heteroatom groups as leaving motifs, creating thin CNNs in the nanometer domain.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of synthesizing CNNs by using the top–down and bottom–up strategies (reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Moreover, 2D nanostructured g-C3N4 has been a hot study topic in the field of photocatalysis since it was first successfully synthesized, analyzed and characterized by Novoselov and his co-workers.19 The nanosized CNN possesses a larger bandgap, a much higher surface area and an elevated electron transport ability. It can not only obviously enhance photocatalytic activities, but also support attractive bandgap- and surface-engineered applications which range from energy-related fields to other emerging fields. However, it still suffers from some intrinsic shortcomings, such as a high electron–hole recombination rate, high exciton binding energy and insufficient sunlight absorption (∼2.8 eV), which are mainly due to the poor crystallinity and the defective polymerization of organic networks. In order to solve these issues, several strategies have been put forward, such as doping, sensitization and hybridization. In this review, we will mainly discuss the hybridization strategy.
2.1 CNN-based metal-free nanocomposites
Wang and co-workers first constructed a metal-free heterojunction photocatalyst by wrapping CNNs and reduced graphene oxide (RGO) sheets on crystals of cyclooctasulfur (α-S8) for photocatalytic inactivation of bacterial cells under visible-light.20 And the photocatalyst showed different photocatalytic reductive inactivation activities toward Escherichia coli K-12 cells when it was synthesized from two different wrapping sequences. One was CNNs wrapped in the heterojunction of RGO sheets and α-S8 (i.e., CNRGOS8), while the other one was CNNs sandwiched in a heterojunction of RGO sheets and α-S8 (i.e., RGOCNS8). The mechanisms of photocatalytic inactivation of bacterial cells under visible-light under aerobic and anaerobic conditions were different (Fig. 2). For photocatalytic bacterial inactivation in the presence of CNRGOS8 under aerobic conditions, the photogenerated e− in the conduction band (CB) of CNNs could promptly flow to the CB of α-S8via the RGO sheets, while the photogenerated h+ in the valence band (VB) of α-S8 could migrate to the VB of CNNs via the RGO sheets. The reactive oxidative species generated from e− and h+ (e.g. ˙O2−, ˙OH, and H2O2) were responsible for photocatalytic bacterial inactivation under aerobic conditions. While in the case of RGOCNS8, the RGO sheets were the outer layer which could inject e− into bacterial cells, more efficiently than the CNNs in the case of CNRGOS8, because of the high mobility of photogenerated e− on graphene (>200000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at electron densities of 2 × 1011 cm−2). The prompt e− trapping by bacterial cells could in turn prevent the e−–h+ recombination of RGOCNS8, leading to a higher photocatalytic activity. Interestingly, under aerobic or anaerobic conditions with visible light, these two structures exhibited dissimilar photocatalytic antibacterial activities. CNRGOS8 possessed much higher photocatalytic bacteria inactivation efficiency than RGOCNS8 in the aerobic atmosphere. In contrast, when compared with CNRGOS8, RGOCNS8 demonstrated better bactericidal performance under anaerobic conditions. In this case, the bacterial cells were inactivated by reduction rather than oxidation.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the visible-light-driven photocatalytic bacterial inactivation mechanisms of (a) CNRGOS8 and (b) RGOCNS8 under aerobic conditions, and (c) CNRGOS8 and (d) RGOCNS8 under anaerobic conditions (reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright (2013) The American Chemical Society). 
Some other CNN/carbon material binary nanocomposites, such as polymeric CNN/graphene hybrids,21 CNN/graphene oxide aerogels22 and ultrathin CNN/carbon quantum dots,23 also possessed enhanced photocatalytic activity. In particular, the group of Qiao used a facile low-temperature self-assembly of CNNs and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) approach which consisted of thermal oxidation etching, liquid exfoliation and hydrothermal methods to fabricate a strongly coupled 3D porous nanocomposite catalyst (denoted as CNN/CNT) (Fig. 3).24 The driving force for the self-assembly of the CNTs and CNNs could be attributed to two aspects. One was the π–π stacking interaction between conjugated tri-s-triazine motifs in the CNNs and graphene fragments in the CNTs. The other was the electrostatic interaction between COO− groups on the CNTs and the positively charged CNNs. And the highly porous 3D architecture favoured the easy infiltration of electrolytes, the efficient transfer of reactants and the fast emission of products. The nanocomposite exhibited the highest activity among non-metal oxygen evolution reaction (OER) catalysts and better performance with more favourable kinetics and stronger durability than noble-metal catalysts. And the outstanding photocatalytic activity could be ascribed to its high N content (high concentration of active sites), strong coupling between CNNs and CNTs (good electron conductivity) and unique porous architecture (fast mass transport).
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of CNN/CNT; (c) schematic illustration of fabricating the 3D CNN/CNT porous composite (reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright (2014) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Zhang et al. prepared a sheet-on-sheet and metal-free graphene/g-C3N4/carbon dots ternary heterostructure via a facile hydrothermal method.25 It has been proved that loading a small amount of graphene and carbon dots could improve the photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4 toward the reduction of heavy metals ions (e.g. Cr) under visible light irradiation. The nanocomposite with enhanced photocatalytic activity could remove over 83.6% of Cr(VI) within 120min. And the mechanism of Cr(VI) reduction is shown below. As shown in eqn (1), electrons are first excited from the CB to the VB over g-C3N4 under visible light irradiation. Then, as indicated in eqn (2), Cr(VI) could serve as an electron acceptor, promoting the transfer of photogenerated electrons from the CB of g-C3N4. C3N4 + hν → e− (CB) + h+ (VB)(1) Cr(VI)− + 14H+ + 16e− → 2Cr(III) + 7H2O(2)
2.2 Metal/CNN hybrid nanocomposites
Metal co-catalysts have been extensively used in semiconductors in the past few years by using the Schottky junction form to collect electrons at their surface for the reduction. Because of the diverse couplings of electronic structures, the efficiency of charge migration from bulk g-C3N4 to the metal surface is varied by the alternation of metal facets in most cases. 2D CNNs can provide an ideal platform to address this issue because the charge generated in CNNs can easily reach the semiconductor–metal interface. In addition, the conjugated structure of g-C3N4 may offer multiple coupling configurations with a metal plane, ensuring equivalent efficiency of charge transfer with different metal surface facets. Bai et al. explored a solution-phase approach to in situ grow single-faceted Pd nanocrystals on the CNNs in a water–isopropanol (IPA) co-solvent and the hybrid was denoted as Pd/CNN.26 And it was found that reduction of CO2 was performed better on Pd{111} facets in Pd/CNN hybrid structures. This study opened the avenue of designing high-selectivity photocatalysts and offered valuable information for investigating the facet-dependent selectivity in photocatalytic reactions. Many other metal/CNN hybrid nanocomposites, such as Au/CNN,27 Pt/CNN28 and Ag/CNN,29 also displayed higher photocatalytic activities toward environmental purification. Particularly, in order to optimize the structural and electro-optical properties of carbon nitride and reduce its dependency on the high loading of the Pt co-catalyst, Qiao and his group fabricated sub-nanometer-thin CNNs via a combined three-step method including co-polymerization, surface activation and exfoliation.30 The resultant nanosheets were structurally robust and photocatalytically efficient as evidenced by the 38 times enhancement in the hydrogen production rate. In addition, this high performance could be achieved with only 0.03 wt% of Pt as a co-catalyst, whereas the same loading of Pt could not accomplish any significant hydrogen production by pristine C3N4. The enhanced photocatalytic activity of metal/CNN nanocomposites originated from the lower Fermi levels of noble metals and a combined result of the hybrid effect from C3N4 and the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect for the noble metal. And it could lead to a larger light absorption intensity, favourable adsorption capacity, long lifetime of charge carriers and high separation efficiency of photogenerated electrons–holes.
Compared with monometallic nanoparticles (NPs), bimetallic NPs show greater potential in catalytic applications due to their unique microstructure and enhanced catalytic performance. And because different components of the catalysts have different contributions to the reaction mechanism, bimetallic catalysts can probably achieve chemical transformations which are hardly accomplished by monometallic catalysts. Han et al. developed a PtCo/CNN catalyst by loading the PtCo bimetallic alloy on CNNs via an ethylene glycol reduction approach for the first time.31 The 1.0 wt% PtCo/CNN exhibited the highest H2 evolution activity of 960 μmol h−1g−1 which was 2.9 times higher than that of bulk 1.0 wt% Pt/CNN. The significant improvement in H2 evolution could be attributed to the synergistic effect between PtCo bimetallic NPs and CNNs. After introducing PtCo NPs, the two materials bound together and formed interfaces which could foster electron capture capability and facilitate electron transfer from CNNs to the PtCo NPs surface. And these could render the CB electrons higher mobility and promote the separation of electron–hole pairs. The holes in the VB of CNNs were consumed by TEOA sacrificial regents. Chen et al. used an ultrasound-assisted growth route to prepare Zn0.2Cd0.8S/P-CNN nanocomposites which consisted of mesoporous P-doped CNNs immobilized with homogeneously dispersed Zn0.2Cd0.8S NPs.32 And the as-prepared Zn0.2Cd0.8S/P-CNN also showed higher photocatalytic performances toward both nitro group reduction and hydrogen production.
2.3 Semiconductors/CNN hybrid nanocomposites
Hybridizing CNNs with other semiconductors is another strategy to decrease the recombination of photo-generated electron–hole pairs and increase the photocatalytic activity of CNNs under visible-light irradiation. As a semiconductor, TiO2 has attracted increasing attention since it was first reported as a photocatalyst. Therefore, many research groups devoted themselves to developing novel methods to prepare g-C3N4/TiO2 nanocomposites.33–36 Jiang and his group first synthesized a CNN/TiO2 nanocomposite by combining the arginine-enabled biomimetic mineralization of TiO2 with the thermal oxidation etching of bulk g-C3N4 (Fig. 4a and b).37 The sample exhibited a well-defined morphology, in which TiO2 NPs with a diameter of 5.5 nm were uniformly distributed on the CNNs. And it possessed higher photocatalytic degradation activity toward rhodamine B (RhB) under simulated-sunlight which could degrade almost all the RhB within 50 minutes. As illustrated in Fig. 4c, when the CNN/TiO2 nanocomposite was exposed to the simulated sunlight, the photo-generated electrons produced from CNNs transferred from the CB of CNNs to the CB of TiO2 through the heterojunction between CNNs and TiO2. And this could enhance the photocatalytic activity of the nanocomposite due to the reduction of the recombination rate of photogenerated electrons and holes. The electrons transferring on the CB edge of TiO2 were trapped by O2 near the TiO2 surface to form reactive superoxide radical ions (˙O2−), which were the crucial oxidizing species responsible for the RhB degradation. The photo-induced holes tended to keep in the VB of CNNs, and directly decomposed RhB. And because the VB position of CNNs (1.83 eV) was more negative than the potential of the H2O/˙OH (2.7 eV) couple, the generated holes on the VB of CNNs could not react with absorbed water molecules to form hydroxyl radicals (˙OH). CNNs + TiO2 + hν → TiO2 (e−) + CNN (h+)(3) TiO2 (e−) + O2 → TiO2 + ˙O2−(4) ˙O2− + CNNs (h+) + RhB → degradation products(5)
 Fig. 4  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images CNN/TiO2nanosheets; (c) schematic illustration of the mechanism for the RhB degradation on the CNN/TiO2 nanosheets photocatalyst under visible-light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm) (reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2014) Elsevier). 
Other semiconductors, such as metal oxides (WO3,38,39 SnO2,40 Al2O341), metal halides,42,43 polymetallic halides,44 oxometallates45–47 and polyoxometalates,48,49 can also be combined with CNNs to form heterojunction structures. And these nanocomposites all exhibited remarkably enhanced photocatalytic activities toward environmental purification.
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) with tunable properties, high chemical stability and thermostability are highly porous crystalline materials. Similar to the typical metal sulfide and metal oxide semiconductors, MOF photocatalysts can generate electrons and holes under visible-light irradiation. Combining MOFs with CNNs to synthesize heterojunction nanocomposites is an efficient way to enhance the photocatalytic activity due to the proper bandgap, large surface area and low electron–hole pair recombination rate. Ye and her group incorporated UiO-66, a zirconium-based MOFs material, with CNNs by using a facile electrostatic self-assembly approach for the first time.50 As shown in Fig. 5, electrons were excited from the VB of CNNs to its corresponding CB under visible light irradiation. The photogenerated electrons migrated to the surface of CNNs and then transferred to UIO-66 across the interface between CNNs and UIO-66. The electrons in UIO-66 could reduce the absorbed CO2 to CO, and the holes which resided within the VB of CNNs were consumed by triethanolamine (TEOA), which acted as an electron donor. The UiO-66/CNN nanocomposite exhibited excellent stability and reusability, as well as an enhanced activity toward the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. The CO yield was 59.4 μmol gCN−1 under light illumination for 6 hours, which was over three times than that of CNNs (17.1 μmol gCN−1). Hong et al. synthesized a CNNs–MIL-100 (Fe) nanocomposite via an in situ synthesis method for the first time.51 The nanocomposite with high specific surface area and strong visible light absorbance exhibited better electron–hole separation and higher performance for dye degradation (up to 1.5 to 2 times higher) compared to the parent materials.
 Fig. 5  Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by the UiO-66/CNN nanocomposite under visible-light irradiation (reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright (2015) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
2.4 Polymer/CNN hybrid nanocomposites
The π-conjugated electronic system and aromatic-based molecular structure of the graphitic carbon nitride polymer facilitate the coupling of CNNs with themselves to form isotype g-C3N4/CNN hybrid nanocomposites. Based on the band alignment between carbon nitride and sulfur-mediated g-C3N4 (SCN), Wang and his group prepared the SCN/CNN isotype heterojunction to exploit the slight difference in their electronic band structures.52 The CB offset between CNNs and SCN could drive the migration of photogenerated electrons from CNNs to SCN, while the photoinduced holes transferred from SCN to CNNs by the VB offset. The SCN/CNN nanocomposite exhibited an enhanced H2 evolution activity over the corresponding host substrates and the best sample could reach 11 times higher performance. Then, the same group synthesized a B-modified g-C3N4/CNN (denoted as BCN/CNN) nanocomposite via a calcination process.53 And the degradation ratio of MO and phenol was twice more than that of BCN and CNNs, and the H2 evolution rate was ∼1.8 and ∼3.4 times higher than that of BCN and CNNs, respectively. Taking into account of the fact that the band gap structure of g-C3N4 can be tuned by using different precursors, Sun and his group synthesized a novel sheet-like g-C3N4/g-C3N4 metal-free heterojunction.54 Because the heterojunction was developed via an in situ approach which took the molecular composite consisting of urea and thiourea as precursors, it was described as CN–TU heterojunction. As shown in Fig. 6, when CN-TU heterojunction was irradiated by visible light, the photogenerated electrons transferred from CN-T (thiourea as a precursor) to CN-U (urea as a precursor) driven by CB offset of 0.10 eV, while the photogenerated holes transferred from CN-U to CN-T driven by a VB offset of 0.40 eV. The effective separation of electron/hole pairs prolonged the lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers. And it could allow the fast charge transfer to the reactive substrates on the photocatalyst surface, promoting the photocatalysis reaction. The sheet-like CN-TU exhibited remarkably improved photocatalytic activity toward removal of NO in air under visible-light irradiation and excellent stability over g-C3N4 alone and a physical mixture of g-C3N4 samples.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of electron–hole separation and transport at the CN–TU heterojunction interface and in both semiconductors (reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2013) The American Chemical Society). 
The π-conjugated electronic system and aromatic-based molecular structure of the graphitic carbon nitride polymer can also facilitate the coupling of CNNs with other polymers to form polymer/CNN hybrid nanocomposites. For instance, a polyaniline/CNN (PANI/CNN) composite hydrogel with a 3D hierarchical nanostructure was synthesized by Jiang et al. via an in situ polymerization method.55 The composite with a 3D hierarchical structure was stable and robust, and possessed excellent photocatalytic activity toward degradation of MB and removal of phenol.
2.5 Sensitizer/CNN hybrid nanocomposites
Dye sensitization has been successfully employed to semiconductors of wide band gap (TiO2, ZnO, etc.) to convert long-wavelength light to energy. The dyes could extend light absorption and generate excited electrons and holes, leading to high solar energy efficiency and improved photocatalytic activity. There are some reports over dye-sensitized bulk carbon nitride materials while dye-sensitized CNNs for photocatalytic application are rarely reported which still need to be further explored.56,57 After adding Erythrosin B in the photoreaction suspension, the Pt/CNN synthesized by Wang et al. exhibited a 14 times higher H2 evolution rate under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420nm) than before.58 Cheng et al. assembled CNNs and hexagonal-phase NaYF4 upconversion nanocrystals (β-NaYF4 UCNs) into a hybrid photocatalyst (UCN/CNN) via an electrostatic assembly approach.59 The UCN/CNN could be activated under both visible and near-infrared (NIR) light and exhibited higher photocatalytic activity under a Xe lamp.
2.6 CNN based complex systems
In order to further promote the charge separation and transfer in binary systems, many researchers focused on constructing ternary systems by combining conducting materials, another semiconductor and a co-catalyst together. And in these multicomponent hybrid nanocomposites, multistep charge transfer was induced, leading to a remarkable enhancement in the photocatalytic activity. Hou et al. synthesized a 2D porous carbon nitride nanosheet/nitrogen-doped graphene/layered MoS2 (CNN/NRGO/MoS2) ternary nanojunction via pyrolysis and a following hydrothermal treatment method.60 The sample with broadened optical window, large contact area and short diffusion distance exhibited a higher photocurrent density and photocatalytic activity for simultaneous oxidation of MB and reduction of Cr(VI) than other reference electrodes under simulated sunlight irradiation. Another ternary nanocomposite, carbon nitride nanosheet/reduced graphene oxide/ZnS (CNN/RGO/ZnS), also exhibited remarkably enhanced photocatalytic activities toward the degradation of RhB (about 97% after 60 min) under visible-light irradiation, which was 5.38, 1.17 and 1.04 times higher than those of RGO/ZnS, CNN/ZnS and CNN/RGO, respectively.61
3. 3D g-C3N4-based nanocomposites
In order to achieve high photocatalytic activities, textural engineering has been developed to modify g-C3N4 materials. Three-dimensional spherical g-C3N4 with high specific surface area, fast mass and electron transport has been a hotspot in the field of photocatalysis since it was first synthesized by Zimmerman et al.62 However, a major barrier to the widespread application of spherical carbon nitride as a photocatalyst is its high recombination rate of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Many researchers tried different strategies to solve these issues. In this chapter, we will mainly focus on spherical g-C3N4-based nanocomposites.
3.1 3D g-C3N4 sphere-based nanocomposites
Wang and his group interconnected the CNNs into nanospheres with highly open-up surface structures.63 Such a kind of complex nanoarchitecture could effectively avoid the agglomeration of nanosheets and better utilize the unique structural benefits of both CNNs and CNS. The apparent quantum yield (AQY) of the nanospheres toward photocatalytic H2 evolution at 420 nm reached 9.6%. And it was the highest AQY value for g-C3N4-based photocatalysts which was even much bigger than that of CNNs (AQY = 3.75%). In order to better utilize the advantages of the spherical carbon nitride, many researchers try to combine it with other materials. The synthesized hybrid nanocomposites can effectively inhibit the recombination of photogenerated charges and then enhance the photocatalytic activity.
Lin et al. synthesized novel SiO2/g-C3N4 core–shell nanospheres via a heating method.64 This kind of structure could promote interface combination and enhance the charge transport capability of the composite. Thus the photocatalytic degradation activity of the SiO2/g-C3N4 composite toward RhB was 3.5 times higher than that of pure g-C3N4 with an RhB conversion of 94.3% after 150 min of visible light irradiation. Zhou et al. combined metallic oxide with CNS to prepare a porous Fe3O4/CNS nanocomposite with an appropriate porous structure via a hydrothermal method.65 Immobilizing catalysts onto the surface of magnetic nanoparticles would be very convenient to recycle the nanocomposite and prevent the agglomeration of the catalyst particles during recovery, as well as increase the durability of the catalyst. The as-synthesized porous Fe3O4/CNS nanocomposite exhibited considerable photocatalytic activity toward MO degradation under visible light irradiation, and excellent reusability and magnetic properties with almost no change after five runs. Dimitrios et al. found oxidized g-C3N4 which was processed via the Hummers oxidation method to exhibit enhanced adsorption and photocatalytic performance. Then they combined a copper-based MOF material with oxidized CNS to form a new composite (denoted as MOF/CNSox).66 The oxidized CNS acted as a linker between the copper sites and played a crucial role in the composite building process. And the resultant composite showed remarkably enhanced adsorption and degradation abilities toward a variety of organic and inorganic pollutants.
3.2 3D hollow sphere of g-C3N4-based nanocomposites
The 3D hollow nanostructure has been extensively applied in the field of photocatalysis since Wang and his group fabricated HCNS with controlled shell thickness for the first time via a hard-templating approach.67 However, the pristine HCNS suffered from the limitation of surface defects and structural imperfections. Wang and other researchers explored varieties of methods to overcome the defects of pristine HCNS, such as the template method,68 the copolymerization method69 and the molecular cooperative assembly method.70 This unique architecture with interior and exterior surfaces could allow chemical and morphological engineering to produce multi-functional or even unpredicted synergistic properties. Thus, in order to make better use of the unique architecture and improve the photocatalytic activity of HCNS, many groups tried to synthesize HCNS-based nanocomposites.
In recent years, 3D graphene with a high specific surface area, fast mass and electron transport kinetics has been widely exploited in many fields. Qin et al. combined mesoporous HCNS with 3D graphene to fabricate a HCNS/G nanocomposite via a hydrothermal treatment.71 And the hybrid nanocomposite had an increased density of catalytically active sites and improved accessibility to electrolytes when compared with bulk g-C3N4. Wu et al. coupled HCNS with RGO through electrostatic interactions to fabricate a HCNS/RGO nanocomposite which could remove NO from air at 600 ppb level under visible-light irradiation (Fig. 7a and b).72 Due to the enlarged interior and exterior surface areas of the shell and the increased specific surface area, the as-synthesized sample had a NO removal ratio of 64%, which was superior to most other visible-light photocatalysts. Then, they immobilized HCNS/RGO on porous carbonized polymer nanofibers to obtain a photocatalytic membrane without affecting photocatalytic efficiency. Furthermore, the membrane showed excellent photochemical stability and recyclability. The schematic of the reaction mechanism during the photocatalytic process for NO removal is shown in Fig. 7c. Photoelectrons and holes were generated in HCNS/RGO (eqn (6)) under the illumination of visible light. The major reactive radicals, ˙O2−, were generated via the reduction of O2, and became ˙OH as minor reactive radicals (eqn (7)–(9)). The NO reacted with photogenerated reactive radicals and produced HNO2 and HNO3, as shown in eqn (10)–(13). Meanwhile, the holes generated on the VB could photooxidize NO to NO3− directly because of the strong oxidation power of the holes (eqn (14)). HCNS/RGO + hν → e− + h+(6) e− + O2 → ˙O2−(7) ˙O2− + 2H+ + e− → H2O2(8) H2O2 + e− → ˙OH + OH−(9) NO + 2 ˙OH → NO2 + H2O(10) NO2 + ˙OH → NO3− + H+(11) NO + NO2 + H2O → 2HNO2(12) NO + ˙O2− → NO3−(13) NOx + h+ → NO3−(14)
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of HCNS/RGO; (c) schematic of the reaction mechanism for NO removal (reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
It has been proved that embedding inorganic NPs in a nitrogen-rich polymeric framework is an efficient way to prevent aggregation during operating conditions. HCNS can not only impart a large, accessible interface to host QDs for fast charge separation, but also facilitate the transport of reactants to the active sites. Wang and his group adopted an interface self-assembly method to introduce CdS QDs onto the exterior surface of HCNS.73 This stable hollow conjugated structure could increase the amount of light absorption and promote surface-dependent reactions by shuttling both the electronic and chemical species through the porous shell. The CdS/HCNS heterostructure exhibited a high stability under visible-light irradiation and enhanced photocatalytic activity toward H2 evolution which was about 5 times faster than that of the pure HCNS. Later, the same group constructed a hollow MoS2/HCNS hybrid via an impregnation–sulfidation method and a ternary Z-scheme CdS–Au–HCNS nanocomposite through the integration of Au, CdS and HCNS.74,75 And both of them exhibited higher photocatalytic performance than pure HCNS.
4. 1D g-C3N4-based nanocomposites
1D nanostructures with distinct electronic, optical and chemical properties could be tuned by the size and morphology of the materials which lead to the development of different strategies to enhance their photocatalytic reactivity.76 In addition, 1D nanostructures allow the lateral confinement of electrons and guide the movement of electrons in the axial direction. In this section, we mainly focus on the 1D g-C3N4-based nanocomposites with synergetic effects on photocatalytic performance.
4.1 g-C3N4 nanotube-based nanocomposites
Inspired by CNTs, a considerable portion of work has been dedicated to prepare carbon nitride nanotubes. Guo et al. first synthesized high-quality graphitic carbon nitride nanotubes (CNNTs) with the C3N4 stoichiometry via a benzene-thermal process.77 Based on the previous work, many other synthesis methods of CNNTs have been developed, including the templating method, the chemical vapour deposition method, the modified recrystallization method and so on.78–82 The synthesized CNNTs exhibited significantly increased visible-light photocatalytic activities. And these could be ascribed to their unique tubular nanostructure along with the concomitant high photogenerated carrier transfer efficiency, sufficient active sites, excellent mass transfer capability and enhanced light utilization efficiency. Therefore, the electronic structure of CNNTs with an adjustable bandgap can be easily modified by functionalizing with metal atoms or combining with other semiconductors to increase the conversion efficiency of solar energy and enhance the photocatalytic activity.83
Noble metal deposition is recognized as an effective strategy to enhance the visible-light photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4 because noble metals can capture photoexcited electrons to decrease the photogenerated electron (e−)–hole (h+) pair recombination probability.84–86 Abundant nitrogen sites in CNNTs can act as active sites for nucleation of the NPs and assist the particles anchored on the surfaces of the nanotubes. Therefore, Li et al. synthesized platinum nanoparticle-deposited carbon nitride nanotubes (Pt/CNNT) for the first time via a one-step solvothermal treatment strategy with Pt NPs uniformly dispersed on the internal and external surface of CNNTs (Fig. 8).87 The visible-light photocatalytic activity of Pt/CNNT was higher than that of bulk g-C3N4 in p-chlorophenol (PCP) degradation and the hydrogen evolution system due to their unique nanostructure and the synergic effect of Pt NPs.
 Fig. 8  (a) and (b) TEM images of Pt(2%)/CNNT. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright (2014) Elsevier). 
Moreover, the catalytic activity of noble NP decorated CNNTs could be elevated through hybridization with transition metals, like Co, Ni, or Fe.88,89 Especially, bimetallic CoPt NPs are believed to provide unprecedented benefits in catalysis by tuning the durability of the catalysts.90 Devadoss et al. first reported a facile insitu approach to fabricate a catalytically active CoPt NP-decorated CNNT hybrid (CoPt–CNNT hybrid) via pyridine-like nitrogen sites in the CNNTs, which led to high stability of CoPt NPs on the CNNTs.91 The as-synthesized hybrid oxidized reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) to a greater extent than CNTs or CNNTs alone. And it could be attributed to the synergistic interactions between CNNTs and CoPt NPs through the improved internal network.
12-Tungstophosphoric acid (H3PW12O40) is an efficient electron trap with a well-defined Keggin structure. And it exhibits distinct superiority in photocatalytic application compared to noble metals and CdS precursors due to its low cost and nontoxicity. Therefore, doping H3PW12O40 in semiconductor photocatalysts is an effective approach to reduce e−–h+ pair recombination. Li et al. prepared a series of H3PW12O40-doped carbon nitride nanotubes (H3PW12O40/CNNT) via a one-step hydrothermal treatment.92 The H3PW12O40/CNNT nanocomposite exhibited higher photocurrent response, as well as higher photocatalytic activity and stability toward methyl orange (MO) and diethyl phthalate (DEP) degradation than bulk g-C3N4 and CNNTs under visible-light irradiation. These could be ascribed to its unique tubular structure, enhanced quantum efficiency and high light-utilization efficiency.
Constructing heterostructures from g-C3N4 and other semiconductors is deemed as an effective way to improve the visible-light-induced charge separation efficiency. To overcome the band gap structure drawbacks of TiO2 and the morphology disadvantages of pristine TiO2/g-C3N4 heterojunction, Li et al. prepared a series of nonmetallic element co-doped titanium dioxide coated carbon nitride nanotube (C/X–TiO2@CNNT, X = N, F, Cl) composites through a sol–gel pyrolysis process.93 Due to their unique tubular nanostructure, enlarged surface area, perfect phase structure, increased quantum efficiency and improved light absorption capacity, the synthesized C/X–TiO2@CNNT exhibited enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activity in the conventional degradation and hydrogen evolution systems.
4.2 g-C3N4 nanofiber-based nanocomposites
As one of the 1D nanostructured carbon nitride materials, g-C3N4 nanofibers (CNFs) have also attracted considerable efforts on their synthesis and characterization. CNFs could be synthesized through many different ways, such as the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method, the solvothermal method, the hydrolysis-driven top–down synthesis method, soft-templating, hard-templating and self-templating strategies.94–99 And in order to obtain large-scale production, Tahir et al. developed a template-free and scale up method for preparing CNFs.100 The as-prepared CNFs with a high surface area, few defects and an appropriate bandgap could increase the redox potential and promote mass transfer. As a result, the photocatalytic activity of CNFs was higher than that of bulk g-C3N4.
In order to broaden the photoresponse window and suppress the carrier recombination of CNFs, many researchers tried to explore g-C3N4 nanofibers-based nanocomposites. Han and his co-workers prepared an interconnected framework of mesoporous g-C3N4 nanofibers merged with in situ incorporated nitrogen-rich carbon (denoted as CNF/C) (Fig. 9).101 The strongly coupled binary structure, high surface area and 3D porous skeleton enhanced the light-harvesting efficiency and the efficient photogenerated charge separation. Thus, the CNF/C hybrid showed an ultrahigh hydrogen evolution rate of 16885 μmol h−1 g−1 without the assistance of any co-catalysts under λ > 420nm irradiation, and an excellent apparent quantum efficiency of 14.3% which was even higher than most reported g-C3N4-based photocatalysts in the presence of Pt-based co-catalysts.
 Fig. 9  (a) High-magnification SEM image of CNF/C; (b) TEM images of CNF/C (reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2016) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Han et al. prepared g-C3N4/N-doped TiO2 nanofibers through an electrospinning technique combined with a modified thermal oxidation process.34 However, the energy conversion efficiency of the synthesized nanofibers was still unsatisfactory due to their limited light-harvesting capability, poor charge carrier generation, and large overpotential for H2 evolution. Fortunately, the metal NPs with a lower overpotential for H2 evolution and the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect could obviously enhance the localized electric fields, with magnitudes about 105 times that of the incident photon energy near the metal surface.102,103 Then, Wei et al. synthesized plasmonic NPs (Au, Ag, or Pt)-decorated g-C3N4/TiO2 heterojunction nanofibers through a facile combination of an electrospinning technique with a thermal reduction/oxidation process.104 And coupling heterojunction sensitization on the g-C3N4/TiO2 interface with Ag SPR effects by plasmonic resonant energy transfer was an optimal strategy for synergistically improving the charge–carrier kinetics to achieve highly efficient photocatalytic H2 evolution. In this case, the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of Ag/g-C3N4/TiO2 nanofibers could reach ∼1.5 μmol h−1 under simulated sunlight irradiation, which was ∼10.7 times higher than that of pure TiO2 nanofibers and nearly 22 times higher than that of the pure CNNs.
Xu et al. prepared polyacrylonitrile (PAN)-splitted graphitic carbon nitride nanofibers (g-C3N4/PAN nanofibers) by electrospinning which could get rid of the aggregation of g-C3N4 in water, and recycle g-C3N4 from the reaction system.105 The nanofibers showed enhanced photocatalytic degradation of RhB which could adsorb RhB quickly and completely decompose it within 180 min under visible light irradiation. Additionally, it also exhibited excellent self-reliant regeneration and recycling activity which indicated that the g-C3N4/PAN nanofibers had a broad application prospect in removing organic pollutants. Then, the same group prepared PAN-supported graphitic carbon nitride coupled with zinc tetracarboxyphthalocyanine nanofibers (g-C3N4/ZnTcPc/PAN nanofibers) by electrospinning.106 In the presence of the g-C3N4/ZnTcPc/PAN nanofibers over a wide pH range, almost all the RhB was degraded after 180 min and the removal rate of carbamazepine was nearly 98% after irradiation for 5 hours in sunlight. Meanwhile, the g-C3N4/ZnTcPc/PAN nanofibers showed excellent stability and reusability because there was no significant loss in catalytic activity under visible light irradiation after repeating the degradation experiment 5 times.
4.3 g-C3N4 nanorod-based nanocomposites
Carbon nitride nanorods (CNRs) can be prepared by using various alumina or silica as templates and the nanostructures of CNRs can be manipulated by changing monomers or adjusting the morphology of the templates, such as dimensions and pore sizes.3,96,107–113 There are also other new preparation methods of CNRs, such as the template-free infrared heating method, the hydrothermal treatment method, the reactive thermolysis method, as well as the simple reflux method.114–117
Combining CNR substrates with supported metal NPs with an optimized size and shape can obtain metal–semiconductor heterojunctions, which can enhance photocatalytic activity by facilitating electron transfer between photoexcited semiconductors and noble metal NPs. Li et al. prepared a CNR/noble metal NP nanocomposite by distributing uniform and homogeneous Au, Pt and Pd NPs inside the mesochannels of CNRs.110 Liu et al. used Pt NPs to decorate CNRs and the resultant nanocomposite exhibited improved hydrogen evolution from water in the presence of TEOA and excellent biophotocatalytic capability toward enzymatic conversion of formaldehyde to methanol when compared with bulk carbon nitride.118 This work established a fundamental and general platform to construct artificial bio-inspired light energy conversion systems from sustainable biological materials.
Combining CNRs with other metal oxides can considerably enhance photocatalytic performance. Wang et al. exploited a facile and straightforward synthesis method to prepare a porous nanorod-type g-C3N4/CuO hybrid (CuO–g-C3N4 nanorods) (Fig. 10) and Fe2O3–g-C3N4 nanorods by using Cu–M supramolecular and Fe–M supramolecular frameworks as a precursor, respectively.119,120 Due to the efficient light harvesting and the heterostructures between metal oxides and CNRs, these two nanocomposites showed strong optical absorption within the whole visible-light region and enhanced visible-light-driven photocatalytic activities toward degradation of RhB dyes. These results indicated that the metal–M supramolecular framework was a promising precursor for preparing efficient g-C3N4 nanocomposite photocatalysts.
 Fig. 10  (a) and (b) TEM images of CuO–g-C3N4 nanorods (reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright (2015) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
4.4 g-C3N4 nanowire-based nanocomposites
As one of the 1D g-C3N4 nanostructures, g-C3N4 nanowires (CNWs) were first observed in the turbostratic carbon nitride product.121 Inspired by the former research, Lu et al. synthesized CNWs through the reactions between C3N3Cl3 and NaN3 with Zn powder as the catalyst.122,123 There are many other synthesis methods for CNWs, including the ion irradiation method, the solid state thermolysis method, the thermal nitridation method, the self-templating method, the hot-melt reduction synthetic method and so on.98,124–128 CNWs with high specific surface areas, excellent light harvesting properties and a low recombination rate of electron–hole pairs possess enhanced photocatalytic activities compared with bulk g-C3N4. But there are few reports about nanowire-type g-C3N4 and its nanocomposites.
Zhang et al. fabricated CdS/g-C3N4 core/shell nanowires via a combined solvothermal and chemisorption method.129 The nanocomposite exhibited excellent photostability and photocatalytic activity toward H2 production which could be ascribed to the synergetic effect between g-C3N4 and CdS with well-matched overlapping band structures. Another two similar one-dimensional core/shell nanowires (Cu2O–g-C3N4 and LaPO4/g-C3N4, designed by Wang and Li, respectively) also showed high photocurrent activities and humidity responses.130,131 Among them, the nanostructure of the 1D LaPO4/g-C3N4 core–shell nanocomposite is shown in Fig. 11. And the photocatalytic CO production capability of the nanocomposite was obviously enhanced, which was around 10.36 and 8.07 times that on LaPO4 and tubular g-C3N4, respectively. The nanowire-type g-C3N4-based nanocomposites and these novel core/shell structured nanocomposites without any noble metals as co-catalysts could be further explored.
 Fig. 11  (a) HRTEM image of LaPO4/g-C3N4 nanowires; (b) inserted with the magnified HR-TEM image of the selected area (inset) (reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright (2016) Elsevier). 
5. 0D g-C3N4-based nanocomposites
As an emerging kind of material, graphene exerted huge impacts in diverse fields and has already been processed into a 0D quantum-dot structure.132,133 When the size of graphene is down to 10nm, the strong quantum confinement and edge effect render it excellent optical properties.134,135 Inspired by these, Wang et al. synthesized graphitic carbon nitride quantum dots (CNQDs) for the first time via a thermal–chemical etching process.136 Bulk g-C3N4 was first exfoliated into CNNs using a thermal oxidation method and then the CNNs underwent an acid etching process to produce CNRs. Finally, CNQDs are obtained after the hydrothermal process of CNRs. Other synthesis methods of CNQDs, such as the low-temperature solid-phase method, hydrolysis of bulk g-C3N4 in an acidic solution and the facile microwave-assisted solvothermal method, will be not explained in detail in this review.137–144
Compared with bulk g-C3N4, 0D CNQDs possess a larger surface-to-volume ratio, higher solubility in both aqueous and nonaqueous solvents, better amenability to hybridize with other nanomaterials, as well as higher tunability in physiochemical properties. CNQDs also have strong blue emission and upconversion behaviors. Therefore, CNQDs can be utilized as current energy-transfer components in visible-light-driven metal-free photocatalytic systems. Moreover, due to the favorable interactions and synergetic effects, CNQD based nanocomposites can obviously enhance photocatalytic performance.76,136
Li et al. combined CNQDs with single-crystal TiO2 nanotube arrays (TiO2–NTAs) via chemical vapor deposition and the nanocomposite was labelled CNQD/TiO2-NTA.145 As shown in Fig. 12a and b, the CNQDs with an average size of approximately 2.4nm were uniformly dispersed onto the inner walls of TiO2 nanotubes in TiO2–NTAs. The CNQD/TiO2–NTA nanocomposite exhibited high activity toward degradation of organic pollutants and H2 evolution. Su et al. also prepared highly ordered TiO2–NTAs decorated with CNQDs.146 But they took a simple two-step method which included an electrochemical anodization technique followed by a facile organic molecular linkage. The resultant nanocomposite exhibited significantly improved photoresponse and the saturation photocurrent reached nearly 3.5 times that of pristine TiO2. The nanocomposite also showed enhanced photocatalytic activity in both degrading RhB and water splitting. Wang et al. prepared a novel Sb2S3/ultrathin CNN heterostructure embedded with CNQDs (CNQD/CNN/Sb2S3) via a facile hydrothermal process.43 And the nanocomposite demonstrated apparently high reusability and stability toward MO degradation during the cyclic experiments and enhanced photocatalytic performance for the MO degradation under UV, visible and NIR irradiation. Lin et al. reported a successful attempt about the preparation of a CNQD/InVO4/BiVO4 hierarchical nanostructure by an in situ precipitation approach and the photocatalytic activity of the nanocomposite in degrading RhB under visible light was obviously enhanced.147 Li et al. fabricated a CNQDs modified rutile TiO2 (rTiO2) hybrid (CNQD/rTiO2) by a one-pot strategy.148 And after modification, both the reactivity of visible-light-induced photocatalytic degradation of RhB and photocatalytic oxidation of NO were significantly increased.
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM and SAED inset images and (b) size distribution of CNQDs in CNQD/TiO2-NTA (reprinted with permission from ref. 145.Copyright (2015) Elsevier). 
6. Summary and perspective
As a novel and efficient visible light photocatalyst, g-C3N4 has triggered exceptional interest about its design and preparation, structure manipulation, catalytic mechanism, performance intensification and potential application since it was first reported as a semiconductor photocatalyst in 2009.2 Though g-C3N4 has a number of distinct advantages, its large-scale applications are still hindered by some obstacles, especially the high recombination rate of photo-generated electron–hole pairs and small specific surface areas. Over the past few years, great efforts have been dedicated to prepare g-C3N4-based hybrid nanocomposites. This review is mainly focused on the recent advances in fabrication methods and photocatalytic performance of different dimensional g-C3N4-based nanocomposites, as well as the photocatalytic mechanisms in different environmental purification fields, spanning from pollutant degradation, heavy metal ion reduction, bacteria disinfection to CO2 reduction. The incorporation of different dimensional g-C3N4 into these nanocomposites can render specific morphology, improved charge carrier separation time, enhanced transportation efficiency, enlarged surface area and adequate visible light absorption. And these features govern the overall photocatalytic performance.
In spite of the above progress, there are still a number of grand challenges to be resolved. First, deeper understanding about the multiple interactions among different components in the complex nanostructures and the charge transfer efficiency of the resultant heterojunctions should be acquired. Second, the mechanisms relevant to the enhancement of photocatalytic activity in different dimensional g-C3N4-based nanocomposite systems remain partly unclear and need to be further elucidated. Third, compared with 2D g-C3N4-based nanocomposites, research about 3D g-C3N4-based nanocomposites is far less developed. The subsequent research should put more attention on preparing 3D g-C3N4 materials and designing 3D g-C3N4-based nanocomposites due to their unique structure and properties. Fourth, with the rapid development of materials science and nanotechnology, future research can focus on preparing novel nanocomposites by combining advanced photocatalysts with different dimensional g-C3N4 to explore more fascinating properties. Till now, the majority of studies about different dimensional g-C3N4-based photocatalysts mainly concentrate on binary nanocomposites. It may be worthwhile for researchers to fabricate ternary nanocomposites and investigate the photocatalytic mechanisms of the more complicated systems.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (21125627), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21406163, 91534126, 21621004), the Tianjin Research Program of Application Foundation and Advanced Technology (15JCQNJC10000), and the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities (B06006).
Notes and references
C. George, M. Ammann, B. D'Anna, D. J. Donaldson and S. A. Nizkorodov, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4218–4258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y.-S. Jun, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4093–4095 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Gong, J. Zhang, L. Zhan, L. Ma, Z. Fang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Niu, L. C. Yin, Y. Q. Yang, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8046–8052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Bhunia, K. Yamauchi and K. Takanabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11001–11005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, N. Ping, C. Sun, S. C. Smith, C. Zhigang and H. M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11642–11648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717 CAS .
Z. Jiang, D. Jiang, Z. Yan, D. Liu, K. Qian and J. Xie, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 170–171, 195–205 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Chen and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3092–3108 CAS .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, L. Lin and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6297–6301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Xie, H. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin and P. J. King, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, H. Yu, X. Quan, S. Chen, H. Zhao and H. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 624–628 RSC .
S. Yang, X. Feng, X. Wang and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339–5343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Sun, K. Maeda, K. Domen, P. Liu, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 675–678 CAS .
G. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8083 RSC .
X. Lu, K. Xu, P. Chen, K. Jia, S. Liu and C. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18924–18928 CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, J. C. Yu, D. Xia, P. K. Wong and Y. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 8724–8732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Lai, C. Xie, K. S. Teng, Y. Li, F. Tan, F. Yan and S. P. Lau, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 555–561 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wan, S. Yu, F. Dong, Q. Zhang and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7823–7829 CAS .
Q. Liu, T. Chen, Y. Guo, Z. Zhang and X. Fang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 248–258 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7281–7285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, Q. Wen, M. Hong, Z. Zhuang and Y. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 307, 593–603 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, X. Wang, C. Hu, M. Xie, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6094–6097 RSC .
N. Cheng, J. Tian, Q. Liu, C. Ge, A. H. Qusti, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6815–6819 CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and S. T. Yong, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1249–1257 RSC .
X. Bai, R. Zong, C. Li, D. Liu, Y. Liu and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 82–91 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Rahman, J. Ran, Y. Tang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2445–2452 CAS .
C. Han, Y. Lu, J. Zhang, L. Ge, Y. Li, C. Chen, Y. Xin, L. Wu and S. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23274–23282 CAS .
W. Chen, T. Huang, T.-Y. Liu, G.-R. Duan, X.-J. Yang and X.-H. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 690, 503–511 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dai, L. Lu, C. Liang, Q. Liu and G. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156–157, 331–340 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, Y. Wang, Y. Lei, B. Wang, N. Wu, Q. Shi and Q. Li, Nano Res., 2014, 8, 1199–1209 CrossRef .
Q. Tay, X. Wang, X. Zhao, J. Hong, Q. Zhang, R. Xu and Z. Chen, J. Catal., 2016, 342, 55–62 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kondo, N. Murakami, C. Ye, T. Tsubota and T. Ohno, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 362–367 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tong, D. Yang, T. Xiao, Y. Tian and Z. Jiang, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 260, 117–125 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, N. Murakami, T. Tsubota and T. Ohno, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150–151, 479–485 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohno, N. Murakami, T. Koyanagi and Y. Yang, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 6, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, X. Zeng, S. Gao, L. Ma, Q. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Wang, B. Huang, Y. Dai and J. Lu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1969–1982 CrossRef CAS .
X.-j. Wang, C. Liu, X.-l. Li, F.-t. Li, Y.-p. Li, J. Zhao and R.-h. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 394, 340–350 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zeng and J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22116–22125 CAS .
H. Wang, X. Yuan, H. Wang, X. Chen, Z. Wu, L. Jiang, W. Xiong and G. Zeng, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 36–46 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, T. Y. Liu, T. Huang, X. H. Liu and X. J. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3711–3719 RSC .
J. Su, Z. Bai, B. Huang, X. Quan and G. Chen, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 148–157 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ye, H. Fang, Y. Z. Zheng, N. Li, Y. Wang and X. Tao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13879–13889 CAS .
Q. Zhang, B. Xu, S. Yuan, M. Zhang and T. Ohno, Catal. Today, 2017, 284, 27–36 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thaweesak, M. Lyu, P. Peerakiatkhajohn, T. Butburee, B. Luo, H. Chen and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 184–190 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, J. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 191–198 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, T. Wang, H. Zhang, K. Chang and J. Ye, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5360–5367 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hong, C. Chen, F. E. Bedoya, G. H. Kelsall, D. O'Hare and C. Petit, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 5042–5051 CAS .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, R. Q. Sun and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10145–10149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Liu, X. Gao, C. Fu and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1189–1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dong, Z. Zhao, T. Xiong, Z. Ni, W. Zhang, Y. Sun and W. K. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11392–11401 CAS .
W. Jiang, W. Luo, R. Zong, W. Yao, Z. Li and Y. Zhu, Small, 2016, 12, 4370–4378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takanabe, K. Kamata, X. Wang, M. Antonietti, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 13020–13025 RSC .
S. Min and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19644–19652 CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Hong, W. Zhang and R. Xu, Catal.
Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1703 CAS .
E. Cheng, W. Yin, S. Bai, R. Qiao, Y. Zhong and Z. Li, Mater. Lett., 2015, 146, 87–90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, X. Guo and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6291–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shao, D. Jiang, P. Xiao, L. Zhu, S. Meng and M. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 198, 200–210 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Zimmerman, W. Robert, V. N. Khabashesku and J. L. Margrave, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 731–734 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, C. Yang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4121–4126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lin, C. Xue, X. Yan, G. Yang, G. Yang and B. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 357, 346–355 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, B. Jin, R. Chen, F. Peng and Y. Fang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 1447–1452 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Giannakoudakis, N. A. Travlou, J. Secor and T. J. Bandosz, Small, 2017, 13 DOI:10.1002/smll.201601758 .
J. Sun, J. Zhang, M. Zhang, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2012, 1, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zheng, C. Huang and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 465–470 RSC .
D. Zheng, C. Pang, Y. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9706–9709 RSC .
Y.-S. Jun, E. Z. Lee, X. Wang, W. H. Hong, G. D. Stucky and A. Thomas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3661–3667 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, J. Li, J. Yuan, Y. Kong, Y. Tao, F. Lin and S. Li, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 696–702 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, D. Chen, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He and J. Lu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12066–12072 RSC .
D. Zheng, G. Zhang and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 479–488 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zheng, G. Zhang, Y. Hou and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 521, 2–8 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zheng, C. Pang and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17467–17470 RSC .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, Y. Xie, X. Wang, S. Zhang, T. Hou and S. Lv, Chem. Commun., 2004, 26–27 RSC .
S.-W. Bian, Z. Ma and W.-G. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8668–8672 CAS .
J. W. Lee, R. Viswan, Y. J. Choi, Y. Lee, S. Y. Kim, J. Cho, Y. Jo and J. K. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2213–2218 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, F. Li, B. Chen and G. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 102700–102706 RSC .
J. Gao, Y. Zhou, Z. Li, S. Yan, N. Wang and Z. Zou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3687–3692 RSC .
S. Wang, C. Li, T. Wang, P. Zhang, A. Li and J. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2885 CAS .
H. Pan, Y.-W. Zhang, V. B. Shenoy and H. Gao, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 99–104 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Datta, B. V. Reddy, K. Ariga and A. Vinu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5961–5965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ge, C. Han, J. Liu and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 409–410, 215–222 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Lu, G. Wu and W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8826–8828 RSC .
K. Li, Z. Zeng, L. Yan, S. Luo, X. Luo, M. Huo and Y. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 428–437 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, D. van der Vliet, K. L. More, N. J. Zaluzec, S. Peng, S. Sun, H. Daimon, G. Wang, J. Greeley, J. Pearson, A. P. Paulikas, G. Karapetrov, D. Strmcnik, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 919–926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Zhang, J. F. Hui, Z. G. Guo, Q. Y. Yu, B. Xu, X. Zhang, Z. C. Liu, C. M. Xu, J. S. Gao and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2633–2639 RSC .
S. Jiang, Y. Ma, G. Jian, H. Tao, X. Wang, Y. Fan, Y. Lu, Z. Hu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4953–4956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Devadoss, J. W. Lee, C. Terashima, A. Fujishima, Y.-P. Kim, J. K. Kang and U. Paik, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 208, 204–211 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, L. Yan, Z. Zeng, S. Luo, X. Luo, X. Liu, H. Guo and Y. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156–157, 141–152 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, Z. Zeng, L. Yan, M. Huo, Y. Guo, S. Luo and X. Luo, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 187, 269–280 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Wang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2002, 85, 105–108 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mu, J. Huang, Z. Liu, Z. Li and B. Han, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 21, 1658–1663 CrossRef .
F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4467–4471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun and Y. He, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 216, 453–460 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, W. Wei, Z. Jiang, Y. Xu and J. Xie, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 4158–4170 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, J. Reboul, S. Furukawa, L. Radhakrishnan, Y. Zhang, P. Srinivasu, H. Iwai, H. Wang, Y. Nemoto, N. Suzuki, S. Kitagawa and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8124–8126 RSC .
M. Tahir, C. Cao, N. Mahmood, F. K. Butt, A. Mahmood, F. Idrees, S. Hussain, M. Tanveer, Z. Ali and I. Aslam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1258–1265 CAS .
Q. Han, B. Wang, J. Gao and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10849–10853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 CAS .
X. Wei, C. Shao, X. Li, N. Lu, K. Wang, Z. Zhang and Y. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11034–11043 RSC .
T. Xu, F. Wu, Y. Gu, Y. Chen, J. Cai, W. Lu, H. Hu, Z. Zhu and W. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 86505–86512 RSC .
T. Xu, D. Ni, X. Chen, F. Wu, P. Ge, W. Lu, H. Hu, Z. Zhu and W. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 317, 17–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Groenewolt and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1789–1792 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Jun, W. H. Hong, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4270–4274 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Li, J. Zhang, X. Chen, A. Fischer, A. Thomas, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4344–4348 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Li, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2170 RSC .
Z. Zhao, Y. Dai, J. Lin and G. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3151–3161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Huang, H. Zhou and M. Antonietti, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8434–8440 CAS .
Y. Zheng, L. Lin, X. Ye, F. Guo and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11926–11930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, J. Xia, L. Wang, H. Ji, J. Qian, H. Xu, K. Wang and H. Li, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2014, 2014, 3665–3673 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. Wu, J. Zhang, S. Tang, C. Hu, Y. Li, L. Jiang and Q. Cui, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2015, 119, 1507–1513 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Li, D. J. Qian and M. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25162–25170 CAS .
X. Bai, L. Wang, R. Zong and Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9952–9961 CAS .
J. Liu, R. Cazelles, Z. P. Chen, H. Zhou, A. Galarneau and M. Antonietti, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 14699–14705 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Xu, X. Qian, Y. Dong, J. Gao, G. Qian and J. Yao, Chem. – Asian J., 2015, 10, 1276–1280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Li, J. Cong, Z. Liu, H. Zhang, M. Liang, J. Gao, S. Wang and J. Yao, J. Solid State Chem., 2016, 238, 246–251 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhao, D. L. Yu, H. W. Zhou and Y. J. Tian, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 2645–2647 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takenaka, Y. Shigeta, E. Tanabe and K. Otsuka, J. Catal., 2003, 220, 468–477 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, L. Gai, D. Cui, Q. Wang, X. Zhao and X. Tao, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 4255–4258 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yong, Z. Wang, J. Hu, C. Ren and Z. Zhu, Carbon, 2007, 45, 2134–2136 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao, B.-n. Wang, X.-y. Chen and Y.-t. Qian, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2009, 25, 412–416 CAS .
X. Bai, C. Cao, X. Xu and Q. Yu, Solid State Commun., 2010, 150, 2148–2153 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Zhang, F. Long, W. Wang, Y. Gu, S. Mo, Z. Zou and Z. Fu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 23272–23278 RSC .
K. Zhang, L. Wang, X. Sheng, M. Ma, M. S. Jung, W. Kim, H. Lee and J. H. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502352 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Lin, F. Huang and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10317–10324 CAS .
L. Wang, F. Zhao, Q. Han, C. Hu, L. Lv, N. Chen and L. Qu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9694–9702 RSC .
M. Li, L. Zhang, X. Fan, M. Wu, M. Wang, R. Cheng, L. Zhang, H. Yao and J. Shi, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 629–635 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Ponomarenko, F. Schedin, M. I. Katsnelson, R. Yang, E. W. Hill, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 356–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Sangwon and H. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pan, C. Xi, Z. Li, L. Wang, Z. Chen, B. Lu and M. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3551 CAS .
S. Zhuo, M. Shao and S.-T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, J. Wang, Z. Wei, P. Zhang, H. Li and Y. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2303–2309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. Yang and C. Y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8605–8607 RSC .
Z. Zhou, Y. Shen, Y. Li, A. Liu, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12480–12487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, J. Ma, Y. Lin, B. Yao, F. Li, W. Weng and X. Lin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 151, 875–880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, Y. Su, N. Yang, L. Zhang and Y. Lv, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4528–4535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bai, S. Yan, J. Wang, L. Wang, W. Jiang, S. Wu, C. Sun and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17521–17529 CAS .
X. Chen, Q. Liu, Q. Wu, P. Du, J. Zhu, S. Dai and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1719–1728 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Wang, Q. Zhang, J. Xie, Y. Tian, J. Wang and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4438–4443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Barman and M. Sadhukhan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21832 RSC .
G. Li, Z. Lian, W. Wang, D. Zhang and H. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 446–454 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, L. Zhu and G. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 186, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, D. Xu, J. Zheng, M. Song, G. Che, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, C. Liu, L. Zhao and L. Chang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 688, 891–898 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, K. Lv, W. Ho, F. Dong, X. Wu and Y. Xia, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 611–619 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Fei Ding	Fei Ding received her Bachelor's Degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Xiamen University in 2015. She is pursuing her master's degree under Prof. Zhongyi Jiang at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University. Her current research is focused on the development of new visible light active photocatalysts for environmental and energy applications.
Dong Yang	Dong Yang obtained his Ph.D. at the Northeast Forestry University in 2001 under the guidance of Prof. Lijia An. After a stint with Prof. Limin Qi as a Postdoctoral student at Peking University, he joined the faculty of Tianjin University in 2004, where he is currently an associate professor in biochemical engineering. His research interests encompass functional nanomaterials, membranes and membrane processes.
Zhenwei Tong	Zhenwei Tong received her Bachelor's Degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Sichuan University in 2012. She is pursuing her Ph.D. under Prof. Zhongyi Jiang at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University. Her research interests include hierarchically structured materials, biocatalysis and photocatalysis.
Zhongyi Jiang	Zhongyi Jiang is a professor at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology of Tianjin University. He obtained his Ph.D. degree from Tianjin University in 1994. He was a visiting scholar of the University of Minnesota with Prof. Edward Cussler in 1997 and California Institute of Technology with Prof. David Tirrell in 2009. He is a winner of the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in China. His research interests include biomimetic and bioinspired membranes and membrane processes, biocatalysis and photocatalysis. He has co-authored over 390 SCI papers, which were cited over 9000 times in total and he has an h-index of 49.

Environmental significance
As a metal-free conjugated semiconductor visible light photocatalyst, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) has attracted numerous research interests. However, its practical application is severely hindered by some inherent limitations, such as high recombination rate of photo-generated electron–hole pairs, small specific surface area, low electronic conductivity and low utilization rate of visible light. Combining g-C3N4 with other components to fabricate g-C3N4-based nanocomposites proves a promising solution because of the improved charge carrier separation time and transportation efficiency, enlarged surface area and adequate visible light absorption. Till now, g-C3N4-based nanocomposites have been broadly utilized in degradation of aqueous organic pollutants, reduction of heavy metal ions, disinfection of bacteria, removal of atmospheric pollutants and reduction of CO2.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of synthesizing CNNs by using the top–down and bottom–up strategies (reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the visible-light-driven photocatalytic bacterial inactivation mechanisms of (a) CNRGOS8 and (b) RGOCNS8 under aerobic conditions, and (c) CNRGOS8 and (d) RGOCNS8 under anaerobic conditions (reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright (2013) The American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of CNN/CNT; (c) schematic illustration of fabricating the 3D CNN/CNT porous composite (reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright (2014) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 
C3N4 + hν → e− (CB) + h+ (VB)	(1)
Cr(VI)− + 14H+ + 16e− → 2Cr(III) + 7H2O	(2)
CNNs + TiO2 + hν → TiO2 (e−) + CNN (h+)	(3)
TiO2 (e−) + O2 → TiO2 + ˙O2−	(4)
˙O2− + CNNs (h+) + RhB → degradation products	(5)

 	Fig. 4  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images CNN/TiO2nanosheets; (c) schematic illustration of the mechanism for the RhB degradation on the CNN/TiO2 nanosheets photocatalyst under visible-light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm) (reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2014) Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 5  Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by the UiO-66/CNN nanocomposite under visible-light irradiation (reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright (2015) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of electron–hole separation and transport at the CN–TU heterojunction interface and in both semiconductors (reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2013) The American Chemical Society).	 
HCNS/RGO + hν → e− + h+	(6)
e− + O2 → ˙O2−	(7)
˙O2− + 2H+ + e− → H2O2	(8)
H2O2 + e− → ˙OH + OH−	(9)
NO + 2 ˙OH → NO2 + H2O	(10)
NO2 + ˙OH → NO3− + H+	(11)
NO + NO2 + H2O → 2HNO2	(12)
NO + ˙O2− → NO3−	(13)
NOx + h+ → NO3−	(14)

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of HCNS/RGO; (c) schematic of the reaction mechanism for NO removal (reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) and (b) TEM images of Pt(2%)/CNNT. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright (2014) Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) High-magnification SEM image of CNF/C; (b) TEM images of CNF/C (reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2016) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) and (b) TEM images of CuO–g-C3N4 nanorods (reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright (2015) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) HRTEM image of LaPO4/g-C3N4 nanowires; (b) inserted with the magnified HR-TEM image of the selected area (inset) (reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright (2016) Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM and SAED inset images and (b) size distribution of CNQDs in CNQD/TiO2-NTA (reprinted with permission from ref. 145.Copyright (2015) Elsevier).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
