Micromotors for environmental applications: a review  - Environmental Science: Nano (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EN00299A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EN00299A
(Frontier)
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 1530-1544Micromotors for environmental applications: a review

        
          
            Beatriz 
            Jurado-Sánchez
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Joseph 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Analytical Chemistry, Physical Chemistry and Chemical Engineering and Research Institute “Andrés M. del Río”, University of Alcala, Madrid, Spain
bDepartment of Nanoengineering, University of California, La Jolla, San Diego, CA 92093, USA. E-mail: josephwang@ucsd.edu
Received 
      14th March 2018
    , Accepted 16th May 2018First published on 18th May 2018AbstractSelf-propelled micromotors represent a new paradigm in the environmental field, greatly enhancing the efficiency of traditional operations due to the actively moving matter phenomena. This review highlights current opportunities and challenges in the use of micromotors for enhancing pollutant degradation and removal, accelerating bacterial killing or enabling dynamic environmental monitoring. Such studies exemplify the wide range of potential environmental applications of dynamic micromachines associated with their continuous motion, force and functionality. We will conclude with the challenges of moving these exciting advances from the bench scale to larger-scale field applications.Beatriz Jurado-SánchezBeatriz Jurado Sánchez has been a Ramon y Cajal researcher in the Department of Analytical Chemistry, at the University of Alcalá (Spain) since 2017. She received her PhD in chemistry from the University of Cordoba in 2009. In 2013 she was awarded the prestigious Marie Curie IOF fellowship to carry out research at the University of California, San Diego under the supervision of Prof. Joseph Wang. She has co-authored over 45 scientific papers (H Index = 19) and several book chapters. Her current research interests focus on the development of micromotors and Janus particles for analytical and environmental applications.Joseph WangJoseph Wang is a Distinguished Professor, SAIC Endowed Chair and Chair of the Department of Nanoengineering at the University of California, San Diego. He held the Regents Professorship and Manasse Chair positions at NMSU, and served as the Director of the Center for Bioelectronics and Biosensors at Arizona State University. He received two ACS National Awards in 1999 and 2006 and 8 Honorary Professorships from Spain, Argentina, Slovenia and China. Prof. Wang is the Editor-in-Chief of Electroanalysis (Wiley). His scientific interests include nanomachines, bioelectronics, biosensors, wearable devices and bio nanotechnology. He has authored over 1050 papers (H Index = 150).

Environmental significance
This frontier article reviews recent advances in the use of self-propelled micromotors in the environmental field. It illustrates how mobile reactors or receptors can greatly improve the efficiency and speed of environmental remediation and monitoring processes. The new capabilities of synthetic micromotors that enable such exciting environmental applications are discussed. Current opportunities and challenges for using such functional nanomotors for improving diverse environmental applications are discussed.

Micromotors and the environment
The rapid pace of industrialization has resulted in excessive emissions of hazardous pollutants into our water and air resources. To protect the human health and the environment, adequate contaminant management is required either by biological, physical or chemical treatment. Yet, the efficiency of these processes is limited by diffusive mass transport, and external means of agitation are required for enhancing the yields. Emerging applications of nanotechnology have added a new dimension to environmental remediation processes.1 In particular, self-propelled micro- and nanomotors, capable of converting energy into movement and forces, exhibit considerable potential to overcome the diffusion limit of treatment operations by employing actively moving matter.2–9 The continuous movement of such microscale objects imparts significant mixing without external stirring, leading to higher efficiencies and shorter clean-up times.10 Since early pioneering studies on self-electrophoretic and peroxide-driven micromotors,11 research efforts have been aimed at exploring alternative propulsion mechanisms based on the Marangoni effect,12 photoinduced motion,13 electromagnetic,14,15 thermal,16 light17–19 or ultrasound fields20–22 and even biohybrid motion.23,24 The efficient propulsion and motion control of modern micromotors have been coupled with additional capabilities, including facile functionalization, cargo towing or collective and chemotactic behaviors. Such impressive capabilities of microscale machines have been exploited for improving diverse operations in diverse fields, including enhanced drug delivery,25,26 analytical sensing,27–29 energy generation30 or assisted fertilization.31
The new capabilities of synthetic micromotors have also opened a new horizon in the environmental field. Recent proof-of-concept studies have demonstrated that micromotors can have a profound impact on the environmental field, with applications ranging from water-quality screening to the degradation and removal of pollutants. Early studies on micromotor-based environmental applications, initiated by Wang's group in 2009, exploited the pollutant effect on the micromotor speed for motion based-detection of silver ions (Fig. 1).32 This pioneering work has laid the foundation for future micromotor-based sensing protocols, which will be reviewed in the following sections. The same group reported in 2012 the first application of functionalized tubular micromotors for dynamic removal of oil from water.33 Subsequently, Sanchez and Schmidt employed rolled-up Fe/Pt tubular micromotors for degrading organic pollutants in water via the Fenton oxidation process.34 These early efforts represent the first proof-of-concept applications of micromotors for water cleaning. Since then, the number of papers reporting on environmental applications of micromotors has risen exponentially. Such studies relied primarily on the use of hydrogen peroxide as fuel. While hydrogen peroxide is often used as an oxidative reagent in water treatment and is naturally decomposed in time, its widespread applications may be limited. A logical step in the field (since 2014) has been the design of water-fueled micromotors or the exploration of environmentally-friendly fuel-free propulsion mechanisms such as light or ultrasound.35 In parallel, recent efforts have aimed at improving the overall efficiency of micromotor-based remediation protocols by exploiting new nanomaterials such as graphene. Yet, some key issues, crucial to the translation of these major advances for practical environmental applications, remain unexplored. These demand future studies concerning scale-up issues toward coverage of large contaminated areas or deeper toxicity studies.
 Fig. 1  Time-line showing the progress in the use of self-propelled micromotors for environmental applications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 (top part in 2011), copyright 2012 American Chemical Society; ref. 34 (top part in 2013), copyright 2013 American Chemical Society; ref. 65 (top part in 2016), copyright 2015 Wiley and ref. 17 (top part in 2017), copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
The aim of the present review is to highlight recent advances and prospects in the application of self-propelled micromotors for environmental applications. As several reviews have covered early progress in the field,36–38 we will focus here on recent developments over the last 3 years. We will illustrate first how the movement of functional micromachines adds a new dimension to environmental monitoring processes with shorter analysis times and on-site monitoring capabilities. We will also discuss the use of micromotors for adsorptive removal and advanced pollutant degradation. Novel bacteria killing applications will be also covered. These recent studies exemplify the wide range of potential environmental applications of mobile micromachines towards dynamic remediation and sensing activities. A brief overview is summarized in Table 1, which we hope will help the reader to follow the contents of this comprehensive review.
Table 1 Summary of self-propelled micromotors for environmental application




Motor
Pollutant
Ref.





Environmental sensing and monitoring




Motion based pollutant detection



Au/Pt nanowires
Silver

32



PEDOT/Au-catalase tubular micromotors
Hg, Cu, NaN3, aminotriazole, nerve agents

45, 46



CdTe/PEDOT/Pt tubular micromotors
Hg

50



Fluoresceinamine loaded Si/Pt Janus micromotors
Sarin and soman simulants

51



MIP-PEDOT/Pt/Ni/Pt tubular micromotors
Phycocyanin

53



Catalase-polycaprolactone micromotor
HCl, NH3

47




Selective pollutant isolation and detection



Lectin modified Au/Ni/PANI/Pt tubular micromotors

Escherichia coli


55




Assisted electrochemical detection



Mg/Au Janus micromotors
Nerve agents, phthalates

57, 58




Adsorptive removal of pollutants



SAM modified Au/Ni/PEDOT/Pt tubular micromotors
Oil droplets

33



Marangoni propelled capsule millimotor
Oil droplets

12



Water driven Mg/Au/SAM micromotors
Oil droplets

62



Heavy metals

72



MnFe2O4 Janus micromotors
Oil droplets

60



Activated carbon/Pt Janus micromotors
Heavy metals, explosives, nerve agents, azo-dyes

65



Zeolite/Ag Janus micromotors
Chemical and biological warfare agents

69



Zr/rGO/Ni/Pt tubular micromotors
Chemical warfare agents

67



rGO/Ni/Pt tubular micromotors
Heavy metals

68



rGO/Pt Janus micromotors
Persistent organic pollutants

66



Carbonic anhydrase functionalized PEDOT/Pt tubular micromotors
CO2

70



GO/PtNPs rolled-up micromotors
Oil droplets

61




Pollutant degradation




Advanced oxidation



Fe/Pt rolled-up micromotors
Azo-dyes

34, 73



PEDOT/Pt tubular micromotors
Chemical warfare agents

78



rGO/Prussian blue hydrogel micromotor
Azo-dyes

75



Ti/Fe/Cr rolled-up micromotors
4-Nitrophenol

80



MnO2 Janus micromotors
Azo dyes

79



CoNi@Pt mesoporous nanowires
Azo dyes, 4-nitrophenol

81



Ag/ZIF Janus micromotors
Rhodamine B

77




Biocatalytic degradation



SDS-based enzyme-releasing motors
Phenolic pollutants

82



Plant (radish) based enzymatic motors
Phenolic pollutants

83




Photocatalytic degradation



TiO2/Mg Janus micromotors
Chemical and biological warfare agents

86



Au/TiO2/Pt Janus micromotor
Azo dyes

89



TiO2/Pt and Pt/TiO2 tubular micromotors
Rhodamine B

88



CdS/PANI/Pt tubular micromotors
Bisphenol A

90



TiO2/Pt Janus micromotors
Rhodamine B

92



Light driven TiO2/Au Janus micromotors
Dyes

94



Light-driven Au–WO3@C Janus micromotors
Dyes

19




Bacteria killing



US propelled lysozyme modified nanowire motors

Micrococcus lysodeikticus


22



Mg/chitosan Janus micromotors

Escherichia coli


96





Micromotors for “on the move” environmental sensing and monitoring
Self-propelled micromotors represent a new paradigm for real-time environmental monitoring, holding considerable promise for detecting sudden changes and incoming threats or monitoring continuously remediation processes or inaccessible environments with minimal sample preparation. One early and effective strategy relies on the changes in the swimming behaviour of catalytic micromotors in the presence of hazardous chemicals. Catalytic micromotors can display a chemotactic behaviour in the presence of a gradient of the fuel concentration, with a directed movement and increased speed toward higher peroxide concentrations.39 Polymeric microsphere motors based on embedded Pd nanoparticles display chemotactic movement (with increasing speed) toward a higher pH region, indicating promise for environmental pH monitoring.40 Micromotors could use chemotactic search strategies to track chemical plumes to their source. For example, bimetallic nanowire motors display dramatic and specific acceleration in the presence of silver ions. Such acceleration reflects the underpotential deposition of silver onto a platinum segment that increases the catalytic activity. Such motion based sensing protocols are highly selective and sensitive (down to the nanomolar level) with the speed or distance providing the quantitative information.32,41 The silver-based acceleration has formed the basis for a motion-based detection of DNA hybridization in connection with silver nanoparticle tags.42 Iridium-based Janus micromotors, powered by low levels of hydrazine, display a well-defined fuel-concentration/speed dependence that indicates considerable promise for tracking hydrazine plumes.43,44 Inspired by fish-life stage toxicity test, catalase-powered tubular micromotors (see Fig. 2) display diminished speeds and lifetime in the presence of toxic pollutants (e.g., heavy metals, pesticides), nerve agents,45,46 or HCl and NH3 gases.47 Such motion-based toxicity screening protocols rely on the toxin-induced inhibition of the catalase enzyme powering the micromotor.46 Similar strategies using enzyme-free micromotors rely on the poisoning of the Pt catalytic layer in the presence of certain pollutants that leads to diminished speeds. For example, Pumera employed Cu/Pt tubular motors for selective monitoring of lead in the presence of cadmium ions. Such selectivity is based on the different adsorption rates of each metal ion on the Pt catalyst.48 A similar protocol was applied for detecting dimethyl sulfoxide and amino acids or peptides containing thiol groups that can poison the Pt catalyst.49
 Fig. 2  (A) Motion-based pollutant detection using self-propelled micromotors: (a) biocatalytic PEDOT-Au-catalase micromotors for heavy metal ion screening. The scheme illustrates the pollutant effect on the micromotor speed through inhibition of the catalase biocatalytic layer; (b) CdTe-QD modified micromotors for selective mercury detection based on the Hg-induced fluorescence quenching of the QDs immobilized on the micromotor surface. (B) Lectin-modified PEDOT/Pt micromotors for selective pick-up, transport and release of Escherichia coli bacteria in environmental samples. (C) Mg/Au Janus micromotor assisted detection of non-electroactive nerve agents in sensing strips. Localized OH ions generated by Mg/Au micromotors, along with convection forces, result in the degradation of organophosphate (OP) nerve agents into readily detectable nitrophenol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 (A, a), copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, ref. 50 (A, b), copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 55 (B), copyright 2012 American Chemical Society and ref. 57 (C), copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The coupling of micromotors with fluorescent dyes or nanoparticles, such as quantum dots, represents an attractive and convenient way for designing advanced mobile environmental microsensors. This strategy relies on rapid binding-induced changes (quenching/recovery) in the fluorescence intensity. Fig. 2A illustrates an example for detecting heavy metals ions based on the use of quantum dot (QD) embedded tubular micromotors. The micromotors were fabricated by integrating CdTe QDs on the outer surface of PEDOT/Pt micromotors through a positively-charged (poly(diallyldimethylammoniumchloride) layer. The motion accelerated binding of trace Hg2+ to the QDs selectively quenches the fluorescence emission and leads to effective “on-the-fly” discrimination between the two most relevant mercury species, Hg2+ and CH3Hg+, and other co-existing ions.50 Silica/Pt Janus micromotors loaded with fluorescein amine have been used for “on–off” detection of diethyl chlorophosphate, a simulant for sarin and soman chemical threats.51 The fluorescence quenching of micromotors has been attributed to the interruption of the fluorophore's conjugation upon the release of the HCl by-product of the diethyl chlorophosphate-fluorescein amine phosphoramidation reaction. Tubular graphene micromotors modified with a specific ricin B aptamer, tagged with fluorescein amidine dye, offer considerable potential for “off–on” fluorescence detection of chemical agents such as ricin.52 Molecularly imprinted-based tubular micromotors, fabricated using phycocyanin as the imprinting molecule and employing Pt and Ni as catalytic and magnetic layers, have been applied for detecting phycocyanin in water samples.53 The native fluorescent emission of such cyanobacteria associated protein allowed for water quality assurance against pathogenic bacteria.
The transmission of infectious diseases via contaminated water and microbial pathogen contamination represents a major global risk to public health. Thus, isolation and identification waterborne pathogens are extremely important for meeting environmental monitoring requirements. Self-propelled functionalized micromotors have shown to be extremely useful for the direct selective isolation of target analytes from untreated samples.54Fig. 2B illustrates an example of lectin-modified Pt based tubular micromotors for direct isolation of Escherichia coli bacteria from untreated seawater and drinking water samples.55Bacillus globigii antibody-functionalized micromotors have been shown to selectively recognize, capture, transport and destroy deadly Bacillus globigii spores in environmental matrices.56 Another promising example reported on the utility of Mg/Au Janus micromotors was their assistance in electrochemical measurements in strip-based micro-volume electrodes. Micromotors can act both as “autonomous stirrers” toward greatly enhanced mass transport and as “artificial enzymes”, inducing localized pH gradients for the degradation of the target analytes (Fig. 2C). In this example, the micromotors, confined in the surface of sensor strips, serve as “artificial” enzymes toward the alkaline hydrolysis of paraoxon into readily detectable p-nitrophenol.57 In a similar strategy, Mg/Au Janus micromotors have been used for the degradation of the non-electroactive persistent organic pollutant diphenyl phthalate (DPP) into readily detectable phenol.58 Recently developed multi-stimuli responsive micromotors – prepared by screen-printing technology – incorporating specific responsive materials capable of colour-changes in response to a variety of environmental stimuli (e.g., temperature, pH and light) indicate considerable promise for highly efficient naked-eye ‘on-the-fly’ water quality monitoring.59
Micromotors for enhanced adsorptive removal of pollutants
Adsorption is the adhesion of atoms, ions or molecules from a gas, liquid or dissolved solid to a surface. Regarding micromotors and the environment, research aims have been directed towards the design of micromotors functionalized with adequate (bio)-ligands or composed of high surface area materials such as graphene or activated carbon. A great deal of attention has been given to dynamic oil removal using micromotors as efficient way to fight against petroleum spills. Guix et al.33 employed alkanethiol-modified PEDOT/Pt tubular micromotors to clean oil-contaminated water via adhesion and permeation onto the alkanethiol coating (Fig. 3A). Judicious optimization of the alkanethiol chain length and navigation time allowed for efficient capture and transport of multiple oil droplets. In addition, the micromotors can be further reused after releasing and degrading the captured oil droplets for future practical applications. Later on, hydrophobic MnFe2O4@oleic acid pot-like bubble propelled micromotors were directly used for environmental oil remediation without any further surface modification because of the hydrophobic surface endowed by the pre-existed oleic acid long chains.60 Similarly, hydrophobic graphene/Pt tubular micromotors, prepared by a rolled-up process assisted with wax-printed membranes, were successfully applied for collecting oil from water samples. The high surface-to-volume ratio associated with the graphene along with self-propelled micromotor movement offers favourable conditions to collect oil droplets present in water through hydrophobic interactions.61 Yet, to avoid the use of peroxide fuel, Pumera et al.12 employed millimeter-sized dodecyl sulfate/polysulfone polymeric capsule motors powered by the Marangoni effect. The capsule repels the oil droplets over several centimetres and merges several oil droplets, effectively cleaning the water surface. A more biofriendly approach relies on seawater-powered Au/Mg micromotors modified with self-assembled monolayers of long-chain alkanethiols.62 The spontaneous redox reaction of Mg particles upon contact with chloride-rich water (via galvanic and pitting corrosion processes) results in efficient hydrogen bubble generation and enhanced propulsion whereas the strong hydrophobicity of the modified gold layer results in effective ‘on-the-fly’ collection of oil droplets. The incorporation of a Ni layer allowed for efficient recovery after dissolution of the Mg core.
 Fig. 3  (A) Dynamic oil removal using SAM modified Au/Ni/PEDOT/Pt tubular micromotors: schematic of the functionalization and time-lapse images of hexanethiol-modified micromotors transporting a payload of multiple oil droplets (11, 50, and 73 s, respectively). (B) Carbon based micromotors for adsorptive removal of pollutants: (a) schematic of activated carbon/Pt Janus micromotors for removal of heavy metals, explosives, nerve agents, azo-dyes and photographs of different coloured polluted water solutions before and after micromotor treatment; (b) graphene/Pt/Ni tubular micromotors for lead removal. Bar graph showing the removal efficiency of the micromotors (in green) compared with control experiments (moving and magnetic control in red; micromotors under magnetic stirring; purple, static, blue and peroxide). (C) Self-propelled carbonic anhydrase PEDOT micromotors for CO2 sequestration. (D) Thiol-modified Mg/Au Janus micromotors for heavy metal removal: (a) schematic of the chelation mechanism and SEM images of the micromotor before and after water treatment and (b) stripping voltammograms of a water contaminated solution before (in red) and after 5 min treatment (green) with the ligand-modified micromotors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 (A), copyright 2012 American Chemical Society; ref. 65 (B, a), copyright 2015 Wiley; ref. 68 (B, b) copyright 2016 American Chemical Society; ref. 70 (C), copyright 2015 Wiley and ref. 72 (D), copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Carbon allotrope-based catalytic micromotors, combining the high surface area of such nanomaterials along with the efficient fluid mixing imparted by micromotor movement, hold considerable promise for efficient removal of a myriad of pollutants.63,64Fig. 3B, a illustrates self-propelled activated-carbon micromotors prepared by asymmetric deposition of a Pt patch on the surface of 80 μm activated carbon microspheres. The coupling of the high adsorption capacity of carbon adsorbents with the rapid movement of catalytic Janus micromotors results in a highly efficient moving adsorption platform for the fast isolation of heavy metals, nitroaromatic explosives, organophosphorus nerve agents and azo-dyes.65 Yet, graphene is the most exploited carbon allotrope for adsorptive removal of pollutants. For example, reduced graphene oxide coated silica/Pt Janus magnetic micromotors display enhanced removal capabilities for persistent organic pollutants (polybrominated diphenyl ethers and triclosan) from water. The micromotors can be reused in 4 consecutive cycles without a change in their adsorption properties.66 Reusable zirconia/graphene oxide/Pt hybrid micromotors have shown to display remarked efficiency for “on-the-fly” nerve agent capture, with their outer zirconia nanostructures being responsible for effective and selective binding of organophosphate compounds.67 Inspired by graphene micromotor works, Sanchez's group employed graphene oxide-based micromotors for active capture and removal of lead ions, followed by analysis of the micromotors' reusability after the chemical detachment of lead from their surface (see Fig. 3B, b).68 Apart from carbon allotropes, zeolites, which display high retention capacity associated with their microporous inner structure, have been exploited for micromotor preparation. Thus, zeolite/Ag micromotors have proven to be extremely useful as dual-function ‘fighters’ towards highly efficient nerve agent adsorption and, as will be described in a following section, for killing bacteria.69
Recent efforts have explored the coupling of enhanced movement with highly efficient (bio) catalytic remediation agents. For example, addressing growing concerns regarding the build-up of greenhouse gas, Uygun et al. described an effective mobile CO2 scrubbing platform coupling the biocatalytic activity of carbonic anhydrase (CA) with the autonomous movement of peroxide-fueled micromotors (Fig. 3C). The CA enzyme bound to the micromotor surface catalysed the hydration of CO2 to form bicarbonate that was mineralized as CaCO3. The continuous movement of the immobilized CA and enhanced the mass transport of the CO2 substrate lead to significant improvements in the sequestration efficiency and speed compared to the stationary immobilized or free enzymes.70 DNA functionalized gold/platinum tubular micromotors have been applied for the removal of mercury ions from water. The highly specific and strong binding of Hg(II) to T–T mismatched pairs in DNA sequences confers the adsorption capability for Hg(II) on these mobile microtubes.71 A very environmentally friendly strategy which avoids the use of hydrogen peroxide is depicted in Fig. 3D. Mg/Au micromotors, incorporating a dithiol (2-mercaptosuccinic acid) chelating layer, have been used for highly specific Zn, Cd and Pb ion chelation. While propelling in the sample, the Mg core is dissolved (see SEM images in the figure), propelling the micromotors while trapping the heavy metals in the thiol layer. The shell gold layer, with the heavy metals, floats to the water surface for convenient disposal.72
Micromotors for accelerated pollutant degradation and killing bacteria
Self-propelled micromotors in advanced oxidation processes for pollutant degradation
Advanced oxidation processes refer to a set of chemical treatments designed to remove organic and inorganic threats in water by oxidation through reactions with hydroxyl radicals, ozone, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) or UV light. In this context, peroxide driven micromotors offer a new dimension to advanced pollutant removal since peroxide acts here as a strong oxidizing agent, which has been widely used by the environmental and defence communities for the degradation of harmful organic substances. The drag on the mixture by the micromotor movement enables better contact and mixing between the active reactants and the pollutant, resulting in more efficient degradation processes compared to static counterparts. Some examples are illustrated in Fig. 4. For example, taking advantages of the peroxide fuel, rolled-up Fe/Pt tubular micromotors hold considerable promise for degrading organic pollutants via the Fenton oxidation reaction. In the presence of peroxide fuel and under acidic conditions (pH 2.5), the outer iron layer of the micromotor gradually dissolves into the ferrous ion which together with the peroxide fuel drives the Fenton reaction. Thus, the hydroxyl radicals generated react with rhodamine 6G as a model pollutant, breaking down it organic rings into an oxidized product and gradually into CO2. Active micromotor motion results in a ca. 12 times faster pollutant removal rate compared to their static counterparts.33 In addition, as shown in the figure, the degradation efficiency can be increased by increasing the Fe thickness. Further studies by the same research group using 4-nitrophenol as a model pollutant revealed that the micromotors can swim for more than 24 hours and be stored for more than 5 weeks during multiple cleaning cycles, revealing thus their potential for future full-scale applications.73 Similarly, multifunctional zero-valent-iron/platinum Janus micromotors powered by peroxide fuel have been used as mobile Fenton-like catalysts for the degradation of methylene blue after 60 min of treatment.74 Recent efforts have exploited the replacement of the Pt catalyst or the use of adsorptive-degradation configurations to improve the overall efficiency of Fenton micromotor schemes. For example, Prussian blue-reduced graphene oxide moving hydrogels75 and platinum-free cobalt ferrite micromotors76 have been described for Fenton mediated removal of methylene and antibiotics, respectively. Also, Fig. 4A, b shows a schematic of a zeolitic imidazolate metal organic framework (ZIF)-Zn–Fe–Ag micromotor for the degradation of rhodamine B (RhB) by Fenton-like processes. Upon peroxide addition, efficient micromotor movement and bubble evolution result in an enhanced adsorption of RhB onto the ZIF-Zn–Fe micromotor matrix. At the same time, OH radicals are generated due to the catalytic decomposition of peroxide in the Ag catalytic sites, which oxidize the RhB present in the matrix and in solution.77
 Fig. 4  (A) Micromotor-based advanced pollutant oxidation: (a) tubular Fe/Pt rolled-up micromotors for destroying organic contaminants based on the Fenton reaction. The micromotors display a dual functionality with an inner Pt layer for the self-propulsion and an outer Fe layer for the in situ generation of Fe ions. The bottom part shows the influence of the Fe thickness on the rhodamine removal; (b) self-propelled metal–organic framework/Ag Janus micromotor for adsorptive removal/Fenton degradation of rhodamine 6G. (B) Micromotor-based accelerated oxidative detoxification of nerve agents and schematic of the degradation process. (C) Wastewater activated Pd/Ti/Fe/Cr rolled-up micromotors for 4-nitrophenol degradation using NaBH4 as a reductant and fuel. The bottom part shows SEM and propulsion images of the micromotors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34 (A, a), copyright 2013 American Chemical Society; ref. 77 (A, b), copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry; ref. 78 (B), copyright 2013 Wiley and ref. 80 (C), copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
A pioneering work from Wang's group demonstrated the accelerated oxidative detoxification of organophosphorus nerve agents using bubble-propelled polymer/platinum composite micromotors (see Fig. 4B).78 Hydrogen peroxide was used as both an oxidation agent and fuel whereas NaHCO3 or NaOH acted as a peroxide activator. In situ generation of peroxyl anions (with no external stirring) results in the conversion of the nerve agents into p-nitrophenol. The forced convection and enhanced mass transport of the remediation agents with the micromotors is the principal cause of oxidative decontamination. Later efforts illustrate the efficiency cost-effective MnO2 moving microspheres for the degradation of methylene blue as a pollutant in a similar fashion, using peroxide as a remediation reagent.79 Current efforts of the micromotor community include exploring the use of sodium borohydrate as an alternative remediation agent and fuel. Fig. 4C displays a highly efficient wastewater-mediated activation micromotor strategy for 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) degradation. Rolled-up Ti/Fe/Cr micromotors decorated with Pd nanoparticles were used in connection with NaBH4 as a reductant. The catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol (as fuel) by Pd particles in the presence of NaBH4 drives the micromotors while degrading it into 4-aminophenol. The enhanced intermixing ability of these micromotors caused an about 10 times faster removal of the pollutant when compared with non-motile counterparts.80 Magnetic mesoporous CoNi@Pt nanorods display enhanced movement and effective azo-dyes degradation capabilities in NaBH4 rich solutions.81
Self-propelled micromotors for biocatalytic pollutant degradation
Enzyme-assisted pollutant removal is a natural, less harmful and effective way to remove pollutants. Yet, despite its potential promise only a few studies have been devoted to this topic. On a first study, Marangoni-effect powered biocatalytic motors, fabricated by filling commercial pipette tips with SDS and laccase solution, were used for highly efficient removal of eriochrome black-T and 2-amino-4-chlorophenol. The simultaneous release of laccase as a decontamination agent and SDS as a propellant into the contaminated solution led to greater mobility and to a faster biocatalytic decontamination process through the efficient dispersion of laccase.82 Enzyme-rich tissue based motors, prepared using unmodified Raphanus sativus radish tissues, containing the enzymes catalase and peroxidase, displayed efficient motion and decontamination activities for 2-amino-4-chlorophenol, catechol, and guaiacol pollutants within 3 min.83
Chemical and light-driven micromotors for photocatalytic pollutant degradation
The use of a light source (UV, VIS, etc.) to assist water purification processes is a convenient and biofriendly approach for microbial water treatment and pollutant removal. Photolysis can be considered as another advanced water oxidation process in which light is used in connection with a semiconductor metal oxide as a catalyst. In some cases, an additional oxidizing reagent (peroxide) should be also present to generate radicals for subsequent pollutant oxidation.84 The use of light to power or improve the efficiency of micromotors in environmental remediation schemes entails several advantages such as the use of a renewable energy source that does not require a physical connection to the motor, precise control of movement and reaction rates and the absence of toxic waste products.17,18 The first generation of micromotors relies on the use of catalytic propulsion (using Mg or catalytic layers for peroxide fuel decomposition) combined with UV light irradiation for photocatalytic degradation of a myriad of pollutants. Such initial configurations rely on TiO2 as the base material for micromotor fabrication, which is a highly efficient semiconductor. Upon light irradiation, TiO2 adsorbs a photon with energy higher than the band gap energy and the negative electrons transferred from the valence band to the conduction band, creating positive holes. The photo-induced electron–hole pairs either recombine and release heat or interact with other molecules such as peroxide, resulting in the generation of OH radicals as powerful oxidizing reagents.85 A fully biocompatible and environmentally-friendly early approach is based on TiO2/Au coated Mg microparticles for the degradation of chemical and biological warfare agents (see Fig. 5A). UV irradiation of the TiO2 shell thus generates the essential oxidative species for pollutant mineralization. The Mg core facilitates efficient propulsion and significant mixing during the photo-catalytic decontamination process toward a remarkably effective photocatalytic cleaning microsystem. Nearly complete degradation of the nerve agent's simulants methyl paraoxon (see Fig. 5A) and bis(4-nitrophenyl) phosphate has been achieved using the micromotors. Further bacteria killing applications will be described in a following section.86
 Fig. 5  (A) Water-powered TiO2/AuNPs/Mg Janus micromotors for photocatalytic degradation of chemical and biochemical warfare agents: mechanism and time lapse image of the micromotor navigation in a 15 min period. UV/vis spectra showing the degradation of methyl paraoxon using the micromotors (in green) and control experiments. (B) Internally (a) and externally (b) propelled TiO2/Pt tubular microengines for photocatalytic degradation of azo-dyes. (C) Plasmonic motor for the sunlight photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants; schematic of the operation and corresponding SEM and EDX images. The bottom part shows the decontamination ability of a mixture of azo dyes before (a and b) and after (c and d) treatment with the micromotors. (D) Light-driven Au–WO3@C Janus micromotors for rapid photodegradation of dyes. The bottom images show the STEM characterization and element distribution on the micromotor body and degradation experiments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86 (A), copyright 2014 American Chemical Society; ref. 88 (B), copyright 2017 American Chemical Society; ref. 89 (C), copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry and ref. 19 (D), copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Another interesting strategy relies on coaxial TiO2–PtPd–Ni nanotubes for water remediation under UV light, visible light, and natural sunlight. Such hybrid structures display 100% degradation of rhodamine B under visible light and natural sunlight irradiation. The multicomponent design enables efficient propulsion and actuation using magnetic or acoustic fields as external energy sources or peroxide fuel.87 Other configurations rely on the use of peroxide as a co-reagent along with light irradiation and micromotor movement. Fig. 5B shows a schematic of two different tubular TiO2 micromotors, one with Pt nanoparticles decorated on the inner surface and the other with Pt nanoparticles decorated on the outer surface. The micromotors can propel at low peroxide levels (0.05%) without the aid of any surfactant owing to the superhydrophilic wetting behaviour of TiO2. Efficient degradation of rhodamine B upon UV light irradiation demonstrates the intermixing and photocatalytic ability of the two micromotor systems.88 A similar approach is depicted in Fig. 5C and relies on TiO2-based microshells decorated with AuNPs and PtNPs (by template-assisted, aqueous phase synthesis method) as the outer and inner layers, respectively. Under anaerobic conditions and using H2O2 as fuel, the plasmonic micromotor can efficiently propel by O2 and efficiently degrade methylene blue, rhodamine B, and methyl orange under artificial solar light irradiation. The AuNPs in the TiO2 shell lead to a high electron–hole separation efficiency and to absorption for strong photocatalytic activity.89 CdS quantum dots have also been explored as alternative photocatalyst to TiO2. Thus, peroxide-driven CdS/polyaniline Pt tubular micromotors are extremely efficient for solar light photocatalytic degradation of bisphenol A as a model persistent organic pollutant. In this case, active oxygen species such as OH and superoxide radicals are the key active intermediates for the efficient degradation. Photons with energy higher than CdS are absorbed onto its surface. Thus, the valence band electrons are excited to the conduction band, leaving a positively charged hole in the valence band. Subsequently, valence and conduction band electrons can react with water or a hydroxyl groups to produce the above mentioned degradation radicals.90
A second generation of motors employs light both for degradation and as external stimuli for micromotor propulsion towards environmentally friendly schemes. TiO2 microtube arrays prepared by electrochemical anodization of Ti sheets can propel under UV light irradiation by diffusiophoresis.91 Water-fueled TiO2/Pt Janus micromotors display aggregation and separation behaviours that can be wirelessly and remotely controlled by regulating the “on/off” switch, intensity and pulsed/continuous irradiation mode of UV light. Efficient motion in water is governed by the light-induced self-electrophoresis under the local electrical field generated by the asymmetrical water oxidation and reduction reactions on its surface were exploited for rhodamine B degradation.92 Similarly, water-driven TiO2/Au Janus micromotors have been used for the degradation of dye pollutants under UV irradiation. Interestingly, in the presence of the dyes methyl blue, cresol red and methyl orange there is an enhanced motion and improved micromotor velocity, which can be attributed to a self-electrophoresis mechanism induced by the photocatalytic degradation of the dyes on the asymmetrical surface. Valence band electrons of TiO2 are excited to the conduction band under UV light, facilitating the electron transfer TiO2–Au, suppressing the recombination of electron–hole pairs and enhancing their lifetime. The separated electron–hole pairs trigger the formation of reactive superoxide radicals, which react with the dye molecules inducing their oxidative degradation to mineralized products.93,94 Also, as depicted in Fig. 5D, light-driven Au–WO3@C Janus micromotors were used for the rapid photocatalytic degradation of sodium-2,6-dichloroindophenol and rhodamine B. In this case, however, a diffusiophoretic effect is the dominant driving force for the micromotor propulsion. Indeed, the higher concentration of photodegradative products around the WO3 side in comparison with the Au side, and the nanosized porous structure of WO3@C microspheres facilitate the diffusion of reactive products, leading to an osmotic flow from low to high solute concentration regions on the surface of the Janus particles which propels the micromotors forward. This is accompanied by the generation of oxide radicals for dye mineralization.19 AgCl based star-like micromotors were used for the degradation of different organic dyes and the simultaneous inhibition of bacteria growth. The reduction of Ag ions into metallic silver from the AgCl particles takes place upon UV light irradiation. This leads to the generation of a local electrolyte gradient for self-diffusiophoretic motion.95
Self-propelled micromotors for killing bacteria
The quest for efficient microbial antibacterial treatments has led to the development of novel micromotor based strategies. Fig. 6A shows an excellent example of the use of chitosan–Mg Janus micromotors for Escherichia coli bacteria inactivation in contaminated seawater and freshwater. The chitosan-coated Mg micromotors swim through water sample, come into contact with and damage the bacteria cell through the activity of their outer chitosan layer. Such bacterial death is facilitated by the mechanical interaction between the chitosan layer, present on the micromotor structure, and the bacteria.96 A particularly attractive and environmentally friendly approach relies on the use of lysozyme-modified ultrasound propelled nanowire motors. The antibacterial properties of lysozyme, associated with the cleavage of glyosidic bonds of peptidoglycans present in the bacteria cell wall, have been combined with the rapid movement of nanomotors, resulting in a greatly enhanced bacteria-killing capability. Rapid and effective killing of the Gram-positive Micrococcus lysodeikticus bacteria (69–84%) can be achieved within 5 min, thus offering great promise for future nanotechnological water purification schemes (see Fig. 6B).22 The TiO2/Mg micromotors described previously can efficiently inactivate Bacillus globigii spores (anthrax simulants).86 Mg/Fe micromotors decorated with Ag nanoparticles can kill bacteria through silver's antibacterial effect.97 The micromotor motion enhanced the transport of the released Ag+ ions, while the inner iron magnetic layer offered remote guidance and convenient micromotor removal. Similarly, zeolite/Ag micromotors, described in a previous section, are useful for “on-the-move” killing of Escherichia coli bacteria69 (see Fig. 6C).
 Fig. 6  (A) Water-powered Mg/Au/PLGA/Alg/Chi micromotors for Escherichia coli bacteria killing. The right part shows SEM images of the bacteria before (live) and after micromotor treatment (dead). (B) Ultrasound propelled lysozyme nanowire motors for killing bacteria. (C) Zeolite/Ag Janus micromotors for biological warfare agent's detoxification: schematic of the operation, propulsion and effective Escherichia coli killing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96 (A), copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry; ref. 22 (B), copyright 2015 American Chemical Society and ref. 69 (C), copyright 2015 Wiley. 
Conclusions
The new capabilities of synthetic micromotors have opened a new horizon in the environmental field. Self-propelled micromotors represent a new paradigm in the environmental field, greatly enhancing the efficiency of traditional strategies due to the actively moving matter phenomena. This review highlights current and previous prospects and challenges for translating such recent advances into practical applications (see Table 1). Since early developments of micromotors almost a decade ago, micromotors have shown considerable opportunities in the environmental field, ranging from water-toxicity screening to accelerated remediation processes. We have illustrated first how the ability of micromachines to modify their motion in the presence of different contaminants can be used for environmental assurance. From early motion-based detection schemes to novel configurations involving fluorescent nanoparticles and dyes, micromotors hold considerable potential for on-site detection of threats and for monitoring remediation processes and most importantly, inaccessible environments. The second important core of the review has been devoted to the application of micromotors as mobile reactors for water cleaning, mainly via adsorptive removal and enhanced pollutant degradation. Since pioneering proof-of-concept applications for oil removal and micromotor-assisted Fenton oxidation, we have witnessed a rapid growth on studies devoted to such exciting topics. Recent trends in micromotor adsorptive pollutant removal include exploring the use of high surface area nanomaterials such as graphene or its combination with highly efficient biocatalysts for greenhouse gas capture. Micromotor-based advanced pollutant schemes are experiencing a tremendous research activity with some studies addressing the scalability and reusability concerns, towards practical future applications. Yet, as many of these strategies still rely on the use of environmentally-unfriendly peroxide fuel or on water-powered (Mg, Zn) motors with limited lifetimes, new environmentally friendly propulsion mechanisms based on light or ultrasound have been explored. In particular, substantial progress has been achieved in light-driven micromotors in which UV or solar light exerts a dual role as external input for micromotor propulsion and for generating radicals used for pollutant degradation. Another promising topic is illustrating the remarkable capabilities of dynamic micromotors as bacteria fighters.98
Yet, future efforts should be aimed at translating such exciting advances into practical environmental applications, which will require close collaboration with environmental scientists and engineers, along with new technological breakthroughs and greater sophistication of micromotors, ultimately contributing further to the environmental benefits of nanotechnology. Thus, future studies should address scale-up issues toward coverage of large contaminated areas and large volumes of wastewater.99,100 A convenient solution relies on the coordinated action of swarms of numerous micromotors for dynamic action over larger scales and for transporting larger payloads of remediation agents. Attention should also be given to the influence of the environmental media on the propulsion behaviour. For example, in highly polluted water or oxidation based-schemes, part of the micromotor body can be quickly consumed resulting in a short lifetime, not to mention micromotors based on reactive particles. Highly turbid polluted waters can deactivate light-driven motors and catalytic sites of bubble-propelled motors, thereby deactivating them. Finally, potential toxicity issues need to be evaluated to prevent potential adverse environmental impacts. This can be accomplished by using self-degrading materials to construct the micromotor body and by removing the micromotors after decontamination by incorporating magnetic materials (e.g., Fe), allowing also for future reusability and cost-effective processes.
Where we are heading? The maturity of micromachines to address environmental problems is just beginning to be explored. While major progress has been accomplished over the past decade, significant efforts are required to translate these innovative micromotor-based proof-of-concept studies into large-scale environmental applications. In the not-so distant future, we anticipate seeing self-regulated multifunctional micromachines, capable of performing multiple tasks, “sensing, isolating and destroying” toxic pollutants and chemical threats, searching for sources of hazardous chemicals, or delivering nanosensors to remote hostile locations. Swarms of micromachines could be assembled in response to hazardous conditions, used for mapping the spread of a toxic pollutant over large areas or for accelerating environmental cleanup. We hope that the present review will stimulate extensive research efforts in environmental applications of micromotors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Dr. Wang acknowledges support from the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (grant HDTRA1-14-1-0064). B. J-S acknowledges the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness for her Ramon y Cajal contract (RYC-2015-17558, co-financed by EU).
Notes and references
P. G. Tratnyek and R. L. Johnson, Nanotechnologies for environmental cleanup, Nano Today, 2006, 1, 44–48 CrossRef .
S. J. Ebbens and J. R. Howse, In pursuit of propulsion at the nanoscale, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 726 RSC .
Y. Mei, A. A. Solovev, S. Sanchez and O. G. Schmidt, Rolled-up nanotech on polymers: from basic perception to self-propelled catalytic microengines, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2109–2119 RSC .
G. A. Ozin, I. Manners, S. Fournier-Bidoz and A. Arsenault, Dream nanomachines, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 3011–3018 CrossRef .
S. Sanchez and M. Pumera, Nanorobots: the ultimate wireless self-propelled sensing and actuating devices, Chem. – Asian J., 2009, 4, 1402–1410 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sengupta, M. E. Ibele and A. Sen, Fantastic voyage: designing self-powered nanorobots, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8434–8445 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. Wang, Nanomachines: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley-VCH,  2013, ISBN: 978-3-527-33120-8 Search PubMed .
J. Wang and K. M. Manesh, Motion control at the nanoscale, Small, 2010, 6, 338–345 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Karshalev, B. Esteban-Fernández de Ávila and J. Wang, Micromotors for “Chemistry-on-the-Fly”, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3810–3820 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Orozco, B. Jurado-Sánchez, G. Wagner, W. Gao, R. Vazquez-Duhalt, S. Sattayasamitsathit, M. Galarnyk, A. Cortés, D. Saintillan and J. Wang, Bubble-propelled micromotors for enhanced transport of passive tracers, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 5082–5087 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wang, T. Y. Chiang, D. Velegol and T. E. Mallouk, Understanding the efficiency of autonomous nano- and microscale motors, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10557–10565 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhao, T. H. Seah and M. Pumera, External-energy-independent polymer capsule motors and their cooperative behaviors, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 12020–12026 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ibele, T. E. Mallouk and A. Sen, Schooling behavior of light-powered autonomous micromotors in water, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3308–3312 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tottori, L. Zhang, F. Qiu, K. K. Krawczyk, A. Franco-Obregón and B. J. Nelson, Magnetic helical micromachines: fabrication, controlled swimming, and cargo transport, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 811–816 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, X. Feng, A. Pei, C. R. Kane, R. Tam, C. Hennessy and J. Wang, Bioinspired helical microswimmers based on vascular plants, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 305–310 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Qian, D. Montiel, A. Bregulla, F. Cichos and H. Yang, Harnessing thermal fluctuations for purposeful activities: the manipulation of single micro-swimmers by adaptive photon nudging, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1420–1429 RSC .
R. Dong, Y. Hu, Y. Wu, W. Gao, B. Ren, Q. Wang and Y. Cai, Visible-light-driven BiOI-based Janus micromotor in pure water, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1722–1725 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Jang, A. Hong, H. E. Kang, C. Alcantara, S. Charreyron, F. Mushtaq, E. Pellicer, R. Büchel, J. Sort, S. S. Lee, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Multiwavelength light-responsive Au/B-TiO2 Janus micromotors, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6146–6154 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, R. Dong, Y. Wu, W. Gao, Z. He and B. Ren, Light-driven Au-WO3@C Janus micromotors for rapid photodegradation of dye pollutants, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4674–4683 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, L. A. Castro, M. Hoyos and T. E. Mallouk, Autonomous motion of metallic microrods propelled by ultrasound, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6122–6132 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Garcia-Gradilla, J. Orozco, S. Sattayasamitsathit, F. Soto, F. Kuralay, A. Pourazary, A. Katzenberg, W. Gao, Y. Shen and J. Wang, Ultrasound-propelled magnetically guided nanomotors: toward practical biomedical applications, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9232–9240 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kiristi, V. V. Singh, B. Esteban-Fernández de Ávila, M. Uygun, F. Soto, D. Aktaş Uygun and J. Wang, Lysozyme-based antibacterial nanomotors, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9252–9259 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Stanton, B.-W. Park, A. Miguel-López, X. Ma, M. Sitti and S. Sánchez, Biohybrid microtube swimmers driven by single captured bacteria, Small, 2017, 13, 1603679 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, M. Medina-Sánchez, V. Magdanz, L. Schwarz, F. Hebenstreit and O. G. Schmidt, Sperm-hybrid micromotor for targeted drug delivery, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 327–337 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Esteban-Fernández de Ávila, P. Angsantikul, J. Li, W. Gao, L. Zhang and J. Wang, Micromotors go in vivo: from test tubes to live animals, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201705640 .
F. Peng, Y. Tu and D. A. Wilson, Micro/nanomotors towards in vivo application: cell, tissue and biofluid, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5289–5310 RSC .
B. Jurado-Sánchez and A. Escarpa, Janus micromotors for electrochemical sensing and biosensing applications: a review, Electroanalysis, 2017, 29, 14–23 CrossRef .
W. Duan, W. Wang, S. Das, V. Yadav, T. E. Mallouk and A. Sen, Synthetic nano- and micromachines in analytical chemistry: sensing, migration, capture, delivery, and separation, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2015, 8, 311–333 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Campuzano, D. Kagan, J. Orozco and J. Wang, Motion-driven sensing and biosensing using electrochemically propelled nanomotors, Analyst, 2011, 136, 4621–4630 RSC .
V. V. Singh, F. Soto, K. Kaufmann and J. Wang, Micromotor-based energy generation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6896–6899 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Medina-Sánchez, L. Schwarz, A. K. Meyer, F. Hebenstreit and O. G. Schmidt, Cellular cargo delivery: toward assisted fertilization by sperm-carrying micromotors, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 555–561 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kagan, P. Calvo-Marzal, S. Balasubramanian, S. Sattayasamitsathit, K. M. Manesh, G.-U. Flechsig and J. Wang, Chemical sensing based on catalytic nanomotors: motion-based detection of trace silver, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12082–12083 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Guix, J. Orozco, M. García, W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit, A. Merkoçi, A. Escarpa and J. Wang, Superhydrophobic alkanethiol-coated microsubmarines for effective removal of oil, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4445–4451 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Soler, V. Magdanz, V. M. Fomin, S. Sanchez and O. G. Schmidt, Self-propelled micromotors for cleaning polluted water, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9611–9620 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-Z. Chen, B. Jang, D. Ahmed, C. Hu, C. De Marco, M. Hoop, F. Mushtaq, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Small-scale machines driven by external power sources, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705061 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Soler and S. Sanchez, Catalytic nanomotors for environmental monitoring and water remediation, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7175–7182 RSC .
W. Gao and J. Wang, The environmental impact of micro/nanomachines: a review, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3170–3180 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Moo and M. Pumera, Chemical energy powered nano/micro/macromotors and the environment, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 58–72 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sen, M. Ibele, Y. Hong and D. Velegol, Chemo and phototactic nano/microbots, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 143, 15–27 RSC .
K. K. Dey, S. Bhandari, D. Bandyopadhyay, S. Basu and A. Chattopadhyay, The pH taxis of an intelligent catalytic microbot, Small, 2013, 9, 1916–1920 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Ezhilan, W. Gao, A. Pei, I. Rozen, R. Dong, B. Jurado-Sanchez, J. Wang and D. Saintillan, Motion-based threat detection using microrods: experiments and numerical simulations, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7833–7840 RSC .
J. Wu, S. Balasubramanian, D. Kagan, K. M. Manesh, S. Campuzano and J. Wang, Motion-based DNA detection using catalytic nanomotors, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 36 Search PubMed .
W. Gao, A. Pei, R. Dong and J. Wang, Catalytic iridium-based janus micromotors powered by ultralow levels of chemical fuels, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2276–2279 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Dong, J. Li, I. Rozen, B. Ezhilan, T. Xu, C. Christianson, W. Gao, D. Saintillan, B. Ren and J. Wang, Vapor-driven propulsion of catalytic micromotors, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13226 CrossRef PubMed .
V. V. Singh, K. Kaufmann, B. Esteban-Fernandez de Avila, M. Uygun and J. Wang, Nanomotors responsive to nerve-agent vapor plumes, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3360–3363 RSC .
J. Orozco, V. García-Gradilla, M. D'Agostino, W. Gao, A. Cortés and J. Wang, Artificial enzyme-powered microfish for water-quality testing, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 818–824 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, Y. Sun, T. Wang, Z. Ye, H. Zhang, B. Dong and C. Y. Li, A biodegradable, all-polymer micromotor for gas sensing applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5945–5952 RSC .
J. G. S. Moo, H. Wang, G. Zhao and M. Pumera, Biomimetic artificial inorganic enzyme-free self-propelled microfish robot for selective detection of Pb2+ in water, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4292–4296 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhao, S. Sanchez, O. G. Schmidt and M. Pumera, Poisoning of bubble propelled catalytic micromotors: the chemical environment matters, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2909–2914 RSC .
B. Jurado-Sanchez, A. Escarpa and J. Wang, Lighting up micromotors with quantum dots for smart chemical sensing, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14088–14091 RSC .
V. V. Singh, K. Kaufmann, J. Orozco, J. Li, M. Galarnyk, G. Arya and J. Wang, Micromotor-based on-off fluorescence detection of sarin and soman simulants, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11190–11193 RSC .
B. Esteban-Fernández de Ávila, M. A. Lopez-Ramirez, D. F. Báez, A. Jodra, V. V. Singh, K. Kaufmann and J. Wang, Aptamer-modified Graphene-based catalytic micromotors: off–on
fluorescent detection of ricin, ACS Sens., 2016, 1, 217–221 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, J. Li, L. Fu, D. Liu and L. Chen, Magnetic molecularly imprinted microsensor for selective recognition and transport of fluorescent phycocyanin in seawater, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7437–7444 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, Self-propelled affinity biosensors: Moving the receptor around the sample, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 76, 234–242 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Campuzano, J. Orozco, D. Kagan, M. Guix, W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. C. Claussen, A. Merkoci and J. Wang, Bacterial isolation by lectin-modified microengines, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 396–401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Orozco, G. Pan, S. Sattayasamitsathit, M. Galarnyk and J. Wang, Micromotors to capture and destroy anthrax simulant spores, Analyst, 2015, 140, 1421–1427 RSC .
S. Cinti, G. Valdes-Ramirez, W. Gao, J. Li, G. Palleschi and J. Wang, Microengine-assisted electrochemical measurements at printable sensor strips, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8668–8671 RSC .
D. Rojas, B. Jurado-Sanchez and A. Escarpa, “Shoot and Sense” Janus micromotors-based strategy for the simultaneous degradation and detection of persistent organic pollutants in food and biological samples, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 4153–4160 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Karshalev, R. Kumar, I. Jeerapan, R. Castillo, I. Campos and J. Wang, Multistimuli-responsive camouflage swimmers, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1593–1601 CrossRef .
F. Mou, D. Pan, C. Chen and Y. Gao, L. Xu and J. Guan, Magnetically modulated pot-like MnFe2O4 micromotors: nanoparticle assembly fabrication and their capability for direct oil removal, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6173–6181 CrossRef .
L. Baptista-Pires, J. Orozco, P. Guardia and A. Merkoçi, Architecting graphene oxide rolled-up micromotors: a simple paper-based manufacturing technology, Small, 2018 DOI:10.1002/smll.201702746 .
W. Gao, X. Feng, A. Pei, Y. Gu, J. Li and J. Wang, Seawater-driven magnesium based Janus micromotors for environmental remediation, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4696–4700 RSC .
R. Maria-Hormigos, B. Jurado-Sanchez, L. Vazquez and A. Escarpa, Carbon allotrope nanomaterials based catalytic micromotors, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8962–8970 CrossRef .
A. Martín, B. Jurado-Sánchez, A. Escarpa and J. Wang, Template electrosynthesis of high-performance graphene microengines, Small, 2015, 11, 3568–3574 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Jurado-Sanchez, S. Sattayasamitsathit, W. Gao, L. Santos, Y. Fedorak, V. V. Singh, J. Orozco, M. Galarnyk and J. Wang, Self-propelled activated carbon Janus micromotors for efficient water purification, Small, 2015, 11, 499–506 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Orozco, L. A. Mercante, R. Pol and A. Merkoçi, Graphene-based Janus micromotors for the dynamic removal of pollutants, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3371–3378 Search PubMed .
V. V. Singh, A. Martin, K. Kaufmann, S. D. S. de Oliveira and J. Wang, Zirconia/graphene oxide hybrid micromotors for selective capture of nerve agents, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8162–8169 CrossRef .
D. Vilela, J. Parmar, Y. Zeng, Y. Zhao and S. Sanchez, Graphene-based microbots for toxic heavy metal removal and recovery from water, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2860–2866 CrossRef PubMed .
V. V. Singh, B. Jurado-Sánchez, S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Orozco, J. Li, M. Galarnyk, Y. Fedorak and J. Wang, Multifunctional silver-exchanged zeolite micromotors for catalytic detoxification of chemical and biological threats, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2147–2155 CrossRef .
M. Uygun, V. V. Singh, K. Kaufmann, D. A. Uygun, S. D. S. de Oliveira and J. Wang, Micromotor-based biomimetic carbon dioxide sequestration: towards mobile microscrubbers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12900–12904 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, B. Khezri and M. Pumera, Self-Propelled micromachines for environmental remediation, Chem, 2016, 1, 473–481 Search PubMed .
D. A. Uygun, B. Jurado-Sánchez, M. Uygun and J. Wang, Self-propelled chelation platforms for efficient removal of toxic metals, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2016, 3, 559–566 RSC .
J. Parmar, D. Vilela, E. Pellicer, D. Esqué-de los Ojos, J. Sort and S. Sánchez, Reusable and long-lasting active microcleaners for heterogeneous water remediation, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4152–4161 CrossRef .
C.-S. Lee, J. Gong, D.-S. Oh, J.-R. Jeon and Y.-S. Chang, Zerovalent-iron/platinum Janus micromotors with spatially separated functionalities for efficient water decontamination, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 768–776 CrossRef .
J. Hao, W. Yang, Z. Zhang and J. Tang, Surfactant-assisted fabrication of 3D Prussian blue-reduced graphene oxide hydrogel as a self-propelling motor for water treatment, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10498–10503 RSC .
J. Parmar, K. Villa, D. Vilela and S. Sánchez, Platinum-free cobalt ferrite based micromotors for antibiotic removal, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 9, 605–611 CrossRef .
R. Wang, W. Guo, X. Li, Z. Liu, H. Liu and S. Ding, Highly efficient MOF-based self-propelled micromotors for water purification, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 42462–42467 RSC .
J. Orozco, G. Cheng, D. Vilela, S. Sattayasamitsathit, R. Vazquez-Duhalt, G. Valdes-Ramirez, O. S. Pak, A. Escarpa, C. Kan and J. Wang, Micromotor-based high-yielding fast oxidative detoxification of chemical threats, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13276–13279 CrossRef PubMed .
O. M. Wani, M. Safdar, N. Kinnunen and J. Janis, Dual effect of manganese oxide micromotors: catalytic degradation and adsorptive bubble separation of organic pollutants, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 1244–1247 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Srivastava, M. Guix and O. G. Schmidt, Wastewater mediated activation of micromotors for efficient water cleaning, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 817–821 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Garcia-Torres, A. Serra, P. Tierno, X. Alcobe and E. Valles, Magnetic propulsion of recyclable catalytic nanocleaners for pollutant degradation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23859–23868 Search PubMed .
J. Orozco, D. Vilela, G. Valdes-Ramirez, Y. Fedorak, A. Escarpa, R. Vazquez-Duhalt and J. Wang, Efficient biocatalytic degradation of pollutants by enzyme-releasing self-propelled motors, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 2866–2871 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sattayasamitsathit, K. Kaufmann, M. Galarnyk, R. Vazquez-Duhalt and J. Wang, Dual-enzyme natural motors incorporating decontamination and propulsion capabilities, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 27565–27570 RSC .
R. Andreozzi, V. Caprio, A. Insola and R. Marotta, Advanced oxidation processes (AOP) for water purification and recovery, Catal. Today, 1999, 53, 51–59 CrossRef .
Y. Qu and X. Duan, Progress, challenge and perspective of heterogeneous photocatalysts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2568–2580 RSC .
J. Li, V. V. Singh, S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Orozco, K. Kaufmann, R. Dong, W. Gao, B. Jurado-Sanchez, Y. Fedorak and J. Wang, Water-driven micromotors for rapid photocatalytic degradation of biological and chemical warfare agents, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11118–11125 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Mushtaq, A. Asani, M. Hoop, X.-Z. Chen, D. Ahmed, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Highly efficient coaxial TiO2-PtPd tubular nanomachines for photocatalytic water purification with multiple locomotion strategies, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6995–7002 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Z. Jiang, S. Ouyang, Z. Dai and T. Wang, Internally/externally bubble-propelled photocatalytic tubular nanomotors for efficient water cleaning, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23974–23982 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, A. Zhao, F. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Design of a plasmonic micromotor for enhanced photo-remediation of polluted anaerobic stagnant waters, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5550–5553 RSC .
B. Jurado-Sánchez, J. Wang and A. Escarpa, Ultrafast nanocrystals decorated micromotors for on-site dynamic chemical processes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19618–19625 Search PubMed .
M. Enachi, M. Guix, V. Postolache, V. Ciobanu, V. M. Fomin, O. G. Schmidt and I. Tiginyanu, Light-induced motion of microengines based on microarrays of TiO2 nanotubes, Small, 2016, 12, 5497–5505 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Mou, L. Kong, C. Chen and Z. Chen, L. Xu and J. Guan, Light-controlled propulsion, aggregation and separation of water-fuelled TiO2/Pt Janus submicromotors and their “on-the-fly” photocatalytic activities, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4976–4983 RSC .
R. Dong, Q. Zhang, W. Gao, A. Pei and B. Ren, Highly efficient light-driven TiO2–Au Janus micromotors, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 839–844 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, R. Dong, Q. Zhang and B. Ren, Dye-enhanced self-electrophoretic propulsion of light-driven TiO2–Au Janus micromotors, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 9, 30 CrossRef .
J. Simmchen, A. Baeza, A. Miguel-Lopez, M. M. Stanton, M. Vallet-Regi, D. Ruiz-Molina and S. Sánchez, Dynamics of novel photoactive AgCl microstars and their environmental applications, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 65–71 CrossRef .
J. A. Delezuk, D. E. Ramirez-Herrera, B. Esteban-Fernandez de Avila and J. Wang, Chitosan-based water-propelled micromotors with strong antibacterial activity, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2195–2200 RSC .
D. Vilela, M. M. Stanton, J. Parmar and S. Sánchez, Microbots decorated with silver nanoparticles kill bacteria in aqueous media, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22093–22100 Search PubMed .
B. Jurado-Sánchez, M. Pacheco, R. Maria-Hormigos and A. Escarpa, Perspectives on Janus micromotors: materials and applications, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 9, 407–418 CrossRef .
W. Hong, P. M. G, J. J. A, K. Bahareh, M. Tijana, C. Nam-Joon and M. Pumera, Bioinspired Spiky Micromotors Based on Sporopollenin Exine Capsules, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702338 CrossRef .
T. W. Zhe, Z. Radek, M. Ivo and M. Pumera, Fe0 Nanomotors in Ton Quantities (1020 Units) for Environmental Remediation, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 4789–4793 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Beatriz Jurado-Sánchez	Beatriz Jurado Sánchez has been a Ramon y Cajal researcher in the Department of Analytical Chemistry, at the University of Alcalá (Spain) since 2017. She received her PhD in chemistry from the University of Cordoba in 2009. In 2013 she was awarded the prestigious Marie Curie IOF fellowship to carry out research at the University of California, San Diego under the supervision of Prof. Joseph Wang. She has co-authored over 45 scientific papers (H Index = 19) and several book chapters. Her current research interests focus on the development of micromotors and Janus particles for analytical and environmental applications.
Joseph Wang	Joseph Wang is a Distinguished Professor, SAIC Endowed Chair and Chair of the Department of Nanoengineering at the University of California, San Diego. He held the Regents Professorship and Manasse Chair positions at NMSU, and served as the Director of the Center for Bioelectronics and Biosensors at Arizona State University. He received two ACS National Awards in 1999 and 2006 and 8 Honorary Professorships from Spain, Argentina, Slovenia and China. Prof. Wang is the Editor-in-Chief of Electroanalysis (Wiley). His scientific interests include nanomachines, bioelectronics, biosensors, wearable devices and bio nanotechnology. He has authored over 1050 papers (H Index = 150).

Environmental significance
This frontier article reviews recent advances in the use of self-propelled micromotors in the environmental field. It illustrates how mobile reactors or receptors can greatly improve the efficiency and speed of environmental remediation and monitoring processes. The new capabilities of synthetic micromotors that enable such exciting environmental applications are discussed. Current opportunities and challenges for using such functional nanomotors for improving diverse environmental applications are discussed.


 	Fig. 1  Time-line showing the progress in the use of self-propelled micromotors for environmental applications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 (top part in 2011), copyright 2012 American Chemical Society; ref. 34 (top part in 2013), copyright 2013 American Chemical Society; ref. 65 (top part in 2016), copyright 2015 Wiley and ref. 17 (top part in 2017), copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 


Environmental sensing and monitoring


Motion based pollutant detection

Au/Pt nanowires	Silver	
32

PEDOT/Au-catalase tubular micromotors	Hg, Cu, NaN3, aminotriazole, nerve agents	
45, 46

CdTe/PEDOT/Pt tubular micromotors	Hg	
50

Fluoresceinamine loaded Si/Pt Janus micromotors	Sarin and soman simulants	
51

MIP-PEDOT/Pt/Ni/Pt tubular micromotors	Phycocyanin	
53

Catalase-polycaprolactone micromotor	HCl, NH3	
47


Selective pollutant isolation and detection

Lectin modified Au/Ni/PANI/Pt tubular micromotors	
Escherichia coli
	
55


Assisted electrochemical detection

Mg/Au Janus micromotors	Nerve agents, phthalates	
57, 58


Adsorptive removal of pollutants

SAM modified Au/Ni/PEDOT/Pt tubular micromotors	Oil droplets	
33

Marangoni propelled capsule millimotor	Oil droplets	
12

Water driven Mg/Au/SAM micromotors	Oil droplets	
62

Heavy metals	
72

MnFe2O4 Janus micromotors	Oil droplets	
60

Activated carbon/Pt Janus micromotors	Heavy metals, explosives, nerve agents, azo-dyes	
65

Zeolite/Ag Janus micromotors	Chemical and biological warfare agents	
69

Zr/rGO/Ni/Pt tubular micromotors	Chemical warfare agents	
67

rGO/Ni/Pt tubular micromotors	Heavy metals	
68

rGO/Pt Janus micromotors	Persistent organic pollutants	
66

Carbonic anhydrase functionalized PEDOT/Pt tubular micromotors	CO2	
70

GO/PtNPs rolled-up micromotors	Oil droplets	
61


Pollutant degradation


Advanced oxidation

Fe/Pt rolled-up micromotors	Azo-dyes	
34, 73

PEDOT/Pt tubular micromotors	Chemical warfare agents	
78

rGO/Prussian blue hydrogel micromotor	Azo-dyes	
75

Ti/Fe/Cr rolled-up micromotors	4-Nitrophenol	
80

MnO2 Janus micromotors	Azo dyes	
79

CoNi@Pt mesoporous nanowires	Azo dyes, 4-nitrophenol	
81

Ag/ZIF Janus micromotors	Rhodamine B	
77


Biocatalytic degradation

SDS-based enzyme-releasing motors	Phenolic pollutants	
82

Plant (radish) based enzymatic motors	Phenolic pollutants	
83


Photocatalytic degradation

TiO2/Mg Janus micromotors	Chemical and biological warfare agents	
86

Au/TiO2/Pt Janus micromotor	Azo dyes	
89

TiO2/Pt and Pt/TiO2 tubular micromotors	Rhodamine B	
88

CdS/PANI/Pt tubular micromotors	Bisphenol A	
90

TiO2/Pt Janus micromotors	Rhodamine B	
92

Light driven TiO2/Au Janus micromotors	Dyes	
94

Light-driven Au–WO3@C Janus micromotors	Dyes	
19


Bacteria killing

US propelled lysozyme modified nanowire motors	
Micrococcus lysodeikticus
	
22

Mg/chitosan Janus micromotors	
Escherichia coli
	
96


 	Fig. 2  (A) Motion-based pollutant detection using self-propelled micromotors: (a) biocatalytic PEDOT-Au-catalase micromotors for heavy metal ion screening. The scheme illustrates the pollutant effect on the micromotor speed through inhibition of the catalase biocatalytic layer; (b) CdTe-QD modified micromotors for selective mercury detection based on the Hg-induced fluorescence quenching of the QDs immobilized on the micromotor surface. (B) Lectin-modified PEDOT/Pt micromotors for selective pick-up, transport and release of Escherichia coli bacteria in environmental samples. (C) Mg/Au Janus micromotor assisted detection of non-electroactive nerve agents in sensing strips. Localized OH ions generated by Mg/Au micromotors, along with convection forces, result in the degradation of organophosphate (OP) nerve agents into readily detectable nitrophenol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 (A, a), copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, ref. 50 (A, b), copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 55 (B), copyright 2012 American Chemical Society and ref. 57 (C), copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Dynamic oil removal using SAM modified Au/Ni/PEDOT/Pt tubular micromotors: schematic of the functionalization and time-lapse images of hexanethiol-modified micromotors transporting a payload of multiple oil droplets (11, 50, and 73 s, respectively). (B) Carbon based micromotors for adsorptive removal of pollutants: (a) schematic of activated carbon/Pt Janus micromotors for removal of heavy metals, explosives, nerve agents, azo-dyes and photographs of different coloured polluted water solutions before and after micromotor treatment; (b) graphene/Pt/Ni tubular micromotors for lead removal. Bar graph showing the removal efficiency of the micromotors (in green) compared with control experiments (moving and magnetic control in red; micromotors under magnetic stirring; purple, static, blue and peroxide). (C) Self-propelled carbonic anhydrase PEDOT micromotors for CO2 sequestration. (D) Thiol-modified Mg/Au Janus micromotors for heavy metal removal: (a) schematic of the chelation mechanism and SEM images of the micromotor before and after water treatment and (b) stripping voltammograms of a water contaminated solution before (in red) and after 5 min treatment (green) with the ligand-modified micromotors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 (A), copyright 2012 American Chemical Society; ref. 65 (B, a), copyright 2015 Wiley; ref. 68 (B, b) copyright 2016 American Chemical Society; ref. 70 (C), copyright 2015 Wiley and ref. 72 (D), copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Micromotor-based advanced pollutant oxidation: (a) tubular Fe/Pt rolled-up micromotors for destroying organic contaminants based on the Fenton reaction. The micromotors display a dual functionality with an inner Pt layer for the self-propulsion and an outer Fe layer for the in situ generation of Fe ions. The bottom part shows the influence of the Fe thickness on the rhodamine removal; (b) self-propelled metal–organic framework/Ag Janus micromotor for adsorptive removal/Fenton degradation of rhodamine 6G. (B) Micromotor-based accelerated oxidative detoxification of nerve agents and schematic of the degradation process. (C) Wastewater activated Pd/Ti/Fe/Cr rolled-up micromotors for 4-nitrophenol degradation using NaBH4 as a reductant and fuel. The bottom part shows SEM and propulsion images of the micromotors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34 (A, a), copyright 2013 American Chemical Society; ref. 77 (A, b), copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry; ref. 78 (B), copyright 2013 Wiley and ref. 80 (C), copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Water-powered TiO2/AuNPs/Mg Janus micromotors for photocatalytic degradation of chemical and biochemical warfare agents: mechanism and time lapse image of the micromotor navigation in a 15 min period. UV/vis spectra showing the degradation of methyl paraoxon using the micromotors (in green) and control experiments. (B) Internally (a) and externally (b) propelled TiO2/Pt tubular microengines for photocatalytic degradation of azo-dyes. (C) Plasmonic motor for the sunlight photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants; schematic of the operation and corresponding SEM and EDX images. The bottom part shows the decontamination ability of a mixture of azo dyes before (a and b) and after (c and d) treatment with the micromotors. (D) Light-driven Au–WO3@C Janus micromotors for rapid photodegradation of dyes. The bottom images show the STEM characterization and element distribution on the micromotor body and degradation experiments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86 (A), copyright 2014 American Chemical Society; ref. 88 (B), copyright 2017 American Chemical Society; ref. 89 (C), copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry and ref. 19 (D), copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Water-powered Mg/Au/PLGA/Alg/Chi micromotors for Escherichia coli bacteria killing. The right part shows SEM images of the bacteria before (live) and after micromotor treatment (dead). (B) Ultrasound propelled lysozyme nanowire motors for killing bacteria. (C) Zeolite/Ag Janus micromotors for biological warfare agent's detoxification: schematic of the operation, propulsion and effective Escherichia coli killing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96 (A), copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry; ref. 22 (B), copyright 2015 American Chemical Society and ref. 69 (C), copyright 2015 Wiley.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
