HERs in an acidic medium over MoS 2 nanosheets: from fundamentals to synthesis and the recent progress  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE01683G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE01683G
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 1952-1987HERs in an acidic medium over MoS2 nanosheets: from fundamentals to synthesis and the recent progress

        
          
            Sriram 
            Mansingh
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kundan Kumar 
            Das
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kulamani 
            Parida
          
          
        
      *
      Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar 751 030, Odisha, India. E-mail: paridakulamani@yahoo.com; kulamaniparida@soa.ac.in
Received 
      12th November 2020
    , Accepted 1st March 2021First published on 16th March 2021AbstractThe generation of sustainable and eco-friendly energy is the lifeline of modern civilization. Electrocatalytic water splitting producing molecular hydrogen using inexpensive, non-noble metal, and eco-friendly materials is a promising and sustainable approach that can minimize the dependency on fossil fuels and the carbon footprint of society. However, there are some major obstacles such as complex/sluggish reaction pathway, high overpotential, low catalyst durability, limited faradic efficiency and pricey catalyst (Pt, Ir, and Ru) in the process of constructing commercial electrochemical HER systems, and hence, there is an immediate need for fabricating a cost-viable non-precious HER electrocatalyst. In addition to the widespread use of 2D metal chalcogenides, in particular MoS2, this layered electrocatalyst shows robust catalytic performance towards hydrogen evolution reactions under grating acidic conditions. However, its catalytic efficiency is still inferior to that of the standard catalyst (Pt). Thus, through this Mini review, we try to cover the fundamentals, underlying catalytic mechanism, activity evaluating parameters, future opportunities, and associated challenges with MoS2 electrocatalysts and adopted advanced strategies for subduing the shortcomings. Furthermore, different edge and basal plane modification strategies, various developed MoS2 preparation techniques, and characteristic advantages of MoS2 nanosheets towards HERs are also briefly discussed. Additionally, the review provides a comprehensive collection of the latest pioneering research outcomes on layered MoS2 for HER applications, particularly in acidic electrolytes. The included state-of-the-art MoS2 catalytic performance, synthesis procedure, and advanced modification methods will act as a guiding tool to tune other materials accordingly to achieve the benchmark activity and turn the dream of H2-fuel commercialization in an environmentally sustainable manner, i.e. by non-noble metal-based HER electrocatalysis.Sriram MansinghDr Sriram Mansingh received his BSc Hons. (2nd Rank), MSc, and MPhil (1st Rank) from Utkal University, Bhubaneswar, India. Then, he completed his PhD degree from the Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan (Deemed to be University) Bhubaneswar, India, under the guidance of Prof. Kulamani Parida. His current research mainly focuses on the development of nanostructured materials such as metal oxides, metal sulfides, phosphides, layered materials and their application towards water splitting, N2 fixation, and organic/inorganic pollutant detoxification. He has published 23 research articles in various international journals and one patent.Kundan Kumar DasMr Kundan Kumar Das obtained his MSc and MTech in Environmental Science from Fakir Mohan University, Balesore, and Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan (Deemed to be University) Bhubaneswar respectively. Then he joined as a PhD scholar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida at the Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, S‘O’A Deemed to be University in 2017 and continuing. His present research includes the design and development of conducting polymer-sensitized ferrite-based material for energy generation, environmental pollutant degradation, and antibacterial studies. He has published 9 research articles in various high impact international journals and one patent.Kulamani ParidaProf. Kulamani Parida is working as Distinguished Professor in Chemistry and is the Director, Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha O Anusandhan, Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Before joining SOA, Deemed to be University, he worked for 37 years in CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar at different capacities, and retired from the position of Chief Scientist and Head of Colloids and Materials Chemistry Department. Dr Parida has made a significant contribution towards exploring chemistry related to the structural, morphological, optical, electronic, and electrochemical properties of several wide bandgaps and narrow bandgap semiconductors, doped metal oxides, metal carbides, metal sulfide, and nitrides for the effective visible light absorption and charge separation required for efficient photocatalytic water splitting, the degradation of pollutants and the synthesis of fine chemicals. He has published more than 400 papers in high impact factor journals, 15 review papers, 7 book chapters, filed 35 patents, and supervised 50 PhD students. The important and current relevance of his work is amply reflected in a large number of citations (∼20 433) of his work and H index (74). For more details: https://kmparidaimmt.weebly.com/.
Introduction
Considering the current status and utility of the conventional fossil fuel as an energy source and its detrimental effects on biodiversity, it is extremely essential to find a suitable eco-friendly and energy-dense substitute to meet the growing demand of society keeping environmental issues in mind. In this context, molecular hydrogen as the zero-carbon energy carrier with an energy density of 140 MJ kg−1 and water as the combustion product are the ultimate and ideal alternatives.1–3 However, associated limitations that obstruct the productive conversion of fossil fuel-oriented energy into a hydrogen economy include storage, transportation, and efficient production method. The present commercial method of H2 production, i.e. steam reforming technique is not an environmentally benign process as it is both greenhouse gas emitting and energy intensive. Promisingly electro-catalytic water dissociation without any carbon footprint for hydrogen evolution reactions (HERs) is gathering global attention but somehow affected by certain factors such as catalyst cost, overpotential factor (η), catalytic efficiency and stability.4–6 Adding more, Pt, Ru, Ir, Ni-alloy and Pt-based alloys are considered as state-of-the-art cathode material for HERs, but high price, durability, and scantiness are the associated bottlenecks that constricts its widespread entry as an electro-splitting device.7,8 Furthermore, the best performance of the Pt cathode is observed in the acidic medium compared to the alkaline and neutral electrolytes, which is due to slow water splitting kinetics in the alkaline medium.2,9,10 Hence, there is a pressing urgency to fabricate and explore newly inexhaustible and economically viable cathode materials showing low overpotential, smaller Tafel slope, and long-term stability. In this regard, several catalytic systems were examined ranging from oxides, carbides, borides, non-noble metal alloys, hydroxides, phosphides, to nitrides.3 However, the holy grain comes with the 2D layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), i.e. MoS2, a non-noble metal and cost-effective HER (free energy of hydrogen adsorption is close to that of Pt-group metals.) electrocatalyst, where the activity is inversely related to the layer count, or in other words, HER performance is dependent on active site concentration, which is maximum at the edge of MoS2, as reported by Jaramillo et al. and Bonde et al. respectively.11–14 Exfoliated MoS2 (layered) shows encouraging results due to its high conductivity and availability of more catalytically active sulfur sites compared to bulk MoS2, where the MoS2 layers are bond to each other via van der Waal forces, which leads to a decrease in the number of active surface sites and conductivity.13,15–19 Furthermore, a DFT study by Hinnemann et al. demonstrates that moly-edge sulfur atoms of the 2H-MoS2 phase with a trigonal-prismatic skeleton are indeed responsible for HER activity and significantly available in layered MoS2, which is later confirmed by the Jaramillo group.11,20 However, low conductivity, fewer linear co-ordinated moly-periphery sulfur atoms, and limited exposed surface area are certain limitations associated with bulk MoS2 that make it even challenging to achieve better HER activity.20 This brought about a revolution in non-noble metal-based HER electrocatalysts, but less quantity of available active sites, inert basal plane, and poor conductivity are some associated bottlenecks that hinder its electrocatalytic features for an efficacious hydrogen evolution reaction. Hence, the HER performance of MoS2 can be improved by (i) modulating the electronic structure of the edge or activating the chemically inert basal plane for better hydrogen adsorption, (ii) increasing the number of reactive centers on a mass or area basis by generating cracks or void in the layers and (ii) raising the electrical conductivity by forming new band states near the Fermi level.21 To achieve this, various techniques were followed, which include defect creation, heteroatom doping, exfoliation of layers, strain engineering, and phase transition from 2H to 1T polymorph.22 Furthermore, tuning the structural aspect such as nano-structured (thin film, double helix, complex hollow, column or flower shape, etc.), hybrid formation with conductive materials (graphene, CNT, carbon fibers, etc.), space-confined nucleation (quantum dots), vertical alignment, intercalation engineering (Li), etc., can increase the concentration of the active edge site and induce more conductivity within MoS2 that essentially revamps the electrocatalytic activity.22–25 In this direction, several research articles are there signifying the promising electrocatalytic HER performance of layered MoS2 and its successive edge tailoring methods to enhance its activity to touch the set standard. Yong-Yuan et al. prepared ultrafine MoS2 nanoparticles dispersed over hierarchically porous carbon nanosheets (MoS2@NSCS) by a traditional polymer-confined pyrolysis method without any post-treatment. Because of the hierarchical structure and synergistic effect of porous carbon frameworks and Mo-based nanoparticles, the formed binary composite exhibits excellent HER activity with high faradic efficiency.26 Furthermore, Li and team reported MoS2 nanoflowers via the hydrothermal process from the α-MoO3 precursor with KSCN in the HCl medium and observed that the nanoflower sample exhibits high hydrogen evolution activity with an overpotential of 256 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 48 mV dec−1 and maintains the catalytic performance up to 1000 cycles with a relatively long stability of 5 h.27 Additionally, to remove the associated limitations with MoS2 such as poor conductivity and pH tolerance, Zhu and coworker designed a MoS2/Nb2CTx binary hybrid by a hydrothermal method. The MoS2/MXene heterostructure depicts a metallic character with a low p-type Schottky barrier resulting in high conductivity, efficient interfacial charge transfer, and better hydrogen adsorption. Therefore, the binary composite shows enhanced HER activity at a low overpotential of 127 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and a smaller Tafel slope of 56.3 mV and retains the electrocatalytic property up to 3000 cycles.28 Interestingly, the electronic property or in-plane catalytic activity of the MoS2 basal plane can be tuned by a heteroatom confinement strategy that leads to an extraordinary increment in the HER performance of the material. With this knowledge, Deng et al. prepared a distance-optimized single Rh-atom-confined MoS2 electrocatalyst with basal plane reactivity, resulting in excellent hydrogen generation in an acidic medium (overpotential of 67 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2).29 Again, Yu et al. reported basal plane activation by S-vacancy engineering via a facile chemical reduction strategy, which results in a significant improvement in the catalytic efficiency. The controlled S-vacancy-oriented MoS2 nanosheet shows the optimum HER with a low overpotential of 190 mV and a small Tafel slope of 54 mV dec−1.30 Additionally, many more electrocatalytic systems were examined in an acidic electrolyte and found to exhibit the benchmark HER activity, which includes: CoS2/SnO2@MoS2,31 Co and Pd co-doped MoS2,32 (PAH-rGO/Zn–N–(MoS2))n,33 (1T/2H) MoS2 nanoflowers decorated on Mo–CoSx,34 hollow Co–MoS2,35 ZnxCo1−x/NC@MoS2,36 N-doped MoS2 nanoflakes,37 and 3D 1T-MoS2/CoS2 heterostructure.38 Since the past decade and so, an enormous amount of effort has been devoted toward MoS2-based HER electrocatalysis with encouraging output. Moreover, taking into consideration the trendy increasing research activities in this particular field, a state-of-the-art and exhaustive account of recent progress and associated challenges of electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reactions is very much essential. Thus far, several comprehensive reviews are there on the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction, HER activity of 2D transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs), and layered MoS2-driven HER performance in different electrolytic mediums.39,40 However, in this review, we particularly summarized the HER activity of 2D layered MoS2 in an acidic medium along with different established preparation methods and discussed the achievements of some recent MoS2-based HER catalytic systems. In short, gathering the knowledge from the above-mentioned literature survey and taking into account the ongoing research outcomes in the field of HERs in an acidic electrolyte, the present mini-review will act as an information capsule for its potential utility as a cathode material and its further modification to uplift the performance. This report will give a detailed idea about the inherent advantages of 2D layered MoS2 over bulk MoS2. The review also elaborates on the fundamentals of HERs, MoS2 as an electrocatalyst, related challenges, and followed effective master plans to eliminate these associated shortcomings and various adopted modification techniques to boost the hydrogen evolution efficiency of layered MoS2. Finally, the review presents different reported HER catalysts with their corresponding electrocatalytic activities and future scopes of 2D layered MoS2 as competent HER catalysts. However, our group has made tremendous advancement in MoS2-based catalytic systems but in the zone of the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction, and recently, the research team has started exploring MoS2 in this electrocatalytic HER field.41–46 This is the main motivation behind writing this review to gather knowledge and share the same with our research community with the hope that it will enlighten them to tune 2D MoS2 in more advanced ways to achieve the benchmark performance with low overpotential, low Tafel slope, high faradic efficiency, and long-term stability.
Basics of electrocatalytic water reduction reactions (HERs)
The HER is one part of the total water-splitting reaction, as shown in Fig. 1, which is pH-dependent, i.e. shifts by −59 mV pH−1 change and a multi-step reaction. This is theoretically represented by linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) plotting and the Tafel plot.47
 Fig. 1  General electrocatalytic water splitting reaction and the corresponding current vs. potential (I–V) graph. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Nano Convergence, Copyright 2017. 
(a) HER in acidic medium

 
4H+ + 4e− ⇄ 2H2(g)
(i)
E
HER = 0.059 × pH V vs. NHE = 0 V vs. RHE.
Cathodic half-cell reaction eqn (i), i.e. proton/hydrogen reduction reaction in the acidic electrolyte, may proceed by either the Volmer–Tafel or Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway. The mechanistic pathway of HERs is equated ((ii)–(iv)) as follows: Volmer adsorption step ⇒ catalyst + H+ + e− ⇄ H* (H-atom adsorbed on catalyst)(ii) Tafel dissociation desorption step ⇒ 2H* ⇄ H2 + catalyst(iii) Heyrovsky desorption step ⇒ H* + H+ + e− ⇄ H2 + catalyst(iv)
Generally, the HER mechanism of a catalyst is decided based on the Tafel slope (lnj vs. η) value, which is ∼29 mV dec−1 for Tafel, and ∼39 and ∼118 mV dec−1 for Heyrovsky and Volmer respectively.2,3,22,48 Furthermore, the Tafel slope also speaks about the required overpotential to increase the current density by ten times.3 However, the Volmer–Heyrovsky path is generally followed in acidic medium HERs, as suggested by Anantharaj et al. and Kong et al. respectively.49,50 Furthermore, ΔGH (Gibbs free energy of hydrogen adsorption) of the catalyst plays a pivotal role in signifying the efficiency of the material towards HERs. As per Greeley group and Nørskov et al., ΔGH > 0 makes the Volmer step sluggish and if lower then affects Heyrovsky and Tafel's reaction, so it needs to be near to zero like Pt the standard HER catalyst.51,52 Furthermore, as per Sabatier's statement, a satisfactory HER electrocatalyst is the one that possesses a nearly zero ΔGH value is neither too high nor too low.2,3 To filter out the premier HER catalyst, the following variable is taken into account, e.g. overpotential, Tafel slope, turn over frequency, faradic efficiency, cost stability, etc. Interestingly, thin-layered MoS2 has a ΔGH value of ∼0.08 eV with low overpotential, so a few-layered MoS2 can be an optimal alternative for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reactions.15,20
(b) Important parameters for evaluating catalytic efficiency

Overpotential and exchange current density. 
Practically, HER does not start at the theoretical calculated equilibrium potential rather some additional energy is required to initiate the process called overpotential (η) and this is due to destitute energy efficiency and dull reaction kinetics. In brief, overpotential is a combination of activation energy, restricted ion/gas diffusion, obstruction to electrolyte diffusion, resistance from the bubble, electrode, and wire.2Eqn (v) describes the overpotential-related terms: Ei (operating potential) = E0HER (standard potential) + iR (ohmic potential drop) + η(v)
This is classified into three types as activation overpotential, diffusion overpotential, and resistance overpotential respectively.3 Generally, onset overpotential and overpotential (η10) to achieve 10 mA cm−2 (relevant to solar fuel synthesis) current density (the normalized metric (η10)) is used to quantify the HER efficiency of the electrocatalyte.3,15 For highly active materials η50 and η100 are used as reference values for evaluating the catalytic capacity.53,54 The onset overpotential is determined from the polarization curve and the Tafel plot.3,55 Pt the reference material shows η10 within 30–40 mV.1,12,16 To become a commercial HER-catalyst, the target is 1 mA cm−2 current density at the lowest possible overpotential, so the search to find such a promising electrocatalyst is gaining great interest.55 Additionally, exchange current density (j0) is another important activity assessing the parameter that illustrates the rate of the electrocatalytic reaction at the state of equilibrium. This parameter largely depends on the nature of electrolyte and purity, e.g. for Pt the value is within the range of 10−4 to 10−2 A cm−2.1 Furthermore, the electrochemical potential dependent on the relationship between current density (j) and exchange current density (j0) is given by the Butler–Volmer equation (eqn (vi)) as follows: j = j0[−e−αnFη/RT + e−(1−α)nFη/RT](vi)
However, with an overpotential (η) < 0.005 V, then eqn (vi) becomes eqn (vii) and when η > 0.005 V the Butler–Volmer equation is simplified to the Tafel equation as shown in eqn (viii): (vii)


Tafel slope. 
The Tafel slope (η vs. logj) which defines the intrinsic features (adsorption and desorption rate of the proton) of the catalyst is an important parameter in drawing the mechanism of the water reduction reaction. This given empirical formula (eqn (viii)) describes the Tafel slope value and is obtained by linear fitting the graph:3,56 η = a + b × logj(viii)or (ix)Here, in eqn (viii), “a” stands for the Tafel constant, “b” the Tafel slope and “j” the current density respectively, and in eqn (vi), α is the electrochemical transfer co-efficient, n the number of electrons involved in the reaction, j0 the exchange current density, F the Faraday constant, T the absolute temperature, and R the ideal gas constant. Furthermore, j0 is the absolute cathodic or anodic current density when hydrogen evolution is in equilibrium, which also gives information regarding the rate of electron flow corresponding to the intrinsic catalytic performance of the material. The Tafel slope is calculated from the  value of eqn (ix) and expressed in mV dec−1 unit. Additionally, the Tafel slope is inversely related to the charge transfer co-efficient; hence, it can be used as an effective tool to judge the efficiency of electrocatalytic material.22 The value “b” gives the rate-determining step, and based on this value, the reaction pathway or mechanism is predicted, as discussed in the above section.3,57 In short, the HER mechanism in an acidic medium starts with the adsorption of proton, i.e. Volmer step (H+ + e− ↔ Had) followed by desorption of molecular hydrogen either via a chemical recombination Tafel route (2Had ↔ H2) or an electron transfer Heyrovsky path (H+ + Had + e− ↔ H2).22 The Gibbs free energy for hydrogen adsorption of a catalyst also plays an important role because near to zero value makes the adsorption and desorption process easier while too low and high value makes the process difficult. Based on the Tafel slope value, the rate-determining step was evaluated, i.e. a slope of 129 mV dec−1 means the Volmer step, likewise when the value is ∼40 mV dec−1, it suggests a Heyrovsky route and for the Tafel reaction, the slope is ∼30 mV dec−1 respectively.3 Furthermore, when the slope value is around 29 mV dec−1, hydrogen evolution occurs via the Volmer–Tafel mechanism; however, the HER follows the Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway when the Tafel slope is about 38 mV dec−1.22 A smaller Tafel slope suggests faster reaction kinetics and most of the MoS2-based catalysts show the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism. Fig. 2(a) shows the HER mechanism over Ir/SiNW electrocatalysts and Fig. 2(b–d) depicts the plot representing the Tafel, Volmer, and Heyrovsky reactions.3 Li and group proposed the Volmer–Tafel pathway of HERs on the Pt electrode as the observed Tafel slope is 30 mV dec−1.58 The value of slope also gives an idea about the surface and structural feature of the material that affects the electrode–electrolyte interface charge diffusion.59 The Tafel slope is a more potential-dependent parameter, i.e. it varies with the change in potential.60
 Fig. 2  (a) Mechanism of the HER process and (b–d) the corresponding Tafel, Volmer, and Heyrovsky reaction pathway. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 3 and 53 with permission from ChemElectroChem and Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., Copyright 2020 and 2013 respectively. 


Turnover frequency (TOF). 
Turnover frequency (TOF for HER) is defined as evolved H2 per second per active site or turnover rate per active site, and it is quite crucial in denoting the best catalyst (eqn (x)). However, because of the difference in active site measuring methods and catalyst structures, it is unjustified to draw a juxtaposition of TOF, and also due to this, the TOF value varies.22 Therefore, estimating or quantifying the reactive sites of catalysts is compulsory and this is done through cyclic voltammograms, multiplying the surface sites with the roughness factor, and the Jaramillo method.3,61,62 All the followed method gives only an approximate TOF value because while calculating, the condition is taken to be ideal.63 TOF = rate of H2 evolution/number of active sites(x)


Electrocatalytic active surface area. 
The current density is normally standardized by either the geometrical area of the working electrode on which the material is loaded (A cm−2) or the weight (A g−1) or the geometric surface area of the catalyst (SECSA; A cm−2) respectively.49 Generally, the geometric area is followed for the current density calculation. Furthermore, the average surface area is estimated by an in situ method, i.e. calculating the electrochemical surface area (ECSA) obtained from the double-layer capacitance (Cdl), which reflects the intrinsic property of the catalyst and given by eqn (xi) or via ex situ methods like adsorption study or scanning microscope imaging.3 ECSA is affected by the nature of the catalyst surface, i.e. roughness or smoothness.3,64 ECSA = Rf (roughness factor) × S (geometric surface area) = Cdl/Cs (specific capacitance)(xi)
The double-layer capacitance was measured through a static cyclic voltammogram in a non-faradic potential zone or by the frequency-dependent Nyquist plot.65


Faradic efficiency (FE). 
This is another quantity that represents the efficiency of a catalyst for a particular electrochemical reaction and is calculated as the electron involved in that reaction divided by the total electron injected.66 For HERs, faradic or coulombic efficiency is the ratio of the number of experimentally produced hydrogen to theoretically evolved hydrogen (100% yield), as depicted in eqn (xii).3,67 In addition, this is computed via measuring the amount of hydrogen evolved through gas chromatography or using an electrochemical method.3 The obtained faradic efficiency of the catalyst is compared with that of the standard Pt electrocatalyst, and it is based on the closeness of values that the capability is decided. Usually, evolved hydrogen is estimated by a water displacement method and using a gas chromatography (GC) instrument. (xii)


Stability. 
Durability, stability and long cycle life all these terms mean the same, i.e. how long the material can retain a standard catalytic activity, and this result specifies the catalyst practical or industrial execution. Chronoamperometric (Δj0vs. t at constant η) and chronopotentiometry (Δη vs. t at constant j0) measurements are generally carried out to evaluate this factor.68,69 Additionally, linear sweep voltammetry, cyclic voltammetry, and multi-step chrono-potentiometry test are performed to observe the variation in polarization and current density of the material, which later helps in expressing the stability of the catalyst. Presently, changes in morphology, composition, and structure of the sample are investigated by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, XPS, electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance, XRD, and microscopic imaging techniques (TEM, HRTEM, HAADF-STEM, and EDX), which help to ascertain the apparent stability of the catalyst, but these are performed after the performed electrochemical reaction and compared with the initial condition.3,16,70 Furthermore, contamination is another serious issue that hampers the activity or durability.


Gibbs free energy for hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH). 
In HERs, hydrogen adsorption on the catalyst surface is a vital step. In brief, if the adsorption is strong it leads to catalyst surface poisoning and when bonded loosely, the adsorption and activation step became difficult as stated by Sabatier.3,71 For a good HER electrode, the ΔGH value of the material should be close to zero, which can be referred from the volcano plot shown in Fig. 3. Further, the Gibbs free energy of adsorption is calculated using density functional theory as follows (eqn (xiii)):3 ΔGH = ΔE* (hydrogen adsorption enthalpy) + ΔEφ (zero-point energy) − TΔS(xiii)T = absolute temperature and S = entropy.
 Fig. 3  A volcano plot shows the relation between the measured exchange current density and the DFT-calculated Gibbs free energy of hydrogen adsorption on the catalyst surface. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from ACS Nano, Copyright 2019. 


Cost. 
Price is an important criterion in defining the catalyst, which is the combination of reagents used and the method followed for preparation. In brief, the synthesis process that includes ultrahigh vacuum and elevated temperature condition along with expensive chemical precursors (e.g. Pt, Ru, Re, phosphines, and fluorides) are termed big-budget process and the formed catalysts are costlier; however, the materials prepared from abundant elements under ambient conditions are usually cheap.16

(c) MoS2 as a HER catalyst
The hydrodesulfurization catalyst, i.e. MoS2, is very stable in most of the acids, which is an essential criterion for an HER catalyst. The investigation made by Nørskov and Chorkendorff in the year 2005 via a DFT study demonstrates that MoS2 is a competent HER catalyst but surprisingly only a specific region of MoS2 is chemically active, i.e. sulfur atoms coordinated to the edge Mo-atom of the MoS2 plane.20 However, in bulk form MoS2 is somehow inert towards HER activity, as reported by Tributsch et al., and further studies suggest that in the nanostructured, amorphous, or layered form, it is a highly promising HER electrocatalyst.11,19 In brief, bulk MoS2 is a stacked flat polygon of the S–Mo–S tri-layer arranged framework held by van der Waals interaction with a sheet spacing of 6.5 Å, and the atoms constituting the layers are attached via a covalent bond; therefore, its exfoliation or formation of single-layered MoS2 is a bit easy. The Mo atom is covalently attached with six nearby sulfur atoms and there is no dangling bond between the MoS2 layers. Additionally, MoS2 exists in three crystal phases, namely, 1T-MoS2, i.e. (i) 1S–Mo–S layers with a tetragonal symmetry, (ii) 2H-MoS2 represents a hexagonal lattice with 2S–Mo–S layers, and (iii) 3R-MoS2 indicates 3S–Mo–S layers with the rhombohedral framework.72 Further, the single-sheet MoS2 exists in either the trigonal prismatic (D3h group symmetry) or octahedral (D3d group symmetry) crystal phase, resulting in a significant difference in the characteristic properties. In 2H and 3R polymorph, the stacking style is like A–B–A type (A = chalcogenides and B = transition metal) but in 1T form, it is like A–B–C pattern. The Mo atom in both 2H and 3R is at the center of a triangular prism and in the 1T phase, it is present at the center of the octahedral structure. Heating results in converting the 3R form into 2H type, whereas 1T-MoS2 is obtained by chemical Li-intercalation or exfoliation of 2H-MoS2.73,74 Further, Fig. 4 depicts the ball and stick model of the 1T and 2H crystal phase of MoS2 along with its Mo and S-edge side view. The metallic 1T (metastable) form is generated by disturbing one sulfur layer of 2H-MoS2. In 1T MoS2, both basal and edge S-site are active but in the 2H crystal phase, only uncoordinated edge sulfur is catalytically active.72 This crystal graphitic like the skeleton of MoS2 contains different surface sites, but the high charge carrier mobility (∼2200 times) is confined to the edge sites only.15,25,72 However, low conductivity between the parallelly stacked nanosheets resists the smooth flow of charge from the electrode to the active site, and the surface-bound catalytically inert basal plane sites make pristine/bulk MoS2 a dead/low rated HER catalyst.47 Usually, few-layered MoS2 or exfoliated MoS2 displays significant electrocatalytic behavior with faster electron–hole mobility, and the high conductivity of MoS2 sheets largely depends on the number of d-electrons in the non-bonding d-orbital, which is present in between the bonding and anti-bonding states of Mo–S bonds and the co-ordination number of the Mo-metal. Therefore, based on the difference in the filling of d-orbital electrons, the MoS2 character changes from metallic to semiconductor, i.e. in 2H-phase all the non-bonding d-orbitals are completely occupied, resulting in semiconducting character, whereas in the case of 1T-MoS2, the non-bonding orbitals are partially filled leading to a metallic behavior.74 Further, MoS2 in amorphous, crystalline, and molecular mimics depicts notable electrochemical ability. The chemical configuration, morphology, and crystal orientation determine the behavior of the MoS2 sheet towards electrocatalytic reactions.77 It was again, experimentally verified through nanostructured MoS2, i.e. MoS2 nucleated over Au particles, that the catalytic activity and edge length are directly related, or in other words, the edge sulfur atom density will regulate the HER kinetic.11,20 Out of the available polymorphs of MoS2, the 1T metastable phase with high conductivity and atom populated basal horizon displays magnified HER activity compared to 2H-MoS2.22,74 Tang et al. carried out a DFT study on the 1T-MoS2 basal plane and found that the inert basal plane becomes active with high conductivity after the transfer of the 2H phase (semiconducting) to the 1T-MoS2 (metallic) and also shows more hydrogen adsorption ability.76 However, the catalytic efficiency of 2H polymorphs can be increased by converting the large basal surface to energetic catalytic sites via triggering defect formation, doping mechanism, and strain engineering.74 As we know, bulk MoS2 is not a suitable candidate for the electrocatalytic water reduction reaction, but in the nanostructure form or exfoliated form, it is of great potential. When pristine MoS2 is delaminated into sheets, basal plane and edge sites are brought to light with Mo or S-atoms present at the terminal edge. Again, the edge, kinks, and corner atoms of these formed nanosheets are low coordinated and they stand over the basal plane, which makes these atoms reactive centers for hydrogen evolution reaction. The sulfur passivated Mo-edge is more active due to unsaturated coordination and sulfide dense surroundings. Further, the availability of dangling bonds and low coordinated edge atoms in the nanosheets makes the adsorption of the substrate to the edge molybdenum atom feasible. Hence, increasing the number of active edge sites and conductivity of MoS2 are highly essentials in designing efficient MoS2-based HER electrocatalysts. Exhaustively, the superior HER activity of 2D layered MoS2 is well justified by (i) the volcano plot which reports that Gibb's free energy of hydrogen adsorption on the edge site of MoS2 is nearly zero, i.e. ΔGH ∼ 0.08 eV (thermoneutral) or comparable to that of Pt, and (ii) the high current density.11,15,20,76 The work of Jaramillo in 2007 set the platform for MoS2 as a front-row HER catalyst, in that experiment, the group reported a TOF of 1 s−1 and 10 s−1 (η10 = 100 and 160 mV respectively) for MoS2 nanoparticles embedded on the Au (111) facet.11,15 Additionally, the MoS2 edge reaction sites show a mirror resemblance with that of natural enzyme systems like nitrogenase and hydrogenase as far as selectivity and performance are concerned.20,22 Further, the layered structure of MoS2 provides a huge surface area where reactive sites are equal to several atoms ready to carry out the reaction. Again, thin-layered MoS2 is best for HER activity because of the following properties like high stability in the acidic medium, cost-effectiveness, copiousness, and comfortable modification for better catalytic performance (doping, strain, defect, etc.), and requires a facile synthesis method (electrodeposition and wet chemical synthesis).22,23,78 Additionally, its large surface horizon favors other materials or substrates to form a hybrid to further enhance its catalytic potential.24 The unsaturated edge S-atoms are more sensitive for the HER activity but certain reports suggest that the in-plane S-domain can be converted into a catalytic site of significant potential.79,80 Mo and S-terminated planes are sensitive to electrolytic HERs, whereas the (0001) crystal basal plane is passive. In the MoS2 sheet, the Mo edge covered with sulfur is more active than another region. Furthermore, the dangling bond and unsaturated coordinated edges are more in number in the case of the MoS2 sheet, which ultimately enhances the electrocatalytic activity.72 Generally, based on the Tafel slope value, MoSx follows the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanistic pathway for the HER, i.e. proton gets adsorbed on the S-center and then passes on to the Mo-site forming the Mo–H bond, and finally, molecular hydrogen is produced along with hydronium ions.22,72 Adding more to it, a TOF value of 1 s−1and 10 s−1 is reported at the edge sites of MoS2 at η of 100 and 160 mV respectively, whereas the standard HER catalyst, i.e. Pt shows a TOF of 1–1000 H2 per s per site at η = 0.15 All the above-mentioned facts give solid ground for projecting MoS2 as a competent non-precious HER catalyst.
 Fig. 4  Representing the ball-stick model of 2H and 1T phase of MoS2 (a) metal co-ordination image, top and lateral view of a single layer, and (b) basal plane, Mo and S-edge planes image. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from J. Mater. Chem. A, Copyright 2017. 
Preparation techniques for 2D layered MoS2
Generally, bulk MoS2 is composed of graphite-like stacked tri-layers of S–Mo–S units (the hexagonal plane of Mo sandwiched between two hexagonal planes of S-atom) via weak van der Waals forces and these flat polygon tri-layers contain terrace site and edge site respectively, as shown in Fig. 5.11,72,81 The ultrathin or 2D layered MoS2 is encouragingly active, so the majority of research work focuses on designing MoS2 sheets with a high edge/basal ratio, presenting a large number of the active site.21 This section narrates different synthesis procedures followed towards 2D MoS2 preparation, which is broadly classified into top-down (micromechanical and liquid phase exfoliation) and bottom-up (physical vapor deposition, solution chemical process, and chemical vapor deposition) techniques, as represented in Fig. 6 respectively. Additionally, Table 1 depicts various preparation methods followed by researchers to fabricate layered MoS2 based on some previously reported articles.
 Fig. 5  Distance between different layers of the tri-layer units (S–Mo–S). 
 Fig. 6  Top-down methods and bottom-up methods for synthesizing layered MoS2. 
Table 1 Summary of various preparation methods for layered MoS2 based on some previous reports in the literature




Sl no.
Sample
Synthesis technique
Procedure
Reference




1
3D rose-petal-shapedMoS2 hierarchical nanostructures
Chemical vapor deposition
First carbon nanofibers (CNF) mats were synthesized by combining the electrospinning and carbonization processes, and then MoS2 is grown directly over CNF by the CVD method from MoO3 and sulfur vapor at 900 °C

114



2
MoS2 nanoflowers (MoS2NFs) coated on reduced graphene oxide (rGO) paper
Solvothermal
MoS2NFs/rGO electrode is prepared from (NH4)2MoS4 and rGO paper precursor by subjecting the precursor containing Teflon autoclave to 200 °C for 24 h

115



3
Vertically oriented MoS2 nanosheet thin films grown on carbon cloth (CC)
Solvothermal
(NH4)2MoS4 has dissolved in DMF and H2O solution. Then the above solution and the CC (against the wall) are subjected to solvothermal treatment at 200 °C for 12 h

116



4
2H-MoS2 was grown on carbon fiber paper (CFP)
Pyrolysis, Li-electrochemical intercalation, and exfoliation processes
MoO3 NPs dispersed over CFP (S–MoO3) are first prepared from (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O by heating at 600 °C in Ar atmosphere. Then S–MoO3 is transferred to S–MoS2via sulfurization followed by Li-electrochemical intercalation to give the final sample

117



5
Vertically aligned-MoS2 and cage like MoS2 on CNF
Pyrolysis
CNF is dipped in 20% (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O solution is heated at 600 °C for 1.5 h under Ar atmosphere in the tube furnace and then rapid sulfurization

118



6
MoS2 thin film
Liquid exfoliation and deposition over polish quartz plate
(i) Exfoliation of the pristine MoS2 crystals to single layers, (ii) producing nanocrystalline MoS2 particles from the dispersions of single MoS2 layers, and (iii) their deposition onto the substrate in the form of a film

119



7
Inorganic fullerene-like MoS2
Ablating polycrystalline MoS2
Solutions were prepared ablating a polycrystalline MoS2 target. The target was prepared by pressing commercially available MoS2 powder. The ablation is performed by the second harmonic of an Nd:YAG laser

120



8
Exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets modified glass carbon electrode (GCE)
Liquid exfoliation via ultra-sonication
Commercially available MoS2 powder is first dispersed in DMF and then exfoliated by ultrasonication, followed by deposition over GCE by a drop-casting method

121



9
Hall bar structure and a hexagonal array monolayer MoS2
Etching process using XeF2
Etching MoS2 using XeF2 as a reaction gas. To study the mechanism of etching PMMA is used as an etching mask and combining micro-fabrication with etching different morphology-oriented MoS2 are prepared

122



10
Monolayer MoS2 single crystals (∼25 microns) on different insulating substrates (SiO2, sapphire, and glass)
Catalyst free vapor–solid (VS) growth mechanism
MoS2 powder in an alumina boat is placed in the center and insulating substrate at the cooler zone of a horizontal quartz tube furnace. Then the tube is maintained at a pressure of 20 m torr in the Ar atmosphere. Finally, the furnace temperature is raised to 900 °C for 15–20 min

123



11
Epitaxial monolayer MoS2 on an inert and nearly lattice-matching mica substrate
The low-pressure chemical vapor deposition method
Monolayer MoS2 over mica is prepared from MoO3 and sulfur powder along with fluorophlogopite mica in a multi-temperature zone tubular furnace kept at 300 °C and 30 Pa under Ar condition

124



12
MoS2 thin film
Chemical bath deposition method on glass and quartz substrate
First (NH4)2MoS4 crystal is prepared by precipitation method from H2S and ammonium paramolybdate. MoS2 film is coated over the substrate by chemical bath method where (NH4)2MoS4 and hydrazine solutions are mixed and adjusted to pH = 10. Then transferred to a beaker containing glass substrate and capped with Teflon tape and the bath temperature is kept at 60 °C for 1 h

125



13
Closed caged fullerene-like molybdenum disulfide
Arc discharge
An arc discharge is carried out between graphite cathode (diameter = 12 mm and length = 20 mm) and Mo anode (diameter = 7 mm and length = 80 mm) filled with tiny MoS2 powder merged in de-ionized water. The arc current of 30 A and a voltage of 17 V are supplied by direct current to the reactor

126



14
Wafer-scale MoS2 atomic layers
Magnetron sputtering
MoS2 film is grown over substrates like SiO2/Si, and sapphire from Mo metal target sputter in sulfur vapor leaking from heating tape. The chamber pressure is kept at 3 × 10−7 mbar and Ar pressure at 6 × 10−4 mbar with a sputtering power of 6 W. The number of the layer in MoS2 film is tuned by varying the sputtering power and deposition time

127



15
MoS2 atomic layers
Thermal vapor sulfurization
Thin Mo and MoO3 films are deposited over sapphire and SiO2/Si substrate in a magnetron sputtering chamber with Ar–O2 gas flow and high temperature. Then thermal vapor sulfurization of the above-coated substrates is done in a tubular furnace in presence of sulfur powder and N2 gas flow

128





(a) The top-down method towards the preparation of thin layered MoS2
This is classified into two categories: (i) mechanically peeling up the sheets of bulk material using an adhesive tape, similar to that adopted for the exfoliation of graphene sheets but this is not favorable for commercial application and very tedious to manage the size and thickness,75,82–84 (ii) liquid-phase exfoliation by intercalating ions inside the layer spacing that results in a difference of structure and electronic features of the obtained sheet compared to bulk, e.g. when MoS2 is mixed with n-butyl lithium, an intensive reaction occurs causing the evolution of H2 that ultimately separates the MoS2 shack layers.83 The disadvantage of this method is the reaction that occurs at high temperatures over a long-time duration and also requires balance exposure of MoS2 to lithium.82 However, this technique allows for additional and upgrade applications of layered MoS2.84
(b) Bottom-up
Bottom-up approaches such as hydrothermal and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) can be followed to produce scalable and controllable ultra-thin MoS2 on an industrial scale.23,75,85 In the hydrothermal method, the obtained nanosheets are of uniform thickness and also a cost-effective process due to the use of low-cost precursors,86–90 whereas in CVD, a solid support is required like Si substrate, Cu-foil, and graphene over which MoS2 is formed at high temperatures and vacuum atmosphere.82 Additionally, simultaneous vaporization of sulfur and MoO3 at elevated temperatures results in direct deposition of MoS2 on the substrate.91 In another example MoS2 is prepared by dip coating (NH4)2MoS4 over the wafer and then subjected to heating.92 The CVD method is highly recommendable for the production of MoS2 sheets of desirable size and thickness but the harsh reaction condition limits its applicability.84,92,93 Additionally, the details of different synthesis methods along with examples are elaborated in the following section.
Top-down approaches
Micromechanical exfoliation
The mechanical method of exfoliation is stemmed from the simple “Scotch tape method” commonly adopted to attain layered graphene sheets. Identical to graphene exfoliation, researchers have tried to obtain the ultrathin layers of the MoS2 material via the same technique.94 This “Scotch tape method” involves a combination of bonding agent, building substrate, and some kind of external mechanical force to obtain the layered structure from the bulk ones.95 In this process, bulk MoS2 is attached to an adhesive tape, continuously exfoliated, followed by adhering to a building substrate. Due to the existence of weak van der Waals adhesion force, ultra-thin layers of MoS2 get attached to the substrate surface. Via this method, layered MoS2 is produced of random shapes and sizes. Using this micro-exfoliation method, Kis and his group members have synthesized MoS2 monolayers that can be used in different sectors like (i) photodetectors, (ii) analogue electronic devices, (iii) metal–insulator transition, and (iv) digital circuits.81,96 Good quality of monolayers and 2D materials can be obtained but this method doesn't provide hope for large-scale applications owing to its low yield and very tedious to manage the morphological characteristics like flake thickness size and thickness because of frailer van der Waals adhesion than that of graphene.81 Therefore, there is an urgency to modify the synthetic technique for defined morphological characters along with large-scale-up. In this theme, Magda et al. made an interesting science by modifying the MoS2-substrate attachment, to obtain the single layers of MoS2 with the lateral size within the range of several hundred microns.97 Because of low yield and limited production, MoS2 prepared by this “Scotch tape method” is restricted to laboratory-based studies only.
Liquid phase exfoliation
Liquid exfoliation (LE) is another well-established technique for producing large quantities of mono and multiple layers of MoS2 nanoflakes from the bulk ones with arbitrary shape and size.94 Besides, the LE method gives an ultra-edge over micromechanical exfoliation in terms of production but the quality of layered materials is not up to the standard. Generally, LE includes both ion intercalation and solvent exfoliation methods for the synthesis of layered MoS2 materials. In atomic intercalation procedure, lithium is generally preferred to get intercalated between the layers of MoS2 to amplify the layer spacing that results in a difference of structure and electronic feature of the obtained sheet compared to bulk.81 Zhang et al. in the year 2011 suggested a swift and facile well-regulated approach to exfoliate the MoS2 layers by an electrochemical lithiation discharge course.98 Similarly, Fan, and the group also developed an effortless way for MoS2 exfoliation using a sonication-supported lithium intercalation. In this process, when MoS2 is mixed with n-butyl lithium, an intensive reaction occurs causing the evolution of H2 that ultimately separates the MoS2 shacked layers. Additionally, a high yield of single-layered MoS2 and 1T phase of MoS2 can be obtained from this ultra-sonication method.99 Moreover, the sonication process of exfoliation can introduce defects within the layers and simultaneously can reduce the size of the layer.81 Strongin and group prepared 1T-MoS2via a Li intercalation method from bulk 2H-MoS2 using LiBH4 and n-butyl lithium. The so-formed LixMoS2 is further exfoliated to monolayer MoS2 nanosheets (NS) using water.100 Apart from intercalated exfoliation; the solvent exfoliation method has also been proposed in the same year, whose principal aim was to extract 2H MoS2 from the bulk phase of MoS2. LE can generate a suspension of monolayers that can be used for composite formation. LE is a simple, cost-beneficial method of exfoliation that can produce a high amount of 2D nanosheets.81,94 Therefore, this method is being considered to be the most suitable one for the commercial-scale production of 2D layered materials. The LE not only produces wet suspensions of sheets or dry powder but also generates thin films as well. Additionally, Miller et al. adopted a chemical exfoliation technique to fabricate 1T-MoS2 nanosheets from bulk 2H-MoS2 using n-butyl lithium and water. The obtained metallic 1T-MoS2NSs are further functionalized with different electron-donating and -withdrawing groups containing organic compounds and found that the functionalized NS shows better activity than unfunctionalized 1T-MoS2. In addition, out of the functionalized NSs, the electron-donating group-attached MoS2 shows higher performance.101
Bottom-up approaches
Physical vapor deposition
Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) is found to be an advanced technology for developing thin films of a single crystal of 2D materials. Further, utilization of this method for procuring 2D materials is not the gratification and hence requires further modification. The particle size of 2D materials extracted through the physical vapor deposition method is not up to the mark as anticipated. In fact, the application of this method for attaining 2D materials is rarely being observed. However, literature is available which reports on the formation of amorphous MoS2–Ti composite through vacuum sputtering, where MoS2 and Ti are the target materials.81
Solution chemical process
In this current era of research, there are several methods based on solution chemistry that has been reported for MoS2 synthesis. In the hydrothermal and solvothermal-based synthesis process, molybdate is allowed to react with sulfur groups at high temperatures and high pressures for a certain period.81 The output product of the reaction results in the formation of MoS2 powders with unique morphological characteristics. Moreover, the crystallinity and purity phase of the material can be improved by post-calcination treatment operated at high temperatures. The precursor solution is the only difference between the hydrothermal and solvothermal synthesis procedures. MoS2 is commonly prepared from the ammonium tetrathiomolybdate [(NH4)2MoS4] precursor as it easily decomposes to MoO3 and can be further converted into a MoS2 material. Apart from the chemical process, researchers have adopted electrochemical and photo-assisted deposition techniques to synthesize the MoS2 material.81 Li et al. successfully fabricated morphological oriented MoS2 nanowires and nanoribbons from MoOx as the starting material. The MoOx is then reacted with H2S at high temperatures to prepare MoS2 materials.102 However, the 2H and 3R phases of MoS2 can be synthesized by tuning the reaction temperature. The MoS2 nanoribbons are found to be on the scale of 50 μm in length, and parallel arrangement of ribbons is preferable for device fabrication.
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
Chemical vapor deposition is the most popular and unique method adopted for the synthesis of thin layers of MoS2 materials. In this technique, MoS2 is developed on the surface of some insulating substrates or insulating supportive materials like SiO2, Cu-foil, carbon nanofibers, graphene, or sapphire. In this method, obtaining crystallographic MoS2 by controlling the number of layers is quite a challenging task. In the present scenario, precursors like Mo, (NH4)2MoS4, MoO3 are first deposited on the substrate followed by sulfurization or thermal decomposition of starting materials at elevated temperatures for the preparation of MoS2 material with controlled morphology.94 For the first time in history in 2012, Y. H. Lee's group had reported a unique CVD method for synthesizing MoS2 specimens. Through this technique, the group members were able to fabricate wide-surface-based single-layered MoS2 films on a substrate like silicon dioxide. The team members allowed MoO3 and S powder to react with each other on a SiO2 substrate, which should be further pre-treated with graphene-like molecules to increase the nucleation points.103 Later in the year 2013, Yu's group also suggested a self-limiting CVD process under high pressure to synthesize uniform shape and size of MoS2 films only by altering the MoO3 precursor to MoCl5 one.104 As per literature, the thermal evaporation-exfoliation method has been applied to acquire the ultra-thin layers of MoS2 which is a two-step method.105 This approach provides a window to develop large-sized MoS2 layers with polycrystalline nature, but controlling the number of layers is a strenuous work. To address these types of problems, a method to develop high crystalline layers of MoS2 has been demonstrated by controlling the number of layers using MoO2 as a template.94 In detail, MoO3 powder was initially evaporated and reduced with vapors of sulfur to obtain MoO2, which then binds to SiO2 substrates and finally converts into rhomboidal micro-sheets inside the furnace of the CVD reaction instrument. The micro-sheets of MoO2 were again sulfurized at high temperatures to achieve a varied amount of MoS2 layers. For separating the thin flakes of MoS2, a thin layer of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) is applied on the surface of MoS2/MoO2 micro-sheets, whereas the remaining MoO2 layer can be transferred onto the other supports based on PMMA-mediated transfer printing. The as-prepared MoS2/MoO2 layers were produced by reducing MoO3 followed by annealing. In the binary MoS2/MoO2 hybrid, the stripped MoS2 layers, and the MoO2 layers retained on the supports, demonstrating the successful synthesis of MoS2 layers from MoO2 precursors.94 Zhan and his group members had adopted the CVD technique to synthesize mono/few layers of MoS2 using Mo-based compounds and sulfur as precursors.106 Xiang and his group members have utilized the CVD methodology to fabricate mono-layered MoS2 of controlled shape and over rutile phase TiO2 (110) substrate.107 Wu and his group members have synthesized the monolayer of MoS2 single crystals on a variety of standard insulating substrates (SiO2, sapphire, and glass) using a catalyst-free vapor–solid growth mechanism.108 A single-step NaCl-assisted CVD method was adopted by Li and his co-workers to synthesize Nb-doped MoS2 on a SiO2 substrate.109Fig. 7 displays the general synthesis of thin layered MoS2via CVD techniques. The CVD method highly recommendable for the production of MoS2 sheets of desirable size and thickness but the harsh reaction condition limits its applicability. Therefore, to counter these issues, plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) has been developed that lowers the growth temperature and as a result, the MoS2 is easily deposited over the substrate.110 Apart from these traditional CVD processes, there also exists a special type of CVD known as the metal–organic CVD process (MOCVD), where organometallic compounds are used as precursors. This technique is used to produce epitaxial films of single crystals. However, a few pieces of literature have been reported on the utilization of this technique to prepare the thin films of MoS2. For example, Kang and his co-workers have adopted the MOCVD method to develop metal sulfides like MoS2 and WS2 on a 4 inch oxidized silicon substrate.111 The layered MoS2 is prepared using a gaseous state of Mo(CO)6 precursors along with the addition of hydrogen gas. It has been argued that the supplement of H2 at a lower rate has a positive impact on the development of MoS2 monolayers and also essential for removing debris of carbon species produced during the MOCVD process.81,111 Moreover, obtaining 2D materials via the MOCVD process indeed shows a way for its future application as in this synthetic method, ultra-pure gaseous precursors are used to deposit on the building substrate. Apart from this, MoS2 can also be synthesized through the ALD method (atomic layered deposition), which is one of the advanced techniques to prepare the metal sulfides. In this synthesis technique, thin films are developed by uncovering the surface of the substrate to alternating gaseous precursors. In comparison to the traditional CVD method, the precursors are not continuously supplied into the reactor chamber. As an alternative, the precursors are introduced as chronological and non-overlapping pulses, which are separated by purges. In each section, molecules are allowed to react with the surface of the substrate in a controlled manner, which results in the development of materials with high thickness. Very recently, scientists and researchers have used this ALD process of synthesis to prepare MoS2 where they have applied a combination of MoCl5 and H2S precursors to prepare monolayers of MoS2 on the Si substrate.81,112,113
 Fig. 7  General CVD synthesis of MoS2. (a) Sulfurization of MoO3 powder. (b) Sulfurization of Mo films. (c and d) Vapor–solid growth from MoS2 powder. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 103, 106 and 108 with permission from Adv Mater., Small, and ACS Nano, Copyright 2012, 2012 and 2013 respectively. 
Various adopted methods to boost the HER activity and overview of some recent reports in the literature
The HER catalytic performance of MoS2 is yet to reach the set standard value; therefore, several strategies are implemented to tune its property such as active site and conductivity via edge and basal plane modification. The basic refinement techniques followed are phase conversion, defect/vacancy creation, heteroatoms doping, composite formation, edge–basal plane tailoring, crystallographic engineering, and strain induction (as shown in Fig. 8).22,72 As we know edge sites are highly responsive to electrocatalytic HER activity, whereas the basal region is almost inactive and further because of multi-stacked layers in bulk MoS2, it shows low conductivity. Therefore, it is of prior importance to increase the reactive site and conductivity by modifying the basal plane and exfoliating bulk MoS2 to an ultrathin layered form. Further, reported articles clearly emphasized the importance of the layer structure and HER production rate, i.e. with exfoliation or delamination, the number of active sites (terraces, uncoordinated/corner atoms, and kinks) and conductivity both get upgraded.22,72 Hence, thinning the MoS2 layer resulted in an increased number of active centers and also the conductivity that ultimately boosts the proton reduction ability of the MoS2 cathode. The below-given text narrates the detailed process and various modification techniques followed by different research groups towards increasing the number of active sites and conductivity of MoS2 nanosheets for enhanced hydrogen evolution reactions basically in an acidic medium.
 Fig. 8  Different strategies that were followed to enhance the HER activity of 2D-MoS2. 
(a) Maximizing active site concentration
This can be achieved by delaminating bulk MoS2 into thin sheets via CVD, liquid exfoliation, ball milling, ultrasonication, and template method.21,72,128,129 Through exfoliation of MoS2 layers, the number of active sites increases, and at the same time, material conductivity is enhanced. As we knew, the basal surface is inert towards the HER process, so converting these areas into the reactive site by defect and edge engineering is a very productive technique towards improving the catalytic performance of the material. Additionally, confined growth or reducing MoS2 particle size is also beneficial for the development of highly dense active edge sites containing sheets that finally increase the HER activity. Therefore, rather than just increasing the surface area, it is highly a requisite to improve the edge-to-basal plane ratio; as a result, thin-layered MoS2 with concentrated active sites is highly demanding. In the theme of active site increment, Wang et al. comprehensively examined the effect of sixteen types of structural defects, which include seven kinds of grain boundary and nine types of point defects on the activation process of the chemically inert basal plane of the MoS2 framework (as shown in Fig. 9). The 16 kinds of defects are monosulfur (VS)/disulfur (VS2) vacancy, vacancy complex of Mo and nearby three sulfur (VMoS3)/three sulfur pairs (VMoS6), a sulfur atom replacing a Mo atom (SMo), or a S2 column substituting Mo atom (S2Mo), antisite defect where a Mo atom replaces a sulfur atom (MoS)/replacing a S2 atom (MoS2), Mo2 column substituting a S2 column (Mo2S2), grain boundaries with 21.8° tilt containing 5–7 rings (5|7a,5|7b), 60° tilt containing 4–4 rings (4|4), composed of 4–8 rings (4|8a,4|8b), Mo–Mo bond and sulfur bridge respectively. Further, based on the performed computational studies, the group observed that defects such as VS, VMoS3, MoS2, 4|8a, Mo–Mo bond, and sulfur bridge have a major impact on magnifying the HER activity of in-plane sulfur atoms of the MoS2 layer because of their corresponding low ΔGH values of −0.06, −0.13, 0.09, 0.15, −0.13 and 0.04 eV respectively. Again, these six defects show improved activity in both Tafel and Heyrovsky processes, which are well demonstrated via the amendatory band-center model.130
 Fig. 9  (a) Reaction mechanism and corresponding energy profile of the HER on MoS2 4|8a GBs, (b) stable adsorption location for hydrogen atom adsorption at different defect sites, (c and d) energetics of the HER process on designed catalysts. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Chem. Mater., Copyright 2016. 
Additionally, Xie et al. adopted a hydrothermal method to fabricate a scalable amount of defect-rich MoS2 ultrathin nanosheets from a concentrated amount of hexaammonium heptamolybdate tetrahydrate and thiourea precursors (as depicted in Fig. 10). Excess amounts of thiourea are employed because it (i) helps in the reduction of Mo(VI) to Mo(IV), (ii) stabilizes the ultrathin structure, and (iii) partly restricts the oriented crystal nucleation, which results in the origin of defective surplus MoS2 nanosheets with a quasi-periodic arrangement. The presence of a high amount of defects in the MoS2 ultrathin nanosheet brings about the partial breaking of chemically inert basal plane, resulting in the exposure of more active edge sites that eventually improves the HER activity of the sample. The defect-rich nanosheet with the highest active site density, i.e. 1.785 × 10−3 mol g−1 demonstrates a large cathodic current density of 13 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 200 mV and a Tafel slope of 50 mV. Further, defect engineering MoS2 displays long-term stability up to 3000 CV cycles (retains the current density up to 10000 s) and a turnover frequency of 0.725 s−1 at an overpotential of 300 mV and pH = 0.131
 Fig. 10  (a) Preparation pathway for developing defect-free and defect-rich sample, (b) FESEM image of ultrathin MoS2, (c) LSV plot of initial and after 3000 cycles showing catalyst stability, and (d) atomic reconstruction picture. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Adv. Mater., Copyright 2013. 
Adding more this, Wang's research unit followed a simple and straightforward O2 and Ar plasma-engineering procedure, as presented in Fig. 11, to create defective and hetero atom-doped MoS2 thin films. First, MoS2 thin films are prepared by a chemical vapor deposition strategy and then by proper steering of plasma irradiation time; the physical and chemical defects of the 2D MoS2 crystal is controlled that results in tuning the electronic properties and also increases the density of reactive sites leading to a notable increment in HER activity. Ar plasma 720 second sample and O2 plasma 480 second sample show the best HER performance with a Tafel slope of 108 and 105 mV dec−1 and a TOF value of 1.32 and 1.30 s−1 respectively.132
 Fig. 11  (a) Followed plasma synthesis procedure in Ar and O2 atmosphere, (b and c) current density graph of Ar and O2 plasma-treated MoS2, and (d and e) corresponding Tafel slope of Ar and O2 plasma-treated MoS2. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Chem. Commun., Copyright 2015. 
Further, experimental and computational studies indicate that introduction of hetero-atoms into the lattice framework of MoS2 resulted in an enormous increase in reactive site count, which finally leads to an increment in exchange current density and a decrease in hydrogen adsorption free energy. In this context, Dai et al. reported scalable and highly active transition metal (Fe, Co, and Ni)-doped few-layered MoS2 over a carbon black substrate via a facile and cost-effective deposition-precipitation strategy. Among the fabricated doped systems, Co-doped MoS2 depicts the best activity with an exchange current density of 0.03 mA.cm−2 at a low onset potential of 90 mV with a small Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1. The cause of such enhanced HER performance of Co-doped MoS2 is attributed to the formation of the CoMoS phase after the thermal annealing process resulting in the proper blending of structural and electronic properties of MoS2 and Co ions, which leads to the origin of abundant defects in reactive edge sites and increment in electronic conductivity.133 In another case, Zhang and the team fabricated chemically modulated 2H-MoS2 with a large number of active sites via a one-pot cobalt acetate/graphene oxide-promoted hydrothermal technique. The work demonstrates the effect of Co ions on the catalytic activity of MoS2 Ns. Co-ion introduction into the MoS2 framework leads to defect creation and transfers the structure to the nanomesh form. Because of this modification, the Co-promoted defect-rich MoS2 nanomesh/RGO catalyst (Dr-MoS2 Nm/RGO) shows improved HER activity (i.e. overpotential as low as 80 mA and a Tafel slope of 36 mV) compared to the MoS2 nanosheet/RGO prepared without Co acetate. The observed enhancement in HER performance is due to the combined effects of high interconnectivity and excellent conductivity which encourage smooth electron migration and defect formation that open up more active sites for the effective water reduction reaction.134 Further, the Du group concluded that heteroatom doping (Pd, Rh, and Ag) along with some strain engineering brings about a drastic change in free energy for hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH), which is a vital step in the HER mechanism. Usually, the ΔGH becomes negative for the atom next to the dopant and so acts as a reactive site for hydrogen evolution reactions. This experiment brought about the hydrogen evolution process in the inert basal plane of MoS2 and observed that the HER activity optimization largely depends upon doping density (θ) of the heteroatoms, i.e. when θ = 3/16, a small compressive strain is enough to tune ΔGH to an ideal value. Therefore, this work concludes that a fusion of strain and doping can be a productive strategy to stimulate the inert S-atoms of MoS2 to achieve benchmark HER response.135 In another approach, Luo et al. activated the MoS2 basal plane by Pd doping through a spontaneous interfacial redox method that resulted in the transition of the 2H phase to the 1T crystal form and creating sulfur vacancies. Further, the DFT study illustrates that the S-atom next to Pd shows low hydrogen adsorption energy, i.e. 0.02 eV, which is quite essential in the performed proton reduction reaction. Among the prepared electrocatalyst, 1% Pd doped MoS2 shows the best HER activity of η10 = 78 mV and an exchange current density of 805 μA cm−2.136 Further, Zheng et al. prepared polycrystalline 2H-MoS2 by thermolysis method and introduced S-vacancy in the basal plane of MoS2via electrochemical desulfurization technique. The electrodeposited cobalt atoms get incorporated in the basal plane S-vacancy (coordinatively unsaturated) and edge sites of the formed desulfurized MoS2−x. The team carried out both density functional theory calculations and experiments to find out the effect of Co cluster addition on the inert basal plane towards the hydrogen evolution reaction of the Co–MoS2−x electrocatalyst. Further, the synthesized Co–MoS2−x catalyst displays accelerated charge transfer dynamic and hydrogen evolution ability, i.e. Tafel slope of 114 mV and η10 = 210 mV vs. RHE. This observed enhancement in the HER activity of the Co–MoS2−x sample is due to the increment in both activity per active sites and electrochemical active surface area resulting from the Co cluster entering the S-vacancies forming the Co–Mo interface and is well illustrated by DFT and XAS analysis.137 Additionally, amorphous MoS2 is gathering huge attention in this HER field due to its simple preparation methods (wet chemical or electrodeposition) compared to the crystalline phase which requires high temperature, ultrahigh vacuum, hydrothermal, and sulfidation process.16,47 Jaramillo et al. adopted a facile wet chemical method to synthesize a scalable quantity of chemically active amorphous MoS2 samples. The followed preparation method is quite a simple one, as it requires an easily available starting material, no need of high vacuum or temperature condition, no separate sulphidization method rather catalyst is directly deposited on the surface of different substrates. The catalyst shows extraordinary HER activity with an overpotential of 200 mV for 10 mA cm−2 current density and exhibits notable stability, i.e. to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2, the overpotential increases by only 57 mV after 10000 reductive potential scans. The deposited catalyst appears to be like MoS3 but the domains mimic MoS2 in composition and chemical state as created under reaction conditions and this is responsible for the observed high HER activity.138 Additionally, Yeo and the group fabricated amorphous MoS2 films with different compositions via electrodeposition and cyclic voltammetry oxidative stripping technique and tested the HER performance in an aqueous 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. It was reported that TOF for hydrogen generation varies directly with the number of sulfur atoms (may be apical S2− or bridging S22−) having higher binding energy. To distinguish which sulfur atom, i.e. bridging or apical responsible for HER activity, quantum chemical stimulation using DFT study is executed and it was found that apical S2− are not active sites for hydrogen evolution processes as hydrogen adsorption at these sites are very weak with the ΔGH value greater than +1 eV. However, in situ Raman analysis on model cluster [Mo3S13]2− indicates that bridging sulfur is more catalytically active for proton reduction than terminal sulfur.139 Extending the research further, Hu et al. prepared MoSx film by electrodeposition method where MoS3-CV is formed at the anodic potential and amorphous MoS2-CV is produced cathodically. It was found that amorphous MoS2 shows best HER activity accounting for a current density of 15 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 200 mV with a Tafel slope of 40 mV dec−1, where the reaction goes via an ion plus atom mechanism and more importantly the catalyst is resistive to a wide range of pH variation, i.e. from 0 to 13.140 This work is taken one step ahead by the same group in another experiment, where the team investigated the effect of certain transition metal ions (Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn) on the catalytic behavior of amorphous MoS3 film prepared by the same cyclic voltammetry method from corresponding metal chloride as the transition metal ion source and (NH4)2[MoS4] as MoS3 precursor, respectively. From the performed HER experiment, it was concluded that Fe, Co, and Ni-promoted MoS3 films show better activity than Mn, Cu, and Ni-added MoS3 samples in both acidic and neutral media. The observed improvement in catalytic activity is attributed to high surface area exposure and large catalyst loading resulting from the feasible growth of MoS3 films in the presence of Fe, Co, and Ni ions.141 Furthermore, the Mo4S13 cluster designed by the Besenbacher research team shows significant HER activity. The catalyst is synthesized by the wet-chemical method and later coated on various substrates by a drop-casting technique. It was observed that GPs (graphite powder) and HOPG (highly ordered pyrolytic graphite) supported that thiomolybdate nanoclusters display the highest ever TOF value compared to any other MoS2 catalyst prepared by this scalable procedure. This can be attributed to the presence of large active centers as the maximum fraction of S-atoms in the cluster is in the proper structural arrangement, or in other words, placed at the edge position for enhanced HER catalysis.142 As an emerging material in the field of catalysis, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are now gathering much attention in various catalytic applications due to their flexible and porous skeleton. Based on this, Kim et al. tailored Co-based MOFs (Co-MOF-74) into amorphous MoSx materials by a simple solvothermal procedure. The developed long-lasting (stable up to 1000 cycles) amorphous CoMoS catalyst (40% MoSx/Co-MOF-74) depicts low Gibbs' free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH) resulting in enhanced HER performance with low onset potential (−147 mV) and a smaller Tafel slope of 68 mV dec−1 respectively.143 As we know, MoS2 crystals contain two types of surface sites, i.e. terrace sites at the basal plane and edge sites on the boundary region. However, the most efficient MoS2 crystal will be the one in which the maximum surface is covered with edge and this is possible by vertically positioning the MoS2 layers over the film where a large number of edges are exposed. Cui et al. followed a kinetically controlled rapid growth technique to prepare edge-terminated MoS2 and observed a TOF of 0.013 s−1 with an exchange current density of 2.2 × 10−6 mA cm−2, an exchange current density per site of 4.1 × 10−21 A per site, and a durability of 1000 cycles. The observed high activity is due to the exposure of a large number of edge sites on the film horizon.144 Further, Joo et al. prepared size-controlled MoS2 nanoparticles containing one to four layers with a basal plane size of 5 nm embedded over-ordered mesoporous carbon (MoS2@OMC) using an SBA-15 template by following carbonization, sulfurization, and thermal etching techniques (as shown in Fig. 12). Additionally, computational calculation suggests that the HER response of MoS2 inversely proportional to the layer number (3L < 2L ≤ 1L), i.e. a decrease in layer count results in an increase in the HER activity in a quasi-linear fashion. The size steered MoS2@OMC exhibits remarkable HER performance, i.e. TOF ∼ 2.4 s−1 for 1L-MoS2, a Tafel slope within the range of 60–65 mV dec−1, and an over-potential ranging from 178 to 192 mV at a current density of −10 mA cm−2. The study is further extended to Co-doped MoS2@OMC nanocatalysts, which also display improved hydrogen evolution activity.145
 Fig. 12  (a) Preparation route of the MoS2@OMC catalyst, the pores of SBA-15 were partly packed with carbon and rest of the pores are filled by the growth of MoS2 and finally, the silica template is removed to produce MoS2@OMC, (b–d) corresponding TOF, polarization, and current density plot of the as-prepared catalysts. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from ACS Nano, Copyright 2015. 
Again, to prove the importance of morphology-controlled materials at the nanoscale, Jaramillo and partners engineered double-gyroid-MoS2 (DG-MoS2) via electrodeposition of Mo followed by sulphidization with H2S. Tuning the atomic-scale surface structure, a great number of reaction centers were exposed that facilitate the adsorption and successful reduction process. The designed mesoporous MoS2 thin film with a radius of curvature in nano-dimension and high edge-to-basal plane ratio, i.e. DG-MoS2 electrocatalysts show a notable HER reactivity (η10 = 150–200 mV and a Tafel slope of 50 mV per decade).146 Moreover, Jin and the group converted semiconducting 2H-MoS2 (trigonal prismatic) to 1T phase (metallic octahedral) by a chemical exfoliation technique (using lithium intercalation). In this case, the group first prepared flower-like MoS2 nanostructures with a large number of active edge sites over graphite surface via a chemical deposition strategy from MoCl5 and the elemental sulfur precursor. Further, formed nanostructured MoS2 is deposited over different templates like silicon, glass, fluorine-doped tin oxide on glass, silicon oxide, Mo foil, carbon paper, and graphite at 525 °C. The method offers (i) proliferated concentration of edge sites and (ii) direct nucleation of MoS2 on conductive graphite leads to facile electrode kinetics and low-loss electrical transport. Because of the above-stated features, the metallic 1T-MoS2 polymorph show a slow overpotential (η10 = 187 mV) and a smaller Tafel slope (43 mV dec−1) compared to the semiconducting 2H-MoS2 phase (η10 = 313 mV, 110 mV per decade), as presented in Fig. 13.147
 Fig. 13  Electrochemical activity of the as-prepared and chemically exfoliated MoS2 nanosheet. (a and b) Polarization plot at a higher and lower potential. (c) Respective Tafel slope. (d) Polarization curve after 1000 continuous cycles showing excellent stability of the catalyst. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., Copyright 2013. 
Through a similar method, Voiry et al. reported that the inactive basal planes of MoS2 can be transferred to the more active form by increasing the electrical interface contact between the substrate and MoS2 that boosts the electron injection and migration to the reaction sites. Therefore, the followed phase-engineered low-resistance interaction strategy on the basal plane of monolayer MoS2 results in significant improvement of electron injection in the 2H-MoS2 sheet with a sulfur vacancy, which ultimately uplifts its electrocatalytic proton reduction ability, i.e. an onset potential of −0.1 V and a Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1 was observed for 2H-MoS2 with the only basal horizon subjected to the reaction medium.148 Further, intercalation engineering of foreign species into the van der Waal gap of layered material opens up immense possibilities for researchers for tuning electronic properties of 2D materials, with this idea, Wang research group successfully intercalated Li+ ions into the vertically positioned MoS2 nanofilms by an electrochemical method at different applied voltages that alter the oxidation state of Mo, widens the van der Waals space until exfoliation and transferred 2H to 1T-MoS2 polymorph. The formed MoS2 nanofilms with different amounts of Li intercalation resulting in the low oxidation state of Mo and more degree of metallic 1T phase depict robust hydrogen generation activity. For the optimum catalyst, i.e. 1.1 V MoS2, the observed electrocatalytic measurement data (as shown in Fig. 14) are as follows: η(0.1) = −113 mV, η(−6.74) = 200 mV, Tafel slope = 43–46 mV dec−1, and an exchange current of 0.13–0.25 × 10−3 mA cm−2. Further, it was observed that the MoS2 film vertically grown on both 3D and flat electrodes shows a significant hike in catalytic response when scanned at a low potential vs. Li+/Li.149
 Fig. 14  (a and b) Polarization graph of pristine and lithiated MoS2 on MPGC and Tafel slope of MoS2 is regularly tuned by Li intercalation under different scanning potentials, (c and d) HER activity of Atomic Layered Deposition (ALD) MoS2 on CFP and durability curve of lithiated ALD MoS2, (e) crystal structure of 2H MoS2 and a battery testing system, where the MoS2 nanofilm acts as the cathode and Li foil as the anode (yellow color = edge sites, and green = terrace sites) and (f) galvanostatic discharge curve representing the lithiation process. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., Copyright 2013. 
Reported articles clearly emphasized the importance of the layer structure and HER production rate, i.e. with exfoliation or delamination, the number of active sites (terraces, uncoordinated/corner atoms, and kinks) and conductivity both get upgraded and so the electrocatalytic performance of the material gets enhanced.22,72 Hence, thinning or reducing the MoS2 layer resulted in an increment of the number of active centers that ultimately boosts the proton reduction ability of the MoS2 cathode. Additionally, forming porosity within the MoS2 framework is another advantageous tactic to boost HER activity. In this framework, Yin and group prepared a series of MoS2 derivatives such as porous 2H, porous 1T, porous 2H + S, 1T, and 2H phase respectively by a liquid-ammonia-assisted lithiation method and evaluated the effect of edge, crystal phase, and S-vacancies on the hydrogen evolution reaction activity. The contribution and presence of each parameter are systematically investigated by various advanced characterization techniques like XPS, Raman polarization, EIS, EPR, and positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy. The obtained comparative results suggest that not only does the crystal phase contribute majorly in tuning the catalytic performance of 1T and porous 1T-MoS2 but also edge and S-vacancies play a critical part in improving the electrocatalytic behavior of MoS2. Hence, the combined effect of phase, edge, and vacancies are the cause of the observed high HER activity (η10 = 153 mV vs. RHE and Tafel slope = 43 mV dec−1) for porous 1T-MoS2 with a large electrochemically active surface area.150 Further, Ajayan et al. prepared defect engineered MoS2via two post-synthesis techniques i.e. (i) oxygen plasma and (ii) high-temperature H2 exposure method that results in the formation of cracks and trigonal holes in MoS2 layers. The H2 treated MoS2 shows improved HER performance (Tafel slope of 147 mV per decade and stability of 10000 cycles) compared to the O2 plasma-treated one (Tafel slope of 162 mV per decade), which is attributed to the formation of more active edge sites for hydrogen adsorption and successive reduction.151 In another strategy, Sun and the team synthesized MoS2 nanoflakes via mechanical activation of MoO3 and sulfur precursor at 600 °C in Ar atmosphere. The followed ball-milling process helps in minimizing the particle size and producing micro-domain that ultimately nucleates to ultrathin nanoflakes with more exposed rim and edge sites.152 Likewise in his next work, the group fabricated a crystal layered 2D MoS2 nanosheet with smaller basal areas by the same micro-domain reaction method. This method was usually adopted to synthesize ultrathin MoS2 catalysts, which can be used to report benchmark HER activity.153 Following the same preparation technique, Wilkinson and co-worker developed a highly stable (up to a thousand cycles) MoS2 NS electrocatalyst and examined its catalytic ability towards hydrogen evolution reactions. The research team also evaluated the effect of annealing temperature on the microstructure and stack structure of MoS2 on the HER activity of MoS2 NSs. The formed MoS2 NSs at 550 °C with a large edge-to-basal plane ratio and high crystallinity show the best activity with an exchange current density of 3.89 × 10−5 A cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 68 mV dec−1 (Fig. 15).21
 Fig. 15  (a and b) Tafel slope, polarization curve of all prepared electrocatalysts, (c) current density graph showing the notable stability of prepared electrocatalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 and (d and e) SEM and TEM images of MoS2 NSs-550. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from ACS Catal., Copyright 2013. 
(b) Accelerating the electron transport feature of MoS2
Besides just increasing the active edge site density, rapid charge transport/conductivity is another vital parameter towards improving the HER kinetics of the material. In order to achieve this, Yang and co-worker prepared a highly active amorphous carbon-supported MoS2 (MoS2/AC) electrocatalyst by a cost-effective hydrothermal method followed by annealing. The vertically grown MoS2/AC catalyst projects a maximum number of edge sites of MoS2 layers for proton reduction and the amorphous carbon helps enhance the conductivity of the composite. The carbon–MoS2 composite shows excellent electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reactions at low overpotentials of 200 mV (current density = 14 mA cm−2) and 80 mV (current density = 10 mA cm−2) respectively (detail of activity shown in Fig. 16). The obtained Tafel slope of 40 mV dec−1 implies a Volmer–Heyrovsky proton reduction pathway over the MoS2/AC sample with a notable durability of 1000 cycles.154
 Fig. 16  (a and b) SEM, HRTEM image, (c) polarization graph depicting excellent durability of MoS2/AC after 1000 cycles, and (d and e) Tafel slope and polarization curve of the as-prepared samples respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Nanoscale, Copyright 2014. 
Liu et al. and Bao et al. tuned the electronic property of MoS2via Se and Pt doping respectively that depicts superior HER activity to that of undoped MoS2.155,156 The Se doped MoS2 is prepared from a diphenyl diselenide dopant by an annealing method and found to exhibit outstanding HER activity and stability (a Tafel slope of 55 mv dec−1 and a durability of 9000 s), which is due to the formation of more active edge sites (reduced grain size) and excellent electrical conductivity resulting from the more metallic character of Se compared to the S atom.157 However, the introduction of Pt-atoms into the in-plane region of the MoS2 nanosheet by a chemical method proves to be very productive as the single Pt-doped MoS2 sample shows a distinct increment in catalytic activity (η10 = 60 mV and a Tafel slope of 96 mV per decade) and durability (5000 cycles). Pt introduction results in increasing the electron density around the Fermi level, which magnifies the H-adsorption capacity of in-plane sulfur atoms and thereby accelerates the HER performance (Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism) as justified by the DFT study (detail of activity and reaction mechanism is shown in Fig. 17).158
 Fig. 17  (a) Hydrogen evolution reaction on Pt–MoS2 electrocatalysts, (b) HER polarization graph of Pt–MoS2, GC electrode, bulk MoS2, FL-MoS2, and 40% Pt/C, (c) corresponding Tafel slope of Pt–MoS2, FL-MoS2, and 40% Pt/CHER catalysts, (d) durability test of Pt–MoS2 (polarization curve of initial and after 5000 cycles) between a potential window of −0.13 V and +0.57 V (vs. RHE) at 100 mV s−1, and (e) stability measurement of Pt–MoS2 at different current densities. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., Copyright 2016. 
Next, the Zheng research group for the first time reported activation and optimization of the basal plane of 2H-phase of MoS2 by the Ar-plasma method leading to the production of S-vacancies and strain in the MoS2 framework (SV-MoS2). Further, the performed computational and experimental investigation suggests that the formed S-vacancies act as new catalytic centers of the basal plane, where the gap states about the Fermi level offer the binding of the hydrogen atom to the exposed Mo-atom easier. A controlled combination of S-vacancy and strain tunes Gibbs' free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH ∼ 0) that significantly improves the HER activity, i.e. the catalyst shows a smaller Tafel slope of 60 mV per decade and TOF = 0.08–0.31 s−1. The experimental outcomes indicate that ΔGH value can be steered by straining the MoS2 surface with sulfur vacancies, which ultimately improves HER performance.157 Forby, Cao et al. fabricated S-vacancies induced MoS2 with high electrocatalytic activity. In this study, the team examined the reaction activity of all the possible regions of MoS2 which includes sulfur vacancies, edge sites, and grain boundaries respectively. Further, the calculated turnover frequencies and Tafel slopes for edge site (7.5 s−1, 65–75 mV dec−1), grain boundaries (0.1 s−1, 120–160 mV dec−1), and sulfur vacancies (3.2 s−1, 65–85 mV dec−1) suggest that along with edge sites, sulfur vacancies also act as the prominent catalytic sites for the proton reduction reaction, whereas grain boundaries show less activity. Additionally, it was observed that the catalytic response of sulfur vacancies mainly depends on the number of vacancies and its surrounding crystallinity, i.e. higher HER performance is observed when the vacancy concentration is within 7–10% and interestingly sulfur vacancies in highly crystalline MoS2 is more than those of low crystalline MoS2.158 Therefore, generating S-vacancy within MoS2 can reduce the free energy of hydrogen adsorption and effective charge migration that remarkably robust the HER task.72 Again, Wang et al. and Zhou et al. demonstrated the effect of P-doping and N-doping (separately) on the electronic structure of the S atom of MoS2 and observed an interesting result.159,160 The P-doped MoS2 is synthesized by an annealing method from the C18H15P precursor (phosphorus source). Phosphorus doping resulted in improving the density of active edge sites and conductivity of MoS2 sheets that increase the HER performance of MoS2 (η10 = −215 mV, onset potential = −118 mV, stability = 1000 cycles and Tafel slope of 52 mV dec−1),159 whereas the noble metal-free N-doped MoS2 fabricated by a hydrothermal method shows enhanced hydrogen evolution activity (η10 = −168 mV, a Tafel slope of 40.5 mV per decade and follows Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism) originating from more available Mo reactive sites because of S-defects and perfect electron density states of S-atoms formed by sulfur doping which is well explained by DFT calculation.160 In the work by Lin research team, the basal Mo atoms were functionalized via exfoliating and disintegrating the bulk 2H-MoS2 and observed that the formed monolayered MoS2 crystal with low mass (1.2 μg) depicts impressive HER behavior due to more edge ratio and metallicity (η10 = 60–75 mV, j150 = 9.64 mA cm−2, j200 = 52.13 mA cm−2, stability = 3000 cycles and a Tafel slope of 29 mV per decade). The study is further extended by modifying the nanocrystals (NCs) with 3D graphene sheets that result in significant enhancement of the HER activity due to high surface manifestation that eventually increases the current densities, i.e. j150 = 49.5 mA cm−2 and j200 = 232 mA cm−2 at a low mass of 14.3 μg NCs. The above claim is well justified by a computational study.161 Sun et al. developed a facial interlayer vanadium doping technique to create ultrathin (containing ≤5 S–(V, Mo)–S atomic layers) semimetallic V-doped MoS2 nanosheets with improved in-plane conductivity (1.7 × 103 S m−1) and enhanced charge carrier density (7 × 1017 cm−3) because of short electron transfer path (Fig. 18 shows details of electrocatalytic activities). Benefiting from the observed high electrical features, the V-doped MoS2 catalyst shows robust HER activity with a low overpotential of 0.13 V, smaller Tafel slope equal to 69 mV dec−1, and reusability of 1000 cycles.162
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the catalytic activity of V-doped MoS2 nanosheets (VSM) due to high in-plane conductivity and increased electron transfer process. (b and c) Polarization curve and corresponding Tafel slope of Pt, VSM, MoS2 Ns, commercial MoS2 and bare GC electrode. (d) Polarization graph (initial and after 1000 cycles) showing high durability of V0.90M0.91S2 electrocatalysts respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Nanoscale, Copyright 2014. 
Adding more to the survey, Merki along with his research team examined the promotional effect of specific transition metal ions such as M = Fe, Co, Zn, Mn, Cu, and Ni ion on amorphous MoS3 films prepared from respective metal chloride (MCl2) and (NH4)2[MoS4] precursors by a cyclic voltammetry method and found that a Fe, Ni, and Cu-promoted molybdenum sulfide system shows better HER activity in acidic and neutral media compared to rest. The observed increment in catalytic performance is attributed to high surface active sites and high catalyst loading. Further, at pH = 0, the Fe–MoS3 film shows the best result, i.e. at η = 200 mV and η = 150 mV, the obtained current densities are 24.9 and 1.55 mA cm−2 respectively, likewise at pH = 7 Co-promoted amorphous molybdenum sulfide film depicts five times more current density (1.05 mA cm−2) at an overpotential of 200 mV.141 Pumera and the team investigated the impact of different dopant (Ti, V, Mn, and Fe) introduction to MoS2 lattice by a solid-state solution method. Surprisingly, it was recorded that none of the dopants have any effect on the HER activity increment. Therefore, DFT studies were carried out to identify the role of dopants in the catalytic performance of the MoS2 layer. However, the calculated ΔGH value for different dopants follows the sequence as V < Ti < Mn < Fe, which is well correlated with the obtained overpotential of respective catalysts.163 Other techniques used to enhance the proton reduction reaction capacity of MoS2 are via forming a hybrid with multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). In this direction, Zhang et al. fabricated a unique and highly durable (stable up to 2000 cycles) binary composite constituting MWCNTs and MoS2 nanosheets via an inexpensive hydrothermal technique and examined its catalytic efficiency towards hydrogen evolution reactions. Because of the uniform growth of 1T-MoS2 over the surface of carbon nanotubes, the composite offers an enormous amount of active edges for hydrogen adsorption and successful reduction as well as accelerated electron migration through the conductive MWCNTs. Hence, the MoS2NS/MWCNT hybrid catalyst depicts excellent HER activity via the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism at an onset potential of −0.05 V vs. RHE and Tafel slope of 43 mV per decade (as shown in Fig. 19).164
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the HER mechanism on MoS2 NS/MWCNTs, (b and c) TEM and HRTEM images of MoS2 NS/MWCNTs hybrid, and (d–f) polarization curve (MoS2NS/MWCNTs, Pt/C, MoS2NFs, and CNT), stability graph (chronopotentiometry and polarization result), and Tafel slope of prepared samples (MoS2NS/MWCNTs, Pt/C and MoS2NFs) respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Sci. Rep., Copyright 2017. 
Substantially, Dai and group prepared a MoS2/RGO hybrid by a solvothermal method, where the functional groups of graphene oxide sheets provide the necessary surface area for the nucleation and uniform growth of a few-layered MoS2 nanostructure. However, in the absence of GO, the nanoparticles get agglomerated, which is well characterized by Raman and microscopic imaging. The formed MoS2/RGO composite is then deposited on the horizon of the glassy carbon electrode and subjected to a water reduction reaction in H2SO4 electrolyte, using a three-electrode system. The working electrode (MoS2/RGO) depicts significant improvement in the HER activity at an onset potential of − 0.110 V vs. RHE and a Tafel slope of 41 mV per decade describing the Volmer–Heyrovsky reduction route and the increase in catalytic behavior of composite corresponds to the availability of more number of chemically active sites and better electrical conductivity (as shown in Fig. 20).58
 Fig. 20  (a) Polarization curve of Pt-, MoS2/RGO-, MoS2 NP-, and RGO-coated GC electrode, (b) Tafel slope graph of 0.28 mg cm−2 catalyst loaded over GC electrode (Pt, MoS2/RGO, and MoS2 NP), (c) polarization curve of 1 mg cm−2 loaded sample over CFP compared to two reported article data of the same catalyst loading, (d) polarization plot of MoS2/RGO (initial and after 1000 cycles) showing the excellent stability of the catalyst, and (e) schematic of the followed synthesis procedure. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., Copyright 2011. 
Yang et al. and Ma et al. synthesized a MoS2@RGO composite separately by novel solvent-evaporation-assisted intercalation and thermal synthesis methods respectively.165,166 In the former work, experiments were conducted to find the relationship between oxidation degree of graphene, crystallinity, and active site concentration of MoS2 towards HER activity, and it was observed that the uniformity between the number of exposed active site and electron channelizing property of graphene leads to high rate of hydrogen evolution. The MoS2/RGO2 composite shows the best result, i.e. a current density of 23 mA cm−2 at an overpotential 200 mV with a Tafel slope of 42 mV dec−1.165 In the work of Ma and team, tiny ultrathin MoS2 nanoplates were evenly distributed over the graphene sheet forming a 2D hybrid structure. The strong integration between graphenes and MoS2 nanoplates in the composite leads to the formation of a more catalytic active surface with densely populated reaction sites that encourage effective electron migration and proton trapping. Additionally, the MoS2/G hybrid exhibits a noticeable HER, with a low onset overpotential of 30 mV, a Tafel slope around 67.4 mV dec−1, and a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 110 mV respectively.152 Additionally, Yang and the group developed Ni-doped MoS2 modified with a nitrogen-doped CNT (Ni–MoS2/NCNTs) by a calcination and hydrothermal method. Importantly, with the intercalation of Ni atoms, the interlayer spacing within the MoS2 sheets get expanded resulting in large surface area (150 m2 g−1), ultrathin structure (4 nm), and a large amount of un-coordinated sulfur atoms in the basal plane leading to abundant active sites to carry out the performed hydrogen evolution reaction. Additionally, NCNTs play a dual role, i.e. a support material for MoS2 growth, and also increase the conductivity of the formed binary composite. Hence, the obtained hierarchical binary composite displays an excellent HER activity with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a low overpotential of 158 mV and a Tafel slope of 69.3 mV dec−1. The smaller Tafel slope indicates faster kinetic and robust hydrogen evolution.25 Adding more to this, Qiu and co-workers reported that MoS2/CNT (η10 = 194 mV and Tafel slope of 52.7 mV per decade) is a more efficient catalyst than MoS2/RGO (η10 = 216 and 218 mV and Tafel slope of 56.7 mV per decade) via a HER experiment and DFT study (Fig. 21). The superior HER performance of CNT-modified MoS2 is attributed to (i) the simplified support interaction preventing in-plane MoS2 nucleation that uncovers more edge site, and (ii) retaining of the native characteristic of MoS2 promoting the reduction of the potential barrier for hydrogen evolution.167
 Fig. 21  (a and b) Polarization graph and corresponding Tafel slope of all GO and CNT-modified MoS2 and also of the neat MoS2 catalyst, and (c) scheme representing MoS2 nucleation over GO and CNT substrates by a microwave-assisted steam heating method (MSH). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from Nanoscale, Copyright 2020. 
Rosei et al. successfully fabricated well-dispersed MoS2-supported free-standing TiO2 nanotube electrocatalysts (MoS2/TiO2 NTs) with optimal HER activity and excellent durability (5000 cycles). First, the highly codified free-standing TiO2 nanotubes arrays were prepared by anodization of the Ti-foil in fluoride-containing organic solutions and then MoS2 nanosheets by a hydrothermal method. Finally, MoS2 is immobilized over the surface of TiO2 NTs by a slow evaporation technique. Further, the surface structure, length, diameter, and wall thickness of TiO2 nanotubes are maintained by regulating the anodization condition. The binary hybrid MoS2/TiO2 NTs show notable hydrogen evolution in 0.5 M H2SO4 with a smaller Tafel slope, i.e. 70 mV dec−1 and a low overpotential of 170 mV for a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The observed enhanced electrocatalytic activity and stability of MoS2/TiO2 NTs are attributed to the synergetic effect operating between the well-dispersed MoS2 and TiO2 nanotubes.168 Defect engineering is a widely followed technique to tune the optical, electrical, magnetic, and catalytic features of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). Regulating sulfur-vacancies in TMDs, a class of extremely delicate defect is probing to be efficacious in improving their catalytic efficiency but the effect of vacancy and its concentration on the performed catalysis is a big topic of discussion. On this very concept, Zhang et al. along with his team made a series of computational calculations on MoS2 model catalysts to figure out the optimal S-vacancy in terms of concentration and distribution, which is responsible for the observed best HER activity. The team adopted the H2O2 chemical etching method to comprehensively produce uniformly distributed single S-vacancies in the MoS2 nanosheet lattice framework by carefully controlling the etching time, temperature, and solution concentration. The single S-vacancy-oriented MoS2 displays exceptional HER activity (a smaller Tafel slope of 70 mV dec−1 and an overpotential of 130 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2) compared to the agglomerated or populated S-vacancy MoS2 which is well justified by performed electron density difference and the presented electron density state stimulations of d-band (as shown in Fig. 22). The observed improvement in catalytic performance is ascribed to high-concentration effective surface electronic structure and robust electrical transport properties of singe S-vacancy MoS2 sheets.169
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic of single S-vacancy MoS2 preparation by a chemical etching technique, (b) SEM of P–MoS2, and (c) STEM image with a rectangular frame, indicating CVD-grown monolayer MoS2 thin films after etching and yellow dots highlighting S-vacancies, and (d and e) HER polarization graph with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 and the corresponding Tafel slope of as-synthesized electrocatalysts. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., Copyright 2020. 
Reported literature on electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction in acidic electrolytes
To relay the advancement made in designing MoS2-based materials as a promising HER electrocatalyst, several reports have been investigated and Table 2 is just an overview of some collected published MoS2-based systems presenting significant HER activity in an acidic medium.
Table 2 Summary of previous reported HER performance of different MoS2-based materials




Sl no.
Catalytic system
Electrolyte
Overpotential (mV)
Tafel slope (mV per decade)
Current density (mA cm−2)
Stability
Mechanism
Reference




1
Ni–MoS2/RGO
0.5 M H2SO4
85
71.3
10
20000 cycles/30000 s
Volmer–Heyrovsky

170



2
MoS2 on Au
0.5 M H2SO4
90
69
0.92
1000 cycles
NA

171



3
MoO3–MoS2 nanowires
0.5 M H2SO4
150–200
50–60
8
10000 cycles
NA

172



4
Al–MoS2
0.5 M H2SO4
248
82
10
1000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

173



5
MoS2/N–RGO
0.5 M H2SO4
56
41.3
10
5000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

174



6
MoO2 nanobelts/N-doped MoS2 nanosheets
0.5 M H2SO4
−156 (onset potential)
47.5
NA
2000 cycles/12 h
Volmer–Heyrovsky

175



7
Mo2N–MoS2 composites
0.5 M H2SO4
190
56
10
3000 cycles/60000 s
Volmer–Heyrovsky

176



8
MoS2/carbon aerogel hybrids
0.5 M H2SO4
200
59
9.68
2000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

177



9
Pd-Modulated Co–MoS2
0.5 M H2SO4
60
56
10
40 h
NA

178



10
MoS2 nanosheet–carbon macroporous hybrid
0.5 M H2SO4
136
78
10
24 h/10000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

179



11
Co-Doped MoS2 and graphene
0.5 M H2SO4
143
71
10
5000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

180



12
MSQDs
0.5 M H2SO4
−210
78
10
2000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

181



13
MoS2/CoNi2S4
0.5 M H2SO4
81
67
10
48 h
Volmer–Heyrovsky

182



14
Ag@MoS2
0.5 M H2SO4
235.3
41.1
10
10000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

183



15
MoS2@CoS2
0.5 M H2SO4
96
60
10
1000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

184



16
MoS2–WS2–CNTs
0.5 M H2SO4
212
50
10
1000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

185



17
S–MoS2/rGO/CNT
0.5 M H2SO4
159
85
10
18 h
Volmer–Heyrovsky

186



18
La2S3–MoS2
0.5 M H2SO4
205
51
10
20000 cycles/24 h
Volmer–Heyrovsky

187



19
Nb4N5−xOx-MoS2/NG
0.5 M H2SO4
39
30
10
10000 cycles
Volmer–Tafel

188



20
MoSe2-ts@MoS2-ts
0.5 M H2SO4
186
71
10
1000 cycles/24 h
Volmer–Heyrovsky

189



21
OGNs@MoS2
0.5 M H2SO4
118
73
10
105 s
Volmer–Heyrovsky

190



22
Osmotically swollen ammoniated MoS2
0.5 M H2SO4
NA
45
10
1000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

191



23
L-MoS2 nanosheet
0.5 M H2SO4
178
41.1
10
10 h
NA

192



24
PCN@MoS2@C
0.5 M H2SO4
130
40–120
10
1000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

193



170
100


25
MoS2@rGO hybrid
0.5 M H2SO4
239
46
10
NA
Volmer–Heyrovsky

194



26
Ammonia intercalated flower-like MoS2 electrocatalyst film
0.5 M H2SO4
200 mV and an onset overpotential of 120 mV
49 mV dec−1
10 mA cm−2
1000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

195



27
Pt–MoS2
0.5 M H2SO4
20 mV as onset potential
25 mV dec−1
10 mA cm−2
10 h
Volmer–Tafel

196



28
MoS2/Ag strain 0.02%
0.5 M H2SO4
400 mV
135 mV dec−1
9.24 mA cm−2
35 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky reaction

197



29
MoS2−2xNx (x = 0.1) (MS-TMPD)
0.5 M H2SO4
150 mV
35 mV dec−1
10 mA cm−2
12 h
Volmer–Heyrovsky

198



30
MoS2–Ti3C2 MXene
0.5 M H2SO4
98 mV
45 mV dec−1
10 mA cm−2
1000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

199



31
MoS2–NiCNTs composite catalysts
0.5 M H2SO4
182 mV and onset potential of 115 mV
49 mV dec−1
10 mA cm−2
50 h
Volmer–Heyrovsky

200



32
CN/CNL/MoS2/CP
0.5 M H2SO4
112 mV
77 mV dec−1
10 mA cm−2
1000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

201



33
NiS@MoS2 core–shell microspheres
0.5 M H2SO4
208 mV
62.44 mV dec−1
10 mA cm−2
1000 cycles
Volmer–Heyrovsky

202



34
V-Doped MoS2 nanosheets
0.5 M H2SO4
156 mV, and onset potential of 102 mV
54 mV dec−1
10 mA cm−2
1000 cycles, 12 h
Volmer–Heyrovsky

203





Summary and outlook
MoS2 is a challenging 2D chalcogenide material that finds extensive application in the field of photocatalysis, electrocatalytic HER, and fuel cells. This review demonstrates current progress made on the topic of layered MoS2-based electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reactions in an acidic medium. Undoubtedly, layered MoS2 is a promising HER catalyst for practical application in an acidic medium; however, in bulk form, it shows negligible activity due to low conductance and less availability of reaction sites. This catalyst is thought to compete with the state-of-the-art catalyst, i.e. Pt because of its nearly zero ΔGH value, large scale availability, high stability, and cost-effective properties. The review describes the basic principle of HER and different preparation techniques towards the fabrication of thin layered MoS2-based catalytic systems to achieve optimal HER activity. Preparation methods play a big role in influencing the catalytic behavior of the material. Therefore, by following various developed synthesis techniques which include exfoliation (mechanical and liquid), CVD (plasma-enhanced, metal–organic and atomic layered), and solution chemical process (hydrothermal and solvothermal), researchers fabricated a scalable quantity of highly efficient layered MoS2-based electrocatalysts with optimum catalytic potential and durability, which is a major limitation associated with MoS2. The discussion has concentrated on various other critical limitations encountered by MoS2-based HER catalysts and specifically focused on recent and advanced tactics followed for magnifying the HER catalytic performance. To boost the HER response over MoS2-framed electrocatalytic systems, activating the basal plane, increasing the density of edge site, and tuning electronic conductivity are proved to be the most effective strategies. In this review, we have also summarized different techniques followed towards increasing the concentration of active sites and electrical conductivity of MoS2 systems for enhancing HER activity which includes edge engineering, defect creation, heteroatom doping, phase transition, strain engineering, and composite formation with a suitable literature survey. Moreover, by a proper blending of both the advantageous feature of additional reaction centers and increased electrical conductivity, scientists are designing efficient MoS2-based electrocatalytic systems with excellent HER activity. Despite all the above-discussed advantages, there still exist several shortcomings that limit its market entry as a potential HER electrocatalyst. Additionally, numerous MoS2-based catalysts have been fabricated in recent years, but the majority of them lack the desired quality, so it is very essential for the large-scale production of good quality MoS2 to ensure industrial utility. Via doping and defect engineering, it is possible to tune MoS2 properties for future applications. Likewise, by composite formation, MoS2 systems can be utilized for a broad range of applications. At present, the research is more focused on developing high-performance MoS2 framed HER materials by the composite formation in a highly controlled manner. Further, proper knowledge of the reaction mechanism and their respective connection with the structure and composition of MoS2 active sites play a key role in designing new production catalysts. Additionally, stability is an essential parameter for quantifying the catalyst effectiveness or its practical use, although MoS2 shows enhanced catalytic activity, durability is a major concern. Low stability may originate from other counterparts of the catalytic system/reaction device or due to sintering/undesirable surface reconstruction. Therefore, for designing ultrastable MoS2 electrocatalysts, it is highly essential to gather knowledge about the reaction mechanism at the molecular level via theoretical measurements, operando characterization techniques, and high space-time resolution analysis. Again, with the advancement of computer technology, scientists can now theoretically frame the characteristic of a material that has not yet been synthesized i.e. via theoretical simulations. Hence, computational/theoretical studies will act as a guiding tool towards the fabrication of efficacious MoS2-based HER catalysts. In brief, to address the current energy requirements of the growing economy and population, it is highly essential to develop potent MoS2-based hybrids/composites with other efficient materials and hence the current research community is more committed to the design of durable, scalable, and economically sustainable MoS2composites for electrochemical green energy production. Further, another interesting and promising opportunity is to investigate the catalytic efficiency of other members of the MoS2 family (like MoSe2, MoTe2, WS2, and WTe2) and their composites with adjustable properties towards various electrocatalytic applications. We believe that this review acts as an information capsule for the scientific community in developing promising MoS2-oriented catalysts to address various energy and environmental-related issues.
Conflicts of interest
No conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors are very much gratified to the S‘O’A (Deemed to be University) management for all the support to publish the work. The authors are very much grateful to Dr Kaushik Parida for his technical advice.
References
M. Zeng and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14942–14962 RSC .
S. Y. Bae, J. Mahmood, I. Y. Jeon and J. B. Baek, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 43–56 RSC .
W. Feng, W. Pang, Y. Xu, A. Guo, X. Gao, X. Qiu and W. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 31–54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, G. Yu, G. D. Li, Y. Sun, T. Asefa, W. Chen and X. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10752–10757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M. C. Tsai, J. Zhou, M. Guan, M. C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, D. Y. Wang, J. Yang and S. J. Pennycook, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
J. Mahmood, M. A. R. Anjum, S. H. Shin, I. Ahmad, H. J. Noh, S. J. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, J. S. Lee and J. B. Baek, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805606 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1972, 39, 163–184 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chia, A. Y. S. Eng, A. Ambrosi, S. M. Tan and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11941–11966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Huang, J. Song, K. Li, M. Tahir, Y. T. Wang, L. Pan, L. Wang, X. Zhang and J. J. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1359–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Strmcnik, P. P. Lopes, B. Genorio, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bonde, P. G. Moses, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 219–231 RSC .
P. Xiao, W. Chen and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500985 CrossRef .
X. Y. Yu, Y. Feng, Y. Jeon, B. Guan, X. W. Lou and U. Paik, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9006–9011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Benck, T. R. Hellstern, J. Kibsgaard, P. Chakthranont and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3957–3971 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. B. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 951–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ganguly, M. Harb, Z. Cao, L. Cavallo, A. Breen, S. Dervin, D. D. Dionysiou and S. C. Pillai, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1687–1709 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Faber and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3519–3542 RSC .
H. Tributsch and J. C. Bennett, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1977, 81, 97–111 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, B. Fang, Z. Wang, C. Wang, Z. Liu, F. Liu, W. Wang, A. Alfantazi, D. Wang and D. P. Wilkinson, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2101–2107 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seo and S. H. Joo, Nano Convergence, 2017, 4, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yu, S. Y. Huang, Y. Li, S. N. Steinmann, W. Yang and L. Cao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 553–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ou, P. Fan, X. Ke, Y. Xu, K. Huang, H. Wei, W. Yu, H. Zhang, M. Zhong, H. Wu and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 751–761 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dong, X. Zhang, P. Wang, H. S. Chen and P. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 338, 135885 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Ren, L. Chen, D. D. Yang and Z. Y. Yuan, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118352 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Q. Yao, J. Ma, Y. Xu, J. Jiang, X. Liu and Z. Li, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 2258–2267 RSC .
L. Hu, Y. Sun, S. J. Gong, H. Zong, K. Yu and Z. Zhu, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 7902–7911 RSC .
X. Meng, C. Ma, L. Jiang, R. Si, X. Meng, Y. Tu, L. Yu, X. Bao and D. Deng, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 10588–10593 CrossRef .
S. Geng, W. Yang, Y. Liu and Y. Yu, J. Catal., 2020, 391, 91–97 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, S. Huang, M. Liu, P. Li, W. Sun and L. Hou, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 2660–2668 RSC .
W. Yang, S. Zhang, Q. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. Wei, H. Jiang, Y. Lin, M. Zhao, Q. He, X. Wang and Y. Du, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, Y. Zhang, L. Feng, X. Li and Q. A An, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1902022 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, H. Hua, M. Du, J. Liu, X. Wu, Y. Pu and X. A. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 515, 145842 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, A. Zhong, W. Liu, S. Chen and Y. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 28361–28371 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, H. Zhou, D. Chen, T. Bian and A. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 135445 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, H. Ren, H. Hu and Y. F. Song, Chem.–Eur. J., 2020, 26, 4150–4156 CAS .
Y. Feng, T. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Fan, C. He and J. Song, Small, 2020, 16, 2002850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K. Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2019, 120, 851–918 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Zhu, D. Gao, J. Ding, D. Chao and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4332–4356 RSC .
G. Swain, S. Sultana, J. Moma and K. M. Parida, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 10059–10071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Swain, S. Sultana and K. M. Parida, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 4848–4862 CrossRef CAS .
G. Swain, S. Sultana and K. M. Parida, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 9941–9955 CrossRef CAS .
G. Swain, S. Sultana, B. Naik and K. M. Parida, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 3745–3753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nayak, G. Swain and K. M. Parida, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20923–20942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Subudhi, G. Swain, S. P. Tripathy and K. Parida, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 9824–9837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Shinagawa and K. Takanabe, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1318–1336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Merki and X. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3878–3888 RSC .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8069–8097 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kong, J. J. Cha, H. Wang, H. R. Lee and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3553–3558 RSC .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. B. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. R. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov and U. Stimming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, J23–J26 CrossRef .
S. Chen, J. Duan, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13567–13570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, Y. Li, H. Wang, Y. Liang, J. Z. Wu, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8452–8455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sheng, B. Jiang, B. Wu, F. Liao, X. Fan, H. Lin, Y. Li, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee and M. Shao, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2786–2794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Smith, M. S. Prévot, R. D. Fagan, S. Trudel and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11580–11586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Fletcher, Physical electrochemistry. Fundamentals, techniques, and applications by EliezerGileadi.  2012 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Karthick, S. S. Sankar, K. Sangeetha, P. E. Karthik and S. Kundu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 744–771 RSC .
N. M. Markovića, S. T. Sarraf, H. A. Gasteiger and P. N. Ross, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 3719–3725 RSC .
S. Anantharaj, M. Jayachandran and S. Kundu, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3188–3205 RSC .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Liu, Z. Liao, S. Liu, X. Zhuang, M. Chen, E. Zschech and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. Boudart, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 661–666 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dutta, Y. Wu, J. Chen, J. Wang, J. He, M. Sharafeldin, P. Kerns, L. Jin, A. M. Dongare, J. Rusling and S. L. Suib, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 456–465 CrossRef .
C. C. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
X. Ren, D. Wu, R. Ge, X. Sun, H. Ma, T. Yan, Y. Zhang, B. Du, Q. Wei and L. Chen, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2024–2033 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, Z. Yuan, S. Li, H. Li, J. Chen, Y. Wang, Q. Huang, C. Wang, H. E. Karahan, G. Henkelman and X. Liao, Small, 2019, 15, 1900358 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Lu, L. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav6009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Bloom, L. K. Walker, J. K. Basco, T. Malkow, A. Saturnio, G. De Marco and G. A Tsotridis, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 451–457 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sabatier, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1911, 44, 1984–2001 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jayabal, G. Saranya, J. Wu, Y. Liu, D. Geng and X. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24540–24563 RSC .
S. Parida, A. Mishra, J. Chen, J. Wang, A. Dobley, C. B. Carter and A. M. Dongare, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2020, 103, 6603–6614 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gan, H. Zhao, D. Lei and P. Wang, J. Catal., 2020, 391, 424–434 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, H. Xiang, L. Tao, H. Dong, Y. Zhou, T. S. Hu, X. Chen, S. Liu, S. Wang and S. Garaj, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 535–541 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang and D. E. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4953–4961 CrossRef CAS .
D. McAteer, Z. Gholamvand, N. McEvoy, A. Harvey, E. O'Malley, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 672–683 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, K. Yang, B. Jiang, J. Li, M. Zeng and L. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8187–8208 RSC .
J. Zhang, J. Wu, H. Guo, W. Chen, J. Yuan, U. Martinez, G. Gupta, A. Mohite, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701955 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tsai, H. Li, S. Park, J. Park, H. S. Han, J. K. Nørskov, X. Zheng and F. Abild-Pedersen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, X. Li, W. Guo, M. Zhao, X. Fan, Y. Dong, C. Xu, J. Deng and Y. Fu, Crystals, 2017, 7, 198 CrossRef .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, X. Zhan, Y. Huang, K. Liu, Z. Cheng, C. Jiang and J. He, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19764–19788 RSC .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Lee, X. Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M. T. Chang, C. T. Lin, K. D. Chang, Y. C. Yu, J. T. W. Wang, C. S. Chang, L. J. Li and T. W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. To, Z. Chen, H. Yao, J. He, K. Kim, H. H. Chou, L. Pan, J. Wilcox, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, ACS Cent. Sci., 2015, 1, 68–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, A. Kumar, V. NavakoteswaraRao, A. Kumar, M. V. Shankar and V. Krishnan, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 5622–5634 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sharma, V. Maivizhikannan, V. Navakoteswara Rao, S. Kumar, A. Kumar, A. Kumar, M. V. Shankar and V. Krishnan, Ceram. Int., 2020, 47, 10301–10313 CrossRef .
A. Kumar, V. NavakoteswaraRao, A. Kumar, M. Venkatakrishnan Shankar and V. Krishnan, ChemPhotoChem, 2020, 4, 427–444 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, N. L. Reddy, H. S. Kushwaha, A. Kumar, M. V. Shankar, K. Bhattacharyya, A. Halder and V. Krishnan, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3588–3603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Salmeron, G. A. Somorjai and R. R. Chianelli, Surf. Sci., 1983, 127, 526–540 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Liu, W. Zhang, Y. H. Lee, Y. C. Lin, M. T. Chang, C. Y. Su, C. S. Chang, H. Li, Y. Shi, H. Zhang and C. S. Lai, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, Q. Fu, W. Wang, J. Huang, J. Huang, J. Zhang and B. Xiang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10490–10497 RSC .
H. Wang, C. Li, P. Fang, Z. Zhang and J. Z. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6101 RSC .
J. Brivio, D. T. L. Alexander and A. Kis, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5148–5153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, M. B. Whitwick and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9934–9938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Magda, J. Petö, G. Dobrik, C. Hwang, L. Biró and L. Tapasztó, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zeng, Z. Yin, X. Huang, H. Li, Q. He, G. Lu, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11093–11097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, P. Xu, D. Zhou, Y. Sun, Y. Li, M. Nguyen, M. Terrones and T. Mallouk, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5956–5960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. H. Attanayake, A. C. Thenuwara, A. Patra, Y. V. Aulin, T. M. Tran, H. Chakraborty, E. Borguet, M. L. Klein, J. P. Perdew and D. R. Strongin, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 7–13 CrossRef .
E. E. Benson, H. Zhang, S. A. Schuman, S. U. Nanayakkara, N. D. Bronstein, S. Ferrere, J. L. Blackburn and E. M. Miller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 441–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, E. Walter, W. Van der Veer, B. Murray, J. Newberg, E. Bohannan, J. Switzer, J. Hemminger and R. Penner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3169–3182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lee, X. Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M. T. Chang, C. T. Lin and K. D. Chang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, C. Li, Y. Liu, L. Su, Y. Zhang and L. Cao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1866 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Balendhran, J. Z. Ou, M. Bhaskaran, S. Sriram, S. Ippolito, Z. Vasic, E. Kats, S. Bhargava, S. Zhuiykov and K. Kalantarzadeh, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 461–466 RSC .
Y. Zhan, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Small, 2012, 8, 966–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiang, H. Liu, C. Huang, Y. Li, H. Zeng and X. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34378–34387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, C. Huang, G. Aivazian, J. S. Ross, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2768–2772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, J. Yao, X. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Xing, X. Niu, X. Yan, Y. Yu, Y. Liu and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6276–6282 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ahn, J. Lee, H.-U. Kim, H. Bark, M. Jeon, G. Ryu, Z. Lee, G. Yeom, K. Kim, J. Jung, Y. Kim, C. Lee and T. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5223–5229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kang, S. Xie, L. Huang, Y. Han, P. Huang, K. Mak, C.-J. Kim, D. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2015, 520, 656–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, M. Larsson, I. Maximov, H. Hardtdegen and H. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 042114 CrossRef .
A. Valdivia, D. Tweet and J. F. Conley Jr, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2016, 34, 021515 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, M. L. Du, M. Zhang, M. Zou, T. Yang and Y. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7680 RSC .
C. B. Ma, X. Qi, B. Chen, S. Bao, Z. Yin and X. J. Wu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5624 RSC .
Y. Yan, B. Y. Xia, N. Li, Z. C. Xu, A. Fisherc and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 131 RSC .
H. Wang, Z. Lu, D. Kong, J. Sun, T. M. Hymel and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4940e7 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Zhang, H. Yao, Z. Lee, H. W. Liang and P. C. Hsu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7138e44 Search PubMed .
X. Feng, Q. Tang, J. Zhou, J. Fang, P. Ding, L. Sun and L. Shi, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2014, 48, 363–368 CrossRef .
M. S. Delphine, M. Jayachandran and C. Sanjeeviraja, Mater. Res. Bull., 2005, 40, 135–147 CrossRef .
T. S. Zhuravleva, E. P. Krinichnaya, O. P. Ivanova and I. V. Klimenko, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 3125–3130 CrossRef CAS .
G. Compagnini, M. G. Sinatra and G. C. Messina, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 5672–5676 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ji, Z. Yang, C. Zhang, Z. Liu and W. W. Tjiu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 109, 269–275 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, J. Wu, X. Xu, Y. Ho, G. Ni, Q. Zou and G. K. W. Koon, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 200–207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, C. Huang, G. Aivazian, J. S. Ross, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2768–2772 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ji, Y. Zhang, T. Gao, Y. Zhang, D. Ma and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3870–3877 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J.-K. Huang, C.-H. Chen, Y.-H. Chang, Y. J. Cheng and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3456–3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Roy and S. K. Srivastava, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 293–298 CrossRef CAS .

          A. K. Samantara and S. Ratha, Electroactive Materials, in Metal Oxides/Chalcogenides and Composites, Springer, Cham,  2019, pp. 31–67 Search PubMed .
Y. Ouyang, C. Ling, Q. Chen, Z. Wang, L. Shi and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4390–4396 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. Wang, X. Sun, M. Zhou, J. Zhou, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5807–5813 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tao, X. Duan, C. Wang, X. Duan and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7470–7473 RSC .
X. Dai, K. Du, Z. Li, M. Liu, Y. Ma, H. Sun, X. Zhang and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27242–27253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, H. J. Kim, J. T. Lee, G. W. Chang, X. Shi, W. Kim, M. Ma, K. J. Kong, J. M. Choi, M. S. Song and J. H. Park, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2489–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gao, Q. Sun and A. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16761–16766 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, Y. Ouyang, H. Zhang, M. Xiao, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, J. Wang, D. Tang, X. Cao, C. Liu and W. Xing, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park, J. Park, H. Abroshan, L. Zhang, J. K. Kim, J. Zhang, J. Guo, S. Siahrostami and X. Zheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2685–2693 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Benck, Z. Chen, L. Y. Kuritzky, A. J. Forman and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1916–1923 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. L. Ting, Y. Deng, L. Ma, Y. J. Zhang, A. A. Peterson and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 861–867 CrossRef CAS .
D. Merki, S. Fierro, H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1262–1267 RSC .
D. Merki, H. Vrubel, L. Rovelli, S. Fierro and X. Hu, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2515–2525 RSC .
J. Kibsgaard, T. F. Jaramillo and F. Besenbacher, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Do, Q. Van Le, M. A. Tekalgne, A. V. Tran, T. H. Lee, S. H. Hong, S. M. Han, S. H. Ahn, Y. J. Kim, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 852, 156952 CrossRef .
D. Kong, H. Wang, J. J. Cha, M. Pasta, K. J. Koski, J. Yao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1341–1347 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seo, G. Y. Jung, Y. J. Sa, H. Y. Jeong, J. Y. Cheon, J. H. Lee, H. Y. Kim, J. C. Kim, H. S. Shin, S. K. Kwak and S. H. Joo, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3728–3739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10274–10277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, R. Fullon, J. Yang, C. D. C. C. e Silva, R. Kappera, I. Bozkurt, D. Kaplan, M. J. Lagos, P. E. Batson, G. Gupta and A. D. Mohite, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1003–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Lu, S. Xu, D. Kong, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, P. C. Hsu, K. Yan, D. Bradshaw, F. B. Prinz and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 19701–19706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin, J. Han, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, P. Xu, Q. Yuan, L. Samad, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang and P. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7965–7972 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ye, Y. Gong, J. Lin, B. Li, Y. He, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1097–1103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, D. Wang and A. Sun, J. Cryst. Growth, 2010, 312, 340–343 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, D. Wang, Y. Wang and A. Sun, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2010, 12, 534–538 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, H. Zhu and X. Yang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10680–10685 RSC .
X. Ren, Q. Ma, H. Fan, L. Pang, Y. Zhang, Y. Yao, X. Ren and S. F. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15997–16000 RSC .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Nørskov and X. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, D. Zhang, Q. Qiao, Y. Yu, D. Peterson, A. Zafar, R. Kumar, S. Curtarolo, F. Hunte, S. Shannon, Y. Zhu, W. Yang and L. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16632–16638 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, F. Yang, R. Chen, P. Ren and Y. Wang, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 1493–1499 RSC .
R. Li, L. Yang, T. Xiong, Y. Wu, L. Cao, D. Yuan and W. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2017, 356, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, N. Miao, Y. Wen, S. Zhang, P. Ghosez, Z. Sun and D. A. Allwood, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8929–8937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, J. Dai, Y. Guo, C. Wu, F. Hu, J. Zhao, X. Zeng and Y. Xie, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8359–8367 RSC .
V. Urbanová, P. Lazar, N. Antonatos, Z. Sofer, M. Otyepka and M. Pumera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20383–20392 CrossRef .
J. Cao, J. Zhou, Y. Zhang and X. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zheng, J. Xu, K. Yan, H. Wang, Z. Wang and S. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2344–2353 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, Y. Hu, G. Zhu, R. Chen, T. Chen, H. Lu, Y. Wang, J. Liang, H. Liu, C. Yan and Z. Tie, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5733–5742 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qiu, Y. Huang, Z. Nie, B. Ma, Y. Tan, Z. Wu, N. Zhang and X. Xie, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6810–6820 RSC .
N. Komba, G. Zhang, Z. Pu, M. Wu, F. Rosei and S. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 4468–4480 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Si, Q. Zhang, J. Wu, L. Gao, X. Wei, Y. Sun, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang and K. Ammarah, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4298–4308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Chen, Z. W. Chen, Y. Wang, C. C. Yang and Q. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8107–8114 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, L. Liu, Z. Zhu, P. Papakonstantinou, J. Hu, H. Liu and M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 625–633 RSC .
Z. Chen, D. Cummins, B. N. Reinecke, E. Clark, M. K. Sunkara and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4168–4175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gao, X. Du, Y. Ma, Y. Li, Y. Li, S. Ding, Z. Song and C. Xiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 117750 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Tang, Y. Wang, X. L. Wang, S. L. Li, W. Huang, L. Z. Dong, C. H. Liu, Y. F. Li and Y. Q. Lan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600116 CrossRef .
W. Zhou, D. Hou, Y. Sang, S. Yao, J. Zhou, G. Li, L. Li, H. Liu and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11358–11364 RSC .
K. Ojha, S. Saha, S. Banerjee and A. K. Ganguli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19455–19461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Zuo, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, F. Lai, W. Fan and T. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 3140–3148 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, L. Zhou, W. Zhang, J. Jin, X. Mu, S. Zhang, C. Chen and S. Mu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 9943–9949 RSC .
Q. Xu, Y. Liu, H. Jiang, Y. Hu, H. Liu and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802553 CrossRef .
X. Meng, L. Yu, C. Ma, B. Nan, R. Si, Y. Tu, J. Deng, D. Deng and X. Bao, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 611–616 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Xu, Y. Zhu, W. Peng, Y. Li, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 89–94 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Amiinu, Z. Pu, X. Liu, K. A. Owusu, H. G. R. Monestel, F. O. Boakye, H. Zhang and S. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702300 CrossRef .
J. Chen, G. Liu, Y. Z. Zhu, M. Su, P. Yin, X. J. Wu, Q. Lu, C. Tan, M. Zhao, Z. Liu and W. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7161–7167 CrossRef CAS .
S. He, H. Du, K. Wang, Q. Liu, J. Sun, Y. Liu, Z. Du, L. Xie, W. Ai and W. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 5548–5551 RSC .
P. Thangasamy, S. Oh, S. Nam and I. K. Oh, Carbon, 2020, 158, 216–225 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, J. Li, A. Feng, X. Han, Y. Lv, M. Ma and C. Lin, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2869–2874 RSC .
X. Ding, T. Yang, W. Wei, Y. Wang, K. Xu, Z. Zhu, H. Zhao, T. Yu and D. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 3247–3254 RSC .
Y. Yang, Y. Wang, H. L. He, W. Yan, L. Fang, Y. B. Zhang, Y. Qin, R. Long, X. M. Zhang and X. Fan, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4925–4937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Sharma, C. Mahala and M. Basu, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 4377–4388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. T. Nguyen, P. A. Le, Y. C. Hsu and K. H. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11533–11542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, C. Tang, P. Zhou, Z. Liu, Y. Xu, D. Wang and B. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13050–13056 RSC .
C. Meng, M. C. Lin, X. W. Du and Y. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 6999–7003 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mei, T.-T. Li, J. Qian, H. Li, M. Wu and Y.-Q. Zheng, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 13393–13396 RSC .
Y. Wang, F. Lu, K. Su, N. Zhang, Y. Zhang, M. Wang and X. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 126018 CrossRef CAS .
F. Z. Wang, M. J. Zheng, B. Zhang, C. Q. Zhu, Q. Li, L. Ma and W. Z. Shen, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, K. Leng, X. Zhao, S. Malkhandi, W. Tang, B. Tian, L. Dong, L. Zheng, M. Lin, B. S. Yeo and K. P. Loh, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–9 CrossRef .
J. H. Lee, W. S. Jang, S. W. Han and H. K. Baik, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 9866–9873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. H. Kwak, I. S. Kwon, H. G. Abbas, J. Seo, G. Jung, Y. Lee, D. Kim, J. P. Ahn, J. Park and H. S. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2334–2343 RSC .
X. Li, X. Lv, X. Sun, C. Yang, Y. Z. Zheng, L. Yang, S. Li and X. Tao, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 284, 119708 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and P. Yang, Carbon, 2021, 175, 176–186 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, X. Zhan, J. Huang, J. Hu, Z. Chen and Y. Lai, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 128556 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, X. Liu, P. Xin, H. Wang, Y. Wu, C. Gao, Q. He, Y. Jiang, Z. Hu and S. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 853, 157352 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, B. Cai, R. Tian, X. Yu, M. B. Breese, X. Chu, Z. Han, S. Li, R. Joshi, A. Vinu and T. Wan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 409, 128158 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Sriram Mansingh	Dr Sriram Mansingh received his BSc Hons. (2nd Rank), MSc, and MPhil (1st Rank) from Utkal University, Bhubaneswar, India. Then, he completed his PhD degree from the Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan (Deemed to be University) Bhubaneswar, India, under the guidance of Prof. Kulamani Parida. His current research mainly focuses on the development of nanostructured materials such as metal oxides, metal sulfides, phosphides, layered materials and their application towards water splitting, N2 fixation, and organic/inorganic pollutant detoxification. He has published 23 research articles in various international journals and one patent.
Kundan Kumar Das	Mr Kundan Kumar Das obtained his MSc and MTech in Environmental Science from Fakir Mohan University, Balesore, and Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan (Deemed to be University) Bhubaneswar respectively. Then he joined as a PhD scholar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida at the Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, S‘O’A Deemed to be University in 2017 and continuing. His present research includes the design and development of conducting polymer-sensitized ferrite-based material for energy generation, environmental pollutant degradation, and antibacterial studies. He has published 9 research articles in various high impact international journals and one patent.
Kulamani Parida	Prof. Kulamani Parida is working as Distinguished Professor in Chemistry and is the Director, Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha O Anusandhan, Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Before joining SOA, Deemed to be University, he worked for 37 years in CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar at different capacities, and retired from the position of Chief Scientist and Head of Colloids and Materials Chemistry Department. Dr Parida has made a significant contribution towards exploring chemistry related to the structural, morphological, optical, electronic, and electrochemical properties of several wide bandgaps and narrow bandgap semiconductors, doped metal oxides, metal carbides, metal sulfide, and nitrides for the effective visible light absorption and charge separation required for efficient photocatalytic water splitting, the degradation of pollutants and the synthesis of fine chemicals. He has published more than 400 papers in high impact factor journals, 15 review papers, 7 book chapters, filed 35 patents, and supervised 50 PhD students. The important and current relevance of his work is amply reflected in a large number of citations (∼20 433) of his work and H index (74). For more details: https://kmparidaimmt.weebly.com/.

 	Fig. 1  General electrocatalytic water splitting reaction and the corresponding current vs. potential (I–V) graph. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Nano Convergence, Copyright 2017.	 

4H+ + 4e− ⇄ 2H2(g)
	(i)
Volmer adsorption step ⇒ catalyst + H+ + e− ⇄ H* (H-atom adsorbed on catalyst)	(ii)
Tafel dissociation desorption step ⇒ 2H* ⇄ H2 + catalyst	(iii)
Heyrovsky desorption step ⇒ H* + H+ + e− ⇄ H2 + catalyst	(iv)
Ei (operating potential) = E0HER (standard potential) + iR (ohmic potential drop) + η	(v)
j = j0[−e−αnFη/RT + e−(1−α)nFη/RT]	(vi)
	(vii)
η = a + b × logj	(viii)
	(ix)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Mechanism of the HER process and (b–d) the corresponding Tafel, Volmer, and Heyrovsky reaction pathway. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 3 and 53 with permission from ChemElectroChem and Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., Copyright 2020 and 2013 respectively.	 
TOF = rate of H2 evolution/number of active sites	(x)
ECSA = Rf (roughness factor) × S (geometric surface area) = Cdl/Cs (specific capacitance)	(xi)
	(xii)
ΔGH = ΔE* (hydrogen adsorption enthalpy) + ΔEφ (zero-point energy) − TΔS	(xiii)

 	Fig. 3  A volcano plot shows the relation between the measured exchange current density and the DFT-calculated Gibbs free energy of hydrogen adsorption on the catalyst surface. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from ACS Nano, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 4  Representing the ball-stick model of 2H and 1T phase of MoS2 (a) metal co-ordination image, top and lateral view of a single layer, and (b) basal plane, Mo and S-edge planes image. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from J. Mater. Chem. A, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 5  Distance between different layers of the tri-layer units (S–Mo–S).	 

 	Fig. 6  Top-down methods and bottom-up methods for synthesizing layered MoS2.	 

1	3D rose-petal-shapedMoS2 hierarchical nanostructures	Chemical vapor deposition	First carbon nanofibers (CNF) mats were synthesized by combining the electrospinning and carbonization processes, and then MoS2 is grown directly over CNF by the CVD method from MoO3 and sulfur vapor at 900 °C	
114

2	MoS2 nanoflowers (MoS2NFs) coated on reduced graphene oxide (rGO) paper	Solvothermal	MoS2NFs/rGO electrode is prepared from (NH4)2MoS4 and rGO paper precursor by subjecting the precursor containing Teflon autoclave to 200 °C for 24 h	
115

3	Vertically oriented MoS2 nanosheet thin films grown on carbon cloth (CC)	Solvothermal	(NH4)2MoS4 has dissolved in DMF and H2O solution. Then the above solution and the CC (against the wall) are subjected to solvothermal treatment at 200 °C for 12 h	
116

4	2H-MoS2 was grown on carbon fiber paper (CFP)	Pyrolysis, Li-electrochemical intercalation, and exfoliation processes	MoO3 NPs dispersed over CFP (S–MoO3) are first prepared from (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O by heating at 600 °C in Ar atmosphere. Then S–MoO3 is transferred to S–MoS2via sulfurization followed by Li-electrochemical intercalation to give the final sample	
117

5	Vertically aligned-MoS2 and cage like MoS2 on CNF	Pyrolysis	CNF is dipped in 20% (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O solution is heated at 600 °C for 1.5 h under Ar atmosphere in the tube furnace and then rapid sulfurization	
118

6	MoS2 thin film	Liquid exfoliation and deposition over polish quartz plate	(i) Exfoliation of the pristine MoS2 crystals to single layers, (ii) producing nanocrystalline MoS2 particles from the dispersions of single MoS2 layers, and (iii) their deposition onto the substrate in the form of a film	
119

7	Inorganic fullerene-like MoS2	Ablating polycrystalline MoS2	Solutions were prepared ablating a polycrystalline MoS2 target. The target was prepared by pressing commercially available MoS2 powder. The ablation is performed by the second harmonic of an Nd:YAG laser	
120

8	Exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets modified glass carbon electrode (GCE)	Liquid exfoliation via ultra-sonication	Commercially available MoS2 powder is first dispersed in DMF and then exfoliated by ultrasonication, followed by deposition over GCE by a drop-casting method	
121

9	Hall bar structure and a hexagonal array monolayer MoS2	Etching process using XeF2	Etching MoS2 using XeF2 as a reaction gas. To study the mechanism of etching PMMA is used as an etching mask and combining micro-fabrication with etching different morphology-oriented MoS2 are prepared	
122

10	Monolayer MoS2 single crystals (∼25 microns) on different insulating substrates (SiO2, sapphire, and glass)	Catalyst free vapor–solid (VS) growth mechanism	MoS2 powder in an alumina boat is placed in the center and insulating substrate at the cooler zone of a horizontal quartz tube furnace. Then the tube is maintained at a pressure of 20 m torr in the Ar atmosphere. Finally, the furnace temperature is raised to 900 °C for 15–20 min	
123

11	Epitaxial monolayer MoS2 on an inert and nearly lattice-matching mica substrate	The low-pressure chemical vapor deposition method	Monolayer MoS2 over mica is prepared from MoO3 and sulfur powder along with fluorophlogopite mica in a multi-temperature zone tubular furnace kept at 300 °C and 30 Pa under Ar condition	
124

12	MoS2 thin film	Chemical bath deposition method on glass and quartz substrate	First (NH4)2MoS4 crystal is prepared by precipitation method from H2S and ammonium paramolybdate. MoS2 film is coated over the substrate by chemical bath method where (NH4)2MoS4 and hydrazine solutions are mixed and adjusted to pH = 10. Then transferred to a beaker containing glass substrate and capped with Teflon tape and the bath temperature is kept at 60 °C for 1 h	
125

13	Closed caged fullerene-like molybdenum disulfide	Arc discharge	An arc discharge is carried out between graphite cathode (diameter = 12 mm and length = 20 mm) and Mo anode (diameter = 7 mm and length = 80 mm) filled with tiny MoS2 powder merged in de-ionized water. The arc current of 30 A and a voltage of 17 V are supplied by direct current to the reactor	
126

14	Wafer-scale MoS2 atomic layers	Magnetron sputtering	MoS2 film is grown over substrates like SiO2/Si, and sapphire from Mo metal target sputter in sulfur vapor leaking from heating tape. The chamber pressure is kept at 3 × 10−7 mbar and Ar pressure at 6 × 10−4 mbar with a sputtering power of 6 W. The number of the layer in MoS2 film is tuned by varying the sputtering power and deposition time	
127

15	MoS2 atomic layers	Thermal vapor sulfurization	Thin Mo and MoO3 films are deposited over sapphire and SiO2/Si substrate in a magnetron sputtering chamber with Ar–O2 gas flow and high temperature. Then thermal vapor sulfurization of the above-coated substrates is done in a tubular furnace in presence of sulfur powder and N2 gas flow	
128


 	Fig. 7  General CVD synthesis of MoS2. (a) Sulfurization of MoO3 powder. (b) Sulfurization of Mo films. (c and d) Vapor–solid growth from MoS2 powder. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 103, 106 and 108 with permission from Adv Mater., Small, and ACS Nano, Copyright 2012, 2012 and 2013 respectively.	 

 	Fig. 8  Different strategies that were followed to enhance the HER activity of 2D-MoS2.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Reaction mechanism and corresponding energy profile of the HER on MoS2 4|8a GBs, (b) stable adsorption location for hydrogen atom adsorption at different defect sites, (c and d) energetics of the HER process on designed catalysts. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Chem. Mater., Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Preparation pathway for developing defect-free and defect-rich sample, (b) FESEM image of ultrathin MoS2, (c) LSV plot of initial and after 3000 cycles showing catalyst stability, and (d) atomic reconstruction picture. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Adv. Mater., Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Followed plasma synthesis procedure in Ar and O2 atmosphere, (b and c) current density graph of Ar and O2 plasma-treated MoS2, and (d and e) corresponding Tafel slope of Ar and O2 plasma-treated MoS2. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Chem. Commun., Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Preparation route of the MoS2@OMC catalyst, the pores of SBA-15 were partly packed with carbon and rest of the pores are filled by the growth of MoS2 and finally, the silica template is removed to produce MoS2@OMC, (b–d) corresponding TOF, polarization, and current density plot of the as-prepared catalysts. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from ACS Nano, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 13  Electrochemical activity of the as-prepared and chemically exfoliated MoS2 nanosheet. (a and b) Polarization plot at a higher and lower potential. (c) Respective Tafel slope. (d) Polarization curve after 1000 continuous cycles showing excellent stability of the catalyst. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a and b) Polarization graph of pristine and lithiated MoS2 on MPGC and Tafel slope of MoS2 is regularly tuned by Li intercalation under different scanning potentials, (c and d) HER activity of Atomic Layered Deposition (ALD) MoS2 on CFP and durability curve of lithiated ALD MoS2, (e) crystal structure of 2H MoS2 and a battery testing system, where the MoS2 nanofilm acts as the cathode and Li foil as the anode (yellow color = edge sites, and green = terrace sites) and (f) galvanostatic discharge curve representing the lithiation process. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) Tafel slope, polarization curve of all prepared electrocatalysts, (c) current density graph showing the notable stability of prepared electrocatalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 and (d and e) SEM and TEM images of MoS2 NSs-550. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from ACS Catal., Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a and b) SEM, HRTEM image, (c) polarization graph depicting excellent durability of MoS2/AC after 1000 cycles, and (d and e) Tafel slope and polarization curve of the as-prepared samples respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Nanoscale, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Hydrogen evolution reaction on Pt–MoS2 electrocatalysts, (b) HER polarization graph of Pt–MoS2, GC electrode, bulk MoS2, FL-MoS2, and 40% Pt/C, (c) corresponding Tafel slope of Pt–MoS2, FL-MoS2, and 40% Pt/CHER catalysts, (d) durability test of Pt–MoS2 (polarization curve of initial and after 5000 cycles) between a potential window of −0.13 V and +0.57 V (vs. RHE) at 100 mV s−1, and (e) stability measurement of Pt–MoS2 at different current densities. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the catalytic activity of V-doped MoS2 nanosheets (VSM) due to high in-plane conductivity and increased electron transfer process. (b and c) Polarization curve and corresponding Tafel slope of Pt, VSM, MoS2 Ns, commercial MoS2 and bare GC electrode. (d) Polarization graph (initial and after 1000 cycles) showing high durability of V0.90M0.91S2 electrocatalysts respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Nanoscale, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the HER mechanism on MoS2 NS/MWCNTs, (b and c) TEM and HRTEM images of MoS2 NS/MWCNTs hybrid, and (d–f) polarization curve (MoS2NS/MWCNTs, Pt/C, MoS2NFs, and CNT), stability graph (chronopotentiometry and polarization result), and Tafel slope of prepared samples (MoS2NS/MWCNTs, Pt/C and MoS2NFs) respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Sci. Rep., Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Polarization curve of Pt-, MoS2/RGO-, MoS2 NP-, and RGO-coated GC electrode, (b) Tafel slope graph of 0.28 mg cm−2 catalyst loaded over GC electrode (Pt, MoS2/RGO, and MoS2 NP), (c) polarization curve of 1 mg cm−2 loaded sample over CFP compared to two reported article data of the same catalyst loading, (d) polarization plot of MoS2/RGO (initial and after 1000 cycles) showing the excellent stability of the catalyst, and (e) schematic of the followed synthesis procedure. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., Copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a and b) Polarization graph and corresponding Tafel slope of all GO and CNT-modified MoS2 and also of the neat MoS2 catalyst, and (c) scheme representing MoS2 nucleation over GO and CNT substrates by a microwave-assisted steam heating method (MSH). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from Nanoscale, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic of single S-vacancy MoS2 preparation by a chemical etching technique, (b) SEM of P–MoS2, and (c) STEM image with a rectangular frame, indicating CVD-grown monolayer MoS2 thin films after etching and yellow dots highlighting S-vacancies, and (d and e) HER polarization graph with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 and the corresponding Tafel slope of as-synthesized electrocatalysts. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., Copyright 2020.	 

1	Ni–MoS2/RGO	0.5 M H2SO4	85	71.3	10	20000 cycles/30000 s	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
170

2	MoS2 on Au	0.5 M H2SO4	90	69	0.92	1000 cycles	NA	
171

3	MoO3–MoS2 nanowires	0.5 M H2SO4	150–200	50–60	8	10000 cycles	NA	
172

4	Al–MoS2	0.5 M H2SO4	248	82	10	1000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
173

5	MoS2/N–RGO	0.5 M H2SO4	56	41.3	10	5000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
174

6	MoO2 nanobelts/N-doped MoS2 nanosheets	0.5 M H2SO4	−156 (onset potential)	47.5	NA	2000 cycles/12 h	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
175

7	Mo2N–MoS2 composites	0.5 M H2SO4	190	56	10	3000 cycles/60000 s	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
176

8	MoS2/carbon aerogel hybrids	0.5 M H2SO4	200	59	9.68	2000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
177

9	Pd-Modulated Co–MoS2	0.5 M H2SO4	60	56	10	40 h	NA	
178

10	MoS2 nanosheet–carbon macroporous hybrid	0.5 M H2SO4	136	78	10	24 h/10000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
179

11	Co-Doped MoS2 and graphene	0.5 M H2SO4	143	71	10	5000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
180

12	MSQDs	0.5 M H2SO4	−210	78	10	2000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
181

13	MoS2/CoNi2S4	0.5 M H2SO4	81	67	10	48 h	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
182

14	Ag@MoS2	0.5 M H2SO4	235.3	41.1	10	10000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
183

15	MoS2@CoS2	0.5 M H2SO4	96	60	10	1000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
184

16	MoS2–WS2–CNTs	0.5 M H2SO4	212	50	10	1000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
185

17	S–MoS2/rGO/CNT	0.5 M H2SO4	159	85	10	18 h	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
186

18	La2S3–MoS2	0.5 M H2SO4	205	51	10	20000 cycles/24 h	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
187

19	Nb4N5−xOx-MoS2/NG	0.5 M H2SO4	39	30	10	10000 cycles	Volmer–Tafel	
188

20	MoSe2-ts@MoS2-ts	0.5 M H2SO4	186	71	10	1000 cycles/24 h	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
189

21	OGNs@MoS2	0.5 M H2SO4	118	73	10	105 s	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
190

22	Osmotically swollen ammoniated MoS2	0.5 M H2SO4	NA	45	10	1000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
191

23	L-MoS2 nanosheet	0.5 M H2SO4	178	41.1	10	10 h	NA	
192

24	PCN@MoS2@C	0.5 M H2SO4	130	40–120	10	1000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
193

170	100
25	MoS2@rGO hybrid	0.5 M H2SO4	239	46	10	NA	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
194

26	Ammonia intercalated flower-like MoS2 electrocatalyst film	0.5 M H2SO4	200 mV and an onset overpotential of 120 mV	49 mV dec−1	10 mA cm−2	1000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
195

27	Pt–MoS2	0.5 M H2SO4	20 mV as onset potential	25 mV dec−1	10 mA cm−2	10 h	Volmer–Tafel	
196

28	MoS2/Ag strain 0.02%	0.5 M H2SO4	400 mV	135 mV dec−1	9.24 mA cm−2	35 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky reaction	
197

29	MoS2−2xNx (x = 0.1) (MS-TMPD)	0.5 M H2SO4	150 mV	35 mV dec−1	10 mA cm−2	12 h	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
198

30	MoS2–Ti3C2 MXene	0.5 M H2SO4	98 mV	45 mV dec−1	10 mA cm−2	1000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
199

31	MoS2–NiCNTs composite catalysts	0.5 M H2SO4	182 mV and onset potential of 115 mV	49 mV dec−1	10 mA cm−2	50 h	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
200

32	CN/CNL/MoS2/CP	0.5 M H2SO4	112 mV	77 mV dec−1	10 mA cm−2	1000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
201

33	NiS@MoS2 core–shell microspheres	0.5 M H2SO4	208 mV	62.44 mV dec−1	10 mA cm−2	1000 cycles	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
202

34	V-Doped MoS2 nanosheets	0.5 M H2SO4	156 mV, and onset potential of 102 mV	54 mV dec−1	10 mA cm−2	1000 cycles, 12 h	Volmer–Heyrovsky	
203


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
