Algal biorefinery: a potential solution to the food–energy–water–environment nexus  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SE01740C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SE01740C
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 2623-2664Algal biorefinery: a potential solution to the food–energy–water–environment nexus

        
          
            Sina 
            Talebi
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Anis 
            Edalatpour
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Omid 
            Tavakoli
          
          
        
      *
      School of Chemical Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: otavakoli@ut.ac.ir
Received 
      1st November 2021
    , Accepted 14th March 2022First published on 18th March 2022AbstractDespite the great potential in wastewater treatment, CO2 bio-fixation and food and bioenergy production, microalgae are not economically viable on a large commercial scale and, as a unifying solution to all sectors, have been less addressed. This study provides an updated review on microalgae to investigate the interaction between the food–energy–water–environment (FEWE) sectors and understand how to manage their challenges effectively. Concerns about food, energy, and water security, as well as challenges, such as climate change, local agrochemical manufacturing, the threat of synthetic pigments, non-degradable plastics and surfactants, thermal pollution, and the demand for livestock and aquafeed, need a platform that can respond to the goals of these four sectors simultaneously. A biorefinery platform as a cost-effective and innovative solution for the FEWE nexus has been proposed. To reduce costs, waste streams and effluent flue gas from plants should be fed into the cultivation media, making the biorefinery platform location sensitive. This review summarizes the challenges and the new techniques in converting microalgae into different types of biofuels, heat, electricity, and other value-added products such as bioplastics, pigments, surfactants, cosmetics, and food products. Therefore, all the conditions of the biorefinery platform should be optimized to solve the interrelated challenges and present a sustainable framework alongside some approaches to enhance the synergies and lower the tradeoffs between food, energy, water, and the environment.Sina TalebiSina Talebi is a graduate researcher at the University of Tehran. He received his M.Sc. in Chemical and Petroleum Engineering from the University of Tehran. His research interests are interdisciplinary between Civil, Chemical, Bioresource, and Environmental Engineering, including water and energy systems, the food–energy–water nexus, water and wastewater treatment, and climate change. He has been involved in numerous projects, including scale inhibition methods, water treatment, membrane fouling and scaling, biomass conversion, thermodynamics, etc. He intends to pursue his studies in Environmental Engineering with the goal of becoming an influential researcher in the field of chemical and environmental studies.Anis EdalatpourMs Anis Edalatpour is a research assistant at the Chemical Flooding Laboratory (CFL) at the University of Tehran. She graduated in HSE engineering from the Petroleum University of Technology in 2018. Then, she received her MSc from the chemical engineering department, University of Tehran, Iran, in 2021. Her master’s project was a study on the foaming tendency of alkanolamine solutions in a CO2 absorption unit. Her research covers a broad range of fields, including microalgal processing, foam reduction in gas treatment units, CO2 capture, biofuel & biorefinery, the food–energy–water–environment nexus, renewable & sustainable energies, and wastewater treatment.Omid TavakoliOmid Tavakoli is currently academic member of the School of Chemical Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran. He is also head of the National Bioeconomy Committee and head of the Water–Energy–Environment Nexus Center. He obtained his PhD in 2004 from Osaka Prefecture University (Japan) and collaborated with the Center of Excellence of Osaka University as a postdoctoral researcher up to 2008. He established the Green Technology Laboratory (GTL) and the Iranian National Algae Culture Collection (INACC) at the University of Tehran. His research interests include microalgae-based technologies, sustainable bioenergy and biohydrogen, commercial biotechnology, food and health biological products, biorefinery and the water–energy–environment nexus.
1 Introduction
In recent decades, increasing demands for food, energy, and water due to the growing population and global urbanization have put pressure on scientists to find a solution to the food–energy–water challenge. The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) report in 2015 estimates that by 2050, the energy, food, and water demand will increase by over 80%, 60%, and 55%, respectively.1 On the other side, environmental issues such as global warming, climate change, and environmental pollution, like the eutrophication phenomenon, toxic and non-degradable waste induced by energy consumption, wastewaters, and food production and processing, have led to growing concerns about polluting the ecosystem and risking the lives of human beings. Global greenhouse gas emissions are estimated to grow by 50% by 2050, driven by the other three sectors. Agriculture and food demand are accountable for 70% of global freshwater consumption and 13.5% of greenhouse gas emissions, especially methane and nitrous oxide. In comparison, the energy supply sector is accountable for 15% of freshwater production and 25.9% of global greenhouse gas emissions.2 Moreover, the operation of wastewater treatment plants results in direct greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, such as methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and carbon dioxide (CO2), in addition to indirect emissions resulting from energy generation.3 So, all of the risks and opportunities of one sector impact the security of the other sectors.
Global climate change threatens the sustainability and stability of food, water, and energy security. For instance, for the water sector, not only will the water balance be influenced, but the changing environment will also alter the way water is utilized by different sectors.4 The impacts of climate change are apparent, especially problems such as flooding due to heavy rainfall and water shortages in areas affected by droughts. As claimed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in 2018, increased demand for water in the near future resulting from climate change increases the pressure on water resources. Moreover, it is stated that 90% of natural disasters exacerbated by climate change are linked somehow to water-related risks. It is anticipated that by 2100, climate change will endanger one-third of the glaciers in Asia and impair the water supply of several million people and their agricultural activities (i.e., food production).5 Climate change can also limit the food crop yields due to rising sea level. It is indicated that rising sea levels contribute to salt intrusion, which lowers agricultural crop productivity; this problem is of more significant importance in arid and semi-arid areas. It is estimated that about 34 million hectares of irrigated areas around the world are currently facing high salinity problems. Environment issues and changes can also influence the energy sector by affecting renewable energy sources (wind and solar), global warming (affecting cooling systems), etc.
The nexus of the food–energy–water–environment (FEWE) is one of the approaches introduced to solve the mentioned problem. The nexus is globally explained as a process to connect ideas and actions of different stakeholders under various sectors to achieve sustainable development.6–8 The four sectors of the nexus are interlinked, meaning that achieving goals in one sector is likely to pressure the other three. For instance, for the food–energy interaction, the bioenergy derived from agricultural biomass is produced as renewable energy to reduce climate change and diversify the energy portfolio regarding the concerns about energy security. But, the increasing demand for biofuel from terrestrial crops affects agricultural land, water use, and food security.9 Likewise, it was proved that the food section is currently responsible for around one-third of the global energy consumption, such as irrigation, harvesting, food processing, transportation, agrochemicals, etc. Also, for water-energy interlinkages, it was proved that around 39% of the total freshwater (approximately equal to the amount of water used for agricultural irrigation) is utilized for power generation in thermal power plants. On the other side, water production and supply require energy. About 1–18% of the electricity used in cities is consumed for water-related processes, such as water heating in households.10 As another example, water supply and wastewater treatment are responsible for a considerable amount of energy consumption and CO2 emissions worldwide. As a case in point, to treat 1 m3 of domestic water, 0.4 kW h of electrical power is required, and this amount of energy needs 13.38 L of freshwater, and 0.23 kg of CO2 is released during the power generation.11,12 Additionally, energy production is also concomitant with CO2 emissions and water demand. Not only does the power generation process emit high amounts of CO2 into the atmosphere, but it also is the second-largest water consumer across the globe. As an example of the energy sector's dependence on water, methanol production from fossil fuels in a conventional way requires large amounts of freshwater. Also, large volumes of wastewater are released. To produce each ton of methanol from coal, roughly 20 m3 of water is required besides the water needed during extraction. Therefore, these two sectors have a cause–effect relation. Also, food system activities require a lot of water resources for the food–water interlinkage. With an estimated 60% increase in food demand by 2050, the irrigation water consumed in this sector will increase by almost 11%. In the food sector, agricultural activity accounts for nearly 70% of the share of water consumption, and animal raising also needs many water resources. For example, the water footprint for beef breeding is 10 L kcal−1 of nutritional value, while its value for cereals is nearly 0.5 L kcal−1.2 On the other hand, the food sector's impact on the water sector, such as nutrient runoff and irrigated agriculture impacting both water quantity and quality, should not be neglected. A more detailed study of the FEWE nexus interactions is shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  The food–energy–water–environment nexus showing casual interlinkages, and the mutual influence on each sector. 
The nexus approach is vital under future climate conditions, particularly while trying to attain inter-disciplinary societal objectives, including the sustainable development goals of clean energy, clean water, life on land, and hunger eradication.4 FEWE-related policies may have some potential advantages, such as preventing global warming, reducing carbon emission, enhancing water quality, preventing fossil depletion, and ensuring food and energy security.11 The nexus will merge the food, energy, water, and environment parts and urge scientists to see the four sectors altogether. This approach helps find a better solution to the challenge because the sectors are not entirely separate from each other.
Biorefineries are among the most effective solutions to the proposed nexus, which leads to sustainable development. Biorefinery is defined as an industrial procedure where biomass is transformed into a spectrum of materials, biochemicals, and energy products analogous to the typical petroleum refinery, where fossil fuel-based diesel, gasoline, kerosene, gas, and other chemicals are manufactured. Biorefineries will play a significant role in achieving the transition from a fossil fuel-based economy to a more renewable and sustainable biobased economy in a circular economy. The idea underlying the biorefinery concept is analogous to a petroleum refinery. A biomass processing facility should produce more than two products with various economic values to remove the investment risk in a biorefinery from market fluctuations. However, biorefineries vary from petroleum refineries in terms of feedstock properties and composition, conversion techniques, and the possible scale of operation. The procedures involved in the biorefinery should be resource-efficient, and relative impacts on the environment should be minimal.13,14 Algal-based biorefineries can address all the mentioned problems simultaneously. Selecting the potential starting material is the main factor in deriving several products concurrently in a biorefinery platform. Microalgae are regarded to be a great biomass starting material in terms of proper land use and wastewater treatment and also of their potential to capture CO2 and biofuels and value-added biochemical production in a biorefinery model.15
Microalgae are single-celled micro-organisms normally 1–400 μm in size and can be non-photosynthetic or photosynthetic. Microalgae can be categorized as photoautotrophic, mixotrophic, and heterotrophic on the basis of their metabolic status, carbon source, and energy requirements. Microalgae can synthesize their own food using CO2 and light in photoautotrophic cultivation. However, under heterotrophic conditions, microalgae cannot produce their own food and have to obtain food and energy by taking in organic materials. The third method combines the other two, meaning that mixotrophic microalgae can obtain inorganic carbon by photosynthesis and use dissolved organic carbon. Scientists worldwide have concentrated chiefly on photoautotrophic microalgae cultivation due to its role in carbon capture on the planet.16 The microalgae population can be divided into diatoms, cyanobacteria, green, blue-green, red, golden, yellow-green, and blood-red algae.17,18 Nutritional demand for microalgae cultivation includes an energy source such as organic or inorganic carbon or sunlight, life-sustaining nutrients, vitamins, and optimal temperature and pH levels.19 Microalgae can be cultivated in closed bioreactors, including tubular photobioreactors, air-lift bubble columns, flat plates, plastic bags, serpentine, and pyramid photobioreactors or open systems, namely raceway, unstirred, and circular ponds. Also, microalgae can be cultivated in various types of water, including freshwater, seawater, and wastewater.17,20–22
Microalgae biomass mainly contains large amounts of lipids, carbohydrates, and proteins. Each of these compounds can be used to make bio-products in the biorefinery, dependent on the microalgae strains. With the dim prospects of available fossil fuel reserves in the near future and the issue of climate change and global warming, biofuels have gained a lot of attention as the renewable and alternative energy types in recent years.13 Biofuel production from various feedstocks has been proposed in the literature. The biofuel obtained from corn, wheat, potatoes, barley, palm, sugarcane, coconuts, sunflowers, rapeseeds, and soybeans is considered the first-generation biofuel. Cassava, miscanthus, jatropha, and lignocellulosic materials, such as straw, grass, and wood, can be used to make second-generation biofuels. The first-generation biofuel has faced economic and environmental limitations owing to its demand for large cultivable land areas. Another limitation is that using food crops as biofuel feedstock can threaten food supply security in the near future. By using food crops as the biofuel feedstock, not only will the competition between energy and food arise in this matter, but it also triggers carbon debt because of land use alterations to compensate for the need to produce feedstock for biofuel production.23 There is no competition between the second-generation biofuel and human beings for food crops, but the demand for large areas for cultivation has limited its functionality. The drawbacks of the first and second-generation biofuels have put a focus on a third-generation biofuel feedstock, microalgae.17 The carbohydrates and the lipid content in the form of free fatty acids of microalgae biomass can be utilized as raw materials for biofuel. After lipid or polysaccharide extraction, the microalgae biomass residue can still be used as a biogas feedstock.23 The usage of biofuels as the replacement of fossil fuels has environmental benefits due to the lower GHG emissions in comparison with fossil fuels.24 In addition to the mentioned benefit, there is a positive carbon flow in microalgae cells during biomass production, meaning that microalgae can utilize CO2 (present in the flue gas or atmosphere) as the carbon input. Protein synthesis accounts for about half of the carbon flow, followed by the synthesis of carbohydrates (15%) and triglycerides (15%) in an algal cell, controlled by the conditions of the cultivation process.15
According to the available literature, the “fuel only” case is not financially realistic because of the considerable investments in operation and capital. Microalgae oil has to be cheap enough to compete with nonrenewable fossil fuels. A study indicated that microalgae oil manufacturing cost estimation ranges from $0.74 to $27.33 per liter of oil based on the cultivation conditions, while the average commodity price for gasoline is $0.78 per liter. Therefore, other sectors should be included to make the algal biorefinery worthwhile.13 Some common co-products derived from microalgae biomass are nutraceuticals, fertilizers, cosmetics, animal feed, and other specialty chemicals. Products such as nutraceuticals have very high values, around $60000 per tonne, but the small market size is their major constraint. A small market size involves the market saturation risk at small farm sizes. In contrast, a large market size such as animal feed does not carry the risk of market saturation but is adversely affected by dramatically lower product values ($350 per tonne).25 Providing plenty of co-products, including algal biomass (potentially for power generation), algal oil (suitable for transportation fuel), cosmetics, human nutrition, fertilizer, animal feed, and remediation opportunities such as carbon capture, wastewater treatment, etc. can be a holistic approach to the challenges of the FEWE nexus.26 This multi-product model with an environmental remediation approach has attracted the world's attention to envisage algal biomass as one of the successful biomass feedstock strategies for the biorefinery platform. Nevertheless, the challenges such as producing high-density microalgal biomass and designing cost-effective downstream processes should be discussed to envision algal biomass as an appropriate candidate for biorefinery.15
This review paper concentrates on the current state-of-the-art and recent developments of the algal biorefinery platform as a solution to the challenges of the FEWE nexus. The existing literature has significantly contributed to the potential of microalgae biorefinery in wastewater treatment, production of human food and animal feed, CO2 capture, and bioenergy production; yet, the interlinks and the nexus between food, energy, water, and the environment are to be investigated. In this study, the current challenges in the four sectors are discussed, and an efficient algal-based approach has been provided. To the best of our knowledge, there have been no published review papers on the potential of microalgae biorefinery with respect to the FEWE nexus. This paper aims to study the literature of food, energy, water, and environment interconnections and how their management and policy affect each other. Another goal of this work is to maximize environmental security by choosing an algal biorefinery platform that optimizes the connections between food, energy, water, and the environment. Up to now, most published papers have doubted the economic viability of microalgae production. This study compares different case studies and scenarios to prove that an algal biorefinery platform would most likely be economically feasible when all the food, energy, water, and environment sectors are considered. Missing one or two of the four mentioned sectors increases the risk of economic and environmental infeasibility, indicating the importance of the FEWE nexus approach for the algal biorefinery platform.
2 Nexus methodology
In the 21st century, the world has been facing an increasing demand for natural resources combined with the growing anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions than ever before.27 The food–energy–water–environment nexus aims to secure the supply of these resources using an integrated approach. The FEWE nexus has emerged as a valuable notion to address the complicated and interconnected nature of our universal resource systems, on which we rely to achieve various social and environmental objectives.6,28 The nexus idea may be particularly meaningful in this regard, helping to lower trade-offs, enhance synergies between the four sections, and support the biorefinery platform design that avoids sectoral approaches that can elevate risks in other sectors.4,29,30 The nexus framework discussed in this paper involves wastewater treatment, production of multiple bio-products, such as fertilizers, nutritional food and feed, bioremediation, pollution control, and energy sources. The algal-based biorefinery development is one of the most promising methods to unravel the contentious FEWE nexus. Biorefineries are referred to as an effective strategy for large-scale sustainable biomass utilization, resulting in a cost-competitive co-production of bio-products with optimal environmental benefits. Lowering GHG emissions, production of bio-products, and recycling on the basis of the biorefinery platform are within the environmental policy agenda and targets on an international level.31Fig. 2 shows some of the most well-known current challenges regarding the FEWE nexus and their possible solutions and impacts under the algal biorefinery concept. In the following paragraphs, some of these challenges, as well as the FEWE nexus synergies and trade-offs, are highlighted, and their effects on the food, energy, water, and environment sectors are discussed.
 Fig. 2  Examples of FEWE nexus challenges, and their solutions and impacts on each sector. 
About 85% of countries depend on food imports, which demands high energy consumption, and food scarcity can be a significant problem in these countries due to the high population growth rates. To secure food demand, terrestrial crop production by means of agriculture makes up approximately 75% of total global freshwater, while water demand is 100 times more for animal protein sources for equivalent protein extraction than plant sources.32 Algal biomass can be utilized as a novel functional food source because of the high amount of protein and other valuable substances, which uses no fresh water source and arable land.23 As one of the main constituents of microalgae, protein can secure food demand in the near future. Proteins derived from microalgae show a high nutritional value and amino acid content at concentrations greater than that of terrestrial plant and animal sources.33 Because the microalgae cells are able to synthesize all amino acids, they can supply the essential ones, such as isoleucine, histidine, lysine, leucine, methionine, tryptophan, threonine, phenylalanine, and valine, to humans and animals.34 Also, for vegetarian and vegan diet followers, there are limited options as most of the plant-based proteins do not contain the complete essential amino acid profile, while algal protein has well balanced essential amino acid content required for human consumption, according to the World Health Organization (WHO).32
Algae are also one of the most valuable sources of carbohydrates in the form of glucose, starch, sugars, and ω-3 fatty acids, which can be used to produce a high-value food supplement.35,36 Similar to essential amino acids, there are types of lipids that positively impact human health, of which the most well-known are docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA). These are long-chain omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids that are traditionally found in cold-water fish and seafood in general. Fish eat algae and plankton as their fatty acid source; thus, this is the reason why fish are enriched in DHA and EPA.34 Rather than the mentioned food sources, microalgae are proved to be a rich source of vitamins such as vitamin A, C, B1, B2, B6, B12, and E and minerals such as magnesium, potassium, iodine, iron, and calcium. For instance, Dunaliella tertiolecta can produce vitamin B2, vitamin B12, vitamin E, and β-carotene. Additionally, Chlorella spp. comprises Vitamin B7 in significant amounts, and Tetraselmis suecica is a great source of vitamin B1, vitamin B3, vitamin B5, vitamin B6, and vitamin C. Spirulina and Chlorella algal species have dominated the global microalgae markets in the past few years. They are gaining traction in health-food shops due to the high nutrient content of these species. Aside from human nutrition, microalgae can also be used as a food source for many aquatic species, pigs, ruminants, poultry, and other animals.32
Artificial colorants used in many industries are linked to detrimental impacts on human health and have environmental concerns associated with their production. Non-renewable synthetic sources such as petrochemicals, inorganic chemicals, and organic acids are the common sources currently producing colorants. The harmful effect of synthetic pigments has created an opportunity for algal pigments to be commercially used in industries. Algal pigments contribute to the algal culture coloration, protection of algal cells, CO2 fixation, and light-harvesting. Microalgae are exposed to free-radicals and high oxidative stresses because of the harsh environmental conditions and photoautotrophic cultivation mode. This issue has evolved the microalgae in developing natural defensive systems, such as antioxidant and pigment production, which are helpful for human supplementation because individuals do not artificially synthesize them. The types of pigments derived from microalgae depend on the algal species and their colors; as a case in point, red and blue microalgae possess phycobiliproteins, green microalgae contain chlorophyll, and yellow, orange, and red microalgae produce carotenoids.32 Pigments, such as lutein, astaxanthin, β-carotene, fucoxanthin, and zeaxanthin can be derived from algae and utilized in food, pharmaceutical, cosmetics, and textile industries.31 For instance, astaxanthin, taken from Haematococcus pluvialis, has practical advantages in treating free radical-associated diseases such as cancers, cardiovascular diseases, and eye disease, or β-carotene from Dunaliella salina is applied as a food color on margarine, butter, and cheese. Many microalgae pigments can be utilized as a natural colorant in the drug, cosmetic, and food industries. Avoiding artificial colorants' poisonous effects elucidates the importance of microalgae pigments as natural color origins.32,37
Overusing synthetic agrochemicals, such as fertilizers and pesticides, is another challenge regarding supplying food demands without any adverse environmental impact, which causes soil infertility, eutrophication problems, ocean dead zones, and biodiversity loss.31 Moreover, high application rates of synthetic chemical fertilizers generate harmful greenhouse gases and deplete the ozone layer. Greenhouse gases such as CO2, CH4, and N2O are created during nitrogenous fertilizer production. Fossil fuel mining and transportation, ammonia synthesis, and its conversion to various nitrogen fertilizer products are among the synthetic fertilizers' manufacturing processes, a major source of greenhouse gas emissions. As a case in point, nitrogenous fertilizer can be converted by soil bacteria into nitrous oxide, and its impact on global warming is 310 times more than that of CO2.38,39 Hence, there is a need to replace petroleum-derived agrochemicals by applying a safer and more efficient alternative to promote plant growth without affecting the agroecosystem.40 Algae, acting as biofertilizers, not only secrete growth-stimulating substances but also facilitate nutrient solubilization and nitrogen fixation, hence increasing crop yields. Moreover, after lipid or polysaccharide extraction, the microalgae biomass residual can be utilized as raw input for the anaerobic digestion process. Besides biogas, another important product of this process is fertilizer which is transferred to agricultural lands to provide them with essential nutrients.23 According to the literature, supplementation of different types of algal biofertilizer in date palm, tomato, and rice agriculture resulted in faster plant growth, increased soil nitrogen content, and several effective impacts on stems, leaves, and roots in comparison to conventional fertilizers. Moreover, the use of algae as agricultural control agents has drawn special attention over the past few years due to the hazardous impact of biocide agents' application in agroecosystems. Being involved in numerous allelopathic interactions between competing organisms, algae are equipped with active metabolites with biocontrol characteristics, including pesticide, larvicidal, antimicrobial, algicidal, and insecticidal properties.31
Massive use of fossil fuel-based energy from gas, oil, and coal has reached critical conditions, such as low available fossil fuel reserves, population explosion, environmental pollution, atmospheric destruction, climate change, and ocean acidification. Thus, using a more sustainable and renewable energy source can solve the so far mentioned problems in the energy sector.23,41 As an interesting renewable and sustainable alternative, biofuels are able to satisfy the global energy demands. Planning for large-scale biofuel production needs the installation of biorefining systems, but first-generation biofuels taken from food crops are ineffective at converting sunlight to biomass (∼0.2%), which is an important parameter to precisely specify the amount of food and water needed for the production of biofuel.24,26 Third-generation biofuels created from microalgae are much more effective than terrestrial plants in converting sunlight to biomass (up to 6%) and can be an appropriate solution to challenges in the FEWE nexus.26 Biodiesel, biomethane, biohydrogen, bioethanol, bio-oil, syngas, and biochar are various algal biofuels derived from diverse algal strains using different conversion technologies.42 It is shown that the production rate of oil from algae cells (91%) is significantly greater than those of other feedstock such as the coconut (1.5%), oil palm (3%), avocado (1.4%), jatropha (1.2%), and rapeseed (1%). Also, various microalgal strains store large amounts of lipids; for example, the lipid production rate in red microalgae is much lower than that in green microalgae.17 The lipid productivity is yet needed to be increased to reduce costs and make the algal systems commercially viable if they can produce 600–10500 gallon oil equivalent per acre every year calculated based on lab studies compared with 105, 70, and 20 gallons from rapeseed, soybean, and corn, respectively.26
Post-extraction waste from high-value crops from large production of microalgae has been increased. As a forward-looking approach to lower the cost of biofuel production and solid waste recycling, microalgae residues can be converted into biochar.43 The biochar produced can be utilized for multiple applications that are interconnected to the proposed nexus, including water purification, soil enhancement, and carbon sequestration.44 Biochar can absorb or eliminate toxic elements and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in the soil and increase its fertility to produce high-quality products by improving soil's water holding capacity and nutrient conditions. Biochar made from algal raw materials has a higher pH than lignocellulosic biochar, balancing acidified soils. Additionally, algal biochar contains more nutrients, including nitrogen, ash, and inorganic elements, and has a lower cation exchange capacity and carbon content. These salient properties are helpful for soil remediation in agriculture for food production.19 Biochar can also be utilized as a bio-adsorbent to remove contaminants such as organic and inorganic compounds, nitrogen, phosphorus, heavy metals, and dyes from industrial wastewater. Using biochar for this purpose can reduce the cost of purchasing expensive conventional adsorbents and improve adsorption capacity by using waste.43 Biochar can also reduce toxic materials produced in the wastewater treatment process, such as antimicrobials and surfactants. Moreover, biochar is used to reduce GHG emissions and the carbon footprint. If not properly managed, wastewater treatment processes can cause pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. 2.8% of the total global GHG emissions belong to the share of wastewater treatment plants, which can be solved by carbonizing biochar. Carbonization is a thermochemical conversion that does not need costly processes such as drying or centrifugation to produce biochar from wet biomass. Along with wastewater treatment, biofuel and biochar are produced during the carbonization procedure that can be recycled in the algal cultivation section. Therefore, wastewater bio-solid carbonization cuts the cost of wastewater treatment and prevents GHG emission. Indeed, this method is better than landfilling and direct agronomical application to overcome the issues of wastewater treatment and biosolid management.19
One of the critical issues regarding water is wastewater treatment, which is attractive as a means to extract overabundant nutrients prior to their release into rivers and lakes. The largest share of global wastewater is related to commercial, domestic, and industrial uses. Improper wastewater management causes severe damage to the environmental sector. Air pollution, pollution of receiving water sources, creating unpleasant smells, degradation of the environment's appearance, the spread of diseases, and the water crisis result from improper wastewater management that put the lives of humans at risk.45 Moreover, wastewater treatment has the ability to provide algal farms with a large source of non-drinking water, which does not compete with conventional agricultural requirements, thereby lowering water stress. Providing water, nitrogen, and some salts and metals for algal biomass growth is a significant challenge in a biorefinery platform, especially when the unbalanced competition between the water demands in domestic and industrial applications and inadequate available water trigger water insecurity. From the other perspective, the global freshwater withdrawals have been increased during the last few years.46 The success of wastewater treatment using an algal biorefinery platform and its economic feasibility can change dependent on the co-location of algal cultivation facilities, wastewater treatment plants, and the quality of the input wastewater. Successful cultivation of several microalgae species such as Scenedesmus, Chlorella, Hormidium, Arthrospira, Botryococcus, and Chlamydomonas, and for wastewater treatment have been reported in the literature.47 Nevertheless, algal wastewater treatment plants require large land areas for open pond systems and high capital investment for bioreactor systems.22,26 Using wastewater as the biorefinery input can provide a pathway for extracting phosphorus, nitrogen, and metal from wastewater and producing microalgal biomass, which can further be used to produce bio products with no requirement of freshwater.48
Thermal pollution of rivers and water streams, which can damage marine wildlife and restrict water availability for efficient power plant operations, is currently an important issue concerning the environment sector. The thermoelectric industry accounts for 10% of total global freshwater demand, chiefly for the process of cooling. This process changes the natural water resource conditions through thermal pollution and evaporation of rivers. On the other side, environmental regulations in the US and Europe have established a limit for the expected temperature increase in rivers and water intake volumes resulting from thermal loads of power plants. Continuing this trend, widespread blackouts and financial loss can happen. One way to deal with this matter is to co-locate power plants that need cooling with biogas plants driven by anaerobic digesters under a biorefinery platform. Using this solution, power plants' thermal load could be run through an algal anaerobic digester unit to keep the operating temperature around 35 °C and cool during the heat exchange. Therefore, the temperature drops to a low level, appropriate for release back into water streams. Not only does this strategy have the benefit of reducing the effects of thermal pollution on marine wildlife and downstream power plants, but it also generates biogas heat and power and reduces CO2 emissions at the site per million kW h generated.26
The most crucial issue regarding the environment sector is global warming and GHG emissions. CO2 represents 68% of GHG emissions into the atmosphere and is an important contributor to global warming.49 The overuse of fossil fuels has considerably contributed to greenhouse gas emissions, where CO2 levels have approached up to 400 ppm.50 Besides global warming, GHG strongly influences the climate and human life. Each year, about 30% of the CO2 exhaust from human action is consumed by oceans, increasing the volume of dissolved gasses in seas. The increase in oceans' dissolved gasses can make the water more acidic, harming aquatic life and coral reef forest habitats.42 The Paris Agreement and the Kyoto Protocol assigned responsibilities for countries to limit GHG emissions. Using CO2 as the microalgae feedstock is one of the most excellent solutions for preventing global warming. The primary component of microalgae cells, carbon, accounts for about 50% of dry cell weight, which can be provided both in low concentrations (atmosphere) and high concentrations (effluent flue gas from plants).49 However, the low CO2 concentration in the atmosphere cannot ensure high growth rates for biofuel production; therefore, an external source such as captured CO2 from plants and factories can be supplied as the biorefinery input.51 To achieve this end, the co-location of microalgae cultivation sites and power plants can play a significant role in the efficiency of the greenhouse gas mitigation process using microalgae. Production of biofuel using microalgae fed with CO2 captured from power plants can alleviate the environmental impact of burning fossil fuels.20 Also, it was proven that microalgae species, Botryococcus braunii, Chlorella vulgaris, Scenedesmus obliquus, and Nannochloropsis oculata are the best choices for biofuel production and CO2 capture, among other algal strains.42
Another critical challenge threatening the world in an environmental aspect is the ever-increasing usage of non-degradable plastics derived from fossil fuels. The current rate of plastic production is more than 300 million metric tons per year, with the major part being fabricated in industrialized countries. Suppose the current growth rate in plastic fabrication remains, in this case, by the year 2050, plastics will account for over one-fifth of the world's total petroleum consumption, thus contributing to the increase of greenhouse gases.25,52 Additionally, plastics' extensive utilization has led to severe environmental pollution issues due to the high disposable plastic waste. The ever-growing plastic waste accumulated into landfills and in the aquatic environment has a harmful effect on the living organisms of these ecosystems.52 Over the past few years, there has been growing interest in using biodegradable bioplastics instead of regular plastics. Some microalgae and cyanobacteria strains have been selected as an alternative for petroleum-derived polymers. The potential of algal-based biopolymer production, such as polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), polylactic acid, cellulose esters, starch, and protein plastics, has been proved to be high.31 Algal-based plastics offer an acceptable substitute that would reduce the ecological footprint, lower petroleum consumption, and in some cases, even enhance plastic quality.25 These biopolymers can be used in different industries, including biomedical applications, constructions and buildings, bioremediation, and so on.31 Because of both the high value and large market size of the plastic industry, bioplastics can directly affect the economic viability of algal-based biorefineries.25
Surfactants and emulsifiers as amphiphilic compounds containing hydrophobic and hydrophilic moieties can display various surface activities that allow solubilization of hydrophobic substrates.53 About half of the currently used surfactants in the United States are derived from petrochemical feedstocks, such as ethylene and benzene. In recent years, the issue of biodegradability has become a crucial parameter in the environmental approval of a surfactant, resulting in the development of surfactants from natural products.33 Bio-based surfactants, derived from algal oils, can be a great alternative to traditional petroleum-based products as drilling fluid additives in oil and gas fields and industrial cleaners. One of the applications of bio-surfactants in the oil industry is the abatement of marine oil pollution. The reason is that the usage of synthetic oil dispersants is strongly reduced due to their toxicity; therefore, a better biodegradability and lower toxicity of biosurfactants could be expected owing to their biogenetic origin.54 Phospholipids make up the main part of the algal lipid composition, extracted from nutrient-replete environments. Phospholipid molecules act as surface-active agents and can be used as emulsifiers in cosmetics, food, and pharmaceutical applications.33
In addition to the opportunities and synergies discussed above, exploring the FEWE nexus trade-offs is necessary to achieve a more efficient algal biorefinery platform. The trade-off is a concept of considering all aspects of a platform and suggests the best strategic choice. It ignores a disadvantage to gain other aspects with a full understanding of desired targets.55 A comprehension of EFWE nexus trade-offs helps evaluate the algal biorefinery's potential pathways and analyze challenges and risks to direct to a more sustainable plan.26 The demand for large lands, especially when the main product is biofuel, casts doubts on using algal biorefinery in countries with inadequate unutilized lands. Despite its potential for biofuel production from microalgae, some countries like Israel have only adequate lands to produce high-value-added products. Some regions such as Haiti and Madagascar have good conditions and tropical climates for algae cultivation, but it is incompatible with biodiversity and harms lands with high-value biodiversity.56 If a country does not have enough non-arable lands and uses agricultural land for algae cultivation, the land-use change in a short time causes increasing carbon footprint and GHG emission. For example, in the European Union (EU), replacing current transport fuel with algal biodiesel demands one-fourth of the land currently used for agriculture.57 In addition, using wastewater is suggested for the cultivation process to solve the water issue, but algal wastewater treatment plants increase the land demand.22,26
In the case of applying an open pond system for algae cultivation to reduce investment costs, the following consequences should be considered. One of them is high water evaporation that conflicts with water demands.57 Another disadvantage of open pond cultivation is the increasing amount of contamination during cultivation. Therefore, removing contamination is necessary, and this process requires more energy, resulting in more GHG emissions.34 Microalgae strains can grow in saline water or wastewater and do not conflict with water demand. However, using saline water or wastewater increases the required energy for algae growth due to water transportation, and more energy causes more GHG emissions. Also, freshwater is cheaper and more accessible than saline water. In some cases, it has been reported that the use of saline water increases almost 50% of energy inputs compared to using fresh water because of pumping between ponds and transferring to algal sites.26
As discussed earlier, algae can produce various products, such as animal feed and fertilizer. Unfortunately, some algal strains produce toxins that harm the food and feed industry due to cultivation in contaminated wastewater or using flue gas as the feedstock. These toxins in the long-term adversely affect the physiology of animals. For example, the color of chickens' skins or yolk eggs will be changed. In addition, if the amount of toxins is excessive in food and feed products, they will contaminate the freshwaters.26,58,59 Also, flue gas creates another problem because of its high temperature. It necessitates using a heat exchanger to reduce the temperature to the desired level. Heat exchangers need excessive water and energy, leading to a trade-off between the environment, energy, and water sectors.15,48
To minimize trade-offs, the right selection of algal strain and cultivation methods can direct biorefinery to a sustainable platform. In this regard, some factors, including the location and costs of resource inputs (i.e., water, carbon, and land), are influential. The collection of these decisions impacts the costs of whole processes and return on investment.26
3 Algal biorefinery platform
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), a biorefinery is “the sustainable processing of biomass into a spectrum of marketable products (food, feed, materials, and chemicals) and energy (fuels, power, and heat)”. Different biorefinery types have different concepts based on platforms, feedstocks, conversion processes, and products. The feedstock type is critical; it is better to use non-food and waste biomass such as agricultural waste, municipal solid waste, food processing waste, and sewage sludge regarding the world food crisis. Using bio-waste feedstocks in biorefineries solves both the resource and waste problems and can be a “double green” approach. Fig. 3 shows different biorefinery types according to the feedstock type and their involvement in the FEWE nexus.60,61
 Fig. 3  Different biorefinery types based on the feedstock. 
In a typical starch or sugar cane biorefinery (first-generation), bioethanol as the main product is produced, and electricity is generated from by-products. In these biorefineries, the main expenses refer to feedstocks, and they compete with the food sector and only generate energy.61 Food waste biorefineries take their feedstocks from farmers, grocery stores, and food producers and convert them into hand sanitizers, whiteboard cleaners, glass cleaners, fertilizer, and animal feed ingredients.61 Moreover, the residue of the food industry may consist of high fermentable sugars and a suitable feedstock for bioethanol production.62 Not only do waste feedstocks produce energy and contribute positively to this sector, but they also do not compete with the food sector. Soybean, rapeseed and canola, castor bean, mustard, sunflower, safflower, and jatropha are some of the most common oilseeds which have great potential to produce biofuels. Edible oilseeds can produce biodiesel, but this gives rise to additional problems in the food sector. The vegetable oil can be obtained from nonedible seeds, such as seed kernels and seed covers. A well-designed biorefinery can use oilseeds to manage fuel and food crises as competing markets simultaneously and sustainably produce food and fuel.63,64
Lignocellulosic biomass (second-generation) can be classified into agricultural residues such as corn stover and sugar cane bagasse, wood residues such as sawmills, dedicated energy crops, paper mill discards, and municipal paper waste. Although the feedstock does not compete with food in these biorefineries, the conversion processes are overwhelmingly expensive. Lignocellulosic biomass has a complex structure of rigid cell walls protecting its carbohydrates from degradation by enzymes or microbes. In order to remove cell wall components, pretreatment methods are required that cause high costs and make the biorefinery approach uneconomical.65 Based on life cycle assessments (LCAs), second-generation biorefineries reduce greenhouse gas emissions more than first-generation.66 Also, due to using wastes as feedstocks, lignocellulosic biorefineries contribute positively to the environment sector.61
Statistics show that every person in Europe produces almost 475 kg of municipal solid waste (MSW) per year. Municipal solid wastes have increased due to the global population increment, energy consumption, and exploitation of natural resources. 40–50% of the total dry matter content of MSW is the organic fraction that contains carbohydrates (30–40%), lipids (10–15%), and proteins (5–15%) that can be used for biogas and bioethanol production.62 Syngas biorefineries use municipal solid waste (after gasification), industrial waste gases, and coal to generate biofuel.61 A green biorefinery is a fully-integrated system that can comprehensively convert green crops such as different kinds of grass, clover, festulolium, ryegrass, lucerne, and alfalfa to chemicals, materials, value-added products, and fuel. In contrast to lignocellulosic biorefineries, which use dry materials, green biorefineries use fresh or wet feedstock. This complex system with various technologies produces multiple products and protects the environment and resources. In green biorefineries, herbaceous biomass is fractionated into liquid and solid fractions. The fermentation feedstock, which is the solid fraction, produces biogas. There are several valuable components such as proteins, amino acids, and vitamins in the liquid fraction. The proteins will be isolated, and after that, the decanted juice is consumed for biogas production. A green biorefinery operates using sustainable principles such as land use, raw materials, gentle technology, autonomous energy supply, and the physiology of the appropriate plant material.67–70
Despite all their benefits, the discussed biorefineries do not address the water issue. Wastewater contains organic materials that can be used for both wastewater treatment and biogas production. For instance, almost 7.6 kJ L−1 energy can be derived from domestic wastewater.71 A wastewater biorefinery uses biodegradable materials in wastewater and converts them into treated water, non-toxic biomass, and CO2. It also produces bioplastics, feed additives, chemicals, and electricity, but the process is energy-intensive. The produced biogas can generate electricity and supply part of the required energy for the wastewater biorefinery to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. It should be noted that wastewater biorefinery can produce only biogas, and other biofuel types require lipids and carbohydrates in the content of the feedstock.61,72 Finally, a marine biorefinery refers to a biorefinery whose feedstock is macroalgae (seaweed) and microalgae. A microalgae biorefinery can address all the food, energy, water, and environment sectors and paves the way to a more sustainable future. Microalgae have great potential to produce value-added products such as food and various types of biofuel, including bio-oil, biodiesel, bioethanol, and biomethane that will be discussed in detail in the next sections. Also, it has significant benefits: carbon dioxide capture and treating wastewater during biomass production. So, microalgae can produce food and energy, minimize CO2 pollution and treat wastewater. In fact, an algal biorefinery, compared to current operative wastewater biorefineries, not only produces various types of biofuel but also addresses the food issue by producing food, feed, and other value-added products.73,74
An algal biorefinery system provides an inimitable opportunity to address the FEWE nexus. The FEWE nexus approach under the biorefinery platform can promote efficient resource management and identify the synergies and trade-offs between sectors. Indeed, these four fields are especially relevant in the case of algal biorefinery. A profound comprehension of the basic knowledge of the processes in combination with technical, financial, and policy analyses help assess their potential advantages and impacts. Proposing a straightforward treatment and a consistent framework can help investment decisions and research and development prioritization for the operation and design of algal systems.75 Although the FEWE nexus depends on location, types of biomass, and process technology, all biorefineries affect water, energy, and food resources. For example, in the energy part, using fossil fuel resources and electricity to operate processes of the biorefinery cause carbon emission and impact life cycle energy. Due to undesirable energy use in biorefineries, increasing water use for cooling duties causes an energy-water nexus issue. It is essential to recognize trade-offs between economic, environmental, and social targets of bioenergy and biorefinery systems, which can be resolved by multi-objective optimization.76
The downstream and upstream processes of algal biomass production can be costly unless various complex compounds are efficiently valorized in their functional state. In other words, focusing on extracting just one specific component from the algal biomass and discarding other valuable components as waste is not economically viable. Therefore, an algal biorefinery should be devised, and energy-efficient, mild, and cost-effective biorefinery techniques should be utilized to exploit microalgae more fully.77 Extracted lipids can be utilized as the input source for biofuels, bio-based chemical production, and edible oils for health and food industries. After purification, proteins can be utilized in the feed, food, bulk chemical, and health markets and extracted carbohydrates for chemical and ethanol production. By exploiting the full potential of microalgae components, various products can be obtained at the same time, and the algal market value will outweigh the production costs.78
The first step after microalgae cultivation is to employ an efficient harvesting method by removing large water volumes in order to concentrate the biomass. This step is essential because biomass concentration in algal cultures is generally low, from 0.5 g L−1 in open ponds to 5 g L−1 in closed bioreactors.77 The separation of biomass from water is challenging because microalgae cells usually have a negative surface charge and almost similar density to that of water.23 Some of the most famous separation techniques, including flocculation and coagulation, sedimentation, centrifugation, air flotation, and membrane filtration, are utilized alone or in combination to concentrate the algal biomass. The repulsive force among algal cells induced by the negative surface charge can be removed by the flocculation method, including regulating the pH of the solution, adding chemicals, or using microorganisms as bioflocculants. In this method, suspended and colloidal particles coalesce and form large flocs that can be divided simply in the next unit. Flocculation is a low-cost technology, but flocculants can interact with algal cells and affect purity, resulting in a considerable reduction of the harvested biomass value. Bio-flocculation is the self-flocculation of microalgae particles by controlling the cultivation conditions. Some studies have shown that polysaccharides are released during microalgae growth under special conditions that interact with microalgae cells and make them flocs. However, some other studies have opposed the positive role of polysaccharides in bio-flocculation. For instance, it was proved that polysaccharides inhibit the flocculation of Chlorella sp. while Ettlia sp. has been flocculated in their presence. Therefore, more investigation is needed to meticulously determine polysaccharides' impact on bio-flocculation.79 The primary mechanism of sedimentation or gravity settling is the higher specific gravity of microalgae cells. This method is easy to control and cost-effective, but the process is time-consuming and inefficient. Centrifugation utilizes the accelerating forces acting in the radial direction and density variation to separate microalgae cells from water. The efficiency of centrifugation is good, but high energy demands and costs are the drawbacks of this method. Moreover, using a high shear rate or pressure associated with centrifugation harms microalgae cells. In the air flotation process, air bubbles are circulated into the liquid algal culture, absorb the microalgae particles, and finally, carry them up to the top of the flotation tank by the buoyancy force to be separated. The method's efficiency depends on the air bubbles' size, which may be nanobubbles, microbubbles, and fine bubbles; however, air bubbles do not interact with cells effectively due to the negative surface charge of algal cells. Finally, in membrane filtration, the diluted algal medium is circulated through a filter. Acting as a barrier, the filter blocks the solids and allows the liquid water to pass through. The microalgae cell size is the most determining factor affecting harvesting efficiency.21,23,80,81
After harvesting techniques, it is of significant importance to explore the cell wall strength and composition to choose the best cell disruption method. Most microalgae do not have a flexible cell wall and need energy-intensive unit processes to break it open.82 It is necessary to break the cell wall mildly to make all cellular components, such as proteins, ready for extraction and fractionation. Conventional methods, such as high-pressure homogenization, high-speed homogenization, bead milling, microwaves, and osmotic shock, lead to total disruption of the microalgae cells and concentrate on extracting only one specific product (usually lipids) while damaging the other obtainable components. Although all conventional methods disrupt the cell wall efficiently, they have some disadvantages, including moderate or high energy consumption, severe conditions, and low selectivity. Several methods, including ultrasonication, supersonic flow fluid processing, and pulsed electric field (PEF), are used as alternative cell disruption technologies, focusing on mildly perforating the outer cell wall. The most important benefit of these methods is that they do not damage the microalgae intracellular composition compared to the conventional methods.59,78
In the PEF, high electric field strength use leads to perforation of a cell wall. Reversible or irreversible electroporation can be produced depending on the strength and length of the electric field. Reversible electroporation is used to transfect cells by introducing foreign DNA, and irreversible electroporation is exploited to analyze cellular content and inactivate or pasteurize cells. In supersonic flow fluid processing with increasing steam flow introduced into the biomass, the velocity of the output steam generates a controllable shock wave in which temperature does not exceed 35 °C. This shock wave makes a homogeneous disruption that does not harm proteins or other valuable components. The benefits of using the PEF include increased protein stability, easier scale-up, soft conditions, improved selectivity, and no particulate formation. Like other methods, PEF has some problems, such as moderate energy consumption, ion free medium, no conductor medium, and no recovery of chloroplast proteins. However, it is still a promising method compared to conventional techniques. Ultrasound waves can also disturb the cell wall by causing bulk pressure variations and then collapsing bubbles. Ultrasonication is a simple method that can be scaled up, but its efficiency and selectivity are low, and it works under severe conditions. In addition, recent studies show that enzymes can be used for effective and mild cell wall disruption; however, due to the high cost of cell lying enzymes, they have not been at the center of attention in the industry. If the right mixture of enzymes regarding the exact composition of algae is chosen, the required energy for mechanical degradation will decrease. Moreover, the enzymatic method has high selectivity and works under soft conditions.59
Moreover, it should be noted that the cell wall composition completely depends on the algal strain. For instance, having no cell wall, Dunaliella salina does not require any energy-intensive cell disruption processes, and harvesting without causing cell lysis is a more efficient method. Hence, cellular structure knowledge, such as cell wall strength and composition and localization of different products in the cell, is needed to choose appropriate disruption technologies.
When the products are released from the cells, an extraction step is necessary to separate cell contents without damaging any composition and retaining functionality. Selective separation of hydrophilic (proteins and carbohydrates) from hydrophobic (lipids and pigments) components in the soluble fraction is the purpose of extraction. Due to the rapid development of the biotechnology market, there has been increasing interest in extraction technologies, including supercritical fluids, organic solvents, and ionic liquids. However, most current extraction techniques focus mainly on lipid separation and, to a lesser extent, proteins.77,78 The main disadvantage of the organic solvent method is that it requires energy-intensive processing, high operation temperature, and organic solvents with low selectivity and high flammability. The advantages of the supercritical fluid method are that it uses no toxic solvent and high selectivity for non-polar lipids can be achieved. However, using a supercritical medium during the extraction is a key disadvantage of this process, resulting in high operational and capital expenditures.83 Recent studies propose using nanomaterials as an alternative to organic solvents. Nanoparticles have some benefits, including non-toxic, fixed extracted lipid composition, and higher oil extraction efficiency. It should be considered that the microalgae cell wall fabric influences nanoparticles' compatibility and efficiency.84 A low melting temperature, generally below 100 °C, is the major benefit of ionic liquids formed from cations and anions of molten salts. Also, they produce low pollution and are simply recyclable and extract hydrophilic compounds from hydrophobic compared to organic solvents.78 Other benefits of the ionic liquid method are negligible vapor pressure, thermal and chemical stability, greater selectivity, and low energy consumption.59 In a study, the ionic liquid method was used to investigate the possibility of mild separation of hydrophobic and hydrophilic contents present in Neochloris oleoabundans. The recovery of total proteins, carbohydrates, and fatty acids was 80, 77, and 68%, respectively, of the total amount present in the cells.82
Fractionation is the last step done if there is a need to isolate and purify cell compositions from mixtures of hydrophobic and hydrophilic phases. Some technologies, such as chromatographic separation, extraction, and membrane filtration, are used for further isolation. However, the technology is costly and is only suitable for the fractionation of high-value products in the cosmetics, food, and health industries.77 When ionic liquids are applied to the aqueous phase after the cell disruption stage, they make both hydrophilic and hydrophobic compounds soluble. After that, liquid chromatography (LC) can be used as a successful separation technique for microalgae. Conventional separation techniques such as centrifugation or filtration harm the non-secreted proteins to separate the cellular material from the soluble compounds. Using surfactants is an effective way to separate specific proteins. Moreover, as a new technology, anionic surfactants make proteins insoluble in the aqueous phase, and with precipitating the protein-surfactant bond, less energy and a low amount of surfactant are needed.78 The following sub-sections discuss the potential of algae utilization considering the food, energy, water, and environment nexus.
3.1 Food production from microalgae
Food markets can be a great opportunity to make algal biorefinery economically viable. This is because certain food products can be more profitable than common algal use, e.g., biofuel production. For instance, fishmeal prices have surpassed $2000 per ton over the last few years, owing to the sharp decrease in production throughout the 2010s.9 During recent decades, there has been growing interest in testing the possibility of including ingredients of vegetable origin into the novel feed as a partial substitute for lipid and protein sources of aquatic animal origin. Nevertheless, these plant-derived ingredients have major nutritional disadvantages, including anti-nutritional factors and unbalanced amino acid content, resulting in poor feed digestibility and palatability. Additionally, the availability of vegetable resources for aquaculture is estimated to decrease due to their high demand in the food and feed market. Among the potential new feed in aquaculture, microalgae are a promising matrix for the aquafeed market.85 The potential of algae as an aquafeed in salmon, carp, and shrimp diets has been demonstrated due to the high nutrition content, such as amino acids and lipids.9,13
Same as for aquaculture, demand for livestock feed has also grown, such as poultry, pig, and ruminant markets.33 As two primary feedstuffs for animal feeding, corn and soybean have been in competition with human food demand; hence, a substitute for these ingredients is needed to balance food and feed markets. Microalgae can be a great solution to animal feed because currently, algae are a small proportion of total human food demand. Studies have indicated that the microalgae use in animal diets could accelerate the growth and quality of meat in livestock besides mitigating the present competition among feed-food markets. As a case in point, microalgae Schizochytrium sp. could improve fatty acid composition in poultry meat and pork because of its high DHA content. Also, Chlorella vulgaris benefits growth performance parameters of poultry even at low percentages in feed.86 The quality and value of biomass after lipid-extraction as a source of animal and human protein demand are dependent on the amino acid content, specifically palatability and digestibility of the proteins, the respective concentration of limiting amino acids, and the amount of non-protein nitrogen and other possible anti-nutritional factors.33 The increase in algal biomass usage as the potential human nutrition can ease stresses on traditional food production. As the human population increases, the demand for food supplies increases. At the same time, climate change and global warming will adversely impact the agricultural sector. While some areas benefit, other regions will see a decline in precipitation, adversely affecting the overall balance. Also, cultivable land decline and overfishing of our seas will add to the mentioned problems, meaning that the need for a new sustainable solution is urgent.34 Currently, algae use as supplementary food in India, Australia, the US, and Israel has been widespread.26
Some improvements are needed to convert microalgae into a regular food source, similar to other agricultural crops. Constant selection of strains with more desirable traits was the key to improving traditional crops over the years. These traits include high product yield, lack of toxins, high nutrient content, resistance to abiotic and biotic stresses, and so on. In order to improve the mentioned traits for algal species and develop microalgae with a suitable phenotype, the underlying genotype and the growth environment should be enhanced. Genotype improvement means choosing the right microalgae species and then enhancing this strain over time by selection, following genome alteration through genetic engineering, breeding, or mutagenesis. The starting algal strain should always be the one with the most characteristics in common with the final phenotype; choosing the wrong algae as the starting strain can be a setup for biorefinery failure.34Table 1 shows the lipid, carbohydrate, and protein content of various types of microalgae strains.
Table 1 Composition of different microalgae species in percentage of dry mass (modified fromref. 20, 23, 50 and 87–92)






Protein
Carbohydrates
Lipid





Microalgae species




Anabaena cylindrica

43–56
25–30
4–7



Ankistrodesmus sp.
31.1
10.8
24–31



Aphanizomenon flos-aquae

62
23
3



Botryococcus braunii

22
14.1
14–75



Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

48
17
21



Chlorella pyrenoidosa

57
26
2



Chlorella protothecoides

52
10–11
15



Chlorella vulgaris

51–58
12–17
14–22



Chlorogloeopsis fritschii

50
44
7



Dunaliella bioculata

49
4
8



Dunaliella tertiolecta

20
12.2
15–71



Dunaliella salina

57
32
6



Euglena gracilis

39–61
14–18
14–20



Haematococcus pluvialis

48
27
15–25



Isochrysis sp.
31–51
11–14
20–22



Laminaria sp.
12
15
2



Nannochloropsis sp.
28.8
35.9
12–53



Neochloris oleoabundans

20–60
20–60
35–54



Porphyridium cruentum

28–39
40–57
9–14



Prymnesium parvum

28–45
25–33
22–39



Scenedesmus quadricauda

47
—
1.9



Scenedesmus obliquus

50–56
10–17
12–14



Spirogyra sp.
6–20
33–64
11–21



Spirulina maxima

60–71
13–16
6–7



Spirulina platensis

46–63
8–14
4–9



Synechococcus sp.
63
15
11



Tetraselmis maculata

52
15
3



Ulva sp.
10–33
23–78
0–6






Conventional food sources



Egg
49.8
2.7
47.7


Soybean
37
30
20


Meat
43
1
34


Peas
28.8
47.1
3.7


Oil palm
16–27
6–11
50–70


Corn
9
85
4


Milk
26
38
28




Enhancing the growth environment means selecting the best conditions for algal growth in terms of the media composition, climate, and growth process.34 Even a slight variation in the growth environment, such as the growth media (nutrient content of input water), growth system, and relevant abiotic and biotic factors (temperature, the dark–light cycle, and light intensity), leads to significant differences in algal growth, especially when food is the desired output. For instance, as for growth media, to have high lipid production, microalgae are often exposed to nutrient deprivation; this situation can be detrimental in protein production because it causes protein catabolism and changes the nutritional value and the amino acid profile of the algae. Therefore, the co-production of proteins and lipids in biorefinery should be optimized to enhance the viability of the entire biorefinery platform.33 Another critical factor in attaining high biomass yield is the growth system. Different types of growth systems, such as photoautotrophic growth in open ponds, photoautotrophic growth in a closed photobioreactor, and heterotrophic growth in closed bioreactors, can be applied to algal strains. In heterotrophic production, by using organic carbon as the source of carbon and energy, algal yields can be 50 times greater than that of photoautotrophic, but the method is very expensive. Also, using a closed system can benefit from lower contamination and better-controlled conditions, such as nutrient content and the energy source. Choosing a proper growth system depends highly on the final product, meaning that for a higher value product, such as cosmetics and nutraceuticals, a more expensive system should be used, while products of low value must be grown using a less expensive method. For example, to produce astaxanthin, a valuable natural food colorant, the microalgae Haematococcus pluvialis has been cultivated in a large closed photobioreactor with high capital costs.34
Light intensity and, subsequently, light penetration into the culture markedly affect biomass productivity. Standard light intensities ranging from 10 to 30 μmol photons per m2 per s have been demonstrated to be an optimum amount for most microalgal species. Still, it should be noted that some algal strains, like most dinoflagellates, often require higher light intensities (60–100 μmol photons per m2 per s).18,20 Also, the effect of the light/dark cycle on algal growth and biomass productivity has been an important factor in algal cultivation. Over-illumination may lead to photo-oxidative stresses in some microalgae; thus, light and dark photoperiods are needed to enhance algal culture media. Light/dark periods can range from 12/12 to 24/0 hours of light to hours of darkness. Light intensity and the photoperiod are somehow interlinked, meaning that they should be optimized together. To illustrate this, microalgae Nannochloropsis sp. was cultivated at three different light intensities, which are 50, 100, and 200 μmol photons per m2 per s at three different photoperiod regimes (24/0, 18/6, and 12/12 h light/dark), and microalgae growth was monitored. The results showed that at low light intensities (50 μmol photons per m2 per s), increasing the photoperiod cycle from 12/12 to 24/0 increased the algal growth rate, while at high light intensity (200 μmol photons per m2 per s), further increase in the photoperiod from 12/12 to 24/0 decreased the biomass growth rate.93 As another critical factor affecting biomass productivity, the temperature should be monitored and controlled during algal cultivation. CO2 solubility reduction and consequently low photosynthetic efficiency can happen at high temperatures. In contrast, very low temperatures can slow down the metabolic rate, reduce protein content and chlorophyll, and prolong the lag phase.94 Maximum algal biomass yield can be observed at an optimum growth temperature. The optimum growth temperature differs from species to species, but most species can tolerate temperatures up to 15 °C lower than their optimal temperature.20 Indoor cultures benefit from better temperature control at desired levels, but daily weather fluctuations can adversely affect algal cultivation in outdoor cultures. Thus, the microalgae medium can be maintained at a set temperature by locating the photobioreactor in a room with a fixed temperature.81 There are also other factors affecting microalgal growth, such as CO2 concentration, culture pH, salinity, toxic content, etc. Optimization of growth parameters is a necessary task that should be considered before microalgae cultivation based on the desired final biorefinery products.

3.1.1 Challenges of microalgae as food and value-added products. 
Technological challenges in cultivation and harvesting systems are the most significant constraints in commercial-scale algal biomass production and extraction.95 Reducing the high costs of cultivation and extraction and inventing new technologies can pave the way for a successful algal biorefinery platform. Currently, bio compounds from algae are not commercially competitive compared to other biomasses sources. As a solution for the FEWE nexus, the high costs of upstream processes can be significantly reduced when the nutrients and carbon needed for algal growth are provided from wastewater effluents and CO2 flue gas. However, it should be noted that using wastewater streams can limit the use of microalgal biomass in the food and feed industry. Toxins in algal food and feed products are a new challenge to the algal biorefinery platform. Studies show that some microalgae species, such as Aphanizomenon flos-aquae and Arthrospira, produce microcystins that pose a major threat to human and animal life by contaminating the freshwater supplies and being present in excessive amounts in food and feed products.59 These toxins appear due to the use of contaminated wastewaters or the cultivation of toxin-producing algae such as A. flos-aquae DC-1.58 Due to the current toxicity issue regarding microalgae consumption, algal biorefinery cannot draw governmental and social support for the commercialization of algal bioproducts. Thus, the safety and allergenicity of microalgae should be totally studied for each specific algal species because only some species produce toxins or have allergic effects.
Another challenging bottleneck in the way of food and value-added product strategy is harvesting and separating chlorophyll–protein complexes without damaging or altering the protein fraction. Algal proteins are considered a satisfactory substitute for animal-based proteins due to their high nutritional value and amino acid content. The current obstacle that hinders the vast microalgae protein extraction is preserving the protein functionality during cell disruption and extraction. Non-invasive and mild technologies, such as ultrafiltration, are needed to purify algal proteins. Purifying reduces the final yield, which adds up to production costs.96–98 Studies have shown that novel methods, including extrusion, high-pressure homogenization, and microwave-assisted extraction, are among the most efficient strategies for microalgae cell disruption for food production. Other methods, such as acid/alkaline treatment, are not suitable for protein extraction because they lead to protein degradation. More efficient and green techniques are needed to be developed in order to increase the purity of current microalgal protein extracts. Aside from high separation efficiency, these techniques should not include treatments with organic solvents and high temperatures because they may cause protein denaturation and degradation.99,100

3.2 Bioenergy production from microalgae
The current reliance on fossil fuels for energy is not environmentally sustainable and contributes to significant greenhouse gas emissions, waste generation, and unprecedented pollution.101 Thus, biofuels as the alternative for conventional fossil fuels are gaining more attention day after day. Demand for biofuels is expected to increase threefold by 2050. Among all sources that have been used as feed for biofuel production, recently, algae have been considered as a good choice because of their advantages, such as (1) no demand for arable land, (2) the ability to grow in wastewater, saline, and brackish water, (3) high yield, (4) the ability to grow rapidly and in the all seasons of the year, (5) the use of carbon dioxide for growth and production of oxygen and (6) high lipid and starch contents.22,102 But to produce algal biofuels, some aspects must be evaluated, including expenses and profits. For optimizing fuel generation, consideration of water quality, using waste streams such as flue gas or wastewater, competition from other food or fuel value chains, climate change, and energy-food security issues can be helpful. To achieve an optimal design of biofuel and other co-product production, some new processes must be linked to the biofuel production process, such as the nitrogen and phosphorus uptake in lipid extracted algal waste for use as fertilizer.75,103
This section discusses the conversion technologies to produce biofuel from microalgal biomass. The selection of conversion methods is influenced by the type of biomass feedstocks, demanded products, economic viability, and preservation alternatives.22 These processes can be divided into thermochemical, chemical, biochemical conversion.

3.2.1 Thermochemical conversion. 
This type of conversion can utilize organic components of composts and generate useful energy. This technology decomposes the bonds of the organic material in biomass at high temperatures and produces syngas (a gas mixture of hydrogen and carbon monoxide), methane, biochar, bio-oil, steam, and electricity.20 Some products such as methanol or diethyl ether can be produced from further processing of gas products obtained through thermochemical conversion.104 This conversion leaves residues such as ash used as fertilizer to reduce disposal and transportation costs.20 One of the most practical and important methods of extracting biofuels from microalgal biomass is thermochemical conversion.48 This conversion has advantages such as no need for chemical additions, the ability to convert and use various biomass raw materials, and a short time to produce biofuels.105 It is attainable by different processes such as gasification, liquefaction, pyrolysis, combustion, and torrefaction.
Gasification converts biomass into combustible gases ranging from 800–900 °C employing partial oxidation.22,48 Along with combustible gases, unwanted products, including tar, ash, and water, are formed, impacting the desired product's performance. The appropriate moisture content for the biomass fed in gasification is 15%. However, 40% moisture content of algal biomass is also permissible. The biomass with higher moisture content results in the syngas' lower gasification efficiency and lower energy content. The stages of microalgal biomass gasification are dewatering, pyrolysis, and oxidation. In the first stage, the temperature is increased to 150 °C to remove biomass moisture. Then, dried biomass is converted to combustible gases, such as CO2, H2, CO, and solid char at 500 °C. Next, at temperatures up to 900 °C, a reaction is performed between the gasifying agent (steam/oxygen) and combustible gases in partial oxidation or combustion. The overall gasification efficiency can be increased by enhancing the catalyst concentration and reactor temperature.104 Gasification's product has a low calorific value and is consumed for electricity generation, heating, and gas turbine fuel.48 It can also be a feedstock to generate chemical materials.20 Microalgal biomass gasification can be used to produce various liquid fuels using Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS). FTS is a method that can purify the gases produced and upgrade them to liquid fuels.104 Conventional and supercritical water gasification (SCWG) are two gasification processes considering the mechanisms and operation conditions.48
Conventional gasification is a commercialized method, but it has lower thermal efficiency, mainly for wet biomass. Higher thermal efficiency is the advantage of SCWG, but this method has not been commercialized yet. In conventional gasification, a reaction between dry microalgae and the oxidizer is performed in a partial oxidation environment at a temperature ranging from 800–1000 °C and a pressure between 0.1 and 1 MPa. Reactions in the gasifier involved include drying, pyrolysis, oxidation, reduction, homogeneous water gas shift, methanation, heterogeneous water gas, and Boudouard reactions. In this method, the drying stage of microalgae requires a lot of heat energy due to their high moisture content, so the proposed method to use them in the production of gas fuel without the drying stage is the SCWG method. This method is performed with or without catalysts and at a temperature and pressure of 400–500 °C and 24–36 MPa, respectively. In SCWG, the microalgae are placed in the supercritical region of water (374 °C and 22.1 MPa), and the dielectric constant – the constant for measuring the solvent's polarity – is highly reduced. This makes water an appropriate solvent for the microalgae gasification process due to its non-polarity behavior. Ammonium, phosphate, sodium, acetate, and potassium may be found in the aqueous phase. Therefore, by recovering the solution of SCWG and using it as a nitrogen nutrient for microalgae culture, some energy utilization for cultivation can be reduced.105
Due to its high moisture content (80–90%), microalgae biomass needs a dewatering process to produce biofuels. This process increases the cost of energy production, but liquefaction is an effective method to solve this problem.104 Algal biomass with high moisture content (more than 60% water) is a good raw material for the liquefaction process that converts them into liquid fuel at high pressure (5–20 MPa) and low temperature (300–350 °C). This conversion is done with the aid of a catalyst in the presence of hydrogen.22 In addition, microalgae are a good feedstock for liquefaction due to their small size. The smaller size leads to faster heat transfer and reaches the required processing temperature.105 An autoclave made of stainless steel is used to perform the liquefaction process by mechanical mixing.106 In the liquefaction process, biomass breaks down into smaller unsteady molecules and can be composed of oily compounds.20 In hot compressed water, the microalgae's fats, carbohydrates, and proteins will be depolymerized and repolymerized; thus, biomass is converted to bio-oil, gas, and solid composites.105 This process can be performed directly or indirectly.20 The biomass is converted to bio-oil, liquid tar, and condensable organic vapor by fast pyrolysis in direct liquefaction. However, in indirect liquefaction, non-condensable products (organic vapor and liquid tar) and gases from gasification in the presence of catalysts are converted into liquid products.104 Liquefaction has a higher efficiency in producing oily products than other methods.105 But, it is considerable to point out that due to the sophisticated physical structure, reactors, fuel-feed systems, and the use of hydrogen, liquefaction conversion is a relatively expensive process.20,22,48,107
Pyrolysis has a major impact on the reaction kinetics and reactor design in all thermochemical conversions while determining crop composition, distribution, and quality.20 In pyrolysis, dry biomass converts to liquid, solid, and gaseous fuel in the presence of scanty oxygen or absence of oxygen by heating at a temperature of about 500 °C.48 The energy can be generated by combusting bio-oil, achieved from pyrolysis in engines and turbines, but there are technical problems. Because of pyrolysis oil's poor properties, such as being acidic, impoverished thermal stability, containing solids and chemically dissolved water, instability, and high viscosity, this method needs hydrogenation and catalytic cracking to reduce oxygen content and eliminate alkalies.22,48
Pyrolysis can be classified into three classifications of flash, fast, and slow pyrolysis. Flash pyrolysis with a short hot vapor residence time (about 1 s) is suitable for producing liquid fuel because of its high conversion efficiency (up to 90%).22 In fast pyrolysis, biomass is heated to decompose into short-chain molecules and cool down to liquid rapidly.106 This process is done at a high heating rate and moderate gas residence time (about 10–20 s) using a catalyst.22,106 Zeolites and other mesoporous aluminosilicates are the catalysts used for cracking.108 Fast pyrolysis has the advantage of producing liquid fuel directly.106 Low temperature (400 °C), long residence time, and low heating rate are the conditions of slow pyrolysis.22,106 These conditions decrease the yield, increase energy input, and affect biofuel properties unfavorably.106 Pyrolysis does not require any sophisticated separation of the biomass fraction.108 However, due to algal biomass's high moisture content, the drying process demands considerable heating energy. The heating energy for drying or pyrolysis can be supplied by the process's exhaust gas.106 Compared with other conversion processes, pyrolysis attains hopeful and certain results that can cause commercial utilization.22
Combustion is one of the first fuel-to-energy conversion technologies that has been utilized by humans for heating and cooking. It also greatly impacted the industrial revolution for steam power generation.109 Today, biomass combustion in the presence of oxygen is used as a direct technology to produce hot gases for use in turbines, furnaces, and boilers up to a small to large scale (100–300 MW).110 In other words, combustion is burning biomass and converting it into hot gases at high temperatures (above 800 °C) in the presence of air.22 In this process, any kind of biomass with moisture content less than 50% dry weight and a sufficient calorific value is burned for power generation, which can lower the need for fossil fuels.22,109 The power generated can be applied in energy-intensive processes in algal biorefinery, such as the harvesting technique and extraction to make the algal biorefinery economically and technically viable. The disadvantage of combustion conversion is the demand for pretreatment processes, such as grinding, chopping, and drying, requiring extra cost and energy.22 To reveal the application of fuel in industry, the higher heating value (HHV) of a fuel is a key index. Typically, microalgae's HHVs are between 14 and 24 MJ kg−1, considerably lower than that of coal, a range of 25 to 35 MJ kg−1. Therefore, although combustion is the most straightforward path of using microalgae as a fuel, due to their lower energy density compared to coal, utilizing them in this way should be financially considered.105 However, in large biomass plants, the yield of biofuel conversion is acceptable compared to coal-fired power plants, but the high moisture content of biomass gives rise to higher costs. So, combined heat and power (CHP) and coal-algae co-firing are utilized to enhance the total plant efficiency and reduce GHG emissions and air pollution.22,105
Some inherent specifications of the microalgae biomass such as low carbon and high moisture contents, decreased HHV and microalgae's volumetric energy density. Furthermore, a high operating cost is required for dewatering or drying before conversion processes because of the high moisture content. Also, it leads to waste energy in the form of latent heat to evaporate water, which ultimately reduces the overall yield of the process. Another method has been recognized, called torrefaction, to overcome the concern about the low efficiency of the aforementioned thermochemical conversion processes.110 In this process, thermal degradation of microalgae occurs in an inert or nitrogen environment without oxygen and a temperature ranging from 200–300 °C at different time intervals (from a few minutes to a few hours).105,110 This process is similar to pyrolysis, which usually occurs in the range of 350–650 °C. Torrefaction is also called mild pyrolysis due to its lower operating temperature compared with pyrolysis.105
In the torrefaction process, biochar is produced as the main product and liquids and gases as the by-products. The biochar produced in this process has better properties than biochar obtained from pyrolysis, and it can be used as a suitable alternative to coal. This process damages the biomass structure and improves the biomass's calorific value and energy density. Due to the milder operating conditions of torrefaction than pyrolysis, it offers higher performance and efficiency of the solid mass. The process is such that, at first, the carbohydrates are damaged. Then by enhancing the temperature and the holding time of the torrefaction, the protein is disrupted, and the lipids are partially used up.43 This is why the carbohydrate-rich microalgae are more easily burned than protein-rich or lipid-rich microalgae. In this process, with increasing the degree of carbonization of microalgae, the content of volatile materials decreases and fixed carbon increases, which leads to improved grind-ability and an increase in the rigidity of the prepared material. During the torrefaction process, the surface functional groups change significantly through decarboxylation and dehydroxylation; thus, the hydrophobicity of the biofuel greatly increases, which is useful for long-term storage and transportation. Torrefaction enables better combustion efficiency of microalgae and decreases CO emissions by diminishing the moisture content. This point is considerable that the devolatilization phenomenon during the torrefaction may enhance the fly ash emission and harm both human health and the natural environment. Also, releasing dangerous gases such as NOx and SOx resulting from protein combustion is another drawback of torrefaction.111
At temperatures of 200–300 °C, torrefaction can be categorized into three severities: light (200–235 °C), mild (235–275 °C) and severe (275–300 °C) torrefaction.110 If the torrefaction severity is higher, the carbonization extent will be greater.105 In light torrefaction, moisture and light volatiles are released. Hemicelluloses – which are the most active components in biomass compared to lignins and celluloses – will be demoted to some level while celluloses and lignins are not affected in particular. Thus, biomass weight loss can be neglected after a light torrefaction, and the energy density or calorific value increases slightly. Hemicelluloses are significantly released during a mild torrefaction, and celluloses are used up to a certain level. When a severe torrefaction occurs, the hemicelluloses are entirely drained, and the celluloses are highly decomposed. Since these are the main biomass constituents, their weight and energy yield usually decrease while the fuel energy density increases significantly.109


3.2.2 Chemical conversion. 
Chemical conversion is a process that converts biomass into biodiesel by addition of chemical materials. The most common method for producing biodiesel as a non-toxic, renewable, and biodegradable fuel is transesterification.20 Biodiesel can be consumed by motor engines without the requirement of any modification. Moreover, it can be mixed with conventional diesel at proportional ratios for use in regular combustion engines. Also, biodiesel reduces CO and CO2 emissions.92
Transesterification is a process that converts lipids (free fatty acid and triglyceride) and alcohols (methanol, ethanol, propanol, butanol, and amyl alcohol) to fatty acid methyl esters (biodiesel) and glycerol (by-product). So to produce biodiesel from microalgae, the algal lipid should be extracted. Methanol and ethanol are the most applicable among the aforementioned alcohols, but methanol is preferred because of its lower cost and some physicochemical properties.50 In this multiple-step process, first triglycerides convert to diglycerides, next diglycerides convert to monoglycerides, and finally, monoglycerides convert to the desired product.112 In transesterification, first, the temperature increases to 120 °C for 5–10 minutes to eliminate the water content of oil. Then, the cooled oil is mixed with alcohol and a catalyst to produce sodium methoxide. In the meantime, clean oil with a temperature of 60 °C and sodium methoxide are mixed. After that, the separation process would be performed. As a result, biodiesel and glycerol would be placed on the top and bottom layers, respectively, owing to their density differences.106 It should be noted that the excess alcohol is consumed in the process due to the reversibility of the transesterification reaction and making it a forward reaction. Studies have shown that the yield of biodiesel production from algal biomass is about 80%.50
Some factors such as the temperature and time of the reaction, concentration of alcohol, and catalyst affect biodiesel yield.50 The types of catalysts that can be applied in transesterification are alkalis and acids. One of the most usual ways to generate biodiesel is transesterification with an alkali catalyst (such as sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide). In this way, the process will be carried out at a very high speed (4000 times faster) compared to using an acid catalyst. The drawback of alkali-catalyzed transesterification is the production of soaps and water from a feedstock with a high ratio of free fatty acids (>2%) due to a reaction between the alkali catalyst and the free fatty acids. The produced water during the process leads to increased foam formation, decreased biodiesel yield, loss of the catalyst, and difficulty in separating biodiesel and glycerol due to the increased viscosity and formation of gels. To inhibit the saponification reaction of feedstock with a free fatty acid content of more than 2%, the acidic materials can be utilized as a catalyst.20,50,113
With the addition of an acid catalyst (such as sulfuric acid, sulfonic acid, and hydrochloric acid), transesterification is performed very slowly and requires high temperature (100 °C) and pressure, making it expensive.50 To optimize the transesterification conversion, glycerol, the by-product, can be used for food, cosmetics, and pharmaceutical products. Also, glycerol is a suitable feedstock for poly(hydroxybutyrate) (PHB), a biopolymer. PHB has resembling features to fossil fuel-based polymers and is produced by microorganisms.114 One of the applications of the lipid-extracted algal biomass residue after the transesterification is biohydrogen production. Also, using residues for biomethane production with the anaerobic digestion process can supply some energy requirements of biorefinery.21


3.2.3 Biochemical conversion. 
Biochemical conversion provides the conditions for converting biomass into biofertilizer, bioelectricity, and biofuel products such as biohydrogen, biogas, and alcohol under biological processes. This type of conversion can be classified into alcoholic fermentation, anaerobic digestion, photobiological hydrogen production, and the microbial fuel cell.20,22
Ethanol production has been commercialized up to a large scale through the fermentation process of sugar and starch crops. Worldwide, corn is one of the main feeds in the bioethanol industry due to its high starch content (60–70%).20 The relatively high carbohydrate content (such as cellulose and starch) in some microalgae, especially green algae, has made them good potential candidates for ethanol fermentation.115 Fermentation is exploited to produce ethanol from the starch of microalgae; therefore, the starch must be separated from the microalgae's cells in the first step of this process. Starch separation can be performed by mechanical equipment or enzymes.20 To maintain the natural biological pathway of the fermentation process, a microorganism is needed to ferment the sugar and convert it to alcohol or lactic acid. Some factors affect the optimal fermentative microorganism selection, such as the higher concentration of produced ethanol and the greater tolerance to chemical inhibitors created during pretreatment and hydrolysis.116 Various organisms, such as bacteria, fungi, and, yeasts are used for ethanol fermentation, but Saccharomyces cerevisiae is the most common type.115 When cells commence to break down, Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast is added to the biomass.20 The ethanol generated is transferred to a distillation unit for purification.106 This step requires much energy because the alcohol product is dilute (10–15% ethanol), and water and other contaminants should be eliminated. Then ethanol with an increased concentration is liquefied and can be consumed as fuel in cars. To compensate for feedstock costs, the processing of the solid residue into animal feed or gasification can be performed.22 It should be noted that the pre-treatment process is required for efficient ethanol production from microalgal biomass fermentation.115 Also, usually, this process takes a few days to produce biofuels.105
The conversion of organic waste into biogas (methane and carbon dioxide) is performed through anaerobic digestion (AD). The energy content of the produced gas is almost one-fifth to two-fifths lower than the heating value of the feedstock.22 Another product of anaerobic digestion is a nutrient-rich material that can be utilized as a fertilizer. The amount of digestible biomass is a critical aspect in achieving a successful process. The biogas can be consumed for cooking, combined heat and power gas engines, or improved to natural gas-quality biomethane.20 In a biorefinery platform, the produced biomethane can be utilized for electricity generation or consumed as natural gas in the grid or as a fuel car. Also, the produced CO2 can be recycled into the algae cultivation section to produce more biomass, resulting in a sustainable process.18 This conversion method is appropriate for wet algal biomass with about 80–90% moisture content.22 The steps of anaerobic digestion are hydrolysis, fermentation, and methanogenesis. In the hydrolysis step, intricate structures decompose into soluble sugars. Then, volatile fatty acids (VFAs), acetic acid, alcohols, and gas composed of H2 and CO2 are made by fermentative bacteria. Finally, these products are metabolized into biogas (CO2 30–40% and CH4: 60–70%) by methanogens.20 In this stage, a combined heat and power cycle (CHP) can reduce the dependency of external energy sources to transform the biogas generated.114
Some parameters impact the process's efficiency and production turnover. A high percentage of proteins and a low ratio of C/N in microalgae can adversely affect the anaerobic digester's performance. Co-digestion with materials with a high C/N ratio such as waste paper is one solution for this issue. The other problem of the high protein percentage is enhanced ammonium production that inhibits anaerobic microorganisms. Additionally, sodium ions have a toxic effect on some anaerobic microorganisms, but it is possible to solve this problem using microorganisms that are adapted with salt for the anaerobic digestion of marine algae biomass.22 Using wastewater and residues to produce chemical materials and biogas by anaerobic digestion is an opportunity for algae biorefineries. This helps wastewater treated for recycling and nutrients recovered for food production.76 Lipid extracted microalgae biomass, sludge from the wastewater treatment plant, and waste paper are the potential substrates for the anaerobic digestion process. Indeed, residual water from harvesting and dewatering steps and a nutrient-rich stream exhausted from the anaerobic digester can be recycled into the microalgae cultivation system to reduce exterior nutrients and water requirements.114 One approach to improve biogas yield is disrupting microalgae's cell walls. For reducing costs and supplying required energy, the generated power by biomethane in anaerobic digestion can be injected into the cell disruption section.117
Microalgae, especially green microalgae such as S. obliquus and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, can produce clean energy such as hydrogen gas (H2) due to their essential metabolic, enzymatic, and genetic properties.21,22 Bio-photolysis is the most appropriate technique for hydrogen production, which is divided into direct and indirect bio-photolysis. Direct bio-photolysis is the same method of photosynthesis that occurs in microalgae cells. In this method, biohydrogen is produced directly from the photosynthesis of microalgae, and solar energy is converted into chemical energy to produce hydrogen molecules under anaerobic conditions.91 Indeed, the typical path of photosynthesis is that the hydrogen ions are produced from the breaking down of H2O molecules and then react with CO2 to generate carbohydrates, but in some algal species and under certain special conditions, hydrogen molecules are produced instead of carbohydrates.21 Therefore, during photosynthesis, the water molecules are converted to hydrogen ions (H+) and oxygen by microalgae, and then the hydrogen ions are transformed into hydrogen molecules by hydrogenase enzymes. Due to the reversibility of the hydrogen process, protons are consumed to produce hydrogen and vice versa.22 In general, the direct photolysis process is an excellent method due to the use of solar energy to convert H2O into O2 and H2. Still, because of some problems, its application has been limited. The activity of hydrogenase enzymes is very sensitive to oxygen, which makes it challenging to produce hydrogen. This problem was solved by increasing respiration by utilizing exogenous acetate and endogenous carbohydrate substrates and limiting the sulfur available to algae.21,91 In respiration, if the O2-uptake's rate is more than the rate of produced photosynthetic oxygen, the growth conditions change to anaerobic and lead to activating the hydrogenase enzymes.21 Depletion of sulfur inhibits the sulfur-rich enzymes and proteins' regeneration. Consequently, these conditions disturb the internal oxygen flow of algae in the photosynthetic apparatus that causes hydrogenase enzymes to make hydrogen. Using a new two-phase method allows the possibility that hydrogen is produced in a low-cost system. The first phase is the photosynthetic growth of microalgae, and the second phase is shifting to the evolution of hydrogen by sulfur deprivation.21,118 The growth media for direct bio-photolysis does not require any organic carbon layers and does not emit greenhouse gases and depends on the photosynthetic performance of microalgae.118
The process of indirect bio-photolysis is that microalgae produce H2 from stored starch and glycogen. In this two-step process, first, carbohydrates are produced from light energy, and then H2 from the fermentation of carbohydrates is generated.91 So, in this method, hydrogen and oxygen evolution are separated spatially or/and temporally. This separation prevents the conflict between oxygen and hydrogen evolution, and the difficulty of hydrogen purification decreases due to the more comfortable elimination of CO2 from the mixture of H2/CO2.21 Generally, the light intensity is varied in the different hours of a day, so the oxygen and hydrogen evolution are separated temporally. During the photosynthetic metabolism, algae fix CO2 into protein and carbohydrates and release O2. At night, the produced protein and carbohydrates are consumed by metabolism and make some extra electrons. These electrons will be transported until oxygen is present in the environment. Oxygen deficiency in the culture with anaerobic conditions activates the hydrogenase enzymes that consume the electrons produced in the fermentation pathway and generates hydrogen. This procedure stops when the light cycle begins, and subsequently, hydrogenase enzymes become passive, and the growth becomes photosynthetic.118
Indirect bio-photolysis is efficient due to the constant availability of carbon sources during cell growth.91
Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) are an auspicious technique for producing electricity and hydrogen.137 A microbial fuel cell involves the activity of microbes at the anode to produce electrons by catalyzing organic substrates under anaerobic conditions. Passing these electrons through an external circuit causes electricity generation. The membrane of proton exchange separates the anode and cathode chambers. In addition, the substrates can be metabolized by microbes, and hydrogen as a secondary product will be produced.138 Glucose, formate, and acetate can be consumed as organic substrates at the anode, but their usage is not affordable because of their high price. Using wastewater substrates, besides reducing costs, can treat the input wastewater, but the process leads to diminishing of the output power and system's performance.139 In MFCs, electrons are oxidized on the anode, and by utilizing these electrons on the cathode, O2, nitrate, and CO2 can be reduced to H2O, N2, and acetate, respectively.140 However, bacteria are mostly applied as microorganisms in MFCs, but they are not economical due to limitations such as low efficiency and low power output. So, MFC bacteria-based systems can be shifted to MFC algal-based for reducing costs because of absence of limitations for the anaerobic conditions.138 Integrating algae cultivation with MFCs leads to a photosynthetic algal microbial fuel cell (PAMFC). In this method, microalgae can be used as substrates in the anode chamber. Additionally, microalgae can consume CO2 and light radiation to accomplish the photosynthesis process on the cathode side, and electricity is generated by utilizing the produced photosynthetic oxygen.141,142 To produce hydrogen by this method, the MFC should be connected to a proton-reducing cathode using a power supply.137 Expanding MFCs to a large commercial scale has some problems, and supplying electricity of grids is relatively difficult. For instance, maintaining and preparing the required materials have a high cost. Based on observations, MFCs have the best performance when biodegradable organic materials have low concentrations, so maybe it is better to use MFC technology after producing ethanol, CH4, and H2 as a polishing stage. The best state for using MFC technology is to treat solid and liquid waste in biorefineries. In this way, the remaining energy is not lost, and photosynthetic biomass can be turned into heat, electricity, fuel, and value-added chemical crops.115 The generated electricity by MFCs can supply a part of energy demand for wastewater treatment. Studies have shown that this method can increase COD removal efficiency, an important factor in wastewater treatment.139 Furthermore, this method can consume the produced oxygen as an electron acceptor on the cathode. This inhibits oxygen accumulation, which prevents microalgae photosynthesis in a photobioreactor and is toxic if existing more than a specific threshold. Another advantage of using MFCs is to improve reactor resistance by attaching microalgae to cathode walls.141Table 2 provides a comprehensive review of the productivity of different types of biofuel based on various algal strains.
Table 2 Bioenergy productivity of different types of algal species




Microalgae species
Conversion process
Bioenergy type
Bioenergy yield
Ref.





Tetraselmis chui

Slow pyrolysis
Syngas
20 wt%

119




Microcystis aeruginosa

Fast pyrolysis
Syngas
55 wt%

119




Chlorella protothecoides

Fast pyrolysis
Syngas
29 wt%

119




C. vulgaris

Gasification
Syngas
H2 = 41.75, CO = 18.63, CO2 = 24.40, and CH4 = 15.19 (% mol)

120




Chlorella protothecoides

Transesterification
Biodiesel
15.5 g L−1

121




Chlorococcum sp.
Transesterification
Biodiesel
10 g L−1

121




Haematococcus pluvialis

Transesterification
Biodiesel
420 GJ per ha per year

121




Neochloris oleoabundans

Transesterification
Biodiesel
56 g g−1

121




Chlorella sp.
Anaerobic fermentation
Biohydrogen
8.29 (mL gVS−1)

122




Chlorella sp.
Dark fermentation
Biohydrogen
22 (mL gVS−1)

123




Scenedesmus obtusiusculus

—
Biohydrogen
48.08 (mL gVS−1)

124




Chlorella vulgaris

Batch fermentation
Biohydrogen
190.9 (mL gVS−1)

125




Chlorella sorokiniana

Anaerobic digestion
Bio methane
298 (mL gVS−1)

126




Chlorella minutissima

Anaerobic digestion
Bio methane
167.30 (cm3 CH4 per g VS)

127




Acutodesmus obliquus

Anaerobic digestion
Bio methane
115.6 ± 8.9 (N m3 t−1 CODuntreated)

128




B. trilocularis

Anaerobic digestion
Bio methane
255 (mL gVS−1)

129




C. vulgaris ESP-31
Alcoholic fermentation
Bio ethanol
0.0761 (g gmicroalgae−1)

130




Chlorella sp. GD
Alcoholic fermentation
Bio ethanol
0.0068 (g gmicroalgae−1)

130




Chlorella sp. MI
Fermentation
Bio ethanol
0.09 (g gmicroalgae−1)

131




Nannochloropsis oculata

Fermentation
Bio ethanol
0.04 (g gmicroalgae−1)

132




Scenedesmus dimorphus

Pyrolysis
Biochar
36% (max)

133




Chlorella vulgaris FSP-E
Pyrolysis
Biochar
26.90%

134




Tetraselmis chui

Slow pyrolysis
Biochar
37 wt%

119




Microcystis aeruginosa

Fast pyrolysis
Biochar
21 wt%

119




Chlorella minutissima

Anaerobic digestion
Biogas
341.43 (cm3 gVS−1)

127




Chlorella vulgaris

Anaerobic digestion
Biogas
56 mLbiogas per Lreactor per day

135




Chlorella vulgaris

Anaerobic digestion
Biogas
0.04 gCOD gCOD−1

136




Chlorella vulgaris FSP-E
Pyrolysis
Bio-oil
29.50%

134




Tetraselmis chui

Slow pyrolysis
Bio-oil
43 wt%

119




Scenedesmus sp.
Fast pyrolysis
Bio-oil
55 wt%

119




Scenedesmus dimorphus

Pyrolysis
Bio-oil
39.6% (max)

133







3.2.4 Current challenges of bioenergy production. 
The main challenges regarding bioenergy production from microalgae are low oil/lipid content and low biomass concentration in the culture.169 The volume of the final biomass and the generated calorific value are not high enough.170 In order to compete with diesel, a biofuel derived from microalgae should have a high calorific value. The calorific value is the amount of energy released when 1 kg of fuel burns in the presence of oxygen. The normal range of microalgae's calorific value is between 14 and 24 MJ kg−1, while the number for diesel fuel and petrol is more than 45 MJ kg−1.48,105 One promising approach to enhancing algal-based biofuels' calorific value is the nitrogen-limiting conditions. Research showed that by altering the cultivation medium from nitrogen-sufficient to nitrogen-depletion conditions, the calorific value of Chlorella vulgaris biomass increases by 5 MJ kg−1.171 There are also other methods to improve lipid production in microalgae. As a case in point, the algae–bacteria symbiotic system can elevate nutrient removal and consequently lipid production as follows: first, microalgae produce oxygen as the outcome of the photosynthesis process. Secondly, the O2 produced is utilized by the heterotrophic bacteria to assimilate and mineralize organic matter. Lastly, aerobic metabolism of bacteria is done, and phosphorus, carbon dioxide, and inorganic nitrogen are produced, which microalgae can use for photosynthesis.91,172 Moreover, genetic engineering technology can be useful to alter pathways for microalgae biomass and lipid production. In-depth knowledge of algal biology can help expedite gene cloning and manipulation. Higher lipid production and photosynthetic efficiency, enhanced metabolic activity, and temperature tolerance ability are among the most desired applications of genetic engineering in the concept of algal biorefinery.95
For instance, the lipid content can be increased when acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACCase) and diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DAGAT) are activated, and the starch pathway is being blocked.58
Also, the economic infeasibility of microalgae biofuel production is another challenging barrier to successful algal biofuel production. The development of an algal biorefinery strategy and the concept of extracting high-value coproducts are the best approaches for the sustainable development of algal biofuels. Biofuel production alone is not commercially attractive without extracting value-added co-products, such as fertilizer, food, animal feed, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, and colorants.95,173 A comprehensive techno-economical analysis of algal biofuel production will be discussed in Section 4.

3.3 Phycoremediation: wastewater treatment using microalgae
Wastewater management has been one of the hottest topics concerning preserving a pristine ecosystem. Before 1998, there were some ways to remove sewage sludge, mainly including disposal into seas, incineration, use as fertilizer on agricultural land, and landfilling. After 1998, the mentioned disposal strategies have been gradually restricted or banned due to their adverse impact on the ecosystem, but still continued in most developing countries, resulting in the eutrophication phenomenon.174 Eutrophication is the significant increase in the concentration of phosphorus, nitrogen, and other plant nutrients, resulting in increased incidences of fish kills, dissolved oxygen depletion, and toxic phytoplankton species.175 According to an IPCC report in 2018, 80% of the wastewater worldwide remains untreated and releases highly damaging greenhouse gases.5
Different types of wastewater, including dairy, municipal, and industrial wastewater, contain many nutrient inorganic species. The chemical composition of industrial wastewaters entirely depends on the dumping site. To contrast the types of wastewater in terms of the effect on the growth rate of algae, it can be said that industrial wastewater reduces the growth rate and increases production costs due to less nitrogen and phosphorus and more toxins.20 Thus, the tendency to use these types of wastewater as an algal cultivation medium is not high. Table 3 compares the nutrient contents of different types of wastewater.
Table 3 Characteristics of typical wastewaters




Wastewater type
TN (mg L−1)
TP (mg L−1)
Avg N:P (molar ratio)
COD (mg L−1)
BOD (mg L−1)
TSS (mg L−1)
Ref.





Municipal



Domestic
40.65
5.66
16
227–235
—
—

20



Domestic
25–30
8–12
6
400–500
—
150–225

143



Domestic
85
15
13
—
—
—

144



Landfill
112–192
7–9
42
3726–4860
—
488–622

145



Domestic
15–90
5–20
9
—
—
—

146



Domestic
62.8
9.5
15
729.1–835.7
—
—

147



Domestic
90.8–106.4
11.1–14.5
17
711–847
—
245–288

148



Hospital
81.1–120.7
14–19
14
450–654
220–354
259–520

149



Domestic
18
1.4
28
63
—
—

150



Domestic
29.8–50.3
5.3–11.7
10
485–815
199–482
70–303

151



Domestic
45.6
4.36
23
234
41.8
63

152



Domestic
27
5.04
12
31
—
50

150



Domestic
23.1–35.4
3.8–4.9
15
103–190
—
—

153







Industrial



Paper mill
11
0.6
41
5020
1600
800

154



Textile
89.9
18.4
11
1047
444
—

155



Winery
110
52
5
15553
8858
760

156



Chemical factory
19.2
2.4
18
185.17
47.87
45.67

152



Food processing
39.81
3.95
22
221
49.64
88.17

152



Steel mill
200–210
50–55
9
1700–1720
650–700
—

157



Slaughterhouse
450
50
20
5000
3000
3000

158



Tannery
273
21
29
2200
—
6600

159







Agricultural and livestock



Dairy
170
20.1
19
—
—
—

160



Dairy
3456
249.7
31
23760
—
—

161



Potato
45.2
4.2
24
1007–2065
751–1083
1215–1991

162



Poultry
1380–1580
370–382
9
1550–1950
370–470
1060–1200

163



Poultry
802–1825
50–446
12
—
—
847

164



Rice
25–95
12–94
3
2578–6480
—
—

165



Starch
246–284
28.34
19
861–991
—
—

166



Swine
2055
620
7
37643
—
—

150



Swine
2430
324
17
—
—
5310

167



Swine
895
168
12
3122
923
811

168





Conventional wastewater treatment methods, including aerobic activated sludge, coagulation, denitrification, have some inherent drawbacks, such as consuming a high amount of energy, taking a long time to complete the process, releasing carbon, etc.91 Phycoremediation is one of the eco-friendly methods to eliminate contamination in different types of wastewater. Phycoremediation is defined as using algae to abolish or biotransform pollutants, such as nutrients and CO2 from wastewater.176 This method has a high capacity in removing nutrients and can provide oxygen to the water body at the lowest cost. In addition to these benefits, it can improve the economic viability of biofuel production, which is why it gained interest worldwide.94 The release of waste feedstocks into the environment due to their low value requires regulated compulsory treatment. To reduce the cost of additional treatments, the concept of biorefineries to waste streams is applied with more impetus to create additional revenue streams or regain some treatment expenses in this way.14 One of the most important benefits of wastewater usage as the microalgae feedstock is that it will lower the stress on the freshwater demand. The predictions demonstrate that the water availability will be reduced by 18% for the agricultural and food industries until 2050 if the competition for water resources continues. Microalgae biomass contains a high amount of nitrogen and phosphorus compounds, which can be provided through wastewater treatment.
Microalgae cultivation in the wastewater medium has some more benefits such as (i) biofuel production from algal biomass, (ii) low energy needed, (iii) decrease in production of sludge, (iv) low-cost and environment-friendly treatment, (v) combating with eutrophication, (vi) no production of toxic substances by microalgae species, (vii) minimal odor compared to the conventional methods, and (viii) increase of the dissolved oxygen level through photosynthetic activity.17,190 There are still a few technical hurdles to be surmounted to attain high-efficiency phycoremediation. As a case in point, one of the main obstacles for algal cultivation in wastewater is the unbalanced C/N/P ratio (carbon/nitrogen/phosphorus) of municipal or industrial wastewater. Table 3 provides different N/P ratios of various types of wastewater based on recent studies. The solution is flue gas addition in wastewater to keep the Redfield ratio (C/N/P 106:16:1), an optimal algal growth C/N/P fraction. This also controls the pH level of wastewater and affects the uptake of CO2 by algal biomass. So algal CO2 fixation by considering this approach can be environmentally sustainable.191

3.3.1 Nutrient removal. 
Nitrogen in the form of ammonium (NH4+), urea (CH4N2O), and nitrates (NO3−), and phosphorus in the form of phosphate ions (PO43−) are the most important nutrients found in wastewater. As an adenosine triphosphate (ATP) element, phosphorus significantly impacts microalgae growth due to its role in photosynthesis.48 Microalgae can easily absorb these chemical compounds for cell growth and microalgae metabolism.20 This process not only provides microalgae with cheap sources of nutrients but also prevents polluting the environment. Nowadays, numerous research efforts are oriented towards studying the nutrient removal efficiency of different types of algal strains under various operating conditions. Aside from nitrogen and phosphorus fixation, chemical oxygen demand (COD) or biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) reduction is another indicator of wastewater treatment process effectiveness. Micro-organisms need a specific amount of oxygen, called BOD, to degrade the organic material, while the amount of oxygen needed to break down organic and inorganic matter in a stream is called COD. In other words, BOD is a key factor in converting organic compounds in wastewater into CO2 and H2O with the help of the oxidizing agent, oxygen. The surplus amount of BOD leads to depletion of dissolved oxygen (DO) levels in water and adversely affects aquatic life.192Table 4 provides nutrient removal rates based on types of wastewater input from the most recent studies in this context. Removal capacities up to 99% were measured for ammonium, nitrate, phosphate, and up to 87% of the chemical oxygen demand.
Table 4 Nutrient removal efficiency by algal growth




Microalgae species
Wastewater type
Removal rate (%)
Ref.


Nitrogen
Phosphate
COD





Trichormus variabilis

Mixed wastewater (60%)
42
75.22
—

46




Desmodesmus

Municipal wastewater
83.9
61
—

177




Chlorella sp.
Municipal wastewater before primary settling
68.4
83.2
50.9

178




Chlorella pyrenoidosa

Mix of industrial and domestic sewage from a pig farm and a palm oil mill
60–70
50–60
82

179




Chlorella + Nitzschia
Settled domestic sewage
92
74
87

180




Micractinium pusillum Fresenius

Digested effluent from a covered anaerobic pond treating municipal wastewater
69
42
—

181




Microalgae/bacteria consortia

Full-scale municipal wastewater HRAPs operated in series
62
31
—

182




Tetraselmis sp.
Activated sludge-recycling system in large scale municipal wastewater
98
82
—

183




P. kessleri

Activated sludge-recycling system in large scale municipal wastewater
98
20
—

183




Chlorella sp.
Soybean-processing
85
97
70.5

184




Chlamydomonas sp.
Palm oil mill effluent
65
34
56

185




Scenedesmus obliquus

Brewery effluent
88
30
71

186




Chlorella vulgaris

Swine manure
71
54
78.8

187




Desmodesmus sp.
Oil refinery
—
53
82

188




Chlorella sorokiniana

50% swine wastewater diluted in water
94.4
99.5
84.6

130




P. kessleri

Pig farm wastewater
58
—
47

189





Some factors affect the nutrient removal performance of microalgae based on the literature, including the light intensity, C/N and N/P ratios, wastewater characteristics, light–dark cycle, cultivation mode, symbiosis, and additional carbon source. Different types of wastewater have different properties chemically and physically, such as pH levels, temperature, toxic substances, and the amount and types of nutrients.91,193,194 For example, dairy wastewaters' carbon and nutrient concentrations are about twice the ordinary municipal ones.195 It was also proved that the intensity of light and the length of dark cycles could significantly impact carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus removal, resulting in the efficiency of microalgae cultivation.91 Moreover, the algae–bacteria symbiotic system can elevate nutrient removal as follows: first, microalgae produce oxygen as the outcome of the photosynthesis process. Secondly, the O2 produced is utilized by the heterotrophic bacteria to assimilate and mineralize organic matter. Lastly, aerobic metabolism of bacteria is done, and phosphorus, carbon dioxide, and inorganic nitrogen are produced, which microalgae can use for photosynthesis.91,172 In order to compete with diesel, a biofuel derived from microalgae should have a high calorific value. The calorific value is the amount of energy released when 1 kg of fuel burns in the presence of oxygen. The normal range of microalgae's calorific value is between 14 and 24 MJ kg−1, while the number for diesel fuel and petrol is more than 45 MJ kg−1.48,105 One promising approach to enhancing algal-based biofuels' calorific value is the nitrogen-limiting conditions. Research showed that by altering the cultivation medium from nitrogen-sufficient to nitrogen-depletion conditions, the calorific value of Chlorella vulgaris biomass increases by 5 MJ kg−1.171


3.3.2 Heavy metal removal. 
Industrial wastewater contains heavy metals, such as zinc (Zn), nickel (Ni), chromium (Cr), cadmium (Cd), cobalt (Co), mercury (Hg), copper (Cu), manganese (Mn), lead (Pb), and so on. These elements have a detrimental impact on both ecosystems and humans, but some are vital for plant growth (e.g., Zn, Cu, Mn, Ni, and Co) in trace concentrations. Some important factors, including treatment techniques, the type of industrial plant and its capacity, and wastewater flux, affect the removal of heavy metals from industrial wastewater. Reverse osmosis, chemical precipitation, ion exchange, and solvent extraction are among the most well-known methods for heavy metal removal. However, these methods have disadvantages, including high cost, high energy consumption, toxic sludge production, and imperfect metal removal. The mentioned disadvantages made researchers focus on searching for a more efficient treatment technology. One of the efficient technologies for water treatment and heavy metal removal is using the inherent ability of microorganisms.196 Brown algae are the most well-known substrate for removing heavy metal toxicity as they contain alginate and fucoidan.197 Binding on the cell surface and intracellular ligands are involved in the metal sorption process. The carboxyl group is the main functional group for metal binding. Several factors affect metal sorption, including the pH, cations, anions, metal concentration, metabolic stage of the organism, temperature, and biomass in solution. Removal of metal from multi-metal solutions can be done by using the high potential of algae in this field.37 So far, different efficiencies have been obtained from the heavy metal removal by changing the pH, redox potential, and dissolved oxygen in the ponds.198 The metal removal using microalgae cells is comparable and even at times greater than that of other conventional methods. For instance, the efficiency of metal removal by the common method, ion exchanger, is less than 10 mg L−1 metal concentration in the solution, while 97% removal of Pb by algal cells was observed from a solution containing 39.4 mg L−1 initial concentration of Pb.199,200 The presence of heavy metals also has a strong influence on the nutrient removal yield and subsequent microalgae growth. A study indicated that high Zn concentrations in wastewater inhibit microalgae growth and reduce the pH value elevation, decreasing ammonia nitrogen volatilization and assimilation. Moreover, the high Zn concentration promotes phosphorus precipitation and stimulates assimilation of phosphorus, meaning that at low concentrations, Zn decreases the removal efficiency of phosphorus.201


3.3.3 Potential and limitations of microalgae-based wastewater treatment. 
Phycoremediation has numerous advantages over conventional wastewater treatment methods. As stated before, little sludge formation, low energy requirements, and low GHG emissions are among the most well-known benefits of using microalgae to treat wastewater. Conventional wastewater treatment methods require high energy to provide oxygen for aerobic micro-organisms using aeration systems, but microalgae provide oxygen during photosynthesis. Also, sludge formation is insignificant during microalgae-based wastewater treatment because no chemicals are used during the treatment process. In contrast, many chemicals are used in conventional wastewater treatment methods such as flocculation/coagulation, leading to a huge amount of sludge formation. Another important feature of microalgae is their capability of CO2 fixation. By cultivating microalgae, nutrients and carbon should be provided in order to have high algal productivity. CO2 from effluent flue gas is the best option to provide for microalgae. This solution enhances algal productivity and helps solve the problem of GHG emissions.202
Aside from the well-known potential of microalgae-based wastewater treatment, there are some challenges regarding the process, which we must know to build a sustainable algal biorefinery platform. Photoinhibition and light unavailability are among the most important challenges of phycoremediation. Wastewaters contain many suspended solids, which can block the light penetration needed for algal photosynthesis. Reducing light can adversely impact algal productivity, resulting in a low microalgae activity and growth rate. This issue can be solved by continuously mixing algal media with an aeration system in PBRs or rotating discs in raceway open ponds. The turbulence made by aeration systems or rotating discs can rotate the microalgae and expose them to sufficient light. As another solution, a pre-treatment method such as flocculation can be used to remove suspended solids and reduce turbidity. It should be noted that the photoinhibition phenomenon does not always happen due to the presence of solid particles. Microalgae can cause internal shading by their rapid increase in the cell concentration. In these cases, the upper portion of wastewater provides favorable conditions for algal growth due to the direct reception of sunlight. Consequently, the lower portion of wastewater is under the shade of microalgae biomass and is deprived of direct sun energy. The same approach as using aeration systems or rotating discs would help to prevent this phenomenon.203 Also, genetic engineering can be a helpful tool here by modifying the genetics of algal strains. It was shown that algal species with a small antenna size could decrease photoinhibition by lowering light dissipation through non-photochemical quenching.204
Due to the photoinhibition phenomenon, the depth of microalgae ponds should be shallow enough (∼0.3 m) so that light penetration can be guaranteed. Normally low volume/surface (V/S) ratios are recommended for efficient algal growth. However, lowering the depth of microalgae ponds increases the need for a huge cultivation area. Aside from the economic aspect of the project, a huge cultivation area increases the amount of evaporative losses, which is totally dependent on the local climate. The high amount of evaporation losses emphasizes the need for additional water in order to compensate for the evaporated water. Requiring additional water can have an adverse impact on the water sector of the FEWE nexus. Thus, if the biorefinery platform is going to be created in hot, dry, and windy climates with high evaporative losses, it is better to use deeper ponds or photobioreactors instead of shallow ponds with a high surface area.205 Besides evaporation, the environmental stability of the culture has a profound impact on microalgal growth rates and nutrient removal efficiency. Each algal strain has an optimum range of temperatures and light intensities. The variation of light intensity and temperature, whether it is lower or higher than the optimum range, could adversely impact the idea of building an algal biorefinery platform.204
As stated before, nutrients, such as carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus, are the main feedstock for microalgae growth in wastewater media. There have been numerous investigations on the optimum amount of nutrients to detect the most favorable wastewater for algal growth. It was found out that the C:N and N:P ratios play a vital role in successful algae-based wastewater treatment and microalgal growth rates. Unbalanced C:N and N:P ratios can result in low microalgae activity and an unsuccessful phycoremediation process. Also, several cations, including Mg2+, Ca2+, Na+, and K+, are essential for microalgae growth and can be a good criterion for choosing the proper wastewater effluent for the biorefinery platform. Thus, there is a preference to use the appropriate wastewater effluents to obtain efficient nutrient uptake and remove the barriers in the way of microalgae-based wastewater treatment.206

3.4 Environment
The environment sector is yet another critical part of the biorefinery platform. Environmental pollution and climate change have been the most important global issues of recent decades. Greenhouse gases increase due to fossil fuel combustion which has led to one of the most concerning planet issues, climate change. Change in climate variability, temperature, surface water runoff, precipitation, and CO2 fertilization are among the climate change factors.174 Gradually, climate change upsets natural ecosystems and communities and changes the management and allotment of natural resources and settlement models.2 Decreased productivity and increased yearly change in crops and livestock are the destructive effects of increasing temperatures and, consequently, more need for water by crops and livestock. Also, increasing carbon dioxide emissions reduces nutrients such as nitrogen and protein in crops, which lowers their nutritional value and forces farmers and ranchers to use better and more fertilizer. Weeds and insects benefit more from higher temperatures and CO2 concentrations than crops in the food production industry. This results in increased stress on crops and needs greater agricultural control agents. From another aspect, erosion, waterlogging, or heat waves caused by severe weather events, such as droughts and floods, can influence soil water and soil accessibility.
Numerous research studies have been conducted during the past few decades to reduce or control greenhouse gas emissions. The technologies available for CO2 capture can be divided into three methods: pre-combustion, oxyfuel combustion, and post-combustion. So far, the post-combustion method has been used more than the other two methods due to its lower costs, less energy requirements, and easy-to-use process. In the pre-combustion method, fossil fuels react with air or oxygen, and a gaseous combination of H2 and CO termed syngas is generated before the combustion process is finished (partial oxidation). The water-gas shift reaction then occurs between the syngas and steam, resulting in the production of H2 and CO. Eventually, the produced CO2 is isolated, and H2 is used to generate electricity or for other usages. The difficulty of this method is the complexity of the fuel conversion process before combustion. The oxyfuel combustion method uses O2 with a purity of over 95% which reacts with the recovered flue gas to form a combination of water vapor and CO2. The obstacle of this technology is high energy consumption to separate pure O2 from air.211 CO2 capture and storage in underground reservoirs, chemical reactions including absorption, physical adsorption, cryogenic, and membrane separation are among the potential strategies of post-combustion capture methods.94Table 5 provides detailed definitions of post-combustion methods and their practical advantages and disadvantages.
Table 5 Advantages and limitations of different CO2 capture and storage methods (modified from ref.49, 94 and 207–211)




Methods
Mechanisms
Advantages
Limitations





Conventional CO

2

capture



Absorption
Using chemical solvents for CO2 chemical absorption, such as MEA, DEA, and MDEA
High CO2 solubility, thermal stability, safe and permanent sequestration, good efficiency (50–95%), rapid reaction, and large processing capacity
Solvent degradation, equipment corrosion, energy-intensive solvent regeneration, reacting with components other than CO2, such as SO2, resulting in irreversible degeneration of the solvent, difficult to scale-up ionic liquids, poor CO2/N2 selectivity, and not cost-effective


Physical adsorption
Using a solid adsorbent for CO2 capture, such as zeolite, aluminum oxide, activated carbon (AC), and silica gel
Low waste generation, low toxicity, simple, and good efficiency (55–92%)
Energy inefficient, flue gas pre-treatment necessary before channeling to the adsorber because of the presence of contaminants (e.g., SOx and NOx) and high moisture content, poor CO2 selectivity, not suitable for dealing with the emission sources with a large flue gas volume


Using metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) for CO2 capture
High porosity, crystallinity and surface area
Powdered MOFs have low mechanical strength and are difficult to handle


Membrane separation
Using membranes made of metallics, polymers, and ceramics to filter out CO2 from the mainstream based on hydrostatic pressure and concentration gradient
Good efficiency (50–90%), mass transfer increase, environment friendly, and no regeneration process
Necessary cooling of hot flue gas, poor selectivity, high membrane cost and surface area requirement, high moisture content in the effluent flue gas can adversely affect membrane performance, energy inefficient, low pressure and concentration of flue gas can reduce the efficiency of the process, and small processing capacity


Cryogenic separation
Successive refrigeration and condensation of the gas mixture at varied condensation temperatures (very low temperatures) for CO2 separation
High efficiency (up to 99%), easy for transportation via pipelines because of direct production of liquid CO2, absence of solvents, and easy to scale up
High energy requirement for refrigeration


Flue gas moisture removal is required prior to cooling to prevent plugging by ice formation


Solidified CO2 is continuously built up on the heat-exchanger surfaces and is required to be removed, mainly suitable for the treatment of high concentration CO2






Biological CO

2

capture



Microalgae-based
Use CO2 for microalgae growth via photosynthesis
No need for arable land, Co-production of high-value products, biofuel, and food, potential coupling with wastewater treatment, a faster growth rate than plants, high efficiency in a wide range of CO2 concentrations, environment friendly and sustainable
Sensitive to the high concentration of NOx and SOx, predation, contamination, and harsh cultivation conditions (pH, temperature, salinity, etc.)






CO

2

storage



Geological
Injection of CO2 into depleted oil and gas reservoirs and coal seams
Replenish depleted reservoirs, huge storage capacity, and possible recovery of oil/methane
High cost, CO2 leakage prone, and specific geomorphic structure requirement


Oceanic
Injection of CO2 into deep oceans
Large CO2 storage capacity
Cost intensive and a threat to marine life


Potential gas leakage




Combining CO2 bio-mitigation and wastewater's nutrient removal can bring a promising alternative to the mentioned CO2 capture strategies.35 Additionally, CO2 fixation along with microalgae cultivation results in the production of biofuel, food, and high-value products, with no need for arable land. Another great potential of microalgae is their ability to absorb CO2 and NOx; thus, microalgae have been the focus of most climate-related solutions during the past few years.212 Sequestering carbon dioxide in a biological process is done by chlorophylls via photosynthesis, in which carbohydrates are produced from CO2, water, and sunlight. The light reaction and light-independent reaction are two pathways of photosynthesis. In the light-dependent reaction, chlorophyll pigments absorb light photons and release electrons. The following equation completely describes this pathway:20 2H2O + 2NADP+ + 3ADP + 3P + light photon → 2NADPH + 2H+ + 3ATP + O2(1)
Light photons combine ATP (adenosine triphosphate) and NADPH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) and release oxygen. In the second pathway, the light-independent reaction, CO2 reduction occurs when ATP and NADPH (from the light-dependent pathway) are present, and carbohydrate is the product of this reaction. The overall equation for this stage is as below: 3CO2 + 6NADPH + 9ADP + 6H+ → [CH2O]n + 3H2O + 6NADP+ + 9ADP + 8P(2)
Fixing CO2 by microalgae can be performed by applying different sources, such as the atmosphere and flue gas of plants, but since the CO2 content of the atmosphere is only 0.03–0.06%, the cell growth can be disrupted due to the low amount of carbon. On the other hand, the usual composition of coal-fired flue gas is as follows: CO2, 10–15% (v/v); N2, 72–77% (v/v); O2, 3–4% (v/v); SOx, 541–657 mg m−3; NOx, 449–516 mg m−3; CO, 30–40 mg m−3; heavy metals and particulate matter.15 Based on the microalgae average carbon content, it is approximated that 1.78–1.83 kg of carbon dioxide is needed to make 1 kg of algal biomass.15 The CO2 fixation rate totally depends on microalgal species and operating conditions, including the temperature, pH, light utilization efficiency, and CO2 concentration. To achieve efficient CO2 fixation, elements such as microalgae species, the inoculum size, and density must be considered. As a case in point, it was proved that if the initial inoculum density is high, it protects microalgae cells when exposed to the detrimental composition of the flue gas.94 Also, a study on the influence of the photoperiod on CO2 removal was conducted; it was indicated that the intermittent light regime profoundly impacted CO2 fixation, resulting in a loss of 78%.35 Aside from the physiochemical parameters stated above and in the previous sections, the impact of hydrodynamic parameters, including flow, mixing, and CO2 mass transfer, should be taken into consideration. Microalgal cultures should be completely aerated and agitated to distribute nutrients, CO2, light intensity, and temperature uniformly through the media. This process can help prevent the accumulation of O2 and microalgal sedimentation or aggregation. Moreover, it should be stated that the aeration rate and bubble size influence the efficiency of the process because high aeration can increase shear stress and consequently cause mechanical destruction of cells, increase energy consumption and reduce mass transfer. Inefficient CO2 mass transfer decreases the CO2 fixation rate because of the difficulty of propagating carbon dioxide into water. Besides the flow rate and bubble size, the CO2 concentration, gas-and-liquid contact area, and gas hold up govern the mass transfer rate. To commercialize microalgae cultivation for biofuels and other bioproducts, it is necessary to understand these factors.94 The CO2 removal efficiency, as an indicator of the microalgal CO2 fixation efficiency, can be calculated using the following formula:20 (3)

Table 6 provides detailed CO2 fixation results and biomass productivity based on factors, such as production systems and operating conditions.
Table 6 Biomass productivity and CO2 fixation




Microalgae species
Cultivation conditions
B.P. (g per L per day)
CO2 fixation (g per L per day)
Ref.


Production system
Operation strategy
CO2 (%)
L.I. (μmol m−2 s−1)
Light/dark cycle





Chlorella sp. MTF-15
Bubble column, 1 L
On–off feeding; diluted flue gas; batch
23–27
300
12/12 h
0.528
20–35

215




Nannochloropsis oceanica

Raceway pond, 8000 L
On–off feeding; pure flue gas; batch
13
Outdoor
Variable
0.021
—

216




Scenedesmus dimorphus

Bubble column, 0.001 L
On–off feeding; pure flue gas
15
100
—
0.485
0.889

217




Chlorella emersonii

Air-lift column, 5.5 L
On–off feeding; pure flue gas; semi-continuous
15
200
16/8 h
0.067
0.108

218




Chlorella sp. MTF-7
Bubble column, 50 L
On–off feeding; pure flue gas; batch
25
Outdoor
Variable
0.36
—

219




Nannochloropsis salina

Raceway pond, 600 L
Continuous feeding; pure flue gas; batch
10–11
Outdoor
Variable
0.032
0.06

220




Chlorella vulgaris

Conical flask, 0.1 L
Batch
10
165
—
0.033–0.278
0.063–0.522

221




Chlorella sp. MTF-7
Bubble column, 0.8 L
Batch
2–25
300
24/0 h
0.183–0.358
0.345–0.674

219




Chlorella sp.
Bubble column, 1 L
Batch
10–20
84
12/12 h
0.150–0.271
0.282–0.510

222




Spirulina sp.
Tubular PBR, 2.25 L
Continuous feeding
6
4320 (lux)
14/10
1.03
0.678

223




Anabaena sp.
Bubble column, 2 L
Continuous feeding; batch
—
2800
12/12 h
0.6
1

224




Chlorella sp.
Bubble column, 0.8 L
Semi-continuous
40
100
12/12 h
0.13
0.144

225




Chlorella vulgaris

Erlenmeyer flask, 0.25 L
Continuous feeding; simulated flue gas
0.04
—
24/0 h
0.408
0.768

226




Chlorella vulgaris

Erlenmeyer flask, 0.25 L
Continuous feeding; simulated flue gas
5
—
24/0 h
0.39
0.73

226




Scenedesmus obliquus

Erlenmeyer flask, 0.25 L
Continuous feeding; simulated flue gas
0.04
—
24/0 h
0.165
0.311

226




Scenedesmus obliquus

Erlenmeyer flask, 0.25 L
Continuous feeding; simulated flue gas
5
—
24/0 h
0.28
0.53

226




Dunaliella tertiolecta

Erlenmeyer flask, 0.25 L
Continuous feeding; simulated flue gas
0.04
—
24/0 h
0.164
0.308

226




Dunaliella tertiolecta

Erlenmeyer flask, 0.25 L
Continuous feeding; simulated flue gas
5
—
24/0 h
0.08
0.15

226




Thermosynechococcus sp.
Flat panel PBR, 1 L
Batch
0.04
2000
24/0 h
0.143
0.224

227




S. obliquus CNW-N
PBR
Continuous feeding; batch
2.5
140
24/0 h
0.424–0.456
0.718–0.771

228




Thermosynechococcus CL-1
Flat plate PBR, 100 L
Continuous feeding
—
1000
24/0 h
0.116
0.17

229




Thermosynechococcus CL-1
Flat plate PBR, 25 L
Continuous feeding; batch
—
2000
24/0 h
0.138
0.221

230




Chlorococcum sp.
Bubble column, 0.5 L
On–off feeding, batch
0.03
106
14/10 h
0.06
0.054

231




Chlorococcum sp.
Bubble column, 0.5 L
On–off feeding, batch
1
106
14/10 h
0.065
0.058

231




Chlorococcum sp.
Bubble column, 0.5 L
On–off feeding, batch
2.5
106
14/10 h
0.091
0.081

231




Chlorococcum sp.
Bubble column, 0.5 L
On–off feeding, batch
5
106
14/10 h
0.105
0.094

231




Chlorococcum sp.
Bubble column, 0.5 L
On–off feeding, batch
10
106
14/10 h
0.094
0.084

231




Chlorella sp.
Bubble column, 0.5 L
On–off feeding, batch
0.03
106
14/10 h
0.114
0.103

231




Chlorella sp.
Bubble column, 0.5 L
On–off feeding, batch
1
106
14/10 h
0.161
0.144

231




Chlorella sp.
Bubble column, 0.5 L
On–off feeding, batch
2.5
106
14/10 h
0.196
0.176

231




Chlorella sp.
Bubble column, 0.5 L
On–off feeding, batch
5
106
14/10 h
0.208
0.187

231




Chlorella sp.
Bubble column, 0.5 L
On–off feeding, batch
10
106
14/10 h
0.164
0.147

231






3.4.1 Current challenges of microalgae-based carbon capture. 
Flue gases contain other gases rather than CO2, such as nitrogen oxides (NOx) and sulfur oxides (SOx), which can be alternative nitrogen and sulfur sources for microalgal growth. The presence of high amounts of NOx and SOx in flue gas can be toxic for the microalgae growth by decreasing the solution pH and by direct growth inhibition due to the formation of acids including HNO2 or HNO3 and sulfite or sulfate ions.15,35 One of the examples that can be mentioned for this case is the inhibition of microalgal growth due to the reduction of the pH level to 2.5–3.5, which was observed when SO2 concentrations exceeded 100 ppm.15 The reason for the culture medium pH decrease was the release of H+ ions due to the hydrolysis of SO2 in the aforementioned high concentration.94 However, even in the high concentration of SO2, if the pH can be maintained at 8 using NaOH solution, microalgae growth is not inhibited.213 Unlike SOx, high NOx concentrations have been demonstrated to have only a negative impact on the biomass growth rate and productivity and have no direct inhibitory effect. This threshold concentration varies among different microalgae species, like 150 ppm for Scenedesmus sp. and 26 ppm for Euglena gracilis.94,214
The slow CO2 mass transfer rate into water is one of the main reasons that hindered the application of microalgae in CO2 fixation. The most common method for efficient CO2 fixation by microalgae is sparging CO2 in the form of macrobubbles with a diameter of around 1–2 mm.214 This procedure, however, can cause macrobubbles to rise quickly and burst on the water surface, releasing them back into the atmosphere. Therefore, a small amount of supplied CO2 is dissolved in water and assimilated by microalgae. To overcome this issue, microbubbles with a diameter of around 10–50 μm are generated instead of macrobubbles using various methods, such as hydrodynamic cavitation, acoustic cavitation, pressurized gas–liquid circulation, and fluidic oscillation. This novel technology enhances the CO2 mass transfer rate into the water because these microbubbles have a high surface-to-volume ratio and slower rising velocity in the water medium, resulting in a faster CO2 dissolution rate before reaching the water surface.214,232
Flue gas containing up to 15% CO2 makes it the primary source of microalgae cultivation, but there is an issue to overcome. Flue gas's high temperature (almost 120 °C) hinders its direct application in algal reactors; therefore, a heat exchanger is needed to reduce the temperature of the flue gas to about 40 °C.15,48 It should be considered that temperature is a parameter affecting the metabolic behavior of microalgae and, if not maintained at the desired level, reduces the solubility of CO2. Also, it has a detrimental effect on the proper function of carbon sequestration and microalgae biomass production. Besides, high temperatures in microalgae open ponds can result in evaporative losses, a reduction in the amount of accessible water. In this case, additional water is needed to compensate for the water losses due to the high temperature of CO2 effluents. Adding water has an adverse impact on the FEWE nexus by consuming freshwater and causing water insecurity. To reduce the capital cost in CO2 transportation, microalgae biorefineries should be located near sources like cement plants, fossil fuel-fired power stations, or industrial processes. This is because impurities such as sulfur and nitrogen oxides affect the transportation process and make it costly because of considerable corrosion rates.233

4 Integrated solution proposed by the algal biorefinery
The idea of an algal biorefinery as a solution for the FEWE nexus should be sustainable and economical. The large-scale algal biorefinery process is still far off. There are some measures to be taken to improve algal biorefinery viability. As a solution to the current energy crisis, the development of algal biofuels from microalgae species cannot satisfy the economic feasibility of overwhelming capital investments and operations. Based on Table 7, techno-economical analyses have shown that the major cost of microalgae cultivation is from supplying fresh water and nutrients to the cultivation media. This issue is expensive and threatens water security as a sector in the FEWE nexus. Instead of freshwater, various wastewater effluents can be fed into algal cultivation media, making it more economically feasible. Also, this solution can be synergistic between all the nexus sectors. By using wastewaters as the algal feedstock, (1) biofuels and (2) food, feed, and value-added products can be obtained while lowering (3) the stress on freshwater sources and (4) the ecological footprint. The results of ten case studies have been collected and shown in Table 7. The table provides details of many scenarios about algal biorefinery process feasibility. Each scenario involves a specific algal biorefinery feedstock, operating strategy, products, economic analysis, and integration of nexus sectors. Based on Table 7, 31 out of 40 scenarios are economically viable and have a positive net present value (NPV). A positive NPV means the investment in a project is profitable. In some cases, the minimum fuel selling price (MFSP) is reported. This indicates the lowest product price when the NPV is zero, and no profit can be obtained. The MFSP should be a competitive price so that algal bioproducts can have a reasonable market share. Out of the nine uneconomical scenarios, 88% considered only two sectors of the FEWE nexus and ignored the rest, resulting in economic infeasibility. The only infeasible case, considering three out of the four nexus sectors, has only biogas production without any value-added products. Studies have shown that by integrating food, water, and the environment with the energy sector, bio-oil prices can be competitive and economically viable, ranging from $1.85 to $2.23 per gallon. The majority of investigated case studies, which considered food as one of the algal biorefinery products, had a positive NPV. Thus, producing food and value-added products plays an important role in making the algal biorefinery economical. Table 7 highlights the importance of the FEWE nexus as the main and best approach for sustainability. Integrating food and energy with carbon emission mitigation can also increase the process efficiency and help us fight climate change. Plants' flue gas and wastewater effluents can help make the algal biorefinery approach more sustainable, environmentally friendly, and economical. Fig. 4 summarizes the steps of the whole microalgae biorefinery concept from cultivation to the final products, including wastewater treatment, GHG emissions mitigation, biofuel production, electricity production, and value-added product extraction.
Table 7 A comprehensive review on algal biorefinery economical feasibility considering the FEWE nexus




Algal strain
Feedstock
Cultivation & harvesting
Production (tonnes)
Land use
Economical analysis
Nexus sectors
Ref.


Costs
NPV/MFSP
Status





Dunaliella salina

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond without membrane filtration
Fertilizer (1476)
69 ha
Investment: €11.2m
€8.7m
Economical
Food

235



Nutrients; salts
β-Carotene (141)
Operational: €13.4m per year
Environment



Dunaliella salina

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond
Fertilizer (1476)
69 ha
Investment: €10.7m
€36.9m
Economical
Food

235



Nutrients; salts
With membrane filtration
β-Carotene (141)
Operational: €7.9m per year
Environment



Dunaliella salina

Freshwater; CO2
PBR
Fertilizer (1476)
18 ha
Investment: €43.1m
-€13.7m
Uneconomical
Food

235



Nutrients; salts
With membrane filtration
β-Carotene (141)
Operational: €13.2m per year
Environment



Haematococcus pluvialis

Freshwater; CO2
PBR
Fertilizer (1583)
20 ha
Investment: €46.1m
€8.3m
Economical
Food

235



Nutrients
With membrane filtration
Astaxanthin (43)
Operational: €13.7m per year
Environment


—
N, P, and CO2
Open pond
Diesel (1)
4 ha
Investment: $381.2
$6.27 per gallon diesel (MFSP)
Uneconomical
Energy

236



Dewatering needed
Operational: $292.4
Environment


—
N, P, and CO2
Algal turf scrubber
Diesel (1)
—
Investment: $338.9
$8.34 per gallon diesel (MFSP)
Uneconomical
Energy

236



No need for dewatering
Operational: $171.7
Environment



Synechocystis GMO
Freshwater; CO2
Tubular PBR
Bioethanol (0.7)
3000 m3
Investment: €36.2m
-€65.1m
Uneconomical
Energy

237



Nutrients; salts
Fertilizer (0.2)
Environment


Biogas



Synechocystis GMO
Freshwater; CO2
Tubular PBR
Bioethanol (0.7)
3000 m3
Investment: €58.6m
€16.7m
Economical
Food

237



Nutrients; salts
Phycocyanin (0.07)
Energy


Zeaxanthin (0.002)
Environment


Fertilizer (0.2)


Biogas



Synechocystis PCC
Freshwater; CO2
Tubular PBR
Phycocyanin
3000 m3
Investment: €62.8m
€104.8m
Economical
Food

237



Nutrients; salts
Zeaxanthin
Environment



Arthrospira

—
—
Phycocyanin (3)


Total: $235
$800000
Economical
Food

238



Environment



Arthrospira

—
—
Phycocyanin (3) lipid/TFA (1.5)


Total: $359
−$170000
Uneconomical
Food

238



Environment



Arthrospira

—
—
Phycocyanin (3) lipid/TFA (1.5)


Total: $1273
−$770000
Uneconomical
Food

238



Polysaccharide (0.1)
Environment



Dunaliella salina

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond without membrane filtration
Fertilizer (1285)
50 ha
Investment: €17m
−€7m
Uneconomical
Food

239



Nutrients; salts
β-Carotene (113)
Operational: €10m per year
Environment



Dunaliella salina

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond with membrane filtration
Fertilizer (1285)
50 ha
Investment: €18m
€25m
Economical
Food

239



Nutrients; salts
β-Carotene (113)
Operational: €5m per year
Environment



Dunaliella salina

Freshwater; CO2
Tubular PBR with membrane filtration
Fertilizer (1285)
9 ha
Investment: €47m
−€29m
Uneconomical
Food

239



Nutrients; salts
β-Carotene (113)
Operational: €10m per year
Environment



Dunaliella salina

Seawater; CO2
Open pond without membrane filtration
Fertilizer (1285)
23 ha
Investment: €7m
€33m
Economical
Food

239



Nutrients; salts
β-Carotene (113)
Operational: €3m per year
Environment



Dunaliella salina

Seawater; CO2
Open pond
Fertilizer (1285)
23 ha
Investment: €8m
€40m
Economical
Food

239



Nutrients; salts
With membrane filtration
β-Carotene (113)
Operational: €2m per year
Environment



Dunaliella salina

Seawater; CO2
Tubular PBR
Fertilizer (1285)
9 ha
Investment: €31m
€2m
Economical
Food

239



Nutrients; salts
With membrane filtration
β-Carotene (113)
Operational: €6m per year
Environment



Nannochloropsis sp.
Freshwater; CO2
Open pond
Fish feed (1200)
28 ha
Investment: €14.9m
€180m
Economical
Food

240



Nutrients; salts
Sold without processing
Operational: €3.83m per year
Environment



Haematococcus pluvialis

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond
Fertilizer (2450)
114 ha
Investment: €34.8m
€155m
Economical
Food

240



Nutrients
Sold without processing
Carotenoids (84)
Operational: €9.39m per year
Environment



Dunaliella salina

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond
Fertilizer (880)
52.1 ha
Investment: €19.1m
€17.6m
Economical
Food

240



Nutrients; salts
Sold without processing
Carotenoids (111)
Operational: €5.85m per year
Environment



Haematococcus pluvialis

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond
Fertilizer (190)
114 ha
Investment: €35.3m
€154m
Economical
Food

240



Nutrients
AD
Carotenoids (84)
Operational: €9.5m per year
Energy


Biogas (6.73 GW h)
Environment



Dunaliella salina

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond
Fertilizer (70)
52.1 ha
Investment: €19.4m
€17.1m
Economical
Food

240



Nutrients; salts
AD
Carotenoids (111)
Operational: €5.90m per year
Energy


Biogas (2.42 GW h)
Environment



Haematococcus pluvialis

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond
Carotenoids (84)
114 ha
Investment: €38.6m
€151m
Economical
Food

240



Nutrients
Gasification
Syngas (14 GW h)
Operational: €9.73m per year
Energy


Diesel (122 m3)
Environment


Gasoline (113 m3)



Dunaliella salina

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond
Carotenoids (111)
52.1 ha
Investment: €21.2m
€15.1m
Economical
Food

240



Nutrients; salts
Gasification
Syngas (5.1 GW h)
Operational: €6.04m per year
Energy


Diesel (44.6 m3)
Environment


Gasoline (41.3 m3)



Haematococcus pluvialis

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond
Carotenoids (84)
114 ha
Investment: €38.7m
€150m
Economical
Food

240



Nutrients
Torrefaction
Syngas (9.27 GW h)
Operational: €9.75m per year
Energy


Diesel (164 m3)
Environment


Gasoline (152 m3)



Dunaliella salina

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond
Carotenoids (111)
52.1 ha
Investment: €21.3m
€15m
Economical
Food

240



Nutrients; salts
Torrefaction
Syngas (3.39 GW h)
Operational: €6.04m per year
Energy


Diesel (59.8 m3)
Environment


Gasoline (55.4 m3)



Haematococcus pluvialis

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond
Carotenoids (84)
114 ha
Investment: €38.7m
€150m
Economical
Food

240



Nutrients
Pyrolysis
Syngas (7.22 GW h)
Operational: €9.77m per year
Energy


Diesel (213 m3)
Environment


Gasoline (197 m3)



Dunaliella salina

Freshwater; CO2
Open pond
Carotenoids (111)
52.1 ha
Investment: €21.3m
€14.9m
Economical
Food

240



Nutrients; salts
Pyrolysis
Syngas (2.64 GW h)
Operational: €6.05m per year
Energy


Diesel (77.9 m3)
Environment


Gasoline (72.1 m3)



Chlorella vulgaris

Paper wastewater
Open pond
Lipids
—
Investment: €19.42m
€5.07m
Economical
Energy

241



CO2 from flue gas
PE (2%)
Biogas
Operational: €3.37m per year
Water


AD (45%)
Environment


LE (75%)



Chlorella vulgaris

Paper wastewater
Open pond
Lipids
—
Investment: €18m
-€7.41m
Uneconomical
Energy

241



CO2 from flue gas
PE (1%)
Biogas
Operational: €2.61m per year
Water


AD (45%)
Environment


LE (75%)



Chlorella vulgaris

Paper wastewater
Open pond
Lipids
—
Investment: €21.2m
€15.37m
Economical
Energy

241



CO2 from flue gas
PE (3%)
Biogas
Operational: €4.16m per year
Water


AD (45%)
Environment


LE (75%)



Chlorella vulgaris

Paper wastewater
Open pond
Lipids
—
Investment: €19.42m
€3.69m
Economical
Energy

241



CO2 from flue gas
PE (2%)
Biogas
Operational: €3.37m per year
Water


AD (45%)
Environment


LE (60%)



Chlorella vulgaris

Paper wastewater
Open pond
Lipids
—
Investment: €19.42m
€6.44m
Economical
Energy

241



CO2 from flue gas
PE (2%)
Biogas
Operational: €3.37m per year
Water


AD (45%)
Environment


LE (90%)



Chlorella vulgaris

Paper wastewater
Open pond
Lipids
—
Investment: €19.42m
€4.21m
Economical
Energy

241



PE (2%)
Biogas
Operational: €3.37m per year
Water


AD (30%)
Environment


CO2 from flue gas
LE (75%)



Chlorella vulgaris

Paper wastewater
Open pond
Lipids
—
Investment: €19.42m
€5.92m
Economical
Energy

241



CO2 from flue gas
PE (2%)
Biogas
Operational: €3.37m per year
Water


AD (60%)
Environment


LE (75%)



Chlorella sp.
Municipal wastewater
PBR
Bio-oil
—
Investment: $5.35m
$2.23 per gallon bio-oil (MFSP)
Economical
Energy

242



CO2
Pyrolysis
Syngas
Operational: $1.17m per year
Water


Biochar
Environment



Chlorella vulgaris

Wastewater
Open pond
Bio-oil
—
Investment: $1.34m
€70.59m
Economical
Energy

243



CO2
Liquefaction


Operational: $21.25m per year
Water


Centrifuge


Environment



Chlorella vulgaris

Wastewater
Open pond liquefaction
Bio-oil
—
Investment: $1.56m
€163.99m
Economical
Energy

243



CO2
Fourdrinier former
Operational: $3.96m per year
Water


Environment


—
Water streams (centrate)
PBR
Bio-oil
2.57 ha
Investment: $47.07m
$1.85 per gallon bio-oil (MFSP)
Economical
Energy

244



CO2
Pyrolysis
Syngas
Operational: $8.44m per year
Water


Biochar
Environment




 Fig. 4  Flow diagram of the potential algal-based food–energy–water–environment nexus. 
As mentioned before, algal strains have meritorious attributes to produce bioenergy, treat wastewater, for CO2 uptake, and to recover food and value-added products simultaneously. Studies show that making wastewater nutrients as the algal biorefinery feedstock is insufficient to make the whole process sustainable. To enhance the economic viability of the approach, all the biomass components should be valorized. A multi-product algal biorefinery can considerably increase the sustainability of the process.234 Fertilizers, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, human food, animal feed, and fuels are common applications of microalgae biomass. There are various scenarios for producing biofuels, depending on the algal strains, cultivation conditions, dryness of harvested algal biomass, and energy demand.

Fig. 5 shows different routes to produce bioenergy more efficiently. Biomass residues after liquefaction, transesterification and fermentation can be utilized in another conversion process as the feedstock, increasing the efficiency of algal biorefinery. The figure expresses the impact of the first extracted compound on the subsequent compounds. For instance, bio-oil can be obtained from liquefaction, and the residues can be taken to either gasification or pyrolysis to obtain other compounds, such as syngas and biochar. As another example, biodiesel can be produced in the transesterification conversion process. The biomass residues after producing biodiesel can be converted to syngas using gasification, bio-oil and biochar using pyrolysis, and biogas using anaerobic digestion. In addition to the mentioned fuels, electricity can be obtained by combustion of residues to meet the algal biorefinery electricity demand, making the biorefinery concept more sustainable and independent of energy from outside the platform. This issue not only enhances the economic viability of the approach but also helps the energy sector of the FEWE nexus by lowering the stress on energy demand. Selecting the best conversion techniques depends on the regional energy demand and the components of harvested microalgae biomass. For instance, algal strains with high carbohydrate composition, such as Porphyridium cruentum, Spirogyra sp., and Scenedesmus dimorphus, can be utilized more for bioethanol production from the fermentation process and health supplement production. Also, strains with a huge amount of lipids, such as Chlorella zofingiensis, Prymnesium parvum, and Chlorococcum sp., can be the preferred options for biodiesel, bio-oil, and polyunsaturated fatty acid production. The high protein content of some microalgae strains, including Chlorella vulgaris, Chlorella pyrenoidosa, Aphanizomenon flos-aquae, Spirulina platensis, Spirulina maxima, and Synechococcus sp., attracts more attention for food, animal feed, and value-added product synthesis. For the food and value-added products, the order of extraction is important as it affects the final product yield. To extract phycocyanin (proteins), total fatty acids (lipids), and polysaccharides (carbohydrates) from Arthrospira (Spirulina), various stepwise extraction scenarios have been tested. The most efficient scenario was when phycocyanin was extracted as the first product, total fatty acids as the second product, and polysaccharides as the final product. Proteins such as phycocyanin are sensitive to extreme temperatures.
 Fig. 5  Different scenarios in algal biorefinery (energy sector). 
They can be degraded by the high temperature of the extraction solvent needed for lipid and carbohydrate extraction, highlighting the importance of the proper order of stepwise extraction. Various scenarios have different product yields based on different algal strains and desired products. Also, an economic analysis should be done before planning to extract microalgal components. This means extracting all the valuable algal components can be good but inefficient. An economic study showed that producing phycocyanin alone from Spirulina was economically feasible, but producing coproducts was not. As a result, for components that require a specialized extraction process, a cost-benefit analysis of several scenarios should be conducted.238
Following the goal of multi-product algal biorefinery, products other than fuels also need to be fully extracted. Algal strains, such as Spirulina, Dunaliella, and Chlorella, are available in the market for human consumption. Also, as for the cosmetics application, Chlorella and Arthrospira are used mostly in skincare products such as anti-aging creams and anti-irritants in peelers. Scenedesmus, Spirulina, and Chlorella have been used in animal feed and supplements. Currently, one specific product, such as β-carotene or astaxanthin, is extracted, and other valuable components, including carbohydrates and proteins, are discarded. Switching from a single product downstream process to a multi-product biorefinery approach can increase the total revenue from algae cultivation. Techno-economical studies show that a large-scale algal cultivation plant can be economically feasible by fractionating and purifying all biomass components, like a petrochemical refinery. In this way, the total production, including cultivation and the downstream process, costs about 7 USD, while the total revenues are predicted to be about 35 USD per kilogram dry weight of algal biomass.80 As discussed earlier, the first part of expenses, including cultivation, can be lowered using wastewater effluents and self-generated electricity. It was also predicted that the downstream processes, such as harvesting, extraction, and fractionation, composed nearly 50% of the total overall cost. Thus, the other cost-intensive part of the algal biorefinery platform can be saved by employing advanced techniques in the downstream process. The lack of proper downstream process technologies has led to complex process design. For the biorefinery platform to be feasible, the focus should be on overall process optimization and developing new extraction and cell disruption techniques. To attain efficient and cost-effective extraction and fractionation processes, the cell wall structure of each algal strain should be completely studied so that the most suitable technology can be chosen for the specific microalgae species.
After reviewing the current challenges in the FEWE nexus, a unifying framework is necessary to address the mentioned challenges. The framework should be an integrated solution in order to enhance synergies and lower trade-offs between the four sectors. Also, this framework should enlighten the path to developing regional plans for the nexus program in an integrated manner. Concerns over supplying basic resources to an ever-increasing global population have highlighted the importance of essential links between food, energy, and water delivery systems, characterized by the concept of food–energy–water. Current biorefineries that produce first-generation biofuels from food crops have impacted nexus resources, including land, food, water, and fossil fuel energy resources utilized in production and processing.
Alternative feedstocks are required to address biorefinery nexus issues. The microalgae biorefinery tries to consider the current resource constraints and propose a reasonable solution. Freshwater demand and availability, nutrients, available land, appropriate climate, the geographical position, concentrated CO2, power, transportation infrastructure, and the costs and logistics associated with each required resource are the common existing resource constraints for microalgae cultivation.245–248 Algal biorefinery can propose a solution-oriented approach to unify the monodisciplinary research results. There have been efforts to lower the existing competition for resources in the algal biorefinery platform. For instance, the development of algal strains that improve algae's ability to scavenge CO2 could help to alleviate the demand for concentrated CO2 as a resource constraint. Additionally, energy can be generated from residual combustion to meet the algal biorefinery's electrical consumption, reducing the need for power as a resource constraint for microalgae development. As for the nutrients and water, the proper location of the algal biorefinery is the other fundamental issue to be considered when launching a biorefinery platform. Co-location with industries with a huge amount of CO2 effluent and wastewater output can provide the required resources and impact the viability of a successful algal biorefinery. Fossil fuel power stations, pulp and paper mills, iron and steel industry, cement plants, chemical (plastics and fertilizer) industry, aluminum and non-ferrous metal production, textile and leather industry, and food processing industry are among the major emitting industrial sectors. As shown in Table 3, these industries also discharge large amounts of wastewater, which can be used as the biorefinery input. Additionally, closeness to the mentioned industries can reduce the emissions and costs related to the transportation of the biorefinery input materials.249,250 Thus, to establish an algal biorefinery, choosing an appropriate location is critical because it influences investment, transportation, and operating costs. When a biorefinery is established, some factors should be considered, such as types of harvesting crops, the time of collecting them, and the method of transporting feedstock into the biorefinery. Furthermore, the climate and weather impact biomass availability which is determinative for the optimal plant size.251
As another resource requirement for microalgae cultivation, climatic parameters such as the day length, insolation rate, temperature, and latitude (geographic position) strongly impact algae productivity. Studies show that tropical climates and low latitudes are the best conditions for high productivity. Locations with low latitudes such as Hawaii, California, and Israel have commercial microalgae farms. A feasible algal biorefinery should be located in countries with accessible required resources and wide and flat land areas.51,252–254 For example, the weather and location of Malaysia in the tropical region have eased the microalgae growth process. With the uninterrupted and well-distributed solar irradiance, Malaysia provides the perfect conditions for the photosynthesis process. The global map of chlorophyll distribution shows that Malaysia is one of the most viable geographical regions due to the high chlorophyll concentration. Additionally, the temperature of this country is suitable for microalgae production. According to IndexMundi, 180 million metric tons of CO2 is produced in Malaysia, and 50% of this is the share of electricity generation and industrial processes. Not only do flue gases supply the required CO2 to feed microalgae, but the NOx and SOx contents also could be used as an alternative supply of nitrogen and sulfur for microalgal growth. The unique nature of Malaysia for microalgae growth provides the opportunity to use non-arable land areas that are unproductive due to saltwater infiltration, resulting in minimizing the competition with agriculture for food crops. A study on Singapore, a neighboring country of Malaysia with similar climate and conditions, shows that Singapore can use solar radiation and wastewater from industries to produce biodiesel from microalgae with the final cost of $0.42–0.97 per L.255,256 Brunei Darussalam, another tropical country in Southeast Asia, has desirable features such as access to seawater, an appropriate rainfall pattern, a favorable environment, air and water qualities, and annual uninterrupted sunlight for large-scale algae cultivation. Due to the use of natural oil and gas resources and petroleum, the environment of Brunei Darussalam is threatened by the increasing rate of CO2 and becoming a major concern. In a microalgae cultivation site, flue gases can be utilized to simultaneously minimize CO2 emission and utilize algae potential.257
Areas with minimum variation in climatic conditions such as tropical regional countries (Africa, South America, and India), particularly areas close to the equator and with a mean insolation (incoming solar radiation) of 3000 h per year, provide higher microalgae productivity. Studies show that the solar irradiation of India, which is about 4.0 kW h per m2 per day, is adequate to produce algae. Moreover, Africa and Nigeria receive an annual global irradiance between 4.80 and 6.55 kW h per m2 per day and 4.51 and 6.31 kW h per m2 per day, respectively. Besides the light intensity, the sunshine duration is crucial for algae production. Most African countries such as Nigeria have long daily periods of sunshine, greater than six hours. The annual rainfall pattern of Nigeria varies from 3800 mm in the coastal areas to lower than 650 mm in the north-east part of the country. The temperature of African countries is mostly higher than 21 °C for nine months per year. Barumbu, the Democratic Republic of Congo has only a 1.4 °C temperature difference between the summer and winter seasons; however, in the Sahara Desert, this is about 24 °C. In Nigeria, the average annual temperature difference is about 12 °C. Moreover, Africa has large empty and unutilized lands that are of great potential for microalgae production.254
As an example for South America, Brazil, a tropical coastal area with predominantly low latitudes, possesses almost 12% of the world's freshwater supply, and 8–22 MJ per m2 per day average insolation levels are received. Also, it has the richest flora area globally, having 3496 algae cataloged species. More than fifty laboratories in Brazil work on algae cultivation, and some of them keep over 150 strains of algae. The isolation of Chlorella strains produces up to 200 mg L−1 lipids daily. This is a considerable amount and can be compared with Nannochloropsis gaditana and N. salina, the most promising strains from other countries of the world.51,252,253 Additionally, Mexico has a lot of potential for algae growth due to its favorable latitude, yearly sun irradiation, tropical weather, and freshwater and marine locations. It has three suitable states for algae production (Jalisco, Oaxaca, and Veracruz) with a possibility of producing almost 9 million tonnes per year.258
Moreover, increasing demand for water, energy, and food in a society in the forthcoming years can be another signal for promising algal biorefinery establishment in a specific region. With the rapid population growth, emerging oil shortage, and the issue of climate change, some regions are under threat of insufficient food, water, and energy resources. To illustrate, based on the climate change vulnerability index, there are some regions at extreme risk levels. As one of the conspicuous results of global warming, rising sea levels threaten coastal regions by polluting the drinking water and damaging local agriculture (caused by saltwater intrusion) and the fishing industry. Also, drought-prone and water-stressed regions are other areas to be greatly impacted by the imminent threat of climate change.
The nexus concept has gained traction as a lens for evaluating integrated resource management and sustainable development since 2011. However, in recent years, there has been a demand to shift from “nexus thinking” to “nexus action”.259Fig. 6 highlights the importance of water, energy, and food security based on accessibility and availability of the three resource sectors. It can be understood that there is a synergy between locations with high potential for algae cultivation and locations with low access to water, food, and energy. For instance, Iran is an excellent choice for algal biorefinery establishment owing to its good environmental conditions, a high radiation rate, easy access to free seas, and enough lands for microalgae cultivation without competition with food production.
 Fig. 6  A world map of food, energy, and water access and availability (purple, red, and blue maps indicate food, energy, and water sectors, respectively). 
To provide the required nutrients for microalgae growth, areas close to petrochemical platforms such as central climates, the Zagros mountain regions, the coastline of the Oman Sea, and the Persian Gulf are better.260,261 Based on the available data in Fig. 6, Iran ranks 49th, 94th, and 107th for energy, water, and food access and availability worldwide.259 The high potential in algal cultivation integrated with the unfavorable situation regarding food, energy, water access, and availability make Iran a promising candidate for establishing an algal biorefinery platform.
Spain can make Europe independent of other continents for its high lipid and protein production potential from microalgae. Europe imports 6.8 million tonnes of palm oil and 7.5 million tonnes of soybean, composed of 3 million tonnes of protein from other countries. By exploiting efficient separation technology for extracting both proteins and lipids from microalgae, 17 million tonnes of microalgae are required to eliminate the need for biomass import. Statistics show that to produce 50 tonnes per ha per year microalgae, the required 17 million can be generated yearly only by occupying 0.7% of the total area of Spain.78 As for water, energy, and food access and availability, Spain ranks 33rd, 92nd, and 125th globally, respectively.205,259 The ranking indicates that Spain can be a potential country for microalgae biorefinery considering nexus concepts.
North and East Africa, the Middle East, western South America, the Caribbean, and Oceania are the other promising locations for microalgae biofuel production as the average microalgae production per unit area would be higher than 19.5 m3 per ha per year.56 Africa is the second driest continent in the world after Australia. The global renewable water resources are only 9%, and it has the highest urban population growth rate. Climate change and the lack of appropriate wastewater collection and treatment infrastructure cause some African cities, such as Cape Town, to be subjected to chronic water scarcity.254 The United Nations forecasts the population of Africa to grow from the current 1.2 billion to between 3.6 and 5.8 billion people in 2100. So, with the assumption of no change in the agricultural area, the available cropland area per person will decrease from 0.23 to 0.06 ha in Africa. The predictions have shown that the population of Nigeria will increase from the current 180 million to 790 million until 2100, and this country is facing real problems in food production.262 From Fig. 6, it can be derived that most African countries deal with food, energy, and water insecurity. Statistics show that 52% of African countries rank in the 4th quartile of food access and availability. The other 48% belong to the second and third quartile; no countries rank in the first quartile, emphasizing the critical situation of African countries in terms of food access and availability. As for the food access and availability, many indicators have been considered based on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as follows:259 (1) prevalence of undernourishment, (2) average protein supply, (3) prevalence of obesity in the adult population, (4) average dietary energy supply adequacy, (5) prevalence of severe food insecurity in the total population, (6) cereal yield, (7) average value of food production, (8) forestry and fishery and value-added products, (9) pest destroying crops, and (10) quality of food products. Algal biorefinery can impact the mentioned indicators significantly. For instance, microalgae valorization can result in protein, carbohydrate, ω-3 fatty acid, vitamin and colorant production (for human food, aquafeed and animal feed), impacting indicators like “average protein supply”, “prevalence of undernourishment”, “prevalence of severe food insecurity in the total population”, “forestry and fishery and value-added products”, etc. As for the other compounds derived from algal biorefinery, fertilizers and agrochemicals can impact indicators like “cereal yield”, “pest destroying crops”, etc. The numbers for the energy sector are almost the same as those for the food sector; the share of the first, second, third, and fourth quartile of energy access and availability are 2%, 27%, 19%, and 52%, respectively. The situation is worse for the water sector. 57% and 41% of the African countries rank in the 4th and 3rd quartile with only 2% in the 2nd quartile of water access and availability.259
Besides, as stated before, African countries' potential in the production of microalgae is considerable due to long daily periods of sunshine, low daily temperature fluctuation, etc.262 Hence, algal biorefinery establishment in Africa can be a reasonable solution to the FEWE nexus. Fig. 7 indicates the nexus security worldwide based on the water, energy, and food access and availability. The dark green color of the map shows the countries with high security in food, energy, and water. On the other hand, the bright green and red colors depict the countries with more resource constraints. The importance of securing resources is much higher for the second group (bright color on the map). Thus, algal biorefinery platforms can be a great solution to the challenges in the FEWE nexus. Indeed, more research is needed to fully explore the potential of each country regarding algal biorefinery establishment with the consideration of the FEWE nexus. Considering all the above mentioned examples and facts should guide governments to specify an ideal location for a biorefinery platform, which can help solve the nexus challenges.
 Fig. 7  A world map of nexus security (dark colors indicate nexus security and bright colors indicate nexus insecurity). 
5 Challenges and future perspective
The algal cultivation and biorefinery platform has gained considerable attention to synthesize biofuels, food, and value-added products. However, the biggest obstacle faced by the algal biorefinery platform is its low economic feasibility. The high downstream processing costs coupled with the low algal biomass concentration hinder the algal biorefinery scale-up. Techno-economic assessments have been used in the literature to calculate the capital and operating costs and the price of the final product in order to evaluate algal biorefinery viability. Many different results have been reported by using different culture media, algal strains, and operating strategies. For instance, photobioreactors have advantages over open ponds regarding CO2 uptake efficiency, biomass productivity, and culture controllability, but they are hard to operate and lead to higher capital and operation costs. The analyses have shown that unit biodiesel costs of photobioreactors are 2–10 fold of that of open ponds with the same biodiesel production capacity. Thus, the final biodiesel price can vary from USD 0.74–27 per L depending on cultivation and harvesting conditions and techniques. The future of microalgae cultivation can be dependent on compact large-scale photobioreactors. They can be operated at optimized culturing conditions, resulting in high algal biomass concentrations.263 Also, new advanced technologies can be introduced in the downstream process to help valorize the algal biomass. As a case in point, using nanoparticles is a special technology that facilitates adopting the algal biorefinery approach. It is used as a catalyst in microalgae cultivation and biochemical compound accumulation, extraction, and conversion. This technology leads to improvement of overall efficiency and prevention of adverse environmental impacts.84 More research and efforts are necessary to properly link new technologies with the algal biorefinery platform.
Complex manufacturing processes in a microalgae biorefinery can be automated and simplified by applying the internet of things (IoT) as new technology. IoT establishes an omnipresent network between devices, machines, or systems by combining information sensing devices with the internet. IoT comprises sense, transfer, and process parts and provides details for analysis purposes. Also, it proposes some suggestions and discovers possible risks to prevent potential dangers. IoT contributes to the entire processes of microalgae biorefinery and helps wherever information sensing, intelligent automation, and data processing are needed. For instance, it automizes the cultivation and harvesting systems and reduces operating costs and energy input. It can predict cellular production and make a well-adjusted operation to meet the expected product demand. Indeed, IoT as a pioneering approach can automatically control microalgae cultivation, scan and manipulate cultivation parameters, and optimize microalgae productivity (enhance food–energy interactions). Furthermore, IoT has great potential to identify and monitor toxic and target algae species, categorize microalgae species, and detect the viability of microalgal cells. Therefore, for the development and commercialization of a future microalgae biorefinery, IoT technology should be applied to obtain intelligent and automatic processes and achieve more products with lower costs.264
Also, there is a need for comprehensive research on the algal biorefinery considering food, energy, water, and environment sectors. The FEWE nexus can propose many scenarios, which have both advantages and disadvantages. In every scenario, the algal biorefinery pathway can be unique based on the biorefinery location, microalgae strain, nutrients, etc. First, techno-economic assessment and life-cycle assessment should be done to recognize all the factors impacting each scenario's economic and environmental aspects. Then, the most optimized scenario can be selected for the algal biorefinery case study and scaling up.
Other concerns, such as small market size, need to be addressed. For instance, algal products' degradation and stability are issues that can be the reason for a low market share. Pigment products are sensitive to certain environmental conditions, temperature, and light. Genetic engineering can be a helpful tool to enhance algal bioproducts. Existing microalgae need to be genetically improved and new algal strains explored to improve the final algal bioproducts. Enhancing the stability of the final product helps to increase the market size by ensuring high-quality products. The proposed algal biorefinery platform is currently in the research and development phase. Seizing all the opportunities provided in the food, energy, water, and environment sectors can strengthen further the algal biorefinery concept. In the near future, when the need for the FEWE nexus approach is more than ever, the algal biorefinery platform can draw both governmental and social support for the commercialization of algal bioproducts, which are currently missing. Researchers and scientists should be ready for that day because the algal biorefinery platform is the only and the best approach to consider all the four sectors included in the FEWE nexus. More research should be done to transform a fossil-based economy into an algal biomass-based economy successfully.
6 Conclusions
In this paper, a comprehensive review was done to delve into the algal biorefinery platform to solve the food–energy–water–environment nexus. Some major current challenges of the nexus were mentioned in the article, and the interconnections between the four sectors have been discussed. The following are the conclusions of this review article:
(I) Microalgae have the potential to be an effective solution to the proposed nexus regarding their direct impacts on food, energy, water, and environment sectors, including land use management, soil and crop enhancement, competing with or replacing petroleum as a renewable energy source, carbon mitigation, climate change prevention, avoidance of ecosystem contamination, wildlife preservation, increasing freshwater availability, and curbing the eutrophication phenomenon.
(II) Seeking strategies, such as value-added product extraction, choosing an efficient cell disruption and extraction method, and optimizing physiochemical and hydrodynamic cultivation parameters can help the large-scale biorefinery concept be commercially and technically viable.
(III) Besides all the algal biorefinery benefits, the energy and electricity consumption needed to run the platform is considerably high; however, it can be supplied using some conversion technologies, such as AD, MFC, and biomass combustion, making the nexus proposed solution sustainable.
(IV) The efficiency of the microalgae biorefinery as the nexus approach completely depends on its location. Building the platform near some special factories and power plants to use their wastewater and effluent flue gas can reduce the most important pollutants in the ecosystem.
(V) A review on techno-economic assessments showed that most case studies, which neglected two or more sectors of the FEWE nexus, are economically infeasible. Thus, algal biorefinery with the FEWE nexus approach leads to a more sustainable and economic project.
(VI) The integration between the algal biorefinery platform and the FEWE nexus should be considered. The locations and countries with great potential in algal cultivation and high risk for food, energy, and water insecurity have been discussed.
Author contributions
S. T. and A. E. both conceptualized the idea, developed it together, carried out writing (original draft), and writing (review and editing) of the work. O. T. supervised the study, commented on the manuscript, and provided the other authors with useful resources. All authors contributed to the validation and discussion of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References

          R. Ferroukhi, D. Nagpal, A. Lopez-Peña, T. Hodges, R. H. Mohtar, B. Daher, S. Mohtar, M. Keulertz, Renewable Energy In The Water, Energy & Food Nexus, IRENA,  2015 Search PubMed .
I. Ghiat and T. Al-Ansari, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 45, 101432 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Campos, D. Valenzuela-Heredia, A. Pedrouso, A. Val del Río, M. Belmonte and A. Mosquera-Corral, J. Chem., 2016, 2016, 1–12 Search PubMed .
A. Momblanch, L. Papadimitriou, S. K. Jain, A. Kulkarni, C. S. P. Ojha, A. J. Adeloye and I. P. Holman, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 655, 35–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Hock, G. Rasul, C. Adler, B. Cáceres, S. Gruber, Y. Hirabayashi, M. Jackson, A. Kääb, S. Kang and S. Kutuzov, et al., High Mountain Areas, in IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),  2019, pp. 131–202 Search PubMed .
A. Endo, I. Tsurita, K. Burnett and P. M. Orencio, J. Hydrol. Reg. Stud., 2017, 11, 20–30 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, S. Liang, C. Feng, L. Xu, J. Qi, X. Yang, Y. Wang, C. Zhang, K. Li, H. Li and Z. Yang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 9791–9803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, S. Shao, Y. Zhang, Q. Yang, H. Hou and X. Quan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 14830–14842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Walsh, L. Gerber Van Doren, N. Shete, A. Prakash and U. Salim, Appl. Energy, 2018, 210, 591–603 CrossRef .
S. Nair, B. George, H. M. Malano, M. Arora and B. Nawarathna, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2014, 89, 1–10 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. Zhao and J. Lin, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Energy Environ., 2019, 9, 358 Search PubMed .
A. M. Valek, J. Susnik and S. Grafakos, Sci. Total Environ., 2017, 590–591, 258–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 41, 1376–1384 CrossRef .

          G. S. Murthy, in Biofuels: Alternative Feedstocks and Conversion Processes for the Production of Liquid and Gaseous Biofuels,  2019, pp. 77–92,  DOI:10.1016/b978-0-12-816856-1.00003-8 .
R. Dineshkumar and R. Sen, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2020, 14, 879–897 CrossRef CAS .

          K. K. Shandilya and V. M. Pattarkine, in Advances in Feedstock Conversion Technologies for Alternative Fuels and Bioproducts,  2019, pp. 119–136,  DOI:10.1016/b978-0-12-817937-6.00007-2 .
J. P. Maity, J. Bundschuh, C.-Y. Chen and P. Bhattacharya, Energy, 2014, 78, 104–113 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jankowska, A. K. Sahu and P. Oleskowicz-Popiel, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 75, 692–709 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Yu, P. L. Show, H. C. Ong, T. C. Ling, J. Chi-Wei Lan, W.-H. Chen and J.-S. Chang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 150, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Razzak, M. M. Hossain, R. A. Lucky, A. S. Bassi and H. de Lasa, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 27, 622–653 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Shuba and D. Kifle, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 743–755 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brennan and P. Owende, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 557–577 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wibisono, W. Agung Nugroho, L. Akbar Devianto, A. Adi Sulianto and M. Roil Bilad, Membranes, 2019, 9, 166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. López-Díaz, L. F. Lira-Barragán, E. Rubio-Castro, M. Serna-González, M. M. El-Halwagi and J. M. Ponce-Ortega, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2017, 20, 1443–1466 CrossRef .
B. D. Beckstrom, M. H. Wilson, M. Crocker and J. C. Quinn, Algal Res., 2020, 46, 101769 CrossRef .
A. Miara, P. T. Pienkos, M. Bazilian, R. Davis and J. Macknick, Ind. Biotechnol., 2014, 10, 202–211 CrossRef .
F. Pomponi and A. Stephan, Water Res., 2021, 194, 116935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liang, S. Qu, Q. Zhao, X. Zhang, G. T. Daigger, J. P. Newell, S. A. Miller, J. X. Johnson, N. G. Love, L. Zhang, Z. Yang and M. Xu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 779–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Mortensen, R. Gonzalez-Pinzon, C. N. Dahm, J. Wang, L. H. Zeglin and D. J. Van Horn, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 8485–8496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vora, B. D. Fath and V. Khanna, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 10941–10950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Syrpas and P. R. Venskutonis, in Biobased Products and Industries,  2020, pp. 203–243,  DOI:10.1016/b978-0-12-818493-6.00006-3 .
A. K. Koyande, K. W. Chew, K. Rambabu, Y. Tao, D.-T. Chu and P.-L. Show, Food Sci. Hum. Wellness, 2019, 8, 16–24 CrossRef .
L. M. L. Laurens, J. Markham, D. W. Templeton, E. D. Christensen, S. Van Wychen, E. W. Vadelius, M. Chen-Glasser, T. Dong, R. Davis and P. T. Pienkos, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1716–1738 RSC .
Y. Torres-Tiji, F. J. Fields and S. P. Mayfield, Biotechnol. Adv., 2020, 41, 107536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. M. Pires, M. C. M. Alvim-Ferraz, F. G. Martins and M. Simões, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 3043–3053 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Vuppaladadiyam, P. Prinsen, A. Raheem, R. Luque and M. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 14031–14049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Allen, S. Unlu, Y. Demirel, P. Black and W. Riekhof, Bioresour. Bioprocess., 2018, 5, 47 CrossRef .

          K. R. Chandini, R. Kumar and O. Prakash, The Impact of Chemical Fertilizers on Our Environment and Ecosystem, in Research Trends in Environmental Sciences, AkiNik Publications, New Delhi, India, 2nd edn,  2019, pp. 69–86 Search PubMed .
R. Chai, X. Ye, C. Ma, Q. Wang, R. Tu, L. Zhang and H. Gao, Carbon Balance Manage., 2019, 14, 20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Ajeng, R. Abdullah, M. A. Malek, K. W. Chew, Y.-C. Ho, T. C. Ling, B. F. Lau and P. L. Show, Processes, 2020, 8, 1681 CrossRef CAS .
S. Talebi and F. Reisi, J. Pet. Sci. Eng., 2021, 207, 109149 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jalilian, G. D. Najafpour and M. Khajouei, ChemBioEng Rev., 2020, 7, 18–33 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Gan, H. C. Ong, P. L. Show, T. C. Ling, W.-H. Chen, K. L. Yu and R. Abdullah, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 165, 152–162 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alherbawi, A. AlNouss, G. McKay and T. Al-Ansari, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 137, 110605 CrossRef .
A. Fetanat, M. Tayebi and H. Mofid, Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess., 2021, 43, 100937 Search PubMed .
S. Abedia, F. Razi Astaraiea, B. Ghobadian, O. Tavakoli and H. Jalili, J. Renewable Energy Environ., 2017, 4, 39–48 Search PubMed .
M. Molazadeh, H. Ahmadzadeh, H. R. Pourianfar, S. Lyon and P. H. Rampelotto, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2019, 7, 42 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, Y. Li, N. Wu and C. Q. Lan, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 79, 707–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, J. Wang, P. Chen, C. Ji, Q. Kang, B. Lu, K. Li, J. Liu and R. Ruan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 76, 1163–1175 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fazal, A. Mushtaq, F. Rehman, A. Ullah Khan, N. Rashid, W. Farooq, M. S. U. Rehman and J. Xu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 3107–3126 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kang, S. Heo, M. J. Realff and J. H. Lee, Appl. Energy, 2020, 265, 114773 CrossRef .
A. Folino, A. Karageorgiou, P. S. Calabrò and D. Komilis, Sustainability, 2020, 12, 6030 CrossRef CAS .
J. Paniagua-Michel Jde, J. Olmos-Soto and E. R. Morales-Guerrero, Adv. Food Nutr. Res., 2014, 73, 221–257 Search PubMed .
K. Poremba, W. Gunkel, S. Lang and F. Wagner, Z. Naturforsch., C: J. Biosci., 1991, 46, 210–216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, J. Liu, L. Sun, B. Ye, K. Hubacek, K. Feng and O. Varis, Water Res., 2021, 195, 116986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Correa, H. L. Beyer, H. P. Possingham, J. E. Fargione, J. D. Hill and P. M. Schenk, Energy, 2021, 215, 119033 CrossRef .
H. I. Jager, R. A. Efroymson and L. M. Baskaran, Water, 2019, 11, 836 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Saad, N. S. Dosoky, M. S. Zoromba and H. M. Shafik, Energies, 2019, 12, 1920 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Amorim, J. Soares, J. Coimbra, M. O. Leite, L. F. T. Albino and M. A. Martins, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 2021, 61, 1976–2002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Zhong, R. He, X. Wang, J. Cheng, G. Yao and F. Jin, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 1247–1252 RSC .

          D. Winickoff, Working Party on Biotechnology, Nanotechnology
and Converging Technologies: BNCT Project Updates, Technical Report DSTI/STP/BNCT,  2015 Search PubMed .
A. Duque, C. Álvarez, P. Doménech, P. Manzanares and A. D. Moreno, Processes, 2021, 9, 206 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Das, A. S. Reshad, N. Bhuyan, D. Sut, P. Tiwari, V. V. Goud and R. Kataki, in Waste Biorefinery,  2020, pp. 311–336,  DOI:10.1016/b978-0-12-818228-4.00012-5 .
Y. Y. Shim, K. Falk, K. Ratanapariyanuch and M. J. T. Reaney, Eur. J. Lipid Sci. Technol., 2017, 119, 1600358 CrossRef .
S. D. Shinde, X. Meng, R. Kumar and A. J. Ragauskas, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 2192–2205 RSC .
M. Jin, P. J. Slininger, B. S. Dien, S. Waghmode, B. R. Moser, A. Orjuela, C. Sousa Lda and V. Balan, Trends Biotechnol., 2015, 33, 43–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ecker, M. Schaffenberger, W. Koschuh, M. Mandl, H. G. Böchzelt, H. Schnitzer, M. Harasek and H. Steinmüller, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 96, 237–247 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kamm, C. Hille, P. Schönicke and G. Dautzenberg, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2010, 4, 253–262 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kamm, P. Schonicke and C. Hille, Food Chem., 2016, 197(Pt B), 1341–1345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Corona, R. Parajuli, M. Ambye-Jensen, M. Z. Hauschild and M. Birkved, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 189, 344–357 CrossRef .

          M. Waqas, M. Rehan, A. S. Aburiazaiza and A.-S. Nizami, in Progress and Recent Trends in Microbial Fuel Cells,  2018, pp. 347–374,  DOI:10.1016/b978-0-444-64017-8.00017-8 .
R. Chandra, C. Castillo-Zacarias, P. Delgado and R. Parra-Saldívar, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 183, 1184–1196 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. A. Siddiki, M. Mofijur, P. S. Kumar, S. F. Ahmed, A. Inayat, F. Kusumo, I. A. Badruddin, T. M. Y. Khan, L. D. Nghiem, H. C. Ong and T. M. I. Mahlia, Fuel, 2022, 307, 121782 CrossRef CAS .
J. Clark and F. Deswarte, Introd. Chem. Biomass, 2015, 1–29 Search PubMed .
M. Bazilian, R. Davis, P. T. Pienkos and D. Arent, Ind. Biotechnol., 2013, 9, 158–162 CrossRef CAS .
E. Martinez-Hernandez and S. Samsatli, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2017, 18, 16–22 CrossRef .
M. H. M. Eppink, G. Olivieri, H. Reith, C. van den Berg, M. J. Barbosa and R. H. Wijffels, Adv. Biochem. Eng./Biotechnol., 2019, 166, 99–123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vanthoor-Koopmans, R. H. Wijffels, M. J. Barbosa and M. H. Eppink, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 135, 142–149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Rashid, B. Lee and Y.-K. Chang, in Microalgae Biotechnology for Development of Biofuel and Wastewater Treatment,  2019, ch. 1, pp. 3–20,  DOI:10.1007/978-981-13-2264-8_1 .
G. P. t Lam, M. H. Vermue, M. H. M. Eppink, R. H. Wijffels and C. van den Berg, Trends Biotechnol., 2018, 36, 216–227 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Razzak, S. A. M. Ali, M. M. Hossain and H. deLasa, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 76, 379–390 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Desai, M. S. Fernandez, R. H. Wijffels and M. H. M. Eppink, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2019, 7, 284 CrossRef PubMed .
K. W. Chew, J. Y. Yap, P. L. Show, N. H. Suan, J. C. Juan, T. C. Ling, D. J. Lee and J. S. Chang, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 229, 53–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Nguyen, J.-Y. Moon, V. K. H. Bui, Y.-K. Oh and Y.-C. Lee, Algal Res., 2019, 41, 101522 CrossRef .
T. Bongiorno, L. Foglio, L. Proietti, M. Vasconi, A. Lopez, A. Pizzera, D. Carminati, A. Tava, A. J. Vizcaíno, F. J. Alarcón, E. Ficara and K. Parati, Sustainability, 2020, 12, 8779 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Madeira, C. Cardoso, P. A. Lopes, D. Coelho, C. Afonso, N. M. Bandarra and J. A. M. Prates, Livest. Sci., 2017, 205, 111–121 CrossRef .
M. Kayombo, A. W. Mayo, R. Kimwaga and S. Gabrielsson, Tanzan. J. Eng. Technol., 2019, 38, 130–151 CrossRef .
T. Cai, S. Y. Park and Y. Li, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 19, 360–369 CrossRef CAS .
J. Singh and S. Gu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 2596–2610 CrossRef CAS .
I. Priyadarshani and B. Rath, J. Algal Biomass Util., 2012, 3, 89–100 Search PubMed .
M. Anwar, S. Lou, L. Chen, H. Li and Z. Hu, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 292, 121972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Klinthong, Y.-H. Yang, C.-H. Huang and C.-S. Tan, Aerosol Air Qual. Res., 2015, 15, 712–742 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wahidin, A. Idris and S. R. Shaleh, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 129, 7–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yadav and R. Sen, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 17, 188–206 CrossRef CAS .

          S. M. A. Mobin and F. Alam, in Application of Thermo-Fluid Processes in Energy Systems,  2018, ch. 4, pp. 83–108,  DOI:10.1007/978-981-10-0697-5_4 .
I. Gifuni, A. Pollio, C. Safi, A. Marzocchella and G. Olivieri, Trends Biotechnol., 2019, 37, 242–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Chacon-Lee and G. E. Gonzalez-Marino, Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf., 2010, 9, 655–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarma, S. Sharma, D. Rudakiya, J. Upadhyay, V. Rathod, A. Patel and M. Narra, 3 Biotech, 2021, 11, 378 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fu, T. Chen, S. H. Y. Chen, B. Liu, P. Sun, H. Sun and F. Chen, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2021, 112, 188–200 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kusmayadi, Y. K. Leong, H. W. Yen, C. Y. Huang and J. S. Chang, Chemosphere, 2021, 271, 129800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Tumilar, D. Milani, Z. Cohn, N. Florin and A. Abbas, Water, 2020, 13, 69 CrossRef .
D. N. Carruthers, C. M. Godwin, D. C. Hietala, B. J. Cardinale, X. N. Lin and P. E. Savage, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 9279–9288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Leow, B. D. Shoener, Y. Li, J. L. DeBellis, J. Markham, R. Davis, L. M. L. Laurens, P. T. Pienkos, S. M. Cook, T. J. Strathmann and J. S. Guest, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 13591–13599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Raheem, W. A. K. G. Wan Azlina, Y. H. Taufiq Yap, M. K. Danquah and R. Harun, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 49, 990–999 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Chen, B. J. Lin, M. Y. Huang and J. S. Chang, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 184, 314–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Amin, Energy Convers. Manage., 2009, 50, 1834–1840 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rasam, F. Talebkeikhah, M. Talebkeikhah, A. Salimi and M. K. Moraveji, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2021, 101, 2297–2318 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Greenwell, L. M. Laurens, R. J. Shields, R. W. Lovitt and K. J. Flynn, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2010, 7, 703–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-H. Chen, B.-J. Lin, Y.-Y. Lin, Y.-S. Chu, A. T. Ubando, P. L. Show, H. C. Ong, J.-S. Chang, S.-H. Ho, A. B. Culaba, A. Pétrissans and M. Pétrissans, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2021, 82, 100887 CrossRef .
G. Kumar, S. Shobana, W.-H. Chen, Q.-V. Bach, S.-H. Kim, A. E. Atabani and J.-S. Chang, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 44–67 RSC .
S. H. Ho, C. Zhang, F. Tao, C. Zhang and W. H. Chen, Trends Biotechnol., 2020, 38, 1023–1033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Mata, A. A. Martins and N. S. Caetano, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 217–232 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Odjadjare, T. Mutanda and A. O. Olaniran, Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 2017, 37, 37–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. V. García Prieto, F. D. Ramos, V. Estrada and M. Soledad Díaz, in 13th International Symposium on Process Systems Engineering (PSE 2018),  2018, pp. 1933–1938,  DOI:10.1016/b978-0-444-64241-7.50317-7 .
A. M. Lakaniemi, O. H. Tuovinen and J. A. Puhakka, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 135, 222–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Ghasemzadeh, E. Jalilnejad and A. Basile, in Bioenergy Systems for the Future,  2017, pp. 61–86,  DOI:10.1016/b978-0-08-101031-0.00003-x .
E. Kendir and A. Ugurlu, Int. J. Energy Res., 2018, 42, 3711–3731 CrossRef CAS .
D. Nagarajan, D. J. Lee, A. Kondo and J. S. Chang, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 227, 373–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Lee, H. C. Ong, Y. Y. Gan, W.-H. Chen and T. M. I. Mahlia, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 210, 112707 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raheem, W. A. K. G. Wan Azlina, Y. H. Taufiq Yap, M. K. Danquah and R. Harun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 71805–71815 RSC .
M. Faried, M. Samer, E. Abdelsalam, R. S. Yousef, Y. A. Attia and A. S. Ali, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 79, 893–913 CrossRef .
H. Wu, J. Li, Q. Liao, Q. Fu and Z. Liu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 205, 112373 CrossRef CAS .
N. Usmanbaha, R. Jariyaboon, A. Reungsang, P. Kongjan and C.-Y. Chu, Energies, 2019, 12, 2529 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rincón-Pérez, E. Razo-Flores, M. Morales, F. Alatriste-Mondragón and L. B. Celis, BioEnergy Res., 2019, 1–10 Search PubMed .
M. S. Stanislaus, N. Zhang, Y. Yuan, H. Zheng, C. Zhao, X. Hu, Q. Zhu and Y. Yang, Renewable Energy, 2018, 127, 670–677 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ayala-Parra, Y. Liu, J. A. Field and R. Sierra-Alvarez, Renewable Energy, 2017, 108, 410–416 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Kocer and D. Ozcimen, Waste Manage. Res., 2018, 36, 1100–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Gruber-Brunhumer, J. Jerney, E. Zohar, M. Nussbaumer, C. Hieger, G. Bochmann, M. Schagerl, J. P. Obbard, W. Fuchs and B. Drosg, Algal Res., 2015, 12, 230–238 CrossRef .
L. Mendez, A. Mahdy, M. Ballesteros and C. González-Fernández, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 92, 137–142 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Yu, W.-H. Chen, H.-K. Sheen, J.-S. Chang, C.-S. Lin, H. C. Ong, P. L. Show and T. C. Ling, Fuel, 2020, 279, 118435 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Rizza, M. E. S. Smachetti, M. Do Nascimento, G. L. Salerno and L. Curatti, Algal Res., 2017, 22, 140–147 CrossRef .
Z. Reyimu and D. Özçimen, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 150, 40–46 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bordoloi, R. Narzari, D. Sut, R. Saikia, R. S. Chutia and R. Kataki, Renewable Energy, 2016, 98, 245–253 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Yu, P. L. Show, H. C. Ong, T. C. Ling, W.-H. Chen and M. A. M. Salleh, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2018, 20, 2047–2055 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahdy, M. Ballesteros and C. Gonzalez-Fernandez, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 199, 319–325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kavitha, P. Subbulakshmi, J. Rajesh Banu, M. Gobi and I. Tae Yeom, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 233, 34–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Strik, H. Terlouw, H. V. Hamelers and C. J. Buisman, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 81, 659–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shukla and S. Kumar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 402–414 CrossRef CAS .
B. Saba, A. D. Christy, Z. Yu and A. C. Co, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 73, 75–84 CrossRef CAS .

          E. K. Armah, M. Chetty, J. A. Adedeji and D. T. Kukwa, in Biomass, IntechOpen,  2020 Search PubMed .
H. He, M. Zhou, J. Yang, Y. Hu and Y. Zhao, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2014, 37, 873–880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, X. Xu, M. Fujibayashi, Q. Niu, N. Tanaka and O. Nishimura, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int., 2016, 23, 19847–19860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Singh and P. B. Thomas, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 117, 80–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. L. Burton and G. Tchobanoglous, Wastewater Engineering: Treatment, Disposal, and Reuse, McGraw-Hill,  2018 Search PubMed .
E.-M. Mustafa, S.-M. Phang and W.-L. Chu, J. Appl. Phycol., 2012, 24, 953–963 CrossRef CAS .

          B. D. Burks and M. M. Minnis, Onsite wastewater treatment systems, Hogarth House, Ltd., Madison, WI,  1994 Search PubMed .
M. Sacristan de Alva, V. M. Luna-Pabello, E. Cadena and E. Ortiz, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 146, 744–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Drewnowski, Water, 2019, 11, 1218 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pirsaheb, M. Mohamadi, A. M. Mansouri, A. A. L. Zinatizadeh, S. Sumathi and K. Sharafi, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2015, 32, 1340–1353 CrossRef CAS .
E.-S. Salama, M. B. Kurade, R. A. I. Abou-Shanab, M. M. El-Dalatony, I.-S. Yang, B. Min and B.-H. Jeon, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 79, 1189–1211 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Grisolia, A. B. B. d. Oliveira, H. Bonfim and M. d. N. Klautau-Guimarães, Genet. Mol. Biol., 2005, 28, 334–338 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, L. Wang, F. Xiang, L. Zhao and Z. Qiao, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 2020, 17, 436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, A. Mennerich and B. Urban, Water Res., 2011, 45, 3351–3358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pokhrel and T. Viraraghavan, Sci. Total Environ., 2004, 333, 37–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Fongsatitkul, P. Elefsiniotis, A. Yamasmit and N. Yamasmit, Biochem. Eng. J., 2004, 21, 213–220 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mosse, A. Patti, E. W. Christen and T. Cavagnaro, Aust. J. Grape Wine Res., 2011, 17, 111–122 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ahmadi, A. Zinatizadeh, A. Asadi, T. McKay and S. Azizi, Environ. Technol. Innovation, 2020, 100776 CrossRef .
C. Bustillo-Lecompte and M. Mehrvar, Phys.-Chem. Wastewater Treat. Resour. Recovery, 2017, 153–174 CAS .
G. Durai and M. Rajasimman, J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 4, 1–17 CAS .
O. Fenton, M. Healy, M. Rodgers and D. Huallachain, Clay Miner., 2009, 44, 113–123 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Li, P. Chen, M. Min, Y. Chen, J. Zhu and R. R. Ruan, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 2623–2628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hernández, B. Riaño, M. Coca and M. García-González, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 135, 598–603 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yetilmezsoy and S. Sakar, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 151, 547–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Barker, J. Zublena and F. Walls, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2001, 98, 764–770 Search PubMed .
M. I. Queiroz, E. J. Lopes, L. Q. Zepka, R. G. Bastos and R. Goldbeck, Bioresour. Technol., 2007, 98, 2163–2169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, X. Tan, D. Li, H. Chu, X. Zhou, Y. Zhang and H. Yu, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 181, 54–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Bradford, E. Segal, W. Zheng, Q. Wang and S. R. Hutchins, J. Environ. Qual., 2008, 37, S-97–S-115 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Vanotti and A. A. Szogi, J. Environ. Qual., 2008, 37, S-86–S-96 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Medipally, F. M. Yusoff, S. Banerjee and M. Shariff, BioMed Res. Int., 2015, 2015, 519513 Search PubMed .
A. Ahmad, F. Banat, H. Alsafar and S. W. Hasan, Sci. Total Environ., 2022, 806, 150585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Illman, A. Scragg and S. Shales, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2000, 27, 631–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Oswald, H. Gotaas, C. Golueke, W. Kellen, E. Gloyna and E. Hermann, Sewage Ind. Wastes, 1957, 29, 437–457 Search PubMed .
M. C. Deprá, A. M. dos Santos, I. A. Severo, A. B. Santos, L. Q. Zepka and E. Jacob-Lopes, BioEnergy Res., 2018, 11, 727–747 CrossRef .
A. B. Avagyan, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2008, 10, 313–317 CrossRef .

          V. N. de Jonge, M. Elliott and E. Orive, in Nutrients and Eutrophication in Estuaries and Coastal Waters, Springer,  2002, pp. 1–19 Search PubMed .
P. Gani, N. Mohamed Sunar, H. M. Matias Peralta, A. A. Abdul Latiff and U. K. Parjo, Adv. Environ. Biol., 2015, 9, 1–8 Search PubMed .
O. Komolafe, S. B. Velasquez Orta, I. Monje-Ramirez, I. Yanez Noguez, A. P. Harvey and M. T. Orta Ledesma, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 154, 297–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, M. Min, Y. Li, P. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and R. Ruan, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2010, 162, 1174–1186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aziz and W. Ng, Bioresour. Technol., 1992, 40, 205–208 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. McGriff Jr and R. E. McKinney, Water Res., 1972, 6, 1155–1164 CrossRef .
D. L. Sutherland, J. Park, S. Heubeck, P. J. Ralph and R. J. Craggs, Algal Res., 2020, 45, 101734 CrossRef .
D. L. Sutherland, J. Park, P. J. Ralph and R. J. Craggs, Algal Res., 2020, 47, 101850 CrossRef .
T. Aketo, Y. Hoshikawa, D. Nojima, Y. Yabu, Y. Maeda, T. Yoshino, H. Takano and T. Tanaka, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2020, 129, 565–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, Y. Zu, C. Song, M. Xie, Y. Qi, Y. Kansha and Y. Kitamura, Bioresour. Technol. Rep., 2019, 7, 100195 CrossRef .
N. A. S. Hazman, N. H. M. Yasin, M. S. Takriff, H. Hasan, K. F. Kamarudin and N. M. Hakimi, Sains Malays., 2018, 47, 1455–1464 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ferreira, B. Ribeiro, A. F. Ferreira, M. L. Tavares, J. Vladic, S. Vidović, D. Cvetkovic, L. Melkonyan, G. Avetisova and V. Goginyan, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2019, 13, 1169–1186 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Deng, K. Gao, R.-C. Zhang, M. Addy, Q. Lu, H.-Y. Ren, P. Chen, Y.-H. Liu and R. Ruan, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 243, 417–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shahid, S. Malik, H. Zhu, J. Xu, M. Z. Nawaz, S. Nawaz, M. Asraful Alam and M. A. Mehmood, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 704, 135303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qu, P. Loke Show, T. Hasunuma and S. H. Ho, Bioresour. Technol., 2020, 305, 123072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. Sivasubramaniam, Phycoremediation technology applied to effluent treatment, Retrieved August,  2013, 20, 2013 Search PubMed.
R. Kothari, S. Ahmad, V. V. Pathak, A. Pandey, A. Kumar, R. Shankarayan, P. N. Black and V. V. Tyagi, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2019, 11, 1419–1442 CrossRef .
S. Panda, S. Mishra, A. Akcil and M. A. Kucuker, Energy Environ., 2020, 32(4), 604–634 CrossRef .
J. Van Wagenen, M. L. Pape and I. Angelidaki, Water Res., 2015, 75, 301–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Sutherland and P. J. Ralph, Water Res., 2019, 164, 114921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gonzalez, J. Marciniak, S. Villaverde, P. A. Garcia-Encina and R. Munoz, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 80, 891–898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Z. Aksu, in Wastewater Treatment with Algae, Springer,  1998, pp. 37–53 Search PubMed .
M. Rizwan, G. Mujtaba, S. A. Memon, K. Lee and N. Rashid, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 92, 394–404 CrossRef .
C. B. Sekomo, D. P. L. Rousseau, S. A. Saleh and P. N. L. Lens, Ecol. Eng., 2012, 44, 102–110 CrossRef .
S. K. Mehta and J. P. Gaur, Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 2005, 25, 113–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Talebkeikhah, S. Rasam, M. Talebkeikhah, M. Torkashvand, A. Salimi and M. K. Moraveji, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2020, 1–21 CrossRef .
X. Li, C. Yang, G. Zeng, S. Wu, Y. Lin, Q. Zhou, W. Lou, C. Du, L. Nie and Y. Zhong, Algal Res., 2020, 46, 101804 CrossRef .
S. F. Ahmed, M. Mofijur, T. A. Parisa, N. Islam, F. Kusumo, A. Inayat, V. G. Le, I. A. Badruddin, T. M. Y. Khan and H. C. Ong, Chemosphere, 2022, 286, 131656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Mohd Udaiyappan, H. Abu Hasan, M. S. Takriff and S. R. Sheikh Abdullah, J. Water Proc. Eng., 2017, 20, 8–21 CrossRef .
S. Gupta, S. B. Pawar and R. A. Pandey, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 687, 1107–1126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, Q. Liu, F. Fang, R. Luo, Q. Lu, W. Zhou, S. Huo, P. Cheng, J. Liu, M. Addy, P. Chen, D. Chen and R. Ruan, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 291, 121934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Torres-Franco, F. Passos, C. Figueredo, C. Mota and R. Muñoz, Rev. Environ. Sci. Bio/Technol., 2020, 20, 209–235 CrossRef .
M. S. A. Rahaman, L.-H. Cheng, X.-H. Xu, L. Zhang and H.-L. Chen, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 4002–4012 CrossRef .
C. Song, Q. Liu, Y. Qi, G. Chen, Y. Song, Y. Kansha and Y. Kitamura, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2019, 88, 109–117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Singh and D. W. Dhar, Front. Mar. Sci., 2019, 6, 29 CrossRef .
M. N. Anwar, A. Fayyaz, N. F. Sohail, M. F. Khokhar, M. Baqar, W. D. Khan, K. Rasool, M. Rehan and A. S. Nizami, J. Environ. Manage., 2018, 226, 131–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. O. Ochedi, J. Yu, H. Yu, Y. Liu and A. Hussain, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2020, 19, 77–109 CrossRef .
H.-F. Jin, D. E. O. Santiago, J. Park and K. Lee, Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng., 2008, 13, 48–52 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Yen, S. H. Ho, C. Y. Chen and J. S. Chang, Biotechnol. J., 2015, 10, 829–839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Lam, K. T. Lee and A. R. Mohamed, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2012, 10, 456–469 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Kao, T.-Y. Chen, Y.-B. Chang, T.-W. Chiu, H.-Y. Lin, C.-D. Chen, J.-S. Chang and C.-S. Lin, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 166, 485–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, F. Sun, M. Yang, L. Lu, G. Yang and K. Pan, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 174, 53–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, W. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, S. Shen and T. Liu, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 128, 359–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Borkenstein, J. Knoblechner, H. Frühwirth and M. Schagerl, J. Appl. Phycol., 2011, 23, 131–135 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Chiu, C.-Y. Kao, T.-T. Huang, C.-J. Lin, S.-C. Ong, C.-D. Chen, J.-S. Chang and C.-S. Lin, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 9135–9142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Matsumoto, A. Hamasaki, N. Sioji and Y. Ikuta, J. Chem. Eng. Jpn., 1997, 30, 620–624 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Stephenson, J. S. Dennis, C. J. Howe, S. A. Scott and A. G. Smith, Biofuels, 2010, 1, 47–58 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao and Y. Su, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 31, 121–132 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Singh, A. Rahman, K. Dixit, A. Nath and S. Sundaram, Environ. Technol., 2016, 37, 613–622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Clares, J. Moreno, M. G. Guerrero and M. Garcia-Gonzalez, J. Biotechnol., 2014, 187, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Tang, K. Pan, B. Zhu, Y. Li, X. Ma and Y. Zhao, Chemosphere, 2020, 247, 125814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. M. Hanifzadeh, M. H. Sarrafzadeh, O. Tavakoli, 2012 Second Iranian Conference on Renewable Energy and Distributed Generation,  2012, pp. 61–64 Search PubMed .
H. M. Chu, B. Narindri, H. T. Hsueh and H. Chu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2020, 205, 111822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Ho, C. Y. Chen and J. S. Chang, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 113, 244–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Su, H. T. Hsueh, T. Y. Li, L. C. Huang, Y. L. Chu, C. M. Tseng and H. Chu, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 145, 162–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Su, H. T. Hsueh, C. M. Tseng, D. T. Ray, Y. H. Shen and H. Chu, Aerosol Air Qual. Res., 2017, 17, 1887–1897 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yadav, S. K. Dash and R. Sen, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 688, 129–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, X. Gu, Z. Wang, W. Shatner and Z. Wang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 110, 65–82 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhujade, M. Chidambaram, A. Kumar and A. Sapre, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2017, 8, 335–357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Javed, M. Aslam, N. Rashid, Z. Shamair, A. L. Khan, M. Yasin, T. Fazal, A. Hafeez, F. Rehman, M. S. U. Rehman, Z. Khan, J. Iqbal and A. A. Bazmi, Fuel, 2019, 255, 115826 CrossRef CAS .
G. Thomassen, U. Egiguren Vila, M. Van Dael, B. Lemmens and S. Van Passel, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2016, 18, 1849–1862 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hoffman, R. C. Pate, T. Drennen and J. C. Quinn, Algal Res., 2017, 23, 51–57 CrossRef .
T. F. Lopes, C. Cabanas, A. Silva, D. Fonseca, E. Santos, L. T. Guerra, C. Sheahan, A. Reis and F. Gírio, Bioresour. Technol. Rep., 2019, 6, 113–122 CrossRef .
R. Chaiklahan, N. Chirasuwan, V. Loha, S. Tia and B. Bunnag, Biotechnol. Rep., 2018, 20, e00280 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Thomassen, M. Van Dael and S. Van Passel, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 267, 271–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Thomassen, M. Van Dael, F. You and S. Van Passel, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 5945–5959 RSC .
M. I. Silva, A. L. Gonçalves, V. J. P. Vilar and J. C. M. Pires, Sustainability, 2021, 13, 1314 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xin, M. M. Addy, J. Zhao, Y. Cheng, S. Cheng, D. Mu, Y. Liu, R. Ding, P. Chen and R. Ruan, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 211, 584–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Musa, A. Doshi, R. Brown and T. J. Rainey, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 229, 325–336 CrossRef .
C. Xin, M. M. Addy, J. Zhao, Y. Cheng, Y. Ma, S. Liu, D. Mu, Y. Liu, P. Chen and R. Ruan, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 250, 523–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Coleman, J. M. Abodeely, R. L. Skaggs, W. A. Moeglein, D. T. Newby, E. R. Venteris and M. S. Wigmosta, Algal Res., 2014, 5, 79–94 CrossRef .

          J. Sheehan, T. Dunahay, J. Benemann and P. Roessler, A look back at the U.S. department of energy's aquatic species program: Biodiesel from algae, National Renewable Energy Laboratory,  1998, vol. 328, pp. 1–294 Search PubMed .

          L. Y. D. Batan, Life cycle and technoeconomic analysis of microalgae-based biofuels, Colorado State University,  2014 Search PubMed .

          N. R. Council, Sustainable Development of Algal Biofuels in the United States, National Academies Press,  2013 Search PubMed .
M. O. Fortier and B. S. Sturm, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 11426–11434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mu, M. Min, B. Krohn, K. A. Mullins, R. Ruan and J. Hill, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 11696–11704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Serrano, J. Faulin, P. Astiz, M. Sánchez and J. Belloso, Transp. Res. Procedia, 2015, 10, 704–713 CrossRef .
S. F. Siqueira, M. M. Maroneze, R. R. Dias, R. G. Vendruscolo, R. Wagner, C. R. Menezes, L. Q. Zepka and E. Jacob-Lopes, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2020, 95, 2411–2420 CrossRef CAS .
B. Brasil, F. C. P. Silva and F. G. Siqueira, New Biotechnol., 2017, 39, 90–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. G. Nwoba, A. Vadiveloo, C. N. Ogbonna, B. E. Ubi, J. C. Ogbonna and N. R. Moheimani, Clean: Soil, Air, Water, 2020, 48, 2000052 CAS .
N. Hossain, M. H. Hasan, T. M. I. Mahlia, A. H. Shamsuddin and A. S. Silitonga, Energy Strategy Rev., 2020, 32, 100536 CrossRef .
S. Nagarajan, S. K. Chou, S. Cao, C. Wu and Z. Zhou, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 145, 150–156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hossain, J. Zaini and T. M. Indra Mahlia, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 115, 109371 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Lozano-Garcia, S. P. Cuellar-Bermudez, E. del Rio-Hinojosa, F. Betancourt, G. S. Aleman-Nava and R. Parra-Saldivar, Algal Res., 2019, 39, 101459 CrossRef .

          G. Simpson, G. Jewitt, W. Becker, J. Badenhorst, A. Neves and P. Rovira, V. Pascual, The Water-Energy-Food Nexus Index: A Tool for Integrated Resource Management and Sustainable Development, OSF Preprints,  2020 Search PubMed .
M. H. Katooli, A. Aslani, F. Razi Astaraee, T. Mazzuca Sobczuk and A. Bakhtiar, Biofuels, 2019, 12, 789–795 CrossRef .
A. Aslani, M. Mohammadi, M. J. I. Gonzalez, T. M. Sobczuk, M. Nazari and A. Bakhtiar, Bioresour. Technol. Rep., 2018, 1, 24–30 CrossRef .
G. Rahmann, D. Grimm, A. Kuenz and E. Hessel, Org. Agric., 2019, 10, 9–21 CrossRef .
A. K. Koyande, P. L. Show, R. Guo, B. Tang, C. Ogino and J. S. Chang, Bioengineered, 2019, 10, 574–592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, K. S. Khoo, H. Y. Leong, D. Nagarajan, K. W. Chew, H. Y. Ting, A. Selvarajoo, J. S. Chang and P. L. Show, Biotechnol. Adv., 2022, 54, 107819 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Sina Talebi	Sina Talebi is a graduate researcher at the University of Tehran. He received his M.Sc. in Chemical and Petroleum Engineering from the University of Tehran. His research interests are interdisciplinary between Civil, Chemical, Bioresource, and Environmental Engineering, including water and energy systems, the food–energy–water nexus, water and wastewater treatment, and climate change. He has been involved in numerous projects, including scale inhibition methods, water treatment, membrane fouling and scaling, biomass conversion, thermodynamics, etc. He intends to pursue his studies in Environmental Engineering with the goal of becoming an influential researcher in the field of chemical and environmental studies.
Anis Edalatpour	Ms Anis Edalatpour is a research assistant at the Chemical Flooding Laboratory (CFL) at the University of Tehran. She graduated in HSE engineering from the Petroleum University of Technology in 2018. Then, she received her MSc from the chemical engineering department, University of Tehran, Iran, in 2021. Her master’s project was a study on the foaming tendency of alkanolamine solutions in a CO2 absorption unit. Her research covers a broad range of fields, including microalgal processing, foam reduction in gas treatment units, CO2 capture, biofuel & biorefinery, the food–energy–water–environment nexus, renewable & sustainable energies, and wastewater treatment.
Omid Tavakoli	Omid Tavakoli is currently academic member of the School of Chemical Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran. He is also head of the National Bioeconomy Committee and head of the Water–Energy–Environment Nexus Center. He obtained his PhD in 2004 from Osaka Prefecture University (Japan) and collaborated with the Center of Excellence of Osaka University as a postdoctoral researcher up to 2008. He established the Green Technology Laboratory (GTL) and the Iranian National Algae Culture Collection (INACC) at the University of Tehran. His research interests include microalgae-based technologies, sustainable bioenergy and biohydrogen, commercial biotechnology, food and health biological products, biorefinery and the water–energy–environment nexus.

 	Fig. 1  The food–energy–water–environment nexus showing casual interlinkages, and the mutual influence on each sector.	 

 	Fig. 2  Examples of FEWE nexus challenges, and their solutions and impacts on each sector.	 

 	Fig. 3  Different biorefinery types based on the feedstock.	 


Microalgae species


Anabaena cylindrica
	43–56	25–30	4–7

Ankistrodesmus sp.	31.1	10.8	24–31

Aphanizomenon flos-aquae
	62	23	3

Botryococcus braunii
	22	14.1	14–75

Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
	48	17	21

Chlorella pyrenoidosa
	57	26	2

Chlorella protothecoides
	52	10–11	15

Chlorella vulgaris
	51–58	12–17	14–22

Chlorogloeopsis fritschii
	50	44	7

Dunaliella bioculata
	49	4	8

Dunaliella tertiolecta
	20	12.2	15–71

Dunaliella salina
	57	32	6

Euglena gracilis
	39–61	14–18	14–20

Haematococcus pluvialis
	48	27	15–25

Isochrysis sp.	31–51	11–14	20–22

Laminaria sp.	12	15	2

Nannochloropsis sp.	28.8	35.9	12–53

Neochloris oleoabundans
	20–60	20–60	35–54

Porphyridium cruentum
	28–39	40–57	9–14

Prymnesium parvum
	28–45	25–33	22–39

Scenedesmus quadricauda
	47	—	1.9

Scenedesmus obliquus
	50–56	10–17	12–14

Spirogyra sp.	6–20	33–64	11–21

Spirulina maxima
	60–71	13–16	6–7

Spirulina platensis
	46–63	8–14	4–9

Synechococcus sp.	63	15	11

Tetraselmis maculata
	52	15	3

Ulva sp.	10–33	23–78	0–6


Conventional food sources

Egg	49.8	2.7	47.7
Soybean	37	30	20
Meat	43	1	34
Peas	28.8	47.1	3.7
Oil palm	16–27	6–11	50–70
Corn	9	85	4
Milk	26	38	28


Tetraselmis chui
	Slow pyrolysis	Syngas	20 wt%	
119


Microcystis aeruginosa
	Fast pyrolysis	Syngas	55 wt%	
119


Chlorella protothecoides
	Fast pyrolysis	Syngas	29 wt%	
119


C. vulgaris
	Gasification	Syngas	H2 = 41.75, CO = 18.63, CO2 = 24.40, and CH4 = 15.19 (% mol)	
120


Chlorella protothecoides
	Transesterification	Biodiesel	15.5 g L−1	
121


Chlorococcum sp.	Transesterification	Biodiesel	10 g L−1	
121


Haematococcus pluvialis
	Transesterification	Biodiesel	420 GJ per ha per year	
121


Neochloris oleoabundans
	Transesterification	Biodiesel	56 g g−1	
121


Chlorella sp.	Anaerobic fermentation	Biohydrogen	8.29 (mL gVS−1)	
122


Chlorella sp.	Dark fermentation	Biohydrogen	22 (mL gVS−1)	
123


Scenedesmus obtusiusculus
	—	Biohydrogen	48.08 (mL gVS−1)	
124


Chlorella vulgaris
	Batch fermentation	Biohydrogen	190.9 (mL gVS−1)	
125


Chlorella sorokiniana
	Anaerobic digestion	Bio methane	298 (mL gVS−1)	
126


Chlorella minutissima
	Anaerobic digestion	Bio methane	167.30 (cm3 CH4 per g VS)	
127


Acutodesmus obliquus
	Anaerobic digestion	Bio methane	115.6 ± 8.9 (N m3 t−1 CODuntreated)	
128


B. trilocularis
	Anaerobic digestion	Bio methane	255 (mL gVS−1)	
129


C. vulgaris ESP-31	Alcoholic fermentation	Bio ethanol	0.0761 (g gmicroalgae−1)	
130


Chlorella sp. GD	Alcoholic fermentation	Bio ethanol	0.0068 (g gmicroalgae−1)	
130


Chlorella sp. MI	Fermentation	Bio ethanol	0.09 (g gmicroalgae−1)	
131


Nannochloropsis oculata
	Fermentation	Bio ethanol	0.04 (g gmicroalgae−1)	
132


Scenedesmus dimorphus
	Pyrolysis	Biochar	36% (max)	
133


Chlorella vulgaris FSP-E	Pyrolysis	Biochar	26.90%	
134


Tetraselmis chui
	Slow pyrolysis	Biochar	37 wt%	
119


Microcystis aeruginosa
	Fast pyrolysis	Biochar	21 wt%	
119


Chlorella minutissima
	Anaerobic digestion	Biogas	341.43 (cm3 gVS−1)	
127


Chlorella vulgaris
	Anaerobic digestion	Biogas	56 mLbiogas per Lreactor per day	
135


Chlorella vulgaris
	Anaerobic digestion	Biogas	0.04 gCOD gCOD−1	
136


Chlorella vulgaris FSP-E	Pyrolysis	Bio-oil	29.50%	
134


Tetraselmis chui
	Slow pyrolysis	Bio-oil	43 wt%	
119


Scenedesmus sp.	Fast pyrolysis	Bio-oil	55 wt%	
119


Scenedesmus dimorphus
	Pyrolysis	Bio-oil	39.6% (max)	
133



Municipal

Domestic	40.65	5.66	16	227–235	—	—	
20

Domestic	25–30	8–12	6	400–500	—	150–225	
143

Domestic	85	15	13	—	—	—	
144

Landfill	112–192	7–9	42	3726–4860	—	488–622	
145

Domestic	15–90	5–20	9	—	—	—	
146

Domestic	62.8	9.5	15	729.1–835.7	—	—	
147

Domestic	90.8–106.4	11.1–14.5	17	711–847	—	245–288	
148

Hospital	81.1–120.7	14–19	14	450–654	220–354	259–520	
149

Domestic	18	1.4	28	63	—	—	
150

Domestic	29.8–50.3	5.3–11.7	10	485–815	199–482	70–303	
151

Domestic	45.6	4.36	23	234	41.8	63	
152

Domestic	27	5.04	12	31	—	50	
150

Domestic	23.1–35.4	3.8–4.9	15	103–190	—	—	
153



Industrial

Paper mill	11	0.6	41	5020	1600	800	
154

Textile	89.9	18.4	11	1047	444	—	
155

Winery	110	52	5	15553	8858	760	
156

Chemical factory	19.2	2.4	18	185.17	47.87	45.67	
152

Food processing	39.81	3.95	22	221	49.64	88.17	
152

Steel mill	200–210	50–55	9	1700–1720	650–700	—	
157

Slaughterhouse	450	50	20	5000	3000	3000	
158

Tannery	273	21	29	2200	—	6600	
159



Agricultural and livestock

Dairy	170	20.1	19	—	—	—	
160

Dairy	3456	249.7	31	23760	—	—	
161

Potato	45.2	4.2	24	1007–2065	751–1083	1215–1991	
162

Poultry	1380–1580	370–382	9	1550–1950	370–470	1060–1200	
163

Poultry	802–1825	50–446	12	—	—	847	
164

Rice	25–95	12–94	3	2578–6480	—	—	
165

Starch	246–284	28.34	19	861–991	—	—	
166

Swine	2055	620	7	37643	—	—	
150

Swine	2430	324	17	—	—	5310	
167

Swine	895	168	12	3122	923	811	
168




Trichormus variabilis
	Mixed wastewater (60%)	42	75.22	—	
46


Desmodesmus
	Municipal wastewater	83.9	61	—	
177


Chlorella sp.	Municipal wastewater before primary settling	68.4	83.2	50.9	
178


Chlorella pyrenoidosa
	Mix of industrial and domestic sewage from a pig farm and a palm oil mill	60–70	50–60	82	
179


Chlorella + Nitzschia	Settled domestic sewage	92	74	87	
180


Micractinium pusillum Fresenius
	Digested effluent from a covered anaerobic pond treating municipal wastewater	69	42	—	
181


Microalgae/bacteria consortia
	Full-scale municipal wastewater HRAPs operated in series	62	31	—	
182


Tetraselmis sp.	Activated sludge-recycling system in large scale municipal wastewater	98	82	—	
183


P. kessleri
	Activated sludge-recycling system in large scale municipal wastewater	98	20	—	
183


Chlorella sp.	Soybean-processing	85	97	70.5	
184


Chlamydomonas sp.	Palm oil mill effluent	65	34	56	
185


Scenedesmus obliquus
	Brewery effluent	88	30	71	
186


Chlorella vulgaris
	Swine manure	71	54	78.8	
187


Desmodesmus sp.	Oil refinery	—	53	82	
188


Chlorella sorokiniana
	50% swine wastewater diluted in water	94.4	99.5	84.6	
130


P. kessleri
	Pig farm wastewater	58	—	47	
189



Conventional CO

2

capture

Absorption	Using chemical solvents for CO2 chemical absorption, such as MEA, DEA, and MDEA	High CO2 solubility, thermal stability, safe and permanent sequestration, good efficiency (50–95%), rapid reaction, and large processing capacity	Solvent degradation, equipment corrosion, energy-intensive solvent regeneration, reacting with components other than CO2, such as SO2, resulting in irreversible degeneration of the solvent, difficult to scale-up ionic liquids, poor CO2/N2 selectivity, and not cost-effective
Physical adsorption	Using a solid adsorbent for CO2 capture, such as zeolite, aluminum oxide, activated carbon (AC), and silica gel	Low waste generation, low toxicity, simple, and good efficiency (55–92%)	Energy inefficient, flue gas pre-treatment necessary before channeling to the adsorber because of the presence of contaminants (e.g., SOx and NOx) and high moisture content, poor CO2 selectivity, not suitable for dealing with the emission sources with a large flue gas volume
Using metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) for CO2 capture	High porosity, crystallinity and surface area	Powdered MOFs have low mechanical strength and are difficult to handle
Membrane separation	Using membranes made of metallics, polymers, and ceramics to filter out CO2 from the mainstream based on hydrostatic pressure and concentration gradient	Good efficiency (50–90%), mass transfer increase, environment friendly, and no regeneration process	Necessary cooling of hot flue gas, poor selectivity, high membrane cost and surface area requirement, high moisture content in the effluent flue gas can adversely affect membrane performance, energy inefficient, low pressure and concentration of flue gas can reduce the efficiency of the process, and small processing capacity
Cryogenic separation	Successive refrigeration and condensation of the gas mixture at varied condensation temperatures (very low temperatures) for CO2 separation	High efficiency (up to 99%), easy for transportation via pipelines because of direct production of liquid CO2, absence of solvents, and easy to scale up	High energy requirement for refrigeration
Flue gas moisture removal is required prior to cooling to prevent plugging by ice formation
Solidified CO2 is continuously built up on the heat-exchanger surfaces and is required to be removed, mainly suitable for the treatment of high concentration CO2


Biological CO

2

capture

Microalgae-based	Use CO2 for microalgae growth via photosynthesis	No need for arable land, Co-production of high-value products, biofuel, and food, potential coupling with wastewater treatment, a faster growth rate than plants, high efficiency in a wide range of CO2 concentrations, environment friendly and sustainable	Sensitive to the high concentration of NOx and SOx, predation, contamination, and harsh cultivation conditions (pH, temperature, salinity, etc.)


CO

2

storage

Geological	Injection of CO2 into depleted oil and gas reservoirs and coal seams	Replenish depleted reservoirs, huge storage capacity, and possible recovery of oil/methane	High cost, CO2 leakage prone, and specific geomorphic structure requirement
Oceanic	Injection of CO2 into deep oceans	Large CO2 storage capacity	Cost intensive and a threat to marine life
Potential gas leakage
2H2O + 2NADP+ + 3ADP + 3P + light photon → 2NADPH + 2H+ + 3ATP + O2	(1)
3CO2 + 6NADPH + 9ADP + 6H+ → [CH2O]n + 3H2O + 6NADP+ + 9ADP + 8P	(2)
	(3)



Chlorella sp. MTF-15	Bubble column, 1 L	On–off feeding; diluted flue gas; batch	23–27	300	12/12 h	0.528	20–35	
215


Nannochloropsis oceanica
	Raceway pond, 8000 L	On–off feeding; pure flue gas; batch	13	Outdoor	Variable	0.021	—	
216


Scenedesmus dimorphus
	Bubble column, 0.001 L	On–off feeding; pure flue gas	15	100	—	0.485	0.889	
217


Chlorella emersonii
	Air-lift column, 5.5 L	On–off feeding; pure flue gas; semi-continuous	15	200	16/8 h	0.067	0.108	
218


Chlorella sp. MTF-7	Bubble column, 50 L	On–off feeding; pure flue gas; batch	25	Outdoor	Variable	0.36	—	
219


Nannochloropsis salina
	Raceway pond, 600 L	Continuous feeding; pure flue gas; batch	10–11	Outdoor	Variable	0.032	0.06	
220


Chlorella vulgaris
	Conical flask, 0.1 L	Batch	10	165	—	0.033–0.278	0.063–0.522	
221


Chlorella sp. MTF-7	Bubble column, 0.8 L	Batch	2–25	300	24/0 h	0.183–0.358	0.345–0.674	
219


Chlorella sp.	Bubble column, 1 L	Batch	10–20	84	12/12 h	0.150–0.271	0.282–0.510	
222


Spirulina sp.	Tubular PBR, 2.25 L	Continuous feeding	6	4320 (lux)	14/10	1.03	0.678	
223


Anabaena sp.	Bubble column, 2 L	Continuous feeding; batch	—	2800	12/12 h	0.6	1	
224


Chlorella sp.	Bubble column, 0.8 L	Semi-continuous	40	100	12/12 h	0.13	0.144	
225


Chlorella vulgaris
	Erlenmeyer flask, 0.25 L	Continuous feeding; simulated flue gas	0.04	—	24/0 h	0.408	0.768	
226


Chlorella vulgaris
	Erlenmeyer flask, 0.25 L	Continuous feeding; simulated flue gas	5	—	24/0 h	0.39	0.73	
226


Scenedesmus obliquus
	Erlenmeyer flask, 0.25 L	Continuous feeding; simulated flue gas	0.04	—	24/0 h	0.165	0.311	
226


Scenedesmus obliquus
	Erlenmeyer flask, 0.25 L	Continuous feeding; simulated flue gas	5	—	24/0 h	0.28	0.53	
226


Dunaliella tertiolecta
	Erlenmeyer flask, 0.25 L	Continuous feeding; simulated flue gas	0.04	—	24/0 h	0.164	0.308	
226


Dunaliella tertiolecta
	Erlenmeyer flask, 0.25 L	Continuous feeding; simulated flue gas	5	—	24/0 h	0.08	0.15	
226


Thermosynechococcus sp.	Flat panel PBR, 1 L	Batch	0.04	2000	24/0 h	0.143	0.224	
227


S. obliquus CNW-N	PBR	Continuous feeding; batch	2.5	140	24/0 h	0.424–0.456	0.718–0.771	
228


Thermosynechococcus CL-1	Flat plate PBR, 100 L	Continuous feeding	—	1000	24/0 h	0.116	0.17	
229


Thermosynechococcus CL-1	Flat plate PBR, 25 L	Continuous feeding; batch	—	2000	24/0 h	0.138	0.221	
230


Chlorococcum sp.	Bubble column, 0.5 L	On–off feeding, batch	0.03	106	14/10 h	0.06	0.054	
231


Chlorococcum sp.	Bubble column, 0.5 L	On–off feeding, batch	1	106	14/10 h	0.065	0.058	
231


Chlorococcum sp.	Bubble column, 0.5 L	On–off feeding, batch	2.5	106	14/10 h	0.091	0.081	
231


Chlorococcum sp.	Bubble column, 0.5 L	On–off feeding, batch	5	106	14/10 h	0.105	0.094	
231


Chlorococcum sp.	Bubble column, 0.5 L	On–off feeding, batch	10	106	14/10 h	0.094	0.084	
231


Chlorella sp.	Bubble column, 0.5 L	On–off feeding, batch	0.03	106	14/10 h	0.114	0.103	
231


Chlorella sp.	Bubble column, 0.5 L	On–off feeding, batch	1	106	14/10 h	0.161	0.144	
231


Chlorella sp.	Bubble column, 0.5 L	On–off feeding, batch	2.5	106	14/10 h	0.196	0.176	
231


Chlorella sp.	Bubble column, 0.5 L	On–off feeding, batch	5	106	14/10 h	0.208	0.187	
231


Chlorella sp.	Bubble column, 0.5 L	On–off feeding, batch	10	106	14/10 h	0.164	0.147	
231




Dunaliella salina
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond without membrane filtration	Fertilizer (1476)	69 ha	Investment: €11.2m	€8.7m	Economical	Food	
235

Nutrients; salts	β-Carotene (141)	Operational: €13.4m per year	Environment

Dunaliella salina
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond	Fertilizer (1476)	69 ha	Investment: €10.7m	€36.9m	Economical	Food	
235

Nutrients; salts	With membrane filtration	β-Carotene (141)	Operational: €7.9m per year	Environment

Dunaliella salina
	Freshwater; CO2	PBR	Fertilizer (1476)	18 ha	Investment: €43.1m	-€13.7m	Uneconomical	Food	
235

Nutrients; salts	With membrane filtration	β-Carotene (141)	Operational: €13.2m per year	Environment

Haematococcus pluvialis
	Freshwater; CO2	PBR	Fertilizer (1583)	20 ha	Investment: €46.1m	€8.3m	Economical	Food	
235

Nutrients	With membrane filtration	Astaxanthin (43)	Operational: €13.7m per year	Environment
—	N, P, and CO2	Open pond	Diesel (1)	4 ha	Investment: $381.2	$6.27 per gallon diesel (MFSP)	Uneconomical	Energy	
236

Dewatering needed	Operational: $292.4	Environment
—	N, P, and CO2	Algal turf scrubber	Diesel (1)	—	Investment: $338.9	$8.34 per gallon diesel (MFSP)	Uneconomical	Energy	
236

No need for dewatering	Operational: $171.7	Environment

Synechocystis GMO	Freshwater; CO2	Tubular PBR	Bioethanol (0.7)	3000 m3	Investment: €36.2m	-€65.1m	Uneconomical	Energy	
237

Nutrients; salts	Fertilizer (0.2)	Environment
Biogas

Synechocystis GMO	Freshwater; CO2	Tubular PBR	Bioethanol (0.7)	3000 m3	Investment: €58.6m	€16.7m	Economical	Food	
237

Nutrients; salts	Phycocyanin (0.07)	Energy
Zeaxanthin (0.002)	Environment
Fertilizer (0.2)
Biogas

Synechocystis PCC	Freshwater; CO2	Tubular PBR	Phycocyanin	3000 m3	Investment: €62.8m	€104.8m	Economical	Food	
237

Nutrients; salts	Zeaxanthin	Environment

Arthrospira
	—	—	Phycocyanin (3)	
	Total: $235	$800000	Economical	Food	
238

Environment

Arthrospira
	—	—	Phycocyanin (3) lipid/TFA (1.5)	
	Total: $359	−$170000	Uneconomical	Food	
238

Environment

Arthrospira
	—	—	Phycocyanin (3) lipid/TFA (1.5)	
	Total: $1273	−$770000	Uneconomical	Food	
238

Polysaccharide (0.1)	Environment

Dunaliella salina
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond without membrane filtration	Fertilizer (1285)	50 ha	Investment: €17m	−€7m	Uneconomical	Food	
239

Nutrients; salts	β-Carotene (113)	Operational: €10m per year	Environment

Dunaliella salina
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond with membrane filtration	Fertilizer (1285)	50 ha	Investment: €18m	€25m	Economical	Food	
239

Nutrients; salts	β-Carotene (113)	Operational: €5m per year	Environment

Dunaliella salina
	Freshwater; CO2	Tubular PBR with membrane filtration	Fertilizer (1285)	9 ha	Investment: €47m	−€29m	Uneconomical	Food	
239

Nutrients; salts	β-Carotene (113)	Operational: €10m per year	Environment

Dunaliella salina
	Seawater; CO2	Open pond without membrane filtration	Fertilizer (1285)	23 ha	Investment: €7m	€33m	Economical	Food	
239

Nutrients; salts	β-Carotene (113)	Operational: €3m per year	Environment

Dunaliella salina
	Seawater; CO2	Open pond	Fertilizer (1285)	23 ha	Investment: €8m	€40m	Economical	Food	
239

Nutrients; salts	With membrane filtration	β-Carotene (113)	Operational: €2m per year	Environment

Dunaliella salina
	Seawater; CO2	Tubular PBR	Fertilizer (1285)	9 ha	Investment: €31m	€2m	Economical	Food	
239

Nutrients; salts	With membrane filtration	β-Carotene (113)	Operational: €6m per year	Environment

Nannochloropsis sp.	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond	Fish feed (1200)	28 ha	Investment: €14.9m	€180m	Economical	Food	
240

Nutrients; salts	Sold without processing	Operational: €3.83m per year	Environment

Haematococcus pluvialis
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond	Fertilizer (2450)	114 ha	Investment: €34.8m	€155m	Economical	Food	
240

Nutrients	Sold without processing	Carotenoids (84)	Operational: €9.39m per year	Environment

Dunaliella salina
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond	Fertilizer (880)	52.1 ha	Investment: €19.1m	€17.6m	Economical	Food	
240

Nutrients; salts	Sold without processing	Carotenoids (111)	Operational: €5.85m per year	Environment

Haematococcus pluvialis
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond	Fertilizer (190)	114 ha	Investment: €35.3m	€154m	Economical	Food	
240

Nutrients	AD	Carotenoids (84)	Operational: €9.5m per year	Energy
Biogas (6.73 GW h)	Environment

Dunaliella salina
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond	Fertilizer (70)	52.1 ha	Investment: €19.4m	€17.1m	Economical	Food	
240

Nutrients; salts	AD	Carotenoids (111)	Operational: €5.90m per year	Energy
Biogas (2.42 GW h)	Environment

Haematococcus pluvialis
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond	Carotenoids (84)	114 ha	Investment: €38.6m	€151m	Economical	Food	
240

Nutrients	Gasification	Syngas (14 GW h)	Operational: €9.73m per year	Energy
Diesel (122 m3)	Environment
Gasoline (113 m3)

Dunaliella salina
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond	Carotenoids (111)	52.1 ha	Investment: €21.2m	€15.1m	Economical	Food	
240

Nutrients; salts	Gasification	Syngas (5.1 GW h)	Operational: €6.04m per year	Energy
Diesel (44.6 m3)	Environment
Gasoline (41.3 m3)

Haematococcus pluvialis
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond	Carotenoids (84)	114 ha	Investment: €38.7m	€150m	Economical	Food	
240

Nutrients	Torrefaction	Syngas (9.27 GW h)	Operational: €9.75m per year	Energy
Diesel (164 m3)	Environment
Gasoline (152 m3)

Dunaliella salina
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond	Carotenoids (111)	52.1 ha	Investment: €21.3m	€15m	Economical	Food	
240

Nutrients; salts	Torrefaction	Syngas (3.39 GW h)	Operational: €6.04m per year	Energy
Diesel (59.8 m3)	Environment
Gasoline (55.4 m3)

Haematococcus pluvialis
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond	Carotenoids (84)	114 ha	Investment: €38.7m	€150m	Economical	Food	
240

Nutrients	Pyrolysis	Syngas (7.22 GW h)	Operational: €9.77m per year	Energy
Diesel (213 m3)	Environment
Gasoline (197 m3)

Dunaliella salina
	Freshwater; CO2	Open pond	Carotenoids (111)	52.1 ha	Investment: €21.3m	€14.9m	Economical	Food	
240

Nutrients; salts	Pyrolysis	Syngas (2.64 GW h)	Operational: €6.05m per year	Energy
Diesel (77.9 m3)	Environment
Gasoline (72.1 m3)

Chlorella vulgaris
	Paper wastewater	Open pond	Lipids	—	Investment: €19.42m	€5.07m	Economical	Energy	
241

CO2 from flue gas	PE (2%)	Biogas	Operational: €3.37m per year	Water
AD (45%)	Environment
LE (75%)

Chlorella vulgaris
	Paper wastewater	Open pond	Lipids	—	Investment: €18m	-€7.41m	Uneconomical	Energy	
241

CO2 from flue gas	PE (1%)	Biogas	Operational: €2.61m per year	Water
AD (45%)	Environment
LE (75%)

Chlorella vulgaris
	Paper wastewater	Open pond	Lipids	—	Investment: €21.2m	€15.37m	Economical	Energy	
241

CO2 from flue gas	PE (3%)	Biogas	Operational: €4.16m per year	Water
AD (45%)	Environment
LE (75%)

Chlorella vulgaris
	Paper wastewater	Open pond	Lipids	—	Investment: €19.42m	€3.69m	Economical	Energy	
241

CO2 from flue gas	PE (2%)	Biogas	Operational: €3.37m per year	Water
AD (45%)	Environment
LE (60%)

Chlorella vulgaris
	Paper wastewater	Open pond	Lipids	—	Investment: €19.42m	€6.44m	Economical	Energy	
241

CO2 from flue gas	PE (2%)	Biogas	Operational: €3.37m per year	Water
AD (45%)	Environment
LE (90%)

Chlorella vulgaris
	Paper wastewater	Open pond	Lipids	—	Investment: €19.42m	€4.21m	Economical	Energy	
241

PE (2%)	Biogas	Operational: €3.37m per year	Water
AD (30%)	Environment
CO2 from flue gas	LE (75%)

Chlorella vulgaris
	Paper wastewater	Open pond	Lipids	—	Investment: €19.42m	€5.92m	Economical	Energy	
241

CO2 from flue gas	PE (2%)	Biogas	Operational: €3.37m per year	Water
AD (60%)	Environment
LE (75%)

Chlorella sp.	Municipal wastewater	PBR	Bio-oil	—	Investment: $5.35m	$2.23 per gallon bio-oil (MFSP)	Economical	Energy	
242

CO2	Pyrolysis	Syngas	Operational: $1.17m per year	Water
Biochar	Environment

Chlorella vulgaris
	Wastewater	Open pond	Bio-oil	—	Investment: $1.34m	€70.59m	Economical	Energy	
243

CO2	Liquefaction	
	Operational: $21.25m per year	Water
Centrifuge	
	Environment

Chlorella vulgaris
	Wastewater	Open pond liquefaction	Bio-oil	—	Investment: $1.56m	€163.99m	Economical	Energy	
243

CO2	Fourdrinier former	Operational: $3.96m per year	Water
Environment
—	Water streams (centrate)	PBR	Bio-oil	2.57 ha	Investment: $47.07m	$1.85 per gallon bio-oil (MFSP)	Economical	Energy	
244

CO2	Pyrolysis	Syngas	Operational: $8.44m per year	Water
Biochar	Environment

 	Fig. 4  Flow diagram of the potential algal-based food–energy–water–environment nexus.	 

 	Fig. 5  Different scenarios in algal biorefinery (energy sector).	 

 	Fig. 6  A world map of food, energy, and water access and availability (purple, red, and blue maps indicate food, energy, and water sectors, respectively).	 

 	Fig. 7  A world map of nexus security (dark colors indicate nexus security and bright colors indicate nexus insecurity).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
