Chemical input and I–V output: stepwise chemical information processing in dye -sensitized solar cells  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP43460A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP43460A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 16014-16022Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsChemical input and I–V output: stepwise chemical information processing in dye-sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Norifusa 
            Satoh
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Liyuan 
            Han
          
        
      
Photovoltaic Materials Unit, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0047, Japan. E-mail: SATOH.Norifusa@nims.go.jp;  Fax: +81 298592331;   Tel: +81 298592301
Received 
      1st October 2012
    , Accepted 4th October 2012First published on 4th October 2012AbstractAs a complex system, a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) exhibits emergent photovoltaics not obvious from the properties of the individual components. The chemical input of 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) into DSC improves the open circuit voltage (Voc) and reduces the short circuit current (Isc) in I–V output through multiple interactions with the components, yet it has been difficult to distinguish the multiple interactions and correlate the interactions with the influences on I–V output due to the complexity of the system. To deal with the multiple interactions, we have adapted a conceptual framework and methodology from coordination chemistry. First, we titrated the photovoltaic interface and electrolyte with TBP to identify the stepwise chemical interaction processes. An isopotential point observed in I–V output indicates that most of the inputted chemicals interact with the electrolyte. Cyclic voltammetric titration of the electrolyte demonstrates asymmetric redox peaks and two different isopotential points, indicating that the two-step coordination–decoordination process inhibits the reduction current of the electrolyte. Second, we set an interaction model bridging the hierarchical gaps between the multiple interactions and the I–V output to address the influences on outputs from the amount of the inputs. From the viewpoint of the interaction model and interactions observed, we are able to comprehend the processes of the complex system and suggest a direction to improve Voc without sacrificing Isc in DSCs. We conclude that the conceptual framework and methodology adapted from coordination chemistry is beneficial to enhance the emergent outputs of complex systems.
Introduction
A complex system is composed of many components that interact with each other, exhibiting emergent outputs not obvious from the properties of the individual components.1 The most difficult obstacle to comprehend the processes of complex systems is how to distinguish the multiple interactions in these systems. However, when all the interactions are well-known and conditions are well-controlled without random errors, the output is reproducible and predictable regardless of the degree of complexity. To determine whether multiple interactions can be distinguished in an actual device, we examined the multiple interactions that occur in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). In particular, we examined how the initial input influences the output of a complex system. The input interacts in multiple capacities with the components in the complex system and the influences of each interaction on the output are multiple and complex. For example, dopants or additives are inputted into materials or devices, although the multiple influences on the output, including their functionality, performance, or efficiency, are not yet fully understood. Therefore, by closely examining and then distinguishing the interactions in the complex system, it will be possible to comprehend the entire system. This will allow for the improvement of the output, specifically the functionality, performance, or efficiency, in a complex system.
Background
Analysis of multiple interactions in coordination chemistry
Coordination chemistry has already established the theory and techniques to analyse multiple chemical interactions for metal complexes in solution. Although several compositions of metal complexes are formed through multiple interactions between metal ions and organic ligands, the concentration of each metal complex in the system is correlated by the stepwise equilibrium constants using an interaction model. Experimentally, such coordination processes are confirmed during titration and monitored through the colour changes of metal complexes with UV-vis spectroscopy, since light absorption linearly increases with the concentrations. For example, metal complex ML6 forms through multiple interactions between metal ion M and ligand L. As an interaction, L coordinates to M one-by-one. During the stepwise coordinations, MLX (X = 1–5) complexes are formed. For each coordination process, the stepwise equilibrium constants K0 and KX are given by the ratios of concentration of related compounds as follows: (1) (2)The experimental spectra taken by UV-vis spectroscopy, as outputs of a complex system, depend on the initial concentrations of [M] and [L], as the initial inputs. The data are then analysed by comparison with spectra simulated by the interaction model and the linearity of light absorptions of each metal complex to the concentrations. This method of analysis is therefore highly suited to comprehend the multiple interactions in a complex system.
The observation of isosbestic points is useful to distinguish multiple interactions.2,3 When the stepwise equilibrium constant of a coordination process is high enough to ignore the subsequent progress, an isosbestic point appears that indicates the single coordination process. On the other hand, when using titration with UV-vis spectroscopy, it is difficult to distinguish the transition of weak interactions because of the requirement that the titrant should react with the analyte quantitatively.4 Due to its high detection sensibility of chemical compounds, UV-vis spectroscopy is observed using samples of less than 10−5 M concentration. Under these conditions, interactions of over 105 M−1 as an equilibrium constant are analysable. While the UV-vis spectroscopy can distinguish strong interactions, it is difficult to distinguish weak interactions. Therefore, a possible choice to detect weak interactions is titration using cyclic voltammetry (CV) when the analyte is active for reduction–oxidation (redox), since the sample concentration for CV measurement is approximately 10−2 M. The equilibrium constant is related to the redox potential, which is described by the Nernst equation. The redox potential is, however, determined from CV curves only when the redox species show symmetric redox peaks. Even if the analyte shows symmetric redox, not all analyte-titrant complexes show symmetric redox due to the decoordination of the titrant during redox process. In asymmetric redox systems, the process of chemical interactions cannot be analysed by the Nernst equation. Although CV provides a way to distinguish the weak interactions, there are certain limitations to this particular method.
In connection with the observation of isosbestic points, similar iso-points have been reported recently with other spectroscopy not only in solution-based systems5,6 but also in material-based functional systems. During the change of scan rates in CV, observed isopotential points have been used as a diagnostic for the reversibility of the redox system.7 The origin of isothermal points during a thermodynamic change is discussed in terms of the specific heat of strongly correlated materials.8 In contrast, the origin of iso-points observed in output changes during gradual changes of the initial inputs into complex systems has yet to be clarified. For instance, an isosbestic point, an isopotential point, and an isothermal point are exhibited during atomic replacements in the photoconductivity of atomic layer superlattices,9 photovoltaics of coaxial nanowire devices,10 and specific heat and magnetism of perovskite oxides,11 respectively. In short, the generalized concept for the observation of iso-points has not been established.
DSCs as a complex system
Due to their lower manufacturing costs, DSCs are expected to be a viable power source12–18 A DSC consists of six components: a transparent conduction oxide (TCO) electrode, titanium oxide (TiO2) nanoporous film, dye adsorbed on TiO2, electrolyte like I−/I3− reduction–oxidation (redox) mediator in acetonitrile, and a platinum (Pt) electrode as shown in Fig. 1. Electrons and holes generated from photo-excited dyes are separated toward the TCO electrode through TiO2 nanoporous film and Pt electrode as I3− diffusion, respectively, although some carriers are recombined. After a certain amount of time, the concentration of the carriers at each point reaches a dynamic equilibrium under light illuminated conditions. In the actual DSCs, the concentration of electrolytes and additives is approximately 10−1 M for improved carrier transport. The higher concentration of electrolytes then stimulates weak interactions. In the complex system, the emergent output is hierarchically described by photovoltaics such as diode and resistance, electron transfer and carrier transport, and chemical interactions. Since multiple chemical interactions occur between the various components and influence the emergent outputs, DSCs can be seen as a complex system.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the principle of a DSC. RS involved in I–V outputs is divided into RTCO, RPt, and Relec by EIS. 
From the viewpoint of solar cells, the equivalent circuit model of silicon solar cells is applicable to DSCs.19 In solar cells, the diode is the primary factor that defines the shape of the I–V outputs. The energy conversion efficiency (Ef) is characterised by the shape of the I–V output as the product of open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current (Isc), and fill factor (ff). According to the equivalent circuit model, the diode current (Idiode) is: (3)where I0, n, q, kB, and T represent the reverse saturation current of the diode, the ideality factor of the diode, elementary charge, the Boltzmann's constant, and absolute temperature, respectively. The diode is characterised by I0 and n. Iph ≫ I0, Voc is: (4)where Iph is the photo-generated current and is nearly equal to the short circuit current (Isc). Although the potential energy gap of the light absorber layer strongly relates to Voc and Isc, the Shockley–Queisser limit theoretically determines the best potential energy gap to achieve the maximum Ef.20 The increase in the potential energy gap to obtain high Voc narrows the light absorption range in the wavelength and results in a low Isc.21 In DSCs, the molecular engineering of dyes to control the potential diagram has been established by Nazeeruddin et. al.22 Therefore, the challenge is to further improve Ef suppression of the diode current for higher Voc without changing the energy diagram. Since the origin of the diode current is assigned as a back electron transfer from TiO2 to electrolyte, modifications of the photovoltaic interface have been attempted by metal oxides, alkyl chains, or dendirmers to physically inhibit the back transfer.23–26 The interface modifications, however, sacrifice electron injection from dyes or regeneration of oxidised dyes for the improvement in Voc, which results in low Isc.
Before the development of DSCs, the concept to describe the diode as the back electron transfer was presented in photo-electrochemical cells. This was based on single crystals instead of nano-porous films27 and this concept is also applied to explain the diode in DSCs.28–33 Based on the photo-electrochemical model, Voc is related to the electron transfer rate, the concentration of the electrolyte, and the electron population in TiO2. In some of these studies, Marcus theory has attempted to describe the back electron transfer rate since this theory describes the electron transfer rate in chemical reactions. The basic concept of Marcus theory is that the electron transfer occurs after the formation of activation states in both donors and acceptors through the reorganization of its surroundings, including the solvent.34,35 In the Marcus inverted region, electron transfer with very large free energy decelerates due to this mechanism, whereas the reaction rate generally accelerates with large free energy. On the other hand, nano-porous films have numerous surface trap sites due to their large surface areas. Based on the differences between single crystals and nano-porous films, the kinetics of electron in TiO2, such as carrier diffusion, trapping, and detrapping, are taken into account to discuss the diode properties in other types of models.36–42 Current discussions relate to the diode centre on the electron trapping in TiO2, yet, from the standpoint of Marcus theory, it may be more important to focus on the basic concept of electron transfer.
For a substantial length of time, 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) has been inputted into DSC systems as a common and simple way to improve diode properties.43 The chemical inputs interact with the components of DSCs in multiple ways to form a new I–V output. The multiple chemical interactions of TBP improve Voc but also reduce Isc. The phenomena have been explained mainly through the interactions of TBP with TiO2.44–47 In terms of the types of interactions, TBP deprotonates TiO2 to shift quasi-Fermi level of TiO2 upward by reducing the number of the trap sites. Due to the upward shift of the quasi-Fermi level of TiO2, the free energy for the electron injection from dyes is reduced, resulting in a decrease of Isc. Since the maximum Voc is defined by the energy level gap between the quasi-Fermi level of TiO2 and the redox potential of I−/I3−, the upward shift is also consistent with the increase in Voc. Although equilibrium constants of H+ with TBP are not given, equilibrium constants with pyridine have been reported to be pK = 12.53 (K = 3.4 × 1012 M−1) in acetonitrile.48 In contrast, the chemical influence on the electrolyte has been reported on a limited basis. As an interaction, the coordination of TBP to I2 is considered as the chemical influence on redox potential.49 The equilibrium constant for this coordination is determined to be K = 70 M−1 in acetonitrile using the Nernst equation based on the redox potential of the I3–/I2 redox couple.50 In the pyridine·I2 mixture solution, pyridine·I2 complex is reported to dissociate and form cationic species, such as pyridine·I+ and (pyridine)2·I+, in polar solvents like acetonitrile, since ionic species are more stable in polar solvents.51 The chemical influence on I−/I3− redox is observed with a Pt electrode that is modified by dendrimers containing numerous pyridine-like ligands.26 The increase in the amount of the ligand deforms I−/I3− redox asymmetrically. In the back electron transfer, since the current flows from TiO2 to the electrolyte, it is important to consider the chemical interactions with TiO2 and the electrolyte.
While the first factor in establishing the shape of the I–V output is the diode, the second main factor is series resistance (RS), which is related to ff.52 In DSCs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a well-established and useful technique to analyse RS.19,36,37,53–55 EIS divides RS into the sheet resistance of the transparent conductive oxide (RTCO), resistance of the I−/I3− redox process at the Pt counter electrode (RPt), and resistance due to the Nernstian diffusion of the I3− toward the electrode (Relec), which simultaneously gives the time constants for RPt and Relec (τPt and τelec). Generally, EIS is performed at Voc to avoid an influence on the carrier flow toward RPt and Relec. Under these conditions, the resistance of electron diffusion in TiO2 is too small to be observed and the time constant is ignorable compared with τelec.36,40,53 This means that the rate-determining step in the carrier transport process is the electrolyte diffusion, although the detrapping step is the rate-determining step of carrier transport in TiO2.56,57 Thus, Isc is limited by the size of the electrolytes.58 In fact, a recent report on high Ef using large-size electrolyte suggests that Ef over 12% would be possible with I−/I3− electrolytes, since the large-size electrolyte gives limited Isc and lower ff due to high Relec.21 Therefore, the chemical interactions with the electrolyte may influence Isc by changing the size of the electrolyte.
While RS in EIS is well understood and consistent with other solar cells, the discussion of diode resistance in EIS lacks the same level of consistency when compared to general solar cells. During the EIS analysis at Voc, diode resistance [Rdiode(Voc)] is also observed as the second semicircle as diode resistance itself depends on voltage. The time constant of Rdiode(Voc) [τdiode(Voc)] expresses the life time of electrons in TiO2 until the electron recombines with oxidised electrolytes. Thus, τdiode(Voc) was adopted to discuss the chemical influences on the diode properties.36,39 In contrast, some experimental data conflicts with the explanation.55,59 On the other hand, the voltage- and carrier density- dependence of Rdiode or τdiode have been discussed to address the detail of I0 recently.41,60–63 While the conventional approach to understanding the diode in DSCs has focused on TiO2, the electrolyte plays a more critical role in the back electron transfer. By understanding the role of the electrolyte, it will be possible to comprehend the complex system as a whole.
Working hypothesis
Iso-points indicating single processes
We expanded the general concept of isosbestic points that indicates a single coordination process to iso-points that indicate a single process, such as isopotential and isothermal points. When the total amount of an initial state F and the final state G remains constant during a process from F to G, signal S(x) is described as follows: S(x) = (1–ξ)f(x) + ξg(x)(5)where, x, ξ, f(x), and g(x) are given by: a parameter for signals, the extent of the process, signal function for F at ξ = 0, and signal function for G at ξ = 1, respectively; and, f(x) and g(x) are proportional to each amount of F and G, respectively. Combining the terms with ξ in eqn (5), we can obtain eqn (6): S(x) = f(x) − ξ[f(x) – g(x)](6)If there is x0 such that f(x0) − g(x0) = 0, an iso-point is given for any ξ at the following point: S(x0) = f(x0) = g(x0)(7)Therefore, the appearance of an iso-point clearly indicates that a single process is in progress. The process transitions can be determined by the shift or demise of iso-points.
Iso-points indicate single processes under the following conditions: when signals increase linearly with the concentration of functional atoms/units, the initial and final signal functions for a parameter have cross points, and the total concentration of the initial and final states is maintained (or signals are normalised by the total concentrations). Hence, iso-points can be observed during the analysis of complex systems, including multi-step or -component chemical reactions, materials, and devices, using linearization, which is one of the most common strategies to analyse systems.1 Iso-points observed during the atomic replacements in the solid-based systems clearly indicate that the replacements of atoms successfully occur without significant interaction between dopants and without other significant effects on the crystal structure. Since the concept of iso-points is applicable to atomic replacement in solid, functional material, it likely also applies to various complex systems.
We then adapted the concept of iso-points for the actual DSCs. An isopotential point can be observed during I–V output changes of DSCs when the interaction of chemical inputs occurs at the photovoltaic interface, where x, f(x), and g(x) correspond to voltage, current for an initial state, and current for the final state obtained by a chemical input, respectively. The currents f(x) and g(x) are proportional to the area of the photovoltaic interface, where the bare state F is transformed to the fully influenced state G. For comparison purposes, the total areas of F and G equal the active cell area, of which each cell is strictly controlled for random errors. Note that the isopotential point does not appear when the inputted chemicals interact with the electrolytes as the concentration of electrolytes is not proportional to the current in the outputs. According to the equilibrium constants of pyridine, the interaction with H+ is 2 × 1010 times stronger than the interaction with iodine, which suggests that deprotonation of the photovoltaic interface occurs first. To verify consistency between the observation of isopotential points and the chemical influences on the actual devices, we use Relec and τelec in EIS. Therefore, this will allow for the determination of whether a chemical interaction is occurring at the photovoltaic interface and what amount of TBP interacts with the photovoltaic interface in the actual devices.
Interaction model bridging the hierarchical gaps between photovoltaics and chemical interactions
Using Marcus theory, we presume that the rate-determining step in the back electron transfer represents the reorganization of the electrolyte. Since reorganization energy is the sum of Coulomb energy caused by the electron transfer, the reorganization process strongly depends on the sizes of the donor and acceptor. In the back electron transfer, the size of the acceptors, the electrolytes, is much smaller than that of the donor, TiO2 nano-porous film. Since smaller charging sites require larger Coulomb energy, the reorganization process of the electrolytes is dominant in the back electron transfer. Since electrons in TiO2 can be described as a static distribution of electron population in each trap and depth profile under a steady state,13,15,17,31,32,64 the chemical influences on the diode are divided into the influences on the static distribution of electron population in TiO2 and the reorganization process.
The consideration above allows us to apply our knowledge of photo-electrochemical cells to describe the diodes of DSCs. Although single crystals are used instead of nano-porous films in photo-electrochemical cells, this difference seen in DSCs does not affect the description of the back electron transfer. As discussed above, the kinetics of electrons in TiO2 is insignificant in terms of the back electron transfer. Herein, we relate photovoltaic and photo-electrochemical expression to explain chemical influences on the diode since I–V outputs of solar cells only exhibit the diode properties. Using each diode current for individual acceptors produced by the chemical interactions with the electrolyte, we obtain the following equations to describe the diode characteristics through a comparison of eqn (4) and the photoelectro-chemical expression for Voc:28 IA = qkA[A]mn0uα(8) n = uα(9)where IA is the reverse saturation current for an acceptor A, the sum of all IA is I0, kA is the electron transfer rate, [A] is the concentration of A, n0 is the electron population in TiO2 under the dark state, m is the order of the rate of reaction for A, u is the order of the rate of reaction for electrons, and α is the electron-transfer coefficient.
In the chemical influences on diode, we mainly consider the influences on I0 relating to kA, [A], and n0 because n is nearly constant and approximately 2 in DSCs.40 According to the Marcus theory, kA is expressed as follows: (10)where kA-max is the maximum rate constant depending on the distance from TiO2 to A, −ΔGA is the free energy for the electron transfer of Fig. 1, and λA is the reorganization energy for A. Deprotonation of TiO2 affects the trap states and then influences −ΔGA and n0. To describe the chemical influence on the electrolyte, we consider a dynamic equilibrium state for DSCs depending on the applied voltage and light irradiation condition. At a certain position in DSCs, we obtain the following multiple variable simultaneous equations for [A]: (11) where Ki (i = 0–6) is a stepwise formation constant and H+ originates from TiO2. Although all the shown chemical species belong to A, each IA is not always high enough to influence I–V outputs. II2 has little influence on I0 because [I2] is small enough to be ignored due to high [I−]K1 even if −ΔGI2 is larger than −ΔGI3−. Thus, ITBP·I2 is also negligible. Similar to pyridine·I2, TBP·I2 would not be stable in acetonitrile, which means negligible [TBP·I2] and a high enough K3/K4. Therefore, we can describe I0 as follows: I0 = II3− + ITBP·I+ + ITBP2·I+(12)Chemical interactions with the electrolyte therefore shift the chemical equilibriums and the diode, depending on the reduction properties of the formed iodine complexes.
We also presume that redox properties observed in CV represent characteristics of electron transfers in the actual DSCs as CV measures a dynamic equilibrium state for the sample solution near the working electrode. CV of I− gives the following two redox peaks:26,50 (13)The back electron transfer corresponds to the reduction of I3−. Thus, we consider the chemical interaction with I3−. Based on eqn (11), we can describe the stepwise interaction processes as follows: (14)Combining eqn (13) and (14), we can predict that 0.333… equiv. and 0.666… equiv. of TBP versus I− are required to form TBP·I+ and TBP2·I+, respectively. Even if I−/I3− redox is deformed asymmetrically, we can distinguish the transition of the coordination processes since CV satisfies the requirement for observation of isopotential points. In CV measurements, the current at each voltage is directly proportional to the concentration of redox compounds. The sample concentration is also suitable to distinguish the weak interactions. In the DSC system, reduction of I3− also corresponds to electrolyte regeneration at the Pt electrode. Thus, we use RPt and τPt in EIS to verify the consistency between the observation of isopotential points and the chemical influences on the actual devices.
Finally, we first predict no chemical influences on Rdiode(Voc) and τdiode(Voc) in EIS from the viewpoint of solar cells. Rdiode(V) is described as the differential resistance of Idiode: (15)In solar cells, the voltage loss at RS is negligible at Voc as I = 0. Thus, all of the applied voltage Voc is consumed on the diode element. Hence, Rdiode(Voc) is as follows: (16)Rdiode(Voc) is not related to I0. Additionally, τdiode(Voc) is given by a production of Rdiode(Voc) and the chemical capacitances.65–67eqn (16) illustrates that Rdiode(Voc) and τdiode(Voc) cannot explain the diode properties directly as all of the photogenerated carriers recombine as the diode current at Voc. Thus, τdiode(Voc) and the carrier lifetime depend on the total amount of the photogenerated carrier that is in proportion to Iph as expressed in eqn (16). DSCs fall into the same conditions,30 where all of the electrons injected into TiO2 recombine with oxidised electrolytes at Voc. This prediction is convergent with the recent studies of the voltage- and carrier density-dependence of Rdiode or τdiode in EIS, as illustrated in eqn (15). In EIS analysis, these dependences are necessary to address I0. In this study, we directly calculated the experimental value of I0 from Voc and Isc obtained in I–V outputs based on eqn (4), where Iph = Isc and n = 2. From the viewpoint of coordination chemistry, we analysed the complex system to reveal the relationship between the chemical input and I–V output, which will improve the efficiency of the output.
Experimental
1,3-Dimethylimidazolium iodide (DMPII) was synthesised as reported in previous studies.68Cis-bis (isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II)bis-tetrabutylammonium (N719) dye was purchased from Dyesol. I2, LiI, and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) were purchased from Fluka, Aldrich, and Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd., respectively. All other chemicals were purchased from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd. All the purchased chemicals were used without any further purification.
In order to observe an isopotential point for a single process, other experimental factors were kept constant. DSCs without random error were fabricated as follows: Transparent TiO2 nano-porous films were prepared via screen-printing on TCO and sintered at 500 °C for 2 h, and then the proper films were selected for comparison (area: 0.25 cm2, thickness: 25.0 ± 0.5 μm). The films were soaked in 5ml acetonitrile solution of 3 × 10−4 M of N719 dye divided from the same stock solution. The electrolyte, composed of 0.6 M DMPII, 0.05 M I2, and 0.1 M LiI with/without 0–1 M TBP in acetonitrile, was prepared by the following procedure in a glove box: first, the electrolyte was prepared at a 2-fold higher concentration without TBP, and then divided and diluted to prepare 1 M and 0 M TBP electrolytes with/without the addition of TBP, respectively. Each TBP-concentrated electrolyte (0.01, 0.05, 0.1, and 0.5 M) was prepared from the dilution of 1 M electrolyte by a 0 M one. After the soaked photovoltaic electrodes were taken out from the dye solution, the photovoltaic electrodes were stored in acetonitrile temporally during the assembly of other cells to suppress their exposure to air. The photovoltaic electrodes and Pt electrodes were sealed with a Surlyn spacer (60 μm thick), and then the space was penetrated immediately after with the electrolyte. The current–voltage characteristics were measured using an Advantest R6243 current/voltage unit after 10 min wait time to achieve thermal equilibrium under AM 1.5G simulated solar light of 100 mW cm−2, and irradiated from a WACOM super solar simulator.
All the electrochemical measurements were carried out with a Solatron electrochemical analysis system constructed from a 1255 B frequency response analyser and a 1287 A potentiostat. EIS was performed under AM 1.5G simulated solar light of 100 mW cm−2 and recorded over a frequency range of 102–106 Hz at 298 K. The applied bias voltage and ac amplitude were set at Voc of the DSCs and 10 mV, respectively. The electrical impedance spectra were characterised with Z–View software (Solartron Analytical). The three semicircles in the EIS spectra were analysed by two parallel resistor–capacitor elements for the left and the centre ones and a Warburg mass transport element for the right one to obtain RPt, Rdiode, and Relec with the time constants, respectively. In the titration of TBAI with TBP, 3.7 μl of diluted and undiluted TBP were added to 5 ml acetonitrile solution containing 50 mM TBAI and 0.2 M LiClO4, drop-by-drop. The CV curve was recorded per drop using a standard three-electrode apparatus. A Pt electrode was used as the working electrode, which was polished with alumina paste before the analysis. The counter and reference electrodes were Pt wire and Ag/Ag+, respectively. The scan rate was 100 mV s−1 and the potential was calibrated by ferrocene/ferrocenium.
Results

Fig. 2a and c show I–V outputs and EIS curves generated by 0–1 M inputs of TBP. An isopotential point appeared at 0.34 V during the low inputs (≤0.05 M) and later disappeared in the I–V output changes. An iso-point also appeared and disappeared in the EIS curves. The results indicate that, first, TBP interacted with the photovoltaic interface during the low inputs and then with the electrolyte. The idea was also supported by the changes in I–V parameters and EIS. Iph and I0 decreased more at the low input regions than at the high input regions, which suggests two different ways in which TBP influences the I–V outputs (Fig. 2b). Similarly, only the high inputs increased Relec and τelec (Fig. 2f). The increase in τelec is consistent with the molecular size growth from I3− to TBP2·I+.36,37 The titration of the photovoltaic interface revealed that only the 0.05 M amount of TBP interacts with the photovoltaic interface, although Ef reached the maximum at 0.5 M (Table 1). This indicates that the majority of the TBP interacts with electrolyte.
 Fig. 2  Characterization of TBP-inputted DSCs. (a) I–V outputs with 0–1 M TBP inputs. (b) I–V parameters Iph and I0 when n = 2 and T = 316 K. (c) EIS with 0–1 M TBP inputs at Voc. Internal resistances with the time constants of RPt (d), Rdiode (e) and Relec (f). The I–V outputs and EIS spectra were measured under AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 with N719 dye and a 0.25 cm2 metal mask. 
Table 1 Characteristics of DSCs inputted with 0–1 M TBP and a predicted performance




TBP conc. (M)

I
sc (mA)

V
oc (mV)

ff


Ef (%)





a Assumed to be equal to Isc at 0.05 M.
b Calculated using eqn (4) with Isc at 0.05 M and I0 at 1 M.
c Assumed to be equal to ff at 0.5 M.
d Predicting the improvement in Ef by 14% from the maximum Ef obtained at 0.5 M.





0
4.46
512
0.65
5.9


0.01
4.42
524
0.65
6.0


0.05
4.31
570
0.66
6.5


0.1
4.13
604
0.69
6.9


0.5
3.95
652
0.70
7.2


1.0
3.69
671
0.70
7.0


Simulated
4.31a
679b
0.70c
8.2d




CV titration of I− with TBP was performed to reveal how the chemicals influence the redox processes (Fig. 3). TBP strongly deforms I−/I3− redox from symmetric to asymmetric and shows an isopotential point at −0.13 V during the addition of 0–0.2 equiv. The further addition of TBP shifted the redox potential of I3−/I2 redox toward a negative field, which becomes saturated around 0.6 equiv., and shows adifferent isopotential points at 0.12 V for 0.4–1.0 equiv. The predicted stoichiometry explains the equivalent to shift the isopotential points. The asymmetry indicates that the reduction is inhibited more than the oxidation, which is consistent with the premise that the decoordination of TBP is required for reductions of TBP·I+ and TBP2·I+ to finally form I−. A delay in the reduction process of I3− by coordination/decoordination processes was also confirmed in the actual DSCs. Only at the high input regions did τPt increase linearly with the amount of TBP in EIS (Fig. 2d). In contrast, the low inputs do not affect τPt. The strong adsorption of TBP on the Pt electrode does not influence the redox mechanisms; it simply increases RPt.69 The increase in RPt at the high input region relates to the coordination/decoordination processes. The CV titration reveals that TBP affects the reduction process of I3− in I−/I3− redox instead of the potential shift. As we predicted, Rdiode(Voc) and τdiode(Voc) have no significant dependence on the amount of TBP even though I0 decreases dramatically (Fig. 2e). Overall, our results have confirmed our working hypotheses, which indicates that chemical interactions in a complex system occur in a stepwise progression; therefore, we were able to more clearly identify the relationship between the chemical interactions and the influences on I–V output.
 Fig. 3  CV titration of I−/I3− redox and I3−/I2 redox during the addition of TBP (0–0.2 equivalent for red line, and 0.4–1.2 equivalent for blue line). The counter and reference electrodes were Pt wire and Ag/Ag+, respectively, and the scan rate was 100 mV s−1. 
Discussion
The observation of isopotential points suggests that the conceptual framework and methodology in coordination chemistry are applicable to the study of complex systems; the basic concept of coordination chemistry is that the output can be simulated using stepwise equilibrium constants of each individual interaction based on an interaction model for the whole interactions. When the output of a system is sensitive to a slight amount of the initial input, the stepwise equilibrium constant is high enough to cause the interactions between the initial input and a component in the system to occur quantitatively. When weak interactions also exist in the system, the influences on the output are complex and not obvious from the amount of the initial inputs because of the multiple interactions.
In DSCs, the input of TBP simply increases Voc and decreases Isc in the I–V output, yet the chemical influences on the complex system are markedly different between the low input region and the high input region due to the different chemical interactions. According to our working hypothesis, the decrease in I0 at the low input region is explained by the decrease of kI3− and n0, where I0 = II2− because the isopotential point indicates that TBP does not interact with any electrolyte at the low input regions. As previously discussed, the deprotonation decreases the number of trap sites in TiO2, which is represented by the decrease of n0. The deprotonation also increases −ΔGI3− and then decreases kI3−. From the viewpoint of electron transfer, the back electron transfer reaction is in the Marcus inverted region (Fig. 4). While the chemical interactions are different between the low input and high input regions, the chemical influences on I0 can be explained by the interaction model combined with Marcus theory.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of dependence of kA toward −ΔGA; kA-max is obtained at −ΔGA = λA (×). In the Marcus inverted region, a small increase in λA raises kA, as shown by gray lines. 
Based on the results of the CV titration, the decrease of I0 at the high input region originates from the chemical influences on the reorganization process in I−/I3− redox. During the low inputs, the inputted TBP is consumed by the deprotonation of TiO2. At the high input regions, TBP inputs decrease [I3−] and increase [TBP·I+] and [TBP2·I+]. Thus, the presence of ITBP·I+ and ITBP2·I+ in I0 are enhanced (eqn (12)). In other words, the following requirement should be held to explain the decrease of I0: kI3− ≫ kTBP·I+, kTBP2·I+(17)After the deprotonation is completed, the inputted TBP no longer affects –ΔGA and n0. Additionally, the back electron transfer occurs in the Marcus inverted region. Under these conditions, λTBP·I+ and λTBP2·I+ should be large enough to meet the requirements above (Fig. 4), which is consistent with the experimental observations. The dramatic increase in λA corresponds to the coordination–decoordination processes during I−/I3− redox observed in the CV titration and the time delay in τPt. Therefore, we conclude that the additional reorganization caused by TBP decreases I0 at the high input region.
The chemical influences on Isc are also different at the low input region and at the high input region, due to the different chemical interactions. As previously discussed, the deprotonation at the low input region shifts the quasi-Fermi level of TiO2 upward, which suppress the electron injection from dyes to TiO2. At the high input region, we found that TBP coordinates with I3− and retards the reduction process of I3−, delaying the carrier diffusion in the electrolyte diffusion layer and regeneration of electrolyte at the Pt electrode, respectively. For the reasons mentioned above, Isc deceases at the high input region. Interestingly, the chemical influences on Voc and Isc at the high input regions occur at different positions: at the photovoltaic interface for Voc and in the electrolyte diffusion layer and at Pt electrode for Isc. This indicates a possible opportunity to discover how to improve Voc without sacrificing Isc.
Given the aforementioned conditions, we can suggest the possibility to improve Voc without scarifying Isc at the high input region. Coordination programming to shift the chemical equilibrium only at the photovoltaic interface would suppress I0 without the sacrifice of Isc for the high input region since the sacrifice does not originate from the coordination at the interface. If all the inputted TBP were gathered only at the photovoltaic interface, the improvement of Ef by 14% or more would be expected (Table 1). Note that ff should be higher than the adopted value in the simulated situation as the decreases of RPt and Relec were not considered in this calculation. The experimental conditions might have been achieved by the interface modification using dendrimers containing numerous pyridine-like units in the molecules with no pyridine-type chemicals.26 The modification improves the Ef by 15% when contrasted with 0.5 M TBP input. The strong agreement between the simulated value and the experimental value suggests that the main effect of the dendrimers is to shift the chemical equilibriums over the photovoltaic interface. However, other mechanisms, such as the blocking effect of the back electron transfer based on energy levels, and the mismatching and smoothing of the electron transfer from the electrolyte to oxidized dyes through π-conjugated orbitals of the dendirmers, were also nominated to explain the improvement.70,71 Therefore, the coordination programming can be applied to a new conceptual design of dyes and co-adsorbents anchoring coordination units. Pyridine-type chemicals have traditionally been inputted into DSC systems to improve Ef, yet the improvement strategy without pyridine-type chemical inputs can act as a paradigm shift in DSC research.
Note that other interactions not mentioned also occur in DSCs and the dye structure also affects diode properties.14,15,17,29 In particular, chemical interactions of iodine are important since they relate to the rate-determining steps for both the carrier transport process and for the back electron transfer process. In addition, the concept and technique employed in this study are widely applicable to DSC systems including nanowires, organic dyes, quantum dot sensitisers, and/or new types of electrolytes.16,18,31,56 As for further studies, it will be important to consider all of the interactions, the total chemical equilibria depending on position, and dye structure simultaneously for a full understanding of diodes at steady states in DSCs. This future research will allow for the establishment of a device simulator for DSCs.
Conclusions
Based on the conceptual framework and methodology used in coordination chemistry, we have demonstrated the analysis of a complex system using DSCs. In order to distinguish multiple interactions in complex systems, we expanded the general concept of isosbestic points to iso-points for any signals linear to the concentration of functional atoms/units. Since signals with linearity were adopted as outputs to evaluate systems, iso-points were observed in various types of complex systems. Additionally, we generated an interaction model, which bridged the hierarchical gaps between multiple interactions of an initial input and the output in DSCs to address the influences on outputs from the amount of inputs. From the viewpoint of the interaction model and the interactions that were revealed, we understood the processes involved in the complex system and suggested a direction to improve Ef in DSCs, an approach focusing on the “chemical coordination programming” instead of “pyridine-type chemical inputting”. We conclude that the conceptual framework and methodology in coordination chemistry is beneficial to enhance emergent outputs of complex systems.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NIMS internal project, the CREST program of JST, the MEXT program for the development of environmental technology using nanotechnology, and WPI of MEXT, Japan. We acknowledge A. Ichihashi and T. Harimoto for their technical assistance and J. Cai, K. Zhang, M. Yanagida and A. Islam for useful discussions.
References
G. M. Whitesides and R. F. Ismagilov, Science, 1999, 284, 89 CrossRef CAS .
N. Satoh, T. Nakashima, K. Kamikura and K. Yamamoto, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 106 CrossRef CAS .
N. Satoh and K. Yamamoto, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 1729 Search PubMed .
N. Satoh, T. Watanabe, Y. Iketaki, T. Omatsu, M. Fujii and K. Yamamoto, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2004, 15, 159 Search PubMed .
D. N. Whiteman, G. E. Walrafen, W.-H. Yang and S. H. Melfi, Appl. Opt., 1999, 38, 2614 Search PubMed .
I. L. Medintz, A. R. Clapp, H. Mattoussi, E. R. Goldman, B. Fisher and J. M. Mauro, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 630 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Paul and J. Leddy, Anal. Chem., 1995, 67, 1661 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vollhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 1307 Search PubMed .
X. Zhai, C. S. Mohapatra, A. B. Shah, J.-M. Zuo and J. N. Eckstein, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1136 Search PubMed .
Y. Dong, B. Tian, T. J. Kempa and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2183 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Belik, Y. Matsushita, M. Tanaka and E. Takayama-Muromachi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7723 Search PubMed .
B. O’Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. V. Ryswykac and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66 RSC .
S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 115 RSC .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS .
A. Listorti, B. O’Regan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3381 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Hardin, H. J. Snaith and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 162 CrossRef CAS .
N. Koide, A. Islam, Y. Chiba and L. Han, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 182, 296 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CAS .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M.-K. Nazeeruddin, E. G.-W. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Péchy, T. Renouard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte, P. Liska, L. Cevey, E. Costa, V. Shklover, L. Spiccia, G. B. Deacon, C. A. Bignozzi and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1613 CrossRef CAS .
E. Palomares, J. N. Clifford, S. A. Haque, T. Lutz and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 475 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Kroeze, N. Hirata, S. Koops, M. K. Nazeeruddin, L. Schmidt-Mende, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16376 CrossRef CAS .
C. Prasittichai and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1611–1615 Search PubMed .
N. Satoh, T. Nakashima and K. Yamamoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13030 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Rosenbluth and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 3735 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Huang, G. Schlichthörl, A. J. Nozik, M. Grätzel and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2576 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, F. Gstrein, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13949 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyashita, K. Sunahara, T. Nishikawa, Y. Uemura, N. Koumura, K. Hara, A. Mori, T. Abe, E. Suzuki and S. Mori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17874 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Ondersma and T. W. Hamann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8264 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Anderson, P. R. F. Barnes, J. R. Durrant and B. C. O’Regan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2439 CrossRef .
R. A. Marcus and N. Sutin, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Rev. Bioenerg., 1985, 811, 265 Search PubMed .
R. A. Marcus, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 1050 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 325 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and I. Mora-Seró, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13550 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adachi, M. Sakamoto, J. Jiu, Y. Ogata and S. Isoda, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13872 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert and I. Mora-Seró, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 450 Search PubMed .
J. P. Gonzalez-Vazquez, J. A. Anta and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8552 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai and L. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17154 Search PubMed .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humpbry-Baker, E. Miiller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakade, T. Kanzaki, W. Kubo, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3480 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wang and G. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15417 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schlichthörl, S. Y. Huang, J. Sprague and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 8141 CrossRef .
S. A. Haque, Y. Tachibana, R. L. Willis, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 538 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kaljurand, A. Kütt, L. Sooväli, T. Rodima, V. Mäemets, I. Leito and I. A. Koppel, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 1019 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kebede and S.-E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1999, 57, 259 CrossRef CAS .
G. Boschloo, L. Haggman and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13144 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tassaing M. Besnard, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 2803 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, N. Koide, Y. Chiba, A. Islam, R. Komiya, N. Fuke, A. Fukui and R. Yamanaka, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 213501 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Grätzel, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25210 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, K. Miettunen and P. Lund, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E210 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. A. Lee, A.-M. S. Jackson, A. Hess, S.-T. Fei, S. M. Pursel, J. Basham, C. A. Grimes, M. W. Horn, H. R. Allcock and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15234 CAS .
X. Feng, K. Zhu, A. J. Frank, C. A. Grimes and T. E. Mallouk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2727 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Fabbri, F. Detto, N. Armani, N. Satoh, T. Besagni, M. Pavesi and G. Salviati, submitted.
Y. Liu, A. Hagfeldt, X.-R. Xiao and S.-E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 55, 267 CrossRef CAS .
T. Daeneke, A. J. Mozer, T.-H. Kwon, N. W. Duffy, A. B. Holmes, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7090 RSC .
Y. Bai, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, M. Zhang and P. Wang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4749 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Jennings, Y. Liu, F. Safari-Alamuti and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1556 Search PubMed .
L. Han, A. Islam, H. Chen, C. Malapaka, B. Chiranjeevi, S. Zhang, X. Yang and M. Yanagida, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6057 RSC .
D. Zhou, Q. Yu, N. Cai, Y. Bai, Y. Wang and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2030 RSC .
J. Cai, N. Satoh and L. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6033 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 5360 RSC .
Y. Liang, B. Peng and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10992 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Barea, J. Ortiz, F. J. Payá, F. Fernández-Lázaro, F. Fabregat-Santiago, A. Sastre-Santos and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1985 RSC .
D. Kuang, C. Klein, S. Ito, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, N. Evans, F. Duriaux, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1133 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Krauskopf, L. M. Rice-Jackson and A. Wieckowski, Langmuir, 1990, 6, 970 CrossRef CAS .
N. Satoh, T. Nakashima and K. Yamamoto, J. Photopolym. Sci. Technol., 2006, 19, 141 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakashima, N. Satoh, K. Albrecht and K. Yamamoto, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2538 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the principle of a DSC. RS involved in I–V outputs is divided into RTCO, RPt, and Relec by EIS.	 
	(3)
	(4)
S(x) = (1–ξ)f(x) + ξg(x)	(5)
S(x) = f(x) − ξ[f(x) – g(x)]	(6)
S(x0) = f(x0) = g(x0)	(7)
IA = qkA[A]mn0uα	(8)
n = uα	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
I0 = II3− + ITBP·I+ + ITBP2·I+	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)

 	Fig. 2  Characterization of TBP-inputted DSCs. (a) I–V outputs with 0–1 M TBP inputs. (b) I–V parameters Iph and I0 when n = 2 and T = 316 K. (c) EIS with 0–1 M TBP inputs at Voc. Internal resistances with the time constants of RPt (d), Rdiode (e) and Relec (f). The I–V outputs and EIS spectra were measured under AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 with N719 dye and a 0.25 cm2 metal mask.	 


0	4.46	512	0.65	5.9
0.01	4.42	524	0.65	6.0
0.05	4.31	570	0.66	6.5
0.1	4.13	604	0.69	6.9
0.5	3.95	652	0.70	7.2
1.0	3.69	671	0.70	7.0
Simulated	4.31a	679b	0.70c	8.2d

 	Fig. 3  CV titration of I−/I3− redox and I3−/I2 redox during the addition of TBP (0–0.2 equivalent for red line, and 0.4–1.2 equivalent for blue line). The counter and reference electrodes were Pt wire and Ag/Ag+, respectively, and the scan rate was 100 mV s−1.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of dependence of kA toward −ΔGA; kA-max is obtained at −ΔGA = λA (×). In the Marcus inverted region, a small increase in λA raises kA, as shown by gray lines.	 
kI3− ≫ kTBP·I+, kTBP2·I+	(17)

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
