Recent progress of cocatalysts loaded on carbon nitride for selective photoreduction of CO 2 to CH 4  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3NR00242J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3NR00242J
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 8548-8577Recent progress of cocatalysts loaded on carbon nitride for selective photoreduction of CO2 to CH4

        
          
            Rui-Tang 
            Guo
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhen-Rui 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cheng 
            Xia
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chu-Fan 
            Li
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Wei-Guo 
            Pan
          
        
      ab
aCollege of Energy and Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai 200090, People's Republic of China. E-mail: grta@sohu.com
bShanghai Non-Carbon Energy Conversion and Utilization Institute, Shanghai 200090, People's Republic of China
Received 
      16th January 2023
    , Accepted 12th April 2023First published on 12th April 2023AbstractA photocatalytic system driven by solar light is one of the promising strategies for converting CO2 into valuable energy. The reduction of CO2 to CH4 is widely studied since CH4 has a high energy density as the main component of nonrenewable natural gas. Therefore, it is necessary to develop semiconductor materials with high photocatalytic activity and CH4 selectivity. Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4/CN) has attracted widespread attention for photocatalytic CO2 reduction due to its excellent redox ability and visible light response. A hybrid system constructed by loading cocatalysts on g-C3N4 can significantly improve the yield of target products, and serve as a general platform to explore the mechanism of the CO2 reduction reaction. Herein, we briefly introduce the theory of selective CO2 photoreduction and the basic properties of cocatalysts. Then, several typical configurations and modification strategies of cocatalyst/CN systems for promoting CH4 selective production are presented in detail. In particular, we systematically summarize the application of cocatalyst/CN composite photocatalysts in the selective reduction of CO2 to methane, according to the classification of cocatalysts (monometal, bimetal, metal-based compound, and nanocarbon materials). Finally, the challenges and perspectives for developing cocatalyst/g-C3N4 systems with high CH4 selectivity are presented to guide the rational design of catalysts with high performance in the future.
1. Introduction
With the rapid development of society, the unrestricted exploitation and consumption of fossil fuels have dramatically increased the emission of CO2, which has been gradually disrupting the balance of the carbon cycle in nature.1,2 Therefore, it is imperative to develop advanced technologies to reduce the atmospheric CO2 concentration. So far, many approaches for converting CO2 into usable chemicals and fuels have been explored, including photocatalytic, biochemical, electrochemical, plasma chemical and thermochemical processes. Unlike other strategies, photocatalysis directly driven by solar light can convert CO2 into valuable derivatives (CO, CH4, CH3OH and longer-chain hydro-carbons) without external energy input and thus has become a research hotspot in recent years.3 Among all the possible C1 products, CH4 is desirable for its high energy density and clean combustion characteristics and is regarded as an ideal product for photocatalytically selective reduction.4 Although the transformation of CO2 into CH4 is thermodynamically favourable compared to the reduction of CO2 to other hydrocarbon and oxocarbon products, it involves multiple proton-coupled electron transfers accompanied by the formation and adsorption of various C1 intermediates.5 This makes the reduction of CO2 to CH4 difficult in kinetics.5 Moreover, the two-electron-transfer hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is kinetically favourable in the photocatalytic system with water as the proton source, consuming many photoelectrons that should be involved in the CO2 reduction reaction (CRR). Consequently, CO2 is often simultaneously converted into a series of products (CO, CH4, CH3OH, C2 products and H2) in photocatalytic systems with water as the proton source. And the subsequent separation and purification processes for high-purity target products are expensive. Therefore, developing photocatalysts with high CO2 affinity and a suitable C1 intermediate adsorption capacity can significantly facilitate CH4 selectivity kinetically.6
Since Inoue et al.7 successfully achieved photoreduction of CO2 over different semiconductor powders in suspensions, numerous semiconductors such as CdS, ZnO, layered double hydroxides (LDHs), g-C3N4, and WO3 have been investigated for photocatalytic CO2 reduction in the following decades.8–12 g-C3N4 is a metal-free semiconductor composed of triazine (C3N3) (Fig. 1(b)) or tris-triazine/heptazine (C6N7) (Fig. 1(c)) rings and can be synthesized by a bulk thermal copolymerization route utilizing nitrogen-rich precursors (Fig. 1(a)) such as melamine, urea, dicyandiamide etc.13 In as-synthesized bulk g-C3N4, two-dimensional (2D) layers are stacked together through weak interlayer van der Waals forces. The tri-s-triazine ring tectonic units are connected via tertiary amines and a high degree of condensation provides g-C3N4 with excellent heat resistance (thermal stability up to 600 °C in air) and chemical stability (to conventional acids, alkalis or organic solvents).14,15 Meanwhile, the suitable conductive band (CB) position (−1.3 eV vs. NHE at pH = 7) of g-C3N4 meets the thermodynamic requirements of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction. In particular, the CB position of CN proves to be more negative than most conventional inorganic semiconductors, which implies that CN can produce photogenerated electrons with a higher CRR driving force under photoexcitation.13,16 Moreover, g-C3N4 has the advantages of a medium band gap (2.7 eV), abundant uncoordinated surface atoms, non-toxicity, and a simple preparation process. Consequently, the application of the g-C3N4 photocatalytic reduction of CO2, photocatalytic water splitting, and pollutant decomposition have been significantly studied.17–22
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the bulk thermal copolymerization route utilizing nitrogen-rich precursors to synthesise g-C3N4. (b) Triazine and (c) tri-s-triazine (heptazine) structures of g-C3N4. 
Nevertheless, highly selective CH4 generation in the CRR process is a great challenge for unmodified semiconductors. Similar to other conventional photocatalysts, the yield of CH4 over pristine g-C3N4 is barely observable (∼0.048 μmol g−1 h−1) in the CO2 photoreduction reaction with H2O.23 This unsatisfactory CH4 yield is due to the rapid recombination of photogenerated carriers and few adsorption sites for the key intermediate needed for CH4 generation on CN.24 In this regard, various strategies such as cocatalyst modification, elemental doping, defect engineering, and heterojunction construction are reported to effectively improve the performance of CN in the high-CH4-selective CRR.18,25,26
The construction of heterojunctions between CN and other semiconductors with a suitable band structure/Fermi level is considered one of the most effective approaches for enhancing the activity of the CRR by inducing efficient spatial separation of electron–hole pairs.18 Although apparent improvements in the CRR activity were detected in most cases, the respective selectivity improvements for specific products were hard to observe. The design requirements for specific high-CH4-selectivity g-C3N4-based heterojunctions remain unclear. Defects introduced via impurity (O, B, S, P etc.) doping and C, N-vacancy construction on crystallized g-C3N4 are widely utilized as adsorption sites for CO2 or dissociation sites for H2O to adjust the surface activity of the CO2 reduction reaction.27,28 However, the selective enhancement effect of defect engineering on CN is limited by the structural characteristics and defect capacity of CN. Accurate control of the defect concentration and location for achieving satisfactory CH4 selectivity remains challenging with current synthesis methods. In summary, although the above methods can effectively improve the CRR performance on CN, they still have difficulties in achieving highly selective CH4 generation due to their inability to precisely regulate the active sites for CH4 production.
By contrast, cocatalyst loading targets the regulation of charge carrier separation and transport, the reaction's activation energy, and the reaction pathway of the CRR simultaneously, and hence, has attracted a lot of attention in recent years.29,30 It has been demonstrated that several cocatalysts immobilized on CN can achieve the selective production of CH4 in the CRR process. They can be divided into four main categories: mono-metal particles, bimetal particles, metal-based compounds, and nanocarbon materials. Metallic cocatalysts (Pt, Au, Pb, Cu nanoparticles/atoms) exhibit excellent electron capture capability and distinct product affinity due to their excellent conductivity, high work function and ability to adsorb key intermediates of the CRR process.31–34 Liu et al. loaded Pd atom and nanoparticle (NP) cocatalysts on CN simultaneously. The prepared composite possessed remarkable selectivity (97.8%) and yield (20.3 μmol g−1 h−1) for CH4 in the CRR with water.35 Bimetallic alloys (Cu–Pt, Au–Cu, Cu–Pd etc.) exhibited higher CH4 selectivity and activity for the photocatalytic CRR than monometallic nanoparticles due to synergistic effects between components. Zhao et al. incorporated Cu and H atoms into the Pd cocatalyst lattice, and the alloying and hydriding synergism achieved a uniform selectivity towards CH4 in the CRR.36 Recently, cost-efficient materials such as metal-based compounds (transition metal carbides, sulfide, and oxides) and nanocarbon materials (reduced graphene oxide, carbon quantum dots) have also been extensively studied as cocatalysts. According to the study of Li et al., the mesoporous g-C3N4/Ti3C2Tx nanocomposite displayed an enhanced CH4 generation of 2.117 μmol g−1 h−1 with 68% selectivity.37 The yield of CH4 on nonpolar carbon quantum dots/g-C3N4 was reported to be up to 20.78 μmol g−1 h−1 under an atmosphere of H2O vapor.38 It is worth noting that the selective conversion of CO2 into CH4 in a cocatalyst/semiconductor system relies on the efficient synergy between the individual components. Therefore, it is indispensable to optimize the configuration of the cocatalyst/CN system and promote the performance of each component to construct more efficient collaborative patterns in the composite photocatalytic systems for further enhancing CH4 selectivity in the CRR. The appropriate CN optimization strategies mentioned above are necessary to achieve these goals.
Previously, significant advances were made in designing product-tuned cocatalyst/CN photocatalytic systems. Herein, the mechanism of CO2 photoreduction and CH4 selectivity enhancement by cocatalysts and the method of studying CRR selectivity on CN-based photocatalysts through combining DFT calculations with experimental characterization are briefly introduced. Then we systematically discuss engineering modification strategies for enhancing the CH4 selectivity on cocatalyst/CN systems and summarize the applications of cocatalysts in CN-based photocatalysts to increase selective CH4 formation. Finally, the review is concluded with the potential of developing high-CH4-selective cocatalyst/CN composites. We strongly believe that this work can inform the design of highly selective CN-based photocatalysts in the future and further promote the use of CN in photocatalysis.
2. Theory of selective photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CH4
Currently, two categories (homogeneous and heterogeneous) of CRR processes have been developed based on the types of photocatalysts. The homogeneously catalytic CO2 reduction reactions occur in a homogeneous system where several metal complexes (ruthenium, rhenium complexes) are employed as photocatalysts.39 The difficulties faced with the application of this system lie in the stability of homogeneous photocatalysts and the separation of products, especially the ones with liquid phases. By contrast, heterogeneous systems are more promising to realize the high-efficiency photoreduction of CO2, where the reduction process mainly occurs at the interface of heterogeneous photocatalysts. In this section, we first introduce the mechanism of the heterogeneous photoreduction of CO2 including thermodynamics, kinetic analysis of CO2 reduction and the solid energy band theory. Subsequently, the pathways of CO2-to-CH4 conversion and the decisive factors for CH4 selectivity are emphatically analysed.
2.1 Mechanism of heterogeneous CO2 photoreduction
CO2 molecules with linear geometry show high thermodynamic stability. The high dissociation of CO (750 kJ mol−1) prevents it from being converted into value-added chemicals without a catalyst and energy input.40 Additionally, the large energy gap between the LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) and HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) leads to a strongly negative electrochemical potential of −1.9 V required for the transfer progress of CO2 to CO2˙− (Table 1). Fortunately, the adsorption of CO2 onto the photocatalyst surface can effectively lower the LUMO position, as some CO2 molecules transform into highly reactive charged CO2˙− species during this process.41 Alternatively, the proton-assisted transfer of multiple electrons results in a higher potential for CO2 photoreduction.42
Table 1 Standard potentials for CO2 reduction reactions (at 1.0 atm and 25 °C)




Electrochemical half-reactions
Standard potential E° (V, vs. NHE at pH 7)




2H+ + 2e− → H2(g)
−0.42


2H2O(l) + 4h+ → O2(g) + 4H+
+0.81


CO2(g) + e− → CO2˙−
−1.9


CO2(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH
−0.61


CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O
−0.53


CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O
−0.48


CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → C + 2H2O
−0.02


CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O
−0.38


CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
−0.24


2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 + 4H2O
−0.33


2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O
−0.27


3CO2(g) + 18H+ + 18e− → C3H7OH + 5H2O
−0.32




Generally, the photoreduction process on semiconductors can be divided into the following four steps. (1) The CO2 molecules are adsorbed and activated on the semiconductor. (2) The incident photons with energy equal to or greater than the band gap energy (Eg) of the semiconductor catalyst are absorbed to generate electron–hole (e−–h+) pairs. (3) The photogenerated electrons and holes migrate to the corresponding reduction and oxidation reaction sites on the catalyst surface. (4) The photogenerated electrons reduce CO2 into fuels along with holes oxidizing H2O to O2.
Based on the solid energy band theory, a semiconductor should have a suitable band structure to absorb visible light and to produce photogenerated electrons and holes that can reduce CO2 to its reduction products. On one hand, the wavelength range over which a semiconductor can be excited depends on its band gap. Visible and near-infrared light with long wavelengths make up about 95% of the total solar spectrum, suggesting that a catalyst with good light absorption should have a narrow band gap.43 On the other hand, whether a reaction can occur on light-excited semiconductors depends on the band gap crossing the overpotential required for the reaction. Therefore, photogenerated electrons on the CB of photoexcited semiconductors should have a more negative reduction potential than that of reduction product/CO2, and the valence band (VB) should have a higher positive potential than the oxidation potential. From the thermodynamic viewpoint, the photogenerated electrons and holes on CN can accomplish the surface reduction and oxidation half-reactions in the CRR (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  The band structure of g-C3N4 and the overpotentials required for various C1 products in the CRR. 
The adsorption and activation of CO2 on the photocatalyst surface are the crucial first step that results in a CO2˙− species.44 There are three main possible modes of CO2 adsorption on photocatalysts, as shown in Fig. 3. Oxygen atoms act as electron donors to bond with acidic sites in oxygen coordination (Fig. 3(a)) while carbon atoms act as electron acceptors to bond with basic sites in carbon coordination (Fig. 3(b)). Indeed, the mixed coordination pattern (Fig. 3(c)) is a combination of the above two modes. The adsorption and activation of CO2 on catalysts can be promoted by introducing more adsorption sites via defect engineering, alkali treatment, and structural and morphological control.45–48
 Fig. 3  Possible modes of CO2 adsorption on the catalyst. (a) Oxygen coordination, (b) carbon coordination and (c) mixed coordination modes of CO2 adsorption on the catalyst. 
The following transfer of electrons to absorbed CO2 drives a series of chemical reactions that eventually determine the distribution of the final products. The complex multi-electron involvement in CO2 reduction reactions results in various products being obtained along different reaction pathways. Table 1 lists the thermodynamic potentials of different CO2 reduction products and water-splitting reactions versus the standard hydrogen electrode (NHE), at pH 7, 1.0 atm and 25 °C in aqueous solutions. Thermodynamically, the reduction products are produced in the following order of ease: methane, ethane, propanol, ethanol, acetylene, methanol, formaldehyde, carbon monoxide and formic acid. However, complex kinetic factors in actual CRR reactions, such as the separation efficiency of photogenerated carriers and the intermediate energy level relative to the initial state energy level, also determine whether or how fast a given reaction pathway will occur.
2.2 Pathways and selectivity of CO2-to-CH4 conversion
In the CO2 reduction process, methane is mainly produced through the formaldehyde and carbene pathways, with the specific stepwise reactions and bond-breaking patterns shown in Fig. 4. According to the carbene pathway, the primary intermediate *CO is converted into *CHO, *CH2O and *CH3O in sequence by stepwise hydrogenation reactions. Subsequently, the *CH3O intermediate can be converted into CH4 and H2O. *CHO in the above process can also be dehydrated to form *C and undergo successive hydrogenation reactions to form CH4. Unlike the carbene pathway, CO2 in the formaldehyde pathway is converted into HCO2* and H2OCO* to form the critical intermediate *CHO. Then this intermediate is hydrogenated to form *CH3OH, which is considered to play the same role as *CO in the carbene pathway. *CH3OH can either be desorbed directly from the catalyst to form CH3OH or undergo a dehydrated reaction to form *CH3, which is subsequently converted into CH4. Overall, the reduction of CO2 to CH4 is not thermodynamically favourable on its own (as shown in Table 1). However, the dehydration of intermediates in the CO2 reduction process promotes the overall reduction reaction.
 Fig. 4  Possible pathways of photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CH4 on the surface of photocatalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
In general, achieving highly selective CH4 production in the CRR requires a sufficient proton/electron environment and effective inhibition of the production of CO, CH3OH and H2 by side reactions.49 Accordingly, the three critical points in the CRR that determine CH4 selective production are summarized as follows:
Firstly, the binding pattern of CO2˙− with the catalyst can determine the CRR pathway. The formaldehyde pathway is more likely to occur when a single C atom of CO2 forms a covalent bond with the catalyst. In contrast, the carbene pathway can easily occur when CO2 creates a coordinated oxygen-binding catalyst.17,50 More importantly, the bonding mode between CO2 and the catalyst surface also affects the evolution of the CRR process towards the target products. Traditional photocatalysts tend to adsorb C or O atoms in CO2 due to the few isolated active sites on the surface, and the weak bonding pattern is not conducive to the profound reduction of CO2 to higher-value hydrocarbon products (Fig. 5(a)). Therefore, the mode of both C and O atoms binding to the catalyst proves to be more conducive to the coverage and adsorption of CO2 derivatives, which avoids the low selectivity of target products due to the desorption of key intermediates (Fig. 5(b)). Recent studies reported that constructing dual active sites such as bimetallic atomic sites or dual vacancies on the photocatalyst led to CO2 adsorption in the mixed coordination pattern, which was conducive to obtaining high-yield value-added products such as CH4 or C2 products.51,52
 Fig. 5  Scheme of (a) CO2 photoreduction to CH4 and CO on photocatalysts with the traditional active site and (b) dual active sites. Adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright (2022) Elsevier. 
Secondly, adjusting the mass transfer of protons and CO2 on the catalyst surface and the selective coupling of protons and CO2 can contribute to the selective production of CH4. In CO2 photocatalytic systems with H2O as the proton source, h+ at the VB of the photocatalyst is used for the oxidation of H2O and release of H+, which will later be involved in the hydrogen evolution reaction or CO2 reduction, leading to both hydrogen production and CO2 reduction occurring competitively. Unfortunately, the migration rate of CO2 molecules to the catalyst surface is limited by low solubility and slow diffusivity in aqueous solution and can seriously hinder the reduction of CO2.53 The 2-electron hydrogen production process is also more likely to occur dynamically than the 8-electron CO2 reduction to CH4 process. Therefore, it is essential to overcome the mass-transfer limitation of CO2 on the photocatalyst surface and coordinate water dissociation and the subsequent hydrogenation process in the CRR for the selective generation of CH4. Developing a three-phase photocatalytic system can promote the transfer of gas-phase CO2 to the photocatalyst's surface while maintaining a high-efficiency water supply and uncovered active sites.54,55 It is also reported that the co-adsorption of H2O and CO2 on photocatalysts by introducing specific surface defects or forming intermolecular hydrogen bonds during the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with the H2O process contributes to CH4 formation.56–58 The rational separation of the water dissociation site and the CRR site can also inhibit H2 evolution and achieve a higher CO2 reduction selectivity.
Thirdly, the adsorption/desorption of intermediates/side products significantly impacts CH4 selective formation. When key intermediates such as *CO, *HCOO and *CH3OH interact strongly with the catalyst surface, further hydrogenation reduction reactions are more likely to occur. Weak binding will lead to these substances being directly desorbed from the catalyst surface as by-products.52 Other intermediates such as C, O-bound and CHxOy also affect CH4 formation.5,59 Apart from regulating the CO2 adsorption mode mentioned previously, loading cocatalysts with a high adsorption capacity for the intermediates is also an effective strategy for promoting specific product generation.
Achieving highly selective conversion of CO2 towards CH4 on most unmodified conventional photocatalysts is challenging as they face the twin restrictions of slow carrier dynamics and weak adsorption of reactants/intermediates. For example, pristine g-C3N4 presents a high PL peak emission intensity (∼465 nm), reflecting the poor transfer of photoelectrons.60 This can be attributed to the delocalization of electrons around the coordinated N atom preventing the transfer of excited electrons from the N atom towards the C atom.61 DFT calculations also demonstrate that the *CO adsorption energy of g-C3N4 is a positive value (0.04 eV), indicating that *CO is difficult to absorb on g-C3N4. Therefore, further design and tuning of CN should be carried out to address these difficulties.
Furthermore, environmental factors are also reported to influence the CRR selectivity. The relative ease with which the HER and CRR processes occur is highly pH dependent. The higher proton concentration in an acidic environment makes the HER more predominant, whereas in an alkaline environment, CO2 tends to be converted directly into bicarbonate or carbonate and is challenging to reduce.62–64 Heat input can also promote reactant activation and electron migration, which is conducive to the continuous multi-step reaction.4 The availability of total light intensity (UV and visible light) for the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction is also an influencing factor. A mixture of UV and visible light is more promising for maximizing the efficiency of CO2 reduction and thus the selective production of methane.63 Additionally, the aqueous phase photocatalytic environment is more conducive to CH3OH formation, while gaseous phase photocatalysis favours the selective generation of CH4.65
The calculation of product selectivity and the investigation of reaction pathways in photocatalytic systems are essential tools for assessing the selective performance of the system and for the study of the catalytic mechanism. The calculation of product selectivity quantifies the selectivity for specific products. Since HER reaction usually accompanies CRR reactions, the selectivity for a product of CRR is generally calculated as the ratio of the number of electrons transferred to obtain the product to the number of electrons transferred to obtain the total product, which can be described as: (1)
Taking the calculation of the photocatalyst selectivity for CH4 as an example, the main products include CO, CH4, and others (H2 and so on). The selectivity for CH4 can be defined as: (2)

R represents the product yield, and x represents the number of electrons transferred to obtain the product. Density functional theory (DFT) is the most frequently used method to assess the adsorption properties of the product on the catalyst.66
3. Fundamentals of cocatalysts loaded on carbon nitride for selective CH4 production
Since Bard et al. first introduced the concept of integrated micro-PEC cells and successfully deposited Pt on TiO2 to promote its photocatalytic efficiency, the strategy of constructing suitable cocatalyst/catalyst systems to achieve a high level of photocatalysis has been widely used in the fields of CO2 reduction, hydrogen production and degradation of pollutants.67–73 In terms of different functions, cocatalysts can be classified into two main categories, namely: reduction cocatalysts that capture electrons and provide active sites for reduction reactions and oxidation cocatalysts that collect holes and offer active sites for oxidation reactions.9,74 For regulating the selectivity of products in the CRR, research mainly focuses on reduction cocatalysts, and the appropriate oxidation cocatalyst can also be employed to improve the photocatalytic efficiency with reduction cocatalyst synergistically.
3.1 Key role of cocatalysts in selective CO2 reduction to CH4
So far, several materials such as metals (Pt, Pb, Cu, Ni, Bi, etc.), bimetals (Pt–Cu, Pd–Cu, Ru–Cu, etc.), metal compounds (Ti3AlC2, Ti3C2, MoO2, Ni2P–NiO, etc.), and nanocarbons (graphene, carbon quantum dots etc.) have been loaded on CN to promote the selective photoreduction of CO2 to CH4. Fig. 6 compares each kind of cocatalyst in terms of the loading method on CN, combination mode with CN, CH4 selectivity, stability and unique properties.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of the cocatalysts in terms of loading method on CN, combination mode with CN, CH4 selectivity, stability and unique properties. 
In summary, the critical roles of these cocatalysts for promoting selective CH4 production and photocatalytic efficiency mainly lie in the following three aspects:
(1) The loaded cocatalyst can be used as a trapping site for photogenerated electrons or holes of semiconductors via interfaces/junctions constructed between them, preventing unfavourable complexation of electron–hole pairs. Since most cocatalysts have metallic properties and a large wok function, a Schottky barrier can be created at the interface between the reduction cocatalysts and semiconductor, thus facilitating electron transfer and carrier separation.75
(2) The cocatalyst affects the adsorption–desorption behaviour of reactants, reaction intermediates and products, and thus, lowers the activation energy of the CO2-to-CH4 reaction. Metal NPs/atoms have the advantage of acting as the active sites for CO2 adsorption, and photoelectrons are allowed to be transported through their d-orbitals directly to the (C–O) π*-orbitals of CO2, leading to the formation of bent CO2˙− species.76 Additionally, the customizable nanostructure of metals enhances the adsorption of reactants/key intermediates, further reducing the energy barrier of the CRR and improving the selectivity for CH4.34 For example, Cu NP cocatalysts loaded on CN can promote the selective conversion of CO2 to CH4 by enhancing the adsorption of CH3OH on the photocatalyst, owing to the efficient electron channel constructed between Cu and CH3OH.77 In contrast, transition metal compounds and nanocarbon cocatalysts exhibit weak adjustability for intermediate adsorption, which results in a relatively weak promotion of CH4 selectivity. Despite the fact that the synergy of their high electron enrichment ability and stable adsorption of CO2 have improved the selectivity for CH4 production in most cases.78,79
(3) Several cocatalysts process unique optical properties (LSPR excitation, up-conversion luminescence (UPCL) etc.) that enable efficient utilization of the solar spectrum and therefore promote the production of more charge carriers to improve the efficiency of the photoreduction of CO2.80 It is well known that when plasmonic metal NPs (Au, Ag, Cu, Bi, etc.) are combined with semiconductors, the performance of the catalysts can be enhanced by three mechanisms, namely: temperature increase, optical near-field enhancement, and hot electron injection (Fig. 7) without affecting the band structure of the semiconductors, especially the positions of the conduction or valence bands.81 In addition, carbon dots have been reported to show a unique up-conversion effect, which can take near-infrared light and produce UV/visible light, allowing it to be a potent energy transfer constituent in the preparation of hybrid heterojunctions.11
 Fig. 7  LSPR-related mechanisms over hybrid materials composed of plasmonic NPs and CN: (a) local temperature increase causes the enhancement of exciton formation on CN, (b) optical near-field enhancement promotes the transfer of photons to CN, thus increasing exciton formation, (c) hot-electrons and holes are transferred to CN. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.2 Typical configurations of cocatalyst/CN systems with high CH4 selectivity
The synergy between CN and cocatalysts contributes to the efficient migration of protons and electrons toward the CO2 reduction active sites, which creates conditions for the selective conversion of CO2 to CH4. In this collaborative model, CN functions as the primary electron donor, H2O dissociation site and cocatalyst support, while the cocatalyst is employed as an electron sink and CO2 reduction site. Consequently, to achieve more active and selective conversion of CO2 to CH4, cocatalyst/CN systems need to be designed for the following purposes: (1) to enhance the absorption of visible light, (2) to promote carrier separation and H2O dissociation, (3) to create the favourable proton-coupled electron transfer pathway towards highly selective CO2-to-CH4 conversion, (4) to construct solid and stable interfacial electronic interactions between semiconductors and cocatalysts, and (5) to enhance the stable loading of cocatalysts on CN. To achieve these purposes, approximately four typical configurations of the cocatalyst/CN composites have evolved from the basic two-component configuration and engineering to promote the properties of the cocatalyst and CN can further facilitate this conversion in the composite catalytic system. This section reviews several typical configurations and synergistic mechanisms of high CH4 selectivity cocatalyst/CN systems. Then concrete engineering strategies for CN and cocatalysts are summarized.
It is challenging to optimize each step of CO2-to-CH4 conversion through the basic cocatalyst/CN system (Fig. 8(a)), which consists of a single component cocatalyst and unmodified CN, although it is shown to enhance the yield of CH4. On one hand, the promotion effect of the Schottky junction for carrier separation in the cocatalyst/CN system is limited; thus the carrier separation efficiency still has much room for improvement. On the other hand, few cocatalysts can ideally facilitate the reduction of CO2 to CH4 since each cocatalyst has its drawbacks: several noble metal cocatalysts (Pt, Pb, Ru) usually promote both CO2-to-CH4 conversion and the HER while non-precious metal cocatalysts suffer from the relatively weak ability to extract electrons from CN and slow surface proton–electron kinetics. Therefore, it is necessary to optimize the configuration of the cocatalyst/CN for establishing more efficient and selective synergistic modes.
 Fig. 8  Schematic of five basic configurations of cocatalyst/CN composite: (a) CN-supported single reduction cocatalyst system, (b) CN-dual (double reduction cocatalysts) cocatalyst system, (c) CN-dual (reduction and oxidation) cocatalyst system, (d) heterojunction supported single reduction cocatalyst system, (e) plasmonic metal–CN–cocatalyst system. 
Based on the primary cocatalyst/CN catalytic system, approximately four cocatalyst/CN composite configurations were designed and developed to achieve high CH4 selectivity (Fig. 8(b–e)). As shown in Fig. 8(b), the introduction of a muti-component reduction cocatalyst (mainly bimetal NPs/dual-metal atoms) can optimize the efficiency of CO2-to-CH4 conversion through the following possible collaborative modes: (1) charge redistribution inside the bimetallic NPs/dual-metal atoms due to different work functions between two metals can further improve the carrier separation efficiency; (2) hydrogen production is inhibited since the cooperation between the two metal components can improve the consecutive hydrogenation process towards CH4 production; and (3) the distribution of CO2 reduction products can be modulated purposefully by combining two metals with different adsorption/desorption behaviours for reactants and intermediates. To further improve the synergistic interaction between the two components, the morphology, exposed crystal surface, size, surface properties, atomic arrangement and loading position of bimetallic cocatalysts should be adjusted reasonably.82 In addition to loading reduction cocatalysts on CN, the introduction of both O2 evolution and CO2 reduction cocatalysts (Ni–Mn, NiO–Ni2P, etc.) onto CN can realize the simultaneous modulation of photoelectrons and holes, resulting in significantly enhanced charge separation in the photocatalysis (Fig. 8(c)).83–85
It is also encouraging to introduce a third role into the primary two-component system, which can improve light absorption, carrier separation, and optimization of the CH4 generation pathway. In heterojunction–cocatalyst systems (Fig. 8(d) takes a type-II heterojunction supported cocatalyst system as an example), carrier separation and charge transfer can be promoted by introducing semiconductors that satisfy the energy band alignment to build heterojunctions with CN, hence providing abundant electrons for CH4 production at the reduction site.75,80,86–89 Another approach is to introduce surface plasmon resonance (SPR) metals such as Au, Ag and Pt, etc. to further extend the visible-light response of cocatalyst/CN systems (Fig. 8(e)).90 These SPR metals can also act as cocatalysts in collaboration with the existing components.
3.3 Key points in loading cocatalysts on CN
A range of in situ procedures (photodeposition, hydro-(solvo)treatment, chemical reduction, impregnation) and ex situ procedures (ultrasonic treatment, mechanical grinding, electrostatic self-assembly, and van der Waals coupling) were developed to synthesize the cocatalyst/CN composites.32,91 Various loading methods are applied for different cocatalyst materials. The in situ procedures are typically used for loading metal nanoparticles/single atoms, C dots and C quantum dots on g-C3N4, ensuring good interfacial contact and efficient electron transfer between them,31,92,93 whereas the ex situ procedures are widely applied to assemble the preselected cocatalyst and semiconductor, accurately controlling the microstructure of components.94,95 Based on this, ex situ procedures are suitable for the compositing of a 2D cocatalyst and 2D layered g-C3N4 to construct the compact 2D/2D heterostructure. More importantly, synthesis methods can affect the parameters of the cocatalysts such as structure, morphology, size, atomic arrangement, and loading position, and thus influence product selectivity and photocatalytic efficiency. We discuss this in detail in the next section.
A volcano-like relationship between the cocatalyst loading and the catalytic performance (Fig. 9) can often be observed, in which the optimal loading amount corresponds to the highest activity performance.96 An additional increase in cocatalyst loading will lead to performance deterioration for the following possible reasons: (1) excess cocatalysts could shield the incident light, thereby reducing the photoinduced absorption of incident light and the generation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs in the photocatalyst,45 (2) excess loading of the cocatalyst may cover the active sites on the photocatalyst and prevent contact with H2O and a sacrificial agent, (3) excess loading could easily lead to aggregation or even sintering of cocatalysts as a charge recombination centre, which results in the deterioration of cocatalyst performance and disappearance of the surface effect.
 Fig. 9  Relationship between cocatalyst loading and photocatalytic activity of the cocatalyst/semiconductor system. Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.96 
The photostability of the cocatalyst/CN system, an essential criterion for evaluating the potential for industrial utilization, is often overlooked in research. The photostability of a catalyst is usually evaluated by comparing the catalyst's performance in each cycle. Unfortunately, cocatalyst/CN photocatalysts exhibit poor stability (3–30 h) compared to other CN-based catalysts. This phenomenon can be attributed to the occupation of reactive sites caused by the accumulation of intermediate products and the unstable loading of cocatalysts on CN.93 The strategies of graft site establishment and metal–N bond construction have been developed to improve the stability of metal cocatalyst loading on CN.85,97 However, the current technology is far from achieving a stable loading of the cocatalyst on CN.
3.4 Theoretical calculations on carbon nitride-based photocatalysts for CO2 photoreduction to CH4
Theoretical simulations based on density functional theory (DFT) can be employed as an efficient tool to determine the electronic structure of the photocatalysts and propose possible catalytic mechanisms of the CRR. Therefore, it has become the main force of efficient computational catalysis.98 As semiconductors with a well-defined structure, CN-based photocatalysts can be studied through DFT calculations at a relatively precise level.10,99 In this section, we summarize several specific descriptors (electronic, quantum chemical, thermodynamic descriptors and kinetic descriptors) in theoretical calculations, as well as giving examples of their corresponding calculations in revealing the mechanism of the selective reduction of CO2 to CH4 over CN-based photocatalysts.
The electronic properties and possible multi-interface electron transfer mechanism of CN-based composite photocatalysts can be preliminarily revealed via electronic band descriptor (total density of states (DOS), projected DOS (pDOS) electronic localization function (ELF) work function, etc.) calculations. The bond strength and electron transfer efficiency between the metal cocatalyst and support are the indexes to evaluate the electron capture ability of the cocatalyst. Li et al. established the Cu and Au atom loaded-CN photocatalyst model (Cu/CN, Au/CN) and calculated the electron band descriptor of these two composite systems.34 The Au and Cu metal loading promoted the light absorption intensity Fig. 10(a). The total DOS calculation results for the band gap of Au/CN, Cu/CN and pristine CN indicated that Cu and Au atoms were conducive to excitation of electrons from the conduction band to the valence band to achieve higher photocatalyst efficiency. The degree of DOS signal overlap between Cu 4s/Au 6s and N 2p reflected the strength of the covalent bond and electronic interaction over the metal–CN interface. It can be seen from Fig. 10(c) that the Cu–CN interface has a more robust electron transmission than that of Au–CN, which is also verified by comparing ELF calculation results for Au/CN and Cu/CN. Zeng et al. carried out pDOS calculations to characterize Cu and Ru atom modified CN.100 The result implied that metal atoms contributed to the valence band maximum (VBM) of RuCu–CN and the pDOS of Ru was closer to the Fermi level than that of Cu, indicating that metallic atoms (especially Ru atoms) could efficiently collect photogenerated electrons from CN. According to the report of Li et al., the work functions of CeO2 and g-C3N4 were compared through DFT calculations.88 The results showed that the work function of CeO2 was significantly higher than that of CN, which implied that electrons flowed towards CeO2 at the composite interface. In addition, the electronic property calculations for CN-based composites also contributes to the favourable doping/loading site dopant/cocatalyst in CN, which is highlighted in the next section.92
 Fig. 10  (a) Calculated absorption spectra; (b) DOS; (c) projected DOS; electronic localization function (ELF) and charge density difference results for (d and e) Au/CN and (f and g) Cu/CN. Blue, grey, gold and green spheres refer to C, N, Au and Cu atoms, respectively. Electron depletion is given in yellow and accumulation is given in blue. The isosurfaces of e and g are both set to 0.006 eV A−3. Positive values of q depict electron depletion. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
DFT research is also widely used to determine the mechanism of CO2 selective reduction over CN-based catalysts. The related factors based on thermodynamics (adsorption/desorption energy, Gibbs free energy) and kinetics (energy barrier in the transition state, reaction pieces and intermediate) play critical roles in mechanistic analysis with the combination of in situ analytical technology.66 The thermodynamic free energy calculations on cocatalyst/CN composites helps to explore the possible synergistic mechanism among the active sites. For example, free energy calculations for the CRR were performed on the dual Ru and Cu atom-modified carbon nitride photocatalyst (PCN-RuCu) to explore the synergetic mechanism between Cu and Ru atoms for high-efficiency CO2-to-CH4 conversion.100 The results show that the protonation of CO2 to *CO is more favourable on the Ru site than on the Cu site, whereas subsequent protonation towards *CHO is more likely to occur on the Cu site. Except for the thermodynamic Gibbs free energy calculations, the investigation of kinetic calculations on the CRR feasibility of the transition reaction in the CRR is applied to provide solid evidence for evaluating the reaction efficiency. The nudged elastic band (NEB) method is used to find saddle points and minimum-energy pathways through observing the kinetic adsorption/desorption of reactants/intermediates. Gao et al. investigated the CO2 reduction pathway on Pt/CN through CI-NEB calculations in the presence of hydrogen.101 As shown in Fig. 11(a), CO2-to-CH4 conversion is more favourable on Pt/CN in the presence of hydrogen than other possible conversions towards HCOOH or CH3OH; this is attributed to the stable adsorption of intermediates on Pt sites resulting in a lower energy barrier for the hydrogenation process. In another study, the reduction pathways of CO2 on Cu/CN were studied through the CI-NEB method (Fig. 11(b)).101 The desorption energy of a series of intermediates (CO*, HCOOH*, CH3OH*, etc.) in the CRR is higher than the energy required for further hydrogenation steps, and the low desorption energy of CH4 makes it more accessible. Due to the relatively limited simulation conditions of the CI-NEB method (1 atm, −273 °C) (Fig. 11(c)), ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) calculations were also carried out to track the thermostability of adsorbed CH3OH under actual experimental conditions (1 atm, 25 °C) (Fig. 11(d)).
 Fig. 11  (a) Calculated free-energy diagram for CO2 reduction to CH4 on Cu and Ru sites of PCN-RuCu. Adapted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright (2022) Wiley. Free-energy diagram of the Cu site with CO adsorbed on the Ru site of PCN-RuCu is also calculated. (b) Reaction pathways for CO2 reduction to COOH, CH3OH, and CH4 on the Pt/g-C3N4 catalyst. Under standard conditions (pH 0, p(H2) = 1 bar, U = 0 V vs. SHE), the total energies of H+(aq) + e− and 1/2H2(g) are equal. The reference energy (the total free energy of the catalyst, isolated CO2, and four H2) is set to zero. The important intermediates and products are shown as well. The substrate is displayed partly in the stick model. Colour code: Pd, pine green; C, gray; O, red; H, white. Adapted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (c) Calculated reaction pathways using the CI-NEB method and (d) calculated AIMD result for CH3OH@Cu/CN. Blue, grey, green, red and pink spheres depict C, N, Cu, O and H atoms, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In summary, DFT computations for exploring the electronic description of multicomponent photocatalysts and revealing possible CRR mechanisms have emerged as a new frontier in heterogeneous catalysis. However, research on DFT calculations is still in the preliminary stages, and current limitations faced by this field are obvious. In the CRR process with H2O as a proton source, the HER is regarded as a significant competitor to the CRR process, especially on noble metal cocatalysts/CN photocatalysts. However, DFT calculations cannot simultaneously consider the effect of the HER on the selectivity of CH4, which leads to a deviation in the evaluation of the selective electron–CO2 coupling on the photocatalyst. Additionally, DFT calculations are mainly used to reveal the CRR mechanism in the present research on cocatalyst/CN photocatalysts. To develop high-CH4-selectivity cocatalyst/CN systems more efficiently, DFT calculations should be widely used in the screening and design process of the photocatalysts.
4. Engineering strategies for high CH4 selectivity cocatalyst/CN systems
4.1 Engineering of cocatalysts
The rational design of cocatalysts is beneficial for constructing high-selectivity cocatalyst/semiconductor systems. Here we summarize cocatalyst modification strategies based on cocatalyst/CN systems, mainly including component engineering, facet engineering, size engineering, and single-atom engineering and analyse the mechanisms of these strategies for promoting selective CH4 generation.

4.1.1 Controlling the composition of cocatalysts. 
The surface composition of cocatalysts can significantly influence the adsorption of CO2 reduction intermediates and electron transfer paths, thus affecting product selectivity. In particular, the types of metal cocatalysts largely determine their CO2 reduction product affinity. For example, Ag NPs contribute to the formation of CO.102 Pt, Cu NPs facilitate CH4 formation and Pd NPs benefit CH3OH and CH4 production.77,103,104
In addition, the surface composition of hybrid cocatalysts dramatically affects product selectivity. The bimetallic cocatalyst/CN system highly depends on the ratio of cocatalyst components. Generally, a specific ratio of the composite metal cocatalyst can maximize the CH4 selectivity on cocatalyst/CN composites in the CRR.105,106 In a PdAg/CN photocatalytic system, a higher proportion of Pd in bimetals would enhance the selectivity of CH4. In contrast, the increased proportion of Ag would help to improve the CO selectivity.23 However, a high Pd content was detrimental to the overall photocatalytic performance since plasmonic Pd NPs reduced the absorption of shorter wavelengths (high energy photons) and created deactivation regions on the CN below the Pd NPs (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  (a) The evolution rates of CO and CH4 on CN, CN-A, CN-PA12, CN-PA11, CN-PA21, and CN-P in CRR. (b) Schematic of the model to explain the formation of the shadow under the Pd–Ag bimetals. Adapted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright (2020) Elsevier. 
It was also reported that the molar ratio of metal precursors added could affect the construction of core–shell structures during the preparation of bimetallic cocatalysts.107 Similarly, optimizing the spatial distribution and mass ratio of redox cocatalysts significantly influences the CO2 photocatalytic activity.83 Notably, the contact of the reduction cocatalyst and the oxidation cocatalyst may not be conducive for the migrating protons toward CO2 reduction sites.108,109 Therefore, the spatial separation degree may also be considered when design redox cocatalysts.
Furthermore, tuning the valence states of metal cocatalysts is usually considered promising for modulating the binding energy of absorption of reactants and charge transfer; therefore promoting the selective formation of target products. Recent studies confirmed that the oxidation states of Pt (Pt2+ and Pt4+), Au (Au+) and Pd (Pd2+) were more inclined to promote the conversion of CO2 to CH4 and inhibit H2 evolution since they could establish a more efficient electronic transmission relationship with CN.4,60,110 Sun et al. introduced the Pt2+ oxidation state into Pt/g-C3N4 by vacuum calcination and studied its role in regulating the selectivity of CRR products.4 It could be speculated from the XPS spectra of the samples (Fig. 13) that during vacuum treatment, the electrons of platinum atoms transferred to the surrounding C–N–C sp2-hybridized CN atoms and formed the Pt2+–N bond state, which ensured efficient and stable electronic transmission between the cocatalyst and CN. The CRR product selectivity of NaBH4–Pt/CN samples with higher Pt0 and Pt/CN samples with more Pt2+ was also compared. The results showed that under the same reaction conditions, the selectivity of 2%-Pt/CN for CH4 production (∼34.8%) was much higher than that of NaBH4–Pt/CN (∼100%). The presence of Pt2+ effectively inhibited H2 precipitation, thus obtaining higher CH4 selectivity. Additionally, low-valence Cu species (Cu0, Cu+) are more effective for CH4 formation than Cu2+ species due to their relatively high ability to capture electrons.111,112
 Fig. 13  High-resolution XPS spectra of (a) Pt 4f; (b) N 1s; (c) C 1s and O 1s; and (d) Cl 2p. Adapted with permission from ref. 4. Copyright (2021) Elsevier. 
Interestingly, studies also reported that the electron transfer process might lead to the interconversion of metal cocatalysts between the possible states, and the synergistic effect of different metal states could contribute to higher product selectivity. For example, Zhang et al. found that the synergistic effect between Pd2+ and Pd0 in the Pd–g-C3N4/RGOA system showed higher CH4 selectivity than Pd2+–g-C3N4/RGOA and Pd0–g-C3N4/RGOA.113 In another work, the mixture of Cu0 and Cu+ also exhibited a higher selectivity for CH4 than the pristine Cu0/Cu+ in the CRR.112


4.1.2 Controlling facet exposure. 
Different crystal facets of a metal cocatalyst also exhibit distinct functions and properties with the same surface composition.114,115 Bai et al. found that Pd with an exposed (111) facet preferred to reduce CO2 to carbon products while Pd with an exposed (100) facet promoted the reduction of H2O to H2; this can be attributed to different adsorption and activation capacities of different facets for CO2 and H2O molecules.116 Generally, high-index facet surfaces maximize the exposure of atoms with low coordination numbers, thus contributing to the substrate's orbital roughness and promoting the participation of more electrons in the interaction between adsorbent and substrate.117 Cao et al. reported that Pd(111) had a higher CO2 photoreduction activity and CH3OH production rate than Pd(100). At the same time, both surfaces exhibited similar CH4 yields, which may be attributed to excellent carrier separation and more efficient CH3OH desorption on Pd(111). In another study, Lang et al. discovered that the high index facets of PtCu alloy cocatalysts loaded on CN acted as efficient CH4 generation sites.29 Through the addition of different amounts of HCl during the loading process, the PtCu alloy concave nano-cubes with (730) facets and (100) facets were prepared (Fig. 14(a–d)). The (730) faceted C3N4-PtCu CNC sample exhibited nearly three times enhancement of CH4 production rate compared with those of the (100) faceted g-C3N4-PtCu NC sample and achieved a high 90.6% selectivity for CH4 (Fig. 14€). Calculations of the partial density of states (pDOS) revealed that the reason for its excellent performance was that the low coordination number of Pt increased the adsorption of CO2 on the catalyst surface and enhanced electron flow between the catalyst and CO2.
 Fig. 14  (a–d) TEM and HRTEM images of C3N4–PtCu CNCs and C3N4–PtCu NCs. (e) Evolution rates of H2, CO, and CH4 over C3N4, C3N4–PtCu NCs and C3N4–PtCu CNCs samples in the CRR. (f–i) Most stable configurations of CO2 adsorbed on Pt(100), PtCu(100), Pt(730) and PtCu(730) facets together with the adsorption energies (blue ball for the Pt atom; pink, gray and red ones for Cu, C and O atoms, respectively). Adapted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.1.3 Optimizing the size of cocatalysts. 
It is generally considered that decreasing the size of cocatalysts may enhance the photocatalytic efficiency directly as it may contribute to exposing more low-coordinated surface atoms.118,119 However, the selectivity of CO2 reduction to CH4 is not simply influenced by the amounts of active sites provided by the cocatalyst. Several properties of the cocatalyst, such as the LSPR effect and the absorption strength of the intermediate, can also affect the distribution of products, and these factors are precisely affected by the size of the cocatalyst.81,120 Therefore, the dependence mechanism between the selective reduction of CO2 and the size of the cocatalyst is more complex, and needs to be analyzed by integrating multiple factors.
There is a solid size-dependent mechanism for the energy and number of hot electrons generated from plasmonic metals: the larger-sized nanoparticles tend to produce more hot electrons with lower energy, while the smaller-sized nanoparticles present the opposite characteristics.121 The study of Li et al. revealed the effect of size-dependent hot electron injection on CH4 formation in the Au/CN photocatalyst system.122 A range of Au nanoparticles with different sizes were loaded on CN by changing the concentration of HAuCl4 precursor, and the size distribution of different samples is shown in Fig. 15(a–d). Smaller Au NPs (3 nm) exhibited the highest CO2 photoreduction efficiency, and the yield of CH4 was nearly 10 times higher than that on pure CN due to more unsaturated bonds and moderate LSPR influence. However, under visible light/UV light irradiation, hot electron injection from large Au NPs (5–10 nm) to CN was greatly facilitated, which hindered the transfer of photogenerated electrons from CN to Au NPs. The size reduction of certain metals could also promote the HER, leading to the inhibition of CH4 production.120 Dong et al. proposed a facile acid-mediated alcohol reduction (ABAR) method to accurately adjust the size of the Pt cocatalyst.123 It was found that small-sized Pt NPs showed a higher electron extraction capacity, but the selectivity of the competing hydrogen evolution reaction was higher than that of methane. The results showed that the selective production of CH4 preferred to occur on the terrace positions of Pt, while the HER was facilitated at low coordination sites.
 Fig. 15  (a–d) TEM images, (a1–d1) size distribution histograms of 1-Au/CN, 3-Au/CN, 5-Au/CN, and 10-Au/CN. Adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 


4.1.4 Designing single-atom cocatalysts. 
As the ultimate small-sized metal NPs, single-metal atoms (SMAs) as supported catalysts have evoked intense research interest in CO2 photoreduction due to their extremely high atomic utilization (100%) and encouraging catalytic activity.124–126 However, when loaded on substrates, SMA catalysts are prone to aggregation and deactivation due to their high free energy. CN can provide adequate and stable anchoring sites for single metal atoms since its internal pore structure filled with six N atoms can afford lone-pair electrons for binding single metal atoms with empty orbitals. Meanwhile, the deformed wrinkle space of g-C3N4 contributes to the stability of SMAs in the six-fold cavity of g-C3N4.127,128
SMAs can generally be anchored on CN via photodeposition, the wet chemical route, thermal copolymerization, atomic layer deposition, and molecular metal complexes.129–133 To achieve the stable loading of SAM cocatalysts on CN with high dispersion, diverse methods such as ligand decoration and interlaminar bridged site construction have been adopted with great improvements.131,134–136 For example, boron–oxo species can be highly dispersed on CN via a boric-acid-mediated route due to dative B–N coordination and prove to be effective mediators for anchoring transition metal (Ni, Co, Fe) atoms.85,97 According to the report of Wang et al., Ni single atoms were anchored by boron–oxo species on g-C3N4via a facile ion exchange strategy (Fig. 16(a)). Several efforts have also been dedicated to avoiding the transitional aggregation of single atoms on the graft indeterminate. An innovative “chemical scissors” strategy achieves the loading of Pd SA cocatalyst up to 2.02 wt% on bare CN substrates without any pre-treatment by emphasizing the precise match between the strength of the etching agent and the binding energy of metal–metal/metal–substrate (Fig. 16(d)).135
 Fig. 16  (a) Synthesis of single-atom Ni(II) sites supported on boric acid-modified carbon nitride nanosheets; (b) FTIR spectra of CN, 5OB-CN, and 0.7Ni-5OB-CN, respectively; (d) scheme of the possible mechanism of the hydrogen-assisted CRR process over Ni-OB-CN photocatalyst under illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. (c) Scheme for constructing high-loading single atom Pd1/PCN with chemical scissors. Pd–Pd bonds are selectively broken by Fe3+, and Pd–PCN bonds remain intact because the interaction between Pd and PCN is stronger. Fe3+ is reduced to Fe2+ during this process. Adapted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright (2019) Wiley. 
Loading SMAs on CN as cocatalysts enables the design of photocatalysts at the atomic scale via energy levels and electronic structure modulation and thus better product selectivity in the multi-electron CO2 photoreduction process is exhibited.127,137 According to DFT calculations, the band gaps of single atom (SA) Pt/CN and SA Pd/CN were reduced to 0.64 and 0.72 eV with the d bands of SA Pt and SA Pd lying in the band gap of CN, which led to a red shift of visible light adsorption.101 As shown by Shi's group, the unsaturated Pt atoms could be dispersed on defective CN by coordinating with two N atoms, reducing the N atoms’ electron density (Fig. 17(a–c)).132 XPS results showed that the binding energy of Pt atoms to the defective CN substrate was higher than that of Pt nanoparticles, indicating a stronger interaction between individual Pt atoms and the CN substrate (Fig. 17(b)). The results of CO2 photoreduction tests for the samples showed that Pt atoms anchored on defective carbon nitride were favourable for CH4 production and exhibited a lower photocatalytic H2 evolution activity than Pt NPs (Fig. 17(e)). In addition, low-coordinated metal atoms have strong interactions with reactants/intermediates, and the covalent bonds formed with N atoms can act as channels for high-speed electron transfer. For instance, the Au atoms on amino-group modified g-C3N4 enhanced the adsorption of CO2 and HCHO* and thus led to an improved selectivity for CH4 products.110
 Fig. 17  (a and b) AC-HAADF-STEM images of Pt@Def-CN. (c) EDS mapping of Pt@Def-CN. (d) High-resolution Pt 4f XPS spectra of Pt@Def-CN and PtNPS@Def-CN. (e) CO2 reduction products and selectivity for CH4 on P-CN, Def-CN, Pt@Def-CN and PtNPs@Def-CN. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright (2022) Wiley.132 

4.2 Engineering of CN substrate
Optimizing the substrate CN through proton functionalization, element doping and structural engineering can further improve CO2 reduction efficiency by enhancing the synergistic interaction with the cocatalyst, thus improving the selectivity for CH4 products over cocatalyst/CN. Fig. 18 summarizes several excellent CN modification methods for improving CRR efficiency on cocatalyst/CN.
 Fig. 18  Summary of several excellent CN modification methods for improving the CRR efficiency on cocatalyst/CN. 
Generally, the proton-functionalized CN is more conducive to cocatalyst loading and constructing an efficient and tight electron transport interface between the cocatalyst and CN. After functionalization in aqueous acid solution (HCl, HNO3, H3BO3), positive CN can be combined with negative polarity cocatalysts (rGO, MXenes, CDs, etc.) successfully via a self-assembly process.95,138,139 The well-contacted 2D/2D or 0D/2D heterojunction between CN and the cocatalyst is also conductive to charge separation over cocatalyst/CN. According to the study of Tahir et al., nitrate-stripped f-C3N4 had an excellent 2D structure and a more negative CB position than the original.140 In addition, f-C3N4 exhibited a higher carrier separation efficiency and could cooperate with the cocatalyst to provide sufficient electrons for CH4 production.95 Studies also demonstrated that acid modification could enrich the amount of OH groups, improving the dispersion of metal cocatalysts on the semiconductor surface and enhancing the adsorption of CO2 on the catalyst surface.64
In addition to protonation treatment, designing a hydrophobic surface on CN is an effective surface functionalization strategy since it can improve the CO2 mass transfer efficiency in photocatalyst systems. As a unique example, Li et al. designed an ordinary three-phase cocatalyst/CN catalyst system composed of hydrophobic polymeric carbon nitride and a Pt nanoparticle cocatalyst.55 By planting hydrophobic polymer onto g-C3N4, the hydrophilicity of g-C3N4 can be well modulated, and o-PCN with excellent hydrophobicity was obtained as demonstrated by the contact-angle test. As shown in Fig. 19, the fluorophilic polymer surface patches were not conducive to water wetting and promoted the increase of CO2 adsorption on the surface, resulting in a three-phase contact interface with a high CO2 concentration and effectively inhibited HER.
 Fig. 19  Models of the photocatalyst samples (a) PCN, (b) o-PCN, (c) Pt/PCN, and (d) Pt/o-PCN. TEM images of (e) PCN, (f) o-PCN, (g) Pt/PCN, and (h) Pt/o-PCN. Contact angle measurement of water on (i) PCN, (j) o-PCN, (k) Pt/PCN and (l) Pt/o-PCN. (m) Scheme and mechanism of the three-phase photocatalyst Pt/o-PCN. (n) The generation rate and selectivity of carbon derivatives in the CRR. Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright (2019) Wiley. 
Doping g-C3N4 with heteroatoms (B, O, S, Sr) is an effective strategy to adjust its electron band structure and increase the number of active sites for the catalytic reaction, which may contribute to light absorption enhancement and proton/reductant migration pathway modulation.25,92,137 Theoretically, oxygen doping in CN can induce abundant N defects, which is favourable for water oxidation. However, defects are also thought to trap electrons and inhibit electron transport towards CO2.141 Li et al. reported that loaded CQDs on oxygen-doped CN (OCN) might synergistically enhance the CO2 photocatalytic reduction performance of the OCN effectively by enhancing the adsorption and activation of CO2 on the catalyst surface, which allowed the photogenerated electrons to participate in the reduction of reactants before they combined with holes. The synergistic effect of the hybridized binary CQDs/OCN addressed three challenging issues of the CN-based materials and thus improved the performance of CO2 photocatalytic conversion to CH4 over CQDs/OCN-x.93
The structural design of CN was also investigated to enhance the performance of the cocatalyst/CN system. In recent years, CN with porous and mesoporous configurations was widely used to enhance the CO2 adsorption capacity of cocatalysts/CN.142,143 It is worth noting that the pore size affects the CO2 adsorption performance, with macro (50 nm) and mesopores (10–50 nm) exhibiting superior performance compared to micropores as they can inhibit the unfavourable process of gas diffusion.144 Studies also confirmed that nanostructured 3D g-C3N4 showed a higher ability to improve the CO2-to-CH4 transformation process compared with 2D g-C3N4. For example, Zhang et al. compared the effects of spine-like 3D g-C3N4 nanostructures and 2D g-C3N4 on selective CH4 formation with the Pt/g-C3N4 composite catalyst.145 The pristine spine-like 3D g-C3N4 nanostructures were produced via an innovative three-step synthesis method. Due to its porous and defective nanostructure, 3D g-C3N4 had a more negative conduction band position, which led to its high reducibility photoelectron production and high photogenerated carrier separation efficiency. In addition, spinous 3D g-C3N4 was more conducive to the uniform dispersion of the metal nanocluster cocatalyst due to its cage-like structure. The above characteristics made spine-like g-C3N4 more favourable for CH4 formation in the cocatalyst/CN composite.
5. Cocatalysts loaded on CN to improve the selectivity of CH4
Numerous cocatalysts, including noble metal-based, non-noble metal-based and nonmetal-based ones, have been immobilized on CN to enhance product selectivity synergistically. In this section, we summarize research progress for various kinds of cocatalysts supported on CN to improve the selectivity of CH4 products in the CRR in recent years.
5.1 Monometallic cocatalyst

5.1.1 Noble cocatalysts. 
Precious metal particles are the most widely used cocatalysts for CO2 reduction due to their significant product selectivity, high conductivity, and outstanding stability. Table 2 summarizes the performances of various noble metal/CN photocatalysts. Generally, Pt, Pd, and Au cocatalysts immobilized on CN can promote the selective reduction of CO2 to CH4. Pt can extract electrons from CN in a few picoseconds due to its large work function (5.65 eV) and thus efficiently facilitate the separation of carriers on CN and exhibit excellent adsorption of the key intermediate *CO, leading to CH4 being observed to be the preferred product over CO.31,145–147
Table 2 Summary of noble metal/CN photocatalysts for photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH4




Photocatalyst
Cocatalyst
Synthesis method
Light source
CH4 yield (μmol g−1 h−1)
CH4 selectivity (%)
Reducing agent
Stability
Ref.




g-C3N4
Pt NPs
Polyol approach
15 W daylight bulb
1.30
—
H2O vapor
3 cycles (30 h)

31



g-C3N4
Pt NPs
Photoreduction deposition
420 nm LED light (125 °C)
14.8
100.0
H2O
12 h

4



Defective polymeric carbon nitride
Pt atoms
Calcination under Ar atmosphere
300 W Xe
6.3
99.0
H2O
6 cycles (12 h)

132



Au/Sr–g-C3N4
Pt NPs
Photodeposition
300 W Xe (λ ≥ (420 nm)
48.55
72.4
H2O
4 cycles (8 h)

92



3D g-C3N4
Pt NPs
Sonochemical synthesis
300 W Xe (λ ≥ (420 nm)
2.7
56.0
H2O
4 cycles (16 h)

91



g-C3N4
Pt atoms, Fe3O4
Photodeposition, hydrothermal
300 W Xe (λ ≥ 420 nm)
0.53
50.4
H2O vapor
5 cycles (5 h)

60



g-C3N4
Pt NPs
Photodeposition
8 W Hg (λ = 254 nm)
3.12
76.0
H2O
—

150



p-C3N4
3.85
82.0
—


Hydrophobic g-C3N4
Pt NPs
Photodeposition
300 W Xe (λ ≥ 400 nm)
1.36
65.5
H2O
3 cycles (9 h)

55



g-C3N4/rGO
Pd NPs
One-pot thermal reduction strategy
300 W Xe
6.4
—
H2O vapor
2 cycles (6 h)

113



g-C3N4
Pd NPs, Pd atoms
Calcination under Ar atmosphere
250 mW Xe (full spectrum)
20.3
97.8
H2O
4 cycles (24 h)

35



g-C3N4
Pd (tetrahedron)
Chemical reduction
300 W Xe
0.61
44.6
H2O
—

104



Pd (cube)
0.58
52.13
—


g-C3N4
Au NPs
Chemical reduction
Xe (λ ≥ (420 nm)
3.1
19.1
H2O
—

32



g-C3N4
Au NPs
Constant temperature bath-reduction
8 W Hg
4.81
38.0
H2O
4 cycles (2 h)

122



Amine-functionalized g-C3N4
Au NPs
Impregnated
300 W Xe
1.3
16.8
H2O
4 cycles (8 h)

151



Amine-functionalized g-C3N4
Au atom
Calcination (in air)
300 W Xe
2.4
30.7
H2O
—

110





However, Pt acts as an active center for both hydrogen production and CO2 reduction, which results in a large proportion of electrons and protons being used for competing HER reactions rather than CH4 production.33,144 Accordingly, a series of studies were concerned with inhibiting the HER and further enhancing CH4 yields on Pt/CN.64 Section 3 summarised the high CH4 selective state of Pt, including Pt in the single atomic state, oxidation state of Pt (Pt2+, Pt4+) and Pt nanoparticles with suitable small sizes.4,60,132 On this basis, higher CH4 selectivity can be achieved on Pt/CN composite catalysts by the synergistic use of functionalized substrates and beneficial reaction conditions. Sun et al. took advantage of the synergistic oxidation state of Pt (Pt2+), the effect of electronic metal–support interactions (EMSIs) and thermal coupling to achieve remarkably high CH4 selectivity on Pt/CN.4 Under low intensity LED light the 2%-Pt/CN sample reached the highest 100% selectivity for CH4 at 125 °C, with a total CH4 yield of 14.8 μmol g−1 h−1. According to Fig. 20, the EMSI effect effectively inhibited the occurrence of hydrogen precipitation reactions. In addition, additional heat input was effective at suppressing the complexation of photogenerated carriers to further increase the CH4 yield.
 Fig. 20  Possible CO2 photoreduction mechanisms on Pt/CN with appropriate heat input. Adapted with permission from ref. 4. Copyright (2021) Elsevier.4 
It is an effective way to regulate the selectivity of the Pt/CN photocatalytic system by introducing other synergistic components. Asiri et al. coloaded Fe3O4 and Pt cocatalysts onto CN via hydrothermal and photodeposition methods to form the Fe3O4/Pt/g-C3N4 heterostructure.60 The yield of H2 decreased monotonically while an increase of the O2 yield was observed on the 0.50%FPtCN sample, which clearly indicated that the synergistic effect of Pt and Fe3O4 could result in more protons being involved in CH4 formation rather than H2 generation. Shi et al. proposed a strategy for reducing the adsorption of H atoms on Pt by introducing defects on CN and the prepared Pt@Def-CN sample exhibited a significant 99% selectivity for CH4.132 Kelvin probe force microscope (KPFM) and surface photovoltage (TS-SPV) results indicated that Pt could act as an electron enrichment centre and a centre for CO2 adsorption and activation while defects with –OH groups on CN could act as the proton adsorption site, suggesting that more of the photogenerated electrons would be used for CH4 production.
Pd also acts as an active site for CO2 reduction reactions and aqueous dissociation and is much less active for the HER than Pt. However, it shows a higher selectivity for CH3OH than CH4, especially on its (111) surface.104 In a subsequent study, Zhang et al. constructed an innovative monolithic Pd–g-C3N4/RGOA composite photocatalyst with a maximum CH4 evolution rate of 6.4 μmol g−1 h−1via a one-pot thermal reduction route (Fig. 21(a)).113 RGOA acted as a macroscopic substrate to realize the full contact of CO2, while Pd NPs acted as an electron sink for promoting CH4 production. The 2D–2D electron pathway constructed between CN and RGOA also accelerated the separation of charge carriers (Fig. 21(b)). Compared with Pd NPs, monatomic Pd exhibits higher selectivity (55%) for CH4 and a lower propensity to hydrogen production. Taking advantage of this feature, Liu et al. introduced dual-functional sites of single Pd atoms (Pd1) and Pd nanoparticles (PdNPs) on g-C3N4 (named Pd1+NPs/C3N4) to achieve a high selectivity of 97.8% with a yield of 20.3 μmol g−1 h−1 for the photoreduction of CO2 to CH4 in pure water.35 In this efficient synergy pattern, Pd NPs were responsible for promoting the dissociation of water, and the protons were used for further *CO hydrogenation on single Pd atoms, which meant that hydrogen spillover was successfully implemented in this catalytic system.
 Fig. 21  (a) TEM image of Pd–g-C3N4/RGOA and (b) schematic illustration of proposed photocatalytic hydrogenation of CO2 to CH4 on Pd–g-C3N4/RGOA. Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
As an excellent plasma metal, Au has a LSPR effect in the visible light region (<520 nm).148 The light absorption region of CN extends from ultraviolet (UV) to visible or even near-infrared 440 nm to 560 nm after Au NP loading.32 According to the study of Li et al., the CH4 yield on the Au/CN composite catalyst was 9.1 times higher than that on pure CN.32 When P-doped CN was used as the substrate, the synergistic interaction between P dopant and Au cocatalyst further facilitated the conversion of CO2 to CH4.149 Wang et al. reported the introduction of bio-templates with unique periodic micro/nanostructures into the Au/CN system. The hierarchical and multi-scale structure of butterfly wings could enhance spectral light absorption and optimize the LSPR effect, while expanding the specific surface area of CN and increasing the number of active sites to achieve higher CO2 reduction efficiency and CH4 generation in collaboration with Au nanoparticles and CN.45 The yields of CO and CH4 on the composite samples were 331.57 μmol g−1 h−1 and 39.71 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively, which were 36 and 88 times higher than those of the products on pure CN under the same conditions.


5.1.2 Non-precious metal cocatalysts. 
In recent years, non-precious metal-based cocatalysts have attracted a lot of attention due to their low cost and abundant reserves on Earth. Among them, the transition metals Cu, Bi, Co, and Ni (especially in their monatomic form) loaded on CN are shown to be effective at enhancing the product selectivity of CH4. The performances of various noble metal/CN photocatalysts are summarized in Table 3. It is well-documented that Cu, as a non-precious metal plasma cocatalyst, can effectively improve the selectivity of CH4 products in the CRR due to its stable adsorption of intermediates. A binary electron channel is established between Cu/CN and CH3OH, which enables the intermediate to be firmly adsorbed on the interface for subsequent reduction reactions towards CH4 products. On the other hand, Cu leads to the formation of *CO and *CH3O on Cu/CN, which means that the reduction of CO2 on the material prefers the CH4 generation path.77,152
Table 3 Non-precious metal/CN photocatalysts for selective CO2 reduction toward CH4




Photocatalyst
Cocatalyst
Synthesis method
Light source
CH4 yield (μmol g−1 h−1)
CH4 selectivity (%)
Reducing agent
Stability
Ref.




S-Doped g-C3N4
Cu NPs
Wet-impregnation
500 W Xe
0.58
49.0
H2O vapor
4 cycles

112



g-C3N4 nanorods
Cu NPs
Sonicated assisted wet-impregnation
Solar simulator
109.0
83.1
H2O vapor
—

152



Boric acid modified g-C3N4
Ni atoms
Facile ion-exchange
300 W Xe
8.7
57.6
H2O
5 cycles (30 h)

131



S-Doped g-C3N4
Ni atoms
Calcination
300 W Xe (λ ≥ 420 nm)
3.8
56.3
H2O
4 cycles (20 h)

137



g-C3N4
Bi nanospheres
One-step solvothermal
300 W Xe with a 3 AM 1.5 G filter
1.65
63.6
H2O
3 cycles (21 h)

156



g-C3N4
Hollow-structured Bi
Solvothermal
300 W Xe (λ ≥ (420 nm)
0.13
23.7
H2O
3 cycles (24 h)

154





Ojha et al. loaded Cu onto S-modified g-C3N4, and the optimum photocatalyst 2% Cu-SCN displayed almost 7 times higher photocatalytic CH4 production than that on g-C3N4.112 The enhanced activity could be attributed to the synergistic effect between the different valence states of Cu and the modified CN substrate and cocatalyst as shown in Fig. 22. The electron transfer process led to the interconversion of Cu between three valence states (Cu0, Cu+, Cu2+). In addition, Cu was easily oxidized by air to form a CuO shell, which would be coupled with CN to form a heterojunction structure and promote carrier separation. Meanwhile, S modified CN was also found to exhibit better H2O dissociation capacity, which could provide more protons for CH4 production on the cocatalyst.
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of the proposed charge transfer mechanism of CO2 reduction operating in water vapor over the Cu-SCN surface. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Bi was shown to be a beneficial cocatalyst for enhancing CRR efficiency due to its LSPR effect and unique electronic properties.153 Meanwhile, CH4 selectivity can be significantly improved by using Bi cocatalysts with specific shapes. Li et al. reported that Bi nanospheres with a hollow structure loaded on g-C3N4 as a cocatalyst improved the photoreduction efficiency of the CH4 product selectivity.154 After loading the Bi cocatalyst, there was little change in the yield of CO on the catalyst, while the CH4 yield on the 30Bi/g-C3N4 sample reached 9 times that on unmodified g-C3N4. Importantly, the researchers found that the high selectivity of CH4 products on the composite catalyst could be attributed to the hollow structure of Bi, which provided more reactive sites, and allowed the light to complete multiple reflections in the body cavity (Fig. 23(a)). Gu et al. prepared a series of composite photocatalysts by depositing Bi nanospheres on g-C3N4 material by a one-step solvothermal method.155 The light absorption range of Bi/CN nanohybrids was enhanced to the infrared light region owing to the local plasma effect of Bi. The amounts of CO and CH4 evolved during 4 h on the BiCN-0.6 sample reached 3.78 μmol g−1 h−1 and 1.65 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively. The synergistic effect of the Schottky junction and the LSPR effect of the excitation of Bi, as well as the large specific surface area of the Bi nanosphere structure, enhanced the efficiency of conversion of CO2 to CH4 (Fig. 23(b)).
 Fig. 23  Schematic illustration of (a) the photoinduced electron–hole separation on 30(50)-Bi/g-C3N4. Adapted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Mechanism of CO2 photoreduction using Bi/g-C3N4 photocatalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright (2021) American Chemical Society. 

5.2 Bimetallic cocatalysts
Bimetallic nanoparticles or atoms loaded on CN were found to show higher product selectivity for particular production in the CRR due to the effective synergy between the two components. Table 4 summarizes bimetallic cocatalyst/CN systems for efficient CO2-to-CH4 conversion. For instance, Wang et al. prepared a Pd–Ag/g-C3N4 composite photocatalyst and the sample (CN-PA12) with a satisfying Pd/Ag ratio of 1:2 showed a 40-fold increase in CH4 yield compared to that of pristine g-C3N4 with 73.1% selectivity. The synergistic plasma effect of Pd and Ag at the optimum molar ratio extended the photoresponse spectrum of CN into the visible region, and the synergistic effect of electron transfer facilitated the production of CH4.
Table 4 Summary of bimetal/CN photocatalysts for conversion of CO2 to CH4




Photocatalyst
Cocatalyst
Synthesis method
Light source
CH4 yield (μmol g−1 h−1)
CH4 selectivity (%)
Reducing agent
Stability
Ref.




g-C3N4
Pd–Cu alloy
Self-assembly
300 W Xe (780 > λ > 420 nm)
4.95
96.5
H2O
4 cycles (12 h)

157



g-C3N4
Pt–Cu alloy

In situ growth
300 W Xe
7.47
90.6
H2O vapor
4 cycles (12 h)

29



g-C3N4
Ru–Cu dual atoms
Preassembly-coprecipitation-pyrolysis
300 W Xe (λ > 420 nm)
19.25
95.1
H2O
—

100



g-C3N4
Pd–Ag bimetallic nanoparticles
Chemical reduction
Solar simulator (AM 1.5 illumination, 100 mW cm−2)
4.03
74.8
H2O vapor
20 h

23



g-C3N4
Pd–Cu alloy

In situ grown
300 W Xe (780 nm > λ > 420 nm)
1.2
100
H2O vapor
4 cycles (4 h)

36



g-C3N4
Cu–Ni core–shell bimetal nanoparticles
Impregnation
300 W Xe
75.20
—
H2O vapor
4 cycles (20 h)

107



Borate modified g-C3N4
Ni atoms
Ion exchange
300 W Xe
4.8
43.3
H2O
5 cycles (15 h)

85



Co atoms




There is a typical configuration of bimetallic combinations, namely: a noble/rare earth metal (Pt, Pd, Ru) with a high work function and H2O dissociation capacity is combined with a high CO2 adsorption activation site but a low work function (Cu), e.g., Pt–Cu, Pd–Cu, Ru–Cu.29,36,100,157 In this combined model, the adsorption of CO2 molecules at sites adjacent to the noble metal can effectively inhibit the occurrence of hydrogen-producing competition reactions. Simultaneously, the protons generated by the hydrolysis of H2O at the noble metal sites can be transferred to the CO2 adsorption sites to participate in the hydrogenation progress through the hydrogen spillover effect. Zeng et al. used the pre-assembly–coprecipitation–pyrolysis method to co-load Ru and Cu single atoms onto CN to achieve high selectivity for CH4 products up to 95%.100 Ru–N4 sites mainly played the role of proton and *CO generation sites while Cu–N3 acted as sites for CO2 adsorption and hydrogenation of the *CO intermediate (Fig. 24). Furthermore, the isolated Cu atom or Cu vacancy in this bimetallic combination pattern is the active site for CH4 generation.36,157,158 According to the study of Cai et al., the isolated Cu atomic sites were introduced into the Pd–Cu alloy cocatalyst via an annealing process. As the annealing temperature increased from 250 °C to 375 °C, the phase of PdCu alloy changed from mixed A1 and B2 phases to B2 phase with a higher degree of order.157 According to Fig. 25(a), before the ordering treatment, the sample with a higher proportion of Pd (with a higher work function) exhibited more efficient electron extraction capabilities, which led to higher CH4 selectivity. In contrast, the relatively high Cu component content after the ordering treatment means that the number of isolated Cu atomic sites increases, providing more CH4 formation sites and facilitating electron transport. As shown in Fig. 25(b), the best performing sample, C3N4-Pd1Cu2-375, exhibited a surprising 4.95 mmol gcat−1 h−1 yield for CH4 production with a selectivity of 96.5%. In addition to the ordered and faceted engineering mentioned in section 3, highly selective alloy cocatalysts can also be achieved by hydrogenation. Zhao et al. further improved the selectivity of CH4 by hydrogenation engineering of the PdCu alloy cocatalyst, and the composite catalyst Pd9Cu1Hx even reached 96.1% selectivity for CH4.36 Metal hydrides provide H atoms for continuous hydrogenation of *CO to form CH4. Furthermore, the extended metal hydride lattice also promoted the diffusion of H atoms into the lattice, further preventing H2 precipitation in the photocatalytic reaction.
 Fig. 24  Schematic illustration of the possible photocatalytic mechanism of the PCN-RuCu sample for the photocatalytic CRR under light illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2022) Elsevier. 
 Fig. 25  Schematic of (a) the electron capture capacity and the number of isolated Cu sites of ordered PdCu cocatalyst related to the Pd/Cu molar ratio and annealing temperature, (b) the photocatalytic mechanism of CO2 reduction to CH4 with C3N4–Pd1Cu2-375. (c) H2, CO, CH4 evolution rates and CH4 production selectivities with C3N4-based samples under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright (2018) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Encouragingly, some specific non-noble bimetal cocatalysts were also shown to promote the evolution of CO2 towards CH4 on CN recently. Lee et al. decorated CN with a Cu–Ni core–shell bimetallic cocatalyst, and the sample with a Cu:Ni molar ratio of 1:1 exhibited excellent activity for CO2-to-CH4 evolution (75.2 μmol g−1 h−1).107 The strong synergy between the Cu–Ni bimetallic core–shell nanoparticles and CN significantly improved the optical response and CO2 adsorption as well as the separation efficiency of photoexcited charges. In addition, a NiCo dual-atom cocatalyst was also loaded on CN, and the composite showed a specific promotion effect on the formation of CH4.85 It is clear that the excellent synergism of the components in bimetallic cocatalysts leads to the significantly enhanced photocatalytic activity towards the selective reduction of CO2 to methane, which paves a new way to design highly selective and highly active CO2 reduction photocatalysts.
5.3 Non-noble metal-based compound cocatalysts
Non-noble metal-based compounds (i.e., metal oxides, metal sulphides, metal phosphides, metal carbides and metal nitrides) have received much attention as cocatalysts due to their versatility and cost-effectiveness.159,160Table 5 displays the performances of metal-based compound/CN photocatalysts for the CRR. MAX and MXenes, composed of layered transition metal carbides, nitrides and carbo nitrides, were employed as efficient 2D cocatalysts loaded on CN in recent years.161 The general formulas for MAX and MXene are Mn+1AXn and Mn+1Xn (n = 1, 2, 3), respectively, where M represents transition metals such as Sc, Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta and Mo, A is an A-group element, and X represents C and/or N.162–164 Among MAX and MXene materials, Ti3AlC2 and Ti3C2 have been widely investigated for CO2 reduction due to their benefits of high electronic conductivity and good chemical/thermal stability.78,165 In particular, MAX and MXenes can be coupled with CN via a low-cost ex situ self-assembly method and a 2D/2D interface is established between the cocatalyst and CN to accelerate electronic interface transfer, which facilitates the production of CH4.166
Table 5 Summary of metal-based compound/CN photocatalysts for selective conversion of CO2 into CH4




Photocatalyst
Cocatalyst
Synthesis method
Light source
CH4 yield (μmol g−1 h−1
CH4 selectivity (%)
Reducing agent
Selectivity
Ref.




g-C3N4
MoO2
Self-assembly
300 W Xe
4.0
52.8
H2O vapor
3 cycles (9 h)

94



g-C3N4
BiO2−x
Hydrothermal
300 W Xe with a 3 AM 1.5 G filter
1.028
40.5
H2O
3 cycles (21 h)

97



Proton-rich g-C3N4
Oxygen-defective Ti3AlC2
Ultrasonic treatment
35 W high-intensity discharge (HID) lamp
786.0
84.4
H2
3 cycles (24 h)

95



TiO2/g-C3N4
Ti3C2 quantum dots
Electrostatic self-assembly
350 W Xe lamp
1.2
52.2
H2O
4 cycles (12 h)

75



Mesoporous g-C3N4
Ti3C2Tx
Directly heating
300 W Xe
2.12
68.0
H2O
—

37



g-C3N4
Ni2P, NiO
One-step gas–solid phosphating reaction
300 W Xe (λ ≥ 420 nm)
2.32
16.1
H2O
3 cycles (24 h)

83





The simple configuration of the MXene/CN catalytic system cannot achieve satisfactory CH4 selectivity due to the lower work function and poor thermal stability of MXenes.167 Modifications of the CN substrate and cocatalysts are beneficial for CH4 selectivity enhancement.37,143,163 A heterostructure of oxygen-defective OV-Ti3AlC2 MAX with proton-rich functionalized CN, for example, was reported to show extremely high selectivity for CH4 (84.4% during the CRR with H2O and 91.2% under a CO2/H2 atmosphere), which even exceeded that of some precious metal cocatalyst/CN composites.95 Dual mediators with oxygen clusters improved the conductivity of the composites and achieved efficient interfacial charge transfer. Tahir et al. loaded Bt (SnS2) and Ti3C2 on g-C3N4 successively by a self-assembly method and obtained a 2D/2D/2D g-C3N4/Bt/Ti3C2 composite nanosheet.63 Under visible light, the CH4 yield on the g-C3N4/Bt/Ti3C2 composite catalyst reached 230 μmol g−1 h−1, which was incredibly high compared with that on g-C3N4/Ti3C2. The photoactivity of the catalyst for CH4 production increased due to the adsorption of more CO2 at the active site of C–SnS2 and the obvious charge transfer between Sn and S and C, which enhanced the activation of CO2 on the catalyst surface.
TiO2 is also found to be an excellent additional component because it can form suitable heterostructures with CN. He et al. prepared a 2D/2D/0D TiO2/C3N4/Ti3C2 composite catalyst via the electrostatic self-assembly method.75 The van der Waals structure of 2D/2D TiO2/CN could effectively shorten the electron transfer path. In addition, as shown in Fig. 26, the formation of the S-scheme heterojunction enabled the surface electrons of C3N4 to be extracted onto TiO2, effectively inhibiting photogenerated carrier recombination. More importantly, high reducing capacity electrons screened out through the TiO2/CN heterojunction were transferred to the surface of Ti3C2 quantum dots (TCQD) to participate in the reduction reaction.
 Fig. 26  Charge migration and separation in the S-scheme heterojunction of TiO2/C3N4/Ti3C2 quantum dots: (a) before contact, (b) after contact, and (c) after contact under irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2020) Elsevier. 
Interestingly, MXene materials are usually prepared by etching MAX precursor materials with HF where the etching of MAX phase Ti3AlC2 with concentrated acid (HF) enables the removal of Al layers with the formation of TiO2 NPs over Ti3C2 multilayers.78,161 Etching lengths are reported to be related to TiO2 growth.79 Tahir et al. etched MAX powder with 39% HF aqueous solution, then studied the chemical composition of products generated with different etching lengths and the selectivity of CO2 photoreduction for CH4 products (Fig. 27).142
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the preparation of PCN/Ti3C2TA MXene nanocomposites by the ultrasonic approach. Adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright (2022) Elsevier. 
Several metal oxides (MoO2, NiO) were also used as cocatalysts to modify C3N4 for selective CH4 reduction. Metallic MoO2 was found to be an excellent cocatalyst for improving the selectivity of CH4 due to its unique electronic properties. Its relatively high Mo 4D state is located in the valence band region, leading to its high conductivity and low Fermi level. When MoO2 is loaded on CN, a Schottky junction will be established between the MoO2 and CN interface, accelerating the separation of photon-generated carriers. Li et al. carried out photocatalytic experiments on composite materials by loading MoO2 on CN through the self-assembly method.94 CO2 photoreduction results showed that MoO2 with a loading capacity of 20% showed the highest selectivity to CH4, and the yield of CH4 on it was 15 times that of CN reaction products under the same conditions. Li et al. synchronously introduced spatially isolated Ni2P and NiO redox cocatalysts on CN, and the optimal Ni2P/NiO/CN(0.25) sample delivered remarkably enhanced selectivity for CH4 production in the CRR.83 NiO was employed as a hole acceptor by forming a p–n heterojunction with CN, which facilitated the water oxidation half-reaction, while Ni2P acted as an electron sink to promote CO2 adsorption and activation, as well as the CO2 reduction half-reaction. Due to the synergistic effect of Ni2P and NiO, the separation and transfer of photogenerated carriers are greatly accelerated and the CO2 photocatalytic reduction rate of CN is significantly enhanced.
5.4 Nanocarbon cocatalysts
Nanocarbon cocatalysts, namely: graphene (GO, rGO), carbon nanotubes and carbon quantum dots (CQDs), are non-toxic while showing outstanding electrical conductivity and unique morphologies.168 Meanwhile, the π–π stacking interactions arising from the similarity of the sp2 lattice structures of g-C3N4 and nanocarbon cocatalysts lead to the formation of strong interfacial interactions between them, facilitating the CO2 activation and subsequent reduction process.86,169Table 6 summarizes typical excellent nanocarbon/CN photocatalysts for highly selective conversion of CO2 to CH4.
Table 6 Summary of nanocarbon/CN photocatalysts for photocatalytic reduction of CO2 into CH4




Photocatalyst
Cocatalyst
Synthesis method
Light source
CH4 yield (μmol g−1 h−1)
CH4 selectivity (%)
Reducing agent
Stability
Ref.




Ag2S/g-C3N4
rGO
Hydrothermal
300 W Xe/8 W Hg (λ > 420 nm)
15.1
73.1
H2O
4 cycles(8 h)

87



Protonated g-C3N4
rGO
Sonication-assisted electrostatic self-assembly
15 W energy-saving daylight bulb
1.39
—
H2O vapor
4 cycles

138



R-CeO2/g-C3N4
rGO
Hydrothermal
300 W Xe (λ > 420 nm)
8.2
67.4
H2O
3 cycles (30 h)

88



Au/g-C3N4
rGO
Hydrothermal
300 W Xe (λ > 420 nm)
6.0
77.7
H2O
5 cycles (25 h)

90



g-C3N4
CQDs
—
300 W Xe (λ > 400 nm)
20.7
78.1
H2O vapor
4 cycles (8 h)

38



g-C3N4
CND
Electrostatic self-assembly
500 W Xe (λ > 400 nm)
2.9
66.5
H2O vapor
3 cycles (30 h)

139



O-Doped g-C3N4
CQDs
One-pot hydrothermal
300 W Xe (λ > 420 nm)
1.2
70.0
H2O vapor
5 cycles (25 h)

93



LDH/g-C3N4
N-Doped C dot
One-pot hydrothermal
300 W Xe
25.69
99.0
H2O
8 h

80





Graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) are typical 2D materials with honeycomb planar structures and have attracted a lot of attention in recent years.170 They can form tight 2D/2D interfaces with CN via self-assembly or a hydrothermal method and thus increase the adsorption of CO2 and provides more active sites for the CRR.89,171 A study reported that rGO modified g-C3N4 showed 5.4 times higher CH4 yield (1.39 μmol g−1 h−1) than that on pristine g-C3N4; this was mainly due to the well-contacted 2D/2D interface. To further overcome the disadvantages of easy agglomeration of the powdered g-C3N4/GO photocatalyst and increase the CO2 adsorption capacity, Zhang et al. introduced skeleton materials into the composite catalyst.172 Due to the introduction of a melamine sponge (MS) porous structure, the CH4 yield on the composite reached 6.4 times that of the g-C3N4/GO composite.
Furthermore, recent studies also focused on introducing more high-efficient collaboration modes into rGO/CN systems to further facilitate CH4 production. For instance, Raziq et al. prepared a Au/rGO/g-C3N4 hybrid photocatalyst by hydrothermal and photodeposition methods.90 In this plasmonic metal–CN–cocatalyst system, Au with a plasma effect significantly extended the photoactivity into the visible light region while rGO played the roles of electron transport channels and shielding the photocatalyst from deactivation. The average yield of CH4 on the 2Au/0.6rGO/g-C3N4 sample with the best catalytic efficiency was 6 μmol g−1 h−1, showing a higher promoting ability than that of pristine g-C3N4 (3 μmol g−1 h−1). In addition, the construction of a heterojunction-supported single reduction cocatalyst system shows impressive results. Li et al. prepared rGO/Ag2S/CN materials, in which a type-I Ag2S/g-C3N4 heterojunction was found in the composite catalyst.87 Ag2S and rGO showed good coordination, which effectively improved the light absorption performance and carrier separation efficiency of the composite system, and thus increased the selectivity of the CH4 product. More importantly, rGO/Ag2S/CN had a sandwich structure, in which the layered structure of rGO and CN protected Ag2S well. The effective synergy mode of the system led to a high CH4 selectivity of 74.7%. A similar synergistic pattern was also found in the rGO modified R-CeO2/G-C3N4 system, which had a CH4 selectivity rate of 67.4%.88
In addition to 2D structured carbon-based cocatalysts, small-sized carbon nanodots and carbon quantum dots were also used as cocatalysts to enhance the activity of CO2 photocatalytic reduction on CN. The selectivity of 0D nanocarbon cocatalyst/CN systems for CH4 can be further improved by optimisation. Designing tight 0D/2D interfaces can enhance carrier separation efficiency to facilitate eight-electron reactions. Ong et al. immobilized carbon nanodots on protonated g-C3N4 (PCN) to form perfectly integrated 0D/2D heterojunction photocatalysts via a simple electrostatic self-assembly method. A significant enhancement of the CO2 methanation performance (∼66.9% selectivity, 2.9 μmol g−1 h−1) was realized on a 3% CND-loaded PCN photocatalyst under visible light. DFT calculations confirmed that the significant increase in photocatalytic efficiency was mainly due to efficient electron transport on 0D/2D interfaces.
Particularly, non-polar CQD cocatalysts result in a significant reduction in the polarity of the composite. The nonpolar surface modification of g-C3N4 exhibited significantly enhanced CO2 adsorption capacity, which enhanced the efficiency of the CO2 reduction reaction.38 At the same time, the loading of non-polar CQD promoted the selective coupling of protons with CO2, which improved the selectivity for CH4 products. Li et al. prepared a series of composite catalysts by modifying carbon quantum dots on CN with oxygen doping.93 The CQD cocatalyst was loaded onto CN by a simple one-pot hydrothermal method where CN was oxidized to OCN simultaneously (Fig. 28). The CQD/OCN-25% material showed an impressive selectivity for CH4, with a CH4 yield nearly 14 times that of CN. In addition to this, it was found that non-polarised CQDs cocatalysts loaded on CN could also contribute to their catalytic efficiency.
 Fig. 28  Schematic illustration of the CO2 photocatalytic reduction mechanism on CQDs/OCN-x under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. 
6. Conclusions and perspectives
In the past few decades, the design of cocatalyst/CN photocatalyst systems has provided a broad range of high-CH4-selectivity CO2 photoreduction catalyst development possibilities and thus has become a research hotspot. This review elucidates recent progress in cocatalyst/CN systems for the selective photoreduction of CO2 to CH4. We also highlight efficient synergistic modes and modification strategies to prepare cocatalyst/CN composites for high CH4 selectivity. Despite burgeoning cocatalyst/CN design strategies over the past few years, we firmly believe that further improvements are still necessary; there is still a long way to go to develop cocatalyst/CN photocatalysts with high CH4 selectivity. The current challenges and development directions for cocatalyst/CN photocatalytic systems with high product selectivity are as follows:
(1) Numerous cocatalyst/CN materials with high CH4 selectivity have been synthesized. However, more efforts should be made towards developing Earth-abundant and environment-friendly materials. Nanocarbons are appealing candidates that meet the above conditions. Therefore, in-depth research should be carried out on nanocarbon/CN materials in the future. For example, studies on the relationship between UPCL properties and the cocatalytic performance of C dots should be studied systematically to guide advanced cocatalyst/CN systems with high CH4 selectivity. In addition, the combination of theoretical calculations, experiments and data-driven screening strategies should be applied to design novel cocatalyst/CN systems as the way forward for photocatalyst development.
(2) Additional studies towards the mechanism of the selective photoreduction of CO2 to CH4 in cocatalyst/CN systems are required. For example, the structure–property relationships between the cocatalyst and selectivity for CH4 need to be further studied. To the best of our knowledge, when a metal atom coordinated with the N site, different coordination numbers of N resulted in different interactions between the two sites. In this regard, it is necessary to study the effect of different N coordination environments on the selectivity of CH4 over a monatomic metal/CN photocatalyst. In addition, the CRR mechanism on the plasmonic metal–CN–cocatalyst configuration should be further studied to explore the effect of hot electrons on the photogenerated carrier separation efficiency on CN. Moreover, the combination of experimental studies and focused DFT calculations is required to predict and analyze reaction pathways to reveal reaction mechanisms and rationalize the observed reactivity trends.
(3) The inevitable hydrogen evolution on metal cocatalysts remains a main factor that hinders the highly selective CO2 reduction reaction. As analyzed in section 2.2, efficient CO2 mass transfer, H2O dissociation, and selective coupling of CO2 reduction intermediates with protons on the photocatalyst are key factors that inhibit the hydrogen evolution reaction. Hence it is necessary to design metal cocatalyst/CN catalysts with the above functions. We summarized high-efficiency cocatalyst/CN systems (bimetallic CN and cocatalyst/functional CN photocatalysts) with separate H2O hydrolysis dissociation sites and CO2 reduction sites to improve the CRR selectivity. However, the factors that affect the synergistic effect of bifunctional sites need to be further studied; these can provide essential guidance for the design of bifunctional cocatalyst/semiconductor photocatalysts with directional product selectivity. In addition, developing multifunctional metal–cocatalyst sites for inhibiting the competitive HER will be the next vital step. Research has demonstrated that modifying vanadium oxide (VO4, VO2) species on the metal/semiconductor contributes to the stable adsorption of H species on the photocatalyst surface, which can reduce the reaction energy barrier of carbon dioxide protonation.173,174 Therefore, we speculate that the growth of vanadium oxide on the metal cocatalyst can inhibit the occurrence of the hydrogen evolution reaction.
(4) Controllable preparation methods for cocatalyst/CN catalysts should be further studied. On one hand, the current synthesis methods cannot precisely tune the degree of polymerisation, microcrystalline size, morphology and crystallinity of g-C3N4, which results in significant differences in the physicochemical properties between batches. On the other hand, designing a cocatalyst that considers more parameters is hugely challenging owing to the limited synthesis methods used to achieve complex designs. In addition, more strategies for stable cocatalyst loading need to be developed to overcome the problem of cocatalyst “delamination” in heterojunction matrix composites.
(5) The design of CO2 photoreduction reactors with high efficiency, low cost and easy operation is pivotal for the commercial utilization of photocatalysis. Based on this, a series of strategies for optimizing the optical and chemical engineering systems of the reactor, such as minimizing adverse light reflection, scattering and transmission loss and removing the products from the reactor in a timely manner, are also important. In addition, external fields (electric, thermal or photovoltaic installations) can also be integrated into CO2 reduction devices.
In summary, the cocatalyst/CN photocatalyst system for selective CO2-to-CH4 conversion has the potential to realize the efficient and sustainable recycling of CO2. By further understanding the effect of cocatalyst/CN photocatalyst engineering strategies on the CO2 reduction product selectivity, designing cocatalyst/CN catalytic systems with more functions and excellent synergy modes will be the next important step. Through solving the above problems, highly selective CO2 photoreduction on the cocatalyst/CN photocatalyst will create more impressive results in the future.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (23ZR1424500).
References
X. Chen, W. Pan, R. Guo, X. Hu, Z. Bi and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7604–7625 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Li, T. Li and Z. Jin, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2023, 7, 2200139 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guo, Z. Bi, Z. Lin, X. Hu, J. Wang, X. Chen and W. Pan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 627, 343–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sun, Y. Zhu, M. Li, J. Zhang, J. Qin, Y. Li and C. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120565 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Sun, J. Xu, Y. Shao, J. Wu, X. Xu, Y. Pan, H. Ju, J. Zhu and Y. Xie, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 690–699 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Wen, J. Low, Y. Fang and J. Yu, Sci. China Mater., 2014, 57, 70–100 CrossRef .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
G. Han, C. Liu, Y. Pan, W. Macyk, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and F. Xu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2023, 7, 2200381 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, X. Wang, S. Jin, Z.-Q. Liu and M. Zhu, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 1306–1315 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fei, H. Tan, B. Cheng, B. Zhu and L. Zhang, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2021, 37, 2010027 Search PubMed .
R.-T. Guo, Z.-X. Bi, Z.-D. Lin, X. Hu, J. Wang, X. Chen and W.-G. Pan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 627, 343–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, X. Wu, Z. Mei, S. Zhou, Y. Su and G. Wang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2022, 6, 2200056 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bie, B. Cheng, J. Fan, W. Ho and J. Yu, EnergyChem, 2021, 3, 100051 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, H. Wang, Z. Wu and L. Wang, Catal. Today, 2018, 300, 160–172 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Singh and V. Srivastava, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 18245–18265 RSC .
Q. Lu, K. Eid, W. Li, A. M. Abdullah, G. Xu and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 5394–5428 RSC .
M. Que, W. Cai, J. Chen, L. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 6692–6712 RSC .
G. Liao, Y. Gong, L. Zhang, H. Gao, G. Yang and B. Fang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2080–2147 RSC .
S. S. Lam, V.-H. Nguyen, M. T. N. Dinh, D. Q. Khieu, D. D. La, H. T. Nguyen, N. V. Dai Viet, C. Xia, R. S. Varma and M. Shokouhimehr, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10571–10603 RSC .
X. Liu, R. Ma, L. Zhuang, B. Hu, J. Chen, X. Liu and X. Wang, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2021, 51, 751–790 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Y. Liu and J. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 10361–10369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, H. Lee, J. Chen, M. Wu, D. Y. Leung, C. A. Grimes, Z. Lu, Z. Xu and S.-P. Feng, J. Power Sources, 2020, 466, 228306 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Ng, J. J. Foo and W. J. Ong, InfoMat, 2022, 4, e12279 CAS .
M. Arumugam, M. Tahir and P. Praserthdam, Chemosphere, 2022, 286, 131765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, X. Wang, Q. Xu, Z. Mei, L. Duan and H. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 316, 121679 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, H. Wang, L. Jiang, H. Yu, Y. Zhao, H. Chen, X. Yuan, J. Liang, H. Li and Z. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 130991 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, K. Liu, K. Jiang, H. Li, P. An, W. Li, N. Zhang, H. Li, X. Xu and H. Zhou, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhu, W. Hu, W. Jiang, S. Zhong, P. Gong, B. Teng, L. Zhao and S. Bai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6686–6694 RSC .
X. Li, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3962–4179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and S. T. Yong, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1249–1257 RSC .
H. Li, Y. Gao, Z. Xiong, C. Liao and K. Shih, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 439, 552–559 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, C. Gao, S. Bai, S. Chen, R. Long, L. Song, Z. Li and Y. Xiong, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3396–3406 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, P. Yan, K. Li, J. You, H. Wang, W. Cui, W. Cen, Y. Chu and F. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17014–17021 RSC .
P. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Gao, X. Hong, J. Zhu, G. Wang, Y. Wu, J. Zeng and X. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, F. Ye, D. Wang, X. Cai, C. Meng, H. Xie, J. Zhang and S. Bai, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3524–3533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Bai, X. Shi, J. Huang, K. Zhang, R. Wang and L. Ye, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 546, 149111 CrossRef CAS .
H. Feng, Q. Guo, Y. Xu, T. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, M. Wang and D. Shen, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 4256–4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Kiefer and K. J. Kubarych, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 1527–1533 RSC .
J. Mao, K. Li and T. Peng, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2481–2498 RSC .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
M. Li, L. Zhang, X. Fan, Y. Zhou, M. Wu and J. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5189–5196 RSC .
X. Chen, R. Guo, L. Hong, Y. Yuan and W. Pan, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 19920–19942 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, X. Yue, H. Zhou, J. Fan and Q. Xiang, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 1608–1616 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Z. Fang, X. Zhao, C. Dong, Y. Li, C. Guo, Q. Liu, F. Song and W. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 59855–59866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Wang, G. Li, Y. Xiong, M. Zhang, S. Zhang and Q. Zhong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 603, 210–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Rather, M. Khan and I. M. Lo, J. Catal., 2018, 366, 28–36 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, J. M. T. A. Fischer, Q. Li, J. Hu, Q. Tang, H. Wang, Z. Wu, M. Hankel, D. J. Searles and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 216, 146–155 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, X. Feng, Y. Shangguan, X. Wu and H. Chen, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 246–254 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, W. Chen, D. Zhang, Y. Du, R. Amal, S. Qiao, J. Wu and Z. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5310–5349 RSC .
J. Fu, K. Liu, H. Li, J. Hu and M. Liu, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2021, 20, 1–20 Search PubMed .
J. Li, H. Huang, W. Xue, K. Sun, X. Song, C. Wu, L. Nie, Y. Li, C. Liu and Y. Pan, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 719–729 CrossRef CAS .
D. Raciti, M. Mao, J. H. Park and C. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 2364–2369 RSC .
H. Huang, R. Shi, Z. Li, J. Zhao, C. Su and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2022, 134, e202200802 Search PubMed .
A. Li, Q. Cao, G. Zhou, B. V. Schmidt, W. Zhu, X. Yuan, H. Huo, J. Gong and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 14691–14697 CrossRef .
Z. Fu, R. Xu, J. T. Moore, F. Liang, X. Nie, C. Mi, J. Mo, Y. Xu, Q. Xu and Z. Yang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 4273–4278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, L. Zhu, Z. Wang, K. Liu, H. Li, J. Hu, H. Pan, J. Fu, N. Zhang and X. Qiu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 508, 145173 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma, J. Chen, Z. Huang, W. Fa, F. Wang, Y. Cao, Y. Yang, Z. Rao, R. Wang and R. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 444, 136585 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Wan, Y. Shi, H. Wang, Y. Kang, S. Zhu, S. Lin and L. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 288, 120000 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Asiri, A. Raza, M. K. Shahzad, W. A. Adeosun, S. B. Khan, K. A. Alamry, H. M. Marwani, M. M. AlOtaibi, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 592, 153159 CrossRef CAS .
D. Masih, Y. Ma and S. Rohani, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 556–588 CrossRef CAS .
Y. I. Hori, Mod. Aspects Electrochem., 2008, 42, 89–189 CAS .
M. Tahir and B. Tahir, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 125868 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Bai, Z. Zhang, Y. Qu and L. Jing, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2019, 45, 249–259 CrossRef CAS .
E. Karamian and S. Sharifnia, J. CO2 Util., 2016, 16, 194–203 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng, Z. Sun, K. H. Lim, T. Z. H. Gani, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Yin, K. Liu, H. Guo and T. Du, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200389 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, J. Ji, J. Liu, S. Mine, M. Matsuoka, J. Zhang and M. Xing, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 14072–14080 CrossRef .
F. Raziq, Y. Qu, M. Humayun, A. Zada, H. Yu and L. Jing, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 486–494 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kraeutler and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 4317–4318 CrossRef CAS .
J. Di, C. Chen, C. Zhu, P. Song, M. Duan, J. Xiong, R. Long, M. Xu, L. Kang and S. Guo, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105429 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Mu, W. Zhu, X. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Su, Y. Lian, P. Qi, Z. Deng, D. Zhang and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 262, 118144 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhong, X. Wu, Y. Liu, X. Wang, J. Fan and H. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 280, 119455 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xia, C. Chen, X. Qi, Q. Xu, H. Tang and G. Liu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2023, 7, 2200134 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu, W. Ho and W. Macyk, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 119006 CrossRef CAS .
J. Raskó, Catal. Lett., 1998, 56, 11–15 CrossRef .
J. Li, P. Yan, K. Li, J. You, H. Wang, W. Cui, W. Cen, Y. Chu and F. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17014–17021 RSC .
Y. Zhao, M. Que, J. Chen and C. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 16258–16281 RSC .
C. Yang, Q. Tan, Q. Li, J. Zhou, J. Fan, B. Li, J. Sun and K. Lv, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118738 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Jo, S. Kumar and S. Tonda, Composites, Part B, 2019, 176, 107212 CrossRef CAS .
G. Baffou and R. Quidant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3898–3907 RSC .
Y. Li, J. Li and Y. Xu, EnergyChem, 2021, 3, 100047 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, W. Feng, Y. Liu, D. Chen, Z. Wu and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 15752–15765 RSC .
J. Xiao, S. Chen, J. Jin, R. Li, J. Zhang and T. Peng, Langmuir, 2021, 37, 12487–12500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, B. Qu, Z. Zhang, J. Sun, X. Zhao, L. Bai and L. Jing, Mater. Res. Bull., 2022, 153, 111883 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, B. Cheng, W. Wang, C. Jiang and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 231, 368–380 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, D. Shen, C. Liu, J. Li, Y. Zhou, X. Song, P. Huo, H. Wang and Y. Yan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 554, 468–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Guan, H. Jiang, X. Song, P. Huo and H. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 563, 150042 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jo, S. Kumar, S. Eslava and S. Tonda, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 586–598 CrossRef CAS .
F. Raziq, J. He, J. Gan, M. Humayun, M. B. Faheem, A. Iqbal, A. Hayat, S. Fazal, J. Yi and Y. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118870 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, J. Guan, J. Li, X. Li, H. Wang, P. Huo and Y. Yan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 537, 552–559 Search PubMed .
M. Humayun, H. Ullah, L. Shu, X. Ao, A. A. Tahir, C. Wang and W. Luo, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 1–18 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, S. Wang, Z. Sun, Q. Tang, Y. Liu, L. Wang, H. Wang and Z. Wu, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2749–2759 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. W. Li, H. Zhou, K. Chen, K. Liu, S. Li, K. Jiang, W. Zhang, Y. Xie, Z. Cao and H. Li, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900416 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir and B. Tahir, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 9841–9857 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
Y. Miao, R. Guo, J. Gu, Y. Liu, G. Wu, C. Duan and W. Pan, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 44, 101377 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, S. Zhang, R. Shi, G. I. Waterhouse, J. Tang and T. Zhang, Mater. Today, 2020, 34, 78–91 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kovacic, B. Likozar and M. Hus, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 14984–15007 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zeng, J. Chen, L. Zhong, W. Zhen, Y. Y. Tay, S. Li, Y. Wang, L. Huang and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 307, 121154 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Anzai, N. Fukuo, A. Yamamoto and H. Yoshida, Catal. Commun., 2017, 100, 134–138 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, K. Wang, W. Xiao and B. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11492–11501 RSC .
S. Cao, Y. Li, B. Zhu, M. Jaroniec and J. Yu, J. Catal., 2017, 349, 208–217 CrossRef CAS .
A. Li, T. Wang, X. Chang, Z.-J. Zhao, C. Li, Z. Huang, P. Yang, G. Zhou and J. Gong, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 5334–5340 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Li, J. Zhao, Z. Xiong, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 3454–3463 RSC .
D.-E. Lee, S. Moru, R. Bhosale, W.-K. Jo and S. Tonda, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 599, 153973 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, C. Wang, M. Song, D. Li, X. Zhang and Y. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 760–770 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chu, Q. Zhu, Z. Pan, S. Gupta, D. Huang, Y. Du, S. Weon, Y. Wu, C. Muhich and E. Stavitski, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 6376–6382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, F. Li, J. Chen, J. Fan and Q. Xiang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 1979–1985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, F. Gao, H. Zhao and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 134, 349–358 CrossRef .
N. Ojha, A. Bajpai and S. Kumar, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 4598–4613 RSC .
R. Zhang, Z. Huang, C. Li, Y. Zuo and Y. Zhou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 475, 953–960 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, K. Zhao, J. Xiong, Y. Wei, C. Han, W. Li and G. Cheng, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2593–2603 RSC .
Y. A. Wu, I. McNulty, C. Liu, K. C. Lau, Q. Liu, A. P. Paulikas, C. Sun, Z. Cai, J. R. Guest and Y. Ren, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 957–968 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, X. Wang, C. Hu, M. Xie, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6094–6097 RSC .
G. Ouyang, K.-J. Zhu, L. Zhang, P.-F. Cui, B.-T. Teng and X.-D. Wen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 387, 875–881 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, S. Jeong, W. D. Kim, S. Lee, K. Lee, W. K. Bae, J. H. Moon, S. Lee and D. C. Lee, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10043–10048 RSC .
Y. Zhu, Z. Xu, W. Jiang, S. Zhong, L. Zhao and S. Bai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2619–2628 RSC .
S. Xie, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3644–3653 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manjavacas, J. G. Liu, V. Kulkarni and P. Nordlander, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7630–7638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, C. Liu, D. Wu, J. Li, P. Huo and H. Wang, Chin. J. Catal., 2019, 40, 928–939 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dong, C. Lian, S. Hu, Z. Deng, J. Gong, M. Li, H. Liu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1252 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mitchell, E. Vorobyeva and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15316–15329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zeng and C. Xue, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 934–944 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Hiragond, N. S. Powar, J. Lee and S. I. In, Small, 2022, 18, 2201428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tong, B. Zhu, C. Jiang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 433, 1175–1183 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Z.-Y. Zhao, H.-T. Wei, X.-Y. Deng and Q.-J. Liu, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 4276–4285 RSC .
J. Fu, S. Wang, Z. Wang, K. Liu, H. Li, H. Liu, J. Hu, X. Xu, H. Li and M. Liu, Front. Phys., 2020, 15, 1–14 Search PubMed .
G. Vilé, D. Albani, M. Nachtegaal, Z. Chen, D. Dontsova, M. Antonietti, N. López and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11265–11269 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Qu, B. Qu, L. Bai, Y. Liu, Z. Yang, W. Zhang, L. Jing and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2105482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Bo, D. Duan, Z. Wang, J. Cao, G. Zhu, W. Ho, L. Wang and T. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202203063 CAS .
Y. Cao, S. Chen, Q. Luo, H. Yan, Y. Lin, W. Liu, L. Cao, J. Lu, J. Yang and T. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12191–12196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, L. Cao, W. Cheng, Y. Cao, X. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Mou, L. Jin, X. Zheng and W. Che, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 9440–9445 CrossRef .
A. Li, E. Kan, S. Chen, Z. Du, X. Liu, T. Wang, W. Zhu, H. Huo, J. Ma and D. Liu, Small, 2022, 18, 2200073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, S. Lin, L. Zhang, H. Meng, J. Zhou, Q. Li, J. Liu, P. Qiao, B. Jiang and H. Fu, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 2928–2934 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Chen, M. Chen, J. Wang and L. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 442, 136208 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai, S.-T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 757–770 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Ong, L. K. Putri, Y.-C. Tan, L.-L. Tan, N. Li, Y. H. Ng, X. Wen and S.-P. Chai, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1673–1696 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Khan, M. Tahir and A. Bafaqeer, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 9810–9828 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dong, D. L. Jacobs, L. Zang and C. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 515–524 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir and B. Tahir, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 591, 20–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, J. Ding and Q. Zhong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 582, 647–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tasbihi, A. Acharjya, A. Thomas, M. Reli, N. AmbroŽová, K. Kočcí and R. Schomäcker, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 18, 5636–5644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang and P. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2021, 32, 175401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, P. Xia, L. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10472–10480 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, M. Huang, J. Zhou, M. Liu and D. Jing, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 781–794 CrossRef CAS .
M. Humayun, Q. Fu, Z. Zheng, H. Li and W. Luo, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 568, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kočí, H. D. Van, M. Edelmannová, M. Reli and J. C. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 503, 144426 CrossRef .
F. Li, H. Zhou, J. Fan and Q. Xiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 570, 11–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tahir, M. Tahir and N. A. S. Amin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 419, 875–885 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Li, J. Fan, S. A. Carabineiro and K. Lv, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 419, 129484 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Z. Sun, H. Wang and Z. Wu, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 28, 126–136 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Gu, R.-T. Guo, Y.-F. Miao, Y.-Z. Liu, G.-L. Wu, C.-P. Duan and W.-G. Pan, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 10102–10112 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, R. Guo, Y. Miao, Y. Liu, G. Wu, C. Duan and W. Pan, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 10102–10112 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, A. Wang, J. Wang, R. Wang, S. Zhong, Y. Zhao, L. Wu, J. Chen and S. Bai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17444–17456 RSC .
Q. Liu, Q. Chen, T. Li, Q. Ren, S. Zhong, Y. Zhao and S. Bai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27007–27015 RSC .
J. You, M. Xiao, Z. Wang and L. Wang, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 101817 Search PubMed .
K. He, E. Campbell, Z. Huang, R. Shen, Q. Li, S. Zhang, Y. L. Zhong, P. Zhang and X. Li, Small Struct., 2022, 3, 2200104 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hong, R. Guo, Y. Yuan, X. Ji, Z. Li, Z. Lin and W. Pan, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 18, 100521 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Q. Tang and Z. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 8425–8434 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Wu, X. Yuan, G. Zeng, J. Zhou, X. Wang and J. W. Chew, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704561 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hou, G. Shao and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13722–13745 RSC .
P. Kumar, D. Laishram, R. K. Sharma, A. Vinu, J. Hu and M. G. Kibria, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 9012–9092 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, Z. Sun, S. Deng, H. Wang and Z. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 564, 406–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Yu, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Xie, Small, 2016, 12, 6640–6696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen and X. Bai, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 142 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 858–861 RSC .
J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704649 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, M. Ma, Q. Zhang, F. Dong and Y. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 235, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, C. Ning, H. Wang, G. Liu, L. Zheng and Y. F. Song, Small, 2022, 18, 2203787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, X. Liu, W. Peng, Y. Zhao, Z. Liu, M. Peng, Y.-R. Lu, T.-S. Chan, X. Xu and Y. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 3044–3051 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the bulk thermal copolymerization route utilizing nitrogen-rich precursors to synthesise g-C3N4. (b) Triazine and (c) tri-s-triazine (heptazine) structures of g-C3N4.	 

2H+ + 2e− → H2(g)	−0.42
2H2O(l) + 4h+ → O2(g) + 4H+	+0.81
CO2(g) + e− → CO2˙−	−1.9
CO2(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH	−0.61
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	−0.53
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O	−0.48
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → C + 2H2O	−0.02
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O	−0.38
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	−0.24
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 + 4H2O	−0.33
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O	−0.27
3CO2(g) + 18H+ + 18e− → C3H7OH + 5H2O	−0.32

 	Fig. 2  The band structure of g-C3N4 and the overpotentials required for various C1 products in the CRR.	 

 	Fig. 3  Possible modes of CO2 adsorption on the catalyst. (a) Oxygen coordination, (b) carbon coordination and (c) mixed coordination modes of CO2 adsorption on the catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 4  Possible pathways of photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CH4 on the surface of photocatalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  Scheme of (a) CO2 photoreduction to CH4 and CO on photocatalysts with the traditional active site and (b) dual active sites. Adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright (2022) Elsevier.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of the cocatalysts in terms of loading method on CN, combination mode with CN, CH4 selectivity, stability and unique properties.	 

 	Fig. 7  LSPR-related mechanisms over hybrid materials composed of plasmonic NPs and CN: (a) local temperature increase causes the enhancement of exciton formation on CN, (b) optical near-field enhancement promotes the transfer of photons to CN, thus increasing exciton formation, (c) hot-electrons and holes are transferred to CN. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of five basic configurations of cocatalyst/CN composite: (a) CN-supported single reduction cocatalyst system, (b) CN-dual (double reduction cocatalysts) cocatalyst system, (c) CN-dual (reduction and oxidation) cocatalyst system, (d) heterojunction supported single reduction cocatalyst system, (e) plasmonic metal–CN–cocatalyst system.	 

 	Fig. 9  Relationship between cocatalyst loading and photocatalytic activity of the cocatalyst/semiconductor system. Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.96	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Calculated absorption spectra; (b) DOS; (c) projected DOS; electronic localization function (ELF) and charge density difference results for (d and e) Au/CN and (f and g) Cu/CN. Blue, grey, gold and green spheres refer to C, N, Au and Cu atoms, respectively. Electron depletion is given in yellow and accumulation is given in blue. The isosurfaces of e and g are both set to 0.006 eV A−3. Positive values of q depict electron depletion. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Calculated free-energy diagram for CO2 reduction to CH4 on Cu and Ru sites of PCN-RuCu. Adapted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright (2022) Wiley. Free-energy diagram of the Cu site with CO adsorbed on the Ru site of PCN-RuCu is also calculated. (b) Reaction pathways for CO2 reduction to COOH, CH3OH, and CH4 on the Pt/g-C3N4 catalyst. Under standard conditions (pH 0, p(H2) = 1 bar, U = 0 V vs. SHE), the total energies of H+(aq) + e− and 1/2H2(g) are equal. The reference energy (the total free energy of the catalyst, isolated CO2, and four H2) is set to zero. The important intermediates and products are shown as well. The substrate is displayed partly in the stick model. Colour code: Pd, pine green; C, gray; O, red; H, white. Adapted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (c) Calculated reaction pathways using the CI-NEB method and (d) calculated AIMD result for CH3OH@Cu/CN. Blue, grey, green, red and pink spheres depict C, N, Cu, O and H atoms, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The evolution rates of CO and CH4 on CN, CN-A, CN-PA12, CN-PA11, CN-PA21, and CN-P in CRR. (b) Schematic of the model to explain the formation of the shadow under the Pd–Ag bimetals. Adapted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright (2020) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  High-resolution XPS spectra of (a) Pt 4f; (b) N 1s; (c) C 1s and O 1s; and (d) Cl 2p. Adapted with permission from ref. 4. Copyright (2021) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a–d) TEM and HRTEM images of C3N4–PtCu CNCs and C3N4–PtCu NCs. (e) Evolution rates of H2, CO, and CH4 over C3N4, C3N4–PtCu NCs and C3N4–PtCu CNCs samples in the CRR. (f–i) Most stable configurations of CO2 adsorbed on Pt(100), PtCu(100), Pt(730) and PtCu(730) facets together with the adsorption energies (blue ball for the Pt atom; pink, gray and red ones for Cu, C and O atoms, respectively). Adapted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a–d) TEM images, (a1–d1) size distribution histograms of 1-Au/CN, 3-Au/CN, 5-Au/CN, and 10-Au/CN. Adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Synthesis of single-atom Ni(II) sites supported on boric acid-modified carbon nitride nanosheets; (b) FTIR spectra of CN, 5OB-CN, and 0.7Ni-5OB-CN, respectively; (d) scheme of the possible mechanism of the hydrogen-assisted CRR process over Ni-OB-CN photocatalyst under illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. (c) Scheme for constructing high-loading single atom Pd1/PCN with chemical scissors. Pd–Pd bonds are selectively broken by Fe3+, and Pd–PCN bonds remain intact because the interaction between Pd and PCN is stronger. Fe3+ is reduced to Fe2+ during this process. Adapted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright (2019) Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a and b) AC-HAADF-STEM images of Pt@Def-CN. (c) EDS mapping of Pt@Def-CN. (d) High-resolution Pt 4f XPS spectra of Pt@Def-CN and PtNPS@Def-CN. (e) CO2 reduction products and selectivity for CH4 on P-CN, Def-CN, Pt@Def-CN and PtNPs@Def-CN. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright (2022) Wiley.132	 

 	Fig. 18  Summary of several excellent CN modification methods for improving the CRR efficiency on cocatalyst/CN.	 

 	Fig. 19  Models of the photocatalyst samples (a) PCN, (b) o-PCN, (c) Pt/PCN, and (d) Pt/o-PCN. TEM images of (e) PCN, (f) o-PCN, (g) Pt/PCN, and (h) Pt/o-PCN. Contact angle measurement of water on (i) PCN, (j) o-PCN, (k) Pt/PCN and (l) Pt/o-PCN. (m) Scheme and mechanism of the three-phase photocatalyst Pt/o-PCN. (n) The generation rate and selectivity of carbon derivatives in the CRR. Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright (2019) Wiley.	 

g-C3N4	Pt NPs	Polyol approach	15 W daylight bulb	1.30	—	H2O vapor	3 cycles (30 h)	
31

g-C3N4	Pt NPs	Photoreduction deposition	420 nm LED light (125 °C)	14.8	100.0	H2O	12 h	
4

Defective polymeric carbon nitride	Pt atoms	Calcination under Ar atmosphere	300 W Xe	6.3	99.0	H2O	6 cycles (12 h)	
132

Au/Sr–g-C3N4	Pt NPs	Photodeposition	300 W Xe (λ ≥ (420 nm)	48.55	72.4	H2O	4 cycles (8 h)	
92

3D g-C3N4	Pt NPs	Sonochemical synthesis	300 W Xe (λ ≥ (420 nm)	2.7	56.0	H2O	4 cycles (16 h)	
91

g-C3N4	Pt atoms, Fe3O4	Photodeposition, hydrothermal	300 W Xe (λ ≥ 420 nm)	0.53	50.4	H2O vapor	5 cycles (5 h)	
60

g-C3N4	Pt NPs	Photodeposition	8 W Hg (λ = 254 nm)	3.12	76.0	H2O	—	
150

p-C3N4	3.85	82.0	—
Hydrophobic g-C3N4	Pt NPs	Photodeposition	300 W Xe (λ ≥ 400 nm)	1.36	65.5	H2O	3 cycles (9 h)	
55

g-C3N4/rGO	Pd NPs	One-pot thermal reduction strategy	300 W Xe	6.4	—	H2O vapor	2 cycles (6 h)	
113

g-C3N4	Pd NPs, Pd atoms	Calcination under Ar atmosphere	250 mW Xe (full spectrum)	20.3	97.8	H2O	4 cycles (24 h)	
35

g-C3N4	Pd (tetrahedron)	Chemical reduction	300 W Xe	0.61	44.6	H2O	—	
104

Pd (cube)	0.58	52.13	—
g-C3N4	Au NPs	Chemical reduction	Xe (λ ≥ (420 nm)	3.1	19.1	H2O	—	
32

g-C3N4	Au NPs	Constant temperature bath-reduction	8 W Hg	4.81	38.0	H2O	4 cycles (2 h)	
122

Amine-functionalized g-C3N4	Au NPs	Impregnated	300 W Xe	1.3	16.8	H2O	4 cycles (8 h)	
151

Amine-functionalized g-C3N4	Au atom	Calcination (in air)	300 W Xe	2.4	30.7	H2O	—	
110


 	Fig. 20  Possible CO2 photoreduction mechanisms on Pt/CN with appropriate heat input. Adapted with permission from ref. 4. Copyright (2021) Elsevier.4	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) TEM image of Pd–g-C3N4/RGOA and (b) schematic illustration of proposed photocatalytic hydrogenation of CO2 to CH4 on Pd–g-C3N4/RGOA. Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

S-Doped g-C3N4	Cu NPs	Wet-impregnation	500 W Xe	0.58	49.0	H2O vapor	4 cycles	
112

g-C3N4 nanorods	Cu NPs	Sonicated assisted wet-impregnation	Solar simulator	109.0	83.1	H2O vapor	—	
152

Boric acid modified g-C3N4	Ni atoms	Facile ion-exchange	300 W Xe	8.7	57.6	H2O	5 cycles (30 h)	
131

S-Doped g-C3N4	Ni atoms	Calcination	300 W Xe (λ ≥ 420 nm)	3.8	56.3	H2O	4 cycles (20 h)	
137

g-C3N4	Bi nanospheres	One-step solvothermal	300 W Xe with a 3 AM 1.5 G filter	1.65	63.6	H2O	3 cycles (21 h)	
156

g-C3N4	Hollow-structured Bi	Solvothermal	300 W Xe (λ ≥ (420 nm)	0.13	23.7	H2O	3 cycles (24 h)	
154


 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of the proposed charge transfer mechanism of CO2 reduction operating in water vapor over the Cu-SCN surface. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic illustration of (a) the photoinduced electron–hole separation on 30(50)-Bi/g-C3N4. Adapted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Mechanism of CO2 photoreduction using Bi/g-C3N4 photocatalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright (2021) American Chemical Society.	 

g-C3N4	Pd–Cu alloy	Self-assembly	300 W Xe (780 > λ > 420 nm)	4.95	96.5	H2O	4 cycles (12 h)	
157

g-C3N4	Pt–Cu alloy	
In situ growth	300 W Xe	7.47	90.6	H2O vapor	4 cycles (12 h)	
29

g-C3N4	Ru–Cu dual atoms	Preassembly-coprecipitation-pyrolysis	300 W Xe (λ > 420 nm)	19.25	95.1	H2O	—	
100

g-C3N4	Pd–Ag bimetallic nanoparticles	Chemical reduction	Solar simulator (AM 1.5 illumination, 100 mW cm−2)	4.03	74.8	H2O vapor	20 h	
23

g-C3N4	Pd–Cu alloy	
In situ grown	300 W Xe (780 nm > λ > 420 nm)	1.2	100	H2O vapor	4 cycles (4 h)	
36

g-C3N4	Cu–Ni core–shell bimetal nanoparticles	Impregnation	300 W Xe	75.20	—	H2O vapor	4 cycles (20 h)	
107

Borate modified g-C3N4	Ni atoms	Ion exchange	300 W Xe	4.8	43.3	H2O	5 cycles (15 h)	
85

Co atoms

 	Fig. 24  Schematic illustration of the possible photocatalytic mechanism of the PCN-RuCu sample for the photocatalytic CRR under light illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2022) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic of (a) the electron capture capacity and the number of isolated Cu sites of ordered PdCu cocatalyst related to the Pd/Cu molar ratio and annealing temperature, (b) the photocatalytic mechanism of CO2 reduction to CH4 with C3N4–Pd1Cu2-375. (c) H2, CO, CH4 evolution rates and CH4 production selectivities with C3N4-based samples under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright (2018) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

g-C3N4	MoO2	Self-assembly	300 W Xe	4.0	52.8	H2O vapor	3 cycles (9 h)	
94

g-C3N4	BiO2−x	Hydrothermal	300 W Xe with a 3 AM 1.5 G filter	1.028	40.5	H2O	3 cycles (21 h)	
97

Proton-rich g-C3N4	Oxygen-defective Ti3AlC2	Ultrasonic treatment	35 W high-intensity discharge (HID) lamp	786.0	84.4	H2	3 cycles (24 h)	
95

TiO2/g-C3N4	Ti3C2 quantum dots	Electrostatic self-assembly	350 W Xe lamp	1.2	52.2	H2O	4 cycles (12 h)	
75

Mesoporous g-C3N4	Ti3C2Tx	Directly heating	300 W Xe	2.12	68.0	H2O	—	
37

g-C3N4	Ni2P, NiO	One-step gas–solid phosphating reaction	300 W Xe (λ ≥ 420 nm)	2.32	16.1	H2O	3 cycles (24 h)	
83


 	Fig. 26  Charge migration and separation in the S-scheme heterojunction of TiO2/C3N4/Ti3C2 quantum dots: (a) before contact, (b) after contact, and (c) after contact under irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2020) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the preparation of PCN/Ti3C2TA MXene nanocomposites by the ultrasonic approach. Adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright (2022) Elsevier.	 

Ag2S/g-C3N4	rGO	Hydrothermal	300 W Xe/8 W Hg (λ > 420 nm)	15.1	73.1	H2O	4 cycles(8 h)	
87

Protonated g-C3N4	rGO	Sonication-assisted electrostatic self-assembly	15 W energy-saving daylight bulb	1.39	—	H2O vapor	4 cycles	
138

R-CeO2/g-C3N4	rGO	Hydrothermal	300 W Xe (λ > 420 nm)	8.2	67.4	H2O	3 cycles (30 h)	
88

Au/g-C3N4	rGO	Hydrothermal	300 W Xe (λ > 420 nm)	6.0	77.7	H2O	5 cycles (25 h)	
90

g-C3N4	CQDs	—	300 W Xe (λ > 400 nm)	20.7	78.1	H2O vapor	4 cycles (8 h)	
38

g-C3N4	CND	Electrostatic self-assembly	500 W Xe (λ > 400 nm)	2.9	66.5	H2O vapor	3 cycles (30 h)	
139

O-Doped g-C3N4	CQDs	One-pot hydrothermal	300 W Xe (λ > 420 nm)	1.2	70.0	H2O vapor	5 cycles (25 h)	
93

LDH/g-C3N4	N-Doped C dot	One-pot hydrothermal	300 W Xe	25.69	99.0	H2O	8 h	
80


 	Fig. 28  Schematic illustration of the CO2 photocatalytic reduction mechanism on CQDs/OCN-x under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
