Fabrication and characterization of nanostructured titania films with integrated function from inorganic–organic hybrid materials   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS15321A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS15321A
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5131-5142Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFabrication and characterization of nanostructured titania films with integrated function from inorganic–organic hybrid materials†

        
          
            Monika 
            Rawolle
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Martin A. 
            Niedermeier
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gunar 
            Kaune‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Jan 
            Perlich§
a, 
      
        
          
            Philipp 
            Lellig
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mine 
            Memesa¶
b, 
      
        
          
            Ya-Jun 
            Cheng||
b, 
      
        
          
            Jochen S. 
            Gutmann**
bc and 

        
          
            Peter 
            Müller-Buschbaum
          
          
        
      *a
aTechnische Universität München, Physik-Department, Lehrstuhl für Funktionelle Materialien, James-Franck-Str. 1, 85748 Garching, Germany. E-mail: muellerb@ph.tum.de;  Fax: +49 (0)89 289 12473;   Tel: +49 (0)89 289 12451
bMax Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, 55128 Mainz, Germany
cCENIDE University Duisburg-Essen, Institute of Physical Chemistry, Universitätsstr. 5, 45117 Essen, Germany
Received 
      29th November 2011
    First published on 13th March 2012AbstractNanostructured titania films are of growing interest due to their application in future photovoltaic technologies. Therefore, a lot of effort has been put into the controlled fabrication and tailoring of titania nanostructures. The controlled sol–gel synthesis of titania, in particular in combination with block copolymer templates, is very promising because of its high control on the nanostructure, easy application and cheap processing possibilities. This tutorial review gives a short overview of the structural control of titania films gained by using templated sol–gel chemistry and shows how this approach is extended by the addition of further functionality to the films. Different expansions of the sol–gel templating are possible by the fabrication of gradient samples, by the addition of a homopolymer, by the combination with micro-fluidics and also by the application of novel precursors for low-temperature processing. Moreover, hierarchically structured titania films can be fabricated via the subsequent application of several sol–gel steps or via the inclusion of colloidal templates in a one-step process. Integrated function in the block copolymer used in the sol–gel synthesis allows for the fabrication of an integrated blocking layer or an integrated hole-conductor. Both approaches grant a one-step fabrication of two components of a working solar cell, which make them very promising towards a cheap solar cell production route. Looking to the complete solar cell, the top contact is also of great importance as it influences the function of the whole solar cell. Thus, the mechanisms acting in the top contact formation are also reviewed. For all these aspects, characterization techniques that allow for a structural investigation of nanostructures inside the active layers are important. Therefore, the characterization techniques that are used in real space as well as in reciprocal space are explained shortly as well.
Monika Rawolle
Monika Rawolle graduated in physics at the Universität Stuttgart. She worked as a visiting research student in the group of Prof. Susanne Stemmer at the Materials Research Laboratory at the University of California, Santa Barbara, funded through a scholarship by the International Centre for Materials Research. Her diploma thesis was written while working in the group of Prof. Bernhard Keimer at the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research. Afterwards, she joined the group of Prof. Peter Müller-Buschbaum to start her PhD project investigating inorganic–organic hybrid materials at the Chair of Functional Materials (Technische Universität München).
Jochen S. Gutmann
Jochen S. Gutmann studied chemistry at the “Technische Hochschule Darmstadt” and the University of Bristol. He received a PhD from the University of Mainz and worked as a PostDoc at the IPF Dresden and Cornell University. In 2002 he joined the MPI for Polymer Research and was appointed as a professor for Physical Chemistry at the University Mainz in 2005. Since 2010 he is a professor for Physical Chemistry at the University of Duisburg-Essen and the managing director of the “Deutsches Textilforschungszentrum Nord-West” in Krefeld. His research focuses on characterization of multicomponent polymer materials and chemistry at interfaces.
Peter Müller-Buschbaum
Graduation in Physics and PhD in Physics at Univerität Kiel were followed by a postdoctoral work at Max-Planck-Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz. In 1999 Peter Müller-Buschbaum moved to the Physics department of Technische Universität München and joined the chair of Professor Winfried Petry on a group leader position. In 2002 he finished his habilitation and became assistant professor. Since 2006 he is full university professor and heading the chair of Functional Materials in replacement of Professor Petry. He is member of TUM.Energy, heading TUM.solar and the section ‘Renewable Energies’ of the Munich School of Engineering (MSE).
1 Introduction to the tailoring of titania nanostructures
Tailoring of titania nanostructures in thin film geometry has attracted considerable attention because of its application potential in photovoltaics, photocatalysis and gas sensing, among others.1–4 In particular, several concepts in photovoltaics make wide use of titania nanostructures. For example, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) consist of titania in contact with a dye and a liquid electrolyte.5,6 The success in the field of DSSCs can be partly attributed to the advances in tailoring of semiconducting titania nanostructures.7 Since years, DSSCs have reliably reached efficiencies of about 10% and consequently DSSCs are foreseen in the European Union Photovoltaic Roadmap to significantly contribute by the year 2020.8 Furthermore, so-called quasi solid-state and all solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells (ssDSCCS), in which the liquid electrolyte is replaced by a quasi-solid like a gel polymer electrolyte9 or by a solid hole-conductor,10 are of high interest, as the problem of potential leakage of the corrosive liquid electrolyte can be overcome. In addition, the solid hole-conductor can even exist of a hole-conducting polymer, permitting to combine the advantages of the DSSCs and polymer technology.11 A third type of solar cell based on titania consists of the hybrid solar cell, in which the charge separation takes place at the interface of titania and the hole-conductor.12,13 Even all-inorganic solar cells which are based on nanostructured titania are possible.14 All these different types of solar cells require specially optimized titania morphologies.15,16 Therefore, new approaches in designing nanostructured titania films can be a promising way to further improve the solar cell efficiencies for such systems.
In more detail, for solar cell applications the morphology of the titania layer has to be controlled on several length scales. Small scale structures with a high surface-to-volume ratio are important, as the charge separation only takes place at the interface of titania and the dye in DSSCs and ssDSSCs, or at the interface of titania and the hole-conductor in hybrid solar cells.13,17,18 In addition, larger structures provide advantages in solar cell applications as they enhance the light scattering and, thereby, the effective light path in the active material, which leads to a higher light absorption.19
Given the widespread use of titania, a large variety of different preparation routes for titania nanostructures have been developed in the last decade. Possible preparation methods of tuning the morphology of titania range from chemical vapour deposition,20 electrospinning21 and growth driven by catalysis22via sputtering of titanium with subsequent anodization23,24 to sol–gel synthesis.25 Sol–gel based preparation routes are particularly promising in combination with amphiphilic block copolymer templates, acting as structure directing agents, as they constitute a cheap and easy one-pot-route to titania films with a defined nanomorphology.26–30 Controlling the weight ratio of the components of the sol–gel synthesis allows for a wide spread diversity of nanostructures, including lamellae, nanoparticles, nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes, nanovesicles and sponge-like nanoscale networks.31 Furthermore, an additional functionality can be introduced by choosing the diblock copolymer appropriately.
The synthesis of such novel titania nanostructures benefits heavily from structural characterization techniques which have a high spatial resolution. For example, the determination of the structures in the volume of thin films requires special characterization techniques, which will be reviewed briefly. One main focus of the review lies on the possibilities arising from properly tailored block copolymers as building blocks for a controlled sol–gel synthesis of titania nanostructures with an additional function. For example, the blocking layer, which is important for titania based solar cells of ssDSSC or hybrid type, can be included in the titania tailoring step. Alternatively, a hole-conducting component can also be integrated in the one-pot synthesis of the active material.
The application of block copolymer self-assembly to template inorganic materials for energy application was reviewed recently, highlighted through examples of recent work of the Wiesner group and collaborators.32 Thus, rather than attempting a broad overview of the tailoring of titania nanostructures in general, recent examples of the Müller-Buschbaum and Gutmann groups and collaborators are used to illustrate the advances in combining the sol–gel based synthesis of nanostructures with the integration of additional function and advanced structural characterization.
This review is structured as follows: First, a short introduction to characterization techniques in real space as well as in reciprocal space is given. Then, the possibilities to create titania nanostructures by the combination of sol–gel chemistry and block copolymer templates are reviewed, with a focus on improvement of the basic idea in the sense of controlled nanostructure fabrication as well as in the sense of hierarchical structures. The additional improvement of the structuring approach by integrating further functions in the structure directing block copolymer is discussed with respect to integrated blocking layer fabrication and with respect to integrated hole-conducting materials. As a further aspect of the solar cell device, the growth of the metal electrode on top of the hole-conducting material is discussed subsequently. A short conclusion with an outlook on future perspectives completes this tutorial review.
2 Advanced techniques for characterization of nanostructured thin films
The characterization of tailored titania nanostructures requires advanced characterization techniques to probe the fabricated structures on the different length scales. Along with real space techniques such as scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM), surface scattering techniques are successfully applied. Both types of techniques, operating in real and reciprocal space, will be introduced briefly in the following two subsections.
2.1 Real space characterization techniques

2.1.1 SEM. 
With scanning electron microscopy (SEM) conducting structures can be resolved easily down to sizes of a few nanometres with an element specific contrast. Electrons are accelerated towards the sample surface and the electron density of the sample is detected with backscattered and secondary electrons, which are emitted from the sample surface. The thermionic electron source in conventional SEM is replaced by a field-emission source in FE-SEM, which allows for a small electron beam diameter with high current densities. Some depth information allows for a three-dimensional structure resolution, but without quantitative information on the topography of the sample. Furthermore, it is not possible to measure isolating materials with SEM directly, but only after they have been coated with a thin metal layer.


2.1.2 AFM. 
To gain topographic knowledge of the structure surface, atomic force microscopy (AFM) has been successfully applied. A cantilever is deflected by forces between a cantilever tip and the film surface, which can for example consist of the van der Waals force. The deflection of the cantilever tip is probed via the reflection of a laser beam. A typical advantage of this technique is the possibility to probe conducting and isolating materials equally well. However, structure sizes and distances cannot be deduced directly because of tip convolution.33

2.2 Reciprocal space characterization techniques
The advantage of scattering experiments lies in the possibility to probe a large volume of the film as compared to small areas on the surface of the film as probed with SEM or AFM.34 As a consequence, the statistical relevance of scattering experiments is significantly higher. Moreover, structures located inside the film can be detected which cannot be seen when probing the sample surface.
X-Rays and neutrons can be used for the scattering experiments. For X-rays, the scattering contrast depends on the electron densities of the investigated materials, whereas neutrons interact with the nuclei. Furthermore, for neutrons the contrast can be tuned by selective deuteration of one component. The scattering of neutrons by nuclei is varying strongly with the used material, with a very high contrast between protons and deuterons. By choosing a substrate like silicon, which is transparent for neutrons, even the interface between the substrate and the films can be investigated with tunable depth information by varied incident angle.35

2.2.1 Reflectometry. 
Reflectometry measurements reveal the material composition in vertical arrangement with respect to the sample surface. The incoming beam of X-rays or neutrons impinges on the sample under a shallow angle. Reflectometry is measured in the θ/2θ configuration, where the angle θ between the incoming beam and the sample is changed in a coupled way with the exit angle of the final beam to the detector. Typically, angles up to about 2θ = 6° are used for reflectometry measurements. Reflectometry data are commonly fitted by the Parratt algorithm yielding the film thickness as well as the scattering length density (SLD) profile of the film, which can be converted to a vertical composition profile.36


2.2.2 GISAS. 
With grazing incidence small-angle scattering (GISAS), lateral and vertical structures can be probed by the detection of the diffuse scattering from the film. For GISAS measurements the incoming beam of X-rays or neutrons also impinges on the sample under a shallow angle. However, a fixed incident angle (typically below 1°) is used and the diffuse scattering is detected on an area detector where the directly reflected signal is shielded by a beam stop. Depending on the used setup, structure sizes in the range of 1 nm up to several μm are resolved with a good statistical relevance. The distance between sample and detector is typically in the range of 2 m to 4 m. With novel synchrotron sources the structure evolution can be probed in situ with very good time resolution. The application of in situ GISAXS measurements reveals for example the self-assembly time of the block copolymers.37 With a micro-focused beam, changes of the structural length over the sample can be probed with high position sensitivity.38,39
GISAS data can be modelled by a variety of approaches. The effective interface approximation contains correlations of lateral size distributions.40 For more detailed modelling, the distorted wave born approximation (DWBA) has to be applied, which takes into account single scattering processes in combination with and without reflections in the sample. This modelling can be done with the simulation program IsGISAXS, for example, which comprises structure sizes, shapes, distances as well as size and distance distributions.41


2.2.3 GIWAS. 
Grazing incidence wide-angle scattering (GIWAS), which is sometimes also called GID for grazing incidence diffraction, is used to investigate the molecular structure of thin films. The basic setup of GIWAS measurements is very similar to the setup for GISAS measurements but with a much shorter sample-to-detector distance in the range of several centimetres (typically around 10 cm). With this shorter distance, the scattered signal is detected for larger angles on the area detector and the molecular arrangement with typical crystal lattice constants of 0.25 nm to 5 nm is resolved. Furthermore, information on the lattice type, crystallinity and crystallite size can be extracted from the GIWAS data. For larger molecules and polymers the structure is quite often arranged relative to the substrate. This relative arrangement is visible in the GIWAS signal, which is a great advantage over lab-scale XRD measurements.42,43 With high-intensity X-ray beams from synchrotron sources, the crystallization can even be probed in real time with GIWAXS measurements.37

3 Sol–gel based tuning of titania nanostructures
Nanostructured titania can be obtained from block-copolymer templating in combination with sol–gel chemistry.26,27,44 There is no limitation to just one amphiphilic block copolymer, as long as one block consists for example of poly(ethylene oxide) [PEO].28,29,45 The reason for the PEO block is explained in the following subsection. The synthesis of new amphiphilic block copolymers allows for the integration of new functionality. As other recent reviews focus on the basics of tailoring of titania nanostructures by sol–gel chemistry in combination with templating block copolymers,46 the emphasis in the present review is on the extension of this approach towards the implementation of additional function as detailed after a brief introduction to the structuring technique.
3.1 Sol–gel synthesis combined with structure directing block-copolymer templating
Block copolymers consisting of two or more distinct polymer blocks that are covalently bound to each other exhibit micro-phase separation on the molecular scale (5–100 nm) when the blocks are thermodynamically incompatible, as in the case of an amphiphilic block copolymer.47 This property allows for the tuning of structure sizes on the nanometre scale.
In the general approach of applying block copolymer self-assembly as a template to structure inorganic material such as titania, the amphiphilic block copolymer is dissolved in good solvents for both blocks. With the addition of a titania precursor and a selective solvent, a microphase separation sets in, where titania coordinates to the hydrophilic PEO part of the block copolymer via hydrogen bonds,26,48,49 leading to nanostructured titania. The resulting titania sol is typically stirred for a selected time before further usage.
A promising nanostructure for photovoltaic applications consists of a titania network with a characteristic length of the order of 30 nm.50,51Fig. 1 shows the SEM image of such a titania network where the amphiphilic block copolymer used in the sol–gel synthesis was poly(styrene-block-ethylene oxide) [denoted as P(S-b-EO)].52,53 This diblock copolymer is dissolved in 1,4-dioxane as good solvent for both polymer blocks. Afterwards, the solution is mixed with titanium isopropoxide [TTIP] as titania precursor and hydrochloric acid as selective solvent. The titania sol is stirred for 60 min and then transferred to a substrate, which is done by spin-coating in the present example, but can also be achieved by dip-coating or solution casting. Subsequently, the structure directing block copolymer, in the case of P(S-b-EO), is combusted by calcination at elevated temperatures, typically in the range of 400 °C to 450 °C. In this high temperature step the amorphous titania as derived from TTIP is transferred to the crystalline anatase polymorph of titania. More focus on this aspect is given in the subsection about crystallinity. In the original publication,53 Perlich et al. show not only the importance of the obtained sponge-like nanostructures, but also how they can be analysed with AFM, SEM and GISAXS, where the SEM graph is shown exemplary in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  SEM graph of a sponge-like titania nanostructure, as obtained by combination of sol–gel chemistry with a structure directing P(S-b-EO) block copolymer template. The inset shows the corresponding FFT pattern. Originally published in ref. 53. 
3.2 Gradient samples
Many process parameters affect the resulting titania nanostructure. The combinatorial approach to investigate several process parameters at once by the preparation of gradient samples allows for the optimization of the structuring process. As one example for a gradient sample, titania nanostructures are prepared on a substrate consisting of the transparent conducting oxide (TCO) electrode with varying thickness. This approach allows determining the influence of the substrate.54 Titania is often used in combination with TCOs for applications like photovoltaics.

Fig. 2 shows a plot of the typical structure sizes, as determined by the analysis of GISAXS measurements, taken with a step size of 50 μm across the FTO gradient. The structural sizes are shown with respect to the FTO gradient underneath the titania film. The titania film is spin-coated from a sol with P(S-b-EO) as a structure directing agent, in combination with TTIP and HCl as in the previous example.53 Here, the titania–polymer nanocomposite film is investigated before calcination. As can be seen in Fig. 2, structures on top of fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) tend to be larger by a factor of around two than structures on the bare support glass. The changing structure sizes are a result of the different flow fields during spin-coating on top of substrates with different interface potentials. This effect has to be taken into account when comparing structures on top of bare silicon or glass substrates with the actual structures in a photovoltaic device where the substrate consists of a TCO.
 Fig. 2  Characteristic length ξ in the film, as detected with GISAXS, as a function of the lateral position y on the FTO gradient. The solid line illustrates the position on top of the FTO gradient with the relative change of the FTO signal IFTO/I0. This relative change resembles the FTO layer thickness. The solid symbols depict ξ for structures in the FTO film, open symbols for structures in the titania–polymer nanocomposite film. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. 
3.3 Selective tuning: Addition of homopolymers
One further improvement of the structuring of titania by the sol–gel process in combination with templating block copolymers arises from the selective tuning of nanostructure sizes by the addition of a homopolymer. The applied homopolymer is miscible with one of the two blocks used in the block copolymer templating, preferably the majority component, to allow for a controlled tuning. As an example, Fig. 3 shows SEM images of a series of increasing polystyrene [PS] concentration in a sol–gel with P(S-b-EO) after calcination of the titania films.55 The resulting titania morphology can be tuned by a change in the composition ratio of P(S-b-EO), TTIP and HCl.31 Here, the selected morphology consists of nanowires and nanowire aggregates. Small amounts of homopolymer PS added to the sol–gel based on P(S-b-EO), where PS constitutes the majority component of the block copolymer, change the structure sizes of the observed nanowires and clusters of nanowires: The aggregates decrease in size, the nanowires tend to get thinner. This trend could also be verified by GISAXS measurements (data shown in ref. 55). Larger amounts of added homopolymers allow for a change in morphology. The variation of morphology sets in with a weight ratio of 0.1 to 0.3 of added PS. The class of morphology can still be described as nanowires, but the nanostructures are a lot more pronounced and regular.
 Fig. 3  SEM images of the titania nanostructures prepared from a sol–gel with P(S-b-EO) and a weight fraction of added PS homopolymer in the solution 0 (a), 0.01 (b), 0.03 (c), 0.05 (d), 0.1 (e), 0.3 (f) and 0.5 (g). Images are taken after calcination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
3.4 Combination with micro-fluidics
A higher control over the structure formation is granted by combining block copolymer templated sol–gel synthesis with micro-fluidics. In this approach, the components of the sol–gel synthesis and the structure directing block copolymer solution are not mixed in one pot and left to stir for 60 minutes, as is typically done in the conventional approach, but the components are mixed in a y-shaped micro-fluidic channel with well-defined flow speed.56 In detail, the amphiphilic diblock copolymer solution is injected into one inlet of the y-shaped channel, and the sol–gel components TTIP and HCl, dissolved in the same solvent, are injected into the other inlet of the y-shaped channel. Micro-fluidics allow the control over the fast reaction kinetics that take place in the micro-phase separation and sol–gel process.57 Thereby, the reaction kinetics can be controlled to ensure a structure formation with less defects. SEM as well as GISAXS reveal a porous titania nanostructure with a disordered hexagonal arrangement of mesopores with a size of 25 nm instead of a mixture of mesopore sizes of 21 and 36 nm in the case of a titania film prepared in the conventional way. The porosity of up to 79% of the titania films after calcination is calculated from the SLD, which is determined by GISAXS and XRR measurements (shown in ref. 56). Fig. 4 shows how the calculated porosity and the light scattering, as measured with UV/Vis spectroscopy, is tuned by changing the flow rate applied during sol–gel templating in the micro-fluidic channel. The data for the film derived from a sol–gel mixed in the conventional way is also included in the figure. The better order in the structures obtained from micro-fluidics results in a better light scattering performance.
 Fig. 4  Porosity of titania films prepared by mixing of the sol–gel components in a y-shaped microfluidic channel with different flow rates and without usage of the microfluidic channel, denoted as “normal sol–gel”(left) and light scattering for the same titania films (right). Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Adapted with permission from ref. 56. 
3.5 Crystalline titania at low temperatures
As noted above, the crystallinity of the titania nanostructures in the anatase or rutile polymorph is crucial for the conductivity and photoactivity of the inorganic material.58–60 In the usual sol–gel approach combined with structure direction by block copolymer templating, the nanocomposite film contains amorphous titania after deposition. This amorphous titania is transferred to the crystalline phase of anatase by a calcination step with temperatures typically in the range of 400 to 450 °C, depending on the used polymer template.50,61,62 For the build-up of solar cells, the active material is deposited on top of a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) electrode, which in turn is grown on a substrate like glass. In order to prepare flexible solar cells, the glass substrate has to be replaced by an organic flexible substrate like a poly(ethylene terephthalate) [PET] foil. These foils can be coated with a TCO material, but cannot withstand high temperatures. Therefore, the preparation of crystalline mesoporous titania at low temperatures is a crucial aspect63 which has already been picked up in a few low temperature synthesis routes.64–67 One alternative approach makes use of a new precursor material which allows for obtaining crystalline titania already at low temperatures with a control of the fabricated nanostructures. An ethylene glycol modified titanate (EGMT), which was synthesized with a modified procedure following the literature,68,69 can be used for that purpose. The crystal polymorph of titania obtained from EGMT is tunable from anatase to rutile by a change of the pH value in aqueous solution.70 The precursor EGMT has been applied for the tailoring of titania structures in aqueous solutions with the miniemulsion technique.68,71 From the combination with a polymer templated sol–gel process, based on the diblock copolymer P(S-b-EO), alternative titania nanostructures arise. As an example, a crystalline and well-defined network structure of titania in the rutile phase is tailored already at 90 °C.
4 Hierarchically structured titania films
Different levels of functionality are important to further improve titania nanostructures, for example to optimize the spectral response,72 or as a scattering layer.73,74 Therefore, several approaches are pursued, promising improvements of the block copolymer based templating of titania nanostructures in combination with sol–gel chemistry not only on one structural level, but on different length scales.75
4.1 Step-by-step approach
As noted above, with block copolymer templated sol–gel chemistry different titania morphologies can be tuned by adjustment of the weight ratios of block copolymer, selective solvent and titania precursor.31 This can be expanded to a step-by-step adding-up of different morphologies in a layer-by-layer approach. The step-by-step synthesis can be done either by subsequent spin-coating of different sol–gel mixtures and a final calcination step or by subsequent spin-coating with intermediate calcination steps.76–78 This way, for example granular nanostructures with different size distributions76 or network structures with different pore sizes and degrees of porosity77 can be combined to form hierarchical structures. Even different types of nanostructures, like sponge and granular structures, can be mingled to increase the functionality in a very controlled way.78Fig. 5 shows a sketch of how granules of different sizes, as tuned by different compositions of the sol–gel prepared from P(S-b-EO) with TTIP and HCl can be combined with repeated calcination. The figure also shows SEM images of the final nanostructure at different magnifications. Repeated SEM measurements at the different steps as well as GISAXS measurements (shown in ref. 76) reveal that the nanostructure implemented in one step remains throughout the further steps, guaranteeing the tunability of the hierarchical structures.
 Fig. 5  Sketch of the layer-by-layer approach by combination of granules with different sizes, as tuned by different sol–gel compositions, with the respective calcination steps (top). SEM images with different magnifications of the final titania film reveal the hierarchical structure (bottom). The scale bar in each SEM image corresponds to 1 μm. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. 
4.2 Addition of colloidal templates
While the layer-by-layer approach is very successful for mixing different morphologies or differently sized objects, network structures with different hole diameters cannot be obtained via such a route. To realize such structures, a polymer-colloidal templating approach was introduced.79 Applied during the sol–gel synthesis, titania nanostructures are created that coexist with larger structures for enhanced light scattering in a one-step process.80Fig. 6 shows an SEM image of a calcined titania structure that has been obtained by the addition of poly(methyl methacrylate) [PMMA] microspheres to a sol–gel solution with poly dimethyl siloxane-block-methyl methacrylate (poly ethylene oxide) [PDMS-b-MA(PEO)] as structure directing agent.79 The PMMA microspheres are grafted with poly(dimethylsiloxane) [PDMS] and are (1.00 ± 0.01) μm in diameter. The other sol–gel components, TTIP and HCl, are added to the block copolymer templated sol–gel in the common way.
 Fig. 6  SEM image of a mesoporous titania film with additional macropores prepared by the addition of PDMS-grafted PMMA microspheres in the titania sol templated with the diblock copolymer PDMS-b-MA(PEO). Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
The structure directing block copolymer template gives rise to a mesoporous titania nanostructure with pore sizes of the order of 35 nm and 200 nm. The 1 μm colloids, which are removed by an acetic acid treatment before calcination, give rise to micropores with a pore size of the order of 1 μm and a perfect circular shape. The extension of meso- and macropores throughout the volume of the titania films is proven with GISAXS measurements (data shown in ref. 79). The larger pores result in a noticeable decrease in light reflection as measured with UV/Vis spectroscopy,79 thereby enabling more light to be absorbed. The mesopores ensure the infiltration paths for the hole-conducting material and grant the large interface area, necessary for effective charge separation.
5 Structured titania films with integrated blocking layer
In addition to the nanostructured titania layer, for photovoltaic applications in the case of the ssDSSC and the hybrid solar cells an electron-conducting but hole-blocking layer has to be present. This layer prevents charges from recombining at the bottom electrode.81 Conventionally, the blocking layer consists of a dense compact layer of titania, which is placed directly on the electrode, and the active material, consisting of nanostructured titania, is placed on top. Thus, typically at least two deposition steps are involved. In contrast, with the application of specifically chosen block copolymers, composite materials can be produced in one step. For example, carbon–titania composites can be prepared by the combination of poly(acrylonitrile-block-ethylene oxide) [P(AN-b-EO)] with a titania sol, where the PAN transfers to a carbon layer by calcination in an inert gas.82 In this section, the advances on titania nanostructures with integrated blocking layer derived from block copolymers containing a poly(dimethyl siloxane) [PDMS] block are discussed. The integrated blocking layer is created in a one-step process in combination with the active titania material by these PDMS-containing block copolymers. Firstly, the synthesis of such specifically tuned block copolymers containing a PDMS block is reviewed briefly. Secondly, the application of the PDMS containing block copolymers in sol–gel synthesis for photovoltaic applications is shown.
5.1 Structure directing block copolymer with further functionality as blocking layer
Instead of a PS block, which has no further function beyond the polymer assisted templating, a functional block is used. The hydrophobic part of the amphiphilic block copolymer consists of PDMS which converts to a silicon-oxy-carbide [SiOC] type ceramic by calcination in an inert gas. The titania nanostructures in the PDMS containing nanocomposite can be exposed by a plasma etching step before calcination. The crystallization of the titania encapsulated in the SiOC type ceramic takes place during the heat treatment that also converts the PDMS block to the ceramic. Before the presentation of examples for applications of the novel PDMS-containing diblock copolymer, in the following, the synthesis of three kinds of amphiphilic block copolymers of that kind is shortly reviewed, namely poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(dimethyl siloxane) methyl methacrylate [PEO-b-MA(PDMS)], poly(ethylene oxide) methyl methacrylate-block-poly(dimethyl siloxane)-block-poly(ethylene oxide) methyl methacrylate [(PEO)MA-b-PDMS-b-MA(PEO)] and poly(dimethyl siloxane)-block-methyl methacrylate poly(ethylene oxide) [PDMS-b-MA(PEO)].79,83,84

5.1.1 Synthesis of PEO-b-MA(PDMS). 
PEO-b-MA(PDMS) diblock copolymer is synthesized by atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) of functionalized PEO and poly(dimethyl siloxane) methyl methacrylate [MA(PDMS)]. Anionic polymerization of ethylene oxide is initiated by potassium isopropoxide in tetrahydrofuran [THF] to yield living poly(ethylene oxide). For the ATRP polymerization of the diblock copolymer, a PEO macro starter and an MA(PDMS) macro monomer are used. After purification, the diblock copolymer is obtained as a colorless, viscous liquid with 41% yield. More details are explained in ref. 83.


5.1.2 Synthesis of (PEO)MA-b-PDMS-b-MA(PEO). 
(PEO)MA-b-PDMS-b-MA(PEO) triblock copolymer is synthesized by ATRP of poly(ethylene oxide) methyl methacrylate [(PEO)MA] monomer after preparation of a difunctional Br-PDMS-Br macroinitiator.85 Subsequent polymerization of (PEO)MA yields the triblock copolymer as a clear viscous liquid with 95% yield. More details can be found in ref. 84.


5.1.3 Synthesis of PDMS-b-MA(PEO). 
Mono hydroxyl end functionalized PDMS is converted to monofunctional ATRP initiators as in the previous examples. Polymerization of (PEO)MA yields the diblock copolymer PDMS-b-MA(PEO) as a clear viscous liquid. More details are listed in ref. 79.

5.2 Functional stack: solar cells including PDMS-derived integrated blocking layers
The PDMS containing amphiphilic block copolymers can be used to template titania by combination with sol–gel chemistry. A functional stack based on the titania nanostructures with integrated blocking layer is investigated after each step of the preparation exemplary for the triblock (PEO)MA-PDMS-MA(PEO).86Fig. 7(a) shows the setup of the functional stack in the case of a ssDSSC. The substrate consists of glass coated with FTO as TCO. The nanocomposite film, consisting of the structure directing block copolymer with integrated function with a PDMS block, is transferred to the substrate via spin-coating. In detail, the amphiphilic triblock copolymer (PEO)MA-b-PDMS-b-MA(PEO) is used as a templating agent in the sol–gel synthesis of titania with TTIP and HCl. After spin-coating of the PDMS containing sol (step s1 in Fig. 7(a)), the titania at the surface is exposed via plasma etching (s2). Subsequently, the nanocomposite film is calcined in an inert gas (s3). During the calcination, the previously amorphous titania is transferred to the crystalline phase whereas the PDMS block of the block copolymer is transferred to an SiOC type ceramic. This nanostructure is filled with a monolayer of dye by storage in a dye solution for 12 hours (s4), with a subsequent infiltration of the hole-conducting component (s5). As shown in Fig. 7(a), poly(3-hexylthiophene) [P3HT] is selected as the solid hole-conductor. In such a device layout, the block copolymer derived SiOC-type ceramic–titania nanocomposite blocks holes that are conducted in P3HT from direct contact with the TCO and, thereby, prevents charge recombination at that electrode. An additional electron-blocking but hole-conducting layer consisting of poly(3,4-ethylene dioxy thiophene):poly(styrene sulphonate) [PEDOT:PSS] is coated on top of the hole-conductor (s7) before evaporation of the metal counter electrodes consisting of gold in the final step (s8). Fig. 7(b) shows the structure sizes as probed with GISAXS after each of the different steps of the solar cell assembly. The structure sizes as provided by the FTO substrate with ΛA = (36.0 ± 2.1) nm as well as the structure sizes in the titania with ΛB = (479 ± 12) nm stay constant throughout all the steps of the assembly, showing that structuring of titania in the beginning really leads to the nanostructures of the active material that are conserved in the resulting solar cell. Furthermore, the functionality of the block copolymer derived ceramic–titania nanocomposite as hole-blocking layer has been proven. The application of the block copolymer PEO-MA(PDMS) to prepare a hybrid blocking layer shows a strong improvement of the power conversion efficiency from 0.35% to 1.27% as compared to solar cells without blocking layers.83
 Fig. 7  Setup of a functional stack with all main steps involved in the preparation of a ssDSSC (a) and the most prominent structure sizes ΛA (top data row) and ΛB (bottom data row) in the films at each step as measured with GISAXS (b). Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Adapted with permission from ref. 86. 
6 Structured titania films with integrated hole-conducting component
Besides the titania nanostructures and the blocking layer in the build-up of the functional stack of a ssDSSC and hybrid solar cell, the integration of a hole-conducting solid is a crucial step.17,87,88 In particular, the infiltration of titania network structures with nanopores is challenging. There are different methods to infiltrate the hole-conductor into an existing network, which will be reviewed briefly. An alternative approach is to include the hole-conductor as conducting block of the structure directing block copolymer already in the sol–gel synthesis, omitting the problem of subsequent infiltration.
6.1 Infiltration of a hole-conducting polymer into an existing titania network
The possibilities to infiltrate a solid hole-conductor into an existing titania network range from simple solution casting via doctor blading to spin-coating. The most promising and widely applied method for infiltration of small hole-conducting organic molecules is a combination of solution casting and waiting for several tens of seconds before spin-coating off the residue of the solvent together with a serious amount of polymer.89 As the hole-conducting polymers are typically still expensive, methods saving the polymer and not throwing it away to a large amount are of high interest. Further improvement of the infiltrated hole-conductor in the case of organic polymer hole-conductors are achieved by installing a doping profile which is obtained by a layer-by-layer approach.90

Fig. 8(a) and (b) show the cross-sectional SEM graphs of titania structures backfilled with the hole-conductor poly(N-vinylcarbazole) [PVK].91 The titania structures are prepared by the combination of a block copolymer template with the sol–gel process using TTIP and HCl with further hierarchical structuring by the inclusion of colloidal templates as described above.79 Some backfilling with the creation of an overlayer is concluded qualitatively in the case of spin-coating and more backfilling in the case of solution casting from the SEM graphs as is shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b). To investigate the percentage of backfilling in a quantitative way, differently filled titania networks have been measured with grazing incidence small-angle neutron scattering (GISANS) in the time-of-flight (TOF) mode. The TOF mode allows us to probe the thin film volume with a bunch of different wavelengths at a time, which make the SLD and thereby the backfilling and porosity quantitatively accessible. Fig. 8(c)–(e) show the dependencies of the critical angles αc = λ(SLD/π)0.5 of the measured materials on the neutron wavelength λ. From fits to the data, the densities of the materials are determined and the amount of backfilling with PVK is calculated to be only 45% of the titania network by simple spin-coating and to be 63% in the case of solution casting. The initial porosity of the titania network film is determined in an analogue way to be 85%.
 Fig. 8  SEM graphs of titania sponge structures backfilled with the hole-conductor PVK by spin-coating (a) and solution casting (b), respectively. (c) and (e) show the linear dependency of the critical angle αc of the empty titania film (c), the titania film backfilled with PVK by solution casting (d) and the titania film backfilled with PVK by spin-coating (e), as measured with GISANS in the TOF mode. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Adapted with permission from ref. 91. 
6.2 Structure directing block copolymer with further functionality as hole-conductor
To overcome the problems related to the backfilling of titania nanostructures, an integrated approach appears promising. This approach picks up the idea of integrating function in the diblock copolymer used in the sol–gel synthesis. Instead of adding the function of a blocking layer, as described in the previous section, a hole-conducting polymer is the target. Thus, a block copolymer with a hole-conducting block is used to tailor the titania nanostructure and simultaneously infiltrate it with a hole-conducting material. As it is possible to synthesize block copolymers containing a conducting component, a block copolymer where one block is replaced with PEO, is used in polymer assisted sol–gel templating. The corresponding synthesis and application of two types of block copolymers containing a PEO block are reviewed in the following. The two types of PEO containing block copolymers, namely poly(3-ethylene oxide thiophene) [P3EOT] and poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(triphenylamine) [PEO-b-PTPA], are used to create titania hybrid nanostructures.

6.2.1 Synthesis of P3EOT. 
P3EOT graft copolymer is synthesized by the Grignard reaction of PEO-functionalized bromothiophene. More details on the synthesis can be found in ref. 92.


6.2.2 Synthesis of PEO-b-PTPA. 
PEO-b-PTPA diblock copolymer is synthesized by RAFT polymerization of functionalized PEO-macrostarter and triphenylamine. More details are explained in ref. 93.


6.2.3 Application of P3EOT and PEO-b-PTPA. 
As is common in polymer templated sol–gel synthesis, the titania nanostructure can be adjusted by a change of sol–gel composition. By application of the copolymers containing a hole-conducting polymer, this yields the corresponding titania–polymer-composite structures in one step with the installation of a titania-/hole-conductor interface.
P3EOT is successfully introduced as a structure directing agent in combination with the precursor EGMT to create hybrid nanostructures. Crystallinity of both active parts, the titania and the P3EOT, is observed in GIWAXS measurements and thus, the interface between both is successfully installed.
PEO-b-PTPA is used as a structure directing agent in a sol–gel process with the titania precursors TTIP and EGMT, respectively. Whereas the nanostructuring works nicely, solar cells based on PEO-b-PTPA tailored active layers result still in very low power conversion efficiencies of 0.2% and 0.4%.93,94

7 Growth of metal films on top of conducting polymer films
Following the blocking layer, nanostructured titania and infiltrated hole-conductor, for applications in photovoltaics a metal electrode has to be grown on top of the hole-conducting polymer film. The growth of metal on polymer films is crucial for the efficiency in solar cell devices. GISAXS measurements allow the determination of the structure formation in situ during sputter deposition with a time resolution of down to several tens of milliseconds on the newest synchrotron radiation sources. The examples of gold [Au] and aluminium [Al] electrodes are reviewed with a focus on differing growth behavior.
In sputter deposition, Au grows in a four-step-process on top of a hole-conductor like PVK.95Fig. 9 shows the cluster size evolution after initial nucleation which is too small to be probed: clusters of Au grow laterally on top of the polymer film before coarsening sets in. Finally, only vertical growth takes place. These four different stages are characterized by distinct power laws, as can be determined by the evolution of cluster height, radius and distance resulting from the analysis of the GISAXS data.
 Fig. 9  Evolution of gold cluster height (h), radius (r) and distance (D) versus thickness of deposited Au layer on PVK. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Contrarily, after initial nucleation Al grows in a layer-by-layer growth process without any cluster formation on top of a conducting polymer film like P3HT.96 The reason for this completely different growth behavior is the strong tendency of Al to form chemical bonds with P3HT. In order to optimize the top layer of the solar cell, not only the band gap of the chosen top electrode but also the growth behavior has to be considered. Furthermore, the growth of a metal on top of a conducting polymer also changes the conductivity in the polymer layer. For very low sputtering rates a significant amount of the deposited material can migrate inside the polymer film, thereby, doping the topmost polymer layer and changing the electronic band structure.97 For both the growth of Au on PVK and the growth of Al on P3HT a metal enrichment layer in the polymer at the interface of polymer and metal is detected with XRR (data shown in ref. 95 and 96).
8 Conclusions
In summary, tailoring of titania nanostructures by the combination of sol–gel chemistry with block copolymers as structure directing agents can be extended beyond the classical routes. The structure of titania films is tuned very precisely and also hierarchically to match the needs of application in the different types of solar cells by the preparation of gradient samples, the addition of homopolymers, the combination with micro-fluidics and the use of novel precursors as well as by applying step-by-step processes and the usage of colloidal templates. Including further functionalities by the synthesis and application of new block copolymers, where one block integrates more function, allows for tuning of the structures of several layers constituting a solar cell device in one step. The inclusion of the blocking layer in the titania synthesis has been shown successfully. Especially the inclusion of the hole-conducting component in the structure directing block copolymer is an aspect which has a high potential. The still challenging problem of backfilling the whole titania nanostructure with the hole-conducting component could be solved with a guarantee of contact at the whole interface with titania. This is an aspect which will continue to be of great interest in future research, as the necessity for improvements is still large.
The ever progressing improvement of the characterization techniques allows for the control over the structures on all size scales and also on all time scales during the synthesis. New questions like the nucleation of metal atoms on top of conducting polymer films during the sputter deposition process will become accessible in the future. This will allow for the tuning of these aspects for the preparation of efficient solar cells as well.
Acknowledgements
The financial support of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft in the priority program SPP 1181 ‘Nanomat’ (MU1487/5 and GU771/2) is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 99 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Schattka, D. G. Shchukin, J. Jia, M. Antonietti and R. A. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 5103 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese, D. Gong, M. Paulose, K. G. Ong and C. A. Grimes, Sens. Actuators, B, 2003, 93, 338 CrossRef .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef .
International Energy Agency (IEA): Technology Roadmap—Solar photovoltaic energy, 2010.
J. Das, F. S. Freitas, I. R. Evans, A. F. Nogueira and D. Khushalani, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4425 RSC .
H. Tokuhisa and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 831 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and D. T. Schwartz, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 4749 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arango, L. R. Johnson, V. N. Bliznyuk, Z. Schlesinger, S. A. Carter and H.-H. Horhold, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1689 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, A. N. Kadnikova, Y. Liu, M. D. McGehee and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9486 CrossRef CAS .
R. O'Hayre, M. Nanu, J. Schoonman, A. Goossens, Q. Wang and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1566 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Eang, H. Kawauchi, T. Kashima and H. Arakawa, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1381 CrossRef .
E. J. W. Crossland, M. Nedelcu, C. Ducati, S. Ludwigs, M. A. Hillmyer, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2813 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Kroeze, N. Hirata, L. Schmidt-Mende, C. Orizu, S. D. Ogier, K. Carr, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1832 CrossRef CAS .
P. Docampo, S. Guldin, M. Stefik, P. Tiwana, M. C. Orilall, S. Hüttner, H. Sai, U. Wiesner, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1787 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhai, S. Tan, L. Wang, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2090 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kettunen, R. J. Silvennoinen, N. Houbenov, A. Nykänen, J. Ruokolainen, J. Sainio, V. Pore, M. Kemell, M. Ankerfors, T. Lindström, M. Ritala, R. H. A. Ras and O. Ikkala, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 510 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wessel, R. Ostermann, R. Dersch and B. M. Smarsly, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 362 CAS .
M. H. Kim, J. M. Baik, J. Zhang, C. Larson, Y. Li, G. D. Stucky, M. Moskovits and A. M. Wodtke, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10697 CAS .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2011 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bandara, K. Shankar, J. Basham, H. Wietasch, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, C. A. Grimes and M. Thelakkat, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2011, 53, 20601 CrossRef .
K. M. Coakley, Y. Liu, M. D. McGehee, K. L. Frindell and G. D. Stucky, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 301 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, D. Zhao, D. I. Margolese, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Nature, 1998, 396, 152 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, D. Zhao, D. I. Margolese, B. F. Chmelky and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2813 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Finnefrock, R. Ulrich, A. Du Chesne, C. Honeker, K. Schumacher, K. K. Unger, S. Gruner and U. Wiesner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1208 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. W. Simon, R. Ulrich, H. W. Spiess and U. Wiesner, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3464 CrossRef CAS .
N. Haberkorn, M. C. Lechmann, B. H. Sohn, K. Char, J. S. Gutmann and P. Theato, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1146 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Cheng and J. S. Gutmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4658 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Orilall and U. Wiesner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 520 RSC .
K. C. Grabar, K. R. Brown, C. D. Keating, S. J. Stranick, S.-L. Tang and M. J. Natan, Anal. Chem., 1997, 69, 471 CrossRef CAS .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376, 3 Search PubMed .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, L. Schulz, E. Metwalli, J.-F. Moulin and R. Cubitt, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7639 CrossRef .
L. G. Parratt, Phys. Rev., 1954, 95, 359 CrossRef .
B. Smarsly, D. Grosso, T. Brezesinski, N. Pinna, C. Boissière, M. Antonietti and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 2948 CrossRef CAS .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, S. V. Roth, M. Burghammer, A. Diethert, P. Panagiotou and C. Riekel, Europhys. Lett., 2003, 61, 639 CrossRef .
S. V. Roth, R. Döhrmann, M. Dommach, M. Kuhlmann, I. Kröger, R. Gehrke, H. Walter, C. Schroer, B. Lengeler and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2006, 77, 085106 CrossRef .

          P. Müller-Buschbaum, in Applications of Synchrotron Light to Scattering and Diffraction in Materials and Life Sciences, ed. T. A. Ezquerra, M. Garcia-Gutierrez, A. Nogales and M. Gomez, Springer, Berlin,  2009, vol. 776, p. 61 Search PubMed .
R. Lazzari, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2002, 35, 406 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perlich, J. Rubeck, S. Botta, R. Gehrke, S. V. Roth, M. A. Ruderer, S. M. Prams, M. Rawolle, Q. Zhong, V. Körstgens and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2010, 81, 105105 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sasaki, H. Masunaga, H. Tajiri, K. Inoue, H. Okuda, H. Noma, K. Honda, A. Takahara and M. Takata, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2007, 40, s642 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Crepaldi, G. J. A. A. de Soler-Illia, D. Grosso, F. Cagnol, F. Ribot and C. Sanchez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9770 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Cheng, P. Müller-Buschbaum and J. S. Gutmann, Small, 2007, 3, 1379 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Pan, X. S. Zhao and W. I. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 170, 363 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ikkala and G. ten Brinke, Science, 2002, 295, 2407 CrossRef CAS .
M. Templin, A. Franck, A. Du Chesne, H. Leist, Y. Zhang, R. Ulrich, V. Schädler and U. Wiesner, Science, 1997, 278, 1795 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gutierrez, A. Tercjak, I. Garcia, L. Peponi and I. Mondragon, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 155607 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, Y. Cheng, M. Lechmann, J. Li, J. Li, J. Wu, A. Grimsdale, K. Müllen, H.-J. Butt and J. S. Gutmann, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 1604 RSC .
M. Nedelcu, J. Lee, E. J. W. Crossland, S. C. Warren, M. C. Orilall, S. Guldin, S. Hüttner, C. Ducati, D. Eder, U. Wiesner, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 134 RSC .
G. Kaune, W. Wang, E. Metwalli, M. Ruderer, R. Roßner, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2008, 26, 73 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perlich, G. Kaune, M. Memesa, J. S. Gutmann and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2009, 367, 1783 CrossRef CAS .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Perlich, M. M. Abul Kashem, L. Schulz, S. V. Roth, Y.-J. Cheng and J. S. Gutmann, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2007, 1, 119 CrossRef .
J. Perlich, L. Schulz, M. M. Abul Kashem, Y.-J. Cheng, M. Memesa, J. S. Gutmann, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10299 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rawolle, M. A. Ruderer, S. M. Prams, Q. Zhong, D. Magerl, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth, P. Lellig, J. S. Gutmann and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Small, 2011, 7, 884 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, J. Jormes and C. S. S. R. Kumar, Small, 2008, 4, 698 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, K. Prasad, R. Sanjinès, P. E. Schmid and F. Lévy, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 2042 CrossRef CAS .
L. Forro, O. Chauvet, D. Emin, L. Zuppiroli, H. Berger and F. Lévy, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 633 CrossRef CAS .
V. Puddu, H. Choi, D. D. Dionysiou and G. L. Puma, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 94, 211 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, E. Stathatos and D. D. Dionysiou, Top. Catal., 2007, 44, 513 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guldin, S. Hüttner, P. Tiwana, M. C. Orilall, B. ülgüt, M. Stefik, P. Docampo, M. Kolle, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, S. A. T. Redfern, H. J. Snaith, U. Wiesner, D. Eder and U. Steiner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 225 CAS .
H. J. Snaith and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3187 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamaguchi, N. Tobe, D. Matsumoto and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4767 RSC .
S. Haseloh, S. Y. Choi, M. Mamak, N. Coombs, S. Petrov, N. Chopra and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1460 RSC .
H. Shibata, T. Ogura, T. Mukai, T. Ohkubo, H. Sakai and M. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16396 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nilsson, Y. Sakamoto and A. E. C. Palmqvist, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2781 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rossmanith, C. K. Weiss, J. Geserick, N. Hüsing, U. Hörmann, U. Kaiser and K. Landfester, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5768 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, T. Herricks and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Denkwitz, M. Makosch, J. Geserick, U. Hörmann, S. Selve, U. Kaiser, N. Hüsing and R. J. Behm, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 91, 470 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kubiak, T. Fröschl, N. Hüsing, U. Hörmann, U. Kaiser, R. Schiller, C. K. Weiss, K. Landfester and M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, Small, 2011, 7, 1690 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mihi, M. E. Calvo, J. A. Anta and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13 CAS .
F. Huang, D. Chen, X. L. Zhang, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1301 CrossRef CAS .
S. Colodrero, A. Mihi, L. Häggman, M. Ocana, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and H. Míguez, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 764 CrossRef CAS .
L. Malfatti, M. G. Bellino, P. Innocenzi and G. J. A.A. Soler-Illia, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2763 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perlich, M. Memesa, A. Diethert, E. Metwalli, W. Wang, S. V. Roth, A. Timmann, J. S. Gutmann and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2009, 3, 118 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perlich, M. Memesa, A. Diethert, E. Metwalli, W. Wang, S. V. Roth, J. S. Gutmann and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2012, 290, 119 CAS .
M. A. Niedermeier, D. Magerl, Q. Zhong, A. Nathan, V. Körstgens, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Nanotechnology, 2012 Search PubMed  , submitted.
G. Kaune, M. Memesa, R. Meier, M. A. Ruderer, A. Diethert, S. V. Roth, M. D'Acunzi, J. S. Gutmann and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2862 CAS .
Z.-Y. Yuan and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 663 RSC .
B. Peng, G. Jungmann, C. Jäger, D. Haarer, H.-W. Schmidt and M. Thelakkat, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1479 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stefik, J. Lee and U. Wiesner, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2532 RSC .
P. Lellig, M. A. Niedermeier, M. Rawolle, M. Meister, F. Laquai, P. Müller-Buschbaum and J. S. Gutmann, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1607 RSC .
M. Memesa, S. Weber, S. Lenz, J. Perlich, R. Berger, P. Müller-Buschbaum and J. S. Gutmann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 783 CAS .
K. Huan, L. Bes, D. M. Haddleton and E. Khoshdel, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2001, 39, 1833 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perlich, M. Memesa, A. Diethert, E. Metwalli, W. Wang, S. V. Roth, A. Timmann, J. S. Gutmann and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 799 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Chen, I. Cesar, S. M. Zaheeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424003 CrossRef .
L. Schmidt-Mende and M. Grätzel, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 500, 296 CrossRef CAS .
I.-K. Ding, N. Tétreault, J. Brillet, B. E. Hardin, E. H. Smith, S. J. Rosenthal, F. Sauvage, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2431 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kaune and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2010, 4, 52 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kaune, M. Haese-Seiller, R. Kampmann, J.-F. Moulin, Q. Zhong and P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed., 2010, 48, 1628 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. McCullough and S. P. Williams, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 11608 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Lechmann, D. Kessler and J. S. Gutmann, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10202 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Lechmann, S. A. L. Weber, J. Geserick, N. Hüsing, R. Berger and J. S. Gutmann, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7765 RSC .
G. Kaune, M. A. Ruderer, E. Metwalli, W. Wang, S. Couet, K. Schlage, R. Röhlsberger, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 353 CAS .
G. Kaune, E. Metwalli, R. Meier, V. Körstgens, K. Schlage, S. Couet, R. Röhlsberger, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1055 CAS .
E. Metwalli, S. Couet, K. Schlage, R. Röhlsberger, V. Körstgens, M. Ruderer, W. Wang, G. Kaune, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4265 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Part of a web theme on the topic of nanomaterials (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft SPP1181/Nanomaterials program).‡ Present address: Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, von-Danckelmann-Platz 3, 06120 Halle, Germany.§ Present address: HASYLAB at DESY, Notkestr. 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany.¶ Present address: Materials Science and Technology of Polymers, MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, the Netherlands.|| Present address: Polymer and Composites Division, Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 519 Zhuangshi Rd, Zhenhai District, Ningbo City, Zhejiang Province, 315201, P. R. China.** Present address: Deutsches Textilforschungszentrum Nord-West e.V., Institut an der Universität Duisburg-Essen, Adlerstr. 1, 47798 Krefeld, Germany.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Monika Rawolle
	Monika Rawolle graduated in physics at the Universität Stuttgart. She worked as a visiting research student in the group of Prof. Susanne Stemmer at the Materials Research Laboratory at the University of California, Santa Barbara, funded through a scholarship by the International Centre for Materials Research. Her diploma thesis was written while working in the group of Prof. Bernhard Keimer at the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research. Afterwards, she joined the group of Prof. Peter Müller-Buschbaum to start her PhD project investigating inorganic–organic hybrid materials at the Chair of Functional Materials (Technische Universität München).

Jochen S. Gutmann
	Jochen S. Gutmann studied chemistry at the “Technische Hochschule Darmstadt” and the University of Bristol. He received a PhD from the University of Mainz and worked as a PostDoc at the IPF Dresden and Cornell University. In 2002 he joined the MPI for Polymer Research and was appointed as a professor for Physical Chemistry at the University Mainz in 2005. Since 2010 he is a professor for Physical Chemistry at the University of Duisburg-Essen and the managing director of the “Deutsches Textilforschungszentrum Nord-West” in Krefeld. His research focuses on characterization of multicomponent polymer materials and chemistry at interfaces.

Peter Müller-Buschbaum
	Graduation in Physics and PhD in Physics at Univerität Kiel were followed by a postdoctoral work at Max-Planck-Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz. In 1999 Peter Müller-Buschbaum moved to the Physics department of Technische Universität München and joined the chair of Professor Winfried Petry on a group leader position. In 2002 he finished his habilitation and became assistant professor. Since 2006 he is full university professor and heading the chair of Functional Materials in replacement of Professor Petry. He is member of TUM.Energy, heading TUM.solar and the section ‘Renewable Energies’ of the Munich School of Engineering (MSE).

 	Fig. 1  SEM graph of a sponge-like titania nanostructure, as obtained by combination of sol–gel chemistry with a structure directing P(S-b-EO) block copolymer template. The inset shows the corresponding FFT pattern. Originally published in ref. 53.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characteristic length ξ in the film, as detected with GISAXS, as a function of the lateral position y on the FTO gradient. The solid line illustrates the position on top of the FTO gradient with the relative change of the FTO signal IFTO/I0. This relative change resembles the FTO layer thickness. The solid symbols depict ξ for structures in the FTO film, open symbols for structures in the titania–polymer nanocomposite film. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of the titania nanostructures prepared from a sol–gel with P(S-b-EO) and a weight fraction of added PS homopolymer in the solution 0 (a), 0.01 (b), 0.03 (c), 0.05 (d), 0.1 (e), 0.3 (f) and 0.5 (g). Images are taken after calcination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Porosity of titania films prepared by mixing of the sol–gel components in a y-shaped microfluidic channel with different flow rates and without usage of the microfluidic channel, denoted as “normal sol–gel”(left) and light scattering for the same titania films (right). Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Adapted with permission from ref. 56.	 

 	Fig. 5  Sketch of the layer-by-layer approach by combination of granules with different sizes, as tuned by different sol–gel compositions, with the respective calcination steps (top). SEM images with different magnifications of the final titania film reveal the hierarchical structure (bottom). The scale bar in each SEM image corresponds to 1 μm. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM image of a mesoporous titania film with additional macropores prepared by the addition of PDMS-grafted PMMA microspheres in the titania sol templated with the diblock copolymer PDMS-b-MA(PEO). Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Setup of a functional stack with all main steps involved in the preparation of a ssDSSC (a) and the most prominent structure sizes ΛA (top data row) and ΛB (bottom data row) in the films at each step as measured with GISAXS (b). Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Adapted with permission from ref. 86.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM graphs of titania sponge structures backfilled with the hole-conductor PVK by spin-coating (a) and solution casting (b), respectively. (c) and (e) show the linear dependency of the critical angle αc of the empty titania film (c), the titania film backfilled with PVK by solution casting (d) and the titania film backfilled with PVK by spin-coating (e), as measured with GISANS in the TOF mode. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Adapted with permission from ref. 91.	 

 	Fig. 9  Evolution of gold cluster height (h), radius (r) and distance (D) versus thickness of deposited Au layer on PVK. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnotes
† Part of a web theme on the topic of nanomaterials (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft SPP1181/Nanomaterials program).
‡ Present address: Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, von-Danckelmann-Platz 3, 06120 Halle, Germany.
§ Present address: HASYLAB at DESY, Notkestr. 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany.
¶ Present address: Materials Science and Technology of Polymers, MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, the Netherlands.
|| Present address: Polymer and Composites Division, Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 519 Zhuangshi Rd, Zhenhai District, Ningbo City, Zhejiang Province, 315201, P. R. China.
** Present address: Deutsches Textilforschungszentrum Nord-West e.V., Institut an der Universität Duisburg-Essen, Adlerstr. 1, 47798 Krefeld, Germany.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
