Ag-Based nanocomposites: synthesis and applications in catalysis  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR01408J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR01408J
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7062-7096Ag-Based nanocomposites: synthesis and applications in catalysis

        
          
            Guangfu 
            Liao†
abc, 
      
        
          
            Jiasheng 
            Fang†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Li
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Sihan 
            Li
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zushun 
            Xu
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Baizeng 
            Fang
          
          
        
      *e
aSchool of Environment and Civil Engineering, Dongguan University of Technology, Guangdong 523808, China. E-mail: fangjs@dgut.edu.cn
bGuangxi Key Laboratory of Chemistry and Engineering of Forest Products, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Guangxi University for Nationalities, 530008 Nanning, Guangxi, China. E-mail: liqing@gxun.edu.cn
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory for Polymeric Composite and Functional Materials of Ministry of Education, Guangdong Laboratory of High-Performance Polymer Composites, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510275, China
dHubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Advanced Organic Chemical Materials, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for The Green Preparation and Application of Functional Material, Hubei University, Wuhan, 430062, China
eDepartment of Chemical & Biological Engineering, University of British Columbia, 2360 East Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada. E-mail: bfang@chbe.ubc.ca
Received 
      15th February 2019
    , Accepted 12th March 2019First published on 14th March 2019AbstractAg-Based nanocomposites, including supported Ag nanocomposites and bimetallic Ag nanocomposites, have been intensively investigated as highly efficient catalysts because of their high activity and stability, easy preparation, low cost, and low toxicity. Herein, we systematically summarize and comprehensively evaluate versatile synthetic strategies for the preparation of Ag-based nanocomposites, and outline their recent advances in catalytic oxidation, catalytic reduction, photocatalysis and electrocatalysis. In addition, the challenges and prospects related to Ag-based nanocomposites for various catalytic applications are also discussed. In light of the most recent advances in Ag-based nanocomposites for catalysis applications, this review provides a comprehensive assessment on the material selection, synthesis and catalytic characteristics of these catalysts, which offers a strategic guide to build a close connection between Ag nanocomposites and catalysis applications.Guangfu LiaoGuangfu Liao received his M.Sc. in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Hubei University in 2017. He then joined Prof. Haiyang Gao's group at Sun Yat-sen University to pursue his Ph.D. in Materials Science. His primary research is focused on Ag-based catalysts, nanocomposites, biomaterials, and coordination polymerization. He has more than 6 years of research experience in the fields of catalysis, environment and biomaterials. He has published over 20 scientific papers and also received some awards including the Graduate Student National Scholarship, Hubei University First-class Academic Scholarship, Hubei University Outstanding Graduate & Excellent Graduation Thesis, and Sun Yat-sen University Second-class Academic Scholarship.Jiasheng FangDr Jiasheng Fang completed his Ph.D. in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering from Southeast University in 2018. Currently, he is a lecturer at the School of Environment and Civil Engineering, Dongguan University of Technology. His primary research interest includes the synthetic methods of high-thermal-stability noble-metal nanocatalysts, the controllable preparation of highly efficient catalytic materials and the study of interfacial chemistry and multiphase catalysis of composite materials. He has published over 20 papers in international peer-reviewed journals like Nanoscale, Journal of Power Sources, Journal of Hazardous Materials, Carbon, Chemical Engineering Journal, ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, Langmuir, Chemistry – A European Journal, etc.Qing LiDr Qing Li was born in Hubei, China, in 1989. He received his B.Sc. degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Hubei University in 2012. Then he joined the laboratory of Prof. Zushun Xu at Hubei University to receive his master's degree in 2014 and his Ph.D. in 2017 in Materials Science. Currently, he works at Guangxi University for Nationalities as a lecturer. His primary research interest is focused on polyimide nanocomposites, Ag-based catalysts, and two-dimensional COF materials.Sihan LiMr Sihan Li was born in 1995 in Yunnan, China. He received his B.Sc. degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Dalian Maritime University in 2017. Then he joined the laboratory of Prof. Fangming Zhu at Sun Yat-sen University to pursue his M.S. degree in Polymer Chemistry and Physics. Currently, he is carrying out research on the development of catalysts leading to the creation of new olefinic polymers.Zushun XuProf. Zushun Xu was born in Hubei, China, in 1963. He received his Ph.D. from Zhejiang University in 1998. Now he is a Professor at Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Advanced Organic Chemical Materials at Hubei University. His current main research interest is in polymer/metal nanocomposites and their applications in catalysis, biological applications, and engineering. The awards he received up to now include Excellent Backbone Teachers of National Colleges and Universities, Third Prize of the Natural Science Award of Hubei Province, Best Youth Award, and so on.Baizeng FangDr Baizeng Fang earned his Ph.D. in Materials Science from the University of Science and Technology, Beijing in 1997. He has worked as a JSPS research fellow (Japan), a Lise Meitner scientist (Austria), and a research professor (Korea), and is a Senior Scientist at the University of British Columbia (Canada). He has published over 100 scientific papers in high-profile journals including reviews in Accounts of Chemical Research, Chemical Reviews, Chemical Society Reviews, Energy & Environmental Science and Progress in Materials Science. His research interests include nanostructured materials for electrochemical energy storage/conversion and artificial photosynthesis. He also serves as an Associate Editor of RSC Advances.
1. Introduction
In recent decades, nanomaterials have received enormous attention on account of their superior performance and extensive applications in the field of heterogeneous catalysis, e.g., nanocatalysis, magnetite-supported catalysis, and integrated catalysis.1–3 Among them, noble-metal nanoparticles (NPs), particularly Ag NPs, are considered to be an attractive catalyst material because of their unique physiochemical properties in contrast to their bulk counterparts, which mainly include: (1) the catalytic activity of Ag NPs is easily tuned using the particle size, shape, and temperature;4 (2) Ag NPs catalysts are active under mild conditions or even ambient temperature;5 and (3) Ag NPs catalysts are particularly suitable for practical applications due to their relatively low prices, generally less than 1/50 of that of Au or Pt, and about 1/25 of that of Pd;6 (4) Ag NPs catalysts are endowed with high application value owing to their relatively low toxicity.7
Despite the fact that Ag NPs are an ideal catalyst, there are still a number of problems in using single Ag NPs as a catalyst, e.g., easy oxidation and agglomeration, poor stability, and low catalytic activity.8 It has been reported that the size, shape, support, and composition of Ag NPs have a crucial impact on their catalytic properties.9 The reaction rate constant (k) is proportional to the total surface area (S) available in the Ag NPs,10 which indicates that the smaller the size and the sharper the shape, the better the catalytic properties. It is certain that the strong interaction between the support and Ag NPs can effectively decrease Ag agglomeration, and thus enhance their catalytic properties. In addition, bimetallic catalytic systems have also recently emerged to tune the composition effects due to their reduced active catalyst price and enhanced activity, selectivity, and long-term stability. Thus, in order to overcome the abovementioned issues, many different strategies have been developed, of which one effective attempt is to construct Ag-based nanocomposites, mainly including supported Ag nanocomposites and bimetallic Ag nanocomposites. It is worth emphasizing that supported Ag nanocomposites can effectively reduce Ag nanoparticle agglomeration due to the strong interaction force between Ag nanoparticles and supports (e.g. polymer, oxides, carbon, and MOFs), thus improving their catalytic activity.11,12 Bimetallic Ag nanocomposites show superior catalytic activity when compared to their corresponding monometallic Ag nanoparticles because of the composition-dependent characteristics and the synergistic effect of bimetallic Ag nanocomposites.13 These unique features of Ag-based nanocomposites endow them with enormous potentials in catalytic fields.
Although various applications of Ag-based nanocomposites6,14–26 have been reviewed, as far as we know there is no review that has paid particular attention to summarizing comprehensively a number of fabrication strategies and catalysis applications of Ag-based nanocomposites. In this review, we begin with the presentation of a systematic introduction to the construction of Ag-based nanocomposites. Then an overview of recent advances in Ag-based nanocomposites for various catalytic applications (e.g., catalytic oxidation, catalytic reduction, photocatalysis and electrocatalysis) is given. Finally, particular challenges as well as research opportunities for Ag-based nanocomposites for future development in catalysis are also critically discussed.
2. Fabrication of Ag-based nanocomposites
As mentioned above, Ag-based nanocomposites mainly include supported Ag nanocomposites and bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites. In the following subsections, we will minutely describe the synthetic strategies of supported Ag nanocomposites and bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites.
2.1. Fabrication of supported Ag nanocomposites
In recent years, many research studies have focused on exploring solution-phase methods, as well as the influence of the matrix surface on directing the nano-unit nucleation and subsequent organization.27 Core–shell and yolk–shell nanostructures can achieve highly efficient and stable catalytic reactions due to movable Ag nanoparticle cores and functionalized shell materials.28 Different chemistry/physical structures of supported Ag nanocomposites can be obtained using different methods and conditions. Until now, synthetic strategies of supported Ag nanocomposites had several chemical and physical pathways including sol–gel, wet chemical, seeding method, electroless plating, layer-by-layer self-assembly, in situ reduction, stabilizer- or core-assisted reduction, and spraying. The comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of different methods for the fabrication of supported Ag-based nanocomposites is shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Advantages and disadvantages of different methods for the fabrication of supported Ag-based nanocomposites




Synthesis method
Advantages
Disadvantages




Sol–gel method
(1) Producing Ag-based nanocomposites with good control over nanoparticle size, size distribution, nanostructure and concentration
Low efficiency, time- and cost-consuming, and complicated preparation process


(2) Highly precise and green fabrication of Ag-based nanocomposites with high activity and stability


Wet chemical reduction
(1) Simple, green, and wide applicability
Time- and cost-consuming


(2) Basically controllable nanoparticles size, size distribution, and shape


(3) The functionalization of Ag-based nanocomposites is easy to achieve


Direct in situ reduction of the Ag precursor
(1) Large-scale production of Ag-based nanocomposites with high activity and stability
(1) The prepared Ag nanoparticles readily agglomerate


(2) Facile, wide applicability, and time- and cost-saving
(2) The overuse of reducing agents is harmful to ecology and the environment


(3) Controllable Ag nanoparticles size and size distribution


Core-assisted reduction
(1) Achieving specific Ag nanoparticles size, size distribution, and shape
Low efficiency, time- and cost-consuming, and relatively complicated preparation process


(2) Constructing various functional Ag-based nanocomposites via selecting different “core” materials





2.1.1. Sol–gel methods. 
An attractive bottom-up preparation strategy for synthesizing supported Ag nanocomposites consists of sol–gel methods and versatile low-temperature routes.29,30 Li's group31 presented a sol–gel method for the preparation of Ag@SiO2 core–shell nanostructures, which effectively avoided the Ag core agglomeration. In this way, Ag nanoparticles were used as the core and tetraethoxy orthosilicate (TEOS) as the silica source for constructing the SiO2 shell under alkaline conditions. Kuo and co-workers32 reported a sol–gel method to fabricate Ag-SiO2@TiO2 ternary heterostructured nanocomposites utilizing tetraethyl orthosilicate and titanium tetraisobutoxide as precursors. By means of photodeposition, Ag nanoparticles (∼10 nm) were supported on the SiO2@TiO2 spheres surface. Bagheri and co-workers33 prepared the Ag-SiO2-polydiphenylamine ternary nanostructure using the sol–gel method. In this nanostructure, SiO2–polydiphenylamine nanocomposites were covered with Ag nanoparticles. In this approach, butanethiol capped Ag nanoparticles mixed with polydiphenylamine were added to SiO2 colloidal solutions, and the Ag nanoparticles were then adsorbed on the SiO2 spheres for stabilization. Fu and co-workers34 prepared Ag nanoparticles with different weight percentages loaded on Ni–Cu–Zn ferrite@SiO2@TiO2 nanocomposites through the sol–gel technique. The particle size and shape of these magnetic recyclable nanocomposites were observed by TEM, showing a core–shell nanostructure with an average Ag particle diameter of 20 nm.


2.1.2. Wet chemical reduction. 
Wet chemical reduction methods have proved to be effective methods for immobilizing noble metal nanoparticles on the outer and inner surfaces of various substrates.35 For example, Shameli and co-workers36 reported Ag nanoparticles decorated on the surface layer of talc mineral (Ag/talc) synthesized via the wet chemical reduction method. AgNO3 and NaBH4 were selected as a Ag precursor and a reductive agent, respectively. As a result, Ag nanoparticles (ca. 7.6–13.1 nm) are attached to the outer surface of the talc. Mohapatra and co-workers37 presented a facile method for the fabrication of Ag–ZnO hybrid plasmonic nanostructures, where citrate-assisted photoreduction was adopted to modify Ag nanoparticles within the ZnO nanostructures. Due to the orientational attachment of citrate-assisted ZnO nanostructures, Ag–ZnO nanodisks were formed under higher citrate concentrations. Similarly, Hou et al.38 also reported the construction of high-yield ZnO/Ag hybrid nanostructures by a simplified wet-chemical method. The prepared product consists of a metallic Ag shell coated on a ZnO nanorod core.
In the past few decades, Ag-based core–shell nanocomposites comprising dielectric solid spheres (such as PS and SiO2) covered with continuous Ag shells have received increasing attention for their ascendant optical and electromagnetic characteristics.39 Different strategies have been reported to introduce Ag layers to the surface of a dielectric core, including electroless plating,40,41 layer-by-layer self-assembly,42 and the seed-mediated growth technique.43 For example, Liz-Marzán's group40 reported an electroless plating method mediated by SnCl2 for depositing Ag nanoparticles on SiO2 colloids. A two-step method was proposed to achieve the dense coverage: the first step was the adsorption of Sn2+ ions on the SiO2 particle surfaces, and then Ag nanoparticles were adsorbed on the SiO2 particle surface by electroless plating of Ag+ + Sn2+ → Ag0 + Sn4+. A similar study was reported by Zhang's group41 that showed that a complete Ag shell can be regulated with controlled thickness on a SiO2 colloid by electroless plating. No additional surface treatment is required; the prepared SiO2@Ag core–shell colloidal composites could be crystallized into long-range ordered structures with photonic bandgaps. Caruso's group42 prepared core–shell nanostructures with a continuous metallic Ag shell covering the dielectric solid sphere by the layer-by-layer self assembly of octa(3-aminopropyl)silsesquioxane-stabilized Ag nanoparticles and poly(styrenesulfonate) onto colloidal surfaces. Liu's group43 used the seed-mediated growth method for the construction of SiO2@Ag composite particles, where the supported Ag nanoparticles acted as nucleation sites for the overlayer of a Ag nanoshell. Through changing the deposition cycle number, the thickness of the Ag nanoshell could be easily regulated.


2.1.3. Direct in situ reduction of the Ag precursor. 
Decoration of Ag nanoparticles onto/into a series of substrates via direct in situ reduction of the Ag precursor is a facile and effective strategy. Li's group44–47 reported that Ag nanoparticles could be coated on polystyrene (PS) microspheres by a facile and controllable method based on colloid thermodynamics. In this way, the Ag precursor was in situ reduced to Ag nanoparticles, which was then coated on the surface of PS. In contrast to other traditional preparation methods, a unique advantage of these studies was the surface pretreatment of PS microspheres. Inspired by this, we reported the preparation of PS/Ag nanocomposites by means of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) assisted reduction,2,48 namely, polystyrene-methyl acrylic acid/Ag (PSMAA/Ag) and poly(styrene-N-isopropylacrylamidemethacrylic acid)/Ag (PSNM/Ag) (Fig. 1a and b). PVP was acted as a reductant and a stabilizer in this way without the use of any toxic reagent during the preparation process.
 Fig. 1  Diagrammatic sketches of the fabrication of (a) PSMAA/Ag spheres, reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from the American Chemical Society, and (b) PSNM/Ag spheres, reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Elsevier. 
3D nanoporous Ag-based nanocomposites show a remarkable enhancement in catalytic properties due to their large specific surface area, improved reactant molecule adsorption, and unique plasmonic behavior. Wang's group reported the preparation of Ag nanoparticles/nanoporous ZnO micrometer-rods (Ag/n-ZnO MRs) via a simple two-step method. The n-ZnO MRs with a diameter of 90–150 nm and a length of 0.5–3 μm were firstly prepared via solvothermal assisted heat treatment. Ag nanoparticles with a diameter of 20–50 nm were then decorated on the prepared n-ZnO MR surface via a simple in situ photoreduction. The degradation rate of methylene blue over the Ag/n-ZnO MRs was about 5.6 times faster than that of the pure n-ZnO MRs under visible light illumination. This is mainly due to the formation of Schottky barriers between the Ag nanoparticles and n-ZnO MRs.49 Xie's group reported Ag nanoparticles supported on nanoporous Fe2O3 microboxes by in situ reduction. In that work, magnetic Fe2O3 microboxes displayed an interesting response to an external magnetic field, ensuring that the catalyst is easily recovered. In addition, the defined nanoporous structures are beneficial for the highly efficient adsorption of reactants and for further enhancing catalytic properties.50


2.1.4. Core-assisted reduction. 
In addition, core-assisted reduction is another effective method to prepare Ag-based core–shell nanocomposites. Polydopamine (PDA) is a biomolecule containing catechol and amine functional groups,51–56 and is used as an active template. Deng's group57 reported a facile and green approach involving PDA chemistry and electroless metallization of Ag for the preparation of PDA/Ag particles. In this method, firstly, dopamine in an alkaline water–ethanol solution is oxidized and self-polymerized at room temperature to obtain monodisperse PDA spherical particles. Since its surface contains rich catechol and amine groups, it can be used as an active template for the next reaction. Next, the surface of PDA particles can easily capture the silver precursor [Ag(NH3)2]+ ions, which were immediately in situ reduced to metallic Ag by these active catechol and amine groups (Fig. 2a). A uniform dispersion of Ag nanoparticles can be found on the PDA particle surfaces (Fig. 2b–e), and the coverage concentration of Ag nanoparticles on PDA particles was correlated positively with the concentration of Ag precursor [Ag(NH3)2]+ ions (Fig. 2f and g). A similar study was reported by Ganesh's group,58 who prepared a PDA-capped Ag nanoparticle modified ITO electrode (Ag-PDA/ITO) by a facile in situ approach. In the meantime, the active template PDA functioned as a reductant and a stabilizer.
 Fig. 2  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the formation of PDA/Ag particles. TEM images of (b) PDA particles and (c) PDA/Ag particle. SEM images of (d) PDA particles and (e) PDA/Ag particles. TEM images of PDA/Ag particles obtained at various concentrations of [Ag(NH3)2]+ ions: (f) 1.57 × 10−2 mol L−1; (g) 1.96 × 10−2 mol L−1. SEM images of (h) PS spheres, (i) PS/PDA composite spheres and (j–m) PS/Ag particles obtained employing various concentrations of [Ag(NH3)2]+ ions: (j) 1.2 × 10−2 mol L−1; (k) 2.3 × 10−2 mol L−1; (l) 4.7 × 10−2 mol L−1 and (m) 9.4 × 10−2 mol L−1. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from Elsevier. 

2.2. Fabrication of bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites
Although they only consisted of two elements, the architectures and chemistry/physical structures of bimetallic nanocrystals are different from atomic ordering (alloyed or intermetallic), crystal structure and internal structure (with different numbers of twin defects and/or stacking faults).59 The structures of bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites play a vital role in catalytic performance, which can be easily regulated using different preparation methods. In the following sections, we mainly focus on the most commonly used synthetic strategies and their different nanostructures. The comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of different methods for the fabrication of bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites is shown in Table 4.
Bimetallic Ag nanostructures mainly include core–shell nanocrystals and their derivatives, core-frame nanocrystals and their derivatives, and dendritic and heterostructured nanocrystals, etc. A bimetallic Ag core–shell nanocrystal consists of an arbitrarily shaped inner core conformally coated with a shell of another metal. Its synthesis route commonly involves a seed-mediated approach. In general, a bimetallic Ag core–shell nanocrystal contains shells of single atomic layer thickness (growing a monolayer of one metal on the surface of another), shells of multiple (n = 2–6) atomic layers thickness, shells thicker than six atomic layers, and hollow derivatives of core–shell nanocrystals (nanoboxes and nanocages). The core-frame nanocrystal belongs to a bimetallic nanostructure, which possesses a well-defined solid metal core with a second metal coating on the edges, corners, or even twin defects, which can be easily prepared via a kinetically controlled seed-mediated process. Dendritic and heterostructured nanocrystals consist of a solid core derived from branches or arms and core as stemming. A comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of various bimetallic Ag nanostructures is summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Advantages and disadvantages of various bimetallic Ag nanostructures




Bimetallic Ag nanostructures
Common synthesis method
Advantages
Disadvantages




Core–shell nanocrystals
Seed-mediated growth approach
(1) Constructing a variety of shapes
Poor controllability


(2) Enhanced catalytic activity and stability


(3) Augmenting magnetic anisotropy


(4) Serving as a critical intermediate for forming other types of structures


Core-frame nanocrystals
(1) Seed-mediated growth approach
(1) Constructing a variety of shapes
Time- and cost-consuming and complicated preparation process


(2) Galvanic replacement method
(2) Readily tunable catalytic property


(3) Providing a necessary channel for intermixing two metals


Dendritic and heterostructured nanocrystals
(1) Seed-mediated growth approach
(1) Large surface-to-volume ratios and accessible high index surfaces
Time- and cost-consuming and complicated preparation process


(2) Galvanic replacement method
(2) Sharp tips are conducive for improving catalytic properties


(3) Anisotropic etching of facet-controlled nanocrystals
(3) Highly branched plasmonic structures


(4) Aggregation or oriented attachment





2.2.1. Co-reduction. 
Co-reduction is considered to be the most straightforward method for the fabrication of bimetallic Ag nanocomposites. This method displays the synchronous reduction of two metal-mixed precursors to zero-valent atoms. It then encounters nucleation and growth together to produce a bimetallic Ag nanocomposite. In some cases, a subsequent annealing treatment is needed to obtain a uniform alloy, or structural ordering of intermetallic compounds for some bimetallic combinations.60 In addition, co-reduction can also lead to the formation of abundant bimetallic nanocrystals, and their ultimate structure can be adjusted through variable experimental parameters, e.g., the capping agent, reduction potentials of metal ions, feature of the coordination ligand, the strength of the reducing agent, and the reaction temperature.59
According to zero-order approximation, metal ions possessing more positive reduction potentials would be inclined to decline at a faster rate than those possessing lower potentials. Usually, metal ions are essentially different in terms of reduction potential, and only metal ions possessing similar reduction potentials (Table 3) can be chosen for forming bimetallic alloyed nanocrystals through co-reduction. For instance, Pd2+/Pd and Ag+/Ag, possessing reduction potentials of +0.95 and +0.8 V respectively, are easily co-reduced to generate Pd–Ag alloyed nanocrystals. Kapoor and co-workers61 presented a microwave technique for the fabrication of Pd–Ag bimetallic nanoparticles through co-reducing Pd2+ and Ag+ in glycerol and ethylene glycol under the protection of the stabilizer PVP. The size, composition and morphology of the Pd–Ag bimetallic nanoparticles could be adjusted according to the feeding ratio variation of the two precursors.62 Wu and co-workers63 reported a simple one-step reduction technique for the fabrication of alloyed Cu/Ag bimetallic nanoparticles through co-reducing Cu2+ and Ag+ using low-cost glucose as a reduction agent. Through controlling the molar ratio of these metal precursors, the size, composition and morphology of the Cu–Ag alloyed nanoparticles could be tuned, which would have an important influence on their catalytic performance.
Table 3 Reduction potentials of a series of traditional metal ions/metal




Reduction reaction

E
0 (V vs. SHE)a





a Standard conditions: 25 °C and 1 atm. SHE: standard hydrogen electrode.





Au3+ + 3e− → Au
1.50


Pt2+ + 2e− → Pt
1.18


Ir3+ + 3e− → Ir
1.16


Pd2+ + 2e− → Pd
0.95


Ag+ + e− → Ag
0.80


Rh3+ + 3e− → Rh
0.76


Ru3+ + 3e− → Ru
0.45


Cu2+ + 2e− → Cu
0.34


Ni2+ + 2e− → Ni
−0.25


Co2+ + 2e− → Co
−0.28


Fe2+ + 2e− → Fe
−0.44




However, if two metal ions show a great difference in the reduction potential, co-reduction will encounter potential problems. Under these circumstances, the more active precious metals will be reduced first, and then the others will follow suit. For example, for the pairs Au3+/Au and Ag+/Ag, possessing reduction potentials of +1.5 and +0.8 V respectively, the reduction rates of the two precursors can be the same by adjusting the molar ratio of these metal precursors. Sun and co-workers64 showed a one-pot approach for the fabrication of uniform AuxAg100−x alloy nanocrystals through the co-reduction of HAuCl4 and AgNO3 using oleylamine as a reductant and a surfactant. By changing the precursor ratio and growth time, the composition from a Au-rich concentration to a Ag-rich concentration can be continuously adjusted. For instance, bimetallic Au0.60Ag0.40 nanoparticles were obtained under the conditions of 2 mmol of AgNO3, 0.2 mmol of HAuCl4, and a growth time of 1 h. Bimetallic Au0.52Ag0.48 nanoparticles can be generated by reaction of 4 mmol of AgNO3 and 0.2 mmol of HAuCl4 for 1 h, while bimetallic Au0.39Ag0.61 nanoparticles can be obtained by reaction for 2 h (Fig. 3a–f). Similarly, Ashokkumar and co-workers65 adopted the sonochemical approach to assist the co-reduction of Au3+ and Ag+ ions in aqueous solutions for the preparation of bimetallic Au@Ag core–shell nanoparticles. In this system, the formation of the core–shell morphology was attributed to the reduction order of the metal ions and the engagement of a polymer–Ag ion complex.
 Fig. 3  Typical TEM images of AuxAg1−x alloy nanoparticles obtained by the one-pot approach: (a) Au0.82Ag0.18, (b) Au0.60Ag0.40, (c) Au0.52Ag0.48, and (d) Au0.39Ag0.61 and HRTEM images of (e) Au0.60Ag0.40 and (f) Au0.52Ag0.48 nanoparticles. The nanoparticles sizes were found to be 8 nm in (a) and (b) and 9 nm in (c) and (d), respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 


2.2.2. Thermal decomposition. 
Another efficient strategy to prepare bimetallic Ag-based nanocrystals is based on the thermal decomposition method. Traditionally, thermal decomposition is considered to be a favorable method for some metal precursors which possess low reduction potentials and are not easily chemically reduced, particularly for Mn, Cr, Fe, Co, and Ni (Table 2). Some commonly used organometallic precursors including the acetylacetonates (M(acac)n), carbonyls (Mx(CO)y), and cupferronates, fatty acids, oleic acid, hexadecylamine, etc.66,67 readily decompose under moderate heating. Similar to the co-reduction strategy, the ratio of the metal precursors, capping agents, solvent, surfactants, reaction temperature, and reaction time are some of the most important parameters for controlling the size, composition and shape of the resulting nanocrystals.
Similar to co-reduction, the synchronous thermal decomposition of two metal-mixed precursors leads to the formation of zero-valent metal atoms, which subsequently undergo nucleation and growth together to form bimetallic nanocrystals. Hilgendorff and co-workers68 prepared monodisperse bimetallic Ag/Co core–shell nanocrystals using a colloid chemistry strategy. This method was based on the thermal decomposition of dicobalt octacarbonyl (Co2(CO)8) combined with a transmetalation reaction with water-free AgClO4 using oleic acid and tridodecylamine as surfactants as shown below: Co2(CO)8 + 2AgClO4 → 2Ag + Co + 8CO + Co(ClO4)2. As a result, bimetallic AgcoreCoshell nanoparticles were formed by a kinetically controlled crystal growth. The obtained nanocrystals exhibited no surface oxidation and possessed magnetic properties, which could be used for magnetophoretic deposition experiments.
In addition, bimetallic nanocrystals can also be obtained through a combination of thermal decomposition and co-reduction. Chen and co-workers69 used oleylamine as a solvent and a reductant and triphenylphosphine as a surfactant in a facile one-pot synthesis strategy to prepare magnetically recyclable Ag–Ni core–shell nanoparticles. Specifically, the Ag–Ni core–shell nanoparticles were formed through the simultaneous co-reduction and thermal decomposition of AgNO3 and Ni(acac)2 in oleylamine at 190 °C. However, because of the relatively large lattice mismatch and the difference in surface energy between Ag and Ni, it was difficult to grow a homogeneous shell on the Ag nanocrystal surface in a controlled manner. As a typical nucleophilic reagent in organic reactions, triphenylphosphine was used as a surfactant to obtain homogeneous Ni shells in this work. As a result, the prepared Ag–Ni core–shell nanoparticles (∼14.9 nm) possessed a very narrow size distribution and a tunable shell thickness, and the generation of the Ni shell on the Ag core could inhibit the surface plasmon resonance of the Ag core and produce a red-shifted surface plasmon resonance absorption peak.


2.2.3. Seed-mediated growth. 
Seed-mediated growth is the most important preparation method for the fabrication of well-controlled nanostructured bimetallic Ag-based nanocrystals, which remains a challenge for other methods.70,71 Core–shell and heterostructured bimetallic Ag-based nanocrystals are especially easy to prepare by a seeded-growth strategy. In this way, well-defined nanocrystals (or seeds) are prefabricated and act as the primary sites for the heterogeneous nucleation of newly formed atoms derived from the reduction or thermal decomposition of metal precursors. The core–shell nanostructure can be formed through uniformly depositing a secondary metal on the surface of the precast seed, while if the deposition and growth of the second metal occur at a particular location in the seed, heterostructural nanocrystals will be prepared. Usually, to obtain bimetallic nanostructures through a seed-mediated growth strategy, heterogeneous nucleation and simple growth through atomic addition must be achieved on the basis of avoiding homogeneous nucleation. This method for the fabrication of bimetallic Ag-based nanocrystals was first reported in 2002 by Xia's group72 who prepared Ag nanowires from Pt seeds. Since this seminal example, a number of literature reports have emerged which focus on using seed-mediated growth as an effective strategy for the fabrication of bimetallic Ag-based core–shell, dendritic and heterostructure nanocrystals.
Compared to individual component metals, core–shell bimetallic Ag-based nanoparticles possess excellent optical, electronic, and catalytic characteristics, and therefore show great potential in basic and applied sciences.1,73 The seed-mediated growth strategy is a promising method for the fabrication of core–shell bimetallic Ag-based nanoparticles. Chang and co-workers74 reported a simple synthetic strategy (seed-mediated growth) for the fabrication of Au–Ag core–shell nanorods from Ag+ and ascorbate ions with Au nanorods as seeds under alkaline conditions. The Ag+ ions were reduced to metallic Ag by the ascorbate ions, and then modified on the Au nanorod surface to form different dumbbell-shaped Au–Ag core–shell nanorods. Bardhan's group75 prepared bimetallic Au–Ag core–shell nanostructures with diverse geometries using a seed-mediated synthesis approach. They also observed the ultrafast dynamics of shape- and composition-regulated bimetallic Au–Ag core–shell nanostructures by means of transient absorption spectroscopy as a function of Ag layer thickness (0–15 nm) and pump excitation fluence (50–500 nJ per pulse). Similarly, Wang and co-workers76,77 reported a seed-mediated growth method to prepare Au@Ag core–shell nanorods using Au nanorods as the seeds, which could be used as an analytical probe for the detection of ellagic acid and antioxidants.
Bimetallic Ag-based nanoparticles with other shapes can also be prepared by seed-mediated growth. Mirkin and co-workers78 prepared Agcore/Aushell nanoprisms and nanoclusters with corrugated surfaces using various aliquots of Ag nanoprisms as seeds in hydrogen tetrachloroaurate trihydrate, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, L-ascorbic acid, and sodium hydroxide. The size and morphology of these core–shell nanostructures could be adjusted using various stoichiometric ratios of Ag and Au. Xia and co-workers79 reported that the nucleation and growth of Ag can be observed on one, three or six of the equivalent (100) faces of the Pd seeds through simply adjusting the introduction rate and reduction rate of the precursor. As a result, three different bimetallic Ag/Pd nanocrystal nanostructures (core–shell nanocrystals, eccentric nanobars, and hybrid dimers) under similar experimental conditions were obtained. These bimetallic nanocrystals have different local surface plasmon resonance characteristics compared to those of pure metals and their alloys, which has led to their great appeal to photonics applications. Ling and co-workers80 reported a two-step growth method mediated by Ag octahedral nanoparticles as seeds to synthesize a novel class of spiky Ag–Au octahedral nanoparticles (Fig. 4a). The prepared spiky Ag–Au octahedral nanoparticles possessed an average size of ∼267 nm (Fig. 4b). Moreover, the taper-like structure was observed from all facets of the Ag–Au octahedral nanoparticles (Fig. 4c), and the hollow interior of spiky Ag–Au octahedral nanoparticles was similar to the Ag–Au octahedral nanocages reported in the previous literature.81 In addition, by altering the amount of Au precursor added and the implantation rate, the length of the nanonails could be regulated between 10 and 130 nm (Fig. 4c and d).
 Fig. 4  (a) A hypothesis for the construction of Au–Ag spiky nanoparticles. SEM images, TEM images, camera pictures, and histogram of spike lengths of (b) Ag octahedral nanoparticles and (c and d) Ag–Au spiky nanoparticles, SP50 and SP130, respectively. SP50 and SP130 possess spiky nanoparticles with an average spike length of 50 and 130 nm, respectively. The length of the spikes can be regulated from <10 to 130 nm by changing the amount of HAuCl4 precursors and the precursor injection rate during the growth process. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Among these seed-mediated growth strategies, the most vital method is to realize the internal defect structure of a seed, which regulates its possible shapes. The internal defect structure of a seed ultimately defines the surface energy landscape, along with the initial symmetry and the relative proportions of different facets. For instance, during seed-mediated growth, when the deposition is heteroepitaxial, single-crystal seeds can form octahedra, cubes, cuboctahedra, rectangular or octagonal rods, singly twinned seeds can produce bipyramids or nanobeams, multiply twinned seeds can form decahedra or icosahedra, and seeds lined with stacking faults can produce triangular or hexagonal nanoplates.82


2.2.4. Galvanic replacement. 
Massive bimetallic Ag-based hollow nanocrystals can be obtained by galvanic replacement,83 but they are unattainable just through simple co-reduction, thermal decomposition or seed-mediated growth. Herein, galvanic replacement is an electrochemical process, where one metal (often considered to be a sacrificial template) can be oxidized by another metal ion possessing a more positive reduction potential.84 If these conditions are achieved, the metal ions would abandon electrons from the template for self-reduction, and then load the exterior of the template. In the meantime, the interior dissolves into the solution. The final structure is shown as a hollow bimetallic nanostructure that inherits the shape of the initial template.
As mentioned above, the galvanic replacement reaction has become an effective synthetic method for converting solid metal nanostructures into hollow metal nanostructures. As early as 2007, Tang and co-workers85 prepared bimetallic Ag–Pd hollow nanoparticles through the successive reduction of AgNO3 and H2PtCl6 solutions with hydrazine. Lu and co-workers86 reported a facile strategy for the preparation of Pt–Ag bimetallic hollow nanostructures with a controllable number of void spaces by an adjustable galvanic replacement reaction. In this way, the Ag nano-column acted as a template to react with Pt ions in HCl. The introduction of HCl into the galvanic replacement reaction resulted in rapid precipitation of AgCl, and the AgCl grew on the Ag nanocube surface and worked as a removable secondary template for Pt deposition. The amount of nucleation sites of AgCl can be regulated via adding a variable amount of HCl to the Ag nanocube or introducing PVP into the reaction. As a result, Pt/Ag hollow nanoboxes, multimers, dimers, or popcorn-shaped nanostructures were obtained (Fig. 5a–f). Jin and co-workers87 described a simple and convenient strategy to fabricate Ag/Au bimetallic hollow and porous nanoshells with a controlled porosity by adopting polycrystalline Ag nanoparticles as starting templates. Hydrogen peroxide was used as a mild etchant to controllably dissolve Ag atoms from the precursor Ag–Au bimetallic hollow nanoshells, which can easily adjust the optical and catalytic properties of the hollow and porous nanoshells. Moreover, the surface plasmon bands of the hollow and porous nanoshells could be also easily regulated from the visible to near infrared region. Yang's group88 presented a one-pot method for the preparation of stellated Ag@Pt bimetallic nanoparticles based on the galvanic replacement reaction. These star-shaped Ag@Pt nanoparticles can be further processed into hollow Pt nanoparticles by a highly selective Ag extraction procedure without changing the star shape.
 Fig. 5  (a) Explanation of the construction of Pt/Ag nanobox, multimer, heterodimer, and popcorn-shaped nanoparticle from the galvanic replacement reaction between Ag nanocubes and K2PtCl4 in the presence of HCl. TEM images of (b) Pt/Ag nanoboxes, (c) Pt/Ag heterodimers, (d) Pt/Ag multimers. After washing with solutions of saturated NaCl and 50 mM Fe(NO3)3, the (c) dimers and (d) multimers were converted to nanostructures with (e) two or (f) multiple hollow domains, respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Bimetallic Ag-based nanostructures with other shapes can also be prepared by the galvanic replacement reaction. Meng and co-workers89 applied galvanic replacement of Ag dendrites in a HAuCl4 solution to obtain dendritic Ag/Au bimetallic nanostructures. Since the standard electrode potential of the AgCl/Ag pair (0.22 V vs. SHE) is lower than that of the AuCl4−/Au pair [0.99 V vs. SHE], the galvanic replacement reaction would proceed as follows: 3Ag (s) + AuCl4− (aq) → Au (s) + 3AgCl (s) + Cl− (aq). Different reaction times lead to different compositions, crystal structures, and morphologies of the resultant Ag/Au products. In addition, they also attempted the galvanic replacement of Ag dendrites in a Na2PdCl4 solution to produce Pd–Ag bimetallic dendrites. Due to the higher standard reduction potential of the PdCl42−/Pd pair [0.83 V vs. the SHE] than that of the AgCl/Ag pair (0.22 V vs. SHE), the galvanic replacement reaction would proceed as follows: 2Ag (s) + PdCl42− (aq) → Pd (s) + 2AgCl (s) + 2Cl− (aq). The obtained product of partially exhausted Ag dendrites was coated with a rough surface and a number of Pd granules protruding up to 20 nm.90 Zhou and co-workers91 prepared well-shaped Ag@Au hexagonal nanorings by means of Ag hexagonal nanoplates as structure-directing templates via a galvanic replacement route. During the synthetic process, the morphology and internal cavity size of the Ag@Au hexagonal nanorings were found to be strongly dependent on the dosage of HAuCl4. The prepared Ag@Au hexagonal nanorings showed superior surface-enhanced Raman scattering performance due to the strong electromagnetic improvement resulting from the plasmon hybridization of the Ag ring and the Au shell.


2.2.5. Other methods. 
Nanostructured and porous bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites have received growing attention from materials scientists due to their large specific surface area, good gas permeability, high electrical conductivity, unique plasmonic effect and size-enhanced catalytic reactivity.92–94 In order to construct porous bimetallic or multimetallic Ag-based aerogels, hard or soft template methods are usually adopted, but relatively low specific surface areas are obtained, and these methods are also time-consuming.95–97 Template-free methods, using direct self-assembly of metal nanoparticles, can produce porous bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites with a large specific surface area and low costs. Potential methods for the fabrication of porous metallic nanomaterials are selective dealloying,98 combustion synthesis,99 hydrothermal treatment,100 and the formation of metallic nanosponges101 by pH-triggered linear aggregation and cross-linking of nanoparticles or even by mixing metal precursors and the reducing agent in an appropriate ratio.102
Mann's group prepared Ag, Au and CuO, as well as composites of Ag/CuO and Ag/TiO2 sponges by using dextran as a soft template. This approach is facile and environmentally friendly, whereas calcination at high temperature (600–900 °C) was required and relatively low specific surface areas of about 0.1–0.5 m2 g−1 were obtained.97 An important advancement has been made by Yang's group, who reported a facile template-free method, a hydrothermal treatment strategy, for the preparation of nanoporous bimetallic foams with a large specific surface area of 20.19 m2 g−1. The hydrothermal treatment displayed a series of advantages such as mild synthesis conditions, and green and highly efficient preparation, and more importantly, it is convenient to adjust the bimetallic reduction rates.100 Unfortunately, this strategy is time-consuming and suffers from a limited specific surface area.
The sol–gel method shows great potential in overcoming the abovementioned disadvantages, and was recently reported by Eychmüller's group to prepare porous bimetallic and multimetallic Ag-based aerogels.92,93 In fact, this strategy can form fine gel-like nanostructures without the assistance of templates, external fields, or linker systems. Nanochains were firstly generated via the controlled coalescence of Au, Ag, Pt, and Pd nanoparticles in aqueous media, and their interconnection and interpenetration resulted in the construction of a self-supporting network. The obtained noble-metal-gels were subsequently converted into solid aerogels via the supercritical drying strategy. Furthermore, the prepared multimetallic Ag-based aerogels displayed an extremely low relative density (<0.2%) and high specific surface area (>50 m2 g−1). Table 4 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of various synthesis strategies for the preparation of bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites.
Table 4 Advantages and disadvantages of different methods for the fabrication of bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites




Synthesis method
Advantages
Disadvantages




Co-reduction
(1) Simple preparation process, and time- and cost-saving
(1) Narrow applicability (only metal ions with similar redox potentials can achieve co-reduction)


(2) Regulatable bimetallic Ag nanostructure
(2) The overuse of reducing agents is harmful to ecology and the environment


(3) Large scale production of bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites


Thermal decomposition
(1) Facile, time-saving, and highly efficient
Narrow applicability (only a few organometallic precursors can achieve thermal decomposition)


(2) Controllable composition, size, and shape of the resultant bimetallic Ag nanocrystals


Seed-mediated growth
(1) Producing well-defined bimetallic Ag-based nanocrystals
(1) Complicated and ambiguous nucleation and growth mechanisms restrict further application


(2) Facile and wide applicability
(2) Time- and cost-consuming


(3) Tunable Ag nanoparticle size, size distribution, composition, and structure


Galvanic replacement
(1) Producing a variety of bimetallic hollow Ag-based nanocomposites
Time- and cost-consuming and complicated preparation process


(2) Controllable Ag nanoparticle size, size distribution, composition, and structure





3. Application of Ag-based nanocomposites in catalysis
Ag nanoparticles possess several unique advantages such as high activity, easy preparation, low cost and good stability, and thus have been widely used as one of the most effective catalysts in heterogeneous catalysis.6 In comparison with other metal-based nanoparticles catalysts such as Pd, Pt, Au, Ru, Rh, etc., Ag nanoparticles catalysts have relatively lower cost and toxicity, which ensures that they have great potential for practical application.103 Nevertheless, single Ag nanoparticles as a catalyst pose a number of issues, e.g., poor stability, easy oxidation and easy aggregation.2 To overcome these issues, many different strategies have come up, and one effective attempt is to incorporate Ag nanoparticles into various matrixes or onto their surfaces, or to form bimetallic Ag nanocomposites. The enhanced catalytic performance of supported Ag-based materials is mainly ascribed to the markedly reduced agglomeration of Ag nanoparticles by the supporting strategy. Whether Ag nanoparticles act as catalytic active sites or electronic conductive channels, the smaller and stabler Ag nanoparticles can improve the catalytic activity due to size-dependent reaction rate and surface plasmon resonance effects.104,105 The enhanced catalytic performance of bimetallic Ag-based materials is mainly attributed to the composition-dependent property of the synergistic effect. The catalytic performance of bimetallic Ag nanoparticle composites mainly depends on the geometric and electronic states of Ag, which can be remarkably affected by the blended foreign element.106 In general, the Ag-based nanocomposites can be employed as highly efficient catalysts for various catalytic applications. Here, we will mainly introduce Ag-based nanocomposites for catalytic oxidation reactions, catalytic reduction reactions, photocatalytic reactions, and eletrocatalytic reactions.
3.1. Catalytic oxidation reactions
The catalytic oxidation of alcohols, aldehydes and sulfides is a vital reaction for organic synthesis, as it is capable of employed to prepare plenty of valuable raw materials.107,108 Various Ag-based nanocomposites for oxidation reactions have been extensively studied recently, and are reviewed in the following subsections.

3.1.1. Supported Ag nanocomposite catalysts for oxidation reactions. 
The commercial production of formaldehyde is mainly based on methanol oxidation catalyzed by noble metals, e.g., Pt, Pd, Au, and Ag. However, the catalytic activity of unsupported noble metal nanoparticles is low because of severe agglomeration effects. Supported Ag-based nanocomposites are a promising catalyst for methanol oxidation because of their reduced aggregation and low cost. As early as 1997, Deng's group109 reported the catalytic oxidation of methanol to formaldehyde on Ag/SiO2 catalyst obtained via the sol–gel strategy. Surprisingly, the yield of formaldehyde catalyzed via Ag/SiO2 catalyst was 10% higher than that of traditional pumice-supported Ag catalyst and even about 1% higher than that of commercial electrolytic Ag catalyst. Inspired by this, Dai's group110 designed a novel Ag–SiO2–Al2O3 catalyst for the catalytic oxidation of methanol to formaldehyde. The yield of formaldehyde catalyzed by Ag–SiO2–Al2O3 catalyst was up to 91%, which was much higher than that of pumice-supported Ag catalyst (75%) and even higher than that of commercial electrolytic Ag catalyst (85%). In addition, the selectivity and conversion rates have also been significantly enhanced. The enhancements were probably ascribed to the larger specific surface area (1–3 m2 g−1) and smaller particle size (10–100 nm).
Recently, in order to efficiently oxidize alcohols using molecular oxygen (O2) as an oxidant, the development of homogeneous or heterogeneous catalysts has attracted great attention because environmentally friendly methods have been used to replace toxic oxidants such as chromium and manganese salts.111 Hosseini-Monfared and co-workers112 compared the catalytic potentials of three different types of Ag-based graphene oxides catalysts toward the aerobic oxidation of benzyl alcohol, namely, Ag/rGO with reduced graphene oxide, Ag/GO with partially reduced graphene oxide and Ag/GOSH with thiolated partially reduced graphene oxide. High catalytic activity could be achieved in the presence of the radical initiator N-hydroxyphthalimide. GOSH endowed Ag nanoparticles with uniform particle size via preventing its aggregation and adsorbing Ag nanoparticles on the GOSH surface because of the strong adsorption capability between the GOSH and Ag nanoparticles. As a result, Ag/GOSH showed markedly enhanced catalytic properties when compared to those of Ag/rGO and Ag/GO. In addition, it could also be easily separated and retrieved from the mixture.
Formaldehyde released from organic coatings has become one of the most serious indoor pollutants. Catalytic oxidation is an ideal strategy for the removal of formaldehyde since it can be oxidized into carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) using suitable catalysts at room temperatures.113 Qu's group114 prepared monodisperse Ag/SBA-15 catalyst via the post-grafting method. The formaldehyde could be completely oxidized into CO2 and H2O over Ag/SBA-15 catalysts at about 100 °C. They also prepared a series of other Ag-based catalysts e.g. Ag/MCM-41, Ag/NaY, Ag/SiO2 and Ag/TiO2. It was found that formaldehyde molecules adsorbed on Ag sites could also be oxidized easily into CO2 and H2O. This confirmed that Ag-based composite catalysts possessed enormous potential for formaldehyde oxidation.115,116
Propylene oxide is the most frequently used chemical intermediate and is recorded by millions of tons of emissions each year. Thus, the catalytic oxidation of propylene to propylene oxide by molecular O2 is very important.117 Oyama's group118 reported Ag/CaCO3 catalysts for the catalytic oxidation of propylene to propylene oxide for the first time. The resultant Ag/CaCO3 catalysts showed a propylene oxide production rate of 1.43 × 10−3 mol gcat−1 h−1 (Table 5). Bal's group119 reported a novel synthesis strategy for the preparation of Ag nanoparticles (2–5 nm) loaded on WO3 nanorods (30–40 nm) by employing a cationic surfactant (cetyltrimethylammonium bromide), a capping agent (PVP), and a reducing agent (hydrazine) (Fig. 6a–d). The synergism between surface Ag nanoparticles and WO3 nanorods could enhance the dissociation of O2 molecules on the Ag nanoparticle surface and produce Ag oxide (Fig. 6e), which then transferred its oxygen to the propylene to form propylene oxide selectively. As a result, the obtained Ag/WO3 catalyst showed a very high propylene oxide production rate of 6.1 × 10−2 mol gcat−1 h−1, which was the highest rate compared with all the previously reported noble metal nanocomposites (Table 5).118,120–126
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM images, (b) size distribution, (c) high-resolution image, (d) lattice fringes of (a) Ag/WO3 catalyst, and (e) the potential formation mechanism of propylene oxide. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Table 5 Catalytic activity of the reported catalysts for propylene oxidation reactions




Catalysts
Oxidation
Propylene oxide production rate (×10−3 mol gcat−1 h−1)
Ref.




Ag/CaCO3
O2
1.43

118



VCe1−xCux–NaCl
O2
0.17

120



Au/TS-1
H2 + O2
2.36

121



Au–Ba(NO3)2/titanosilicate, trimethyl amine promoter
H2 + O2
1.4

122



Au/Ti–SiO2, Ba promoter
H2 + O2
1.37

123



Au/TS-1
H2 + O2
2.75

124



Au/TiO2
H2 + O2
0.2

125



Au/TS-1
H2 + O2
40

126



Ag/WO3
O2
61

119





In addition, there is a highly efficient strategy to reduce ammonia pollution: low temperature selective catalytic oxidation of ammonia with O2 to N2 and H2O.127 Ag-Based nanocomposites are an appealing catalyst for the selective catalytic oxidation of ammonia due to their relatively low cost and high efficiency. As early as 2003, Gang and co-workers128 reported that Ag/Al2O3 catalysts were extremely active for ammonia oxidation at low temperature, and the catalytic activity of the Ag/Al2O3 catalysts was even superior to those of noble metal catalysts. Inspired by this, He and co-workers129 explored the effect of Ag species on Ag/Al2O3 catalysts prepared using impregnation, incipient wetness impregnation and sol–gel methods for the selective catalytic oxidation of ammonia to N2. The Ag species state and the Ag nanoparticles size have a very important effect on the activity and selectivity of ammonia-catalyzed oxidation of N2 at low temperature. In addition, zeolite USY could also be used as a support, which guaranteed a high concentration of uniformly dispersed metallic Ag species and Ag+ cations with strong electron acceptor properties. As a result, the resultant Ag/zeolite USY catalysts exhibited a high activity and selectivity for ammonia oxidation.130 Another important study was reported by Palkovits and co-workers,131 who reported mesoporous TiO2 with a major anatase phase as a support, which ensured the formation of highly oxidized Ag species that were easily reduced. As a result, the resultant Ag/mesoporous TiO2 catalysts showed higher selectivity and activity for ammonia oxidation than those of Ag/Al2O3 and Ag/TiO2 catalysts.
From a practical and a theoretical point of view, low temperature carbon monoxide (CO) oxidation processes are also very important. The SiO2-supported Ag catalysts have received considerable attention as highly efficient and relatively inexpensive catalysts for CO oxidation. Qu's group132 presented a novel one-pot synthesis approach to synthesize the SiO2-supported Ag nanoparticles by employing dodecylamine as the capping agent and structure director. The loading amount and the size of Ag nanoparticles have a good positive correlation with the surfactant dodecylamine. The obtained Ag-based catalysts showed outstanding catalytic properties for complete CO oxidation at 20 °C. Vodyankina's group133 reported the preparation of Ag/SiO2 catalysts with an Ag loading of 5 and 8%. Interestingly, the amount of surface –OH groups and the OH/Ag ratio had a great impact on the distribution, size, and structure of the Ag nanoparticles (Fig. 7a–c), and accordingly their catalytic activity for CO oxidation (Fig. 7d). In this work, Ag nanoparticles with suitable distribution and defect structure could adsorb O species, which were beneficial for achieving a high catalytic activity for CO oxidation (Fig. 7e). Thus, the OH/Ag ratio played a considerably important role in designing highly efficient Ag/SiO2 catalysts.
 Fig. 7  TEM images (left) of 5Ag/SiO2-500 (a), 5Ag/SiO2-700 (b) and 5Ag/SiO2-900 (c) catalysts and the corresponding particle size distributions (right). (d) Dependence of turnover frequency on the ratio of OH/Ag for different Ag/SiO2 catalysts. (e) Diagrammatic sketch of CO oxidation at room temperature on the Ag nanoparticles with different distributions and structures. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Elsevier. 
Currently, Ag/Al2O3 is the most commonly used catalyst in the production of formaldehyde b the oxidation of methanol. Researchers in both academic and commercial organizations are doing their best to explore and develop novel supported Ag-based catalysts with high activity, stability and large-scale production capability. The basic principle of the design should comprehensively consider the catalytic efficiency, fabrication cost, and environmental pollution problems. The currently reported catalyst supports are mostly metal oxides, which are relatively expensive and also harmful to ecology and the environment. In fact, some natural porous carbon materials are highly worth considering due to their large specific surface area and low cost and toxicity. Future studies should focus on Ag/porous carbon nanocomposites.


3.1.2. Bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposite catalysts for oxidation reactions. 
In addition to supported Ag nanocomposites, bimetallic Ag nanoparticles have also been considered to be a highly efficient catalyst for oxidation reactions. Toshima's group134 reported that the introduction of AgClO4 into an aqueous suspension of Au nanoparticles produces bimetallic Ag–Au nanoparticles with a core–shell structure (Ag@Au). Surface plasmon resonance peaks of the Au nanoparticles were evidently improved after the introduction of AgClO4. As a result, the highest activity (4079 mol glucose per h per mol metal) for glucose oxidation was achieved for the Ag@Au nanoparticles obtained with a Ag/Au molar ratio of 1:4, which was about 18-fold higher than that of the original monometallic Au nanoparticles under the same conditions. It was also reported that bimetallic Ag/Au nanoparticles (≤2 nm) were prepared via physically mixing colloidal dispersions of Ag and Au nanoparticles. The prepared Ag/Au nanoparticles exhibited ultrahigh catalytic activity for aerobic glucose oxidation with the highest activity of 11510 mol of glucose per h per mol of metal, which was approximately 2-fold higher than that of the Au nanoparticles with almost the same particle size.135
In addition, supported bimetallic Ag nanocomposites have also been used as highly effective catalysts for oxidation reactions. Beck and co-workers136 prepared SiO2 supported Au–Ag nanoparticles by absorbing various Ag/Au molar ratios of bimetallic colloids. It was found that the Ag/Au = 23/77 composition showed the highest activity and selectivity for glucose, benzyl alcohol and CO oxidation. J. Hutchings and co-workers137 reported that bimetallic Ag/Pd nanoparticles decorated on MgO showed improved catalytic activity for cyclohexane oxidation when compared to those of monometallic Ag/MgO and monometallic Pd/MgO. Yuan and co-workers138 reported a binary Au–Ag/SBA-15 catalyst prepared by a step-by-step metal-loading technique that was first discovered to be active in the dehydrogenation of benzyl alcohol without an oxidant or a hydrogen acceptor (Fig. 8a–d). Benzyl aldehyde was the main dehydrogenation product with a selectivity of >99% (Fig. 8a). The intrinsic activity was remarkably improved when the Ag atoms gradually replaced the Au sites on the metallic surfaces. The geometric nanostructure and electronic alloying effects resulting from the change in the surface composition were deemed the main contributors to the enhanced intrinsic activity (Fig. 8e–f).
 Fig. 8  (a) Component change of benzyl alcohol and benzyl aldehyde as a function of the reaction time Δt over Au1–Ag0.111 catalyst. (b) Comparison of catalytic activities over the pure Au, Ag, Au + Ag (mechanical mixing of pure Au and pure Ag), and Au1–Ag0.111 bimetallic catalysts. (c) Performance and intrinsic activity in benzyl alcohol dehydrogenation as a function of Ag promoter content. (d) Size distribution of Au1–Ag0.111 catalyst. The inset shows its TEM image. (e) Routes for surface construction and snapshot of benzyl alcohol dehydrogenation on the nanocrystallite framework. (f) Proposed schematic routes of a reaction cycle of benzyl alcohol dehydrogenation on Au–Ag/SBA-15. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
To date, there are very few reports about bimetallic Ag-based catalysts for oxidation reactions, and the further development of bimetallic Ag-based oxidation reaction catalysts is highly desired. In order to further improve catalytic properties and endow them with advanced functions, supported bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites are highly worth considering. A lot of advanced catalyst supports such as polymers, porous carbons, oxides, MOFs, and COFs can be selected. It is believed that with further development, supported bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites can achieve highly efficient catalytic oxidation reactions and large-scale production.

3.2. Catalytic reduction reactions
Ag-Based nanocomposites are also an outstanding catalyst for many catalytic reduction reactions such as aqueous phase organic pollutants’ reduction, nitrogen oxides (NOx) reduction, and acetylene reduction due to their relatively low cost and high catalytic activity.

3.2.1. Supported Ag nanocomposite catalysts for reduction reactions. 
In recent years, Ag-based nanocomposites have received increasing attention in the field of reduction reactions, especially the reduction of aqueous phase organic pollutants, such as nitrophenol, methylene blue, rhodamine dye, etc. For example, our group reported a simple, mild and green approach for the fabrication of monodisperse polystyrene-methyl acrylic acid/silver (PSMAA/Ag) nanocomposite spheres (Fig. 9a). Ag nanoparticles were found to be uniformly coated on the PSMAA sphere surface, ranging in size from 8 to 24 nm (Fig. 9b–e). The obtained PSMAA/Ag nanocomposite spheres showed high catalytic activity and outstanding recyclability for 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) reduction (Fig. 9f and g), and the corresponding reaction rate constant was as high as 8.17 × 10−3 s−1 (Table 6).2 In addition to polymer/Ag nanocomposites, oxides/Ag nanocomposites have also been used for 4-NP reduction. Zhang's group139 reported a novel front/post core method combined with laser ablation processing to create a complex catalyst structure with a hm-SiO2 spherical shell and multiple encapsulated Ag nanoparticles yolk (Ag@hm-SiO2) (Fig. 10a). Each Ag@hm-SiO2 contains 5–10 Ag nanoparticle yolks (∼20 nm) (Fig. 10b and c), where the content of Ag was about 3.6 wt%. In order to further improve the catalytic properties, an innovative laser ablation treatment was adopted to decrease the size and increase the number of encapsulated Ag nanoparticles (Fig. 10b–e). The laser ablation treated Ag@hm-SiO2 exhibited 3-fold enhanced catalytic activity towards 4-NP reduction when compared to the pure Ag@hm-SiO2 (Fig. 10f and g). Such excellent catalytic properties could be mainly ascribed to the distinctive structural characteristics of Ag@hm-SiO2, where the mesoporous shell offered an easily accessible route for the rapid transfer of the reactants to the encapsulated Ag nanoparticles, and it also provided an effectively protective shield for the encapsulated Ag nanoparticles.139 Chi and co-workers140 presented a simple approach to construct magnetic Fe3O4@SiO2-Ag nanocomposites by the in situ wet chemistry method using PVP as a reductant and a stabilizer. This approach could effectively impede the agglomeration of Ag nanoparticles, thus yielding uniformly-dispersed and small-sized Ag nanoparticles. The obtained Fe3O4@SiO2-Ag nanocomposites could be used as a recyclable catalyst for 4-NP reduction, because it contained a highly magnetic separable Fe3O4 core for efficient magnetic separation, an SiO2 intermediate layer for preventing nuclear chemistry and/or photolysis of Fe3O4, and small-sized Ag nanoparticles for enhancing catalytic activity.
 Fig. 9  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the construction of PSMAA/Ag nanocomposite spheres. TEM images of (b) PSMAA spheres, (c–e) PSMAA/Ag nanocomposite spheres prepared by using different [Ag(NH3)2]+ ion concentrations. (f) Plots of ln(At/A0) versus reaction time t for 4-NP reduction over different PSMAA/Ag samples. (g) Recyclability of different PSMAA/Ag samples as a catalyst for 4-NP reduction with NaBH4. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 10  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the preparation process of Ag@hm-SiO2 nanoarchitectures. (b) TEM image of Ag@hm-SiO2 nanoarchitectures with the multiple-core/shell configuration and (c) the corresponding size distribution of Ag cores. (d) TEM image of Ag@hm-SiO2 spheres after the treatment with laser ablation and (e) the size distribution histogram of the Ag cores. (f) and (g): Ct/C0 and the corresponding linear fittings versus time in the presence of different catalysts, (I) Ag@hm-SiO2 before laser ablation; (II) Ag@hm-SiO2 after laser ablation; (III) without any catalyst. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 6 Comparison of catalytic activities for the various Ag-based nanocomposites catalysts




Catalyst
Concentration
Catalyst (mg)/Ag loading (wt%)
Ag size (nm)

k

 (× 10−3 s−1)
TOFb (× 10−3 s−1)
Ref.


4-NP (mM)
NaBH4 (mM)





a “k” represents the reaction rate constant, which is calculated from the equation: ln(Ct/C0) = −kt.
b “TOF” represent the turnover frequency, which is calculated as the moles of reduced 4-NP per mole of Ag content per consumed time.





PSMAA/Ag
0.1
60
2/9.66
16
8.17
0.63

2



Ag@hm-SiO2
16
800
2/3.6
20
18
16

139



Fe3O4@SiO2-Ag
0.12
12
—/0.1
3.65
7.67
—

140



Au@Ag core–shell NCs
1
100
—/—
22.5
0.16
—

141



Au@Ag core–shell NPs
0.2
16
0.1/—
3
5.4
—

142



Au@Ag@PDA
0.2
15
—/—
10
0.83
—

143



MOFs-decorated Au@Ag
0.18
353.5
3.46/2
—
4.97
7.1

144





Apart from 4-NP, methylene blue (MB) reduction is also an important catalytic model. Sun's group145 reported a simple method for preparing polystyrene/silver (PS/Ag) nanocomposite spheres. In the presence of Sn2+ ions, uniform Ag nanoparticles were coated on the entire PS sphere surface. The prepared PS/Ag nanocomposite spheres exhibited outstanding catalytic properties for MB reduction. Our group also reported a facile strategy for the fabrication of novel poly(styrene-N-isopropylacrylamidemethacrylic acid)/silver (PSNM/Ag) nanocomposite spheres. Ag nanoparticles with an average diameter of ∼15 nm were uniformly loaded on PSNM sphere surfaces by in situ reduction. The as-prepared PSNM/Ag catalyst revealed a reaction rate constant of 2.24 × 10−3 s−1.48 In addition, we also reported poly(acrylic acid)-modified tourmaline/Ag nanocomposites for MB reduction, and the corresponding reaction rate constant was up to 1.28 × 10−3 s−1.8
Rhodamine dyes are potentially hazardous because of their toxicity and resistance to aerobic degradation. Ag-Based nanocomposites have been used as highly effective catalysts for rhodamine dye reduction. Deng and co-workers146 prepared SiO2@Ag nanocomposites using a binary surfactant template method. The size and coverage of Ag nanoparticles could be readily adjusted by changing the concentration of the precursor [Ag(NH3)2]+ ions. The prepared SiO2@Ag nanocomposite rods showed an excellent catalytic performance for rhodamine B reduction. Kurtan and co-workers147 prepared MnFe2O4@SiO2@Ag nanocomposites using co-precipitation and chemical reduction strategies. The prepared MnFe2O4@SiO2@Ag catalysts revealed high catalytic activity towards the reduction of a series of azo compounds, e.g., methyl orange, MB, eosin Y, and rhodamine B, and aromatic nitro compounds, e.g., 4-NP, 4-nitroaniline (4-NA) and 2-nitroaniline (2-NA). Moreover, it also exhibited good reusability. Hydrocarbon selective reduction of NO with excess O2 is an effective method for removing NOx from various exhaust gases.148 Ag-Based nanocomposites are a potential catalyst for NOx reduction. Shimizu and co-workers149 prepared Ag–Al2O3 nanocomposite catalysts through sol–gel and impregnation routes. The prepared Ag–Al2O3 catalysts showed excellent catalytic properties for NO reduction. Ström and co-workers150 paid attention to the selective catalytic reduction of NOx with ethane, acetic acid, ethene, ethanol ether and dimethyl, respectively, with Ag–Al2O3 and In–Al2O3 catalysts. Because hydrocarbon activation was considered to be a vital reaction step in hydrocarbons-selective catalytic reduction of NOx, this may explain the promoting effect of the introduction of hydrogen (H2) with both the Ag/Al2O3 and the In/Al2O3 catalysts.
All in all, in order for supported Ag-based catalysts to achieve high catalytic activity and stability, a rational design of the morphology and nanostructure of the support is of great importance. In the selection of advanced catalyst supports from polymers, porous carbons, oxides, MOFs, and COFs, the following considerations should be given: (1) incorporating magnetic oxide(s) for good recoverability; (2) introducing a hierarchical nanostructure for fast mass transport; (3) possessing a large surface area for more active sites and enhanced catalytic activity; and (4) having strong interaction with the supported Ag nanoparticles for enhanced chemical stability.


3.2.2. Bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposite catalysts for reduction reactions. 
Bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites have gained more and more research attention due to their unique performance and great catalytic potential compared to the corresponding single metal and alloy counterparts.151–153 Tsao and co-workers141 reported the size-dependent catalytic properties of the Au@Ag core–shell nanocrystals. It was observed that the catalytic activity of the Au@Ag core–shell nanoparticles could be adjusted only via regulating the size of the core. Li's group142 prepared narrow-size distributed and water-soluble Au@Ag core–shell nanoparticles through adopting unmodified apoferritin as a template. Through changing the loading amounts of the Ag precursor, the Ag shell thickness could be adjusted from one layer to several layers. In addition, the prepared Au@Ag core–shell nanoparticles exhibited prominent catalytic properties for 4-NP reduction. Gholami's group153,154 reported AgPt-supported-GO and AgNi-supported-CeO2 nanocomposites for highly efficient reduction of organic pollutants. Zhou and workers143 reported a PDA-based method to develop highly efficient Au@Ag@PDA core–shell nanocatalysts. It was found that the redox coupling of dopamine with Ag+ in solution induced seed growth of the Ag shell with an adjustable thickness on the gold nanoparticles (Fig. 11b–d), resulting in a PDA coating layer formed on the Au@Ag core–shell bimetallic nanoparticles (Fig. 11a). In addition, single metal Au shells and Ag shells could also be obtained on nanocrystalline seeds with the same chemical properties, forming single metal Au@Au@PDA nanoparticles and Ag@Ag@PDA nanoparticles, respectively (Fig. 11e and f). The reaction rate constant of the Au@Ag@PDA core–shell nanoparticles exceeded 2-fold those of the monometallic Au@Au@PDA nanoparticles and Ag@Ag@PDA nanoparticles, which was attributed to the synergistic effect in the Au@Ag@PDA core–shell structures (Fig. 11g).
 Fig. 11  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the preparation process of core–shell Au@Ag@PDA nanocatalysts. TEM images of Au@Ag@PDA nanoparticles with different thicknesses of Ag layer (b, c and d). TEM images of monometallic Au@Au@PDA nanoparticles (e) and Ag@Ag@PDA nanoparticles (f). (g) The dependence of ln (Ct/C0) on reaction time (t) for the reactions catalyzed by different catalysts. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Many colloidal or solid scaffolds, such as MOFs, have also been used to support Au@Ag core–shell bimetallic nanoparticles to reduce aggregation. Xu's group presented the preparation of MOF-decorated Au@Ag core–shell bimetallic nanoparticles using a sequential deposition–reduction approach. The porous surface structure of MOFs could confine and impede the growth of Au@Ag nanoparticles. Moreover, the obtained MOF-decorated Au@Ag core–shell bimetallic nanoparticles possessed superior catalytic activity for 4-NP reduction to that of the alloyed and monometallic nanoparticles, which was mainly attributed to a strong bimetallic synergistic effect of the core–shell structured Au@Ag nanoparticles.144
Aromatic nitro compounds (nitroaromatics) are proverbially utilized in the preparation of various products such as dyes, pesticides, polymers and explosives. However, their overuse has resulted in a series of environmental problems.155 An ideal solution is the catalytic reduction of the nitroarenes. Recently, Metin's group156 reported a simple seed-mediated approach for the preparation of Ag/Pd core/shell nanoparticles and its assembly on rGO for the catalytic reduction of nitroaromatics to aniline. The thickness of the Pd shell had an enormous influence on the catalytic activity of the rGO@Ag/Pd catalysts, and the rGO@Ag/Pd with Pd shell (0.75 nm) catalyst offered the highest catalytic activity for the catalytic reduction of nitroarenes to anilines.
Formic acid is a potential biomass material and a promising H2 storage material because of its high energy density, low toxicity, and outstanding stability, and could be degraded into CO2 and H2O: HCOOH(l) → CO2 (g) + H2 (g).157,158 Recently, Wang's group159 reported a simple approach for the construction of well dispersed Ag–Pd alloy nanoparticles embedded in the pores of an amine-functionalized UiO-66 (NH2-UiO-66) using a pre-coordination method. In this way, Ag+ and PdCl42− were embedded into the pores of NH2-UiO-66 via the coordination or electrostatic interaction with the –NH2 groups, which played a considerably important role in the nucleation and growth of the Ag–Pd alloy. Amazingly, the prepared AgPd@NH2-UiO-66 catalysts showed excellent catalytic properties and 100% H2 selectivity for the dehydrogenation of formic acid. Yu and co-workers160 presented a one-pot route for the preparation of networked Ag/AgPd core/shell nanowires (Fig. 12a). The prepared Ag/AgPd nanowires with a 0.9 nm shell thickness (Fig. 12b and c) showed the highest activity towards the dehydrogenation catalysis of formic acid, with an initial turnover frequency of 1400 h−1 (Fig. 12d–g), and the highest selectivity for the catalytic reduction of NO3− and NO2− to N2 in water (Fig. 12h–m). The improved bifunctional catalytic properties could be ascribed to more rapid electron migration from the polymer-polyvinylpyrrolidone imine and Ag to Pd.
 Fig. 12  (a) A diagrammatic sketch of the oriented attachment of Ag/AgPd nanoparticles. (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of the obtained Ag/AgPd nanowires. (d) The volume of gas mixture (CO2 + H2) generated vs. time for the catalytic dehydrogenation of formic acid at different temperatures and (e) the related Arrhenius plot (lnTOF vs. 1/T). (f) CO2 + H2 volume generated vs. time for the catalytic dehydrogenation of formic acid at different concentrations and (g) the plot of gas generation rate vs. formic acid concentration. (h) The catalytic NO3− and NO2− reduction and (i) the catalytic formic acid decomposition of the Ag/AgPd-0.9 catalysts vs. the reaction time in 0.5 M aqueous formic acid at 25 °C. (j) The ammonia nitrogen content in the catalytic NO3− and NO2− reduction system vs. the reaction time. (k) The selectivity of the Ag/AgPd-0.9 catalysts toward NO3 and NO2 to meet the drinking water standards recommended by the Environmental Protection Agency at 25 mg L−1. (l) Gas chromatography spectrum using TCD for the evolved gas from commercial pure N2, the reduction of NO3− and NO2− over Ag/AgPd-0.9 at 25 °C in the formic acid dehydrogenation system and formic acid aqueous solution over the Ag/AgPd-0.9 at 25 °C. (m) Gas chromatography spectrum using an FID-methanizer for the evolved gas from the reduction of NO3− and NO2− over Ag/AgPd-0.9 at 25 °C in the formic acid dehydrogenation system, commercial pure CO and formic acid aqueous solution over Ag/AgPd-0.9 at 25 °C. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In order to further reduce bimetallic Ag nanocomposite agglomeration, catalyst supports should be firstly considered. A series of advanced supports have been reported, and choosing a suitable support for decorating bimetallic Ag nanoparticles has resulted in a highly efficient catalytic reduction reaction (e.g., Au@Au@PDA and MOFs-decorated Au@Ag). In addition to catalytic activity and stability, fabrication cost is also an important factor. In a comprehensive consideration of the catalytic efficiency and fabrication cost, other cost-effective supports (such as natural porous carbon materials and biomass materials) seem to be better choices.

3.3. Photocatalytic reactions
The photocatalytic reaction is an appealing strategy for dealing with a series of pollutants caused by agricultural and industrial production, and transportation. Ag-Based nanocomposite catalysts are some of the most important catalyst materials for photocatalytic reactions due to their relatively low cost and high catalytic activity and stability. Because of these merits, Ag-based nanocomposites have been frequently considered as photocatalysts in many photocatalytic areas, e.g., O2 reduction reaction, H2 evolution reaction, alcohol oxidation reaction, CO2 reduction reaction, etc.

3.3.1. Supported Ag nanocomposites for photocatalytic reactions. 
Water pollution caused by the toxic chemicals and organic dyes in industrial waste water has recently attracted extensive research attention for sustainable development and environmental remediation.161 Photocatalytic degradation of aqueous phase organic pollutants is one of the most effective strategies for solving this problem.162 Mohapatra and co-workers163 prepared Ag/ZnO nanospindles via a simple wet chemical approach, which exhibited significantly improved photocatalytic performance for methyl orange degradation in contrast to the ZnO nanospindles. The improved photocatalytic properties are attributed to the plasma response of Ag nanoparticles and the inhibition of electron–hole recombination. Kale and co-workers164 prepared Ag–ZnO nanocomposites using a plant-extract-mediated hydrothermal approach. The hierarchical ZnO nanostructures were loaded on Ag nanoparticles with a diameter of 10–50 nm. The apparent rate constant of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposites was 0.99 × 10−3 s−1, which was higher than that of the untreated ZnO nanostructures (0.42 × 10−2 s−1). Wang and co-workers165 prepared 3D Ag/ZnO with porous nanosheets as building blocks through a facile solution approach followed by topological morphology transformation. Almost 100% of 10 ppm 4-NP photocatalytic degradation was obtained from the Ag/ZnO nanocomposites in only 25 minutes. The synergistic effect between the 2D ZnO porous single crystal nanosheet and the Ag component not only accelerates the separation and migration efficiency of the charge carrier, but also improves the charge collection efficiency, which endows the Ag/ZnO nanocomposites with excellent photocatalytic activity. Pragathiswaran and co-workers166 prepared TiO2@SiO2/Ag nanocomposites through a sol–gel method. The photocatalytic degradation efficiencies of rhodamine B and MB under direct sunlight were 92% and 85%, respectively, implying very high photocatalytic performance for this photocatalyst. With the rapid industrial development, a large amount of fossil fuel combustion and vehicle exhaust has resulted in dramatically increasing CO2 emission, causing the greenhouse effect and other environmental problems.167 Similar to photosynthesis in plants, direct photoconversion from CO2 into chemical fuels168,169 or organic raw materials, catalyzed by Ag-based nanocomposites, may be an ultimate means to realize a sustainable carbon-neutral society. Zhou and co-workers170 prepared Ag/TiO2 nanocomposites by a simple and rapid Ag mirror approach. The obtained Ag/TiO2 nanocomposites displayed excellent photocatalytic properties because of the surface plasmonic resonance and electron absorption effect of the Ag component, which was found to be closely related to the size and loading amount of Ag. Zhang and co-workers171 reported a novel atmospheric pressure dielectric barrier discharge cold plasma method for the preparation of Ag/TiO2 nanocomposites without any environmentally and biologically hazardous reducing chemicals. The Ag nanoparticles (<6 nm) were homogeneously distributed on the TiO2 surface, which resulted in a localized surface plasmon resonance effect. The prepared Ag/TiO2 nanocomposites exhibited evidently improved catalytic activity for reducing CO2 to CO and CH4 under visible light when compared with the pristine TiO2.
With the development of science and technology, photocatalytic H2 evolution reaction from water using solar energy has become an effective solution to take full advantage of solar energy because both solar energy and water are highly abundant on the Earth. Ag/graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanocomoposite photocatalysts have been proverbially used for the photocatalytic H2 evolution reaction. Gao and co-workers172 reported a novel and simple supramolecular hydrogel method as a self-template for the construction of porous nanofiber Ag/g-C3N4 nanocomposites (Fig. 13a). The prepared Ag/g-C3N4 nanofibers possessed high specific surface areas, enlarged absorption in the visible light region, and enhanced photoinduced electron–hole separation capability (Fig. 13b–d). In addition, the Ag/g-C3N4 showed ultrahigh H2 evolution rate under visible-light irradiation (625 μmol h−1 g−1), which was about 6.6-fold that of the pristine g-C3N4 (Fig. 13e). Fang and co-workers173 prepared a ternary Z-scheme g-C3N4/Ag/MoS2 photocatalyst with a flower-shaped architecture and a diameter of 0.4–0.6 μm. The prepared g-C3N4/Ag/MoS2 samples displayed outstanding photocatalytic properties in degrading rhodamine B, which was 9.4 and 3.6 times those of the Ag/MoS2 and g-C3N4/MoS2 samples, and 8.8 and 2.0 times in the generation of H2, respectively. The prominent photocatalytic properties were mainly ascribed to the synergetic effects of Ag, g-C3N4, and MoS2 nanostructures in the g-C3N4/Ag/MoS2 nanocomposites, leading to Z-scheme-mechanism-assisted rapid separation and torpid recombination of the photo-induced electron–hole pairs.
 Fig. 13  (a) Construction of porous nanofiber-shaped Ag/g-C3N4 from Ag-melamine supramolecular hydrogels. (b) Solid state UV-vis diffusion reflectance spectra of g-C3N4 and Ag/g-C3N4 samples. (c) The steady state PL spectra of g-C3N4 and Ag/g-C3N4 samples at an excitation wavelength of 375 nm. (d) Time resolved PL decay spectra of g-C3N4 and Ag/g-C3N4 samples monitored at 488, 488, and 577 nm, respectively. (e) Photocatalytic H2 evolution of the samples under visible light irradiation. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Gu and co-workers174 prepared dendrite-ZnO@Ag heterostructure nanocrystals employing a simple two-step chemical strategy. Heterostructure nanocrystals consist of single crystal Ag nanowires as boles and high density (0001) oriented ZnO nanorods as boughs. Six upper side surfaces of the Ag nanowires with a diameter of 50–400 nm have been successfully grown on ZnO nanorods. The prepared ZnO@Ag composites showed a better photocatalytic performance than the pure ZnO nanorods, indicating that the Ag@ZnO interfaces promoted the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and thus improved the photocatalytic properties. Fan and co-workers175 prepared Ag-loaded TiO2 (Ag/TiO2) nanocomposites via the microwave-assisted chemical reduction approach employing tetrabutyl titanate as the Ti source. The visible light absorption and Raman scattering of TiO2 were improved by the introduction of Ag nanoparticles, which resulted from its surface plasmon resonance effect. In addition, Ag nanoparticles can effectively inhibit the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes, and possess a longer luminescence lifetime. As a result, the prepared Ag/TiO2 nanocomposites possessed high catalytic activity and can reduce CO2 to methanol. The corresponding energy efficiency is as high as 0.5%, and the methanol yield is 405.2 μmol gcat−1, which is 9.4-fold higher than that of the pure TiO2.
Commonly, Ag/semiconductor composites are some of the most popular heterostructures and have been widely studied as supported Ag-based photocatalysts. A Schottky barrier is formed when Ag nanoparticles are hybridized with a semiconductor, which is greatly beneficial for the charge carrier separation and for further improving photocatalytic properties. In addition, Ag possesses a great potential to take full advantage of visible light by the surface plasmon resonance effect. All of these endow Ag/semiconductor photocatalysts with excellent photocatalytic properties. In addition to the photocatalytic efficiency, the cost should also be considered seriously. It is believed that an effective combination of multiple components with different functions will be a good development direction in this field.


3.3.2. Bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposite catalysts for photocatalytic reactions. 
In addition to supported Ag nanocomposites, substrates–bimetallic Ag nanocomposites have also been used as highly efficient photocatalysts. Shanthi and co-workers176 prepared Ag–Au–ZnO nanocomposites through a precipitation–decomposition method. Ag–Au–ZnO was observed to be more effective than Ag–ZnO, Au–ZnO, commercial ZnO, bare ZnO, TiO2-P25 and TiO2 for the photocatalytic degradation of MB dye. Misra and co-workers177 reported a simple method for the preparation of the Au@Ag@ZnO triple layer core–shell nanostructure with Au as the core, Ag as the intermediate layer and ZnO as the outer shell. The prepared Au@Ag@ZnO core–shell nanocomposites possessed better charge separation in contrast to the ZnO and Au@ZnO nanostructures. As a result, the photocatalytic properties for the degradation of methyl orange over the Au@Ag@ZnO core–shell nanocomposites were found to be better than those of the pure ZnO, Au@ZnO, and TiO2. Yang and co-workers178 found that methanol could be selectively oxidized by low partial pressure of O2 in air. The highest methanol conversion is as high as 90%, and the highest selectivity to methyl formate is up to 85%. Ashkarran and co-workers179 prepared a Ag–Au–TiO2 composite photocatalyst through a combination of photodeposition and electrospinning techniques. The ratio of utilized Ag/Au in the final composites has a powerful effect on the photocatalytic efficiency. The introduction of a proper amount of bimetallic Ag–Au into the TiO2 matrix could result in the evident enhancement of visible-light decomposition of rhodamine B.
H2 generation by water splitting under sunlight is considered to be the most promising strategy for producing clean energy in the future for society,180,181 and substrates–bimetallic Ag nanocomposites are believed to be very promising photocatalysts for this application. Idriss and co-workers182 reported a bimetallic Ag–Pd supported on a mixed phase TiO2 photocatalyst for the generation of H2 from H2O. Pd was selected as the standard high work function metal required for the Schottky junction to remove electrons from the conduction band of the semiconductor and Ag from the bandgap edge of TiO2 to obtain its high plasmon resonance response. Inspired by this, Nadeem and co-workers183 reported that Pd–Ag bimetallic (∼8–10 nm) and monometallic (∼3–5 nm) nanoparticles were decorated on the g-C3N4 surface using a facile chemical reduction strategy (Fig. 14a–d). The prepared Pd0.7-Ag0.3/g-C3N4 photocatalyst with an overall metal loading of 1 wt% exhibited the highest H2 evolution rate of 1250 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 1.5 and 5.7-fold higher than those of the Pd/g-C3N4 and Ag/g-C3N4 photocatalysts, respectively (Fig. 14e and f). The prominent photocatalytic properties of the Pd-Ag/g-C3N4 photocatalysts were mainly attributed to the intrinsic properties and strong visible light absorption of Pd metal quenching the photogenerated electrons through the Schottky barrier formation mechanism (Fig. 14g and h).
 Fig. 14  (a–d) High resolution transmission electron microscopy images of the Pd0.7–Ag0.3/g-C3N4 photocatalyst at low and high magnifications. (e) Comparison of H2 production over the all samples. (f) Steady state photoluminescence measurements of all samples. (g) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy Nyquist plots of the pristine g-C3N4, Pd1.0/g-C3N4, Ag1.0/g-C3N4, and Pdx–Agy/g-C3N4. (h) A diagrammatic sketch of the H2 production and charge migration in the Pd0.7–Ag0.3/g-C3N4 photocatalyst under visible light illumination. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In comparison with monometallic Ag nanoparticles, bimetallic Ag possesses advantageous charge separation to lengthen the lifetime of electron–hole pairs, thus enhancing photocatalytic properties. It is a fact that various components in the bimetallic system possess a designated function in affecting catalytic properties. In a comprehensive consideration of the catalytic efficiency and fabrication cost, bimetallic Ag photocatalysts are expected to achieve considerably enhanced photocatalytic performance along with very low manufacturing cost through a reasonable adjustment of the components, size, shape, nanostructure, and support.

3.4. Electrocatalytic reactions
Ag is a promising substitute for Pt because it has similar mechanisms and kinetics for electrocatalytic reactions. Moreover, Ag has a higher tolerance toward methanol poisoning than Pt and rapidly decomposes hydroxide ions that can form peroxides that are known to cause membrane degradation.184 Thus, Ag-based nanocomposite catalysts have been proverbially used in various electrochemical conversion and energy conversion methods.185 The catalytic activity of these materials can be easily adjusted by regulating their structure, size, and composition. Inspired by this, Ag-based nanocomposite electrocatalysts have been explored in many electrocatalytic areas, such as O2 reduction reactions, H2 evolution reactions, alcohol oxidation reactions, CO2 reduction reactions, etc.

3.4.1. Supported Ag nanocomposite catalysts for electrocatalytic reactions. 
The O2 evolution reaction is a very important process in the field of sustainable electrochemical fuel generation and energy storage.167,186 Supported Ag nanocomposite catalysts have been found to be an attractive material for electrocatalytic O2 evolution reaction because of the synergistic effect between two or more distinct components. Zou's group187 prepared Ag@CoxP core–shell O2 evolution reaction nanoelectrocatalysts through in situ growth of transition-metal phosphides on Ag seed, involving the formation of Ag seeds, the growth of the Co shell, and succeeding phosphating (Fig. 15a–c). The distinctive Ag core structure ensured the construction of the surrounding CoxP shell, which led to the occurrence of electronic interactions between Co and Ag (Fig. 15d), further enhancing the O2 evolution reaction activity. As a result, the prepared Ag@CoxP nanocatalysts could transfer a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a small overpotential of 310 mV and exhibited high catalytic stability for the electrocatalytic O2 evolution reaction. In addition, the catalytic activity of Ag@CoxP nanocomposites was about 8-fold higher than that of pure Co2P nanoparticles (Fig. 15e–h). The oxygen reduction reaction is an important electrochemical process in low temperature fuel cells. However, Pt-based catalysts are frequently used due to its sluggish kinetics.181,188 Jeon and co-workers189 reported an electro-deposition approach for the preparation of Ag nanoflowers on nitrogen doped carbon nanotubes (NCNTs-AgNFs) for the electrocatalytic O2 reduction reaction in alkaline media. The prepared NCNTs-AgNFs showed an improved electrocatalytic activity for O2 reduction reaction when compared to a commercial Pt/C.
 Fig. 15  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the Ag@CoxP core–shell nanoparticle construction process. TEM (b) and HRTEM images (c) of the Ag@CoxP core–shell nanoparticles. (d) Diagrammatic sketch of the electron migration between the CoxP shell and the Ag core. (e) Polarization curves of Ag@CoxP and Co2P (the inset shows the I–t curve obtained at an overpotential of 274 mV). (f) Nyquist plots of Ag@CoxP and Co2P (the inset displays the corresponding equivalent circuit model). (g) Tafel slope measured from the polarization curves. (h) Linear relationship between Δj and the scan rate. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
In addition, the H2 evolution reaction is also is of great importance for sustainable electrochemical fuel production and energy storage.190 Amin's group191 reported that monodisperse Ag nanoparticles were successfully loaded on a titanium (Ti) substrate via simple electroless deposition without using stabilizers, reducing agents, or any chemical pre-treatments. The Ti substrate coated with the largest amount of Ag nanoparticles showed the highest electrocatalytic activity towards the H2 evolution reaction, even better than Pt. Basu's group192 prepared Ag2S/Ag nanocomposites via a simple photoinduced wet-chemical technique utilizing CuS as a sacrificial template. Ag2S/Ag (nanowires and nanoflowers balls) with different morphologies were synthesized after two different growth pathways, followed by deposition of Ag on Ag2S to form a heterostructure. The unique heterostructure of Ag2S/Ag exhibited high electrocatalytic activity in the H2 evolution reaction.
Hydrous hydrazine, especially hydrazine monohydrate (N2H4·H2O), is considered to be an ideal hydrogen source material for H2 production due to its high content of usable hydrogen, safe handling, high energy density, outstanding stability, and low toxicity.193 C60 is considered to be a promising electrocatalyst for H2 production because of its low density, high specific surface area and high flexibility and improved stability and mechanical strength. Sathe's group194 presented the fabrication of Ag@C60 (Ag nanoparticles, 10 ± 0.5 nm; C60, 15 ± 2 nm) by in situ reduction of Ag+ ions on the pre-surface functionalized C60 and subsequently thermal treatment at 160 °C. The electrocatalytic studies revealed a higher catalytic activity of the Ag@C60 than the Ag nanoparticles and functionalized C60 for electrochemical oxidation of hydrazine with outstanding and long term stability. These enhancements are primarily due to cooperative responses and related structural defects resulting from their oxidative functionalization and nano-scale synergistic functions. Pandian and co-workers195 prepared PANI/Ag nanocomposites via an interfacial polymerization strategy using dimeraniline as the starting material instead of aniline in the presence of AgNO3 aqueous solution. The prepared PANI/Ag nanocomposite could be utilized for the electrocatalytic oxidation of hydrazine within a concentration range of 20–100 M. This excellent property was due to a unique protective effect of PANI.196
In various CO2 conversion processes, the reduction of electrochemical CO2 by supported Ag nanocomposites in aqueous solutions has recently attracted increasing attention because it is environmentally friendly and can be combined with renewable energy sources e.g., solar and wind.197 Hwang and co-workers198 developed a direct one-pot method for the fabrication of Ag nanoparticles on carbon support (Ag/C) nanocomposites using a suitable anchoring agent. Three different Ag/C nanocomposites (Ag nanoparticles size: 3, 5, and 10 nm) (Fig. 16a–d) were used for the electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction in an aqueous solution. The results indicated that 5 nm-sized Ag/C nanocomposites displayed the highest activity, improved durability, and maximum faradaic efficiency (84.4%) for the electrochemical conversion of CO2 to CO (Fig. 16i–l). Moreover, the overpotential for CO production decreased by about 300 mV at 1 mA cm−2 with 5 nm-sized Ag/C in contrast to the polycrystalline Ag foil (Fig. 16e and f). In addition, after the CO2 reduction reaction, the 5 nm-sized Ag/C showed almost no size change (Fig. 16g and h). Liu and co-workers199 developed novel Ag-coated nanoporous Cu nanocomposite electrocatalysts, which were employed in electrocatalytic CO2 reduction, displaying the advantages of high surface area, open porosity and high faradaic efficiency.
 Fig. 16  (a) TEM images of (a) 3 nm, (b) 5 nm and (c) 10 nm sized Ag nanoparticles directly loaded on the carbon support. (d) HR-TEM image of 5 nm Ag/C. Dependence of CO faradaic efficiency (e) on the applied potential and (f) fixed potential at −0.75 V (vs. RHE). CO2 electrochemical reduction was performed in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3. (g) TEM image and (h) HR-TEM image of 5 nm Ag/C after CO2 reduction. (i) CO partial current density dependent on the applied potential, (j) overpotentials at fixed current densities, (k) mass activity dependent on the applied potential and (l) specific activity dependent on the applied potential. Specific activity was normalized by the electrochemically active surface area of Ag measured from Pb UPD. CO2 electrochemical reduction was performed in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3. The thermodynamic reduction potential for CO2 to CO is −0.11 V vs. RHE. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) have drawn great attention over that last few decades because of their advantages of ease of handling, high energy density, and low operating temperature.200 High performance DMFCs require an anode catalyst with high electrocatalytic activity. Ag/TiO2 nanocomposites are a promising electrocatalyst for methanol oxidation because the modification of Ag on the TiO2 surface greatly improves the electrocatalytic properties through enhancing the interfacial charge migration process, which restrains the charge recombination. As a result, the Ag/TiO2-modified electrode exhibited enhanced photoelectrocatalytic activity, and the corresponding photocurrent density was as high as 1 mA cm−2, which was 4-fold higher than that of the unmodified TiO2 electrode.201
In short, interest in supported Ag-based nanocomposites as electrocatalysts has increased because Ag displays many unique characteristics that are not found in many other metals. The development of new and highly efficient supported Ag-based electrocatalysts should focus mainly on overcoming the large overpotentials and low current densities associated with the electrochemical process and the reasonable selection of supports. Besides high catalytic efficiency, the fabrication cost should also be considered.


3.4.2. Bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposite catalysts for electrocatalytic reactions. 
Recently, bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposite catalysts have also received increasing attention for the electrocatalytic O2 reduction reaction. Linic and co-workers202 presented the fabrication of low cost Ag–Co alloy electrocatalysts for the O2 reduction reaction. The prepared Ag alloy showed a more than 5-fold improved area-specific activity for an alkaline O2 reduction reaction in contrast to the pure Ag electrocatalysts at 0.8 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode, and over half the specific activity of Pt nanoparticles at the same potential (Fig. 17a–e). This phenomenon is attributed to the fact that Co atoms act by a ligand mechanism to disturb the Ag surface sites and enhance their inherent electrochemical activity (Fig. 17f and g). Chen and co-workers203 prepared 1-dodecyne-functionalized Ag/Au alloy nanoparticles through chemical reduction of metal salt precursors at various initial feed ratios. The obtained Ag/Au nanoparticles showed high electrocatalytic activity for O2 reduction, and the highest activity was achieved for the sample with 35.5 at% Au. The high electrocatalytic activity was attributed to the unique metal–ligand interfacial bonding interactions and the alloying effects that increased metal–oxygen affinity. Feng and co-workers204 reported a simple one-pot aqueous approach for the preparation of hollow AgPt core–shell bimetallic nanocrystals through employing 5-aminoorotic acid (5-amino-2,6-dioxo-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyrimidine-4-carboxylic acid) as a growth-directing agent, without using any seed, organic solvent or template. The prepared hollow AgPt electrocatalysts displayed enhanced catalytic activity toward the O2 reduction reaction with increased onset potential (ηonset) (0.916 V) and improved kinetic current density (243.23 mA mgPt−1) in 0.1 M HClO4 at 0.850 V in contrast to that of Pt black (0.876 V, 25.85 mA mgPt−1).
 Fig. 17  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the construction of Ag3[Co(CN)6] precursor and Ag–Co alloy. (b) Leaching CV in Ar-purged 0.001 M H2SO4 + 0.1 M Na2SO4, displaying dissolution of Co on the first cycle, and then featureless scans. (c) Rotating disk electrode I–V polarization curves (potentials relative to the RHE) taken in O2-saturated 0.1 M NaOH at 25 °C and 900 revolutions per minute for the Ag–Co surface alloy, as well as a leached alloy, a segregated Ag/Co sample and pure Ag and Co. (d) Mass-transport corrected kinetic current Tafel plots for the samples. The inset displays Pb-stripping voltammograms adopted to calculate the electrochemical surface area at 10 mV s−1 in the Ar-purged electrolyte with 125 μM Pb(NO3)2 added after the activity measurements. (e) Summary of kinetic current densities for oxygen reduction on each sample, measured at 0.8 VRHE and 0.85 VRHE. Error bars indicate the standard deviation for three or more separately synthesized samples. Scans were recorded in Ar-purged 0.1 M NaOH for the obtained and leached Ag–Co catalyst particles, and for pure Ag and Co control samples, with upper potential limits of 1.00 VRHE (f) and 1.15 VRHE (g). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 202 with permission from Springer Nature. 
The electrocatalytic H2 evolution reaction in water decomposition has been widely studied as a sustainable method for generating H2 in energy applications.205 Zhang and co-workers206 reported that Au–Ag decahedra and icosahedra with multiple twin structures were directly grown on reduced graphene oxide (rGO) through a simple method under microwave irradiation. The prepared Au–Ag/rGO nanocomposites displayed outstanding electrocatalytic activity and stability for H2 production because of the rich twin defects and the synergistic effect between the Au–Ag alloy and rGO. Specifically, Au–Ag icosahedra/rGO showed improved electrocatalytic activity and stability in contrast to commercial Pt/C.
Bimetallic Ag-based electrocatalysts can enhance the activity and selectivity of their single metal counterparts by adjusting structure, composition and morphology. Nevertheless, there are only a few systematic models to understand the structural–effect relationship of CO2 electrochemical reduction reactions. Wang and co-workers207 reported a structure-controlled model of the growth process of Ag@Cu bimetallic nanoparticles constructed via a polyol method, reducing mixtures of Ag+ and Cu2+ (excess amount) in the presence of PVP and ethylene glycol. Various Ag@Cu nanoparticles were regulated from the Ag core to the Cu outer shell by adjusting the heating time (0–25 min). The prepared Ag@Cu-7 (7 min of heating time) showed outstanding electrocatalytic activity and synergistic reaction toward CO2 reduction. The excellent electrocatalytic activity was attributed to the surface geometric effect and the electronic effect. Jiao's group208 prepared AgSn/SnOx core–shell electrocatalysts with an Ag–Sn bimetallic core and an ultrathin partially oxidized SnOx shell via galvanically displacing Sn with Ag (Fig. 18a). Uniformly dispersed nanoparticles (20 nm) and a near-spherical shape were found in Ag76Sn24 (Fig. 18b and c). The presence of partially oxidized SnOx in the Ag76Sn24 electrocatalyst was further confirmed by X-ray absorption spectroscopy. At the optimal SnOx shell thickness of 1.7 nm, the catalyst showed a high formate faradaic efficiency of 80% and a formate partial current density of 16 mA cm−2 at −0.8 V vs. RHE, indicating an evident improvement when compared to the state-of-the-art formate-selective CO2 reduction catalysts (Fig. 18d–g). Density-functional theory calculations indicated that oxygen vacancies on the SnO (101) surface were steady at highly negative potentials as well as vital for CO2 activation (Fig. 18h–i).
 Fig. 18  (a) Preparation of ultrathin partially oxidized SnOx catalyst for CO2 electroreduction. (b, c) TEM images of Ag76Sn24. (d) X-ray absorption near-edge structure spectrum of Ag76Sn24. Spectra of SnO2 and Sn standards are displayed for contrast. (e) CO2 reduction faradaic efficiencies of AgSn/SnOx catalysts. Electrochemical CO2 reduction performance of Ag76Sn24 catalyst: (f) CO, formate, and H2 faradaic efficiencies, (g) CO, formate, and H2 partial current densities. (h) The free formation energies of surface defects (Ov: oxygen vacancy, –(O)H*: hydroxyl from H+ reduction, and asymmetric 2OH* from chemical water dissociation) on the SnO as a function of potentials vs. RHE. (i) The most advantageous free energy routes of CO and HCOOH construction on SnO with Ov and –(O)H*, respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The most promising anode catalysts used in DMFCs are Pt and Pt-based alloys. However, the high cost of Pt can impose some restrictions on its large-scale applications. Bimetallic Ag-based electrocatalysts are catching researchers’ interest due to their relatively low cost and synergistic effect between various compositions. Atar and co-workers209 presented Ag/rGO, Au/rGO and Ag@Au/rGO composites, which were used for electrocatalytic methanol oxidation. Among them, the Ag@Au/rGO exhibited the highest electrocatalytic activity for methanol oxidation due to their synergistic effect. Chen and co-workers210 reported a simple kinetic control solution method for the fabrication of a novel Au–Ag nanoporous sponge consisting of a 3D network without the use of additional stabilizers. An unthinkable shift of the d-band center in Au–Ag nanoporous sponges was observed, which effectively activated the Au–Ag nanoporous sponges for electrochemical reactions. Therefore, in contrast to the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst, the powerful electronic effect combined with the affluent accessible active sites in the layered porous structure gave the naked Au–Ag nanoporous sponge ultra-high electrocatalytic activity for oxygen reduction, ethylene glycol oxidation, and glucose oxidation reactions.
Similar to the supported Ag-based nanocomposites, the design and development of practical electrochemical processes using bimetallic Ag-based nanocatalysts is generally meant to overcome the high overpotentials and low current density. In addition, the integration of various components into bimetallic nanosystems for optimum and synergistic utilization offers an effective method to develop ideal electrocatalysts as exemplified by various hybrid tactics to improve their electrocatalytic performance.

3.5. Other
Coupling reactions are of great vital importance for the formation of many pharmaceutical intermediates and prodrugs.211,212 The most widely reported coupling reactions mainly include the Heck reaction, the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction and the Sonogashira reaction, which often involve noble metals, e.g., Pd, Au, and especially Ag213,214 due to their relatively low cost and low toxicity. So far, Ag-based nanocomposites have been widely employed for catalytic coupling reactions. Santhanalakshmi and co-workers215 prepared trimetallic Au/Ag/Pd core–shell nanoparticles with cetyltrimethylammonium bromide as the capping agent. The prepared trimetallic Au/Ag/Pd nanoparticles displayed improved catalytic activity for Sonogashira coupling reactions when compared to those of mono- and bimetallic catalysts. The enhanced catalytic activity of the trimetallic nanoparticles was mainly attributed to the sequential electronic effect between Au, Pd and Ag. Liu and co-workers216 reported ultrafine Ag–Pd bimetallic nanoparticles homogeneously distributed on rGO through redox reactions between Pd2+, Ag+ and GO. The prepared Ag–Pd@rGO catalysts displayed high catalytic activity and good recyclability in the Suzuki–Miyaura carbon coupling reaction and the Sonogashira carbon coupling reaction.
Carbon–carbon cross-couplings are one of the most hot research topics in current synthetic chemistry. These coupling reactions offer innovative ideas for the preparation of many important compounds.217,218 Among them, supported bimetallic nanoparticles are promising heterogeneous catalyst for carbon–carbon cross-coupling reactions. Karak and co-workers219 prepared bimetallic Pd–Ag nanoparticles supported on carbon quantum dots (Pd–Ag@CQDs) through a facile and fast UV-light-driven one-pot protocol (Fig. 19a). In this way, CQDs served as reducing and stabilizing agents, and their surfaces were enriched with diverse polar functionalities, e.g., alkoxyl, hydroxyl, epoxy, aldehydic carbonyl, and carboxylic groups.220 Moreover, the CQDs promoted nucleation-oriented growth of Ag and Pd nanoparticles on their surfaces and were beneficial for their stabilization (Fig. 19b). TEM images showed the near-spherical shape and uniform particle distribution, with a size distribution between 2 and 6 nm (Fig. 19c–e). The prepared bimetallic Pd–Ag@CQDs nanohybrids could be used as highly efficient heterogeneous catalysts for promoting the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction with aryl bromides and aryl chlorides under ligand-free and ambient conditions. The synergistic effect of the components of the Pd–Ag@CQDs nanohybrids (Fig. 19f) induced an enhanced catalytic performance of the cross-coupling reaction with short reaction times (<1 h) and high yields (>90%) (Table 7).
 Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis of the Pd–Ag@CQDs nanohybrids. (b) Mechanism of UV-light-assisted reduction and subsequent formation of the Pd–Ag@CQDs nanohybrids. (c, d) TEM images of Pd–Ag@CQDs. (e) Size distribution of Pd–Ag@CQDs. (f) Synergistic role of the Pd–Ag@CQDs nanohybrid in the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Table 7 Systematic comparison of the different catalysts for the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reactiona,b,c









Entry
Catalyst
R1
R2
X
Time (h)
Yield (%)





a Reaction conditions: Aryl boronic acid (0.255 mmol), aryl halide (0.25 mmol), K2CO3 (1.0 mmol, 0.138 g), and EtOH–H2O (4 mL).
b wt% aryl boronic acid.
c Isolated yield, purified by column chromatography and authenticated by NMR analyses.





1
Pd–Ag@CQDs
H
H
4-Br
1
97


2
Pd–Ag@CQDs
H
4-OCH3
4-Br
1
94


3
Pd–Ag@CQDs
H
4-NO2
4-Br
1.2
90


4
Pd–Ag@CQDs
CH2CH3
H
4-Br
1
92


5
Pd–Ag@CQDs
CH2CH3
4-OCH3
4-Br
1
94


6
Pd–Ag@CQDs
3-NO2
H
4-Br
1.4
90


7
Pd–Ag@CQDs
3-CF3
H
4-Br
1.8
83


8
Pd–Ag@CQDs
3-NO2
4-NO2
4-Br
3
74


9
Pd–Ag@CQDs
2-Naphthyl
4-OCH3
4-Br
1
92


10
Pd–Ag@CQDs
4-OCH3
4-OH
4-Br
1
90


11
Pd–Ag@CQDs
H
H
4-Cl
24
25


12
Pd–Ag@CQDs
CH2CH3
H
4-Cl
16
30


13
CQDs
CH2CH3
H
4-Cl
24
—


14
AgNPs
CH2CH3
H
4-Cl
24
—


15
PdNPs
CH2CH3
H
4-Cl
32
16


16
PdNPs + AgNPs
CH2CH3
H
4-Cl
32
22


17
AgNPs + CQDs
CH2CH3
H
4-Cl
24
—


18
PdNPs + CDs
CH2CH3
H
4-Cl
24
20


19
AgNPs + PdNPs + CDs
CH2CH3
H
4-Cl
22
25


20
Pd–Ag@CQDs
CH2CH3
H
4-Cl
16
30




The selective hydrogenolysis of glycerol into useful chemicals (such as propylene glycol) has attracted increasing attention.221,222 This reaction is very important as a promising model reaction and can be used for the selective cleavage of C–O and C–C bonds in the catalytic dehydroxylation of graduated material-derived polyols.223 Zhang and co-workers224 prepared a series of Ag-modified Ni catalysts and studied the influence of bimetallic Ag/Ni on the selective cleavage of C–O and C–C bonds in glycerol hydrogenolysis. Compared with single Ni, the Ni6Ag catalysts were more highly efficient at glycerol conversion and C–O bond cleavage, showing a higher selectivity toward C3 products (1,2-propanediol and lactic acid; ∼88%) under the same conversion of glycerol (∼70%) and 1,2-propanediol (73%). The Ag additive improved the hydrogenation activity of Ni catalysts, which could be attributed to the higher adsorption strength of hydrogen when compared to substrates on single Ni sites.
The selective removal of acetylene from ethylene feeds is crucial in the contemporary olefin industry, not only acting as an impurity in the ethylene feeds, but also as a poison to the catalyst used for subsequent polymerization of the ethylene.225 One of the most effective ways to remove acetylene in ethylene feeds is to selectively hydrogenate acetylene to ethylene. Kaneda's group226 reported core-Pd/shell-Ag (Pd@Ag) nanocomposite catalysts (Fig. 20b–d) for highly selective semihydrogenation of alkynes. The core–shell catalyst made full use of the advantages of Pd and Ag in a synergistic manner, allowing selective semi-hydrogenation under mild reaction conditions (Fig. 20a). In the meantime, coating the core-Pd nanoparticles with shell-Ag nanoparticles led to efficient suppression of over-hydrogenation of alkenes by the Pd nanoparticles. As a result, the prepared Pd@Ag catalysts showed high chemoselectivity toward a wide range of alkenes with high Z-selectivity under mild reaction conditions. Moreover, it could also be easily separated and recovered from the reaction mixture with almost no loss in the catalytic activity or selectivity.
 Fig. 20  (a) Design concept of complementary bimetallic Pd@Ag catalysts for selective semihydrogenation of alkynes. Composition and structural analysis of Pd@Ag-0.20. (b) TEM image. (c) and (d) HAADF-STEM images. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
In recent years, catalytic hydrodechlorination has received growing attention since it is an environmentally friendly technique to convert harmful chlorinated hydrocarbons into useful olefins.227,228 Heinrichs's group229 prepared Pd–Ag alloy loaded on a tailored texture carbon via the co-impregnation method. The obtained Pd–Ag/C catalysts were active for the hydrodechlorination of 1,2-dichloroethane to ethylene. Moreover, the ethylene selectivity increased with the increase of the amount of Ag at the Pd–Ag alloy surface. Wan and co-workers230 prepared Al2O3 supported Pd–Ag and Pd–Cu bimetallic catalysts with varied Pd/Ag and Pd/Cu ratios employing a surface reduction approach. The prepared Pd–Ag/Al2O3 displayed a higher catalytic activity and selectivity for hydrodechlorination of 1,2-dichloroethane to ethylene than Pd–Cu/Al2O3.
The Ag-based nanocomposites catalysts are highly efficient tools in various organic reactions which do not require any ligand source, and are of relatively easy preparation and separation, and have good stability at low temperature. It is crucial to conduct research towards the synthesis of various Ag-based nanocomposites catalysts using simpler, greener and economical methods. In addition, it is also necessary to rationally design and develop Ag-based nanocomposites via tailoring the interactions between the Ag nanoparticles and other components.
4. Conclusions and outlook
In summary, Ag-based nanocomposites, including supported Ag nanocomposites and bimetallic Ag nanocomposites, have been intensively adopted as highly efficient catalysts due to their prominent advantages, e.g., high activity and stability, easy preparation, low cost, and low toxicity. The synergistic effects between the Ag nanoparticles and other components can be exploited for tailoring and improving the catalytic activity, stability, and selectivity and reducing the price of active catalysts. In addition, the size, shape, and chemistry/physical structures of Ag-based nanocomposites are also vital for tuning and promoting their catalytic properties. The smaller the size and the sharper the shape, the better the catalytic properties. Controlling the internal defect structure of Ag-based nanocomposites may be a good method for enhancing their catalytic properties. So far, various synthetic strategies have been developed to prepare Ag-based nanocomposites, such as the sol–gel method, the wet chemical method, the seeding method, layer-by-layer self-assembly, the in situ reduction method, the stabilizer- or core-assisted reduction method, the co-reduction method, the thermal decomposition method, seed-mediated growth, and the galvanic replacement method. As a result, the prepared Ag-based nanocomposites have also been widely investigated in a wide range of catalysis applications, e.g., catalytic oxidation, catalytic reduction, photocatalysis and electrocatalysis.
Although a large number of studies have been recently made on the syntheses and catalytic applications of Ag-based nanocomposites, some problems have not yet been fully addressed and need to be investigated: (1) the price and large-scale preparation of Ag-based nanocomposites. To promote basic research for practical industrialization, Ag-based nanocomposites with lower prices should be produced on a large scale; (2) the catalytic activity, stability, and selectivity of Ag-based nanocomposites. To further improve the catalytic activity, stability, and selectivity of Ag-based nanocomposites, the synergistic effect between the Ag nanoparticles and other components is highly worth considering; and (3) the recoverability of Ag-based nanocomposites. To endow them with recoverability, some magnetic iron oxides should be introduced into Ag-based nanocomposite systems. Thus, in order to realize the optimal utilization of Ag-based nanocomposites, it is crucial to rationally design and develop Ag-based nanocomposites via tailoring the interactions between the Ag nanoparticles and other components. There is no doubt that the emerging Ag-based nanocomposite catalysts will have a great potential for various catalysis applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51573039) and Specific Research Project of Guangxi for Research Bases and Talents (2017AD19029).
References
M. B. Gawande, A. Goswami, T. Asefa, H. Guo, A. V. Biradar, D. L. Peng, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7540–7590 RSC .
G. Liao, J. Chen, W. Zeng, C. Yu, C. Yi and Z. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 25935–25944 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liao, Y. Gong, C. Yi and Z. Xu, Chin. J. Chem., 2017, 35, 1157–1164 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kastner and A. F. Thunemann, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 7383–7391 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhao, X. Feng, D. Huang, G. Yang and D. Astruc, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 287, 114–136 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Dong, Z.-W. Gao, K.-F. Yang, W.-Q. Zhang and L.-W. Xu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 2554–2574 RSC .
A. M. El Badawy, R. G. Silva, B. Morris, K. G. Scheckel, M. T. Suidan and T. M. Tolaymat, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 283–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liao, W. Zhao, Q. Li, Q. Pang and Z. Xu, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 1631–1634 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Cuenya, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 3127–3150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mei, G. Sharma, Y. Lu, M. Ballauff, M. Drechsler, T. Irrgang and R. Kempe, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 12229–12234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Mudassir, S. Z. Hussain, A. Rehman, W. Zaheer, S. T. Asma, A. Jilani, M. Aslam, H. Zhang, T. M. Ansari and I. Hussain, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 24190–24197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, Q. Liu, X. Yang, X. Ye, H. Duan, J. Zhang, B. Zhao and Y. Huang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9634–9639 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dang-Bao, D. Pla, I. Favier and M. Gómez, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 207 CrossRef .
P. Dallas, V. K. Sharma and R. Zboril, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 166, 119–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Rizzello and P. P. Pompa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1501–1518 RSC .
Y. Yan, T. Wang, X. Li, H. Pang and H. Xue, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 33–51 RSC .
F. Paladini, M. Pollini, A. Sannino and L. Ambrosio, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 1873–1885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Eckhardt, P. S. Brunetto, J. Gagnon, M. Priebe, B. Giese and K. M. Fromm, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 4708–4754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Rizzello, R. Cingolani and P. P. Pompa, Nanomedicine, 2013, 8, 807–821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Zhang, Z. G. Liu, W. Shen and S. Gurunathan, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2016, 17, 1534 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Schwartzberg and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10323–10337 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Ray, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5332–5365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Hsu, A. L. Rodarte, M. Som, G. Arya and A. R. Tao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3100–3120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Farka, T. Jurik, D. Kovar, L. Trnkova and P. Skladal, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 9973–10042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Bhosale and B. M. Bhanage, Curr. Org. Chem., 2015, 19, 708–727 CrossRef CAS .
B. Khodashenas and H. R. Ghorbani, Arab. J. Chem., 2015 DOI:10.1016/j.arabjc.2014.12.014 .
L. Armelao, D. Barreca, G. Bottaro, A. Gasparotto, S. Gross, C. Maragno and E. Tondello, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 1294–1314 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, M. Wang, Y. Hu, C. Zhou and R. Guo, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2017, 70, 52–91 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, D. W. Baggett, J. W. Kim, E. J. Siochi and J. W. Connell, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1652–1664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kobayashi, M. A. Correa-Duarte and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 6375–6379 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Jia, Y. Li, T. He and X.-M. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 345, 122–126 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. O. Mahesh, D.-H. Kuo and B.-R. Huang, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2015, 396, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bagheri and S. Banihashemi, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 886, 56–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Chen, D. Jaihindh, S.-H. Hu and Y.-P. Fu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 334, 74–85 CrossRef CAS .
S. Papp, R. Patakfalvi and I. Dékány, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2007, 286, 3–14 CrossRef .
K. Shameli, M. B. Ahmad, W. Z. Yunus, N. A. Ibrahim and M. Darroudi, Int. J. Nanomed., 2010, 5, 743–751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kuriakose, V. Choudhary, B. Satpati and S. Mohapatra, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 639–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, Mater. Lett., 2015, 139, 201–204 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bowden, W. T. S. Huck, K. E. Paul and G. M. Whitesides, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 2557–2559 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kobayashi, V. Salgueiriño-Maceira and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 1630–1633 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Liu, S. Wang, P. Zhan, Z. Wang and N. Ming, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1089–1096 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cassagneau and F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 732 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang and C. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 12411–12415 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Pan, L. Zhu, Z. Wang, D. Su and G. Xue, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 1741–1747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Pan, C. Yang, Y. Gao, Z. Wang and G. Xue, Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 414, 504–511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Pan, H. Gu and G. Xue, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 12704–12710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Wu, Y. Gao, S. Sha, J. Hao, G. Cao and C. Yang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 26361 RSC .
G. Liao, Q. Li, W. Zhao, Q. Pang, H. Gao and Z. Xu, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 549, 102–111 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Deng, X. Duan, D. H. Ng, H. Tang, Y. Yang, M. Kong, Z. Wu, W. Cai and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6030–6037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jiang, D. Jiang, A. M. Showkot Hossain, K. Qian and J. Xie, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2550–2559 RSC .
P. Xu and G. Liao, Materials, 2018, 11, 1616 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zou, H. Jin, F. Sun, X. Dai, Z. Xu, S. Yang and G. Liao, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 2294–2305 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, T. Zhao, B. Newland, W. Liu, W. Wang and W. Wang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 78, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, G. Liao, J. Tian and Z. Xu, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2018, 303, 1700407 CrossRef .
Y. Zou, F. Sun, C. Liu, C. Yu, M. Zhang, Q. He, Y. Xiong, Z. Xu, S. Yang and G. Liao, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 357, 237–247 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Y. Zou, Y. Zhong, G. Liao, C. Yu and Z. Xu, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 630–637 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, G. Zhang, T. Xia, Z. Li, K. Zhao, Z. Deng, D. Guo and B. Peng, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 55, 155–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Thota and V. Ganesh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 49578–49587 RSC .
K. D. Gilroy, A. Ruditskiy, H. C. Peng, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10414–10472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chi, C. Wang, Y. Lei, G. Wang, D. Li, K. L. More, A. Lupini, L. F. Allard, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Patel, S. Kapoor, D. P. Dave and T. Mukherjee, J. Chem. Sci., 2005, 117, 311–316 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lahiri, B. Bunker, B. Mishra, Z. Zhang, D. Meisel, C. M. Doudna, M. F. Bertino, F. D. Blum, A. T. Tokuhiro, S. Chattopadhyay, T. Shibata and J. Terry, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 094304 CrossRef .
W. Wu, M. Lei, S. Yang, L. Zhou, L. Liu, X. Xiao, C. Jiang and V. A. L. Roy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3450–3455 RSC .
C. Wang, H. Yin, R. Chan, S. Peng, S. Dai and S. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 433–435 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anandan, F. Grieser and M. Ashokkumar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15102–15105 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Lu, E. L. Salabas and F. Schuth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1222–1244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bönnemann and R. M. Richards, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2001, 2001, 2455–2480 CrossRef .
N. S. Sobal, M. Hilgendorff, H. Möhwald, M. Giersig, M. Spasova, T. Radetic and M. Farle, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 621–624 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, Y. Chen, X. Chen, R. Wen, G. H. Yue and D. L. Peng, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 195604 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1044–1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, K. D. Gilroy, H. C. Peng and X. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 60–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Y. Yin, B. T. Mayers, T. Herricks and Y. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4736–4745 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cathcart, J. I. L. Chen and V. Kitaev, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 612–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Huang, Z. Yang and H. T. Chang, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 6089–6092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Zarick, A. Boulesbaa, E. M. Talbert, A. Puretzky, D. Geohegan and R. Bardhan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4540–4547 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, P. Zhang, W. Fu, M. Yang and Y. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 276, 158–165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Zeng, W. Fu, P. Zhang, L. Li, C. Ye, L. Yu, X. Zhu and S. Zhao, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1002, 97–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Sanedrin, D. G. Georganopoulou, S. Park and C. A. Mirkin, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1027–1031 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zeng, C. Zhu, J. Tao, M. Jin, H. Zhang, Z. Y. Li, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2354–2358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pedireddy, A. Li, M. Bosman, I. Y. Phang, S. Li and X. Y. Ling, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16640–16649 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. M. McLellan, A. Siekkinen, Y. Xiong, Z. Y. Li and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14776–14777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3385–3391 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hajfathalian, K. D. Gilroy, S. D. Golze, A. Yaghoubzade, E. Menumerov, R. A. Hughes and S. Neretina, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6354–6362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xia, Y. Wang, A. Ruditskiy and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6313–6333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, X. Ren, D. Chen, F. Tang and J. Ren, Scr. Mater., 2007, 57, 687–690 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Yang and X. Lu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7397–7405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, P. Wang, H. He and Y. Jin, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 135–144 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, F. Ye, Q. Yao, H. Cao, J. Xie, J. Y. Lee and J. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3969 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Huang, S. Vongehr, S. Tang, H. Lu, J. Shen and X. Meng, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11890–11896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, S. Vongehr, S. Tang, H. Lu and X. Meng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15005–15010 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lai, J. Zhou, Z. Jia, L. Petti and P. Mormile, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 9726–9733 RSC .
A.-K. Herrmann, P. Formanek, L. Borchardt, M. Klose, L. Giebeler, J. Eckert, S. Kaskel, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 1074–1083 CrossRef .
N. C. Bigall, A. K. Herrmann, M. Vogel, M. Rose, P. Simon, W. Carrillo-Cabrera, D. Dorfs, S. Kaskel, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmuller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9731–9734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu and A. Eychmuller, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 244–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shaik, W. Zhang and W. Niu, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 3281–3286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Bigall, M. Reitzig, W. Naumann, P. Simon, K. H. van Pee and A. Eychmuller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7876–7879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Walsh, L. Arcelli, T. Ikoma, J. Tanaka and S. Mann, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 386–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wittstock, B. Neumann, A. Schaefer, K. Dumbuya, C. Kübel, M. M. Biener, V. Zielasek, H.-P. Steinrück, J. M. Gottfried, J. Biener, A. Hamza and M. Bäumer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5593–5600 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Tappan, S. A. Steiner 3rd and E. P. Luther, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4544–4565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu and Q. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11961 RSC .
G. W. Qin, J. Liu, T. Balaji, X. Xu, H. Matsunaga, Y. Hakuta, L. Zuo and P. Raveendran, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10352–10358 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Krishna, C. S. Sandeep, R. Philip and M. Eswaramoorthy, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2681–2688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Tolaymat, A. M. El Badawy, A. Genaidy, K. G. Scheckel, T. P. Luxton and M. Suidan, Sci. Total Environ., 2010, 408, 999–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. Y. Liu, X. J. Ju, W. Wang, R. Xie and L. Y. Chu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33137–33148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Z. Zheng, X. Ke, E. Jaatinen, T. Xie, D. Wang, C. Guo, J. Zhao and H. Zhu, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 414 RSC .
F. Liao, T. W. B. Lo and S. C. E. Tsang, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1998–2014 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Sheldon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1437–1451 RSC .
L. I. Granone, F. Sieland, N. Zheng, R. Dillert and D. W. Bahnemann, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 1169–1192 RSC .
Y. Cao, W.-L. Dai and J.-F. Deng, Appl. Catal., A, 1997, 158, L27–L34 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dai, Y. Cao, L. Ren, X. Yang, J. Xu, H. Li, H. He and K. Fan, J. Catal., 2004, 228, 80–91 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Bryliakov, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11406–11459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zahed and H. Hosseini-Monfared, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 328, 536–547 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, D. Yan, Z. Xu, X. Chen, X. Chen, W. Xu, H. Jia and J. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 4728–4737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qu, S. Shen, D. Chen and Y. Wang, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2012, 356, 171–177 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, Z. Qu, S. Shen, X. Li, Y. Shi, Y. Wang, Q. Fu and J. Wu, Catal. Today, 2011, 175, 338–345 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, Z. Qu, Y. Sun, K. Gao and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 838–848 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zuwei, Z. Ning, S. Yu and L. Kunlan, Science, 2001, 292, 1139–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, J. Bravosuarez, A. Takahashi, M. Haruta and S. Oyama, J. Catal., 2005, 232, 85–95 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, S. S. Acharyya, R. Tiwari, B. Sarkar, R. K. Singha, C. Pendem, T. Sasaki and R. Bal, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2169–2174 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, M. Luo, H. Lei, X. Bao and C. Li, J. Catal., 2002, 211, 552–555 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, T. Takei, T. Akita, H. Ohashi and M. Haruta, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 95, 430–438 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chowdhury, J. J. Bravo-Suarez, M. Date, S. Tsubota and M. Haruta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 412–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Sinha, S. Seelan, M. Okumura, T. Akita, S. Tsubota and M. Haruta, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3956–3965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-S. Lee, M. Cem Akatay, E. A. Stach, F. H. Ribeiro and W. Nicholas Delgass, J. Catal., 2012, 287, 178–189 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hayashi, K. Tanaka and M. Haruta, J. Catal., 1998, 178, 566–575 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, T. Akita, J. Faye, T. Fujitani, T. Takei and M. Haruta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7862–7866 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jabłońska and R. Palkovits, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 332–351 CrossRef .
L. Gang, B. G. Anderson, J. van Grondelle and R. A. van Santen, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 40, 101–110 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, C. Zhang and H. He, J. Catal., 2009, 261, 101–109 CrossRef CAS .
K. Góra-Marek, K. A. Tarach, Z. Piwowarska, M. Łaniecki and L. Chmielarz, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 1651–1660 RSC .
M. Jabłońska, W. Ciptonugroho, K. Góra-Marek, M. G. Al-Shaal and R. Palkovits, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 245, 31–44 CrossRef .
Z. Qu, X. Zhang, F. Yu and J. Jia, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 188, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Dutov, G. V. Mamontov, V. I. Zaikovskii, L. F. Liotta and O. V. Vodyankina, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 598–609 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tokonami, N. Morita, K. Takasaki and N. Toshima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10336–10341 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, M. Haba, M. Okumura, T. Akita, S. Hashimoto and N. Toshima, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 10330–10339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nagy, T. Benkó, L. Borkó, T. Csay, A. Horváth, K. Frey and A. Beck, React. Kinet., Mech. Catal., 2015, 115, 45–65 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, M. Conte, Q. He, D. W. Knight, D. M. Murphy, S. H. Taylor, K. Whiston, C. J. Kiely and G. J. Hutchings, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 11834–11842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, J. Qu, H. Lin, Q. Zhang, X. Yuan, Y. Yang and Y. Yuan, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6662–6669 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, X. Ge, H. Zhang, Q. Ding, H. Ding, Y. Zhang, G. Wang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 663–670 RSC .
Y. Chi, Q. Yuan, Y. Li, J. Tu, L. Zhao, N. Li and X. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 383, 96–102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Tsao, S. Rej, C. Y. Chiu and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 396–404 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, S. Chattopadhyay, T. Shibata, R. E. Cook, J. T. Miller, N. Suthiwangcharoen, S. Lee, R. E. Winans and B. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14458 RSC .
J. Zhou, B. Duan, Z. Fang, J. Song, C. Wang, P. B. Messersmith and H. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 701–705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Jiang, T. Akita, T. Ishida, M. Haruta and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1304–1306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, T. Zhao, P. Zhu and R. Sun, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2012, 290, 401–409 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, C. Wu, Z. Deng, Y. Guo and B. Peng, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 52726–52736 RSC .
U. Kurtan, M. Amir, A. Yıldız and A. Baykal, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 376, 16–25 CrossRef CAS .
T. Boningari, A. Somogyvari and P. G. Smirniotis, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 5483–5494 CrossRef CAS .
K.-I. Shimizu, J. Shibata, H. Yoshida, A. Satsuma and T. Hattori, Appl. Catal., B, 2001, 30, 151–162 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ström, P.-A. Carlsson, M. Skoglundh and H. Härelind, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 403–412 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, L. Chen, X. Wang, W. Yao and Q. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10559–10583 RSC .
S. Mourdikoudis, R. M. Pallares and N. T. K. Thanh, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12871–12934 RSC .
M. Kohantorabi and M. R. Gholami, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2017, 31, e3806 CrossRef .
M. Kohantorabi and M. R. Gholami, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 10948–10958 RSC .
B. A. Ulrich, M. Palatucci, J. Bolotin, J. C. Spain and T. B. Hofstetter, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2018, 5, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
O. Metin, H. Can, K. Sendil and M. S. Gultekin, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 498, 378–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Bielinski, P. O. Lagaditis, Y. Zhang, B. Q. Mercado, C. Wurtele, W. H. Bernskoetter, N. Hazari and S. Schneider, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10234–10237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Z. Guo, X. G. Wei, C. Gallenkamp, J. Bonin, E. Anxolabehere-Mallart, K. C. Lau, T. C. Lau and M. Robert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10918–10921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-T. Gao, W. Liu, C. Feng, N.-Z. Shang and C. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 869–874 RSC .
H. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Yu, W. Yang, J. Li, M. Feng and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4611–4616 RSC .
Z. Cai, Y. Sun, W. Liu, F. Pan, P. Sun and J. Fu, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int., 2017, 24, 15882–15904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhong, S. Shen, S. Feng, Z. Lin, Z. Wang and B. Fang, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 7851–7856 RSC .
S. Kuriakose, V. Choudhary, B. Satpati and S. Mohapatra, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 17560–17568 RSC .
S. S. Patil, M. G. Mali, M. S. Tamboli, D. R. Patil, M. V. Kulkarni, H. Yoon, H. Kim, S. S. Al-Deyab, S. S. Yoon, S. S. Kolekar and B. B. Kale, Catal. Today, 2016, 260, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mou, C. Song, Y. Zhou, B. Zhang and D. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 565–573 CrossRef CAS .
P. Govindhan and C. Pragathiswaran, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 8778–8785 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Fang, Y. Xing, A. Bonakdarpour, S. Zhang and D. P. Wilkinson, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2381–2388 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fang, A. Bonakdarpour, K. Reilly, Y. Xing, F. Taghipour and D. P. Wilkinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15488–15498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yu, Y. Zhou, P. Li, W. Tu, P. Li, L. Tang, J. Ye and Z. Zou, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11870–11874 RSC .
X. Cheng, P. Dong, Z. Huang, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, X. Nie and X. Zhang, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 20, 200–207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Cong, H. Xu, J. Wang, H. Liu, M. Liang, J. Gao, Q. Ni and J. Yao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10633–10639 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lu, H. Wang, X. Zhao, K. K. Kondamareddy, J. Ding, C. Li and P. Fang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1436–1445 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gu, C. Cheng, H. Huang, T. Wong, N. Wang and T.-Y. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3278–3285 CrossRef CAS .
E. Liu, L. Kang, F. Wu, T. Sun, X. Hu, Y. Yang, H. Liu and J. Fan, Plasmonics, 2013, 9, 61–70 CrossRef .
A. Senthilraja, B. Subash, B. Krishnakumar, D. Rajamanickam, M. Swaminathan and M. Shanthi, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2014, 22, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
M. Misra, P. Kapur, M. K. Nayak and M. Singla, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 4197–4203 RSC .
C. Han, X. Yang, G. Gao, J. Wang, H. Lu, J. Liu, M. Tong and X. Liang, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3603–3615 RSC .
P. Shahini and A. A. Ashkarran, Colloids Surf., A, 2018, 537, 155–162 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, Q. Chu, Z. Wu, Q. Chen, S.-Q. Fan, G.-J. Yang and B. Fang, J. Catal., 2015, 325, 118–127 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Wang, G. Chang, Q. Chen, G.-J. Yang, S.-Q. Fan and B. Fang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 685–688 RSC .
M. A. Nadeem, M. Al-Oufi, A. K. Wahab, D. Anjum and H. Idriss, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 2754–2762 CrossRef CAS .
I. Majeed, U. Manzoor, F. K. Kanodarwala, M. A. Nadeem, E. Hussain, H. Ali, A. Badshah, J. A. Stride and M. A. Nadeem, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 1183–1193 RSC .
C. Wen, A. Yin and W.-L. Dai, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 160–161, 730–741 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Kim, F. Mueller, H. Kim, D. Bresser, J.-S. Park, D.-H. Lim, G.-T. Kim, S. Passerini and Y. Kim, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e144–e144 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Strickler, M. A. Escudero-Escribano and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6040–6046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, Y. Liu, R. Gao, Q. Li, H. Guo, A. Goswami, R. Zboril, M. B. Gawande and X. Zou, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7038–7042 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Wang, N. Zhao, B. Fang, H. Li, X. T. Bi and H. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 3433–3467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yasmin, M. Shamsuddin Ahmed and S. Jeon, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 1075–1084 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, C. Tang, P. Zhou, Z. Liu, Y. Xu, D. Wang and B. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13050–13056 RSC .
M. A. Amin, S. A. Fadlallah and G. S. Alosaimi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 19519–19540 CrossRef CAS .
M. Basu, R. Nazir, C. Mahala, P. Fageria, S. Chaudhary, S. Gangopadhyay and S. Pande, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 3178–3186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Singh, X. B. Zhang and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9894–9895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Narwade, B. B. Mulik, S. M. Mali and B. R. Sathe, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 396, 939–944 CrossRef CAS .
P. Paulraj, N. Janaki, S. Sandhya and K. Pandian, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 377, 28–34 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liao, Q. Li and Z. Xu, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 126, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Amin, E. M. Ahmed, N. Y. Mostafa, M. M. Alotibi, G. Darabdhara, M. R. Das, J. Wysocka, J. Ryl and S. S. Abd El-Rehim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23655–23667 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, H. S. Jeon, T. Eom, M. S. Jee, H. Kim, C. M. Friend, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13844–13850 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wang, S. Q. Liu, K. L. Huang, Q. J. Feng, D. L. Ye, B. Liu, J. L. Liu and G. H. Jin, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2010, 21, 987–990 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, G. Jin, L. Li, K. Li, M. Srinivasan, S. Ramakrishna and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1225–1241 RSC .
S. P. Lim, A. Pandikumar, N. M. Huang and H. N. Lim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 14720–14729 CrossRef CAS .
A. Holewinski, J. C. Idrobo and S. Linic, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 828–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hu, Y. Song, L. Chen and S. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9627–9636 RSC .
F. Q. Shao, X. Y. Zhu, A. J. Wang, K. M. Fang, J. Yuan and J. J. Feng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 505, 307–314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L. A. Stern and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555–6569 RSC .
Y. Qin, X. Dai, X. Zhang, X. Huang, H. Sun, D. Gao, Y. Yu, P. Zhang, Y. Jiang, H. Zhuo, A. Jin and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3865–3871 RSC .
Z. Chang, S. Huo, W. Zhang, J. Fang and H. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 11368–11379 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luc, C. Collins, S. Wang, H. Xin, K. He, Y. Kang and F. Jiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1885–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Atar, T. Eren, B. Demirdögen, M. L. Yola and M. O. Çağlayan, Ionics, 2015, 21, 2285–2293 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, F. Chen, Y. Jin and Y. Lei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6276–6287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zell, U. Dhawa, V. Müller, M. Bursch, S. Grimme and L. Ackermann, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4209–4213 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Egorova, E. G. Gordeev and V. P. Ananikov, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 7132–7189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Han, S. Liu, X. Nie, D. Yuan, P. Sun, Z. Dai and J. Bao, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6061 RSC .
M. Nasrollahzadeh, M. Atarod, M. Alizadeh, A. Hatamifard and S. Sajadi, Curr. Org. Chem., 2017, 21, 708–749 CrossRef CAS .
P. Venkatesan and J. Santhanalakshmi, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12225–12229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, Z. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Liu, W. Wang and J. Gao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 30914 RSC .
M. Tobisu and N. Chatani, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1717–1726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Crovak and J. M. Hoover, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2434–2437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bayan and N. Karak, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 8868–8876 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6921 RSC .
Q. Sun, S. Wang and H. Liu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4265–4275 CrossRef CAS .
N. Razali and A. Z. Abdullah, Appl. Catal., A, 2017, 543, 234–246 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Ruppert, K. Weinberg and R. Palkovits, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2564–2601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, B. Zhang, Y. Zhang and X. Yang, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 1929–1936 CrossRef CAS .
A. Borodziński and G. C. Bond, Catal. Rev., 2008, 50, 379–469 CrossRef .
T. Mitsudome, T. Urayama, K. Yamazaki, Y. Maehara, J. Yamasaki, K. Gohara, Z. Maeno, T. Mizugaki, K. Jitsukawa and K. Kaneda, ACS Catal., 2015, 6, 666–670 CrossRef .
M. Bonarowska, Z. Kaszkur, D. Łomot, M. Rawski and Z. Karpiński, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 162, 45–56 CrossRef CAS .
A. Śrębowata, R. Baran, D. Łomot, D. Lisovytskiy, T. Onfroy and S. Dzwigaj, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 208–220 CrossRef .
N. Job, B. Heinrichs, F. Ferauche, F. Noville, J. Marien and J.-P. Pirard, Catal. Today, 2005, 102–103, 234–241 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, G. Gu, J. Sun, W. Wang, H. Wan, Z. Xu and S. Zheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 355, 183–190 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Guangfu Liao	Guangfu Liao received his M.Sc. in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Hubei University in 2017. He then joined Prof. Haiyang Gao's group at Sun Yat-sen University to pursue his Ph.D. in Materials Science. His primary research is focused on Ag-based catalysts, nanocomposites, biomaterials, and coordination polymerization. He has more than 6 years of research experience in the fields of catalysis, environment and biomaterials. He has published over 20 scientific papers and also received some awards including the Graduate Student National Scholarship, Hubei University First-class Academic Scholarship, Hubei University Outstanding Graduate & Excellent Graduation Thesis, and Sun Yat-sen University Second-class Academic Scholarship.
Jiasheng Fang	Dr Jiasheng Fang completed his Ph.D. in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering from Southeast University in 2018. Currently, he is a lecturer at the School of Environment and Civil Engineering, Dongguan University of Technology. His primary research interest includes the synthetic methods of high-thermal-stability noble-metal nanocatalysts, the controllable preparation of highly efficient catalytic materials and the study of interfacial chemistry and multiphase catalysis of composite materials. He has published over 20 papers in international peer-reviewed journals like Nanoscale, Journal of Power Sources, Journal of Hazardous Materials, Carbon, Chemical Engineering Journal, ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, Langmuir, Chemistry – A European Journal, etc.
Qing Li	Dr Qing Li was born in Hubei, China, in 1989. He received his B.Sc. degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Hubei University in 2012. Then he joined the laboratory of Prof. Zushun Xu at Hubei University to receive his master's degree in 2014 and his Ph.D. in 2017 in Materials Science. Currently, he works at Guangxi University for Nationalities as a lecturer. His primary research interest is focused on polyimide nanocomposites, Ag-based catalysts, and two-dimensional COF materials.
Sihan Li	Mr Sihan Li was born in 1995 in Yunnan, China. He received his B.Sc. degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Dalian Maritime University in 2017. Then he joined the laboratory of Prof. Fangming Zhu at Sun Yat-sen University to pursue his M.S. degree in Polymer Chemistry and Physics. Currently, he is carrying out research on the development of catalysts leading to the creation of new olefinic polymers.
Zushun Xu	Prof. Zushun Xu was born in Hubei, China, in 1963. He received his Ph.D. from Zhejiang University in 1998. Now he is a Professor at Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Advanced Organic Chemical Materials at Hubei University. His current main research interest is in polymer/metal nanocomposites and their applications in catalysis, biological applications, and engineering. The awards he received up to now include Excellent Backbone Teachers of National Colleges and Universities, Third Prize of the Natural Science Award of Hubei Province, Best Youth Award, and so on.
Baizeng Fang	Dr Baizeng Fang earned his Ph.D. in Materials Science from the University of Science and Technology, Beijing in 1997. He has worked as a JSPS research fellow (Japan), a Lise Meitner scientist (Austria), and a research professor (Korea), and is a Senior Scientist at the University of British Columbia (Canada). He has published over 100 scientific papers in high-profile journals including reviews in Accounts of Chemical Research, Chemical Reviews, Chemical Society Reviews, Energy & Environmental Science and Progress in Materials Science. His research interests include nanostructured materials for electrochemical energy storage/conversion and artificial photosynthesis. He also serves as an Associate Editor of RSC Advances.

Sol–gel method	(1) Producing Ag-based nanocomposites with good control over nanoparticle size, size distribution, nanostructure and concentration	Low efficiency, time- and cost-consuming, and complicated preparation process
(2) Highly precise and green fabrication of Ag-based nanocomposites with high activity and stability
Wet chemical reduction	(1) Simple, green, and wide applicability	Time- and cost-consuming
(2) Basically controllable nanoparticles size, size distribution, and shape
(3) The functionalization of Ag-based nanocomposites is easy to achieve
Direct in situ reduction of the Ag precursor	(1) Large-scale production of Ag-based nanocomposites with high activity and stability	(1) The prepared Ag nanoparticles readily agglomerate
(2) Facile, wide applicability, and time- and cost-saving	(2) The overuse of reducing agents is harmful to ecology and the environment
(3) Controllable Ag nanoparticles size and size distribution
Core-assisted reduction	(1) Achieving specific Ag nanoparticles size, size distribution, and shape	Low efficiency, time- and cost-consuming, and relatively complicated preparation process
(2) Constructing various functional Ag-based nanocomposites via selecting different “core” materials

 	Fig. 1  Diagrammatic sketches of the fabrication of (a) PSMAA/Ag spheres, reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from the American Chemical Society, and (b) PSNM/Ag spheres, reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the formation of PDA/Ag particles. TEM images of (b) PDA particles and (c) PDA/Ag particle. SEM images of (d) PDA particles and (e) PDA/Ag particles. TEM images of PDA/Ag particles obtained at various concentrations of [Ag(NH3)2]+ ions: (f) 1.57 × 10−2 mol L−1; (g) 1.96 × 10−2 mol L−1. SEM images of (h) PS spheres, (i) PS/PDA composite spheres and (j–m) PS/Ag particles obtained employing various concentrations of [Ag(NH3)2]+ ions: (j) 1.2 × 10−2 mol L−1; (k) 2.3 × 10−2 mol L−1; (l) 4.7 × 10−2 mol L−1 and (m) 9.4 × 10−2 mol L−1. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from Elsevier.	 

Core–shell nanocrystals	Seed-mediated growth approach	(1) Constructing a variety of shapes	Poor controllability
(2) Enhanced catalytic activity and stability
(3) Augmenting magnetic anisotropy
(4) Serving as a critical intermediate for forming other types of structures
Core-frame nanocrystals	(1) Seed-mediated growth approach	(1) Constructing a variety of shapes	Time- and cost-consuming and complicated preparation process
(2) Galvanic replacement method	(2) Readily tunable catalytic property
(3) Providing a necessary channel for intermixing two metals
Dendritic and heterostructured nanocrystals	(1) Seed-mediated growth approach	(1) Large surface-to-volume ratios and accessible high index surfaces	Time- and cost-consuming and complicated preparation process
(2) Galvanic replacement method	(2) Sharp tips are conducive for improving catalytic properties
(3) Anisotropic etching of facet-controlled nanocrystals	(3) Highly branched plasmonic structures
(4) Aggregation or oriented attachment


Au3+ + 3e− → Au	1.50
Pt2+ + 2e− → Pt	1.18
Ir3+ + 3e− → Ir	1.16
Pd2+ + 2e− → Pd	0.95
Ag+ + e− → Ag	0.80
Rh3+ + 3e− → Rh	0.76
Ru3+ + 3e− → Ru	0.45
Cu2+ + 2e− → Cu	0.34
Ni2+ + 2e− → Ni	−0.25
Co2+ + 2e− → Co	−0.28
Fe2+ + 2e− → Fe	−0.44

 	Fig. 3  Typical TEM images of AuxAg1−x alloy nanoparticles obtained by the one-pot approach: (a) Au0.82Ag0.18, (b) Au0.60Ag0.40, (c) Au0.52Ag0.48, and (d) Au0.39Ag0.61 and HRTEM images of (e) Au0.60Ag0.40 and (f) Au0.52Ag0.48 nanoparticles. The nanoparticles sizes were found to be 8 nm in (a) and (b) and 9 nm in (c) and (d), respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A hypothesis for the construction of Au–Ag spiky nanoparticles. SEM images, TEM images, camera pictures, and histogram of spike lengths of (b) Ag octahedral nanoparticles and (c and d) Ag–Au spiky nanoparticles, SP50 and SP130, respectively. SP50 and SP130 possess spiky nanoparticles with an average spike length of 50 and 130 nm, respectively. The length of the spikes can be regulated from <10 to 130 nm by changing the amount of HAuCl4 precursors and the precursor injection rate during the growth process. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Explanation of the construction of Pt/Ag nanobox, multimer, heterodimer, and popcorn-shaped nanoparticle from the galvanic replacement reaction between Ag nanocubes and K2PtCl4 in the presence of HCl. TEM images of (b) Pt/Ag nanoboxes, (c) Pt/Ag heterodimers, (d) Pt/Ag multimers. After washing with solutions of saturated NaCl and 50 mM Fe(NO3)3, the (c) dimers and (d) multimers were converted to nanostructures with (e) two or (f) multiple hollow domains, respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

Co-reduction	(1) Simple preparation process, and time- and cost-saving	(1) Narrow applicability (only metal ions with similar redox potentials can achieve co-reduction)
(2) Regulatable bimetallic Ag nanostructure	(2) The overuse of reducing agents is harmful to ecology and the environment
(3) Large scale production of bimetallic Ag-based nanocomposites
Thermal decomposition	(1) Facile, time-saving, and highly efficient	Narrow applicability (only a few organometallic precursors can achieve thermal decomposition)
(2) Controllable composition, size, and shape of the resultant bimetallic Ag nanocrystals
Seed-mediated growth	(1) Producing well-defined bimetallic Ag-based nanocrystals	(1) Complicated and ambiguous nucleation and growth mechanisms restrict further application
(2) Facile and wide applicability	(2) Time- and cost-consuming
(3) Tunable Ag nanoparticle size, size distribution, composition, and structure
Galvanic replacement	(1) Producing a variety of bimetallic hollow Ag-based nanocomposites	Time- and cost-consuming and complicated preparation process
(2) Controllable Ag nanoparticle size, size distribution, composition, and structure

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM images, (b) size distribution, (c) high-resolution image, (d) lattice fringes of (a) Ag/WO3 catalyst, and (e) the potential formation mechanism of propylene oxide. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

Ag/CaCO3	O2	1.43	
118

VCe1−xCux–NaCl	O2	0.17	
120

Au/TS-1	H2 + O2	2.36	
121

Au–Ba(NO3)2/titanosilicate, trimethyl amine promoter	H2 + O2	1.4	
122

Au/Ti–SiO2, Ba promoter	H2 + O2	1.37	
123

Au/TS-1	H2 + O2	2.75	
124

Au/TiO2	H2 + O2	0.2	
125

Au/TS-1	H2 + O2	40	
126

Ag/WO3	O2	61	
119


 	Fig. 7  TEM images (left) of 5Ag/SiO2-500 (a), 5Ag/SiO2-700 (b) and 5Ag/SiO2-900 (c) catalysts and the corresponding particle size distributions (right). (d) Dependence of turnover frequency on the ratio of OH/Ag for different Ag/SiO2 catalysts. (e) Diagrammatic sketch of CO oxidation at room temperature on the Ag nanoparticles with different distributions and structures. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Component change of benzyl alcohol and benzyl aldehyde as a function of the reaction time Δt over Au1–Ag0.111 catalyst. (b) Comparison of catalytic activities over the pure Au, Ag, Au + Ag (mechanical mixing of pure Au and pure Ag), and Au1–Ag0.111 bimetallic catalysts. (c) Performance and intrinsic activity in benzyl alcohol dehydrogenation as a function of Ag promoter content. (d) Size distribution of Au1–Ag0.111 catalyst. The inset shows its TEM image. (e) Routes for surface construction and snapshot of benzyl alcohol dehydrogenation on the nanocrystallite framework. (f) Proposed schematic routes of a reaction cycle of benzyl alcohol dehydrogenation on Au–Ag/SBA-15. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the construction of PSMAA/Ag nanocomposite spheres. TEM images of (b) PSMAA spheres, (c–e) PSMAA/Ag nanocomposite spheres prepared by using different [Ag(NH3)2]+ ion concentrations. (f) Plots of ln(At/A0) versus reaction time t for 4-NP reduction over different PSMAA/Ag samples. (g) Recyclability of different PSMAA/Ag samples as a catalyst for 4-NP reduction with NaBH4. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the preparation process of Ag@hm-SiO2 nanoarchitectures. (b) TEM image of Ag@hm-SiO2 nanoarchitectures with the multiple-core/shell configuration and (c) the corresponding size distribution of Ag cores. (d) TEM image of Ag@hm-SiO2 spheres after the treatment with laser ablation and (e) the size distribution histogram of the Ag cores. (f) and (g): Ct/C0 and the corresponding linear fittings versus time in the presence of different catalysts, (I) Ag@hm-SiO2 before laser ablation; (II) Ag@hm-SiO2 after laser ablation; (III) without any catalyst. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 



PSMAA/Ag	0.1	60	2/9.66	16	8.17	0.63	
2

Ag@hm-SiO2	16	800	2/3.6	20	18	16	
139

Fe3O4@SiO2-Ag	0.12	12	—/0.1	3.65	7.67	—	
140

Au@Ag core–shell NCs	1	100	—/—	22.5	0.16	—	
141

Au@Ag core–shell NPs	0.2	16	0.1/—	3	5.4	—	
142

Au@Ag@PDA	0.2	15	—/—	10	0.83	—	
143

MOFs-decorated Au@Ag	0.18	353.5	3.46/2	—	4.97	7.1	
144


 	Fig. 11  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the preparation process of core–shell Au@Ag@PDA nanocatalysts. TEM images of Au@Ag@PDA nanoparticles with different thicknesses of Ag layer (b, c and d). TEM images of monometallic Au@Au@PDA nanoparticles (e) and Ag@Ag@PDA nanoparticles (f). (g) The dependence of ln (Ct/C0) on reaction time (t) for the reactions catalyzed by different catalysts. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) A diagrammatic sketch of the oriented attachment of Ag/AgPd nanoparticles. (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of the obtained Ag/AgPd nanowires. (d) The volume of gas mixture (CO2 + H2) generated vs. time for the catalytic dehydrogenation of formic acid at different temperatures and (e) the related Arrhenius plot (lnTOF vs. 1/T). (f) CO2 + H2 volume generated vs. time for the catalytic dehydrogenation of formic acid at different concentrations and (g) the plot of gas generation rate vs. formic acid concentration. (h) The catalytic NO3− and NO2− reduction and (i) the catalytic formic acid decomposition of the Ag/AgPd-0.9 catalysts vs. the reaction time in 0.5 M aqueous formic acid at 25 °C. (j) The ammonia nitrogen content in the catalytic NO3− and NO2− reduction system vs. the reaction time. (k) The selectivity of the Ag/AgPd-0.9 catalysts toward NO3 and NO2 to meet the drinking water standards recommended by the Environmental Protection Agency at 25 mg L−1. (l) Gas chromatography spectrum using TCD for the evolved gas from commercial pure N2, the reduction of NO3− and NO2− over Ag/AgPd-0.9 at 25 °C in the formic acid dehydrogenation system and formic acid aqueous solution over the Ag/AgPd-0.9 at 25 °C. (m) Gas chromatography spectrum using an FID-methanizer for the evolved gas from the reduction of NO3− and NO2− over Ag/AgPd-0.9 at 25 °C in the formic acid dehydrogenation system, commercial pure CO and formic acid aqueous solution over Ag/AgPd-0.9 at 25 °C. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Construction of porous nanofiber-shaped Ag/g-C3N4 from Ag-melamine supramolecular hydrogels. (b) Solid state UV-vis diffusion reflectance spectra of g-C3N4 and Ag/g-C3N4 samples. (c) The steady state PL spectra of g-C3N4 and Ag/g-C3N4 samples at an excitation wavelength of 375 nm. (d) Time resolved PL decay spectra of g-C3N4 and Ag/g-C3N4 samples monitored at 488, 488, and 577 nm, respectively. (e) Photocatalytic H2 evolution of the samples under visible light irradiation. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a–d) High resolution transmission electron microscopy images of the Pd0.7–Ag0.3/g-C3N4 photocatalyst at low and high magnifications. (e) Comparison of H2 production over the all samples. (f) Steady state photoluminescence measurements of all samples. (g) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy Nyquist plots of the pristine g-C3N4, Pd1.0/g-C3N4, Ag1.0/g-C3N4, and Pdx–Agy/g-C3N4. (h) A diagrammatic sketch of the H2 production and charge migration in the Pd0.7–Ag0.3/g-C3N4 photocatalyst under visible light illumination. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the Ag@CoxP core–shell nanoparticle construction process. TEM (b) and HRTEM images (c) of the Ag@CoxP core–shell nanoparticles. (d) Diagrammatic sketch of the electron migration between the CoxP shell and the Ag core. (e) Polarization curves of Ag@CoxP and Co2P (the inset shows the I–t curve obtained at an overpotential of 274 mV). (f) Nyquist plots of Ag@CoxP and Co2P (the inset displays the corresponding equivalent circuit model). (g) Tafel slope measured from the polarization curves. (h) Linear relationship between Δj and the scan rate. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) TEM images of (a) 3 nm, (b) 5 nm and (c) 10 nm sized Ag nanoparticles directly loaded on the carbon support. (d) HR-TEM image of 5 nm Ag/C. Dependence of CO faradaic efficiency (e) on the applied potential and (f) fixed potential at −0.75 V (vs. RHE). CO2 electrochemical reduction was performed in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3. (g) TEM image and (h) HR-TEM image of 5 nm Ag/C after CO2 reduction. (i) CO partial current density dependent on the applied potential, (j) overpotentials at fixed current densities, (k) mass activity dependent on the applied potential and (l) specific activity dependent on the applied potential. Specific activity was normalized by the electrochemically active surface area of Ag measured from Pb UPD. CO2 electrochemical reduction was performed in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3. The thermodynamic reduction potential for CO2 to CO is −0.11 V vs. RHE. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the construction of Ag3[Co(CN)6] precursor and Ag–Co alloy. (b) Leaching CV in Ar-purged 0.001 M H2SO4 + 0.1 M Na2SO4, displaying dissolution of Co on the first cycle, and then featureless scans. (c) Rotating disk electrode I–V polarization curves (potentials relative to the RHE) taken in O2-saturated 0.1 M NaOH at 25 °C and 900 revolutions per minute for the Ag–Co surface alloy, as well as a leached alloy, a segregated Ag/Co sample and pure Ag and Co. (d) Mass-transport corrected kinetic current Tafel plots for the samples. The inset displays Pb-stripping voltammograms adopted to calculate the electrochemical surface area at 10 mV s−1 in the Ar-purged electrolyte with 125 μM Pb(NO3)2 added after the activity measurements. (e) Summary of kinetic current densities for oxygen reduction on each sample, measured at 0.8 VRHE and 0.85 VRHE. Error bars indicate the standard deviation for three or more separately synthesized samples. Scans were recorded in Ar-purged 0.1 M NaOH for the obtained and leached Ag–Co catalyst particles, and for pure Ag and Co control samples, with upper potential limits of 1.00 VRHE (f) and 1.15 VRHE (g). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 202 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Preparation of ultrathin partially oxidized SnOx catalyst for CO2 electroreduction. (b, c) TEM images of Ag76Sn24. (d) X-ray absorption near-edge structure spectrum of Ag76Sn24. Spectra of SnO2 and Sn standards are displayed for contrast. (e) CO2 reduction faradaic efficiencies of AgSn/SnOx catalysts. Electrochemical CO2 reduction performance of Ag76Sn24 catalyst: (f) CO, formate, and H2 faradaic efficiencies, (g) CO, formate, and H2 partial current densities. (h) The free formation energies of surface defects (Ov: oxygen vacancy, –(O)H*: hydroxyl from H+ reduction, and asymmetric 2OH* from chemical water dissociation) on the SnO as a function of potentials vs. RHE. (i) The most advantageous free energy routes of CO and HCOOH construction on SnO with Ov and –(O)H*, respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis of the Pd–Ag@CQDs nanohybrids. (b) Mechanism of UV-light-assisted reduction and subsequent formation of the Pd–Ag@CQDs nanohybrids. (c, d) TEM images of Pd–Ag@CQDs. (e) Size distribution of Pd–Ag@CQDs. (f) Synergistic role of the Pd–Ag@CQDs nanohybrid in the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 



1	Pd–Ag@CQDs	H	H	4-Br	1	97
2	Pd–Ag@CQDs	H	4-OCH3	4-Br	1	94
3	Pd–Ag@CQDs	H	4-NO2	4-Br	1.2	90
4	Pd–Ag@CQDs	CH2CH3	H	4-Br	1	92
5	Pd–Ag@CQDs	CH2CH3	4-OCH3	4-Br	1	94
6	Pd–Ag@CQDs	3-NO2	H	4-Br	1.4	90
7	Pd–Ag@CQDs	3-CF3	H	4-Br	1.8	83
8	Pd–Ag@CQDs	3-NO2	4-NO2	4-Br	3	74
9	Pd–Ag@CQDs	2-Naphthyl	4-OCH3	4-Br	1	92
10	Pd–Ag@CQDs	4-OCH3	4-OH	4-Br	1	90
11	Pd–Ag@CQDs	H	H	4-Cl	24	25
12	Pd–Ag@CQDs	CH2CH3	H	4-Cl	16	30
13	CQDs	CH2CH3	H	4-Cl	24	—
14	AgNPs	CH2CH3	H	4-Cl	24	—
15	PdNPs	CH2CH3	H	4-Cl	32	16
16	PdNPs + AgNPs	CH2CH3	H	4-Cl	32	22
17	AgNPs + CQDs	CH2CH3	H	4-Cl	24	—
18	PdNPs + CDs	CH2CH3	H	4-Cl	24	20
19	AgNPs + PdNPs + CDs	CH2CH3	H	4-Cl	22	25
20	Pd–Ag@CQDs	CH2CH3	H	4-Cl	16	30

 	Fig. 20  (a) Design concept of complementary bimetallic Pd@Ag catalysts for selective semihydrogenation of alkynes. Composition and structural analysis of Pd@Ag-0.20. (b) TEM image. (c) and (d) HAADF-STEM images. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
