Glycerol in energy transportation: a state-of-the-art review  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC02597J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC02597J
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 7865-7889Glycerol in energy transportation: a state-of-the-art review

        
          
            Tianjian 
            Zhang†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Changhui 
            Liu†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Yanlong 
            Gu
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            François 
            Jérôme
          
          
        
      *c
aSchool of Electrical and Power Engineering, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221116, China. E-mail: liuch915@cumt.edu.cn
bSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China
cIC2MP UMR CNRS_Université de Poitiers 7285, ENSIP 1 rue Marcel Doré, TSA 41195, 86073 Poitiers Cedex 9, France
Received 
      21st July 2021
    , Accepted 20th September 2021First published on 21st September 2021AbstractGlycerol, which bears green, low-cost, and good miscibility features, provides a variety of solvent portfolios to satisfy the complex market demands. Owing to its abundant feedstock and unique properties, glycerol is a good candidate in catalysis, high-value-added chemical conversion, and solvents. It can also be used as an energy transportation medium attributed to its high boiling temperature, promising thermal stability, and fertile hydrogen bond. Despite the great potential of glycerol in energy transportation, a review paper that summarizes and discusses its recent advances is blank to date. In this review paper, recent advances in the utilization of glycerol and glycerol-based mixture solvent systems in energy transportation were summarized. Thermophysical properties of glycerol-containing fluids, including their performance in various heat transfer occasions, and principles of related energy transportation were comprehensively introduced and discussed. Applications of these fluids in industrial processes were also discussed systematically. Furthermore, advantages and drawbacks of glycerol in energy transportation were concluded. It opens an important avenue to alleviate the backlog of glycerol production by means of valuable applications.Tianjian ZhangTianjian Zhang is currently a Ph.D. student at the Huazhong University of Science and Technology under the supervision of Prof. Yanlong Gu. He received his bachelor degree from China University of Mining and Technology, China, in 2021 under the supervision of Dr Changhui Liu. His current research mainly focuses on the synthesis of thermal energy materials and green chemistry.Changhui LiuDr Changhui Liu earned his Ph.D. from Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Yanlong Gu, then worked as a postdoctoral researcher in the group of Prof. Shu Kobayashi in The University of Tokyo (Japan) from 2017 to 2018. Currently, he works as an associate Professor at the China University of Mining and Technology (Xuzhou, China). His research interests include sustainable chemistry, heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis, energy storage and conversion.Yanlong GuYanlong Gu received his B.Sc. degree in 1999 from Inner Mongolia University, and obtained his Ph.D. degree from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Science in 2005. He then started his journey as a post-doc researcher in the group of Prof. Shu Kobayashi, The University of Tokyo, Japan (one year), and in the group of Prof. Francois Jerome, The University of Poitiers, France. Since October 2008, he has been a professor at Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. Yanlong Gu has a broad interest in homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis, organic synthesis, and biomass valorization.François JérômeFrançois Jérôme received his Ph.D. degree in chemistry from the University of Burgundy (France) in 2000 under the supervision of Prof. R. Guilard. He then moved as a postdoc to the University of California of Davis (USA) in the group of Prof. K. M. Smith, followed by a second postdoctoral position at the University of Rennes 1 under the guidance of Prof. P. H. Dixneuf, where he worked on homogeneous catalysis. In 2015, he created the research federation INCREASE, hosted by the CNRS, gathering scientists from academia working together with chemical companies on the catalytic conversion of renewable feedstocks to specialty chemicals.
1. Introduction
Highly efficient flowing media for energy transportation is crucial in various industrial processes.1–3 These working fluids have wide applications, ranging from the heat dissipation of miniature electronic devices4 to the cooling of large-scale nuclear reactor systems.5 On the other hand, the current fossil energy crisis emphasizes on highly efficient utilization of energy,6–8 which has generated a series of advanced applications, such as solar collection9–12 and waste heat recovery.13–16
Efficient heat transfer fluids thus face new challenges in these energy transport processes. Conventional heat transfer fluids represented by water have been widely used in commercial applications.17,18 However, the short liquid range of traditionally used base liquids, such as water and fossil oil, leads to the invalidation of heat transfer fluid under severe working conditions.19 Glycerol is a typical molecule with hydrophilic trihydroxy groups that form several hydrogen bonds, which confer its low vapor pressure, high boiling point (290 °C under an atmospheric pressure of 101.3 kPa.20,21), good miscibility with many solvents (water, alcohols, etc.), and high viscosity.22 With its good miscibility, glycerol has a variety of solvent portfolios with other substances to satisfy the complex demands.23,24 However, the energy transport application of glycerol, given its thermal and rheological characteristics, is often overlooked.
Biodiesel is a sustainable alternative to fossil fuels because of its high calorific value, low noxious emissions, and large availability.25,26 Glycerol is a main by-product in the large-scale production of biodiesel (i.e., over 10 wt%).27 As a result, it has been produced on scales far exceeding the market demand, and its abandonment is a serious waste of resources and may generate environmental problems.28 Many efforts have been exerted to study the wide applications of glycerol to alleviate the backlog of glycerol production.20,21,29–32 For example, Quispe et al.33 reviewed the production and consumption levels of glycerol and technologies about the combustion of glycerol. Gu and Jérôme34 reviewed the superiority and potential applications of glycerol as a green solvent for organic synthesis and catalysis. Silva et al.35 reviewed the utilization of glycerol as a carbon source for growing microorganisms in industrial microbiology to obtain valuable products through bioconversion. Anitha et al.36 summarized comprehensively that glycerol has wide applications, including chemical synthesis, biorefinery, methanol production, and even fuel cell and wastewater treatment because of its abundant transformation, and they proposed that glycerol is extremely promising. Moreover, there have been already 46802 publications and 2137 reviews retrieved through the string (glycerol or glycerine or glycerin) from 2011 to 2020 based on the Web of Science database (Fig. 1a). The number of publications in 2020 reached 5409 and is maintaining a constant growth trend, which shows that glycerol-related research has attracted more and more attention over the past ten years. In general, glycerol-related topics are mainly concentrated in the fields of chemistry and biology, which are the top two areas with the largest proportion of publications (Fig. 1b). What is more, the number of reviews related to this topic of biochemistry molecular biology has reached 55.6% of the total (Fig. 1c). However, the number of publications of glycerol in the field of energy and fuels is also considerable, reaching 11.7% of the total, which means that glycerol also plays an important role in the energy field. Among them, these publications are mainly about glycerol as an energy source of hydrogen gas through reforming methods. However, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first review paper dedicated to glycerol as an energy transport medium, which sheds light on the development of glycerol, glycerol/water mixture, and nanofluids involving glycerol for energy transport applications from the material science and heat transfer engineering perspective (Fig. 1d). This review aims to elucidate the mechanisms behind many heat transfer phenomena related to glycerol accounting for essential interaction between various components in the system, which is expected to open a novel perspective for scholars to gain a deep understanding on the potential applications of glycerol in energy transportation (Fig. 1e). In this review paper, characteristics and applications of glycerol and its derivatives as functional media for energy transportation are summarized. Preparation and modification strategies for nanomaterial synthesis are reviewed. Applications of these fluids in industrial processes are also discussed systematically. Furthermore, advantages and drawbacks of glycerol in energy transportation are concluded.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the importance of this work. (a) Publications and (b) their main subject areas on glycerol or glycerine or glycerin according to the Web of Science database (2011–2020). (c) Reviews and (d) their main subject areas on glycerol or glycerine or glycerin according to the Web of Science database (2011–2020). (e) The source and main applications of glycerol. 
2. Performance and properties of glycerol-containing energy transport media
2.1. Glycerol

2.1.1. Viscosity. 
Glycerol is a typical molecule with trihydroxy groups and therefore forms several intermolecular hydrogen bond network structures, which make it highly viscous.37,38 Consequently, many studies used glycerol as a representative of high-viscosity fluids and analyzed its unique rheological behaviors and heat transfer characteristics. These related results have important guiding significance for industrial processes involving high-viscosity fluids, such as food and lubricant production.39,40 As early as 1931, Thomas Bradford Drew at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology analyzed the heat transfer in the stream-line flow (laminar flow) of glycerol and sought for a general correlation. This experiment was carried out in a horizontal circular pipe heated by surrounding dry steam, but the data obtained lacked correlation and reproducibility because of the limited accuracy of the experimental apparatus.41,42 Pantokratoras applied numerical simulation to study the classic laminar natural convection heat transfer with glycerol as the working fluid. The boundary conditions of a vertical stationary plate with uniform heat flux43 and a vertical isothermal surface with large temperature differences44 were studied. This research focused on the influence of variable thermophysical properties of glycerol on heat transfer performance as temperature changes during energy transportation and compared the results obtained with the constant physical properties reported in previous work. This experiment involved upward and downward flows, which corresponded to the state of glycerol being heated and cooled, respectively. Results showed that the viscosity of glycerol has a strong functional relationship with temperature, almost in exponential form. Specifically, when the temperature of glycerol rises from 20 °C to 60 °C, the Prandtl number (Pr) decreases from 10785 to 825. Pr describes the competition between energy transportation and momentum transportation in a working fluid. A large Pr indicates that the momentum diffusion rate is faster than the heat diffusion rate and that thermal convection is more effective than thermal conduction. In general, the drastic change in glycerol viscosity with temperature generates a remarkable impact on wall heat transfer and a much greater impact on wall shear stress. Thus, heating is an effective measure to reduce the viscosity of glycerol, thereby promoting heat transfer performance. However, it should be noted that the viscosity of glycerol after heating is still much higher than that of traditional working fluids, which hinders the flowing properties of glycerol.


2.1.2. Verify the effectiveness of heat transfer with high viscosity. 
Given its high viscosity, glycerol is often used to simulate actual industrial processes to verify the validity of heat transfer models or equipment. Such studies have important guiding significance for the development of new equipment and technologies. For example, Rainieri et al. used glycerol as the working fluid for forced convection heat transfer in straight and coiled tubes to verify the effectiveness of the passive technique for heat transfer enhancement.45 The passive technique means that no energy is consumed for enhancing heat transfer except for the power used for medium transportation and generally includes wall surface treatment and geometric modification in heat exchangers.46,47 Owing to its simplicity, this technique is widely used in industrial fields, such as the food, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic industries.48 All the above processes involve high Prandtl number fluids and usually need to maintain the laminar flow state. Thus, glycerol must be applied to verify the effectiveness of the heat exchange equipment. The researchers manufactured straight pipes with spirally corrugated walls and coiled pipes with smooth and corrugated walls, as shown in Fig. 2a and b. All tubes were performed in two Reynolds number (Re) ranges: the low Re (5–13) provided by glycerol and the high Re (150–1500) provided by ethylene glycol. The research results showed that the wall curvature of coiled tubes can improve the convective heat transfer coefficients at high and low Re, but the corrugated wall can only enhance heat transfer at the higher Re. The greatest heat transfer increase was observed in the smooth coiled tubes at low Re and the corrugated coiled tubes at high Re. Through geometric modification of the tubes, the wall curvature delays the transition of the flow regime in the presence of inertial forces, where the fluid clusters flow along the curved trajectory, thereby maintaining the laminar flow state. Moreover, owing to the centrifugal forces in the coiled geometry, a pair of counter rotating vortices is formed in the flow cross-section to make the boundary layer thin, thereby improving the heat transfer performance in the coiled tubes. Zhu et al. also used glycerol and ethylene glycol to verify the improvement of heating uniformity in the continuous-flow microwave reactor after introducing a screw propeller.49 The microwave heating system is adopted by the industrial field because of its high efficiency, energy saving, and easy control, but the working fluid tends to stagnate and form heterogeneity in the reactor. Consequently, a screw propeller was added to this design to ensure uniform heating. Glycerol was introduced as a functional fluid with high viscosity (approximately 1000 times that of water at room temperature) to explore the energy transfer and temperature distribution before and after adding the propeller to verify the effectiveness. Sahin et al. proposed a simple method for estimating the entropy production in a pipe and used glycerol as the working fluid to verify its accuracy.50 Enhanced heat transfer is widely used in various heat exchanger equipment; however, growing entropy generation means more exergy loss. Thus, economic factors must be considered in industrial applications. Accurate numerical calculations of the entropy generation rate are generally time consuming. Hence, simple prediction methods are in raring demand. In a flow pipe, pressure drop caused by viscous friction and temperature difference are associated with entropy generation. However, the estimated results obtained by previous models under nonlinear temperature conditions are doubtful. In particular, the dependence between viscosity and temperature of most viscous fluids, such as glycerol, changes exponentially in the boundary layer. Therefore, glycerol was used in this study as a typical viscous fluid to explore the entropy production in the laminar flow state (0 < Re < 10) and to evaluate the economics in energy transportation. The error of the result predicted by this simple method is within 0.01%, which can provide meaningful guidance for industrial applications.
 Fig. 2  (a) Straight and (b) coiled corrugated tubes under test ((a) and (b) were reproduced with permission from ref. 45, Copyright (2012) Elsevier). (c) Experimental setup of reciprocating oscillated flow in porous domains (reproduced with permission from ref. 51, Copyright (2017) Springer Nature). 


2.1.3. Reciprocating oscillated flow. 
Sayar51 used glycerol as the working fluid to study the heat transfer performance of reciprocating oscillated flow in a porous domain. This experiment was carried out in a vertical double-layer pipe, as shown in Fig. 2c. The upper part of the inner pipe is the heating area, and the lower part is the cooling area, separated by a heat-insulating object in the middle. The outer layer is a tempered glass pipe wrapped in thermal insulation, and the interlayer is filled with stationary stainless-steel wool and glycerol. The annular glycerol fluid was driven by a piston cylinder to reciprocate at a fixed frequency. In this process, glycerol transported energy between the heating and cooling sections. This study explored the effects of oscillating frequency, heat flux, and porous media on the heat transfer performance of oscillating flow. Oscillating flow has attracted considerable attention because of its obvious heat transfer improvement, which is caused by thinning of the thermal boundary layer and weakening of the thermal resistance from oscillation.52,53 The results of this study showed that the oscillation frequency strongly affects the heat transfer performance of the glycerol fluid; the more violent the oscillation motion, the stronger the effect on the thermal boundary layer. Furthermore, a stainless-steel wool porous medium with a porosity of 93.69% was introduced to enhance heat transfer, and its effect was attributed to two aspects.54 On the one hand, the porous structure provides a larger contact area for enhancing heat exchange, especially those with high thermal conductivity. On the other hand, the narrow pores make the continuous glycerol fluid divide into small droplets, so that heat is evenly distributed, as indicated by the uniform radial temperatures of glycerol. Results showed that the oscillating flow of glycerol in the porous domain has a fivefold increase in heat transfer coefficients compared with the non-porous domain.


2.1.4. Natural convection heat transfer from the outside surface. 
Akbari et al.55 conducted an experimental study on natural convection heat transfer from the outside surface of an inclined cylinder for glycerol under different heat fluxes. Natural convection heat transfer from the outside surface of the cylinder is applied in many industrial processes, such as solar energy collection, power transmission cables, and air conditioning systems.56,57 However, inclined cylinders are poorly studied. This experiment involved 10 working conditions with different inclination angles from the horizontal, ranging from 0° to 90°. As the angle increases, the Nusselt number obtained under the same heat flux decreases; under the same inclined angle, the natural convection heat transfer performance increases with the enhancement of heat flux. This study also provided an experimental correlation for predicting the average Nusselt number of natural convection heat transfer from the outside surface, which accurately matches the obtained experimental data.

2.2. Glycerol-based nanofluids
Nanofluids contribute to promote the development of heat transfer engineering significantly.58 As for glycerol, its unique molecular structure and consequent properties create opportunities to be utilized as a carrier for nanofluids. Intense interactions in glycerol-based nanofluids among nanoparticles, base solvent, and other additives generate various effects on thermal conductivity, viscosity, surface tension, and other properties.59 Provided by its good miscibility, glycerol as the base fluid of nanofluids helps develop a series of combinations and improve thermal conductivity and rheological properties. The abundant hydrogen bonds in glycerol allow chemical modification in glycerol-based systems to achieve stable nanoparticle dispersion and improve thermal properties. Nanoparticles also generate modification on glycerol. For example, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) can fracture the intermolecular hydrogen bond network structure of glycerol to reduce viscosity (Fig. 3).60 Consequently, glycerol is promising in developing functional nanofluids. The energy transport performance of nanofluids should be discussed on the basis of previous research on the base fluid and also be assisted by the promotion effect of nanoparticles.
 Fig. 3  (a) Interaction between carbon nanotubes and glycerol molecules. Rheological curves of (b) single-walled carbon nanotubes and glycerol, (c) double-walled carbon nanotubes and glycerol (reproduced with permission from ref. 60, Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society). 

2.2.1. Glycerol-based nanofluids involving metal oxide. 
Aluminum oxide (Al2O3). 
Al2O3 nanoparticles were the first to be applied to prepare nanofluids when Choi proposed the concept of nanofluids in 1995.61 Subsequently, Xie et al. dispersed α-Al2O3 nanoparticles with the specific surface area of 25 m2 g−1 into glycerol and three other base fluids through intensive ultrasonication and agitation at a volume concentration of 5% and then measured the thermal conductivity of the prepared nanofluids by using the hot wire method. Results showed that all the measured values are larger than the values predicted using the theoretical model. Therefore, they concluded that the models suitable for the suspended mixture of large-size (micrometer or larger) particles are inappropriate to predict the thermal conductivity of nanofluids because of the nonlinear energy transfer between the nanoparticle and the liquid interface.62 A small amount of nanoparticles can improve the thermal conductivity but also affect the viscosity of the fluid, which is also an important issue related to energy transport. Therefore, Sharifpur et al. applied an optimized two-step method assisted with ultrasonication to prepare Al2O3 nanofluids based on glycerol. Three Al2O3 particle sizes of 19, 139, and 160 nm were dispersed, and the effects of particle size, volume concentration (up to 5%), and temperature (20 °C–70 °C) on nanofluid viscosity were explored in detail. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern, and particle size analysis were performed to characterize the nanoparticles, whereas UV–vis analysis was carried out to characterize the dispersion of nanofluids. Results showed that the nanofluid with the smallest particles has the highest shear resistance, and the viscosity of the nanofluid decreases with increasing temperature and increases with increasing volume concentration. On the basis of the presented experimental data, a neural network algorithm coupled with the group method of data handling to predict the viscosity of nanofluids was offered with accuracy.63 Moreover, Sharifpur et al. conducted a series of experiments to explore the effect of the same three parameters above on the thermal conductivity of α-Al2O3/glycerol nanofluids. Results showed that the particle size and volume concentration significantly affect the thermal conductivity of the nanofluid, whereas the variation of temperature exerts almost no significant effect on the thermal conductivity within the experimental temperature range of 20–45 °C. The prepared nanofluid at 4% volume fractions can be constantly stable for 50 h without thermal conductivity reduction.64 Sharifpur et al. also employed the two-step method with different ultrasonication time periods of 3 and 6 h to prepare glycerol-based gamma alumina (γ-Al2O3) nanofluids with particle sizes of 20–30 nm in the volume concentration regime of up to 2%. The obtained nanofluids were subsequently subjected to viscosity, electrical conductivity, and pH measurements in the temperature range of 20–70 °C to discuss in detail the influence of the introduction of nanoparticles on the mixed system. The sonication time affects the viscosity and electrical conductivity of the nanofluids, and the γ-Al2O3/glycerol nanofluid loading 2 vf% nanoparticles prepared by sonicating for 6 h reduces the viscosity and conductivity compared with the sample that was only sonicated for 3 h. Nanoparticles carry residual charges during the synthesis process. Introducing nanoparticles into the electroneutral glycerol solvent causes the destruction of ionic configuration on the particle surface and the attraction of the counterion groups to the particle surface, which originates from the surface electrokinetic interaction and alters the electrical conductivity of nanofluids. Some studies have also proven that the viscosity and zeta potential, both of which are related to stability, can be changed by adjusting the pH of the nanofluid.65–67 Results of this study showed that temperature significantly influences the pH of nanofluids and indicated that the pH of the nanofluid can be utilized to determine the optimal preparation temperature to improve stability.68 Sharifpur et al. conducted experiments focusing on the optimal ultrasonication energy required for the two-step preparation of stable and homogeneous alumina/glycerol nanofluids. The agglomeration of nanoparticles during the preparation of nanofluids is difficult to avoid, and ultrasonic treatment is the most commonly used method to eliminate agglomeration. This study evaluated the effect of several parameters, including energy density, particle size, volume concentration, and temperature, on minimizing the viscosity of as-prepared nanofluids. Results showed that the optimum energy density required for the prepared nanofluids with particle sizes of 20–30 nm is 3.0 × 107 kJ m−3 and that the optimum energy density for 80–100 nm nanofluids is 1.5 × 107 kJ m−3. Furthermore, an empirical model for predicting the energy density required to prepare initially uniform and stable Al2O3/glycerol nanofluids based on the fluid properties was proposed, and this model is beneficial to improve the economy and convenience of the preparation process.69
Magnetic iron oxide. 
The thermal performance of energy transport media can be improved not only by adding components with high thermal conductivity but also with the assistance of external forces, such as magnetic fields.70 Some works related to magnetic nanofluids based on glycerol have been reported. Smolkova et al. coprecipitated ferrous and ferric salts to control the crystal growth of magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles and obtain a nanoparticle mixture of magnetite and maghemite with an average size of 13 nm (original sample). Annealing was performed for up to 6 h at 300 °C air to ensure that magnetite is completely transformed into maghemite for acquiring single-phase maghemite (annealed sample). Subsequently, the original and annealed samples were dispersed in glycerol solvents to prepare nanofluids for heating experiments in an alternating magnetic field. Although the saturation magnetization value of the annealed sample is reduced, its nanofluid still provides good heating performance. In addition, the heat output of the magnetic nanofluids is only accompanied with a power loss of no more than 30 W g−1, which is attributed to the combined effect formed between the magnetic nanoparticles and the glycerol medium.71 Hajiyan et al. dispersed Fe3O4 nanoparticles with the volume fractions of 0.5%–3.0% into glycerol to prepare magnetic nanofluids and studied the thermal conductivity and rheological properties in detail under the promotion of a uniform external magnetic field. Results showed that the presence of an external magnetic field significantly increases the viscosity and thermal conductivity of the magnetic nanofluids, and the nanofluid with 3.0% Fe3O4 nanoparticles obtains a 16.9% enhancement in thermal conductivity. They also developed a nonlinear correlation to predict the relationship between the thermal conductivity of Fe3O4/glycerol nanofluids and temperature, magnetic field strength, and nanoparticle volume fraction. The promotion effect on energy transport by the magnetic field is expected to be applied to the non-contact control of electronic equipment cooling, drug delivery, and so on.72
Tungsten oxide. 
Given their unique properties, tungsten oxide (WO3) nanoparticles have produced advanced applications in photocatalysis, sensing, photothermal conversion, and so on. Some of these processes involve the dispersion of WO3 in liquid, and a few studies have been conducted on the transport behaviors of WO3 in glycerol nanofluids. Karimi-Nazarabad et al.73 used sodium tungstate (Na2WO4) as the precursor to prepare nanoparticles by using the hydrothermal method, and characterization through TEM, XRD, and Doppler light scattering techniques confirmed the existence of nanocrystals. Subsequently, the as-prepared nanoparticles were dispersed in glycerol to synthesize nanofluids in the mass fraction ranging from 0.5%–4.0%. The rheological properties of the nanofluids were studied on the basis of three variables: mass fraction, temperature, and shear rate. At low shear rates, the as-prepared nanofluids exhibit shear-thinning behaviors. Compared with the WO3 nanofluids prepared by another base fluid, ethylene glycol, the glycerol nanofluids have better stability, as determined through the UV–vis tests within 15 days. Furthermore, Karimi-Nazarabad et al.74 used four preparation methods to synthesize tungsten oxide nanoparticles with different shapes to explore the effect of particle shape on the energy transport properties of nanofluids. Four methods consisting of hydrothermal or microwave treatment and with or without the addition of sodium chloride (NaCl) were labeled as HT, HN, MW, and MN, respectively. As shown in the TEM images (Fig. 4a), all samples can be roughly divided into three shapes, spherical, polygonal, and blade, and nanoparticles with these shapes coexist in different proportions. Sampling statistics show that the proportion of spherical nanoparticles is the highest in the sample prepared by the hydrothermal method without NaCl, whereas the proportion of polygonal nanoparticles is the highest in the sample prepared by microwave treatment with NaCl (MN). The presence of NaCl significantly promotes the formation of polygonal nanoparticles; thus, the proportions of polygonal shape in the samples with NaCl (HN and MN) are higher, which may be due to the good alignment of WO3 caused by NaCl.75 Moreover, the samples prepared by HN and MW are similar in particle shape distribution; hence, they exhibit almost the same rheological properties as expected (Fig. 4b). The MN nanofluids possess greater viscosity because the Brownian motion of elongated particles has structural restriction.76 Homoplastically, nanofluids with more spherical particles (HT) obtain a greater enhancement in thermal conductivity (Fig. 4c). The different shapes of nanoparticles affect the energy transport properties of the prepared nanofluids. In addition, nanofillers of glycerol-based nanofluids have also been extended to zinc oxide77–79 and magnesium oxide.80
 Fig. 4  (a) TEM image for samples synthesized using different methods. (b) Viscosity versus temperature. (c) Thermal conductivity ratio as a function of temperature ((a–c) were reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright (2016) Elsevier). 


2.2.2. Glycerol-based nanofluids involving carbon materials. 
Graphene. 
Graphene, a honeycomb 2D carbon material with a series of unique properties, has set off a worldwide revolution in the advanced materials field since it was successfully synthesized by Geim et al. in 2004.81–83 Given its high thermal conductivity up to 5300 W (m K)−1, graphene has also been widely used in the preparation of nanofluids,84,85 and some studies on introducing graphene into glycerol to prepare nanofluids have emerged. Goharshadi et al. synthesized few-layer graphene nanosheets on a large scale by using a green method of burning magnesium ribbons in dry ice with significant superiority in terms of cost, simple operation, and non-toxicity. The principle used is shown in the following chemical reaction formula: 2Mg(s) + CO2(g) → 2MgO(s) + C(s)(1)
The obtained sample was mixed with glycerol to prepare nanofluids according to the mass fraction range of 0.25%–2.0%. The as-prepared few-layer graphene was characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Raman spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR), high-resolution TEM (HRTEM), XRD, and N2 adsorption–desorption analysis to illustrate the success of this preparation method. Subsequently, the rheological properties of the prepared nanofluid were studied. Results showed that the viscosity of the nanofluid decreases with increasing temperature and increases with increasing mass fraction.86 Furthermore, Goharshadi et al. carried out molecular dynamics simulations to study the rheological and transport properties of glycerol-based nanofluids involving few-layer graphene nanosheets. Primary results showed that the graphene nanosheets/glycerol mixed system can achieve stable dispersion. Graphene and glycerol have similar solubility parameters (37.37 and 38.62 MPa1/2, respectively), indicating the relative dissolving capacity of a certain substance by numerical values.87 Then, the viscosity and diffusion coefficient of graphene/glycerol nanofluids were calculated, and they are closely linked to the energy transport performance of nanofluids. The effect of the layer number of graphene nanosheets on nanofluids was also investigated. Results showed that the calculated viscosity value of the nanofluids is similar to the experimental results obtained at 293.15 K, and the diffusion coefficient decreases with the increasing number of graphene nanosheet layers. The increasing number of nanosheet layers also increases the solubility parameter of pure graphene nanosheets.88 In continuation of the research on graphene/glycerol nanofluids, Goharshadi et al. prepared graphene quantum dots (GQDs) by using a green bottom-up method involving the pyrolysis of citric acid and then utilized them to prepare GQDs/glycerol nanofluids; the effect of temperature and mass fraction on the viscosity, thermal conductivity, and electrical conductivity of the nanofluids were analyzed.89 GQDs are zero-dimensional graphene fragments with sizes less than 100 nm, which exhibit special physical and chemical properties due to their quantum confinement effect and boundary effect.90–92 Compared with traditional metal oxides or metal sulfide QDs, GQDs possess outstanding advantages, such as high electrical conductivity, low toxicity, good solubility in water, high thermal conductivity, good biocompatibility, and stable fluorescence properties, which have been widely used in many cutting-edge scientific and technological fields.93–95 The successful preparation of GQDs was confirmed using luminescence spectrometry, XRD, FTIR, UV–vis absorbance spectrometry, and atomic force microscopy. The rheological properties of the as-prepared nanofluids were studied, and results showed that the introduction of GQDs acts as a lubricant. Thus, the viscosity of nanofluids by loading only 2% GQDs is reduced by 49.97% compared with pure glycerol at 293.15 K. However, in the study of graphene nanosheets/glycerol nanofluids previously reported by the same authors, the addition of 2% nanosheets enhances the viscosity of glycerol by 401.49% at 303.15 K.86
Carbon nanotubes. 
CNTs are formed by curling graphite sheets. Similar to that on graphene, the carbon atom on CNTs is mainly hybridized through sp2 hybridization; however, a certain number of atoms are also sp3 hybridized because of the curved hexagonal grid structure.96–98 CNTs are also equipped with high thermal stability and excellent thermal conductivity,99 which allow them to be used in the preparation of functional nanofluids. To improve the poor compatibility of multi-walled CNTs in base fluids, Chen et al. utilized concentrated acid and mechanical ball milling to process the multi-walled CNTs and then dispersed the resulting samples into the glycerol solvent to obtain stable nanofluids without a dispersant to study the rheological behaviors at different volume concentrations and temperatures.100 Results showed that the multi-walled CNTs/glycerol nanofluids exhibit Newtonian behavior under all research conditions. In other words, the shear stress of the nanofluids is always linearly related to the shear rate. When the test temperature is higher than 55 °C, the augmentation in viscosity caused by CNTs becomes insignificant. However, the opposite conclusion was reported by Bognár et al.; in their study, they added nitrogen-doped bamboo-shaped multi-walled CNTs into glycerol to prepare nanofluids and analysed the influence of temperature, addition amount, and rotational speed on the rheological behaviors of the nanofluids.101 The CNTs were synthesized through catalytic chemical vapor deposition with nickel nitrate hexahydrate salt as a catalyst. All the tested nanofluids showed exponentially increasing viscosity tendencies with increasing CNT amount. In pure glycerol solvent, the shear stress is linearly proportional to the shear rate, indicating that glycerol is a Newtonian fluid. However, the CNTs/glycerol nanofluid exhibits non-Newtonian shear thinning behaviors, that is, the fluid is pseudoplastic, which is also affected by temperature.


2.2.3. Glycerol-based nanofluids involving non-metal oxide nanoparticles. 
Akilu et al. used a two-step method to mix non-porous spherical silica nanoparticles with glycerol to prepare nanofluids, as shown in Fig. 5a–d. Studies on nanofluids involving non-porous spherical silica are relatively rare compared with porous amorphous silica. The thermal conductivity of the as-prepared nanofluids is increased by 11.5% at most. The analysis results of rheological properties can prove that these silica/glycerol nanofluids exhibit the properties of Newtonian fluids within the shear rate range of 20–100 s−1.102
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of SiO2 nanoparticles and corresponding particle size distribution graph. (b) Photographic image of SiO2–glycerol nanofluids. (c) Viscosity distribution as a function of particle concentration for SiO2–glycerol nanofluids. (d) Thermal conductivity distribution of SiO2–glycerol nanofluids ((a–d) were reproduced with permission from ref. 102, Copyright (2017) Elsevier). 


2.2.4. Glycerol-based nanofluids involving composite nanoparticles. 
Various simple nanoparticles, including metal,103 metal oxides, non-metal oxides, and carbon-based materials, have been used to prepare glycerol nanofluids to investigate their energy transport properties, as mentioned above. Furthermore, some composite nanoparticles have been synthesized by chemical means to enhance the performance of glycerol nanofluids and endow additional functions to simple nanofluids.
Metallic silver-decorated mesoporous silica (Ag/mSiO2). 
Tadjarodi et al. synthesized novel Ag/mSiO2 nanoparticles to prepare glycerol-based nanofluids with enhanced thermal performance.104 The preparation process of the nanocomposites consists of three stages. Primarily, they used hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (HTAB) as a template to support tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) condensation and form silica networks, and then HTAB was removed by calcination to obtain mSiO2. To achieve the surface modification by metallic silver, the hemiaminal groups were grafted onto the silica surface and channels as the reducing agent to react with silver nitrate (AgNO3) for anchoring metallic silver. The as-prepared nanoparticles were subsequently subjected to a series of morphology and structure characterizations, including SEM, FTIR, UV–vis spectroscopy, XRD, inductively coupled plasma, and N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms, to verify the successful preparation of nanocomposites. Ag/mSiO2 and mSiO2 were mixed with glycerol to prepare nanofluids. Rheological research results showed that all these nanofluids exhibit Newtonian behaviors, and the immobilization of metallic silver on mSiO2 can reduce the viscosity of nanofluids. Compared with that of mSiO2 nanofluids, the thermal conductivity of Ag/mSiO2 nanofluids is better, and the thermal conductivity increases by 10.95% when loading 4 wt% Ag/mSiO2 nanoparticles with 2.98% silver.
Microencapsulated phase-change materials (MPCMs). 
MPCMs, which are efficient energy storage materials with stabilized shape, have been used in many thermal management systems.106–109 The suspension of MPCMs acts as energy storage and energy transport. Some studies regard it as a superior working fluid for thermal control, and the most common one is based on water.110–112 In water-based suspensions, MPCMs are prone to destabilize the dispersion due to floating, which can be relieved by adding surfactants, but it will become invalid as the temperature rises. In addition, glycerol has a greater viscosity to carry MPCMs and possesses better compatibility with organic ingredients. Thus, glycerol-based suspensions can be regarded as another solution to achieve stable dispersion. Cao et al. synthesized a core–shell structure MPCM with a high latent heat of 100 J g−1 and prepared its glycerol suspension to investigate thermal and rheological properties.105 Low-density polyethylene and ethylvinylacetate copolymers were selected as the shell materials, and the core was paraffin. The thermal conductivity of suspensions decreases as the mass concentration increases, which is reasonable because the thermal conductivity of the MPCM is very poor. Interestingly, as shown in Fig. 6a, the rheological properties of the suspensions show a transition regardless of the variations in temperature or shear rate. This result can be attributed to the agglomeration generated by structural damages in non-encapsulated PCMs and MPCMs caused by excessively high temperature (above melting temperature 27 °C) or excessively large shear rate. Consequently, the rheological properties of the MPCMs/glycerol suspension have two parts. Below the melting temperature and at a small shear rate, the suspension exhibits Newtonian behavior. Above the critical shear rate or melting temperature, the suspension exhibits shear thinning behavior, which can be described by the power law model. The agglomeration also leads to clogging of piping systems, which is another serious problem. Therefore, how to avoid the formation of agglomerates needs further study. Furthermore, Cao et al. studied the time-dependent structural breakdown behavior of the MPCMs/glycerol suspension and found the optimal kinetic model that fits the experimental data well (Fig. 6b), which is important for revealing the regularity of MPCM structural breakdown.113
 Fig. 6  (a) Different MPCM concentrations as a function of shearing time at 20 °C. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 113, Copyright (2014) Taylor & Francis Group). (b) Effect of temperature and shear rate on the viscosity of 20 wt.% MPCM suspensions. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 105, Copyright (2018) Springer Nature). 

2.3. Glycerol/water mixture
Introducing another component as an additive into a pure liquid can enhance thermal performance, which is not only limited to solid particles but is also the same for other solvents,114–116 such as introducing water to glycerol. The high viscosity of glycerol always hinders its application in flowing processes, which is predominately caused by abundant hydrogen bonding structure.38,117 The hydrogen bonds of glycerol have attracted considerable interest, and some studies have clearly demonstrated that water affects the hydrogen bond network of glycerol to reduce viscosity.118,119 They found that water improves the rheological properties and enhances the thermal properties of glycerol. Consequently, the introduction of water widens the application of glycerol/water mixture in heat exchangers and other energy transport processes. Glycerol/water mixture is also a typical system with a large difference in vapor pressure, and its unique energy transport behaviors are worthy of research.

2.3.1. Pool boiling. 
Pool boiling refers to boiling behaviors under natural convection conditions, without imposed liquid flow over heat surface by external means, which is an efficient heat transfer mode with much smaller thermal resistance than natural and forced convection. Therefore, pool boiling has drawn much attention in various energy transportation systems, such as refrigeration and distillation. Glycerol possesses a relatively higher boiling point than water (290 °C vs. 100 °C under atmospheric pressure), which is conducive to the ignorance of some complex phenomena in the pool boiling heat transfer of water–glycerol binary solutions. That is, during boiling, water evaporates, accompanied with bubble formation, whereas glycerol is still not vaporized and still transports between the heating surface and the bulk of the surrounding liquid. Water–glycerol solutions are a typical binary system where the boiling point of one constituent is much different from that of another component. Such systems are widely used in various industrial conditions, including distillation, power generation, and refrigeration.120,121 Sarafraz et al.122 used water/glycerol binary solutions at various concentrations (zero to 35% mass glycerol) to investigate the pool boiling heat transfer coefficient on a horizontal rod heater. They observed an approximately 15%–20% enhancement at the low glycerol concentration of approximately 0.02% mole fraction. Interestingly, similar enhancements have been achieved at very low concentrations in other reported binary systems. This enhancement is possibly related to the effect of glycerol on wettability characteristics and bubble dynamics. The bubble generation under different heat fluxes is shown in Fig. 7a and b, and the heat transfer coefficient of nucleate boiling increases with increasing heat fluxes.
 Fig. 7  Boiling of water/glycerol at water 99 wt% and (a) q/A = 30 kW m−2, (b) q/A = 40 kW m−2 ((a) and (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 122, Copyright (2013) Taylor & Francis Group). 
A simple model was proposed to predict the boiling heat transfer coefficient, which is accurate for predictions of low glycerol concentrations and medium/low heat fluxes. This model is helpful for the design, operation, and optimization of heat transfer units in industrial fields. Based on a large amount of experimental data about three dilute binary mixtures, they also evaluated the influence of using different thermodynamic models to estimate the thermophysical properties of binary working fluids on the prediction of pool boiling heat transfer coefficient and selected the suitable model to minimize prediction error.123 To improve the heat transfer coefficient, Sarafraz et al. introduced ammonium salts into the water/glycerol binary pool boiling system.124 Ammonium salts possess higher heat absorption of excessive heat from the environment compared with other components. Consequently, the presence of ammonium salts in a water/glycerol mixture lowers the heat surface temperature to exacerbate the temperature gap between the heating surface and the surrounding microlayer of liquid. In this way, a higher pool boiling heat transfer coefficient is obtained according to Newton's law of cooling, but this improvement is not obvious under high heat fluxes. They also explored the effect of nanoparticles on the pool boiling heat transfer performance of the water/glycerol binary solution. The results showed that the increasing rate of the pool boiling heat transfer coefficient also increases as more Al2O3 nanoparticles are added. This phenomenon may be related to the deposition of nanoparticles on the heating surface, which changes the thermal conductivity and roughness of the surface to accelerate nucleation formation rate, thereby increasing the boiling heat transfer coefficient of water/glycerol binary solution.125 In addition, McNeil et al. designed an industrial boiler to conduct some boiling experiments in glycerol/water mixture under a range of heat fluxes for understanding the effect of mass transfer on boiling behaviors at a low sub-atmospheric pressure of 50 mbar.126


2.3.2. Paramagnetic effect. 
Applications of magnetic fields to control the motion of objects have increasingly appeared in recent decades, and these techniques have been involved in the field of heat transfer fluids. Braithwaite et al. scored a first by using a magnetic field to study the suppression or enhancement of the buoyancy-driven convection in paramagnetic fluids.130 Afterward, Fornalik et al. used a visualization method to explore the thermosiphon phenomenon in paramagnetic fluids induced by a magnetic field; they used a glycerol aqueous solution added with Gd(NO3)3·6H2O to increase its magnetic susceptibility.127 Glycerol aqueous solution possesses good compatibility to bear the thermo-sensitive liquid crystal slurry, which presents different colors according to the non-uniformly distributed fluid temperatures under white light irradiation to visualize the thermosiphon phenomenon. They studied the impact of a strong magnetic field available from the superconducting magnet on thermally stable and thermally unstable configurations. For the stable configuration, forming an obvious thermosiphon is difficult because of the poor heat transfer performance in the gravitational field. However, because of the induction of the magnetic field, convection of the paramagnetic fluid occurs and is enhanced with increasing magnetic induction intensity, which corresponds to the more obvious visualization of the spoke patterns in Fig. 8a. As for the thermally unstable configuration with apparent intrinsical convection, the heat transfer performance of the glycerol aqueous paramagnetic fluid is further enhanced in the magnetic field. Bednarz et al. applied the same method to explore visually the heat transfer enhancement in a horizontal magnetic field129 and suppression in a vertically oriented magnetic field128 of joint gravitational and thermo-magnetic convection of a paramagnetic fluid, as shown in Fig. 8b–e. In the horizontal magnetic field with increasing intensity, increased Nusselt numbers can be measured and the convection of paramagnetic fluids rotated by 90° in the visualized image can be observed, indicating that the magnetic field enhances natural convection. Similarly, in this vertical magnetic field, a pair of opposite forces acts on the paramagnetic fluids. With the increased magnetic induction, the heat convection between hot and cold fluids gradually disappears and finally forms an apparent separation of the non-interference layer, which denotes that the convection under the action of gravity has been suppressed by the magnetic force. All the above research results based on the paramagnetic fluids of glycerol aqueous solution strongly prove that the strong magnetic field has a good control effect on the convection of fluids, and it is potentially applied to the control of fluid behaviors in the microchannel.
 Fig. 8  (a) Isotherms for various strengths of the magnetic field in the stable configuration (reproduced with permission from ref. 127, Copyright (2006) Elsevier). (b) Experimental measurements of horizontal magnetic fields. (c) Temperature visualization of enhancement in heat convection at various magnetic inductions of 0, 5, 6, and 10 T ((b) and (c) were reproduced with permission from ref. 128, Copyright (2009) Elsevier). (d) Experimental measurements of vertical magnetic fields. (e) Temperature visualization of suppression in heat convection at various magnetic inductions of 0, 5, 6, and 10 T (reproduced with permission from ref. 129, Copyright (2009). 


2.3.3. Evaporation behavior of droplets. 
The evaporation behavior of droplets is essential to many industrial applications involving energy transportation in a thermal convection environment, such as fuel combustion in internal combustion engines and package of tablets in the pharmaceutical field, and most of these droplets are composed of multi-component systems. In such a typical process, the atomizing droplets are ejected to the high temperature environment at a rapid rate, and then an evaporation process coupled with heat and mass transfer behavior is performed. Many efforts have been devoted to understanding the factors that control the evaporation rate in multi-component systems. However, current studies on the droplet evaporation of multi-component systems composed of polar components are extremely rare because the complex effects in these systems account not only for the Stefan flow on the evaporation surface but also the influence of non-ideal liquid behavior affected by polarity. Nguyen et al. studied the droplet evaporation behavior of the glycerol/water mixture binary polar system by measuring the temporal variation of decreasing droplet size and increasing droplet temperature.131 Glycerol/water mixture was selected as the research object because it possesses a large boiling point difference in the common binary polar system, making it suitable in evaluating the effect of instantaneous volatility in mass transfer behavior on the evaporation rate. In addition, they established an integrated parameter evaporation model based on the rapid mixing hypothesis to predict the variations in droplet diameter and temperature over time, and introduced an activity coefficient to characterize the non-ideality of polar liquid behavior. The presented model is generally in agreement with the experimental data, but deviations due to the large liquid phase diffusional resistance caused by the high viscosity of glycerol were not considered in the model. An optimized model covering more factors shall be proposed in the future.


2.3.4. Marangoni effect. 
Yang et al. systematically studied the influence of the volumetric concentration, heat flux, and flow rate of glycerol aqueous solution in the microchannel heat exchanger on the convective heat transfer coefficient, Nusselt number, pressure drop, and friction factor and provided a wealth of information to evaluate the thermo-hydraulic characteristics of glycerol aqueous solution.132 Interestingly, they found that the heat transfer performance of low-concentration glycerol aqueous solution of 5 vf% increases by 16% compared with that of pure water but decreases by 40% at a high concentration of 40 vf%. They attributed this phenomenon to surface tension and the Bénard–Marangoni effect. This effect refers to the generation of surface tension gradient and density gradient on the phase interface due to the mass transfer behavior across the phase interface, thereby inducing the convection on the phase interface.133 As shown in Fig. 9a, in the diluted glycerol aqueous solution, the fluid temperature of the sub-layer near the heating surface is relatively high, and the surface tension of water is greater than that of glycerol. Thus, glycerol will be pushed toward the bulk of the solution because of the Bénard–Marangoni effect. Therefore, a two-way mass transfer model for minimizing mass diffusion resistance to promote energy transport has been developed. However, in the high-concentration glycerol aqueous solution, the increments in density and friction resistance hinder the mass transfer of glycerol from the sub-layer. In addition, only one path opposite to the heat transfer direction for mass transfer exists (Fig. 9b), which consumes more energy to overcome mass diffusion resistance, thereby weakening the convection heat transfer performance.
 Fig. 9  Bénard–Marangoni effect in (a) a dilute mixture, (b) a high-concentration mixture (reproduced with permission from ref. 132, Copyright (2019) Elsevier). 

2.4. Nanofluids based on glycerol aqueous solution
In glycerol-based nanofluids, the influence of nanoparticles on the base fluid has been discussed. Similarly, the nature of the base fluid also affects the thermal performance of the nanofluids.

2.4.1. Good alignment of nanoparticles improves thermal conductivity. 
Younes et al. used glycerol, glycerol/water mixture, and other solvents to prepare Iron(III) oxide (Fe2O3)-based nanofluids to investigate the influence of solvent hydrogen bonding and viscosity on the thermal conductivity of nanofluids.134 The good alignment of nanoparticles in the solvent increases thermal conductivity.135,136 Moreover, in some solvents such as water, ethanol, and isopropanol, which only have a hydroxyl group, the intermolecular hydrogen bond promotes the dispersion and arrangement of Fe2O3 nanoparticles, and the measured thermal conductivity is higher than the theoretical calculation value. However, as the number of hydroxyl groups on molecules increases, such as the glycerol molecule, the formation of intramolecular hydrogen bonds and larger molecular weights increases the viscosity of the solvent and hinders the alignment of nanoparticles. When 50% water is mixed with 50% glycerol, the hydrogen bond structure formed by glycerol is destroyed, which not only significantly decreases viscosity but also promotes the good alignment of Fe2O3 nanoparticles, thereby increasing the thermal conductivity.


2.4.2. Performance enhancement by graphene oxide. 
Ijam et al. exfoliated graphene oxide (GO) to prepare graphene oxide nanosheets (GONs) (Fig. 10a) and used a series of methods for characterization.137 Subsequently, GONs/glycerol–water-based nanofluids were prepared by a two-step method, and the stability, thermal conductivity, and electrical conductivity of the nanofluids were studied. The as-prepared nanofluids can remain stable for more than 5 months. At 45 °C, the thermal conductivity increases by about 11.7% with 0.1 wt% GONs, and the electrical conductivity increases by 5890% with the same addition at 25 °C. Liu et al. comprehensively studied the thermophysical properties of three types of glycerol-based binary solvent systems, glycerol/water, glycerol/ethylene glycol, and glycerol/dimethyl sulfoxide, by measuring the freezing point, boiling point, thermal conductivity, and viscosity; their study provided systematic information for industrial applications in the energy transport of glycerol-based composite solvents.138 Furthermore, GO nanoparticles were prepared by chemical exfoliation. Subsequently, the as-prepared GO was dispersed into these binary solvent systems to prepare nanofluids, and their thermal conductivity and viscosity were studied in detail. Results showed that the thermal conductivity of the nanofluids can be increased by up to 20% by filling only 0.6 vol% GO. Importantly, this research demonstrated that the glycerol/water mixture is suitable as an energy transport medium because of its better rheological properties and greater thermal conductivity than the two other combinations, as shown in Fig. 10c and d.
 Fig. 10  (a) Chemical exfoliation of graphite oxide (reproduced with permission from ref. 137, Copyright (2014) Springer Nature). (b) Graphical comparison of Cu nanofluids and Ni5 microfluids (reproduced with permission from ref. 139, Copyright (2017) Elsevier). (c) Viscosities of GO-filled nanofluids with different glycerol mixture combinations as a function of temperature. (d) Thermal conductivities of base solvents with different GL mixture combinations as a function of temperature (reproduced with permission from ref. 138, Copyright (2020) Elsevier). 


2.4.3. Other novel nanofluids. 
Suleimanov et al. synthesized a novel monocrystalline pentanickel(II) metal string complex [Ni5(μ5-pppmda)4Cl2] (Ni5) material with a colloidal structure and explored the stability, thermal conductivity, and other properties of its microfluid based on the glycerol/water mixture. Results showed that the Ni5 microfluids are more stable than the Cu, Ni, and Al nanofluids prepared by the same base fluid because of the smaller density of the microparticles and the formation of particle assemblies. Further research showed that the colloidal structure of Ni5 microparticles considerably impacts its thermal properties, and its microfluidic thermal conductivity is equivalent to the thermal conductivity of nickel nanofluids (Fig. 10b). A proposed equation predicts that if the size of the microparticles can be further optimized into nanoparticles, the thermal conductivity of the corresponding nanofluid can be increased by 10 times.139

2.5 Deep eutectic solvent (DES)-based nanofluids involving glycerol
Deep eutectic solvents (DESs) emerged as an efficient ionic liquid alternative with superiority in non-toxic, biodegradable, and low-cost features. They are usually formed by two or three components based on intense hydrogen bond interactions to achieve a lower melting point than neat constituents, and they have been widely used in catalysis, organic synthesis, separation, and so on.142–144 Some reports have demonstrated that DESs are potential candidates for energy transportation. Liu et al. prepared glycerol/choline chloride (ChCl) DESs to carry TiO2, Al2O3, and GO nanoparticles separately and fabricate nanofluids, and investigated related thermophysical properties.140 Results showed that these nanofluids have a wide liquid range from −35 °C to 275 °C and obtain a 3%–11.4% increase in thermal conductivity. The viscosity of glycerol/ChCl DES is significantly lower than that of pure glycerol because of the transformation in hydrogen bond structure (Fig. 11a), which is conducive to the reduction of flowing hindrance during energy transport. Interestingly, Al2O3-filled nanofluids exhibit unique thermal conductivity enhancement behavior (Fig. 11b). Therefore, the introduction of 1H NMR and FTIR chemical means elucidates that the hydrogen bond interaction between Al2O3 nanoparticles and glycerol plays a key role in heat transfer (Fig. 11c), thereby opening a novel perspective to display the importance of chemical tools for analyzing in depth the mechanism of heat transfer. Based on the thorough understanding of strong hydrogen bonding interactions between nanoparticles and glycerol, Liu et al. synthesized novel copper silica hybrid nanoparticles to enhance the dispersion stability and thermal conductivity of silica filling nanofluids based on glycerol/ChCl DES.141 Primarily, silica with sulfhydryl groups (SiO2-SH) was synthesized through a typical sol–gel reaction, and then SiO2-SH was subjected to react with pre-synthesized 2-butoxy-3,4-dihydropyran (DP) to obtain SiO2-SH-DP under the catalysis of Lewis acid for enhancing lipophilicity and anchoring metal particles. In this way, the copper nanoparticles were uniformly coated on the surface of silica (SiO2-SH-DP-Cu) with the advantage of thermal performance enhancement (Fig. 11d). Subsequent molecular dynamics simulations revealed that the alkyl chains grafted on the silica surface strengthen the hydrogen bond interaction between the nanoparticles and glycerol, thus achieving a stable dispersion in this multi-component system. In addition, Albayati et al. studied the thermal conductivity of some other glycerol based DESs recently to explore their potential to be used as the base fluid of novel nanofluids, including glycerol/ammonium acetate DES, glycerol/potassium carbonate DES and glycerol/proline DES. Results show that DESs containing choline chloride possess the best thermal conductivity stability.145
 Fig. 11  (a) Temperature-dependent viscosity variation of glycerol/ChCl DESs. (b) Thermal conductivity of the three nanofluids at 320 K as a function of volume fraction. (c) Structure test and schematic of mechanism analysis by means of 1H NMR and FT-IR spectra for illustration of the proposed mechanism responsible for thermal behavior Al2O3-filled nanofluid (reproduced with permission from ref. 140, Copyright (2019) Elsevier). (d) Schematic of the DP and Cu nanoparticle-modified SiO2 nanoparticle and thermal conductivity enhancement in glycerol DESs (reproduced with permission from ref. 141, Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society). 
2.6 Hybrid nanofluids involving glycerol
Hybrid nanofluids refer to the stable dispersion of more than one nanofiller in the base fluid with the assistance of external means; they have attracted widespread attention because of their capacity to exploit a series of functional combinations to meet various demands.146–149 Akilu et al. used a binary mixture of glycerol and ethylene glycol (G/EG) with a mass ratio of 60:40 as the base liquid to prepare ceramic copper oxide/carbon (SiO2-CuO/C) hybrid nanofluids through ultrasonic-assisted wet mixing. Results showed that the addition of hybrid nanoparticles is detrimental to the specific heat capacity of the nanofluids. In addition, it can significantly enhance thermal conductivity compared with single-component silica nanofluids. The hybrid nanofluid with only 2% nano-additives composed of 80% SiO2 and 20% CuO/C can achieve a 26.9% enhancement in thermal conductivity at 353.15 K, whereas the SiO2–G/EG nanofluid with the same addition amount only has a 6.9% increase under the same conditions; this result can be ascribed to the synergistic effect between the hybrid nanoparticles.150 Moreover, Amini et al. synthesized silica/multiwalled CNT (SiO2/MWCNT) hybrid nanoparticles by using a wet chemical technique and prepared corresponding hybrid nanofluids based on glycerol solvent through a two-step method. The surface of CNTs was grafted with carboxyl functional groups to enhance the interaction between SiO2 nanoparticles and the surface of MWCNTs, and then SiO2 nanoparticles were uniformly coated on these surfaces to obtain SiO2/MWCNTs powders. Using an improved transient hot wire method and a falling ball viscometer, they studied the effects of temperature and volume fraction on the thermal conductivity and viscosity of the hybrid nanofluids. Experimental observations showed that the utilization of ultrasonic disruptor and gum arabic as the surfactant can effectively enhance the dispersibility of hybrid nanofluids.151
3. Applications of glycerol-containing fluids in energy transportation
3.1. Photovoltaic/thermal collector
To improve the performance of nanofluids applied into photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) collectors, Hjerrild et al. developed a core–shell silver-silica nanocomposite and selected glycerol as the base fluid for providing a relatively higher temperature range compared with water.152 The photovoltaic/thermal collector can convert solar radiation into electricity and serviceable heat simultaneously to increase energy conversion efficiency with the help of functional nanoparticles to selectively utilize radiation in different wavelength ranges, as shown in Fig. 12b and c. Among the noble metals, silver has unique optical properties and high electron density, and exhibits the best surface plasmon resonance.153 Given its excellent thermal conductivity, silver was selected as the absorbent material in PV/T application. In synthesizing core–shell Ag-SiO2 nanocomposites, silver nanodiscs were prepared primarily by using the modified seed-mediated solution method,154 and then the nanodiscs were enveloped with a modified silica shell generated by (3-mercaptopropyl) trimethoxysilane (MPTMS), TEOS, and dimethylamine (DMA).155 This silica shell can not only raise the melting temperature of the inner metal nanodiscs to achieve the protective effect but also slightly impact the optical performance of metallic silver. The initially as-prepared nanocomposites were dispersed in glycerol to prepare nanofluids, which were then subjected to stability analysis under high-temperature (125 °C) heating and strong ultraviolet irradiation to assess whether the stability of the nanofluids in practical applications can meet the harsh working conditions. As shown in Fig. 12a, UV–vis analysis results showed that the spectrum of the original sample (Ag-SiO2–Water NF) has a blue shift. As displayed in the corresponding TEM image, the shape of the nanocomposite has changed. This result can be ascribed to the fact that the original sample was designed for water as the base liquid; thus, the core–shell structure was damaged and the composition of the nanofluid changed when it was dispersed in glycerol. Subsequently, the enhancement of the compatibility between the core and the shell was achieved by adjusting the ratio of MPTMS, TEOS, and DMA. After 2 h of heating, the structure of the modified nanocomposite is still intact (Fig. 12a right). In the 96 h high-temperature heating and strong ultraviolet irradiation tests, UV–vis analysis showed that the Ag-SiO2–glycerol nanofluids only produced a negligible offset under these harsh conditions. This result suggests that the extremely stable nanofluids can be used in long-term energy transport without the worry of clogging.
 Fig. 12  (a) Spectral shift and TEM images of standard samples of Ag-SiO2 nanofluids before and after heating at 125 °C in glycerol for 2 h. (b) Schematic of a PV/T collector using a nanofluid volumetric absorber. (c) Optimal spectral selectivity of a nanofluid, wherein the purple box denotes the spectrum to transmit to the PV, with remaining light absorbed by the nanofluid for heat generation ((a–c) were reproduced with permission from ref. 152, Copyright (2018) Elsevier. 
3.2. Heat exchanger

3.2.1. Helically coiled pipe heat exchanger. 
Helically coiled pipes are important in passive heat transfer enhancement techniques owing to their large heat transfer surface area per volume unit, compactness, and low cost, which have been applied in widespread industrial processes for better energy transport performance compared with a straight pipe, such as generation of steam, manufacture of polyethylene, and fermentation of molasses.156–158 Among these complex situations, the heat transfer and fluid dynamic behaviours of Newtonian fluids are involved, and some research has been carried out to develop correlations for better heat exchange equipment design. Ali performed a series of experiments to explore steady natural convection heat transfer from the outside surface of helically coiled pipes in different diameter ratios and coil turns.159 Glycerol/water solution 57% by mass was chosen as the Newtonian fluid to provide the flow regime of laminar and transition to turbulent. The obtained experimental results showed that the heat transfer performance can be improved by decreasing the diameter ratio or reducing the coil turns. Based on a large quantity of data, Ali et al. established an artificial neural network model to develop a correlation for predicting the heat transfer coefficients of the outside surface of the spiral tubes; this model is widely applicable to Newtonian fluids represented by glycerol aqueous solution.160 The heat transfer performance of glycerol/water mixture inside helical coils was also studied. Pimenta et al. selected five glycerol aqueous solutions ranging from 25% to 78% by mass as the working fluids to research the Newtonian behavior in fully developed laminar flow under the boundary condition of constant wall temperature.161 The global correlation of Nusselt number in helical coils for all Newtonian fluids was proposed with accuracy. Pawar et al. performed many experiments in glycerol/water mixture under isothermal state and non-isothermal state conditions to calculate Nusselt numbers in helically coiled tubes; they found that the heat transfer performance improves with decreasing helix diameter.162 Interestingly, they proposed a novel dimensionless number correlated with Nusselt number based on experimental data preliminarily. Furthermore, Pawar et al. performed more than 300 tests in laminar to turbulent flow regimes of 10% and 20% glycerol aqueous solutions under isothermal and non-isothermal conditions to verify the importance of the new dimensionless number; then, they attempted to develop correlations with a wide covering range of flowing parameters.163 This new dimensionless number plays a significant role in characterizing the hydrodynamic properties of the Newtonian fluid in the spiral tubes for any practical heat transfer phenomenon. In addition, they used computational fluid dynamics modelling and simulation methods to confirm this present experimental conclusion in the visualized energy transport process in helical coils.164 The remarkable feature of flowing fluids inside the helical coils is the generation of secondary flow on the cross-section driven by the centripetal force, which enhances heat transfer performance notably.


3.2.2. Finned ducts heat exchanger. 
Olayiwola et al.165 studied the influence of flow pulsation on convection heat transfer performance by using glycerol/water mixture as the working fluid and designed a flat channel with regularly arranged fins that are fixed on the insulated wall opposite to the heat transfer surface, as shown in Fig. 13a. Results showed that the geometrical factor of the heat exchanger significantly influences the steady flow but exerts almost no influence on the pulsating flow controlled by oscillation, which is due to the greater influence of the boundary layer rearrangement caused by flow pulsation. Ismail et al. also studied the influence of fluid properties on the formation of the boundary layer by adding the polyacrylamide polymer to glycerol aqueous solution in order to gain dilute viscoelastic solutions.166 Viscoelastic fluids are featured with the generation of secondary flow on transverse direction to the thin wall boundary layer, thereby enhancing the heat transfer coefficients.
 Fig. 13  (a) Description of the flow behavior in arranged fins (reproduced with permission from ref. 165, Copyright (2009) American Society of Mechanical Engineers). (b) Schematic of a thermosiphon. (c) Effective thermal conductivity of thermosiphon ((b) and (c) reproduced with permission from ref. 167, Copyright (2018) Taylor & Francis Group). (d) Cooling curves of the 5 mass% glycerol solution, water, and 5 mass% PAG. (e) Temperature-cooling rate curves of the 5 mass% glycerol solution, water, 5 mass% PAG, and oil (reproduced with permission from ref. 168, Copyright (2017) Elsevier). (f) Schematic of the tested heating tower heat pump module (reproduced with permission from ref. 169, Copyright (2019) Elsevier). 


3.2.3. Thermosiphon heat exchanger. 
Ramezanizadeh et al. prepared Ni/glycerol–water nanofluids at three concentrations to fill the thermosiphon for the enhancement of heat transfer. Thermosiphon, also called a gravity-assisted heat pipe, is efficient heat transfer equipment with a simple structure and excellent performance (Fig. 13b). Various concentrations of nanofluids were investigated experimentally, and the results showed that this 0.625 g/lit Ni/glycerol–water nanofluid produced the smallest thermal resistance in the thermosiphon (Fig. 13c). They designed a thermosiphon heat exchanger, which achieves a 135% increase in heat exchange efficiency compared with the copper tube heat exchanger.167

3.3. Temperature regulation system
In addition to abundant studies on the energy transport behaviours of glycerol aqueous solution, some examples applied glycerol/water mixture into practical industrial fields related to temperature regulation. The heating tower heat pump is an efficient and convenient thermal source for heating and cooling, and it is widely used in air conditioning.170,171 When the air is heated by the heat pump, antifreeze is necessary to avoid the frosting issue on the heat transfer surface. Song et al. used a glycerol/water mixture as an antifreeze for a closed-type heating tower heat pump and studied the related heat transfer performance.169 As shown in Fig. 13f, the finned tube heat exchanger is the core component of the heat pump, in which energy transportation occurs among the secondary refrigerant, air, and glycerol aqueous solution. Results showed that the heat transfer performance increases with increasing flow rate for all the three fluids, and the heat transfer capacity of the glycerol aqueous solution is 1.3–1.7 times higher than that of the CaCl2 solution, another candidate for antifreeze. In addition, the glycerol aqueous solution is non-toxic and has extremely low corrosivity on heat exchange equipment, which is highly suitable to serve as an antifreeze.
Like traditional heat pumps, the solar diffusion absorption cooling system has received extensive attention because of its high efficiency and convenience. Acuña et al. attempted to apply glycerol aqueous solution as a heat transfer fluid into the solar energy diffusion absorption cooling system. They found that a low-concentration glycerol aqueous solution can reach the highest temperature compared with ethylene glycol aqueous solution and propylene glycol/water mixture.172
Raval et al. used 80% glycerol aqueous solution as the heat transfer fluid to characterize the heat removal rates of 20 and 50 L orbitally shaken cylindrical bioreactors; their results have great significance for practical operations.173 In the viscous system, a large amount of heat accumulates, and the heat dissipation rate mainly depends on the lateral air flow. The overall heat transfer coefficient is mainly determined by the heat transfer rate from vessel wall to the surrounding air. When the scale of the bioreactor is further upgraded, the vessel wall thickness becomes a limiting factor.
3.4. Industrial production process

3.4.1. Quenching. 
The quenching process is important in the manufacture of a high-quality workpiece, where the workpiece is heated to above the austenitizing temperature, maintained at this temperature for a while, and then undergoes rapid cooling to form bainite and martensite.174 Therefore, a quenchant capable of providing a large cooling rate is the key. Chen et al. developed 5 mass% glycerol aqueous solution as a new quenchant and obtained a rapid cooling rate that exceeds that of conventional quenchants, as shown in Fig. 13e.168 Its quenching performance is also extremely excellent because the glycerol aqueous solution possesses large heat transfer coefficients at high temperatures and low heat transfer coefficients at low temperatures. As shown in Fig. 13d, in the first two stages of the quenching treatment, the glycerol aqueous solution possesses a cooling rate similar to that of water, and its cooling rate is lower in the convection stage, thereby reducing the deformation and cracking on the workpiece being processed. In addition, replacing the traditional quenchant with glycerol aqueous solution can solve the problems of pungent gas generation and easily aging, and the cost is lower. In general, the aqueous solution of glycerol has great potential as a quenchant.


3.4.2. Film boiling. 
Film boiling is an important multi-phase heat transfer mode. However, it usually makes the high-temperature wall and the coolant isolated by a thin film of vapor with poor heat transfer performance, thereby damaging the equipment.175,176 Therefore, strategies to avoid film boiling in industrial energy transport processes need to be developed. However, Sharma et al. utilized the film boiling characteristics of glycerol to decompose itself into fuel gas mixtures under well-controlled conditions.177 An electrically heated horizontal metal tube was immersed in a stagnant tank filled with saturated glycerol under atmospheric pressure, as shown in Fig. 14a. The boiling point of glycerol is 563 K, whereas the temperature range of decomposition is 1250–1550 K. In this heating process, saturated glycerol undergoes single-phase heat transfer, nucleate boiling, and critical heat flux and then grows into film boiling to form a reaction space. As shown in Fig. 14b, nucleate boiling transitions to film boiling when the critical heat flux is reached. Among the reaction domain, the maximum heating temperature (1570 K) is determined by the limit temperature that the metal tube can withstand, and the minimum temperature (1260 K) is used to maintain the vapor film. When the temperature is lower than 1260 K, the reaction space will collapse. Under the gravitational field, the gaseous mixture produced by glycerol decomposition forms bubbles and floats without consuming pump power. After composition analysis, 95% of the products are combustible gas, and this research combined the heat transfer characteristics of glycerol with fuel gas conversion.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of film boiling on a horizontal tube. (b) Glycerol boiling curve ((a) and (b) were reproduced with permission from ref. 177, Copyright (2019) Elsevier). 


3.4.3. Osmotic distillation. 
Osmotic distillation is a commonly used membrane technique that relies on the activity difference of highly volatile components as the driving force for mass transfer through the membrane, which can achieve high concentration of the feed material under normal temperature and pressure; thus, it is widely used in industrial processes, such as juice concentration.178–180 Osmotic distillation involves a succession of procedures: vaporization of volatile components in the feed, selective passing of volatile components through the hydrophobic microporous membrane, and absorption of volatile components by the extract. Indeed, the phase change process is influenced by the cooling at the feed side and warming up at the extract side of the membrane, where the resulting temperature difference generates a counter driving force for mass transfer, which is called thermal effect.181,182 Celere et al. studied the performance of osmotic distillation influenced by two predominant factors, concentration polarization and thermal effect, by applying glycerol and glycerol–water–NaCl ternary mixture as the extracts.183 Glycerol is non-toxic and highly soluble in water, and its volatility is negligible; thus, it will not diffuse to the feed side. Experimental results presented that the temperature difference created by energy transport, even if it is only a few degrees, notably affects the flux of products at the outlet. Osmotic distillation is a simple mass transfer process determined by concentration polarization; it is also influenced by energy transportation in glycerol extract equally and in glycerol–water–NaCl ternary mixture extract to a greater extent.

3.5. Nanofluidic energy absorption system
Using molecular dynamics simulations, Liu et al. constructed a nanofluidic energy absorption system based on glycerol aqueous solution/nano-porous materials as nanofluids to transport the mechanical work generated by impact or explosion into the solid−liquid interfacial energy for storage (Fig. 15d).184 The utilization of nano-porous materials with high specific surface area is an efficient method to raise the interfacial energy storage density. In this work, the simulation results showed that liquid molecules enter the inner space of CNTs under the impact of mechanical waves and are compressed because of their confinement effects, resulting in the generation of interfacial potential energy. Compared with small molecules (water), large molecules (e.g., glycerol) do not easily penetrate into CNTs and therefore produce a higher potential energy difference. In other words, the glycerol solution with a high-concentration of glycerol possesses a greater energy absorption density, which reveals that the liquid environment also influences the nanofluidic energy absorption system.
 Fig. 15  (a) Glycerol-based nanofluidic energy absorption system (reproduced with permission from ref. 184, Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society). (b) Variation of phase change temperature with respect to the number of cycles. (c) Variation of latent heat with respect to the number of cycles. (d) Effect of mass fractions of CuO nanoparticles on thermal conductivity ((b–d) were reproduced with permission from ref. 185, Copyright (2013) IEEE). 
3.6. Latent heat storage
Harikrishnan et al. used CuO/water–glycerol nanofluids as phase-change materials (PCMs) for latent heat storage and studied the effect of nanoparticles on thermophysical properties after being added into 20 wt% glycerol aqueous solution. After 500 melting–solidification cycle tests, results showed that the introduction of nanoparticles produces only negligible deviations in the phase transition temperature and latent heat of the nanofluid PCM (Fig. 15b and c). However, a small number of CuO nanoparticles greatly improves the thermal conductivity of the PCM, as shown in Fig. 15d, which helps increase the heat absorption and release rate of the latent heat storage system. This study reveals that CuO/water–glycerol nanofluids satisfy the requirements well as a latent heat storage medium.185
4. Summary and outlook
This review summarizes the utilization of glycerol, glycerol/water mixture, and nanofluids involving glycerol in energy transportation. These materials generate various heat transfer and flowing behaviors and allow the synthesis of functional materials. In the context of overproduction of glycerol, this review provides new ideas for its high-value-added utilization. The research on heat transfer fluid involving glycerol can be divided into the following three parts. Given its high viscosity, glycerol alone as an energy carrier is used to verify heat transfer models or correlations. Temperature generates minimal effect on the thermal conductivity of glycerol, but its viscosity drops sharply as the temperature increases, and the rheological properties are significantly improved. This result is ascribed to the effect of temperature on the hydrogen bonds of glycerol. In other words, the flow drag of glycerol at high temperatures decreases sharply, which confirms its suitability as a heat transfer medium. In the glycerol/water binary system, the presence of water strengthens the thermal performance of glycerol to a certain extent and alters the hydrogen bond network of glycerol, thereby significantly decreasing its viscosity. Due to the reduced flowing drag, glycerol/water mixtures can be used in spiral tube heat exchangers for energy transportation. Introducing water has become another convenient way to reduce the viscosity of glycerol except for heating. Glycerol also enhances the functionality of water.
The wide liquid range is the most significant feature for glycerol as an energy transport medium, which effectively avoids the failure behavior of traditional heat transfer fluids in extreme environments. The presence of glycerol allows glycerol/water mixtures to be used in heat pumps without worrying about frosting. In addition, its boiling point of up to 290 °C also prompts glycerol to be further explored for application in high-temperature solar collectors without the problem of molten salt clogging the pipeline. However, hydrogen bonding association will inherently bring a viscosity rise of glycerol, which thus results in drag force increase in practical utilization. Novel combination or modification on the glycerol molecule will be important approaches for benefiting use of glycerol and avoiding its high viscosity, for example DESs and molecular level modification on nanoparticles. Moreover, the importance of the hydrogen bond structure in glycerol needs to be further studied to elucidate the energy transport mechanism in depth and develop advanced applications of glycerol as an energy transport medium.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Thanks for financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51906252), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20190632), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019M661980) and ANR (project Bioplatform, ANR-17-CE07-0053-02).
References
D. Jiang, Y. Su, K. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Xu, M. Dong and G. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104459 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bonk, S. Sau, N. Uranga, M. Hernaiz and T. Bauer, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2018, 67, 69–87 CrossRef .
J. Navas, A. Sanchez-Coronilla, E. I. Martin, M. Teruel, J. Jesus Gallardo, T. Aguilar, R. Gomez-Villarejo, R. Alcantara, C. Fernandez-Lorenzo, J. Carlos Pinero and J. Martin-Calleja, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 213–224 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Naqiuddin, L. H. Saw, M. C. Yew, F. Yusof, T. C. Ng and M. K. Yew, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 901–914 CrossRef .
L. Hu, D. Chen, Y. Huang, L. Li, Y. Cao, D. Yuan, J. Wang and L. Pan, Energy, 2015, 89, 874–886 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, W. Liu, W. He, H. Guo, L. Long, Y. Xi, X. Wang, A. Liu and C. Hu, Joule, 2021, 5, 441–455 CrossRef .
A. Deshmukh, C. Boo, V. Karanikola, S. Lin, A. P. Straub, T. Tong, D. M. Warsinger and M. Elimelech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1177–1196 RSC .
S. B. Sadineni, S. Madala and R. F. Boehm, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 3617–3631 CrossRef .
P. Pan, S. Wu, Y. Xiao and G. Liu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 48, 624–634 CrossRef .
R. A. Taylor, P. E. Phelan, T. P. Otanicar, C. A. Walker, M. Nguyen, S. Trimble and R. Prasher, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2011, 3, 023104 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, X. Quan, Z. Wang, C. Lee, Z. Wang, P. Tao, C. Song, J. Wu, W. Shang and T. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17503–17511 RSC .
J. Navas, P. Martínez-Merino, A. Sánchez-Coronilla, J. J. Gallardo, R. Alcántara, E. I. Martín, J. C. Piñero, J. R. León, T. Aguilar, J. H. Toledo and C. Fernández-Lorenzo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14919–14929 RSC .
Y. Li, S. Chang, L. Fu and S. Zhang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 287–296 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Zhao, S. Smith, J. Xu and X. Yu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 599–617 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Khalaj and S. K. Halgamuge, Appl. Energy, 2017, 205, 1165–1188 CrossRef .
A. Jarrett and I. Y. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 644–655 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wen, L. Lu, W. He and Y. Min, Appl. Energy, 2020, 261, 114473 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. S. Sarkar, A. K. Tilak and D. N. Basu, Ann. Nucl. Energy, 2014, 73, 250–263 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, P. Jiang, Y. Huo, T. Zhang and Z. Rao, Heat Mass Transfer, 2021 DOI:10.1007/s00231-021-03030-z .
N. H. Tran and G. S. K. Kannangara, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9454–9479 RSC .
G. M. Lari, G. Pastore, M. Haus, Y. Ding, S. Papadokonstantakis, C. Mondelli and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1012–1029 RSC .
Y. H. Chung, D. E. Rico, C. M. Martinez, T. W. Cassidy, V. Noirot, A. Ames and G. A. Varga, J. Dairy Sci., 2007, 90, 5682–5691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ainembabazi, K. Wang, M. Finn, J. Ridenour and A. Voutchkova-Kostal, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 6093–6104 RSC .
G. Wang, T. Pang, S. Chen, W. Sui, C. Si and Y. Ni, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 8594–8603 RSC .
T. M. Mata, A. A. Martins and N. S. Caetano, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 217–232 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Agarwal, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2007, 33, 233–271 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, J.-C. Liu, W. Cai, J. Ma, H. B. Yang, H. Xiao, J. Li, Y. Xiong, Y. Huang and B. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1779 CrossRef PubMed .
B. R. Moser, In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol.: Plant, 2009, 45, 229–266 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Zhou, J. N. Beltramini, Y.-X. Fan and G. Q. Lu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 527–549 RSC .
D. Sun, Y. Yamada, S. Sato and W. Ueda, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 75–92 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tao, N. Sun, Y. Li, T. Tong, M. Wielicako, S. Wang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8325–8333 RSC .
Y. Nakagawa, M. Tamura and K. Tomishige, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6688–6702 RSC .
C. A. G. Quispe, C. J. R. Coronado and J. A. Carvalho Jr., Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 27, 475–493 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu and F. Jérôme, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1127–1138 RSC .
G. P. da Silva, M. Mack and J. Contiero, Biotechnol. Adv., 2009, 27, 30–39 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Anitha, S. K. Kamarudin and N. T. Kofli, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 295, 119–130 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, T. Runge, L. Wang, R. Li, J. Feng, X. L. Shu and Q. S. Shi, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 200, 115–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Blazhnov, N. P. Malomuzh and S. V. Lishchuk, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 6435–6441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schultze-Jena, M. A. Boon, R. C. Vroon, P. J. T. Bussmann, A. E. M. Janssen and A. van der Padt, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 237, 116386 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, C. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, B. Li, M. Yang, X. Zhang and G. Liu, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 140, 1060–1076 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Drew, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1932, 24, 152–157 CrossRef .
T. B. Drew, J. J. Hogan and W. H. McAdams, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1931, 23, 936–945 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pantokratoras, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2003, 46, 1675–1678 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pantokratoras, Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 2002, 23, 530–532 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rainieri, F. Bozzoli and G. Pagliarini, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2012, 55, 498–504 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu and M. Sakr, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 19, 64–81 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dewan, P. Mahanta, K. S. Raju and P. S. Kumar, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part A, 2004, 218, 509–527 CrossRef CAS .
P. Naphon and S. Wongwises, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2006, 10, 463–490 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, J. Ye, T. Gulati, Y. Yang, Y. Liao, Y. Yang and K. Huang, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2017, 123, 1456–1461 CrossRef CAS .
A. Z. Sahin, Arabian J. Sci. Eng., 2013, 39, 1241–1249 CrossRef .
E. Sayar, Heat Mass Transfer, 2017, 53, 2351–2361 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gül, Exp. Heat Transfer, 2007, 20, 73–84 CrossRef .
P. Bouvier, P. Stouffs and J.-P. Bardon, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2005, 48, 2473–2482 CrossRef .
R. A. Mandi, H. A. Mohammed, K. M. Munisamy and N. H. Saeid, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 41, 715–734 Search PubMed .
A. Akbari, E. Mohammadian, S. A. Alavi Fazel, M. Shanbedi, M. Bahreini, M. Heidari, P. Babakhani Dehkordi and S. N. Che Mohamed Hussein, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 7038–7046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Demir, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 2010, 37, 422–429 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Kuehner, A. M. Hamed and J. D. Mitchell, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2015, 82, 78–97 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, L. Zhang, G. Zhang, D. Wang, T. Wang and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2817–2827 RSC .
A. R. Harikrishnan, P. Dhar, P. K. Agnihotri, S. Gedupudi and S. K. Das, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter, 2017, 40, 53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin, L. Ma, S. Wen and J. Luo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 19931–19936 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, S. U.-S. Choi, S. Li and J. A. Eastman, J. Heat Transfer, 1999, 121, 280–289 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Xie, J. C. Wang, T. G. Xi, Y. Liu and F. Ai, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 2002, 21, 1469–1471 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sharifpur, S. A. Adio and J. P. Meyer, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 2015, 68, 208–219 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sharifpur, N. Tshimanga, J. P. Meyer and O. Manca, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 2017, 85, 12–22 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Zhao, Z.-Y. Luo, M.-J. Ni and K.-F. Cen, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2009, 26, 066202 CrossRef .
E. V. Timofeeva, J. L. Routbort and D. Singh, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 014304 CrossRef .
F. J. Rubio-Hernandez, M. F. Ayucar-Rubio, J. F. Velazquez-Navarro and F. J. Galindo-Rosales, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 298, 967–972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Adio, M. Sharifpur and J. P. Meyer, Heat Transfer Eng., 2015, 36, 1241–1251 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Adio, M. Sharifpur and J. P. Meyer, J. Exp. Nanosci., 2015, 11, 630–649 CrossRef .
H. Bai, Y. Zheng, T. Wang and N. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14392–14399 RSC .
I. S. Smolkova, N. E. Kazantseva, V. Babayan, P. Smolka, H. Parmar, J. Vilcakova, O. Schneeweiss and N. Pizurova, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2015, 374, 508–515 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hajiyan, S. Ebadi, S. Mahmud, M. Biglarbegian and H. Abdullah, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2018, 135, 1451–1464 CrossRef .
M. Karimi-Nazarabad, E. K. Goharshadi, M. H. Entezari and P. Nancarrow, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2015, 19, 1191–1202 CrossRef CAS .
M. Karimi-Nazarabad, E. K. Goharshadi and A. Youssefi, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 223, 828–835 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zheng, M. Zhang and M. Guo, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 534, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Timofeeva, J. L. Routbort and D. Singh, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 10 CrossRef .
M. Moosavi, E. K. Goharshadi and A. Youssefi, Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 2010, 31, 599–605 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jalal, E. K. Goharshadi, M. Abareshi, M. Moosavi, A. Yousefi and P. Nancarrow, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 121, 198–201 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliani, R. Jalal and E. Kafshdare Goharshadi, Jundishapur J. Microbiol., 2015, 8, e17115 Search PubMed .
N. Tshimanga, M. Sharifpur and J. P. Meyer, Heat Transfer Eng., 2016, 37, 1538–1553 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, T. Zhang, B. Lv, Y. Qiao and Z. Rao, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 319, 114165 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Pu, L. Wang and Q. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3797–3809 RSC .
M. B. Moghaddam, E. K. Goharshadi, M. H. Entezari and P. Nancarrow, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 231, 365–372 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Root and F. H. Stillinger, J. Chem. Phys., 1989, 90, 1200–1208 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Moghaddam, E. K. Goharshadi and F. Moosavi, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 222, 82–87 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Goharshadi, Z. Niyazi, M. Shafaee, M. B. Moghaddam, R. Ludwig and M. Namayandeh-Jorabchi, J. Mol. Liq., 2017, 241, 831–838 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, M.-H. Jang, H. D. Ha, J.-H. Kim, Y.-H. Cho and T. S. Seo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3657–3662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Zheng, A. Ananthanarayanan, K. Q. Luo and P. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 1620–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Song, X. Zhao, J. Shao, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 355–381 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Li and M. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 734–738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, K.-Q. Lu, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3717–3734 RSC .
V. Georgakilas, J. N. Tiwari, K. C. Kemp, J. A. Perman, A. B. Bourlinos, K. S. Kim and R. Zboril, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 5464–5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2002, 297, 787–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Abu Nayem, S. S. Shah, N. Sultana, M. A. Aziz and A. J. S. Ahammad, Chem. Rec., 2021, 21, 1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Shoukat and M. I. Khan, Microsystem Technologies-Micro-and Nanosystems-Information Storage and Processing Systems,  2021,  DOI:10.1007/s00542-021-05211-6 .
M. F. L. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. J. Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, H. Xie, W. Yu and Y. Li, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2011, 32, 550–554 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bognár and A. Vencl, Tribol. Ind., 2019, 41, 267–273 CrossRef .
S. Akilu, A. T. Baheta, A. A. Minea and K. V. Sharma, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 2017, 88, 245–253 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Suleimanov and H. F. Abbasov, Russ. J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 90, 420–428 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tadjarodi and F. Zabihi, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 4150–4156 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Cao, C. Salas-Bringas, R. B. Schuller, A. M. Szczotok, M. Hiorth, M. Carmona, J. F. Rodriguez and A. L. Kjoniksen, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2018, 296, 981–988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, P. Du, B. Fang, Z. Li, B. Chen and Z. Rao, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 2020, 118, 104876 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Doguscu, Y. Damlioglu and C. Alkan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 198, 5–10 CrossRef .
Q. Zhao, F. He, Q. Zhang, J. Fan, R. He, K. Zhang, H. Yan and W. Yang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 203, 110204 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, Z. Chang, G.-K. Xu, F. McBride, A. Ho, Z. Zhuola, M. Michailidis, W. Li, R. Raval, R. Akhtar and D. Shchukin, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 721–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang and G. Lin, Heat Mass Transfer, 2012, 48, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Chai, Z. Yang, H. Chen and C. Tan, J. Heat Transfer – Trans. ASME, 2015, 137, 091019 CrossRef .
T. Wang, L. Wang, L. Bai, G. Lin, X. Bu, X. Liu and G. Xie, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 103, 943–957 CrossRef .
V. D. Cao, C. Salas-Bringas, R. Barfod Schüller, A. M. Szczotok and A.-L. Kjøniksen, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2018, 40, 179–185 CrossRef .
B. G. Suhas and A. Sathyabhama, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2017, 113, 1596–1609 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vasileiadou, K. Sefiane, T. G. Karayiannis and J. R. E. Christy, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2017, 127, 1617–1626 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Domínguez-Inzunza, J. A. Hernández-Magallanes, M. Sandoval-Reyes and W. Rivera, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2014, 66, 612–620 CrossRef .
C. S. Callam, S. J. Singer, T. L. Lowary and C. M. Hadad, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 11743–11754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Spann, M. J. Hancock, A. A. Rostami, S. P. Platt, M. J. Rusyniak, R. S. Sundar, R. W. Lau and Y. B. Pithawalla, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 670–677 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, W. Z. Li, Y. C. Song and J. Yang, J. Mol. Liq., 2009, 146, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. You, J. H. Kim and K. H. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3374–3376 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Das, N. Putra and W. Roetzel, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2003, 46, 851–862 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. A. Fazel, M. Sarafraz, A. A. Shamsabadi and S. M. Peyghambarzadeh, Heat Transfer Eng., 2013, 34, 828–837 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Sarafraz and S. M. Peyghambarzadeh, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 2012, 39, 1303–1310 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Sarafraz, S. M. Peyghambarzadeh and S. A. Alavifazel, Heat Mass Transfer, 2012, 48, 1755–1765 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Sarafraz, S. M. Peyghambarzadeh, S. A. Alavi Fazel and N. Vaeli, Period. Polytech., Chem. Eng., 2013, 57, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. McNeil, B. M. Burnside, E. A. Elsaye, S. M. Salem and S. Baker, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2017, 115, 1438–1450 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fornalik, P. Filar, T. Tagawa, H. Ozoe and J. S. Szmyd, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2006, 49, 2642–2651 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Bednarz, C. Lei, J. C. Patterson and H. Ozoe, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 2009, 36, 97–102 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bednarz, J. C. Patterson, C. Lei and H. Ozoe, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 2009, 36, 781–786 CrossRef CAS .
D. Braithwaite, E. Beaugnon and R. Tournier, Nature, 1991, 354, 134–136 CrossRef .
T. T. B. Nguyen, S. Mitra, M. J. Sathe, V. Pareek, J. B. Joshi and G. M. Evans, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 2018, 91, 329–344 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, M. M. Sarafraz and M. Arjomandi, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2019, 161, 114142 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Tokaruk, T. C. A. Molteno and S. W. Morris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 3590–3593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Christensen, H. Younes, H. Hong and P. Smith, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 214302 CrossRef .
G. Xia, H. Jiang, R. Liu and Y. Zhai, Int. J. Therm. Sci., 2014, 84, 118–124 CrossRef CAS .
H. Younes, G. Christensen, X. Luan, H. Hong and P. Smith, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 064308 CrossRef .
A. Ijam, A. Moradi Golsheikh, R. Saidur and P. Ganesan, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 5934–5944 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y. Qiao, B. Lv, T. Zhang and Z. Rao, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 2020, 112, 104491 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Suleimanov, R. H. Ismayilov, H. F. Abbasov, W.-Z. Wang and S.-M. Peng, Colloids Surf., A, 2017, 513, 41–50 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, H. Fang, Y. Qiao, J. Zhao and Z. Rao, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2019, 138, 690–698 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, H. Fang, X. Liu, B. Xu and Z. Rao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 20159–20169 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Hansen, S. Spittle, B. Chen, D. Poe, Y. Zhang, J. M. Klein, A. Horton, L. Adhikari, T. Zelovich, B. W. Doherty, B. Gurkan, E. J. Maginn, A. Ragauskas, M. Dadmun, T. A. Zawodzinski, G. A. Baker, M. E. Tuckerman, R. F. Savinell and J. R. Sangoro, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 1232–1285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Tran, M.-T. F. Rodrigues, K. Kato, G. Babu and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 339–345 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, K. De Oliveira Vigier, S. Royer and F. Jerome, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7108–7146 RSC .
N. Albayati, M. Kadhom, G. Abdullah and S. Salih, J. Therm. Sci., 2021 DOI:10.1007/s11630-021-1428-1 .
M. U. Sajid and H. M. Ali, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2018, 126, 211–234 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Sundar, K. V. Sharma, M. K. Singh and A. C. M. Sousa, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 68, 185–198 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. R. Babu, K. K. Kumar and S. S. Rao, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 77, 551–565 CrossRef .
J. Sarkar, P. Ghosh and A. Adil, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 43, 164–177 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akilu, A. T. Baheta, M. A. M. Said, A. A. Minea and K. V. Sharma, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 179, 118–128 CrossRef CAS .
F. Amini, S. Z. Miry, A. Karimi and M. Ashjaee, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 3398–3407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. E. Hjerrild, J. A. Scott, R. Amal and R. A. Taylor, Renewable Energy, 2018, 120, 266–274 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Jain and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 487, 153–164 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aherne, D. M. Ledwith, M. Gara and J. M. Kelly, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2005–2016 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Brandon, D. M. Ledwith and J. M. Kelly, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 415, 77–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Jayakumar, S. M. Mahajani, J. C. Mandal, P. K. Vijayan and R. Bhoi, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2008, 86, 221–232 CrossRef CAS .
A. Garcia, P. G. Vicente and A. Viedma, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2005, 48, 4640–4651 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Prabhanjan, G. S. V. Raghavan and T. J. Rennie, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 2002, 29, 185–191 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ali, Heat Mass Transfer, 2003, 40, 615–620 Search PubMed .
D. Colorado, M. E. Ali, O. García-Valladares and J. A. Hernández, Energy, 2011, 36, 854–863 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Pimenta and J. B. L. M. Campos, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2013, 58, 676–690 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Pawar and V. K. Sunnapwar, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 2013, 44, 792–804 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Pawar, V. K. Sunnapwar and A. R. Tagalpallewar, Heat Mass Transfer, 2015, 52, 169–181 CrossRef .
S. S. Pawar and V. K. Sunnapwar, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2014, 92, 2294–2312 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Olayiwola and P. Walzel, J. Heat Transfer, 2009, 131, 051701 CrossRef .
Z. Ismail and R. Karim, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2012, 39, 171–178 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ramezanizadeh, M. Alhuyi Nazari, M. H. Ahmadi and K.-w. Chau, Eng. Appl. Comput. Fluid Mech., 2018, 13, 40–47 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Jie, Y. Li and X. Huang, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2017, 109, 209–214 CrossRef CAS .
P. Song, H. Xiao, W. Shi, X. Li, B. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Zhang and H. Zhong, Int. J. Refrig., 2019, 99, 272–287 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, W. Zuo, H. Lu, C. Liang and X. Zhang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 180, 1039–1054 CrossRef .
S. K. Tyagi, S. Wang, S. R. Park and A. Sharma, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 2194–2210 CrossRef .
A. Acuña, N. Velázquez, D. Sauceda, P. Rosales, A. Suastegui and A. Ortiz, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2016, 102, 1374–1383 CrossRef .
K. Raval, Y. Kato and J. Buechs, Biochem. Eng. J., 2014, 86, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Speer, D. V. Edmonds, F. C. Rizzo and D. K. Matlock, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2004, 8, 219–237 CrossRef CAS .
C. Thomas Avedisian, W.-C. Kuo, W. Tsang and A. Lowery, J. Heat Transfer, 2018, 140, 061501 CrossRef .
C. T. Avedisian, W.-C. Kuo, W. Tsang and A. Lowery, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 8334–8340 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sharma, C. T. Avedisian, J. D. Brunson and W. Tsang, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2019, 139, 873–880 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. McGinnis and M. Elimelech, Desalination, 2007, 207, 370–382 CrossRef CAS .
E. Curcio and E. Drioli, Sep. Purif. Rev., 2005, 34, 35–86 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lagana, G. Barbieri and E. Drioli, J. Membr. Sci., 2000, 166, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Cath, S. Gormly, E. G. Beaudry, M. T. Flynn, V. D. Adams and A. E. Childress, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 257, 85–98 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Petrotos and H. N. Lazarides, J. Food Eng., 2001, 49, 201–206 CrossRef .
M. Celere and C. Gostoli, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 257, 99–110 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu and G. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25223–25233 CrossRef CAS .
S. Harikrishnan, A. A. Roseline and S. Kalaiselvam, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2013, 12, 629–635 CAS .

Footnote† Co-first authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Tianjian Zhang	Tianjian Zhang is currently a Ph.D. student at the Huazhong University of Science and Technology under the supervision of Prof. Yanlong Gu. He received his bachelor degree from China University of Mining and Technology, China, in 2021 under the supervision of Dr Changhui Liu. His current research mainly focuses on the synthesis of thermal energy materials and green chemistry.
Changhui Liu	Dr Changhui Liu earned his Ph.D. from Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Yanlong Gu, then worked as a postdoctoral researcher in the group of Prof. Shu Kobayashi in The University of Tokyo (Japan) from 2017 to 2018. Currently, he works as an associate Professor at the China University of Mining and Technology (Xuzhou, China). His research interests include sustainable chemistry, heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis, energy storage and conversion.
Yanlong Gu	Yanlong Gu received his B.Sc. degree in 1999 from Inner Mongolia University, and obtained his Ph.D. degree from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Science in 2005. He then started his journey as a post-doc researcher in the group of Prof. Shu Kobayashi, The University of Tokyo, Japan (one year), and in the group of Prof. Francois Jerome, The University of Poitiers, France. Since October 2008, he has been a professor at Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. Yanlong Gu has a broad interest in homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis, organic synthesis, and biomass valorization.
François Jérôme	François Jérôme received his Ph.D. degree in chemistry from the University of Burgundy (France) in 2000 under the supervision of Prof. R. Guilard. He then moved as a postdoc to the University of California of Davis (USA) in the group of Prof. K. M. Smith, followed by a second postdoctoral position at the University of Rennes 1 under the guidance of Prof. P. H. Dixneuf, where he worked on homogeneous catalysis. In 2015, he created the research federation INCREASE, hosted by the CNRS, gathering scientists from academia working together with chemical companies on the catalytic conversion of renewable feedstocks to specialty chemicals.

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the importance of this work. (a) Publications and (b) their main subject areas on glycerol or glycerine or glycerin according to the Web of Science database (2011–2020). (c) Reviews and (d) their main subject areas on glycerol or glycerine or glycerin according to the Web of Science database (2011–2020). (e) The source and main applications of glycerol.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Straight and (b) coiled corrugated tubes under test ((a) and (b) were reproduced with permission from ref. 45, Copyright (2012) Elsevier). (c) Experimental setup of reciprocating oscillated flow in porous domains (reproduced with permission from ref. 51, Copyright (2017) Springer Nature).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Interaction between carbon nanotubes and glycerol molecules. Rheological curves of (b) single-walled carbon nanotubes and glycerol, (c) double-walled carbon nanotubes and glycerol (reproduced with permission from ref. 60, Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) TEM image for samples synthesized using different methods. (b) Viscosity versus temperature. (c) Thermal conductivity ratio as a function of temperature ((a–c) were reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright (2016) Elsevier).	 
2Mg(s) + CO2(g) → 2MgO(s) + C(s)	(1)

 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of SiO2 nanoparticles and corresponding particle size distribution graph. (b) Photographic image of SiO2–glycerol nanofluids. (c) Viscosity distribution as a function of particle concentration for SiO2–glycerol nanofluids. (d) Thermal conductivity distribution of SiO2–glycerol nanofluids ((a–d) were reproduced with permission from ref. 102, Copyright (2017) Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Different MPCM concentrations as a function of shearing time at 20 °C. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 113, Copyright (2014) Taylor & Francis Group). (b) Effect of temperature and shear rate on the viscosity of 20 wt.% MPCM suspensions. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 105, Copyright (2018) Springer Nature).	 

 	Fig. 7  Boiling of water/glycerol at water 99 wt% and (a) q/A = 30 kW m−2, (b) q/A = 40 kW m−2 ((a) and (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 122, Copyright (2013) Taylor & Francis Group).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Isotherms for various strengths of the magnetic field in the stable configuration (reproduced with permission from ref. 127, Copyright (2006) Elsevier). (b) Experimental measurements of horizontal magnetic fields. (c) Temperature visualization of enhancement in heat convection at various magnetic inductions of 0, 5, 6, and 10 T ((b) and (c) were reproduced with permission from ref. 128, Copyright (2009) Elsevier). (d) Experimental measurements of vertical magnetic fields. (e) Temperature visualization of suppression in heat convection at various magnetic inductions of 0, 5, 6, and 10 T (reproduced with permission from ref. 129, Copyright (2009).	 

 	Fig. 9  Bénard–Marangoni effect in (a) a dilute mixture, (b) a high-concentration mixture (reproduced with permission from ref. 132, Copyright (2019) Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Chemical exfoliation of graphite oxide (reproduced with permission from ref. 137, Copyright (2014) Springer Nature). (b) Graphical comparison of Cu nanofluids and Ni5 microfluids (reproduced with permission from ref. 139, Copyright (2017) Elsevier). (c) Viscosities of GO-filled nanofluids with different glycerol mixture combinations as a function of temperature. (d) Thermal conductivities of base solvents with different GL mixture combinations as a function of temperature (reproduced with permission from ref. 138, Copyright (2020) Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Temperature-dependent viscosity variation of glycerol/ChCl DESs. (b) Thermal conductivity of the three nanofluids at 320 K as a function of volume fraction. (c) Structure test and schematic of mechanism analysis by means of 1H NMR and FT-IR spectra for illustration of the proposed mechanism responsible for thermal behavior Al2O3-filled nanofluid (reproduced with permission from ref. 140, Copyright (2019) Elsevier). (d) Schematic of the DP and Cu nanoparticle-modified SiO2 nanoparticle and thermal conductivity enhancement in glycerol DESs (reproduced with permission from ref. 141, Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Spectral shift and TEM images of standard samples of Ag-SiO2 nanofluids before and after heating at 125 °C in glycerol for 2 h. (b) Schematic of a PV/T collector using a nanofluid volumetric absorber. (c) Optimal spectral selectivity of a nanofluid, wherein the purple box denotes the spectrum to transmit to the PV, with remaining light absorbed by the nanofluid for heat generation ((a–c) were reproduced with permission from ref. 152, Copyright (2018) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Description of the flow behavior in arranged fins (reproduced with permission from ref. 165, Copyright (2009) American Society of Mechanical Engineers). (b) Schematic of a thermosiphon. (c) Effective thermal conductivity of thermosiphon ((b) and (c) reproduced with permission from ref. 167, Copyright (2018) Taylor & Francis Group). (d) Cooling curves of the 5 mass% glycerol solution, water, and 5 mass% PAG. (e) Temperature-cooling rate curves of the 5 mass% glycerol solution, water, 5 mass% PAG, and oil (reproduced with permission from ref. 168, Copyright (2017) Elsevier). (f) Schematic of the tested heating tower heat pump module (reproduced with permission from ref. 169, Copyright (2019) Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of film boiling on a horizontal tube. (b) Glycerol boiling curve ((a) and (b) were reproduced with permission from ref. 177, Copyright (2019) Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Glycerol-based nanofluidic energy absorption system (reproduced with permission from ref. 184, Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society). (b) Variation of phase change temperature with respect to the number of cycles. (c) Variation of latent heat with respect to the number of cycles. (d) Effect of mass fractions of CuO nanoparticles on thermal conductivity ((b–d) were reproduced with permission from ref. 185, Copyright (2013) IEEE).	 
Footnote
† Co-first authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
