Comparative well-to-wheel life cycle assessment of OME 3–5 synfuel production via the power-to-liquid pathway   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SE00658C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00658C
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 3219-3233Comparative well-to-wheel life cycle assessment of OME3–5 synfuel production via the power-to-liquid pathway†

        
          
            Christoph 
            Hank
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Lukas 
            Lazar
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Franz 
            Mantei
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Mohamed 
            Ouda
          
        
      ae, 
      
        
          
            Robin J. 
            White‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Tom 
            Smolinka
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Achim 
            Schaadt
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Christopher 
            Hebling
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Hans-Martin 
            Henning
          
        
      a
aHydrogen Technologies Division, Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE, Heidenhofstraße 2, 79110 Freiburg, Germany. E-mail: christoph.hank@ise.fraunhofer.de
bInstitut für Nachhaltige Technische Systeme (INATECH), Emmy-Noether-Straße 2, 79110 Freiburg, Germany
cInstitute for Industrial Ecology (INEC), Pforzheim University, Tiefenbronner Str. 65, 75175 Pforzheim, Germany
dTechnical University of Berlin (TUB), Straße des 17. Juni 135, 10623 Berlin, Germany
eInstitute of Process and Plant Technology, Technical University Munich, Boltzmannstr. 15, 85748 Garching, Germany
Received 
      15th August 2019
    , Accepted 15th September 2019First published on 16th September 2019AbstractOxymethylene Dimethyl Ethers (OMEs) are promising diesel fuel alternatives and interesting solvents for various industrial applications. In this report, a well-to-wheel life cycle assessment of short OME oligomers as produced via a Power-to-Liquid (PtL) pathway has been conducted. Variations in electricity and carbon dioxide supply as well as the hardware demand for the PtL plant components (e.g. PEM water electrolysis, carbon capturing, and 36 kta OME plant capacity) have been considered. Conventional diesel fuel is used as the comparative benchmark. In scenarios with a high share of renewable electricity well-to-wheel greenhouse gas emission for OME3–5 fuel is advantageous compared to fossil diesel. For the best case, well-to-wheel greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced by 86%, corresponding to 29 g(CO2eq) km−1 (OME3–5-fuel) compared to 209 g(CO2eq) km−1 (diesel fuel). However, these results are highly sensitive to the applied method with regard to system multifunctionality. A sensitivity analysis indicates that input electricity at ∼50 g(CO2eq) kWhel−1 enables well-to-wheel greenhouse gas emissions of <100 g(CO2eq) km−1. For other environmental impact categories, acidification, eutrophication, respiratory effects, photochemical ozone creation and resource depletion exceed significantly the fossil fuel reference. A high share of these impacts can be assigned to electricity production, either through direct electricity consumption in the PtL system or during upstream production of hardware components. The presented results and discussion demonstrate the necessity for global defossilisation including material efficient manufacturing of renewable energy plants which remains mandatory for synfuel production addressing a wide range of environmental impact categories. Furthermore, PtL production concerning well-to-wheel greenhouse gas emissions could be beneficial even in Germany if dedicated renewable energy capacities are considered. However, operation of large-scale PtL plants will predominantly be conducted in countries with high renewable energy potential, resulting in low levelized cost of electricity and high full load hours.
Introduction
There is tremendous pressure to limit the global temperature increase to 1.5 °C, which requires intensive defossilisation efforts by the international community.1 In Germany especially the mobility sector stays way behind the sector specific targets which were set up in order to achieve the self-imposed national greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction targets.2,3 Additionally, we face controversial discussions about the impact and handling of high road traffic related local emissions, especially particulate matter (PM) and nitrogen oxides (NOx). Based on renewable energy (RE), carbon dioxide (CO2) capture and its downstream catalytic conversion with renewable hydrogen (H2), the Power-to-Liquid (PtL) approach to chemical and fuel production can support defossilisation and enable integration of the energy, chemical and mobility sectors. PtL, as part of the Power-to-X (PtX) process schemes, is an important element of sector-coupling, enabling the infusion of RE into the primary energy demands of our global economies. The electrification of central end uses such as heating and road transport will lead to a significant rise of electricity in the final energy consumption from 19% today to 29% by 2050.4 In particular the electrification of mobility applications is expected to increase from <1% in 2016 to 27% in 2050. With regard to urban transport the European Union targets a 50% reduction in 2030 and a complete phase out of conventionally (fossil) fuelled cars.5 While battery electric vehicles are favourable for shorter driving distances (i.e. <300 km) long hauls or heavy road transports can in terms of life cycle GHG emissions be more sustainable when fuelled by hydrogen fuel cells or synthetic fuels.6 The Deutsche Energieagentur (DENA) assessed the potential of electricity-based fuels for low-emission transport in the EU. Even for 2050-scenarios favouring electric powertrains, more than 49% of the total fuel demand of all mobility applications will be met by electricity based liquid fuels.7 Studies with a focus on the future German energy system aiming at a 95% GHG reduction quantify a total necessary electricity provision of 129 TW hel for PtL for its application in sector-coupling and future mobility8 (gross electricity generation in Germany in 2018: 649 TW hel).9
In addition to reduction of life cycle GHG emissions, local emissions of PM and NOx shift into the focus of political debate and legislation. In the context of new mobility fuels, short chain oligomeric Oxymethylene Dimethyl Ethers (denoted as OMEs; molecular formula H3CO–(CH2O)n–CH3; where n = 1–5) can be produced from CO2 and H2 typically via methanol (CH3OH).10 OME3–5 are of interest as diesel additives or substitutes as they are non-hazardous, weakly corrosive, miscible with conventional diesel11,12 and their combustion is almost free of PM.13–17 Due to a high oxygen content (48 wt%)18 and cetane number, OME3–5 mixtures have been blended with conventional diesel without modification of the internal combustion engine.13,19,20 OMEs offer a high tolerance towards exhaust gas recirculation and hence can eliminate the PM–NOx trade-off which inevitably occurs in the case of conventional long-chain diesel fuel.13,21,22 Another perspective and a promising market for OMEs is their application as solvents, with OME1 already established as an industrially applied solvent.
Currently, industrial OMEn production provides capacities of ca. 30–40 kta but is characterized by low overall process efficiency.23 The production is based on CH3OH traditionally synthesised via syn-gas obtained from steam-reforming of fossil energy carriers (e.g. methane). For the production of OME3–5 from a PtL basis, whilst economically feasible (as we have reported previously),24 life cycle assessment (LCA) and associated ecological impacts have yet to be examined in detail, especially with regard to the utilisation phase (e.g. combustion). A holistic Well-to-Wheel (WtW) LCA is thus important to determine whether this energy carrier offers environmental advantages compared to fossil-based equivalents. In this regard and within the framework of our current research24–27 this article addresses the following questions (i.e. the goal of the performed LCA):
→ Environmental efficiency of OME3–5: what are the environmental impacts resulting from the production and utilisation of OME3–5 as a fuel? How does the synfuel perform in comparison to the production and utilisation of conventional fossil diesel fuel?
→ What are the systems most impacting life cycle phases and components in terms of environmental impact minimization?
Necessity for the environmental evaluation of OME3–5
Thus far, reports in the literature regarding the LCA of OMEs have focused on either pure OME1–8 derived from forestry biomass with Canada as the geographical reference28 or on the production of shorter chain OME1 based on electrolytic H2 applied in the form of OME1–diesel-blend (35 vol% OME1).21 OME1, commercially known as “Methylal”, has a high vapor pressure, relatively lower specific volumetric energy and low flash point. These are drawbacks when blended with diesel fuel and when long-term storage in the current infrastructure is considered. Both previously reported LCAs indicated that at low blending rates (<35 vol% OME1) soot emissions can be significantly reduced. The WtW GHG emissions can be reduced considerably when either forestry biomass or low-carbon electricity acts as the energy source for synthetic fuel production. A more detailed description of the addressed assessments is provided in the ESI (S1).†
Regarding testing of OME fuel in real internal combustion engines Avolio et al. conducted tests with different OME–diesel blends in different diesel engines.29 Regarding life-cycle emissions it was stated that a 30% OME-content leads to an 18.5%-reduction in WtW CO2-emissions ‘under the premise of a sustainable production from renewable sources’. Further explanation of the assessment background for the WtW emissions was not included in the report.
Therefore and to the best of our knowledge there is currently no publicly available LCA of OME3–5 which is required to support further R&D, process optimisation and indeed policy decision making.
As it is a critical consideration, when conducting the ecological evaluation of sustainable fuels and chemicals, terminologies such as “CO2- or environmentally-neutral” or even “carbon-negative” have to be handled carefully.17,30–33 It is to be emphasised that none of the proposed future mobility options, if powered directly by electricity or by chemical energy carriers, will lead to CO2-neutrality. As such in a WtW approach (i.e. including upstream impacts of fuel production), there will always be net-positive CO2(equivalent) emissions (denoted as CO2eq). Instead of discussing mobility concepts on the basis of Tank-to-Wheel system boundaries, it appears that WtW assessments should be handled as a fundamental prerequisite for environmental evaluation. It is also important to note that carbon emission reduction pathways only serve as temporal CO2-storage mechanisms and aim when sourced from biogenic or atmospheric CO2 at creating a highly integrated carbon cycle.
Thus, the Methodology section below describes the assessed product system and scenarios, the investigated OME synthesis route as well as the environmental indicators and the aspects of multifunctionality of the assessed PtL system.
Methodology for the life cycle assessment
The performed LCA was predominantly structured and conducted in compliance with ISO 14040:2009, ISO 14044:2006,25,34,35 and recommendations of the European Commission.36–38 Synthesis process data are described in the “Theoretical background for the assessed OME3–5 synthesis” section. Umberto® NXT Universal LCA software was used for modelling and impact calculations. Background LCA data were sourced from the ecoinvent database (v.3.3), manufacturer specifications, published literature and in-house experience. For the applied ecoinvent background processes cut-off system models which build on economic allocation as the default methodology have been used.
Assessed product system, functional units and scenarios
The scale of the assessed PtL product system is based on the electricity production of a 100 MWp RE park and it is designed for an annual production capacity of 36 kta of OME3–5. In general it comprises nine main process steps (Fig. 1A): electrolytic H2 production by proton exchange membrane water electrolysis (denoted as “PEM”), CO2 capture from one of the three assessed CO2 sources (i.e. biomethane, ammonia, and direct air capture), methanol synthesis with subsequent flash and distillation units, anhydrous dehydrogenation of methanol to formaldehyde followed by OMEn synthesis and the necessary distillation towards the target product OME3–5 (please see the section “Theoretical background for the assessed OME3–5 synthesis” for further details). Necessary (by-)product separation, recirculation, cooling and compression are part of the related processes of methanol- or OME3–5-synthesis. To reduce the thermal energy demand heat integration has been performed. The OME3–5 product is then assumed to be distributed and utilised in a mid-size diesel-car (WtW system boundaries). All of the described life cycle phases require process energies (electricity and steam), process and cooling water, parts and materials for plants and machinery construction, as well as maintenance and fuel transportation. The life cycle inventory provides further description of the single process steps.25
 Fig. 1  A) Assessed PtL product system grouped into the relevant process steps. (B) The three technology scenarios varying in electricity supply, PEM efficiency, PEM stack lifetime and thermal energy supply. CO2 is supplied from three sources: biomethane, ammonia and direct air capture. The resulting designation of the scenarios is indicated in square brackets. 
To meet the goal of a comparative LCA study the investigated PtL OME production and the reference system need to fulfill the same primary function. Therefore a driving distance of 1 km is chosen as the functional unit (FU) for the WtW system boundaries.
Three main scenarios allow for variation of technology parameters and the applied electricity (Fig. 1B). They are characterized by a high to low GHG intensity of the applied electricity, a variation of the PEM efficiency and stack lifetime and the supply of thermal energy for the synthesis steps.
The CO2 supply cases consider a biogas upgrading plant separating mainly CO2 from biomethane [BM], an ammonia production facility [AM] and a direct air capturing technology [DAC]. The designation of the resulting nine assessed combinations is indicated in square brackets.
Indicators for the environmental impacts
PtL (and CCU) systems are designed for the integration of the carbon cycle and hence the mitigation of fossil CO2 emissions. This is why most discussions on PtL focus on the specific systems' Global warming potential. However, a holistic LCA shall aspire to cover as well further impact categories to disclose fully the potential environmental benefits/disadvantages. The selected impact categories in this study are climate change, GWP 100a [kg CO2eq]; resources (minerals, fossils and renewables) [kg Sbeq]; freshwater and terrestrial acidification [mol Heq+]; freshwater eutrophication [kg Peq]; marine eutrophication [kg Neq]; terrestrial eutrophication [mol Neq]; ozone layer depletion [kg CFC-11eq]; respiratory effects, inorganics [kg PM2.5eq]; photochemical ozone creation [kg ethyleneeq]; cumulative energy demand, total [MJeq]; and cumulative energy demand, non-renewable [MJeq]. The ILCD Handbook “Framework and requirements for LCIA models and indicators” provides general information on these categories.39
Solving of multifunctionality
A comprehensive definition of multifunctionality in the context of CCU can be found in the ESI (S2)† together with references to relevant literature. A description of the avoided burden methodology applied in this study is also provided.
In this study system boundaries have been expanded to include the source of CO2 (Fig. 2A). Besides the primary FU of 1 km driving distance, this leads to the inclusion of an additional functionality – i.e. the production of either biomethane or ammonia. Since the focus is on the production of OME3–5 or fossil diesel fuel and driving over 1 km, these additional functions are designated as “co-products”. For multifunctional CO2 supply cases, biomethane and ammonia life cycle impact results are presented on the basis of the avoided burden approach, sometimes referred to as substitution. This represents one solution for multifunctionality when the alternative approaches of subdivision and system expansion are either not applicable or considered as insufficient for the presentation of results.40
 Fig. 2  A) The assessed product systems with a CO2-supply based on biomethane [BM] or ammonia [AM] are multifunctional since they are providing an additional function (biomethane or ammonia) besides the main function (1 km driving distance). The avoided burden methodology subtracts a respective amount of avoided conventional production from the expanded system. By this, the obtained product specific results (FU: impact per km) can be compared to the other CO2 cases and the reference diesel system. (B) In the case of a CO2-supply from a Direct-Air-Capture [DAC] plant the sole function of the product system is a driving distance of 1 km. (C) This as well applies to the monofunctional reference diesel system. (B and C) The hereby obtained product specific results (FU: impact per km) can be compared to both the CO2 case [DAC] and the reference diesel system. 
Avoided burden presumes that co-product generation in the coupled product system enables the substitution of a conventionally produced co-product. The respective impact of the avoided conventional production is credited (subtracted) to the coupled product system. However, impact crediting can for some cases even lead to negative overall results. Negative results can be mistaken as a reversal of impacts; i.e. if operated the respective product system is assumed to lead to an improvement of environmental conditions. A correct interpretation for negative results is that the total impact of the coupled product system is smaller than the total impact of the avoided conventional production of the single co-product. This leads to a net benefit even though the coupled product system still has an environmental impact. The net benefit is valid as long as the market for the co-product is not saturated.36,40
It is important to note that avoided burden is valid as long as the substitution of conventional production can be assured. The latter for example can be the case for carbon capture from already existing CO2 sources or if the co-production enables a reduced production elsewhere. However, an ever increasing production of the co-product can lead to saturation of the respective market. For this case, results based on the avoided burden approach might be misleading since the substitution cannot be assured. As recommended by the ISO 14044 the results for the expanded systems are included in the ESI (S7).†
For the monofunctional CO2 case [DAC] (Fig. 2B) and the diesel reference process (Fig. 2C) no avoided burden needs to be credited since these product systems are already product-specific with a FU of 1 km.
Theoretical background for the assessed OME3–5 synthesis
The LCA of OME3–5 synthesis conducted in this paper is based on a synthesis process using methanol and anhydrous formaldehyde as described and economically assessed by Ouda et al.10,24 In this work the described process chain, formerly based on fossil methanol, was extended to include the preceding synthesis of CO2-based methanol, the capturing of CO2 and the electrolytic H2 production. The OME3–5 product mixture consists of 39 wt% OME3, 34 wt% OME4 and 27 wt% OME5 resulting in a heating value (19.031 MJLHV per kg(OME3–5)) of 44% compared to that of conventional diesel fuel (42.791 MJLHV per kg(diesel)).The process was simulated using the simulation software CHEMCAD® coupled with Matlab® via a VBA script to describe the process reactors.24 A heat integration process has been performed using the software PinCH2.0.41 Here a heat exchanger network has been developed to maximize the process heat recovery while considering occurring investment costs. Afterwards the heat exchanger network was implemented in CHEMCAD®. Combining the methanol synthesis sub-plant with the formaldehyde and the OME sub-plants has been beneficial for the overall internal energy recovery. A detailed description of the synthesis steps and a simplified process flow diagram are provided in the ESI (S3).†
Inventory for the assessed OME3–5 system
The order of the inventory is organised in analogy to the process scheme. A detailed tabular summary of the life cycle inventory (LCI) and complementing descriptions are included in the ESI (S5).† Since the hardware demand of the PtL components is included it was important to assume a technical lifetime for the overall system as well as exchange rates for the PEM stacks and catalysts. If not mentioned otherwise in the following description of the LCI a lifetime of 20 years has been assumed for H2 production, CO2 sourcing and the synthesis steps, including compression and distillation.
Electricity
Three different scenarios have been selected (compare with Fig. 1B) which combine steady-state electricity provision from grid mixes or hydropower with fluctuating RE. A complementing detailed description of the derivation of the applied electricity mixes is given in the ESI (S4).† The electricity provision scenarios are described as:

• [2018 GR + RE]. 
Consisting of 60% grid mix in Germany, 2018, plus 40% local RE. The 40% share of RE is based on load profiles of local wind and photovoltaic (PV) plants in the south of Germany. The grid data for 2018 are based on published data of the publicly accessible ISE energy charts.42


• [2050 GR + RE]. 
Consisting of 60% grid electricity for a predicted 2050 mix in Germany plus 40% local RE (as described above). For an estimation of the 2050 grid electricity mix and its resulting footprint the REMod-D model developed at Fraunhofer ISE has been used.43–45


• [2018 HY + RE]. 
Consisting of 60% hydropower (run-of-river) and 40% local RE (as described above). The ecoinvent process “hydro, run-of-river [DE]” is used as the background process. When it comes to using limited forms of electricity generation such as the case for hydropower in Germany the argument for the PtL plants' additional electricity demand is justified. It can be argued that in the case of a large-scale PtL plant in Germany an electricity supply from dedicated hydroelectric power plants remains unlikely. However, the [2018 HY + RE] scenario is included to provide the estimation for PtL scenarios where low-carbon electricity is supplied as is already the case for anticipated pilot-projects in Scandinavia.46–48 By now, hydroelectricity provides the largest share of electricity from all RE sources within the EU member-states.
The electricity demand of the background processes such as distribution or production processes of hardware materials is fulfilled by the grid electricity mix defined by the scenarios (year 2018 or 2050). This is justified by the assumption that these external process steps cannot be influenced by the PtL process operator and any decisions promoting RE.
It is indeed important for Power-to-X systems powered by a high share of PV and wind electricity (i.e. without direct CO2 emissions) to account as well for the indirect emissions during their production processes. The upstream emissions of RE plants can on the one hand be influenced by the RE plant's capacity utilization or, on the other, heavily influenced by the applied source of electricity for the RE plant production processes. For example a PV module processed in a factory which in turn is powered by an electricity mix featuring high shares of fossil based energy generation will as well show higher (indirect) GHG emissions per kWhel-produced. In contrast, a PV module from 100% RE-powered factory potentially enables lower GHG emissions per kWhel-produced. Therefore in the section discussing results we will analyse the source for specific life cycle impacts and trace them to their initial “causer”.

CO2 sourcing
The three selected CO2 sources mirror the capture of atmospheric or fossil CO2 and cover a PtL feed demand of 227.6 t(CO2) d−1. For captured atmospheric CO2, the feedstock has already been part of the atmosphere before its re-emission to the atmosphere during product utilisation. Hence for a WtW assessment it can be assumed that the same amount of CO2 removed from the atmosphere will be released to the atmosphere at any point of the life cycle. Indeed that does not mean that ‘feedstock’ atmospheric CO2 can be accounted with zero burden since its upstream technology-based provision causes indirect impacts. Regarding the CO2 feed demand of a PtL fuel production it should be noted that it will always be higher than the stoichiometric CO2 formation during PtL fuel utilization. Part of the feed CO2 is lost in the form of C-containing purge gases and waste streams and not bound in the synfuel. Thus for environmental evaluation of synfuel production it is important to consider the full CO2 demand for correct impact assessment of CO2 capturing, purification and compression.
For the supply case ‘Biomethane’, CO2 is assumed to be supplied from a biogas upgrading plant used for the feed-in of biomethane to the natural gas grid. For the initial production of biogas from biomass and necessary materials and hardware demand the ecoinvent dataset “biogas production from grass [CH]” was modified and adjusted to average substrate feeds for the German market.25,49 A CO2 content of ∼44 vol%, resp. 0.87 kg(CO2) Nm−3 (biogas), was assumed.50 Biogas upgrading includes desulphurisation to reduce H2S content to >500 ppm. In order to protect and improve the lifetime of the methanol synthesis catalyst an additional fine-desulphurisation step has been considered with a final H2S content below 5 ppm. A detailed description including the process parameters applied for the impact assessment is provided in the ESI (S5 – CO2 sourcing).†
With the supply of biogenic CO2, the biogas upgrading plant delivers two products: biomethane and feedstock CO2, thus exhibiting multifunctionality. To obtain a product-specific result (FU = 1 km of driving) the respective amount of produced biomethane is credited (avoided burden approach): a driving distance of 1 km necessitates an upstream provision of 0.27 kg CO2 which in turn can be captured from 0.16 Nm3 CH4. Hence the avoided burden is defined by a conventional biomethane pathway producing an equivalent amount of CH4.
For the supply case ‘Ammonia’, data are based on the ecoinvent dataset “ammonia production, steam reforming, liquid [RER]”.51 The process has been edited as the original ecoinvent process assumes 1.23 kg of CO2 for the downstream production of urea which is not listed as emission in the original dataset.52,53 Thus this amount is assumed to be available for synfuel production at ambient pressure. Due to the high purity of the CO2 desulphurisation is considered unnecessary. For the avoided burden approach the FU of 1 km driving results in 0.22 kg NH3 as the co-product. A conventional ammonia production producing an equivalent amount without CO2 capturing is credited. More information on ammonia as the CO2 source is included in the ESI (S5 – CO2 sourcing).†
For the monofunctional supply case ‘Direct Air Capture’, CO2 is sourced directly from the atmosphere. Here thermal and electrical energy demands are considered as well as the hardware demand for DAC units. For the impact assessment either the available exhaust (burden free) heat or the burning of natural gas is assumed. Details on considered energy demands as well as hardware specification are included in the ESI.†
All three CO2 sources including their upstream processing are assumed to be supplied by either the 2018 electricity grid mix ([2018 GR + RE]; [2018 HY + RE]) or the 2050 electricity grid mix ([2050 GR + RE]). Transportation and related losses for the CO2-feedstock provision are neglected following the assumption that the CO2 sources are located nearby the OME plant.
H2 production
PEM water electrolysis is selected for electrolytic H2 production. PEM technology has not reached the state of year-long operational experience as is the case for alkaline electrolysis (AEL). However PEM systems offer specific advantages when placed in the context of fluctuating RE production and PtX-concepts: they offer faster start-up (cold-start) and response times than AEL, higher current densities, allow for a higher operational pressure and therefore potentially reduce H2 compression demand for downstream synthesis steps.54,55 Today the investment cost for PEM electrolysis systems still exceeds that of AEL systems. However, a strong investment cost reduction and an increase of stack lifetime are expected in the next two decades enabling an alignment with the values for AEL systems.54–57
Details regarding the PEM system's parameters are listed in Table 1. The PEM system for our LCA is based on the data for a 5 MWel PEM water electrolyser system comprising 5 × 1 MWel stacks. Since the H2 production capacity is pre-set by the PtL plants' H2 demand the total number of 5 MWel PEM systems is dependent on the assumed PEM system efficiency defined in the scenarios. For the 2050 scenario a forward projection of the technological development can be assumed leading to a considerably reduced specific electricity demand. The values are based on a recent sector survey including manufacturer estimations for future electrolysis system performances depending on the system size.55 The assumed PEM system efficiencies have been validated by further comparing to published measured or simulated efficiencies.58–61 Electricity is provided at high voltage, transformed to medium voltage and converted into direct voltage. Deionised water input and oxygen output were considered using stoichiometric calculation and in compliance with literature data. Oxygen is vented and not considered as a valuable product for this study. Cooling water demand is also included.62
Hardware data for the 5 MWel PEM systems are based mainly on the primary data of Fraunhofer ISE.25,63 To account for stack longevity the 2018 scenario assumes a stack lifetime of 50k h after which a complete replacement is necessary. For reasons of simplicity any partial recycling of stack components at the end of their lifetime is neglected. The stack hardware data comprise the complete membrane electrode assembly (MEA) consisting of Pt-loaded cathodes, IrO2-loaded anodes, Cu current collectors, Ti-bipolar plates, Nafion® membranes, Ti-current collectors and device frames and sealing. The stack endplates are excluded from replacement. For the two 2050 scenarios a significant increase of stack lifetime to 125k h is assumed representing the median value obtained from statements in sector surveys.55 Secondary data for power electronics are derived from the ecoinvent “fuel cell production, polymer electrolyte membrane, 2 kW electrical, future”, which is a source of uncertainties due to the high difference in installed capacities. Additionally an 800 m2 building hall and three 40-foot intermodal shipping containers have been considered based on presentations and publications from industry.59,64,65 Due to insufficient data availability a water–gas separator and a further H2 purification (De-Oxo) have been excluded from the hardware demand.
Table 1 PEM electrolysis operating parameters






2018 GR + RE
2018 HY + RE
2050 GR + RE




Production capacity (t(H2) d−1)
18.7
18.7
18.7


Electricity demand system (kWhel/Nm3 (H2))
4.6
4.6
4.1


Efficiency system (%LHV, H2)
65
65
74


Efficiency rectifier (%)
98
98
98


Installed capacity (MWel)
40
40
35


Deionised water demand (t(H2ODI) per t(H2))
8.92
8.92
8.92


Cooling water demand (t(H2Ocooling) per t(H2))
1.62
1.62
1.62


Oxygen output, vented (t(O2) per t(H2))
7.90
7.90
7.90


Lifetime PEM stacks (1000 hours)
50
50
125




Methanol & OME3–5 synthesis steps
Process data of the two synthesis steps as well as related compression, pumps and distillation units are based on process simulation with CHEMCAD® and heat integration via PinCH2.0. The synthesis plant capacity is 36 kt per a(OME3–5). Process data include the electricity for compressors and pumps, heat for the dehydrogenation of methanol to formaldehyde and steam for the necessary 5 distillation columns. Thermal energy supply is provided by either natural gas (GRID2018 + RE) or by the respective electricity mix (GRID2050 + RE, HYDRO2018). Material data consider catalysts, reactors, compressors and pumps. The utilities, ancillaries, and offsite infrastructure demand are estimated by means of a standard ecoinvent process. The ESI (S5 – Methanol synthesis and distillation)† provides detailed information on specific energy and material demands as well as additional information on the catalysts assumed for the assessment.
Distribution and utilisation of OME3–5
The final OME3–5 product is assumed to be distributed to the point of utilisation. Since the form of distribution is very dependent on geographical and case specific assumptions, a distribution mix including comparable shares of lorry, train and ship transportation is assumed. The necessary transportation distance is assumed to be 400 km. The differing energy densities of diesel and OME3–5 result in a higher OME3–5 distribution demand.
Utilisation in a medium size passenger car fuelled by OME3–5 was assumed in the utilisation phase. Due to different heating values of diesel and OME3–5, the engine has a higher mass flow in the case of OME fuel. Empirical data show that the injection demand of diesel is ca. 46% of that of OME3–5 which corresponds to the ratio of heating values. However, OME fuel can show 1–3% efficiency improvement.20,66 Hence the OME3–5 fuel consumption equals:25  mdiesel – mass of diesel fuel [kg]. LHVdiesel – lower heating value of diesel = 42.791 MJ kg−1.67 LHVOME3−5 – lower heating value of OME3−5 = 19.031 MJ kg−1.68,69 Δη – efficiency increase for OME vs. diesel = 2%.20,66
The specific energy demand of the passenger car of 237 MJ or 12.5 kg OME3–5 per 100 km is based on the EU-wide transport model TREMOVE of the European Union.70 This specific energy demand equals a real-world fuel consumption of 11.7 and 6.6 litres of OME3–5 and diesel fuel, respectively, for a mid- to upper-size passenger car. Wietschel et al. 2019 assessed a diesel fuel consumption of 5.7 and 8.2 litres for a mid- and upper size car, respectively.71 The German federal environmental agency (UBA) quantifies the average fuel consumption of cars in Germany to 7.4 litres.72 The assumption we make regarding the specific energy demand affects both fuel concepts equally. The ecoinvent process “transport, passenger car, medium size, diesel EURO 5” has been chosen. The environmental impacts resulting from car manufacturing are excluded since the fuel production and utilisation related emissions are of major interest in this assessment. Tire, brake and road wear emissions are also excluded since they are assumed to be independent of the used fuel. The detailed compilation for the emissions resulting from the utilisation of OME3–5 in an internal combustion engine is provided in the ESI (S5 – OME3–5 utilization).†
Diesel reference process
The diesel reference process has been selected based on secondary data obtained from the ecoinvent database; i.e. the “transport, passenger car, medium size, diesel, EURO 5” dataset has been selected for the impact assessment. Ecoinvent classifies vehicles with a gross weight of 1.6 t and an engine displacement of 1.4–2.0 L as “medium size” passenger cars. The diesel fuel consumption adds up to 0.055 kg diesel per km. Upstream processes of low-sulphur diesel production, petroleum refinery operation and petroleum extraction are included in the reference system boundaries. Electricity consumptions of the diesel production and the petroleum refinery operation have been adapted to the respective electricity mix of either 2018 ([2018 GR + RE], [2018 HY + RE]) or 2050 ([2050 GR + RE]). However, the results for the diesel product system showed that a variation of the electricity mix only has a negligible impact on the total GHG emissions (<0.1%). For reasons of a clear presentation the results of the OME3–5 product systems are solely compared to the results of the diesel product system based on the 2050 grid electricity mix. Technological improvements for 2050 in the case of fossil diesel production have not been considered. It can be assumed that these conventional processes are established and mature. As for OME3–5 production, emissions from the manufacturing of the car as well as tire, brake and road wear emissions have been excluded from the assessment.
Environmental impacts of OME3–5 as synfuel – via the avoided burden approach
To answer the main research questions (environmental impacts of OME3–5 production and utilisation compared to conventional fossil diesel fuel) the life cycle impact assessment results are first discussed for the global warming potential (GWP100). Subsequently, additional assessed impact categories will be addressed to disclose a more complete picture of the environmental implications. A sensitivity analysis regarding the footprint of supplied electricity as well as the PEM system efficiency concludes the section on results. The whole section on results is based on and valid for the avoided burden approach (compare with the section “Solving of multifunctionality”). The life cycle impact assessment results for the expanded system are included in the ESI (S7 – Life cycle impact assessment results for system expansion).†
Global warming potential

Fig. 3 presents the product specific GWP results (expressed as GHG emissions g(CO2eq) km−1; overall impact as green bars). The product specific FU of 1 km allows the comparison of all CO2 cases and the diesel reference. For the CO2 cases Biomethane and Ammonia, the avoided burden approach has been applied and a conventional production of the co-product is credited to the OME product system (i.e. a negative value in light blue). For the CO2 cases Biomethane and Direct Air Capture (i.e. atmospheric CO2 sources), the final exhaust pipe CO2 emissions are considered without GWP (compare with the section CO2 sourcing). By contrast, the fossil CO2 case Ammonia and the reference diesel process show GWP during the utilisation phases (grey bar). In the following all three CO2 sources based on the 2018 grid and RE mix [OME2018 GR + RE] will be discussed. Subsequently the results for the additional two electricity cases are analysed.
 Fig. 3  Product specific well-to-wheel life cycle impact assessment results (GWP100a [g CO2eq km−1]) for the assessed product systems. In the case of subtraction of an avoided burden the respective negative value is indicated in light blue. The resulting total impact is plotted as a green bar. The difference compared to the conventional diesel is specified with black arrows. For the CO2 case Direct-Air-Capture, the thermal demand of the DAC plant is met either by exhaust heat (EH, burden-free) or natural gas (NG). 

Case [OME2018 GR + RE]. 
The electricity mix consisting of 60% grid 2018 + 40% RE carries a GWP burden of 350 g(CO2eq) kWhel−1, with the highest contribution from lignite and hard coal based electricity production. The 40% share of local wind and PV production accounts for only 6% of the electricity's GWP. Regarding the WtW driving emissions, results clearly show that for all three CO2 sources the assessed OME3–5 production pathway is not favourable in comparison to driving with conventional diesel fuel. The corresponding GHG emissions per km of driving distance with OME3–5 exceed those of driving with conventional diesel fuel by up to 263% for the worst case [OME2018 GR + RE DAC, natural gas as heat supply]. The calculated WtW emissions of 209 g(CO2eq) km−1 for the diesel reference align with the values published by Mahbub et al. of 199 g(CO2eq) km−1.28 The diesel exhaust pipe emissions (Tank-to-Wheel) for the present LCA account for 177 g(CO2eq) km−1. The 2020 European fleet target value aims at 95 g(CO2eq) km−1 and takes manufacturer specifications as a calculation basis. For the present study the specific energy demand of the passenger car orientates on a current mid-class vehicle under real driving conditions (2.37 MJ km−1; 6.6 L of diesel fuel).
With regard to H2 production it should be recalled that in the case of PtX all of the final fuel energy content is provided by H2 or rather the upstream electricity. Due to a chain of involved conversion efficiencies even minor shares of a carbon intensive electricity supplier (coal-fired or natural gas power plants) are mirrored in the PtX products’ GWP footprint. The same accounts for the thermal heat supply for synthesis and distillation steps. The WtW results for the Direct-Air-Capture cases increase by 114 g(CO2eq) km−1 in the case of a natural gas based provision of necessary low-temperature heat for CO2 desorption.
The steps of methanol- and OME-synthesis account for 31–42% of the total OME3–5 life-cycle GHG emissions. Here the synthesis steps in the case of ammonia result in a slightly higher GHG emission since CO2 containing purge streams are of fossil origin.


Case [OME2050 GR + RE]. 
The GHG footprint of the REMod based 2050 electricity grid mix results in 100 g(CO2eq) kWhel−1. Accompanied by a 40% share of local wind and PV electricity the applied electricity's total footprint results in 81 g(CO2eq) kWhel−1. With a less carbon-intensive electricity provision the GHG emissions per km of driving distance can be lowered significantly by up to −40% and fall below the ones of the diesel reference system. The scenarios’ total specific GHG emissions of the OME3–5 product system result in 124–151 g(CO2eq) km−1.


Case [OME2018 HY + RE]. 
The [OME2018 HY + RE] scenarios profit from a very low GWP for an electricity of 20 g(CO2eq) kWhel−1 (i.e. hydropower). However, when assessing life cycle impacts of hydropower it is important to consider that further environmental impact categories are heavily dependent on the type, capacity and location of the facility.73,74 For this low-carbon electricity provision the GHG emissions for OME3–5 fuel clearly fall below the emissions of driving with conventional diesel fuel by −59% to −86%. The DAC supplied with thermal energy from natural gas is in the range of fossil diesel fuel.


GWP of the electrolytic H2 production. 
When based on the 2018 grid + RE electricity mix the life cycle phase of H2 production accounts for 53–68% of the PtL systems' total overall GWP. GHG emissions arising from PEM electrolysers sum up to 18.3 kg(CO2eq) per kg(H2), which is significantly higher than that of conventional H2 production such as steam-reforming of natural gas (9.0–13.0 kg(CO2eq) per kg(H2))75–77 or coal gasification (11.0–12.5 kg(CO2eq) per kg(H2)).77 In the case of [OME2050 GR + RE] the life cycle phase of H2 production results in a reduced GWP impact of 3.5 kg(CO2eq) per kg(H2). Other published GWP footprints for low-carbon H2 production also clearly depend on the electricity source and vary between 0.6 kg(CO2eq) per kg(H2),75,78 1.9 kg(CO2eq) per kg(H2)78 and 3.0 kg(CO2eq) per kg(H2).79 Electrolysis hardware is, if part of the respective LCA, identified to have a minor impact. In the present assessment the share of GWP impact resulting from the PEM hardware varies between 0.6% (2018: 40 MWel PEM, lifetime 50k h) and 1.8% (2018: 35 MWel PEM, lifetime 125k h) of the H2 production phase.


Thermal demand of synthesis and distillation. 
The synthesis and distillation steps are characterised by a high thermal energy demand (4.84 MWhth per t(OME3–5) produced). In case low-carbon-electricity is available these steps can benefit from thermal energy provided via electric energy. If natural gas is used for steam and heat production its proportional GWP sums up to 144 g(CO2eq) km−1. A switch to an electricity based thermal supply in the 2050 grid mix decreases the total GWP of the two synthesis steps by 72%. At the same time the electricity demand of the PtL foreground system (PEM electrolyser + synthesis and distillation) is increased from 1.27 kWhel km−1 to 1.79 kWhel km−1. The temperature level of the necessary heat supply for methanol dehydrogenation to formaldehyde is at ca. 700 °C, equal to a thermal demand of 6.93 MWth. Thus a thermal supply via excess heat at such high temperatures seems highly case-dependent. However, industrial processes requiring high temperature process heat (>500 °C) such as pig iron and steel mills, stone and brick production or the glass and ceramics industry are available and at the same time due to high direct CO2 emissions, a potential CCU case.80 If not utilised otherwise the available high temperature excess heat can thus be available as a “burden free” heat source to meet the thermal demand of the PtL process. For a hypothetical scenario in 2050 where the assessed OME3–5 production is supplied with high temperature excess heat the overall GWP can be lowered to 94 g(CO2eq) km−1, −55% in comparison to the reference diesel process' GWP. The impact related to the provision of PtL plant hardware and infrastructure lies between 0.8% [OME2018 GR + RE] and 17% [OME2018 HY + RE] of the overall WtW GHG emissions.

Further environmental impacts

Fig. 4 shows the further assessed environmental impact categories for the CO2 case Biomethane. The results are normalised to the diesel reference. All results are again based on the avoided burden methodology.
 Fig. 4  Further evaluated impact categories by means of the CO2 case [BM]. Relative shares relate to the diesel reference (100%). The flows presented exemplify the cause of specific impact categories. The percentage value for the specific initial causer relates to the absolute value of the impact category (e.g. spoil from lignite mining causes 74% of the overall freshwater eutrophication in the scenario [OME2018 GR + RE BM]). 
For the [OME2018 GR + RE] scenarios synthetic fuel production and utilisation performs worse than the diesel reference for all impact categories. The largest contributor for most categories is the fossil share of the electricity used. With a reduction of fossil energy shares for the [OME2050 GR + RE] and the [OME2018 HY + RE] scenarios the impacts can be reduced significantly for most cases. However, the categories addressing impacts on ecosystems remain high even with a low carbon electricity provision. The following subsections focus on the worse performing categories and analyze the respective cause in this context.

Freshwater eutrophication. 
The impact category freshwater eutrophication (kg Peq) is outstanding by exceeding the diesel reference by 15100% for the [OME2018 + RE] scenario. Here the largest share (74%) can be attributed to lignite based electricity provision, more precisely to the spoil and tailing wastes resulting from opencast mining.81 However, even without any direct fossil-based electricity in the [OME2018 HY + RE] scenario, the contribution to freshwater eutrophication remains high (+645%). One main reason for eutrophication even for RE-based electricity is the provision of minerals and metals for the manufacturing of RE plants. Additionally the electricity for the upstream manufacturing processes of wind energy generators and solar modules is supplied by the manufacturing country's electricity mix and hence include fossil energies. Forthcoming LCA studies for future scenarios should therefore account for changes in the electricity supply of RE manufacturing processes. The assessed environmental footprints of RE technologies will otherwise appear high and not reflect any progress in future defossilisation.


Respiratory effects, inorganics. 
The category respiratory effects is represented by particulate matter (PM) formation (kg PM2.5eq). In the case of the [OME2018 GR + RE] scenario PM formation is dominated by the combustion of fossil resources for the supply of electricity (49%) and syntheses' thermal energy (46%). For the low carbon scenario [OME2018 HY + RE] 82% of PM-formation can be attributed to the electricity supply. Up to 11% of the respiratory effects can be accounted to the OME utilisation phase although direct PM formation has been considered as non-existent in the case of 100% OME3–5 fuel. This is due to the formation of secondary PM equivalents such as NOx which are part of this impact category.


Resource depletion. 
The depletion of resources (minerals, fossils, renewables, kg Sbeq) clearly exceeds the fossil reference for all PtL scenarios. The major share is attributed to the demand for minerals and metals during the manufacturing of RE plants, more precisely to the need for molybdenum (alloy), zinc (galvanizing), copper (generators and cables), cobalt (magnets), and iron (steel constructions). These minerals and metals represent an integral part of RE technologies and thus increase even more for the RE dominated scenario [OME2050 GR + RE]. However, future RE plants will feature increased efficiencies and installed capacities. This in turn will lead to specifically lower amounts of incorporated minerals and metals per energy harvested.82 Nonetheless, the very high increase up to 11200% resource depletion represents a rising future environmental issue which has to be addressed by material efficiency including improved recycling ratios and as well less extensive mining processes.


Cumulative energy demand. 
The total cumulative energy demand (CED total; MJeq) for the production of OME3–5 is increased when compared to fossil-based production. This relates to the concept of the “free-lunch” for fossil-based energy carrier production. Fossil fuels and energy carriers source their energy content from high-carbon containing fossil resources. The amount of primary energy to be considered is the amount of heating value extracted from these fossil resources. For PtL products all of the final energy content is to be provided electrically and hence linked to multiple conversion steps and efficiencies. Hence, on the one hand, it is essential to decrease the total energy demand by further technology development/efficiency improvements whilst fulfilling the energy demand using a very high share of RE. This allows for a low share of fossil-based energy content, mirrored in the CED non-renewable. Here the [OME2050 GR + RE BM] and the [OME2018 HY + RE BM] scenarios are clearly less fossil-intensive than the fossil diesel reference. All statements made in terms of the qualitative results are transferable to the other two evaluated CO2 sources.

Sensitivity of life cycle impact assessment results

Variations in supplied electricity and water electrolysis efficiency. 
The life cycle impact assessment results demonstrated that the process energies both electric as well as thermal energies significantly influence the overall GHG emission intensity. Similar to the case of previous power-to-hydrogen and -methanol studies our results show that the energy intensity of the electrolytic H2 supply proves to be a main driver of the overall GHG intensity.79,83–85 The specific energy demand for H2 generation strongly impacts on the PtL plants' total energy demand, whilst GHG emission intensity of the electricity supply also heavily impacts on the synfuels' GHG emissions.
Therefore it is clear that high efficiency water splitting processes are even more necessary in the cases of a carbon-intensive electricity supply. Fig. 5 shows the dependency of the WtW GHG emissions [g(CO2eq) km−1] on the water electrolysis system efficiency and the GWP intensity of the input electricity [g(CO2eq) kWhel−1]. The CO2 case Biomethane serves as a basis for this sensitivity evaluation. Thermal energy is assumed to be supplied electrically. The sensitivity results reveal that, depending on the water electrolysis system efficiency, an electricity supply with a GWP > 95–115 g(CO2eq) kWhel−1 will result in emissions exceeding the WtW emissions of driving with conventional diesel fuel. Input electricity with a GWP < 50 g(CO2eq) kWhel−1 such as hydro, wind and solar offers WtW GHG emissions considerably below 100 g(CO2eq) km−1. In the case of a supply from national electricity grids only a few European countries (i.e. Sweden, Norway or Iceland) currently offer low GHG intensive grid electricity. Furthermore, the sensitivity analysis shows that for low GHG intensive electricity, water electrolysis efficiency plays a minor role in GWP impact reduction. From an economic perspective, a high water electrolysis efficiency remains, besides the utilisation rate, a key driver for low levelized cost of H2.55,86
 Fig. 5  Dependency of the PtL WtW GWP [g(CO2eq) km−1] on the GWP intensity of the input electricity [g(CO2eq) kWhel−1] and the electrolysis system efficiency. Exemplary GWP intensities of national grid electricity mixes are indicated with red markers (FR: France, GER: Germany, SE: Sweden, NO: Norway, and IS: Iceland). 
Further discussion regarding the dependency of the results based on an expanded system with or without crediting an avoided burden is provided in the ESI (S6).† It should be noted that the way of solving multifunctionality can influence life cycle impact results heavily as is the case for the present LCA: based on a preliminary study17 two common allocation procedures have been applied to the multifunctional system: economical and cut-off allocation (CO2 sourcing without impact). The effect can be high: economical and cut-off allocation show the potential to shift the above-mentioned results with a maximum increase of 300%.

Conclusions
The presented LCA of OME3–5 production based on a PtL approach and different scenarios (e.g. CO2 source and electricity source) was performed on WtW emission basis using an avoided burden approach. Both 2018 and 2050 scenarios have been included to allow for technology developments and an increasing share of RE in the future grid electricity mix for Germany (Fig. 1). The results are very sensitive to the allocation procedure used in the LCA. Solving multifunctionality by an economical or cut-off allocation approach shows high sensitivity and can even reverse the results.
The GWP results (Fig. 3), representing the WtW GHG emissions, show that for a high share of RE the OME3–5 fuel is advantageous compared to fossil diesel. For the best assessed cases the WtW GHG emissions can be reduced by 86% to 59%, equating to 29–86 g(CO2eq) km−1. However, this significant reduction can only be assured with a very high RE electricity contribution. This is due to the fact that all of the synfuels' energy content has to be provided by electricity, chemically stored in the form of H2. Hence, even low shares of fossil-based electricity, as will be the case for the current and near-future European grid mixes, will lead to a noticeable increase in related environmental impacts.
For conventional fossil fuels the bulk of WtW emissions (CO2, CO, NOx, PM, SO2, and HC) arise during the utilisation phase. This results in high local exhaust pipe emissions. For fossil fuels the production phase is of comparatively minor environmental significance – i.e. nature has already done the work. Conversely for synthetic fuels such as OME3–5, exhaust pipe emissions, in particular NOx, PM and SO2, can be reduced significantly due to their purity and combustion chemistry.29,66 Thus, the cause of WtW emissions is rather shifted to the life cycle phase of synfuel production, more precisely the phase of electricity production.
Varying of CO2 sources showed existing but small impacts on the total WtW GHG emissions depending on the required capturing effort. Hence, higher CO2 concentrations and less contained impurities are beneficial. As a consequence this emphasises the utilisation of concentrated industrial waste gases.87 However, to close the carbon cycle in the long-term the utilisation of atmospheric CO2 either based on biomass or DAC is inevitable. DAC demands further technology development in terms of thermal energy demand but benefits from an integration of low-temperature excess heat.
Through the discussed sensitivity analysis, it was demonstrated that future defossilisation of grid electricity will lead to a significant reduction in synfuel GWP. In order to enable significantly reduced WtW GHG emissions of <100 g(CO2eq) km−1 an electricity footprint of <50 g(CO2eq) kWhel−1 is identified for the assessed process configuration. Currently, only a few countries offer an electricity grid mix below this footprint. If powered by local RE it is important to emphasise that large-scale PtL plants of the future (i.e. going beyond pilot-phase) must be powered by dedicated installed RE capacities. A grid-connection should remain in any case enabling PtL plants to provide important energy balancing and limit expansion of the grid. The legal interpretation in Germany of electrolysis and PtL plants acting as “end consumers” is, in turn, inhibiting faster progress in this respect. However, in the case of a 100% supply from local RE the annual full load hours can be significantly reduced accompanied by a fluctuating H2 production. This in turn necessitates intermediate H2 storage for the decoupling of H2 production and steady-state synthesis. Techno-economic studies assessing such PtL scenarios exhibit increased depreciation and production cost.27,88 For these cases system optimization towards high full load hours, reasonable H2 storage demand and levelized cost of H2 are the main target. Such aspects are expected to be addressed by further, more expansive LCA studies. Future large-scale PtL plants (and PtX in general) are even more likely to be realised in countries with higher solar irradiance and wind occurrence resulting in (besides potentially low GWP) optimised levelized cost of electricity and increased full load hours (e.g. Australia or Chile).
In addition it should be emphasised that an environmentally beneficial PtL production depends not only on GWP but also on a multitude of other impact categories. The further assessed impact categories show that even for an electricity supply completely based on the present RE technologies their upstream manufacturing processes can still cause significant increases in acidification, eutrophication, particulate matter, photochemical ozone creation and resource depletion (Fig. 5). This holistic consideration thus sheds light on the necessity of an ongoing radical, complete “system” defossilisation, material efficient manufacturing of RE plants, increased recycling ratios and improved mining processes. Only this holistic approach can enable a PtL and synfuel production which ensures, besides CO2 mitigation, environmental advances over the present fossil fuelled liquid energy carriers.
Finally, as addressed in the Introduction, our findings indicate that future private transport is more likely to be fuelled by batteries (short- to mid-range distances), fuel cells (mid- to long-range) or, as a near-term solution for bringing down local PM- and NOx-emissions, by blends of synthetic fuels such as OMEn. Synthetic fuels based on PtL processes will in turn be indispensable for use in heavy-duty applications, in the rail and maritime sector and in aviation.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Nomenclature

aYear
AELAlkaline water electrolysis
AMScenario with CO2 from ammonia plant
BMScenario with CO2 from biomethane upgrading plant
CEDCumulative energy demand
CH4Methane
CO2Carbon dioxide
CO2eqCarbon dioxide equivalents
DACDirect air capture of CO2/scenario with CO2 from DAC
FUFunctional unit
GHGGreenhouse gas
LCALife cycle assessment
LCILife cycle inventory
LCIALife cycle impact assessment
MEAMembrane electrode assembly
NH3Ammonia
NOxNitrogen oxides
OMEOxymethylene dimethyl ethers
PEMProton exchange membrane water electrolysis
PMParticulate matter
PtLPower-to-liquid
PtXPower-to-X
RERenewable energy
REModFh ISE renewable energy model
TtWTank-to-wheel
vol%Volume percent
wt%Weight percent
WtTWell-to-tank
WtWWell-to-wheel

Acknowledgements
Robin J. White acknowledges funding provided by the Fraunhofer Society and the Fraunhofer ISE via an “Attract Award”. The Fraunhofer ISE group of Dr Christoph Kost are acknowledged for their continuing engagement and optimisation of the “REMod” model (i.e. contributing to a cost and CO2 efficient future energy system). Johannes Full is acknowledged for assisting in simulation of the methanol plant, and Xiaojin Zhang from the Paul Scherrer Institute (Villigen, Switzerland) for provision of DAC life cycle inventory data. Christoph Hank acknowledges funding provided by “ENsource – Zentrum für angewandte Forschung Urbane Energiesysteme und Ressourceneffizienz”, and Franz Kaspar Mantei would like to acknowledge funding through the “Deutsche Bundesstiftung Umwelt”. Achim Schaadt is grateful for funding by the Fraunhofer project “Grüner Verbrennungsmotor”. Flaticon symbols were designed and provided by Vectors Market.89
References

          J. Rogelj, D. Shindell, K. Jiang, S. Fifita, P. Forster, V. Ginzburg, C. Handa, H. Kheshgi, S. Kobayashi, E. Kriegler and L. Mundaca, Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5 °C in the Context of Sustainable Development: Global Warming of 1.5 °C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty, Geneva,  2018 Search PubMed .

          M. Deutsch, M. Buck, P. Graichen and F. Vorholz, Die Kosten von unterlassenem Klimaschutz für den Bundeshaushalt: Die Klimaschutzverpflichtungen Deutschlands bei Verkehr, Gebäuden und Landwirtschaft nach der EU-Effort-Sharing-Entscheidung und der EUClimate-Action-Verordnung, Studie, Berlin,  2018 Search PubMed .

          Umweltbundesamt, Berichterstattung unter der Klimarahmenkonvention der Vereinten Nationen und dem Kyoto-Protokoll 2018: Nationaler Inventarbericht zum Deutschen Treibhausgasinventar 1990–2016, Umweltbundesamt – UNFCCC-Submission, Berlin,  2018 Search PubMed .

          C. Tyggestad, N. Scharma, O. Rolser and B. Smeets, Global Energy Perspective 2019: Reference Case: Energy Insights, Summary, New York, USA,  2019 Search PubMed .

          European Commission, Electrification of the Transport System: Studies and Reports, Brussels,  2017 Search PubMed .

          A. Sternberg, C. Hank and C. Hebling, Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Battery Electric and Fuel Cell Electric Vehicles with Ranges over 300 kilometers: Study Commissioned by H2 Mobility, Freiburg,  2019 Search PubMed .

          S. Siegemund, M. Trommler, O. Kolb and V. Zinnecker, The Potential of Electricity-Based Fuels for Low-Emission Transport in the EU: E-Fuels Study, An Expertise by LBST and Dena, Berlin,  2017 Search PubMed .

          Öko-Institut and Fraunhofer-Institut für System- und Innovationsforschung ISI, Klimaschutzszenario 2050: 2. Endbericht, Studie im Auftrag des Bundesministeriums für, Berlin, Karlsruhe,  2015 Search PubMed .

          https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Branchen-Unternehmen/Energie/Erzeugung/Tabellen/bruttostromerzeugung.html, last accessed September 2019.
M. Ouda, F. K. Mantei, M. Elmehlawy, R. J. White, H. Klein and S.-E. K. Fateen, React. Chem. Eng., 2018, 3(3), 277 RSC .
W. Ying, L. Genbao, Z. Wei and Z. Longbao, Fuel Process. Technol., 2008, 89(12), 1272 CrossRef .
B. Lumpp, D. Rothe, C. Pastoetter, R. Laemmermann and E. Jacob, Motortech. Z., 2011, 2011(72–3), 198 CrossRef .
M. Härtl, K. Gaukel, D. Pélerin and G. Wachtmeister, Motortech. Z., 2017, 78(02), 52 CrossRef .
M. Münz, A. Mokros, D. Töpfer and C. Beidl, Motortech. Z., 2018,(03), 16 CrossRef .

          E. Jacob and M. Härtl, Tagungsband des 37, Internationalen Wiener Motorenymposiums,  2016 Search PubMed .
M. Härtl, P. Seidenspinner, E. Jacob and G. Wachtmeister, Fuel, 2015, 153, 328 CrossRef .

          W. Maus and E. Jacob, Synthetic Fuels – OME1: A Potentially Sustainable Diesel Fuel,  2014 Search PubMed .

The Power to Liquid Concept: Hydrogenation of CO2 to Methanol and the Production of Oxymethylene Ethers, Catalysis – Novel Aspects in Petrochemistry and Refining, ed. M. Ouda, G. Yarce, K. Hesterwerth, M. Hadrich, R. J. White, A. Schaadt and H. Klein,  2016 Search PubMed .
L. Pellegrini, M. Marchionna, R. Patrini and S. Florio, SAE Int., 2013, 2013 Search PubMed .
G. Richter and H. Zellbeck, Motortech. Z., 2017, 78(12), 66 CrossRef .
S. Deutz, D. Bongartz, B. Heuser, A. Kätelhön, L. Schulze Langenhorst, A. Omari, M. Walters, J. Klankermayer, W. Leitner, A. Mitsos, S. Pischinger and A. Bardow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 55(Part B), 7296 Search PubMed .
L. Lautenschütz, D. Oestreich, P. Seidenspinner, U. Arnold, E. Dinjus and J. Sauer, Fuel, 2016, 173, 129 CrossRef .
E. Jacob and W. Maus, Motortech. Z., 2017, 78(3), 54 CrossRef .
M. Ouda, F. Mantei, K. Hesterwerth, E. Bargiacchi, H. Klein and R. J. White, React. Chem. Eng., 2018, 3(5), 676 RSC .

          L. Lazar, Environmental performance of liquid energy carriers and fuels based on renewable hydrogen and recycled carbon dioxide (Power-to-Liquid), Master thesis, Pforzheim University, Pforzheim,  2018 .

          N. Köppel, Life Cycle Assessment of Synthetic Fuel: Environmental Performance of Oxymethylene Ethers (OME) Based on Recycled Carbon Dioxide and Renewable Hydrogen, Master thesis, Technical University of Munich, München,  2019 .
C. Hank, S. Gelpke, A. Schnabl, R. J. White, J. Full, N. Wiebe, T. Smolinka, A. Schaadt, H.-M. Henning and C. Hebling, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2(6), 1244 RSC .
N. Mahbub, A. O. Oyedun, A. Kumar, D. Oestreich, U. Arnold and J. Sauer, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 165, 1249 CrossRef CAS .
G. Avolio, O. Kastner, G. Rösel and R. Brück, Motortech. Z., 2018, 79(07), 16 CrossRef .
G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, J. Org. Chem. USSR, 2009, 74(2), 487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Feiling, M. Münz and C. Beidl, Motortech. Z., 2016, 2016(02/2016), 16 Search PubMed .

          Umweltbundesamt, Postfossile Energieversor-gungsoptionen für einen treibhausgasneutralen Verkehr im Jahr 2050: Eine verkehrsträger-übergreifende Bewertung, Dessau-Roßlau,  2015 Search PubMed .

          Continental AG, Climate-Neutral Driving: Continental Successfully Tests the Synthetic Diesel Fuel OME, Regensburg,  2017 Search PubMed .

          DIN Deutsches Institut für Normung e.V., DIN EN ISO 14040, 2006th edn. 13.020.10,  2009.

          DIN Deutsches Institut für Normung e.V., DIN EN ISO 14044, 2006th edn. 13.020.10,  2006.

          European Commission Joint Research Centre, ILCD-Handbook – General Guide for Life Cycle Assessment: Detailed Guidance, Luxembourg,  2010 Search PubMed .

          European Commission Joint Research Centre, ILCD-Handbook – Recommendations for Life Cycle Impact Assessment in the European Context: Based on Existing Environmental Impact Assessment Models and Factors, Luxembourg,  2011 Search PubMed .

          European Commission Joint Research Centre, ILCD-Handbook – Characterisation Factors of the ILCD Recommended Life Cycle Impact Assessment Methods: Database and Supporting Information, Luxembourg,  2012 Search PubMed .

          European Commission Joint Research Centre, ILCD-Handbook – Framework and Rquirements for Life Cycle Impact Assessments Models and Indicators, Luxembourg,  2010 Search PubMed .

          A. Zimmerman, J. Wunderlich, G. Buchner, L. Müller, K. Armstrong, S. Michailos, A. Marxen, H. Naims, F. Mason, G. Stokes and E. Williams, Techno-Economic Assessment & Life-Cycle Assessment Guidelines for CO2 Utilization, Global CO2 Initiative, University of Michigan, Berlin,  2018 Search PubMed .

          https://pinch-analyse.ch/index.php/de/last accessed January 2019.

          https://www.energy-charts.de/index_de.htmlast accessed September 2018.

          A. Palzer, Sektorübergreifende Modellierung und Optimierung eines zukünftigen deutschen Energiesystems unter Berücksichtigung von Energieeffizienzmaßnahmen im Gebäudesektor, PhD Dissertation, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology KIT, Karlsruhe,  2016 .
A. Palzer and H.-M. Henning, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 30, 1019 CrossRef .
A. Palzer and H.-M. Henning, Energy Technol., 2014, 2(1), 13 CrossRef .

          Sunfire GmbH, First commercial Plant for the production of Blue Crude planned in Norway, Dresden,  2017 Search PubMed .

          A. Varone, Sustainable Fuels in the Nordic Countries, Potsdam,  2015 Search PubMed .

          J. Perner and D. Bothe, International Aspects of a Power-to-X Roadmap: A Report Prepared for the World Energy Council Germany,  2018 Search PubMed .

          P. Adler, E. Billig and A. Brosowski, Leitfaden Biogasaufbereitung und -einspeisung, Gülzow-Prüzen,  2014 Search PubMed .

          W. Urban, K. Girod and H. Lohmann, Technologien und Kosten der Biogasaufbereitung und Einspeisung in das Erdgasnetz: Ergebnisse der Markterhebung 2007–2008, Oberhausen,  2009 Search PubMed .

          https://v31.ecoquery.ecoinvent.org/Details/UPR/044d2021-1c7b-4975-b283-6744737d0f28/8b738ea0-f89e-4627-8679-433616064e82
        .

          H.-J. Althaus, R. Hischier, M. Osses, A. Primas, S. Hellweg, N. Jungbluth and C. Mike, Life Cycle Inventory of Chemicals: Data v2.0, ecoinvent report no. 8, Düsseldorf,  2007 Search PubMed .

          T. Nemecek and T. Kägi, Live Cycle Inventory of Agricultural Production Systems: Ecoinvent Report No. 15, Zürich, Switzerland, Dübendorf,  2007 Search PubMed .
A. Buttler and H. Spliethoff, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 2440 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Smolinka, N. Wiebe, S. Philip, A. Palzer, F. Lehner, M. Jansen, S. Kiemel, M. Robert, S. Wahren and F. Zimmermann, Studie IndWEDe: Industrialisierung der Wasserelektrolyse in Deutschland: Chancen und Herausforderungen für nachhaltigen Wasserstoff für Verkehr, Strom und Wärme, Berlin,  2018 Search PubMed .

          Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking – FCH JU, Study on Early Business Cases for H2 in Energy and More Broadly Power to H2 Applications: Final Report, Brüssel,  2017 Search PubMed .
O. Schmidt, A. Gambhir, I. Staffell, A. Hawkes, J. Nelson and S. Few, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42(52), 30470 CrossRef CAS .

Energiespeicher - Bedarf, Technologien, Integration, ed. M. Sterner and I. Stadler, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2014 Search PubMed .

          T. Smolinka, T. Raksha, T. Pregger, A. Friedrich and G.-S. Schneider, Studie über die Planung einer Demonstrationsanlage zur Wasserstoff-Kraftstoffgewinnung durch Elektrolyse mit Zwischenspeicherung in Salzkavernen unter Druck: Plan Delykad, Plan Delykad, Stuttgart,  2014 Search PubMed .

          T. Smolinka, M. Günther and J. Garche, Stand und Entwicklungspotenzial der Wasserelektrolyse zur Herstellung von Wasserstoff aus regenerativen Energien: Kurzfassung des Abschlussberichts, NOW-Studie, Freiburg,  2011 Search PubMed .
A. Ursua, L. M. Gandia and P. Sanchis, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100(2), 410 CAS .

          S. Estelmann, Efficiency optimization and simulation of Power-to-Liquid-(PtL)-Process using the example of methanol synthesis in consideration of heat integration models, Master thesis, Technical University of Braunschweig, Braunschweig,  2016 .

          T. Smolinka, Material data for Proton Exchange Membrane stacks and related BoP-Hardware demand, EMail, personal conversation, Freiburg,  2018 Search PubMed.

          B. Pitschak, Power-to-X progress and developments at Hydrogenics, Düsseldorf,  2016 Search PubMed .

          H.-J. Fell, Hydrogen from large scale alkaline electrolysis for methanol production, Copenhagen,  2017 Search PubMed .
A. Omari, B. Heuser and S. Pischinger, Fuel, 2017, 209, 232 CrossRef CAS .

          U. Albrecht, S. Patrick, W. Weindorf, R. Wurster and W. Zittel, FVV,  2013, (1031/2013) Search PubMed .

          U. Albrecht, P. Schmidt, W. Weindorf, R. Wurster and W. Zittel, Eine Expertise für die Forschungsvereinigung Verbrennungskraftmaschinen e. V. Abschlussbericht,  2013, 30, Heft 1031-2013 Search PubMed .

          F. K. Mantei, Combined Theoretical and Experimental Approaches to Oxymethylene Ethers Synthesis, Master thesis, Technical University of Berlin, Berlin,  2017 .

          https://ec.europa.eu/environment/archives/air/models/tremove.htm
        .

          M. Wietschel, M. Kühnbach and R. David, Die aktuelle Treibhausgas- emissionsbilanz von Elektrofahrzeugen in Deutschland: Working Paper Sustainability and Innovation No. S 02/2019, Karlsruhe,  2019 Search PubMed .

          https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/daten/verkehr/kraftstoffe, last accessed September 2019.

          O. Edenhofer, R. P. Madruga and Y. Sokona, Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation: Special Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,  2012 Search PubMed .

          M. M. Hand, S. Baldwin, E. DeMeo, J. M. Reilly, T. Mai, D. Arent, G. Porro, M. Meshek and D. Sandor, Renewable Electricity Futures Study (Entire Report), Golden,  2012 Search PubMed .
G. Reiter and J. Lindorfer, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2015, 20(4), 477 CrossRef CAS .

          Shell Deutschlanbd Oil GmbH, Shell Hydrogen Study,  2017 Search PubMed .
R. Bhandari, C. A. Trudewind and P. Zapp, J. Cleaner Prod., 2014, 85, 151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burkhardt, A. Patyk, P. Tanguy and C. Retzke, Appl. Energy, 2016, 181, 54 CrossRef .
K. Bareiß, C. de La Rua, M. Möckl and T. Hamacher, Appl. Energy, 2019, 237, 862 CrossRef .

          Deutsche Energie-Agentur GmbH (dena), Process heat in industry and commerce: Technology solutions for waste heat utilisation and renewable provision, Hannover,  2016 Search PubMed .

          G. Doka, Life Cycle Inventory of the Disposal of Lignite Spoil, Coal Spoil and Coal Tailings, Zürich, Switzerland,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. Lieberei and S. H. Gheewala, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2017, 22(2), 185 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, C. Bauer, C. L. Mutel and K. Volkart, Appl. Energy, 2017, 190, 326 CrossRef CAS .
V. Uusitalo, S. Väisänen, E. Inkeri and R. Soukka, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 134, 125 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hoppe, N. Thonemann and S. Bringezu, J. Ind. Ecol., 2017, 7(3), 181 Search PubMed .

          T. Smolinka, N. Wiebe and M. Thomassen, Cost Break Down and Cost Reduction Strategies for PEM Water Electrolysis Systems: Session B05: H2 from Electrolysers: Concepts & Costs, Luzern, Schweiz,  2017 Search PubMed .
N. v. d. Assen, L. J. Müller, A. Steingrube, P. Voll and A. Bardow, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50(3), 1093 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Decker, F. Schorn, R. C. Samsun, R. Peters and D. Stolten, Appl. Energy, 2019, 250, 1099 CrossRef .

          https://dribbble.com/vectorsmarket, last accessed March 2019.

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00658c‡ Current address: The Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research (TNO), High Tech Campus 25, 5656AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A) Assessed PtL product system grouped into the relevant process steps. (B) The three technology scenarios varying in electricity supply, PEM efficiency, PEM stack lifetime and thermal energy supply. CO2 is supplied from three sources: biomethane, ammonia and direct air capture. The resulting designation of the scenarios is indicated in square brackets.	 

 	Fig. 2  A) The assessed product systems with a CO2-supply based on biomethane [BM] or ammonia [AM] are multifunctional since they are providing an additional function (biomethane or ammonia) besides the main function (1 km driving distance). The avoided burden methodology subtracts a respective amount of avoided conventional production from the expanded system. By this, the obtained product specific results (FU: impact per km) can be compared to the other CO2 cases and the reference diesel system. (B) In the case of a CO2-supply from a Direct-Air-Capture [DAC] plant the sole function of the product system is a driving distance of 1 km. (C) This as well applies to the monofunctional reference diesel system. (B and C) The hereby obtained product specific results (FU: impact per km) can be compared to both the CO2 case [DAC] and the reference diesel system.	 

Production capacity (t(H2) d−1)	18.7	18.7	18.7
Electricity demand system (kWhel/Nm3 (H2))	4.6	4.6	4.1
Efficiency system (%LHV, H2)	65	65	74
Efficiency rectifier (%)	98	98	98
Installed capacity (MWel)	40	40	35
Deionised water demand (t(H2ODI) per t(H2))	8.92	8.92	8.92
Cooling water demand (t(H2Ocooling) per t(H2))	1.62	1.62	1.62
Oxygen output, vented (t(O2) per t(H2))	7.90	7.90	7.90
Lifetime PEM stacks (1000 hours)	50	50	125

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Product specific well-to-wheel life cycle impact assessment results (GWP100a [g CO2eq km−1]) for the assessed product systems. In the case of subtraction of an avoided burden the respective negative value is indicated in light blue. The resulting total impact is plotted as a green bar. The difference compared to the conventional diesel is specified with black arrows. For the CO2 case Direct-Air-Capture, the thermal demand of the DAC plant is met either by exhaust heat (EH, burden-free) or natural gas (NG).	 

 	Fig. 4  Further evaluated impact categories by means of the CO2 case [BM]. Relative shares relate to the diesel reference (100%). The flows presented exemplify the cause of specific impact categories. The percentage value for the specific initial causer relates to the absolute value of the impact category (e.g. spoil from lignite mining causes 74% of the overall freshwater eutrophication in the scenario [OME2018 GR + RE BM]).	 

 	Fig. 5  Dependency of the PtL WtW GWP [g(CO2eq) km−1] on the GWP intensity of the input electricity [g(CO2eq) kWhel−1] and the electrolysis system efficiency. Exemplary GWP intensities of national grid electricity mixes are indicated with red markers (FR: France, GER: Germany, SE: Sweden, NO: Norway, and IS: Iceland).	 
a	Year
AEL	Alkaline water electrolysis
AM	Scenario with CO2 from ammonia plant
BM	Scenario with CO2 from biomethane upgrading plant
CED	Cumulative energy demand
CH4	Methane
CO2	Carbon dioxide
CO2eq	Carbon dioxide equivalents
DAC	Direct air capture of CO2/scenario with CO2 from DAC
FU	Functional unit
GHG	Greenhouse gas
LCA	Life cycle assessment
LCI	Life cycle inventory
LCIA	Life cycle impact assessment
MEA	Membrane electrode assembly
NH3	Ammonia
NOx	Nitrogen oxides
OME	Oxymethylene dimethyl ethers
PEM	Proton exchange membrane water electrolysis
PM	Particulate matter
PtL	Power-to-liquid
PtX	Power-to-X
RE	Renewable energy
REMod	Fh ISE renewable energy model
TtW	Tank-to-wheel
vol%	Volume percent
wt%	Weight percent
WtT	Well-to-tank
WtW	Well-to-wheel
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00658c
‡ Current address: The Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research (TNO), High Tech Campus 25, 5656AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
