Wetting behaviors and applications of metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA08325H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA08325H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22437-22464Wetting behaviors and applications of metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene

        
          
            Afzal 
            Khan
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Rezwan 
            Habib
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rishi Ranjan 
            Kumar
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Sk Masiul 
            Islam
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            V. 
            Arivazhagan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad 
            Salman
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Deren 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Xuegong 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou-310027, P. R. China. E-mail: yuxuegong@zju.edu.cn; afzalkhan@zju.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-0571-87952322;   Tel: +86-0571-87953003
bState Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials, College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, P. R. China
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan
dOpto-Electronics and MOEMS Group, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute, Pilani, Rajasthan 333031, India
eAcademy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-CEERI Campus, Pilani 333031, India
fMOE Key Laboratory of Macromolecular Synthesis and Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Adsorption and Separation Materials & Technologies of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University, 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou 310027, P. R. China
Received 
      27th August 2018
    , Accepted 25th October 2018First published on 25th October 2018AbstractMetal-catalyzed chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth of graphene is one of the most important techniques to produce high quality and large area graphene films. Apart from the outstanding electronic and optoelectronic properties of the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene, its wetting behavior also possesses great potential that can be exploited for various applications such as water harvesting, micro–nano fluidics, triboelectricity generation, electrowetting, oil–water separation, biomimetics, etc. In this review article, we discuss the most recent advancements in the wetting behavior based applications of the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene. The focus is mainly on the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene as it offers better control over the growth of graphene films as compared to other techniques. Moreover, only those wetting behavior based applications are discussed where liquid droplet motion and actuation, and its stable hydrophobic/superhydrophobic state on graphene's surface are exploited. The article starts with a brief introduction of graphene, its metal-catalyzed CVD growth, and surface energy. Thereafter, it is mainly divided into two sections, viz., (1) important concepts and results related to liquid wetting behavior on the surface of metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene and (2) liquid droplet wetting behavior based applications such as omniphobic/hydrophobic/superhydrophobic 3D graphene foam based filters for oil–water–gas separation, biomimetic surfaces for anti-corrosion and droplet transfer applications, water harvesting and defogging, triboelectric nanogenerators, electrowetting-based liquid lenses, and electro-active flow control devices. Finally, conclusions and outlook of this emerging research field are presented. This article aims to provide up-to-date information about the rapidly emerging research area of wetting behavior based applications of metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene.Afzal KhanAfzal Khan received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science from the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India, in 2016. Since April 2017, he has been working as a postdoctoral fellow at the State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials and School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. His current areas of research are catalyst free direct CVD growth of graphene on technologically important dielectric and semiconducting substrates, graphene/Si based photodetectors and wetting behavior of CVD grown graphene.Mohammad Rezwan HabibMohammad Rezwan Habib is currently pursuing Ph.D at the State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials and College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. He received his Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) degree in Physics from the University of Calcutta in 2012 and his Master of Science (M.Sc.) degree in Physics from the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee (IITR) (India) in 2014. His research interests focus on growth and application of 2D materials such as graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), etc.Deren YangDeren Yang, a Cheung Kong Professor, is the director of the State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials and the director of the Institute for Semiconductor Materials at Zhejiang University, China. He received his Ph. D. degree in 1991 from the State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials at Zhejiang University and then worked there. In the 1990s, he worked in Japan, Germany and Sweden for several years as a visiting researcher. He is engaged in the research of silicon materials used for microelectronic devices, solar cells and nano-devices.Xuegong YuXuegong Yu received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Zhejiang University, China, in 2004. After being a research associate in North Carolina State University, Raleigh, USA, and a postdoctorate in Brandenburg Technology University, Cottbus, Germany, he joined the State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials and School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China, in 2016 as a professor. His current research interests include low cost, high efficiency silicon solar cells and related materials.
1. Introduction
The discovery of graphene led to remarkable progress in the field of two-dimensional (2D) materials and its wide variety of applications in the era of nanotechnology. Graphene is a thin mono-atomic sheet of sp2-bonded carbon atoms arranged into a 2D honeycomb lattice.1–3 It is a basic building material of all graphitic forms such as zero-dimensional (0D) fullerenes, one-dimensional (1D) carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and three-dimensional (3D) graphite, as shown in Fig. 1a.1 Graphene is also known as a single layer of graphite and its electronic structure rapidly evolves with the number of layers and reaches the 3D limit of graphite at 10 layers.1–3 The aggregates consisting of 2, 3 to <10, and between 2 to about 10 well-defined, countable, stacked graphene layers of extended lateral dimension are called bi-layer graphene (BLG), few-layer graphene (FLG), and multi-layer graphene (MLG), respectively.1–3 Graphene is well known for its application in new electronic devices owing to its unique structure and extraordinary properties such as high charge-carrier mobility.1,4 To date, various techniques have been adopted to produce graphene such as mechanical exfoliation, chemical exfoliation, chemical synthesis, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), etc.1,3–12 However, for the large-scale production of high quality graphene, the metal-catalyzed thermal CVD method is superior amongst them.10 The CVD technique has been used to produce not only a bulk amount of polycrystalline graphene films on transition metals,9–11 but also single crystalline graphene films.7–9 Generally, Cu and Ni are used to catalyze graphene growth in a CVD system, but Cu is considered as the ideal candidate for producing high quality single layer graphene (SLG) on its surface, which is attributed to its low carbon solubility as compared to Ni.13,14 Besides Cu and Ni, other transition metals such as Mo, Pt, Co, Au, Rh, Pd, Ti, W, and Ta15–25 have also been used for the CVD growth of graphene. Moreover, a variety of metal alloys such as Cu–Zn, Ni–Ti, Cu–Ni, Pt–Rh, Co–Cu, Ni–Mo, Cu–In,26–32etc., have also been used to achieve graphene growth via CVD. It was observed that the properties of the as-grown graphene films such as purity, quality and the number of layers were dependent on the catalyst used. Growing metal-catalyzed graphene via CVD is a promising approach and facilitates several unique advantages including controllability, scalability and feasibility for fundamental research and practical applications.33,34 However, difficulties still exist in achieving the growth of graphene on industrial scale. Apart from its excellent opto-electronic and thermal properties, the water–graphene interactions have also been studied both theoretically and experimentally.35–41 The water–graphene interaction is an important research area which needs to be explored further if graphene is to be used in conformal coatings.
 Fig. 1  Mother of all graphitic forms. Graphene is a 2D building material for carbon materials of all other dimensionalities. It can be wrapped up into 0D bucky balls, rolled into 1D nanotubes or stacked into 3D graphite. Reproduced with permission.1 Copyright 2007, Springer Nature. 
The interaction of a liquid with a solid surface is described by the contact angle (CA), θC. The ability of a liquid to wet the solid surface depends on the interfacial tensions between the solid–liquid–gas phases. The behavior of a liquid droplet on a chemically homogeneous, rigid and ideally flat solid surface, as shown in Fig. 2a and b, is defined by its intrinsic CA which is also a measure of the wettability of the solid surfaces. In the equilibrium state, the intrinsic or apparent CA of a liquid droplet can be expressed in terms of interfacial tensions given by Thomas Young in 180542 by balancing the interfacial forces at the three phase contact line: γSG = γSL + γLGcosθC(1)where θC is the intrinsic or apparent CA and γSG, γSL, γLG are the solid–gas, solid–liquid, and liquid–gas interfacial tensions. When γSG = γSL + γLG, complete wetting of the surface will be observed, whereas for γSG < γSL + γLG, a finite CA will be observed. So, on the basis of θC values, the surfaces are defined as hydrophilic (θC < 90°, γSG > γSL) and hydrophobic (θC > 90°, γSG < γSL) as shown in Fig. 2a and b, respectively. In reality, ideal surfaces as mentioned above do not exist and chemical heterogeneities and roughness are always present on the surface. For these kinds of real or rough and chemically heterogeneous surfaces, two models were proposed by Wenzel43 and Cassie–Baxter44 by modifying the original Young's equation as given in eqn (2) and (3), respectively: cosθw = rcosθC(2) cosθCB = φs(cosθC + 1) − 1(3)where, in eqn (2), θw is the apparent CA in the Wenzel state, θC is the Young's CA on the same but smooth surface, and r is the roughness factor, the ratio between the actual surface area and the apparent surface area of a rough surface. In eqn (3), θCB is the apparent CA in the Cassie–Baxter state, φs is the fraction of the solid substrate in contact with the liquid droplet. The Wenzel model suggests that the liquid droplet fills the gaps on the rough surface and is completely pinned (shown in Fig. 2c), whereas the Cassie–Baxter model suggests that on a rough and chemically heterogeneous surface, a liquid droplet partially sits on the top of solid asperities and the trapped air underneath as shown in Fig. 2d. The Cassie–Baxter model seems to be more appropriate to understand the wetting behavior of micro/nanostructured surfaces as such surfaces can trap large amounts of air and form continuous micro/nano air pockets. On such surfaces, the apparent CA exceeds 150° which is known as superhydrophobicity, as originally exhibited by lotus leaves. It is generally achieved by creating highly rough fractal surfaces and multiscale hierarchical micro/nano structures and further reducing the surface energy by chemical modifications.
 Fig. 2  (a) and (b) A liquid droplet on a chemically homogeneous, rigid and ideally flat solid hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces, respectively. (c) and (d) A liquid droplet in the Wenzel state and Cassie–Baxter state on a rough surface, respectively. 
Similarly, the water–graphene interactions could also be studied in terms of water CA (WCA) and surface energy.45–48 Wang et al. determined the surface energy of graphene sheets produced through chemical exfoliation of natural graphite flake and hydrazine conversion.45 At ambient conditions, the graphene sheet was hydrophobic in nature with a surface energy of 46.7 mJ m−2. Similarly, at ambient conditions, Shin et al. also observed that a single layer epitaxial graphene (EG) on SiC substrate was hydrophobic in nature with a WCA of ∼ 92.5° as shown in Fig. 3a.46 On the other hand, Kozbial et al. observed the hydrophilic behavior of a freshly prepared CVD grown SLG on a Cu substrate.47 However, as the ambient air exposure time increased, its WCA also increased (as shown in Fig. 3b), which was attributed to the adsorption of airborne hydrocarbons on the SLG surface. The initial high surface energy of the freshly prepared SLG continuously decreased as the adsorbed airborne hydrocarbons shielded the polar surface sites. In contrast, very high surface energies of γ = 115 ± 4 mJ m−2 and γ = 119 ± 3 mJ m−2 were found for Cu-catalyzed CVD grown SLG and FLG, respectively, when directly measured in dry nitrogen with the help of graphene–graphene pull-apart experiment where pristine graphene-coated surfaces with a smooth topography brought into contact, and the force required to separate them was measured (Fig. 3c and d).48 Hence, irrespective of the graphene film preparation method and due to the contamination of graphene surface by airborne hydrocarbons, the initial high surface energy of graphene would always decrease with ambient air exposure time, and consequently its WCA would increase.47,49,50
 Fig. 3  (a) Water droplet on single-layer epitaxial graphene on SiC. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) CA data on G/Cu for water. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) The crossed-cylinder, single contact geometry used for adhesion force measurements with the surface force balance. The surfaces are brought into adhesive contact and gradually pulled apart using a spring with a known spring constant kspring until they suddenly jump out of contact to a distance djump. The pull-off force is calculated as Fadh = kspringdjump. (d) Multilayer geometry consisting of a smooth sheet of SLG or FLG glued onto epoxy, supported by a gold-covered silica lens of curvature RL = 10 mm. Because of the thickness inhomogeneity in the epoxy layer, the actual surface curvature (RG) differs from RL. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Since pristine graphene is a gapless and semi-metallic material, its interaction with water is dominated by van der Waals interaction.51–53 Graphene remains non-invasive to the substrate/water interface and transparent to the substrate wetting behavior as van der Waals force controls the wetting on surfaces of metals such as Cu, Au, etc.52 This effect is known as the wetting transparency of graphene. However, when graphene sits on a substrate, the water contact angle (WCA) can be influenced by the number of graphene layers, graphene–substrate interaction, and the nature of the underlying substrate.51–53 Graphene is intrinsically hydrophilic with a WCA of ∼45°.54,55 Moreover, it is also hydrophilic in water as CAs of liquids having different polarities allow the transparency towards polar and dispersive interactions.56 On the other hand, the pristine SLG film behaves as a flexible impermeable membrane to water, standard gases, and other liquids.57–60 But the unavoidable defects present in the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene, such as nanometer-sized holes and cracks primarily concentrated on graphene wrinkles, cause water permeability.58–60 Furthermore, creating randomly etched nanoscale apertures and pores in the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene could help in the permeation of water molecules and could be used for water desalination and purification applications.58,59 However, this is difficult to achieve because the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene exhibits hydrophobic behavior at ambient conditions as the hydro-carbonaceous adsorbates of ambient origin impart hydrophobicity to it by creating local hydrophobic spots sufficient to mask its intrinsic hydrophilicity.47,49,50,61 Therefore, it is more convenient to exploit the hydrophobic or superhydrophobic behavior of the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene for practical applications. As the underlying substrate can play a major role in the wettability of graphene, graphene-based surface-coatings can be employed for micro/nano fluidics, water transport, water harvesting, triboelectricity generation, and electrowetting applications where liquid/droplet motion or actuation is required on its surface.62–67 Similarly, wetting behavior of the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene coupled with its excellent thermal and opto-electronic properties has been exploited for fabricating defoggers and liquid lenses, where it is used as a transparent conducting electrode.68,69 Moreover, it has also been exploited for applications such as fabrication of 3D graphene foam based filters for oil–water separation and biomimetics.70,71
Here, in this review article, we discuss the most recent advancements in the wetting behaviors and applications of the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene. This research area is still developing and less explored so far. Graphene research area is very broad and a number of good reviews are already available on the water–graphene interactions and applications.39–41,72–78 However, these review articles are mainly focused on theoretical and experimental results related to wettability and fabrication of hydrophobic/superhydrophobic surfaces based on graphene and graphene/carbon-related materials such as graphene oxide (GO), reduced graphene oxide (rGO), CNTs, carbon nanofibers (CNFs), etc., prepared by different methods.39–41,72–78 Moreover, some of them are also focused on the applications of graphene and graphene/carbon-related materials but mainly on water desalination, water purification, and oil/water separation applications.72–78 On the other hand, our focus is mainly on the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene as it offers better control over the growth of graphene films as compared to other techniques. Moreover, only those wetting behavior based applications are discussed where liquid droplet motion and actuation, and its stable hydrophobic/superhydrophobic state on graphene's surface are exploited. The article starts with a brief introduction of graphene, its metal-catalyzed CVD growth, and significant discussions about the surface energy of different graphene films and their interactions with water. Thereafter, it is mainly divided into two sections, viz., (1) important concepts and results related to liquid wetting behavior on the surface of metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene and (2) liquid droplet wetting behavior based applications such as omniphobic/hydrophobic/superhydrophobic 3D graphene foams for oil–water–gas separation, biomimetic surfaces for anti-corrosion and droplet transfer, water harvesting and defogging, triboelectric nanogenerators, electrowetting based liquid lenses, and electro-active flow control devices. Finally, conclusions and outlook of this emerging research field are presented.
2. Wetting behavior of metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene
Rafiee et al. in 2012 studied the wetting behavior of transferred graphene on different substrates such as Cu, Au, Si, and glass.52 It was observed that the intrinsic wetting behavior of surfaces did not vary significantly by using graphene coatings because surface–water interactions were dominated by van der Waals forces. Moreover, SLG was observed to be wetting transparent on Cu, Au and Si. SLG films were synthesized via CVD on Cu foils using hexane as the carbon precursor, and then transferred onto Si and Au substrates, respectively, followed by static WCA measurements. Fig. 4a shows the WCA on Si and on an ∼300 nm thick Au film on Si, and found to be ∼32.6° and ∼77.4°, respectively, for uncoated SLG. However, SLG coating resulted in only ∼1–2% increase in the WCAs. Fig. 4b shows the wetting experiment results on Cu substrates with a varying number of SLG layers. WCA increased by ∼0.7% and found to be 86.2° for SLG with the WCA of baseline Cu being ∼85.9°. WCA increased to ∼86.6° for 2–3-layer graphene, and beyond four graphene layers, the WCA increased sharply to ∼88.3°. Finally, after six graphene layers the WCA saturated at ∼90.6° (bulk graphite value). These results confirmed the wetting transparency of the underlying substrate for SLG coatings. The wetting transparency of graphene on Cu was explained in terms of how the graphene layer affected the adsorption energy of water on the Cu substrate. A water molecule adsorbed on the Cu substrate interacted with neighboring Cu atoms within the interaction range. When a SLG was inserted between the Cu substrate and water molecule, only the uppermost layer of Cu was replaced by carbon while essentially keeping the neighboring Cu atoms the same (Fig. 4c). With a varying number of graphene layers, the adsorption energy for Cu substrates only differed by ∼0.4% with or without the SLG coating (Fig. 4d). As the number of graphene layers increased, the adsorption energy decreased monotonically and saturated at approximately four layers.
 Fig. 4  (a) WCA measurements for Si and Au substrates with and without a SLG coating. The intermediate graphene layer has no significant impact on the baseline wettability of the underlying substrate. (b) WCA measurements on Cu substrates with different numbers of graphene layers. There is a <0.7% change in the CA of the Cu substrate in the presence of SLG. Beyond 4 graphene layers, there is a sharp decrease in the wettability, with the WCA finally saturating at the bulk graphite value for more than 6 graphene layers. (c) From bottom to top, illustration of the interaction range of water molecules on Cu substrates without graphene and covered with 1, 3 and 6-layered graphene, respectively. (d) Predicted adsorption energy of water on Cu substrates with different numbers of graphene layers. SLG deposition yields a minimal change in the adsorption energy. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2012, Springer Nature. 
The hypothesis of wetting transparency of graphene breaks down at extreme cases of underlying substrate wettabilities as proposed by Shih et al. (in 2012) while explaining the complexities associated with the wettability of graphene.53 It was predicted and experimentally demonstrated further that the metal-catalyzed CVD grown SLG film was only partially transparent to wetting, and the highest attainable WCA on a SLG-coated surface was 96°. The deviation of WCA on SLG coated substrates as compared to that of bare substrates was observed to be more significant on superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic substrates, and the wetting transparency could be decreased for MLG by further screening the effect of the underlying substrate. In this way, the wetting transparency of graphene could break down significantly on superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic substrates. Furthermore, Raj et al. in 2013 studied the effect of the underlying substrate and the number of graphene layers on wettability by performing dynamic CA measurements unlike in previous cases.51 It was observed that the unavoidable defects present in CVD grown transferred graphene affected the receding CA on different substrates, which resulted in a significant CA hysteresis (16–37°). However, the advancing CA remained unaffected irrespective of the number of graphene layers. CVD grown SLG films on Cu foils were transferred onto glass and ∼300 nm thick thermally grown oxides on Si to obtain mono-, bi-, and tri-layered graphene sheets.
Raman spectra confirmed that as the number of graphene layers increased, the ratio of I2D/Ig increased (Fig. 5a). During the liquid addition phase, the CA measured on MLG on a thermally grown SiO2 surface was found to be 93 ± 2° (Fig. 5b). Due to evaporation, the CA decreased once the liquid addition was stopped (t = 26 s), whereas between t = 26 and 78 s, the contact line remained pinned by the negligible decrease in the droplet base radius. The receding CA on the MLG surface was found to be 60 ± 3° after t > 78 s, indicating a significant CA hysteresis (Δθ > 30°). Similarly, for the bare SiO2 substrate, the advancing and the receding CAs were observed to be 41 ± 1° and 10 ± 2°, respectively, as shown in Fig. 5c. For all nine graphene samples (mono-, bi-, and tri-layered graphene on Cu, silica, and glass), three bare substrates and highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), the dynamic CA measurements are summarized in Fig. 5d–f. As shown in Fig. 5d, the advancing CAs reached the value on the bulk HOPG with the addition of just one layer of graphene on Cu, silica and glass substrates in spite of significant differences between the wettability of these bare substrates (θA,Cu = 0° and θA,SiO2/glass = 41°). The number of layers of graphene sheets and the underlying substrate strongly affected the receding CA as observed from Fig. 5e. It was higher for graphene on the Cu substrate and consistently increased with the number of graphene layers on glass and SiO2 substrates. Hence, it was observed that the wettability of 3D bulk graphite was matched by that of Cu, glass and silica substrates coated with graphene, while only static WCA measurements for studying wetting behavior on these kinds of surfaces are not sufficient.
 Fig. 5  (a) Room temperature Raman spectra of HOPG and monolayer, bilayer, and trilayer graphene films on SiO2 substrate. The evolution of CA, water droplet base radius, and height on (b) a monolayer graphene coating on a thermally grown SiO2 surface and (c) a bare SiO2 surface. The inset in (b) shows the side-view image of the droplet with a 93° CA and a volume of ∼34 nL at 14 s. The dotted red line in the inset of (b) defines the graphene surface to avoid confusion with the reflection. Experimental results of (d) advancing CA, (e) receding CA, and (f) CA hysteresis for bare substrates and mono-, bi-, and tri-layered graphene on them. The corresponding values for HOPG are represented by black straight lines without symbols. The experimental uncertainty in the advancing and receding CAs are ±2° and ±3°, respectively. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
In 2016, Hong et al. proposed and demonstrated further that chemical doping (such as fluorination) could also tune the wetting behavior of graphene by shifting its Fermi level.79 A DC voltage bias was used to establish this as electrical voltage doping is more controlled and similar to chemical doping. SLG films were grown on Cu foils via CVD, and transferred onto SiO2/Si substrates. All the SLG/SiO2/Si samples were annealed in a 10% H2/Ar atmosphere at 500 °C for 1 h to eliminate polymeric residue and thereafter stored at ambient conditions for 1 week to saturate the SLG surfaces with carbon species. A Cu wire was connected on the SLG surface using silver paste to form the top electrode, and the Si substrate acted as the bottom electrode. At 0 V, the static WCA on the SLG surface was found to be 88° which confirmed the saturation of SLG surface with adsorbed hydrocarbons (Fig. 6). The Fermi level moved upward with respect to the Dirac point at −100 V, which was equivalent to n-doping of SLG. This led to a decrease in the WCA which was found to be 78° (Fig. 6). Similarly, at +100 V, the Fermi level moved downward with respect to the Dirac point, which was similar to p-doping of SLG, and the WCA was found to decrease further to 60° (Fig. 6). The WCA values remained constant when the applied negative and positive bias voltages were off. It was inferred that the intrinsic hydrophilicity of SLG is actually related to its Fermi level state and should not be attributed to charge trapping at the interface between the adsorbed hydrocarbons on SLG and water.
 Fig. 6  Wettability of graphene transferred onto a SiO2/Si substrate with bias. At neutral state, the static WCA was close to 88°. In the presence of both negative and positive biases, the WCA decreased. After turning off the bias, the WCA remained the same for both cases. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, Ashraf et al. demonstrated that substrate doping-induced charge carrier density modulation could lead to the tunable wetting behavior of graphene.80 The WCA could vary up to 13° when the work function (WF) was modulated by 300 meV. Graphene on Cu foil was synthesized via CVD using methane (CH4) and then transferred onto a polyelectrolyte-coated SiO2/Si surface by the modified graphene transfer technique as shown in Fig. 7a. A peristaltic pump injected and replaced the etchant solution with deionized (DI) water to obtain free-standing graphene floating on DI water. After injecting the polyelectrolyte into the water, the same pump was used to lower and place the graphene on top of the SiO2/Si substrate, trapping polyelectrolyte in between. The WCA was measured on the micrometer scale by environmental (E)-SEM image analysis, and due to the thermally conductive nature of graphene, the chance of electron beam heating-induced droplet shape alteration was reduced significantly (Fig. 7b). The E-SEM and scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM) results demonstrated that chemically doped graphene exhibited a smaller WCA than nominally un-doped graphene on the same SiO2 substrate (Fig. 7d). Compared to that resulting from polyelectrolyte-induced doping, doping by bare SiO2 substrate was found to be negligible. Depending on the polyelectrolyte type (electron donor or acceptor), graphene's Fermi level shifts could result in either p- or n-type doping, which influenced the WCA (Fig. 7c). Both the n-doped graphene [by high molecular weight (HMW) poly(allylaminehydrochloride) (PAH) and poly-L-lysine (PLL)] and the p-doped graphene [by HMW poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS) and poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)] exhibited lower WCA by up to 13° (Fig. 7d) as compared to un-doped graphene on a SiO2 substrate. Moreover, a lower WCA was observed at higher doping levels. On the other hand, surface wettability of Cu-catalyzed CVD grown SLG can be controlled by treating it under tetrafluoromethane (CF4) plasma as reported by Lim et al.81 The CF4-plasma treated graphene for 20 s exhibited hydrophobic behavior (CA ∼ 104.9°) as compared to hydrophilic pristine graphene (CA ∼ 66.7°). Chemisorption of fluorine on graphene surface after CF4-plasma treatment resulted in durable and stable hydrophobic properties.
 Fig. 7  (a) Transfer method to obtain subsurface polyelectrolyte-doped graphene samples. (b) Schematic illustration showing WCA measurements using E-SEM with a customized beveled sample holder. The concept and relationship between doping and wettability. (c) Schematic illustrations showing graphene wettability modulation by doping induced Fermi level shifts. (d) WCA (left axis) measured by E-SEM and WF (right axis) measured by SKPM of polyelectrolyte-doped and undoped graphene samples. For both n- and p-doping, the WCA of graphene decreases. Error bars represent one standard deviation. Insets show false-colored E-SEM images of water droplets (scale bars represent 10 μm). Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Additionally, the wetting behavior of graphene can also be changed by directly growing or transferring it onto rough or textured substrates. Zhao et al. studied the wetting behavior of Cu catalyzed CVD grown MLG by transferring it onto a micron-scale hole array (MSHA) SiO2/Si textured substrate.82 The transferred graphene on a MSHA substrate was hydrophobic (CA ∼ 93.1°), whereas it exhibited hydrophilic behavior (CA ∼ 83.0°) on a planar SiO2/Si substrate. This was attributed to the fact that the MSHA substrate had a regulation effect on the wettability of graphene only when it completely complied with the morphology of the MSHA substrate surface. This technique can pave the way for designing graphene coated surfaces with controlled wettability. Xia et al. developed an optical visualization approach for SLG with the help of water vapor on a wide variety of substrates [Cu, Si, HF-treated Si, SiO2/Si, quartz, glass, polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), and micropatterned PDMS] by combining the wetting properties of SLG and water condensation.83 It was observed that the edge of SLG acted as a confining wall which blocked the outside water droplets, while enabling the inside water droplets to move out. Thus, a graphene domain looked like an island which enabled the optical visualization of graphene. Seamless SLG and BLG or MLG domains were grown on Cu foils in an atmospheric pressure CVD (APCVD) system by using different flow rates of CH4 for different times.
A schematic of the continuous condensation process of water droplets and its merging on and around SLG/Cu is shown in Fig. 8a, and its corresponding optical images are shown in Fig. 8b–i which clearly depicted the evolution of water droplets. The merging of water droplets inside a graphene domain is shown in Fig. 8d and e, and the merging of a water droplet on the graphene into a nearby droplet on the surrounding substrate is shown in Fig. 8f–i. As the condensation of water vapors increased, an obvious difference between graphene domains and the bare substrate area were observed both in terms of color contrast and in terms of the morphology of water droplets. Due to the difference in wetting properties of graphene and the underlying substrate, optical visualization of graphene domains with water became possible. HF-treated Si exhibited an absence of graphene domains even with the assistance of water vapor as shown in Fig. 9a and b. But graphene could be observed for a naturally formed oxide layer on pristine Si with the assistance of water vapor as shown in Fig. 9d and e. The WCA of the HF-treated Si substrate (∼81.7°) closely matched the WCA of the SLG coated substrate (∼82.2°), which led to a morphology similar to that of water droplets on graphene and bare substrates. The WCA of the pristine Si substrate was 42.2°, whereas the WCA of the SLG coated substrate was 79.7°. The dispersion and morphology of water droplets on such surfaces are schematically depicted in Fig. 9c and f, respectively. Fig. 9g shows the WCAs on various substrates with and without SLG coating, whereas HF-treated Si and Au substrates were not applicable for the water-assisted optical visualization approach. Now, after a thorough discussion and understanding of wetting behavior of the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene, its wetting behavior based important applications will be discussed in the following sections.
 Fig. 8  The merging of water droplets on graphene/Cu and the barrier effect of graphene edge to water. (a) Schematic illustration. (b–i) Optical images showing the condensation of water vapor and the merging of water droplets. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 9  Dependence of the visualization results on the wetting behaviors of bare surfaces and graphene-covered surfaces. (a, b, d and e) The optical visualization images of graphene on an HF-treated Si substrate (a and b), and on a pristine Si substrate (d and e). The insets of (a) and (d) show the water contact angle of the corresponding bare surface and the graphene-covered surface. Scale bar: 200 μm. (c and f) Schematic diagram showing the mechanism of the optical visualization of graphene on substrate in which surface–water interactions were dominated by van der Waals forces (c) and short-range chemical bonding (f). (g) WCA of various substrates with and without monolayer graphene coating. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
3. Wetting behavior based applications of metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene
3.1. 3D-graphene foams for oil–water separation
In order to fabricate an adsorption material for oil–water separation, the adsorbent must be hydrophobic/superhydrophobic and oleophilic in nature such that it can adsorb oil but repel water at the same time. The adsorption capacity (C) is one of the most important performance criteria for adsorbent and defined as C = Mf − Mi/Mi(4)where Mi and Mf are the weights of the adsorbent before and after adsorption, respectively. The adsorption capacity directly depends upon the specific surface area, porosity and density of the adsorbent. Generally, 3D carbon based foams, sponges and aerogels have interconnected pores which help to increase the specific surface area, and can provide a large number of adsorption sites and paths for oils and organic solvents. So far, the sponge and aerogel filters based on GO have mainly been used for oil–water separation.75,77,78,84,85 However, graphene foam (GF) based filters fabricated with the help of metal-catalyzed CVD process are more controllable in terms of porosity, surface roughness and wettability, and can also be used as filters for separating oil and water as well as gas–oil–water.70,86,87 Hydrophobic/superhydrophobic GFs are mainly prepared via CVD by using 3D Ni foam as a template.70,86–89 To date, very few reports are available on GF based filters for oil–water separation and the important results are discussed in this section. For example, in 2014, Singh et al. fabricated a novel macroscopic graphene structure composed of an integrated foam like network of graphene sheets with well controlled microscale roughness and porosity.70 The graphene foam was first synthesized by using a sacrificial Ni foam via template directed APCVD with CH4 as the precursor at 1000 °C, and thereafter the Ni foam was removed by chemical etching.88 A continuous 3D network of graphene was formed over the entire Ni foam scaffold with thin interconnected sheets of graphene having no physical breaks or interfaces (Fig. 10a and b). The walls of the foam were composed of monolayer to FLG sheets with strongly suppressed defects related D-band which confirmed high quality of graphene foam as revealed by Raman analysis (Fig. 10c).
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM images of the micro-porous graphene foam with an average pore size of ∼200 μm (b) SEM image of the Teflon coated graphene foam. (c) Raman spectra of the graphene foam taken from several locations (d) Advancing liquid front for the Teflon coated graphene sample indicating an advancing WCA of ∼163.01°. (e) Receding liquid front on the same sample indicating a receding WCA of ∼143.78°. (f) Corresponding advancing CA on the baseline graphene foam (without a Teflon coating) measured to be ∼134.86°. (g) Corresponding receding CA on the baseline graphene foam measured to be ∼110.72°. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. 
These 3D GFs had an extremely low density of about 5 mg cm−3, a very high porosity of about 99.7% which was close to that of the lightest aerogel (2–3mg cm−3), and a very high specific surface area of about 850 m2 g−1.70,88 Thus, they fulfill all the important criteria to be an excellent adsorption material. In order to increase the hydrophobicity, the graphene foam was coated with a ∼200 nm thick layer of Teflon. The Teflon coated graphene foam exhibited a WCA of ∼163.01° (Fig. 10d) for advancing fronts and ∼143.78° for receding fronts (Fig. 10e). On the other hand, the advancing and receding WCA on the uncoated graphene foam was found to be ∼134.86° and ∼110.72°, respectively (Fig. 10f and g). The Teflon coated foam was much more hydrophobic and the difference of ∼30° between advancing and receding WCA (CA hysteresis) was due to the high surface roughness and micro-scale porosity, which could cause pinning of the liquid front particularly during the receding of the droplet. Hence, 3D GFs modified with low surface energy coatings can exhibit outstanding water repellency, and thus possess great potential for use in oil–water separation applications.
Similarly, in 2015, Bong et al. also adopted the same approach to fabricate 3D GFs as discussed above, and practically used them as filters for separating not only oil and water but also gas.86Fig. 11a show a schematic diagram, photograph (diameter = 25.4 mm; thickness = 2 mm) and field emission (FE)-SEM image of a 3D GF. A 3D structure with pores of 150–200 μm diameters was observed, and the graphene-coated area (Fig. 11a inset) exhibited a perfectly laminated and rough surface. They prepared three different types of GFs with the help of surface modification. The omniphilic GF was obtained by surface O2-plasma treatment by creating defects on the surface (Fig. 11b). The pristine 3D GF was hydrophobic in nature (Fig. 11c), but it became omniphobic (Fig. 11d) after coating with self-assembled (heptadecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrodecyl)trichlorosilane (HDF-S). The –OH groups on the graphene surface and the active group (trichlorosilane-SiCl3) of HDF-S formed covalent bonds and resulted in a strong siloxane network build-up. These three different types of 3D structural GF based filters were successfully tested for selective filtering of gas, water and oils.
 Fig. 11  (a) Photograph of a 3D structural GF 25.4 mm in diameter. FE-SEM image of the GF with an average pore diameter of 150–200 μm. The inset shows a higher magnification image of the surface of a single graphene wire, in which the graphene laminated on the fracture surface is clearly observed. (b–d) Schematic illustration of three different types of graphene by using surface treatment and their selective filtering properties. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. 
The capability of the omniphilic, hydrophobic, and omniphobic graphene filters to filter gas, water, gasoline, kerosene, and olive oil is shown in Fig. 12a–c, respectively. Two polypropylene (PP) beakers were used and each 3D graphene filter was fixed between them. Gas, water, and oil were mixed with dye to easily monitor the filtering process, and thereafter poured into the upper beaker. Fig. 12a shows that gas, water, and oil rapidly permeated through the omniphilic 3D graphene filter and collected into the beaker placed below without applying any external force. Fig. 12b shows that the hydrophobic 3D graphene filter only allowed gasoline, kerosene, and olive oil to permeate through it while water was blocked. Similarly, Fig. 12c shows that the omniphobic 3D graphene filter blocked all liquids (water and oils), and only allowed the gas to permeate through it. Although the filtering capabilities of 3D GFs were demonstrated in this study, their adsorption capacities were not considered. Hence, at present, the performance of these adsorbents (3D GFs) prepared by the metal-catalyzed template directed CVD is difficult to compare with other adsorption materials prepared by different techniques. However, we can expect the reports on high performance 3D GF based filters for oil–water separation in near future as this research area is developing very fast.
 Fig. 12  Gas/water/oil separation achieved with omniphilic, hydrophobic, and omniphobic graphene filters coated on ∼150–200 μm meshes. The graphene foams were fixed between a polypropylene (PP) tube and a PP beaker, and pure gas, water, or oil (the latter two with dye) was placed in the upper PP tube. Water permeates through the coated mesh, while the oil is repelled and retained in the upper tube. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. 
Recently, another important application of these 3D GF based filters was demonstrated by Lim et al. to detect chlorobenzene in water.87 Here, they have exploited the hydrophobic behavior of the 3D GF which was fabricated as discussed above, and was used without any further low surface energy modification unlike the previous cases.70,86 The WCA and chlorobenzene CA on the fabricated 3D GF were found to be 102.8° ± 1.6° and 0°, respectively (Fig. 13a). Liquid detection papers were used under the 3D GF to check the seepage of a water droplet, chlorobenzene droplet, and a water–chlorobenzene mixture droplet (∼30 μL) through the 3D GF, respectively (Fig. 13b). It was observed that only the chlorobenzene droplet completely seeped through the 3D GF and wetted the detection paper. Moreover, by covering the channel region of a bottom-gate structural SnO2 nanowire transistor with the 3D GF as shown in Fig. 13c, the concentration of chlorobenzene in water was determined by monitoring the change in the response current and the shift in the threshold voltage of the device. On the basis of the results discussed in this section, it has been observed that hydrophobic/superhydrophobic 3D GFs fabricated through the metal-catalyzed CVD process are excellent chemical filters and do not allow the seepage of water through them, and are potential adsorption materials for oil–water or chemical–water separation applications which can be used in different ways.
 Fig. 13  (a) CAs of the hydrophobic 3D pristine graphene structure using water and chlorobenzene liquid. (b) Wettabilities of water and chlorobenzene liquid droplets (∼30 μL) on the 3D pristine graphene structure, which were placed on copy papers to observe the penetration of liquid droplets into the filter. (c) Schematic diagram of the SnO2 nanowire transistor covered by the hydrophobic 3D pristine graphene structure. The insets show the photograph of the fabricated SnO2 nanowire transistor array on a SiO2/Si substrate (25.4 mm2) covered by a 3D graphene filter (size, 15 mm2) and a FE-SEM image of a single SnO2 nanowire between the source and drain electrodes. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2017, The Japan Society of Applied Physics. 
3.2. Biomimetics
There are several examples from nature which possess almost perfect micro–nano structures such as lotus leaves which exhibit superhydrophobicity and self-cleaning effect and butterfly wings and bird feathers that exhibit unique hydrophobic properties and beautiful structural colors.90 However, these kinds of biomimetic surfaces can also be fabricated by using high quality continuous graphene. These graphene coated biomimetic surfaces are mainly used to enhance the chemical stability of metal or alloy surfaces.63,91–93 Metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene coatings either directly grown or transferred onto textured metal/alloy substrates can easily mimic these examples from nature (lotus leaves, rose petals, butterfly wings, etc.), and can also be used for anti-corrosion and micro-droplet transfer applications.63,71,92,93 For example, Jiang et al. fabricated hierarchical structured FLG films directly on laser textured Cu foils via template directed CVD by using CH4 at 1020 °C.71 They used femtosecond laser pulsing for fabricating multi-scale hierarchical micro–nano structures on Cu foils, which mimicked butterfly wings (Fig. 14a–d). The iridescence of the FLG film transferred onto a cover glass confirmed the presence of periodic nanostructures (Fig. 14d). Due to the high surface energy of Cu and Cu oxide, the polished Cu surface exhibited a hydrophilic property; however, the laser-textured Cu surfaces exhibited a WCA of ∼90°. The WCA values were found to be in the range of 106–152°, which confirmed the hydrophobicity/superhydrophobicity of all the hierarchical-structured FLG films on textured Cu foils (Fig. 14e). One sample exhibited the highest WCA of 152° when the laser intensity was as high as 200 mW. A structural color was observed when light irradiated the biomimetic FLG films, like the butterfly wings.94Fig. 14f shows iridescence of FLG on Cu foil without corrosion and Fig. 14g shows camera captured iridescence of FLG on glass substrates.
 Fig. 14  (a) Photograph of a neat Cu foil used for laser structuring; a femtosecond laser pulse with a central wavelength of 800 nm was used. (b) Photograph of a laser-structured Cu foil with structural color. (c) CVD growth of graphene on the laser-structured Cu foil. (d) The structured graphene film transferred onto a cover glass. (e) Static WCAs of micro–nanostructured graphene films on different templates. Laser powers of 50, 100, 150 and 200 mW correspond to laser fluences of 6.37 × 105, 12.74 × 105, 19.11 × 105 and 25.48 × 105 mJ cm−2, respectively. (f) Photographs of the Cu-200 mW foil after CVD growth of a graphene film. (g) Structural color of the micro–nanostructured graphene film (Cu-200 mW as template) transferred onto a glass slide. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (h) WCA on graphene-coated structured Al alloy. (i and j) Mechanism of possible anti-corrosion of graphene coatings. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
On the other hand, Zheng et al. prepared biomimetic (hydrophobic; WCA ∼ 130.8 ± 1°) surfaces by transferring the Cu-catalyzed CVD grown SLG/BLG onto the textured Al alloy substrate (Fig. 14h), which were resistant to corrosion.92 An electrochemical cell forms when the surface of the Al alloy is exposed to an ionic solution, and the following electrochemical reactions take place:93,95Anodic reaction: Al = Al3+ + e−Cathodic reaction: 2H+ + 2e− = H2↑
Under Cl− containing solution, aluminium oxide membranes can be corroded easily (Fig. 14i). When a textured Al alloy is coated with CVD grown graphene, it can be protected from being corroded under the electrochemical corrosion process as graphene acts as a barrier (Fig. 14j). Similar results were obtained by Kim et al. for hydrophobic textured metal surfaces prepared by growing SLG via CVD on a roughened Cu surface,63 where the presence of graphene provided the effectiveness as an anti-corrosion barrier with excellent wetting stability.
In addition to this, highly adhesive superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated by transferring the Cu-catalyzed CVD grown hydrophobic SLG (WCA ∼ 92.7°) onto a laser etched (textured) stainless steel (ESS) surface, which mimicked rose petals in terms of the hierarchical structure. This can be used for micro-droplet transfer applications as demonstrated by Song et al.93 The graphene/ESS surface exhibited a highly adhesive superhydrophobic behavior (WCA ∼ 154.3°) like rose petals due to the high surface roughness and hydrophobic nature of transferred graphene.96–98 A 3 μL water droplet was transferred from a superhydrophobic surface to a superhydrophilic surface. Firstly, it was placed on a superhydrophobic textured Si surface (Fig. 15a) and the graphene/ESS surface was brought into contact with it (Fig. 15b). The water droplet strongly adhered to the graphene/ESS surface (Fig. 15d), and finally it was transferred onto a superhydrophilic textured Al alloy substrate (Fig. 15h). A sufficient amount of air can be trapped inside the grooves of micro/nano petals and cause superhydrophobicity.44 As the sizes of hierarchical micro/nanostructures were larger than those of the lotus leaf, water entered only into the larger scale grooves of the petal, thus forming the Cassie impregnating wetting regime.99 Recently, GO based superhydrophobic biomimetic coatings have also been used to demonstrate the transportation of water and oil micro-droplets onto hydrophilic glass substrates.100,101 However, such coatings may not be durable and the coating preparation is a multi-step process and time consuming as compared to the superhydrophobic biomimetic graphene surfaces fabricated via metal-catalyzed CVD, which could be achieved easily by either transfer onto or direct growth on desired substrates.63,71,92,93
 Fig. 15  Transfer of a water droplet from the low adhesive superhydrophobic square-pillar-structured Al alloy substrate to a highly adhesive G/ESS substrate (a–d) and then to another square-pillar-structured Al alloy substrate with superhydrophilic properties (e–h). Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
3.3. Water harvesting and defogging
Many important technological applications such as water harvesting, anti-fouling, self-cleaning, low-friction and drag coatings as well as two-phase heat transfer processes are based on rough hydrophobic surfaces with entrapped air pockets.38,102,103 However, water/fog harvesting could also be achieved by using hydrophilic directional slippery rough surfaces as well as hybrid superwettable surfaces as demonstrated recently.104,105 These kinds of surfaces may outperform the hydrophobic rough surface based water/fog harvesting.104,105 On the other hand, not many reports are available on the water/fog harvesting using metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene except for the Kim et al. report.63 In this report, they demonstrated that the hydrophobicity of textured surfaces can be preserved by depositing graphene via in situ thermal CVD on a roughened Cu surface, which was used for water harvesting.63Fig. 16a–d shows the SEM images of the Cu foil surface, and the measured WCA on these surfaces are shown in insets. A drastic increase in the roughness was exhibited by the electroplated Cu foil as compared to the baseline Cu foil (Fig. 16b). Further changes in morphology were observed after thermal annealing and CVD growth of graphene as shown in Fig. 16c and d, respectively. However, the h-rCu (Fig. 16c) and h-Gr/rCu (Fig. 16d) samples were significantly rougher than the baseline Cu sample (Fig. 16a). WCA measurements on all the samples and the baseline Cu surface exhibited a WCA of ∼86°. When it was coated with SLG, no change in WCA was observed which confirmed that the graphene film was wetting transparent for a flat Cu surface.106 Due to the hydrophilic nature of electrodeposited Cu oxide particles, the electroplated Cu surface (h-Cu) without graphene or thermal annealing is superhydrophilic with a WCA of ∼19°. WCA of the electroplated Cu surface reached ∼128° after thermal annealing owing to the reduction of Cu oxide particles during thermal annealing. Finally, water harvesting experiments were performed using Cu, Gr/Cu, h-rCu and h-Gr/rCu samples via the dehumidification process (Fig. 16e). As evident from Fig. 16f, the h-Gr/rCu surface outperforms the Cu, Gr/Cu and h-rCu surfaces. The Cu and Gr/Cu surfaces were not hydrophobic enough to enable drop-wise condensation, and exhibited film-wise condensation as shown in Fig. 16g and h, respectively. On the other hand, the h-rCu and h-Gr/rCu surfaces exhibited drop-wise condensation behavior (Fig. 16i and j) attributed to their higher hydrophobicity (WCA > 125°). Since we did not carry out a detailed study and also due to the unavailability of enough literature related to water harvesting based on the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene, at present it is difficult to compare its performance with other materials. However, the above findings might be useful in the near future to fabricate excellent water/fog harvesting surfaces based on metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene.
 Fig. 16  Surface characterization and static water repellency of the hydrophobic graphene-coated copper surface. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of (a) bare copper substrate (Cu), (b) electroplated copper substrate (h-Cu), (c) electroplated and thermal annealed copper substrate (h-rCu), and (d) electroplated and thermal annealed Cu after graphene growth (h-Gr/rCu) by chemical vapor deposition. The insets show photographs of water droplets on each surface. (e) Schematic diagram of the water harvesting test set-up. (f) Total condensate mass and dewetting ratio for the Cu, Gr/Cu, h-rCu and h-Gr/rCu surfaces. (g) and (h) Film-wise condensation of water on bare copper (Cu) and graphene coated copper (Gr/Cu), respectively. (i) and (j) Drop-wise condensation on electroplated and thermal annealed copper without (h-rCu) and with (h-Gr/rCu) graphene coating, respectively. Scale bars in (g–j) are 5 mm. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
Similarly, another important application of graphene is in the fabrication of defoggers or defrosters which is attributed to its high optical transparency, thermal conductivity, flexibility, and hydrophobicity at ambient conditions. Graphene-based transparent and electrothermal defoggers could be employed for making smart windows, defogging mirrors, and defogging glasses.68,107–109 To date, metal-catalyst free direct CVD grown graphene, vertical graphene nanowalls (VGNWs), electrochemically exfoliated graphene (EEG), and rGO on transparent substrates have been used to fabricate defoggers.107–112 However, Tan et al. demonstrated that metal-catalyzed direct CVD grown graphene on transparent substrates can also be used for defogging applications.68 They fabricated the first practical SLG based defogger by growing large-area continuous SLG films on quartz substrates. Two types of SLG based transparent defoggers were fabricated; the first one was fabricated by directly growing SLG film on quartz substrate with the help of gallium metal vapors as the floating catalyst in an APCVD system, and the other one was fabricated by transferring Cu-catalyzed low pressure CVD (LPCVD) grown SLG onto a quartz substrate. Electrodes were formed on both edges of the SLG films by depositing Cr/Au and connecting Cu wires. The fabricated defoggers were placed above the water containing beaker maintained at 50 °C. Fig. 17a shows the directly grown SLG defogger covered with fog before (left side) and after (right side) applying a bias voltage of 20 V for 15 s. Complete defogging was observed after applying a bias. Similarly, Fig. 17b shows the starting time and complete defogging time under different bias voltages. The defogging time decreased with increase in the input voltage, and complete defogging time was observed to be 6 s when the input voltage was increased to 32 V. This was reported to be significantly faster than other graphene based defoggers.107–112 The fog started to disappear once the graphene defogger reached ∼25 °C, and was completely removed at a temperature of ∼30 °C (Fig. 17c). Similarly, Fig. 17d shows the defogging robustness after 50 defogging cycles for a bias voltage of 20 V. No significant change in the defogging time was observed, whereas the transferred SLG defogger exhibited poor performance. Fig. 17e shows that the initial resistance of the directly grown SLG and the transferred SLG was the same. The resistance of the directly grown SLG increased by ∼10% when its surface was completely covered by fog, and returned to its initial value after naturally drying at room temperature. However, the transferred SLG exhibited a significant increase of ∼220% in its resistance which further increased upon drying. The directly grown SLG film perfectly adhered onto the quartz substrate, and the water molecules could hardly permeate into the graphene–quartz interface (Fig. 17f). Fig. 17g shows that the upper surface of the directly grown SLG defogger could absorb water molecules while current carriers could still pass through its lower surface protected by the quartz substrate. On the other hand, the transferred SLG will always have cracks and residues (Fig. 17h) which result in a poor interaction with the substrate. Thus, water molecules could be absorbed on both sides and intercalate between the SLG and substrate by traversing the cracks which leads to a drastic increase in the resistance (Fig. 17i). The performances of different defoggers based on graphene and graphene related materials are summarized in Table 1. The metal-vapor assisted direct CVD growth of SLG on quartz substrate provides a new platform to fabricate high performance defoggers in terms of very fast defogging time, as a good contact between the SLG and substrate contributes to the increase in the rate of heat transfer, and prevents the permeation of water molecules at the interface.
 Fig. 17  (a) Fog removal performance of the directly grown SLG defogger before (left) and after (right) heating at 20 V for 15 s. (b) Fog removal time as a function of input voltage. (c) The temperature corresponding to the starting time and complete time for defogging under different input voltages. (d) Defogging robustness of the directly grown SLG defogger investigated by completely removing fog 50 times at 20 V. (e) The resistance profiles of directly grown graphene defoggers and transferred graphene defoggers before and after exposure to fog. (f) Directly grown graphene films perfectly adhered onto the surface of the quartz substrate. (g) Upper surface of directly grown graphene absorbed by water molecules and the current carriers passing through the under surface protected by the quartz substrate. (h) Inevitable cracks and residues caused by the transfer procedure in transferred graphene. (i) Both sides of transferred graphene absorbed by water molecules for lack of strong interaction force between the graphene and the quartz substrate. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
Table 1 Summary of performances of the defoggers based on graphene and graphene-related materials




Material
Method
Substrate
Active area
Applied voltage
Defogging time
Ref.




SLG
Ga vapor-assisted CVD
Quartz
1 × 1 cm2
32 V
6 s

68



SLG
Direct CVD
Quartz
2 × 2 cm2
30 V
21 s

107



rGO/EEG
Solution
Quartz
1 × 1 cm2
30 V
11 s

108



VGNWs
Plasma assisted CVD
Glass
2 × 2 cm2
5 V
8 s

109



rGO
Solution
Quartz
2 × 1.4 cm2
60 V
120 s

110



Glass
30 s


rGO
Solution
Flexible glass
—
10 V
80 s

111



SLG
Ge-assisted CVD
Quartz
—
20 V
—

112





3.4. Triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs)
Electricity can be produced when ions-containing water or droplets of ionic liquid move over graphene/SiO2/Si or graphene/polymer heterostructures.113–116 The liquid flow enabled electricity generation is based on an electro-kinetic phenomenon, where an electric potential is created by moving ionic liquid on a thin-film electrode. This is also known as liquid flow enabled triboelectricity generation. Moreover, creating an electric potential irrespective of electrode material is based on the formation of the electric double layer (EDL) boundary at the electron/ionic liquid interface, where the electron migration takes place during the rapid electrode insertion into or its pulling-out of the ionic liquid. Based on this, Guo and co-researchers demonstrated the generation of a few millivolts of voltage by moving a liquid droplet of sea water or ionic solution on the SLG/polyester terephthalate (PET) heterostructure.114 They obtained high quality Cu-catalyzed LPCVD grown SLG films by using CH4 as the carbon precursor. The SLG film in the form of a strip (∼5 × 110 mm2) was transferred onto a PET substrate, and metal wires were connected to the terminals of the SLG strip to form an ohmic contact (Fig. 18a). Thereafter, a droplet of simulated sea water (0.6 M NaCl aqueous solution) was sandwiched between the SLG and a 5 × 5 mm2 SiO2/Si wafer. The SiO2/Si substrate was placed 1 mm above the SLG and moved along a track at fixed separation. The droplet motion on the SLG with advancing and receding CAs (θA and θR) of ∼91.9° and ∼60.2°, respectively, could be controlled by moving the SiO2/Si substrate (Fig. 18a, inset). Fig. 18b shows that a voltage of ∼0.15 mV was generated by moving (from the left to right end) a 43 mL droplet of 0.6 M NaCl solution on the SLG strip with a constant velocity of 2.25 cm s−1. The generated voltage sharply dropped to zero as the droplet stopped, and the same magnitude voltage with reversed sign was generated as the droplet moved back with the same velocity. It was observed that the generated voltage increased linearly as the velocity of the droplet increased, and its magnitude could be enhanced by increasing the size of the droplet. The voltage generation mechanism was explained with the help of density functional theory (DFT) calculations. A hydrated Na+ ion could be adsorbed on the SLG with an adsorption energy of over 2 eV, and a hydrated Cl− anion was repulsive due to its negative adsorption energy as shown in Fig. 18c. The surrounding water molecules impeded the direct interaction between the SLG and ions, and the adsorbed hydrated Na+ ions drew image electrons from the SLG. This contributed to a significant electron accumulation on the upper surface of the SLG as depicted by the distribution of the differential charge (Fig. 18c). A thin electron accumulation layer extended along the upper surface of the SLG and formed a pseudo-capacitor with the adsorbed Na+ layer as the number of adsorbed hydrated Na+ increased. The formation of pseudo-capacitance was significant, which was attributed to the very small interlayer distance (only ∼0.4 nm) between the positive hydrated Na+ layer and the negative electron layer. Fig. 18d shows that for a static NaCl droplet, there was no potential difference between its left and right sides as the charge redistributed symmetrically on both sides of the droplet on the SLG. However, for a moving droplet, the pseudo-capacitor advanced forward and drew electrons in the SLG as ions were adsorbed at the front end. At the same time, the pseudo-capacitor discharged and released the electrons to the SLG as ions were being desorbed at the rear end of the moving droplet (Fig. 18e). This resulted in an increase/decrease in electron density behind/ahead of the moving droplet, and led to a higher potential at the front end than at the rear end (Fig. 18e). On the other hand, no detectable potential was obtained for deionized water droplets even at a velocity of 8.55 cm s−1, as the pseudo-capacitance could not be formed due to the insufficient ions. Moreover, other ionic solutions were also tested and it was found that the voltage generated by three droplets of NH3·H2O and MgCl2 was ∼2.6 and ∼1.5 times, respectively, as compared to the same number of NaCl droplets, which confirmed that these droplets could draw larger amounts of image electrons. Furthermore, the generated voltage was reduced as the number of graphene layers increased because they provide additional channels for electrons to flow back from the rear end to the front end.
 Fig. 18  Illustration of the experimental set-up: (a) A liquid droplet is sandwiched between graphene and a SiO2/Si wafer, and drawn by the wafer at specific velocities. Inset: a droplet of 0.6 M NaCl solution on a graphene surface with advancing and receding CAs of ∼91.9° and ∼60.2°, respectively. (b) Typical voltage signal produced by drawing a droplet on a graphene strip from the left (L) to right (R) end and then back. The inset highlights the voltage signal during the movement of the droplet. Mechanism for the drawing potential: (c) DFT results for the distribution of differential charge near monolayer graphene caused by adsorbing one to three rows of hydrated sodium cations and the corresponding adsorption energy (Ea). (d) Schematic illustration of the pseudo-capacitance formed by a static droplet on graphene. (e) Schematic illustration of the potential difference induced by a moving droplet. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. 
Following this, in 2016, Kwak et al. used a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) substrate instead of PET to demonstrate triboelectricity generation. They demonstrated a large electric power (1.9 μW) generation from a single moving ionic droplet on a SLG/PTFE hetero-structure, which was attributed to the triboelectrification-induced pseudo-capacitance between them.64 SLG was synthesized via CVD on Cu foil, and then transferred onto PTFE substrate using PMMA as the sacrificial layer. Fig. 19a shows the typical voltage output, and the peak of the signal could reach ∼0.40 V (left) when the droplet (0.6 mL, 0.6 M NaCl solution) moved from the left- to the right-hand side. The voltage of the signal output could be reversed to ∼0.45 V (right) by reversing the moving direction of the droplet. The typical current output was ∼4.5 μA (left) and ∼4.8 μA (right) according to the direction in which the droplet was moving (Fig. 19c). Fig. 19b shows the load resistance dependence of both the voltage output and the current output with the resistance ranging from 10 kJ to 1 GJ using a single droplet. The output voltage was increased and the output current was decreased by increasing resistance, and thus the maximum output power was evaluated to be about 1.9 μW at 50 MJ (Fig. 19d). The output voltage for BLG and tri-layer graphene (TLG) was also studied and corresponded to 1.3 mV and 1.2 mV, respectively (Fig. 19e). It increased linearly with an increase in the size of the droplet (Fig. 19f). Fig. 19h shows a droplet on the SLG surface in a steady state, and there was no potential difference at both ends of the droplet. However, once the droplet achieved constant movement in one direction, the cations inside the droplet accumulated at one side ahead of the droplet. The uniform balance of surface charges in the SLG was broken due to the alteration of cations, and this started to generate the relative potential difference at both ends of the droplet. The potential difference of the droplet was maintained until it reached the end of the SLG, and electrons were constantly drawn when the droplet had a fixed moving speed (Fig. 19i). Fig. 19g demonstrates the use of a SLG/PTFE based energy-harvesting device that uses rain drops. A continuous voltage output (∼0.25 V) was generated by rain droplets due to the continuous contact between the inclined SLG/PTFE hetero-structure and the sliding water droplets. Furthermore, three individual SLG/PTFE hetero-structures were connected in series and parallel to enhance the output voltage and output current of 1.1 V and 8 μA, respectively. In this way, a huge amount of electric power can be generated by using appropriate series and parallel connections of several SLG/PTFE hetero-structure based devices.
 Fig. 19  (a) Voltage output from a graphene/PTFE structure by a single moving droplet. (b) Dependence of the output voltage and current on the external load resistance. (c) Current output from the graphene/PTFE structure according to forward and reverse motion of the water. (d) Maximum power output by a single moving droplet of 0.6 M NaCl. (e) Voltage output change from the graphene/PTFE structures with a different number of graphene layers. (f) The dependence of the voltage output on the size of the water droplet. (g) Electric power generated from the monolayer graphene/PTFE structure by continuous water drops. (h) Charge distribution of the water droplet and graphene/PTFE in the initial state and (i) charge redistribution during movement of the water droplet over the surface of the graphene/PTFE. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to this, in 2017, Lin's group used polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) substrate to generate triboelectricity from a moving liquid droplet on SLG/PVDF hetero-structure.116 In this case, they demonstrated the generation of output voltage even by using de-ionized water droplets unlike previous cases where only ionic aqueous solutions were used.64,113–115 The graphene growth and transfer processes were the same as mentioned above.64,114 A SLG strip (2 × 6 cm2) was transferred onto a 30 μm thick PVDF piezoelectric film, and the fabricated triboelectric nanogenerator was fixed on a slope inclined at 30° (Fig. 20a). Driven by its own gravity, a 0.2 mL droplet of DI water, tap water, and 0.1 M NaCl aqueous solution, respectively, could easily move over the SLG surface. During the droplet motion, the generated voltage increased with time, and when the droplet reached the bottom end of the SLG strip, it decreased sharply to its initial value (Fig. 20b). The peak voltages of around 1.6 mV, 7.5 mV, and 15.5 mV could be generated by using droplets of DI water, tap water, and 0.1 M NaCl aqueous solution, respectively (Fig. 20b). The possible mechanism of voltage generation based on triboelectric effect for DI water or polar liquids was discussed. Fig. 20c shows that electrical charges appeared on the surface of PVDF film due to the pressure exerted by the water droplet when dropped onto the SLG/PVDF substrate. At the same time, opposite charges in the SLG was attracted to the water-contacted area. Due to the very short screening length of SLG (∼0.6 nm), the corresponding ions in the droplet were also dragged and accumulated at the water–SLG interface to screen the piezoelectric charges. There was a symmetrical charge distribution when the droplet was static, but there was no potential difference. For a moving water droplet, piezoelectric charges were generated at the front end and the opposite charges in the SLG along with corresponding ions in the droplet were drawn to the front end to balance the piezoelectric charges. As the motion of ions or water molecules is much slower as compared to SLG, more carriers in the SLG were drawn at the front end of the water-contacted area to temporarily screen the piezoelectric charges. On the other hand, piezoelectric charges disappeared at the rear end and released the carriers and ions back, but the motion of ions was much slower which led to a relative accumulation of ions at the rear end. This resulted in repelling of the induced charges away from the rear end of the droplet contact area (Fig. 20d). Hence, the carriers attracted to the front end of the droplet were released towards the rear end which flowed across the SLG under the droplet, and thus created a potential difference between the two ends of the droplet (Fig. 20e). The performances of liquid enabled triboelectricity generation based on graphene and graphene related materials are summarized in Table 2. A SLG/PTFE hetero-structure seems to have edge over other materials to generate large electric power with the help of an ionic droplet movement. Moreover, efficiency of triboelectricity generation could be enhanced by using organic substrates with stronger surface dipole density or inorganic ferroelectric films.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup for measuring the electrical response to the flow of a certain volume of water over graphene–PVDF heterostructure which is fixed on a slope; the positive end of the multimeter is connected to the flowing direction of the water. (b) Typical voltage responses to the flow of 0.2 mL DI water, tap water, and 0.1 M NaCl aqueous solution from the top end to the bottom end of the graphene strip, where NaCl aqueous solution gives the highest voltage output. (c) Charge distribution at the steady state when the water keeps still; three charged layers are formed at the graphene–water and graphene–PVDF interfaces. (d) Dynamic charging–discharging process when the water is flowing over the graphene surface; more carriers are being attracted to the front side whereas the excessive carriers at the rear side are being repelled. (e) Overall charge transfer process during the water flowing process; the carriers in graphene can be continuously dragged to move from the front side to the rear side. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
Table 2 Summary of liquid-enabled electricity generation from TENGs based on graphene and graphene-related materials




Material
Method
Substrate
Liquid
Flow type
Voltage
Current/current density
Ref.




SLG
CVD
SiO2/Si
∼0.6 M HCl
Fluid flow
∼25 mV
∼4 μA

37



SLG
CVD
SiO2/Si
∼0.6 M HCl
Fluid flow
∼120 mV
—

113



SLG
CVD
PET
∼0.6 M NaCl
Droplet motion
0.15–0.59 mV
—

114



SLG
CVD
PET
∼0.6 M NaCl
Fluid flow
100 mV
11 μA

115



SLG
CVD
PTFE
∼0.6 M NaCl
Droplet motion
∼ 400–450 mV
∼ 4.5–4.8 μA

64



SLG
CVD
PVDF
DI water
Droplet motion
1.6 mV
—

116



Tap water
7.5 mV


0.1 M NaCl
15.5 mV


GO film
Moisture-electric annealing
—
Moisture
Fluid flow
∼20 mV
∼5 μA cm−2

117



GO film
Freeze-drying
—
Moisture
Fluid flow
260 mV
3.2 mA cm−2

118



3D GF
CVD
—
DI water
Fluid flow
—
25 μA

119



3D GF
CVD
—
Water/ethanol mixture
Fluid flow
—
20 μA

120



Graphene-carbon black/PTFE
Hummer
ITO-FTO
0.6 M NaCl
Simulated rain water
∼0.227 mV
∼5.97 μA

121



rGO film
ITO-PET
∼0.109 mV
∼0.49 μA


rGO sheets
Dipping
Paper–pencil
0.6 M MgCl2–DI water
Fluid flow
280 mV
325 mA cm−2

122



rGO/Ni foam
CVD
Ni foam
2 M Na2SO4
Dipping
4 mV
7 μA

123





3.5. Electrowetting (EW)
Electrowetting (EW) is an important phenomenon and used to modulate the CA of a liquid droplet as well as its actuation on a flat or textured hydrophobic/superhydrophobic solid substrate with the help of an external applied electric field.124–131 The dependence of the cosine of CA (θ) on the applied electric field is described by classical EW theory, which is known as the Young–Lippmann equation:130,132,133 (5)where C(E) denotes the potential-dependent capacitance of the solid/liquid interface, γLG is the surface tension between the two fluid phases (liquid/air), and η denotes the EW number. In order to minimize electrolysis of a liquid droplet, a dielectric layer is introduced between the substrate and the hydrophobic/superhydrophobic coating.69,131,134 This is known as EW on dielectric (EWOD), and the concept can be used for practical applications such as liquid lenses, micro/nano-fluidics, lab-on-a-chip devices, etc.69,131,134 In 2012, Tan et al. performed EWOD experiments using transparent, flexible, and stretchable metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene.65 Growth of graphene was carried out using CH4 on a Cu foil substrate. The graphene was then transferred onto PET films, and coated with a thin Teflon layer. The PET film served as the transparent, flexible, curved, and 3D substrate which helped to demonstrate EWOD. A voltage was applied between the droplet and the Teflon coated graphene electrode, and the CA at 0 V was found to be 109.5° ± 1°. The CA was decreased to 70.2° ± 1° as the voltage increased to 90 V, and beyond that no further decrease was observed. This was attributed to the instability of the applied electric field as the high density of the charge carriers was injected into the insulator which led to the CA saturation.135,136 Furthermore, reversible EWOD on graphene was also demonstrated on flat and curved substrates by applying both DC and AC (10 Hz to 1 kHz) voltages.
Similarly, for the first time, Shahini et al. from the same research group fabricated very high resolution (∼456 lp mm−1) tunable ionic liquid lenses based on the EWOD concept using graphene as a transparent electrode.69,134 Cu catalyzed CVD grown SLG was transferred onto a flexible parylene/PDMS substrate. Thereafter, it was patterned into concentric-shaped electrodes, and buried under a parylene layer which was coated with Teflon. The patterned SLG was used as a transparent and flexible electrode material which allowed a large lens aperture (diameter = 2.4–2.74 mm). The substrate was deformed with a 3 mm radius of curvature and the CA modulations of a 3 μL KCl droplet to ac voltages (0–120 V) was studied. The focal length (f) of a liquid lens can be determined with the help of lens-maker's equation given as:69,134 (6)where n and D are the refractive index and the height of a liquid droplet, respectively, and R1 and R2 are the radii of curvature of a liquid droplet and the deformed membrane, respectively. As shown in Fig. 21a, the CA decreased with increase in the applied voltage, and at higher voltages no water hydrolysis was observed. The images through the 3 μL KCl droplet liquid lens (initial diameter of a droplet = 1.8 mm) under different applied voltages are shown in Fig. 21b. At 0 V, the center of the object was in focus and it became blurred on the application of voltage due to a decrease in the curvature of the droplet and increase in the focal length of the lens. On a flat substrate, a significant change in the focal length was not observed at voltages below 50 V due to the small change in CAs (Fig. 21c). However, a significantly large change in the focal length was observed at ∼70 V for a CA of ∼95°. Moreover, it was observed that as the droplet volume increased, the focal length became large due to increase in the radius of curvature. Furthermore, images of bone marrow dendritic cells (BMDCs) were captured through the fabricated liquid lenses, and sharply resolved cell walls could be seen at 100 V (Fig. 21d). The performances of different liquid lenses based on different electrode materials are summarized in Table 3. Hence, to fabricate tunable ionic liquid lenses based on the EWOD concept with a very high resolution, SLG seems to be an excellent electrode material as compared to the traditional ones.
 Fig. 21  (a) Measured CA change for a 3 μL KCl droplet with planar graphene electrodes on the top of a curved PDMS/parylene substrate observed at different voltages. (b) Optical performance of the liquid lenses (a 10 mM 3 μL KCl droplet) at different voltages. The elements of groups 6 and 7 of the 1951 USAF resolution test chart were in focus at 0 V. The images of the object became out of focus with increasing voltage. (c) Corresponding focal length and contact angle change for applied voltages from 0 to 130 V. (d) Images of the BMDCs captured through an ionic liquid lens. At 0 V, the cells were not well focused. At higher applied voltages, cells were focused and a sharp image of cells could be acquired. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Table 3 Summary of performances of the liquid lenses based on graphene and other materials




Electrode material
Actuation method
Applied voltage (V)
Change in focal length (mm)
Resolution (lp mm−1)
Ref.




SLG
EWOD
120
∼4
456.1

69



—
Pneumatic
—
∼0.28
228

137



ITO
EWOD
150
∼28
25.39

138



ITO/Au
EW
300
∼2
—

139



Al
EWOD
250
∼25
—

140



ITO
EWOD
120
∼10
—

141



ITO
EWOD
100
∼0.6
—

142



—
EWOD
230
∼9
—

143





In addition to this, some research groups have also performed EW experiments on the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene. In 2016, Lomax et al. demonstrated an ultra-low voltage EW directly on HOPG conducting substrates by using a variety of aqueous liquid electrolytes.130 Following this, Ounnunkad et al. from the same group performed EW experiments directly on CVD grown graphene transferred onto SiO2/Si substrates.144 As compared to the results obtained for HOPG, no significant wetting response was seen for CVD graphene (Fig. 22a). This was attributed to the presence of polymeric residues from the growth substrate and the presence of grain boundaries due to the high polycrystalline nature of CVD graphene (AFM Fig. 22b), which ultimately resulted in pinning of liquid electrolyte droplets. Recently, Park et al. demonstrated a novel scalable direct patterning method of graphene by simply using water and electricity without vacuum.66 Graphene was synthesized via the typical CVD method on a 35 μm thick Cu foil using CH4 as precursor, and then transferred onto SiO2/Si substrates. An aqueous electrolyte solution (1 M KCl) was used for CA measurements and anodic configuration, and the electrolyte droplets (5 μL per drop) were directly dropped onto graphene using a micropipette (Fig. 22c). The applied bias voltages were scanned from 0 V to 3 V with a 0.2 V step and from 0 V to −4 V with a −0.2 V step. Initially, the CA was in the range of ∼70° to ∼80° at zero applied voltage. The CAs of the electrolyte droplets on graphene decreased, and the radius increased as the applied bias voltage increased (Fig. 22d). The CA variation was relatively small and symmetric for the bias voltage less than 2 V. However, the CA was dramatically changed for the bias voltage higher than 2 V. At the room temperature of 24 °C and relative humidity of 44%, the CA was reduced by the evaporation of the liquid droplet (Fig. 22e). Unexpectedly, without any change in the in-plane radius, the CA of the droplet on graphene reduced (Fig. 22e). Pinning occurred at the edge of the droplet due to the relatively high surface tension at the triple point of graphene–liquid–air.145 On the other hand, when the graphene acted as a cathode, the variation rate of the CA (per voltage) was relatively high compared to that of graphene anodic configuration. It was also observed that the CA variation was not reversible. Although these kinds of behaviors have already been observed on HOPG and CVD graphene,130,144 it clearly suggests that at high voltages, the CA variation does not follow the Young–Lippmann's relationship.130,132,133,146 At the triple point of solid–liquid–air interface, the liquid droplet spread on the graphene surface and permeated between the graphene and the substrate. As the bias voltage increased with time, the permeation of small liquid droplets increased. Due to this, a significant stress developed at the graphene blisters which caused the fracture of the graphene at the weakest bonding sites most probably at pentagon–hexagon bonding sites or impurity sites. In this way, by applying a bias voltage, the intercalation of water under graphene at the triple point could be controlled effectively. Also, a physical or chemical modification (oxidation) may take place depending on the bias polarity. Based on these observations, three different graphene patterning techniques were realized (Fig. 22f–h). A ring shaped patterning and functionalization of graphene could be achieved by controlling the droplet size and bias polarity (Fig. 22f). Similarly, pattern transfer on graphene using a pre-patterned photoresist (PR) pattern and direct patterning or writing of graphene by simply dragging a droplet on graphene using an electrically charged tip could be achieved (Fig. 22g and h).
 Fig. 22  (a) “Side-on” images of 6 M LiCl (aq.) droplets on CVD graphene at various applied potentials. (b) Peak force AFM image of the same sample and line profile along the dotted line are shown. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of graphene electrowetting. The bias voltage between the graphene/SiO2/Si and the gold wire electrode was scanned with alternating bias polarity while the graphene is grounded. (d) Bias voltage dependent contact angles of 1 M KCl aqueous droplets (5 μL) on graphene by varying the applied bias voltages of the gold wire electrode from 0 volt to a positive voltage (A and B) and a negative voltage (C and D) with respect to the grounded graphene with a few representing optical photographs on the right-hand sides (dashed arrows indicating the corresponding CAs). (e) Optical photographs taken at 0 and 900 seconds after the deposition of the water droplets on graphene. Schematics for (f) patterning and functionalization process in a ring shape by a droplet with controllable size, (g) PR-assisted patterning process by a controlled dipping method, and (h) scalable maskless direct patterning process by motorized dragging a droplet on graphene such as ink jet printers. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, for the first time, the potential of direct EW on metal-catalyzed CVD graphene coatings was exploited for application in electroactive flow control devices by Tabassian et al.147 They exploited two antagonistic functions, hydrophobic repellency versus liquid permeability, for electroactive flow control with the help of EW on graphene-coated metal meshes. Here, they used electrical stimuli to control the shapes of liquid droplets and the degree of water penetration through the graphene-coated meshes. Additionally, two active flow devices demonstrating the dynamic locomotion of water droplets and electroactive flow switching were developed. FLG growth was carried out by heating Ni wire mesh substrates at 1000 °C and flowing CH4 gas (Fig. 23a). Also, an etching process was employed to obtain free-standing and hollow FLG meshes (Fig. 23a). The fabricated graphene-coated nickel mesh (GCNM) was comprised of a unique rough surface with periodic topographical feature, and a water droplet exhibited a Cassie state when placed on it.44,148 The water droplet did not penetrate through the GCNM because of the negative capillary effect created from the liquid–air interface in the GCNM openings. The electrical stimulation of the water droplet was realized by using the fabricated 10 mm × 20 mm GCNM as the negative electrode and using a Cu tape as the positive electrode. The control of the hydrophobic repellency and permeability of liquid droplets on the GCNM were manipulated by electrical stimuli as shown in Fig. 23b.
 Fig. 23  Schematic of the synthetic route to the fabrication of graphene-coated metal mesh and hollow graphene mesh. (a) Fabrication steps of graphene-coated metal meshes. Scale bar, 1 cm. (b) Electrowetting and functionally antagonistic flow control using liquid repellency and liquid permeability. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
Firstly, the dynamic movement of water droplets through multi-stage GCNM electrodes was realized by an arrangement of parallel GCNM electrodes in series which were aligned in the vertical direction and having water droplets placed on each mesh (Fig. 24a). The water droplet between the first and second GCNM electrodes was actuated upward and suddenly pulled down the droplet placed on the upper electrode when an electrical field was applied to the first electrode. In this way, sequentially switching the location of the applied voltage between the two GCNM electrodes caused the movement of water droplets from the top GCNM to the bottom GCNM electrodes (Fig. 24a). Eventually, all combined droplets could be accumulated at the bottom GCNM electrode. Secondly, an electroactive flow switcher was realized by functionally utilizing antagonistic control between hydrophobic repellency and liquid permeability (Fig. 24b). A rectangular flow channel standing vertically was used in which a GCNM electrode and a Cu electrode were fixed. Due to the hydrophobic repellency of the GCNM, water was contained above the GCNM electrode in the absence of an electrical field. However, the contained water penetrated through the GCNM on application of an electrical field beyond a critical value. These novel EW and EWOD experiments using metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene as electrode material will prove to be beneficial for various applications such as flexible displays and droplet manipulation in micro/nano fluidics.
 Fig. 24  Irreversible actuation modes and functionally antagonistic active flow devices. (a) Locomotion of water droplets on multi-stage GCNM electrodes and (b) electroactive flow switching device based on GCNM. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
4. Conclusions and outlook
In this review article, we have discussed the most recent advancements in the wetting behavior based applications of metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene. The process of metal-catalyzed CVD growth of graphene is more controlled as compared to other techniques. Important concepts and results related to liquid wetting behavior on the surface of metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene are presented. A pristine SLG is intrinsically hydrophilic in nature. However, the metal-catalyzed CVD grown graphene films are generally hydrophobic in nature due to the presence of physiosorbed airborne organic contaminants. Hence, they are more suited for a variety of applications based on the hydrophobic or superhydrophobic behavior of liquid droplets. Graphene's stable hydrophobic/superhydrophobic behavior and motion of liquid droplets as well as actuation of liquid droplets on its surface have been exploited for a variety of applications such as omniphobic/hydrophobic/superhydrophobic 3D graphene filters for oil–water–gas separation, biomimetic surfaces for anti-corrosion and micro-droplet transfer, water harvesting and defogging, energy harvesting (triboelectricity generation), electrowetting based liquid lenses and electro-active flow control devices. Oil–water or chemical–water separation has been achieved by using FLG coated hydrophobic or superhydrophobic porous Ni foams. Moreover, robust graphene coatings (SLG/BLG/FLG) either directly grown or transferred onto textured metallic substrates have been exploited for corrosion protection, liquid droplet transfer, and water harvesting applications. Generally, Cu-catalyzed CVD grown SLG films are transferred onto polymeric substrates to fabricate TENGs and liquid lenses where the motion and actuation of ionic droplets are exploited. The graphene/PTFE structure could be a very promising platform to produce large power output using a variety of ionic liquid droplets. The FLG coated metal meshes could be exploited for electroactive flow control device application where electrical stimuli control the shapes of liquid droplets and the degree of water penetration through the meshes. High transparency of SLG coupled with its conductivity enabled its use as transparent conducting electrodes in liquid lenses. Similarly, its high thermal conductivity coupled with high transparency enabled the fabrication of defoggers which could be useful in making smart windows, defogging mirrors, and windscreens. There is a need to further study the performance dependence on the number of graphene layers and the durability of the above-mentioned devices. Furthermore, attempts could be made toward growing metal-catalyst free, high quality and large area graphene films directly on PET, glass, quartz, and sapphire substrates by exploring new carbon precursors and by designing novel CVD systems. This will be helpful in fabricating hydrophobic, transparent, conducting electrodes which can be used for micro–nano fluidics applications. This new emerging research area of graphene possesses a great potential and is attracting many researchers to exploit graphene's wetting behavior and develop novel concepts for device making and applications.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61721005) for financial support.
Notes and references
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bianco, H.-M. Cheng, T. Enoki, Y. Gogotsi, R. H. Hurt, N. Koratkar, T. Kyotani, M. Monthioux, C. R. Park, J. M. D. Tascon and J. Zhang, Carbon, 2013, 65, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eigler and A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7720–7738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsoy, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Geng, H. Wang and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2821–2837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6247–6252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Plutnar, M. Pumera and Z. Sofer, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6082–6101 RSC .
B. Deng, Z. Liu and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1800996,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201800996 .
M. R. Habib, T. Liang, X. Yu, X. Pi, Y. Liu and M. Xu, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2018, 81, 036501 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Khan, S. M. Islam, S. Ahmed, R. R. Kumar, M. R. Habib, K. Huang, M. Hu, X. Yu and D. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 1800050 CrossRef .
Z. Qi, X. Zhu, H. Jin, T. Zhang, X. Kong, R. S. Ruoff, Z. Qiao and H. Ji, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2067–2073 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huet and J.-P. Raskin, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3431–3440 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, G. Yu, H. Wang, B. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Zhang, B. Wang, X. Shi, X. Xie, Z. Jin and X. Liu, Carbon, 2012, 50, 5226–5231 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Choi, J. Kwak, S.-D. Park, H. D. Yun, S.-Y. Kim, M. Jung, S. Y. Kim, K. Park, S. Kang, S.-D. Kim, D.-Y. Park, D.-S. Lee, S.-K. Hong, H.-J. Shin and S.-Y. Kwon, ACS Nano, 2014, 9, 679–686 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ago, Y. Ito, N. Mizuta, K. Yoshida, B. Hu, C. M. Orofeo, M. Tsuji, K.-I. Ikeda and S. Mizuno, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7407–7414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Amato, Materials, 2018, 11, 257 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Oznuluer, E. Pince, E. O. Polat, O. Balci, O. Salihoglu and C. Kocabas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 183101 CrossRef .
T. Kojima, Y. Bao, C. Zhang, S. Liu, H. Xu, T. Nakae, K. P. Loh and H. Sakaguchi, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 10439–10445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kordatos, N. Kelaidis, S. A. Giamini, J. Marquez-Velasco, E. Xenogiannopoulou, P. Tsipas, G. Kordas and A. Dimoulas, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 369, 251–256 CrossRef CAS .
X. An, F. Liu, Y. J. Jung and S. Kar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16412–16420 CrossRef CAS .
B.-J. Park, J.-S. Choi, J.-H. Eom, H. Ha, H. Y. Kim, S. Lee, H. Shin and S.-G. Yoon, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2008–2016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zou, X. Song, K. Chen, Q. Ji, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 592–599 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nazarova, T. Stora, A. Zhukov, K. Huang, R. Nair, Y. Wang, J. Yin, M. Holwill, Z. Wang, A. Mishchenko and K. Novoselov, Carbon, 2018, 139, 29–34 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhen, Z. Li, X. Zhao, Y. Zhong, L. Zhang, Q. Chen, T. Yang and H. Zhu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703848 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, G. Wang, H. Geng, H. Zhu, M. Zhang, Z. Di, X. Liu, P. K. Chu and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19876–19881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huang, M. Biswal, H. J. Park, S. Jin, D. Qu, S. Hong, Z. Zhu, L. Qiu, D. Luo, X. Liu, Z. Yang, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, H. Lim, W. J. Yoo, F. Ding, Y. Wang, Z. Lee and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6117–6127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, C. Shen, Y. Tian, L. Bao, P. Chen, R. Yang, T. Yang, J. Li, C. Gu and H.-J. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 063102 CrossRef .
H. Sugime, L. Darsié, S. Esconjauregui, G. Zhong, X. Wu, E. Hildebrandt, H. Sezen, M. Amati, L. Gregoratti, R. S. Weatherup and J. Robertson, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14467–14475 RSC .
M. H. Rümmeli, M. Zeng, S. Melkhanova, S. Gorantla, A. Bachmatiuk, L. Fu, C. Yan, S. Oswald, R. G. Mendes, D. Makarov, O. Schmidt and J. Eckert, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3880–3887 CrossRef .
Y. Hoshi, J. Takahashi, H. Wang, H. Kato and Y. Homma, Surf. Sci., 2018, 670, 72–75 CrossRef CAS .
A. Reina, X. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yavari, C. Kritzinger, C. Gaire, L. Song, H. Gulapalli, T. Borca-Tasciuc, P. M. Ajayan and N. Koratkar, Small, 2010, 6, 2535–2538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rafiee, M. A. Rafiee, Z.-Z. Yu and N. Koratkar, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2151–2154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dhiman, F. Yavari, X. Mi, H. Gullapalli, Y. Shi, P. M. Ajayan and N. Koratkar, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3123–3127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, N. M. Pugno, M. J. Buehler and S. Ryu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Melios, C. E. Giusca, V. Panchal and O. Kazakova, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 022001 CrossRef .
D. Parobek and H. Liu, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 032001 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, L. Dong, D. Yang and H. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5352–5359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Young, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1805, 95, 65–87 CrossRef .
R. N. Wenzel, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 1936, 28, 988–994 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 546–551 RSC .
S. Wang, Y. Zhang, N. Abidi and L. Cabrales, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11078–11081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Shin, Y. Wang, H. Huang, G. Kalon, A. T. S. Wee, Z. Shen, C. S. Bhatia and H. Yang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3798–3802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kozbial, Z. Li, C. Conaway, R. McGinley, S. Dhingra, V. Vahdat, F. Zhou, B. D'Urso, H. Liu and L. Li, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8598–8606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. van Engers, N. E. A. Cousens, V. Babenko, J. Britton, B. Zappone, N. Grobert and S. Perkin, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3815–3821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kozbial, C. Trouba, H. Liu and L. Li, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 959–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Wang, A. Kozbial, G. Shenoy, F. Zhou, R. Mcginley, P. Ireland, B. Morganstein, A. Kunkel, S. P. Surwade, L. Li and H. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 925–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Raj, S. C. Maroo and E. N. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1509–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rafiee, X. Mi, H. Gullapalli, A. V. Thomas, F. Yavari, Y. Shi, P. M. Ajayan and N. A. Koratkar, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 217–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Shih, Q. H. Wang, S. Lin, K.-C. Park, Z. Jin, M. S. Strano and D. Blankschtein, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 049901 CrossRef .
A. Ashraf, Y. Wu, M. C. Wang, N. R. Aluru, S. A. Dastgheib and S. Nam, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 12827–12836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu and N. R. Aluru, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 8802–8813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Belyaeva, P. M. G. V. Deursen, K. I. Barbetsea and G. F. Schneider, Adv. Mater., 2017, 30, 1703274 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Bunch, S. S. Verbridge, J. S. Alden, A. M. V. D. Zande, J. M. Parpia, H. G. Craighead and P. L. Mceuen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2458–2462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Surwade, S. N. Smirnov, I. V. Vlassiouk, R. R. Unocic, G. M. Veith, S. Dai and S. M. Mahurin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 459–464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Seo, S. Pineda, Y. C. Woo, M. Xie, A. T. Murdock, E. Y. M. Ang, Y. Jiao, M. J. Park, S. I. Lim, M. Lawn, F. F. Borghi, Z. J. Han, S. Gray, G. Millar, A. Du, H. K. Shon, T. Y. Ng and K. Ostrikov, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 683 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kwak, S.-Y. Kim, Y. Jo, N. Y. Kim, S. Y. Kim, Z. Lee and S.-Y. Kwon, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1870218 CrossRef .
M. E. Schrader, J. Phys. Chem., 1975, 79, 2508–2515 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xie, M. A. Alibakhshi, S. Jiao, Z. Xu, M. Hempel, J. Kong, H. G. Park and C. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 238–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-T. Kim, S.-J. Gim, S.-M. Cho, N. Koratkar and I.-K. Oh, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5166–5172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Kwak, S. Lin, J. H. Lee, H. Ryu, T. Y. Kim, H. Zhong, H. Chen and S.-W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7297–7302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tan, Z. Zhou and M. M.-C. Cheng, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 375501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Park, H.-K. Park and J. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14954–14961 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, C. Sun, X. Yin, J. Li, S. Cao, C. Zhang, P. M. Voyles and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5335–5342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tan, M. Zeng, Q. Wu, L. Chen, J. Wang, T. Zhang, J. Eckert, M. H. Rümmeli and L. Fu, Small, 2014, 11, 1840–1846 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Shahini, J. Xia, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhao and M. M.-C. Cheng, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 1658–1665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Singh, Z. Chen, F. Houshmand, W. Ren, Y. Peles, H.-M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Small, 2012, 9, 75–80 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-B. Jiang, Y.-L. Zhang, Y. Liu, X.-Y. Fu, Y.-F. Li, Y.-Q. Liu, C.-H. Li and H.-B. Sun, Laser Photonics Rev., 2016, 10, 441–450 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Y. Meng and S.-J. Park, Carbon Lett., 2014, 15, 89–104 CrossRef .
J. N. Wang, Y.-L. Zhang, Y. Liu, W. Zheng, L. P. Leed and H.-B. Sun, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7101–7114 RSC .
S. Ana, B. N. Joshi, J.-G. Lee, M. W. Lee, Y. I. Kim, M.-W. Kim, H. S. Jo and S. S. Yoon, Catal. Today, 2017, 295, 14–25 CrossRef .
V. Chabot, D. Higgins, A. Yu, X. Xiao, Z. Chen and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1564–1596 RSC .
S. Dervin, D. D. Dionysiou and S. C. Pillai, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15115–15131 RSC .
W. Wan, Y. Lin, A. Prakash and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18687–18705 RSC .
M. Ge, C. Cao, J. Huang, X. Zhang, Y. Tang, X. Zhou, K. Zhang, Z. Chen and Y. Lai, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 235–260 RSC .
G. Hong, Y. Han, T. M. Schutzius, Y. Wang, Y. Pan, M. Hu, J. Jie, C. S. Sharma, U. Müller and D. Poulikakos, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4447–4453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ashraf, Y. Wu, M. C. Wang, K. Yong, T. Sun, Y. Jing, R. T. Haasch, N. R. Aluru and S. Nam, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4708–4712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lim and S. Ju, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2017, 328, 89–93 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, G. Wang, W. Huang, X. Fan, Y. Deng, J. Zhang, T. Wei, R. Duan, J. Wang and L. Sun, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 1999–2003 RSC .
K. Xia, M. Jian, W. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500674 CrossRef .
J. Ge, L.-A. Shi, Y.-C. Wang, H.-Y. Zhao, H.-B. Yao, Y.-B. Zhu, Y. Zhang, H.-W. Zhu, H.-A. Wu and S.-H. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 434–440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, C. Shen, L. Chen, C. Wang, M. Rana and P. Lv, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 531–540 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bong, T. Lim, K. Seo, C.-A. Kwon, J. H. Park, S. K. Kwak and S. Ju, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lim, J. Lee, J. Kim, S. Seo and S. Ju, Appl. Phys. Express, 2016, 10, 015101 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-B. Huang, G.-L. Wang, F.-Q. Gao, Z.-T. Qiao, G. Wang, M.-J. Chen, L. Tao, Y. Deng and L.-F. Sun, Chin. Phys. B, 2014, 23, 046802 CrossRef .
C. Sanchez, H. Arribart and M. M. G. Guille, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 277–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yu, L. Camilli, T. Wang, D. M. Mackenzie, M. Curioni, R. Akid and P. Bøggild, Carbon, 2018, 132, 78–84 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, Y. Liu, Y. Bai, J. Zhang, Z. Han and L. Ren, Colloids Surf., A, 2016, 500, 64–71 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, Y. Liu, H. Jiang, Y. Zhang, Z. Han and L. Ren, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2017, 328, 152–160 CrossRef CAS .
O. Sato, S. Kubo and Z.-Z. Gu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kendig, S. Jeanjaquet, R. Addison and J. Waldrop, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2001, 140, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
T.-G. Cha, J. W. Yi, M.-W. Moon, K.-R. Lee and H.-Y. Kim, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 8319–8326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ebert and B. Bhushan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 384, 182–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bhushan and M. Nosonovsky, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 368, 4713–4728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, Y. Zhang, J. Xi, Y. Zhu, N. Wang, F. Xia and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4114–4119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ding, W. Jiao, R. Wang, Y. Niu, L. Hao, F. Yang and W. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17325–17334 RSC .
G. Ding, W. Jiao, R. Wang, Y. Niu, L. Chen and L. Hao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706686 CrossRef .
J. T. Han, S. Y. Kim, J. S. Woo and G.-W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3724–3727 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zang, S. Ryu, N. Pugno, Q. Wang, Q. Tu, M. J. Buehler and X. Zhao, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 321–325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, N. Sun, S. O. Nielsen, B. B. Stogin, J. Wang, S. Yang and T.-S. Wong, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 919 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Zeng, X. Yua, C. Liang and Y. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 465, 986–994 CrossRef CAS .
G. Giovannetti, P. A. Khomyakov, G. Brocks, V. M. Karpan, J. V. D. Brink and P. J. Kelly, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 026803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, Y. Chen, M. K. Priydarshi, Z. Chen, A. Bachmatiuk, Z. Zou, Z. Chen, X. Song, Y. Gao, M. H. Rümmeli, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5846–5854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, D. Chen, C. Ye, X. Li, D. Dai, Q. Yuan, K. W. Chee, P. Zhao, N. Jiang and C.-T. Lin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 435, 809–814 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Liu, S. Yang, A. Xu, D. Chen, Q. Guo and G. Wang, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 065606 CrossRef .
D. Sui, Y. Huang, L. Huang, J. Liang, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Small, 2011, 7, 3186–3192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Fang, H. Zhu, B. Gao, S. Garner, P. Cimo, Z. Barcikowski, A. Mignerey and L. Hu, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 556, 13–17 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Xue, M. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Xie, P. K. Chu, P. Zhou, Z. Di and X. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1700929 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yin, Z. Zhang, X. Li, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1736–1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, X. Li, J. Yu, Z. Zhang, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 378–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, Z. Zhang, X. Li, J. Yu, J. Zhou, Y. Chen and W. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, J. Xia, F. Wang, H. Chen, H. Wu and S. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604226 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, H. Cheng, Z. Zhang, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4351–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, Y. Liang, H. H. Cheng, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 912–916 RSC .
W. B. Huang, G. Wang, F. Gao, Z. Qiao, G. Wang, L. Tao, M. Chen, F. Yu, H. Yang and L. F. Sun, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3921–3924 RSC .
W. Huang, G. Wang, F. Gao, Z. Qiao, G. Wang, M. Chen, Y. Deng, L. Tao, Y. Zhao, X. Fan and L. F. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8783–8787 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, X. Wang, P. Yang and B. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5243–5246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Arun, P. Singh, G. Biswas, N. Chanda and S. Chakraborty, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 3589–3596 RSC .
W. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Liu, D. Li, L. Liao and C. Pan, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18147–18151 RSC .
A. Khan, S. Sohail and C. Jacob, Mater. Res. Express, 2015, 2, 125004 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, J. Xu, Y. Xiu, Y. Sun, D. W. Hess and C.-P. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15945–15950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, B. Tay, C. Tan, M. Shakerzadeh and K. K. Ostrikov, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3031–3036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lapierre, Y. Coffinier, R. Boukherroub and V. Thomy, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 13346–13351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Campbell, M. Breedon, K. Latham and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5091–5098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-D. Zhao, H.-M. Fan, J. Luo, J. Ding, X.-Y. Liu, B.-S. Zou and Y.-P. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 21, 184–190 Search PubMed .
D. J. Lomax, P. Kant, A. T. Williams, H. V. Patten, Y. Zou, A. Juel and R. A. W. Dryfe, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 8798–8804 RSC .
S. Sohail, E. A. Mistri, A. Khan, S. Banerjee and K. Biswas, Sens. Actuators, A, 2016, 238, 122–132 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mugele, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 3377–3384 RSC .
R. Sedev, Eur. Phys. J.: Spec. Top., 2011, 197, 307 CAS .
A. Shahini, H. Jin, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhao, P.-Y. Chen, J. Hua and M. M.-C. Cheng, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2017, 12, 046002 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Quinn, R. Sedev and J. Ralston, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6268–6275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. J. Verheijen and M. W. J. Prins, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 6616–6620 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, D. Kang, T. Wu, N. Tabatabaei, R. W. Carruth, R. V. Martinez, G. M. Whitesides, Y. Nakajima and G. J. Tearney, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2014, 5, 4350–4361 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li and H. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 231105 CrossRef PubMed .
N. B. Khiem, K. Matsumoto and I. Shimoyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 124101 CrossRef .
C. X. Liu, J. Park and J. W. Choi, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2008, 18, 035023 CrossRef .
S. Kuiper and B. Hendriks, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 1128–1130 CrossRef CAS .
T. Krupenkin, S. Yang and P. Mach, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 316–318 CrossRef CAS .
B. Berge and J. Peseux, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2000, 3, 159–163 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ounnunkad, H. V. Patten, M. Velický, A. K. Farquhar, P. A. Brooksby, A. J. Downard and R. A. W. Dryfe, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 199, 49–61 RSC .
F. Du, J. Huang, H. Duan, C. Xiong and J. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. J. Ostrowski and J. D. Eaves, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 530–536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tabassian, J.-H. Oh, S. Kim, D. Kim, S. Ryu, S.-M. Cho, N. Koratkar and I.-K. Oh, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lafuma and D. Quéré, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Afzal Khan	Afzal Khan received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science from the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India, in 2016. Since April 2017, he has been working as a postdoctoral fellow at the State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials and School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. His current areas of research are catalyst free direct CVD growth of graphene on technologically important dielectric and semiconducting substrates, graphene/Si based photodetectors and wetting behavior of CVD grown graphene.
Mohammad Rezwan Habib	Mohammad Rezwan Habib is currently pursuing Ph.D at the State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials and College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. He received his Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) degree in Physics from the University of Calcutta in 2012 and his Master of Science (M.Sc.) degree in Physics from the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee (IITR) (India) in 2014. His research interests focus on growth and application of 2D materials such as graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), etc.
Deren Yang	Deren Yang, a Cheung Kong Professor, is the director of the State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials and the director of the Institute for Semiconductor Materials at Zhejiang University, China. He received his Ph. D. degree in 1991 from the State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials at Zhejiang University and then worked there. In the 1990s, he worked in Japan, Germany and Sweden for several years as a visiting researcher. He is engaged in the research of silicon materials used for microelectronic devices, solar cells and nano-devices.
Xuegong Yu	Xuegong Yu received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Zhejiang University, China, in 2004. After being a research associate in North Carolina State University, Raleigh, USA, and a postdoctorate in Brandenburg Technology University, Cottbus, Germany, he joined the State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials and School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China, in 2016 as a professor. His current research interests include low cost, high efficiency silicon solar cells and related materials.

 	Fig. 1  Mother of all graphitic forms. Graphene is a 2D building material for carbon materials of all other dimensionalities. It can be wrapped up into 0D bucky balls, rolled into 1D nanotubes or stacked into 3D graphite. Reproduced with permission.1 Copyright 2007, Springer Nature.	 
γSG = γSL + γLGcosθC	(1)
cosθw = rcosθC	(2)
cosθCB = φs(cosθC + 1) − 1	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) and (b) A liquid droplet on a chemically homogeneous, rigid and ideally flat solid hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces, respectively. (c) and (d) A liquid droplet in the Wenzel state and Cassie–Baxter state on a rough surface, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Water droplet on single-layer epitaxial graphene on SiC. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) CA data on G/Cu for water. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) The crossed-cylinder, single contact geometry used for adhesion force measurements with the surface force balance. The surfaces are brought into adhesive contact and gradually pulled apart using a spring with a known spring constant kspring until they suddenly jump out of contact to a distance djump. The pull-off force is calculated as Fadh = kspringdjump. (d) Multilayer geometry consisting of a smooth sheet of SLG or FLG glued onto epoxy, supported by a gold-covered silica lens of curvature RL = 10 mm. Because of the thickness inhomogeneity in the epoxy layer, the actual surface curvature (RG) differs from RL. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) WCA measurements for Si and Au substrates with and without a SLG coating. The intermediate graphene layer has no significant impact on the baseline wettability of the underlying substrate. (b) WCA measurements on Cu substrates with different numbers of graphene layers. There is a <0.7% change in the CA of the Cu substrate in the presence of SLG. Beyond 4 graphene layers, there is a sharp decrease in the wettability, with the WCA finally saturating at the bulk graphite value for more than 6 graphene layers. (c) From bottom to top, illustration of the interaction range of water molecules on Cu substrates without graphene and covered with 1, 3 and 6-layered graphene, respectively. (d) Predicted adsorption energy of water on Cu substrates with different numbers of graphene layers. SLG deposition yields a minimal change in the adsorption energy. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2012, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Room temperature Raman spectra of HOPG and monolayer, bilayer, and trilayer graphene films on SiO2 substrate. The evolution of CA, water droplet base radius, and height on (b) a monolayer graphene coating on a thermally grown SiO2 surface and (c) a bare SiO2 surface. The inset in (b) shows the side-view image of the droplet with a 93° CA and a volume of ∼34 nL at 14 s. The dotted red line in the inset of (b) defines the graphene surface to avoid confusion with the reflection. Experimental results of (d) advancing CA, (e) receding CA, and (f) CA hysteresis for bare substrates and mono-, bi-, and tri-layered graphene on them. The corresponding values for HOPG are represented by black straight lines without symbols. The experimental uncertainty in the advancing and receding CAs are ±2° and ±3°, respectively. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Wettability of graphene transferred onto a SiO2/Si substrate with bias. At neutral state, the static WCA was close to 88°. In the presence of both negative and positive biases, the WCA decreased. After turning off the bias, the WCA remained the same for both cases. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Transfer method to obtain subsurface polyelectrolyte-doped graphene samples. (b) Schematic illustration showing WCA measurements using E-SEM with a customized beveled sample holder. The concept and relationship between doping and wettability. (c) Schematic illustrations showing graphene wettability modulation by doping induced Fermi level shifts. (d) WCA (left axis) measured by E-SEM and WF (right axis) measured by SKPM of polyelectrolyte-doped and undoped graphene samples. For both n- and p-doping, the WCA of graphene decreases. Error bars represent one standard deviation. Insets show false-colored E-SEM images of water droplets (scale bars represent 10 μm). Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  The merging of water droplets on graphene/Cu and the barrier effect of graphene edge to water. (a) Schematic illustration. (b–i) Optical images showing the condensation of water vapor and the merging of water droplets. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  Dependence of the visualization results on the wetting behaviors of bare surfaces and graphene-covered surfaces. (a, b, d and e) The optical visualization images of graphene on an HF-treated Si substrate (a and b), and on a pristine Si substrate (d and e). The insets of (a) and (d) show the water contact angle of the corresponding bare surface and the graphene-covered surface. Scale bar: 200 μm. (c and f) Schematic diagram showing the mechanism of the optical visualization of graphene on substrate in which surface–water interactions were dominated by van der Waals forces (c) and short-range chemical bonding (f). (g) WCA of various substrates with and without monolayer graphene coating. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 
C = Mf − Mi/Mi	(4)

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM images of the micro-porous graphene foam with an average pore size of ∼200 μm (b) SEM image of the Teflon coated graphene foam. (c) Raman spectra of the graphene foam taken from several locations (d) Advancing liquid front for the Teflon coated graphene sample indicating an advancing WCA of ∼163.01°. (e) Receding liquid front on the same sample indicating a receding WCA of ∼143.78°. (f) Corresponding advancing CA on the baseline graphene foam (without a Teflon coating) measured to be ∼134.86°. (g) Corresponding receding CA on the baseline graphene foam measured to be ∼110.72°. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Photograph of a 3D structural GF 25.4 mm in diameter. FE-SEM image of the GF with an average pore diameter of 150–200 μm. The inset shows a higher magnification image of the surface of a single graphene wire, in which the graphene laminated on the fracture surface is clearly observed. (b–d) Schematic illustration of three different types of graphene by using surface treatment and their selective filtering properties. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  Gas/water/oil separation achieved with omniphilic, hydrophobic, and omniphobic graphene filters coated on ∼150–200 μm meshes. The graphene foams were fixed between a polypropylene (PP) tube and a PP beaker, and pure gas, water, or oil (the latter two with dye) was placed in the upper PP tube. Water permeates through the coated mesh, while the oil is repelled and retained in the upper tube. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) CAs of the hydrophobic 3D pristine graphene structure using water and chlorobenzene liquid. (b) Wettabilities of water and chlorobenzene liquid droplets (∼30 μL) on the 3D pristine graphene structure, which were placed on copy papers to observe the penetration of liquid droplets into the filter. (c) Schematic diagram of the SnO2 nanowire transistor covered by the hydrophobic 3D pristine graphene structure. The insets show the photograph of the fabricated SnO2 nanowire transistor array on a SiO2/Si substrate (25.4 mm2) covered by a 3D graphene filter (size, 15 mm2) and a FE-SEM image of a single SnO2 nanowire between the source and drain electrodes. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2017, The Japan Society of Applied Physics.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Photograph of a neat Cu foil used for laser structuring; a femtosecond laser pulse with a central wavelength of 800 nm was used. (b) Photograph of a laser-structured Cu foil with structural color. (c) CVD growth of graphene on the laser-structured Cu foil. (d) The structured graphene film transferred onto a cover glass. (e) Static WCAs of micro–nanostructured graphene films on different templates. Laser powers of 50, 100, 150 and 200 mW correspond to laser fluences of 6.37 × 105, 12.74 × 105, 19.11 × 105 and 25.48 × 105 mJ cm−2, respectively. (f) Photographs of the Cu-200 mW foil after CVD growth of a graphene film. (g) Structural color of the micro–nanostructured graphene film (Cu-200 mW as template) transferred onto a glass slide. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (h) WCA on graphene-coated structured Al alloy. (i and j) Mechanism of possible anti-corrosion of graphene coatings. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 
Anodic reaction: Al = Al3+ + e−
Cathodic reaction: 2H+ + 2e− = H2↑

 	Fig. 15  Transfer of a water droplet from the low adhesive superhydrophobic square-pillar-structured Al alloy substrate to a highly adhesive G/ESS substrate (a–d) and then to another square-pillar-structured Al alloy substrate with superhydrophilic properties (e–h). Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  Surface characterization and static water repellency of the hydrophobic graphene-coated copper surface. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of (a) bare copper substrate (Cu), (b) electroplated copper substrate (h-Cu), (c) electroplated and thermal annealed copper substrate (h-rCu), and (d) electroplated and thermal annealed Cu after graphene growth (h-Gr/rCu) by chemical vapor deposition. The insets show photographs of water droplets on each surface. (e) Schematic diagram of the water harvesting test set-up. (f) Total condensate mass and dewetting ratio for the Cu, Gr/Cu, h-rCu and h-Gr/rCu surfaces. (g) and (h) Film-wise condensation of water on bare copper (Cu) and graphene coated copper (Gr/Cu), respectively. (i) and (j) Drop-wise condensation on electroplated and thermal annealed copper without (h-rCu) and with (h-Gr/rCu) graphene coating, respectively. Scale bars in (g–j) are 5 mm. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Fog removal performance of the directly grown SLG defogger before (left) and after (right) heating at 20 V for 15 s. (b) Fog removal time as a function of input voltage. (c) The temperature corresponding to the starting time and complete time for defogging under different input voltages. (d) Defogging robustness of the directly grown SLG defogger investigated by completely removing fog 50 times at 20 V. (e) The resistance profiles of directly grown graphene defoggers and transferred graphene defoggers before and after exposure to fog. (f) Directly grown graphene films perfectly adhered onto the surface of the quartz substrate. (g) Upper surface of directly grown graphene absorbed by water molecules and the current carriers passing through the under surface protected by the quartz substrate. (h) Inevitable cracks and residues caused by the transfer procedure in transferred graphene. (i) Both sides of transferred graphene absorbed by water molecules for lack of strong interaction force between the graphene and the quartz substrate. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

SLG	Ga vapor-assisted CVD	Quartz	1 × 1 cm2	32 V	6 s	
68

SLG	Direct CVD	Quartz	2 × 2 cm2	30 V	21 s	
107

rGO/EEG	Solution	Quartz	1 × 1 cm2	30 V	11 s	
108

VGNWs	Plasma assisted CVD	Glass	2 × 2 cm2	5 V	8 s	
109

rGO	Solution	Quartz	2 × 1.4 cm2	60 V	120 s	
110

Glass	30 s
rGO	Solution	Flexible glass	—	10 V	80 s	
111

SLG	Ge-assisted CVD	Quartz	—	20 V	—	
112


 	Fig. 18  Illustration of the experimental set-up: (a) A liquid droplet is sandwiched between graphene and a SiO2/Si wafer, and drawn by the wafer at specific velocities. Inset: a droplet of 0.6 M NaCl solution on a graphene surface with advancing and receding CAs of ∼91.9° and ∼60.2°, respectively. (b) Typical voltage signal produced by drawing a droplet on a graphene strip from the left (L) to right (R) end and then back. The inset highlights the voltage signal during the movement of the droplet. Mechanism for the drawing potential: (c) DFT results for the distribution of differential charge near monolayer graphene caused by adsorbing one to three rows of hydrated sodium cations and the corresponding adsorption energy (Ea). (d) Schematic illustration of the pseudo-capacitance formed by a static droplet on graphene. (e) Schematic illustration of the potential difference induced by a moving droplet. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Voltage output from a graphene/PTFE structure by a single moving droplet. (b) Dependence of the output voltage and current on the external load resistance. (c) Current output from the graphene/PTFE structure according to forward and reverse motion of the water. (d) Maximum power output by a single moving droplet of 0.6 M NaCl. (e) Voltage output change from the graphene/PTFE structures with a different number of graphene layers. (f) The dependence of the voltage output on the size of the water droplet. (g) Electric power generated from the monolayer graphene/PTFE structure by continuous water drops. (h) Charge distribution of the water droplet and graphene/PTFE in the initial state and (i) charge redistribution during movement of the water droplet over the surface of the graphene/PTFE. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup for measuring the electrical response to the flow of a certain volume of water over graphene–PVDF heterostructure which is fixed on a slope; the positive end of the multimeter is connected to the flowing direction of the water. (b) Typical voltage responses to the flow of 0.2 mL DI water, tap water, and 0.1 M NaCl aqueous solution from the top end to the bottom end of the graphene strip, where NaCl aqueous solution gives the highest voltage output. (c) Charge distribution at the steady state when the water keeps still; three charged layers are formed at the graphene–water and graphene–PVDF interfaces. (d) Dynamic charging–discharging process when the water is flowing over the graphene surface; more carriers are being attracted to the front side whereas the excessive carriers at the rear side are being repelled. (e) Overall charge transfer process during the water flowing process; the carriers in graphene can be continuously dragged to move from the front side to the rear side. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

SLG	CVD	SiO2/Si	∼0.6 M HCl	Fluid flow	∼25 mV	∼4 μA	
37

SLG	CVD	SiO2/Si	∼0.6 M HCl	Fluid flow	∼120 mV	—	
113

SLG	CVD	PET	∼0.6 M NaCl	Droplet motion	0.15–0.59 mV	—	
114

SLG	CVD	PET	∼0.6 M NaCl	Fluid flow	100 mV	11 μA	
115

SLG	CVD	PTFE	∼0.6 M NaCl	Droplet motion	∼ 400–450 mV	∼ 4.5–4.8 μA	
64

SLG	CVD	PVDF	DI water	Droplet motion	1.6 mV	—	
116

Tap water	7.5 mV
0.1 M NaCl	15.5 mV
GO film	Moisture-electric annealing	—	Moisture	Fluid flow	∼20 mV	∼5 μA cm−2	
117

GO film	Freeze-drying	—	Moisture	Fluid flow	260 mV	3.2 mA cm−2	
118

3D GF	CVD	—	DI water	Fluid flow	—	25 μA	
119

3D GF	CVD	—	Water/ethanol mixture	Fluid flow	—	20 μA	
120

Graphene-carbon black/PTFE	Hummer	ITO-FTO	0.6 M NaCl	Simulated rain water	∼0.227 mV	∼5.97 μA	
121

rGO film	ITO-PET	∼0.109 mV	∼0.49 μA
rGO sheets	Dipping	Paper–pencil	0.6 M MgCl2–DI water	Fluid flow	280 mV	325 mA cm−2	
122

rGO/Ni foam	CVD	Ni foam	2 M Na2SO4	Dipping	4 mV	7 μA	
123

	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 21  (a) Measured CA change for a 3 μL KCl droplet with planar graphene electrodes on the top of a curved PDMS/parylene substrate observed at different voltages. (b) Optical performance of the liquid lenses (a 10 mM 3 μL KCl droplet) at different voltages. The elements of groups 6 and 7 of the 1951 USAF resolution test chart were in focus at 0 V. The images of the object became out of focus with increasing voltage. (c) Corresponding focal length and contact angle change for applied voltages from 0 to 130 V. (d) Images of the BMDCs captured through an ionic liquid lens. At 0 V, the cells were not well focused. At higher applied voltages, cells were focused and a sharp image of cells could be acquired. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

SLG	EWOD	120	∼4	456.1	
69

—	Pneumatic	—	∼0.28	228	
137

ITO	EWOD	150	∼28	25.39	
138

ITO/Au	EW	300	∼2	—	
139

Al	EWOD	250	∼25	—	
140

ITO	EWOD	120	∼10	—	
141

ITO	EWOD	100	∼0.6	—	
142

—	EWOD	230	∼9	—	
143


 	Fig. 22  (a) “Side-on” images of 6 M LiCl (aq.) droplets on CVD graphene at various applied potentials. (b) Peak force AFM image of the same sample and line profile along the dotted line are shown. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of graphene electrowetting. The bias voltage between the graphene/SiO2/Si and the gold wire electrode was scanned with alternating bias polarity while the graphene is grounded. (d) Bias voltage dependent contact angles of 1 M KCl aqueous droplets (5 μL) on graphene by varying the applied bias voltages of the gold wire electrode from 0 volt to a positive voltage (A and B) and a negative voltage (C and D) with respect to the grounded graphene with a few representing optical photographs on the right-hand sides (dashed arrows indicating the corresponding CAs). (e) Optical photographs taken at 0 and 900 seconds after the deposition of the water droplets on graphene. Schematics for (f) patterning and functionalization process in a ring shape by a droplet with controllable size, (g) PR-assisted patterning process by a controlled dipping method, and (h) scalable maskless direct patterning process by motorized dragging a droplet on graphene such as ink jet printers. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic of the synthetic route to the fabrication of graphene-coated metal mesh and hollow graphene mesh. (a) Fabrication steps of graphene-coated metal meshes. Scale bar, 1 cm. (b) Electrowetting and functionally antagonistic flow control using liquid repellency and liquid permeability. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 24  Irreversible actuation modes and functionally antagonistic active flow devices. (a) Locomotion of water droplets on multi-stage GCNM electrodes and (b) electroactive flow switching device based on GCNM. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
