Nano-designed semiconductors for electro- and photoelectro-catalytic conversion of carbon dioxide  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00016F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00016F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5423-5443Nano-designed semiconductors for electro- and photoelectro-catalytic conversion of carbon dioxide

        
          
            Lei 
            Zhang†
, 
      
        
          
            Zhi-Jian 
            Zhao†
, 
      
        
          
            Tuo 
            Wang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jinlong 
            Gong
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory for Green Chemical Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, China. E-mail: jlgong@tju.edu.cn
Received 
      6th January 2018
    First published on 25th May 2018AbstractDevelopment of novel catalysts with high efficiency for CO2 conversion is of great research interest, because of the climate hazards caused by the gradual increase in CO2 concentration. Among various types of catalysts, semiconductors have been widely used as effective candidates for both electro- and photoelectro-CO2 conversion. Very recently, with the emerging nanotechnology and advanced characterization techniques, tremendous achievements have been made in highly efficient and clean CO2 conversion based on semiconductor catalysts. This review gives a systematic overview of this field, including the rational design of semiconductor catalysts for electro- and photoelectro-chemical CO2 conversion. Recent advances in the development of mechanism understandings on reaction pathways of CO2 and the feasibility for industrial production are discussed. Furthermore, the challenges and future perspectives of electro- and photoelectro-catalytic CO2 conversion are outlined.
Lei Zhang
Lei Zhang received his BS degree in Chemistry (2008) and PhD degree in Nanomaterial Chemistry (2014) from Xiamen University with Prof. Zhaoxiong Xie. He was a visiting graduate student at Georgia Institute of Technology in Prof. Younan Xia's group from 2012 to 2014. From 2015 to 2016, he worked as a Postdoc at Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering in Tianjin University. He is currently a postdoctoral associate with Professor Xueliang Sun at Western University. His research interests include the design and synthesis of metal nanomaterials and single atom catalysts for fuel cells, carbon dioxide reduction, and water splitting devices.
Zhi-Jian Zhao
Zhi-Jian Zhao received his BS and MS degrees in chemistry from Zhejiang University (supervisor Prof. Qi Wang) in 2008 and his PhD degree from Technische Universität München (supervisor Prof. N. Rösch) in 2012. After working as Postdoc with Prof. J. Greeley in Purdue University and Dr F. Studt, Prof. J. Nørskov in Stanford University, he joined the faculty of Tianjin University in 2015 as an Associate Professor. He also serves as associate editor for Chemical Engineering Science. His current research interest lies in molecular mechanistic understanding of heterogeneous catalytic reactions.
Tuo Wang
Tuo Wang received his BS from Tianjin University and PhD (with Professor John G. Ekerdt) from the University of Texas at Austin, both in chemical engineering. After gaining another year of research experience as a postdoctoral associate, he joined Novellus Systems Inc. (currently Lam Research Corp.) as a process development engineer at Tualatin, Oregon. He joined Tianjin University as an associate professor in chemical engineering in 2012, and was promote to full professor in 2017. He serves as the Subject Editor for Renewable Energy. He is the author of 63 peer-reviewed journal paper. His current research focuses on the design and fabrication of nanostructured thin film materials for energy conversion systems.
Jinlong Gong
Jinlong Gong studied chemical engineering and received his BS and MS degrees from Tianjin University and his PhD degree from the University of Texas at Austin under the guidance of C. B. Mullins. After a stint with Professor George M. Whitesides as a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard University, he joined the faculty of chemical engineering at Tianjin University, where he currently holds a Cheung Kong Chair Professorship. He has served on the editorial boards for several journals including Chemical Society Reviews, Chemical Science, and AIChE Journal. He also serves as an Associate Editor for ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering. He is an elected Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. He has published more than 200 papers in peer-refereed journals and been listed as a co-inventor on 73 patents and applications. His research interests include catalytic conversions of green energy, utilizations of carbon oxides, and synthesis and applications of nanostructured materials.
1. Introduction
The gradual increase of CO2 concentration in the atmosphere has induced potential harms to the Earth's climate and environment, including global warming, ocean acidification, species extinction, etc.1–4 Hence, the development of effective CO2 conversion catalysts has become a hot research topic in recent years. Suitable catalysts are able to promote the CO2 reduction reaction with high conversion rate, together with high selectivity. In addition, a series of technologies have been developed to maximize the efficiency of catalysts, including chemical reforming,5–7 biological,8 mineralization,9,10 electrochemical,11–14 photochemical15–17 and photoelectrochemical18–27 methods. As clean and renewable energy technologies, electro- and photoelectro-chemical reduction of CO2 have huge potential for future industrial applications.
In traditional studies on CO2 electroreduction, research primarily focused on the study of electrolytes, reaction temperature, pressure, and so on.28–32 Several types of catalysts have exhibited promising CO2 conversion properties in photoelectron- and electro-chemical CO2 reduction, for example, the noble metals, metal oxides and carbon-based materials.33–43 Recently, with the breakthrough of nanotechnology and nanoscience, numerous studies have focused on optimizing the size, structure, and composition of catalysts. Rationally designed nanostructured catalysts have been shown to have different performance from commercial catalysts. Semiconductors, as one type of effective catalyst for electroreduction of CO2, can provide active sites for the adsorption and transformation of the CO2 molecule.
To date, several excellent review papers have summarized recent advances in CO2 conversion by semiconductors.44–49 However, most focused on one aspect of photo- and electro-catalytic conversion. In addition to photo- and electro-catalytic conversion, semiconductors can effectively combine light and electronic energy, thus exhibiting high performance in photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction. The combination of photo- and electro-catalytic conversion is beneficial for systematic understanding of the reduction mechanism and rational design of highly efficient semiconductor catalysts. Back in 1978, the photoelectro-chemical conversion of CO2 was reported by Halmann using p-GaP in the electrodes.50 Very recently, with emerging colloidal chemistry and advanced characterization techniques, tremendous achievements have been made for highly efficient CO2 electro and photoelectron-chemical conversion over semiconductor-based catalysts.
The important developments of semiconductor nanocatalysts for electro and photoelectron-chemical reduction of CO2 are summarized in Fig. 1, with performances of the semiconductors listed in Table 1, indicating that the semiconductor catalysts exhibited remarkable selectivity for electro- and photoelectro-chemical CO2 reduction. In this review, important developments in design of semiconductor catalysts for electro- and photoelectro-chemical CO2 conversion are presented. There is a focus on synthetic strategies for preparing the electrodes and the main factors for improving the performance of the semiconductor catalysts. The development of mechanism understandings of the reaction pathways of CO2 and the feasibility for industrial production are then discussed. Finally, the challenges and future perspectives of electro- and photoelectro-catalytic CO2 conversion are addressed.
 Fig. 1  Timeline showing important developments of semiconductor nanocatalysts for electro- and photoelectro-chemical reduction of CO2. 
Table 1 Performance of major nano-designed semiconductor catalysts in electro and photoelectron catalytic CO2 reduction




Electrode
Electrolyte
Potential
Main carbon product
FE (%)
Ref.





a EMIM-BF4: 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate.
b TEABr: tetraethylammonium bromide.
c Faradaic efficiency for reduction reaction.
d Bu4NPF6: tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate.





Cu2O-Derived Cu electrode
0.1 M KHCO3
−0.35 V vs. RHE
CO
45

56



Cu2O-Derived Cu–In electrode
0.1 M KHCO3
−0.6 V vs. RHE
CO
85

61



Cu2O-Derived Cu–Sn electrode
0.1 M KHCO3
−0.6 V vs. RHE
CO
90

60



MoS2 with Mo-terminated edges
EMIM-BF4a in water
−0.77 V vs. RHE
CO
98

55



Sn/SnOx thin-film
0.5 M NaHCO3
−0.7 V vs. RHE
CO
∼55

58



5 nm SnO2/graphene
0.1 M NaHCO3
−1.8 V vs. RHE
Formate
93.6

51



Co/Co3O4 atomic layers
0.1 M Na2SO4
−0.85 V vs. SCE
Formate
90

54



1.72 nm Co3O4 layers
0.1 M KHCO3
−0.88 V vs. SCE
Formate
64.3

52



O-Vacancy-rich Co3O4 layers
0.1 M KHCO3
−0.87 V vs. SCE
Formate
85

53



p-CdTe
0.1 M TEABrb
−1.2 V vs. SCE
CO
78.8

23



p-Si/Au
0.1 M KHCO3
−0.74 V vs. SCE
CO
62

117



ZnTe
0.5 M KHCO3
−0.7 V vs. RHE
CO
22.9

82



ZnO/Au coupled ZnTe
0.5 M KHCO3
−0.5 V vs. RHE
CO
63.0

26



NiO2/RuRe
0.05 M NaHCO3
−0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl
CO
59c

122



Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/Re
Dry acetonitrile with 0.1 M Bu4NPF6d
−2.05 V vs. Fc+/Fc
CO
80–95

121



pn+-Si/GaN/ZnO–Cu
0.5 M KHCO3
+0.07 V vs. RHE
CO
70

27



pn+-Si/nanoporous Au mesh
0.2 M KHCO3
−0.03 V vs. RHE
CO
91

119



CuGaO2/RuRe
0.05 M NaHCO3
−0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl
CO
81c

126



Mg-Doped CuFeO2
0.1 M NaHCO3
−0.9 V vs. SCE
Formate
10

25



Cu2ZnSnS4/Ru complex
Purified water
−0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl
Formate
80

24



TiO2(photocathode)–Cu2O(dark anode)
0.1 M KHCO3
−0.75 V vs. RHE
CH4
54.63

123





2. Nano-designed semiconductors for electro-catalytic conversion of CO2
2.1 Synthetic methodologies of semiconductors for electro-catalytic conversion of CO2
Semiconductor catalysts for electrochemical CO2 reduction can be divided into supported catalysts and film-coated electrodes. In the preparation of supported catalysts, the semiconductor powders can be obtained through traditionally wet-chemical methods. To avoid aggregation of the power catalysts, the samples are deposited on certain substrates with high conductivity, including carbon black, carbon nanotubes, graphene, etc. In addition, the catalysts can be directly deposited on the substrates during the reaction process. For instance, SnO2 nanoparticles were directly deposited on carbon black or graphene through a facile hydrothermal method (Fig. 2a and b). The particle size can be precisely controlled from 3 to 10 nm by tuning the reaction time.51 The complex catalyst growth environment provides a great challenge when attempting to control the specific surface structure in the presence of support.
 Fig. 2  Summary of synthetic methodologies and recent advances of semiconductors for electrocatalytic CO2 conversion. (a and b) Schematic diagram and corresponding transmission electron microscopy images showing formation of nano-designed SnO2 catalysts. (c) Synthetic strategies for preparation of Co3O4 nanosheets with various thickness and compositions. (d) Main procedure and corresponding scanning electron microscope images for fabricating Cu–In bimetallic catalysts through Cu2O-derived Cu substrates. (e) Energy dispersive spectrometer element mapping of the Cu–In bimetallic catalysts: In (green), Cu (red). (b) Adapted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Adapted with permission from ref. 52–54. Copyright 2016, 2017, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d and e) Adapted with permission from ref. 56 and 61. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
For semiconductor metal oxide catalysts applied in CO2 reduction, most of the structure-controlled catalysts have 2-D nanosheet morphologies. Taking Co3O4 as an example, the synthetic strategies for several types of Co3O4 nanosheets are summarized in Fig. 2c. The ultra-thin Co3O4 atomic-layers with thickness of 1.72 nm (Fig. 3) and 3.51 nm are fabricated through preparation of Co(CO3)0.5(OH)·0.11H2O layers by a hydrothermal method, followed by calcination of the precursor layers at 320 °C for 5 minutes in O2.52 The O vacancies in the nanosheets can be tuned by changing the heating atmosphere from O2 to air.53 Furthermore, the composition of final products can be tuned by changing cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide to n-butylamine. Partially oxidized Co four-atom-thick layers and pure Co four-atom-thick layers are obtained by reacting for 3 h and 48 h.54
 Fig. 3  (a) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) image, (b) high resolution transmission electron microscope HRTEM image, (c) atomic force microscope (AFM) image and (d) the corresponding height profiles for Co3O4 atomic-layers with average thickness of 1.72 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Another typical semiconductor catalyst used in electrochemical CO2 reduction is a film-coated catalyst, the composition and structure of which can be rationally designed by tuning the deposition methods. The preparation of film-coated catalysts usually includes more than two steps to fabricate the optimal structure for CO2 reduction. For example, 2-D MoS2 nanosheets with high CO selectivity were prepared by deposition of Mo on the glassy carbon substrate, followed by sulfurization of the substrates.55 Recently, O-derived catalysts were shown to exhibit unique CO2 reduction performance when compared with regular metal foils. To obtain the O-derived catalysts, the polycrystalline Cu foils were first electropolished in o-phosphoric acid to obtain a clean surface. The foils were then annealed at high temperature (500 °C) to achieve a metastable Cu2O layer. Although the formed Cu2O were reduced to Cu particles during the CO2 reduction process, the reduction of Cu2O layers can produce grain boundary structures, which promote conversion of CO2 to CO and formate.56 Based on this synthetic method, a series of O-derived catalysts, including Au, Sn and Pb were fabricated for CO2 reduction.57–61 In addition to single metal catalysts, Cu–In and Cu–Sn bimetallic catalysts were also synthesized by a modified method. Fig. 2d and e illuminate the main procedure for fabricating Cu–In bimetallic catalysts. Firstly, O-derived Cu substrate was obtained by thermally oxidizing a Cu metal sheet at 500 °C. The Cu–In bimetallic electrode was prepared through electrochemical reduction of the O-derived Cu substrate in a two-electrode system in the presence of InSO4 solution. During the reaction, In atoms were deposited onto the electrode; meanwhile, the Cu oxide was reduced to Cu. Thanks to the direct growth of catalysts on substrates, the film-coated catalysts exhibited good dispensability, conductivity, and durability in electrochemical CO2 reduction.
2.2 Three rational design routes for enhancing the performance of electro-catalytic CO2 conversion

2.2.1 Structural design. 
As the coordination numbers of atoms are different on exposed surfaces, the surface structures could greatly influence the performance of catalysts. Recently, 2-D nanostructures have been recognized as having great potential in new-energy and green-environmental areas.62–65 As one typical 2-D semiconductor material, MoS2 shows good performance in several electrochemical-related reactions, including oxygen reduction reaction, hydrogen evolution reaction, lithium storage, etc.66–72 In 2014, a layer-stacked bulk MoS2 with Mo-terminated edges was found to have great electrochemical CO2 reduction performance.55 As shown in Fig. 4, the crystal structure of MoS2 is a layered structure, in which molybdenum atoms are sandwiched by two planes of sulfide ions. Salehi-Khojin and co-workers found that MoS2 exhibited superior CO2 reduction performance compared with noble metal catalysts. Thanks to the high density of d electrons in Mo-terminated edges, the MoS2 catalysts showed a high current density and low overpotential for CO2 reduction (Fig. 5a). In addition, the work function of MoS2 was measured to be 3.9 eV, which is significantly lower than that of Ag (4.38 eV). The lower work function also promotes the advanced performance of the MoS2 catalyst.
 Fig. 4  (a) Layered structure of MoS2 viewed from top and side directions. (b) Scanning electron microscopy images of the MoS2 flakes. Scale bars are 50 and 5 μm (for inset), respectively, and (c) high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) images (scale bar, 5 nm) of MoS2. (d) Higher magnification HAADF images show clearly distinct atomic configuration corresponding to the 1T (top) and 2H (bottom) type of MoS2 (e) raw grayscale HAADF and false-color low-angle annular dark-field (LAADF) image (inset) of MoS2 edges (scale bar, 5 nm) and (f) the line scans (red and blue towards edges) identifying Mo atoms to be the terminating atoms in the general case. Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 5  Three typical effects on the performance of semiconductor catalysts (a) structure effect: CO and H2 faradaic efficiencies on MoS2 flakes at different applied potentials. (b) Size effect: SnO2 nanoparticles with various sizes for in CO2 electroreduction; (c) vacancy effect: faradaic efficiencies of formate on O-vacancy-rich and O-vacancy-poor Co3O4 nanosheets. (d) Multi-composition effect: Sn/SnOx electrode with high performance for reducing CO2 to CO. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Adapted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Adapted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
For the ultra-thin structures, the thickness greatly determined their performances. By constructing an ideal model of transition-metal oxide-based atomic layers, Xie and co-workers clearly showed the key parameter of 2-D semiconductor for promoting CO2 electroreduction. The 1.72 nm-thick Co3O4 layers exhibited greatly enhanced CO2 electroreduction over bulk Co3O4, as a result of the abundant active sites and high electrical conductivity.52 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations revealed that the 2-D ultrathin structure of Co3O4 layers generated a more dispersed charge density, thus increasing electronic conductivity. In addition to the 2D structured materials, other shape-controlled semiconductors with different facets were also successfully prepared. However, because of the characteristics of semiconductors, most of the rationally designed catalysts were applied in photocatalytic CO2 reduction.73,74
Another type of structural design is the formation of grain-boundaries. The grain-boundaries of noble metals were carefully investigated for enhancing the performance of electrocatalytic CO2 conversion. For instance, Au nanoparticles with high density of grain-boundary exhibited significantly enhanced activity compared with regular Au nanoparticles.75 Besides noble metal catalysts, grain-boundaries can also be fabricated in semiconductors.76 Introduction of grain-boundaries into semiconductors could be a way to enhance the performance of electrochemical CO2 conversion to a new level.


2.2.2 Size design. 
In addition to morphological control, tuning the size of active compounds is crucial, because these two parameters allow tailoring of intrinsic properties and thereby enhance performance in various applications. With decreasing particle size, the surface area becomes larger, inducing an increase in total surface energy. Consequently, to obtain a well-dispersed catalyst with a relatively small size (e.g. sub 10 nm), the introduction of a stable substrate is significant. Accordingly, SnO2 nanoparticles of 3, 5, and 10 nm average diameter were prepared using a hydrothermal method.51 To avoid aggregation of nanoparticles, the catalysts were loaded onto a carbon substrate before their performances were investigated. The 5 nm catalysts exhibited the best formate selectivity because of optimized affinity toward surface binding of a key intermediate or intermediates during CO2 reduction (Fig. 5b). Under the prerequisite of obtaining the optimized particle size, the selectivity of support can also enhance CO2 electroreduction performance. For the supported SnO2 catalysts, the substitution of carbon black to graphene greatly improved the electronic perturbations on Sn particle electronic structure, thus increasing the maximum FE for formate production to 93% with current densities of over 10 mA cm−2.


2.2.3 Composition design. 
In recent studies, the oxygen vacancies in metal oxides were found to accelerate the CO2 transformation process by tuning the surface electronic structures. The enhancing mechanism is that the electron-rich surface, which is induced by oxygen vacancies, can promote adsorption and activation of molecular CO2. To achieve an atomic-level understanding of the vacancies for CO2 electroreduction, O-vacancy-rich and O-vacancy-poor Co3O4 single unit-cell layers were successfully fabricated via a lamellar inorganic–organic hybrid intermediate strategy.53 The oxygen vacancy concentration can be demonstrated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and extended X-ray absorption fine structure results (Fig. 6). The onset potential of O-vacancy-rich cobalt oxide catalyst is 0.78 V, which is lower than that of O-vacancy-poor sample. In addition, the O-vacancy-rich cobalt oxide single-unit-cell layers exhibit much higher current density and selectivity of formate (ca. 85%) during the test (Fig. 5c). The corresponding DFT calculations suggested that the O vacancies in the catalysts favored CO2 adsorption, together with HCOO− desorption. This work clearly demonstrated the enhancing mechanism of oxygen vacancies for carbon dioxide electroreduction. Additionally, the vacancy-effect can be spread on photochemical CO2 reduction. During a photochemical reaction, the vacancies in semiconductors can increase photoabsorption and exhibit higher carrier separation efficiency. For instance, Zn-vacancy-rich one-unit-cell ZnIn2S4 layers and V-vacancy-rich BiVO4 atomic layers exhibited much better performance than vacancy-poor catalysts for CO2 photochemical conversion.77,78
 Fig. 6  (a) O 1s X-ray photoelectron spectra of VO-rich and VO-poor Co3O4 single-unit-cell layers. (b and c) Co K-edge extended X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy oscillation function k3χ(k) and the corresponding Fourier transforms FT(k3χ(k)) of VO-rich and VO-poor Co3O4 single-unit-cell layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
In addition to the vacancy-induced enhancement, metal–oxide derived catalysts exhibited extremely high performance over regular metal foils. Kanan and co-workers demonstrated that oxide-derived catalysts have high density of grain-boundaries, which resulted in highly active sites for CO conversion. For example, when a Cu electrode was annealed at 500 °C for 12 h, its performance for CO2 reduction could be greatly improved.56 The obtained Cu2O/Cu electrode exhibited a CO FE of ∼45% and a HCOOH FE of 33%, which is much better than those of polycrystalline Cu electrode. The formed Cu2O layer on the surface of Cu coil could enable formation of the CO2˙− intermediate, while suppressing H2O reduction on the Cu surfaces. The role of metal oxide for CO2 reduction was also demonstrated in Sn/SnOx catalysts.58 The CO faradaic efficiencies were four-fold higher and the HCOOH faradaic efficiencies were two to three-fold higher on Sn/SnOx than on untreated Sn foil (Fig. 5d). Moreover, the oxide-derived catalysts might be further enhanced by forming a multiple component structure. The Cu–In electrode exhibited a highly selective reduction of CO2 to CO while suppressing the formation of H2.61 At 0.5 V vs. RHE, the CO faradaic efficiency of the Cu–In electrode reached 90%, while the oxide-derived-Cu electrode was only 45%. In the crystal structure, when one of the four Cu atoms was replaced by an In atom, the adsorption of hydrogen on the four-fold site was unfavorable, while the CO adsorption energy was substantially unchanged. A Cu–Sn electrode showed a similar mechanism for CO2 reduction.60 By forming a Cu–Sn bimetallic surface on the Cu/Cu2O surface, the catalysts showed an extremely high faradaic efficiency toward CO (90% at −0.6 V vs. RHE).
In addition to the O-derived catalysts, the interface between the metal and metal oxide might be also beneficial for CO2 reduction. As is known from heterogeneous catalytic processes, with the formation of the metal–oxide interface, the catalytic properties of catalysts are remarkably enhanced. As a result, the cooperation of metal and metal oxide could be applied in electrochemical CO2 reduction. By fabricating Au/CeO2 as a model, Bao and his group studied the contribution of interface during the CO2 reduction (Fig. 7).79 The Au/CeO2 catalysts showed current density around 1.6 times larger than that of pure Au catalysts. The CO2 molecules preferred to adsorb on the Au–CeOx interface and be activated at interfacial sites. The interface can strengthen the adsorption of COOH, thus promoting CO formation. With systematic understanding of the enhanced mechanism, Ag–CeOx/C catalysts were synthesized, which displayed a CO current density over four times that of Ag/C.
 Fig. 7  Characterization and CO2 reduction performance of Au–CeOx/C catalyst. (a) HRTEM image of Au–CeOx/C catalyst. (b) Faradaic efficiency, (c) geometric partial current density, and (d) specific activity for CO production over Au/C, CeOx/C and Au–CeOx/C catalysts in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 solution and their dependence on the applied potentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 

3. Nano-designed semiconductors for photoelectro-catalytic conversion of carbon dioxide
Known as artificial photosynthesis, semiconductor-based photoelectrochemical CO2 conversion processes are capable of converting CO2 into carbonaceous products using solar energy. To realize a long-term goal of 10% solar-to-fuel efficiency based on solar-driven CO2 reduction systems, multiple considerations have been systematically analyzed.80 Fundamentals for photoelectrochemical CO2 are subsequently presented from a more general perspective of view, in which the thermodynamics and kinetics concerns, as well as the configuration of the cell and methods for fabricating electrodes will be discussed.
3.1 Fundamentals for photoelectro-catalytic conversion of CO2

3.1.1 Driving force for photoelectrochemical CO2 conversion. 
Since Halmann et al. reported the first successful photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction to HCOOH, HCHO and CH3OH products with a p-GaP photoelectrode,50 this process has drawn considerable attention. Thermodynamically, a suitable band structure is the prerequisite for a semiconductor photocatalyst (especially the particulate system) to generate enough driving force to break the CO bond to enable the CO2 reduction reaction. Specifically, the bottom of the conduction band of a semiconductor should be more negative than the CO2 reduction potential (varying depending on products), and the top of the valence band should be more positive than the water oxidation potential (+1.23 V vs. NHE at pH 0). Fig. 8 summarizes some representative semiconductor materials that are considered to be promising photoelectrode materials for CO2 photoelectrochemical conversion. In a photoelectrochemical system composed of photoanode and photocathode, the requirement for band position can be relaxed as external bias can be applied to assist the reaction. However, the conduction band position of a semiconductor is still a primary thermodynamic concern to enable the CO2 reduction reaction. For example, the relatively high conductive band position of GaP81 and ZnTe82 makes them ideal candidates for CO2 activation. Diamond, with an even higher conductive band position, enables emission of high-energy electrons into water, forming solvated electrons, which results in the CO2 reduction to CO with a selectivity higher than 90%.83
 Fig. 8  Conduction band (upper bar) and valence band (bottom bar) positions of some representative semiconductors and the redox potentials of CO2 reduction vs. NHE at pH 0. The n-type semiconductors could be used as photoanodes for oxygen evolution, and p-type semiconductors could be used as photocathodes for CO2 reduction (Si and InP can be doped to both n-type and p-type). 
An ideal photoelectrochemical CO2 conversion process is expected to take place in an aqueous environment, where CO2 reacts with H2O to produce carbonaceous products and oxygen simultaneously, without using any sacrificial reagents as the hole scavenger. Thus, the water oxidation reaction (OER), an energy uphill four-electron reaction, on the photoanode side is another critical thermodynamics factor that determines the overall solar energy conversion efficiency of the CO2 conversion process. As the conversion of CO2 could be a two, four, six or eight electron process, the CO2 reduction rate will surpass the OER without referring to suitable catalysts. In this sense, photoelectrochemical CO2 conversion shares the same concerns as solar water splitting, in terms of the design and fabrication of efficient semiconductor photoanodes to boost OER. If the photoanode could generate a photovoltage large enough to break the CO bond for CO2 reduction and oxidize water to oxygen at the same time, the cathode would be able reduce CO2 without being illuminated, i.e., a dark cathode could be used for CO2 reduction. In recent years, great progress has been made in the area of solar water splitting, providing a valuable knowledge base for the OER half reaction of the photoelectrochemical CO2 conversion process. The prevalent modification strategies for photoanode semiconductors include element doping,84 loading plasmonic metals,85 nanostructuring,86 as well as enabling the otherwise unstable semiconductors to withstand the OER condition.87 Element doping is an effective route for band gap narrowing and carrier density promoting. For instance, by treating BiVO4 with N2, the obtained nitrogen-doped BiVO4 exhibited much better OER performance than BiVO4, because of simultaneous enhancements in photon absorption and charge transport.84 Loading of plasmonic metals as co-catalysts might enhance the light absorption. For example, with modification of Ag nanoparticles and Co–Pi cocatalyst, hematite nanosheet catalysts exhibited extremely high photocurrent density at 1.23 V vs. RHE. The Ag NPs significantly enhanced the light absorption and improved charge transfer, while the Co–Pi facilitated a highly stable oxygen evolution process.75 To improve the carrier transportation, several different nanostructures were rationally designed. Among them, Grätzel designed dendritic hematite nanostructures to minimize the distance of photogenerated holes. In addition, a thin insulating SiO2 layer below and a cobalt monolayer on top of the Fe2O3 film was fabricated for further improvement of the OER performance.86 Another way to obtain effective OER catalysts is to enable the unstable semiconductors to withstand the OER condition. As is known, semiconductors such as Si, GaAs, and GaP have band gaps that make them efficient photoanodes for OER, but these materials are unstable in aqueous media. Lewis and co-workers attempted to protect these semiconductors with TiO2 through an atomic layer deposition method. The TiO2 layer has electronic defects that promote hole conduction, and are sufficiently transparent to maintain the performance of protected semiconductors. The as-prepared Si photoanodes exhibited stable OER performance for more than 100 hours.87Table 2 presents some benchmark solar energy conversion efficiencies for both solar water splitting and photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction, where the OER results (drawn from water splitting literatures) could provide insights into design of CO2 reduction systems.88–115
Table 2 Solar energy conversion efficiency of major nano-designed semiconductor catalysts in photoelectrochemical OER, HER and CO2 reduction








Structurea
Solar energy conversion efficiency (%)
Ref.





a With components generating photovoltage underlined.
b jn: junction, a-Si: amorphous Si.
c PV: photovoltaic solar cell that does not work in aqueous conditions.





Half cell
OER
j/ITO/Co–Pib
4.70

88



/NiFeOx
2.25

89



//
2.10

90



:/FeOOH/NiOOH
2

84



/FeOOH/NiOOH
1.72

91



:/Co–Pi
1.50

92



/
1.42

93



/Co–Pi
0.55

85



HER
/TiO2/Ru
14

94



Pt/ITO/(+ )//( )/ITO
13.26

95



+/F:SnO2/TiO2/Ir
10.90

96



+/Pt
9.60

97



//Ti/Mo/Pt
8.50

98



//ZnO/TiO2/Pt
7.90

99



+/Ti/TiO2/Pt
6.6 (estimated)

100



CO2 reduction
/
1 (HCOOH)

101



/
1 (HCOOH, 35 days)

102







Full cell
Water splitting
 + (dual photoanode) + (PV)–Pt(dark cathode)c
7.70

103



Ir and Ru-coated Ti plate(dark anode)–(PV) + //ZnO/TiO2/Pt(photocathode)
6.30

99



(photoanode)–+–/(photocathode)
3.00

104



:/FeOOH(photoanode)–j(PV)/Ni
2.50

105



IrO2(dark anode)–(PV) + //TiO2/RuO2(photocathode)
2.50

106



:–,: (particles embedded in carbon layer)
1.2 (331 K, 10 kPa)

107



/NiFeOx(photoanode)–/TiO2/Pt(photocathode)
0.91

108



/(NiFeOx–Bi)(photoanode)–().().//Ti/Mo/Pt (photocathode)
0.91

109



CO2 reduction
//TiO2/Ni(photoanode)–Pd–C(dark cathode)
10 (HCOOH)

127



(PV) + IrO2(dark anode)–Au(dark cathode)
6.5 (CO)

110



IrOx/j/carbon cloth/Ru complex (monolithic)
4.60 (HCOOH)

111



(PV)/Co3O4–Au(dark cathode)
4.23 (CO)

112



(PV) + (photoanode)–Cu2O(dark cathode)
2.5 (CO)

113



j/ITO/CoOx(photoanode)–Au(dark cathode)
2.0 (CO)

114



CoCO3(dark anode)–(PV) + //Au(photocathode)
0.43 (HCOOH) 0.35 (CO)

115







3.1.2 Surface cocatalysts for photoelectrochemical CO2 conversion. 
In addition to thermodynamics concerns, the kinetics of CO2 conversion is a more complicated problem, in which the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is in severe competition with CO2 reduction, accompanied by wide carbonaceous product distribution because of multiple CO2 reduction pathways. Loading surface cocatalyts is an effective approach to control the reaction kinetics of CO2 reduction, which can be summarized into two major categories: (i) loading heterogeneous inorganic catalytic nanoparticles or thin films onto CO2 reduction photoelectrodes, which is very similar to the CO2 electro-catalytic reduction process. (ii) Enabling homogeneous molecular catalysts to be heterogenized onto photoelectrodes by manipulating the covalent bond on semiconductor surfaces.
Loading inorganic surface cocatalyst is one of the most prevalent methods used to control surface reaction routes (Fig. 9). Metallic cocatalysts, particularly those capable of suppressing HER, have been proven to be effective for CO2 reduction in photoelectrochemical processes, where the composition and morphology of the metallic cocatalysts both present strong correlation with the product distribution. Some early investigations have reported that decorating p-Si photoelectrodes with Cu, Au or Ag nanoparticles could realize CO2 photoelectrochemical reduction with CO, CH4 and C2H4 as the main products,116 where the surface structure of the metallic particles plays a critical role in determining the CO2 conversion efficiencies.117 Recently, Yang and co-workers used Au3Cu alloy nanoparticles to improve the CO2 reduction selectivity over a Si nanowire photocathode. The Au3Cu nanoparticles were assembled on the surface of Si nanowire by one-dimensional geometry (Fig. 10). The as-prepared Au3Cu nanoparticle modified Si nanowires exhibited a high CO selectivity of 80% at −0.20 V vs. RHE. A reduction of 120 mV overpotential compared with the planar counterpart was observed resulting from the optimized spatial arrangement of Au3Cu nanoparticle catalysts on nanowires. In addition, this reaction system showed good durability for CO2 reduction, in which the catalysts maintained their photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction capability up to 18 h.118 Additionally, Oh et al. fabricated Si photoelectrode with a nanoporous Au thin film to improve the CO faradaic efficiency in photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction reaction. A nanoporous Au thin layer with many grain-boundaries was prepared through an electrochemical reduction method. The treated Au thin film exhibited improved electrochemical CO2 reduction activity compared with that of regular Au catalysts. When the nanoporous Au catalysts were combined with the Si photoelectrode, the catalysts showed conversion of CO2 to CO with 91% FE, because of the superior co-catalysts and photovoltage from the buried p–n junction in the Si.119 To date, most of the reported cocatalysts are noble metals. The optimization of novel CO2 reduction cocatalysts with high activity and low cost is the primary task. The structure design of noble metal cocatalysts, such as facet controlled nanomaterials and single atom catalysts, might further enhance the photo-electrocatalytic CO2 reduction activity. On the other hand, the cocatalysts are not quite stable because of chemical corrosion and photocorrosion during the CO2 reduction process. The development of cocatalysts with long-lasting performance on semiconductor catalysts is still a challenge for their future commercial application.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of a tandem photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction cell, where n-type semiconductor is the photoanode for O2 evolution (OER cocatalyst not shown for simplicity), and p-type semiconductor is the photocathode for CO2 reduction. The CO2 reduction process could be catalyzed by inorganic cocatalyst or molecular catalysts immobilized on the surface of the cathode. V1 and V2 represents the photovoltage generated from the photoanode and photocathode, respectively, and V3 is the external electrical bias. (b) Photocurrent–potential behavior of a self-driven photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction tandem device, where the anodic photocurrent overlaps the cathodic photocurrent. η: overall solar energy conversion efficiency, Jop: operation photocurrent without applying V3, Pin: power density of incident illumination, FE: faradaic efficiency. CO is the example product, with E0(CO2/CO) = −0.097 V vs. NHE at pH 0. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM image (scale bar 2 μm) of Au3Cu nanoparticle-assembled Si NW arrays. (b) STEM image and elemental mapping of Au (green), Cu (red), and Si (blue). Photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 using integrated photoelectrodes. (c) Comparison between Au3Cu nanoparticle-assembled Si nanowire photoelectrodes in catalytic activity and FE for CO2 conversion to CO. Photoelectrochemical performance in the long term and incorporating ionic liquid as a third component. (d) CO2 reduction activity of Au3Cu nanoparticles/Si nanowire photoelectrode for 18 h. Total current density and FE for CO at −0.26 V vs. RHE. Scale bars are 200 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Molecular catalysts based on metal complexes, especially the Ru, Re complexes, provide another solution to achieve high CO2 reduction selectivity (Fig. 9a). Heterogenizing molecular catalysts onto semiconductor photo-absorbers has been demonstrated as an effective approach to utilize these highly active catalysts, while largely overcoming the difficulty of catalyst recycling in heterogeneous molecular systems.120 Gratzel and co-workers reported successful incorporation of a Re based metal complex, Re(bpy)(CO)3Cl, on TiO2 protected Cu2O photocathode for CO2 photo-reduction. The heterogenization of this Re base molecular catalyst was realized by a phosphonate linker that enabled covalent binding between the Re metal complex and mesoporous TiO2. Upon covalent incorporation of this molecular catalyst, the TiO2 protected Cu2O photocathode presents a significant improvement for CO2 reduction to CO, resulting in a CO faradaic efficiency of 95%.121 With two methylphosphonic acid groups as anchors, a Ru(II)–Re(I) supramolecular metal complex cocatalyst was immobilized on p-type NiO to construct a photocathode for CO2 reduction, yielding a high CO selectivity of 95% and a high stability of 12 h during which the CO selectivity only dropped to 91%.122 Although the molecular catalysts based on Ru, Re exhibited high CO2 reduction selectivity for photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction, the cocatalysts required dissolving in organic solvents, which are harmful to the environment. Hence, it is of great importance to develop water-soluble noble metal complex cocatalysts for CO2 reduction.
Besides cocatalyst loading, some semiconductors by themselves are capable of controlling the reaction pathway of CO2 reduction, i.e., Cu2O. As the key intermediate during CO2 reduction, CO presents a moderate adsorption strength on Cu2O surface, which enables CO intermediate to be further reduced to hydrocarbons, largely suppressing the HER side reaction. However, p-type Cu2O cannot be used directly as a photocathode because of its extremely low stability under illumination in aqueous electrolytes. Recently, it has been shown that the photogenerated holes, rather than electrons, primarily account for the instability of Cu2O. Thus, using bare Cu2O as a dark cathode, which is connected to a photoanode, could improve the stability of the Cu2O catalysts. Gong et al. demonstrated an approach to achieve stable aqueous CO2 reduction using Cu2O as a dark cathode and TiO2 as a photoanode (Fig. 11). The stability of the Cu2O cathode was increased from 0.5 h to 3 h. In addition, a high FE of 87.45% and selectivity of 92.65% for all carbonaceous products were achieved at a low bias of 0.75 V versus RHE. It was found that photogenerated holes have more adverse effects on the Cu2O stability than electrons, which led to unexpectedly large differences of stability between the Cu2O photocathode and dark cathode.123
 Fig. 11  (a) J–V curves using different cathodes measured under dark conditions by two-electrode configuration with TiO2 as work electrode and different cathodes as counter electrode. Amounts of (b) H2, (c) CO, and CH4 as a function of reaction time using TiO2 nanorods as the work electrode, different cathodes as counter electrode and saturated Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode. (d) The calculated selectivity for carbonaceous products by different cathodes as a function of reaction time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 

3.2 Tandem cells for simultaneous CO2 reduction and water oxidation
Although many promising photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction systems have been demonstrated in recent years, many of these systems require external electric bias to drive the OER on the anode side. To realize the ultimate goal of unassisted CO2 reduction in aqueous electrolytes without using sacrificial reagents, CO2 reduction photocathodes and OER photoanodes should be connected in series to construct tandem cells, which would provide enough photovoltage to drive both reactions at the same time. As illustrated in Fig. 9a, when the sum of photovoltage from the anode (V1) and photovoltage from the cathode (V2) exceeds the thermodynamics barrier and kinetics overpotential of converting CO2 to a certain product with oxygen evolution, external electrical bias (V3) becomes unnecessary. In this scenario, the system could be referred to as a self-driven photoelectrochemical tandem device, generating an anodic photocurrent that overlaps the cathodic photocurrent (Fig. 9b). The overall solar energy conversion efficiency (η) could be estimated based on the operation photocurrent (Jop, the intersection of the two photocurrent curves), the reduction potential (CO as the example in Fig. 5b, with E0(CO2/CO) = −0.097 V vs. NHE at pH 0), as well as the faradaic efficiency (calculated from chromatography measurements) of the specific CO2 reduction product being investigated.
As one of the most intensively investigated n-type semiconductors that provides a large photovoltage and highly repeatable performance, TiO2 is a good starting material for photoanodes to verify the feasibility of a tandem system. With TiO2 as the photoanode, an InP/Ru complex polymer hybrid photocatalyst was used as the photocathode in a tandem system. This system can reduce CO2 into HCOOH with a selectivity of 70% under AM 1.5G illumination, with an overall solar to chemical energy conversion efficiency of 0.03%.124 By replacing TiO2 with SrTiO3 as the anode material, the conduction band position of which is higher than that of TiO2, the transfer of charge carriers can be facilitated because of the larger energy difference between InP and SrTiO3 (Fig. 12). Thus, the solar to chemical energy was improved from 0.03 to 0.14% compared with the system with a TiO2 photoanode.125
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 with a two-electrode configuration, comprising an InP photocathode and a SrTiO3 photoanode. (b) Time course of the photocurrent observed for the Z-scheme system combining InP with SrTiO3 (red line) and TiO2 (blue line). Adapted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Compared with wide band gap semiconductors, n-type semiconductors with narrower band gaps are capable of absorbing a larger portion of visible light. Although the photovoltage generated by these semiconductors is smaller, the overall reaction can be assisted with electrical bias and/or chemical bias. For example, a TaON photoanode loaded with CoOx surface cocatalyst was connected with the aforementioned p-type NiO photocathode (catalyzed by RuRe molecular catalyst) to construct a tandem device. Under an electrical bias of 0.3 V and chemical bias of 0.1 V from the pH difference in the electrolyte, this full photoelectrochemical cell can reduce CO2 to CO with high selectivity and produce O2 simultaneously under visible light (λ > 400 nm).66 By replacing NiO with CuGaO2, another p-type semiconductor that enables a larger photovoltage (larger V2 in Fig. 3), the CuGaO2/RuRe (photocathode) – TaON/CoOx (photoanode) tandem cell realized self-driven photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction to CO with simultaneous O2 evolution.126 On the other hand, if the photoanode is able to generate a high photovoltage (V1 in Fig. 3) to drive the overall reaction, even an electrochemical CO2 reduction cathode under dark conditions can perform solar-driven CO2 reduction. When a GaAs/InGaP/TiO2/Ni photoanode is connected to a Pd/C nanoparticle-coated Ti mesh cathode, CO2 reduction to formate with a near 100% faradaic efficiency will proceed with simultaneous O2 evolution under AM 1.5G illumination, without any external bias. The highly efficient GaAs/InGaP/TiO2/Ni photoanode meant that the overall solar-to formate conversion efficiency of this tandem system reached 10%.127
In many cases, however, realizing a self-driven tandem cell is not easy, particularly in the development process of novel semiconductor photo-absorbers or novel surface cocatalysts, where the assistance of external bias is necessary. In these circumstances, it should be noted that the product selectivity of CO2 reduction is highly sensitive to external electrical bias, which is also correlated with the choice of photoanode material. Thus, targeting a certain CO2 reduction product in a tandem configuration is still a major challenge, which requires more intensive research.
In addition to the photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction, solar cells in tandem configuration could also be used to assist the electro-reduction of CO2 (known as the PV + EC configuration, PV for photovoltaic and EC for electrochemical). Perovskite and Si are two typical solar cells used in tandem systems for solar-driven PV + EC CO2 reduction. For example, Jiang et al. reported a system composed of a gold-decorated triple-layered ZnO@ZnTe@CdTe core–shell nanorod array photocathode and a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cell in tandem.128 The device exhibited a steady solar-to-CO efficiency of over 0.35% and a solar-to-fuel efficiency exceeding 0.43%. Sekimoto and coworkers designed a tandem photo-electrode of InGaN and two Si p–n junctions.129 The energy conversion efficiency for HCOOH production reached 0.97%. These systems have great potential for applications in unassisted solar-driven CO2 reduction.
3.3 Synthetic methodologies of thin-film electrodes
The above-mentioned semiconductor photoelectrodes for CO2 reduction are mainly composed of thin-film materials deposited on solid substrates. Thus, obtaining high-quality semiconductor thin films is one of the most important considerations in construction of a photoelectrochemical CO2 conversion system. The prevalent synthetic methods for thin-film photoelectrodes include chemical bath deposition (CBD), (photo-)electrodeposition, e-beam evaporation, sputtering deposition, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), atomic layer deposition (ALD), wet-chemical methods, spin-coating and electrophoretic deposition.
Because of the simple configuration and the wide range of available precursors, CBD and (photo-)electrodeposition are among the most commonly used thin-film synthesis methods for photoelectrodes. CBD is often used to fabricate nanoporous or nanorod array semiconductor thin films, which leads to enlarged surface areas as well as more loading sites for inorganic or molecular surface cocatalysts.130,131 (Photo-)electrodeposition is a reduction process, which is primarily used to prepare metal thin films or nanoparticles serving as surface cocatalysts.117,118,123 CBD and (photo-)electrodeposition are particularly suitable for relatively thick films or nanoparticles. However, when a continuous film with controllable thin thickness is needed, these solution-based thin-film fabrication methods are less likely to satisfy such a high requirement. Thus, vapor phase deposition methods based on vacuum systems are more frequently used.
E-beam evaporation and sputtering deposition are two widely used physical vapor deposition (PVD) techniques to prepare thin-film photoelectrodes for CO2 reduction. In e-beam evaporation, an electron beam bombards the surface of the source material to head and sublimate this material to coat the substrate. The deposition rate of e-beam evaporation could be as low as 1 nm min−1 to as high as a few μm min−1. The sputtering process involves the bombardment of accelerated ions at the surface of a target material, and the momentum exchange between these ions and the atoms of the target, which transfers the target atoms to the substrate. The highly energetic ions could be generated from inert gas plasma, such as Ar plasma. Loosely speaking, e-beam evaporation and DC sputtering are used for deposition of metallic materials, while RF sputtering is capable of depositing dielectric insolating materials, such as oxides and nitrides. Compared with e-beam evaporation, sputtering could produce a more dense film with higher thickness uniformity. These two PVD methods have been widely used for fabrication of CO2 reduction photoelectrodes.119
Because of its self-limiting growth nature, ALD is capable of depositing highly conformal thin films on non-planar substrates, where the film thickness can be controlled down to the angstrom level, and the film can, theoretically, be pinhole-free. These give ALD some unique advantages over PVD techniques that produce films in a line-of-sight fashion, particularly when a dense and ultrathin film is needed. Using ALD grown TiO2 as the protective layer, the aforementioned Cu2O photocathode with immobilized Re-based molecular catalysts can convert CO2 to CO with a faradaic efficiency between 80% and 95%, where the ALD layer is key to enable the corrosion vulnerable p-type Cu2O to withstand the aqueous electrolyte conditions.121
Thus, appropriate thin-film deposition techniques should be carefully selected according to different material requirements during synthesis of a CO2 reduction photoelectrode. Generally, CBD and (photo-)electrodeposition can be used to deposit the semiconductive photo-absorber, which is always a relatively thick layer. To fabricate the surface cocatalytic layer for CO2 reduction, e-beam evaporation and sputtering as well as (photo-)electrodeposition techniques can be used. To improve the stability of a photoelectrode, especially those with a non-planar surface, ALD is a good choice to deposit protective layers. Additionally, some other high-profile techniques such as reactive ion etching (RIE) can be used to construct highly ordered nanostructures on CO2 reduction photoelectrodes.83
In addition to the direct deposition of thin-film catalysts on substrates, the semiconductor catalysts on the thin-film electrodes can be prepared using wet-chemical methods, such as hydrothermal or solvothemal processes. During the wet-chemical preparation, the morphology, composition and structure of the catalysts can be controlled by tuning the reaction conditions. After the preparation, the obtained power catalysts can be deposited onto substrates through spin-coating or electrophoretic deposition methods. Spin-coating is a standard method that has been widely used to produce uniform films of desired thickness. During a spin-coating process, the thickness of the film is greatly dependent on the spinning rate, evaporation rate, density of solution and viscosity of solution.132 Besides, electrophoretic deposition is also an effective route to deposit catalysts on substrates.133 To achieve a high-quality film, the potential of the electric field and electrophoresis time should be carefully adjusted.
4. Reaction mechanism and pathways
4.1 Reaction mechanism based on DFT
As discussed above, the sluggish surface reaction kinetics over semiconductor catalysts hinder the efficiency of (photo)electroreduction of CO2, which can be partially solved by addition of cocatalyst to the system. The most commonly used cocatalysts to speed up surface kinetics are transition metals. Cu is one of the most widely studied (co)catalysts for CO2 reduction, because of its unique ability to produce hydrocarbons other than H2, CO and CH4.134,135 Thermodynamic analysis suggests the high over potential, i.e., low catalytic efficiency, to produce methane is mainly a result of the relatively unstable CHO intermediate,136 while the formation of C2+ hydrocarbons is hindered by a C–C coupling step, either via CO–CO coupling,137,138 or via two hydrogenated CHxO intermediates.139
According to the Sabatier principle, the optimum catalyst should not bind reaction intermediates too weakly or too strongly.140 One of the key surface intermediates determining CO2 reduction overpotential has been suggested to be CO (one exception for formic acid141). Depending on the CO binding strength, the overpotential is dictated by formation of COH* or CHO*.142,143 Weak CO binding, e.g., on Au and Ag, results in formation of CO from CO2 reduction. Cu has been found to sit nearly on the top of the volcano plot (i.e. highest activity), but still with a substantial overpotential of ∼0.8 eV. Enhancing the CO binding, e.g. over Pt, Pd, Rh and Ni, starts to limit the adsorbed CO* protonation step to form CHO*, further reducing the competitiveness of CO2 reduction towards the hydrogen evolution reaction.
It has been shown that the scaling relationship between the surface binding intermediates constrains overall catalytic activity (Fig. 13a).143 Potentials ways breaking the scaling relationship include alloy, formation of hydrogen bond with solvent, promoters, etc. Normally, the catalytic activity of alloys follows the scaling relationship,144 so to break such scaling requires additional electronic effect, e.g., formation of single atom alloys which do not follow the traditional alloy d band model (Fig. 13b),145 and/or geometry effect, by formation of specific sites146 and patterns.147,148 For example, the formation of ordered AuCu nanoparticles strongly suppresses the hydrogen evolution reaction with a high faradaic efficiency (80%) for CO2 conversion to CO, which is caused by the compressively strained gold skins over the AuCu intermetallic core.144 Recent theoretical studies have also tried to understand the solvent effect by explicit treatment of a few or multi-layer solvent molecules.149–151
Compared with the well-developed mechanisms/screening studies on metal/alloy surfaces, simulations on oxide surfaces are more complicated because of the complex surface structures and reconstructions under reaction conditions.152 The Nørskov group recently developed an automatic procedure to construct surface phase diagrams using machine learning,153 which significantly reduces the computational cost. Detailed mechanistic studies on the CO2 reduction over oxide surfaces include study over RuO2,154,155 TiO2,156,157 and other anatase (010) surfaces.158
4.2 Reaction pathways
The (photo)electroreduction of CO2 can lead to various reaction products, depending on the reaction conditions as well as the type of catalyst. The most commonly observed products include CO, CH4, HCOOH, CH2O, CH3OH, as well as C2+ hydrocarbons and oxygenates. There are two generally accepted CO2 reduction pathways, depending on the existence of CO intermediates during the conversion.159 For the first type, CO is generated via the reverse water-gas shift reaction (RWGS), and subsequently hydrogenated to produce hydrocarbons or oxygenates. The second type is direct reduction of CO2 without formation of the CO intermediate, e.g., formation of formic acid.
Even restricting the reaction products by C1 and C2 species, the whole reaction network is still as large as to include ∼100 species, ∼200 elementary steps and >2000 pathways, which restricts a complete understanding of the whole reaction network with modern theoretical calculations.160 Using scaling relations machine learning and DFT calculations, Bligaard and Nørskov et al. suggested an iterative method with a surrogate model to identify the most important steps and then to be treated explicitly with DFT.160 The model successfully identified CHOH to be the precursor of C–O bond scission after nine iterations for the ethanol synthesis over Rh(111), offering a very efficient strategy to simplify a complicated reaction network (Fig. 13c).
 Fig. 13  Recent progress on modeling photo-electro chemical CO2 reduction. (a) Activity volcano plot predicted by first principle thermodynamics analysis; (b) breaking the scaling relationship by formation of Ptx/Cu single atom (cluster) alloys; (c) simplification strategy on the complex reaction network via scaling relation machine learning. Each numbered circle in the full network represents a surface reaction intermediate. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Adapted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Adapted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
5. Feasibility for industrial production
In 2016, the emission amount of energy-related CO2 was 32.1 billion tons, which was almost the same as that in 2015 and 2014. The need to suppress the emission amount of CO2 has greatly contributed to the popularity of renewable energy. Several CO2 transformation routes have achieved industrialization. For example, Japan's Mitsui Chemicals invested US$16 million in early 2009 and completed the pilot production of 100 tons methanol per year by CO2. Iceland Carbon Recycling International Company generates hydrogen through water electrolysis using geothermal power. Based on the production of hydrogen, they developed a methanol production plant using CO2 hydrogenation. The plant can recycle 5.5 thousand tons of carbon dioxide a year. The conversion of CO2 into high value-added carbonate/polycarbonate is another important way for efficient utilization of CO2.
Although an emerging research field, photoelectrochemical catalytic conversion of CO2 has not been applied in industrial production. Three key factors must be considered in photoelectrochemical conversion: selectivity, efficiency and durability. Applying rational designed catalysts, the selectivity of the products can be controlled to 80–90%, but the solar energy conversion efficiency and conversion rate of CO2 is still very low. The highest solar energy conversion efficiency for CO2 photochemical reduction was achieved on a tandem GaAs/InGaP/TiO2/Ni(photoanode)—Pd/C(dark cathode) system, with a 10% efficiency to HCOOH.118 To reduce the cost of industrial production, wind and solar energy have potential as a combination application for photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2. Using a combination of wind and solar energy, the photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 could realize automatic production in future.
6. Conclusions and perspectives
The rational design of semiconductor catalysts provides a great opportunity for accelerating the development of electro- and photoelectro-chemical CO2 conversion. This review has described recent advancements in the development of semiconductors for photoelectro- and electroreduction of CO2. Three key effects on the performance of semiconductor catalysts for enhancing the electrochemical CO2 conversion were discussed. For the photoelectrochemical CO2 conversion, thermodynamic requirements and kinetic considerations, including driving force, surface cocatalysts and synthetic methodologies, were systematically summarized. In addition, the reaction mechanism for CO2 conversion was briefly discussed based on DFT calculations.
Although great progress has been made in the development of semiconductor catalysts for electrochemical CO2 conversion, several key challenges must be overcome for industrial application of such catalysts. The most pressing issue is to develop cost-effective catalysts for large-scale chemical synthesis. Moreover, the development of nanostructured semiconductor catalysts with extremely high selectivity towards one specific product is also an important research trend. Additionally, in most cases, researchers investigated the CO2 reduction activity and selectivity of the catalysts. Another key parameter for the catalysts, long-term durability, requires investigation, as this directly determines the lifetime of catalysts in a practical device.
In terms of photoelectrochemical CO2 conversion, great efforts are required to obtain novel semiconductor materials (generating higher photovoltage with higher selectivity of CO2 reduction) and tandem cell configurations to realize the long-term goal of 10% solar-to-fuel efficiency. Inspired by recent progress in solar water splitting and electrochemical CO2 reduction, future breakthroughs may lie in a combination of a highly efficient narrow band gap semiconductor and highly selective CO2 reduction electrocatalysts, which decouple photovoltage generation from the CO2 reduction sites. This requires more intensive investigation of the interface between the semiconductor photo-absorber and surface cocatalysts. Additionally, because of the complexity of CO2 reduction, a standardized metrology method should be developed to measure the solar energy conversion efficiency and the faradaic efficiency, with well-defined electrolyte composition, illumination condition, CO2 feeding method, air tightness of the system, product analysis method, etc. This would make possible a more reliable comparison between results from different research groups, as in the area of photovoltaic solar cells and solar water splitting.
Combination of experimental and theoretical studies will reveal key factors for enhancing the activity and selectivity of CO2 reduction. The development of artificial intelligence algorithms in cooperation with DFT have already shown possibilities when dealing with complex reaction networks and catalyst surfaces. Rational design of the semiconductors with high performance could become feasible according to the theoretical guidance. Furthermore, the nano-designed synthetic strategies could be extended to preparation of other types of catalysts for CO2 conversion.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFB0600901), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1463205, 21525626, 21606169, and 21722608) and the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities (B06006) for financial support.
References
X. Xiaoding and J. A. Moulijn, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 305–325 CrossRef .
H. Yang, Z. Xu, M. Fan, R. Gupta, R. B. Slimane, A. E. Bland and I. Wright, J. Environ. Sci., 2008, 20, 14–27 CrossRef .
M. Mikkelsen, M. Jorgensen and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 43–81 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11326–11353 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Graciani, K. Mudiyanselage, F. Xu, A. E. Baber, J. Evans, S. D. Senanayake, D. J. Stacchiola, P. Liu, J. Hrbek, J. F. Sanz and J. A. Rodriguez, Science, 2014, 345, 546–550 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Studt, I. Sharafutdinov, F. Abild-Pedersen, C. F. Elkjær, J. S. Hummelshøj, S. Dahl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 320–324 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Pan, Z. Fan, W. Chen, Y. Ding, H. Luo and X. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 507–511 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mondal, S. Khanra, O. N. Tiwari, K. Gayen and G. N. Halder, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2016, 35, 1605–1615 CrossRef .
J. Highfield, H. Lim, J. Fagerlund and R. Zevenhoven, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6535–6541 RSC .
J. W. Ko, S.-W. Kim, J. Hong, J. Ryu, K. Kang and C. B. Park, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 2391–2394 RSC .
S. Lin, C. S. Diercks, Y.-B. Zhang, N. Kornienko, E. M. Nichols, Y. Zhao, A. R. Paris, D. Kim, P. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and C. J. Chang, Science, 2015, 346, 1208–1213 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, Y. Pang, B. Zhang, P. D. Luna, O. Voznyy, J. Xu, X. Zheng, C. T. Dinh, F. Fan, C. Cao, F. P. G. Arquer, T. S. Safaei, A. Mepham, A. Klinkova, E. Kumacheva, T. Filleter, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2016, 537, 382–386 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Hall, Y. Yoon, A. Wutting and Y. Surendranath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14834–14837 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Cao, D. Kim, D. Hong, Y. Yu, J. Xu, S. Lin, X. Wen, E. M. Nichols, K. Jeong, J. A. Reimer, P. Yang and C. J. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8120–8125 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sato, T. Morikawa, S. Saeki, T. Kajino and T. Motohiro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 49, 5101–5105 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Zhang, S. Ouyang, P. Li, Y. Zhang, G. Xi, T. Kako and J. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2041–2043 RSC .
Y. Zhou, Z. Tian, Z. Zhao, Q. Liu, J. Kou, X. Chen, J. Gao, S. Yan and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3594–3601 Search PubMed .
J. Gottschalk, L. C. Skinner, J. Lippold, H. Vogel, N. Frank, S. L. Jaccard and C. Waelbroeck, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11539 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yu, J. Low, W. Xiao, P. Zhou and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8839–8842 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 Search PubMed .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef .
D. Canfield and K. W. Frese Jr., J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, 1772–1773 CrossRef .
H. Yoneyama, K. Sugimura and S. Kuwabata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1988, 249, 143–153 CrossRef .
T. Arai, S. Tajima, S. Sato, K. Uemura, T. Morikawa and T. Kajino, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12664–12666 RSC .
J. Gu, A. Wuttig, J. W. Krizan, Y. Hu, Z. M. Detweiler, R. J. Cava and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12415–12422 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Jang, J.-W. Jang, J. Lee, J. H. Kim, H. Kumagai, J. Lee, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3597–3604 Search PubMed .
S. Chu, S. Fan, Y. Wang, D. Rossouw, Y. Wang, G. A. Botton and Z. Mi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14262–14266 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Mizuno, K. Ohta, A. Sasaki, T. Akai, M. Hirano and A. Kawabe, Energy Sources, 1995, 17, 503–508 CrossRef .
M. Todoroki, K. Hara, A. Kudo and T. Sakata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 394, 199–203 CrossRef .
A. Murata and Y. Hori, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1991, 64, 123–127 CrossRef .
M. R. Thorson, K. I. Sii and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F69–F74 CrossRef .
K. Nakata, T. Ozaki, C. Terashima, A. Fujishima and Y. Einaga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 871–874 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Gao, H. Zhou, J. Wang, S. Miao, F. Yang, G. Wang, J. Wang and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4288–4291 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Reske, H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, B. R. Cuenya and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6978–6986 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhu, Y.-J. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Lv, Q. Li, R. Michalsky, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16132–16135 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, G. Yang, Z. Zhang, M. Jin and Y. Yin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4559–4564 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Won, H. Shin, J. Koh, J. Chung, H. S. Lee, H. Kim and S. I. Woo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9297–9300 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Lu, J. Rosen, Y. Zhou, G. S. Hutchings, Y. C. Kimmel, J. G. Chen and F. Jiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3242 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander III, J. L. White and A. B. Bocarsly, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3148–3156 CrossRef .
N. Sreekanth, M. A. Nazrulla, T. V. Vineesh, K. Sailaja and K. L. Phani, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16061–16064 RSC .
B. Kumar, M. Asadi, D. Pisasale, S. Sinha-Ray, B. A. Rosen, R. Haasch, J. Abiade, A. L. Yarin and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2819 CrossRef .
J. Wu, R. M. Yadav, M. Liu, P. P. Sharma, C. S. Tiwary, L. Ma, X. Zou, X.-D. Zhou, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5364–5371 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, P. Kang, S. Ubnoske, M. K. Brennaman, N. Song, R. L. House, J. T. Glass and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7845–7848 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Huang, W. Ye and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700194 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704649 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4607–4626 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tamaki and O. Ishitani, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3394–3409 CrossRef .
A. Crake, Mater. Sci. Technol., 2017, 33, 1737–1749 CrossRef .
M. Marszewski, S. Cao, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 261–278 RSC .
M. Halmann, Nature, 1978, 275, 115–116 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, P. Kang and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1734–1737 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, X. Jiao, Z. Sun, W. Zhang, Y. Sun, C. Wang, Q. Hu, X. Zu, F. Yang, S. Yang, L. Liang, J. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 698–702 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, Z. Sun, W. Liu, X. Jiao, X. Zu, Q. Hu, Y. Sun, T. Yao, W. Zhang, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14503 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Lin, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, Q. Luo, W. Zhang, D. Li, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Nature, 2016, 529, 68–71 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Asadi, B. Kumar, A. Behranginia, B. A. Rosen, A. Baskin, N. Repnin, D. Pisasale, P. Phillips, W. Zhu, R. Haasch, R. F. Klie, P. Král, J. Abiade and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4470 CrossRef PubMed .
C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231–7234 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19969–19972 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1986–1989 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Lee and M. W. Kanan, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 465–469 CrossRef .
S. Sarfraz, A. T. Garcia-Esparza, A. Jedidi, L. Cavallo and K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2842–2851 CrossRef .
S. Rasul, D. H. Anjum, A. Jedidi, Y. Minenkov, L. Cavallo and K. Takanabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2146–2150 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ping, Z. Fan, M. Sindoro, Y. Ying and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605817 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Z. C. Lai, C. L. Tan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8816–8838 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef PubMed .
H. I. Karunadasa, E. Montalvo, Y. Sun, M. Majda, J. R. Long and C. J. Chang, Science, 2012, 335, 698–702 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963–969 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-Y. Yu, H. Hu, Y. Wang, H. Chen and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7395–7398 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Lu, S. Xu, D. Kong, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, P.-C. Hsu, K. Yan, D. Bradshaw, F. B. Prinz and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 19701–19706 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10274–10277 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, Y. Jiang, H. Zhao, J. Chen, J. Cheng, K. Yang and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1097–1108 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Kou, X. Chen, Z. Tian, J. Gao, S. Yan and Z. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14385–14387 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Feng, K. Jiang, S. Fan and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4606–4609 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. M. Grovenor, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1985, 18, 4079–4119 CrossRef .
X. Jiao, Z. Chen, X. Li, Y. Sun, S. Gao, W. Yan, C. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Lin, Y. Luo and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7586–7594 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, B. Gu, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, X. Zu, F. Yang, W. Zhu, C. Wang, Z. Feng, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3438–3445 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Gao, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, F. Cai, X. Zhao, W. Huang, Y. Li, J. Zhu, P. Liu, F. Yang, G. Wang and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5652–5655 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3663–3674 Search PubMed .
E. E. Barton, D. M. Rampulla and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6342–6344 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Jang, S. Cho, G. Magesh, Y. J. Jang, J. Y. Kim, W. Y. Kim, J. K. Seo, S. Kim, K.-H. Lee and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5852–5857 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, D. Zhu, G. M. Nathanson and R. J. Hamers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9746–9750 CrossRef PubMed .
T. W. Kim, Y. Ping, G. A. Galli and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8769 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Peerakiatkhajohn, J.-H. Yun, H. Chen, M. Lyu, T. Butburee and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6405–6410 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kuang, Q. Jia, H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada, A. Kudo and K. Domen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501645 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, D. Friedrich, M. T. McDowell, F. Yang, S. T. Omelchenko, F. H. Saadi, A. C. Nielander, S. Yalamanchili, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2644–2649 Search PubMed .
T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Zhang, A. Torres-Pardo, J. M. González-Calbet, Y. Ma, P. Oleynikov, O. Terasaki, S. Asahina, M. Shima, D. Cha, L. Zhao, K. Takanabe, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2566 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 892–897 Search PubMed .
M. H. Lee, K. Takei, J. Zhang, R. Kapadia, M. Zheng, Y.-Z. Chen, J. Nah, T. S. Matthews, Y.-L. Chueh, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10760–10764 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-P. Wang, K. Sun, S. Y. Noh, A. Kargar, M.-L. Tsai, M.-Y. Huang, D. Wang and J.-H. He, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2817–2824 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Kast, L. J. Enman, N. J. Gurnon, A. Nadarajah and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22830–22837 Search PubMed .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, M. G. Walter, J. R. McKone, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216–1219 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kumagai, T. Minegishi, N. Sato, T. Yamada, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8300–8307 Search PubMed .
J. Luo, Z. Li, S. Nishiwaki, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer, P. Cendula, Y. H. Lee, K. Fu, A. Cao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Y. E. Romanyuk, S. Buecheler, S. D. Tilley, L. H. Wong, A. N. Tiwari and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501520 CrossRef .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057–1064 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Kang, S. K. Choi, D. J. Ham, S. M. Ji, W. Choi, D. S. Han, A. Abdel-Wahab and H. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2638–2643 Search PubMed .
U. Kang and H. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2123–2131 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kim, J.-W. Jang, Y. H. Jo, F. F. Abdi, Y. H. Lee, R. van de Krol and J. S. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13380 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Cheng, W. Fan, Y. He, P. Ma, S. Vanka, S. Fan, Z. Mi and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700312 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ding, W. Qin, N. Wang, G. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Yan, J. Shi and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15608–15614 RSC .
P. Dias, M. Schreier, S. D. Tilley, J. Luo, J. Azevedo, L. Andrade, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, A. Mendes, M. Grätzel and M. T. Mayer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501537 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Y. Suzuki, Z. Pan, J. Seo, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi, H. Nishiyama, T. Takata, K. Seki, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1675–1683 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Wang, J.-W. Jang, C. Du, Y. Ye, Y. Lin, X. Yao, J. Thorne, E. Liu, G. McMahon, J. Zhu, A. Javey, J. Guo and D. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7447 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Kuang, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4570–4577 CrossRef .
M. Schreier, L. Curvat, F. Giordano, L. Steier, A. Abate, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Luo, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7326 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Arai, S. Sato and T. Morikawa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1998–2002 Search PubMed .
H. S. Jeon, H. S. Jeon, J. H. Koh, S. J. Park, M. S. Jee, D.-H. Ko, Y. J. Hwang and B. K. Min, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5835–5842 Search PubMed .
N. C. D. Nath, S. Y. Choi, H. W. Jeong, J.-J. Lee and H. Park, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 51–59 CrossRef .
Y. Sugano, A. Ono, R. Kitagawa, J. Tamura, M. Yamagiwa, Y. Kudo, E. Tsutsumi and S. Mikoshiba, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 54246–54252 RSC .
Y. J. Jiang, I. Jeong, J. Lee, J. Lee, M. J. Ko and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6980–6987 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Hinogami, Y. Nakamura, S. Yae and Y. Nakato, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1997, 121/122, 301–304 CrossRef .
R. Hinogami, Y. Nakamura, S. Yae and Y. Nakato, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 974–980 CrossRef .
Q. Kong, Q. Kong, D. Kim, C. Liu, Y. Yu, Y. Su, Y. Li and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5675–5680 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Song, H. Ryoo, M. Cho, J. Kim, J.-G. Kim, S.-Y. Chung and J. Oh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601103 CrossRef .
X. Liu, S. Inagaki and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14924–14950 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Schreier, J. Luo, P. Gao, T. Moehl, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1938–1946 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Sahara, H. Kumagai, K. Maeda, N. Kaeffer, V. Artero, M. Higashi, R. Abe and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14152–14158 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chang, T. Wang, P. Zhang, Y. Wei, J. Zhao and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 8840–8845 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sato, T. Arai, T. Morikawa, K. Uemura, T. M. Suzuki, H. Tanaka and T. Kajino, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15240–15243 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Arai, S. Sato, T. Kajino and T. Morikawa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1274–1282 Search PubMed .
H. Kumagai, G. Sahara, K. Maeda, M. Higashi, R. Abe and O. Ishitani, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4242–4249 RSC .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, Y. Chen, E. Verlage, S. A. Francis, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 764–770 CrossRef .
Y. J. Jang, I. Jeong, J. Lee, J. Lee, M. J. Ko and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6980–6987 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sekimoto, S. Shinagawa, Y. Uetake, K. Noda, M. Deguchi, S. Yotsuhashi and K. Ohkawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 073902 CrossRef .
E. E. Barton, D. M. Rampulla and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6342–6344 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bachmeier, S. Hall, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13518–13521 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Acar and I. Dincer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 7950–7959 CrossRef .
D. Janas and K. K. Koziol, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3037–3045 RSC .
M. Gattrell, N. Gupta and A. Co, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 594, 1–19 CrossRef .

          Y. Hori, Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, Springer,  2008, pp. 89–189 Search PubMed .
A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 Search PubMed .
K. J. P. Schouten, Y. Kwon, C. J. M. van der Ham, Z. Qin and M. T. M. Koper, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1902–1909 RSC .
F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7282–7285 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Montoya, A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 737–742 CrossRef .
A. J. Medford, A. Vojvodic, J. S. Hummelshøj, J. Voss, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, T. Bligaard, A. Nilsson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 36–42 CrossRef .
J. S. Yoo, R. Christensen, T. Vegge, J. K. Nørskov and F. Studt, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 358–363 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258 CrossRef .
X. Liu, J. Xiao, H. Peng, X. Hong, K. Chan and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15438 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552–556 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-J. Zhao, R. Mu, X. Wang and J. Gong, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 8700–8706 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Feng, S. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, D. He, D. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, L. Gu, Z. Li, Y. Liu, R. Yu, J. Li and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7294–7301 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ma, M. Sadakiyo, M. Heima, R. Luo, R. T. Haasch, J. I. Gold, M. Yamauchi and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 47–50 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kim, C. Xie, N. Becknell, Y. Yu, M. Karamad, K. Chan, E. J. Crumlin, J. K. Nørskov and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8329–8336 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Nie, M. R. Esopi, M. J. Janik and A. Asthagiri, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2459–2462 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Cheng, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13802–13805 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Cheng, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4767–4773 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bajdich, M. García-Mota, A. Vojvodic, J. K. Nørskov and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13521–13530 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Ulissi, A. R. Singh, C. Tsai and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3931–3935 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Karamad, H. A. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4075–4081 CrossRef .
A. Bhowmik, T. Vegge and H. A. Hansen, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3230–3243 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ji and Y. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15896–15902 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ji and Y. Luo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2018–2025 CrossRef .
H. He, P. Zapol and L. A. Curtiss, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6196–6205 Search PubMed .
H. T. Luk, C. Mondelli, D. C. Ferré, J. A. Stewart and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1358–1426 RSC .
Z. W. Ulissi, A. J. Medford, T. Bligaard and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14621 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Lei Zhang
	Lei Zhang received his BS degree in Chemistry (2008) and PhD degree in Nanomaterial Chemistry (2014) from Xiamen University with Prof. Zhaoxiong Xie. He was a visiting graduate student at Georgia Institute of Technology in Prof. Younan Xia's group from 2012 to 2014. From 2015 to 2016, he worked as a Postdoc at Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering in Tianjin University. He is currently a postdoctoral associate with Professor Xueliang Sun at Western University. His research interests include the design and synthesis of metal nanomaterials and single atom catalysts for fuel cells, carbon dioxide reduction, and water splitting devices.

Zhi-Jian Zhao
	Zhi-Jian Zhao received his BS and MS degrees in chemistry from Zhejiang University (supervisor Prof. Qi Wang) in 2008 and his PhD degree from Technische Universität München (supervisor Prof. N. Rösch) in 2012. After working as Postdoc with Prof. J. Greeley in Purdue University and Dr F. Studt, Prof. J. Nørskov in Stanford University, he joined the faculty of Tianjin University in 2015 as an Associate Professor. He also serves as associate editor for Chemical Engineering Science. His current research interest lies in molecular mechanistic understanding of heterogeneous catalytic reactions.

Tuo Wang
	Tuo Wang received his BS from Tianjin University and PhD (with Professor John G. Ekerdt) from the University of Texas at Austin, both in chemical engineering. After gaining another year of research experience as a postdoctoral associate, he joined Novellus Systems Inc. (currently Lam Research Corp.) as a process development engineer at Tualatin, Oregon. He joined Tianjin University as an associate professor in chemical engineering in 2012, and was promote to full professor in 2017. He serves as the Subject Editor for Renewable Energy. He is the author of 63 peer-reviewed journal paper. His current research focuses on the design and fabrication of nanostructured thin film materials for energy conversion systems.

Jinlong Gong
	Jinlong Gong studied chemical engineering and received his BS and MS degrees from Tianjin University and his PhD degree from the University of Texas at Austin under the guidance of C. B. Mullins. After a stint with Professor George M. Whitesides as a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard University, he joined the faculty of chemical engineering at Tianjin University, where he currently holds a Cheung Kong Chair Professorship. He has served on the editorial boards for several journals including Chemical Society Reviews, Chemical Science, and AIChE Journal. He also serves as an Associate Editor for ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering. He is an elected Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. He has published more than 200 papers in peer-refereed journals and been listed as a co-inventor on 73 patents and applications. His research interests include catalytic conversions of green energy, utilizations of carbon oxides, and synthesis and applications of nanostructured materials.

 	Fig. 1  Timeline showing important developments of semiconductor nanocatalysts for electro- and photoelectro-chemical reduction of CO2.	 


Cu2O-Derived Cu electrode	0.1 M KHCO3	−0.35 V vs. RHE	CO	45	
56

Cu2O-Derived Cu–In electrode	0.1 M KHCO3	−0.6 V vs. RHE	CO	85	
61

Cu2O-Derived Cu–Sn electrode	0.1 M KHCO3	−0.6 V vs. RHE	CO	90	
60

MoS2 with Mo-terminated edges	EMIM-BF4a in water	−0.77 V vs. RHE	CO	98	
55

Sn/SnOx thin-film	0.5 M NaHCO3	−0.7 V vs. RHE	CO	∼55	
58

5 nm SnO2/graphene	0.1 M NaHCO3	−1.8 V vs. RHE	Formate	93.6	
51

Co/Co3O4 atomic layers	0.1 M Na2SO4	−0.85 V vs. SCE	Formate	90	
54

1.72 nm Co3O4 layers	0.1 M KHCO3	−0.88 V vs. SCE	Formate	64.3	
52

O-Vacancy-rich Co3O4 layers	0.1 M KHCO3	−0.87 V vs. SCE	Formate	85	
53

p-CdTe	0.1 M TEABrb	−1.2 V vs. SCE	CO	78.8	
23

p-Si/Au	0.1 M KHCO3	−0.74 V vs. SCE	CO	62	
117

ZnTe	0.5 M KHCO3	−0.7 V vs. RHE	CO	22.9	
82

ZnO/Au coupled ZnTe	0.5 M KHCO3	−0.5 V vs. RHE	CO	63.0	
26

NiO2/RuRe	0.05 M NaHCO3	−0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl	CO	59c	
122

Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/Re	Dry acetonitrile with 0.1 M Bu4NPF6d	−2.05 V vs. Fc+/Fc	CO	80–95	
121

pn+-Si/GaN/ZnO–Cu	0.5 M KHCO3	+0.07 V vs. RHE	CO	70	
27

pn+-Si/nanoporous Au mesh	0.2 M KHCO3	−0.03 V vs. RHE	CO	91	
119

CuGaO2/RuRe	0.05 M NaHCO3	−0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl	CO	81c	
126

Mg-Doped CuFeO2	0.1 M NaHCO3	−0.9 V vs. SCE	Formate	10	
25

Cu2ZnSnS4/Ru complex	Purified water	−0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl	Formate	80	
24

TiO2(photocathode)–Cu2O(dark anode)	0.1 M KHCO3	−0.75 V vs. RHE	CH4	54.63	
123


 	Fig. 2  Summary of synthetic methodologies and recent advances of semiconductors for electrocatalytic CO2 conversion. (a and b) Schematic diagram and corresponding transmission electron microscopy images showing formation of nano-designed SnO2 catalysts. (c) Synthetic strategies for preparation of Co3O4 nanosheets with various thickness and compositions. (d) Main procedure and corresponding scanning electron microscope images for fabricating Cu–In bimetallic catalysts through Cu2O-derived Cu substrates. (e) Energy dispersive spectrometer element mapping of the Cu–In bimetallic catalysts: In (green), Cu (red). (b) Adapted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Adapted with permission from ref. 52–54. Copyright 2016, 2017, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d and e) Adapted with permission from ref. 56 and 61. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) image, (b) high resolution transmission electron microscope HRTEM image, (c) atomic force microscope (AFM) image and (d) the corresponding height profiles for Co3O4 atomic-layers with average thickness of 1.72 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Layered structure of MoS2 viewed from top and side directions. (b) Scanning electron microscopy images of the MoS2 flakes. Scale bars are 50 and 5 μm (for inset), respectively, and (c) high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) images (scale bar, 5 nm) of MoS2. (d) Higher magnification HAADF images show clearly distinct atomic configuration corresponding to the 1T (top) and 2H (bottom) type of MoS2 (e) raw grayscale HAADF and false-color low-angle annular dark-field (LAADF) image (inset) of MoS2 edges (scale bar, 5 nm) and (f) the line scans (red and blue towards edges) identifying Mo atoms to be the terminating atoms in the general case. Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  Three typical effects on the performance of semiconductor catalysts (a) structure effect: CO and H2 faradaic efficiencies on MoS2 flakes at different applied potentials. (b) Size effect: SnO2 nanoparticles with various sizes for in CO2 electroreduction; (c) vacancy effect: faradaic efficiencies of formate on O-vacancy-rich and O-vacancy-poor Co3O4 nanosheets. (d) Multi-composition effect: Sn/SnOx electrode with high performance for reducing CO2 to CO. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Adapted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Adapted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) O 1s X-ray photoelectron spectra of VO-rich and VO-poor Co3O4 single-unit-cell layers. (b and c) Co K-edge extended X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy oscillation function k3χ(k) and the corresponding Fourier transforms FT(k3χ(k)) of VO-rich and VO-poor Co3O4 single-unit-cell layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  Characterization and CO2 reduction performance of Au–CeOx/C catalyst. (a) HRTEM image of Au–CeOx/C catalyst. (b) Faradaic efficiency, (c) geometric partial current density, and (d) specific activity for CO production over Au/C, CeOx/C and Au–CeOx/C catalysts in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 solution and their dependence on the applied potentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Conduction band (upper bar) and valence band (bottom bar) positions of some representative semiconductors and the redox potentials of CO2 reduction vs. NHE at pH 0. The n-type semiconductors could be used as photoanodes for oxygen evolution, and p-type semiconductors could be used as photocathodes for CO2 reduction (Si and InP can be doped to both n-type and p-type).	 


Half cell	OER	j/ITO/Co–Pib	4.70	
88

/NiFeOx	2.25	
89

//	2.10	
90

:/FeOOH/NiOOH	2	
84

/FeOOH/NiOOH	1.72	
91

:/Co–Pi	1.50	
92

/	1.42	
93

/Co–Pi	0.55	
85

HER	/TiO2/Ru	14	
94

Pt/ITO/(+ )//( )/ITO	13.26	
95

+/F:SnO2/TiO2/Ir	10.90	
96

+/Pt	9.60	
97

//Ti/Mo/Pt	8.50	
98

//ZnO/TiO2/Pt	7.90	
99

+/Ti/TiO2/Pt	6.6 (estimated)	
100

CO2 reduction	/	1 (HCOOH)	
101

/	1 (HCOOH, 35 days)	
102



Full cell	Water splitting	 + (dual photoanode) + (PV)–Pt(dark cathode)c	7.70	
103

Ir and Ru-coated Ti plate(dark anode)–(PV) + //ZnO/TiO2/Pt(photocathode)	6.30	
99

(photoanode)–+–/(photocathode)	3.00	
104

:/FeOOH(photoanode)–j(PV)/Ni	2.50	
105

IrO2(dark anode)–(PV) + //TiO2/RuO2(photocathode)	2.50	
106

:–,: (particles embedded in carbon layer)	1.2 (331 K, 10 kPa)	
107

/NiFeOx(photoanode)–/TiO2/Pt(photocathode)	0.91	
108

/(NiFeOx–Bi)(photoanode)–().().//Ti/Mo/Pt (photocathode)	0.91	
109

CO2 reduction	//TiO2/Ni(photoanode)–Pd–C(dark cathode)	10 (HCOOH)	
127

(PV) + IrO2(dark anode)–Au(dark cathode)	6.5 (CO)	
110

IrOx/j/carbon cloth/Ru complex (monolithic)	4.60 (HCOOH)	
111

(PV)/Co3O4–Au(dark cathode)	4.23 (CO)	
112

(PV) + (photoanode)–Cu2O(dark cathode)	2.5 (CO)	
113

j/ITO/CoOx(photoanode)–Au(dark cathode)	2.0 (CO)	
114

CoCO3(dark anode)–(PV) + //Au(photocathode)	0.43 (HCOOH) 0.35 (CO)	
115


 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of a tandem photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction cell, where n-type semiconductor is the photoanode for O2 evolution (OER cocatalyst not shown for simplicity), and p-type semiconductor is the photocathode for CO2 reduction. The CO2 reduction process could be catalyzed by inorganic cocatalyst or molecular catalysts immobilized on the surface of the cathode. V1 and V2 represents the photovoltage generated from the photoanode and photocathode, respectively, and V3 is the external electrical bias. (b) Photocurrent–potential behavior of a self-driven photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction tandem device, where the anodic photocurrent overlaps the cathodic photocurrent. η: overall solar energy conversion efficiency, Jop: operation photocurrent without applying V3, Pin: power density of incident illumination, FE: faradaic efficiency. CO is the example product, with E0(CO2/CO) = −0.097 V vs. NHE at pH 0. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM image (scale bar 2 μm) of Au3Cu nanoparticle-assembled Si NW arrays. (b) STEM image and elemental mapping of Au (green), Cu (red), and Si (blue). Photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 using integrated photoelectrodes. (c) Comparison between Au3Cu nanoparticle-assembled Si nanowire photoelectrodes in catalytic activity and FE for CO2 conversion to CO. Photoelectrochemical performance in the long term and incorporating ionic liquid as a third component. (d) CO2 reduction activity of Au3Cu nanoparticles/Si nanowire photoelectrode for 18 h. Total current density and FE for CO at −0.26 V vs. RHE. Scale bars are 200 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) J–V curves using different cathodes measured under dark conditions by two-electrode configuration with TiO2 as work electrode and different cathodes as counter electrode. Amounts of (b) H2, (c) CO, and CH4 as a function of reaction time using TiO2 nanorods as the work electrode, different cathodes as counter electrode and saturated Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode. (d) The calculated selectivity for carbonaceous products by different cathodes as a function of reaction time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 with a two-electrode configuration, comprising an InP photocathode and a SrTiO3 photoanode. (b) Time course of the photocurrent observed for the Z-scheme system combining InP with SrTiO3 (red line) and TiO2 (blue line). Adapted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  Recent progress on modeling photo-electro chemical CO2 reduction. (a) Activity volcano plot predicted by first principle thermodynamics analysis; (b) breaking the scaling relationship by formation of Ptx/Cu single atom (cluster) alloys; (c) simplification strategy on the complex reaction network via scaling relation machine learning. Each numbered circle in the full network represents a surface reaction intermediate. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Adapted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Adapted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
