Living hybrid materials capable of energy conversion and CO 2 assimilation  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C001799J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C001799J
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3843-3859Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsLiving hybrid materials capable of energy conversion and CO2 assimilation

        
          
            Christophe F. 
            Meunier†‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Joanna C. 
            Rooke†
a, 
      
        
          
            Alexandre 
            Léonard†§
a, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Xie
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Bao-Lian 
            Su
          
          
        
      *ab
aLaboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry (CMI), The University of Namur (FUNDP), 61, rue de Bruxelles, B-5000 Namur, Belgium. E-mail: bao-lian.su@fundp.ac.be;  Fax: +32 81 72 5414;   Tel: +32 81 72 453
bState Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, 122, Luoshi Road, Wuhan, 430070, China. E-mail: baoliansu@whut.edu.cn
Received 
      27th January 2010
    , Accepted 7th April 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      19th April 2010
    AbstractThis paper reviews our work on the fabrication of photobiochemical hybrid materials via immobilisation of photosynthetically active entities within silica materials, summarising the viability and productivity of these active entities post encapsulation and evaluating their efficiency as the principal component of a photobioreactor. Immobilisation of thylakoids extracted from spinach leaves as well as whole cells such as A. thaliana, Synechococcus and C. caldarium was carried out in situ using sol–gel methods. In particular, a comprehensive overview is given of the efforts to find the most biocompatible inorganic precursors that can extend the lifetime of the organisms upon encapsulation. The effect of matrix–cell interactions on cell lifetime and the photosynthetic efficiency of the resultant materials are discussed. Precursors based on alkoxides, commonly used in “Chimie Douce” to form porous silica gel, release by-products which are often cytotoxic. However by controlling the formation of gels from aqueous silica precursors and silica nanoparticles acting as “cements” one can significantly enhance the life span of the entrapped organelles and cells. Adapted characteristic techniques have shown survival times of up to 5 months with the photosynthetic production of oxygen recorded as much as 17 weeks post immobilisation. These results constitute a significant advance towards the final goal, long-lasting semi-artificial photobioreactors that can advantageously exploit solar radiation to convert polluting carbon dioxide into useful biofuels, sugars or medical metabolites.
Christophe F. Meunier
Christophe Meunier obtained his Master’s degree under the supervision of Prof. Dr Bao-Lian Su from the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry, University of Namur (FUNDP), Belgium, in 2006. He received the SRC prize for his master’s thesis from the Royal Chemical Society of Belgium. He is currently working in the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry as a Research fellow (PhD student) in the frame of the Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique (FNRS), Belgium. He is carrying out research on the incorporation of biological functionalities within inorganic matrices.
Joanna C. Rooke
Dr Joanna Rooke received a MNatSc. (Chemistry) degree from the University of Birmingham (2000). She was awarded a PhD, jointly funded by Merck and EPSRC, by the University of Southampton (2004) under the supervision of Prof. M. T. Weller. After a PDRF at the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry, University of Namur she moved to LEPMI, INP Grenoble before returning to Namur to participate in an EU INTERREG IV project concerning VOC and CO2 abatement. Her research interests include synthesis and crystallography of oxynitrides, adsorption of Pt nanoparticles on carbon aerogels and encapsulation of photosynthetic entities within porous silica gels.
Alexandre Léonard
Dr Alexandre Léonard received his Master’s and PhD degrees under the supervision of Prof. Dr Bao-Lian Su at the University of Namur in 2000 and 2005. He was awarded the Royal Chemical Society of Belgium prize and laureate of the DSM Award for Science and Technology in 2005. His research was aimed at new synthesis pathways towards highly structured mesoporous (alumino)silicates and the preparation of hierarchical aluminosilicates, based on original spontaneous formation mechanisms. He is currently working at the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry as “Chargé de Recherches” on the conception of new photobioreactors based on immobilized photosynthetic microorganisms within porous inorganic matrices.
Hao Xie
Dr Xie was awarded a PhD, funded by CVCP (UK), by the University of Leeds (2000) under the supervision of Prof. P. J. F. Henderson. After a PDRF at the Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh, UK, he participated in a BBSRC project in the Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, UK. In 2005, he joined Wuhan University of Technology, China as a Professor of Biochemistry. His research interest is to understand the biological basis of the interaction between living organisms and their environment. The aim is to improve the viability and biological activity of immobilized living materials.
Bao-Lian Su
Prof. Bao-Lian Su joined the faculty and created the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry at the University of Namur, Belgium in 1995. He is currently a Full Professor of Chemistry, Director of the Chemistry Department and the Research Centre for Nanomaterials Chemistry. He is also Changjiang Professor at Wuhan University of Technology and “The Expert of the State” in the frame of “Thousands Talents” program, China. His current research fields include the synthesis, the property study and the molecular engineering of organized, hierarchically porous and bio-inspired materials, living materials and leaf-like materials and the immobilization of bio-organisms for artificial photosynthesis, nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology, cell therapy and biomedical applications.
1. Introduction
Photosynthetic cells are the lungs of our planet. Millions of years ago they changed our world forever, taking an atmosphere that was harsh, reducing and rich in CO2 and converting it to one that has allowed aerobic organisms to evolve. During this time the overproduction of carbohydrates went on to become the fossil fuels we have become so reliant upon over the last few centuries. Unfortunately these resources are now in limited supply, Man must act fast to find suitable alternatives. Solar energy is abundant, we need just a fraction of the power which reaches Earth to fulfil all our needs so why not let nature dictate our energy requirements once again?
Even though the natural world has billions of years of evolution over us, to the best of our knowledge it has come up with just one solution to solar energy conversion, photosynthesis. A photosynthetic cell is in fact a microscale photobioreactor: nature's very own factory, converting atmospheric carbon dioxide and water into carbohydrates and oxygen with the aid of the sun's rays (Fig. 1). Whether you consider the sophistication in the architecture of a leaf or the simplicity of unicellular algae, both have achieved something Man has yet to perfect: the use of solar energy to split water into its constituent parts, hydrogen and oxygen. These gases can be subsequently recombined in a fuel cell to produce electricity in an extremely green fashion.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the light and dark phases of photosynthesis. 
Photosynthesis requires the assimilation of CO2, so whilst the cells themselves are potential green energy sources they are also capable of mitigating the devastating problems arising from this greenhouse gas. Theoretically this results in a renewable energy cycle. Combustion of these biofuels produces more CO2 for the cells to then re-assimilate. Coupled with the water splitting process, could we kick our carbon habit and source all our energy needs through photosynthesis?
The reaction centre of a photosynthetic cell is a highly complex structure, regrettably one that is difficult to replicate or mimic. Nature has chosen to keep its blueprint under wraps. Owing to the difficulties scientists have encountered in mimicking nature many diverse options have arisen that sequester or convert carbon dioxide as well as systems that facilitate the photoproduction of hydrogen. However these systems are artificial and are often based on costly materials. For this reason we have chosen a radically different approach, one of exploitation. By immobilising photosynthetic entities, we can create living hybrid materials capable of photosynthesis.1–4 The benefits of such hybrid materials are plentiful. By a process of selective immobilisation, cells that produce pharmaceutically active compounds5 or efficient biofuels,6 say, can be encapsulated within an inert matrix in order to tailor the hybrid material to its final application.
Previous work has seen the immobilisation of photosynthetic pigments such as chlorophyll a (chl a) in a biopolymer film which was subsequently deposited on a SnO2 electrode.7–9 Several biopolymers were investigated such as polyethylene glycol (PEG), poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) but polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) was eventually selected as it best represented the chlorophyll–protein complex found in nature. However organic polymers were found to swell; more success has been found in inorganic materials. Examples include the design of a NiO–chl a hybrid optical material,10 layered silica/surfactant mesostructured thin films embedded with chlorophyllous pigments to coat surface modified indium tin oxide electrodes,11 or the adsorption of chl a in hectorite,12 bentonite,13 MCM-41,14 and FSM.15,16 The use of inorganic materials imparts added strength to the hybrid materials which organic networks cannot offer owing to the differences in their respective bond strengths. Further work has been carried out on larger systems such as light transducing proteins17–19 and light harvesting centres,20 however difficulties remain with the handling of such fragile, isolated systems to avoid denaturation and overall degradation of the photosynthetic material. To overcome this problem, researchers have turned towards the idea of whole cell encapsulation which enables an in vivo protection of the photosynthetic apparatus. Photosynthetic unicellular algae have been used in conjunction with silica for the continuous production of astaxanthin21 although the choice of organism is critical. Diatoms, famous for their creation of ornate silica exoskeletons, have been shown to interact with a silica gel based immobilising matrix resulting in a widespread dissolution of the silica network around the cell.22 Their ability to break down the inert framework would have detrimental effects on the lifetime of a static bioreactor. In parallel to this, the field of plant cell immobilisation has also moved towards silica gel with the work of Carturan et al. that focuses on the production of enzymes by Ajuga reptans23 and high value pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals by Coronilla vaginalis, Haplophyllum patavinum and Catharantus roseus24,25 that have previously been encapsulated in a sol–gel SiO2 membrane, fabricated via exposure of the cell surface to a gaseous flow of silicon alkoxide. Although a dramatic increase in cellular production was observed, issues remain owing to limited cellular division and consequently this is one of the major challenges that must be overcome in terms of durability and economic viability of any proposed bioreactor. Two-step immobilisation processes have started to emerge that combine the flexibility of an organic biopolymer followed by the rigidity of a sol–gel matrix such as the immobilisation of plant cells initiated from BY2 tobacco calli inside Ca-alginate beads prior to encapsulation in a silica network.26
Aside from cell propagation other critical issues need to be addressed or optimised such as the overall lifetime of the cells and whether it is comparable to, or ideally longer than, that of a free cell. Also the overall efficiency of these materials will be the key to their success. Market forces will play a major role in bioreactor design. The concept has to be merited, it has to be able to absorb CO2 and convert energy more economically than current green technologies. More importantly, one must be able to harvest the metabolites produced from the hybrid photobiomaterial or recover the cells as biomass and recycle the abiotic matrix. These focus points depend upon the matrix properties, the methods of immobilisation, the properties of the cell and matrix–cell interactions. It is not possible to address all of these issues presently, thus attention is centred on the selection of an appropriate matrix in relation to the lifetime, viability and where possible productivity of the encapsulated cells.
The work reviewed herein focuses on a diverse range of photosynthetic entities as different cells can offer very different advantages. The foundation of this work started with the immobilisation of thylakoids and chloroplasts extracted from actively growing plants (Fig. 2), in particular, spinach plants, which were selected owing to their importance in Europe as a horticultural crop. Moreover, spinach leaves have soft tissues and are low in phenolics and other inhibitory compounds, prevalent in most cultivated species. These properties are essential when isolating the photosynthetic structures in an active form. When removed from their cellular environment, these photosynthetic organelles are particularly fragile and extreme care has to be taken when handling them in vitro; this includes the careful control of the immobilisation temperature. These immobilisations have to be carried out below ambient temperature, however by encapsulating whole plant cells the delicate photosynthetic structures are preserved intracellularly, which enables encapsulation to take place at ambient temperature. In this work, whole Arabidopsis thaliana cells have been selected for immobilisation not only because this reduces the problem of sensitivity but also because this plant species is an ideal model for understanding the cellular, molecular and genetic biology of plants.27–29
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of thylakoid and chloroplast location within a plant.2 
Concurrently unicellular photosynthetic entities such as cyanobacteria (PCC¶ 6301 and PCC 7002) and Cyanidium caldarium (SAG|| 16.91) have also been selected as each cell represents an individual discrete entity as opposed to plant cells which normally work in unison within a leaf to harvest light energy. The major work has been undertaken using Synechococcus cyanobacteria as these have previously been studied in depth both in terms of genomics, viz. PCC 700230 and their useful metabolites.31 A brief project has also been conducted on the feasibility of encapsulating C. caldarium, a eukaryotic red algae that is both an acidophile and thermotolerant, which opens the door to a greater diversity of applications for such photochemical materials.
2. Materials and bioencapsulation methods
2.1 Silica as an encapsulating matrix
Bioencapsulation is usually a process that is carried out in situ in that the immobilising matrix is formed around the biological matter. This calls for biocompatible precursors and methods that will not destroy the delicate structures or physiological function of the immobilised species. Work on the immobilisation of photosynthetic entities has predominantly focused on organic matrices such as poly(vinylalcohol)32 or poly(sulfone),33 however such polymers have serious drawbacks such as their limited thermal stability. In comparison to certain inorganic materials they also have poor mechanical strength, even after the inclusion of physical or chemical cross linking networks. This work focuses on the use of silica owing to its easily generated and tuneable porosity, optical transparency and mechanical and chemical resistance, as widely cited in the literature.34 Porosity and optical transparency are of prime importance as these parameters permit the diffusion of nutrients and light energy respectively throughout the bulk of the hybrid material to reach the cells encapsulated within.
Silica materials can be targeted by so called Chimie Douce techniques. Such soft chemistry methods lend themselves to the synthesis of photochemical materials as they can enable the in situ immobilisation of fragile living entities whilst posing minimal risk to their viability. Such photochemical materials would become the active component of a stationary phase bioreactor through which the media can be pumped and the metabolites harvested on account of the porosity of the encapsulating matrix. These hybrid materials can be produced by exploiting well known sol–gel chemistry reactions.
2.2 Alkoxide pathway
The first immobilisations of biological matter were carried out using silicon alkoxide precursors (Si(OR)4, where R is an organic functional group).25,35,36 These precursors readily undergo hydrolysis dependent on the pH of the reaction environment. The silicic acid formed can then undergo condensation polymerisation to form a 3-dimensional silica network (Scheme 1). A major drawback is the liberation of alcohol molecules during hydrolysis. When R corresponds to Me (CH3) or Et (CH2CH3), such is the case in two of the most common precursors TMOS and TEOS, the alcohols liberated are methanol and ethanol respectively. These alcohols are toxic to the photosynthetic entities encapsulated as they can cause a denaturation of proteins and biological membranes. Therefore an adaptation to the protocol is necessary such as an intermediate distillation step on formation of the silicic sol to remove the alcohol prior to introducing the cells or biological matter.2,37 Conversely the use of organically modified precursors that only liberate biocompatible alcohols (e.g. glycerol, sorbitol) is another way around the problem.38
 Scheme 1  Alkoxide pathway to silica gel immobilising matrices; 1 hydrolysis, 2 polycondensation where X and X′ represent alkoxy groups. 
2.3 Aqueous pathway
It is also possible to synthesise aqueous silica gels, which avoids the problematic issue of alcohol by-products. By acidifying a solution of sodium silicate we can also form a silicic acid intermediate which can then undergo a similar polycondensation reaction (Scheme 2). One negative aspect of this protocol is the excess sodium ions that can disturb the osmotic balance of certain entities which in turn can lead to membrane lysis. It is possible to reduce the ionic strength of the sol either through dilution, for instance by addition of a buffer used to control pH,39 or by passing the sodium silicate solution over an acid ion exchange resin to form silicic acid prior to addition of biological matter.
 Scheme 2  Aqueous pathway to silica gel immobilising matrices; 1 neutralisation, 2 polycondensation. 
3. Bioreactors from thylakoids
In nature, a wide variety of eukaryotic algae, gymnosperms, angiosperms, bryophytes and ferns perform carbon dioxide conversion with great efficiency. The key sub-cellular component of this process is the chloroplast. This organelle, which encloses photosynthetic membranes (viz. thylakoids), is extremely efficient since the quantum yield of the primary process of the photochemical reactions is close to 100%.40 In fact, chloroplasts and thylakoids could be advantageously exploited to design new catalysts, photosynthetic fuel cells or cleaning systems.41–43 Even though these biological structures display some self-sufficiency, they are not stable in the isolated state. Preserving such sub-cellular structures after isolation is thus crucial in the design of new sustainable technologies. Fig. 3 clearly highlights that the membrane stacking system, the thylakoids, found within chloroplasts is well preserved, confirming their successful extraction from spinach leaves. Nevertheless, the photochemical activity of these isolated thylakoids rapidly diminished after just a few days.
 Fig. 3  Electron microscopy image of isolated thylakoid stacks.2 
This section highlights that through the encapsulation of photocatalytic membranes within porous silica networks, a photosynthetic material with a long-term stability, capable of harvesting solar energy and splitting water molecules into oxygen, can be targeted.
3.1 Alkoxide precursors
The photochemical activity of thylakoids is very sensitive to fluctuations in ionic strength, osmotic pressure, pH and to the composition of the aqueous medium. Typically, large amounts of aliphatic alcohols (e.g. methanol, ethanol) or sodium ions damage biological membranes and rapidly reduce their activity. For simplicity and the ease with which hydrolysis and condensation of the silica precursors can be controlled, the alkoxide route (TEOS) was first selected to immobilise thylakoids. This pathway is quite attractive since more than 95% of the cytotoxic ethanol liberated can be removed by fractional distillation before entrapment.
The studies on oxygen production under light irradiation highlighted that in using an alcohol-free sol–gel route, the silica matrix produced conferred protection to thylakoids and extended their photochemical activity.2Fig. 4 shows the variation in photosynthetic activity of hybrid gels HG1, HG2 and HG3, obtained using different concentrations of TEOS (1.0, 1.2 and 1.6 M, respectively) and also that of free thylakoids. For all hybrid gels, biological activity could be detected over the course of several weeks whereas oxygen production by thylakoids in suspension was not detectable after 3 days.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of biological stability (10 °C) of entrapped thylakoids within different silica gels to free thylakoids. The gels are synthesized with different silica precursor concentrations: HG1: [Si]sol = 1.0 M; HG2: [Si]sol = 1.2 M; HG3: [Si]sol = 1.6 M. Time zero corresponds to the moment at which thylakoids have been isolated.2 
It should be emphasised that the photochemical conversion efficiency of entrapped thylakoids strongly depended on the matrix type. The biological activity of thylakoids was in the order of HG3 (10 days) < HG2 (20 days) < HG1 (30 days), thus increasing with the decrease in silica precursors concentration. This observation suggests that the stability of thylakoids was associated with the properties of the silica frameworks.
The characterisation of hybrid gels has shown that modifications to the initial silica precursor concentration offered the opportunity to control the kinetics of silica polymerisation, the silica density and the textural properties of hybrid gels. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images have revealed sponge-like structures which were essential as they allowed a facile diffusion of metabolites through the silica matrix. (Fig. 5) From the SEM micrographs, one can clearly see that a lower silica precursor concentration led to a matrix of lower density and larger porosity. Even though different porous structures can influence the diffusion of matter through the hybrid gels, the diffusion experiments have proved that the biological activity of thylakoids was not dependent on pore size in the present case. In fact, the pore size generated in the hydrogels was large enough to ensure good diffusion of nutrients and photo-produced oxygen.
 Fig. 5  Micrographs obtained by scanning electron microscopy (A) and transmission electron microscopy (B) of aerogels prepared from hybrid gels HG1, HG2 and HG3 by supercritical drying with CO2.2 
Porosity can also affect the continuing chemical and physical changes of the host framework during the ageing of hybrid gels. 29Si MAS NMR data of the hybrid gels have shown that a higher degree of condensation was observed for hybrid gels with higher silica content and smaller pore sizes. The siloxane condensation reactions caused the ageing gel to contract and expel the extending fluid found within the pores. Consequently, the shrinkage rate of hybrid gels depended upon the pore size, which is intrinsically related to the initial amount of silica used to synthesise the hybrid material. (Fig. 6) The associated compressive stress was typically imposed upon the entrapped thylakoids, sometimes causing their destruction. The bioactivity of thylakoids within silica materials therefore depended on the silica density and chemical environment, which in turn were controlled by precursor concentration. By minimising the contraction process, thylakoid activity can be improved.
 Fig. 6  Kinetics of gel shrinking for hybrid gels maintained at 10 °C.2 
Another approach to sharply decrease the shrinkage of hybrid gels is to prepare silica gel doped with sugar-based polyols. This kind of matrix can be prepared by simply adding polyols (e.g. glycerol, sorbitol and maltose) to the pre-hydrolyzed TEOS sol or by using sugar silanes as silica precursors (e.g. diglycerylsilane).44 Among the wide variety of polyols, glycerol, a well-known cryoprotectant, has been shown to slightly stabilise thylakoids in suspension. However, surprisingly the opposite effect was observed for the encapsulated photosynthetic membranes. Although the gel contraction was very low, the addition of glycerol modified the thylakoids–matrix interactions in a detrimental way. Del Monte et al. reported that glycerol acts as a physical barrier which avoids silica–biological species interactions.45 Consequently, these results prove that the confinement created by the glycerol-doped silica matrix was not restricted enough to maintain the structure of the thylakoids and thus they lost their activity. The preservation of photochemical activity requires defined interactions of the thylakoids with a robust silica scaffold that has a low rate of contraction.
3.2 H+-exchanged silicate (silicic acid) with fumed silica
Even after distillation of the alcohol, generated via the hydrolysis of a silicon alkoxide, some residual alcohol remains within the sol. However aqueous routes to silica scaffolds do exist and thus another synthesis pathway has been explored to target more efficient photosynthetic materials for the bioreactor.1 As previously discussed, the aqueous phase and the scaffold properties of the hybrid gel are the key to providing a smart environment for thylakoids. Using silica nanoparticles (fumed silica) and an ion-exchanged sodium silicate solution (H2SiO3), a biocompatible silica sol was obtained which almost exclusively contained silica species and was without alcohol and of low sodium ion concentration (<1 mM), mimicking the ideal cytosol composition of plant cells. Such a sol was used to form a robust hybrid gel directly around the thylakoids and was extended to larger organelles (viz. chloroplasts).
As proved by 29Si MAS NMR spectroscopy, the introduction of silica nanoparticles yielded a hybrid gel that contained a high proportion of intra-network silica species (SiO4). Subsequent siloxane condensation was thus limited and the tensile stress exerted on the biological membranes mitigated. As a matter of fact, this strategy of encapsulation extended the stabilisation of thylakoids and of chloroplasts. Micrographs obtained from confocal microscopy (Fig. 7) have shown that the structural organisation of chloroplasts was not only preserved after encapsulation but also well maintained over time. These organelles entrapped within silica remain isolated (e and f of Fig. 7) while those in free suspension display aggregation and degradation (b and c of Fig. 7). These data proved that silica matrices support the hierarchical arrangement of photosynthetic membranes. Consequently, bioreactors constructed from isolated thylakoids and biocompatible silica can produce oxygen from water for more than 40 days (Fig. 8). Although this result is promising, a reduction in oxygen productivity is progressively observed, suggesting a reduction in activity as no leaching was detected.
 Fig. 7  Chloroplasts analysed by confocal fluorescence microscopy in suspension and silica gel.1 
 Fig. 8  Photochemical production of O2 by entrapped thylakoids within a biocompatible silica matrix. Time zero corresponds to the moment at which thylakoids were isolated.1 
4. Bioreactors from whole plant cells: leaf-like materials
Encouraged by the results on entrapped thylakoids, attention turned towards more complex biological systems: photoautotrophic plant cells. These bioproduction platforms have a bright future in the development of new sustainable technologies. The metabolism of plant cells could be exploited advantageously to reduce CO2 emissions, decompose toxic chemicals,46 extract heavy metals47 and synthesise valuable (macro-) molecules and nanomaterials.48,49 A common barrier encountered in the development of such green bioreactors is the fragility of cells. For this reason, Arabidopsis thaliana cells have been encapsulated in a silica-based porous network (Fig. 9). The immobilisation step has been achieved via the co-polymerisation of aqueous silica precursors (H2SiO3 and fumed silica) and a biocompatible trifunctional silane bearing organic moieties (GLTMS) directly around these photoautotrophic cells.50 As for thylakoids, the preservation of plant cells requires a precise control of the cell–matrix interface. In fact, the cell walls play an important part in the transport, absorption and secretion of different chemicals, in addition to their structural support. The modifications of the parietal properties could thus trigger the cellular death. The addition of GLTMS has been shown to provide a suitable environment for plant cells by decreasing the number of silanol and silanolate groups located on the surface of the silica pores. The formation of a hygroscopic sugar layer (GLTMS) on the silica wall limits subsequent condensation of the silanol groups. Such condensation processes provoke deleterious physical constraints upon biological species and must therefore be minimized. In addition, the neutral sugar covering decreases the surface charge of the silica network which may detrimentally affect the membrane potential that determines the equilibrium concentrations of ions in the cytosol and thus the cellular viability.
 Fig. 9  SEM micrograph (cross section) of one A. thaliana cell entrapped within a porous silica-based matrix.50 
The efficiency of the hybrid photobiochemical material was investigated with a fluorescent confocal microscope. The chlorophyll content of cells is related to photosynthetic performance and the number of live cells. If the cells had died then the photobiochemical material would no longer fluoresce. Fig. 10 highlights that the structural organisation of these photosynthetic pigments is preserved over the course of a month, suggesting that encapsulated plant cells still have the ability to photosynthesise.
 Fig. 10  Confocal microscopy images of suspension-cultured cells (A), immobilised plant cells after 10 days (B) and after 30 days (C).50 
Using a Clark-type oxygen electrode unit, the photosynthetic activity was evaluated. Fig. 11 shows that the material was able to produce oxygen for over a month. This result suggests that cells can be kept alive within a confined space. The 14C incorporation method has shown that the photochemical material was also able to reduce CO2 into carbohydrates. A part of these photosynthates was excreted into the aqueous phase contained within the pores of silica. By a simple extraction method, these products could be recovered. Using high performance anion exchange chromatography with pulse amperometric detection (HPAEC-PAD), different neutral sugars have been identified. The molecules excreted by the material were mainly polysaccharides composed of rhamnose, galactose, glucose, xylose and mannose units (Fig. 12). Considering that the quantity of sugars increased as a function of time, this photosynthetic material holds much promise in the development of new, green chemical processes. For instance, atmospheric CO2 could be strategically exploited as a source of carbon to produce valuable compounds or biofuels while the active biomass is continuously reused. These results present a significant advancement in the realisation of a bioreactor based on silica immobilised photosynthetic cells.
 Fig. 11  Photosynthetic production of oxygen by entrapped plant cells. 100% corresponds to the photosynthetic activity of free cells (13 μmol g−1 FW h−1).50 
 Fig. 12  HPAEC-PAD analysis of gel supernatants. Chromatograms showing the comparison between (BG) a blank gel and a hybrid gel after (S5) five days, (S10) ten days and (S20) twenty days. (S5-WA) corresponds to the supernatant of the hybrid gels after five days without acid treatment. The peaks correspond to 1, rhamnose; 2, galactose; 3, glucose; 4, xylose; 5, mannose.50 
5. Bioreactors from unicellular cyanobacteria and algae
The photosynthetic process is not limited to just plants and trees, there are many species of algae and bacteria that can harvest light energy to convert CO2 into chemical energy. Primitive ancestors of these bacteria evolved the biochemical ability to utilise water as the source of electrons in photosynthesis to assimilate CO2 and ultimately created a more hospitable atmosphere on Earth allowing aerobic life to evolve. Furthermore, scientists believe that the chloroplasts found in plant cells have evolved from cyanobacteria via endosymbiosis in that a cell engulfed a cyanobacterium yet failed to digest it and the cyanobacteria flourished inside the cell and eventually evolved into the chloroplasts found in plant cells today.
By selecting unicellular species for immobilisation that perform photosynthesis one creates individual and independent microfactories that can produce metabolites from atmospheric CO2 and H2O via light harvesting.
Cyanobacteria are in fact considered as the potential source towards “3rd generation biofuels” as stated by Posten and Schaub and are currently used in liquid phase bioreactors to produce valuable biofuels.6,51–53 Moreover, cyanobacteria have also been considered as advantageous in heavy metal remediation processes13,54,55 as well as the removal of other pollutants56,57 that could be subsequently transformed into less harmful molecules. As such, cyanobacteria show great potential in pollution detection devices.58–61 For these reasons a concurrent project on such immobilisations was launched to diversify our interest in the field.
5.1 Polyol-modified silanes
Owing to the fact that small aliphatic alcohol molecules like methanol or ethanol are toxic towards cyanobacteria, the use of TMOS or TEOS as gel-forming silica precursor has to be precluded as discussed in the previous section for thylakoids and plant cells. For this reason and to explore other biocompatible immobilisation methods, the use of EGMS [tetrakis(2-hydroxyethyl) orthosilicate] as silica precursor was envisaged as here the molecules liberated during condensation polymerization are ethylene glycol molecules. It has been shown that polyols are potentially less toxic and in some cases can even be beneficial in cell wall protection or are even produced by certain cells. However it is also known that some polyols, like glycerol, can have adverse effects contrary to expectations when employed in plant cell immobilisations.25,62,63 Following the “standard” preparation procedure, EGMS was added to centrifuged pellets of PCC 6301 and 7002 previously re-suspended in an equal volume of growth media. Gelation occurred quickly and additional growth media was added on top of these gels. The intactness of the cell walls after immobilisation was verified by direct TEM observations which revealed that the structural integrity was preserved 1 week post encapsulation (Fig. 13A).
 Fig. 13  TEM images of PCC 7002 immobilised in EGMS–LUDOX based silica gels (A, B) and EGMS–LUDOX–glycerol based silica gels (C, D) after 1 day (A, C) and 1 week (B, D). Scale bars represent 1000 nm. 
The spectroscopic study indicated that for PCC 6301, both the absorption bands of the pigments were well defined after immobilisation but gradually decreased over time and no signal was detected after 7 weeks. This decrease was even more rapid in the case of PCC 7002 with disappearance of the bands after only 5 weeks inside the gel (Fig. 14A). Such quick cell death could be attributed to shrinkage of the gel, thus a decision was taken to reinforce them with LUDOX colloidal silica.
 Fig. 14  Reflectance-mode UV–Vis spectra of PCC 7002 immobilized in silica matrixes based on: EGMS (A), EGMS–LUDOX (B), EGMS–LUDOX–glycerol (C). 
With PCC 6301, the gels lost consistency after only a few days. This phenomenon seems to be a general tendency when combining the BG-11 growth media with LUDOX-based silica gels; it occurs also in the case of blank gels (absence of organisms), but the underlying phenomenon is not yet fully understood.
With PCC 7002, strong gels could be obtained. The absorption bands attributed to the pigments were still present in UV–Vis spectra after 7 weeks and even 9 weeks when additional glycerol was added to the gels (Fig. 14 B and C). Here, glycerol played a beneficial role in the stabilisation of the pore structure by reducing siloxane condensations, which in turn would lead to a contraction of the silica matrix upon ageing. The state of the cells during the early stages of immobilisation in LUDOX-based gels was further examined by direct microscopic observations (Fig. 13). From these images, one can see that the gels display a high level of porosity that is enhanced when the preparations were carried out in the presence of glycerol (Fig. 13). More importantly, a close look at the cyanobacteria reveals intact cell walls, even after 1 week post immobilisation, proving again the biocompatibility of the silica. As illustrated in the case of the immobilisation of thylakoids, although the contraction of pore structure is inhibited by the addition of glycerol to the gel, glycerol acts as a physical barrier reducing silica–biological species interaction. No beneficial effect to the survival of thylakoids is observed. The same effect in the reduction of pore structure contraction is observed in the immobilisation of cyanobacteria with alkoxide as precursor while here glycerol plays a positive role in maintaining the intactness of cyanobacterial cell walls. Glycerol can thus play a different role depending on the entrapped biological species and the immobilisation methods used.
This study shows that it is possible to immobilise cyanobacteria within silica gels obtained from an alkoxide precursor that liberates ethylene glycol upon hydrolysis and polymerisation. This pathway is far more biocompatible in comparison to the use of TMOS or TEOS. Nevertheless, the survival of the cells remains quite short with strong decrease in intensity of the absorption bands of the pigments after 9 weeks (Fig. 14 C) in the case of the best gel composition and more in depth studies are required in order to determine if it is feasible to design photobioreactors based on cyanobacteria immobilised in polyol-modified alkoxide-based silica precursors.
5.2 Sodium silicate

5.2.1 Cyanobacteria: Synechoccocus PCC 6301 and PCC 7002. 
Cytotoxicity tests revealed how cyanobacterial cells were sensitive to certain alcohols and thus an aqueous route, based on sodium silicate and LUDOX, was selected for the immobilisation of whole prokaryotic cells.3,4 Furthermore, as the media in which free cyanobacteria suspensions grow contain salts such as NaCl it was deemed that the cells could tolerate the excess sodium concentration produced during immobilisation. To prevent osmotic shock glycerol was added prior to encapsulation. Glycerol is known to be produced by cyanobacteria strains found in hypersaline environments,64 its role being one of osmoregulation to maintain sodium homeostasis within the cell.
The hybrid gels obtained were characterised using 29Si MAS NMR spectroscopy to ascertain the silicon environments. Results showed that the majority of the silicon was in the quaternary phase, which means near complete condensation was achieved. Any subsequent condensation reactions within an assembled bioreactor would put undue strain on the already restricted cells and thus it is imperative that the immobilisation method chosen is fairly rapid. 29Si MAS-NMR also reveals the presence of terminal silanol groups, found presumably on the surface of the gel. This implies the porous network had a hydrophilic-like environment which would facilitate the porous media to percolate through the active part of a bioreactor. It should also assist in the harvesting of metabolites as the products formed by the immobilised cells could be extracted without the need to either dismantle the bioreactor or destroy the immobilising matrix.
TEM studies have highlighted that over the course of one month there was dissolution of silica around the cells. (Fig. 15) It is still unclear as to whether a physiological interaction between the cyanobacteria cell and the silica network was occurring or whether it was a physicochemical interaction with the aqueous media breaking down the gel. The integrity of the hybrid material is essential for a commercially viable bioreactor. The stability of the material thus needs to be addressed. If the interaction is indeed physiological then some form of pre-encapsulation may overcome this problem. Cyanobacteria encapsulation within biopolymers has been widely reported.32,33,65 Despite imparting more flexibility, their stability and mechanical strength are impaired. By combining the two immobilisation techniques, a biopolymer could act as a barrier between the living cell and inert silica matrix with the silica itself conferring a superior mechanical strength to the hybrid material. A subsequent advantage arising from the more flexible biopolymer would be cellular division. By creating bigger voids within the material the cells would have more space to divide. This propagation of immobilised cyanobacteria would inevitably prolong the lifetime of the bioreactor itself.
 Fig. 15  Transmission electron microscopy images of Synechoccocus PCC 6301 immobilised within silica gel after (i) one hour, (ii) one day, (iii) one week and (iv) one month.3 
As photosynthetic pigments autofluoresce, cell viability was monitored via various fluorimetry techniques. The confocal micrographs in Fig. 16 reveal the presence of photosynthetic pigments post encapsulation. Epifluorescent microscopy has shown that this phenomenon continued for at least 12 weeks post encapsulation for Synechoccocus PCC 6301 and PCC 7002.3
 Fig. 16  Confocal microscopy images of PCC 6301. (i) Free cyanobacteria, (ii) an immobilisation after 1 day, (iii) an immobilisation after 2 weeks and finally (iv) immobilisation of centrifuged cyanobacteria after one week.4 
These results were confirmed by spectroscopy measurements over the visible range. Here both chlorophyll a and phycocyanin can be detected via characteristic reflectance bands. The evolution of the pigments was followed over the course of 3 months. Fig. 17 (6301 and 7002) reveals how the presence of chlorophyll a (680 nm) was detectable after 12 weeks for PCC 6301 yet the phycocyanin component (630 nm) had disappeared. For PCC 7002 this trend was inversed with the water soluble phycocyanin remaining longer. The photosynthetic pigments are crucial to a fully functioning bioreactor. Research has previously shown the possibilities of immobilising the photosynthetic pigments or reaction centres alone within organic or silica based matrices to exploit their photosynthetic properties. (Ref. 66 and references therein) However whole cell encapsulation, whereby the cells remain both viable and active, is much more promising in terms of commercial biotechnologies such as bioreactors and biosensors. Pigments such as chlorophyll a are highly photosensitive and must be handled carefully, which has a serious economical impact on any future developments. By immobilising an entire cell this setback is overcome. The cells are more robust than isolated pigments or cellular fragments and as such immobilisations are carried out at ambient temperature.
 Fig. 17  UV–Visible spectra of hybrid gels, measured over the course of 12 weeks. Weeks have been omitted for clarity.3 
An inorganic radio-labelled isotope was incorporated into several gel matrices. This showed that the immobilised cells still continued to perform the dark reaction, the fixation of CO2. As the readings for gels synthesised with Synechococcus PCC 6301 and PCC 7002 were significantly higher than for their corresponding blank gels one can determine that the hybrid materials were productive in that carbon had been assimilated into the cell and metabolised into organic species found either within the cell environment or excreted into the media. (Table 1).
Table 1 Inorganic carbon assimilation data from cyanobacteria cells immobilised in silica gel, in each case result is an average of three samples. DPM stands for depletions per minute




Sample
DPM 14C (Gel)
DPM 14C (Media)




Gel (Na2SiO3) PCC 6301
56487
7727


Gel (Na2SiO3) Blank
12597
983


Gel (Na2SiO3) PCC 7002
1022531
126061


Gel (Na2SiO3) Blank
126070
80604






5.2.2 Rhodophyta: Cyanidium caldarium SAG 16.91. 

C. caldarium has been immobilised in an identical matrix to the immobilisations described in the previous section, 5.2.1.67 Epifluorescence microscopy revealed cells that autofluoresced post immobilisation, Fig. 18.
 Fig. 18  Epifluorescence microscopy image of (a) free SAG 16.91 and (b) SAG 16.91 immobilised within silica gel, where the scale bars represent 10 μm.67 
The preservation of photosynthetic pigments was confirmed by UV–Vis spectroscopy (Fig. 19), suggesting that the cells are viable post-immobilisation. However primary production experiments, used to monitor the uptake of CO2 or so-called dark reactions, revealed that the cells were not active when glycerol was included in the matrix. By omitting glycerol, significant results could be obtained from the 14C incorporation method. The results in Table 2 reveal that the immobilised cells had assimilated and excreted a considerable amount of the radioactive tracer in comparison to the blank samples.
 Fig. 19  UV–Visible spectra of (a) free SAG 16.91 and (b) SAG 16.91 immobilised within silica gel.67 
Table 2 Inorganic carbon assimilation data from Cyanidium caldarium cells immobilised in silica gel. DPM stands for depletions per minute




Sample
DPM 14C (Gel)
DPM 14C (Media)




Gel (Na2SiO3) C. caldarium
388651
6445


Gel (Na2SiO3) Blank
1823
70




Electrochemical methods were employed to monitor the light reaction by detecting oxygen production. Measurements were taken on one day old gels and it was found that gels containing either LUDOX or LUDOX and glycerol in fact had negligible net respiration rates, whereas a gel made with sodium silicate produces a net amount of oxygen, see Table 3. When LUDOX and glycerol were omitted the rate of oxygen production was 0.25 μmol h−1 g−1 over the first 30 min; however the rate fell for the subsequent 40 min, lowering the overall average.
Table 3 Oxygen production data from C. caldarium cells immobilised in silica gel




Gel precursors
Oxygen production (μmol h−1 g−1)




Sodium silicate, LUDOX, glycerol
−0.052


Sodium silicate, LUDOX
−0.0015


Sodium silicate
0.13




These results highlight the complexity of immobilisation in that there is not one universal protocol suitable for all biological matter. Methods need to be adapted according to the cells immobilised. In this case glycerol, a compound that can be formed by prokaryotic cyanobacteria found in hypersaline lakes and that is used in osmoregulation, was found to be toxic to the eukaryotic C. caldarium cells, inhibiting their photosynthetic activity.
Finally, TEM studies have revealed an interfacial interaction between the cell wall and the forming silica network with a distinct silica crust forming along the cell wall, Fig. 20. This suggests that the forming silica network treated the cells as nucleation sites and potentially used the functional groups typically found within the cell wall as a polymerisation site. These silica nanoparticles may have blocked the active sites on the eukaryotic cell wall, preventing active transport processes. This is a very interesting subject of study.68,69
 Fig. 20  Transmission electron microscopy images of SAG 16.91 immobilised within silica gel where the scale bars represent 1000 nm.67 

5.3 H+-exchanged silicate (silicic acid)
Owing to the fact that osmotic stress can occur in elevated saline conditions, the silicate precursor was replaced with silicic acid as previously mentioned for thylakoid entrapment. Several gel compositions were prepared as in the previous case and in particular the effects of the addition of glycerol and silica nanoparticles were studied.70
Porous silica frameworks based on acid-exchanged silica in the presence of glycerol were prepared as described for sodium silicate with the omission of the colloidal silica (LUDOX). As the silicic acid intermediate was ca. pH 2 it was necessary to adjust the pH by addition of KOH. The time-dependent study of immobilised PCC 6301 shows the presence of the typical absorption bands of the pigments (at 675 and 625 nm, attributed respectively to chlorophyll a and phycocyanin) up to 35 weeks, with a progressive decrease in intensity (Fig. 21). The presence of these bands may indicate that the cells remain intact and are thus able to photosynthesise. This observation clearly shows the beneficial effect of removing the high amounts of Na+ ions from the silica source, as survival was extended threefold in comparison with gels derived from sodium silicate. For PCC 7002, the same trend could be proven with viability up to 23 weeks post-immobilisation, thus survival times had more than doubled. In all cases, the band corresponding to chlorophyll a was best preserved, as already observed previously for PCC 6301 in a sodium silicate based gel.
 Fig. 21  Reflectance-mode UV–Vis spectra of PCC 6301 (left) and PCC 7002 (right) immobilised in gels based on an acid-exchanged silicate precursor. Numbers represent the weeks after immobilisation.70 
Subsequently the role played by glycerol, initially added as an osmoprotective agent to the gels, was investigated. This reagent should, in principle, no longer be necessary owing to a very low concentration of Na+ and the absence of colloidal LUDOX, which uses sodium ions as a stabilising agent. Moreover, it has been stated that Synechococcus can grow heterotrophically in the presence of glycerol71 and that high concentrations of glycerol inhibit the growth of the cyanobacteria.
A study carried out on both PCC 6301 and 7002 strains over 17 weeks proves that glycerol has a negative effect on the preservation of cell integrity. Spectroscopy experiments have shown that the presence of glycerol in the media led to a change in the ratio of the bands and thus the concentration of the pigments, proving that the cells underwent changes to adapt to their environment (Fig. 22). On the other hand, the hybrid gels prepared in the absence of glycerol kept the same intensity ratio of the absorption bands as for the suspension cultures and thus exhibited similar viabilities. Thus from these results it is again confirmed that glycerol can play a different role depending on the strains immobilised and the immobilisation methods employed. In the present case, glycerol has to be omitted from the photosynthetic materials when designing photobioreactors based on acid-exchanged silicate precursors.
 Fig. 22  Influence of glycerol on the preservation of photosynthetic pigments for PCC 6301, (left) with glycerol, (right) without glycerol. 
Glycerol-free gels have been prepared and moulded into different shapes, such as hollow cylinders to allow better percolation of the growth media. Cell survival during the immobilisation procedure was proven by 14C assimilation, with a radiotracer added during gel formation. As can be seen from Table 4, the primary production of the hybrid gels was significantly higher than the blank samples, showing that the cells are still able to metabolise the inorganic carbon into organic products post immobilisation.
Table 4 Inorganic carbon assimilation data (after 24 h and 3 weeks) of cyanobacteria immobilised in acid-exchanged porous silicate gels with the radiotracer added either during gel formation or after gel formation within fresh growth media. In each case the result is an average of three samples. DPM stands for depletions per minute




Sample
DPM 14C (Added to gel)
DPM 14C (Added to media)


24 h
3 wk
24 h
3 wk




Gel (H2SiO3) PCC 6301
145363
133168
393961
295319


Gel (H2SiO3) Blank
3636
2043
1831
1982


Gel (H2SiO3) PCC 7002
101072
99351
322711
248884


Gel (H2SiO3) Blank
386
185
420
537




However, these results could stem from cellular activity during the early stages of gel formation and so parallel experiments were carried out where the radiotracer was placed in the fresh growth media added on top of the preformed gel. Using this test it was also possible to evaluate the porosity of the silica gel; positive results would imply efficient nutrient diffusion throughout the gel towards the cells. As can be seen from Table 4, the DPM, normalised per gram of sample, for the hybrid gels was far higher than the same blank gels for both PCC 6301 and PCC 7002, thus revealing the presence of organic 14C assimilated into or excreted out of the cells. This clearly confirms the ability of the cells to photosynthesise after immobilisation in silica gel and additionally it proves that the porosity of the matrix was appropriate for nutrient diffusion. The assimilation was also monitored over time in order to follow the photosynthesis ability of the cells after defined periods of immobilisation. After a period of 3 weeks, for the gels prepared either in the presence of the tracer or with the tracer added to the media on top of the gel, the average DPM remained quite similar. As these data are normalised with respect to the mass of sample introduced, no conclusions can be drawn regarding an eventual continued production of carbohydrates. It could be attributed either to a lack of inorganic radiotracer with the complete uptake of NaH14CO3 occurring within days of immobilisation or that the cells stopped assimilating after a certain period post immobilisation.
This last statement could be supported by preliminary oximetry measurements. For both PCC 6301 and PCC 7002 immobilised within acid-exchanged silica gels, oxygen production could be evidenced after 3 weeks ageing (data not shown). However it was difficult to perform oxygen concentration measurements using the Clark electrode, since the oxygen production of the immobilised cyanobacteria in this case was very low compared to the oxygen consumption and the productivity could only be demonstrated by analysing the respiration rate of hybrid gels in the dark and comparing that to the production rate under the light.
Despite these very encouraging results, these gels remained quite fragile and had a tendency to liquefy in the presence of culture media over long periods of time, probably due to re-hydrolysis. That is why it was necessary to reinforce them and the most obvious way is the use of preformed silica nanoparticles as already described. Immobilisation matrices devoid of glycerol but containing varying amounts of LUDOX were thus prepared for both PCC 6301 and PCC 7002. Unfortunately for PCC 6301 the gels remained very unstable and liquefaction took place after 24–48 h, independent of the amount of LUDOX added, despite adjusting the pH to the point at which the rate of formation was quickest. This phenomenon also happened for blank gels, so it cannot be attributed to the cyanobacteria but rather to the added nutrient media and has also been observed earlier when using a modified alkoxide as silica precursor. Studies are ongoing in order to understand the underlying reasons for this.
In contrast, the immobilisation of PCC 7002 produced very firm and stiff gels that were much easier to mould into a particular shape. The state of the cyanobacteria was again characterised both by spectroscopy to evaluate the pigment content and by primary production to determine the photosynthetic activity. The UV–Vis spectra recorded over a period of 15 weeks show that additions of either 0.5 or 1.0 mL LUDOX to 3 mL of H+ exchanged silica were the most suitable (Fig. 23). Greater volumes (2.0 mL) resulted in a more significant decrease in absorption intensity, indicating destruction of the cells. This could be attributed to high concentrations of Na+ present as stabilising species in the colloidal silica or the internalisation of the nanoparticles through the cell wall into the cytoplasm.
 Fig. 23  Reflectance mode UV–Vis spectra of cyanobacterial strain PCC 7002 immobilised within an acid-exchanged silicate–LUDOX gel.70 

14C incorporation measurements were carried out on gels with and without LUDOX (no glycerol). To enable a comparative study, the radio-labelled NaH14CO3 was added to the same stock solution of H+ exchanged silicate. From Table 5, the average DPM, corresponding to organic 14C, was higher for the hybrid gels than for the blank gels, indicating the preservation of metabolic activity. The production that occurred in the media and that could be attributed to free cyanobacteria was also verified and remained very low. More importantly, from this table it becomes evident that the activity of the gel containing LUDOX was higher, demonstrating the beneficial effect colloidal silica plays in the formation of the hybrid materials, presumably by rapidly hardening the gel and reducing the phenomenon of gel shrinkage that usually occurs upon ageing, thus minimising the stress exerted on the cyanobacteria.
Table 5 Inorganic carbon assimilation data of cyanobacteria immobilised in acid-exchanged porous silicate gels with and without LUDOX. In each case the result is an average of three samples. DPM stands for depletions per minute




Sample
DPM 14C (Gel)
DPM 14C (Media)




Gel (H2SiO3) PCC 7002
862267
3697


Gel (H2SiO3) Blank
2152
1250


Gel (H2SiO3–LUDOX) PCC 7002
1942019
11982


Gel (H2SiO3–LUDOX) Blank
9016
3867




In order to determine the diffusion ability of the matrix, parallel experiments were performed by adding the radio-tracer to the growth media, which in turn was either added to the precursors before gel formation or afterwards on top of the preformed gel to assess the diffusion ability of the matrix. For both sets of gels, the DPM values were higher in the hybrid gels than in the blank gels (Table 6) and as for the previous example of glycerol-free gels, a very high DPM value for tracer added on top of a preformed gel indicated a good porosity, thus allowing good nutrient diffusion. Nevertheless, as stated earlier in this section, there was no evidence for further carbohydrate production when regarding the data collected 3 weeks after immobilisation.
Table 6 Inorganic carbon assimilation data (after 24 h and 3 weeks) of PCC 7002 immobilised in acid-exchanged porous silicate gels with the radiotracer added during gel formation and after gel formation on top. In each case the result is an average of three samples. DPM stands for depletions per minute




Sample
DPM 14C (Gel formation)
DPM 14C (On top)


24 h
3 wk
24 h
3 wk




(H2SiO3) PCC 7002
101072
99351
322711
248884


(H2SiO3) Blank
86
185
420
537


(H2SiO3–LUDOX) PCC 7002
202395
214578
250439
269799


(H2SiO3–LUDOX) Blank
530
2714
358
4284




The advantages of a LUDOX-based matrix were further demonstrated by oximetry measurements. For PCC 7002 embedded in such a gel, an oxygen production of 0.89, 0.63 and 0.39 μmol g−1 h−1 occurred after 7, 14 and 22 days respectively.
These results show that the use of acid-exchanged silicate is a very promising way to encapsulate cyanobacteria since the boundaries of survival have been pushed far higher than the first results described for sodium silicate. In particular, it has been found that glycerol has to be avoided but the addition of silica nanoparticles acting as a strengthening agent is necessary for the long-lasting stability and durability of the gels; during the polymerisation of the silica source the nanoparticles form cement between these colloids. This synthesis procedure led to silica matrices with porosities sufficient to allow a good diffusion of nutrients, as proven by the uptake of radio-labelled CO2, added to the media after gel formation, within the immobilised gel.
6. Discussion
Earlier immobilisations in silica materials that were based on alkoxide precursors often focused on yeasts, organisms tolerant to the alcohols liberated during gel formation.36 Preliminary studies have highlighted how alkoxide precursors are not a feasible option when considering the encapsulation of photosynthetic entities. When using a TEOS precursor, an intermediate distillation step was required prior to thylakoid entrapment. However alcohol residues remained and the activity of the cells was compromised in comparison to subsequent, more biocompatible matrices. The use of more biologically friendly precursors such as DGS (thylakoids) or EGMS (cyanobacteria) did not suitably prolong cellular activity with respect to the use of simpler alkoxides with an intermediate distillation step. Thus the alkoxide route is in need of further study; however a more favourable aqueous route frequently used in the immobilisation of E.coli by Livage et al.39,62 has proved more successful. Here the use of water glass, sodium silicate, was advocated to produce hybrid materials. However during the process of immobilisation high quantities of sodium ions are released. For this reason problems were incurred in the immobilisation of thylakoids and plant cells which typically have only very low concentrations of sodium ions in their media ([Na+] = 1.02 × 10−4 M). In contrast cyanobacteria are more tolerant owing to a higher concentration of sodium ions in their media, [Na+]BG-11 = 0.018 M (0.41 g dm−3) and [Na+]ASN-III = 0.44 M (10 g dm−3). This explains their greater resistance, with the hybrid gels preserving the photosynthetic reaction centre for up to 3 months.
By passing a sodium silicate solution over an acid exchange resin it is possible to remove the majority of these sodium ions, producing silicic acid directly as a precursor as opposed to an intermediate. Silicic acid has become the reagent of choice for immobilisations. Matrices made with silicic acid have shown vast improvements in viability for both thylakoids, plant cells and cyanobacteria. The only drawback thus far is the strength of the matrix. The original sodium silicate reagent must be diluted; too high a concentration will result in a more compact silica network which would constrict the immobilised cells. However on dilution the gel that forms will be weaker and prone to liquefaction. A prototype bioreactor based on the immobilisation of cyanobacteria within a silicic acid derived matrix has revealed that with time the surface of the silica gel has a tendency to hydrolyse, releasing cells into the medium that is pumped on continuous flow through the reactor. Though no definite explanation is yet known for the re-hydrolysis, one potential hypothesis lies with the concentration of sodium ions as the gels formed in highly saline growth medium (PCC 7002) as well as with sodium silicate have not undergone such severe liquefaction.
Various strengthening agents have been incorporated into the framework, predominantly LUDOX or fumed silica. In the case of LUDOX there is the question of toxicity. In fact, there is a strong possibility that the nanoparticles can pass through the semi-permeable membrane of the cell or that it could block active sites on the cell wall, interfering with the photosynthetic process. In contrast the use of fumed silica, particle size ca. 15 nm, does not have the same problems of toxicity. In fact the fumed silica is added to an aqueous solution prior to use where it forms bigger aggregates, thus mitigating the problems of interactions between nanoparticles and biological matter.
When isolated cells are encapsulated within a biocompatible environment, the constructed bioreactors have been shown to be quite efficient. As a matter of fact, the photosynthetic performances of isolated thylakoids, cyanobacteria or plant cells have been improved by their incorporation into different silica scaffolds. For instance, entrapped A. thaliana cells still produce oxygen 30 days post encapsulation compared to the life span of an Arabidopsis leaf which is around 20 days. This improvement in activity—provided through encapsulation—can be explained by taking into account several factors. Firstly, metabolite production of the bioreactor can be optimized by exploiting the signal transduction pathway used by cells to communicate. Controlling their environment (e.g. nutrients, salts, elicitors) within the artificial silica environment is perhaps one way to design an efficient photochemical material with a targeted production. Another benefit of a bioreactor based on static cells is a decrease in feedback inhibition caused by a surplus of photosynthates. As the medium permeates the porous network it would flush away the metabolites produced, which aids the process of product recovery enabling the bioreactor to work continuously without interruption for product ‘harvesting’. There is also no weather fluctuation. Currently seasonal changes dictate the activity of algae or plants found in temperate zones, where cloud cover or low solar photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) input decrease efficiencies making it economically unfeasible. By designing an indoor reactor, it should be possible to run the system continuously throughout the year.
7. Conclusions and outlook
In the framework of designing a bioreactor, immobilisation of photosynthetic entities within silica scaffolds has been shown to protect cells from harsh environments or even improve their photosynthetic performance. The protection effect observed requires a fine control of the cellular environment. Particularly, the construction of the bioreactor has to be realised via a biocompatible synthesis pathway in order to allow the formation of a robust hybrid silica gel without releasing any noxious by-product during its construction. The obtained silica matrices can be advantageously exploited to extend the photochemical activity of fragile thylakoids for up to 40 days. The viability of unicellular cyanobacteria or even eukaryotic plant cells can be well preserved within porous silica over numerous weeks. As a consequence, this approach could allow the continuous exploitation of cells in a non destructive way to produce metabolites as biofuels.
In order to reach this goal, attention will be paid to several key factors. Firstly, the selection of the biological species is an imperative issue. The basic considerations are viability and biological activity (photosynthetic efficiency). A cell of a unicellular organism contains a complete set of elements for surviving and normally exhibits higher viability than a cell of a multicellular organism that has been removed from its native environment and thus lacks the essential support received from other types of cells. However, a differentiated cell within a multicellular organism may develop a higher biological activity than a cell from a unicellular organism. The major challenge is to incorporate both a high viability and biological activity within a single cell. The technological advances in genome and proteome research make it possible to identify those genes involved in crucial biological processes. Thus genetic manipulation can be performed to improve the viability and biological activity of the cells or to control the products obtained via cellular metabolism. The recent report on the engineering of E. coli to produce structurally tailored fatty esters (biodiesel), fatty alcohols and waxes directly from simple sugars72 is a good example.
Secondly, the preservation of physiological viability and cell productivity are two key characteristics crucial in the development of an efficient, cost-effective bioreactor. Additionally, the chemical, morphological and diffusion properties of the matrix have to be carefully controlled. Looking towards natural systems we see that in many cases it is not only the photosynthetic cell itself that is the key to efficiency but the overall system such as the 3-dimensional architecture of a leaf. With this in mind future work needs to focus on the design of the encapsulating matrix that encompasses structural features such as hierarchical porosity and targeted surface properties.
Thirdly, careful attention needs to be paid to the interactions between the host matrix and the living cells in terms of the functional groups found in the cell wall and the matrix surface to avoid deleterious effects. Studies using materials such as organically modified silicas that may result in a surface inert to the cell wall could result in vast improvements to the hybrid materials, negating the problems of either silica dissolution or biomineralisation of the cell wall. This may also be achieved using a two step process in which the cells would first be immobilised in an inert flexible material prior to encapsulation in a hard durable silica shell. This method would also permit the incorporation of bigger pore sizes allowing cellular growth and division to continue within the hybrid material. This is of particular interest since the metabolite productivity is growth dependent. In this sense, the encapsulation technique offers a tool to both control the level of biomass and to mediate communication between the cells in order to improve the bioreactor's efficiency. If the concentration is too low then the efficiency of the material is compromised, yet if it is too high then a shading effect may occur, where light cannot penetrate throughout the bulk of the material. In nature photosynthetic organisms have adapted to this problem by evolving accessory pigments. Light energy at different sea depths is dependent on absorption and light scattering, both of which are wavelength dependent. Complementary photosynthetic pigments such as fucoxanthin or phycoerythin are activated at higher energies and as a consequence are predominantly found in aquatic species between 5 and 50 m below the surface. Therefore in the future it may be prudent to devise biomaterials that are a snapshot of nature, whereby several different cells, genetically engineered and activated at different energies, are selected to work together in unison, maximising the efficiency of the bioreactor.
Acknowledgements
This work was realised in the framework of “Redugaz”, an Interreg IV (France–Wallonia) project funded by the European Union and the Walloon community. The authors also thank the Interuniversity Attraction Pole (IAP-P6/17) for financially supporting “Inanomat”, a Belgian federal government project. B.-L. Su acknowledges the Chinese Central Government for an “Expert of the State” position in the program of “Thousands Talents” and the Chinese Ministry of Education for a “Changjiang Scholar” position at the Wuhan University of Technology. A. Léonard and C. F. Meunier thank the Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique (FNRS) for their Postdoctoral and Research Fellow positions respectively.
Notes and references
C. F. Meunier, P. Van Cutsem, Y.-U. Kwon and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4131–4137 RSC .
C. F. Meunier, P. Van Cutsem, Y.-U. Kwon and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1535–1542 RSC .
J. C. Rooke, A. Léonard, H. Sarmento, J.-P. Descy and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2833–2841 RSC .
J. C. Rooke, A. Léonard and B. L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1333–1341 RSC .
M. Olaizola, Biomol. Eng., 2003, 20, 459–466 CrossRef CAS .
C. Posten and G. Schaub, J. Biotechnol., 2009, 142, 64–69 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyasaka, T. Watanabe, A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 638–640 CAS .
I. Inamura, H. Ochiai, K. Toki and T. Araki, Chem. Lett., 1984, 1787–1790 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyasaka, T. Watanabe, A. Fujishima and K. Honda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 6657–6665 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mehraban, F. Farzaneh and A. Shafiekhani, Opt. Mater., 2007, 29, 927–931 CrossRef CAS .
H. Furukawa, N. Inoue, T. Watanabe and K. Kuroda, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3992–3997 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ishii, T. ltoh, H. Kageyama, T. Mizoguchi, Y. Kodera, A. Matsushima, K. Torii and Y. Inada, Dyes Pigm., 1995, 28, 77–82 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kodera, H. Kageyama, H. Sekine and Y. Inada, Biotechnol. Lett., 1992, 14, 119–122 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mehraban and F. Farzaneh, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2006, 88, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
T. Itoh, K. Yano, T. Kajino, S. Itoh, Y. Shibata, H. Mino, R. Miyamoto, Y. Inada, S. Iwai and Y. Fukushima, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 13683–13687 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takagi, M. Eguchi, D. Tryk and H. Inoue, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2006, 7, 104–126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ellerby, C. Nishida, F. Nishida, S. Yamanaka, B. Dunn, J. Valentine and J. Zink, Science, 1992, 255, 1113–1115 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, L. Ellerby, J. Cohan, B. Dunn, M. El-Sayed, J. Valentine and J. Zink, Chem. Mater., 1993, 5, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, L. Samuelson, J. Akkara, D. Kaplan, H. Gao, J. Kumar, K. Marx and S. Tripathy, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1779–1783 CrossRef CAS .
I. Oda, K. Hirata, S. Watanabe, Y. Shibata, T. Kajino, Y. Fukushima, S. Iwai and S. Itoh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1114–1120 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fiedler, U. Hager, H. Franke, U. Soltmann and H. Böttcher, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 261–266 RSC .
C. Gautier, J. Livage, T. Coradin and P. J. Lopez, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4611–4613 RSC .
G. Pressi, R. Dal Toso, R. Dal Monte and G. Carturan, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2003, 26, 1189–1193 CrossRef CAS .
G. Carturan, R. Dal Monte, G. Pressi, S. Secondin and P. Verza, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1998, 13, 273–276 CrossRef CAS .
R. Campostrini, G. Carturan, R. Caniato, A. Piovan, R. Filippini, G. Innocenti and E. M. Cappelletti, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1996, 7, 87–97 CAS .
M. Perullini, M. M. Rivero, M. Jobbá, A. Mentaberry and S. A. Bilmes, J. Biotechnol., 2007, 127, 542–548 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Meinke, J. M. Cherry, C. Dean, S. D. Rounsley and M. Koornneef, Science, 1998, 282, 662–682 CrossRef CAS .
K. Baerenfaller, J. Grossmann, M. A. Grobei, R. Hull, M. Hirsch-Hoffmann, S. Yalovsky, P. Zimmermann, U. Grossniklaus, W. Gruissem and S. Baginsky, Science, 2008, 320, 938–941 CrossRef CAS .
W.-D. Reiter, Plant Physiol. Biochem., 1998, 36, 167–176 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Woodger, D. A. Bryant and G. D. Price, J. Bacteriol., 2007, 189, 3335–3347 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Asada, M. Miyake, J. Miyake, R. Kurane and Y. Tokiwa, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 1999, 25, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
A. Avramescu, R. Rouillon and R. Carpentier, Biotechnol. Tech., 1999, 13, 559–562 CrossRef CAS .
A. Blanco, B. Sanz, M. J. Llama and J. L. Serra, J. Biotechnol., 1999, 69, 227–240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Livage, T. Coradin and C. Roux, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2001, 13, R673–R691 CrossRef CAS .
D. Avnir, S. Braun, O. Lev and M. Ottolenghi, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 1605–1614 CrossRef CAS .
G. Carturan, R. Campostrini, S. Dirè, V. Scardi and E. de Alteriis, J. Mol. Catal., 1989, 57, L13–L16 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Ferrer, L. Yuste, F. Rojo and F. del Monte, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3614–3618 CrossRef CAS .
D. Brandhuber, V. Torma, C. Raab, H. Peterlik, A. Kulak and N. Hüsing, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4262–4271 CrossRef CAS .
A. Coiffier, T. Coradin, C. Roux, O. M. M. Bouvet and J. Livage, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2039–2044 RSC .
T. Hiyama, Physiol. Veg., 1985, 23, 605–610 Search PubMed .
M. Hara, S. Iazvovskaia, H. Ohkawa, Y. Asada and J. Miyake, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 1999, 87, 793–797 CrossRef CAS .
P. Euzet, M. T. Giardi and R. Rouillon, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 539, 263–269 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Lam, E. F. Irwin, K. E. Healy and L. Lin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 117, 480–487 CrossRef .
M. A. Brook, Y. Chen, K. Guo, Z. Zhang and J. D. Brennan, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1469–1479 RSC .
M. L. Ferrer, Z. Y. Garcia-Carvajal, L. Yuste, F. Rojo and F. del Monte, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1458–1463 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Yoon, D. J. Olivier and J. V. Shanks, Chemosphere, 2007, 68, 1050–1057 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. McGrath, E. Lombi, C. W. Gray, N. Caille, S. J. Dunhan and F. J. Zhao, Environ. Pollut., 2006, 141, 115–125 CrossRef CAS .
T.-K. Huang and K. A. McDonald, Biochem. Eng. J., 2009, 45, 168–184 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Sharma, S. V. Shahi, S. Nath, J. G. Parson, J. L. Gardea-Torresdey and T. Pal, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 5137–5142 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Meunier, J. C. Rooke, A. Léonard, P. Van Cutsem and B. L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 929–936 RSC .
P. M. Schenk, S. R. Thomas-Hall, E. Stephens, U. C. Marx, J. H. Mussgnug, C. Posten, O. Kruse and B. Hankamer, BioEnergy Res., 2008, 1, 20–43 CrossRef .
E. Sierra, F. G. Acien, J. M. Fernandez, J. L. Garcia, C. Gonzalez and E. Molina, Chem. Eng. J., 2008, 138, 136–147 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Markov, E. R. Eivazova and J. Greenwood, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1314–1317 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gardea-Torresdey, J. Arenas, N. Francisco, K. Tiemann and R. Webb, J. Hazard. Substance Res., 1998, 1, 1–18 Search PubMed .
Z. Aksu, G. Egretli and T. Kutsal, Process Biochem., 1998, 33, 393–400 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Luan, J. Jin, S. M. N. Chan, Y. S. Wong and N. F. Y. Tam, Process Biochem., 2006, 41, 1560–1565 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Kaya, J. de la Noüe and G. Picard, J. Appl. Phycol., 1995, 7, 85–95 Search PubMed .
J. L. Erbe, A. C. Adams, K. B. Taylor and L. M. Hall, J. Ind. Microbiol., 1996, 17, 80–83 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Y. Schreiter, O. Gillor, A. F. Post, S. Belkin, R. D. Schmid and T. T. Bachmann, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2001, 16, 811–818 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Sanders, M. Rodriguez and E. Greenbaum, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2001, 16, 439–446 CrossRef CAS .
B. Podola and M. Melkonian, J. Appl. Phycol., 2003, 15, 415–424 Search PubMed .
N. Nassif, C. Roux, T. Coradin, M. N. Rager, O. M. M. Bouvet and J. Livage, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 203–208 RSC .
A. Ben-Amotz and M. Avron, Plant Physiol., 1973, 51, 875–878 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fulda, J. Huckauf, A. Schoor and M. Hagemann, J. Plant Physiol., 1999, 154, 240–249 CAS .
F. Mbeunkui, C. Richaud, A. L. Etienne, R. D. Schmid and T. T. Bachmann, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2002, 60, 306–312 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Rooke, C. Meunier, A. Léonard and B. L. Su, Pure Appl. Chem., 2008, 80, 2345–2376 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Rooke, A. Léonard, C. F. Meunier, H. Sarmento, J.-P. Descy and B.-L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 344, 348–352 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Meunier, J. C. Rooke, K. Hadju, P. Van Cutsem, P. Cambier, A. Léonard and B.-L. Su, Langmuir, 2010 DOI:10.1021/la9039286 .
C. F. Meunier, Ph. Dandoy and B.-L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 342, 211–224 CrossRef CAS .
A. Léonard, J. C. Rooke, C. F. Meunier, H. Sarmento, J.-P. Descy and B.-L. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 370–377 RSC .
D. Xu, D. Liu, C. Guo and J. Zhao, Microbiology, 2006, 152, 2013–2021A CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Steen, Y. Kang, G. Bokinsky, Z. Hu, A. Schirmer, A. McClure, S. B. del Cardayre and J. D. Keasling, Nature, 2010, 463, 559–562 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† These authors contributed equally to this work.‡ Research Fellow: Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique, 5, rue d'Egmont, B-1000 Bruxelles, Belgium.§ Chargé de Recherches: Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique, 5, rue d'Egmont, B-1000 Bruxelles, Belgium.¶ PCC Pasteur Culture collection of Cyanobacteria|| SAG Sammlung von Algenkulturen der Universität GöttingenThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Christophe F. Meunier
	Christophe Meunier obtained his Master’s degree under the supervision of Prof. Dr Bao-Lian Su from the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry, University of Namur (FUNDP), Belgium, in 2006. He received the SRC prize for his master’s thesis from the Royal Chemical Society of Belgium. He is currently working in the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry as a Research fellow (PhD student) in the frame of the Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique (FNRS), Belgium. He is carrying out research on the incorporation of biological functionalities within inorganic matrices.

Joanna C. Rooke
	Dr Joanna Rooke received a MNatSc. (Chemistry) degree from the University of Birmingham (2000). She was awarded a PhD, jointly funded by Merck and EPSRC, by the University of Southampton (2004) under the supervision of Prof. M. T. Weller. After a PDRF at the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry, University of Namur she moved to LEPMI, INP Grenoble before returning to Namur to participate in an EU INTERREG IV project concerning VOC and CO2 abatement. Her research interests include synthesis and crystallography of oxynitrides, adsorption of Pt nanoparticles on carbon aerogels and encapsulation of photosynthetic entities within porous silica gels.

Alexandre Léonard
	Dr Alexandre Léonard received his Master’s and PhD degrees under the supervision of Prof. Dr Bao-Lian Su at the University of Namur in 2000 and 2005. He was awarded the Royal Chemical Society of Belgium prize and laureate of the DSM Award for Science and Technology in 2005. His research was aimed at new synthesis pathways towards highly structured mesoporous (alumino)silicates and the preparation of hierarchical aluminosilicates, based on original spontaneous formation mechanisms. He is currently working at the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry as “Chargé de Recherches” on the conception of new photobioreactors based on immobilized photosynthetic microorganisms within porous inorganic matrices.

Hao Xie
	Dr Xie was awarded a PhD, funded by CVCP (UK), by the University of Leeds (2000) under the supervision of Prof. P. J. F. Henderson. After a PDRF at the Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh, UK, he participated in a BBSRC project in the Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, UK. In 2005, he joined Wuhan University of Technology, China as a Professor of Biochemistry. His research interest is to understand the biological basis of the interaction between living organisms and their environment. The aim is to improve the viability and biological activity of immobilized living materials.

Bao-Lian Su
	Prof. Bao-Lian Su joined the faculty and created the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry at the University of Namur, Belgium in 1995. He is currently a Full Professor of Chemistry, Director of the Chemistry Department and the Research Centre for Nanomaterials Chemistry. He is also Changjiang Professor at Wuhan University of Technology and “The Expert of the State” in the frame of “Thousands Talents” program, China. His current research fields include the synthesis, the property study and the molecular engineering of organized, hierarchically porous and bio-inspired materials, living materials and leaf-like materials and the immobilization of bio-organisms for artificial photosynthesis, nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology, cell therapy and biomedical applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the light and dark phases of photosynthesis.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of thylakoid and chloroplast location within a plant.2	 

 	Scheme 1  Alkoxide pathway to silica gel immobilising matrices; 1 hydrolysis, 2 polycondensation where X and X′ represent alkoxy groups.	 

 	Scheme 2  Aqueous pathway to silica gel immobilising matrices; 1 neutralisation, 2 polycondensation.	 

 	Fig. 3  Electron microscopy image of isolated thylakoid stacks.2	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of biological stability (10 °C) of entrapped thylakoids within different silica gels to free thylakoids. The gels are synthesized with different silica precursor concentrations: HG1: [Si]sol = 1.0 M; HG2: [Si]sol = 1.2 M; HG3: [Si]sol = 1.6 M. Time zero corresponds to the moment at which thylakoids have been isolated.2	 

 	Fig. 5  Micrographs obtained by scanning electron microscopy (A) and transmission electron microscopy (B) of aerogels prepared from hybrid gels HG1, HG2 and HG3 by supercritical drying with CO2.2	 

 	Fig. 6  Kinetics of gel shrinking for hybrid gels maintained at 10 °C.2	 

 	Fig. 7  Chloroplasts analysed by confocal fluorescence microscopy in suspension and silica gel.1	 

 	Fig. 8  Photochemical production of O2 by entrapped thylakoids within a biocompatible silica matrix. Time zero corresponds to the moment at which thylakoids were isolated.1	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM micrograph (cross section) of one A. thaliana cell entrapped within a porous silica-based matrix.50	 

 	Fig. 10  Confocal microscopy images of suspension-cultured cells (A), immobilised plant cells after 10 days (B) and after 30 days (C).50	 

 	Fig. 11  Photosynthetic production of oxygen by entrapped plant cells. 100% corresponds to the photosynthetic activity of free cells (13 μmol g−1 FW h−1).50	 

 	Fig. 12  HPAEC-PAD analysis of gel supernatants. Chromatograms showing the comparison between (BG) a blank gel and a hybrid gel after (S5) five days, (S10) ten days and (S20) twenty days. (S5-WA) corresponds to the supernatant of the hybrid gels after five days without acid treatment. The peaks correspond to 1, rhamnose; 2, galactose; 3, glucose; 4, xylose; 5, mannose.50	 

 	Fig. 13  TEM images of PCC 7002 immobilised in EGMS–LUDOX based silica gels (A, B) and EGMS–LUDOX–glycerol based silica gels (C, D) after 1 day (A, C) and 1 week (B, D). Scale bars represent 1000 nm.	 

 	Fig. 14  Reflectance-mode UV–Vis spectra of PCC 7002 immobilized in silica matrixes based on: EGMS (A), EGMS–LUDOX (B), EGMS–LUDOX–glycerol (C).	 

 	Fig. 15  Transmission electron microscopy images of Synechoccocus PCC 6301 immobilised within silica gel after (i) one hour, (ii) one day, (iii) one week and (iv) one month.3	 

 	Fig. 16  Confocal microscopy images of PCC 6301. (i) Free cyanobacteria, (ii) an immobilisation after 1 day, (iii) an immobilisation after 2 weeks and finally (iv) immobilisation of centrifuged cyanobacteria after one week.4	 

 	Fig. 17  UV–Visible spectra of hybrid gels, measured over the course of 12 weeks. Weeks have been omitted for clarity.3	 

Gel (Na2SiO3) PCC 6301	56487	7727
Gel (Na2SiO3) Blank	12597	983
Gel (Na2SiO3) PCC 7002	1022531	126061
Gel (Na2SiO3) Blank	126070	80604

 	Fig. 18  Epifluorescence microscopy image of (a) free SAG 16.91 and (b) SAG 16.91 immobilised within silica gel, where the scale bars represent 10 μm.67	 

 	Fig. 19  UV–Visible spectra of (a) free SAG 16.91 and (b) SAG 16.91 immobilised within silica gel.67	 

Gel (Na2SiO3) C. caldarium	388651	6445
Gel (Na2SiO3) Blank	1823	70

Sodium silicate, LUDOX, glycerol	−0.052
Sodium silicate, LUDOX	−0.0015
Sodium silicate	0.13

 	Fig. 20  Transmission electron microscopy images of SAG 16.91 immobilised within silica gel where the scale bars represent 1000 nm.67	 

 	Fig. 21  Reflectance-mode UV–Vis spectra of PCC 6301 (left) and PCC 7002 (right) immobilised in gels based on an acid-exchanged silicate precursor. Numbers represent the weeks after immobilisation.70	 

 	Fig. 22  Influence of glycerol on the preservation of photosynthetic pigments for PCC 6301, (left) with glycerol, (right) without glycerol.	 


Gel (H2SiO3) PCC 6301	145363	133168	393961	295319
Gel (H2SiO3) Blank	3636	2043	1831	1982
Gel (H2SiO3) PCC 7002	101072	99351	322711	248884
Gel (H2SiO3) Blank	386	185	420	537

 	Fig. 23  Reflectance mode UV–Vis spectra of cyanobacterial strain PCC 7002 immobilised within an acid-exchanged silicate–LUDOX gel.70	 

Gel (H2SiO3) PCC 7002	862267	3697
Gel (H2SiO3) Blank	2152	1250
Gel (H2SiO3–LUDOX) PCC 7002	1942019	11982
Gel (H2SiO3–LUDOX) Blank	9016	3867


(H2SiO3) PCC 7002	101072	99351	322711	248884
(H2SiO3) Blank	86	185	420	537
(H2SiO3–LUDOX) PCC 7002	202395	214578	250439	269799
(H2SiO3–LUDOX) Blank	530	2714	358	4284
Footnotes
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡ Research Fellow: Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique, 5, rue d'Egmont, B-1000 Bruxelles, Belgium.
§ Chargé de Recherches: Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique, 5, rue d'Egmont, B-1000 Bruxelles, Belgium.
¶ PCC Pasteur Culture collection of Cyanobacteria
|| SAG Sammlung von Algenkulturen der Universität Göttingen

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
