A case study of SARS-CoV-2 transmission behavior in a severely air-polluted city (Delhi, India) and the potential usage of graphene based materials fo ...  - Environmental Science: Processes & Impacts (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EM00034A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EM00034A
(Perspective)
Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts, 2021, 23, 923-946A case study of SARS-CoV-2 transmission behavior in a severely air-polluted city (Delhi, India) and the potential usage of graphene based materials for filtering air-pollutants and controlling/monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic

        
          
            Amrit Kumar 
            Thakur†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Ravishankar 
            Sathyamurthy†
a, 
      
        
          
            Velraj 
            Ramalingam
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Iseult 
            Lynch†
c, 
      
        
          
            Swellam Wafa 
            Sharshir
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Zhenjun 
            Ma
          
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Ganeshkumar 
            Poongavanam†
f, 
      
        
          
            Suyeong 
            Lee
          
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Yeseul 
            Jeong
          
          
        
      g and 

        
          
            Jang-Yeon 
            Hwang†
*g
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, KPR Institute of Engineering and Technology, Arasur, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu 641407, India. E-mail: amritt1@gmail.com
bInstitute for Energy Studies, Anna University, Chennai-600025, Tamil Nadu, India
cSchool of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, B15 2TT Birmingham, UK
dMechanical Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering, Kafrelsheikh University, Kafrelsheikh33516, Egypt
eSustainable Buildings Research Centre (SBRC), University of Wollongong, Australia
fSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Yeungnam University, 280 Daehak-Ro, Gyeongsan, Gyeongbuk 712-749, Republic of Korea
gDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hjy@jnu.ac.kr
Received 
      20th January 2021
    , Accepted 22nd May 2021First published on 31st May 2021AbstractGlobally, humanity is facing its most significant challenge in 100 years due to the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, which is responsible for COVID-19. Under the enormous pressure created by the pandemic, scientists are studying virus transmission mechanisms in order to develop effective mitigation strategies. However, no established methods have been developed to control the spread of this deadly virus. In addition, the ease in lockdown has escalated air pollution which may affect SARS-CoV-2 transmission through attachment to particulates. The present review summarizes the role of graphene nanomaterials, which show antimicrobial behavior and have antiviral efficacy, in reducing the spread of COVID-19. Graphene and its derivatives have excellent antimicrobial efficacy, providing both physical and chemical mechanisms of damage. Coupled with their lightness, optimal properties, and ease of functionalization, they are optimal nanomaterials for coating onto fabrics such as personal protection equipment, face masks and gloves to control the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 effectively. Biosensors using graphene can effectively detect the virus with high accuracy and sensitivity, providing rapid quantification. It is envisioned that the present work will boost the development of graphene-based highly sensitive, accurate and cost-effective diagnostic tools for efficiently monitoring and controlling the spread of COVID-19 and other air-borne viruses.Amrit Kumar ThakurAmrit Kumar Thakur is presently pursuing a PhD from Anna University, India in Mechanical Engineering. His areas of interest include desalination, water and wastewater, MXenes, batteries, thermal energy storage, and photo thermal conversation applications. He has about 8 years of research/teaching experience. He has published several papers in high impact journals and also serves as a reviewer for various internationally reputed journals.Ravishankar SathyamurthyRavishankar Sathyamurthy is an Associate Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Head of the Renewable energy group of KPR Institute of Engineering and Technology, Arasur, Coimbatore, India. He holds a Doctor of Philosophy in Energy Engineering from the Hindustan Institute of Technology and Science. His research interests include materials science, refrigeration and air conditioning, solar drying, solar still desalination, IC engines, nanofluids in heat transfer applications, materials characterization, computational fluid dynamics, phase change materials, energy storage, alternate fuels, heat and power engineering. He has authored and coauthored more than 200 international articles and presented 7 articles at international conferences. He is currently holding the position of Associate editor of Frontiers in Energy Research (Solar energy section) and Energy Engineering journal. He has also been a visiting researcher at the Faculty of Engineering, Tanta University, Egypt from 2018 onwards.Velraj RamalingamDr R. Velraj is a Professor at the Institute for Energy Studies, and has specialized in Heat Transfer, Computational Fluid Dynamics, and Energy Storage. He received the Tamilnadu Scientist Award – 2014 by the Govt of Tamilnadu, India in the year 2017, the Achiever Award by Appadurai Chair for technology contribution to TANGEDCO, Tamilnadu in the year 2017, the Active Consultant Award in 2011, the Best Innovation Award in 2013, the Research Excellence Award in 2019 by CTDT Anna University, and the Distinguished Researcher Award in 2019 by Anna University. He has in his credit 15 sponsored research projects as Principal Investigator (PI), and 205 research articles in journals of high repute, and has executed 35 consultancy projects as principal consultant for several industries in the areas of energy technologies, thermal storage, CFD analysis, and biomass resource assessment studies.Iseult LynchIseult Lynch is Chair (Professor) of Environmental Nanosciences at the School of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK. She holds a PhD in Chemistry from University College Dublin, Ireland on thermoresponsive polymers for biomedical applications including their interactions with proteins. Her research interests span human and environmental impacts of engineered, anthropogenic and natural nanoscale particles, including development of predictive models for interaction, uptake and effects and exploring sustainability and environmental applications of nanomaterials. An underpinning theme of her research is exploring the interface between engineered materials and the natural world.Swellam Wafa SharshirSwellam W. Sharshir received his BSc degree in mechanical engineering from Kafrelsheikh University, Egypt, in 2008, his MSc degree in mechanical power engineering from Tanta University, Egypt, in 2013, and his PhD degree in thermal power engineering from the School of Energy and Power Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), China, in 2017. He has authored more than 60 SCI articles. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Kafrelsheikh University. He is also a Postdoctoral Fellow with HUST, China. His research interests include solar energy applications, and renewable energy, nanomaterial applications, heat transfer, phase change nanocomposites, thermal management of batteries etc.Zhenjun MaZhenjun Ma is an Associate Professor at the Sustainable Buildings Research Centre, University of Wollongong, Australia. He is a Fellow of the Australian Institute of Refrigeration, Air conditioning and Heating and an Associate Editor of two Elsevier Journals of Solar Energy and Energy for Sustainable Development. He has been working extensively on renewable heating and cooling, thermal energy storage using phase change materials, building control and big data analytics.Ganeshkumar PoongavanamP. GaneshKumar completed his PhD at the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Anna University, Chennai, India. He is working as an International Research Professor in the School of Mechanical Engineering at Yeungnam University at Gyeongbuk, Republic of Korea. His fields of research interests include nanofluids, surface modifications, heat exchangers, and solar thermal and energy storage. He has published over 34 research papers in refereed international journals.Suyeong LeeSuyeong Lee is pursuing a Master's degree in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea, under the supervision of Professor Jang-Yeon Hwang. Her current research interest includes the development of novel electrode materials for alkali-metal sulfur–batteries.Yeseul JeongYe-Seul Jeong is pursuing her Bachelor's degree in the Department of Material Science and Engineering at Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea, under the supervision of Professor Jang-Yeon Hwang. Her current research is focused on the stability improvement of alkali-metals according to electrolyte.Jang-Yeon HwangJang-Yeon Hwang received his PhD degree (2018) in cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries at Hanyang University. He is currently a professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Chonnam National University, Korea. His research is focused on the development of novel electrode materials for high-energy alkali-ion and alkali-metal batteries.

Environmental significance
India was ranked 5th among the most polluted countries in the world in 2019 and Delhi, as the capital of India (annual average PM2.5 concentration = 98.6 μm m−3) was the most polluted city in the world. Air pollution in Delhi is mainly caused by industrial emissions and automobiles, construction sites and burning of crop residues in nearby areas. During the 1st complete lockdown in Delhi, India (March 24, 2020–April 14, 2020), the average PM10 and PM2.5 concentrations were 73.13 and 56.57 μm m−3, which were significantly low compared to those in previous years owing to the near-zeroing of various activities such as, operation of industries, traffic and constructions. However, with the relaxation of the lockdown, the concentrations of PM2.5 and PM10 started to increase further. It is well known that a rapid increase in COVID-19 spreading is associated with lower ambient temperature and air pollution and increased air pollution increases the risk of viral respiratory infections that affect around 10–20% of the population. Therefore, it is essential to effectively monitor and reduce the pollutant level in air for controlling the spread of the SAR-CoV-2 virus. In view of this, effective anti-pollutant/smog masks are indeed helpful in efficiently isolating harmful pollutants such as PM2.5 and PM10 along with controlling the spread of viruses. Graphene based masks exhibited a PM2.5 filtering efficiency of 96.4% and also demonstrated physical dust isolation, PM10 isolation. Although, PM2.5 and other pollutants can be effectively isolated by using graphene based face masks, awareness among people is also a crucial factor. As per the WHO guidelines to effectively control the spread of the SAR-CoV-2 virus, wearing face masks is one of the most prominent tools; however a recent survey conducted in 18 Indian cities highlighted that only 44% of the people in India is wearing a face mask. Hence, there is a great need for awareness among people towards using face masks to effectively control the spread of the SAR-CoV-2 virus along with isolating harmful pollutants such as PM2.5 and PM10 in highly polluted cities such as Delhi.

1. Introduction
A pneumonia-like infection was first noticed in Wuhan city, Hubei province in December, 2019. It then spread to the entire of China and to other countries. Health authorities in China witnessed a huge number of pneumonia cases of an unknown aetiology. After investigation, the etiological agent was recognized as a novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2. The WHO declared COVID-19 as a worldwide health emergency on January 30th, 2020. COVID-19 was then declared a pandemic on March 11th, 2020. SARS-CoV-2 is a pleomorphic ribonucleic acid (RNA) virus belonging to the coronavirus family. It has crown shaped peplomers with a size ranging between 80 nm and 160 nm and a positive polarity with a genome size of 27–32 kb.1 The genome sequence of the COVID-19 virus is 96.2% similar to that of the ‘BatCoV RaTG13’ bat coronavirus.2 COVID-19 causes a low mortality rate of about 2%, which is considerably less than that of severe acute respiratory syndrome ‘SARS’ (9.6%) and Middle East respiratory syndrome ‘MERS’ (35%). However, COVID-19 shows a higher transmission rate amongst humans with an incubation time of 24 days.2Fig. 1 shows the global spread and number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 across 210 countries (59076121) causing 1395296 deaths as of November 23rd, 2020.3Fig. 2a and b show the region-wise total number of cases and deaths, as of November 21st, 2020.
 Fig. 1  Case distribution of confirmed COVID-19 cases as of November 23rd, 2020 (data from Worldometer3). 
 Fig. 2  Regional distribution of the (a) total number of cases of and (b) total deaths due to COVID-19 as of November 21st, 2020 (data from ECDC, Europe4). 
The major path of transmission of COVID-19 among humans occurs through inhalation of saliva and sputum droplets, along with person-to-person physical contact.5 Recently, several studies have shown that the COVID-19 virus can also be shed in feces from infected patients having acute symptoms,6 from asymptomatic individuals,7 and by patients who have been cured and do not present further symptoms.8
In India, the first COVID-19 case was reported on January 30th, 2020. In February 2020, there were only three confirmed cases of COVID-19. However, in March 2020, there was a sharp rise in the number of cases. By the third week of March, 2020 (20 March, 2020), a total of 236 cases were confirmed from 15404 tests performed. As of November 23rd, 2020, a total of 9140312 cases were confirmed in India with 133773 deaths.3 The rapid increase in COVID-19 spread is associated with lower ambient temperature and air pollution. It is well-known that increased air pollution increases viral respiratory infections that affect around 10–20% of the population.9 Recently, research conducted in Italy has demonstrated that the SARS-CoV-2 virus can create clusters with combustion-related particulate matter (PM) under stable weather conditions in which the concentrations of PM increase.10,11 In 2019, India was ranked 5th among the most polluted countries in the world.12 Delhi, as the capital of India, has an annual average PM2.5 concentration of 98.6 μm m−3, and is the most polluted city in the world.13 Air pollution in Delhi is mainly caused by industrial emissions and automobiles, construction sites and burning of crop residues in nearby areas. During the global lockdown (from March–June 2020 varying slightly in different countries and regions depending on where the hotspots were), there was a significant improvement in the air quality index (AQI). It was noticed that during the first complete lockdown in Delhi (March 24, 2020–April 14, 2020), the average PM10 concentration was 73.13 μm m−3; however during the same time period (March 24 – April 14) in the previous three years the average PM10 concentration was about 168.32 μm m−3 (average of 2017, 2018 and 2019).14 Similarly, the PM2.5 concentration was 56.57 μm m−3 (March 24, 2020–April 14, 2020), whereas the preceding three years average concentration of PM2.5 was 83.96 μm m−3 (average of 2017, 2018 and 2019).14Fig. 3 and4 present the PM10 and PM2.5 values of Delhi during March–April, 2020.14
 Fig. 3  PM10 concentration in the pre-lockdown period and during the lockdown period in National Capital Territory of Delhi, India.14 
 Fig. 4  PM2.5 concentration in the pre-lockdown period and during the lockdown period in National Capital Territory of Delhi, India.14 
However, with the relaxation of the lockdown, the concentrations of PM2.5 and PM10 started to increase further, adversely affecting the spread of COVID-19. Interestingly, initially, 126 days were taken to reach 100,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 out of 679,831 tested samples in Delhi, as shown in Fig. 5a and b. With the spread of the COVID-19 virus and the easing of lockdown, the time to reach subsequent 100000 confirmed cases reduced dramatically despite greater understanding of the routes of transmission along with increased testing. It took only 15 days in the month of November, 2020 for the number of confirmed cases to increase from 400000 to 500000.15 It is clearly seen from Fig. 5b that of the 679831 tested samples, 100000 confirmed cases were reported in the initial spread. Later for 400000 to 500000 confirm cases, there was a tremendous increase in testing and a total of 3015299 samples were tested, out of which 100000 confirmed cases were reported. Along with the tremendous increase in testing capacity, the rise in cases could also be associated with severe PM2.5 and PM10 levels in the ambient atmosphere in November 2020. From November 1st to November 15th, 2020, daily confirmed cases showed a significant increase (Fig. 6a).15 The air pollution data of Najafgarh (the second highest active COVID-19 zone in Delhi until November 8th, 2020) were investigated,16 revealing that PM2.5 and PM10 levels were in the severe range as illustrated in Fig. 6b and c. Average variations of PM2.5 and PM10 levels were obtained from the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB).17Table 1 presents the AQI range, PM2.5 and PM10 ranges and the associated adverse health effects. The PM2.5 value was in the severe range during the aforementioned period, whereas PM10 was in the range of poor to severe. Long exposure to these pollutants may lead to respiratory illness and it might have played a crucial role in the daily increase of the number of COVID-19 cases. Case studies from around the world corroborate this. For example, Frontera et al.18 proposed that the high atmospheric pollutant content along with particular climatic conditions could help viral particles to persist for a longer duration in air, and concluded that ambient conditions support the indirect-diffusion of the COVID-19 virus, in addition to the direct virus diffusion through person to person contact.
 Fig. 5  (a) Number of days taken to reach each 100000 confirmed COVID-19 cases in Delhi, India showing the reduced doubling times as infection and (b) testing rates also increased significantly over the time period (data cover the period from March to November 2020 in Delhi, India). 
 Fig. 6  (a) Daily confirmed cases from November 1st to November 15th, 2020 in Delhi; (b) PM2.5 and (c) PM10 levels in Najafgarh, Delhi, India over the same period. 
Table 1 National AQI range, PM2.5 and PM10 pollutant ranges and their health impacts (scale: 0–500)




AQI range
Concentration range
Health effects


PM2.5 (μm m−3) 24 h
PM10 (μm m−3) 24 h




0–50, good
0–30
0–50
Least impact


51–100, satisfactory
31–60
51–100
Minor breathing discomfort to sensitive people


101–200, moderately polluted
61–90
101–250
Breathing discomfort to people with lung disease


201–300, poor
91–120
251–350
Breathing discomfort to people on prolonged exposure


301–400, very poor
121–250
351–430
Respiratory illness to people on prolonged exposure


401–500, severe
>250
>430
Respiratory illness to people on prolonged exposure




Setti et al.19 found that a high concentration of PM10 above 50 μm m−3 could accelerate COVID-19 spread, proposing a “boost effect” for viral infectivity. The authors also observed important differences in both PM10 exceedance and COVID-19 spread between the north and south regions of Italy focusing on Milan and Rome. Zhu et al.20 explored the connection between the COVID-19 spread and the daily measured concentrations of six air-pollutants including PM2.5, PM10, carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, and ozone. The outcomes confirmed COVID-19 cases in 120 Chinese cities between January 23rd, 2020 and February 9th, 2020, and explored the role of the air-pollutants utilizing six different models in order to decrease colinearity, as some of the air-pollutants are greatly correlated. The results highlighted noteworthy positive associations of PM10, PM2.5, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide and ozone with the number of daily confirmed cases, whereas sulfur dioxide was associated negatively. The authors concluded that there is a statistically important connection between short term exposure to high air pollution and an increased risk of COVID-19 infection. Martelletti and Martelletti21 observed how the northern region of Italy, that was most affected by the virus, matches those regions which also showed maximum PM2.5 and PM10. The authors suggested that the COVID-19 virus might leverage the air-pollutant particles as transporters. Moreover, they also establish a linear connection, highlighting that these viruses will live longer and might become more hostile in an ‘immune system’ which was already intensified by air-pollutants. It is important to understand that short and long term exposure to air-pollutants changes the immune response of lung cells and induces an escalation in inflammatory and oxidative stress.18 These cellular conditions facilitate the attack of viruses and escalate the severity of the viral infection in exposed patients. Effective anti-pollutant/smog masks are thus helpful in efficiently isolating harmful pollutants such as PM2.5 and PM10 along with controlling the spread of viruses. With the long persistence of the SARS-CoV-2 viral particles in severely polluted air, the chances of virus transmission are higher and thus, the usage of masks can effectively control the virus spread.
It is also imperative to highlight that as per the WHO guidelines in order to effectively control the spread of the SAR-CoV-2 virus, wearing face masks is one of the most prominent measures; however a recent survey conducted in 18 Indian cities highlighted that only 44% of the Indian population is wearing a face mask.22 Recently, a study23 was conducted on awareness about wearing masks outdoors in 29 countries with over 400000 survey responses, and the mask wearing behavior is depicted in Fig. 7. The survey demonstrated that the people of Asian countries tend to wear masks daily; however the people of Scandinavian countries are less likely to wear masks. This survey study also observed that people in more democratic and prosperous nations are less likely to wear masks. Moreover, women are more likely to wear masks. Therefore, there is a great need for awareness among people towards using face masks to effectively control the spread of the SAR-CoV-2 virus along with isolating harmful pollutants such as PM2.5 and PM10 in highly polluted cities like Delhi, India.
 Fig. 7  Trends in wearing masks country-wise.23 
With technological advancement and enormous efforts by scientists at present Sputnik V, COVAXIN, Oxford/AstraZeneca, Pfizer-BioNTech etc. vaccines have been approved and a majority of the developed countries are vaccinating their people. However, developing countries such as India with a huge population are experiencing a significant increase in the number of daily cases and vaccines will take several months to be circulated and administered in densely populated places with high COVID-19 infection rates. Therefore, effective monitoring and strategies to reduce the transmission of this novel corona virus are essential. To this end, the development of effective and easy to process innovative materials including masks, personal protective equipment and low-cost and rapid methods to diagnose COVID-19 is very important for effectively controlling the virus spread. In addition, graphene based materials can be effectively used in masks and air-filters to absorb and filter air-pollutants in severely polluted cities globally.
2. Graphene and its derivative – a potential material for controlling the spread
In recent years, graphene has gained huge attention in biomedical applications due to its excellent electronic properties. It can be applied to fight or detect drug resistant microbial contagions. Graphene is a two-dimensional sp2-hybridized material with a hydrophobic nature.24 It is widely used in designing efficient biosensors owing to its stable optical and electrochemical behavior, higher electrocatalytic activities, and excellent thermal and mechanical properties.25 Graphene based platforms are being used to immobilize biomolecules for creating biosensors. Pena-Bahamonde et al.26 presented techniques for immobilizing biomolecules onto the surface of graphene through surface chemical engineering. These methods involve covalent bonding, such as biomolecules coupling through 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylamino propyl) carbodiimide hydrochloride and N-hydroxysuccinimide reactions, and physisorption. Pristine graphene (PG) is a single carbon-atom thick sheet organized in a hexagonal manner. Graphene oxide (GO) is its oxidized counterpart, and is hydrophilic and possesses excellent electronic properties.27
Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) can be prepared from GO after eliminating the oxygen group using a reducing agent to obtain a material equivalent to PG. Moreover, in the stacked structured graphene, layers of a carbon stick together through the π–π-stacking mechanism.28 However, the spacing between layers is increased considerably (compared to graphene) due to oxygen-groups intercalated in the interlayers of rGO and GO.29 Graphene and its derivatives have excellent light absorption characteristics over a broad spectrum. Fig. 8 shows the structure of graphene and its derivatives and the conversion routes between the forms. It has been reported that a single graphene layer could absorb 2.3% of incident visible light.30 The absorption properties of materials are vital for generating heat and sterilizing materials. For example, rGO functionalized sulfonated magnetic nanomaterials have been used effectively to capture and photo–thermally kill herpes simplex virus type 1 ‘HSV-1’ utilizing near-infrared light.31,32
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of graphene and its derivatives in different views along with conversion reactions involved with graphene chemistry. 
Graphene and its derivate have been widely explored due to their antimicrobial potentials.33,34 GO materials possess apparently low toxicity, which makes them most suitable candidates for the next-generation of antimicrobial agents. Published research gives evidence about the broad spectrum inhibition activities of GO and its derivatives against bacteria and fungi.35,36 The antiviral properties of GO and partially reduced sulfonated GO (rGO-SO3) by the competitive inhibition mechanism were investigated by Sametband et al.37 against Herpes Simplex Virus Type-1 (HSV-1). It was seen that GO and rGO-SO3 exhibited multiple negative charge groups similar to cell surface receptor heparan sulfate and therefore, both the moieties have competed with each-other in binding with HSV-1. In order to safeguard the Vero cells from infection, the blocking of virus binding sites through nanomaterials was proven to be the most critical factor. Ye et al.38 investigated the antiviral activities of GO against an RNA virus (porcine epidemic diarrhea virus) and a DNA virus (pseudorabies virus). It was inferred from the results that the utilization of GO has significantly suppressed the infection of the RNA virus and DNA virus for a 2-log reduction in virus titers at noncytotoxic concentrations. This was mainly due to the negative charge and single layer structure of the GO. Hence, graphene and its derived nanomaterials, with their sheet-like structure and high affinity for microbes and biomolecules, can be effectively utilized as antimicrobial coatings on fabrics, especially for personal protection equipment (PPE), face masks and gloves to control. It is also important to highlight that various countries have significantly reduced the transmission of the COVID-19 virus by wearing masks.39 Recent research related to COVID-19 has suggested that facemasks can effectively control the spread of infective agents from symptomatic patients.39,40Fig. 9 shows different applications of graphene for controlling the spread of the COVID-19 virus, which are discussed further in the sections below.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the role of graphene and its derivatives in controlling the spread of the COVID-19 virus. 
However, inadequate usage and disposal of face masks pose a severe threat of secondary virus transmission. In addition to virus spread, material shortage and environment pollution are also major concerns owing to the enormous usage of single-use (disposable) masks during the pandemic. The filter layer of disposable masks is typically made of polypropylene which takes around ten years to degrade in landfill.41 In view of above, it is essential to develop reusable materials such as melt-blown fabric which is most commonly used in masks. It has been reported that the COVID-19 virus can be deactivated at 56 °C within 15 min.42,43 Graphene shows excellent broadband solar radiation absorption properties. Its exposure to sunlight could easily achieve this temperature without needing a temperature-controlled oven. Therefore, masks made of graphene can be easily disinfected against the COVID-19 virus, especially in remote locations where sterilisation infrastructure and equipment are still not available. Graphene has also been widely used in the development of disease diagnostics tools, mainly in biosensors. The surface of graphene can be changed by coupling with negative charged antivirals such as heparan sulfate, drugs and heparin44,45 to significantly improve the affinity of the modified graphene towards positively charged residues of viruses and enable graphene to quickly identify target virus proteins. A derivative of thermal rGO sulfate has been prepared which shows antiviral action towards Orthopoxvirus, African swine-fever viruses and herpes virus strains.46,47
3. Graphene based anti-microbial surface coatings for pandemic spread control
The development of anti-microbial surfaces is mainly based on three approaches: (i) the contact killing approach, where microorganisms adhere onto the surface and then get killed on the surface; (ii) the antibiotic-fouling approach that repels microbes and stops them from adhering onto the surface; and (iii) the release-killing approach, in which microorganisms get killed by anti-microbial agents released into the surface environment.48,49 GO and its derivate exhibited wide spectrum antiviral properties against positive and negative sense viruses, and DNA and RNA viruses along with enveloped and non-enveloped viruses.50 Therefore, these materials can be effectively utilized in developing antiviral coating and surfaces in order to prevent contaminations from contagious and virulent viruses.50 In view of the SAR-CoV-2 virus with rich –COOH structural functionalities and a low survival time on the copper surface, GO and rGO-SO3 coatings enriched with copper ions or copper nanoparticles could be a potential option to develop anti SARS-CoV-2 surfaces.50 Copper oxide nanomaterials exhibited antiviral properties,51 owing to the oxidation characteristics and soluble nature of copper oxides leading to the sustained release of Cu2+ ions.52 Li et al.53 designed a multi-functional viricidal coating for influenza virus ‘H1N1’. The coating was developed using encapsulation of ClO2 in polymeric micelles, on which copper nanoparticles were tethered covalently. Copper oxide utilization in face masks can reduce the transmission of ‘avian influenza A’ virus in a simulated breathing environment.54 Recently, Balagna et al.55 showed that a composite coating of silver nanoclusters with silica on face masks exhibits a viricidal effect – the composite nanocoating completely reduced SARS-CoV-2 transmission to zero under the tested conditions. Fig. 10 shows the SEM images of the coated mask, illustrating the silver nanoclusters in the coating. The authors also suggested that the developed coating could be deposited on all kinds of filtering media and on glass, metallic, polymer and ceramic surfaces.
 Fig. 10  SEM images of the coated mask (Ag3W) at (a) lower and (b) higher magnification.55 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
The composite of GO and rGO-SO3 with metal possessing antimicrobial properties such as gold, silver and titanium can also be investigated to design and develop an effective antiviral coating. The above discussed materials can be used to capture and destabilize the virus structures along with reducing their survival time, as shown in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Possible role of metal ion coated graphene (GR) and graphene related material (GRM) – surfaces in inhibiting surface contamination from viruses including SARS-CoV-2. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.50 
It is interesting to note that the SARS-CoV-2 virus can be transmitted by respiration droplets or touching the contaminated surface. As per WHO guidelines, regular hand washing and hygiene could obstruct the direct infection of the virus by the contaminated surface and therefore, face masks are mainly utilized for reducing the chance of infection through respiratory droplets produced through coughing, sneezing, and even talking. The utilization of face masks will reduce the high risk of inhaling these respiratory droplets. In this regard, if the mask surface is super hydrophobic, the respiration droplets can easily roll without being attached to the mask surface and therefore, the self-cleaning capacity of commercial surgical masks can be improved using super hydrophobic porous coatings of graphene. Zhong et al.56 deposited few-layered graphene onto nonwoven pristine masks to enhance hydrophobicity. It was seen that the contact angle of a 5 μL water droplet on pristine masks was approximately 110°, whereas the graphene coated mask exhibited a static contact angle of 141° (Fig. 12) and under such conditions, it is very difficult for the water droplets to stay on the surface owing to the strong super hydrophobic effect. Therefore, the coating of graphene onto nonwoven pristine masks can considerably increase the self-cleaning performance against respiratory droplets. In addition, the surface temperature of the graphene mask can rapidly increase to over 80 °C, owing to the excellent broadband solar radiation absorption properties, which makes the masks reusable again after sunlight sterilization.
 Fig. 12  Contact angle of water on a (a) pristine mask and (b) graphene coated mask.56 
Other commercially available reusable graphene-containing masks include those from flextrapower, which consist of three layers, with inner and outer layers made of cotton and the middle layer made of graphene.57 Maio et al.58 explored the role of graphene and graphene oxide (GO) functionalized textiles for the fabrication of personal protection equipment (PPE). They investigated the use of graphene or GO with cotton/polyurethane based PPE and found that the infectivity of culture medium containing SARS-CoV-2 viral-particles either incubated with or filtered through the functionalized materials was almost fully inhibited. Huang et al.59 compared the health protection capacities of face masks against Escherichia coli (E. coli) as the model microbe using a laser-induced graphene (LIG) material, activated carbon fiber (ACF), and melt-blown fabrics (MBF). It was reported that the anti-bacterial efficiency of all three materials was significantly enhanced under exposure to solar radiation. For ACF, anti-bacterial efficiency increased from only 2% without any solar radiation to a maximum of 67.24% with 10 min exposure to 0.75 kW m−2 irradiation. Similarly, MBF exhibited an anti-bacterial efficiency of 85.3%. The authors haven't reported any data related to 1 min and 5 min light exposure for ACF and MBF. Moreover, LIG showed an anti-bacterial efficiency of 99.9% with 10 min exposure to solar radiation, as presented in Fig. 13. This can be attributed to the fact that graphene possesses excellent broadband absorbance properties. Under the UV-visible-near infrared reflection spectrum, LIG can effectively absorb radiation ranging from 250–2700 nm, leading to higher photo-thermal conversion and rise in the material surface temperature under exposed radiation. With the exposure of solar radiation, the surface temperature of LIG increased from 25 °C to 52 °C in 30 s and thereafter, it was maintained at ∼62 °C with further solar radiation exposure. As the required temperature to attain satisfactory anti-bacterial efficiency against E. coli is 60 °C, LIG demonstrated excellent anti-bacterial efficiency. It is reported that the SARS-CoV virus can be deactivated at 56 °C within 15 min and therefore, the developed LIG material can be a potential viable option for use in masks to control the spread.
 Fig. 13  Antibacterial efficiency of three different materials for different light exposure times.59 
4. Graphene-based biosensors for rapid detection of infections
Nanomaterial-based biosensors are critical tools for detecting people infected by microorganisms. Enzyme-linked immune sorbent assay (ELISA) is a most widely used technique for identifying several kinds of biomarkers related to different syndromes such as AIDS, cancer and influenza.60,61 ELISA can detect biomarkers using optical measurements of fluorescent markers. However, it needs advanced spectral equipment. Various clinical screening tests including SARS-CoV-2 (ref. 62) can be carried out through ELISA diagnostic kits. Nevertheless, due to its sensitivity and the time required (at least a few hours) for the detection process, it is not suitable for the rapid diagnosis of COVID-19. Graphene has a high electrical conductivity and ambipolar transfer characteristics. It has potential to be used as a low-cost material for various biosensors. It acts as a conducting path between the source and the drain in a field-effect transistor (FET). Once the graphene surface adsorbs a molecule, the FET changes the graphene-channel (GC) electronic states, leading to a change in the drain current of the source which can be detected in as minimum as 1 min.63
The binding of any molecules on the GC of FET will initiate a real-time variation in the source drain current. Thus, it permits the generation of standard current vs. concentration curves and their use in the investigation of target molecules quantitatively. Wang et al.63 developed a novel ultrahigh sensitive two-terminal graphene-based FET to detect and quantify biotin by utilizing graphene contact between avidin and biotin molecules. Fig. 14 shows the steps involved in modification of graphene with avidin molecules and the capture and detection of biotin. The results showed that the developed FET could detect a wide range of biomarkers and bio-molecules due to biotin molecule conjugation capacity through biotinylation. Chen et al.64 demonstrated that GO sheets functionalized with silver nanoparticles could inhibit feline coronavirus growth by up to 25%. However, was only up to 16% with pure GO. Recently, Seo et al.65 developed a graphene-coated field-effect transistor (FET) based biosensor for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (S). Antibodies against protein-S were attached to the graphene sheet (external coating of the FET) by 1-pyrenebutanoic acid succinimidyl ester (PBASE). The sensor performance was explored using cultured virus, antigen protein, and the nasopharyngeal swab samples from COVID-19 patients. It was found that the graphene-FET based biosensors can detect protein-S at a concentration of 100 femtogram per mL in the clinical transport medium and at 1 femtogram per mL in PBS. This device can also differentiate the SARS-CoV-2 antigen protein from MERS-CoV protein. Zhang et al.66 developed a rapid detection immunosensor for COVID-19 viruses using graphene-FET with a maximum selective antibody–antigen interaction. The developed sensor was able to quickly detect (about 2 min) and precisely capture the COVID-19 ‘S1-protein’ with a limit of detection (LOD) of 0.2 pM in real time in a label free manner. In addition, the outcomes demonstrated that the developed graphene based sensor could be useful to screen for high affinity antibodies at concentrations below 0.1 pM. The authors concluded that the sensors provide an attractive alternate to address the early detection and diagnosis of the COVID-19 virus. Xiang et al.67 used a 3-D inkjet printing technique to design and develop graphene FET for the identification of norovirus with the LOD of 0.1 μM mL−1. A chemi-resistive rGO based FET biosensor was designed by Pant et al.68 utilizing pyrene-NHS (as a linker) for the addition of antibodies to effectively detect the rotavirus. Liu et al.69 utilized the Hummers' method with photolithography and reduction to fabricate a micro patterned rGO based FET. The results demonstrated that the device had a very low LOD of 102 plaque forming units (PFU) which is much better than that of the conventional ELISA method. Afsahi et al.70 designed a graphene-based FET via photolithography to detect the Zika virus. This low-cost, portable FET sensor could identify virus at a very low concentration of 450 pM. rGO based FET sensors were developed by Basu et al.71 using a silicon oxide template for the identification of the Hepatitis B virus. The excellent quantum transport phenomena of rGO and the advanced interface of the biomolecule with the pore walls was found to enhance the sensitivity of the sensor which attained an LOD of 50 aM. Chen et al.72 designed and fabricated a graphene based FET biosensor using a micro electro-mechanical system to detect the human influenza virus with an LOD of 1 ng mL−1. A flow-through approach was used to design and develop a microfluidic based rGO based DNA sensor by Chen et al.73 for the identification of the avian influenza virus. The results revealed an LOD of 5 pM that was significantly lower than that of optical or electrochemical based schemes. Amine functionalized graphene was used to fabricate an FET biosensor for detection of HIV by Islam et al.74 The developed device could detect HIV with an LOD of 10 fg mL−1. Kwon et al.75 synthesized a liquid ion gated nano-hybrid graphene FET using a photolithographic approach, and the resulting flexible fluidic biosensor could detect HIV at 1 pM. An aptamer functionalized rGO based FET was fabricated by Aspermair et al.76 for detection of the human papillomavirus in saliva. The results revealed that the developed device could identify the virus with an LOD of 1.75 nM. The aforementioned discussion on the design and development of graphene-based FET and their usage in detecting different kinds of viruses is summarized in Table 2.
 Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of the step-wise modification of graphene with avidin molecules along with biotin molecule capture and binding.63 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
Table 2 Summary of FET biosensors based on graphene and its derivatives and their capability for detection of various viruses




Type of virus
Material
LOD
Reference




SARS-CoV-2
Graphene
1 fg mL−1
Seo et al.65


SARS-CoV-2
Graphene
0.2 pM
Zhang et al.66


Norovirus
Graphene
0.1 μm mL−1
Xiang et al.67


Rotavirus
rGO
NA
Pant et al.68


Rotavirus
rGO
100 pfu
Liu et al.69


Zika virus
Graphene
450 pM
Afsahi et al.70


Hepatitis B virus
rGO
50 aM
Basu et al.71


Human influenza virus
Graphene
1 ng mL−1
Chan et al.72


Avian influenza virus
rGO
5 pM
Chen et2 al.73


HIV
Graphene
10 fg mL−1
Islam et al.74


HIV
Graphene
1 pM
Kwon et al.75


Human papillomavirus
rGO
1.75 nM
Aspermair et al.76




Besides graphene, carbonaceous quantum dots are also attracting huge attention for biosensor applications owing to their low preparation cost, excellent optical properties and biocompatibility. For example, Achadu et al.77 developed a nanoparticle-based biosensor using novel composite quantum dots of graphitic carbon nitride and molybdenum for influenza virus detection.
In this study, human serum was utilized to mimic the complex biological medium for establishing the applicability of the designed probe for the detection of the influenza virus in clinical samples. The results showed that the sensitivity achieved in influenza virus detection was 0.25 pg mL−1 and 0.9 pg mL−1 in de-ionized water and human serum, respectively, as presented in Fig. 15. The outcome demonstrated excellent sensitivity for virus detection due to the magnetic separation/purification procedure during virus examination In a recent study, graphene quantum dots were synthesized from citric acid and ethylene diamine by Safardoust et al.78 for use as a biosensor to detect S. aureus and E. coli. The developed sensor illustrated a linear correlation between fluorescence intensity and the bacteria concentrations up to 9 × 107 CFU mL−1. Hazani et al.79 designed and developed a highly sensitive peptide nucleic acid biosensor using cadmium sulfide quantum dots composited with functionalized graphene oxide. The quantum dot-based biosensors were designed to detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis and displayed an LOD of 8.948 × 1013 M. From these observations, it can be inferred that integration of nano-sized particles with graphene can be used for the construction of efficient platforms to detect viruses.
 Fig. 15  H1N1 detection via enhancement of the FL emission of graphitic carbon nitride quantum dots measured in ultrapure water (A) or human serum (B) and their calibration plots (C). λex = 500 nm.77 
Besides graphene-based biosensors, other nanoparticles have also been investigated for effective development of rapid pathogen detection. Zhao et al.80 prepared polyamino ester with carboxyl group (PC) coated magnetic nanoparticles (pcMNPs) to develop a pcMNP-based viral RNA extraction technique for sensitive detection of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The developed method purified the viral RNA within 20 min from multiple samples through a simple manual technique or an automated high throughput technique. By identifying two different regions of the viral RNA (ORFlab and N gene), a 10-copy sensitivity and a strong linear correlation between 10 and 105 copies of SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus particles was determined. The viral RNA extraction technique can detect the SARS-CoV-2 virus within six to ten hours. From the aforementioned investigation, it can be inferred that carbon-based and magnetic nanoparticle-based biosensors contribute significantly in the detection of individuals affected by viruses or other pathogens.
The excellent properties of graphene and its derivate ensure they are also widely proposed for use in advanced bio-medical applications such as gene therapy, combined cancer therapy, drug delivery, biomedical imaging and as antibacterial agents and biosensors.81,82 However, the real-field applications of any kind of nanomaterial in medicine and biology will be critically decided by material biocompatibility. It is well-known that graphene is a hydrophobic material and it needs surface functionalization to make it a bio-medical material. The functionalization may be in the form of covalent and non-covalent surface modification.81 Liu et al.82 summarized the literature showing that non-covalent functionalization enhanced the bio-compatibly, dispersibility, binding capacity, reactivity and sensing of graphene. The feasibility of GO and rGO is being explored for therapeutic applications and drug delivery. GO is much more colloidally stable in aqueous solutions than other carbon-based materials (e.g., CNTs), which makes it more suitable for biomedical applications. Graphene materials are also being explored in phototherapies owing to their excellent chemical and optical properties.81 Compared to CNTs and noble metal nanoparticles, graphene based materials, especially GO, exhibited excellent behaviours such as high photo thermal conversion efficiency, superior optical absorption in the near infrared region, higher specific surface areas and low-cost.83–86
5. Graphene based masks for the filter and capture of air-pollutants
Air-pollutants such as PM pose substantial threat to public health and adversely affect the climate, visibility, and the whole ecosystem. Exposure to PM2.5 over a long period is associated with a greater risk of cardiovascular diseases and lung-cancer.9 In addition, high concentrations of PM2.5 and PM10 are linked to an increased risk of SARS-CoV-2 viral particle exposure owing to their prolonged presence under these ambient conditions which could lead to higher transmission rates of the virus.87 In our focus of study Delhi, India, which is one of the most polluted cities in the world, wearing face masks is becoming a progressively common method for people to reduce their individual exposure to severe air-pollution and also to SARS-CoV-2 viral particles. To improve the existing design of the face masks for long term usage, it could be integrated with some advance features like smart valves and the operational micro-ventilator,88 as depicted in Fig. 16. These features are designed and developed to assist in exhaled gas evacuation from the interior of the mask and are intended to enhance user comfort, as measured quantitatively through the evaluation of the gas content in the dead space of the mask along with systemic and facial thermoregulation.
 Fig. 16  Schematic arrangements of test masks, (a) features designed to improve wearer comfort, and the permitted airflows, (b) airflow through masks during exhalation; details of the smart valves which are place below the ventilator fan illustrating the permitted air flow from the inside to outside of the mask.88 
Graphene and its derivate possesses high specific surface areas along with antimicrobial and antiviral efficiency.34,35 They are capable of absorbing micro-pollutants as well as inactivating micro-organisms present in air. Therefore, masks made of these materials can be used synergistically to absorb air-pollutants and inactive the virus. Recently, a functional graphene-based non-woven anti-smog mask was successfully developed by the nano-medicine research center of Changzhou Industrial Technology Research Institute of Zhejiang University.89 The mask exhibited a PM2.5 filtering efficiency of 96.4% and also demonstrated physical dust isolation of PM10. Mukherjee et al.90 designed multifunctional fibres for potential use in face masks to absorb PM2.5, using polyvinyl alcohol as the polymer for electrospinning with colloidal graphene and in situ produced hydroxyapatite nanoparticles. It was demonstrated that the designed fabric is highly stable and can effectively absorb toxic and pollutant gases including PM2.5. Figerez et al.91 developed a low cost tribo-electric rechargeable respiratory mask which demonstrated a filtration efficiency of >95%. The authors modified the polypropylene layer in a conventional N95 mask with polyvinylidene fluoride and graphene oxide containing ink by utilizing a simple casting technique and this modification improved the tribo-electric change and voltage of the pristine polypropylene. They concluded that low-cost and simple modification of the existing N95 mask will be highly beneficial for next generation face masks.
In addition to masks, indoor air-filters are also gaining significant attention in highly polluted cities, and graphene based filers are effectively utilized in removal of PM and other air-pollutants. Recently, Jung et al.92 developed a filter for removing PM2.5 with noteworthy efficiency and low pressure-drop. The high specific surface area of two dimensional rGO, along with the excellent porous structure provided by rGO foam, rendered the filter effective and permitted it to function under low pressure drop. The air-filter having rGO foam on both sides of the copper mesh plays a vital role in removal of outdoor PM as well as purifying indoor PM. It has been inferred from the above discussion that increasing usage of face masks and air-fillers fabricated using graphene and its derivate will result in highly efficient absorption of pollutants such as PM2.5 and PM10. In addition, the usage of masks will also provide more safety to people exposed to SARS-CoV-2 viral particles and will potentially help in reduction of the transmission. G1 wonders,93 an Indian company, also developed (and applied for a patent) anti-viral graphene with silver composite based anti-pollutant reusable and washable masks which demonstrated 99% bacterial filtration efficiency and >99% PM2.5 particle filtration efficiency, presently being sold online for 3.51 US $.
6. Scalability and market potential of graphene based face masks and biosensors
The market for face masks depends on numerous factors such as a significant decrease in air quality linked to air-pollution, the customer base and their health awareness, the available units manufacturing the face mask and the prevalence of respiratory disease.94 Zion, a market research firm, has evaluated the worldwide market for face masks, indicating that the global market for N95 face masks is approximately 822.6 million US $ in 2019, and this will generate revenue of approximately 1890.3 million US $ by 2026.95 The H1N1 outbreak in 2009 and the present COVID-19 pandemic have significantly increased the demand for face masks amongst ordinary people and frontline workers. With a higher specific surface area and excellent antiviral and antibacterial properties of graphene materials,34,35 they are being widely used in face masks for the absorption of pollutants as well as inactivation of viruses. Shandong Shengquan New Materials Co. Ltd, China developed a respirator using biomass-derived graphene in June 2020.96 They examined the respirator potential in preventing exposure to airborne particles present in outdoor air. The results revealed an excellent filtration effectiveness of over 97%. This product is widely utilized to prevent airborne particle transmission and it is commercially available online with a price of 2.8 US $ per piece.97 ZEN Graphene Solutions Ltd, Canada has recently developed a silver nanoparticle-functionalized graphene based composite ink for face masks.98 The developers stated that the mask can not only protect the wearer, but can also kill the viruses on contact as the graphene based ink is 99% effective against the COVID-19 virus. The masks with composite coating have passed the testing requirements of Health Canada as a level 2 medical device, as reported on 3rd March 2021. To make it available on the market, ZEN Graphene Solutions Ltd and Trebor RX Corp. signed the letter of intent (LOI) which included the first purchase of ZEN's patent and production of at least 100 million masks per filters.99 Graphene based G-Volt filtration face masks were developed by LIGC Applications Company and the developed mask could kill viruses, and is self-sterilizing and reusable.100 The company reported that in comparison to the N95 mask, the graphene mask is 99% effective against viruses of 0.3 μm diameter. This mask is commercially available and has the advantage of being reusable. Grapheal, a France based company, have successfully developed a graphene based digital biosensor for COVID-19 detection using an antigen immunoassay.101 It is available for purchase online and has been widely adopted for quick detection of the COVID-19 virus. While various research groups have also developed graphene based masks and biosensors for detection and controlling the spread of the virus, the commercialization of these materials requires further effort at the community level and testing under real ambient conditions to validate their results. With the severity of the viral transmission and the devastating mortality and morbidity, it is essential that all developed materials are fully evaluated under real conditions prior to approval for use which is expensive.
7. Environmental exposure assessments of graphene
As we have suggested the utilization of graphene and it's derivate in face masks, PPE kits and diagnostic tools to effectively detect the virus and control its spread, it is very important to explore the potential environmental health concerns during the mass production of these materials. In view of large-scale production, the synthesis of graphene doesn't require usage of any materials included in the list of strategic substances, other than the graphite itself, which is newly added in the list of critical materials by the European Commission,102 and thus there is no-risk of resource depletion, even if the production is upscale at the industrial level. Although consumption of electricity during the material synthesis is high, utilization of renewable energy resources will be a viable alternative. In terms of emission, graphene-sheets are large in size and it appears doubtful that the graphene is volatile according to chemical principles and cannot be emitted through mass transport.103 Similarly sized, carbon nanotubes have shown no substantial emissions as compared to background levels of the particles.104 The major potential route of exposure is pulmonary exposure for workers during the mass-production and handling of graphene based materials.103 The National institute for occupational safety and health (NIOSH) has published a report related to engineering controls for mass-production and handling of graphene nano-platelets.105 They measured the breathing zone concentration levels of workers during the synthesis of graphene using two similar processes (tank cleaning and product harvesting) for large (P1) and small batches (P2). The release of graphene was detected during the product harvesting; however, it was concluded that under good working conditions and with suitable usage of emission controls, the exposure level can be significantly reduced with particle removal increasing from 88% to >99.9%. However, more critical research is required to fully evaluate the environmental concerns of graphene based materials during mass-production.
8. Limitations and viewpoint
Although the antiviral efficiencies of graphene and its derivatives have been confirmed, thir prompt utilization for treatment of SARS-CoV-2 appears to be unrealistic various investigations have noted that these nanomaterials may damage respiratory sites and lung functioning when applied as a drug delivery system, although the wide range of sizes, functionalization, the degree of reduction, exposure doses and modalities, and test systems (in vitro and in vivo) mean that definitive conclusions are not yet available to regulators who are responsible for approving medicines. Li et al.106 investigated different GO materials synthesized using a modified Hummers' technique such as pristine, hydrated GO (hGO) and rGO in which quantitative assessment of the carboxyl, hydroxyl, epoxy, and carbon radical contents was used for studying the influence on epithelial cells and macrophages as well as in the murine lung. It was found that hGO, exhibiting maximum carbon radical density triggered cell death in THP-1 and BEAS-2B cells with attendant lipid peroxidation of the cell membrane, although at comparatively higher concentrations (up to 200 μm mL−1). The outcomes also illustrated that hGO is a more prone material than the other to trigger lung inflammation, accompanied by lipid peroxidation in alveolar macrophages. Duch et al.107 administered the solutions of GO, pristine graphene and pluronic (block copolymer) dispersed graphene directly into the lungs of six C57BL mice. It was seen that introduction of GO caused severe and persistent lung injury. The detailed investigation of the lung tissues shown an increased rate of mitochondrial respiration and the existence of activated inflammatory and apoptotic pathways. Conclusions on graphenes toxicity are difficult to make due to countless amalgamations of dose, surface chemistry and the exposure method used for the assessment.108–110 Additionally, there is limited data to date on the adsorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity (ADMET) of graphene family materials. Moreover, on 2nd April 2021, the Canadian health department stated that face masks with graphene may pose a health risk and have banned all graphene-based masked pending further examination.111 It is interesting to note that the quantity of graphene utilized in a properly fabricated face mask is normally a very low percentage of the overall materials used, which even under the worst-case situation leaves a very small quantity of the graphene material accessible per mask in the event that graphene particles were to be liberated.112 A response from the graphene council noted that several toxicological assessments have confirmed that graphene can be well tolerated citing representative scientific reports.112 For example, Fadeel et al.113 explored the role of graphene based materials in view of human health and environmental fate and concluded that graphene and its derivatives are less cytotoxic as compared to carbon nanotubes, and that GO was readily degradable by immune cells. Recently, Moghimian et al.114 reported that few-layered graphene sheets pose a very low risk to health, following detailed regulatory testing at government approved laboratories. Shandong Shengquan New Materials Co. Ltd, China developed a respirator using biomass-derived graphene, which was also examined in terms of the potential for inhalation of the graphene material by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory (NPPTL), who reported that there was no harmful graphene particles released during the investigation.115 In addition to using graphene in face masks, usage of these materials in PPE kits is also considered to be very safe. Recently, Fusco et al.116 examined the role of graphene based material in skin irritation, and concluded that graphene based materials, including rGO, GO, few-layer graphene, and graphene did not induce irritation except where the materials were prepared using irritant surfactants like sodium dodecyl benzenesulfonate and sodium dodecyl sulfate. Zhao et al.117 investigated the skin irritation behavior to measure the safety of cotton fabric modified with GO. The results demonstrated no evidence of any kind of irritation. Generally, the embedding of the graphene based material into the host material can be done either as direct embedding as a part of a mask fabric or as a coating which is applied to the textile.112 Generally, coating is performed through dip-coating or spray-coating.118 In dip-coating, a thin homogeneous layer is deposited using solutions containing particles such as metallic, ceramic, carbon based materials, fibrous materials, and polymer films so as to form the coating on the substrate.118 This method is limited to only flat or smooth surfaces, and it is not appropriate for selective coating the single-side of an object. To overcome this issue, spin-coating is utilized to coat particles such metallic nanoparticles, phosphonium salts, or antimicrobial onto fabrics.118 Due to their sheet like structure, graphene and its derivate can properly adhere to the surface during the coating (align along it), which makes it a safe material for this application. GO was identified as being slightly negatively charged such that the resulting graphene layer will also be negatively charged as a result of the oxygen-functionalities in the honeycomb graphene lattice. Oxygen-functionalities in the GO ensure its adhesion to the surface it is incorporated into.119,120 This is very important for developing stable coatings such as purification filters or membranes. In addition to the risk assessment of graphene in masks/PPE, scientists are trying to develop a generalized and effective scientific risk management structure. The environmental, health and safety section of the US national research strategy for the national nanotechnology initiative mainly concentrates on the development of measurement tools that can effectively determine the physical and chemical properties of nano-medicine and nano-technology based drug delivery systems,121 as PPE applications were not a major area of interest globally until recently.
To date, there are very few successfully developed and demonstrated vaccines like Sputnik V, COVAXIN, Oxford/AstraZeneca and Pfizer-BioNTech, which are available to effectively immunize the population and beneficial in controlling the pandemic. These vaccines are being effectively utilized and implemented in the developed countries with lower population density. However in developing countries like India with a huge population density, a low income and a significantly increasing number of COVID-19 cases and deaths, it will take several months to vaccinate the entire population of the country and significant effort is indeed required by R&D wings of various pharmacological industries to identify appropriate treatment regimes, and to rapidly develop cost-effective vaccines against the virus. In view of this, the impact of nano-graphene and its derivatives is noteworthy. Graphene based materials could be largely produced at a lower cost and didn't have metallic impurities which frequently exist in carbon nano-tubes.122 In addition, graphene is much-more amenable in large scale architectures as compared to one-dimensional carbon nano-tubes.123 Researchers should focus on cost-effective methods for developing a diagnosis tool using graphene for better accuracy in the detection of pathogens and in facemask technologies to reduce transmission of viruses.
9. Conclusions
The COVID-19 epidemic has spread globally with the medical capacities of all countries being tested this year. A key focus of response strategies has been reducing transmission and detection of symptomatic and asymptomatic spreaders early in order to isolate them. Thus, significant research effort has focused on controlling the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and detection of these virus at initial stages. In this regard, the present study critically evaluated the usage of graphene and its derivatives as a potential material to effectively control the spread and rapidly detect the virus. Numerous relevant products can be designed and developed by focusing on the excellent hydrophobic and conductive properties of these materials and exploiting their affinity towards COVID-19 and other viruses. GO and its derivate exhibited wide spectrum antiviral properties against positive and negative sense viruses, and DNA and RNA viruses along with enveloped and non-enveloped viruses. Therefore, these materials can be effectively utilized in developing antiviral coatings and surfaces in order to prevent contaminations from contagious and virulent viruses on fabrics such as PPE, face masks and gloves. Laser-induced graphene materials showed great antibacterial properties and can be effectively used in face masks for controlling the transmission of infection. The development of multilayer graphene nanomaterials with modified positive charge filters with the potential of rupturing the virus can also be effectively used in air-purifiers and air-conditioning devices. With excellent electrical conductivity and ambipolar transfer characteristics, graphene-based materials are ideal for developing cost-effective, highly sensitive and accurate biosensors for detecting SARS-CoV-2 virus in a short time interval. With the excellent properties of graphene and its derivate, several companies and commercial research laboratories such as ZEN Graphene Solutions Ltd, Shandong Shengquan New Materials Co. Ltd, LIGC Applications Company, Grapheal etc. are manufacturing graphene based face masks/respirators and biosensors at large scale to meet the rising demand during this pandemic. Moreover, the majority of university based research laboratories developed masks and examined the efficacy of their respective products at lab-scale and further studies are needed under real-world conditions to validate their results.
In view of environmental concerns related to mass-production of graphene for utilizing it in the aforementioned products, it was concluded that under the proper emission control and good working conditions, the environmental and workers exposure level towards graphene working in the graphene industries are very low; however the generated data are mostly based on the research article, prospective models and patents, which instigate the developed model uncertainties that are still challenging to assess and more critical research is required to evaluate the environmental concerns of graphene based materials during mass-production. With the usage of graphene based materials in face masks, it was stated by Canada health that graphene based materials could be inhaled and not safe. However, several literature reports confirmed that these materials are lesser cytotoxic as compared to carbon nano-tubes. Authors also explored that graphene is readily degradable by immune system cells and few-layer graphene have a very low-risk to health.
Graphene based face masks could be highly beneficial in severe air-polluted cities like Delhi, India. High concentrations of particulate matter in air and exposure to them could lead to penetration into the lungs and bloodstream. Their long term exposure is associated with greater risk of cardiovascular diseases and lung-cancer and therefore, PM filtration masks using graphene based materials can significantly filter air-pollutants and improve the health conditions of people. In addition, the usage of masks in highly polluted cities also reduced the exposure of SARS-CoV-2 viral particles because a high level of air-pollutants prolong the viral particles presence under these ambient conditions that may lead to a higher transmission rate of the virus. Therefore, the usage of graphene based masks can synergetically reduce the exposure of harmful air-pollutants and SARS-CoV-2 viral particles for people living in highly polluted cities.
Based on the above discussion, it can be inferred that graphene can be a potential tool for controlling the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and it will also be helpful in filtering air-pollutants when used in masks. However, a majority of studies are lab-scale based observations and further studies are essential to explore other aspects of this material to effectively design and develop advanced diagnostic technologies.
Author contributions
Amrit Kumar Thakur: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing; Ravishankar Sathyamurthy: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing, Supervision; Velraj Ramalingam: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - review & editing, Supervision; Iseult Lynch: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing; Swellam Wafa Sharshir: Methodology, Data curation, Writing - review & editing; Zhenjun Ma: Methodology, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing; Ganeshkumar Poongavanam : Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing; Suyeong Lee : Methodology, Data curation, Writing - review & editing; Yeseul Jeong: Methodology, Data curation, Writing - review & editing; Jang-Yeon Hwang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing, Supervision.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was financially supported by Chonnam National University (Grant number: 2020-1935). This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (NRF-2021R1A4A1052051). Amrit Kumar Thakur would like to acknowledge KPR Institute of Engineering and Technology, Coimbatore, India for the grant of fellowship.
References
A. H. Sahin, E. Aysegul, M. A. Pelin, D. Yeliz, Y. C. Ahmet, E. S. Mahmut, A. O. Ramazan and T. Ali Muhittin, 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak: a review of the current literature, EJMO, 2020, 4(1), 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Yan, W. I. Shin, Y. X. Pang, Y. Meng, J. Lai, C. You, H. Zhao, E. Lester, T. Wu and C. H. Pang, The first 75 Days of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) outbreak: recent advances, prevention and treatment, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 2020, 17(7), 2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/
        .

          https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/download-todays-data-geographicdistribution-covid-19-cases-worldwide
        .

Modes of transmission of virus causing COVID-19: implications for IPC precaution recommendations, https://www.who.int/news-room/commentaries/detail/modes-of-transmission-of-virus-causing-covid-19-implications-for-ipc-precautionrecommendations, WHO,  2020 Search PubMed.
X. Pan, D. Chen and Y. Xia, Viral load of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical samples, Lancet Infect. Dis., 2020, 20, 411–412,  DOI:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30113-4 .
A. Tang, Z. Tong, H. Wang, Y. Dai, K. Li, J. Liu and J. Yan, Detection of Novel Coronavirus by RT-PCR in Stool Specimen from Asymptomatic Child, China, Emerging Infect. Dis., 2020, 26(6), 1337–1339,  DOI:10.3201/eid2606.200301 .
F. Xiao, M. Tang, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Li and H. Shan, Evidence for gastrointestinal infection of SARS-CoV-2, Gastroenterology, 2020, 158, 1831–1833,  DOI:10.1053/j.gastro.2020.02.055 .
J. L. Domingo and J. Rovira, Effects of air pollutants on the transmission and severity of respiratory viral infections, Environ. Res., 2020, 187, 109650,  DOI:10.1016/j.envres.2020.109650 .
E. Bontempi, First data analysis about possible COVID-19 virus airborne diffusion duen to air particulate matter (PM): the case of Lombardy (Italy), Environ. Res., 2020, 186, 109639,  DOI:10.1016/j.envres.2020.109639 .
J. L. Domingo and J. Rovira, Effects of air pollutants on the transmission and severity of respiratory viral infections, Environ. Res., 2020, 187, 109650,  DOI:10.1016/j.envres.2020.109650 .

          https://www.iqair.com/us/world-most-polluted-countries
        .

          https://www.skymetweather.com/content/weather-news-and-analysis/with-aqi-at-527-delhibecomes-most-polluted-city-in-the-world-today-kolkata-mumbai-in-the-list-too/
        .
M. Susanta, S. Pal and K. G. Ghosh, Effect of lockdown amid COVID-19 pandemic on air quality of the megacity Delhi, India, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 730, 139086,  DOI:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.139086 .

          https://www.ndtv.com/coronavirus/fullcoverage?pfrom=home-coronavirus
        .

          https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/south-delhi-emerges-as-covidhotspot/articleshow/79138472.cms
        .

          https://app.cpcbccr.com/AQI_India/
        .
A. Frontera, C. Martin, K. Vlachos and G. Sgubin, Regional air pollution persistence links to COVID-19 infection zoning, J. Infect., J. Infect., 2020, 81, 318–356,  DOI:10.1016/j.jinf.2020.03.045  , available online: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7151372/.

          L. Setti, F. Passarini, G. De Gennaro, P. Barbieri, M. G. Perrone, A. Piazzalunga, M. Borelli, J. Palmisani, A. Di Gilio, P. Piscitelli, et al., The Potential role of Particulate Matter in the Spreading of COVID-19 in Northern Italy: First Evidence-based Research Hypotheses, medRxiv,  DOI:10.1136/bmjopen-2020-039338, available online: https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.11.20061713v1, accessed on 20 May  2020.
Y. Zhu, J. Xie, F. Huang and L. Cao, Association between short-term exposure to air pollution and
COVID-19 infection: Evidence from China, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 727, 138704 CrossRef CAS .
L. Martelletti and P. Martelletti, Air pollution and the novel covid-19 disease: a putative disease risk factor. SN compr, Clin. Med. Apr, 2020, 15, 1–5 Search PubMed .

          https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/magazines/panache/survey-says-90-indians-aware-but-only-44-wearing-a-mask-discomfort-key-reason-for-noncompliance/articleshow/78315069.cms?from=mdr
        .
S. Annaka, Public Awareness of Mask Usage in 29 Countries, medRxiv, 2021 DOI:10.1101/2021.03.06.21253037 .
A. N. Banerjee, Interface Focus, 2018, 8, 20170056 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Begum, M. S. Ahmed and Y. B. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 515, 145999 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pena-Bahamonde, H. N. Nguyen, S. K. Fanourakis and D. F. Rodrigues, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2018, 16, 75 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Ahmed, H. Begum and Y. B. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2020, 451, 227733 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sheng, X. Tang, E. Pengm and J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. B., 2013, 1, 512–521 RSC .
Q. Li, J. Lu, P. Gupta and M. Qiu, Adv. Optical Mater., 2019, 7, 1900595 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Deokar, A. P. Nagvenkar, I. Kalt, L. Shani, Y. Yeshurun, A. Gedanken and R. Sarid, Bioconjugate Chem., 2017, 28, 1115–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. J. C. Amieva, J. Lopez-Barroso, A. L. Martinez-Hernandez and C. Velasco-Santos, Recent Advances in Graphene Research, ed. Pramoda Kumar Nayak, IntechOpen,  October 12th 2016,  DOI:10.5772/64001 .
X. Zou, L. Zhang, Z. Wang and Y. Luo, Mechanisms of the Antimicrobial Activities of Graphene Materials, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2064–2077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Perreault, A. F. De Faria, S. Nejati and M. Elimelech, Antimicrobial Properties of Graphene Oxide Nanosheets: Why Size Matters, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7226–7236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hu, C. Peng, W. Luo, M. Lv, X. Li, D. Li, Q. Huang and C. Fan, Graphene-Based Antibacterial Paper, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4317–4323 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Wang, F. Chen, C. Zhang, X. Zhi, K. Wang and D. Cui, The antifungal activity of graphene oxide–silver nanocomposites, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 3882–3890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sametband, I. Kalt, A. Gedanken and R. Sarid, Herpes Simplex Virus Type-1 Attachment Inhibition by Functionalized Graphene Oxide, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1228–1235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, K. Shao, Z. Li, N. Guo, Y. Zuo, Q. Li, Z. Lu, L. Chen, Q. He and H. Han, Antiviral Activity of Graphene Oxide: How Sharp Edged Structure and Charge Matter, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21571–21579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zeng, Z. Li, S. Ng, D. Chen and H. Zhou, Epidemiology reveals mask wearing by the public is crucial for COVID-19 control, Medicine in Microecology, 2020, 4, 100015,  DOI:10.1016/j.medmic.2020.100015 .
S. E. Eikenberry, M. Mancuso, E. Iboi, T. Phan, K. Eikenberry, Y. Kuang, E. Kostelich and A. B. Gumel, To Mask or Not to Mask: Modeling the Potential for Face Mask Use by the General
Public to Curtail the COVID-19 Pandemic, Infect. Dis. Model., 2020, 5, 293–308 Search PubMed .
L. Canopoli, F. Coulon and S. T. Wagland, Degradation of Excavated Polyethylene and Polypropylene Waste from Landfill, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 698, 134125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang and X. Wang, COVID-19: A New Challenge for Human Beings, Cell. Mol. Immunol., 2020, 17, 555–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhou, X.-L. Yang, X.-G. Wang, B. Hu, L. Zhang, W. Zhang, H.-R. Si, Y. Zhu, B. Li, C.-L. Huang, H.-D. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Luo, H. Guo, R.-D. Jiang, M.-Q. Liu, Y. Chen, X.-R. Shen, X. Wang and X.-S. Zheng, 
            et al., A Pneumonia Outbreak Associated with a New Coronavirus of Probable Bat Origin, Nature, 2020, 579, 270–273 CrossRef CAS .
A. Naskalska, A. Dabrowska, A. Szczepanski, A. Milewska, K. P. Jasik and K. Pyrc, Membrane protein of human coronavirus NL63 is responsible for interaction with the adhesion receptor, J. Virol., 2019, 93, e00355-19,  DOI:10.1128/JVI.00355-19. .
S. T. Jones, V. Cagno, M. Janeček, D. Ortiz, N. Gasilova, J. Piret, M. Gasbarri, D. A. Constant, Y. Han and L. Vuković, Modified cyclodextrins as broad-spectrum antivirals, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaax9318,  DOI:10.1126/sciadv.aax9318 .
B. Ziem, W. Azab, M. Gholami, J. P. Rabe, N. Osterrieder and R. Haag, Size-dependent inhibition of herpesvirus cellular entry by polyvalent nanoarchitectures, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3774–3783 RSC .
B. Ziem, H. Thien, K. Achazi, C. Yue, D. Stern, K. Silberreis, M. F. Gholami, F. Beckert, D. Gröger and R. Mülhaupt, Highly efficient multivalent 2D nanosystems for inhibition of orthopoxvirus particles, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 2922–2930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mukherjee and S. De, Antibacterial polymeric membranes: a short review, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2018, 4, 1078–1104 RSC .
D. Xie, L. Howard and R. Almousa, Surface modification of polyurethane with a hydrophilic, antibacterial polymer for improved antifouling and antibacterial function, J. Biomater. Appl., 2018, 33, 340–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Srivastava, N. Dwivedi, C. Dhand, R. Khan, N. Sathish, M. K. Gupta, R. Kumar and S. Kumar, Potential of Graphene-based Materials to Combat COVID-19: Properties, Perspectives and Prospects, Mater. Today Chem., 2020, 18, 100385,  DOI:10.1016/j.mtchem.2020.100385 .
K. Sundberg, V. Champagne, B. McNally, D. Helfritch and R. Sisson, Effectiveness of nanomaterial copper cold spray surfaces on inactivation of influenza A virus, J. Biotechnol. Biomater., 2015, 5, 1 Search PubMed .
M. Vincent, R. E. Duval, P. Hartemann and M. Engels-Deutsch, Contact killing and antimicrobial properties of copper, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2018, 124, 1032–1046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Q.-m. Pi, H.-h. You, J.-q. Li, P.-c. Wang, X. Yang and Y. Wu, A smart multi-functional coating based on anti-pathogen micelles tethered with copper nanoparticles via a biosynthesis method using l-vitamin C, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 18272–18283 RSC .
G. Borkow, S. S. Zhou, T. Page and J. Gabbay, A novel anti-influenza copper oxide containing respiratory face mask, PLoS One, 2010, 5, e11295 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Balagna, S. Perero, E. Percivalle, E. V. Nepita and M. Ferraris, Virucidal effect against Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 of a silver nanocluster/silica composite sputtered coating, Open Ceramics, 2020, 100006 CrossRef .
H. Zhong, 
            et al., Reusable and Recyclable Graphene Masks with Outstanding Superhydrophobic and Photothermal Performances, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(5), 6213–6221,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.0c02250 .

          https://www.flextrapower.com/products
        .

          F. De Maio, V. Palmieri, G. Babini, A. Augello, I. Palucci, P. Giordano, A. Salustri, M. De Spirito, M. Sanguinetti, G. Delogu, L. G. Rizzi, G. Cesareo, P. Soon-Shiong, M. Sali and M. Papi, Graphene nanoplatelet and Graphene oxide functionalization of face mask materials inhibits infectivity of trapped SARS-CoV-2,  2020,  DOI:10.1101/2020.09.16.20194316 .
L. Huang, S. Xu, Z. Wang, Ke Xue, J. Su, Y. Song, S. Chen, C. Zhu, B. Z. Tang and R. Ye, Self-Reporting and Photothermally Enhanced Rapid Bacterial Killing on a Laser-Induced Graphene Mask, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 12045–12053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Safaei, R. M. Mohamadi, E. H. Sargent and S. O. Kelley, In situ electrochemical ELISA for specific identification of captured cancer cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14165–14169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Carinelli, C. Xufre, S. Alegret, M. Marti and M. Pividori, CD4 quantification based on magneto ELISA for AIDS diagnosis in low resource settings, Talanta, 2016, 160, 36–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Chen and Q. Qin, Unique epidemiological and clinical features of the emerging 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia (COVID-19) implicate special control measures, J. Med. Virol., 2020, 92, 568–576 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, M. Z. Hossain, K. Shinozuka, N. Shimizu, S. Kitada, T. Suzuki, R. Ichige, A. Kuwana and H. Kobayashi, Graphene field-effect transistor biosensor for detection of biotin with ultrahigh sensitivity and specificity, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 112363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-N. Chen, Y.-H. Hsueh, C.-T. Hsieh, D.-Y. Tzou and P.-L. Chang, Antiviral activity of graphene–silver nanocomposites against non-enveloped and enveloped viruses, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 2016, 13, 430 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Seo, 
            et al., Rapid detection of COVID-19 causative virus (SARS-CoV- 2) in human nasopharyngeal swab specimens using field-effect transistor- based biosensor, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(4), 5135–5142,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.0c02823 .

          X. Zhang, et al., Electrical probing of COVID-19 spike protein receptor binding domain via a graphene field-effect transistor,  2020, ArXiv:2003.12529 [Cond- Mat, Physics:Physics] 27, http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.12529.
L. Xiang, 
            et al., Inkjet-printed flexible biosensor based on graphene field effect transistor, IEEE Sens. J., 2016, 16(23), 8359–8364,  DOI:10.1109/jsen.2016.2608719 .
M. Pant, 
            et al., Detection of rota virus with the help of nanomaterial based field effect transistor (BIO-FET), Biosens. J., 2017, 6(no. 2), 1–7,  DOI:10.4172/2090-4967.1000149 .
F. Liu, 
            et al., Micropatterned reduced graphene oxide based field-effect tran- sistor for real-time virus detection, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 186, 252–257,  DOI:10.1016/j.snb.2013.05.097 .
S. Afsahi, 
            et al., Novel graphene-based biosensor for early detection of zika virus infection, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 100, 85–88,  DOI:10.1016/j.bios.2017.08.051 .
J. Basu and C. RoyChaudhuri, Attomolar sensitivity of FET biosensor based on smooth and reliable graphene nanogrids, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2016, 37(4), 492–495,  DOI:10.1109/led.2016.2526064 .
C. Chan, 
            et al., A microfluidic flow-through chip integrated with reduced graphene oxide transistor for influenza virus gene detection, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 251, 927–933,  DOI:10.1016/j.snb.2017.05.147 .

          Yu-J. Chen, et al., Wireless Portable Graphene-FET Biosensor for Detecting H1N1 Virus,  2017, p. 1 Search PubMed.
S. Islam, S. Shukla, V. K. Bajpai, Y. K. Han, Y. S. Huh, A. Kumar, A. Ghosh and S. A. Gandhi, smart nanosensor for the detection of human immunodeficiency virus and associated cardiovascular and arthritis diseases using functionalized graphene-based transistors, Biosens Bioelectron., 2019, 126, 792–799,  DOI:10.1016/j.bios.2018.11.041 .
S. K. Oh, 
            et al., Large-scale graphene micropattern nano-biohybrids: high-performance transducers for FET-type flexible fluidic HIV immunoas- says, Adv. Mater., 2013, 30(25), 4177–4185,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201301523 .
P. Aspermair, 
            et al., Reduced graphene oxide–based field effect transis- tors for the detection of E7 Protein of human papillomavirus in saliva, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2020, 20 DOI:10.1007/s00216-020-02879-z .
O. J. Achadu, K. Takemura, I. M. Khoris and E. Y. Park, Plasmonic/magnetic molybdenum trioxide and graphitic carbon nitride quantum dots-based fluoroimmunosensing system for influenza virus, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 128494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Safardoust, M. Salavati, O. Amiri and M. Hassanpour, Preparation of highly luminescent nitrogen doped graphene quantum dots and their application as a probe for detection of Staphylococcus aureus and E. coli, J. Mol. Liq., 2017, 241, 1114–1119 CrossRef .
M. H. Mat, J. Abdullah, N. A. Yusof, Y. Sulaiman, H. Wasoh, M. F. Noh and R. Issa, PNA biosensor based on reduced graphene oxide/water soluble quantum dots for the detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 241, 1024–1034 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, H. Cui, W. Song, X. Ru, W. Zhou and X. Yu, A simple magnetic nanoparticles-based viral RNA extraction method for efficient detection of SARS-CoV-2, bioRxiv, 2020 DOI:10.1101/2020.02.22.961268 .
T. P. Dasari Shareena, D. McShan and A. K. Dasmahapatra, 
            et al., A Review on Graphene-Based Nanomaterials in Biomedical Applications and Risks in Environment and Health, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 53,  DOI:10.1007/s40820-018-0206-4 .
J. Liu, L. Cui and D. Losic, Graphene and graphene oxide as new nanocarriers for drug delivery applications, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9(12), 9243–9257,  DOI:10.1016/j.actbio.2013.08.016 .
E. Paszko, C. Ehrhardt, M. O. Senge, D. P. Kelleher and J. V. Reynolds, Nanodrug applications in photodynamic therapy, Photodiagn. Photodyn. Ther., 2011, 8(1), 14–29,  DOI:10.1016/j.pdpdt.2010.12.001 .
D. K. Chatterjee, L. S. Fong and Y. Zhang, Nanoparticles in photodynamic therapy: an emerging paradigm, Adv. Drug Deliver. Rev., 2008, 60(15), 1627–1637,  DOI:10.1016/j.addr.2008.08.003 .
S. Shi, F. Chen, E. B. Ehlerding and W. Cai, Surface engineering of graphene-based nanomaterials for biomedical applications, Bioconjug. Chem., 2014, 25(9), 1609–1619,  DOI:10.1021/bc500332c .
B. Zhang, Y. Wang and G. Zhai, Biomedical applications of the graphene-based materials, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 61, 953–964,  DOI:10.1016/j.msec.2015.12.073 .
S. Comunian, D. Dongo, C. Milani and P. Palestini, Air Pollution and Covid-19: The Role of Particulate Matter in the Spread and Increase of Covid-19's Morbidity and Mortality, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 2020, 17(12), 4487,  DOI:10.3390/ijerph17124487 .
R. J. Roberge, J. H. Kim and A. Coca, Protective facemask impact on human thermoregulation: an overview, Ann. Occup. Hyg., 2012 Jan, 56(1), 102–112,  DOI:10.1093/annhyg/mer069 .

          https://www.nanotechmag.com/graphene-air-filter-mask-developed-china/
        .
S. Mukherjee, S. Kumar, S. R. Kumar and S. Nayar, PVA-Graphene Hydroxyapatite electrospun fibres as air-filters, Mater. Res. Express, 2020 DOI:10.1088/2053-1591/ab6ac9 .
S. P. Figerez, S. Patra, G. Rajalakshmi and T. Narayanan, Graphene Oxide based Rechargeable Respiratory Masks, ChemRxiv, 2020 DOI:10.26434/chemrxiv.12861170.v1  , Preprint, .
W. Jung, J. S. Lee, S. Han, S. H. Ko, T. Kim and Y. H. Kim, An ecient reduced graphene-oxide filter for PM2.5 removal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16975–16982 RSC .

          https://g1wonders.com/
        .

Research and Markets, Global disposable face mask market (2020 to 2025) - Growth, trends and forecasts, GlobeNewswire News Room,  2020, http://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2020/06/15/2047842/0/en/Global-Disposable-Face-Mask-Market-2020-to-2025-Growth-Trends-and-Forecasts.html Search PubMed.

Zion Market Research, Global N95 mask market set for rapid growth, to reach Value USD 1,890.3 Million by 2026,  2020, https://www.zionmarketresearch.com/news/n95-mask-market Search PubMed.

          https://www.sqnewmaterials.com/
        .

          https://www.globalsources.com/Disposable-civilian/KN95-particulate-respirator-1175130106p.htm#1175130106
        .

          https://finance.yahoo.com/news/zen-graphene-solutions-trebor-rx-144500517.html?guccounter=1%26guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8%26guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAGWgFF_09IgqtCifttgUZiA2JeD_iLN2sSSH44kXZr_F3VKSPgrTqWZEnu2OemVlzNNOvdm0bz9WAhQLT6NECS_zcfIwDXUoCbyUVrCWEYk4SRvvvbe1aee_KwhX7ZV-iGOdEAh0p556NlBuTW3UYhsxxGvmdDSNg86JOLgc7m4
        .

          https://www.zengraphene.com/zen-graphene-solutions-and-trebor-rx-corp-sign-binding-letter-of-intent/
        .

DeZeen Guardian G-Volt masks would use graphene and electrical charge to repel viruses and bacteria, https://www.dezeen.com/2020/03/06/guardian-g-volt-face-mask-graphene-coronavirus-bacteria/ Search PubMed.

          https://www.grapheal.com/about-our-solution
        .

          European Commission, 2013 Critical raw materials for the EU: Report of the Ad-hoc Working Group on defining critical raw materials, https://ec.europa.eu/growth/tools-databases/eipraw-materials/en/community/document/critical-raw-materials-eu-report-ad-hoc-working-group-defining-critical-raw, 8 Nov  2013 Search PubMed.
R. Arvidsson, S. Molander and B. A. Sanden, Review of Potential Environmental and Health Risks of the Nanomaterial Graphene, Hum. Ecol. Risk Assess., 2013, 19, 873–887,  DOI:10.1080/10807039.2012.702039 .

          A. Movahedi, Risk Assessment of Nanoparticle Release from the Structure of Polymeric Nanocomposites. Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg: Sweden,  2008 Search PubMed .

          L.-M. Lo, D. Hammond, I. Bartholomew, D. Almaguer, W. Heitbrink and J. Topmiller, Engineering Controls for Nano-Scale Graphene Platelets During Manufacturing and Handling Processes, Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health,  2011 Search PubMed .
R. Li, L. M. Guiney, C. H. Chang, N. D. Mansukhani, Z. Ji, X. Wang, Y.-P. Liao, W. Jiang, B. Sun, M. C. Hersam, A. E. Nel and T. Xia, Surface Oxidation of Graphene Oxide Determines Membrane Damage, Lipid Peroxidation, and Cytotoxicity in Macrophages in a Pulmonary Toxicity Model, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1390–1402 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Duch, 
            et al., Minimizing Oxidation and Stable Nanoscale Dispersion Improves the Biocompatibility of Graphene in the Lung, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5201–5207,  DOI:10.1021/nl202515a .
B. Fadeel, C. Bussy, S. Merino, E. Vázquez, E. Flahaut, F. Mouchet, L. Evariste, L. Gauthier, A. J. Koivisto and U. Vogel, Safety assessment of graphene-based materials: focus on human health and the environment, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10582–10620 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fadeel, 
            et al., Safety Assessment of Graphene-Based Materials: Focus on Human Health and the Environment, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10582–10620,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.8b04758 .
A. Maria Jastrzebska, P. Kurtycz and A. Roman Olszyna, Recent advances in graphene family materials toxicity investigations, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1320,  DOI:10.1007/s11051-012-1320-8 .

          https://healthycanadians.gc.ca/recall-alert-rappel-avis/hc-sc/2021/75309a-eng.php
        .

          https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.thegraphenecouncil.org/resource/resmgr/hse/Graphene_Face_Masks_Statemen.pdf
        .
B. Fadeel, 
            et al., Safety Assessment
of Graphene-Based Materials: Focus on Human Health and the Environment, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10582–10620 CrossRef CAS .
N. Moghimian and S. Nazarpour, The Future of Carbon: An Update on Graphene's Dermal, Inhalation, and Gene Toxicity, Crystals, 2020, 10(9), 718,  DOI:10.3390/cryst10090718 .

          https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/respirators/testing/results/MTT-2020-243.1_International_Shandong-Shengquan_KN95ParticulateRespiratorC-Shaped_TestReport_Redacted-508.pdf
        .
L. Fusco, M. Garrido, C. Martín, S. Sosa, C. Ponti, A. Centeno, B. Alonso, A. Zurutuza, E. Vázquez and A. Tubaro, Skin irritation potential of graphene-based materials using a non-animal test, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 610–622 RSC .
J. Zhao, B. Deng, M. Lv, J. Li, Y. Zhang and H. Jiang, 
            et al., Graphene oxide-based antibacterial cotton fabrics, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2(9), 1259–1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pullangott, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 6544,  10.1039/d0ra10009a .

          N.-F. Chiu, C.-D. Yang, C.-C. Chen, T.-L. Lin and C.-T. Kuo, Graphene Bioelectronics, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 85–112 Search PubMed .

          M. Majumder, W. Gao, P. M. Ajayan, T. Narayanan, B. K. Pradhan, Graphite oxide coated particulate material and method of making thereof, US Pat., 9403115,  2016 Search PubMed .
L. M. Casanova, S. Jeon, W. A. Rutala, D. J. Weber and M. D. Sobsey, Effects of air temperature and relative humidity on coronavirus survival on surfaces, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2010, 76, 2712–2717 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, K. R. Ratinac, S. P. Ringer, P. Thordarson, J. J. Gooding and F. Braet, Carbon nanomaterials in biosensors: should you use nanotubes or graphene?, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49(12), 2114–2138,  DOI:10.1002/anie.200903463 .
L. Feng and Z. Liu, Graphene in biomedicine: opportunities and challenges, Nanomedicine, 2011, 6(2), 317–324,  DOI:10.2217/nnm.10.158 .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Amrit Kumar Thakur	Amrit Kumar Thakur is presently pursuing a PhD from Anna University, India in Mechanical Engineering. His areas of interest include desalination, water and wastewater, MXenes, batteries, thermal energy storage, and photo thermal conversation applications. He has about 8 years of research/teaching experience. He has published several papers in high impact journals and also serves as a reviewer for various internationally reputed journals.
Ravishankar Sathyamurthy	Ravishankar Sathyamurthy is an Associate Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Head of the Renewable energy group of KPR Institute of Engineering and Technology, Arasur, Coimbatore, India. He holds a Doctor of Philosophy in Energy Engineering from the Hindustan Institute of Technology and Science. His research interests include materials science, refrigeration and air conditioning, solar drying, solar still desalination, IC engines, nanofluids in heat transfer applications, materials characterization, computational fluid dynamics, phase change materials, energy storage, alternate fuels, heat and power engineering. He has authored and coauthored more than 200 international articles and presented 7 articles at international conferences. He is currently holding the position of Associate editor of Frontiers in Energy Research (Solar energy section) and Energy Engineering journal. He has also been a visiting researcher at the Faculty of Engineering, Tanta University, Egypt from 2018 onwards.
Velraj Ramalingam	Dr R. Velraj is a Professor at the Institute for Energy Studies, and has specialized in Heat Transfer, Computational Fluid Dynamics, and Energy Storage. He received the Tamilnadu Scientist Award – 2014 by the Govt of Tamilnadu, India in the year 2017, the Achiever Award by Appadurai Chair for technology contribution to TANGEDCO, Tamilnadu in the year 2017, the Active Consultant Award in 2011, the Best Innovation Award in 2013, the Research Excellence Award in 2019 by CTDT Anna University, and the Distinguished Researcher Award in 2019 by Anna University. He has in his credit 15 sponsored research projects as Principal Investigator (PI), and 205 research articles in journals of high repute, and has executed 35 consultancy projects as principal consultant for several industries in the areas of energy technologies, thermal storage, CFD analysis, and biomass resource assessment studies.
Iseult Lynch	Iseult Lynch is Chair (Professor) of Environmental Nanosciences at the School of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK. She holds a PhD in Chemistry from University College Dublin, Ireland on thermoresponsive polymers for biomedical applications including their interactions with proteins. Her research interests span human and environmental impacts of engineered, anthropogenic and natural nanoscale particles, including development of predictive models for interaction, uptake and effects and exploring sustainability and environmental applications of nanomaterials. An underpinning theme of her research is exploring the interface between engineered materials and the natural world.
Swellam Wafa Sharshir	Swellam W. Sharshir received his BSc degree in mechanical engineering from Kafrelsheikh University, Egypt, in 2008, his MSc degree in mechanical power engineering from Tanta University, Egypt, in 2013, and his PhD degree in thermal power engineering from the School of Energy and Power Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), China, in 2017. He has authored more than 60 SCI articles. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Kafrelsheikh University. He is also a Postdoctoral Fellow with HUST, China. His research interests include solar energy applications, and renewable energy, nanomaterial applications, heat transfer, phase change nanocomposites, thermal management of batteries etc.
Zhenjun Ma	Zhenjun Ma is an Associate Professor at the Sustainable Buildings Research Centre, University of Wollongong, Australia. He is a Fellow of the Australian Institute of Refrigeration, Air conditioning and Heating and an Associate Editor of two Elsevier Journals of Solar Energy and Energy for Sustainable Development. He has been working extensively on renewable heating and cooling, thermal energy storage using phase change materials, building control and big data analytics.
Ganeshkumar Poongavanam	P. GaneshKumar completed his PhD at the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Anna University, Chennai, India. He is working as an International Research Professor in the School of Mechanical Engineering at Yeungnam University at Gyeongbuk, Republic of Korea. His fields of research interests include nanofluids, surface modifications, heat exchangers, and solar thermal and energy storage. He has published over 34 research papers in refereed international journals.
Suyeong Lee	Suyeong Lee is pursuing a Master's degree in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea, under the supervision of Professor Jang-Yeon Hwang. Her current research interest includes the development of novel electrode materials for alkali-metal sulfur–batteries.
Yeseul Jeong	Ye-Seul Jeong is pursuing her Bachelor's degree in the Department of Material Science and Engineering at Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea, under the supervision of Professor Jang-Yeon Hwang. Her current research is focused on the stability improvement of alkali-metals according to electrolyte.
Jang-Yeon Hwang	Jang-Yeon Hwang received his PhD degree (2018) in cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries at Hanyang University. He is currently a professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Chonnam National University, Korea. His research is focused on the development of novel electrode materials for high-energy alkali-ion and alkali-metal batteries.

Environmental significance
India was ranked 5th among the most polluted countries in the world in 2019 and Delhi, as the capital of India (annual average PM2.5 concentration = 98.6 μm m−3) was the most polluted city in the world. Air pollution in Delhi is mainly caused by industrial emissions and automobiles, construction sites and burning of crop residues in nearby areas. During the 1st complete lockdown in Delhi, India (March 24, 2020–April 14, 2020), the average PM10 and PM2.5 concentrations were 73.13 and 56.57 μm m−3, which were significantly low compared to those in previous years owing to the near-zeroing of various activities such as, operation of industries, traffic and constructions. However, with the relaxation of the lockdown, the concentrations of PM2.5 and PM10 started to increase further. It is well known that a rapid increase in COVID-19 spreading is associated with lower ambient temperature and air pollution and increased air pollution increases the risk of viral respiratory infections that affect around 10–20% of the population. Therefore, it is essential to effectively monitor and reduce the pollutant level in air for controlling the spread of the SAR-CoV-2 virus. In view of this, effective anti-pollutant/smog masks are indeed helpful in efficiently isolating harmful pollutants such as PM2.5 and PM10 along with controlling the spread of viruses. Graphene based masks exhibited a PM2.5 filtering efficiency of 96.4% and also demonstrated physical dust isolation, PM10 isolation. Although, PM2.5 and other pollutants can be effectively isolated by using graphene based face masks, awareness among people is also a crucial factor. As per the WHO guidelines to effectively control the spread of the SAR-CoV-2 virus, wearing face masks is one of the most prominent tools; however a recent survey conducted in 18 Indian cities highlighted that only 44% of the people in India is wearing a face mask. Hence, there is a great need for awareness among people towards using face masks to effectively control the spread of the SAR-CoV-2 virus along with isolating harmful pollutants such as PM2.5 and PM10 in highly polluted cities such as Delhi.


 	Fig. 1  Case distribution of confirmed COVID-19 cases as of November 23rd, 2020 (data from Worldometer3).	 

 	Fig. 2  Regional distribution of the (a) total number of cases of and (b) total deaths due to COVID-19 as of November 21st, 2020 (data from ECDC, Europe4).	 

 	Fig. 3  PM10 concentration in the pre-lockdown period and during the lockdown period in National Capital Territory of Delhi, India.14	 

 	Fig. 4  PM2.5 concentration in the pre-lockdown period and during the lockdown period in National Capital Territory of Delhi, India.14	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Number of days taken to reach each 100000 confirmed COVID-19 cases in Delhi, India showing the reduced doubling times as infection and (b) testing rates also increased significantly over the time period (data cover the period from March to November 2020 in Delhi, India).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Daily confirmed cases from November 1st to November 15th, 2020 in Delhi; (b) PM2.5 and (c) PM10 levels in Najafgarh, Delhi, India over the same period.	 


0–50, good	0–30	0–50	Least impact
51–100, satisfactory	31–60	51–100	Minor breathing discomfort to sensitive people
101–200, moderately polluted	61–90	101–250	Breathing discomfort to people with lung disease
201–300, poor	91–120	251–350	Breathing discomfort to people on prolonged exposure
301–400, very poor	121–250	351–430	Respiratory illness to people on prolonged exposure
401–500, severe	>250	>430	Respiratory illness to people on prolonged exposure

 	Fig. 7  Trends in wearing masks country-wise.23	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of graphene and its derivatives in different views along with conversion reactions involved with graphene chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the role of graphene and its derivatives in controlling the spread of the COVID-19 virus.	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of the coated mask (Ag3W) at (a) lower and (b) higher magnification.55 Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Possible role of metal ion coated graphene (GR) and graphene related material (GRM) – surfaces in inhibiting surface contamination from viruses including SARS-CoV-2. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.50	 

 	Fig. 12  Contact angle of water on a (a) pristine mask and (b) graphene coated mask.56	 

 	Fig. 13  Antibacterial efficiency of three different materials for different light exposure times.59	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of the step-wise modification of graphene with avidin molecules along with biotin molecule capture and binding.63 Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

SARS-CoV-2	Graphene	1 fg mL−1	Seo et al.65
SARS-CoV-2	Graphene	0.2 pM	Zhang et al.66
Norovirus	Graphene	0.1 μm mL−1	Xiang et al.67
Rotavirus	rGO	NA	Pant et al.68
Rotavirus	rGO	100 pfu	Liu et al.69
Zika virus	Graphene	450 pM	Afsahi et al.70
Hepatitis B virus	rGO	50 aM	Basu et al.71
Human influenza virus	Graphene	1 ng mL−1	Chan et al.72
Avian influenza virus	rGO	5 pM	Chen et2 al.73
HIV	Graphene	10 fg mL−1	Islam et al.74
HIV	Graphene	1 pM	Kwon et al.75
Human papillomavirus	rGO	1.75 nM	Aspermair et al.76

 	Fig. 15  H1N1 detection via enhancement of the FL emission of graphitic carbon nitride quantum dots measured in ultrapure water (A) or human serum (B) and their calibration plots (C). λex = 500 nm.77	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic arrangements of test masks, (a) features designed to improve wearer comfort, and the permitted airflows, (b) airflow through masks during exhalation; details of the smart valves which are place below the ventilator fan illustrating the permitted air flow from the inside to outside of the mask.88	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
