Rational design of nitrogen and sulfur co-doped carbon dots for efficient photoelectrical conversion applications   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA02057C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA02057C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11287-11293Rational design of nitrogen and sulfur co-doped carbon dots for efficient photoelectrical conversion applications†

        
          
            Hang-Xing 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Juan 
            Xiao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ze 
            Yang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hu 
            Tang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhen-Tong 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cheng 
            Zhang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Hao-Li 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry (SKLAOC), Key Laboratory of Special Function Materials and Structure Design (MOE), College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 730000, China. E-mail: haoli.zhang@lzu.edu.cn
bMinistry of Education Key Laboratory for the Synthesis and Application of Organic Functional Molecules, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University, Wuhan, 430062, China
Received 
      20th March 2015
    , Accepted 21st April 2015First published on 6th May 2015AbstractA practical strategy is proposed to improve the photoelectrical response performance of carbon dots by taking advantage of the heteroatom co-doping approach, which effectively enhances the light absorption ability and rightly adjusts the energy level of carbon dots. This work demonstrates that the nitrogen and sulfur atom co-doped carbon dots can be used as a good photosensitizer in future high-performance light-harvesting devices.
Introduction
Nanoscale carbon dots (CDs) have drawn increasing attention owing to their many merits including excellent optical, electric and photoelectric properties.1–4 Compared with conventional organic dyes and inorganic semiconductor quantum dots, CDs are superior in terms of economical viability, chemical inertness, and outstanding optical properties.5–7 Furthermore, in contrast to the zero band gap properties of graphene, CDs have an intrinsic band gap because of the quantum confinement effect and can exhibit higher photoelectric activity.8,9 CDs have been considered as a choice of benign light-harvesting materials for photo-energy conversion.10 To fully explore the unique properties of CDs and employ their applications in light-harvesting devices, fundamental understanding of the effects of particle structure and composition is required.11
For light-harvesting applications, strong light absorption in both UV and visible ranges is required. However, most reported CDs absorb only in the UV range.12 To expand their absorption spectra to a broader range, chemical modification and heteroatom doping are promising methods.13–15 Previous literature studies reported that the introduction of heteroatoms into the graphitic lattice of graphene can decrease the band gap and enhance the optical absorption, and consequently, increase the photo-generated charge carriers.16,17 Recently, Jeon et al. demonstrated that charge transfers between amine functional groups and CDs caused red shifts of the CD photoluminescence.14 Yu et al. reported that nitrogen and sulfur atom co-doped CDs exhibited a very high fluorescent quantum yield and excitation independent emission.18 These results suggested that heteroatom doping plays an important role in tuning the optical properties of CDs.
In this work, a practical strategy is proposed to improve the photoelectrical response performance of carbon dots by taking advantage of the nitrogen and sulfur heteroatom co-doping approach, which effectively enhances the light absorption ability and rightly adjusts the energy level of carbon dots. Under the guidance of the theoretical calculation, a new type of nitrogen and sulfur atom co-doped carbon dot (NS-CD) was synthesized through a condensation polymerization approach. We investigated the photogenerated current response of the NS-CDs in the solid state, and explored their usage as solar harvesting materials in TiO2 based hybrid devices.
Experimental section
Theoretical simulation
The theoretical simulation was conducted at the density functional theory (DFT) level using Gaussian software. Small pieces of CD containing 42 carbon atoms, whose edge was modified by hydrogen, were used as the model to study the electronic structure of the undoped CDs, denoted as CDs. The other three types of CDs were designed; they are nitrogen doped CDs, sulfur doped CDs, and nitrogen and sulfur co-doped CDs, denoted as CDs, N-CDs, S-CDs and NS-CDs, respectively.
Materials and synthesis
All of the reagents were obtained commercially and were of analytical grade. Titanium (Ti) foils (99.7% purity), 0.25 mm thick, were degreased by ultra-sonication in acetone and then isopropanol, respectively, for about 30 minutes, followed by rinsing with deionized (DI) water, further chemical brightening with hydrofluoric acid/nitric acid (HF/HNO3, volume ratio = 1/8) and finally dried in air before use. The indium tin oxide (ITO) was detergent-cleaned under ultrasound for 30 minutes followed by DI water washing. The CDs, N-CDs, S-CDs and NS-CDs were prepared by carbonization of citric acid, ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid, the mercaptoacetic acid and citric acid mixture, and L-cysteine, respectively. Detailed description of the synthesis procedures of these four types of CDs are provided in the ESI.†
Characterization
The CD materials were characterized by UV-vis absorption, photoluminescence (PL), transmission electronic microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Optical measurements were performed at room temperature under ambient air conditions. UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded with a T6 UV-vis Spectrometer. PL measurements were performed using a LS55 Fluorescence Spectrometer (PE, USA). The chemical bonding feature was characterized by using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and data were measured by using an Axis Ultra DLD system having an Al K source. SEM studies were performed using a Hitachi S-4800. The TEM samples were prepared by dropping solution onto the ultra-thin carbon membrane and it was dried in air. The cyclic voltammetry curves were measured with an electrochemical analyzer (660B, CHI Instruments). The lab self-build photoelectrochemical cell consisted of three electrodes system. The NS-CD film coated indium tin oxide (ITO) was used as a working electrode, a platinum (Pt) wire as a counter electrode and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as a reference electrode, 0.05 M sodium sulphide (Na2S) aqueous solution was used as the sacrifice electrolyte. Light: a 300 W Xe lamp.
Photoelectrode preparation
A facile and fully scalable electro-deposition approach was used to assemble the four types CD material films. The CDs were deposited on pre-cleaned ITO-coated glass using a home-built electro-deposition cell: a glass container (25 mL) with two ITO-coated glass electrodes (deposition area: ∼1 cm2) facing each other to simulate a parallel-plate-like geometry with a separation of 1.5 cm. Electro-deposition was performed using a constant voltage of +20 volts at around 0.1 mg mL−1 of four types of CD aqueous solution. After electro-deposition, the four types of CD deposited ITO glass was withdrawn from the solutions and washed with DI water; the samples were further left to dry at room temperature with nitrogen gas blow.
CV measurement for NS-CDs
The energy level of the as-prepared NS-CDs was evaluated by an electrochemical method. CV was carried out by using a standard three-electrode system, which consists of a glassy carbon disk as the working electrode, a platinum wire as the counter electrode, and a SCE as the reference electrode. The NS-CD electrode was prepared by drop-casting of NS-CD aqueous solution onto the glassy carbon electrode. CV was recorded in 0.1 mol L−1 potassium chloride (KCl) aqueous at room temperature.
Preparation of NS-CD/TiO2 nanotube arrays
Highly ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays were prepared by anodization of Ti foils in a two-electrode cell. The Ti foils were anodized in a 0.30 wt% ammonium fluoride (NH4F, 98% ACS reagent) and ethylene glycol (99.8% anhydrous) solution under a constant voltage (60 volts). The as-anodized samples were ultrasonically cleaned in DI water for 30 seconds to remove surface debris. Afterward, the samples were rinsed with DI water and dried in air. The as-anodized TiO2 nanotube arrays were annealed at 450 °C for 2 hours in air. For the NS-CD deposition, the TiO2 nanotubes served as the anode electrode in a conventional two-electrode system, and a Ti foil served as the cathode electrode, respectively. The electrolyte was an aqueous solution of NS-CDs (∼0.1 mg mL−1). The coaxial NS-CD/TiO2 nanotube arrays were prepared by applying a potential of 2 volts, with a typical deposition time of 2 hours. The TiO2 nanotubes acted as the working electrodes in a conventional two-electrode system, and a Ti foil served as the counter electrodes, respectively. The electrolyte was NS-CD aqueous solution with a concentration of about 0.1 mg mL−1. The coaxial NS-CD/TiO2 nanotube arrays were prepared under an applied positive potential of 2 volts for 2 hours, the NS-CDs were spontaneously deposited into the channels of TiO2 nanoarrays to form nanotube arrays.
Photocurrent response measurement
The photoelectrochemical cell was constructed with a three electrode system: CD deposited ITO-coated glass and TiO2 were used as the photoelectrode, a platinum wire as the counter electrode, and a SCE as the reference electrode. The electrolyte was 0.05 M Na2S aqueous solution. The photogenerated current versus time curve was recorded with an electrochemical analyzer.
Solid state NS-CD/TiO2 conductance measurement
TiO2 and NS-CD/TiO2 photoelectrodes have the same area (1.1 cm × 1.95 cm). The top surface of the TiO2 nanotube arrays was tightly connected to a thin copper wire with a silver paste pad (area: 5 mm2), and the back-electrode is the Ti foil underneath the nanotube arrays. All photo-conductance and dark conductance measurements were recorded by using an electrochemical analyzer.
Results and discussion
To understand the effect of chemical doping on the energy levels of the CDs, we performed theoretical simulation on the electronic structures of various carbon nanostructures. The theoretical simulation was conducted at the DFT level using Gaussian software. Small pieces of CD containing 42 carbon atoms, whose edge was modified by hydrogen, were used as the model to study the electronic structure of the CDs. As shown in the inset image of Fig. 1, four types of CDs were designed, they are pristine CDs, nitrogen doped CDs, sulfur doped CDs, and nitrogen and sulfur co-doped CDs, noted as CDs, N-CDs, S-CDs and NS-CDs, respectively. We considered that each CD consists of 13 aromatic rings and the doped heteroatom is at the edge in the sp2 hybridization state. The calculated results of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) for the different CDs are presented in Fig. 1. The band gap decreases from 3.440 eV to 3.234 eV when a CD is doped by two nitrogen atoms (one pyridine and one pyrrole like the hybridized form). The CD doped with one sulfur atom (in the thiophene form) gives a band gap of 3.247 eV. These results indicate that both nitrogen and sulfur doping result in reduction of the band gap. For nitrogen and sulfur co-doped CDs (one pyridine and one pyrrole nitrogen atom accompanied by one thiophene sulfur atom), the band gap is reduced to 3.103 eV, indicating that co-doping of nitrogen and sulfur atoms is most effective in reducing the band gap. The change of the band gap is mainly related to the charge redistribution that results from heteroatom doping.19 In the heteroatom doped CDs, nitrogen or sulfur atoms are positively charged due to the electron donation from the lone pair electrons of the heteroatom to the anti-bonding state of the polycyclic structures, which increases the electron density and results in the decrease of the band gap.14 More detailed information about the HOMO and LUMO iso-surface of each system is provided in ESI, Scheme S1.†
 Fig. 1  The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of CDs, N-CDs, S-CDs and NS-CDs, respectively. Black and blue lines indicate HOMO and LUMO levels of these CDs, respectively. The middle inset images are optimized configuration of the CDs, N-CDs, S-CDs and NS-CDs, respectively (gray, C; white, H; red, oxygen; blue, nitrogen; and yellow, sulfur atom). 
To synthesize the designed CDs, we developed a facile synthesis method based-on direct carbonization of small organic molecules with various polar groups (COOH, OH, NH2 and SH) as precursors in the solid state.20 The polar groups in precursor molecules were dehydrated to form the nucleus of CDs that is composed of conjugated units, such as CC, CN and C–S bonds, then the growth of CDs occurred at the spherical surface (edge growth). The source molecules reach the surface of the CDs and generate new conjugated units through carbonization induced by thermal treatment conditions. With increasing heating time, the freshly formed conjugated units are orderly arranged and assist the growth of crystalline CDs.21
The chemical compositions of the four types of CDs were investigated by XPS analysis (ESI, Fig. S1–S4†). The XPS spectrum indicates that the NS-CDs are mainly composed of carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, and oxygen elements. The higher resolution spectrum of C1s revealed the graphitic structure CC, C–O, C–N, C–S, and CO bonds.18 The presence of nitrogen and sulfur atoms and the fact that they are incorporated into the CD lattices were also ascertained by XPS measurement. The N1s spectrum reveals that the nitrogen atom mainly exists as the pyridine-like sp2-hybridization form (399.7 eV) and pyrrole-like sp3 hybridized form (401.2 eV). The high-resolution spectrum of the S2p bands reveals the presence of C–S–C units.18 The XPS survey spectrum of the pristine CDs only shows the C1s and O1s peaks, the higher resolution spectrum of C1s revealed the graphitic structure CC, C–O, and CO bonds. For the N-CDs and S-CDs, the XPS survey spectra indicate that the N-CDs are mainly composed of carbon, oxygen and nitrogen elements, and the spectrum of the S-CDs is mainly composed of C1s, O1s and S2p peaks. The high-resolution spectra of N1s and S2p reveal that the hybridization manners of the nitrogen and sulfur heteroatoms in N-CDs and S-CDs are similar to that in the NS-CDs.
TEM images of the four types of CDs are shown in Fig. 2, which show good dispersivity with uniform size distribution. According to the histograms (inset of Fig. 2), the average sizes of the CDs, N-CDs, S-CDs and NS-CDs are measured to be about 13 nm, 17.5 nm, 22 nm and 3.5 nm, respectively. As the four CDs were prepared under the same conditions, the difference in the particle size is likely due to the different reactivities of the precursors.
 Fig. 2  TEM images of the four types of carbon dots: (a) CDs, (b) N-CDs, (c) S-CDs, and (d) NS-CDs, respectively. 
For comparison of their optical properties, the UV-vis absorption spectra and fluorescence spectra of the synthesized CD, N-CD, S-CD and NS-CD aqueous solution were recorded (the absorption spectra of the synthesized CD, N-CD, S-CD and NS-CD aqueous solution are shown in ESI, Fig. S5†). The UV-vis spectra indicate that the absorption of the CDs is red-shifted when their graphite lattice is doped with nitrogen or sulfur atoms. It is also found that the NS-CD aqueous solution shows the widest optical absorption range and the highest absorption coefficient among the four types of CDs. In particular, the synthesized CD, N-CD, S-CD and NS-CD samples possess the absorption edge at 392 nm, 495 nm, 462 nm, and 569 nm, respectively. The absorption cut-off edge of the NS-CDs exhibits an approximately 177 nm redshift compared to that of the CDs. Four plots of the transformed Kubelka–Munk function versus energy of light for the synthesized CD, N-CD, S-CD and NS-CD samples are shown in Fig. 3.22 The estimated band gap of the four types of CDs are shown to be around 3.99 eV, 3.14 eV, 3.36 eV, and 3.05 eV, respectively. This result indicates a band gap decrease with the nitrogen and sulfur atom doping, which is consistent with the theory calculation results. For the PL spectra of the four types of CD dispersions, the emission wavelengths appeared at 448 nm, 433 nm, 444 nm and 440 nm, respectively, when excited at 365 nm (ESI, Fig. S6†).
 Fig. 3  Plot of [F(R)hv]2versus hv for the (a) CDs, (b) N-CDs, (c) N-CDs and (d) NS-CDs, respectively. 
The CDs need to be photostable to rival current commercial organic dyes or semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) for practical use in photovoltaic conversion applications.23 Hence, we measured the photostability of the as-prepared NS-CDs in comparison with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC), rhodamine 6G (Rh6G) and CdS QDs, which are regarded as rather photostable fluorescent labels.24 The column chromatography purified NS-CDs emitted strong blue luminescence and exhibited superior stability under UV irradiation. 3 hours irradiation under a 300 W Xe lamp led to no change in the fluorescence intensity of the NS-CDs, but obvious fluorescence quenching of the commercial dyes (ESI, Fig. S7†).
In the photovoltaic system, the energy level alignment of light harvesting materials and the conductive substrate plays an important role in the charge transportation behaviors.8,24,25 It is believed that the heteroatom doped CDs are more advantageous for electron transport than that of undoped CDs because the LUMO level of the doped CDs is lower than that of the undoped CDs, which may contribute to the electron transfer from the LUMO level of the CDs to the conductive substrate, thus decreasing the electron–hole recombination based on the efficiency enhancement of electron transport, and yielding enhanced photogenerated current.26–28 Meanwhile, the heteroatom doping of CDs can cause the band gap decrease that is useful to extend the light absorption range. To support the above hypothesis, photogenerated current response measurement as an excellent tool to reliably evaluate the photogenerated current response of a semiconductor film was used to study these four types of CDs.29
The thin films of the four types of CDs were deposited on the ITO surface by the electro-deposition method, and the CD photoelectrode films with different thicknesses were prepared by changing the electro-deposition time. For these four types of CDs, the photogenerated current response values were affected by the thickness of the photoelectrode film. With the increase of the film thickness, the photogenerated current exhibited a trend of increased first and then decreased (ESI, Fig. S8†). This phenomenon is consistent with previous research result, which shows that the photogenerated current response value of the photoelectrode has a close relationship to the photoelectrode film thickness.30 It is considered that the more thickness of the photoelectrode film, the more light can be aborted, which is helpful for photon-generated charge carrier production. However, a high thickness of the photoelectrode film will increase the transfer time for the charge carriers to reach the electrodes, which will cause severe charge carrier recombination.31,32 Therefore, it is very important to optimize the photoelectrode film thickness by balancing the photon adsorption and charge recombination factors.
The inset in Fig. 4 shows the photogenerated current response value of the four CD films at their optimized thickness subjected to 10 seconds of on/off cycles. These photoelectrodes showed an evident photogenerated current response to change in light on/off states, while the photogenerated current response performance of the NS-CD photoelectrode is much higher than that of the CDs, N-CDs and S-CDs. As shown in the statistical graph of Fig. 4, the photogenerated current response value of NS-CDs (144.2 ± 2.8 μA cm−2) is four times higher than that of CDs (36.5 ± 3.4 μA cm−2), and is two to three times larger than the response values of N-CDs (42.6 ± 3.2 μA cm−2) and S-CDs (70.4 ± 3.9 μA cm−2). Fig. 4 clearly demonstrates that the photogenerated current response of the CD photoelectrode can be significantly enhanced by nitrogen and sulfur heteroatom co-doping.
 Fig. 4  Statistical graph of photogenerated current of the CD, N-CD, S-CD and NS-CD photoelectrodes, respectively. The inset figure is the photogenerated current responses versus light on/off cycle time profiles of the CD, N-CD, S-CD and NS-CD photoelectrodes, respectively. 
The evident high photoelectric conversion performance of the NS-CDs indicates that it has a great potential to be used as the light sensitizer in photovoltaic devices. Herein, the NS-CDs have been used as a solar harvesting material in combination with TiO2 nanotube arrays to demonstrate their potential in photovoltaic cells. As shown in Scheme 1, the coaxial NS-CD/TiO2 nanotube arrays were prepared by an electro-deposition approach under an applied positive potential of 2 volts, the NS-CDs were spontaneously deposited into the channels of the TiO2 nanotube to form NS-CD decorated TiO2 arrays, denoted as NS-CD/TiO2. Detailed information about the preparation of NS-CD/TiO2 devices is provided in the Experiment part. The TiO2 nanotube arrays were used in our work because of their high surface-to-volume ratio and size-dependent properties, and the aligned structure of nanotubes benefits the electron transport along the length direction.33–35
 Scheme 1  Illustration of the electro-deposition of NS-CDs within a TiO2 nanotube array template. 
The TiO2 nanotube arrays were prepared as described in our previous studies.36 The NS-CD/TiO2 were prepared by electro-deposition of NS-CDs under a positive potential of 2 volts for 2 hours. More details regarding the fabrication procedures of the NS-CD/TiO2 are described in the ESI.† As shown in Fig. 5a, the SEM images of the as-prepared TiO2 nanotubes show highly uniform arrays with all the tubes aligned perpendicularly to the Ti substrates with a uniform wall thickness. The top view image indicates that the nanotubes were well open at the top and a mean inter-pore diameter around 100 nm (Fig. 5b). The NS-CD layer was deposited as an inner layer inside of the original TiO2 pores. Both the side view (Fig. 5c) and top view (Fig. 5d) SEM images suggest that it composes of very small NS-CD nanoparticles, which give rough and nanoporous inner layers. Such a rough inner surface of NS-CD/TiO2 nanotubes is favourable to the electrolyte transport.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) SEM images of top view and cross-sectional view of the as-anodized TiO2 nanotube arrays; (c and d) SEM images of top view and cross-sectional view of the NS-CD/TiO2 nanotube arrays. 
The energy level of the as-prepared NS-CDs was evaluated by an electrochemical method. The measurement was conducted at a scan rate of 500 mV s−1 in the voltage range of −1.0 to 1.0 vs. SCE. During the oxidation–reduction scans, one reversible reduction peak at around −0.75 volts (ESI, Fig. S9†) was observed. According to the reported eqn (1),37 ELUMO = −(ERed + 4.4 + 0.34) eV(1)corresponding to the LUMO level of −3.99 eV. Unfortunately, the oxidation behavior was irreversible; therefore, the HOMO level of NS-CDs was unable to be accurately estimated. To determine the HOMO levels, we combined the CV reduction potential with the optical energy band gap (Eoptg) resulting from the Kubelka–Munk function calculated result,22 the energy band gap and the HOMO level of NS-CDs were calculated to be 3.05 eV and −7.04 eV, respectively. In addition, the spectroscopy absorption edge of the NS-CDs appeared at ca. 410 nm. According to the theory presented in Burrows's report,38–40 the HOMO level of NS-CDs was calculated to be 3.03 eV, this value is very near to the calculated result of the Kubelka–Munk function, while the valence band and conduction band of TiO2 are at −4.40 eV and −7.60 eV, respectively, relative to the vacuum level.41 An energy diagram of the NS-CD/TiO2 hybrid is illustrated schematically in Fig. 6a, which indicates that the charge transfer is feasible at the interface of the NS-CD/TiO2 due to the matched band gap alignment.42
 Fig. 6  (a) Illustration of photogenerated current producing mechanism of the NS-CD/TiO2; (b) The emission spectra of NS-CD aqueous solution adding different amount of TiO2. Excitation wavelength is 365 nm (0.1 g L−1 of NS-CD aqueous solution). (c) Photogenerated current response versus voltage potential during light on/off cycle time profiles of TiO2 and NS-CD/TiO2; (d) photocurrent versus voltage curves of the TiO2 and NS-CD/TiO2 electrodes. 
PL measurements were employed to study surface processes involving charge transfer between semiconductors.34 As it is difficult to directly measure the spectra of the TiO2 nanotube array, we have used TiO2 powder (ground TiO2 nanotubes) for the PL measurements. It can be clearly seen from Fig. 6b that the emission intensity of NS-CD aqueous solution is gradually quenched with an increasing amount of TiO2 added to the system, implying efficient electron transfer from NS-CDs to TiO2.43,44
As shown in Fig. 6c, upon illumination with light, a dramatic increase in the photogenerated current was observed.45 Significantly, decoration of NS-CDs remarkably improves photogenerated current density, and the NS-CD/TiO2 heterostructure exhibits at least 1.5 times the enhancement as compared with the blank TiO2. The dramatically enhanced photogenerated current response indicates that the NS-CDs deposited as an inner layer inside the original TiO2 pores can harness the solar light more efficiently.
Shown in Fig. 6d are the experimental current–voltage (I–V) characteristics measured from an as-synthesized nanotube array photoelectrode. The TiO2 device shows an open-circuit voltage, Voc = 0.86 V versus SCE, short-circuit current, Jsc = 1.38 mA cm−2, and fill factor, FF = 0.58, whereas the NS-CD/TiO2 device shows Jsc = 2.00 mA cm−2 with Voc = 0.93 V and FF = 0.64, leading to an estimated power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.19%. Therefore, there is a 1.7 times enhancement in the PCE value from the NS-CD/TiO2 device. The performances of NS-CDs as a photosensitizer, especially the Voc and FF are similar to those of conventional inorganic semiconductor quantum dot sensitized TiO2 devices.46,47 We have also measured the wavelength-dependent photocurrent of the NS-CD sensitized devices in comparison with TiO2 nanotubes, which indicated that the NS-CD sensitized devices gave much higher photocurrent across the whole spectral range (ESI, Fig. S10†).
In this work, the photoelectric activity of NS-CDs has been further utilized in solid state photovoltaics based on the NS-CD/TiO2. To study the effect of the NS-CDs on the photoconductance, pure TiO2 and NS-CD/TiO2 were prepared, and the device models are shown in the inset of Fig. 7. The top surfaces of the nanotube arrays were tightly connected to a thin copper wire with a silver paste pad, and the back-electrode is the Ti foil underneath the nanotube arrays.48 The device preparation details are reported in the Experiment part.
 Fig. 7  The I–V characteristics of the (a) TiO2 and (b) NS-CD/TiO2 devices both in the dark and upon light illumination. Inset pictures are schematic of pure TiO2 and NS-CD/TiO2 device structures, respectively. 
The typical current–voltage characteristics of the pure TiO2 and NS-CD/TiO2 devices were measured in the dark and with illumination, as shown in Fig. 7. The device consisting of bare TiO2 (Fig. 7a) displayed inferior photoconductance with photogenerated current (the current value difference under the condition of light and dark) of only 4.66 × 10−3 mA cm−2 under −2 volts. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 7b, the NS-CD/TiO2 gave a photogenerated current of 97.9 × 10−3 mA cm−2 under the same conditions, which is over 20 times higher than that of the bare TiO2. The dramatically higher photoconductance of the NS-CD/TiO2 devices can be attributed to the high photoelectric activity of the NS-CDs which can more effectively absorb the light. Thus, when the NS-CDs are in contact with the TiO2, more charge carriers can be generated, leading to a fast increase in the photoconductance. These results indicate that NS-CDs represent a new type of photo-harvester that may be used in high performance of the photovoltaic devices.
Conclusions
Aided by theoretical simulation we have studied the effects of heteroatom doping on the photophysical properties of CDs. We have revealed that introduction of nitrogen or sulfur atoms to the graphite lattices could reduce the band gap of the nanoscale graphene structure, while co-doping of nitrogen and sulfur is a more efficient way to reduce the band gap. These theoretical results are useful for future design of CD-based optoelectronic applications. Experimental investigations have confirmed that the NS-CD materials have much higher photogenerated current generation capability than the CDs, N-CDs and S-CDs. The extended absorption wavelength and increased absorption coefficient of the NS-CDs make them a good candidate for photovoltaic applications. We demonstrated that the prepared NS-CDs enhanced 50% of the photogenerated current responses of TiO2 nanotube arrays, indicating that the NS-CDs can be used as an excellent photosensitizer candidate for solar collection and charge transport in the NS-CD/TiO2 hybrid devices.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) no. 2012CB933102, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC. 21233001, 21190034, 51402095), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, 111 Project and the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (2014CFB555).
Notes and references
A. Das, S. Pisana, B. Chakraborty, S. Piscanec, S. K. Saha, U. V. Waghmare, K. S. Novoselov, H. R. Krishnamurthy, A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari and A. K. Sood, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lim, W. Shen and Z. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 362 RSC .
Y. Wang and A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6921 RSC .
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Michalet, F. F. Pinaud, L. A. Bentolila, J. M. Tsay, S. Doose, J. J. Li, G. Sundaresan, A. M. Wu, S. S. Gambhir and S. Weiss, Science, 2005, 307, 538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. Shiral Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S. Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Zheng, A. Ananthanarayanan, A. K. Luo and P. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, B. Li and L.-s. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 46, 2254 CAS .
H. Li, Z. Kang, Y. Liu and T. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24230 RSC .
L. A. Ponomarenko, F. Schedin, M. I. Katsnelson, R. Yang, E. W. Hill, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Yang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3686 RSC .
R. Sekiya, Y. Uemura, H. Murakami and T. Haino, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Jin, D. H. Kim, G. H. Jun, S. H. Hong and S. Jeon, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3335 RSC .
G. Lu, K. Yu, Z. Wen and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1353 RSC .
Y. Dong, H. Pang, H. Yang, C. Guo, J. Shao, Y. Chi, C. Li and T. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Popovici, O. Oliveira, W. de Paula and T. Frederico, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 235424 CrossRef .
Y. Dong, J. Shao, C. Chen, H. Li, R. Wang, Y. Chi, X. Lin and G. Chen, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, G. Wu, G. Yang, J. Peng, J. Zhao and J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4015 RSC .
F. X. Xiao, J. Miao and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Huang, X. Zhou, R. Zhou, H. Zhang, K. B. Kang, M. Zhao, Y. Peng, Q. Wang, H. L. Zhang and W. Y. Qiu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhong, F. Peng, F. Bao, S. Wang, X. Ji, L. Yang, Y. Su, S.-T. Lee and Y. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dutta, S. Sarkar, T. Ghosh and D. Basak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20127 CAS .
J. L. Brédas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691 CrossRef PubMed .
W. T. Sun, Y. Yu, H. Y. Pan, X. F. Gao, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Kim, S. J. Kim, D. H. Wang, S. P. Cho, S. Bae, J. H. Park and B. H. Hong, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Embden, K. Latham, N. W. Duffy and Y. Tachibana, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11562 CrossRef PubMed .
C. X. Guo, H. B. Yang, Z. M. Sheng, Z. S. Lu, Q. L. Song and C. M. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Collins, Z. Li, J. R. Tumbleston, E. Gann, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 909 CrossRef PubMed .
C. G. Shuttlea, R. Hamiltona, B. C. O'Regana, J. Nelsonb and J. R. Urranta, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 16448 CrossRef PubMed .
W. T. Sun, Y. Yu, H. Y. Pan, X. F. Gao, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ye, J. Gong, K. Lai, C. Lin and Z. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, S. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Lu, D. Wang, Y. Lin and T. Xie, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 14262 RSC .
Y. L. Xie, Z. X. Li, Z. G. Xu and H. L. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Leeuw, M. M. J. Simenon, A. R. Brown and R. E. F. Einerhand, Synth. Met., 1997, 87, 53 CrossRef .
P. E. Burrows, Z. Shen, V. Bulovic, D. M. McCarty, S. R. Forrest, J. A. Cronin and M. E. Thompson, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 7991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Q. Meng, L. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Song, H. Jin, K. Zhang, H. Sun, H. Wang and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Akihiko and M. Yugo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
K. J. Williams, C. A. Nelson, Z. Yan, S. L. Li and X. Y. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Xing, S. F. Hung, J. Miao, H. Y. Wang, H. Yang and B. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 554 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Yang, J. Miao, S. F. Hung, F. Huo, H. M. Chen and B. Liu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, Y. C. Chang, R. S. Tsai, S. F. Hu, W. S. Chang and K. H. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hao, Y. Cao, B. Sun, Y. Li, Y. Zhang and D. Xu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 105, 137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zou and Z. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10725 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis routes, HOMO–LUMO iso-surfaces, XPS spectra, UV-vis and PL spectra, photostability comparison, photogenerated current responses of the prepared CDs, N-CDs, S-CDs and NS-CDs and the CV curve of NS-CDs. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta02057cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of CDs, N-CDs, S-CDs and NS-CDs, respectively. Black and blue lines indicate HOMO and LUMO levels of these CDs, respectively. The middle inset images are optimized configuration of the CDs, N-CDs, S-CDs and NS-CDs, respectively (gray, C; white, H; red, oxygen; blue, nitrogen; and yellow, sulfur atom).	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of the four types of carbon dots: (a) CDs, (b) N-CDs, (c) S-CDs, and (d) NS-CDs, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Plot of [F(R)hv]2versus hv for the (a) CDs, (b) N-CDs, (c) N-CDs and (d) NS-CDs, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Statistical graph of photogenerated current of the CD, N-CD, S-CD and NS-CD photoelectrodes, respectively. The inset figure is the photogenerated current responses versus light on/off cycle time profiles of the CD, N-CD, S-CD and NS-CD photoelectrodes, respectively.	 

 	Scheme 1  Illustration of the electro-deposition of NS-CDs within a TiO2 nanotube array template.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) SEM images of top view and cross-sectional view of the as-anodized TiO2 nanotube arrays; (c and d) SEM images of top view and cross-sectional view of the NS-CD/TiO2 nanotube arrays.	 
ELUMO = −(ERed + 4.4 + 0.34) eV	(1)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Illustration of photogenerated current producing mechanism of the NS-CD/TiO2; (b) The emission spectra of NS-CD aqueous solution adding different amount of TiO2. Excitation wavelength is 365 nm (0.1 g L−1 of NS-CD aqueous solution). (c) Photogenerated current response versus voltage potential during light on/off cycle time profiles of TiO2 and NS-CD/TiO2; (d) photocurrent versus voltage curves of the TiO2 and NS-CD/TiO2 electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 7  The I–V characteristics of the (a) TiO2 and (b) NS-CD/TiO2 devices both in the dark and upon light illumination. Inset pictures are schematic of pure TiO2 and NS-CD/TiO2 device structures, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis routes, HOMO–LUMO iso-surfaces, XPS spectra, UV-vis and PL spectra, photostability comparison, photogenerated current responses of the prepared CDs, N-CDs, S-CDs and NS-CDs and the CV curve of NS-CDs. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta02057c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
