Microfluidics-enabled rational design for Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films for enhanced photoelectrochemical performance   - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CE01316D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CE01316D
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 646-653Microfluidics-enabled rational design for Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films for enhanced photoelectrochemical performance†

        
          
            Ho Young 
            Jun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chih-Hung 
            Chang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kwang-Soon 
            Ahn
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Si Ok 
            Ryu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Chang-Ho 
            Choi
          
        
      *c
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, 280, Daehak-ro, Gyeongsan-si, Gyeongsangbuk-do, South Korea. E-mail: soryu@ynu.ac.kr
bSchool of Chemical, Biological & Environmental Engineering, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Gyeongsang National University, 501, Jinjudaero, Jinju-si, Gyeongsangnam-do, South Korea. E-mail: Ch_Choi@gnu.ac.kr
Received 
      21st August 2019
    , Accepted 25th November 2019First published on 25th November 2019AbstractAg–ZnO nanocomposite films have been widely employed as a promising photocatalyst displaying excellent charge separation and broadband absorption under illumination. Although a variety of synthetic methods have been proposed, the preparation of nanocomposite films with controlled morphology in a single process has been rarely attempted. Here, we introduce a facile and rapid synthetic method to fabricate Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films with controlled morphology by using a microreactor-assisted solution deposition (MASD) process. The nanocomposite film could be formed in a single process within 10 min, which is enabled by rationally designing the MASD process. In addition, by simply tuning in situ growth kinetics of ZnO nanostructures in the process, the morphology of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film is varied, including flower- and nanorod-structures. The enhanced photocatalytic activity of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film over its pristine ZnO counterpart is demonstrated by performing photoelectrochemical (PEC) measurements.
Introduction
Photocatalytic reactions with optical semiconductors have been extensively studied for several applications such as photocatalytic water splitting and photocatalytic degradation of organic contaminants.1,2 A variety of metal oxide semiconductors including TiO2, ZnO, ZrO2, and perovskite-type metal oxides (SrTiO3) have been considered promising photocatalysts owing to their high photocatalytic activity, high stability, and non-toxicity.3–5 Among these metal oxides, TiO2 is a chemically stable and highly efficient photocatalyst, finding many photocatalytic related applications.6–8 Besides the TiO2 photocatalyst, ZnO with a similar bandgap to TiO2 has also been employed as a photocatalyst under UV light irradiation.9,10 However, ZnO is only active under ultraviolet owing to its wide bandgap. The rapid recombination of photo-generated electrons and holes at the ZnO surface also yields a low quantum efficiency, leading to a low photocatalytic efficiency.11 The incorporation of guest materials into the pristine ZnO could be a promising strategy to enhance the photocatalytic efficiency.12,13 In particular, the growth of Ag NPs on the ZnO surface is known to alleviate the recombination of the photo-generated electrons and holes by forming a Schottky barrier at the Ag–ZnO interface.14,15 In addition, the plasmonic absorption of Ag NPs at visible wavelengths could eliminate the wide bandgap issue of the pristine ZnO.16
A chemical solution deposition (CSD) process has been intensively researched and developed to prepare Ag–ZnO nanocomposites with high quality in a cost-effective manner.15,17 In a typical CSD process, a Zn precursor and Ag precursor were introduced in a batch reactor to grow ZnO and Ag NPs simultaneously.18 Thus, the controlled growth kinetics of Ag NPs and ZnO is difficult to achieve in the conventional CSD process. The ability to control the growth kinetics is critical to obtain the optimal photocatalyst since it enables rational nanocomposite designs. A two-step synthetic approach has been used to fabricate the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite. In this approach, the pristine ZnO was first synthesized, followed by the subsequent growth of Ag NPs on the ZnO surface via photo-reduction treatment.16 Although the two-step synthetic approach is feasible for the tailored nanocomposite design, it is not facile, requiring two separated processes, the CSD process for the ZnO formation and the photo-reduction treatment for the growth of Ag NPs. Therefore, an advanced synthetic approach should be developed to fabricate high-quality Ag–ZnO nanocomposites in a facile and cost-effective manner, along with the ability to readily tune the morphology of the nanocomposite film.
Here, we introduce an advanced approach to the efficient preparation of Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films with a controlled morphology by adopting a microreactor-assisted solution deposition (MASD) for the first time. The MASD process has provided a rapid and scalable manufacturing platform for synthesizing and depositing nanomaterials to create functional nanostructures.19,20 For the preparation of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film, a microreactor is implemented for the ZnO synthesis, and another microreactor is independently set for the growth of Ag NPs. Then, these two individual microreactor streams are combined to obtain a mixture of ZnO and Ag NP dispersions, followed by the subsequent delivery of the reactive mixtures onto the substrate to rapidly form the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film. A key feature of the MASD process is the ability to tailor in situ reaction kinetics of reactants in a microreactor. Thus, the growth kinetics of both ZnO and Ag NPs could be tailored in the individual microreactor, allowing for the controlled morphology of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite in a single process. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to tailor the morphology of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film using microreactors and study the morphology impact on the photoelectrochemical (PEC) performance. The Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films exhibit an enhanced photocurrent response, as compared to the pristine ZnO. These results indicate that the MASD process can be a general platform to afford facile and rapid fabrication of photocatalytic metal–metal oxide nanocomposite films with various morphologies.
Experimental
Fabrication of Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films

Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the MASD process for the deposition of Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films. The deposition process consists of a microprocessor-controlled dispensing pump (Ismatec), capillary tubing (1.22 mm ID, Upchurch Scientific), and a micro T-mixer (Upchurch Scientific). In the case of ZnO synthesis, zinc acetate (Sigma-Aldrich), ammonium acetate (Sigma-Aldrich), and sodium hydroxide were used without further purification. Stream 1 (0.005 M zinc acetate and 0.025 M ammonium acetate) and stream 2 (0.2 M NaOH) were dissolved in deionized (DI) water and initially pumped into a T-mixer. The T-mixer yielded uniform mixing of the reactants. The mixture was then passed through a capillary tubing reactor with a length of 1.3 m that was immersed in a water bath. The water temperature was maintained at 70 °C during the growth of ZnO NPs. Volumetric flow rates of 14.7 mL min−1 and 6.8 mL min−1 were adopted for the fabrication of the nanocomposite film with flower and NR structures, respectively. For the synthesis of Ag NPs, silver nitrate (Sigma-Aldrich), ammonium hydroxide (30 vol%, Sigma-Aldrich), and formaldehyde (36 vol%, Sigma-Aldrich) were used without further purification. Like the synthesis of ZnO NPs, precursor solutions of 7 mM AgNO3/0.19 M ammonium hydroxide in stream 3 and 5 mL HCHO/50 mL DI water in stream 4 were initially pumped into a T-mixer and sent to a capillary tubing reactor with a length of 40 cm. The growth of colloidal Ag NPs proceeded at a volumetric flow rate of 0.4 mL min−1 and room temperature. The ZnO NP dispersion and Ag NP dispersion synthesized independently in each tubing reactor was mixed in a T-mixer and finally delivered onto the substrate to form the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films. The substrate was placed on a spin-coater set at 2000 rpm. The deposition time for the nanocomposite film formation was 6 min and 14 min on Si/SiO2 (100 nm) and FTO substrates, respectively. The substrates were treated with O2 plasma prior to the deposition process to clean the substrates and promote their wettability. For the characterization of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films, the nanocomposite films were prepared on Si/SiO2, and for the measurement of the PEC activity, the nanocomposite films were grown on FTO glass. The residence time distribution (RTD) of the individual reactant stream in the micro-T mixers is presented in Fig. S1.†
 Fig. 1  Scheme of the MASD process for manufacturing of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films. 
Characterization of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite
The morphologies of the Ag–ZnO films were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Quanta 600 FEG). A high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM, FEI TITAN 80-200) equipped with an electron dispersive spectrometer (EDS) and fast Fourier transform (FFT) was operated at 300 kV. X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 discover) was used to study the crystallinity of the films. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB 200-IXL instrument with Mg K radiation) was employed to investigate the elemental composition of the films. The optical properties of the films were studied using a UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer (Jasco, V-670). Photoluminescence spectroscopy was performed at room temperature by using the 325 nm line of a Xe lamp as an excitation source (Horiba, iHR550). For the measurement of the optical properties, the films were deposited on a bare soda-lime glass substrate. The thickness of the nanocomposite films was measured by using an alpha-step stylus profiler (Kosaka Laboratory Ltd. ET-3000).
Measurement of PEC performance
The PEC performance was measured using a photocurrent response with on/off light irradiation. The PEC measurements were performed in a three-electrode cell with a flat quartz window to facilitate illumination of the photoelectrode surface. The ZnO or Ag–ZnO films on FTO glass (active area: 1 cm2) were used as working electrodes. A platinum wire and Ag/AgCl electrode (with saturated KCl) were used as a counter and a reference electrode, respectively. A 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution was used as the electrolyte. The PEC responses were measured using a Xe lamp (Light source, ABET technologies LS-150, 150 W). The light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 is calibrated using a power meter (Powermeter, Newport 1918-R). The current–voltage performance under chopped light on/off illumination was measured with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 during the potential sweep. Photocurrent curves with respect to time were also measured under light on/off illumination at a constant potential of 0.3 V.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows the schematic diagram of the MASD process for the fabrication of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film. In a previous study, we demonstrated the controlled morphology of ZnO NPs in a continuous flow microreactor by tailoring their growth kinetics, and these ZnO NPs were directly utilized to form ZnO films with various morphologies.21 In another study, colloidal Ag NPs were also synthesized in a similar microreactor system and served as a silver ink for the patterning of a highly conductive silver feature.22 By in situ tuning the growth kinetics of Ag NPs, stable Ag NPs were formed without using any surfactant at room temperature and then immediately supplied for the Ag film formation. From our previous studies, the flow rate of the solution was found to be a key parameter in governing the growth kinetics, morphology, and stability of the nanoparticles. An amorphous ZnO film, a flower-like ZnO film, and ZnO NR arrays were formed at a flow rate of 28.1 mL min−1, 14.7 mL min−1, and 6.8 mL min−1, respectively.21 For the synthesis of Ag NPs, a flow rate of 0.4 mL min−1 was determined as an optimal flow rate. At a flow rate exceeding 0.4 mL min−1, the primary Ag NPs could not be formed due to an extremely short residence time, and a flow rate lower than 0.4 mL min−1 led to the aggregation of colloidal Ag NPs, causing the clogging of the microreactor.22 Based on previous studies, it is reasonable that directly integrating a microreactor for ZnO synthesis with another microreactor for growing colloidal Ag NPs would give rise to the synthesis of Ag–ZnO nanocomposite NPs, and these nanocomposite NPs could serve as building blocks to form the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films. Also, by appropriately adjusting the flow rate of the microreactor responsible for the ZnO synthesis, the morphology of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film could be controlled. The flower-like Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film was prepared at a flow rate of 14.7 mL min−1 while the NR Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film was fabricated at a flow rate of 6.8 mL min−1. The flow rate effect on the film morphology is attributed to the fact that the flow rate determines the structure of building blocks that constitute the ZnO films.21 Therefore, the microreactor in charge of forming ZnO NPs plays two crucial roles; constituting the ZnO matrix (host) and determining the morphology of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film. The total process time from the NP synthesis to the film fabrication is 6 min, proving that our system enables the rapid production of the nanocomposite film in a cost-effective manner. Besides, both ZnO NPs and colloidal Ag NPs are simultaneously synthesized in the individual microreactor in a single process, and thus no additional apparatus is required for the nanocomposite manufacturing. Lastly, the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film with a different morphology could be obtained by simply adjusting the flow rate of the microreactor, providing convenience to readily engineer the nanocomposite structure.
First of all, the pristine flower and NR ZnO films were prepared to compare their characteristics and PEC performance to those of their Ag–ZnO nanocomposite counterparts. The highly dense flower structure was deposited on the substrate, and the NR arrays were also grown on the substrate with high density (Fig. 2a and b). The XRD pattern indicates formation of the ZnO NR arrays with a [001] preferred orientation while the flower-like structure was formed in a random orientation (Fig. S2†). All of the peaks in the XRD spectra are consistent with the reported pristine ZnO film, indicating that the highly pure ZnO films could be prepared by using the microreactor process.21 The SEM images of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films are shown in Fig. 2c and d. Even after incorporating Ag NPs into the ZnO matrix, the morphology of the ZnO matrix was found to remain similar. The presence of Ag NPs onto the ZnO structure was clearly seen onto the ZnO surface (Fig. 2c). The incorporation of Ag NPs onto the ZnO structure led to an increase of the petal density of the flower. Since the majority of colloidal Ag NPs synthesized in the microreactor system are very small with a size of 2–10 nm in diameter,22 the flower ZnO morphology would not be altered significantly. However, Ag NPs may serve as nucleation sites for ZnO growth during the fabrication of the nanocomposite, resulting in the high population of the petals as compared to the pristine ZnO. The incorporation effect on the morphological alteration was also observed for the Ag–ZnO NR nanocomposite film (Fig. 2d). One interesting finding is that Ag NPs somewhat disrupt the preferential growth of ZnO NR arrays, as confirmed by the XRD analysis (Fig. 2e). While a peak for the (002) plane is exclusively prominent for the pristine ZnO NR array, other peaks at 32° and 36° appear for the Ag–ZnO NR nanocomposite film, which corresponds to the (100) and (101) planes of ZnO, respectively. It is speculated that during the formation of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite, the preferential order of the crystalline ZnO NPs may be impeded by the incorporation of Ag NPs. Although Ag NPs cause a little change in the ZnO matrix morphology, the crystallinity of both ZnO and Ag in the nanocomposite film is high. Very sharp diffraction patterns only attributed to ZnO and Ag are presented, and no other peaks are detected in the XRD spectra. The film thickness of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films is provided in Fig. S3.† The Ag–ZnO flower-like film exhibits a thickness of 563 nm, and for the NR nanocomposite film a thickness of 567 nm is measured. Based on our previous study, it is presumed that the nanorods in the NR nanocomposite film are approximately 570 nm and 80 nm in length and diameter, respectively.23 The optical properties of the nanocomposite films were investigated (Fig. 2f). The nanocomposite films exhibit broad absorption at the visible wavelengths between 400 nm to 800 nm owing to the surface plasmon resonance effect of Ag NPs.16
 Fig. 2  Characteristic results of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films: SEM image of (a) pristine flower ZnO, (b) pristine NR ZnO array, (c) flower-like nanocomposite film, and (d) NR nanocomposite film; (e) XRD spectra of the nanocomposite films (*: silicon peak); and (f) optical properties of the pristine ZnO films and the nanocomposite films (scale bar: 500 nm). 
The bandgaps of the pristine ZnO films and the nanocomposite films were estimated by using the Tauc plot method (Fig. S4†). The pristine ZnO films exhibit a band gap of 3.2–3.3 eV that agrees well with the reported one.11 For the nanocomposite films, the band gap value depends on the morphology, showing approximately 2.75 eV and 1.90 eV for the Ag–ZnO NR and Ag–ZnO flower-like structure, respectively. A typical flower-like Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film was analyzed by using STEM and EDS after focused ion beam (FIB) lithography (Fig. 3). The cross-sectional view of the nanocomposite film shows the petals of the flower and Ag NPs deposited onto the surface of the petals. In addition to Ag NPs onto the petal surface, Ag NPs were also embedded inside the petals of the flower (Fig. 3a). The size of individual Ag NPs approximately ranges from 5 nm to 10 nm, and some aggregated Ag NPs were also presented. The corresponding EDS mapping image of the flower petals confirms the synthesis of ZnO and Ag NPs and the incorporation of Ag NPs onto the ZnO surface and inside the ZnO matrix (Fig. 3b). The inclusion of Ag NPs into the ZnO matrix was further evidenced by the TEM image (Fig. 3c). Consistent with the analysis of the STEM image, the Ag NPs are randomly distributed onto and inside the ZnO matrix. An individual Ag NP attached to the ZnO surface was thoroughly examined by HRTEM (Fig. 3d). It was found that the ZnO matrix is composed of polycrystalline ZnO NPs with a d-spacing of 2.36 Å (111) and 2.0 Å (200) whereas the Ag NP shows a single crystalline nature with a d-spacing of 2.0 Å (100) and 1.6 Å (002).24–26 We performed XPS analysis to study the chemical composition of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film (Fig. 4). As compared to the pristine ZnO films, Zn and O binding energies shift to a higher binding energy for the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films. The O1s profile of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films is asymmetric and could be deconvoluted, as shown in Fig. 4c, which indicates the existence of two different O species in the nanocomposite films. The peak at approximately 531.3 eV is attributed to the lattice oxygen of ZnO, and another peak at a higher binding energy of 532.3 eV is associated with the oxygen of the surface hydroxyls.27 No peak appeared at 529.0 eV, which corresponds to O in Ag2O.28 This result confirms that the Ag NPs incorporated into the ZnO matrix are purely metallic. A remarkable shift of the Ag3d5/2 and Ag3d3/2 component to a lower binding energy was also observed for the nanocomposite films, as compared to pristine Ag NPs (Fig. 4d) (the binding energies of Ag3d5/2 and Ag3d3/2 for the pristine Ag are around 368.2 eV and 374.2 eV, respectively).29 The shift of the O1s and Ag3d component to higher and lower binding energies is associated with the strong interaction between Ag NPs and the ZnO matrix. It is known that at the Ag–ZnO interface, electrons transfer from Ag to the conduction band (CB) of ZnO due to the smaller work function of Ag than ZnO.15 Thus, a new Fermi energy level is formed, resulting in the higher valence of Ag. All of these characteristic results strongly support the ability of the MASD process to rapidly produce high-quality Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films with controlled morphologies in a facile manner.
 Fig. 3  (a) STEM image of a cross-sectional flower-like nanocomposite film (arrows indicate Ag NPs), (b) EDS mapping of the flower-like nanocomposite film, (c) TEM image of a cross-sectional flower-like nanocomposite film, and (d) close view of individual Ag NPs on the ZnO matrix in FFT images. 
 Fig. 4  XPS analysis of the nanocomposite films: (a) Zn2P spectra, (b) O1s spectra, (c) fit spectra of O1s, and (d) Ag3d spectra. 
The photocatalytic activity of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films was evaluated by employing the nanocomposite films as photoanodes in the PEC experiment. Fig. 5a shows the linear sweep voltammograms (LSVs) of the pristine flower ZnO and Ag–ZnO nanocomposite photoanode under dark and light conditions in a potential window of −0.2 to 0.5 V at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte. The photocurrent of the illuminated ZnO film is determined by the efficiency of transferring excited electrons from the ZnO film to the FTO layer over their recombination rate at the film surface or electrolyte/film interface. Under illumination, the apparent increment in the photocurrent density relative to the dark state was observed for all the tested photoanodes, indicating that the ZnO films showed collection of solar light and its conversion into a photoelectric current. The photocurrent onset potential was at around −0.2 V versus RHE for the pristine and Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films. The photocurrent of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films continued to increase with an increase of positive potential and became saturated at around 0.3 V. The photocurrent density of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films at 0.2 V is 204.2 μA cm−2 and 123.5 μA cm−2 for the flower and NR structured nanocomposite films, respectively, which is a much enhanced photocurrent density as compared to that of the pristine flower-like ZnO film with 86.3 μA cm−2 at the same potential. The improved photocurrent of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films results from the enhanced separation of the photo-induced electron and hole pair, the extended light absorption into visible wavelengths by the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect of Ag NPs, and lastly the enhanced charge transfer kinetics between Ag and ZnO.14 The on–off cycle polarization was also performed at a constant voltage of 0.3 V versus RHE (Fig. 5b). All of the films exhibited instantly increased photocurrent with the light on, indicating the fast light response and electron transfer under illumination. The flower-like Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film showed the highest values of 187.1 μA cm−2, followed by 107.8 μA cm−2 for the NR nanocomposite and 81.9 μA cm−2 for the pristine flower-like ZnO, and 56.3 μA cm−2 for the pristine ZnO NR film. The flower-like nanocomposite film performed more effectively than its NR nanocomposite counterpart. This is related to the bandgap of the flower-like nanocomposite film. As mentioned before, the bandgap of the flower-like nanocomposite film is lower than that of the NR nanocomposite film, indicating that the flower-like nanocomposite film absorbs wider wavelength of visible light as compared to the NR nanocomposite one. The surface area may also be involved in the enhanced PEC performance of the flower-like nanocomposite film. The flower structure may have a larger surface area than the NR structure due to the fact that the flower structure grows in a random orientation while the NR one mainly forms in a vertical direction. The PEC activity of the nanocomposite films is compared with that of the reported nanocomposite films prepared by a CSD process. Lin et al. reported the fabrication of a nanocomposite film with a NR structure by combining the hydrothermal reaction and photo-reduction treatment.30 The photocurrent density of the nanocomposite film reached around 380 μA cm−2 at 0.2 V. A conventional hydrothermal reaction was used to fabricate Ag-implanted ZnO hierarchical nanoflowers that show a photocurrent density of approximately 95 μA cm−2 at 0.3 V.18 Patil et al. also fabricated a similar Ag–ZnO hierarchical structure by using a hydrothermal method.14 The photocurrent density of around 310 μA cm−2 at 0.3 V was obtained from the Ag–ZnO hierarchical structure. The comparison results of the PEC performance confirm that the MASD process enables fabrication of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film with a comparable PEC activity of 204 μA cm−2. We believe that the PEC activity could be further improved by optimizing the concentration ratio between the ZnO and Ag NP. The aim of this study is to demonstrate the facile and efficient fabrication of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite film by using the MASD process. It is noteworthy that a conventional hydrothermal process typically requires prolonged reaction time with at least several hours for fabricating Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films whereas the MASD process allows for manufacturing of the nanocomposite film within 10 min.
 Fig. 5  (a) Photocurrent density vs. voltage curves for pristine ZnO, flower nanocomposite film and NR nanocomposite film measured in 0.5 M Na2SO4 at 100 mW cm−2 solar simulating light. (b) Photocurrent curves with time measured under light on/off illumination at a constant voltage of 0.3 V. (c) The photocatalytic stability of the pristine ZnO films and nanocomposite films. (d) PL spectra of pristine ZnO and nanocomposite films at room temperature. 
The photocatalytic stability of the nanocomposite films was investigated by extending the PEC experiment up to 1200 s (Fig. 5c). The stability results show that the photocurrent density of all the tested films is consistent without any noticeable deterioration, indicating that the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films prepared by the MASD process are photocatalytically stable.

Fig. 5(d) compares the room temperature PL spectra between the pristine ZnO films and the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films. Four emission peaks appeared at 383, 410, 540, and 592 nm. The UV emission at 383 nm could be attributed to the near band edge emission (NBE) of ZnO, and a broad violet emission at 410 nm could be assigned to the electron transition from the shallow donor level of neutral zinc interstitial to the top level of the valence band.31 The other two emission peaks at the visible region corresponds to bound excitons and defect states located at the surface of ZnO.31,32 As compared to the pristine ZnO films, the emission intensity of the nanocomposite films is decreased, which is consistent with Stern–Volmer quenching.31,33 The quenching of UV emission occurs due to the contact of the Ag NP to the ZnO surface where electrons from the conduction band of ZnO transport to the Fermi level of the Ag NP.14 The PL spectral results indicate a suppression of electron–hole recombination rate by the efficient charge separation, resulting in the enhancement of the PEC activity.34
Conclusions
Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films with flower and NR structures were fabricated by using a microreactor-assisted solution deposition (MASD) process that was rationally designed by using a series of microreactor systems. Two microreactor systems were implemented for separately growing Ag NPs and ZnO NPs, and later the synthesized Ag NP solution and ZnO NP solution were combined in a microreactor to synthesize the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite. The MASD process enabled fabrication of the nanocomposite films with various morphologies via a one-pot process within 10 min. The enhanced photocatalytic activity of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films over pristine ZnO films was demonstrated by the PEC experiment.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work at OSU was funded by the NSF under grant No. 1707506 and the Scalable Nanomanufacturing Program under Grant No. CBET-1449383. Part of this work was conducted at OPIC, a National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure site at the OSU which is supported in part by the NSF (grant ECC-1542101) and OSU. The TEM is funded by the NSF via the MRI Program under Grant No. 1040588. The work at YU was supported by the Yeungnam University Research Grant (No. 216A380108) in 2016.
Notes and references
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. I. Gaya and A. H. Abdullah, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5029–5034 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Miller, S. A. Akbar and P. A. Morris, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 204, 250–272 CrossRef CAS .
J. Desilvestro and O. Haas, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 5C–22C CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakata and A. Fujishima, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13, 169–189 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, S. Wang, J. Lv, M. Zhao, M. Zhang, G. He, C. Fang, L. Li and Z. Sun, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2018, 101, 5469–5476 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lv, R. Miao, M. Zhang, G. He, M. Zhao, B. Yu, W. Wang, B. Li and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 16282–16288 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Deng, X. Duan, D. H. Ng, H. Tang, Y. Yang, M. Kong, Z. Wu, W. Cai and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6030–6037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, P. Yan, M. Zhao, Y. Sun, F. Shang, G. He, M. Zhang and Z. Sun, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 648, 676–680 CrossRef CAS .
V. Srikant and D. R. Clarke, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 5447–5451 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lv, W. Wang, M. Zhao, W. Zhu, Y. Cheng, G. He, M. Zhang, X. Chen and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 4051–4057 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lv, J. Xu, M. Zhao, P. Yan, S. Mao, F. Shang, G. He, M. Zhang and Z. Sun, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 13983–13987 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Patil, M. G. Mali, M. S. Tamboli, D. R. Patil, M. V. Kulkarni, H. Yoon, H. Kim, S. S. Al-Deyab, S. S. Yoon and S. S. Kolekar, Catal. Today, 2016, 260, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ren, B. Yang, M. Wu, J. Xu, Z. Fu, T. Guo, Y. Zhao and C. Zhu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 182, 123–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, L. Ren, Z. Cui, C. Chen, H. Pan and J. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 126, 298–305 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bahlawane, K. Kohse-Höinghaus, T. Weimann, P. Hinze, S. Röhe and M. Bäumer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9957–9960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Rani, A. Anusiya, M. Praveenkumar, S. Ravichandran, R. K. Guduru, G. Ravi and R. Yuvakkumar, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 731–745 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, Y. W. Su and C. H. Chang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 3326–3333 RSC .
C.-H. Choi, E. Allan-Cole and C.-h. Chang, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 1265–1272 RSC .
C. H. Choi and C. H. Chang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 4759–4767 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, E. Allan-Cole and C. H. Chang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 7262–7266 RSC .
C.-H. Choi, J. B. Levin and C.-h. Chang, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 8645–8652 RSC .
B. Mehta, M. Chhajlani and B. Shrivastava, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2017, 836, 012050 CrossRef .
S. Agnihotri, G. Bajaj, S. Mukherji and S. Mukherji, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7415–7429 RSC .
V. Dhand, L. Soumya, S. Bharadwaj, S. Chakra, D. Bhatt and B. Sreedhar, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 58, 36–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, S. Gao and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16792–16800 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Weaver and G. B. Hoflund, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 1693–1699 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kandula and P. Jeevanandam, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 76150–76159 RSC .
Z. Mu, W. Yan, R. Zhao and Y. Lin, Mater. Res. Express, 2015, 2, 065008 CrossRef .
A. Amutha, S. Amirthapandian, B. Sundaravel, B. Panigrahi, K. Saravanan and P. Thangadurai, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 205104 CrossRef .
W. I. Park and G. C. Yi, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 87–90 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Redl, K.-S. Cho, C. B. Murray and S. O'Brien, Nature, 2003, 423, 968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, Q. Zhu, Z. Zeng, M. Zhang, J. Yang, M. Zhao, W. Wang, Y. Cheng, G. He and Z. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2017, 111, 104–109 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ce01316dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Scheme of the MASD process for manufacturing of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characteristic results of the Ag–ZnO nanocomposite films: SEM image of (a) pristine flower ZnO, (b) pristine NR ZnO array, (c) flower-like nanocomposite film, and (d) NR nanocomposite film; (e) XRD spectra of the nanocomposite films (*: silicon peak); and (f) optical properties of the pristine ZnO films and the nanocomposite films (scale bar: 500 nm).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) STEM image of a cross-sectional flower-like nanocomposite film (arrows indicate Ag NPs), (b) EDS mapping of the flower-like nanocomposite film, (c) TEM image of a cross-sectional flower-like nanocomposite film, and (d) close view of individual Ag NPs on the ZnO matrix in FFT images.	 

 	Fig. 4  XPS analysis of the nanocomposite films: (a) Zn2P spectra, (b) O1s spectra, (c) fit spectra of O1s, and (d) Ag3d spectra.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photocurrent density vs. voltage curves for pristine ZnO, flower nanocomposite film and NR nanocomposite film measured in 0.5 M Na2SO4 at 100 mW cm−2 solar simulating light. (b) Photocurrent curves with time measured under light on/off illumination at a constant voltage of 0.3 V. (c) The photocatalytic stability of the pristine ZnO films and nanocomposite films. (d) PL spectra of pristine ZnO and nanocomposite films at room temperature.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ce01316d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
