Mixed metal–antimony oxide nanocomposites: low pH water oxidation electrocatalysts with outstanding durability at ambient and elevated temperatures   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA07293E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA07293E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 27468-27484Mixed metal–antimony oxide nanocomposites: low pH water oxidation electrocatalysts with outstanding durability at ambient and elevated temperatures†

        
          
            Sibimol 
            Luke
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Manjunath 
            Chatti‡
d, 
      
        
          
            Asha 
            Yadav‡
e, 
      
        
          
            Brittany V. 
            Kerr
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Jiban 
            Kangsabanik
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Tim 
            Williams
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Pavel V. 
            Cherepanov
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Bernt 
            Johannessen
          
        
      h, 
      
        
          
            Akshat 
            Tanksale
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Douglas R. 
            MacFarlane
          
        
      di, 
      
        
          
            Rosalie K. 
            Hocking
          
        
      *f, 
      
        
          
            Aftab 
            Alam
          
        
      *e, 
      
        
          
            Aswani 
            Yella
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Alexandr N. 
            Simonov
          
        
      *di
aIITB-Monash Research Academy, IIT Bombay, Mumbai 400076, India
bDepartment of Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science, IIT Bombay, Powai, Mumbai 400076, India. E-mail: aswani.yella@iitb.ac.in
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia
dSchool of Chemistry, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia. E-mail: alexandr.simonov@monash.edu
eDepartment of Physics, IIT Bombay, Powai, Mumbai 400076, India. E-mail: aftab@phy.iitb.ac.in
fDepartment of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, Victoria 3122, Australia. E-mail: rhocking@swin.edu.au
gMonash Centre for Electron Microscopy, Victoria 3800, Australia
hAustralian Synchrotron, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia
iARC Centre for Electromaterials Science, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia
Received 
      25th August 2021
    , Accepted 15th November 2021First published on 16th November 2021AbstractProton-exchange membrane water electrolysers provide many advantages for the energy-efficient production of H2, but the current technology relies on high loadings of expensive iridium at the anodes, which are often unstable in operation. To address this, the present work scrutinises the properties of antimony–metal (Co, Mn, Ni, Fe, Ru) oxides synthesised as flat thin film electrodes by a solution-based method for water electrooxidation in 0.5 M H2SO4. Among the noble-metal-free catalysts, cobalt–antimony and manganese–antimony oxides demonstrate robust performance under ambient conditions, but slowly lose activity at elevated temperatures. A distinctive feature of the ruthenium–antimony system is its outstanding stability demonstrated herein through up to 8 day-long tests at 80 ± 1 °C, during which the reaction rate of 10 mA cm−2 was maintained at a stable overpotential of 0.34 ± 0.01 V. The S-number for this catalyst is on par with those for the high-performance benchmark Ir-based systems. Density functional theory analysis and detailed physical characterisation reveal that this high stability is supported by the enhanced hybridisation of the oxygen p- and metal d-orbitals induced by antimony and can arise from two distinct structural scenarios: either formation of an antimonate phase, or nanoscale intermixing of metal and antimony oxide crystallites.
Introduction
Water electrolysers based on a proton-exchange membrane (PEM) electrolyte are currently seen as the preferred technology for the production of green hydrogen from renewables.1,2 Double digit megawatt PEM plants are already available and even larger installations are planned.3 Recent breakthroughs in the design of bipolar plates and cathode catalysts for the PEM electrolysers now throw a spotlight on the membrane and anode electrocatalysts as the components requiring further significant cost-efficiency improvements.4 Catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) are particularly problematic in essentially all key aspects – price, availability, activity and stability. While iridium oxides provide perhaps the best combination of the activity and stability among known monometallic catalysts,1 there is not enough of this exceptionally rare metal currently available to us to bring the PEM water electrolysis to the TW scale.5 Moreover, both theoretical and extensive experimental studies reveal the unavoidable degradation of iridium-based OER catalysts even under ambient conditions,6–10 and especially in industrially relevant high-temperature tests,11 which is among the reasons for the comparatively high loadings of Ir in the anodes of PEM electrolysers.
Alternative OER catalysts based on more abundant and cheaper elements exist, in particular lead(IV)-based oxides developed through decades of research on the metal electrowinning anodes,12 though their specific activity is significantly lower than that of iridium systems.13 Among other non-noble metal options, the obvious candidates are oxides of manganese, cobalt, nickel and iron, which have been widely investigated as OER catalysts for the alkaline and near neutral conditions.14–20 Monometallic oxides of Mn and Co have also been examined for applications in acidic environment, and in contrast to Ni and Fe which immediately dissolve,21 relatively stable performance for several hours was demonstrated.22,23 However, eventual degradation and essentially complete loss of activity is unavoidable. A noble alternative to iridium is also known – ruthenium oxides are reported to be at least as active OER catalysts.21 While the amount of Ru in the Earth's crust is only slightly higher than that of Ir24 and it continues to rise in price, ruthenium is still more than five-fold cheaper,25 is easier to refine and is produced on an order of magnitude higher scale.26 However, rapid degradation of RuO2 anodes is again a major issue.27–29
Overall, it is highly unlikely that any monometallic oxide can provide an optimal combination of characteristics required to be a high-performance OER catalyst. In contrast, new materials with improved activity and/or stability emerge from the exploration of multielement oxide systems that sometimes combine the properties of individual compounds or exhibit distinct properties of their own. In the context of the design of catalysts for the low pH OER, successful approaches often emerge from combining a catalytically active oxide with the one that is highly stable under operating conditions to enable improved long-term operation with decreased losses in activity. This strategy has been broadly adopted for many years in the research on the electrowinning anode catalysts using PbO2 as a “matrix” that stabilises oxides of cobalt, manganese, silver and other metals.12,30,31 The same approach is now also applied in the design of anode catalysts for PEM water electrolysers. Improved electrochemical activity and durability during the OER in acidic solutions has been reported when catalytically active metals have been combined with the oxides of TaIV,32,33 SnIV,33,34 TiIV,35,36 PbIV,37–39 YIII,40 CrIV,41 and also SbV.42,43
Antimony oxides (SbOx) are of a particular interest in this context. The thermodynamic stability of SbOx under the low pH OER conditions,44 electrical conductivity,45–47 along with abundance and availability of Sb48 render these compounds a suitable structural component for the acid-stable water oxidation electrocatalysts. Antimony oxides have been used as stabilising interlayers and components in robust electrowinning anodes,49,50 and have recently been also introduced to studies of the OER catalysts for acidic water electrolysers. In particular, the research teams of Gregoire43,51 and Lewis42,52 both reported promising activity and improved stability in operation of antimonates of manganese and nickel. More recent work also described cobalt antimonate OER catalysts.53 Thus, the stability of transition metal oxides during oxidation of acidic water can be improved via combination with the highly promising SbOx matrix. In the case of Ru, this can also reduce the noble metal loading and thereby the cost. However, the catalysts of this type are currently underexplored and have only recently gained an increased attention.
In the search for highly active, and genuinely stable catalysts under practical operating conditions, the aim of the present work is the investigation of the electrocatalytic activity and stability of mixed metal–antimony oxides towards the oxidation of acidic water. Specific emphasis is put on the stability, which is rarely assessed rigorously in the current literature, viz. the experiments are commonly limited to several hours and ambient temperature conditions only. Moreover, even such mild conditions cause continuous degradation of many catalysts, which sometimes remains underestimated when the stability data are recorded and presented in the galvanostatic mode. Herein, the initial tests were also undertaken under ambient conditions to identify the most promising catalysts, which were further investigated at elevated temperatures to assess and demonstrate the genuine suitability of antimony–metal oxides for operation under the conditions relevant to the PEM electrolysers. In-depth electrochemical and physical characterisation of the catalysts before and after exhaustive electrocatalytic tests coupled to the density functional theory (DFT) calculations reveal new insights into the origins of the stability of metal–antimony oxide OER catalysts on the structural and atomistic levels.
Experimental
Materials and chemicals
Glass coated with a layer of fluorine-doped tin(IV) oxide (FTO) with a sheet resistivity of 7 Ω sq−1 was purchased from GreatCell Solar. Manganese(II) chloride (beads, 98%), antimony(III) chloride (ACS, ≥99.0%), cobalt(II) chloride (purum, anhydrous, ≥98.0%), ruthenium(III) chloride hydrate (ReagentPlus), iron(III) nitrate nonahydrate (≥99.95%), nickel(II) nitrate hexahydrate (99.999%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF; anhydrous, 99.8%) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO; ACS, ≥99.9%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Sulfuric acid (ACS reagent, 95.0–98.0%, Fe: ≤0.2 ppm, heavy metals (as Pb): ≤1 ppm) was sourced from Merck. Platinum plate was purchased from Sinsil International. Water used for all experimental procedures had a measured resistivity of 18.2 MΩ cm at ambient temperature (24 ± 2 °C) as achieved through the purification using either Elix Millipore or Sartorious Arium Comfort I Ultrapure Water systems.
Working electrode preparation
FTO substrates were cut into pieces (approximately 1 cm × 3 cm) and cleaned by ultrasonication with 2% Hellmanex surfactant solution, water, acetone and isopropanol for 15 min in every solvent and dried in an oven at 80 °C in air. The electroactive geometric area of FTO substrates (0.5 cm × 0.5 cm) was defined using Kapton polyimide tape. Catalyst precursor solutions were prepared by dissolving 0.1 mmol of the required salt(s) in either 2 mL of pure DMF (for nickel- and iron-containing materials) or 2 mL of DMF + DMSO (1:1 vol) mixture (for all other materials investigated herein) at 50 °C. Without allowing the precursor solution to cool down, 5 μL thereof were slowly drop-cast onto FTO substrate pre-heated at 50 °C while increasing the substrate temperature to 100 °C over ca. 2–3 min. The most reliable and stable performance of the [Ru + Sb]Oy samples was achieved when the catalyst was prepared from the solution with a greenish tinge as against solution with a yellow hue; to obtain the solution with a greenish tinge, the as taken precursor solution was sonicated gently for 10 minutes under ambient conditions. For individual oxides, the loading of either metal or antimony on the electrode surface was approximately 1 μmol cm−2; for mixed systems, the loadings were either 0.5 μmol cm−2 metal + 1 μmol cm−2 Sb ([M1 + Sb2]Oy), or 1 μmol cm−2 metal + 1 μmol cm−2 Sb ([M + Sb]Oy), or 1 μmol cm−2 metal + 0.5 μmol cm−2 Sb ([M2 + Sb1]Oy). Further, the Kapton tape was removed and the modified electrodes were placed in a muffle furnace filled with air, the temperature was ramped at the rate of 4° min−1 up to either 500 or 600 °C, kept at this temperature for 6 h, and then allowed to cool down to ambient temperature naturally inside the furnace. Afterwards, the Kapton tape mask was applied again.
Although the FTO substrate is unstable at 60 °C and low pH at positive potentials,37 a dense coating of its surface with antimony-based catalysts was found to provide a sufficiently stable protective layer. However, we note that special care should be taken to ensure complete coverage of the whole FTO area exposed to the electrolyte solution with a catalyst layer and a protective adhesive tape.
IrO2 reference material was synthesised following the reported procedure.54 The mean crystallite size estimated from the X-ray diffraction data (Fig. S1†) was 8 nm. For the electrode preparation, the dispersion of IrO2 (5 mg mL−1 in a 3:1 vol water–isopropanol mixture containing ca. 0.13 wt% Nafion; sonicated for 30 min) was drop-cast and dried under ambient conditions onto the FTO electrode to achieve a loading of 1 μmol cm−2 (0.22 mg cm−2).
Electrochemical experiments
Measurements were carried out in a two compartment Pyrex glass cell with a P4 ceramic frit using either a Biologic VMP or an Metrohm Autolab PGSTAT204 electrochemical workstation operated in a three-electrode mode. The volume of the electrolyte solution in each compartment was maintained constant at ca. 10 or 20 mL; during the long-term experiments water was periodically added to compensate for the unavoidable evaporation. Working electrodes were prepared as explained above and used for electrochemical tests within 12 h after the preparation. Platinum sheet (1.0 cm × 1.5 cm × 0.02 cm) was used as an auxiliary electrode; Ag|AgCl|1 M KCl (CH Instruments, Inc.) was used as a reference electrode, which was always positioned at the distance of few mm away from the center of the electroactive area of the working electrode. The potential of the Ag|AgCl|1 M KCl reference electrode was measured vs. a home-made reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE; platinised platinum wire immersed in the working electrolyte solution saturated with H2 and with 1 atm H2 above37) at required temperature. As a supporting electrolyte, 0.5 M H2SO4 was used; pH of the electrolyte solutions measured using a Thermo Fischer pH-meter at ambient temperature was 0.3. During all chronopotentiometric and chronoamperometric tests, the electrolyte solution was stirred at 600 rpm using a Teflon-lined magnetic bar stirrer. Experiments at elevated temperatures were performed by immersing the cell into a silicone oil bath, which temperature was adjusted to achieve the required value in the working electrolyte solution; the latter was continuously monitored using a conventional thermometer.
Electrochemical impedance spectra were recorded at the beginning and the end of every experiment at a potential where no significant faradaic processes occur to determine the uncompensated resistance (Ru) and to confirm that it did not change during tests. EIS data were additionally collected at 1.63 and 1.83 V vs. RHE before and after tests of [Mn + Sb]Oy (24 ± 2 °C) and [Ru + Sb]Oy (24 ± 2 °C and 80 ± 1 °C). Where specifically mentioned, the reported potentials were post-corrected for the ohmic drop by subtracting the IRu product from the experimental values. A typical testing procedure involved the following measurements: (i) cyclic voltammetry at 0.02 V s−1 until quasi-stabilisation (typically, 3 cycles), (ii) galvanostatic electrooxidation at 10 mA cm−2 for a required period of time, (iii) potentiostatic electrooxidation at 2.03 and 1.93 V vs. RHE for 0.5 h at each potential, and (iv) another set of cyclic voltammetric characterisation at 0.02 V s−1 until quasi-stabilisation. Data presented as average ± one standard deviation are based on tests of at least three independently synthesised samples.
Characterisation
Thickness of the catalyst layers was measured using Alicona 3-D surface profilometer.
Scanning electron microscopic (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopic (EDS) analysis of materials was undertaken using a FEG-SEM Zeiss Ultra 55 scanning electron microscope equipped with a Bruker QUANTAX X-ray detector. Samples for the analysis were cut into pieces of ca. 0.5 cm × 1 cm, attached to SEM stubs using a double-sided carbon sticky tape and sputter coated with nanoparticulate gold (for 10 s at a discharge power of 4 W); electrical contact was provided using a silver paste. SEM imaging was done at 5 kV and a probe current of 1 nA.
Transmission electron microscope (TEM) and scanning transmission electron microscope with EDS elemental mapping (STEM-EDS) studies were carried out using a Thermo Instruments/FEI Tecnai G2TF20 Super-Twin fitted with a Bruker X-Flash SDD windowless X-ray detector and Bruker Esprit 2.0 software. STEM images were recorded using Gatan bright field and Fischione Instruments high angle annular dark-field (HAADF) detectors. TEM images and selected area electron diffraction patterns were recorded with Gatan CCD detectors. Samples were prepared by ultrasonically dispersing the catalyst material into n-butanol and depositing a droplet of the suspension onto a holey-carbon coated copper grid. The microscope was operated at 200 kV and STEM-EDS mapping utilised an electron probe of approximately 1.5–2.0 nm, determining the X-ray elemental mapping image resolution. Thin regions of the sample were selected for elemental mapping in order to obtain as much spatial resolution as possible.
Inductive coupled plasma optical emission spectrometric (ICP-OES) analysis was performed using a Spectro Arcos ICP spectrometer. For calibration, multi-element Merck standard solutions diluted to 25 ppm with aqueous 2 wt% HNO3 were used, which was also a carrier solution. Samples for analysis were withdrawn from the electrochemical cell and diluted with 2 wt% HNO3.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies were performed on a PANanalytical Empyrean X-ray diffractometer equipped with a PIXcel1D detector using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å) generated at 45 kV and 45 mA at room temperature with a step size of 0.026° with 1 s per step. Samples for the XRD analysis were prepared following the procedures used for the working electrode fabrication but with the total material loading increased to ca. 8 μmol cm−2 and with a total sample area of 4 cm2 deposited onto pure glass (to avoid interference with the FTO reflections). Unfortunately, direct analysis of the actual electrodes used in the experiments produced no meaningful diffraction patterns with the instrument available herein. This also prevented the direct analysis of the electrodes after tests.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) analysis of manganese- and cobalt-based materials was performed using an AXIS Supra, Kratos Analytical instrument with a monochromatic Al Kα source (75 W). The analysis chamber was maintained at a pressure of not more than 2.0 × 10−9 mbar. Take-off angle was 90°. FTO electrodes (ca. 1 cm × 1 cm) modified with the catalysts were mounted onto a 2.36-inch diameter platen and immobilised using a duct tape in the way that there was no electrical contact between the sample and the instrument ground; the samples were charge neutralised before the analysis. Collected spectral data were energy corrected by adjusting the maximum of the C–C peak in C 1s spectra to 284.8 eV. For high resolution scans, pass energy was 20 eV and a resolution was 0.5 eV; for survey scans, a pass energy was 160 eV and a resolution was 2 eV.
Ruthenium-based catalysts were analysed using a Nexsa Surface Analysis System, ThermoFisher Scientific instrument with a monochromatic Al Kα source (1486.6 eV). X-ray spot size was set to 400 μm. The analysis chamber was maintained at a pressure of 1.0 × 10−8 or less. Due to the overlap of the Ru 3d and C 1s spectra and resulting ambiguity in the position of the C–C peak, these samples were mounted in the way providing a direct electrical contact between the catalyst film and the instrument ground using a copper tape. No post-correction to the measured binding energies was applied. Survey scans were recorded at a pass energy of 200 eV and a step size of 1 eV, while high resolution data were obtained at a pass energy of 50 eV and a step size of 0.1 eV. At least two different spots on each sample were probed to ensure the consistency of the results.
Fitting of the Sb 3d + O 1s spectra was undertaken in the following steps: (i) background fitting, (ii) fitting of the Sb 3d3/2 component that does not overlap with the O 1s peak, (iii) setting the integrated intensity and binding energy of Sb 3d5/2 peak by using Sb 3d3/2 fitted component as a guide and taking into account the following constrains: 3d3/2 to 3d5/2 integral ratio of 2:3, 3d3/2–3d5/2 doublet spin–orbit splitting of 9.4 eV,55,56 and as close as possible full widths at half of maxima for both components; (iv) attributing the remainder of intensity overlapped with the Sb 3d5/2 peak to the required number of oxygen peaks. Detailed fitting of the Ru 3d + C 1s spectra were undertaken for the simplest case where no significant contribution from Ru4+ was detected. The procedure was similar to that described above for the Sb 3d + O 1s data but using Ru 3d5/2 peak in step (ii) and Ru 3d3/2 + C 1s signals in step (iii). Approximate estimation of the ruthenium integral in the samples containing significant amount of Ru4+ was undertaken by fitting the Ru 3d3/2 component only and assuming that the intensity of the prominent peak with the maximum in the 284.8–285.0 eV range is dominated by the C–C C 1s signal.
X-ray absorption spectra (XAS) were collected on the multipole wiggler XAS beamline (12-ID) operating with an electron beam energy of 3.0 GeV and a beam current of 200 mA (maintained in top up mode), at the Australian Synchrotron. Manganese and cobalt K-edge data were collected in mode 1 using a Si(111) monochromator and focusing optics, ruthenium and antimony K-edge data were collected in mode 3 using a Si(311) monochromator. OKEN ionisation chambers filled with He (Mn) or N2 (all other elements) were used to measure the incident radiation and transmission data of both the sample and a metallic reference foil (where the sample was sufficiently transparent) to ensure consistent energy calibration.
All samples were presented to the beam as thin films deposited on FTO glass electrodes, with the exception of the standard materials Sb2O5, RuO2, Co3O4, CoOOH, MnO2, Mn2O3 and MnO which were prepared as pressed powders using standard methods.57 All data were collected on samples frozen in a 10 K liquid helium cryostat using a solid state 100-element Ge detector.
Raw data obtained from the beamline were converted using Sakura,58 processed using Athena59 (normalisation, background subtraction, energy calibration), PySpline60 (Fourier transform), and Artemis59 (data fitting). The edge energy (the first inflection point of the main absorption peak) of the collected spectra were calibrated to the first inflection points of the foils; the values used were those reported by Bearden and Burr:61,62 6539 eV (Mn), 7709 eV (Co), 22117.2 eV (Ru) and 30491.2 eV (Sb). The E0 values were set at 6555 eV (Mn), 7725 eV (Co), 22135 (Ru), and 30510 eV (Sb).
Computational methods
The spin-polarised first principles calculations were carried out using projector augmented wave method63 based on DFT64,65 as implemented in Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP).66,67 The exchange-correlation term was treated using gradient-corrected Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof functional (PBE).68 The cohesive energy, electronic structure, and magnetic properties of bulk and surfaces of transition metal-based materials were described using PBE augmented with an on-site Hubbard U term (PBE+U) on the d-electrons of Co and Ru ions.69 Recent study on Co3O4 (ref. 70) proposed the use of U = 5.9 eV, which is a weighted average of the U values for Co(II) (4.4 eV) and Co(III) (6.7 eV). This choice of U produces a local electronic structure that is in a fair agreement with the experimental results and was therefore employed in the present study. For Ru, U = 1.3 eV was employed. An 8 × 8 × 8 gamma centred k-mesh was used for the Brillouin-zone (BZ) sampling of bulk Co3O4 and RuO2, while sampling for CoSb2O6 was carried out using an 8 × 8 × 4 k-mesh. For surface calculations, a rectangular slab was chosen, for which a 2 × 4 × 1 k-mesh was used for the BZ integration. Plane-wave basis set with an energy cut off 520 eV was chosen for both bulk and surface calculations. The threshold criteria for self-consistent field convergence (total energy) was set to 10−7 and 10−5 eV for bulk and surface calculations, respectively, with Hellmann–Feynman force converging up to 0.05 eV Å−1 during geometry optimisations.
The electrochemical stability of electrocatalysts can be correlated with the dissolution of metal ions of oxides and described by the potentials at which the surface dissolution becomes favourable, viz. dissolution potentials (Ed).71 Herein, we calculated the difference in the dissolution potentials (ΔEd) of Ru in the antimony-doped RuO2 (Sb:RuO2) with respect to that in pure RuO2 as72  where μSb:RuO2 and μRuO2 are the chemical potentials of metal atoms in Sb:RuO2 and RuO2, respectively (μ are the energy differences of the systems with and without metal vacancy), e = 1.602 × 10−19 C is the electron charge, while n is the number of electrons transferred during the electrooxidation reaction leading to the dissolution. Corrosion of ruthenium(IV) in RuO2 is initiated by its oxidation to RuVIIIO4,73 and therefore n = 4 in this case. Positive values of ΔEd would indicate that the dissolution of metal ions in Sb:RuO2 should occur at more positive electrode potential than in RuO2, viz. increased stability towards electrocorrosion of the antimony-doped metal oxide.
The oxygen grand potential for the Ru–Sb–O system was calculated using the following expression:ϕ(T,P,NRu,NSb,μO) = G(T,P,NRu,NSb,μO) − μONOwhere, G is the Gibbs free energy of the system, T, P, Ni and μO are temperature, pressure, number of atoms of constituent element ‘i’ in the system and the oxygen chemical potential, respectively.
Gibbs free energy is defined as G = E + PV − TS, where E is the total intrinsic energy, V is the volume and S is entropy. Since the compounds involved in the analysis herein are solids, we assume Δ(PV) ≈ 0, and neglect this term in calculations. The entropy term (−TS) can be also considered negligible since another entropy contribution that is a part of μO is significantly higher.
Upon normalisation through the introduction of the atomic fractions of the constituent elements, i.e. by using  instead of Ni, the final expression for the grand potential becomes:  where μO was simulated at the temperature and oxygen partial pressure as those used during the synthesis of the Ru–Sb mixed oxide samples according to the procedures described in the literature.74
Results and discussion
All materials in this work were synthesised via annealing of precursor salts deposited from their solutions onto nominally flat glass supports covered with a thin conductive layer of F-doped SnO2 (FTO). While sputtering and similar advanced techniques provide a better control over the morphology and composition, our choice over the simpler drop-casting/annealing fabrication protocol was motivated by the ease of the future optimisation of this approach for the creation of high-surface area catalysts of applied significance. All electrochemical tests were undertaken in 0.5 M H2SO4 with measured pH of 0.3 (at ambient temperature). All galvanostatic data are presented below after manual post-correction for ohmic losses using the uncompensated (Ru) values measured by the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. However, the correction was generally not applied to voltammograms, where currents cannot be always confidently attributed to the stationary catalytic process only.
Electrocatalytic activity under ambient conditions
Individual metal oxides (MOx) considered herein, viz. RuOx, CoOx, MnOx, NiOx and FeOx, as well as SbOx, were not expected to be high-performance OER catalysts of independent interest, but their properties were briefly examined to understand relevant differences in the key performance parameters that are likely to affect those of the corresponding metal–antimony oxides. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopic (SEM) analysis of the as-prepared MOx and SbOx indicate that the materials were dominated by single oxide phases RuO2, Co3O4, Mn2O3, NiO, Fe2O3 and Sb2O4 (Fig. S1†) of variable morphology (Fig. S2†). Tests of MOx and SbOx as OER catalysts confirmed their either limited stability (RuO2, Co3O4, NiO and Fe2O3) or activity (Mn2O3 and Sb2O4) (Fig. S3–S5† and attached comments).
Further studies focused on mixed metal–antimony oxides, which are referred to as [M + Sb]Oy. These catalysts were synthesised with a 1:1 molar metal:antimony precursor ratio and the initial loading of each element of 1 μmol cm−2, unless stated otherwise. However, the actual composition during the OER is different due to the unavoidable corrosion in acidic solutions, which was quantified for the selected key materials (Fig. 1 and Table S1†) and is discussed later in the text. Initial loading of the catalysts, which defines the thickness of the deposited layers, did not affect the areal electrocatalytic activity of the electrodes to a significant extent (exemplified for [Mn + Sb]Oy and [Ru + Sb]Oy in Fig. S6†), indicating that the catalytically active surface area does not increase with the amount of material deposited. This suggests a close to flat morphology of the catalyst layers with low porosity and roughness, as corroborated by SEM (Fig. S7†). Hence, the reported performance is defined by the top surface of the electrodes with insignificant contribution from the bulk of the catalytic layers.
 Fig. 1  Loss of metals from catalysts (diamonds) during the OER in stirred 0.5 M H2SO4 and corresponding S-numbers (bars) under different conditions. (a) Tests of [Co + Sb]Oy (red), [Mn + Sb]Oy (blue) and [Ru + Sb]Oy (black) at 24 ± 2 °C over 25 h (24 h at 10 mA cm−2; 0.5 h at 2.03 V vs. RHE; 0.5 h at 1.93 V vs. RHE) and 80 ± 1 °C for 193 h (192 h at 10 mA cm−2; 0.5 h at 2.03 V vs. RHE; 0.5 h at 1.93 V vs. RHE) with the ICP-OES analysis undertaken upon completion of the measurements. (b and c) Galvanostatic (10 mA cm−2) tests of [Mn + Sb]Oy and [Ru + Sb]Oy at (b and c) 24 ± 2 and (c) 80 ± 1 °C with periodic withdrawal of samples for the ICP-OES analysis (5 mL) and addition of pure 0.5 M H2SO4 to keep the total electrolyte solution volume constant at 20 mL; S-numbers are calculated for periods between sampling. Antimony corrosion data are provided in Table S1.† 
First, we exclude Ni- and Fe-based systems from detailed analysis, as these materials rapidly degraded under the OER conditions (Fig. S8 and S9†). Attempts to improve their performance through variations in the metal:antimony ratios and annealing temperature were not successful. The effect of the latter parameter was also briefly considered for the much better performing Co–, Mn– and Ru–Sb oxide catalysts. The best results were always obtained at 600 °C (Fig. S10†), which is the highest value we could use due to thermal instability of FTO.75 Hence, all results discussed in the main text of the paper were obtained with the catalysts synthesised at 600 °C.
During galvanostatic OER tests, the cobalt-antimony oxide catalysts suffered an initial drop in the performance (Fig. 2b). The duration of this drop increased with an increase in the Co:Sb ratio used for the synthesis, while the best stabilised activity was demonstrated by the materials prepared with equimolar amounts of Co and Sb (Fig. S12†). This type of [Co + Sb]Oy demonstrated stable water oxidation at 10 mA cm−2 at a well-reproducible IRu-corrected overpotential of 0.769 ± 0.010 V (Fig. 2b and S13†). Subsequent potentiostatic tests at 2.03 and 1.93 V vs. RHE also did not reveal further significant losses in the catalytic activity (Fig. 2c). A plausible explanation of the rapid initial loss in the performance is provided in the following section, while at this stage we conclude that [Co + Sb]Oy exhibits a reasonable short-term stability during the OER at low pH and ambient temperature, yet its catalytic activity is not high.
 Fig. 2  Electrochemical characterisation of [Co + Sb]Oy (red), [Mn + Sb]Oy (blue), [Ru + Sb]Oy (black) and IrO2 (green) in stirred 0.5 M H2SO4 at 24 ± 2 °C: (a) cyclic voltammetry (scan rate 0.020 V s−1; third scans; not IRu corrected) recorded before (vivid traces) and after (pale traces) tests shown in panels (b) and (c) (arrows exemplify the direction of the voltammetric sweeps, which was qualitatively similar for all catalysts); (b) IRu-corrected chronopotentiograms at 10 mA cmgeom.−2; and (c) subsequently recorded chronoamperograms at a non-IRu-corrected potentials of 2.03 and 1.93 V vs. RHE. 
In contrast to the cobalt-based materials, combination of Mn with Sb produced a very significant improvement in the OER catalytic activity (Fig. 2a) with respect to monometallic MnOx (Fig. S3b†). Variations in the Mn to Sb precursor ratio revealed that the manganese-rich materials (Mn:Sb = 2:1) suffer slow deterioration in performance (Fig. S14†), which was also recently reported for Mn antimonate with a similar starting composition and under comparable conditions.51 Contrasting this behaviour, the activity of [Mn + Sb]Oy synthesised herein with 1:1 and 1:2 ratios was highly stable during 24 h galvanostatic tests (Fig. 2b), beyond the initial quick (best seen in Fig. S15†) and not very significant loss in the performance that is reflected in the differences between voltammograms (Fig. 2a) and electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) (Fig. S16 and Table S2†) recorded before and after 25 h durability tests. Between these two types of materials, the Sb-rich one was found to be less active, exhibiting an IRu-corrected overpotential (ηIR) at 10 mA cm−2 of ca. 0.70 V. The best-performing [Mn + Sb]Oy electrocatalysts with the initial equimolar Mn:Sb ratio stably maintain the OER current density of 10 mA cm−2 for at least 24 hours under ambient conditions at a highly reproducible ηIR of 0.677 ± 0.008 V (Fig. 2b and S15†).
Combination of ruthenium with the antimony oxide matrix produced catalysts that exhibit a stable cyclic voltammetric response typical of a robust and highly active OER catalyst up to 2.03 V vs. RHE, in contrast to unstable RuOx (Fig. 2a, S3e and S5e†). Moreover, galvanostatic tests at 10 mA cm−2 improved the performance of the [Ru + Sb]Oy material by ca. 0.04 V over the initial ca. 10–12 h of experiments, eventuating in a reproducible stabilised IRu-corrected overpotential of 0.39 ± 0.03 V (Fig. 2b and S17†). This positive change in the activity was also reflected in voltammetric (Fig. 2a) and EIS data (Fig. S18 and Table S3†), as expected. The stabilised activity of [Ru + Sb]Oy was found to be higher than that of benchmark IrO2 tested under similar conditions (Fig. 2).
Overall, analysis of the initial catalytic performance and 25 h stability at ambient temperature of the metal–antimony oxides revealed a synergistic effect of the combination of a catalytically active metal and acid-stable Sb for the [Mn + Sb]Oy system, where a significant improvement in the activity was achieved. The key advantage of combining Co and Ru with the SbOx matrix is in the substantial improvements in the stability, which is a highly favourable outcome given that the instability of the OER anode catalysts is among the most technologically pressing problems of the PEM water electrolysers.76
Characterisation of the mixed metal-oxide catalysts
To enable deeper understanding of the observed trends in the electrocatalytic performance of the investigated metal–antimony oxides, physical characterisation of the key materials was undertaken using the state-of-the-art techniques.

Corrosion during operation. 
SEM images of the [M + Sb]Oy electrodes taken before and after the OER tests revealed that the catalyst coatings underwent partial erosion due to the loss of material during the OER (Fig. S7†). The level of this loss was quantified for the key catalysts by ICP-OES (Fig. 1 and Table S1†), while the changes in the catalyst surface compositions were estimated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).
After 24 h galvanostatic followed by 1 h potentiostatic tests at ambient temperature, the levels of corrosion of metals and antimony from [Co + Sb]Oy and [Mn + Sb]Oy into the electrolyte solutions were comparable (Fig. 1a and Table S1†), notwithstanding a very distinct electrocatalytic behaviour (Fig. 2). XPS showed that concentrations of the metals at the surface of tested [Co + Sb]Oy and [Mn + Sb]Oy were also similar (Table 1). At the same time, voltammetric analysis, which provides the only reliable means of probing the catalytically active species, indicated that [Mn + Sb]Oy still exhibit detectable peaks associated with Mn redox transformations after the OER (Fig. S11b†), while operated [Co + Sb]Oy present a featureless response (Fig. S11a†). These observations might reflect the differences in the quasi-stabilised concentrations of the catalytically active metals in the top-most layers of the Co–Sb and Mn–Sb oxide systems. While the [Co + Sb]Oy surface loses a very significant part of its cobalt, [Mn + Sb]Oy is likely to retain a higher amount of manganese available for the OER catalysis.
Table 1 Relative surface concentrations of metals for catalystsa before and after OER tests in stirred 0.5 M H2SO4




Catalyst
As prepared
Tested at


24 ± 2 °Cb
80 ± 1 °Cc





a At% with respect to total metal + antimony amount quantified by XPS; data are presented as a mean ± one standard deviation for several measurements.
b 10 mA cm−2 for 24 h followed by 2.03 and 1.93 V vs. RHE for 0.5 h at each potential.
c 10 mA cm−2 for 10 h.





[Mn + Sb]Oy
23 ± 1
12 ± 2
n.a.


[Co + Sb]Oy
34 ± 2
9 ± 4
n.a.


[Ru + Sb]Oy
9 ± 5
n.a.
44 ± 5




In another test of [Mn + Sb]Oy at 10 mA cm−2 over 28 h, samples of the electrolyte solutions for the analysis of dissolved metal and antimony were periodically withdrawn and replaced with fresh 0.5 M H2SO4 to maintain the total volume of the electrolyte solution unchanged (Fig. 1b). The results of this experiment indicate that the most significant corrosion occurred during the initial 4–8 h of operation, followed by a slower and progressively decreasing rate of the metal loss. This deceleration is best seen from the corresponding S-numbers, viz. the amount of O2 evolved per the amount of the catalytically active metal dissolved,6 which increase throughout the test (Fig. 1b and Table S1†).
The lowest level of metal corrosion was observed for [Ru + Sb]Oy where the amount of lost ruthenium was approximately 1 at% over continuous 25 h test at ambient temperature, but the amount of antimony released into the electrolyte solution was significant (Fig. 1a and Table S1†). This was accompanied by a slight increase in the pre-catalytic voltammetric currents (Fig. S11e†). Most critically, longer-term tests of [Ru + Sb]Oy at elevated temperature of 80 ± 1 °C (vide infra) caused only slightly higher level of corrosion (Fig. 1a). Consistent with negligible loss of metal and significant loss of antimony measured by ICP-OES, XPS demonstrated that the surface of the catalyst became enriched with Ru after this longer-term high-temperature test (Table 1). Thus, [Ru + Sb]Oy suffers favourable corrosion of antimony that improves the electrocatalytic activity of the material towards the OER (Fig. 2a and b) through an enrichment of the surface layer with the catalytically active ruthenium species.
When considered together, the observed levels of corrosion (Fig. 1, Tables S1† and 1) and stable electrocatalytic performance of the manganese–, cobalt– and ruthenium–antimony oxides (except for the initial drop in the [Co + Sb]Oy performance) (Fig. 2) suggest that a quasi-equilibrium between the solid oxides and dissolved forms of Mn/Co/Ru and Sb is established within the system. Such an equilibrium between dissolution/redeposition of metal oxides likely sustains the observed stable electrocatalytic operation. This is circumstantially confirmed by slightly higher loss of ruthenium during the [Ru–Sb]Oy tests with continuous sampling at 23 ± 2 and 80 ± 1 °C (Fig. 1c), as compared to the experiments where the final electrolyte solution was analysed only (Fig. 1a). Apparently, periodic removal of dissolved ruthenium induces additional corrosion of the solid catalyst to reinstall a quasi-stabilised concentration of Ru species in the electrolyte solution. Thus, the examined OER catalysts might operate in a self-healing mode,37,38,77–79 with the Sb oxide matrix acting to facilitate the redeposition and suppress the dissolution of the active component.


Structural features. 
The structural features and the oxidation states of metals and antimony in the key [Co + Sb]Oy, [Mn + Sb]Oy and [Ru + Sb]Oy samples were probed by XAS (Fig. 3), XPS (Fig. S19–S21†) and XRD (Fig. 4). The ruthenium–antimony system was additionally investigated by TEM (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 3  XANES and FT EXAFS data at (a) Sb, (b) Mn, (c) Co and (d) Ru K-edges obtained for [Mn + Sb]Oy (blue), [Co + Sb]Oy (red) and [Ru + Sb]Oy (black) before (pale solid traces) and after (vivid solid traces) electrocatalytic tests in stirred 0.5 M H2SO4 compared to the defined reference materials (dashed and dotted teal traces). [Mn + Sb]Oy and [Co + Sb]Oy were tested for 24 h at 10 mA cm−2 and then for 1 h at 2.03 and 1.93 V vs. RHE at 24 ± 2 °C; [Ru + Sb]Oy was tested for 12 h at 10 mA cm−2 at 80 ± 1 °C. 
 Fig. 4  X-ray diffractograms of as-synthesised (a) [Mn + Sb]Oy, (b) [Co + Sb]Oy and (c) [Ru + Sb]Oy. Vertical lines show tabulated positions and relative intensities for (a–c) CoSb2O6 ICSD-108964, (a) Mn2O3 ICDD-00-041-1442 and Mn3O4 ICDD-01-075-1560, (b), Co3O4 ICSD-36256, (c) RuO2 ICSD-731469 and Sb2O5 PDF-01-071-0256. Mean crystallite sizes calculated using Scherrer equation were: (a) dXRD(MnSb2O6) ≈ 7 nm, dXRD(Mn2O3) ≈ 35 nm, dXRD(Mn3O4) ≈ 41 nm; (b) dXRD(CoSb2O6) ≈ 24 nm; dXRD(Co3O4) ≈ 43 nm; (c) dXRD(RuO2) ≈ 10 nm. Asterisks indicate diffraction peaks attributed to the antimonate phase. Triangles indicate peaks which assignment is not straightforward. 
 Fig. 5  TEM and STEM-EDS characterisation of [Ru + Sb]Oy before and after OER tests in stirred 0.5 M H2SO4 at 10 mA cm−2 for 24 h at 80 ± 1 °C: (a and b) medium magnification STEM-EDS mapping of the (a) as-prepared and (b) tested catalyst; (c and d) TEM micrographs of the (c) as-prepared and (d) tested catalyst; (e) selected area electron diffraction taken from a region containing large amounts of both Ru and Sb for the tested catalyst. (f) STEM-EDS mapping analysis of the extended area of the tested catalyst around the region shown in panel (d). 
Fitting of the Sb 3d + O 1s spectra and comparisons to the literature55,56 confirmed that antimony adopts a dominant oxidation state of 5+ in all catalysts after the OER tests, as well as in most of the untreated samples (Fig. S19†). The Sb K-edge XANES (X-ray absorption near edge structure) recorded for Mn–, Co– and Ru–Sb mixed oxides reproduced well the data reported elsewhere for manganese antimonates,51 and are again consistent with the 5+ state of antimony (Fig. 3a and S22†). A slight shift to higher energy was noted in the Sb K-edge after the OER tests (Fig. S22†). Sb K-edge EXAFS (extended X-ray absorption fine structure) of the investigated metal–antimony oxides are similar to each other and to Sb2O5 in that none of the datasets exhibit any notable second coordination sphere peaks in the Fourier transform (FT) of EXAFS beyond the first coordination sphere apparent distances (R′) of 2 Å (Fig. 3a and S23†). This would be consistent with Sb being present as a part of a highly disordered phase or might be the consequence of how the distances in the structure cancel each other out (Fig. S23 and Table S4†).
The shape and position of the Mn 2p5/2 peaks for fresh [Mn + Sb]Oy are similar to those for the oxide/oxyhydroxide Mn3+ compounds,80 and show only a slight shift towards higher binding energies after tests (Fig. S20a†). Initial Mn K-edge XANES for [Mn + Sb]Oy lies between the spectra of the Mn2+ and Mn3+ standards, while the OER test shifts the spectrum to higher energies closer to Mn2O3 (Fig. 3b, S24 and S25†).
The Co K-edge XANES of as-prepared [Co + Sb]Oy also appears between the data for the Co2+ and Co3+ standard compounds, with some features resembling the spectrum of Co3O4 (Fig. 3c). The Co K pre-edge intensity decreases after the OER test, which would be consistent with the loss of a phase with a tetrahedral Co2+ site like Co3O4 (Fig. S26a, b and S27†). This is also supported by changes in the overall XANES profile (Fig. 3c). The major Co oxidation state on the surface can be ascribed to 3+ based on the XPS analysis (Fig. S20b†) and comparisons to the literature.80
Thus, XPS and XANES collectively suggest that the dominant oxidation states of manganese and cobalt in as-prepared metal–antimony mixed oxides are between 2+ and 3+. Although Mn and Co at the catalytic surfaces likely adopt higher oxidation states during the OER, those cannot be detected by ex situ analysis due to their high oxidative reactivity and immediate conversion into reduced states that are thermodynamically favourable under ambient conditions.81–83
X-ray diffractograms of [Co + Sb]Oy and [Mn + Sb]Oy exhibited a set of peaks typical of a tetragonal trirutile phase with major 110, 013 and 123 reflections at ca. 27, 35 and 53°, respectively (Fig. 4a and b). Qualitatively similar XRD patterns were obtained for the mixed nickel–antimony and iron–antimony samples (Fig. S28†). These data agree with the recent studies,42,51,53 and formally suggest that the metal–antimony phase in the investigated materials is structurally similar to CoSb2O6. According to XRD, both [Co + Sb]Oy and [Mn + Sb]Oy also contained individual metal oxide admixtures, but their mean crystallite sizes were notably higher than those for the antimonate phase in [Mn + Sb]Oy (Fig. 4a and b). This suggests that the individual oxides are present as larger agglomerates and therefore make lower contribution to the electrocatalytically active surface area than the mixed manganese–antimony oxide phase.
Well-defined FT EXAFS beyond the first coordination sphere were observed at the metal K-edges for [Co + Sb]Oy and [Mn + Sb]Oy (Fig. 3b and c). This indicates that the metals do not simply dope the antimony oxide lattice, as was observed previously for the conceptually similar Co–Fe–Pb oxide OER catalyst,37 and more complicated structural scenarios apply. To describe the metal–antimony phases, EXAFS simulations based on the crystal structures of MnSb2O6 (ref. 84) and CoSb2O6 (ref.85) were undertaken.
As expected from XRD (Fig. 4a), MnSb2O6 alone could not describe the Mn K-edge EXAFS for as-prepared [Mn + Sb]Oy (Table S5†) due to the presence of a manganese oxide compound, most likely Mn2O3, which produces a peak at ca. 2.5–2.6 Å in FT EXAFS (Fig. 3b and S24f†). After the OER, the contribution of the Mn2O3 pattern to the EXAFS is reduced (Fig. 3b and S24c, Table S5†), which indicates partial loss of Mn2O3 and corroborates the corrosion data (Fig. 1 and Table S1†). Given that this loss does not induce any notable deterioration in the catalytic activity (Fig. 2b), we conclude that individual Mn oxides do not make a significant contribution to the OER performance of [Mn + Sb]Oy. This is consistent with low catalytic activity of MnOx under examined conditions (Fig. S4†).
XAS data recorded at the Co K-edge for [Co + Sb]Oy confirmed the XRD observations of the presence of Co3O4 in the as-prepared material, which vanished after the OER tests (Fig. 3c and S26c, e†). The XAS data of the tested catalyst are well fit with the simulations based on the CoSb2O6 structure85 (Fig. S26c, f and Table S6†). On this basis, we interpret the initial rapid drop in the performance of [Co + Sb]Oy (Fig. 2b) by the dissolution of the catalytically more active Co3O4 phase from the material surface, while the quasi-stabilised performance achieved after ca. 20 h is ascribed to the true catalytic activity of cobalt antimonate.
The most challenging to interpret set of physical characterisation data among examined systems was obtained for the top-performing [Ru + Sb]Oy catalyst. Analysis of the Ru 3d XP spectra is complicated by a direct overlap with C 1s signals, but it was still possible to conclude that the initial mixed Ru3+ + Ru4+ state of the surface undergoes oxidation during the OER to become dominated by Ru4+ (Fig. S20c and S21c†).86 In turn, Ru K-edge XANES recorded for fresh and tested [Ru + Sb]Oy were in a perfect agreement with the Ru4+ state, closely resembling the spectra of the RuO2 reference material (Fig. 3d).
Interpretation of the XRD data for [Ru + Sb]Oy was not straightforward as the diffraction pattern of rutile RuO2 is similar to that of the anticipated trirutile antimonate phase. Nevertheless, the major set of broad diffraction peaks at 28, 35, 40, 54 and 69.5° matches well the positions and relative intensities of the tabulated pattern of ruthenium(IV) oxide (grey bars in Fig. 4c). This interpretation suggests that the Sb component(s) give rise to a set of broad low-intensity signals at ca. 25, 30.5 and 48° that can be attributed to highly disordered Sb2O5, along with two peaks at ca. 38.5 and 44° (marked with triangles Fig. 4c). One might suggest that these two reflections can be attributed to an antimonate phase which other diffraction peaks are presumably merged with the signals of RuO2. However, analysis of the highly resolved up to R’ = 8 Å Ru K-edge EXAFS collected for [Ru + Sb]Oy does not support this hypothesis (Fig. 3d and S29†). Fitting of these data with simulations based on a RuSb2O6-type lattice did not produce any satisfactory level of agreement (Fig. S29 and Table S7†). Clearly resolved FT EXAFS peaks at high R′ of 3.1, 3.9, 5.1, 6.8 Å present in the catalyst before and after the OER tests are associated with groups of Ru–Ru distances at 5.0, 6.8 and 7.2 Å, and cannot be explained by the RuSb2O6 phase. In fact, the EXAFS and XANES of [Ru + Sb]Oy are almost perfectly consistent with the RuO2 structure, although with a slightly increased level of disorder (Fig. 3d and S29, Table S7†), which corroborates the major XRD signals (Fig. 4c).
Taken together, XAS and XRD suggest that the ruthenium structure in [Ru + Sb]Oy is very close to the RuO2 lattice, which opens a question on the origin of the significantly improved electrocatalytic performance of the mixed oxide system as opposed to RuO2 (Fig. 2 and S5a†). To shed light on this, detailed TEM investigations with elemental mapping were undertaken.
At low to moderate magnification, STEM-EDS analysis of [Ru + Sb]Oy showed ruthenium and antimony to be intimately mixed, both before and after the OER tests (Fig. 5a, b and S30†). Conventional TEM imaging demonstrated that the catalyst represents a very fine assembly of nanocrystals, typically less than 10 nm in size, embedded into another material that appears significantly more structurally disordered (Fig. 5c, d and S31†). Higher magnification images revealed clear lattice fringes of ca. 3 Å for the crystalline nanoparticles, which can be attributed to RuO2 with a relatively high degree of crystalline order (Fig. 5c and d).
This is also illustrated in the selected area electron diffraction pattern, which can be indexed as essentially pure RuO2 (Fig. 5e) notwithstanding it was recorded from a large fragment containing both ruthenium and antimony. The material closely neighbouring RuO2 nanocrystals exhibited larger lattice fringes of ca. 4–5 Å (Fig. 5d), which cannot be ascribed to ruthenium oxide and therefore are attributed to antimony oxides. STEM-EDS mapping of this area confirmed the partial segregation of ruthenium and antimony at the nanoscale (Fig. 5f), but we emphasise that the two elements were still found to be mixed very finely, even when analysed at up to 1.3M× magnification (Fig. 5f and S32†).
Other antimony rich areas were generally devoid of clear lattice fringes (Fig. 5c and d), and although this does not definitely rule out crystallinity, it tends to support a hypothesis that Sb oxides in [Ru + Sb]Oy exhibit a very high level of disorder. We also note that the Sb phase appears to coat the edges and interstices of the RuO2 nanocrystals in the catalysts after the OER test (Fig. 5f), suggesting that antimony has been lost from a previously predominating Sb-based coating of Ru oxide particles rather than a simple aggregation of two phases. This supports the corrosion data (Fig. 1 and Table S1†).
Overall, the physical characterisation data reveal several fundamental differences in the investigated catalysts. As-prepared [Mn + Sb]Oy and [Co + Sb]Oy contain a mixture of individual metal oxides, which majorly dissolve during the OER tests, with a metal antimonate oxide phase. The latter is most likely CoSb2O6 in [Co + Sb]Oy, while the structure of the manganese–antimony oxide exhibits some distinctions from the published features of the antimonate phase and a significant level of disorder. At the same time, no evidence for the formation of a ruthenium antimonate was obtained. Instead, the [Ru + Sb]Oy catalyst contains highly-dispersed RuO2 crystallites embedded into and decorated with disordered antimony oxides. One might hypothesise that an interaction and intermixing between ruthenium and antimony oxides might still occur, but at the topmost surface layers of RuO2, especially at the abundant intergrain boundaries visualised by TEM (Fig. 5c and d), rather than in the bulk phase probed by XAS and XRD. To assess this possibility and further assist in establishing a plausible explanation of the improved electrocatalytic performance of mixed metal–antimony oxides, theoretical analysis was undertaken.

Theoretical insights into the improved stability of the Co–Sb and Ru–Sb oxides
Experimental evidence on the stabilisation against corrosion of the oxides of transition metals like Co, Mn, Ni and Ru, through their combination with the oxides that are thermodynamically stable under the OER conditions exists,12,30–43 including the new results reported in the present work. However, there is a lack of understanding behind this stabilising effect, which we aimed to address through the theoretical analysis of the Co–Sb and Ru–Sb mixed oxides, and also of the Fe–Sb oxide material that does not exhibit high stability. Extending the analysis to the Mn–Sb combination could not be realised due to a well-documented complex ground state magnetic structure of Mn2O3, which exhibits noncollinear magnetic ordering and introduces significant uncertainties to the modelling of the electronic structure.87,88
Assessment of the electrochemical and structural stability was undertaken through the computation of cohesive energies of the materials of interest and also differences in the dissolution potentials (ΔEd)71,74,89 for the Ru–Sb system. Both approaches have been previously validated through comparisons of the theoretical predictions and experimental electrochemical stability data for a range of systems, in particular metal oxides.90–92
For the Co–Sb combination, the simulated compositional phase diagram (Fig. 6a) indicates a broad chemical potentials space that favours the formation of CoSb2O6 (structure shown in Fig. S33†) as opposed to individual oxides. Experimental data suggest that this phase dominates the [Co + Sb]Oy catalyst under the OER conditions and was therefore used for further theoretical analysis. As a point of reference in the calculations, Co3O4 – the dominating phase of the CoOx control – was considered. Cohesive energies for Co3O4 and CoSb2O6 were simulated as −12.8 eV and −15.4 eV per formula unit, respectively, which indicates improved overall structural and electrochemical stability93 of the antimonate as compared to the monometallic oxide. The improvement in the cohesive energies is likely to be partially associated with the higher bond energy for Sb–O (434 kJ mol−1) as compared to Co–O (397 kJ mol−1),94 although one might note that this difference does not appear sufficient to explain the calculated cohesive energies. Therefore, we hypothesised if the presence of Sb in the structure might strengthen the Co–O bond through changes in the electronic structure.
 Fig. 6  (a) Simulated compositional phase diagram of CoSb2O6 against individual oxides. Shaded area corresponds to the stable region of CoSb2O6, where the colour scale shows the allowed chemical potentials for oxygen; coloured lines and the corresponding spaces opposite to the shaded region present the stable regions of the identified individual oxides. (b) Normalised oxygen grand potential (ϕnorm) vs. ruthenium atomic fraction, xRu = n/(n + m), calculated for [Run + Sbm]Oy at T = 600 °C and 0.21 atm O2 partial pressure. Sb:RuO2 – Sb-doped RuO2; Ru:SbO2, Ru:Sb2O3 and Ru:Sb2O5 – Ru-doped antimony oxides. Calculated data are shown as symbols; lines are guides to an eye. 
The above supposition was assessed through the analysis of the atom/orbital projected partial density of states (PDOS), calculated bond lengths and Bader charges. The PDOS for Co3O4 demonstrates hybridisation of the oxygen p-orbitals with d-orbitals of cobalt in tetrahedral sites but not in octahedral ones; this contrasts the CoSb2O6 case where only one type of Co sites is present and is strongly hybridised with O 2p (Fig. S34a and b†). It is also noted that the latter interact much stronger with Co 3d orbitals rather than with Sb 5p.
Since the electrocorrosion of materials is an interfacial phenomenon, the above findings were also corroborated by the analysis of the characteristic catalyst surfaces, viz. (110) oriented facet for CoSb2O6 and (110)-A terminated surface for Co3O4 (ref. 70, 95 and 96) (Fig. S33c and d†). Comparisons of the PDOS of bulk and (110) surfaces suggest that the slab geometry produces surface states just above the valence band due to the undercoordinated Co3+, Co2+ and O2− ions, which renders these surfaces metallic. Similar to the bulk, 2p orbitals of the surface O in CoSb2O6 interact stronger with Co 3d as compared to Sb 5p orbitals. Enhanced O-p–Co-d interaction in CoSb2O6 is additionally verified by the calculated PDOS of sub d-orbitals of Co2+ in Co3O4 and CoSb2O6 (Fig. S35†).
The features of the PDOS discussed above can be expected to make the overall cohesive energy of CoSb2O6 more negative than that of Co3O4 and hence enhance the driving force required for the electrocorrosion of cobalt. Furthermore, the simulated Co–O and Sb–O bond lengths in CoSb2O6 were lower and higher than the corresponding expected values based on the combined ionic radii, respectively (2.08 Å simulated vs. 2.105 Å expected for high spin Co–O; 2.02 Å calculated vs. 1.98 Å expected for Sb–O). This internal compressive strain of the Co–O bonds can be associated with the higher electronegativity of Sb as compared to Co. Calculated Bader charges on Co2+ in Co3O4 and CoSb2O6 were +1.31e and +1.36e, respectively, which further supports the stronger Co–O bond in the antimonate as compared to the individual metal oxide.
Further, the highly unstable iron–antimony system was analysed following the same approach as for [Co + Sb]Oy. Simulated compositional phase diagram of the Fe–Sb–O system oxide against Fe2O3 and other individual oxides reveals a space region corresponding to the thermodynamically favoured formation of FeSb2O6 (Fig. S36†). Hence, this phase and corresponding parameters from the Materials Project database97 were used for further analysis. Simulated cohesive energy for Fe2O3 and FeSb2O6 were −15.18 and −13.91 eV per formula unit, respectively, suggesting that the bonding strength between Fe, Sb and O in the metal–antimony oxide system is lower than that between Fe and O in pure iron(III) oxide. This finding was corroborated by the Bader charge analysis, which produced values of the iron ion charge in Fe2O3 and FeSb2O6 of +1.72e and +1.44e-, respectively. This difference indicates weaker charge transfer from Fe to O for the iron antimonate and therefore reduced bond strength between Fe and O, as compared to those in Fe2O3. Comparisons of the partial density of states plots also suggest weaker orbital overlap between Fe 3d and O 2p for the iron–antimony system as compared to the individual metal oxide (Fig. S37†). This is also evident from the higher Fe–O bond length in FeSb2O6 compared to Fe2O3 (1.96 Å and 2.12 Å simulated vs. 1.99 Å and 2.16 Å expected spin up and spin down channel, respectively, for Fe2O3; 1.99 Å and 2.26 Å simulated vs. 1.91 and 2.01 Å calculated spin up and spin down channel, respectively, for FeSb2O6; 2.02 Å calculated vs. 1.98 Å expected for Sb–O). Overall, the theoretical analysis suggests no significant improvements in the stability of FeSb2O6 as compared to Fe2O3, which is perfectly consistent with the experimental observations (Fig. S9a†).
Finally, the ruthenium–antimony system was examined. As discussed above, no robust experimental evidence for the formation of a stabile ruthenium–antimony oxide phase was obtained. In line with these experimental observations, total energies calculated by DFT simulations indicated that hypothesised RuSb2O6 phase is unstable with respect to the individual oxides (Table S8†). This prompted us to undertake a simulation of a grand potential phase diagram of the Ru–Sb system (Fig. 6b), which enables prediction of the thermodynamically stable compositions that can be formed under relevant synthesis conditions,98i.e. at T = 600 °C and 0.2 atm O2 partial pressure in the present work.
Oxygen grand potentials were calculated for various [Run + Sbm]Oy structures and compositions as a function of the metal atomic fraction, xRu = n/(n + m). In addition to a broad range of stoichiometric compounds, substitutional doping of Sb into RuO2 (Sb:RuO2) and Ru in antimony oxides was considered. Among these different possibilities, the lowest ϕnorm at xRu = 0.5, i.e. the highest stability under the conditions employed during the synthesis of [Ru + Sb]Oy, was calculated for the ruthenium(IV) oxide doped with antimony. In fact, Sb:RuO2 are theoretically predicted to be more stable than the parent metal oxide within the xRu range examined (Fig. 6b). At the same time, the experimental XAS data provide a compelling evidence for the dominant state of ruthenium in [Ru + Sb]Oy being very similar to that in RuO2 (vide supra). On this basis, further analysis focused on RuO2 at low levels of the Sb doping.
Differences in the electronic properties of the RuO2 reference and Sb:RuO2 were investigated based on the computations with a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell of tetragonal 6-atom RuO2 unit cell containing 16 Ru and 32 O atoms. First, through the examination of the calculated spin polarised total density of states, we note that Sb substitution into RuO2 maintains its metallic character and even further improves the electrical conductivity as concluded from the shift of the conduction band (Fig. S38†), which is a positive finding from the perspective of the electrocatalytic activity. Further, and most importantly, improved stability of Ru4+ within the Sb:RuO2 materials was confirmed by the positive difference in the dissolution potential71,74,89 ΔEd = 0.08 V and by the negative increase in the cohesive energies when compared to undoped RuO2. Specifically, the cohesive energy changes from −3.28 (RuO2) to −3.51 (Sb0.0625:Ru0.9375O2) and −3.62 eV per unit formula (Sb0.187:Ru0.813O2). This favourable change is again explained by the enhanced strength of the Ru–O bond, which is indicated by the stronger overlap of O 2p and Ru 3d orbitals in the PDOS (Fig. S39†) as well as by the higher Bader charge on ruthenium in Sb0.0625:Ru0.9375O2 (+1.76e) as compared to RuO2 (+1.70e). Enhanced charge donation from ruthenium to neighbouring oxygen atoms is also supported by the differences in the partial density of states of Ru 4d sub-orbitals (Fig. S40†).
In summary, the computational analysis suggests that the improvement in the stability of Ru and Co oxides upon combination with Sb oxide is majorly stemming from the electronic effects of antimony that strengthen the metal–oxygen bonds. The presence of Sb has crucial effect on the strength of the Co–O and Ru–O bonds, which in turn alters a thermal barrier for the release of the metal ion from the catalyst into the solution. However, these effect do not apply to the iron–antimony oxide system.
Aggregate of the experimental and computational data for the Ru–Sb system suggest that, although the well-defined ruthenium antimonate phase is unlikely to be formed, doping of ruthenium(IV) oxide with antimony might be possible. Considering the experimental data that indicate the formation of the slightly distorted RuO2 phase (Fig. 3d, 4c and 5) and the very significant level of corrosion of antimony but not of ruthenium during the OER tests of [Ru + Sb]Oy (Fig. 1, Tables S1† and 1), we hypothesise that Sb doping might be majorly confined to the surface of the RuO2 crystallites. The formation of this protective layer is likely to be sufficient to provide the enhanced stability of the material against the electrocorrosion highlighted above (Fig. 2) and as even more strongly emphasised through the durability tests at elevated temperature that are discussed below.
Longer-term operation at elevated temperature
A final set of tests was undertaken to assess the ability of the two most promising catalysts investigated herein, viz. [Mn + Sb]Oy and [Ru + Sb]Oy, to operate for extended periods of time and at elevated temperatures. Voltammetric analysis confirmed the expected positive effect of increasing the temperature on the kinetics of the OER catalysed by both Mn- and Ru-based materials (Fig. 7a and b). The apparent activation energy of the OER at an IR-corrected overpotential of 0.6 V approximated from the backward potentiodynamic scans for [Mn + Sb]Oy is ca. 20 ± 10 kJ mol−1 (Fig. S41†). This is notably lower than values reported for other OER catalysts operating at low pH,99,100 and probably reflects the increasing instability of this material at elevated temperatures as discussed below.
 Fig. 7  Performance of the [Ru + Sb]Oy (black) and [Mn + Sb]Oy (blue) catalysts during the OER in stirred 0.5 M H2SO4 at 80 ± 1 °C. (a) Cyclic voltammetry (scan rate 0.02 V s−1; not IRu-corrected; third scans) before (vivid traces) and after (pale trace; shown for [Ru + Sb]Oy only) long-term tests shown in panel (b); for comparison, dashed curves show initial voltammetry collected at 24 ± 2 °C. (b) IRu-corrected chronopotentiograms (10 mA cmgeom.−2). 
While no significant deterioration of the [Mn + Sb]Oy performance was observed in the voltammetric regime (Fig. S42a†), short-term 24 h galvanostatic tests revealed that this catalyst suffers detectable losses in activity at 60 °C (Fig. S42b and c†). During these experiments, the overpotential required to maintain the OER rate of 10 mA cm−2 increased almost linearly, meaning an exponential decrease in the activity of the catalyst, at an average rate of ca. 0.001–0.002 V h−1. When longer-term testing was undertaken at 80 ± 1 °C, degradation at essentially the same rate was observed over the initial ca. 100 h of measurements (Fig. 7b). Afterwards, an abrupt loss of the performance, reflected by an increase of the potential to ca. 2.1 V vs. RHE occurred, which was then maintained for at least another 24 h. The latter observation suggests that the change in the OER activity observed in these experiments is unlikely to be associated with the degradation of the FTO support, which would result in a complete loss of any ability of the electrode to sustain water electrooxidation due to the disruption of the electrical contact.
The behaviour of [Ru + Sb]Oy at 80 ± 1 °C was remarkably different to that of [Mn + Sb]Oy (Fig. 7a and S43†). First, the ruthenium-based catalyst demonstrated robust operation for 192 h of chronopotentiometry at 10 mA cm−2 and additional 1 h of chronoamperometry at 2.03 and 1.93 V vs. RHE (Fig. 7b and S43b, c†). Apart from the self-healing Co–Fe–Pb system,37 we are not aware of any other recently reported OER electrocatalyst capable of similarly stable operation under such harsh conditions. Second, comparisons of the cyclic voltammetric data recorded before and after long-term tests reveal a notable improvement in the performance of the catalyst (Fig. 7a). This positive change in activity was also observed in shorter-term tests at both ambient (Fig. 2a and S18†) and elevated temperature (Fig. S43b and S44†) and is likely associated with a significant increase of the amount of ruthenium on the surface due to the loss of the catalytically inactive SbOx (Table 1) but not RuO2 (Fig. 1 and Table S1†). The stabilised catalytic activity for the OER of an essentially flat [Ru + Sb]Oy electrode at 80 ± 1 °C in 0.5 M H2SO4 corresponds to the reaction rate of 10 mA cmgeom.−2 at an IRu-corrected overpotential of 0.34 ± 0.01 V (1.52 ± 0.01 V vs. RHE).
To further emphasise the significance of the above results, we note that publications on low-pH water oxidation catalysts ubiquitously report chronopotentiometric profiles that demonstrate an increase in the potential with time, which might be small on the timescale of the measurements reported but persistent. This is in particular exemplified in Fig. 2b for the benchmark nanoparticulate IrO2 catalyst. The [Ru + Sb]Oy material described herein contrasts this by improving in performance during the OER tests at ambient (Fig. 2b) and even elevated (Fig. 7b) temperatures. When evaluated in terms of the S-number metrics, [Ru + Sb]Oy is on par with the benchmark Ir-based catalysts and notably outperforms recently investigated Ru-based materials also tested as flat thin films at the same or comparable OER current densities at ambient temperature (cf. data in Fig. 1 to those reported in ref. 6 and 101 as well as in Table S10†). Particularly remarkable is the very high S-number for [Ru + Sb]Oy of ca. 6 × 105 recorded over the longer-term test at 80 ± 1 °C. It is also noted that the S-numbers for the [Mn + Sb]Oy catalyst are of the same order of magnitude as those reported for the ruthenium-based pyrochlore catalysts elsewhere (ref. 101 and Table S10†). The major contributor to the initially low S-numbers < 1 × 104 for [Mn + Sb]Oy are the monometallic metal oxide admixtures that are progressively dissolved into the electrolyte solution (Fig. 3b and 4a), while the eventually achieved robust performance with S-number exceeding 5 × 104 more closely reflects the stability of the mixed manganese-antinomy oxide catalytic system. Furthermore, considering recent reports on the significantly lower stability (lower S-numbers) of the OER catalysts in liquid acidic electrolyte solutions as compared to the conditions of a PEM water electrolyser anode,102,103 it can be suggested that the S-numbers reported herein are indicative of the sufficient durability of the manganese–antimony and especially ruthenium–antimony oxide catalysts for applications in real devices.6
Conclusions
The combination of transition metal and antimony oxides in a pursuit of the creation of robust and active catalysts for the electrooxidation of water under acidic conditions was found to produce very different outcomes depending on the chemical nature of the metal employed. While nickel and iron did not yield efficient catalytic systems, mixing Sb with cobalt, manganese and ruthenium resulted in materials with quite distinct structural features, but all demonstrating one very significant and critically important advantage with respect to the individual metal oxides – significantly improved operational stability. The origin of this positive effect can now be explained by the antimony-induced increase in the metal–oxygen bond strength, which substantially suppresses the electrooxidative dissolution, as revealed through the computational studies. The theoretical treatment implemented herein might be considered for future high-throughput screening studies for the identification of robust electrocatalysts for the OER.
Another set of key findings of the present work stems from the exhaustive durability tests of the materials at different temperatures. While demonstration of apparently stable operation of the oxygen evolution reaction catalysts at low pH and ambient temperature on a short timescale does not present a very significant research challenge anymore, longer term operation at elevated temperatures of practical interest is still hard to achieve. Herein, the instability of the promising manganese–antimony oxide catalysts at 60–80 °C was revealed to indicate that this system might require further improvements if it is intended to be designed for operation in PEM water electrolysers. Contrasting this behaviour, mixed ruthenium–antimony oxides were found to be stable in operation at 80 ± 1 °C for at least one week, accompanied by negligible loss of the catalytically active metal into the solution. The lack of any recent reports on a similar performance during the electrooxidation of acidic water under comparably harsh conditions allows us to consider this result as outstanding and highly promising in the context of the development of the anode catalysts for PEM water electrolysers.
Finally, the aggregate of results presented herein suggests that there might be two different mechanisms for stabilising electrocatalytically active species like cobalt, manganese, or ruthenium oxides via the combination with an acid-stable “matrix” during water oxidation. The first is the formation of metal-matrix compounds either through doping or via transformation into new phases like antimonates. The second, less obvious and highlighted in detail herein for the ruthenium–antimony oxide system, is based on the intimate mixing of the discrete phases at the nanoscale. This mechanism might form a basis for a new promising strategy towards the design of electrocatalytic systems that exhibit outstanding stability while maintaining the high activity of the individual metal oxide.
Author contributions
SL designed and undertook experiments, analysed and interpreted data, and co-wrote the manuscript. MC designed and undertook experiments, analysed and interpreted data, and co-wrote the manuscript. A. Yadav undertook computational studies and co-wrote the manuscript. BK recorded, analysed and interpreted XAS data. JK undertook computational studies. TW collected and interpreted the TEM data. PC collected and analysed XPS data. BJ assisted with the collection and interpretation of XAS data. AT contributed to the data interpretation and manuscript preparation. DRM contributed to the data interpretation and manuscript preparation. RKH supervised and undertook XAS analysis, interpreted data and co-wrote the manuscript. AA designed and supervised computational studies. A. Yella co-supervised the project and interpreted data. ANS devised and co-supervised the overall project, analysed and interpreted data, and co-wrote the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Different parts of this work were undertaken at the XAS beamline of the Australian Synchrotron, Monash Centre for Electron Microscopy (partially funded through ARC LIEF project LE 110100223), Monash X-ray platform, Indian National Centre for Photovoltaic Research and Education (NCPRE), Sophisticated Analytical Instrument Facility (SAIF), Central Surface Analytical Facility of IIT Bombay, and spacetime2 cluster at IIT Bombay; the authors are highly grateful for being provided with access to these facilities and resources. The financial support of this work by the Australian Research Council (Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science CE140100012; Future Fellowship to ANS FT200100317), the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (“Renewable Hydrogen for Export” project 2018/RND008 AS008), MNRE Government of India (NCPRE-Phase II, IIT Bombay to AA and A. Yella), Early Career Research Award, Science and Engineering Research Board, Government of India (ECR/2016/000550 to A. Yella), and IITB-Monash Academy (PhD scholarship to SL) is gratefully acknowledged. The authors also sincerely thank Dr T. Gengenbach (CSIRO, Australia) for guidance in the interpretation of the XPS data and Mr H. Takur (IIT Bombay) for assistance with the collection of some of the XRD data.
References
T. Reier, H. N. Nong, D. Teschner, R. Schlögl and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601275 CrossRef .
D. R. MacFarlane, J. Choi, B. H. R. Suryanto, R. Jalili, M. Chatti, L. M. Azofra and A. N. Simonov, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1904804 CrossRef PubMed .

          https://www.hydrogenics.com/2019/02/25/hydrogenics-to-deliver-worlds-largest-hydrogen-electrolysis-plant, accessed  24 August 2021 .
K. Ayers, N. Danilovic, R. Ouimet, M. Carmo, B. Pivovar and M. Bornstein, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2019, 10, 219–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 430–433 CrossRef .
S. Geiger, O. Kasian, M. Ledendecker, E. Pizzutilo, A. M. Mingers, W. T. Fu, O. Diaz-Morales, Z. Li, T. Oellers, L. Fruchter, A. Ludwig, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, M. T. M. Koper and S. Cherevko, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 508–515 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kasian, J. P. Grote, S. Geiger, S. Cherevko and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2488–2491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Claudel, L. Dubau, G. Berthomé, L. Sola-Hernandez, C. Beauger, L. Piccolo and F. Maillard, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4688–4698 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kasian, S. Geiger, T. Li, J. P. Grote, K. Schweinar, S. Zhang, C. Scheu, D. Raabe, S. Cherevko, B. Gault and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3548–3555 RSC .
V. A. Saveleva, L. Wang, O. Kasian, M. Batuk, J. Hadermann, J. J. Gallet, F. Bournel, N. Alonso-Vante, G. Ozouf, C. Beauger, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, S. Cherevko, A. S. Gago, K. A. Friedrich, S. Zafeiratos and E. R. Savinova, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2508–2516 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, J. Li, H. Lv, S. Wang, J. Zuo and L. Zhu, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2019, 6, 182223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, D. Pletcher and F. C. Walsh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3879–3894 RSC .
Z. Lei, T. Wang, B. Zhao, W. Cai, Y. Liu, S. Jiao, Q. Li, R. Cao and M. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1–18 Search PubMed .
S. A. Bonke, A. M. Bond, L. Spiccia and A. N. Simonov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16095–16104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, A. N. Simonov, M. Fekete, H. Chen, N. Nasiri, N. H. Le, P. Reddy Narangari, M. Lysevych, T. R. Gengenbach, A. Lowe, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish, L. Spiccia and A. Tricoli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–9 Search PubMed .
R. K. Hocking, R. Brimblecombe, L. Y. Chang, A. Singh, M. H. Cheah, C. Glover, W. H. Casey and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 461–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Beltrán-Suito, V. Forstner, J. N. Hausmann, S. Mebs, J. Schmidt, I. Zaharieva, K. Laun, I. Zebger, H. Dau, P. W. Menezes and M. Driess, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 11834–11842 RSC .
R. D. L. Smith, M. S. Prévot, R. D. Fagan, Z. Zhang, P. A. Sedach, M. K. J. Siu, S. Trudel and C. P. Berlinguette, Science, 2013, 340, 60–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chatti, A. M. Glushenkov, T. Gengenbach, G. P. Knowles, T. C. Mendes, A. V. Ellis, L. Spiccia, R. K. Hocking and A. N. Simonov, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1561–1573 RSC .
L. Trotochaud, S. L. Young, J. K. Ranney and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6744–6753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4347–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Frydendal, E. A. Paoli, I. Chorkendorff, J. Rossmeisl and I. E. L. Stephens, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500991 CrossRef .
J. S. Mondschein, J. F. Callejas, C. G. Read, J. Y. C. Chen, C. F. Holder, C. K. Badding and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 950–957 CrossRef CAS .

          B. S. Van Gosen, P. L. Verplanck, R. R. Seal II, K. R. Long and J. Gambogi, Rare-earth Elements, Report 1802O, Reston, VA,  2017 Search PubMed .
L. Bloxham, A. Cowley, L. Han and E. Shao, JM, 2020, 1–48 Search PubMed .
R. F. Schulte, U. S. Geol. Surv., 2018, 703, 124–125 Search PubMed .
S. Song, H. Zhang, X. Ma, Z. Shao, R. T. Baker and B. Yi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4955–4961 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cherevko, S. Geiger, O. Kasian, N. Kulyk, J. P. Grote, A. Savan, B. R. Shrestha, S. Merzlikin, B. Breitbach, A. Ludwig and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 170–180 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kasian, S. Geiger, P. Stock, G. Polymeros, B. Breitbach, A. Savan, A. Ludwig, S. Cherevko and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F3099–F3104 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Nikoloski and M. J. Nicol, Miner. Process. Extr. Metall. Rev., 2010, 31, 30–57 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schmachtel, L. Murtomäki, J. Aromaa, M. Lundström, O. Forsén and M. H. Barker, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 245, 512–525 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Marshall, S. Sunde, M. Tsypkin and R. Tunold, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2320–2324 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tunold, A. T. Marshall, E. Rasten, M. Tsypkin, L.-E. Owe and S. Sunde, ECS Trans., 2010, 25, 103–117 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, J. Tayal, S. Basu and K. Scott, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 14796–14804 CrossRef CAS .
E. Oakton, D. Lebedev, M. Povia, D. F. Abbott, E. Fabbri, A. Fedorov, M. Nachtegaal, C. Copéret and T. J. Schmidt, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2346–2352 CrossRef CAS .
M. Etzi Coller Pascuzzi, A. Goryachev, J. P. Hofmann and E. J. M. Hensen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 261, 118225 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chatti, J. L. Gardiner, M. Fournier, B. Johannessen, T. Williams, T. R. Gengenbach, N. Pai, C. Nguyen, D. R. MacFarlane, R. K. Hocking and A. N. Simonov, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 457–465 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Bonke, K. L. Abel, D. A. Hoogeveen, M. Chatti, T. Gengenbach, M. Fournier, L. Spiccia and A. N. Simonov, ChemPlusChem, 2018, 83, 704–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huynh, T. Ozel, C. Liu, E. C. Lau and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4779–4794 RSC .
J. Kim, P. C. Shih, K. C. Tsao, Y. T. Pan, X. Yin, C. J. Sun and H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12076–12083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Z. Tian, L. Zhang, J. Ma, Z. Jiang, L. Chen, B. J. Deibert and R. Ge, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 162 CrossRef PubMed .
I. A. Moreno-Hernandez, C. A. Macfarland, C. G. Read, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2103–2108 RSC .
A. Shinde, R. J. R. Jones, D. Guevarra, S. Mitrovic, N. Becerra-Stasiewicz, J. A. Haber, J. Jin and J. M. Gregoire, Electrocatal, 2015, 6, 229–236 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Brookins, Chem. Geol., 1986, 54, 271–278 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Allen, J. J. Carey, A. Walsh, D. O. Scanlon and G. W. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14759–14769 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ouni, M. Haj Lakhdar, R. Boughalmi, T. Larbi, A. Boukhachem, A. Madani, K. Boubaker and M. Amlouk, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2013, 367, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, Y. Wei, T. Zhai and H. Li, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 437–455 RSC .
P. C. K. Vesborg and T. F. Jaramillo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7933–7947 RSC .
B. Chen, S. Wang, J. Liu, H. Huang, C. Dong, Y. He, W. Yan, Z. Guo, R. Xu and H. Yang, Corros. Sci., 2018, 144, 136–144 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, T. Wang and B. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, D798–D803 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, A. Shinde, J. H. Montoya, A. Singh, S. Gul, J. Yano, Y. Ye, E. J. Crumlin, M. H. Richter, J.
K. Cooper, H. S. Stein, J. A. Haber, K. A. Persson and J. M. Gregoire, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10938–10948 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Moreno-Hernandez, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1241–1248 RSC .
T. A. Evans and K. S. Choi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 5563–5571 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lim, D. Park, S. S. Jeon, C.-W. Roh, J. Choi, D. Yoon, M. Park, H. Jung and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704796 CrossRef .

          C. D. Wanger, W. M. Riggs, L. E. Davis, J. F. Moulder and G. E. Muilenberg, Handbook of X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, Perkin-Elmer Corp.,  1979 Search PubMed .
J. Matthew, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36, 1647 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. King, S. A. Bonke, S. L. Y. Chang, L. Spiccia, B. Johannessen and R. K. Hocking, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 511–521 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Kappen and G. Ruben, Australian Synchrotron,  2013 Search PubMed .
B. Ravel and M. Newville, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2005, 12, 537–541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tenderholt, B. Hedman and K. O. Hodgson, AIP Conf. Proc., 2007, 882, 105–107 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Bearden, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1967, 39, 78 CrossRef CAS .
Reference X-ray spectra of metal foils, EXAFS Materials, http://exafsmaterials.com/Ref_Spectra_0.4MB.pdf.
D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 1758–1775 CrossRef .
L. S. W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. A, 1965, 140 Search PubMed .

          W. Yang and R. G. Parr, Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules, Oxford University Press, New York, Oxford,  1989,  DOI:10.1046/j.1035-6851.2001.00246.x-i3 .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169–11186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dudarev and G. Botton, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 1505–1509 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and A. Selloni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. Greeley and J. K. Nørskov, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 5829–5836 CrossRef CAS .
X. He and Y. Mo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 18035–18044 RSC .
L. M. Gajic-Krstajic, T. L. Trisovic and N. V. Krstajic, Corros. Sci., 2004, 46, 65–74 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Xiao, X. B. Jiang and Q. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 14234–14243 RSC .
J. K. Yang, B. Liang, M. J. Zhao, Y. Gao, F. C. Zhang and H. L. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–6 CAS .
C. Spöri, J. T. H. Kwan, A. Bonakdarpour, D. P. Wilkinson and P. Strasser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5994–6021 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Costentin and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 13380–13384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Mohammadi, S. Loos, P. Chernev, C. Pasquini, I. Zaharieva, D. González-Flores, P. Kubella, K. Klingan, R. D. L. Smith and H. Dau, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 7990–7999 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huynh, D. K. Bediako and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 6002–6010,  DOI:10.1021/ja413147e .
M. C. Biesinger, B. P. Payne, A. P. Grosvenor, L. W. M. Lau, A. R. Gerson and R. S. C. Smart, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 2717–2730 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sabri, H. J. King, R. J. Gummow, X. Lu, C. Zhao, M. Oelgemöller, S. L. Y. Chang and R. K. Hocking, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8244–8256 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Hocking, R. J. Gummow, H. J. King, M. Sabri, P. Kappen, C. Dwyer and S. L. Y. Chang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 1603–1611 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. King, M. Fournier, S. A. Bonke, E. Seeman, M. Chatti, A. N. Jumabekov, B. Johannessen, P. Kappen, A. N. Simonov and R. K. Hocking, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 28533–28549 CrossRef .
H. Vincent, X. Turrillas and I. Rasines, Mater. Res. Bull., 1987, 22, 1369–1379 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Donaldson, A. Kjekshus, D. G. Nicholson and T. Rakke, Acta Chem. Scand., Ser. A, 1975, 29, 803–809 CrossRef .
D. J. Morgan, Surf. Interface Anal., 2015, 47, 1072–1079 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kropáček, M. Krs and V. Bucha, Stud. Geophys. Geod., 1975, 19, 261–274 CrossRef .
S. Ganguly, M. Kabir, B. Sanyal and A. Mookerjee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 2–5 Search PubMed .
S. D. Ghadge, O. I. Velikokhatnyi, M. K. Datta, P. M. Shanthi, S. Tan and P. N. Kumta, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 541–557 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Russell, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 3607–3608 RSC .
X. Lv, W. Wei, H. Wang, B. Huang and Y. Dai, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 255, 117743 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, A. Roudgar and M. Eikerling, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17989–17996 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kadakia, M. K. Datta, O. I. Velikokhatnyi, P. Jampani, S. K. Park, P. Saha, J. A. Poston, A. Manivannan and P. N. Kumta, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 3001–3013 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. R. Luo, Comprehensive Handbook of Chemical Bond Energies, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2007 Search PubMed .
P. W. Tasker, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1979, 12, 4977–4984 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. F. Vaz, H. Q. Wang, C. H. Ahn, V. E. Henrich, M. Z. Baykara, T. C. Schwendemann, N. Pilet, B. J. Albers, U. D. Schwarz, L. H. Zhang, Y. Zhu, J. Wang and E. I. Altman, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 291–297 CrossRef CAS .

          https://materialsproject.org/materials/mp-505009/, accessed 24 August 2021 .
S. P. Ong, L. Wang, B. Kang and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1798–1807 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Eskandrani, S. M. Ali and H. M. Al-Otaibi, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2020, 21, 3785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Suermann, T. J. Schmidt and F. N. Büchi, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 281, 466–471 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hubert, A. M. Patel, A. Gallo, Y. Liu, E. Valle, M. Ben-Naim, J. Sanchez, D. Sokaras, R. Sinclair, J. K. Nørskov, L. A. King, M. Bajdich and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 12182–12196 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Browne, J. Dodwell, F. Novotny, S. Jaśkaniec, P. R. Shearing, V. Nicolosi, D. J. L. Brett and M. Pumera, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9113–9123 RSC .
J. Knöppel, M. Möckl, D. Escalera-López, K. Stojanovski, M. Bierling, T. Böhm, S. Thiele, M. Rzepka and S. Cherevko, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2231 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Extended experimental data. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta07293e‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 		 
ϕ(T,P,NRu,NSb,μO) = G(T,P,NRu,NSb,μO) − μONO

 		 

 	Fig. 1  Loss of metals from catalysts (diamonds) during the OER in stirred 0.5 M H2SO4 and corresponding S-numbers (bars) under different conditions. (a) Tests of [Co + Sb]Oy (red), [Mn + Sb]Oy (blue) and [Ru + Sb]Oy (black) at 24 ± 2 °C over 25 h (24 h at 10 mA cm−2; 0.5 h at 2.03 V vs. RHE; 0.5 h at 1.93 V vs. RHE) and 80 ± 1 °C for 193 h (192 h at 10 mA cm−2; 0.5 h at 2.03 V vs. RHE; 0.5 h at 1.93 V vs. RHE) with the ICP-OES analysis undertaken upon completion of the measurements. (b and c) Galvanostatic (10 mA cm−2) tests of [Mn + Sb]Oy and [Ru + Sb]Oy at (b and c) 24 ± 2 and (c) 80 ± 1 °C with periodic withdrawal of samples for the ICP-OES analysis (5 mL) and addition of pure 0.5 M H2SO4 to keep the total electrolyte solution volume constant at 20 mL; S-numbers are calculated for periods between sampling. Antimony corrosion data are provided in Table S1.†	 

 	Fig. 2  Electrochemical characterisation of [Co + Sb]Oy (red), [Mn + Sb]Oy (blue), [Ru + Sb]Oy (black) and IrO2 (green) in stirred 0.5 M H2SO4 at 24 ± 2 °C: (a) cyclic voltammetry (scan rate 0.020 V s−1; third scans; not IRu corrected) recorded before (vivid traces) and after (pale traces) tests shown in panels (b) and (c) (arrows exemplify the direction of the voltammetric sweeps, which was qualitatively similar for all catalysts); (b) IRu-corrected chronopotentiograms at 10 mA cmgeom.−2; and (c) subsequently recorded chronoamperograms at a non-IRu-corrected potentials of 2.03 and 1.93 V vs. RHE.	 



[Mn + Sb]Oy	23 ± 1	12 ± 2	n.a.
[Co + Sb]Oy	34 ± 2	9 ± 4	n.a.
[Ru + Sb]Oy	9 ± 5	n.a.	44 ± 5

 	Fig. 3  XANES and FT EXAFS data at (a) Sb, (b) Mn, (c) Co and (d) Ru K-edges obtained for [Mn + Sb]Oy (blue), [Co + Sb]Oy (red) and [Ru + Sb]Oy (black) before (pale solid traces) and after (vivid solid traces) electrocatalytic tests in stirred 0.5 M H2SO4 compared to the defined reference materials (dashed and dotted teal traces). [Mn + Sb]Oy and [Co + Sb]Oy were tested for 24 h at 10 mA cm−2 and then for 1 h at 2.03 and 1.93 V vs. RHE at 24 ± 2 °C; [Ru + Sb]Oy was tested for 12 h at 10 mA cm−2 at 80 ± 1 °C.	 

 	Fig. 4  X-ray diffractograms of as-synthesised (a) [Mn + Sb]Oy, (b) [Co + Sb]Oy and (c) [Ru + Sb]Oy. Vertical lines show tabulated positions and relative intensities for (a–c) CoSb2O6 ICSD-108964, (a) Mn2O3 ICDD-00-041-1442 and Mn3O4 ICDD-01-075-1560, (b), Co3O4 ICSD-36256, (c) RuO2 ICSD-731469 and Sb2O5 PDF-01-071-0256. Mean crystallite sizes calculated using Scherrer equation were: (a) dXRD(MnSb2O6) ≈ 7 nm, dXRD(Mn2O3) ≈ 35 nm, dXRD(Mn3O4) ≈ 41 nm; (b) dXRD(CoSb2O6) ≈ 24 nm; dXRD(Co3O4) ≈ 43 nm; (c) dXRD(RuO2) ≈ 10 nm. Asterisks indicate diffraction peaks attributed to the antimonate phase. Triangles indicate peaks which assignment is not straightforward.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM and STEM-EDS characterisation of [Ru + Sb]Oy before and after OER tests in stirred 0.5 M H2SO4 at 10 mA cm−2 for 24 h at 80 ± 1 °C: (a and b) medium magnification STEM-EDS mapping of the (a) as-prepared and (b) tested catalyst; (c and d) TEM micrographs of the (c) as-prepared and (d) tested catalyst; (e) selected area electron diffraction taken from a region containing large amounts of both Ru and Sb for the tested catalyst. (f) STEM-EDS mapping analysis of the extended area of the tested catalyst around the region shown in panel (d).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Simulated compositional phase diagram of CoSb2O6 against individual oxides. Shaded area corresponds to the stable region of CoSb2O6, where the colour scale shows the allowed chemical potentials for oxygen; coloured lines and the corresponding spaces opposite to the shaded region present the stable regions of the identified individual oxides. (b) Normalised oxygen grand potential (ϕnorm) vs. ruthenium atomic fraction, xRu = n/(n + m), calculated for [Run + Sbm]Oy at T = 600 °C and 0.21 atm O2 partial pressure. Sb:RuO2 – Sb-doped RuO2; Ru:SbO2, Ru:Sb2O3 and Ru:Sb2O5 – Ru-doped antimony oxides. Calculated data are shown as symbols; lines are guides to an eye.	 

 	Fig. 7  Performance of the [Ru + Sb]Oy (black) and [Mn + Sb]Oy (blue) catalysts during the OER in stirred 0.5 M H2SO4 at 80 ± 1 °C. (a) Cyclic voltammetry (scan rate 0.02 V s−1; not IRu-corrected; third scans) before (vivid traces) and after (pale trace; shown for [Ru + Sb]Oy only) long-term tests shown in panel (b); for comparison, dashed curves show initial voltammetry collected at 24 ± 2 °C. (b) IRu-corrected chronopotentiograms (10 mA cmgeom.−2).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Extended experimental data. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta07293e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
