Atomic spectrometry update. Atomic mass spectrometry  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B607465K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B607465K
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21, 785-818Atomic spectrometry update. Atomic mass spectrometryJeffrey R. Bacona, Kathryn L. Lingeb, Randall R. Parrishc and Luc Van VaeckdaThe Macaulay Institute, Craigiebuckler, Aberdeen, UK AB15 8QHbNERC ICP Facility, School of Earth Sciences and Geography, Kingston University, Penrhyn Road, Kingston upon Thames, UK KT1 2EEcDepartment of Geology, University of Leicester and NERC Isotope Geosciences Laboratory, Kingsley Dunham Centre, Keyworth, Nottingham, UK NG12 5GGdMicro- and Trace Analysis Centre, Department of Chemistry, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610 Wilrijk, BelgiumReceived 25th May 2006First published on 30th June 2006Contents1 Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)1.1 Reviews1.2 AMS systems1.3 Instrumentation1.4 Developments in radiocarbon analysis1.5 Developments in the measurement of elements other than carbon2 Electrospray mass spectrometry (ESMS)3 Gas chromatography-electron ionization mass spectrometry (GC-EIMS)4 Glow discharge mass spectrometry (GDMS)4.1 Review4.2 Analytical methodology4.3 Depth profiling5 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)5.1 Fundamental studies and instrumentation5.2 Interferences5.3 Sample introduction5.4 Speciation5.5 Analytical methodology5.6 Isotope ratio measurement6 Laser ionization mass spectrometry (LIMS)6.1 Instrumentation6.2 Fundamental study6.3 Analytical methodology7 Resonance ionization mass spectrometry (RIMS)8 Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)8.1 Reviews8.2 Fundamental studies8.3 Analytical methodology8.4 Quantitative analysis8.5 Single and multi-dimensional analysis8.6 Static SIMS (S-SIMS)9 Sputtered neutrals mass spectrometry (SNMS)9.1 Analytical methodology9.2 Depth profiling and imaging10 Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry (SIRMS)10.1 General contributions10.2 Instrumentation10.3 Sample preparation11 Thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS)11.1 Reviews11.2 Instrumentation11.3 Analytical methodology12 Other methods12.1 High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS)12.2 Noble gas mass spectrometry13 Appendix: Glossary of termsReferencesAbstractThis Update is part of a series of annual reviews which cover various aspects of analytical atomic spectrometry. The series of mass spectrometry reviews was initiated in 1988 under the auspices of Allan Ure, who made a major contribution to the development of the ASU reviews and their predecessor, the Annual Reports in Analytical Atomic Spectrometry. After relinquishing the helm of this MS review, Allan continued to oversee its development by acting as an assessor until shortly before his death in December 2005. Details of Allan’s life and his contributions to atomic spectroscopy can be found in his obituary.1 Allan will be missed by many in the analytical atomic spectrometry community.We welcome Randy Parrish to the writing team and value his in-depth knowledge of high-precision isotope ratio analysis. This year’s review follows the same format as last year’s.2 Although an attempt is made to consider all relevant refereed papers, conference abstracts, reports, book chapters and patents for inclusion, the content of the review is highly selective. The selection of papers is based on criteria applied to focus sharply on the most significant developments in instrumentation and methodology or improved understanding of the fundamental phenomena involved in the MS process. The increasing importance of speciation and the blurring of boundaries between atomic and molecular MS require a high degree of judgement to be made in considering papers for inclusion. The main ruling criterion for all speciation papers is that the work should involve or be intended for the study of natural systems. For example, the study of synthetic metal clusters is generally not included whereas the determination of organometallic compounds in environmental samples is.Applications of atomic MS are not covered in this Update and readers are referred to the Updates on Industrial Analysis: Metals, Chemicals and Advanced Materials,3 Environmental Analysis4 and Clinical and Biological Materials, Food and Beverages.5Throughout this review, the term molecular ion will be restricted to denote only the positive or negative radical ion formed by removal or capture, respectively, of an electron. In contrast, addition of a proton or cation to a neutral molecule gives molecular adduct ions. Deprotonated molecules are considered as fragments.Although reproducibility or precision is a key figure of merit in MS, there is no agreed format for quoting it. The reader can assume that values of precision given in this Update as a percentage correspond to the RSD unless otherwise specified. For isotope ratios, however, values of precision are generally given as the SD of a permil value.It is a widespread phenomenon that analytical techniques in general and MS in particular spawn a large number of abbreviations and acronyms. A glossary of all abbreviations used in this Update appears at the end of the review. Most abbreviations are not defined in the text but those which are unlikely to be commonly known are defined in the text when used first and again in the glossary.The developments highlighted in this review indicate the very wide area of applications for which atomic MS can be used. From the measurement of very low isotopic abundances to the measurement of element concentrations at any scale, from bulk analysis to depth profiling and localized analysis, there is likely to be an MS procedure which can provide analytical performance competitive with any other technique. Two substantial reviews highlighted the important role of MS in areas of considerable importance. The excellent review by Becker6 on recent developments in isotope analysis focused on methodological and instrumental developments, novel approaches and applications using different MS techniques. The list of techniques reviewed by Hou et al.7 for application in nuclear forensics was dominated by MS methods. The two reviews emphasised the dominant role that ICP-MS now plays in these areas of research.1 Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)1.1 ReviewsIn the last decade, AMS has emerged as a sensitive tool for bioanalytical tracing. Reviews on the use of AMS in neuroscience8 and phytochemical research9 highlighted the possibility of quantifying isotopes at the 1 in 1015 level. This corresponded to zepto- to attomoles of isotopically labelled compounds in μg to mg amounts of sample. Both reviews focused on recent developments in the determination of 14C in biological tissues and the use of 14C labelling. Brief descriptions of typical AMS systems were given and examples of reported applications discussed. The need to develop procedures for intrinsic labelling with 14C was of particular importance for labelling plants in phytochemical research.A review on the tracing of noble gas radionuclides in the environment included substantial sections on the determination of 39Ar and 81Kr by AMS.10 Because the noble gas isotopes do not form negative ions, they can only be measured on systems that use linacs or cyclotrons as accelerators. In the latter case, an important requirement was the availability of two separate electron cyclotron resonance sources at the injection end of the accelerator in order to reduce cross contamination. One source was used with enriched samples, necessary for tuning and setting up of the accelerator and detectors, and the other with natural samples. Although full stripping of electrons from the accelerated ions worked well to separate Kr (as 81Kr36+) from Br (as 81Br35+), the same technique could not be used to separate 39Ar from 39K because Ar has a lower atomic number than K. In this case, isobaric separation was achieved using a gas-filled spectrograph. Several examples of the dating and tracing of waters were discussed. The authors predicted a dramatic increase in the use of these isotopes once AMS had been developed to provide rapid and routine analysis of water samples of <100 l volume. This could, however, be some time off as few developments of cyclotron-based systems are being reported.1.2 AMS systemsThe rapid development of low-energy AMS systems is highlighted by the commissioning of the first commercial single-stage, low-energy (500 kV) 14C system.11 At least eight further orders had been placed for the new design. The single-stage design with only one acceleration stage had air insulation in place of the SF6 insulation used in tandem accelerators. In the production system the ion source and injection beam line were held at ground potential, whereas the rest of the system was held at 250 kV. This was the reverse of the setup in the prototype. The precision (<5‰ for 14C∶12C) and background (<0.005 modern carbon) demonstrated in initial tests were sufficient for routine applications that required only modest precision. Installation of a new gas ionization chamber with much improved energy resolution over what was previously possible has allowed the 600 kV facility in Zurich to be upgraded to a universal platform for AMS at low energies.12 Additional modifications included installation of a five Faraday cup system after the high-energy magnet, improvements to the ion optics and installation of a bipolar module for injection of all isotopes of interest in fast pulsing mode. Although the new system was considered competitive with larger systems for the determination of 26Al, 10Be, 14C, 41Ca, 129I, 239, 240, 242, 244Pu and 236U, limitations due to scattering and charge changing processes along the beam path remained. The absence of molecular interferences on actinide isotopes made analysis with the low-energy system feasible. Operation of the upgraded system was modified to allow Pu isotopes in environmental samples to be measured routinely at the fg level.13 As the compact design excluded a lens at the low energy side of the system, a constant ratio of pre-acceleration (+29 kV) to terminal voltage (+300 kV) was needed to achieve a well-focused beam at the stripper. Although use of a post-acceleration charge state of 3+ reduced transmission compared with use of the 1+ state, for which the system was designed, better mass separation was obtained. The loss in transmission was reduced by moving the detector 30 cm closer to the electrostatic analyser to compensate for the shorter focal distances. Switching between Pu isotopes by changing the terminal voltage of the accelerator and the electrostatic analyser was faster and more reproducible than by switching the magnet.Although once considered “small”, the 3 MV AMS systems are now intermediate between the new generation of low-energy systems and the traditional high-energy systems. In a study on the limitations of 3 MV systems it was concluded that in cases where no stable isobars exist (e.g., 244Pu or 236U) the LOD were as good as those achieved with large systems but that achievable energy was a limitation when isobar separation was required.14 A significant increase in energy was achieved by replacing the gas strippers with diamond-like-carbon (DLC) stripper foils (0.6 μg cm−2) and increasing the terminal voltage to 3.6 MV. Under these conditions, separation of 36Cl from 36S was made possible by measuring 36Cl7+ ions at 28.8 MeV rather than 36Cl5+ ions at 18 MeV.Discussion of all aspects of a new high-throughput AMS system for radiocarbon analysis provided a good general introduction to the principles of AMS.15 Optimization of instrument operation resulted in a measurement precision of 0.3%. A system sensitivity of about 10−16 for 14C∶12C was verified by measuring 14C-free samples.1.3 InstrumentationHigh transmission and efficient electron stripping are needed for delivering better quality beams at higher energies. A gas stripper produces less scattering and introduces less divergence after stripping than a foil stripper but is generally operated at about 10−2 Torr, which is a much higher pressure than the <10−8 Torr at which the accelerator tubes must be operated. A new pumping system for a gas stripper, based on a recirculating turbomolecular pump, improved the vacuum in the accelerator tubes considerably and resulted in an increased beam transmission.16 The most probable charge state produced by the new gas stripper system was 6+, whereas that which could be produced by foil strippers was 8+.Developments in detector systems have focused almost exclusively on new TOF detectors. In the so-called ΔTOF detector, a new approach for isobar separation at energies of <1 MeV per amu, the specific energy loss after a degrader foil (1 μm thick, highly homogeneous, low-stress silicon nitride) was measured very precisely by TOF.17 Small differences between the specific energy losses of isobars led to clear separation even at low energies. As the velocity of the ions before the degrader foil needed to be known, two TOF measurements were made, before and after the foil. Use of this detector reduced the beam intensity of 36S by a factor of 104 and allowed 36Cl to be measured for the first time using a 3 MV AMS system. The time resolution of a gas-filled TOF detector system was improved to 350 ps by using a thinner entrance window (0.9 μm Mylar foil), optimum flight length (50 cm) and low resistance (400 Ω cm) surface-barrier-detector as the stop detector.18 Although the efficiency of the gas-filled TOF detector was only 40% of that of a ΔE–E detector, the separation power was better at energies of <40 MeV. A detector consisting of a TOF system and an ionization chamber in series had a sensitivity (10−14) sufficient for the measurement of 129I in environmental samples.19 The resolutions of the TOF and energy sections (440 ps and 2%, respectively) allowed 129I to be resolved from 128Te and 130Te as well as the major 127I isotope.1.4 Developments in radiocarbon analysisRadiocarbon dating relies critically on calibration curves which are constructed using various dateable records such as those held within tree rings. As improved methodologies push back the limits of dating, there is an increased need to refine the calibration curves to cover longer periods. Two new curves, IntCal04 and Marine04, have been constructed and ratified to replace the terrestrial components of IntCal98, the previously used curve.20 The new calibration data sets extended the calibration a further 2000 years to cover the range 0–26000 calibrated years BP (Before Present; 0 BP = 1950 AD) and provided much higher resolution, greater precision and more detailed structure than IntCal98. The data sets (tree ring and marine data sets for 0–10500 and 10500–26000 calibrated years BP, respectively) and methods used to construct Marine04 were described in detail. A dataset for the high-resolution analysis (1.5 cm; 10–15 years) of a core, taken from sediments in the Cariaco Basin, was converted into a smooth calibration curve and anchored to a revised tree ring chronology.21 This provided a better estimate of uncertainty in the “wiggle matching” than that in IntCalb98, which was partially based on the low-resolution (100–200 years) dating of another Cariaco Basin core.The random nature of the temporal distribution of 14C ions in an AMS instrument has been demonstrated for a number of counting rates, sputter energies and sample materials.22 The long-assumed Poisson statistical nature of AMS counts held true over a wide range of count rates and under varying source conditions. The purity of the Poisson distribution showed that there was no fundamental limit to the ultimate counting precision attainable by AMS. As samples with very low count rates also followed the Poisson distribution, measurements on very old materials (0.1% pmC) could be used to generate calibration data.A review on sample handling for radiocarbon analysis over different ranges of sample size advocated the use of three different systems in a hybrid ion source.23 A cryogenic storage and release technique would be used for small (1–10 μg C) samples of CO2, injection of CO2 into a continuous flow (CF) of He for samples containing 10–100 μg C and sputtering of solid graphite for samples of >100 μg C. Using gas samples minimized the risk of contamination during target production and ion production from CO2 was more efficient than from graphite. This made the gas source more suitable for analyses of small samples or when best precision was not needed. However, gas samples also introduced a significant degree of cross contamination unlike solid samples, which produced almost none. Larger samples (>100 μg C) were therefore better analysed as solid graphite targets.As improved methodologies reduce sample size requirements, the control of contamination introduced during sample preparation becomes critically important. The LOQ defined by the Poisson statistics (0.9 μg C) and background equivalent mass (0.2 μg C) are commonly exceeded by sampling and processing blanks of 10 μg or more. Reduction of the blank from 5 to <0.5 μg C through stringent attention to the nature and sources of the isotopic-chemical blank allowed concentrations as low as 9 μg C kg−1 to suffice for the quantitative apportionment of fossil and biomass particulate carbon in up to 6 kg of Greenland snow.24 The smallest sample analysed contained just 5.8 μg C. A thermal optical kinetic method was superior to thermal optical transmission as a “clean chemistry” technique for the low-blank separation of elemental and carbonate C in atmospheric particulates.25 Wet chemistry methods had proved disastrous for the isolation of non-carbonate particulate C because of the large blanks introduced by the method. A hybrid RM was developed to test the accuracy of 14C speciation measurements. A new high-vacuum line with a modified graphitization procedure has allowed sample sizes down to 150 μg to be prepared and analysed successfully.26 This was a significant reduction from the previous minimum sample size of 500 μg. The graphite reaction vessels had a smaller volume than previously to increase initial reaction pressure and were less prone to leaks. Use of a coarser grained iron catalyst and higher C∶Fe ratio of 1∶3 produced more consistent analytical performance but measurement uncertainty increased significantly for samples smaller than 150 μg. Special sample collection and preparation procedures have been developed to minimize contamination in the analysis of volcanic gases which contain very small amounts of carbon.27 Reduction of CO2 using Mg introduced contamination by modern C of 0.16%. The LOD for 14C∶12C was 10−16 (equivalent to 0.16 ± 0.05% modern C) which, in principle, would allow the 14C content of samples 65 × 103 years old to be measured.The problems of “old carbon” in samples used for dating have long been recognised but continue to be a major limitation on the application of the technique. Several recent studies have demonstrated that the age provided by an environmental or archaeological sample does not necessarily represent the time elapsed since the sample was formed. In a study on the use of macrofossils to date lake sediments from the northernmost latitudes, significant discrepancies were found between the dates given by different plant tissues.28 Wood and charcoal generally gave older dates than other types of plant remains, and in several cases the dates for these materials exceeded other dates by several hundred years. This finding was attributed to the longer terrestrial residence time of woody macrofossils in arctic and boreal environments with C being assimilated throughout the lifetime of the plant. Woody macrofossils are commonly selected for 14C dating so these findings have important implications for palaeoenvironmental studies. The same study also demonstrated that 14C dates measured in lake sediment macrofossils were independent of sample size down to about 0.05 mg. This sample mass, considered the mass threshold for reliable age determination, was limited by several factors including incomplete graphitization for very small samples, the increased influence of contamination and possible fractionation effects in the ion source. The ability to date such small sample sizes will be crucial for understanding the chronology of lake sediments with only very small organic matter concentrations. The dating of speleothem (cave) formations is potentially a powerful technique for studying climatic and environmental changes but the great variation in the fraction of “dead carbon” in, for example, stalagmites, placed considerable constraints on accurate dating.29 Analogous to the “old wood” effect in the radiocarbon dating of charcoal and wood samples, an “old shell” effect existed in the dating of marine and freshwater shells in archaeological deposits.30 Some disparities were very large (>10000 years) and indicated the use of fossilised shells to make the beads and other archaeological artefacts. It was considered that the problems presented by “old shells” were surmountable through careful sample selection, radiocarbon analysis of multiple samples from a variety of materials and proper calibration procedures. Peat deposits potentially document environmental and climatic changes over recent time but radiocarbon dating was subject to error due to the presence of industrially derived carbonaceous particles in the peat.31 Differential temperature combustion of samples was considered one possible method for separating C fixed by plants from that deposited as particulate matter. The authors suggested that chronologies provided by recent sediments could be inaccurate because of the impact of industrially derived C. In general, all these studies highlighted the need to recognise the widespread problem of “old carbon” but that the problem can be minimized through careful selection of samples and preparation methods.Methodologies for the isolation of radiocarbon from various matrices continue to be developed. Dating oxalate minerals which coat rock art has proven successful for estimating when the art was made but questions have been raised about the origins of the C and the contemporaneity of oxalate formation with the associated art. Rapid oxidation of oxalate samples by 0.1 M KMnO4 in 0.1 M H2SO4 (at 65–80 °C in a stream of N2) liberated CO2 only from bonds in the oxalate ions and stronger bonds in amino acids and other slowly oxidizing compounds remained unattacked.32 The method provided oxalate dates marginally older than covering sediments so the method was considered viable for dating oxalates in selected archaeological settings. A specially developed 14-step pre-treatment procedure for isolating pollen and spores from Late Pleistocene ice wedges removed quartz and other mineral particles of sizes comparable to pollen grains by dissolution in hot 40% HF followed by centrifugation in heavy liquid.33 Two new methods were proposed for the extraction of C from iron artefacts because the low C contents made the required sample sizes too large for sample combustion systems.34 The approach adopted was either direct sputtering of the artefacts to avoid oxidation and reduction of the sample or extraction of C into 2M HCl in order to obtain a sample suitable for combustion. The direct sputtering method was unsuitable for samples with C contents of <1% because the ion current produced was low (up to 40 nA of 13C compared with the usual current of 100–200 nA). As most iron artefacts fall into this category, the extraction procedure will generally be more viable than direct sputtering. A robust sampling system developed for use in the field included re-usable molecular sieve cartridges, a lightweight pump and an IR gas analyser (IRGA) for the collection of isotopically representative samples of CO2 respired from soils.35 Use of the zeolite molecular sieve avoided the inconvenience of chemical or cryogenic trapping of samples in the field and the potential isotopic fractionation that could occur.Alkenones, long-chain (C36–C39) unsaturated ketones produced by a biologically restricted yet ubiquitous group of marine algae, serve as molecular counterparts to microfossil-derived proxies in marine sediments. A series of papers has discussed the details and performance of a procedure for the radiocarbon dating of alkenones.36–38 The unusual structural characteristic of these compounds was exploited in a multi-step scheme for their isolation in high purity.36 In particular, the linear structure resulting from the unusual trans double bond configuration allowed the compounds to be occluded within urea whereas other branched and cyclic compounds and unsaturated cis configuration lipids were excluded. An evaluation of the potential process blanks of the procedure applied to sample sizes in the μg–mg range showed that there was no systematic contamination that would bias the results.37 Results within measurement uncertainty (±17‰) were given for alkenones of known age. A study on the use of conventional organic geochemical procedures (Soxhlet extraction and accelerated solvent extraction) to isolate molecular biomarkers such as alkenones concluded that the accuracy of AMS analysis of extracted samples was as good as that for the analysis of unextracted sediments.381.5 Developments in the measurement of elements other than carbonA method for quantifying Be in biological samples at the attomole level involved tissue digestion in HNO3, further digestion in H2O2 and ammonium persulfate and finally precipitation of Be with NaOH and conversion into BeO for preparation of targets.39 Measurements were made in a quasi-simultaneous injection mode in which 10Be3+ counts were measured for 300 ms and then those for 9Be3+ for 5 ms. This rapid cycling was continued throughout the measurement (5 min) and provided an implicit internal correction for time-dependent drifts of the ion source output. The LOD for the measured 10Be∶9Be ratio was 3 × 10−14, equivalent to 0.8 attomole Be. The measured ratios varied between 10−10 and 10−14 in different organs. The method provided the sensitivity for tracing Be in biological samples at very low doses with the purpose of identifying the molecular targets involved in chronic Be disease.Determination of the long-lived radioisotope 41Ca at the ultra-trace level has applications in cosmochemistry and environmental and biomedical research. A comparison of AMS and RIMS for the determination of 41Ca at the 10−11–10−10 isotopic abundance level showed good agreement between the methods.40 Although AMS delivered significantly smaller uncertainties (low % range) and reached lower abundances (10−13) than RIMS, the latter required less sophisticated sample preparation and could handle smaller samples. In contrast to previous AMS studies, in which the 5+ charge state was used, this study used the 4+ charge state to avoid interference from parasitic O2+ and S4+ beams that rendered the measurement of 40Ca5+ currents difficult. Use of a TOF spectrometer improved mass separation and suppressed 42Ca1H2+ ions at m/z 44. In the first reported use of 41Ca to monitor differences in bone turnover between healthy individuals and patients with end-stage renal disease, isotope ratios spanning 5 orders of magnitude were measured with excellent precision in samples from patients who had received 10 nCi of 41Ca only.41 The background value for the measurement of the 41Ca8+ ion was 6 × 10−14. A 41Ca dose material for use in human studies has been produced with a dilution series covering the range 10−6 to 10−13 in order to allow instrument linearity to be checked over the range to be expected in urine over several years following administration of a typical 100 nCi oral dose.42The desire to measure the anthropogenic radionuclide 129I in pristine environments placed three constraints on the AMS analysis—production of high ion currents from small samples, good isobar discrimination and low dark current in the detector.43 These requirements were illustrated by the determination of 129I in atmospheric particles collected in the Canadian Arctic. Negative ions at m/z 127 (typically 3 μA) and 129 were selected for alternating injection into the accelerator. Following acceleration, 129I5+ ions were selected rather than 129I4+ because the latter would suffer interference from 97Mo3+ which results from the breakup of 97MoO2−. Continuous care was required to avoid cross and external contamination during the multiple-step sample preparation. A radiochemical method used to extract I from aerosol samples could potentially allow samples to be collected with high resolution (every two days).44 It was possible to monitor 129I∶127I with a sensitivity of 10−8–10−9, equivalent to 104–105 atoms 129I m−3. Alternative preconcentration procedures, based on alkaline wet ashing, extraction and precipitation, were used to isolate I from biological and environmental samples.45 Although the levels of 129I in samples from China were two to three orders of magnitude lower than those previously found in samples from the vicinity of nuclear fuel reprocessing facilities, these levels were nevertheless one to two orders of magnitude higher than those found in samples taken before the “nuclear” age. This indicated the global nature of 129I deposition from the atmosphere. Improved analytical procedures, which included a new tuning protocol for high-precision measurement, have allowed the 129I concentration in the IAEA-375 CRM to be determined with precision (<1%) better than were previously possible.46 The measured activity concentration of 129I in the CRM of 1.59 ± 0.08 mBq kg−1 was 7% lower than the recommended value of 1.7 mBq kg−1.A new heavy-ion beam line for the determination of Pu and other actinide elements has been described.47 There had been concern that the presence of U in samples would interfere in the determination of 239Pu but it was demonstrated that a rejection factor of 107 was possible. Therefore sample preparation did not require special reagents or facilities and this, together with the high-throughput design of the instrument, resulted in a sensitive (down to 106 atoms for Pu) and cost-effective method for the measurement of actinides in environmental and bioassay samples.2 Electrospray mass spectrometry (ESMS)Recent reviews have highlighted the fact that ESMS analysis has, despite its limitations, become almost indispensable for the identification of individual metal species. A review on element speciation discussed these limitations, which included poor sensitivity, lack of elemental specificity, species-specific ionization and limited acceptance of mobile phases used in chromatographic separation systems.48 Quantification by external calibration was inaccurate and species-independent calibration impossible. An excellent table listed the various techniques that have been used for element speciation together with their detection capabilities, major advantages and limitations. The advantages of on-line, dual-detection systems (ICP-MS and ESMS for elemental and molecular information, respectively) were highlighted. Recent developments in analytical techniques for providing information on heteroatom-containing biomolecules have been discussed critically.49 Although the review (282 references) dealt primarily with the use of ICP-MS, the role of ESMS and its synergy with ICP-MS were emphasised. A critical review on the application of capillary electrophoresis (CE) as a high-resolution separation technique in metalloproteomics research focused on the requirements and challenges involved in coupling CE to sensitive element and molecule-specific detection techniques.50 Instrumental developments, limitations, current applications and potential improvements in CE-hyphenated techniques were discussed.Electrochemically controlled solid-phase-extraction (EC-SPE) using conducting polymers (e.g., polypyrrole) as stationary phase is a relatively new preconcentration technique. Its advantage over solvent-based techniques is that both the extraction and desorption steps can be controlled simply by changing the applied potential of the conducting-polymer-coated working electrode. The method was interfaced on-line to both ESMS (for the determination of FeCN63–) and ICP-MS (for the determination of Br−) using polypyrrole-coated electrodes and a thin layer electrochemical flow cell.51 When a potential of 800 mV was applied to the working electrode the polymer was oxidized, became positively charged and adsorbed the anionic determinands. The polymer was restored to its neutral state by applying a potential of −800 mV and the anions were expelled from the stationary phase. Interfacing EC-SPE to ESMS was not straightforward and further optimization would be required to make it feasible. The EC cell and potentiostat were decoupled from the ES high voltage by using an isolation transformer to float the EC cell system at the potential induced by the ES voltage. Sudden changes in conductivity of the mobile phase caused the electrospray to become unstable. Although this could be overcome through use of a conductive sheath flow, further problems were introduced due to analyte ion suppression.The large number of As species known to be present in marine samples presents a challenge for As speciation analysis. Because of signal depression caused by co-eluting matrix compounds, ESMS is used mainly for species identification but not for quantification. In the development of a new HPLC-ESMS/MS method with selected reaction monitoring (based on CID) for both qualitative and quantitative analysis, three critical factors were addressed.52 Compatibility of the HPLC conditions with ES ionization was ensured by using volatile buffers, acids and bases at low concentrations, by adding methanol to the mobile phase and by using a post-column split. The selected reaction monitoring conditions were optimized for each analyte by selecting the most abundant product ions and their corresponding energies. Although chromatographic systems were designed to separate the analytes sufficiently from matrix components, significant signal suppression was still experienced so the time-consuming standard addition approach was needed for quantification. The advantage of selected reaction monitoring was its high selectivity due to the monitoring of parent ion to product ion transitions characteristic for each analyte. The disadvantage of this approach was that only known compounds could be targeted because the mass of the parent ion and one fragment ion needed to be known. Twenty-one of the 28 As compounds identified in extracts of marine samples could be quantified. A study of the photochemical alkylation of As, a transformation which can change the availability and toxicity of As in ecosystems, also used the CID approach to identify the molecular species produced.53 The eluates from multidimensional LC systems were monitored by ICP-MS so that the species of interest could be targeted for ESMS analysis.The sensitivity of ESMS for the identification of Se compounds was enhanced significantly by coupling on-line a narrow bore HPLC column (2.1 mm id) to the mass spectrometer.54 Use of this column eliminated the need for the flow split, necessary after analytical columns (4.6 mm id) because the mass spectrometer could not tolerate a flow rate of 0.8 ml min−1. The whole sample could therefore be introduced into the mass spectrometer rather than only the 40% that is possible with analytical columns. Although the procedure was successfully used to identify the main Se species (Se-methionine) in yeast supplements, the results also highlighted the care required in the use of CID to identify Se species in complex matrices. Parent–daughter ion transitions associated with Se-containing compounds were not necessarily unique and could also occur for other compounds not containing Se. The presence of γ-glutamyl-Se-methylselenocysteine in aqueous extracts of yeast has been verified for the first time by using HPLC conditions compatible in terms of mobile phase flow rate and composition with both ESMS and ICP-MS.55 The reversed phase HPLC method used a mobile phase (water–methanol, 98∶2, containing 0.1% formic acid) and flow rate (0.5 ml min−1) suitable for on-line coupling to both the MS systems. No cleanup of the extract was needed.The statutory requirement to determine bromate in drinking waters at the μg l−1 level is challenging because of the presence of interfering compounds, in particular in waters with a high salt content. Coupling of IC to ESMS has been investigated as a selective and sensitive alternative detection to post-column derivatization.56 The use of a hydroxide eluent in an IC system overcame the problem of carbonate interference by moving the carbonate peak to a later elution time. Interference from chloride at the mg l−l level could not be overcome, however, and resulted in both a loss in chromatographic efficiency and suppressed ionization of bromate. It was considered that for most samples a pre-treatment to remove chloride was unavoidable to allow bromate to be determined at the μg l−l level.3 Gas chromatography-electron ionization mass spectrometry (GC-EIMS)The majority of GC-EIMS developments in organometallic speciation concern the determination of organotin compounds in environmental media. A new, automated, on-line hydride-generation (HG) method for DBT and TBT speciation at the trace level used a programmable-temperature vaporizing inlet.57 The analysis consisted of two methods run in sequence. In the first, the system was configured for HG using NaBH4 as reagent, and in the second the system was configured for speciation using a conventional autosampler and data acquisition. Method performance was very dependent on the injector set-up, in particular on the initial inlet temperature, injection volume and solvent characteristics. With an initial inlet temperature of −20 °C, injection volume of 2 μl and He flow rate of 150 ml min−1, excellent precision (<4%) and linear dynamic range (up to 50 μg ml−1) were achieved. The LOD were 120 and 9 ng ml−1 for DBT and TBT, respectively.Accurate isotope ratio measurements are a prerequisite for ID but are only feasible if molecular interferences do not occur. An algorithm for the reconstruction of isotope patterns, potentially useful for ensuring the absence of interferences, was used to study the fragmentation patterns of butyltin compounds.58 Standards of natural Sn isotopic abundance and butyltin compounds enriched with 119Sn were used, derivatized as either the ethylated or propylated compounds, to elucidate fragmentation patterns. Pure interference-free structural fragments were obtained only for certain R3Sn+ ions where no isobaric overlap with R2SnH+ ions occurred. All other fragments were subject to interferences. Use of [M−29]+ or [M−43]+ ions for ethylated and propylated butyltin compounds, respectively, was recommended. The care required in the selection of sufficiently specific ions for monitoring was also highlighted in the analysis of biota samples.59 In an improved procedure, derivatized samples were cleaned up using SPME rather than traditional column methods. The butyltin compounds were extracted into 0.05% w/v methanol in tropolone and subjected to Grignard pentylation prior to SPME on Florisil. As strong matrix interferences were evident on the fragment ions at m/z 177–179, 191–193 and 247–249, the ions at m/z 305 (TBT) and 319 (DBT and MBT) were selected for monitoring. Although the reproducibilities of 13 (DBT) and 7% (MBT and TBT) could only be considered satisfactory, good LOD of 6.4, 6.2 and 4.5 ng g−1 were obtained for TBT, DBT and MBT, respectively.Methods continue to be developed using SPME as a very simple and efficient solventless sample preparation method. An automated analyser for the simultaneous determination of six organotin compounds in water and sediment samples used derivatization with sodium tetraethylborate followed by automated headspace SPME (100 μm polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) 30 min, 80 °C) and GC-EIMS under retention-time-locked conditions.60 Although optimum derivatization yields were obtained for butyl- and phenyltin compounds at pH 5.3 and 8, respectively, a pH of 5.3 was selected as the best compromise. The LOQ were in the ranges 1.3–15 ng l−1 and 1.0–6.3 μg kg−1 for water and sediment samples, respectively. A very similar method, developed for the determination of organotin compounds in water samples, used in situ ethylation of the organotin compounds and simultaneous SPME (100 μm PDMS, 30 min, 45 °C) of the derivatives in a headspace device.61 This method also provided LOD in the low ng l−1 range. Derivatization with sodium tetraphenylborate together with SPME (100 μm PDMS, 15 min, 40 °C) was a fast, simple and solvent-free alternative to traditional extraction techniques for the quantitative determination of methylmercury and inorganic Hg in sediments and biota samples.62 Although equilibrium in the extraction was only established after 50–60 min, an extraction time of 15 min was considered a suitable compromise between maximizing the extraction yield and minimizing the extraction time for routine analysis. The absolute LOD were 0.02 and 0.05 ng (as Hg) for methylmercury and HgII, respectively. A common feature of all these methods was the choice of non-polar PDMS as extractant with a 100 μm thick coating. Thinner coatings of 7 or 30 μm were less effective extractants.The analytical potential of fullerene as a sorbent for organometallic compounds in environmental samples has been explored by developing an automated SPE system for the simultaneous preconcentration of Hg and Sn species.63 The method was based on complexation with sodium diethyldithiocarbamate (4.0 × 10−3 M, pH 5.3), retention on a column of C60 fullerene and elution with ethyl acetate (0.2 M) containing sodium tetra-n-propylborate (2.8 × 10−2 M) as derivatizing agent. The flow rates and reactor length were chosen to give a derivatization time of 5.5 min. The main challenge was to select conditions suitable for the simultaneous extraction of both Hg and Sn compounds, in particular for the extraction of Hg compounds from sediments. The extraction time in this new method (2 min) was considerably shorter than that (45 min) in a previous method for the extraction of Hg compounds from sediments. The LOD were 0.8–1.5 pg ml−1 (sample volume 50 ml) and the precisions 6.2–7.4%.Because elemental S is commonly used as a fuel component in inorganic explosive mixtures, residues from explosive mixtures also contain S. A widely used presumptive chemical colour test for the presence of S has been declared unacceptable for sole positive identification so alternative methods are required. The LOD of 2.5 ng (injected onto the GC column) of a new efficient and conclusive GC-EIMS procedure was 400 times better than that for the chemical colour test.64 A CS2 wash of the sample was reduced in volume by evaporation and injected directly into the GC. Identification of S was based on both retention time and fragmentation pattern. The longer analysis time (10 min) than that of the colour test was considered the sole disadvantage of the new method, the use of which was recommended for cases in which there was insufficient material to perform analysis by XRD or EDX.A simple yet sensitive (LOD 1 mg l−1) method for the determination of bromide in whole blood or urine used pentafluorobenzyl p-toluenesulfonate (100 mM in acetone and mixed 5∶1 with 0.5 M phosphate buffer, pH 6.8) as alkylating agent.65 Samples (0.1 ml) were derivatized directly without a deproteinization step. In the positive-ion EI mode, the molecular ion peak of the bromide derivative was observed at m/z 260 and the base ion peak at m/z 181 ([M−Br]+). In the negative-ion CI mode, the base ion peak was Br− at m/z 79. The calibration curve, linear over the range 2–100 mg l−1, allowed Br− to be determined in whole blood and urine from subjects poisoned through inhalation of brominated hydrocarbons.4 Glow discharge mass spectrometry (GDMS)4.1 ReviewA concise yet comprehensive review with 169 references to key publications provided an excellent overview and critical discussion of methodological aspects of GDMS.66 In addition to consideration of the present state of the art, figures of merit, application areas and foreseen developments, particular attention was paid to the reasons for the discrepancies between modelling and experimental studies. For instance, simulations studies were especially limited in accounting for the effects from asymmetry and moisture levels while the process was often described in terms of parameters such as the gas or electrode temperatures, which were almost inaccessible experimentally. This compromised attempts to model RSF when no RM were available. The authors believed that research should focus on increases in data acquisition rates to improve depth resolution, fast flow (FF) sources to enhance sample throughput and the use of pulsed GD to improve LOD and suppression of discharge gas ions.4.2 Analytical methodologyA suite of 27 RM with cobalt, copper, iron or nickel matrices allowed absolute quantitation strategies for multi-elemental analysis to be evaluated.67 Specifically, a standardless quantification was compared with the use of an average RSF derived from RM with different matrices, and the application of a specific RSF determined using a matrix-matched RM. In comparison with the standardless method, RSF-based quantification improved the agreement between the experimental and the certified values by a factor 2–4. An accuracy of 5–12% was achieved for elements with concentrations >1%. Interestingly, the use of matrix-specific RSF did not dramatically improve the accuracy in comparison with quantification using average-RSF.The benefits from the coupling of GDMS to capillary GC for quantitative speciation analysis have been further explored. Sample introduction into the afterglow region source rather than into the active discharge region of a FF GD source connected to a quadrupole mass analyser improved the quantitative speciation analysis of organotin compounds.68 The fast transfer of the analyte to the sampling cone minimized diffusion losses and source fouling. Detection of Sn+ or SnH+ ion signals resulted in an absolute LOD of 0.2–0.4 pg and a precision of better than 5% (5 injections). The linear range extended over 3–4 orders of magnitude. Additionally, the ion extraction voltage could be used to control the degree of fragmentation without affecting the primary discharge. Detection of structural ions provided significant specificity but the LOD was >30 pg. Another study on the use of structural ions for quantitative speciation exploited the benefits arising from selective sampling of ions in the pre-peak, plateau and after-peak regime in a ms-pulsed GD TOFMS system.69 Analysis of halogenated hydrocarbons revealed that the linear range, precision and LOD achieved through detection of structural ions was equal or even superior to those obtained through conventional detection of atomic ions. The authors commented, however, that both the LOD and the reproducibility had to be improved before the method could be seen as a viable alternative to existing speciation methods.4.3 Depth profilingLeaking of hydrogen into a dc GD source resulted in an improved resolution in depth profiling of metals as a consequence of the suppression of the discharge ion suppression and reduction of the sputter rate under optimized conditions.70 Analysis of metal samples (copper, iron or nickel matrix) using Ar with up to 10% (v/v) H2 showed that the sputter rate and, in particular, its variation as a function of the applied power decreased with the H2 concentration in the discharge gas. The addition of 0.5% H2 was recommended as it increased the analyte:Ar+ ion intensity ratio by a factor of up to 3. Interestingly, the analyte signal improvement occurred for both the major and minor elements in the sample. Furthermore, the depth resolution at the interface of Cr and Sn coatings (50–300 nm thick) on steel samples improved by 18 and 30%, respectively.A systematic study of different source designs showed the critical dependence of depth resolution, sensitivity and stability on the geometry of a FF Grimm-type source operated in either dc or rf mode and connected to a HR magnetic sector analyser.71 In comparison with GD in the static regime, FF conditions (flow rate 240 ml min−1) increased the analyte ion intensities at least ten-fold and improved the analyte:discharge ion intensity ratio by at least two orders of magnitude. Moreover, FF conditions minimized redeposition of sputtered material around the crater but caused preferential sputtering from a ring shape area close to the anode. The resulting curvature of the crater bottom critically depended on the distance between the flow tube and the sample surface. Optimization allowed the height variations over the crater bottom to be reduced to 2.5 and 10 μm for copper and silicon samples, respectively.5 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)5.1 Fundamental studies and instrumentationA secondary electron multiplier (EM) has been characterized using a wide range of beam intensities.72 Electron multiplier non-linearity was tested by measuring 234U∶238U and 235U∶238U ratios using MC-ICP-MS with 234U or 235U measured by the EM and 238U measured on a Faraday detector. Whereas a standard peak jumping protocol was not sensitive enough to show EM non-linearity below 105 cps, an alternative approach clearly revealed EM non-linearity of 0.3–1.1% per decade between 2 × 103 and 8 × 104 cps. This non-linearity was also demonstrated for 229Th∶232Th and 230Th∶232Th, suggesting that the effect is element independent. The non-linearity could not be explained by dead time of either the EM or the MC-ICP-MS counting system. Memory effects were also observed for the EM up to 20 s after application of a high intensity beam. Protocols to characterize EM non-linearity were outlined.The fate of aerosol droplets in the ICP has been studied using two novel laser-based imaging techniques.73,74 Particle image velocimetry was used to measure 2-D velocity field maps and optical patternation was used to measure droplet size and distribution. Firstly, the primary aerosols produced by three types of nebulizers were measured: a direct injection high efficiency nebulizer (DIHEN), a large bore DIHEN and a perfluoroalkyl (PFA) micronebulizer.73 Also, the tertiary aerosol was measured from the PFA nebulizer connected to a Scott-type spray chamber. Although most velocity vectors were overwhelmingly horizontal, some vectors did have a noticeable vertical component near the fringes of the aerosol spray, close to the nebulizer nozzle. All primary aerosols exhibited faster droplets in the centre of the spray cone and slower droplets at the fringes. Slower droplets tended to collide with each other, leading to droplet coalescence. Droplet velocities varied along the central channel and the position of maximum velocity was further away for the PFA nebulizer (10–15 mm) than for either of the DIHEN (5–10 mm) because the PFA nebulizer used a higher gas flow rate. In comparison, tertiary aerosol droplets had substantially slower, uniform velocities and a narrower size distribution and were confined to the central channel. The results suggested that both large and fast droplets were removed in the spray chamber, which acted as a momentum filter rather than just a size filter. Particle imaging velocimetry was subsequently used to study droplets entering the ICP torch without the plasma ignited.74 The DIHEN produced a very wide spray cone, with some droplets likely to enter the induction region of the ICP where they could cause plasma instability and interferences. In contrast, the tertiary aerosol from the PFA nebulizer and spray chamber was confined to the centre of the ICP torch, probably leading to a more homogeneous plasma with less noise. By averaging over 100 images, it was estimated that only 30% of DIHEN droplets entered the central channel. The authors suggest that a DIHEN in which more aerosol is confined to the central channel should be more sensitive. Finally, particle tracking velocimetry was used to track droplets surviving evaporation within the ICP itself and to produce qualitative distributions of the axial and radial velocity of surviving droplets. The tertiary aerosol showed few surviving droplets with no radial velocity and relatively slow axial velocities. Surviving droplets from both DIHEN had faster axial velocities than those from the tertiary aerosol and a significant distribution of radial velocities. More surviving droplets were seen for the large bore DIHEN than the DIHEN, probably because it produced bigger droplets. Faster droplets were also more likely to survive the ICP as there was less time for their desolvation. The results highlighted the importance of low droplet velocity for efficient droplet evaporation.5.2 InterferencesThe effect of volatile organic compounds on ICP processes has been further investigated. Signal enhancement for elements with high IP has been achieved by introducing acetone (0–4 mol C l−1), methanol (0–9.9 mol C l−1) or acetic acid (0–35 mol C l−1) directly into the spray chamber.75 Signals of As and Se were improved by factors of about 3–4 but only minimal enhancement was seen for easily ionizable Cd and Rb. Mercury also showed only minimal signal enhancement, despite its high IP. All signals decreased at high C concentrations, although C deposition on to the interface cones was never observed. Acetone improved the signal most, possibly because it had the highest vapour pressure and its addition resulted in more accurate Se analysis of NIST SRM 1577b (Bovine Liver) and two urine samples compared with conventional ICP-MS. In a similar manner, the sensitivity of a sector field (SF) ICP-MS instrument was improved by adding methane through a second port in the double-pass PFA spray chamber.76 Compared with methane addition to either the plasma or auxiliary Ar gas flows, this approach used less methane for the same signal enhancement. The signal for elements with high ionization energies increased by 2–4 compared with operation without methane. Elements with high oxide bond dissociation energies also gave an improved signal, probably because oxide formation was suppressed by the preferential formation of CO. All other elements showed only small improvements (10–20%), or significant decreases in sensitivity as methane gas flow rate increased. Although methane addition suppressed 40Ar35Cl+ formation, high methane flow rates increased C-based spectral interferences and the hotter plasma also caused higher background signals derived from the sample introduction system. Discussion of both these impacts was limited and formation of new interfering species not previously considered may limit the multielement application of this method. Addition of ethanol (4% v/v) to samples before ICP-MS analysis also suppressed Ar-based interferences.77 Ethanol addition mitigated the signal suppression of elements with high IP that was seen with increasing HNO3 concentration, although the optimum nebulizer gas flow decreased with increasing solvent vapour load. Production of 40Ar35Cl+ was also suppressed by an order of magnitude when ethanol was added, even when the matrix contained Cl, and the As LOD calculated from a blank containing 3% HNO3 improved slightly from 0.006 ng ml−1 to 0.002 ng ml−1.A study of interferences resulting from glucose, sucrose and fructose found that sugar molecules did not completely break down in the ICP and produced complex polyatomic ions throughout the entire mass range.78 The almost identical polyatomic ions observed in the spectra for all three sugars were not present in spectra produced by ethanol or acetic acid. The results suggested that the polyatomic ions were present because of insufficient breakdown time in the ICP but could also have been influenced by the higher plasma loading from the sugars compared with the more volatile acetic acid or ethanol. Analysis of diluted Canadian icewine containing >4% combined fructose and glucose demonstrated that As, Cd and Ni could suffer from polyatomic ion interferences. Fragmentation patterns proposed for sugar breakdown in the ICP were based on ESI-MS/MS spectra.Modulation of the central gas flow of an ICP-TOFMS instrument allowed rapid switching between hot and cold plasma conditions to be employed during an analysis.79 Under normal hot plasma conditions, samples were introduced using a concentric pneumatic nebulizer at a gas flow rate of 1 ml min−1. Cool plasma conditions were achieved by increasing the central gas flow rate alone, which was modulated by a supplementary flow of Ar added to the tertiary aerosol by means of a cyclonic mixer. This allowed the same nebulizer conditions to be used under both high and low flow rates. At high flow rates 14N16O+ and 1H316O+ signals became more apparent, consistent with cold plasma conditions. Some light elements (e.g., Li and Mg) demonstrated better S/N in cool plasma conditions, but generally most elements showed better S/N in hot plasma conditions. In particular, elements with high oxide bond strengths gave no signal under cold plasma conditions. To operate in the modulated mode, the supplementary gas flow was cycled between low (0.05 ml min−1) and high (0.45 ml min−1) flows at 10 Hz. Measurements of ion signals at m/z 56 from HNO3 with and without 50 ppb Fe confirmed that ArO+ formation was substantially lower during the cool plasma cycle than the hot plasma cycle. The LOD of only Fe, Li and Mg were improved in the cool plasma cycle.Use of 2H2 as the reaction gas in a collision cell (CC) ICP-MS instrument instead of H2 improved Se measurement in Br-containing samples of urine and blood plasma.80 Measurements of 77Se, 78Se, 80Se and 82Se were compared for non-, H2 and 2H2 reaction modes and calibrated externally with an inorganic Se standard. For blood plasma samples (Br∶Se >5), all isotopes were overestimated in the non-reaction mode and 80Se was unable to be determined due to 40Ar2+ formation. In the H2 mode 80Se and 82Se were overestimated, presumably due to production of 79Br1H+ and 81Br1H+. This overestimation was less for urine samples because Br∶Se was ∼1.5. Calculated Se concentrations were the same for all isotopes for both blood plasma and urine samples in the 2H2 mode, which could be beneficial for studies using enriched Se isotope tracers.Use of NH3 as the cell reaction gas in LA-DRC-ICP-MS determination of Cr in polymers circumvented the problem of severe C interferences seen in non-reaction mode.81 Although there was significant suppression of both Cu and Ti signals, the high levels of these elements in polyethylene meant that measurement was still possible. In contrast, the As signal was suppressed almost completely and could not be measured in the presence of NH3. The authors noted that use of NH3 might cause the formation of unexpected polyatomic ions that themselves could cause interferences in the determination of other elements.5.3 Sample introduction5.3.1 Laser ablation (LA). In a review of elemental fractionation in LA-ICP-MS, Günther and Hattendorf considered that further improvement in figures of merit relied on improved spatial resolution and reduced matrix dependency.82 These would be achieved by development in specific areas, including models describing particle formation and agglomeration, better aerosol transport efficiency, complete ionization in the ICP and truly simultaneous isotope detection. A study of the effect of sample matrix composition on elemental fractionation using a Nd∶YAG laser (λ = 266 nm) showed that the absorption of synthetic lithium tetraborate glasses at 266 nm increased with increasing iron oxide content and this influenced how the sample ablated more than sample melting point did.83 Laser energy was concentrated into a smaller volume in highly absorbing samples and the sample volume was estimated to decrease by a factor of four between a transparent glass with no added Fe and a glass with 6% by weight Fe2O3. Average particle sizes were also smaller for aerosols produced from glass with 6% by weight Fe2O3. Separation of large particles from aerosols from the transparent glass indicated that elements were not homogeneously distributed between different particle sizes. The low efficiencies calculated for all glasses indicated that the majority of ablated material remained within the ablation cell. A study of aerosols generated from glasses and brass demonstrated two fundamentally different particle structures.84 Particles collected on filters were inspected using SEM imaging. A grid-like agglomeration of particles smaller than ∼10 nm was ascribed to condensation from the vapour phase and experiments using fewer laser pulses indicated that nanoparticle agglomeration was not influenced by collection on the filter. Large spherical particles with no significant agglomeration were ascribed to ejection of liquid droplets and were more likely to be produced from transparent materials or at higher power. The dependence of the agglomerate shape on sample matrix had implications for the use of transparent glasses such as NIST 610 to calibrate more absorbent samples. Droplet ejection may lead to the formation of non-stoichiometric aerosols and should be avoided. A numerical model developed for ns ablation of metallic samples (targets) was used to investigate how samples responded to different LA conditions.84 Target heating, melting and vaporization were incorporated in the model, which did not yet include mechanisms for particle formation. Data for ablation of a copper target were presented for a wide range of laser operating conditions typical of LA-ICP-MS. As was expected, heating, melting and vaporization all increased with increasing laser irradiance. The effect of laser pulse duration depended on whether laser irradiance or laser fluence was kept constant. In general, good agreement was reached between data from the model and experimental data. The model may be able to predict the response of a target to LA and provide data that would otherwise be difficult to obtain experimentally.Measurement of Fe isotopes in small samples by LA-HR-MC-ICP-MS has presented evidence of isotopic fractionation during LA.86 Analysis of single spots on IRMM CRM 014 (metallic Fe) demonstrated that 56Fe∶54Fe ratios changed systematically by up to 4‰ during the ablation. An initial enrichment of 56Fe was followed by a depletion as the crater became deeper. It was postulated that finer particles were isotopically lighter than large particles and that isotopically fractionated material previously deposited on the crater walls could be re-ablated. External correction of isotopic fractionation has been made using sol–gel standards produced at room temperature and spiked with NIST SRM 981 (common lead) and NIST SRM 982 (equal atom lead).87 The gels were derived from silicon oxide and therefore matched the matrix of glass samples. Isotopic fractionation was observed which was not related to production of the sol–gel and which could not be corrected using measurements of mass bias from solutions. It was estimated for 208Pb∶206Pb that the sum of fractionation and mass bias from LA was 6.5%, compared with an average bias of ∼1.5% for solution analysis. Measurements of 207Pb∶206Pb and 208Pb∶206Pb for NIST SRM 612 (Trace Elements in Glass) were in good agreement with literature values after mass bias correction using the sol–gels. The authors suggested that sol–gel standards with custom-made isotopic ratios could correct for both instrumental mass bias and LA isotopic fractionation.Several studies have demonstrated the effect of particle size on elemental composition in ablated aerosols. The chemical and phase composition of particles produced by Nd∶YAG (λ = 266 nm) LA of silicate glasses and zircon were studied by SEM and HR-TEM techniques.88 In aerosols generated by LA of silicate glasses, large particles composed of oval melt droplets and fragments derived directly from the sample. Smaller particles aggregated from condensates in the vapour phase. Ion probe analysis of the ejecta blanket around the ablation pits demonstrated significant variations in Pb, Th, and U composition, while other results suggested that very small particles were enriched with Pb relative to U. The relationship of elemental fractionation and particle size in zircon was very different from that in the glasses, emphasizing that different materials ablate very differently. Signal fluctuations and spikes observed in the ablation of a brass sample were eliminated when an in-line cascade impactor was operated with a 105 nm cut off diameter.89 Short term internal precision improved to 4% from 20% when the impactor was not used. External precision between spots was better than 2%. However, 66Zn∶65Cu ratios increased from ∼0.6 to ∼0.8 as the cut off diameter increased, confirming previous reported Zn enrichment in smaller particles. The SEM analysis of particles collected from the impactor showed that most particles were spherical, resembling re-solidified molten droplets, and confirmed that the smallest droplets were enriched in Zn.90 The authors suggested that molten droplets depleted in relatively volatile Zn acted as nucleation points for condensation of the Zn-rich vapour phase. If the entire surface of each droplet received a layer of Zn-rich condensate, then smaller molten droplets would have relatively more Zn than larger droplets. Aerosols generated by the near-IR (λ = 795 nm) fs LA of NIST 1412 (multicomponent glass) were classified by analysing the particles collected in each stage of a 13-stage low-pressure impactor.91 Although the majority of particles had diameters <0.1 μm, noticeable numbers of particles existed with diameters of 0.1–1 μm. The proportion of large particles increased at low laser fluence (e.g. 2 J cm−1). There was a consistent pattern of volatile elements (Pb, Zn) enriched in small particles and less volatile elements (Ba, Ca, Sr) enriched in larger particles.Three methods for the determination of agglomerate particle size distributions in LA aerosols were particle impaction, differential mobility analysis and optical particle sizing.92 Particle impaction allowed exact determination of mass collected per size fraction but off-line analyses were necessary and agglomerates up to 1.5 μm long were collected by the impactor stage corresponding to an aerodynamic diameter of 30 nm. In contrast, differential mobility analysis matched agglomerates closely to their physical diameter but, as this was much greater than their volume equivalent diameter, determinations of total mass for each particle size were inaccurate. Optical measurements gave a good approximation of the volume equivalent diameter of agglomerates.Manipulation of particle size distributions of LA aerosols has been attempted. In the electrothermal vaporization (ETV) of aerosols of 21 different single element metals, brass and steel samples, concurrent ICP-MS and particle size measurements were made.93 The signal intensity dropped as the ETV temperature was increased until a minimum was reached and the signal subsequently increased. The temperature at which minimum signal occurred was different for each element and the effect was less apparent for elements with high vaporization temperatures. It was postulated that elements began to vaporize at a temperature approximately 500 °C below their boiling points, and were absorbed on the surface of the ETV transfer tube. At higher temperatures the adsorbed elements were re-released. The effect of ETV on particle size distribution depended on elemental melting point and therefore this technique cannot easily be used to reduce elemental fraction caused by incomplete vaporization of large particles in the ICP. However, ETV was a suitable tool for studying the composition and high temperature behaviour of LA aerosols and coarsely simulated heating processes occurring within the ICP. A double pulse LA technique improved both internal and external RSD for single pulse LA-ICP-MS.94 An initial laser pulse from a dual pulsed Nd∶YAG laser (λ = 266 nm) was used to ablate mass from the brass sample (spot size 40 μm), before application of another pulse from a second laser head after a fixed delay. It was hypothesized that the second pulse interacted with larger particles in the aerosol produced during the initial pulse, thereby producing a narrower particle size distribution. The signal intensities for both 65Cu and 66Zn increased and fewer spikes were observed when the second laser pulse was delayed by 2 μs rather than 1 s. Signal increases (50–100%) were proportionally larger than the increase in crater volume (∼20%). Shadowgraph images suggested that the aerosol formed a denser cloud of smaller particles after interaction with the second laser pulse. The RSD of triplicate measurements was improved by a factor of 5 compared with single pulse analysis.The production of oxides of Ba and the light REE in LA-ICP-MS was related to the strength of the M–O bond and nebulizer gas flow rate but was found to be minimized when ThO+∶Th+ < 2.5%.95 The presence of oxygen gas within the ablation chamber also influenced oxide formation, which decreased with increasing stabilization time until a steady state was reached after 60–90 min. Neither pulse rate nor spot diameter had any systematic effect on oxide formation, suggesting minimal oxide formation during ablation. Analysis of several glass RM showed that, except in the case of Gd, light REE oxide interferences on middle REE elements were insignificant.Although analysis of liquid samples by LA of dried droplets demonstrated a two to seven-fold enhancement of transport efficiency, calibration proved difficult and only ID provided accuracy comparable to that of solution ICP-MS.96 Furthermore, the significantly better precision of solution ICP-MS, even when ID was used for LA analysis, resulted in better LOD. The poor precision of LA analysis was attributed to the small absolute intensities measured and the uncertainty predicted by counting statistics was large. Although the overall performance of LA analysis was poorer than that of solution analysis, absolute sensitivities and atom transport efficiencies were better for LA analysis. Estimated sample throughput was high (250 samples h−1), although the time required to process the data off-line was not mentioned. The short transient signal (5–10 s) means that multi-element analysis is not possible with a sequential quadrupole mass analyser. The only advantage of using this method would be if solution analysis was limited by sample volume or matrix.A rotating-ablation-cell gas-inlet-nozzle was designed to avoid producing a gas jet that had high transport efficiency in the path of the jet, but only low flush efficiencies in marginal regions.97 The cylindrical ablation chamber (30 cm3) had a ‘turbo’ gas inlet with 4 eccentric holes in the tip of nozzle. Although, in comparison with a traditional gas inlet, the nozzle improved the signal in the static mode, point-to-point repeatability was poor at slow rotation (1300 rpm), possibly due to increased turbulence in the chamber. However, at fast rotation (2500 rpm) point-to-point repeatability improved by 50% over slow rotation, although the signal was not dramatically higher. Signals from single shots were characterized by a smoother profile, less dispersion and fewer secondary spikes, indicating rapid aerosol transport with the fast rotating nozzle. Measurement of fractionation indices for Ag, Al, Ce and U all indicated that the fast rotating nozzle produced less elemental fractionation than the traditional outlet.In an in-torch LA sampling configuration, the LA sample was placed in the torch at the tip of the injector tube.98 The Nd∶YAG (λ = 266 nm) laser beam was then orthogonally focused through the torch and onto the sample. Placement at the tip of the injector tube allowed the carrier gas to provide fast transport of the ablated material into the ICP and samples were changed without disturbing the ICP by pulling out and replacing the injector tube. Samples were restricted to those with high melting points as temperatures could reach 500 °C. Both conventional and in-torch LA were possible with the system devised. Analysis of NIST SRM 610 for 238U showed in-torch signals were significantly higher but considerably shorter (4 ms compared to 2 s). Analysis of peak shapes indicated that the aerosol produced in the torch was affected by similar diffusion processes to the aerosol produced in the cell but that dispersion was significantly reduced. Multi-element analysis of in-torch generated aerosols will require ICP-TOFMS, however, as quadrupole ICP-MS is not capable of multi-element analysis within the lifetime of the transient signal.5.3.2 Nebulization. Techniques for the introduction of microvolume liquid samples have been reviewed by Todolí and Mermet.99 The advantages of working with sub-ml volume samples included a reduced solvent loading on the ICP, minimization of interference formation and improved waste management. Disadvantages included potentially long signal stabilization times at low flow rates and lower sensitivity. The principles of the most commonly used micronebulizers and spray chambers were described. Aerosol desolvation could also minimize solvent load, washout times and interferences. Direct injection of aerosols into the ICP could improve aerosol transport efficiency but coarse aerosol droplets would cause ICP instability. As well as continuous sample introduction, discrete sample introduction methods including FI and ETV were described.A PEEK cyclonic spray chamber has been coupled directly to a PFA Scott-type double pass spray chamber to produce a tandem HF-resistant spray chamber for SF-ICP-MS.100 Signals for 115In increased by 280% compared with the performance from either the cyclonic or Scott-type spray chamber alone. The sensitivity increase was mass dependent, however, with lower m/z giving lower gains (∼240%) than higher m/z (∼300%). The precision of replicate 115In analyses improved by a factor of three and oxide formation was lower because the aerosol was drier.The variability in performance of handmade commercially available nebulizers was demonstrated by assessing four nebulizers of the same make and model.101 Slight differences in the positioning of the gas outlet in relation to the central sample outlet impacted on the absolute signal each nebulizer produced. The best signal was achieved when the gas outlet was positioned so that the aerosol was directed towards the centre of the spray chamber. The authors advised that nebulizers be individually optimized by manually rotating them in the spray chamber until the optimum signal is reached.Directly heating the sample using a rod heater in a new membrane filter desolvating sample introduction system reduced by an order of magnitude the length of membrane filter required compared with conventional membrane filter desolvation systems.102 This resulted in fewer memory effects and a shorter washout time and improved the precision of 56Fe∶54Fe ratio measurement by MC-ICP-MS to 0.04%. The membrane filter removed water vapour and thereby reduced production of 40Ar16O+ ions. Analyte sensitivity was comparable to that of conventional solution nebulization, indicating that the membrane filter did not cause significant loss of analyte.5.3.3 Thermal vaporization. Isobaric interferences for Cd, Ge, In, Ni, Se, Sn and Zn have been overcome by optimization of transient signals in ETV-ICP-TOFMS.103 Peak broadening was modelled using Monte Carlo simulations of Cu vaporization and transport. Use of 1.5 mm id tubing decreased the transit time between the ETV and the ICP and produced much narrower peaks compared with 6 mm id tubing. The width of experimentally measured peaks for Cu fitted the simulated profiles very well for both sizes of tubing but the simulated peak height was normally greater than experimentally measured heights, particularly at lower rates of heating. This finding was ascribed to non-uniform temperatures within the furnace. Results showed that 116Cd and 116Sn were separated at heating rates of 625 °C s−1 and lower when using the 1.5 mm tubing, but only at either 310 or 250 °C s−1 when using the 6 mm tubing. However, the signal obtained using the 1.5 mm tubing was only 25% of the signal obtained using 6 mm tubing. This could not be explained. Furthermore, Cd∶Sn ratios were frequently different from the expected ratios based on isotopic abundances, probably because of the differences in vaporization, transport and ionization efficiency of each element.Direct determination of Hg in solid samples has been achieved by ID-ETV-ICP-MS using a 200Hg-enriched gaseous phase generated from a droplet of enriched metallic Hg mixed with a smaller amount of natural Hg and placed in a polyethylene permeation tube.104 The Hg was released from the permeation tube by heating in a thermostatted water bath and transported into the graphite tube by a flow of Ar gas. The use of ID allowed signal suppression by matrix components during volatilization to be corrected and gave accurate determination of Hg in wet fish samples, as well as hair and sediment RM. Analysis of the hair RM was more accurate than that of the sediment RM, probably because the hair was completely volatilized. The LOD for the method was 6 ng g−1.5.3.4 Chemical vapour generation. A general reaction scheme based on fundamental chemistry and previously reported literature has been presented for chemical vapour generation of the transition and noble metals.105 The reaction scheme was based on a stepwise replacement of ligands by hydrogen but, while traditional hydride-forming elements have stable intermediate and final products, the stability of transition and noble hydrides is low and the stability of the intermediate products can vary. Investigation of the effect of spray chamber material and design allowed elements to be divided into four groups, based on observed memory effects, performance in glass and ryton spray chambers and the effect of the acid-generating medium used. It was demonstrated that some intermediate products can produce volatile species through surface-mediated reactions.5.3.5 Flow injection. An ultra-low dead-volume nanoinjection valve (25 nl internal volume, 54 nl total port-to-port volume) was used for nanovolume FI determination of Pu and U at ultra-trace concentrations.106 Sample introduction to the SF-ICP-MS instrument was tested using a microflow total consumption nebulizer, operating at 7 μl min−1, fitted to a low dead-volume single-pass spray chamber. The aerosol was almost completely desolvated at nebulizer gas flow rates of >1.1 l min−1. The high sample transport efficiency and the minimal solvent plasma loading of the total consumption nebulizer showed very good sensitivity compared with other commercial nebulizers such as a DIHEN and a microconcentric nebulizer. The LOD of 242Pu and 238U were 0.3 and 1.6 ng l−1, respectively. The nanovolume injector provided significant preconcentration of even small samples and good accuracy and precision were obtained for U isotope ratios in NIST U350 isotopic standard.5.4 SpeciationNumerous reviews of hyphenated ICP-MS speciation techniques have been published. A review of trends since 2000 described developments in speciation using GC, LC, CE and field flow fractionation.107 Consideration of the literature revealed that LC is still by far the most commonly used separation method but that use of CE has overtaken that of GC, reflecting a growing number of bioanalytical applications. A review by Shah and Caruso108 of the importance of ICP-MS in the speciation of P also highlighted the continued widespread use of LC-ICP-MS and increased use of CE-ICP-MS. Other topics discussed included protein separation using a gel electrophoresis system, with element-specific detection by LA-ICP-MS, and the impact of polyatomic ion interferences on non-metals. A review by Michalke109 summarized the basic principles of both CE and ICP-MS and gave a detailed discussion of the requirements for coupling the two techniques, including closure of the CE circuit, adjustment of CE flow rate to the optimum flow rate for the ICP-MS nebulizer and a low dead-volume. A trend away from the use of home-made nebulizers to commercially available micronebulizers was noted and sheath-flow interfaces remained the most popular interface option. Further interface optimization was identified as a key issue for continuing CE-ICP-MS development.Three nebulizers (a PFA 20 micro-flow nebulizer, a commercially available CE nebulizer and a modified CE nebulizer with optimized nebulizer capillary) have been tested for their suitability in the coupling of capillary or nano-LC to ICP-MS.110 All three were tested with either a cyclonic spray chamber (40 ml internal volume) or a home-made injector tube extension (4 ml internal volume) that allowed the nebulizer to be directly coupled to the ICP torch. The PFA 20 nebulizer could not be used at flow rates of <2.5 μl min−1, whereas both CE nebulizers demonstrated stable operation at 0.1 μl min−1. Capillary LC-ICP-MS was demonstrated with separation of a tryptic digest of beta casein and on-line nano-LC-ICP-MS (0.5 μl min−1 flow rate) was demonstrated for the first time, although further optimization was required. A new CE-ICP-MS interface, consisting of a silica capillary encased in an electrically grounded steel T-piece, was designed to overcome the flow discrepancy between the CE (∼0.1 μl min−1) and ICP-MS (>500 μl min−1) normally encountered.111 A make-up solution (0.3 M HNO3) flowed though the T-piece to give closure of the CE circuit. The interface was tested with three micronebulizers: a concentric quartz nebulizer, operated with a peristaltic pump at variable flow rates (5–160 μl min−1) and two concentric PFA nebulizers, operated under self aspiration, with nominal flow rates of 20 and 50 μl min−1. The highest absolute sensitivity was achieved with the quartz nebulizer at flow rates >100 μl min−1 but the extra dilution of the CE eluent required meant that overall sensitivity was poor. Absolute sensitivity for the quartz nebulizer was poorer than that for either of the two PFA nebulizers at their natural uptake. After accounting for dilution, the 20 μl min−1 PFA nebulizer gave best sensitivity. However, the 50 μl min−1 PFA nebulizer was less prone to clogging and gave a more stable signal. It was found that the syringe pump supplying the make-up solution could not be calibrated exactly to the flow rate of the nebulizer and therefore a second T-piece was added through which a second make-up solution flowed freely to compensate for natural variation. The LOD for CE-ICP-MS for a range of elements were better by 1–3 orders of magnitude than those for conventional CE with UV detection, but the LOD for Pu was still too poor for successful determination of Pu at concentrations found in environmental samples. Analysis of these samples would require use of a lower flow nebulizer or a more sensitive ICP-MS instrument.The online coupling of gel electrophoresis to SF-ICP-MS has been described for the first time.112 Gels were housed in glass tubes set between two Pt electrodes fixed at each end by a frit permeable to the analytes of interest. A buffer solution, pumped through a second orthogonally oriented tube, eluted analytes from the gel as they travelled towards the anode. The eluent was directly pumped through a self-aspirating microflow nebulizer into the SF-ICP-MS instrument. The system was used to separate ATP and phosphate and for the separation of double-stranded DNA fragments, although for both cases separation times (40–50 min) were long.Three sample introduction systems (a microconcentric nebulizer and membrane desolvator, a microconcentric nebulizer connected to a cyclonic spray chamber and a DIN) have been tested for Se speciation using HPLC-ICP-MS with high concentrations of methanol.113 Se-containing compounds in 50% methanol were introduced into each system by FI at a flow rate of 50 μl min−1. Most molecules showed comparable response factors for each sample introduction system but both selenite and methaneseleninic acid had very low transmission though the membrane desolvator. This was ascribed to evaporative loss. Although the DIN gave best precision (1.6%) and LOD (100 ng Se l−1), its signal intensity changed with increasing methanol concentration so its use was preferred only when methanol gradients remained between 35 and 75%. When wider gradients were used, the microconcentric nebulizer coupled to the membrane desolvator was more suitable.Calibration of separation methods using ID remains popular. A mathematical approach for blank correction of both ID and reverse ID demonstrated that only a fraction of the blank should be subtracted from the gross analyte concentration when the blank contributed to both ID and reverse ID processes.114 The full blank should only be subtracted when there was no contribution to the reverse ID process. The approach was applied to the determination of methylmercury in tuna in which contamination from the NaOAc–HOAc buffer solution contributed approximately 7% of the total methylmercury in the sample. Single and multiple ID procedures have been compared for determination of butyltin compounds in sediments using GC-ICP-MS.115 A triple-spike procedure involved addition of a spike containing MBT, DBT and TBT, each enriched with a different Sn isotope (117Sn, 118Sn and 119Sn, respectively). Three independent isotope ratios could therefore be measured for each species, allowing both concentration and interconversion reactions to be determined. In the single-spike procedure all butyltin species were enriched with 119Sn. Although both procedures gave the same accuracy, the precision of the triple-spike method (1.6–3%) was better than that of the single-spike procedure (2.1–6.1%). Uncertainty budgets, evaluated for both methods, indicated that a source of uncertainty (possibly sediment heterogeneity or variable extraction efficiency) in MBT results had previously been overlooked. It was suggested that the more complex triple-spike method be used to validate extraction procedures, with the single-spike procedure being used for routine analysis. Full uncertainty budgets for single and double-spike ID-MS procedures have been calculated for the determination of methylmercury in BCR CRM 464 (Tuna Fish) and NRCC CRM DORM-2 (Dogfish Muscle) using HPLC-CV-MC-ICP-MS.116 Double-spike ID-MS was more precise than single-spike ID-MS when a full uncertainty budget was estimated, while the converse applied when method precision was estimated only by the standard deviation of replicate analyses. Over 50% of the single-spike ID uncertainty budget was contributed by the standard uncertainty associated with 200Hg∶199Hg isotopes ratios calculated from IUPAC data.5.5 Analytical methodologyVerma and Santoyo117 compared data from a wide range of analytical techniques, including ICP-MS, to show that the ratios of the LOD for odd numbered elements to those of neighbouring even number elements were always <1 and often <0.5. The reason for this was not made clear. The effect was also evident in ICP-MS data alone and could not be related to odd–even ratios of IP, electronegativity or the cosmic abundance of each element. The authors did not discuss whether issues that normally affect ICP-MS LOD, such as the presence of polyatomic ions, quadrupole mass response, isotopic abundance and blank contamination, affected the results. It was suggested that the trend could be used to test the validity of LOD data. The authors also suggested that the blank concentrations and analytical sensitivity should always be reported alongside LOD estimates.Analysis of bacteria cells indicated that bacteria act more like solid particles than droplets in the ICP.118Bacillus subtilis was grown in a medium spiked with U and analysed by perfusion chromatography ICP-MS. Signals of Ca, Mg and U were up to 30% higher when cells were fully lysed. Chromatographic separation of partially and fully lysed bacteria demonstrated that the U-containing components in lysed cells eluted at the same retention times as inorganic U, rather than cell-bound U or U bound to macromolecules like proteins or DNA. Time-resolved ICP-MS measurements of 4 ms duration showed intermittent signal spikes for samples containing bacteria that were not apparent in analyses of inorganic U solutions and were thought to be related to the presence of intact bacteria. The spikes persisted even after desolvation of the aerosol.A novel sample preconcentration method for ICP-MS utilized the adsorption of analytes onto sub-μm sized particles of Fe(OH)3 and introduction to the ICP-MS instrument via a conventional Babington nebulizer and cooled double-pass spray chamber.119 Time-resolved analysis used the minimum integration time of 10 ms and measured only one isotope per experiment to maximize the data sampling rate. Particles of Fe(OH)3 were produced using a novel ‘spraying’ method in which an ultrasonic nebulizer was used to spray FeIII solution into a basic receiving solution causing precipitation. Measurement of 57Fe produced a time-resolved spectrum that contained a large number of spikes of intensity of 103–104 counts above the background (240 counts). Similar patterns were observed for 138Ba after adsorption onto Fe(OH)3 suspensions. The intensity of the spikes was related to the quantity of the analyte absorbed on each particle, whereas the frequency of spikes related to particle density. Analysis of single particles was not possible with the minimum integration time of the ICP-MS but was achieved by connecting an oscilloscope directly to the dual-mode EM detector. This confirmed that Ba was absorbed onto Fe(OH)3 particles rather than being in solution. Log–log plots of integrated spike intensity versus initial Ba concentration were linear and preconcentration of Ba onto the Fe(OH)3 particles improved Ba LOD from 1.2 pg ml−1 to 0.05 pg ml−1.5.6 Isotope ratio measurementPrecision and accuracy have been retained during the simplification of ID-ICP-MS procedures to make analysis more routine than is currently possible. A simplified calculation of ID-ICP-MS uncertainty budgets included only those components that contributed significantly to the uncertainty.120 In the approach adopted, a target uncertainty value was set based on the requirements of the analysis. The calculated uncertainly included only components that were estimated to be at least 20% of the target value. If the calculated value was less than the target value then uncertainty was reported as the target value. The approach was demonstrated for analysis of Ni in low-alloy steel and Cu in fresh water. Although the detailed budget included many more components than the simplified approach (e.g., 15 compared with 4), uncertainties calculated using both methods were similar. The accuracy and precision of ‘approximate signal matching’ ID has been investigated for samples deviating from the ideal 1∶1 ratio.121 Increasing the blend 32S∶34S ratio to 10 did not affect accuracy and precision of measurements of an unknown pure sulfur sample. Analysis of a diesel fuel sample with high S content (NIST candidate reference material SRM 1624d) also demonstrated that analyses at high ratios (32S∶34S = 14) were as accurate as those blended to a ratio of 1, provided the ratio in the sample and standard was matched to within 0.5%.The precision of isotope ratio measurements on transient signals has been studied for both quadrupole ICP-MS and ICP-TOFMS.122 A FI device was used to produce transient signals and measurement was made of 65Cu∶63Cu, 57Fe∶56Fe and 68Zn∶66Zn. Ratios were calculated using both area and point-to-point methods over fractional and whole peak windows. For quadrupole ICP-MS, both processing modes gave better precision and similar accuracy when a fractional window was used rather than the full peak. Irrespective of the processing method, best 65Cu∶63Cu precision was achieved using a 40% window, whereas best 68Zn∶66Zn precision was achieved with a 20% window. In contrast, point-to-point 57Fe∶56Fe ratios were more precise with a narrow window (10%) over the most intense part of the signal, whereas area integrated ratios were more precise with a wide window (90%). This corresponds to the behaviour expected from small abundance isotopes like 57Fe. Errors for ratios measured with ICP-TOFMS were very large compared with those obtained with quadrupole ICP-MS, particularly for Cu. This probably indicated that the deflection windows for Ar, ArO and Ar2 caused significant mass bias. The precision of isotope ratios measured from transient signals has also been investigated using an ICP-TOFMS with orthogonal, rather than axial, acceleration.123 Signals were in accordance with counting statistics for both signal processing modes (analog and pseudo pulse counting). Precision was calculated using both point-to-point and integrated peak area methods for transient signals of seven isotope ratios ranging from 1∶1 (142Nd∶144Nd) to 1∶46 (208Pb∶204Pb). Ratios calculated from peak areas were more accurate than those calculated using the point-to-point method. The precisions of analog and pulse counting modes were similar but could only be compared for small transient signals (120 pg absolute). Precision at higher concentrations, measurable only in the analog mode, was comparable to that of quadrupole ICP-MS.The contribution of both instrumental and procedural blanks to the error introduced by blank correction of MC-ICP-MS data was investigated using a simple empirical method.124 It was recommended that instrumental blanks be considered for standards and samples that do not undergo laboratory treatment, with blank correction using an average of bracketing blanks or a grand average of all blanks ever measured. The error caused by blank correction was then determined using an ‘instrumental blank database’ collected by measuring ‘on zero’ blanks between samples varying in signal intensity. The contribution of this error was ignored if it was smaller than that derived from counting statistics. It was acknowledged that the instrumental blank database would need to be reassessed every time the MC-ICP-MS system was disturbed, such as when sampling cones or tubing were changed. Blank correction using full procedural blanks would be required for samples undergoing laboratory treatment and subtraction of an average blank from a database (>25 samples) was recommended in this case.Sjrögen et al.125 warned of an apparent software-induced mass bias that could be interpreted as a concentration-dependent measurement bias or the effect of an interfering species. A dataset comprising 2000 SF-ICP-MS measurements, each of 235U and 238U, was analysed using both instrument software and off-line in a spreadsheet. The software reported 235U∶4238U ratios that were overestimated by up to 13% when the data was treated as 2000 separate analyses rather than when data were grouped into blocks. Although blocking measurements improved the accuracy, RSD increased as the number of blocks decreased below 100. Reported 235U∶238U ratios also altered as the U concentration decreased, an effect which could be interpreted as increasing interferences of a polyatomic ion. In contrast, no bias was seen when ratios were calculated manually and it was suggested that manual calculation was a more reliable method for obtaining accurate and precise ratios, despite the extra labour required.The importance of interference correction in the Sr isotope analysis of carbonates by LA-MC-ICP-MS has been emphasized.126 The ablation of carbonates produced significant CaAr and CaCa polyatomic interferences (e.g., 44Ca40Ar, 40Ca46Ca). Measurement at m/z 82 (40Ca42Ca and 42Ca40Ar) allowed measured 84Sr∶86Sr ratios to be corrected to expected values. Corrections for isobaric Kr interferences at m/z 82, 83, 84 and 86 were achieved by measuring ‘on zero’ blanks for each sample, immediately before LA. Although minimal, the isobaric interference of 87Rb on 87Sr was corrected by measuring 85Rb. The authors noted that, although unlikely, doubly charged REE ions could also impact on Sr isotope measurements and suggested that 89Y be measured as a proxy to alert the analyst to high REE concentrations. While the accuracy of modern mollusc shells analysis (50 ppm) by this method was poorer than that of optimum TIMS measurements published for NIST SRM 987 (strontium carbonate), the method was considered promising for analyses where high spatial resolution was required. Use of an excimer laser (λ = 193 nm) allowed the laser beam to be shaped as a long slit. By traversing the slit across a sample, high resolution was maintained but with better sensitivity than can be achieved by using a spot with equivalent diameter.6 Laser ionization mass spectrometry (LIMS)This section covers the one-step laser irradiation–ionization of solids. The increasing use of lasers for the post-ionization of neutrals generated by laser-beam irradiation or primary ion bombardment of solids is treated in the section on SNMS. Because the aim of RIMS is typically different from that of solid state analysis with focused laser or ion beams, publications dealing with the ionization of atomic beams or gas-phase neutrals under resonant conditions are dealt with separately from SNMS in the section on RIMS. Laser microprobe mass spectrometry (LMMS) refers to the use of a focused laser with a spot diameter on the sample of <5 μm. The application of LMMS to suspended particles in combination with TOF analysis is called aerosol-TOF LMMS (a-TOF LMMS). In this section, the symbols λ and τ denote the nominal laser wavelength and pulse duration, respectively.6.1 InstrumentationA commercial TOFMS instrument with ion reflector and orthogonal extraction was redesigned to include a He-filled high-pressure laser ionization source and an ion guide CC.127 The new approach aimed at reducing the kinetic energy distribution (KED) of the analyte ions to minimize the mass discrimination effects and at suppressing interferences from cluster and doubly charged ions. Specifically, a frequency-doubled Nd∶YAG laser (λ = 532 nm, τ = 5 ns) irradiated the sample with a spot diameter of 150 μm and a power density of 5 × 109 W cm−2. A hexapole ion guide CC was mounted between the ion source (filled with He at 40 mTorr) and the skimmer in front of the TOFMS instrument. Analysis of NIST SRM 393 (copper) and 1763–1766 (steel) showed that the RSF of most elements (referenced to the matrix ion signal) varied less than 15% for concentrations between 0.01 and 10%, but the RSF could change by a factor up to 2 when the power density increased from 109 to 5 × 109 W cm−2. The LOD currently achievable were in the range 0.001–0.01% but improvements were foreseen through redesign of the ion optics.6.2 Fundamental studyThe combined application of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) and LIMS in the same analysis yielded evidence for the prevalent role of thermal processes in ionization and plasma formation under conditions typically used for analysis.128 Metallic targets (Al, Cu, Fe, Mo, Ni, W, Zn) were irradiated with ns pulse lasers (λ = 532 nm) at power densities of 107–109 W cm−2. Whereas the signal intensities in LIMS showed the lowest RSD at high fluence, those in LIBS data featured the best RSD at low fluence. The threshold fluence for laser ionization was always lower than that for plasma formation. Both correlated with the melting temperature of the metal under study, not with its first IP or work function.6.3 Analytical methodologyBoric acid serves as the starting material for the production of the boron carbide pellets used in nuclear reactors. A simple, fast and cost-effective method for the determination of the isotopic composition of B in boric acid used deposition of 25–50 μl of the sample, either alone or mixed with a graphite or copper suspension, on an aluminium target.129 The samples were analysed with a TOF LIMS instrument using a frequency-doubled Nd∶YAG laser (λ = 532 nm, τ = 10 ns, repetition rate 10 Hz). The mixing with copper or graphite matrix improved the signal intensities by a factor of 4 and 8, respectively. Although the absolute signal intensities depended on the distribution of the sample over the surface, the precision of 10B∶11B ratio measurements was 3–5%. Comparison with TIMS data showed absence of systematic bias for ratios lower than 2.In comparison with the traditionally applied ns-pulses, improved elemental analysis and depth profiling by the use of fs lasers was demonstrated in a study on multilayered metal–oxide semiconductor structures containing thin films of materials with high dielectric constant (high k materials) such as Pr6O11 on silicon.130 Since the ablation (<200 fs) took place faster than the electron-lattice thermalization (∼0.5 ps), a lower erosion depth and improved depth resolution were expected. Consecutive irradation of the same spot with a Ti:sapphire laser (λ = 800 nm, τ = 100 fs, power density =1011–1012 W cm−2) resulted in an ablation rate as small as 1 nm per pulse. However, ripple formation due to the generation of localized holes and nanoparticles at the bottom of the crater hampered depth profiling.A comprehensive package of signal and data processing techniques was developed to reduce the limitations typically encountered in TOFMS as a result of the low mass resolution and considerable electronic noise.131 Several algorithms dealt with the automated and real-time correction of hardware artefacts such as noise due to detector overload, mass jitter introduced by peak timing errors and baseline variations caused by space charging effects. Owing to the TOFMS principle, mass resolution and peak definition were significantly better for signals at low m/z than for those at high m/z. The developed deconvolution filter used the peak shape of the low m/z signals to improve that of the high m/z signals. The robust methods for improved peak identification and quantification were believed to be of interest for other TOFMS methods.The use of FT LMMS with dual cell and sample ionization inside the magnet for the speciation analysis of Cr in aerosols made it possible to distinguish between the different chemical forms (CrIII and CrVI) of the contaminants.132 The LOD were in the region of 10 μg g−1. In contrast to the use of a TOF LMMS, off-line sampling and analysis were required and data were typically accumulated from 100 shots with a laser spot diameter between 5 and 100 μm. Comparison of this method with AAS analysis showed that the serious problems with quantification of the FT LMMS signals still had to be solved. On the other hand, FT LMMS provided the advantages of high structure-specificity for the detected ions and ultra-high mass resolution, allowing virtually all possible isobaric interferences to be dealt with.An emerging field appears to be the application of a TOF LMMS to biological aerosols. The complementary use of LIBS and a TOF LMMS has been investigated for differentiation of organic anthropogenic particles in biological aerosols such as pollen and bacilli.133 The inherently extensive fragmentation resulting from the one-step desorption–ionization in a TOF LMMS limited the analysis of large (bio)structures in single aerosol particles. The results from LIBS were superior in recognising pollen and even brake-pad aerosols collected near a traffic light. In the development of a method for real-time detection of airborne pathogens, the relative contributions of the 12C14N− or 13C14N− ions and 12C15N− ions were used to elucidate the composition of the fragments in the mass spectra from pathogens, grown in a 13C- or 15N-enriched medium.134 The direct correlation of the main signals to specific constituents from the core of spores was explained by the presence of specific UV-absorbing components in the spore’s core rather than in its exosporium. As a result, distinction could be made between the vegetative cells and the spores of a bacterial strain, used as a model for airborne pathogens such as Bacillus anthracis.7 Resonance ionization mass spectrometry (RIMS)Measuring the relative abundances of the minor 234U and 236U isotopes near or below their natural background levels allows distinction to be made between the natural and anthropogenic contributions, respectively, of U in the environment. The use of a single-mode continuous laser for a triple-resonance excitation of U isotopes into the auto-ionization state was explored to improve the determination of U-isotope ratios.135 It was shown that the high angular momentum auto-ionization levels just above the ionization threshold could be used for the selective analysis of U in aqueous samples. The authors believed the three-step-three-colour RIMS scheme allowed U isotope measurements to be carried out with an overall efficiency (ions counted relative to the number of atoms in the consumed sample) of better than 10−6.The ultra-trace determination of the long-lived 41Ca radioisotope with relative abundances of 10−10–10−11in small samples finds applications in variety of fields, ranging from environmental to biomedical research. Currently available methods for such tasks comprise AMS, RIMS and TIMS. The application of AMS and TIMS provided excellent analytical figures but required relatively large samples and, especially in the case of AMS, access to complicated and expensive instrumentation. Therefore, continuing RIMS development is being driven by the prospect of an adequate alternative methodology, applicable to extremely small samples. In an investigation into the use of RIMS and AMS for the determination of 41Ca in calcium oxide, three external-cavity diode lasers and a powerful CO2 laser were used for the three-step resonant narrowband excitation and the non-resonant ionization of the sample atoms, generated by graphite furnace heating.40 An isotope selectivity of about 109 was sufficient for routine measurements but the authors believed that values up to 1011 should be feasible. In comparison with the linear geometry, the perpendicular arrangement of the atomic beam and the MS improved the background by a factor of 100. An overall efficiency of 2 × 10−6 was attained but temperature instabilities in the laser spectral or spatial positioning resulted in poorer precision for measurement of 41Ca:Ca ratios of <10−10. Comparison with AMS analysis showed agreement within 1σ for isotopic abundances down to 10−11, whereas AMS had superior precision to RIMS and the capability of measuring isotopic abundances of 10−13.8 Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)The bombardment of a sample with primary ions in the 1–25 keV range causes the development of a collision cascade over a distance of several tens of nm below the surface. Along its trajectory the projectile imparts sufficient energy to the lattice to break all intermolecular forces and to move individual atoms from their initial positions in the lattice. The generation of the secondary ions is believed to occur through the recoil of momentum towards the surface. Extensive atom relocation destroys the molecular structures in the subsurface but the ultra-fast penetration of the projectiles through the surface layer allows molecules in the upper (few) monolayer(s) to remain intact. Static SIMS (S-SIMS) limits sputtering to a fraction of the upper monolayer, allowing the contribution of ions specific to the molecular form of the element to be maximized. Speciation and organic surface analysis forms the major application, while depth profiling is incompatible with the principle of S-SIMS. This review restricts the acronym SIMS to the dynamic mode using continuous sputtering for the erosion of subsequent layers and depth profiling of elements. As TOFMS is beneficial in dynamic and static experiments, explicit distinction is made between TOF SIMS and TOF S-SIMS. The incidence angles, mentioned throughout this section, are expressed as the angle between the beam and the normal to the sample surface. Unless otherwise specified, the surface roughness is referred to by the root mean square (rms) parameter.8.1 ReviewsA concise tutorial dealt with the fundamental aspects and methodological use of polyatomic projectiles in SIMS.136 In-depth coverage of the current insights into energy deposition and sputtering mechanisms focused on the non-linear yield increase of, in particular, the structure-specific ions to be used for speciation. Bombardment with large polyatomic projectiles such as C60 introduced new possibilities for depth profiling because of the minimal beam-induced damage in the deep subsurface and reduced topography development in comparison with the use of monoatomic primary ions. This unforeseen increase in the secondary ion yields was expected to form the basis of a significant breakthrough in the chemical imaging of surface components in the very near future.A treatise on the possibilities and limitations of beam analysis techniques for application at the sub-μm scale considered the prospects for the role of SIMS in nanosciences.137 Up to now, its application in micro-electronics served as one of the main driving forces for the development of SIMS instrumentation and methodology. Unlike in LIMS analysis, beam focusing to a spot in the region of 10 nm could be achieved but fundamental limitations related to the beam-induced damage might compromise the future of SIMS for nanoscale depth profiling. On the other hand, the emerging possibilities from the related S-SIMS method with respect to speciation and molecule-specific analysis were considered of growing importance for dealing with the challenging needs of nanoscale analysis in material sciences.A review on biological imaging with SIMS covered the recent instrumental and methodological developments.138 The advent of ion optics with a single immersion lens for primary-ion-beam focusing, secondary-ion extraction and electron flooding all contributed to the current use of spot sizes as small as 40 and 100–200 nm for Cs+ and O2+ or O−projectiles, respectively. In addition, it was possible to use the electron gun for critical compensation of the bombardment-induced charge build-up in non-conducting samples. Another major improvement came from the development of MC systems for the simultaneous registration of ion intensities at up to 5 different m/z. Transmission of 40–60 and 15% at a mass resolution of 5000–7500 and 15000, respectively, allowed most isobaric interferences in biological analysis to be eliminated. Finally, LOD improved to a level where the analysed microvolume had to contain only 200 C atoms.8.2 Fundamental studiesThe need for experimental measurements of secondary ion velocity distributions and KED in the absence of an extraction field was stressed in a study on the Al+ emission from pure polycrystalline aluminium bombarded with 0.5 keV and 5 keV Ne+ and Ar+ projectiles.139 To overcome the inherent distortion effects from the extraction field on experimental KED, experiments were performed in the range from 1–1000 eV without a secondary ion extraction field. The KED of neutral atoms were obtained by numerical simulations and theoretical calculations. Unlike the neutrals, ions showed two distinct contributions. The characteristic velocity of secondary ions emitted with low energy was independent of the mass and energy of the projectile. In contrast, the projectile’s mass influenced the characteristic velocity of the secondary ions emitted with high energy. The data pointed to the importance of mechanisms related to the direct impact of the projectile and knockout by primary recoils for Al+ ion emission from the surface.A study of the KED for AlCsn+ (n = 0–2) adduct ions emitted from Al targets delineated the dependence of the surface work function on energy and incidence angle of the Cs projectiles.140 The KED were measured with a resolution of 0.003–0.77 eV for primary ions with energy and incidence angle in the ranges of 1–5 keV and 0–45°, respectively. The surface work function was derived from the energy corresponding to the maximum in the KED. Increasing the projectile’s energy from 1 to 5 keV caused the work function to vary by ∼1 eV with a minimum value when 2 keV primary ions were used. This was explained by the competitive effects, which resulted from the Cs coverage of the surface and the presence of a native oxide layer. Depending on the incidence angle, the work function could change by as much as 3.5 eV as a result of a different degree of Cs surface implantation. The difference in surface work function values derived from the KED of AlCs+ and AlCs2+ ions was explained by the emission from sample sites with different work functions.Use of a quartz crystal microbalance allowed sputter rate variations during depth profiling of organic materials to be monitored in real time during the erosion.141 The effect of the primary ion fluence, the reactivity of projectile (Ar, N2 or O2) and the polymer composition was studied. Bombardment with 1 μA cm−2 of 1 keV Ar+ projectiles with ion dose densities of up to 1016 ions cm−2 resulted in averaged sputter rates of 0.24 and 5.76 nm min−1 for polystyrene and Teflon, respectively, and intermediate values for the other polymers. The sputter rate of a given polymer dramatically decreased with time to a primary ion dose density of ∼1015 ions cm−2 and then remained essentially constant. Use of noble gas or reactive projectiles had little effect on the sputter rate of a given polymer.Ion-beam-induced mixing effects were shown to limit the resolution in ultra-shallow depth profiling using low energy Cs+ projectiles.142 Specifically, experimental depth profiles were recorded for sub-10 nm junctions, formed by implantation of As+ ions with energy between 0.5 and 1 keV to achieve a peak concentration of 3 × 1021 atoms cm−3. Simulations showed that ion-beam-induced mixing rather than surface roughening was responsible for the tailing of the depth profile. Another study used Monte Carlo simulations to calculate the angular distributions of Sb and Si atoms sputtered from the corresponding metallic target by Cs+ or O− primary ions with energies of 5–15 keV and 40–80° incidence angles.143 Calculation of ion trajectories and recoils in a 3-D matrix accounted for the distribution of impurities due to beam-induced atom mixing and accumulation of the implanted ions. The simulations were particularly useful for quantifying the effects of the primary ion energy and impact angle on the beam-induced atom mixing and sputter rate.Modifications to the mixing depth-roughness-information (MRI) depth model accounted for the non-linear variation of the model parameters as a result of beam-induced changes in the local composition.144 In this way, the quantitative description of the relationship between sputter time and erosion depth could be significantly improved, yielding more adequate depth resolution functions to deconvolute experimental profiles. The new approach was claimed to push the limits of quantification to 20% of a monolayer or 0.06 nm on the elemental layer thickness scale.Comparative application of several simulation codes for modelling experimental depth profiles revealed the pitfalls associated with sputter rate variations in the near surface zone and the presence of a native oxide layer.145 A new depth-scale calibration method using sputter-rate corrections at shallow depths was developed. The importance of correctly accounting for experimental effects such as interface broadening due to the initial surface roughness and local variations of the primary-ion-current density within the rastered area was shown. The authors warned against the increasing use of simulations rather than properly calibrated standards for the correction of experimental results.Nevertheless, the lack of adequate CRM for depth profile calibration often necessitates the use of simulations to estimate the depth distribution of dopants in ion-implanted materials. As a result, the development of increasingly refined simulation tools remains of interest to the SIMS community. As a fast alternative to advanced Monte Carlo simulations, a simple analytical model was developed to calculate the dopant profiles from successive implantation steps without the need of fitting parameters.146 The model was applied to over 40 implantation schemes used in state-of-the-art complementary metal–oxide semiconductor technology. The results from the analytical model showed good agreement with those obtained from calibrated Monte Carlo methods as well as with the experimental SIMS depth profiles. Responding to the interest in high-k materials such as HfO2 for replacing SiO2 in scaled-down metal–oxide semiconductor field effect transistors, new simulation codes based on molecular dynamics (MD) rather than Monte Carlo calculations were developed.147 While Monte Carlo codes using the binary-collision-approximation required many fitting parameters, the new approach calculated the interactions between ions and target atoms by solving the Newton force equations. In contrast to Monte Carlo-based methods, MD simulations yielded values for the projected range that closely agreed with those derived from experimental SIMS data.8.3 Analytical methodologyAn interesting example of the way that ingenious sample preparation can be used to overcome inherent limitations of the SIMS technique such as transient regime effects, involved the use of chemical etching for low angle bevelling of a B-implanted silicon sample and subsequent imaging.148 Specifically, the silicon sample was slowly moved in and out of a solution of HF/HNO3/acetic acid to produce a bevelled surface with slope of ∼160 nm mm−1. An oil layer on the top of the etching solution suppressed surface tension effects. Subsequently, the bevelled surface was imaged in SIMS using a 10 keV O2+ primary ion beam with spot diameter of 14 μm. Combination of ion imaging with accurate measurement of the bevel morphology allowed the shallow B-implant profile to be reconstructed. Under the conditions used here, a lateral resolution of about 10 μm in the imaging mode would correspond to a resolution of 1 nm in “direct” depth profiling.Although in situ cleavage of samples is often considered to be adequate for the analysis of labile and reactive samples, oxidation and reorganization of the surface components can occur extremely rapidly even in high vacuum conditions. An original approach for monitoring this oxidation was based on the measurement of the work function using the contact potential between two metals.149 The applicability of the method was shown for Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8, a cooling superconductor that was known to be extremely sensitive to surface oxidation. The close correlation between the time dependence of the Ca+, Cu+, O− and Sr+ secondary ion intensities for in situ cleaved samples, kept at room temperature or at 100 K for up to 2 h, and that of the contact potential strongly supported the use of the developed method to measure the surface work function.Several studies dealt with the challenge of particle analysis in environmental and forensic applications. Sample rotation was required to optimize the sputtering of the size-fractionated aerosols and reveal the existence of core-shell structure dependent on the particle diameter.150 The distribution of elements such as Cr, Cu and Pb over a depth of 100 nm was determined using Ar+ primary ion bombardment at an impact angle of 45°. Spark source mass spectrometry was used to verify the global element concentrations of the particles collected on the different stages of the cascade impactor. The use of oblique-angle dark-field optical scattering was explored for the localization of particles smaller than the resolution of the optical visualization microscope in SIMS instruments.151 When the feature of interest could not be positioned within the analysis spot of the focused primary ion gun, time-consuming raster-analysis of a large area had to be performed. Therefore, deposition of the particles on a perfectly polished surface allowed scattering of oblique incident laser light to be used for the localization of particles as small as 200 nm. In contrast to electron beam localization, laser light scattering had the advantage of being non-destructive. Finally, the problem of accurate sample positioning for multi-technique analysis of the same sample in different instruments was dealt with by the use of microscopic reference marks in the metal coating of the sample support.152 New algorithms were developed to link the images of a given sample mounted in different instruments and to correct this information for parallax and other geometry-related effects. Sample repositioning with a precision of better than 10 μm was demonstrated for SEM-to-SEM and SEM-to-SIMS experiments using standard specimen stages.The dependence of SIMS results on a variety of experimental uncertainties motivated the development of protocols to standardize quantitative depth profiling. Precise guidelines defined the procedures for deriving the depth resolution from the leading-edge decay length, the trailing-edge decay length and Gaussian broadening from steady state measurements on multiple δ-layer reference materials.153 An additional protocol dealt with the quantitative depth profiling of B in single crystals, polycrystalline and amorphous silicon, using either Cs+ primary ions combined with detection of 10B28Si− and 11B28Si− secondary ions or oxygen bombardment and monitoring of the 10B+ and 11B+ ion signals.154 Stylus profilometry or optical interferometry was considered adequate for determining the depth of the sputtered crater. The protocol was not applicable to shallow depth profiling (i.e., at <50 nm from the initial surface) and B concentrations of <1020 atoms cm−3. To facilitate the implementation of these protocols, a B-doped silicon multiple-δ-layer CRM with nominal layer spacings of 10 and 50 nm was developed.155 The interlayer distance of 10 nm suited shallow junction analysis while that of 50 nm was adequate for high energy SIMS measurements. The B peak concentration was kept sufficiently low to avoid matrix effects. Use of 4.1 keV O2+ primary ion bombardment at an incidence angle of 45° to avoid development of surface topography led to depth resolution parameters that were virtually constant over the entire depth range.Although polyatomatic projectiles are generally considered to be ideal for depth profiling of organic layers, sputtering with Cs+ rather than with SF5+ projectiles significantly improved the quantitative depth profiling of F-containing polymers with dual-beam TOF SIMS, using Ga+ primary ions for analysis.156 In comparison with the erosion with SF5+ projectiles, sputtering with 1 keV Cs+ ions increased the secondary ion intensities of CnFm+ ions (n = 3–5, m ranges from 2n
					− 1 to 2n + 1) by a factor of 2–4. This was related to Cs+-implantation induced polarization of the C–F bonds which facilitated chain scissions. The yield enhancement was optimized at a Cs+ dose of ∼3 × 1014 ions cm−2. The authors suggested that pre-sputtering the sample with Cs+ could also be beneficial to S-SIMS analysis of fluorinated polymers.The use of the burst mode in TOF SIMS for isotope ratio measurements during depth profiling minimized the error due to counting statistics but kept the count rate of the major isotopes sufficiently low to avoid saturation of the detector.157 In contrast to the conventional bunched analysis, burst-mode experiments used a MHz signal to generate 1 ns primary ion pulses in quick succession, i.e., at a time interval shorter than the time needed to record a full mass spectrum. Dedicated methods for the relatively complicated data processing were needed. The method was applied to the diffusion of oxygen in Fe-doped SrTiO3 exposed to an 18O-enriched atmosphere.The advantage of inherent panoramic detection with TOFMS has been exploited in different ways. For instance, the isobaric interference of TeS− ions by TeO2− was elegantly dealt with by using the simultaneously recorded signal intensities for the TeO− and TeO3− anions in a study on the Te-related intrinsic defects by depth profiling of ZnS1−xTex (x = 0.005–0.026) thin films.158 Application of such corrections in experiments with a scanning analyser such as a quadrupole or magnetic sector would compromise either the LOD or the depth resolution. Another example involved the use of the specific elemental signature to recognise spores of Bacillus subtilis, a model system for Bacillus anthracis.159 Less than 1 ng of sample was sufficient for the analysis with Aun+ primary ion bombardment, using pre-sputtering with O2+ ions to expose the core of the spores. Multivariate statistical processing of the signal intensities of over 30 elements was needed. Confusion matrices constructed with nearest-neighbour classification of the PCA scores showed the usefulness of the method for detecting spores.Quantification with SIMS requires the application of independent methods for verifying the concentration of standards used to calibrate the secondary ion intensity as a function of the local concentration. A study on the distribution of H in glass showed the potential pitfalls in linking results from methods with different depth resolution.160 Specifically, elastic recoil detection analysis (ERDA) allowed absolute concentrations to be determined in sample zones with thicknesses of ∼50 nm. Depending on the function used for deconvolution of the ERDA depth profiles, the scaling factors to convert SIMS depth profiles could differ by as much as 14%. The use of a Gaussian fit gave the best agreement between the deconvoluted ERDA data and the experimental SIMS depth profile. Similarly, EPXMA is often used to verify the elemental composition of calibration standards. However, a study on the determination of Mn in Ga1−x MnxAs films (x = 0.02–0.08) with a thickness in the range of 1 μm showed discrepancies as high as 50% between the results from SIMS and EPXMA while an agreement within 5% was found between data from SIMS with MCs+ detection and a combination of XRF and XRD analysis.161A method for eliminating systematic errors due to the use of sequential detection for isotope ratio measurements on small particles was based on interpolation of the corresponding intensity versus time profiles.162 Analytical formulae were developed to predict the random errors introduced by correlating data subjected to Poisson statistics. The performance of the method was quantified by the processing of simulated data sets with similar complexity to those generated by SIMS.8.4 Quantitative analysisOptimized conditions for the determination of B and Ge in ultra-thin SiGe layers allowed the Ge levels to be measured with a precision of 0.5 atom% and the B peak concentration to be determined with a repeatability of better than 5%.163 Bombardment with 1 keV O2+ primary ions at normal incidence gave better results than the use of Cs+ sputtering at an impact angle of 45°. However, the optical conductivity enhancement unit was found to be extremely efficient for compensating the potential of the fully oxidized surface during sputtering. The linear relationship between erosion rate and Ge concentration facilitated the calculation of the B-concentrations from the experimental depth profiles. Comparative analysis of samples with RBS and SIMS agreed within experimental error for Ge concentrations below 20%.The application of low-energy electron-induced X-ray emission spectrometry (LEXES) to ultra-shallow As implants revealed systematic underestimation of the implanted As dose when using SIMS analysis.164 This resulted from As trapping in the upper layers of the sample. This contribution fell within the transient regime of the SIMS analysis and therefore was not accounted for properly. In contrast, good agreement between the doses determined with SIMS and LEXES was found for annealed samples.Precise and accurate isotope ratio measurements with SIMS crucially require standards with homogeneous composition at the microscale. The suitability of a wide range of glass RM from USGS and NIST for Li isotope ratio measurements was investigated.165 Both MC-ICP-MS and TIMS were used for the independent control of the bulk and local compositions. The USGS GSD-1G and BCR-2G glass RM providing a δ7Li of 31.1 ± 0.8‰ and 4.1 ± 1.0‰ (2σ), respectively, were proposed as suitable standards for SIMS. All the methods gave isotopic compositions for these RM to within 2‰.Unexpectedly strong matrix effects of up 12‰ occurred during the measurement of the 11B∶10B isotope ratios in silica-rich and borate-rich phases of the geochemical Si–B–Al–Ca–Na system.166 Analysis conditions involved bombardment with 2.5 keV O− primary ions and detection of the 10B+, 11B+ and 30Si+ secondary ions at a mass resolution of ∼1700. Using a pre-burn of 300 ns, the internal precision of the 11B∶10B isotope ratio measurement was 0.7‰ and 0.5–2.9‰ for borate-rich and borate-poor glasses, respectively. The systematic investigation of several glass RM and complementary use of EPXMA and TIMS failed to identify the cause of the strong matrix effect. Hence, the use of a −60 V high-voltage offset was proposed for circumventing the matrix effect.A systematic study identified potential pitfalls in the study of oxygen transport by depth profiling samples exposed to or annealed in 18O-enriched atmospheres.167 Although the quantitative determination of the local 18O concentration relative to the total oxygen content elegantly circumvented matrix effects, adequate correction of IMF was critical for deriving correct values for the background isotope fractions. Furthermore, an often overlooked source of error was the depletion of the 18O levels in the reservoir during the exchange process. To obtain correct diffusion parameters, the depth profile had to be corrected for the gradually decreasing supply of 18O to the top layers of the sample.A spatial resolution of 20–30 μm for the determination of the 13C∶12C isotope ratio in organic matter has been achieved.168 The analysis, optimized for samples with 41–96% (w/w) C, H∶C ratios in the range 0.04–1.74 and δ13C values between −6.8 and −31.1‰, used 25 keV Cs+ projectiles and parallel detection of 12C− and 13C− ions at a mass resolution of ∼5000. The IMF did not depend on primary ion beam intensity or sputter time but scaled linearly with the H∶C atomic ratio in the sample. Accounting for the matrix effect reduced the total uncertainty on the δ13C values by up to ±0.7‰.Crystal structure and mineral composition can cause important IMF in oxygen isotope analysis of Fe–Mg–Ca garnets. A simple and reliable scheme to account for the matrix effects was based on the analysis of 5 commonly used garnets and 7 additional garnet separates.169 The homogeneity of the standards and the oxygen isotopic composition were verified with EPXMA and SIRMS, respectively. An external reproducibility of 0.3‰ was achieved over 10 SIMS sessions. The developed method for matrix correction allowed the δ18O values of most standards to be reproduced within ±0.6‰.A concentration of 10 ppm 207Pb was found to be sufficient for Pb-isotope dating with a lateral resolution of ∼3 μm using a MC-HR-magnetic sector instrument.170 Zircon and zirconolite samples were analysed with 16 keV O− ions and magnetic peak-switching for the measurement of the different lead isotopes with a mass resolution of about 5000. The 206Pb+ ions could be detected with a sensitivity of 3 and 10 cps ppm−1 nA−1 in the analysis of the zircon and zirconolite samples, respectively. Although no IMF occurred for a Pb metal SRM and zirconolite samples, the observed enhancement of light isotopes by up to 1.2% per atomic mass unit in xenotime and uraninite required additional investigation.Use of the “sensitive high resolution ion microprobe with reverse geometry” (SHRIMP-RG) at a mass resolution of 7000–90000 allowed the demanding determination of 87Sr∶86Sr isotope ratio in inorganic and biogenic carbonates to be achieved.171 The lateral and depth resolutions were typically ∼25 and 2 μm, respectively. In spite of the high mass resolution, a sensitivity ∼40 cps ppm−1 nA−1 was achieved with O2+ primary ions. The 87Sr∶86Sr ratio in carbonates containing between 400 and 1500 ppm of Sr could be measured with an external precision of ∼2‰ (2σ) if standard bracketing was used to correct for the interference by the Ca-dimer.Determination of minor (Mg, Sr) and trace elements (Ba, U) in calcium carbonates using a beam spot diameter of 5–6 μm and a HR MC magnetic sector SIMS instrument has been achieved.172 Primary ion bombardment with 8 keV O− projectiles and parallel detection of 138Ba+, 43Ca+, 26Mg+, 88Sr+, 238U16O+ and 238U16O2+ secondary ions at a mass resolution between 3000 and 5000 gave a LOD of 1 μmol per mol Ca for both Ba and U. The RSD was typically 5–10%. Excellent agreement was obtained with analysis with LA-ICP-MS but SIMS analysis featured advantages of superior lateral and depth resolutions.8.5 Single and multi-dimensional analysis8.5.1 Depth profiling. Anomalies in depth profiles due to ion-beam shadowing effects occurred during the analysis of an 8-nm thick In0.24Al0.19Ga0.57As layer buried at a depth of 1.59 μm in an Al0.25Ga0.75As/GaAs waveguide system.173 Whereas the depth profile of the In+ secondary ion showed multiple maxima when 5 keV Ar+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 45° or 70° was applied, a profile with a single peak was obtained using an impact angle of 20°. Images of the crater bottom during different stages of the bombardment showed the development of topography in the form of oval features whose shape depended on the impact angle. This effect was related to initial uneven sputtering caused by local defects (contamination). Geometrical considerations in combination with the well-known dependence of the ion yield on the impact angle explained the generation of multiple maxima in the depth profile.Optimizing the conditions for SIMS analysis of gettering centres in semiconductors treated with MeV ion implantation resulted in quantitative depth profiling of various trace elements with a LOD typically better than 1 μg g−1 for a 50 μm spot diameter.174 The RSF referenced to 28Si were determined using implanted standards and profilometry served to calibrate the depth scales.Accurate determination of the layer thickness in multi quantum-well (MQW) nanostructures required the use of Ar+ primary ion bombardment with an energy in the sub-keV range.175 The MQW consisted of InxAlyGa1−x−yAs layers (x = 0.17–0.3, y = 0.25–0.29) and GaAs interlayers with thicknesses of 4.5–9 and 30 nm, respectively, sandwiched between GaAs cap and buffer layers with thicknesses in the ranges 50–70 nm and 150–500 nm, respectively. Reducing the ion bombardment energy from 5 keV to 880 eV improved the depth resolution by a factor 2–3.5 nm, in agreement with the predictions of Monte Carlo simulations. Comparative determination of the layer thickness by XRD showed the SIMS data to be accurate within 10%. A study on a SiGe single-quantum well (QW) showed bombardment with 5.5 keV O2+ ions at an incidence angle to be adequate on the condition that a point-by-point deconvolution was applied to the experimental depth profiles with a DRF, derived from Ge δ-layer.176 Specifically, RBS and SIMS both gave a value of 4% for the Ge concentration in the QW. Moreover, the QW thickness and position of 12.1 and 64.9 nm obtained with SIMS agreed closely with the values of 12.4 and 63.0 nm, respectively, found with RBS.Continuous recording of the sample stage current provided an elegant solution for the in situ detection of the interface for organic coatings with thicknesses of 20–200 nm on 5 μm carbon fibres.177 The depth distribution of impurities in the polymer layer relative to the local thickness of the coating was needed to determine at which stage contaminants were introduced during the deposition process. The total stage current, which reflected the charge balance between the impinging primary ions and the emitted secondary electrons, showed marked discontinuities when the beam passed from the organic coating into the core of the carbon fibre. This allowed the time scale in the depth profiles of impurities to be linked directly to the local layer thickness.The dependence of sputter rate and transient width on the incidence angle of ultra-low-energy projectiles was studied by depth profiling silicon samples with 10 δ-layers of Si0.7Ge0.3 with a thickness of 0.4 nm.178 Use of 250–500 eV O2+ projectiles at impact angles of <20° minimized the transient width to a value of about 0.7 nm. Topography development started at a primary-ion-beam incidence-angle of 40 and 60° for 1 and 0.25 keV projectiles, respectively. Interestingly, the use of 150 eV projectiles at an impact angle of <40° confined the erosion rate variations during the entire analysis (including the transient regime) to about 7%.The advantages of using ultra-low-energy bombardment to determine the layer thickness of ultra-thin coatings were demonstrated in a study of 10–20 nm thick structures of strained silicon on the top of relaxed SiGe buffer layers.179 Bombardment with 700 eV Cs+ ions at an incidence angle of 60° optimized the steepness of the Ge depth profile to typically 0.6 nm per decade. A polynomial function for deriving the sputter rate from the Ge content was used for correcting the experimental depth profile point-by-point. The method allowed the layer thickness to be determined with a precision of better than 0.2 nm. Limits were pushed even further in a study on the 5 nm thick oxide layers at the surface of tungsten.180 Dual-beam experiments with 600 and 10 keV Ar+ ion bombardment for sputtering and analysis, respectively, in a TOF instrument gave values for the layer thickness within 1 nm of those found with TEM of thin cross sectioned samples. This agreement was remarkable, especially as the surface roughness was revealed by AFM analysis to be about 0.5 nm (rms).Depth profiling of N in ultra-thin (3–4 nm) hafnium dioxide high-k layers on silicon using ultra-low-energy O2+ ions (250 eV) at an incidence angle of 60° resulted in a short transient, low matrix effects and reduced generation of Si− matrix ions that complicated measurement of the NO− ions.181 The O2− profile was used to normalize the data. The depth scale was calibrated using films, the thickness of which was verified with TEM. Optimization of the experimental conditions allowed the transient regime to be kept within a distance of <0.5 nm. Applications showed the usefulness of the method for process development.The use of Ar+ and Cs+ primary ions with energies between 0.3 and 1 keV for the depth profiling of ultra-shallow B implants in diamond grown by chemical vapour deposition showed significant discrepancies between the experimental results and the predictions of TRIM, a commonly used simulation software.182 Those discrepancies could be traced back to the lack of appropriate parameters for this type of sample implanted at an energy of 5 keV. The depth profiles obtained with Ar+ and Cs+ ion bombardment under optimized conditions were quite different in terms of shape, position of the maximum and width of the implanted B-distribution. Reduced atomic mixing was believed to account for the narrower distribution profiles measured with the Ar+ projectiles, lighter than the Cs+ ions. Bombardment with Ar+ ions in the range 0.3–1 keV and extrapolation of the profile parameters to zero energy was proposed as the best approach to estimating the implanted distribution.The quantitative depth profiling of oxygen in Nd–Fe–B sintered hard magnet alloys was optimized by the use of 3.5 keV Cs+ primary ion bombardment and O− secondary ion detection.183 These materials exhibited a complex microstructure that typically consisted of Nd2Fe14B grains separated by a thin intergranular Nd-rich phase and this last could even contain α-Fe. The oxygen concentrations determined with SIMS were compared with the bulk values found using the carrier-gas-hot-extraction method or XPS. The best agreement was found for annealed single crystals, whereas deviations by a factor of up to 2 occurred for thin films and polycrystalline samples before annealing. The discrepancies could be related to the presence of local oxide inclusions.The study of the diffusion of 103Pd in a Rh matrix to be used in brachytherapy required the quantitative depth profiling of Pd/Rh multilayers on glassy carbon.184 Dual-beam depth profiling with 2 keV Cs+ and 25 keV Ga+ primary ion bombardment for sputtering and analysis, respectively, resulted in reduced matrix-dependence typical of MCs+ detection. Homogeneous RhxPd1−x layers (x = 0–1) with a thickness of 33 nm on silicon served to calibrate the secondary ion intensities as a function of the Pd concentration, independently determined with PIXE. Complementary experiments with RBS allowed the Pd concentration to be used for sputter rate corrections in SIMS.The formation of cobalt silicides in a silicon-capped Co layer on silicon by heavy-ion irradiation could be detected by means of an anomalous dip in the Co secondary ion depth profile just after the first interface.185 Dual-beam experiments using 1 keV and 11 keV Ar+ for sputtering and analysis, respectively, in a TOFMS instrument resulted in a depth resolution of about 2 nm. Complementary use of evidence obtained with HR TEM, XRD and Raman spectrometry allowed the sudden change of the Co+ intensity near the first interface to be correlated with the local presence of cobalt silicides, which caused an abrupt change in the dimensions of the beam-induced mixing zone.The deconvolution of depth profiles for multiple As-doped δ-layers (1 nm thickness, 50 nm interlayer distance) in silicon was optimized through use of DRF, derived for a single δ-layer sample with the corresponding thickness.186 Experimental conditions involved sputtering and analysis by 0.5 keV Cs+ and 15 keV Ga+ projectiles at an incidence angle of 45° for sputtering and analysis, respectively, in dual-beam TOF SIMS depth profiling. Non-destructive medium-energy ion-scattering spectroscopy was used to confirm the physical validity of the deconvolution method. This allowed a virtually correct FWHM value of 1 nm to be obtained for multiple δ-layers.8.5.2 3-D analysis. An interesting application involved the use of ion images to improve the resolution of depth profiling experiments.187 The local variations in composition and structure led to a varying degree of beam-induced roughness from one spot to another. Therefore, ion images at specific planes within the eroded volume were used to select areas with minimal topography development for reconstruction of the depth profiles. Typically about 45% of the initially rastered area could be used. In this way, sufficient depth resolution could be achieved for observing the distinct degree of deuterium incorporation into the iron hydroxide and oxide phases in the duplex oxide layer on iron exposed to deuterated water vapour. The total thickness of the oxide layers ranged between 0.8 and 1.2 nm.The quantitative determination of Ca in subcellular store regions of dividing cells is a challenge in cell biology that few analytical techniques can handle. Freeze-dried mammalian cells captured in the interphase and various stages of mitosis were used as a model system to demonstrate the feasibility of measuring the 3-D calcium gradients with a subcellular lateral resolution of ∼0.5 μm.188 Coating with a thin metal layer, sputtered away to expose the spot to be analysed, overcame the problem of excessive charge build-up. The use of 5 keV O2+ bombardment at an erosion rate of ∼2.5 nm s−1 allowed C, Ca, Mg and Na images to be recorded with an integration time of between 0.4 s and 2 min, depending on the secondary ion intensity. The surface roughness of the freeze-dried cells did not hamper imaging or quantification based on RSF referenced to the matrix C signal.The 3-D analysis of ancient coins with minimal damage in order to understand their corrosion was investigated using model objects with the same composition as coins.189 Only slight damage, readily removed by gentle polishing, resulted from the use of Cs+ primary ion bombardment (20 μm spot diameter) and negative ion detection to obtain the chemical composition within a volume with diameter of 150 μm and thickness of ∼2 μm. This procedure was therefore considered acceptable for real art objects. Analysis of artificially corroded samples allowed the enrichment of elements such as Cl and S at the boundaries of alloy grains to be visualized with a lateral resolution of 2 μm. The method was believed to be useful in assisting the selection of suitable conservation treatments.The possibilities of 3-D analysis for fundamental and applied technological research still seem to be underestimated when one considers the wealth of information on the grain boundary diffusion of elements in Fe–Cr alloys and its relation to the oxide-scale formation that could be obtained in just one experiment.190 The atomic ion images recorded at successive depth intervals of 25 nm featured a lateral resolution of ∼1 μm. The reconstructed depth profiles at the grain boundary reflected the fast diffusion of elements such as Cr and Mn. On the other hand, depth profiles reconstructed for the bulk of the alloy grains provided evidence for the existence of several shells with specific elemental composition around a more or less homogeneous core. Quantification of the ion images provided important information on the growth mechanism and kinetics of scale formation.8.6 Static SIMS (S-SIMS)8.6.1 Fundamental studies. Bombardment of water films, either pure or containing ammonia (with or without deuterium) at 15 K with 1.5 keV He+ projectiles allowed the beam-induced reorganization and exchange of H-bonds at the surface to be delineated.191 The damage to the films occurred at ion dose densities above 2 × 1014 ions cm−2. At temperatures <140 K, the sputter yield was as high as 0.9 ± 0.2 molecules per incident ion and essentially depended on the kinetic collisions of the projectile with the sample molecules. Intermixing between adsorbate and substrate molecules only occurred after removal of the first monolayer. This study demonstrated that S-SIMS was indeed capable of probing the H-bond organization at the surface.Insight into the reasons for improved quantitative speciation by the use of polyatomic projectiles was pursued in a systematic study of an extensive series of oxysalts with polyatomic and monoatomic primary ions.192 Bombardment with SF5+ ions gave a total ion yield 4–10 greater than bombardment with Ga+ primary ions. Strikingly, the ion intensity gain of the adduct and fragment ions systematically exceeded that of the elemental and low m/z ions. The non-linear ion yield increase as well as relative contribution of low and high m/z ions could be explained by a structure-specific reaction of the analyte resulting from ultra-fast thermal heating of the subsurface. This linkage of the spectral features with structural properties was consistent with simulations, which predicted that polyatomic ions would deposit their energy in a confined zone close to the surface.8.6.2 Analytical methodology. The growing need to share mass spectra for comparative interpretation motivated development of an international protocol (ISO 220482004) specifying a spectral data file format, compatible with the existing protocol for data transfer formats and with free software for viewing and printing spectra.193 Attention was given to development of a common and general system for reporting relevant instrumental settings. Its use should facilitate exchange of data between dedicated instruments or in-house developed software.The expanding use of surface tailoring in nanotechnology-driven applications increasingly requires elemental analysis combined with speciation. For instance, development of novel bio-ceramics required detection of Ti in a monolayer as well as quantification of the relative fraction of Ti present as titanium dioxide, titanium pentafluoride (direct binding to phosphate) and titanium hexafluoride (binding to the calcium counter ion of phosphate groups through a F bridge).194 Bombardment of the sample with 15 keV Au+ projectiles at a dose density of <1011 ions cm−2 generated secondary ions, which gave specific information on the direct binding of Ti to the phosphate oxygen or to oxygen in an oxide. The fraction of Ti attached by F-bridging to the calcium had to be derived indirectly from the CaF+ signal. The precision of better than 1% for the peak intensities indicated the analytical potential of the methodology. The slope of the linear relationship between the recorded Cn− secondary cluster ion intensities produced from diamond films and n was used to distinguish between sp2 and sp3 forms of carbon. The validity of the approach was verified with XPS and Raman measurements.A chemical derivatization using nitro- or pentafluorobenzaldehyde was developed for the selective quantification of N present as amino groups in the outer monolayer of a plasma-polymerized ethylenediamine film on glass.195 The intensities of several specific ions from the implanted surface groups, normalized on the Si+ peak intensity from the substrate, correlated linearly with surface amine concentrations between 1.4 and 5.6 molecules per nm2.8.6.3 Imaging. Direct analysis of rat brain tissue without preliminary washing or coating showed the analytical potential of using a Bi-cluster ion source for the imaging of biological tissues.196 The use of a liquid metal ion gun for generating Binq+ projectiles (n = 1–7, q = 1 or 2) allowed the secondary ion yield increase, typical of bombardment with polyatomic instead of monoatomic primary ions, to be exploited to give a lateral resolution as good as 400 nm. Essential parameters such as damage cross section, useful ion yield, static ion dose and efficiency were systematically evaluated to assess the limits for the lateral resolution in imaging. Better performance was obtained with Bi cluster ions than with polyatomic Au projectiles because the higher primary ion current allowed images with comparable lateral resolution to be acquired more rapidly. In addition, the doubly charged Bi52+ projectiles provided superior ion yields in comparison with singly charged Au clusters.The use of TOF S-SIMS for the imaging of trace element distributions in human hair was improved by development of dedicated sample preparation procedures for longitudinal sectioning of the hair.197 The procedure did not involve embedding, thereby avoiding redistribution of the elements. Images over an area of 150 × 150 μm and reconstructed line scans featured a lateral resolution in the μm range. The panoramic registration capabilities of TOF S-SIMS were considered to be essential as the full elemental signature was needed to assess endogenous and environmental influences. Additionally, specific organic components could be identified by means of structure-specific ions without sacrificing the atomic ion detection capabilities.A two-part study on the analysis of Be in settled dust from industrial workplaces showed the strengths of TOF S-SIMS imaging for the relatively fast detection of individual particles with a lateral resolution of 200–150 nm.198,199 The toxicological risk assessment required quantification of Be levels of 40–150 μg g−1 together with speciation, in particular distinguishing Be salts from oxides. Use of a 15 keV Ga+ primary-ion beam rastering across a sample area between 50 × 50 to 500 × 500 μm, together with panoramic secondary-ion detection in the imaging mode, allowed Be at concentrations down to 100 μg g−1 to be measured in single particles with a lateral resolution of ∼100 nm.The simultaneous detection of high m/z adduct ions was exploited for Hg-speciation in vermillion pigment that was darkening in historical paintings.200 Cross sections of an embedded paint fragment were imaged over an area of 50 × 50 μm using a 15 keV In+ primary ion beam with spot diameter of ∼120 nm. Reconstruction and overlay of the images for atomic ions and molecule-specific adducts with m/z in the range of up 700–800 provided complete information on the distribution and chemical form of the elements within a microscopic paint fragment.9 Sputtered neutrals mass spectrometry (SNMS)9.1 Analytical methodologyQuantitative speciation analysis of S in several organic or inorganic matrices using plasma-based SNMS with a quadrupole analyser required energy selection to deal with the isobaric interferences at m/z 16 (O+ and S2+) and 32 (O2+ and S+).201 Using the signals from 12 atomic and diatomic ions containing O, S and/or C together with 30 KED parameters, linear discriminant analysis could be applied to distinguishing between 30 S-containing species in different matrices. A partial-least-squares algorithm was developed to perform quantitative analysis of S-species in samples. Although the method did not account for the matrix effect, results showed a regression coefficient of >98% for the correlation between the experimental and real S∶C ratios in the samples.The application of laser post-ionization to the neutrals generated in a TOFMS instrument opens up possibilities for overcoming the variability inherently associated with the conventionally used laser irradiation for the one-step desorption–ionization of single suspended particles. A comparison has been made between the use of impaction of the aerosol particles on a heater and IR CO2 laser irradiation.202 Subsequent ionization used either 10.48 or 8.75 eV photons from a laser pulse at λ = 118 or 142 nm, respectively. The ionization threshold was determined by energy-selective detection of the emitted photo-electrons. Coincidence with the emission of zero-energy photo-electrons served to select the mass spectra of ions with minimum excess energy. In this way, the contribution of the vaporization and ionization steps to the total internal stress could be separated. Impaction on the heater imparted a more reproducible amount of internal stress to the components from different aerosol particles than did IR laser desorption. The internal stress and extent of fragmentation under laser vaporization were dependent on the shot-to-shot variations in the applied power density.9.2 Depth profiling and imagingThe relative insensitivity of SNMS to matrix effects in comparison with SIMS motivated its application to the demanding task of quantitative depth profiling of Pt in nanogranular tin dioxide layers on silicon.203 The tin dioxide grains (diameter of 15–20 nm) typically contained ∼1 atom% Pt. The use of 400 eV Ar+ sputtering resulted in an erosion rate of 0.65 nm s−1. Quantification was based on RSF derived from analysis of a tin dioxide layer with 0.4% atom Pt. The application of SNMS provided detailed information on the doping and redistribution of Pt upon annealing and the local presence of different trace contaminants at the surface and interfaces could be used to pinpoint problems in individual processing steps.The absence of ion-induced artifacts during depth profling of vanadium nitride thin films when using electron gas SNMS in the high frequency mode has been demonstrated.204 The vanadium nitride films (nominal thickness of 400 nm and deposited either on silicon with a 150 nm silicon oxide layer or on sapphire) were sputtered with 500 eV Ar+ projectiles. Analysis using energy-filtering TEM and electron-energy-loss spectroscopy linked the smooth nitrogen profile to the non-uniform diffusion front and formation of V2N phases. The observed tail reflected enhanced diffusion along the grain and did not result from ion-beam-induced broadening effects.Nanophosphors use atomic dopants in the host particles (diameter 2–5 nm). Although TOF S-SIMS was adequate for analysing Gd2O2S nanophosphors, heavily doped with Pr3+, single photon photo-ionization was required for the chemical imaging of the dopants in nanoparticles at the 100 μg g−1 level.205 The 30 keV Ga+ primary ion bombardment with a spot of about 200 nm was complemented with a excimer laser beam (λ = 157 nm) at a distance of 150 μm above the sample. The increased ion yield allowed the homogeneous distribution of the dopant to be visualized. The low secondary ion intensities per pixel and the surface topography limited the use of image processing techniques such as 2-D correlation analysis, however.The distribution of specific atoms and molecules within living cells is of great interest in biomedical research. Adding a focused excimer laser (λ = 193 nm, τ = 20 ns, spot diameter 150 μm) to a commercial TOF SIMS instrument for the post-ionization of neutrals generated by 30 keV Ga+ primary ion bombardment (spot diameter of 200 nm) allowed high-resolution images of atomic ions to be recorded.206 Using RSF derived from dextran standards, the pixel intensities from specific sub-cellular zones in the cell could be converted into relative concentrations with a precision of 20%. This was a remarkable achievement as the precision reflected the sum of instrumental effects, sample preparation and biological variability.10 Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry (SIRMS)10.1 General contributionsThe presentation and discussion of uncertainty in stable isotope applications has been reviewed by Jardine and Cunjak,207 especially as pertaining to ecologists not always familiar with analytical instrumentation. The authors reported a lack of rigorous treatment of uncertainty in stable isotope measurements in some of the ecological literature and they suggested that this related to the ease of automated analysis of SIRMS data. Of 330 ecological research papers surveyed, 63 (19%) failed to report any form of analytical error associated with SIRMS. Of the 267 papers that did report analytical error, there was considerable variation both in the terminology and approach used to quantify and describe it. The authors urged a more rigorous approach to uncertainty presentation and estimation so that robust interpretations can be drawn.The availability of reliable and long-lasting CO2 isotope standards is pivotal to the continued application of SIRMS to a range of problems in the environmental sciences. An effort to generate large volumes of a new isotopically certified CO2 in air for a new RM has used a custom-built system for acid reaction of a well-characterized carbonate material and mixing of the liberated gas with CO2-free air.208 Distribution into glass flasks was made stepwise in a highly controlled fashion. The isotopic composition, established on automated extraction and measurement systems, varied within very small margins of error appropriate for high-precision air–CO2 work (about ±0.015 and 0.025‰ for δ13C and δ18O, respectively). To establish a valid δ18O relation to the PeeDee Belemnite (PDB) scale, the temperature dependence of the acid reaction between 25 and 47 °C was determined with a high level of precision and the air produced calibrated against a number of CRM. The work has resulted in production of a new RM, the ‘Jena-Reference Air Set’, designed to serve as a high-precision link to VPDB for improving inter-laboratory comparability.10.2 InstrumentationThe measurement of 18O- and 17O-bearing CO2 molecules containing more than one of the rarer C or O isotopes (e.g., 13C18O16O, 12C17O18O) presents measurement challenges in SIRMS because of the very low abundance of CO2 molecules in the 47–49 mass range. The application of these isotopes to studies of atmospheric processes is growing rapidly and there are indications that detector modifications are being made to meet this new measurement challenge. Several conference abstracts have reported modification of a SIRMS instrument to include additional collectors with higher resistance feedback resistors appropriate for lower abundance signals but full details have yet to be published.209 In another study, a simple measurement system for determination of δ17O in nmole quantities of CO2 consisted of a CF-SIRMS instrument equipped with a sample injection system, a He-purged CO2 purification line, a capillary GC and a combustion unit.210 The δ17O value was calculated by determining alternately the intensity ratios for signals at both m/z 45∶44 and m/z 46∶44 for two streams of CO2 from different aliquots of a single sample. One stream flowed directly into the mass spectrometer, whereas the other passed through a unit containing CuO at 900 °C prior to introduction into the mass spectrometer. Oxygen atoms in the sample CO2 molecules were exchanged with those in CuO for which a δ17O value of 0 was assumed. A precision (SD) of 0.35‰ for δ17O could be realized using as little as 8.7 nmol CO2. Assonov and Brenninkmeijer211 discussed the terminology and definitions for reporting and measuring δ13C (the deviation from an expected mass-dependent fractionation) as it pertained to high precision analysis of 17O in relation to other O isotopes.In a moving wire analyser for measurement of δ13C, dissolved non-volatile organic compounds were dried on to a continuously spooling nickel wire that, in turn, was continuously introduced into a combustion-SIRMS system.212 A typical analysis required 1 μl of sample solution and produced a CO2 peak about 5 s wide. Bulk δ13C values for ∼10 nmol of organic C could be measured to better than ±0.2‰. Accuracy was better than 0.5‰ for nearly all dissolved analytes tested including lipids, proteins, nucleic acids, sugars, halocarbons and hydrocarbons. The sensitivity demonstrated represented a ∼1000-fold improvement relative to existing elemental analysers.The removal of N2O species in the analysis of δ13C and δ18O in CO2 generated from soil samples was significantly improved by use of a packed Porapak Q column rather than a capillary GC column.213 Accuracy was improved and uncertainty reduced to about 50% of that obtained previously. Benefits of using the columns were that samples were not limited to small N2O concentrations, no extra N2O concentration measurement was required and measurements were independent of the variable isotopic composition of N2O from soil.A new procedure for determination of the δ15N of total dissolved nitrogen used a commercial total organic carbon (TOC) analyser coupled to an EA-SIRMS instrument.214 Nitrogen compounds were converted to NO and NO2 by high-temperature catalytic oxidation prior to isotope analysis. An important change to previous systems was that the flow paths were modified so that both the TOC and SIRMS analysers could be run with He as carrier gas while maintaining complete sample oxidation.The direct determination of δ18O of O2 dissolved in small quantities of sea-water has been improved through use of a headspace device in which O2(aq) was transferred from solution to He gas under shaking.215 Subsequent isotope analysis of the extracted O2 was achieved by transferring the entire headspace into a large sampling loop. This enabled sufficient O2 to be admitted into a packed molecular sieve column for separation from N2 before SIRMS measurement directly on O2+ at m/z 32–34. Automated analyses of up to 180 samples in a single batch were possible with a precision (±0.3‰) comparable to that encountered in CF applications.Two-dimensional GC separation combined with SIRMS has the potential for overcoming the problems of insufficient chromatographic resolution which frequently occurs when single columns methods are used for organic compound separation. The method has been tested and applied to PCB analysis216 and “congener-specific” carbon isotopic analysis of PCB.217 Two GC columns were housed inside the same oven and sample effluent from the first column selectively introduced into the second column and combustion furnace. In comparison with the use of a single column, improved resolution and separation of compounds were achieved. This allowed the δ13C data for the organic compounds to be interpreted more robustly than previously possible.10.3 Sample preparationA set up for the collection and analysis of CO2 samples in air included custom-built physically robust field sampling equipment for use in ecosystem studies.35 The field system for isotope measurement employed reusable molecular sieve cartridges, a lightweight pump and a portable IRGA and mass spectrometer. Analysis of international isotopic RM showed that CO2 could be trapped and recovered for determination of both δ13C and 14C without any contamination, fractionation or memory effect. In a vehicle-mounted field laboratory, air at various heights was sampled every three minutes via a PTFE tube for continuous analysis using a closed-path IRGA in line with a CF IRMS instrument.218 Precisions (SD) of 0.21–0.07 and 0.34–0.14‰ were obtained for repeated single measurements of δ13C and δ18O, respectively, in CO2 (200–800 μM) in an air RM prepared in-house.The determination of δ15N and δ18O in small quantities of gas trapped in ice involves the analytical challenges of field site measurement and minimum consumption of valuable ice core samples. A continuous on-line extraction and analysis technique allowed fast high-resolution measurements of the isotopic and elemental ratios of the main components of air (Ar, N2 and O2) to be made.219,220 The reproducibilities (SD) for continuous analysis at 3 cm resolution of either pure bubble or completely bubble-free ice were ±<0.2, ±<0.5 and ±<0.6‰ for δ15N, δ18O and δ17O, respectively. These were comparable to values obtained using conventional melt extraction techniques.Improved procedures for the isotopic analysis of C, Cl and/or Br by conversion into methyl halides have been reported. Inorganic Cl was precipitated as AgCl and converted into CH3Cl, which was separated from CH3I on a 60 m DB-5MS GC column prior to GC-CF-SIRMS analysis.221 The internal and external precision (SD) for analysis of pure CH3Cl gas and sea-water were ±<0.04 and ±<0.07‰, respectively. Shouakar-Stash et al.222 developed a method of Br isotope analysis in which inorganic bromide was precipitated as AgBr using silver nitrate standard methods and then converted to CH3Br using CH3I. As little as 0.2 mg of AgBr could be analysed with external precision (SD) for pure CH3Br gas and standard sea-water of 0.03‰ and 0.06‰, respectively. The average analysis time of 16 min was considerably less than that (75 min) of the method used previously. Determination of the carbon isotope composition of atmospheric CH3Br, CH3Cl and chlorofluorocarbons (CFC) has benefited from the development of a preconcentration method used with a GC SIRMS system.223 The methodology in general caused no stable isotope shifts for methyl halides and most CFC but a correction scheme was needed for the small but consistent shifts observed for specific CFC. The method had the capacity to separate the target halocarbons from more than 50 others in ambient air samples. Trace gases occurring at the lowest abundance level were determined by using up to 10 l samples to achieve measurements at the 10−12 (v/v) level from air. The δ13C composition of methyl halides and selected saturated hydrocarbons in gas samples containing 20 pmole C could be measured with a precision of better than 0.5‰ even when the samples also contained substantial amounts of unsaturated hydrocarbons.224A method for the nitrogen and oxygen isotope analysis of nitrate or nitrite was based on reduction with cadmium metal and buffered sodium azide to produce N2O for analysis.225 The precisions (SD) for the analysis of 0.5–40 μM nitrate (50 ml) were 0.2 and 0.5‰ for δ15N and δ18O, respectively. No adverse effects were caused by the presence of organic matter or halide at high concentrations. The method was well-suited to the measurement of small amounts of nitrate or nitrite in both fresh water and sea-water and built on an earlier method for isotopic analysis of nitrate in which N2O was produced using bacteria. Both procedures depended on the analysis of a wide range of standards under similar conditions and were most suitable for laboratories requiring a high sample throughput. Benefits of this new, abiotic method included the ability to analyse nitrite independently of nitrate, application to samples incapable of sustaining bacteria and the lack of a requirement to prepare and maintain bacterial cultures.Improved methods have been presented for the determination of δ13C of dissolved C using CF methodologies. Water samples (0.1–1.5 ml) were injected in the field into He-filled autosampler vials for subsequent analysis of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) using a CF SIRMS system.226 The overall measurement precision (SD) was 0.1‰ and the preparation time 10 min. Capasso et al.227 developed a fast and completely automated procedure based on oxidation by phosphoric acid addition to convert all DIC to CO2. An automated acid-injection and He-flushing system was used prior to equilibration (at 70 °C for <24 h) followed by on-line isotope analysis. The precisions (SD) were assessed to be 0.1–0.2‰ for standard solutions with a range of concentrations. Marschner et al.228 used HPLC to separate dissolved organic carbon into fractions. Each fraction was analysed using a total C analyser interfaced with a CF SIRMS instrument. The recoveries for short chain fatty acids were almost 100% recoveries and sample integrity was maintained. No isotope effects of the sample preparation procedure were noted. A specific limitation of the method was the requirement for C-free solvents in the C analyser.Attempts have been made to use SIRMS to study the isotopic composition of site- or position-specific N or C in compounds. For organic materials this is based on the concept that isotope fractionation occurs primarily at sites of bond-breaking and formation in biological processes. Sacks and Brenna229 developed a methodology for high-precision position-specific isotope ratio analysis for nitrogen in amino acids and presented the first survey of natural intramolecular 15N∶14N ratios in these molecules. Nitrogen atoms were liberated by enzymatic reaction or acid hyrolysis and analysed by GC combustion SIRMS using N-ethoxycarbonyl ethyl ester derivatives of the parent amino acids. The average precision (SD) for measurement of δ15N was 0.3‰. Position-specific δ15N values were either measured directly or calculated using mass balance with precisions of 0.2–0.4 and 0.6–1.3‰, respectively. In some cases it was possible to distinguish commercial sources by this method that could not be distinguished by compound-specific analysis. Nitrous oxide produced by the combustion of coal was enriched in 15N relative to fuel. Combustion experiments revealed that the N occupying the end position of the nitrous oxide molecule was enriched in the lighter isotope. In a study of C isotopes in alanine and phenylalanine, Wolyniak et al.230 exploited the fact that pyrolytic fragments originated from unique sites within the parent molecule. The breaking of bonds during sample preparation followed by isotope analysis of the fragments allowed the isotope fractionation during bond breaking or formation to be determined. Pyrolysis of alaninol was used in conjunction with isotope labelling experiments to measure the isotope ratios of CO and CH4 fragments, and for phenethylamine, fragments of benzene and toluene fragments were measured. The contribution from the different C sites in the parent molecules to the formation of the pyrolysis-derived fragments could be calculated with precisions of 1% or less for each C site. The <0.2‰ precision obtained for direct measurement of δ13C deteriorated for values that needed to be calculated because of the propagation of errors.An improved sealed tube combustion technique for N allowed δ15N to be measured for rocks containing N at the 10−6 mg kg−1 level.231 Nitrogen was extracted from samples by combustion in quartz tubes sealed under vacuum. The N gas was purified using Cu, CuO and CaO. Analysis was made on a triple-collector static-vacuum mass spectrometer. The N2 gas blank was 0.65 ± 0.39 nmol N. The measurement precisions were ±8% and ±0.5‰ for the N concentration and δ15N, respectively, even for samples containing less than 2 × 10−6 mg kg−1 N. The method was well suited to the study of rocks that are relevant to the exchanges between the N reservoirs of the earth’s mantle and surface.11 Thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS)11.1 ReviewsSeveral reviews on the relative strengths of TIMS and MC-ICP-MS methods suggested a declining role of TIMS in some applications areas.6,232–234 This trend has been evolving largely since MC-ICP-MS methods have matured and is influenced by the higher demands of chemical purification for TIMS required to achieve high ionization on thermal filaments. This has led many laboratories to analyse materials by both methods in order to validate MC-ICP-MS measurements and evaluate efficiencies in the sample preparation and measurement procedure that might offer a benefit. One could conclude from some of these reviews that TIMS methods are becoming obsolete and will be replaced by MC-ICP-MS. This is incorrect because TIMS retains fundamental strengths that cannot easily be replicated, at least on the basis of existing and near-term evolution of MC-ICP-MS techniques. As is generally true in analytical spectrometry, the two methods have complementary strengths. Regardless of the MS method used, high tolerance chemical preparation and purification is required to obtain the best precision data on isotope ratios. This in part obviates the initially-perceived advantages of MC-ICP-MS. Nevertheless, there is a clear trend in applications towards expanding use of MC-ICP-MS for elements that may have been analysed previously mainly by TIMS. As indicated below, the inherent ultra-low LOD of TIMS for various elements, its applications in metrology using total evaporation techniques and, in particular, its strength in high-precision U–Pb zircon geochronology of pg quantities of Pb and U are not likely to be superseded easily or in the near future.11.2 InstrumentationAppelhaus et al.235 designed and tested a prototype larger-dispersion MC-TIMS instrument with combined magnetic sector and electrostatic dispersion lens. This small-scale design has had its ion optic predictions verified and it is planned to incorporate multiple discrete dynode ion counting multipliers in the detector array to measure seven isotopes in the 240 m/z range. This innovative approach contrasts with that adopted in existing commercially available instruments, which largely rely on channeltron-type ion counting detectors for multiple ion detection at 1 m/z spacing in the high m/z range but have limitations in terms of linearity and maximum signal intensity. The new design may offer advantages for isotope ratio measurements of fg to ag quantities of Pu, for example.11.3 Analytical methodologyTotal evaporation TIMS has been used in the preparation and certification of U isotope standards.236,237 This method involves calculating average ratios from the integrated intensity signals measured continuously until the sample is exhausted. It offers advantages over other methods in determining absolute isotope composition independent of mass fractionation. The mixed detector (Faraday and ion counting) array used by Richter et al.236 allowed a very large dynamic range (up to 108) to be measured with very good precision. The total evaporation method proved particularly useful for the analysis of Li at the ng level for which mass fractionation can be much larger than for heavier elements.238Special attention has been paid in the measurement of the atomic weights of La239 and Ta240 to the linearity of the Daly type detector used. The linearity of ion counting electron multiplier detectors is a requirement of rapid and reliable measurement of small ion beams with good precision and continues to challenge manufacturers and users alike. Demonstration of linearity involves relatively frequent calibrations and testing to ascertain accurate dead time for counting systems and stability of any non-linearity. The lack of suitably accurate values for the abundances of the 139La and 180Ta isotopes has, until now, impeded our understanding of nucleosynthesis processes in the early solar system.Refinements to the measurement of Li isotopes involved the conversion of Li to LiPO4 salt for loading onto the TIMS filament and analysis as LiPO4+ for improved ionization.241 Results for the analysis of Li in foraminifera, a good proxy for dissolved Li in sea-water, gave results comparable with those obtained by MC-ICP-MS but rigorous cleaning procedures of the foraminifera were required to eliminate contamination and to produce meaningful data.Determination of the isotopic composition of S by measuring the AsS+ ion using MC-TIMS gave a precision comparable to that obtained by SIRMS but with a sample requirement one tenth of that of SIRMS analysis.242 This offered a way forward for the analysis of small samples.High precision TIMS measurements of Pb isotopes in remote air samples in Tasmania were achieved by paying particular attention to reducing the level of contamination.243 Distant pollution sources could be identified. Use of the low contamination method made it possible to measure Pb concentrations in air as low as 0.1 pg m−3 of air. Sharma et al.244 used very high precision MC-TIMS to try to distinguish whether reported 142Nd anomalies in very old terrestrial samples are real or an artefact of the measurement protocol (including choice of fractionation law) and data reduction procedures. The measurement protocol limited the fractionation to <0.1% in a controlled standardized procedure for evaluation of fine ion optical effects. A positive correlation between 148Nd∶144Nd and 150Nd∶144Nd was thought to be associated with ion beam growth. The overall precision of ratio measurement was ∼6 × 10−6. It was considered to be possible to resolve 142Nd anomalies greater than 1 × 10−5 relative to standards but that below this level artefacts needed to be evaluated with exceedingly great care. LaMont et al.245 developed a method to purify and concentrate Pu from urine for a Pu bioassay that had a LOD of 0.6 fg l−1 urine. The development of this highly sensitive test was driven by a requirement for a urine bioassay at low PuO2 concentrations that could not be met by α-spectrometry. The method included four radiochemical separation steps to eliminate virtually all matrix interferences in TIMS analysis. Consideration of the total procedural blank and the 239Pu background in urine samples from unexposed individuals gave a minimum 239Pu concentration of 2.4 fg l−1 for indication of exposure. Hennesey et al.42 showed that high precision TIMS analysis of CRM (tracers and standards) was essential for accurate quantification of osteological processes. They determined Ca isotopes in 41Ca-labelled material and bone tissue to evaluate bone re-working and dissolution. In the tracing of origin of nuclear materials, the date of uranium metal purification could be determined by accurate ID-TIMS determination of the amount of 230Th produced by decay of 234U present in the refined metal.246A correction for isobaric interferences in the determination of 238Pu in mixed U–Pu samples247 used the differential formation of metal to monoxide ions during thermal ionization as a function of different heating conditions applied to evaporation and ionization filaments. By optimizing ionization conditions for UO+ relative to Pu+ ions and monitoring m/z 235, 238, 239, 251, and 254 for the isotopes 235U, 238U, 238Pu and 239Pu it was possible to derive a correction that allowed 238Pu to be determined. This method could be applied when quantitative chemical separation of Pu from U was not feasible.Improved CrVI–H2SO4 dissolution and ion exchange separation, together with high-precision negative ionization 187Re–187Os isotope measurements, have been used to determine the date of sedimentation of rocks that lie on the Devonian–Carboniferous boundary of the geological time scale.248 An age of (361.3 ± 2.4) × 106 years for the organic components in black shale agreed with U–Pb monazite and zircon dates measured by U–Pb TIMS and SIMS methods.The non-radiogenic isotope composition of Sr in a series of materials including NIST SRM 987 was evaluated by high precision TIMS measurement using a single collector instrument.249 The slopes and intercepts of dual isotope ratio plots with variable fractionation were used assuming a linear fractionation law. A variety of dual isotope plots (e.g.86Sr∶88Sr versus84Sr∶88Sr) was used to derive 86Sr∶88Sr, 84Sr∶88Sr and 84Sr∶86Sr. The values of 86Sr∶88Sr from two natural rock samples and NIST SRM 987 (0.11956 ± 0.00017, 0.11957 ± 0.00008, 0.11942 ± 0.00018) agreed within limits of uncertainty with the recommended value of 0.1194, used world-wide to normalize measured 86Sr∶88Sr data. On the basis of the precision of the measurements, however, the authors suggested that variation in 86Sr∶88Sr ratios may exist in nature at the ∼0.1% per m/z level.In an innovative application to the zircon dating of very young volcanic events (<1 × 105 years), U-series geochronology was used to determine the eruption sequence of volcanic rocks in New Zealand to evaluate the extent of growth or residence periods of zircons in magma chambers prior to eruption.250 Zircons were analysed by ID-TIMS for 230Th∶234U and 234U∶238U by using 229Th and 236U tracers and zircon dissolution techniques.Although U–Pb zircon geochronology is a mature field of earth science research, the methodologies involved continue to evolve rapidly. A very major advance in zircon sample preparation, termed chemical abrasion TIMS (CA-TIMS), was shown by high precision ID-TIMS to remove entirely the effects of the natural process of lead-loss in zircon which arises from radiation damage to the crystal lattice.251 Selected zircons were heated or annealed to over 800 °C for a period of hours and then selectively dissolved in HF to remove the components of zircon that were responsible for the lead-loss, leaving a residue that was concordant and represented a closed system. It was shown that ages could be resolved to 0.1% of the geological age or better if a sufficiently well calibrated mixed tracer (205Pb and 235U) was used. This methodology had been used by other researchers in the past two years but this was the first time the method was described fully. This is the most important advance in zircon sample preparation for ∼25 years and is likely to become standard practice. The power of the method lies in producing concordant zircon that can, with suitable low-contamination methods, be analysed to very high precision, thereby allowing more confident refinements of the ages of geological events throughout Earth’s history to be made. Using this method for small single zircons weighing as little as 2 μg and containing as little as 20 pg Pb, the age of glaciation could be determined to within 1 × 106 years or better for deposits more than 5 × 108 years old.252 This study could not have been accomplished by a method other than ID-TIMS, thereby illustrating the usefulness of the method. Root et al.253 used the CA-TIMS method to determine the age of zircon in ultra-high-pressure eclogite rocks subducted to more than 100 km depth and showed that SIMS dates for zircons from the same samples were inaccurate because of subtle effects of lead loss. All of these studies indicated that when very high precision dates are required to solve a geological problem, the CA-TIMS method is pivotal.12 Other methods12.1 High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS)A comprehensive review described in detail the development and operation of this new technology, which separates ions as they are carried by a stream of gas between two closely spaced electrodes.254 Although the applications described in the review were of the analysis of complex organic molecules, the technique is particularly suitable for coupling with ESMS and therefore has potential in the analysis of organometallic species. In the FAIMS device, an rf voltage forced the ions to oscillate between two electrodes as they were carried along by the stream of gas. Some ions were transmitted whereas others collided with the walls of the electrode. The device was, therefore, an ion separator in its own right but was considered an ideal ion processing tool for MS. In a combined FAIMS-MS system, ions were filtered prior to MS on the basis of the their mobility in high and low electric fields and the separation of many types of isobaric ions was demonstrated. The S/N could be improved by separating many of the background ions from the analyte ion of interest prior to FAIMS analysis. In most cases there was little loss of signal intensity when the device was used because the transmission efficiency was good. Operated at atmospheric pressure, the device was located between the ion source (e.g. ES) and the vacuum system, which made its insertion and removal simple.12.2 Noble gas mass spectrometryThe elemental and isotopic abundances of noble gases are generally determined by a static operation on magnetic sector instruments. Although this method provides good abundance sensitivity and mass resolving power, it is not suitable for routine high-throughput analysis. A new procedure, based on the use of ID and a quadrupole instrument, for the analysis of sea-water gave the advantages over the traditional method of low cost (one tenth of a magnetic sector instrument), small sample requirement (8 ml STP) and superior precision (0.4–1.5%) of abundance measurement.255 Dissolved gases were extracted from sea-water and mixed by ultrasonic vibration with known amounts of isotopic spikes (36Ar, 86Kr, 22Ne, 124Xe) previously introduced into a preparation vacuum line. The noble gases were subsequently purified using three-stage hot Ti getters and separated by two activated charcoal traps held at low temperature.13 Appendix: Glossary of termsAASAtomic absorption spectrometryAFMAtomic force microscopyAMSAccelerator mass spectrometryaTOFAerosol time of flightATPAdenosine triphosphateBPBefore PresentCAChemical abrasionCCCollision cellCECapillary electrophoresisCFContinuous flowCFCChlorofluorocarbonCIDCollision induced dissociationcpsCounts per secondCRMCertified Reference MaterialCVCold vapourDBTDibutyltindcDirect currentDICDissolved inorganic carbonDIHENDirect injection high efficiency nebulizerDLCDiamond-like carbonDNADeoxyribonucleic acidDRCDynamic reaction cellDRFDepth resolution functionEAElemental analyserECElectrochemically controlledECRElectron cyclotron resonanceEIElectron ionizationEIMSElectron ionization mass spectrometryEMElectron multiplierEPXMAElectron probe X-ray microanalysisERDAElastic recoil detection analysisESElectrosprayESMSElectrospray mass spectrometryETVElectrothermal vaporizationFAIMSHigh-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometryFFFast flowFIFlow injectionFTFourier transformFWHMFull width at half maximumGCGas chromatographyGDGlow dischargeGDMSGlow discharge mass spectrometryHGHydride generationHPLCHigh-performance liquid chromatographyHRHigh resolutionICIon chromatographyICPInductively coupled plasmaICP-MSInductively coupled plasma mass spectrometryIDIsotope dilutionIMFInstrumental mass fractionationIPIonization potentialIRInfraredIRGAInfrared gas analyserIRMMInstitute of Reference Materials and MeasurementsISOInternational Standardization OrganizationIUPACInternational Union of Pure and Applied ChemistrykDielectric constantKEDKinetic energy distributionLALaser ablationLCLiquid chromatographyLEXESLow energy electron induced X-ray emission spectroscopyLIBSLaser-induced breakdown spectroscopyLIMSLaser ionization mass spectrometryLMMSLaser microprobe mass spectrometryLODLimit of detectionLOQLimit of quantificationMBTMonobutyltinMCMultiple collectorMDMolecular dynamicsMQWMulti-quantum wellMRIMixing-depth roughness informationMSMass spectrometrym/zMass-to-charge ratioNISTNational Institute of Standards and TechnologyNRCCNational Research Council CanadaPCAPrincipal components analysisPCBPolychlorinated biphenylPDBPeeDee BelemnitePDMSPolydimethylsiloxanePEEKPolyether ether ketonePFAPerfluoroalkylPIXEParticle-induced X-ray emissionpmCPercentage modern carbonppmParts per millionQWQuantum wellRBSRutherford backscattering spectrometryrfRadiofrequencyRIMSResonance ionization mass spectrometryRMReference materialrmsRoot mean squareRSDRelative standard deviationRSFRelative sensitivity factorSDStandard deviationSEMScanning electron microscopySFSector fieldSIMSSecondary ion mass spectrometrySIRMSStable isotope ratio mass spectrometryS/NSignal-to-noise ratioSNMSSputtered neutral mass spectrometrySPESolid phase extractionSPMESolid phase microextractionSRMStandard Reference MaterialS-SIMSStatic secondary ion mass spectrometrySTPStandard temperature and pressureTBTTributyltinTEMTransmission electron microscopyTIMSThermal ionization mass spectrometryTOCTotal organic carbonTOFTime of flightTOFMSTime of flight mass spectrometryUSGSUnited States Geological SurveyUVUltravioletVPDBVienna PeeDee BelemniteXPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopyXRDX-ray diffractionYAGYttrium aluminium garnet2-DTwo dimensional3-DThree dimensionalλWavelengthτPulse duration14 ReferencesD. Littlejohn, C. Davidson, J. Bacon and P. Quevauviller, J. Soils Sediments, 2006, 6(1), 62 Search PubMed .J. R. Bacon, K. L. Linge and L. Van Vaeck, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 763 RSC .A. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds and D. M. Penny, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1398 RSC .O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill, J. Rieuwerts and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 217 RSC .A. Taylor, S. Branch, M. P. Day, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(4), 439 RSC .J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1173 RSC .X. D. Hou, W. Chen, Y. H. He and B. T. Jones, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2005, 40(3), 245 CrossRef CAS .M. Palmblad, B. A. Buchholz, D. J. Hillegonds and J. S. Vogel, J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 40(2), 154 CrossRef CAS .L. T. Vuong, B. A. Buchholz, M. W. Lame and S. R. Dueker, Nutr. Rev., 2004, 62(10), 375 Search PubMed .P. Collon, W. Kutschera and Z. T. Lu, Annu. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci., 2004, 54, 39 Search PubMed .G. M. Klody, J. B. Schroeder, G. A. Norton, R. L. Loger, R. L. Kitchen and M. L. Sundquist, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 240(1–2), 463 CrossRef CAS .M. Stocker, M. Dobeli, M. Grajcar, M. Suter, H. A. Synal and L. Wacker, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 240(1–2), 483 CrossRef CAS .L. Wacker, E. Chamizo, L. K. Fifield, M. Stocker, A. Suter and H. A. Synal, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 240(1–2), 452 CrossRef CAS .P. Steier, R. Golser, V. Liechtenstein, W. Kutschera, A. Priller, C. Vockenhuber and A. Wallner, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 240(1–2), 445 CrossRef CAS .L. Caleagnile, G. Quarta and M. D’Elia, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2005, 62(4), 623 CrossRef CAS .S. Chopra, N. S. Pawar, M. P. Singh, R. Kumar, J. Prasad, V. P. Patel, R. Pal, M. Sota, K. Devarani, S. Ojha, S. Gargari, R. Joshi, D. Kanjilal and S. K. Datta, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 550(1–2), 70 CrossRef CAS .C. Vockenhuber, R. Golser, W. Kutschera, A. Priller, P. Steier, K. Vorderwinkler and A. Wallner, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 240(1–2), 490 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Guan, X. D. Ruan, M. He, H. J. Wang, G. Q. Li, S. Y. Wu, K. J. Dong, M. Lin and S. Jiang, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2005, 22(7), 1622 CrossRef CAS .H. Reithmeier, V. Lazarev, F. Kubo, W. Ruhm and E. Nolte, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 239(3), 273 CrossRef CAS .K. A. Hughen, M. G. L. Baillie, E. Bard, J. W. Beck, C. J. H. Bertrand, P. G. Blackwell, C. E. Buck, G. S. Burr, K. B. Cutler, P. E. Damon, R. L. Edwards, R. G. Fairbanks, M. Friedrich, T. P. Guilderson, B. Kromer, G. McCormac, S. Manning, C. B. Ramsey, P. J. Reimer, R. W. Reimer, S. Remmele, J. R. Southon, M. Stuiver, S. Talamo, F. W. Taylor, J. van der Plicht and C. E. Weyhenmeyer, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(3), 1059 CAS .K. A. Hughen, J. R. Southon, C. J. H. Bertrand, B. Frantz and P. Zermeno, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(3), 1161 CAS .J. S. Vogel, T. Ognibene, M. Palmblad and P. Reimer, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(3), 1103 CAS .T. Uhl, W. Kretschmer, W. Luppold and A. Scharf, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 240(1–2), 474 CrossRef CAS .L. A. Currie, J. D. Kessler, R. A. Fletcher and J. E. Dibb, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 263(2), 399 CrossRef CAS .L. A. Currie and J. D. Kessler, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2005, 5, 2833 CAS .T. Ertunc, S. Xu, C. L. Bryant, C. Maden, C. Murray, M. Currie and S. Freeman, Radiocarbon, 2005, 47(3), 453 CAS .H. Yoshikawa, H. Nakahara, M. Imamura, K. Kobayashi and T. Nakanishi, Radiocarbon, 2005, 47(2), 211 CAS .W. W. Oswald, P. M. Anderson, T. A. Brown, L. B. Brubaker, F. S. Hu, A. V. Lozhkin, W. Tinner and P. Kaltenrieder, Holocene, 2005, 15(5), 758 Search PubMed .Y. J. Cai, W. Beck, Z. C. Peng and Z. F. Zhang, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2005, 50(8), 817 Search PubMed .T. C. Rick, R. L. Vellanoweth and J. M. Erlandson, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2005, 32(11), 1641 Search PubMed .D. J. Charman and M. H. Garnett, Radiocarbon, 2005, 47(1), 135 CAS .A. Watchman, S. O’Connor and R. Jones, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2005, 32(3), 369 Search PubMed .A. Vasil’chuk, J. C. Kim and Y. Vasil’chuk, Radiocarbon, 2005, 47(2), 243 CAS .A. Scharf, W. Kretschmer, T. Uhl, K. Kritzler, K. Hunger and E. Pernicka, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 240(1–2), 478 CrossRef CAS .S. M. L. Hardie, M. H. Garnett, A. E. Fallick, A. P. Rowland and N. J. Ostle, Radiocarbon, 2005, 47(3), 441 CAS .N. Ohkouchi, L. Xu, C. M. Reddy, D. Montlucon and T. I. Eglinton, Radiocarbon, 2005, 47(3), 401 CAS .G. Mollenhauer, D. Montlucon and T. I. Eglinton, Radiocarbon, 2005, 47(3), 413 CAS .N. Ohkouchi, T. I. Eglinton, K. A. Hughen, E. Roosen and L. D. Keigwin, Radiocarbon, 2005, 47(3), 425 CAS .M. L. Chiarappa-Zucca, R. C. Finkel, R. E. Martinelli, J. E. McAninch, D. O. Nelson and K. W. Turteltaub, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 2004, 17(12), 1614 CrossRef CAS .C. Geppert, P. Müller, K. Wendt, C. Schnabel, H. A. Synal, U. Herpers and S. Merchel, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 229(3–4), 519 CrossRef CAS .R. L. Fitzgerald, D. J. Hillegonds, D. W. Burton, T. L. Griffin, S. Mullaney, J. S. Vogel, L. J. Deftos and D. A. Herold, Clin. Chem., 2005, 51(11), 2095 CrossRef CAS .C. Hennessy, M. Berglund, M. Ostermann, T. Walczyk, H. A. Synal, C. Geppert, K. Wendt and P. D. P. Taylor, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 229(2), 281 CrossRef .W. E. Kieser, X. L. Zhao, C. Y. Soto and B. Tracy, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 263(2), 375 CrossRef CAS .F. J. Santos, J. M. Lopez-Gutierrez, M. Garcia-Leon, M. Suter and H. A. Synal, J. Environ. Radioact., 2005, 84(1), 103 CrossRef CAS .B. Li, P. Q. Zhang, C. Y. Chen, M. He and Z. F. Chai, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2005, 33(7), 904 CAS .S. S. Jiang, Z. Y. Chang, M. Zhao, Y. G. Zhao, X. L. Zhao and W. E. Kieser, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 264(3), 549 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Marchetti, T. A. Brown, C. C. Cox, T. F. Hamilton and R. E. Martinelli, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 263(2), 483 CrossRef CAS .J. Feldmann, Trends Anal. Chem., 2005, 24(3), 228 CrossRef CAS .J. Szpunar, Analyst, 2005, 130(4), 442 RSC .A. Prange and D. Profrock, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 383(3), 372 CrossRef CAS .G. Liljegren, N. Forsgard, C. Zettersten, J. Pettersson, M. Svedberg, M. Herranen and L. Nyholm, Analyst, 2005, 130(10), 1358 RSC .V. Nischwitz and S. A. Pergantis, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(17), 5551 CrossRef CAS .S. McSheehy, X. M. Guo, R. E. Sturgeon and Z. Mester, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 709 RSC .E. Dumont, K. De Cremer, M. Van Hulle, C. C. Chery, F. Vanhaecke and R. Cornelis, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1071(1–2), 191 CrossRef CAS .H. Goenaga Infante, G. O’Connor, M. Rayman, R. Wahlen, J. E. Spallholz, R. Hearn and T. Catterick, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 864 RSC .S. Cavalli, S. Polesello and S. Valsecchi, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1085(1), 42 CrossRef CAS .H. Serra and J. M. F. Nogueira, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1094(1–2), 130 CrossRef CAS .J. Meija, G. Centineo, J. I. G. Alonso, A. Sanz-Medel and J. A. Caruso, J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 40(6), 807 CrossRef CAS .E. Magi, M. Di Carro and P. Rivaro, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2004, 18(12), 646 CrossRef CAS .C. Devos, M. Vliegen, B. Willaert, F. David, L. Moens and P. Sandra, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1079(1–2), 408 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Chou and M. R. Lee, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1064(1), 1 CrossRef CAS .S. Mishra, R. M. Tripathi, S. Bhalke, V. K. Shukla and V. D. Puranik, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 551(1–2), 192 CrossRef CAS .J. Munoz, M. Gallego and M. Valcarcel, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 548(1–2), 66 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Bradley, J. Forensic Sci., 2005, 50(1), 96 CAS .S. Kage, K. Kudo, H. Ikeda, A. Tsujita and N. Ikeda, J. Chromatogr., B, 2005, 817(2), 335 CrossRef CAS .V. Hoffmann, M. Kasik, P. K. Robinson and C. Venzago, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381(1), 173 CrossRef .D. M. McClenathan and G. M. Hieftje, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1326 RSC .K. Newman and R. S. Mason, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 830 RSC .D. Fliegel, R. Waddell, V. Majidi, D. Gunther and C. L. Lewis, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(6), 1847 CrossRef CAS .A. Menéndez, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(6), 824 CrossRef .J. Pisonero, I. Feldmann, N. Bordel, A. Sanz-Medel and N. Jakubowski, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(8), 1965 CrossRef CAS .D. L. Hoffmann, D. A. Richards, T. R. Elliott, P. L. Smart, C. D. Coath and C. J. Hawkesworth, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 244(2–3), 97 CrossRef CAS .K. Kahen, K. Jorabchi, C. Gray and A. Montaser, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(24), 7194 CrossRef CAS .K. Jorabchi, K. Kahen, C. Gray and A. Montaser, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(5), 1253 CrossRef CAS .M. Kovacevic and W. Goessler, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(9–10), 1357 CrossRef .I. Rodushkin, P. Nordlund, E. Engström and D. C. Baxter, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1250 RSC .Z. C. Hu, S. Gao, S. H. Hu, H. L. Yuan, X. M. Liu and Y. S. Liu, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1263 RSC .V. F. Taylor, R. E. March, H. P. Longerich and C. J. Stadey, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 243(1), 71 CrossRef CAS .D. M. McClenathan and G. M. Hieftje, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1318 RSC .Y. Ogra, K. Ishiwata and K. T. Suzuki, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 554(1–2), 123 CrossRef CAS .M. Resano, E. García-Ruiz and F. Vanhaecke, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(11), 1472 CrossRef .D. Günther and B. Hattendorf, Trends Anal. Chem., 2005, 24(3), 255 CrossRef .P. Weis, H. P. Beck and D. Günther, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381(1), 212 CrossRef CAS .H. R. Kuhn and D. Günther, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 383(3), 434 CrossRef CAS .A. Bogaerts and Z. Y. Chen, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(9–10), 1280 CrossRef .J. Kosler, R. B. Pedersen, C. Kruber and P. J. Sylvester, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(3), 192 RSC .W. C. Davis, S. J. Christopher and G. C. Turk, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(19), 6389 CrossRef CAS .J. Kosler, M. Wiedenbeck, R. Wirth, J. Hovorka, P. Sylvester and J. Míková, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(5), 402 RSC .C. Y. Liu, X. L. Mao, J. González and R. E. Russo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(3), 200 RSC .C. Y. Liu, X. L. Mao, S. S. Mao, R. Greif and R. E. Russo, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(20), 6687 CrossRef CAS .J. Koch, H. Lindner, A. von Bohlen, R. Hergenröder and K. Niemax, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 901 RSC .H. R. Kuhn, J. Koch, R. Hergenröder, K. Niemax, M. Kalberer and D. Günther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 894 RSC .T. Vaculovic, M. Guillong, J. Binkert, V. Kanicky and D. Günther, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2004, 49(6), 353 CAS .J. González, C. Y. Liu, J. Yoo, X. L. Mao and R. E. Russo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(1), 27 CrossRef .A. J. R. Kent and C. A. Ungerer, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1256 RSC .L. Yang, R. E. Sturgeon and Z. Mester, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(9), 2971 CrossRef CAS .D. Bleiner and H. Altorfer, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 754 RSC .M. Tanner and D. Günther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 987 RSC .J. L. Todolí and J. M. Mermet, Trends Anal. Chem., 2005, 24(2), 107 CrossRef CAS .M. Krachler, N. Rausch, H. Feuerbacher and P. Klemens, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(6), 865 CrossRef .E. G. Yanes and N. J. Miller-Ihli, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(4), 555 CrossRef .T. Hirata and I. Kohge, Bunseki Kagaku, 2005, 54(5), 347 CrossRef CAS .G. Ertas and J. A. Holcombe, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 687 RSC .M. Resano, I. Gelaude, R. Dams and F. Vanhaecke, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(3), 319 CrossRef .Y.-L. Feng, R. E. Sturgeon, J. W. Lam and A. D’Ulivo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 255 RSC .D. Schaumlöffel, P. Giusti, M. V. Zoriy, C. Pickhardt, J. Szpunar, R. Lobinski and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(1), 17 RSC .R. Waddell, C. Lewis, W. Hang, C. Hassell and V. Majidi, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2005, 40(1), 33 CrossRef CAS .M. Shah and J. A. Caruso, J. Sep. Sci., 2005, 28(15), 1969 CrossRef CAS .B. Michalke, Electrophoresis, 2005, 26(7–8), 1584 CrossRef CAS .D. Pröfrock, P. Leonhard, W. Ruck and A. Prange, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381(1), 194 CrossRef CAS .C. Ambard, A. Delorme, N. Baglan, J. Aupiais, F. Pointurier and C. Madic, Radiochim. Acta, 2005, 93(11), 665 CrossRef CAS .W. Brüchert and J. Bettmer, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(15), 5072 CrossRef CAS .L. Bendahl and B. Gammelgaard, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(5), 410 RSC .L. Yang and R. E. Sturgeon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 724 RSC .P. Rodríguez-González, J. I. García Alonso and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1076 RSC .R. Clough, S. T. Belt, B. Fairman, T. Catterick and E. H. Evans, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1072 RSC .S. P. Verma and E. Santoyo, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2005, 10(4), 144 Search PubMed .F. M. Li, D. W. Armstrong and R. S. Houk, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(5), 1407 CrossRef CAS .M. H. P. Yau and W.-T. Chan, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1197 RSC .B. Magnusson, I. Trešl and C. Haraldsson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1024 RSC .R. Hearn, P. Evans and M. Sargent, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1019 RSC .D. Beauchemin, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2004, 49(6), 436 CAS .S. Willie, Z. Mester and R. E. Sturgeon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1358 RSC .M. A. Elburg, P. Vroon and A. Scherstén, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1389 RSC .A. Sjögren, P. K. Appelblad, A. Tovedala and H. Ramebäck, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 320 RSC .J. Woodhead, S. Swearer, J. Hergt and R. Maas, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(1), 22 RSC .W. Hang, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 301 RSC .J. M. Vadillo, C. C. Garcia, J. F. Alcántara and J. J. Laserna, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 948 CrossRef .P. Manoravi, M. Joseph, N. Sivakumar and R. Balasubramanian, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(12), 1453 CrossRef CAS .F. Costache, M. Ratzke, D. Wolfframm and H. Reif, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 247(1–4), 249 CrossRef CAS .D. I. Malyarenko, W. E. Cooke, B. L. Adam, G. Malik, H. J. Chen, E. R. Tracy, M. W. Trosset, M. Sasinowski, O. J. Semmes and D. M. Manos, Clin. Chem., 2005, 51(1), 65 CAS .V. Carré, F. Aubriet, P. T. Scheepers, G. Krier and J. F. Muller, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 19(7), 871 CrossRef CAS .S. Itoh, H. Nakajima, H. Yamaguchi and T. Kobayashi, Bunseki Kagaku, 2005, 54(10), 1015 CrossRef CAS .G. A. Czerwieniec, S. C. Russell, H. J. Tobias, M. E. Pitesky, D. P. Fergenson, P. Steele, A. Srivastava, J. M. Horn, M. Frank, E. E. Gard and C. B. Lebrilla, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(4), 1081 CrossRef CAS .P. G. Schumann, K. D. A. Wendt and B. A. Bushaw, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(11), 1402 CrossRef .N. Winograd, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(7), 142A CAS .F. Adams, L. Van Vaeck and R. Barrett, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(1), 13 CrossRef .J. L. Guerquin-Kern, T. D. Wu, C. Quintana and A. Croisy, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2005, 1724(3), 228 CrossRef CAS .A. Tolstogouzov, S. F. Belykh, M. Stepanova, S. K. Dew and C. Pagura, Surf. Rev. Lett., 2004, 11(4–5), 391 CrossRef CAS .S. Sarkar and P. Chakraborty, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 232, 153 CrossRef CAS .J. Zekonyte, V. Zaporojtchenko and F. Faupel, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 236, 241 CrossRef CAS .T. Eto and K. Shibahara, Jpn J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2005, 44(4B), 2433 CrossRef CAS .M. Ullrich, A. Burenkov and H. Ryssel, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 228, 373 CrossRef CAS .S. Hofmann, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 241(1–2), 113 CrossRef CAS .K. Mayerhofer, H. Foisner, K. Piplits, G. Hobler, L. Palmetshofer and H. Hutter, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 271 CrossRef CAS .S. Strauss, C. Zechner, A. Terterian, R. Gautschi, A. Erlebach and A. Scholze, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2005, 124, 376 CrossRef .H. Shi, M. Yu, R. Huang, Y.-Y. Wang, S. Kunihiro and H. Oka, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2005, 22(1), 76 CrossRef CAS .S. Fearn and D. S. McPhail, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(4), 893 CrossRef CAS .S. Saito, Y. Uhara, Y. Kogushi, H. Yoshida, S. Isono, H. Yamasaki, H. Murakami, T. Sutou, T. Soumura and T. Kioka, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2005, 202(12), R129 CrossRef CAS .P. Konarski, J. Haluszka, M. Cwil, I. Iwanejko, K. Kaczorek, J. Gawel, K. Pisiewicz, A. Lesiak-Bednarek and H. Strugala-Stawik, Vacuum, 2005, 78(2–4), 297 CrossRef CAS .W. P. Lee, S. F. Koh, H. K. Yow and T. Y. Tou, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8(3), J5 CrossRef CAS .U. Admon, D. Donohue, H. Aigner, G. Tamborini, O. Bildstein and M. Betti, Microsc. Microanal., 2005, 11(4), 354 Search PubMed .D. W. Moon, Surf. Interface Anal., 2005, 37(7), 646 CrossRef CAS .Y. Homma, Surf.
Interface Anal., 2005, 37(1), 90 CrossRef CAS .K. J. Kim, D. W. Moon, P. Chi and D. Simons, Surf. Interface Anal., 2005, 37(10), 802 CrossRef CAS .J. T. Francis and N. S. McIntyre, Surf. Interface Anal., 2005, 37(9), 743 CrossRef CAS .R. A. De Souza, J. Zehnpfenning, M. Martin and J. Maier, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176(15–16), 1465 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Chan, H. J. Liu, C. T. Chan, Z. Q. Zhang, W. K. Ge and I. K. Sou, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71(19) Search PubMed  , art no. 195421.J. B. Cliff, K. H. Jarman, N. B. Valentine, S. L. Golledge, D. J. Gaspar, D. S. Wunschel and K. L. Wahl, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2005, 71(11), 6524 CrossRef CAS .M. Lenzen, R. E. Collins and K. Prince, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2005, 351(4), 317 CrossRef CAS .L. X. Zhao, R. P. Campion, P. F. Fewster, R. W. Martin, B. Y. Ber, A. P. Kovarsky, C. R. Staddon, K. Y. Wang, K. W. Edmonds, C. T. Foxon and B. L. Gallagher, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 20(5), 369 CrossRef CAS .K. J. Coakley, D. S. Simons and A. M. Leifer, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 240(2), 107 CrossRef CAS .H. U. Ehrke and H. Maul, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2005, 8(1–3), 111 CrossRef CAS .H. Graoui, G. Conti, M. Hilkene, B. McComb, A. Tjandra, M. A. Foad, D. Kouzminov, J. Hunter, C. J. Hitzman and C. A. Evans, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 237(1–2), 336 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Kasemann, A. B. Jeffcoate and T. Elliott, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(16), 5251 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Gurenko, I. V. Veksler, A. Meixner, R. Thomas, A. M. Dorfman and D. B. Dingwell, Chem. Geol., 2005, 222(3–4), 268 CrossRef CAS .R. A. De Souza and R. J. Chater, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176(23–24), 1915 CrossRef CAS .L. Sangély, M. Chaussidon, R. Michels and V. Huault, Chem. Geol., 2005, 223(4), 179 CrossRef CAS .D. Vielzeuf, M. Champenois, J. W. Valley, F. Brunet and J. L. Devidal, Chem. Geol., 2005, 223(4), 208 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Stern, I. R. Fletcher, B. Rasmussen, N. J. McNaughton and B. J. Griffin, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 244(2–3), 125 CrossRef CAS .P. K. Weber, C. R. Bacon, I. D. Hutcheon, B. L. Ingram and J. L. Wooden, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(5), 1225 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sano, K. Shirai, N. Takahata, T. Hirata and N. C. Sturchio, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(9), 1091 CrossRef CAS .M. Cwil and P. Konarski, Vacuum, 2005, 78(2–4), 291 CrossRef CAS .D. Krecar, M. Fuchs, R. Koegler and H. Hutter, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381(8), 1526 CrossRef CAS .P. Konarski, M. Cwil, M. Zaremba, D. Radziewicz, B. Sciana and J. Kozlowski, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2004, 8(1), 16 Search PubMed .D. Krecar, M. Rosner, M. Draxler, P. Bauer and H. Hutter, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 123 CrossRef CAS .M. Serantoni, A. S. Sarac and D. Sutton, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2005, 194(1), 36 CrossRef CAS .A. R. Chanbasha and A. T. S. Wee, Surf. Interface Anal., 2005, 37(7), 628 CrossRef CAS .G. G. Goodman, V. Pajcini, S. P. Smith and P. B. Merrill, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2005, 8(1–3), 255 CrossRef CAS .A. Romanyuk, P. Oelhafen, R. Steiner, P. M. Nellen, J. C. Reiner and V. Melnik, Surf. Sci., 2005, 595(1–3), 35 CrossRef CAS .Z. X. Jiang, K. Kim, J. Lerma, D. Sieloff, T. Y. Luo, J. Y. Yang, D. Triyoso, H. Tseng, P. Tobin and N. Ramani, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2005, 23(4), 589 CrossRef CAS .B. G. de la Mata, M. G. Dowsett and V. Palitsin, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2005, 202(11), 2148 CrossRef .S. Oswald, I. Mazilu, S. Fahler, W. Gruner, R. Hermann, W. Loser, O. Filip, H. Wendrock, L. Schultz, B. Schmidt and W. Rodewald, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2005, 290, 1240 CrossRef .R. L. Hubert, J. Brison, L. Houssiau and S. Lucas, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 240(1–2), 420 CrossRef CAS .B. R. Chakraborty, S. K. Haider, N. Karar, D. Kabiraj and D. K. Avasthi, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38(16), 2836 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Lee, K. J. Kim, H. K. Kim and D. W. Moon, Surf. Interface Anal., 2005, 37(2), 176 CrossRef CAS .A. P. Grosvenor, J. T. Francis, B. A. Kobe and N. S. McIntyre, Surf. Interface Anal., 2005, 37(5), 495 CrossRef CAS .S. Chandra, Eur. J. Cell Biol., 2005, 84(9), 783 Search PubMed .K. E. Mayerhofer, K. Piplits, R. Traum, M. Griesser and H. Hutter, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 133 CrossRef CAS .T. Horita, Y. P. Xiong, K. Yamaji, H. Kishimoto, N. Sakai, M. E. Brito and H. Yokokawa, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 174(1–4), 41 CrossRef CAS .M. Kondo, T. Shibata, H. Kawanowa, Y. Gotoh and R. Souda, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 232, 140 CrossRef CAS .R. Van Ham, L. Van Vaeck, F. Adams and A. Adriaens, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1088 RSC .I. S. Gilmore, M. P. Seah and A. Henderson, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(13), 1642 CrossRef CAS .C. J. L. Silwood, I. Abrahams, D. C. Apperley, N. P. Lockyer, E. Lynch, M. Motevalli, R. M. Nix and M. Grootveld, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15(16), 1626 RSC .J. Kim, H. K. Shon, D. Jung, D. W. Moon, S. Y. Han and T. G. Lee, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(13), 4137 CrossRef CAS .D. Touboul, F. Kollmer, E. Niehuis, A. Brunelle and O. Laprévote, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 16(10), 1608 CrossRef CAS .I. M. Kempson and W. M. Skinner, Sci. Total Environ., 2005, 338(3), 213 CrossRef CAS .M. Rouleau, C. Dion, P. Plamondon, G. Kennedy, G. L’Espérance and J. Zayed, J. Toxicol. Env. Health Part A, 2005, 68(21), 1889 Search PubMed .M. Rouleau, C. Dion, P. Plamondon, G. L’Espérance and J. Zayed, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health, Part A, 2005, 68(21), 1907 Search PubMed .K. Keune and J. J. Boon, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(15), 4742 CrossRef CAS .M. Sommer and J. Goschnick, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 252 CrossRef CAS .D. G. Nash, X. F. Liu, E. R. Mysak and T. Baer, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 241(2–3), 89 CrossRef CAS .T. Schneider, M. Sommer and J. Goschnick, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 257 CrossRef CAS .G. Kothleitner, M. Rogers, A. Berendes, W. Bock and B. O. Kolbesen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 66 CrossRef CAS .B. R. Chakraborty, D. Haranath, H. Chander, S. Hellweg, S. Dambach and H. F. Arlinghaus, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16(8), 1006 CrossRef CAS .A. Wittig, M. Wiemann, M. Fartmann, C. Kriegeskotte, H. F. Arlinghaus, K. Zierold and W. Sauerwein, Microsc. Res. Tech., 2005, 66(5), 248 CrossRef CAS .T. D. Jardine and R. A. Cunjak, Oecologia, 2005, 144(4), 528 Search PubMed .P. Ghosh, M. Patecki, M. Rothe and W. A. Brand, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 19(8), 1097 CrossRef CAS .H. P. Affek, W. Guo, J. M. Eiler, K. A. Boering and K. J. Hoag, Eos Trans. AGU, 2005, 86(52) Search PubMed  , Abstract B22_08.S. Kawagucci, U. Tsunogai, S. Kudo, F. Nakagawa, H. Honda, S. Aoki, T. Nakazawa and T. Gamo, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(14), 4509 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Assonov and C. A. M. Brenninkmeijer, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 19(5), 627 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Sessions, S. P. Sylva and J. M. Hayes, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(20), 6519 CrossRef CAS .D. Beheydt, P. Boeckx, T. J. Clough, J. Vermeulen, R. R. Sherlock and O. Van Cleemput, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 19(11), 1365 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Joshi, B. D. Shrivastava and A. Mishra, X-Ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(6), 466 CrossRef CAS .J. A. C. Barth, A. Tait and M. Bolshaw, Limnol. Oceanogr. Meth., 2004, 2, 35 Search PubMed .Y. Horii, K. Kannan, G. Petrick, T. Gamo, J. Falandysz and N. Yamashita, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(11), 4206 CrossRef CAS .Y. Horii, G. Petrick, M. Okada, K. Amano, T. Katase, T. Gamo and N. Yamashita, Bunseki Kagaku, 2005, 54(5), 361 CrossRef .H. Schnyder, R. Schaufele and R. Wenzel, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(24), 3068 CrossRef CAS .C. Huber and M. Leuenberger, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2004, 5 Search PubMed  , art no. Q10002.C. Huber and M. Leuenberger, Isot. Environ. Health Stud., 2005, 41(3), 189 Search PubMed .O. Shouakar-Stash, R. J. Drimmie and S. K. Frape, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 19(2), 121 CrossRef CAS .O. Shouakar-Stash, S. K. Frape and R. J. Drimmie, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(13), 4027 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Archbold, K. R. Redeker, S. Davis, T. Elliot and R. M. Kalin, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 19(3), 337 CrossRef CAS .D. D. Komatsu, U. Tsunogai, J. Yamaguchi and F. Nakagawa, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 19(4), 477 CrossRef CAS .M. R. McIlvin and M. A. Altabet, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(17), 5589 CrossRef CAS .C. Spotl, Isot. Environ. Health Stud., 2005, 41(3), 217 Search PubMed .G. Capasso, R. Favara, F. Grassa, S. Inguaggiato and M. Longo, Ann. Geophys., 2005, 48(1), 159 Search PubMed .M. Marschner, P. Middlestead and I. D. Clark, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 19(2), 261 CrossRef CAS .G. L. Sacks and J. T. Brenna, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(4), 1013 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Wolyniak, G. L. Sacks, B. S. Pan and J. T. Brenna, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(6), 1746 CrossRef CAS .V. Busigny, M. Ader and P. Cartigny, Chem. Geol., 2005, 223(4), 249 CrossRef CAS .A. Cocherie, P. Rossi, C. M. Fanning and C. Guerrot, Lithos, 2005, 82(1–2), 185 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Hergt, L. P. Bedard, E. Deloule, K. L. Linge, P. J. Sylvester, M. Wiedenbeck and J. D. Woodhead, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(1), 5 Search PubMed .J. D. Woodhead, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(1), 26 Search PubMed .A. D. Appelhans, J. E. Delmore and J. E. Olson, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 241(1), 1 CrossRef CAS .S. Richter, A. Alonso, W. De Bolle, H. Kuhn, A. Verbruggen, R. Wellum and P. D. P. Taylor, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1381 RSC .S. Richter, A. Alonso, W. De Bolle, H. Kuhn, A. Verbruggen, R. Wellum and P. D. P. Taylor, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 247(1–3), 37 CAS .D. Tuttas, C. Bouman and J. B. Schwieters, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(10), A796 .J. R. de Laeter and N. Bukilic, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 244(2–3), 91 CrossRef CAS .J. R. de Laeter and N. Bukilic, Phys. Rev. C, 2005, 72(2) Search PubMed  , art. no.J. M. Hall, L. H. Chan, W. F. McDonough and K. K. Turekian, Mar. Geol., 2005, 217(3–4), 255 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Mann and W. R. Kelly, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 19(23), 3429 CrossRef CAS .A. F. Bollhofer, K. J. R. Rosman, A. L. Dick, W. Chisholm, G. R. Burton, R. D. Loss and W. Zahorowski, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(20), 4747 CrossRef .M. Sharma and C. Chen, Precambrian Res., 2004, 135(4), 315 CrossRef CAS .S. P. LaMont, C. R. Shick, P. Cable-Dunlap, D. J. Fauth and T. R. LaBone, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 263(2), 477 CrossRef CAS .S. P. LaMont and G. Hall, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 264(2), 423 CrossRef .S. K. Aggarwal and D. Alamelu, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 241(1), 83 CrossRef CAS .D. Selby and R. A. Creaser, Geology, 2005, 33(7), 545 CrossRef CAS .G. Cavazzini, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 240(1), 17 CrossRef CAS .B. L. A. Charlier, C. J. N. Wilson, J. B. Lowenstern, S. Blake, P. W. Van Calsteren and J. P. Davidson, J. Petrol., 2005, 46(1), 3 CAS .J. M. Mattinson, Chem. Geol., 2005, 220(1–2), 47 CrossRef CAS .D. Condon, M. Y. Zhu, S. Bowring, W. Wang, A. H. Yang and Y. G. Jin, Science, 2005, 308(5718), 95 CrossRef CAS .D. B. Root, B. R. Hacker, J. M. Mattinson and J. L. Wooden, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2004, 228(3–4), 325 CrossRef CAS .R. Guevremont, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2004, 49(3), 105 CAS .Y. Sano and N. Takahata, J. Oceanogr., 2005, 61(3), 465 Search PubMed .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
Table Content:
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
AMS	Accelerator mass spectrometry
aTOF	Aerosol time of flight
ATP	Adenosine triphosphate
BP	Before Present
CA	Chemical abrasion
CC	Collision cell
CE	Capillary electrophoresis
CF	Continuous flow
CFC	Chlorofluorocarbon
CID	Collision induced dissociation
cps	Counts per second
CRM	Certified Reference Material
CV	Cold vapour
DBT	Dibutyltin
dc	Direct current
DIC	Dissolved inorganic carbon
DIHEN	Direct injection high efficiency nebulizer
DLC	Diamond-like carbon
DNA	Deoxyribonucleic acid
DRC	Dynamic reaction cell
DRF	Depth resolution function
EA	Elemental analyser
EC	Electrochemically controlled
ECR	Electron cyclotron resonance
EI	Electron ionization
EIMS	Electron ionization mass spectrometry
EM	Electron multiplier
EPXMA	Electron probe X-ray microanalysis
ERDA	Elastic recoil detection analysis
ES	Electrospray
ESMS	Electrospray mass spectrometry
ETV	Electrothermal vaporization
FAIMS	High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry
FF	Fast flow
FI	Flow injection
FT	Fourier transform
FWHM	Full width at half maximum
GC	Gas chromatography
GD	Glow discharge
GDMS	Glow discharge mass spectrometry
HG	Hydride generation
HPLC	High-performance liquid chromatography
HR	High resolution
IC	Ion chromatography
ICP	Inductively coupled plasma
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
ID	Isotope dilution
IMF	Instrumental mass fractionation
IP	Ionization potential
IR	Infrared
IRGA	Infrared gas analyser
IRMM	Institute of Reference Materials and Measurements
ISO	International Standardization Organization
IUPAC	International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
k	Dielectric constant
KED	Kinetic energy distribution
LA	Laser ablation
LC	Liquid chromatography
LEXES	Low energy electron induced X-ray emission spectroscopy
LIBS	Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy
LIMS	Laser ionization mass spectrometry
LMMS	Laser microprobe mass spectrometry
LOD	Limit of detection
LOQ	Limit of quantification
MBT	Monobutyltin
MC	Multiple collector
MD	Molecular dynamics
MQW	Multi-quantum well
MRI	Mixing-depth roughness information
MS	Mass spectrometry
m/z	Mass-to-charge ratio
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NRCC	National Research Council Canada
PCA	Principal components analysis
PCB	Polychlorinated biphenyl
PDB	PeeDee Belemnite
PDMS	Polydimethylsiloxane
PEEK	Polyether ether ketone
PFA	Perfluoroalkyl
PIXE	Particle-induced X-ray emission
pmC	Percentage modern carbon
ppm	Parts per million
QW	Quantum well
RBS	Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
rf	Radiofrequency
RIMS	Resonance ionization mass spectrometry
RM	Reference material
rms	Root mean square
RSD	Relative standard deviation
RSF	Relative sensitivity factor
SD	Standard deviation
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SF	Sector field
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
SIRMS	Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry
S/N	Signal-to-noise ratio
SNMS	Sputtered neutral mass spectrometry
SPE	Solid phase extraction
SPME	Solid phase microextraction
SRM	Standard Reference Material
S-SIMS	Static secondary ion mass spectrometry
STP	Standard temperature and pressure
TBT	Tributyltin
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TIMS	Thermal ionization mass spectrometry
TOC	Total organic carbon
TOF	Time of flight
TOFMS	Time of flight mass spectrometry
USGS	United States Geological Survey
UV	Ultraviolet
VPDB	Vienna PeeDee Belemnite
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
YAG	Yttrium aluminium garnet
2-D	Two dimensional
3-D	Three dimensional
λ	Wavelength
τ	Pulse duration

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
