Open-circuit voltage in organic solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM33719C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM33719C
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24315-24325Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsOpen-circuit voltage in organic solar cells

        
          
            Boyuan 
            Qi
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jizheng 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *
      Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: jizheng@iccas.ac.cn
Received 
      10th June 2012
    , Accepted 4th September 2012First published on 5th September 2012AbstractOpen-circuit voltage (VOC) is the maximum voltage a solar cell can provide to an external circuit, which is derived from the splitting of hole and electron quasi-Fermi levels. In crystalline Si solar cells, the effective density of states at the bottom (top) of the conduction (valence) band is constant, and the quasi-Fermi level can be directly calculated via the Fermi–Dirac distribution. However, in organic materials, similar to amorphous Si, disorder induces gap tail states. Relaxation of carriers into these tail states brings the electron quasi-Fermi level down and the hole quasi-Fermi level up, and hence reduces VOC. Furthermore, carrier recombination of various kinds can cause additional loss of VOC. This article reviews the research progress in understanding the origin of VOC in organic solar cells. In particular, the dependence of VOC on four important factors, namely temperature, light intensity, work function of the electrode and material microstructure are discussed based on the model of density of states. Techniques to enhance VOC are also briefly introduced and their mechanisms are analysed.Boyuan QiBoyuan Qi received his B. S. degree from the Department of Physics at Nankai University in 2008 and obtained his M. S. degree from the Department of Physics at Peking University in 2011. He is now a Ph.D student at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include device engineering and device physics in organic optoelectronics.Jizheng WangProfessor Jizheng Wang got both his B. S. degree (1994) and M. S. degree (1997) from the Department of Physics at Lanzhou University (majored in Semiconductor Device Physics), and earned a Ph.D degree from the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences (2001) in the area of inorganic electronics (III–V quantum dot/well lasers). He worked on organic electronics at Cavendish Laboratory as a post-doc guided by Professor Henning Sirringhaus and Professor Richard H. Friend (2002–2005). After that, he moved to the US in 2005 and worked in the same area at several institutions (Columbia University/Dupont, Arizona State University/US Army Flexible Display Centre). In 2010, he returned to the Chinese Academy of Sciences as a professor, and continues his research in organic electronics at the Institute of Chemistry.
1 Introduction
The work process of a solar cell has four consecutive steps: (1) the active layer absorbs light and generates excitons; (2) the excitons dissociate into free carriers (holes and electrons); (3) the free carriers drift to their respective electrodes under the force of built-in potential; (4) the free carriers are collected by the electrodes and provide power to the external circuit. If the solar cell is at the open-circuit state, the free carriers generated under steady illumination will accumulate at the anode and cathode, forming a potential difference which cancels out the built-in potential. Under this condition, carrier generation and recombination exactly balance each other and no net current exists at any point inside the device. The system is now in a quasi-equilibrium state, and the potential difference formed between the two electrodes is the open-circuit voltage (VOC), which represents the maximum voltage a solar cell can provide to an external circuit.
Many reports have shown that in organic solar cells (OSCs), VOC is linearly related to the difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the donor material and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the acceptor material, and it does not depend much on the work functions of the electrodes. Maybe the most famous work was done by Brabec et al.1 in 2001. They synthesized a series of fullerene derivatives with different LUMO levels and blended them with a common donor poly(2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene) (MDMO-PPV). In their experiments, VOC was always linearly dependent on the LUMO level of the acceptor. While the work function of the cathode varied in the wide range of 2.87 eV (Ca) to 4.28 eV (Au), the variation of VOC was comparatively very small (<0.2 V). In 2006, Scharber2 carefully studied a series of OSC devices (26 polymer donor materials with different HOMO levels blended with a common acceptor), and proposed an empirical equation to express VOC: VOC = (1/q)(|EHOMO,D| − |ELUMO,A| − 0.3 V)(1)where q is the elementary charge, EHOMO,D is the HOMO level energy of the donor and ELUMO,A is the LUMO level energy of the acceptor. It should be noted that the VOC loss of 0.3 eV is empirical, and the loss could be greater or smaller. The origin of such a loss has been discussed for a long time.
In general, VOC originates from the splitting of electron and hole quasi-Fermi energy levels triggered by light illumination: VOC = (1/q)(EFn − EFp)(2)where EFn and EFp are the electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels, respectively. In crystalline Si solar cells (with normal doping and under normal sun light illumination), the electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels are close to the conduction and valence bands, respectively. So VOC in crystalline Si solar cells is approximately equal to the bandgap. However in amorphous Si solar cells, disorder induces gap tail states. The distribution of photogenerated carriers in such gap tail states downshifts the electron quasi-Fermi level and upshifts the hole quasi-Fermi level, which obviously reduces VOC. For the same reason, disorder in organic materials plays a role in bringing the electron quasi-Fermi level down away from the LUMO level of the acceptor, and lifting up the hole quasi-Fermi level away from the HOMO level of the donor, and hence ultimately reducing VOC. In Section 2 of this article we review research progress in understanding such VOC losses based on the model of density of states (DOS), where additional VOC loss induced by carrier recombination is also discussed. In Section 3, four important parameters, namely temperature, light intensity, work function of the electrode and material microstructure, and how they impact VOC, are presented. In Section 4, another model—the charge transfer (CT) state model—of VOC is briefly outlined. In Section 5, the last section of this review, techniques to enhance VOC and their mechanisms are introduced.
2 Origin of VOC
2.1 Equivalent circuit of solar cells
The equivalent circuit of an ideal solar cell is shown in Fig. 1(a), and consists of a constant current source, a diode and an external load. Under illumination a solar cell works like a current source, providing a current density of Jph. A proportion of this current counteracts the junction current of the diode, and the residual current flows to the load. According to Shockley's theory, the junction current density of the diode is presented by: Jd = J0[exp(qV/kBT) − 1](3)where T is the temperature, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and J0 is the reverse saturation current density (in a p–n junction solar cell, J0 represents the current density of minority carriers, which is a summation of the hole current in the n region and the electron current in the p region). V is the output voltage (generally in a test, we simulate the potential drop on the load with an externally applied voltage to counteract the output voltage of the cell. Therefore V is also the voltage applied during the test).
 Fig. 1  Equivalent circuit of (a) an ideal solar cell and (b) a practical solar cell. 
However, series resistance Rs and shunt resistance Rsh have to be taken into account in a practical solar cell,3 whose equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 1(b). Rs is composed of the resistance of the bulk active layer, the resistance of electrodes and the contact resistance between the active layer and the electrodes, etc. Rsh originates from various kinds of current leakage, such as current leakage in the p–n junction, current leakage from the edge of the cell, current leakage induced by impurities in the cell, etc. The current density J recorded on the load can be written as: (4)
Under the conditions of an open circuit, V = VOC, J = 0, and with the assumption that Rsh ≫ Rs, VOC can be expressed as: (5)
It is noted that in eqn (4) and (5), a new parameter m is introduced, which is the ideality factor of the diode. It qualifies the property of the diode. In the case of an ideal diode, there is no carrier recombination in the depletion region (i.e. no recombination current), diffusion current is dominant in the device, and m = 1. In the opposite case, if there is no diffusion current and only recombination current is considered, then m = 2. In a practical diode, the current involves both recombination current and diffusion current, so the value of m normally varies in the range of 1 to 2. From eqn (5), VOC is directly proportional to m. It is worth noting here that eqn (5) becomes unreliable if the quality of the diode is too poor (m > 2).
In a normal test environment under 1 sun illumination at room temperature (T = 300 K), for a given material system the variation in JSC is usually within one order of magnitude (∼10 mA cm−2). In contrast, J0 is found to be very adjustable (it can vary within several orders of magnitude), and hence it is a crucial parameter that determines VOC. J0 in OSCs has been extensively studied.
Potscavage et al.4,10 found that J0 in their pentacene/C60 device was exponentially dependent on temperature, and concluded that the dark current comes from the thermally activated injection of carriers at the pentacene–C60 interface. Their experimental data can be expressed as: (6)where J00 is a prefactor determined by carrier generation and recombination rate, and ΦB is the activation energy. Potscavage also proposed that the activation energy can be written as the offset between the HOMO level of the donor and the LUMO level of the acceptor (ΔEDA) divided by a factor (larger than 1), which is used to cover various non-ideal effects such as vacuum level misalignments and the formation of charge transfer states.
Similar to this work, Perez and co-workers31 also studied J0 in small molecules/C60 based OSCs, and found that J0 could be expressed as: (7)Here the factor 2 is introduced by considering the fact that in the process of thermal activation, two free carriers (a hole and an electron) are simultaneously generated at the donor–acceptor interface. Substituting eqn (6) or (7) into (5), the relationship between VOC and ΔEDA can immediately be seen. However, it should be stressed that both these conclusions are reached based on small molecular solar cells, in which the donor–acceptor interface is relatively simple. How far these conclusions can apply to polymer bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells is still under discussion. Another important point that should be noted is that the validity of Shockley’s equation (which is derived from inorganic crystal solar cells) in OSCs implies there must be some important fundamental common ground between organic devices and their inorganic counterparts.
2.2 
          V
OC in crystalline and amorphous Si solar cells
In order to gain a better understanding of VOC, it is necessary to review the working principles of crystalline Si p–n junction cells, which form the solid base for almost any solar cells later developed.
Before p-type Si and n-type Si come into contact with each other, they have the same valence band energy (EV) and conductive band energy (EC), while their Fermi levels are different due to the different dopant types (the Fermi level of p-type Si is close to EV, and n-type to EC, as shown in Fig. 2(a)). When they are brought together, due to the presence of a carrier concentration gradient, the electrons of n-type Si will diffuse to p-type Si, and the holes of p-type Si will diffuse to n-type Si. Redistribution of electrons and holes produces a built-in potential, under which the carriers drift and form a drift current, whose direction is opposite to the diffusion current. When equilibrium is reached, the two currents are equivalent and there is no net current flow inside the junction. The Fermi levels of the two Si semiconductors are now the same, EFn = EFp. In Fig. 2(b), we can see that all the energy bands of p-type Si are upshifted, and the bands of n-type Si are downshifted. It is clear that EpC − EnC = EpV − EnV = qVBI (VBI is the built-in potential under equilibrium), and VBI equals the initial energy difference between EFn and EFp (before they come into contact with each other).
 Fig. 2  A Si p–n junction: (a) before contact (b) after contact (c) junction under illumination. 
When Si is irradiated with light, photogenerated excitons are immediately thermally dissociated into free electrons and holes. They then drift in opposite directions under the force of the built-in potential. The potential of the p side increases and the n side decreases, generating a so-called photo-voltage, which plays a role in cancelling out the built-in potential. Under open circuit conditions, their potentials eventually equal each other, and the system reaches a quasi-equilibrium state. The photo-voltage now is VOC. From Fig. 2(c), it is clear that qVOC = EFn − EFp.
In amorphous Si solar cells the situation is fundamentally similar to that in crystalline Si devices, but certain modifications should be made to the conduction band and the valence band. As a comparison to the spatially periodic atoms in crystalline Si, the atomic array in amorphous Si is ordered at short range but disordered at long range. Subsequently, the periodic potential in amorphous Si is influenced by the disorder, inducing localized states around the top of valence band and the bottom of conduction band called tail states. Models of bands in crystalline Si and amorphous Si are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b), respectively. Considering energy disorder in amorphous Si solar cells, the effective bandgap can be given by EC − EV − Δ, where Δ is a reduction caused by the disorder-induced tail states around the conduction band and the valence band.
 Fig. 3  Models of bands: (a) crystalline Si, (b) amorphous Si and (c) organic material. 
It is easy to understand why tail states can cause a loss in VOC: photogenerated electrons and holes will firstly prefer to occupy tail states rather than the energy states in the conduction band and the valence band, and this lowers the average energy of the electrons and holes, leading to a lower electron quasi-Fermi level and a higher hole quasi-Fermi level.
2.3 
          V
OC in OSCs
Materials for OSCs, especially polymers, are soft materials. In the process of film preparation, kinks in the polymer chains, interactions between molecules, and the degrees of crystallinity of polymers and fullerenes can all introduce disorder into the system. Furthermore, the regioregularity, molecular weight, and purity variation are all important causes of disorder. Control of film growth is now becoming an important subject in the field of OSCs. Thus disorder should also be taken into consideration when discussing origin of VOC in OSCs.
The HOMO and LUMO levels are two important concepts in organic materials. Generally, they refer to the frontier orbitals of a single isolated molecule. However, Ishii et al.67 pointed out that in a polyatomic molecule or a polymer chain, the molecules interact mainly by the weak van der Waals force, and thereby only the upper atomic orbitals (AOs) will merge to form delocalized molecular orbitals (MOs). Deeper AOs are still localized on each atom. The intermolecular band widths introduced by the merging of AOs are less than 0.1 eV. Therefore the terms HOMO level and LUMO level are also widely used in organic solids.
The value of the HOMO level is often determined by means of cyclic voltammetry and photoemission yield spectroscopy, while the value of the LUMO level is usually measured by cyclic voltammetry or calculated by adding up the measured HOMO level and the measured optical bandgap. The DOS declines rapidly as the tail extends deeper into the bandgap, which is eventually beyond the range that the instrument can detect. Therefore the measured value of the HOMO level is usually lower than its actual value, and that of the LUMO level is usually higher than its actual value (the concepts of HOMO level and LUMO level in organic materials are similar to those of valence band and conduction band in inorganic materials). This means that the bandgap we obtain from ΔEDA (|EHOMO,D| − |ELUMO,A|) is often larger than the actual effective energy gap, so VOC measured in practical devices is generally lower than ΔEDA obtained from measured HOMO/LUMO levels.
Disorder induced tail states have been reported in several organic materials,69–71 and the DOS distribution of these tail states can be approximated as a Gaussian or exponential type, with typical widths of 0.1 to 0.2 eV.72 Here, for simplicity, only the Gaussian model (red dotted lined in Fig. 3(c)) is discussed, as the conclusion reached by the exponential law is similar. Under a Gaussian distribution, DOS can be written as: (8)where E is energy, ND/A represents total density of hole or electron states, and σ characterizes the width of the Gaussian DOS. The effective bandgap of the system can be represented by ΔEDA − σ2/kBT.9 It is clear that the broader the DOS (larger σ), the lower the effective energy gap, and hence the lower the VOC.
Blakesley9 has simulated the influence of disorder on VOC, and found that as the disorder increases (σ increases), VOC drops as expected. Meanwhile, both JSC and FF drop along with VOC. This is explained by disorder induced carrier traps, which decrease the carrier mobility.
An example of different occupancy of the DOS leading to variation in VOC is given by Garcia-Belmonte and co-workers.24 They compared two fullerene acceptors, [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) and 4,4′-dihexyloxydiphenylmethano[C60]fullerene (DPM6) (Fig. 4); these two materials have almost the same LUMO level and similar charge transport capability, but different DOS after blending with P3HT (proved by impedance spectroscopy). The much lower DOS of the gap tail in DPM6 means a much smaller σ, and hence a higher electron quasi-Fermi level, which leads to higher VOC.
 Fig. 4  Molecular structure and DOS scheme of DPM6 and PCBM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
2.4 Recombination in solar cells
Shockley and Queisser41 proposed in 1961 that inevitable radiative recombination sets an upper limit on VOC for all solar cells. Other possible recombination can cause additional loss of VOC, for example, Auger recombination in crystalline Si solar cells, nonradiative recombination in amorphous Si solar cells, and non-geminate recombination in OSCs.73–75 Recombination, regardless of its type, annihilates carriers and hence causes energy loss, reducing VOC as a result.
In order to quantify the recombination rate R in OSCs, an important question should be clarified: is the recombination monomolecular, or bimolecular, or a combination of the two? In monomolecular recombination, carriers recombine through a trap or a recombination centre, and in the acceptor (donor) material the recombination rate R is proportional to the product of electron (hole) concentration n (p) and electron (hole) trap concentration nt (pt), i.e., R ∝ nnt (or R ∝ ppt). For bimolecular recombination, R ∝ np.
A recent study has shown that the recombination mechanism can change from monomolecular at short circuit to bimolecular at open circuit.49 At short circuit, electrons and holes are spatially separated and swept out quickly by the built-in potential, and the recombination of free electrons and holes is rare, so the dominant recombination is monomolecular (trap-induced). At VOC the built-in potential is cancelled out and photo-generated carriers remain and accumulate inside the device; bimolecular recombination is then greatly increased, which overwhelms the monomolecular recombination.57 When the cell is connected to an external load, the output photo-voltage can vary from 0 to VOC as the resistance of the external load varies from 0 (short-circuit) to ∞ (open-circuit), and the recombination thereby gradually switches from monomolecular dominated to monomolecular/bimolecular co-dominated, and then to bimolecular dominated.
Taking no account of tail states at first and assuming the absorption is the same everywhere in the active layer, the generation rate can be regarded as a constant, G. The bimolecular recombination rate R can be represented by R(x) = γp(x)n(x), where x is the depth in the active layer (the whole thickness of the active layer is L), and γ is the recombination rate coefficient.9 At open-circuit, J = 0, there is no net current, and G = R(x) at any site in the active layer. Blakesley et al. applied the Boltzmann approximation, and obtained the expression for n(x) and p(x). Substituting them into G = R, VOC can be expressed as: (9)
If tail states are present, the photogenerated carriers will occupy these tail states via the rule of Fermi distribution.17,26 In case of Gaussian DOS, n(x) and p(x) can be written as: (10)Here f(E) is the function of Fermi distribution, and the recombination rate R depends on the conditions of energy state distribution and carrier occupancy. Again using G = R, VOC can be expressed: (11)
This is a general expression for VOC. On the right hand side of the equation, there are three terms. The first term is the effective bandgap, ΔEDA, the second term represents disorder-induced VOC loss, and the third term represents carrier recombination induced VOC loss.
3 Important factors related to VOC
There are many factors that can influence VOC. Among them, four are particularly important and the most studied, namely temperature T, illumination intensity P0, the work function of the electrode, and material microstructure. The dependence of VOC on T, P0 (impact on n and p) and microstructure (impact on σ) can be immediately seen in eqn (11), while the work function of the electrode determines the contact nature (Ohmic or non-Ohmic), and plays its role via surface recombination. In this section, we discuss the effects of the four factors on VOC.
3.1 Temperature
Katz58 reported that VOC in a BHJ solar cell based on MDMO-PPV:PC61BM decreases linearly when the temperature increases from 10 °C to 60 °C, and attributed this observation to temperature dependent mobility. Similar behaviour was also found in other BHJ systems.59–61 Linearly fitting the experimental data of VOCvs. T under different illumination intensities P0 has been done by both Cowan49 and Vandewal7 for various material systems. They found an interesting phenomenon: all fitting lines for the same material system cross at T = 0 K with VOC = ΔEDA. However, detailed experiments on VOCvs. T offered different results: for example in the system of APFO3:PCBM, it is found that VOC firstly increases as the temperature decreases, but then saturates at certain temperature, and as the temperature further decreases VOC starts to decrease. Numeral simulations successfully explained such experimental observations.25,26 Considering the most famous P3HT:PCBM system, ΔEDA is 1 eV (HOMO level of P3HT is 4.9 eV, LUMO level of PCBM is 3.9 eV), ND = NA = 1019 cm−3, JSC is 10 mA cm−2, σ is 50 meV, the thickness of the active layer (L) is 100 nm, and the recombination coefficient γ is 10−12 cm3 s−1.49 Under short circuit conditions, JSC approximately equals Jph, and the photocurrent generation rate76 is simply G = Jph/eL = JSC/eL. Using the parameters given above, G is about 6.25 × 1021 cm−3 s−1. In case of an open circuit, G = R = γnp, so np = G/γ = 6.25 × 1033 cm−6, and thus the densities of photogenerated holes and electrons are both ∼1017 cm−3. Substituting these values into eqn (11), VOC can be written as: VOC = 1 − 30/T − 8 × 10−4T. It is seen there are two terms related to T. The first term is caused by tail states induced by disorder, with a typical value of 0.1 eV (ref. 9) (the reason that σ is set to 50 meV); the second term is caused by recombination. The concentration of thermally generated carriers (ni) can be calculated by Gtherm = γNANDexp(−ΔEDA/kBT), and nipi = Gtherm/γ, thus ni = 2 × 109 cm−3, which is obviously lower than the concentration of carriers generated by light and can be neglected if the temperature is not very high. So carrier density n and p can be seen as constants in this model. VOC and the two terms related to T are plotted in Fig. 5(a); the grey dashed line is the linear fitting line of VOCvs. T, with T at around 300 K (room temperature). It is seen that when T is larger than 200 K, the second term dominates in the equation, and a linear dependence of VOC on T is observed. When T is lower than 200 K, the first term is the main cause of loss, causing deviation of VOC from the linear fit. This can explain why VOC of the APFO3:PCBM device saturates and then decreases at lower T. The phenomenon of VOC saturation can be used to estimate the degree of disorder in OSCs. For a given material system, the density of states (for donor and acceptor materials) can be regarded as constant, and saturation temperature and saturation VOC can both be obtained via experiments, thus σ can be calculated based on eqn (11). It is worth noting that based on eqn (11), the lesser the disorder (smaller σ), the lower the saturation temperature, which can be seen in Fig. 5(b).
 Fig. 5  Linear dependence of VOC on temperature simulated with eqn (11). The grey dashed line in (a) is the linear fitting line of VOC around room temperature. 

V
OC saturation was also observed by Rand et al.8 in a series of small molecular heterojunction solar cells (Fig. 6). The saturation temperatures of these bilayer solar cells are around 150 K, lower than those observed in BHJ polymer solar cells. This may suggest that disorder is lower in bilayer solar cells than in BHJ cells. In Rand's work, VOC saturation was attributed to the balance between JSC and J0 (with decreasing the temperature, J0 declines according to eqn (6), while Jph also decreases due to the decreased electron transfer rate from donor to acceptor. The decrease of Jph should also be partially due to reduced mobility at low temperatures, at which carriers could be seriously localized81).
 Fig. 6  
V
OC
versus T for various donor–acceptor heterojunctions. The metal in parentheses in the legend indicates the cathode material for that device. The error bars displayed for the NPD/C60 (Ag) device are typical for all of the heterojunctions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2007 American Physical Society. 
3.2 Light intensity
In Fig. 7(a), the dependence of VOC on light intensity (P0) can also be seen. The observed logarithmic relationship between VOC and P0 (ref. 47) can be easily understood based on eqn (11). In this equation, n and p are the only parameters that can be adjusted by P0. At low light intensity, n and p should change linearly with P0, resulting in a logarithmic dependence of VOC on P0. However, when P0 is large, it will significantly reduce the parallel resistance Rsh (Rsh ∝ P−10, Rand et al.8,60,77), and hence the term V/Rsh in eqn (4) cannot be neglected anymore, and it plays a role in decreasing VOC, which counteracts the effect of increased n and p. Once the two effects exactly balance each other, VOC will saturate.
 Fig. 7  (a) Logarithmic dependence of VOC on incident light intensity with slope kBT/e, cell temperature modulated. (b) Linear dependence of VOC on temperature in a PCDTBT:PC71BM solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2010 American Physical Society. 
3.3 Work function of the electrode
Electrode–active layer contact can also influence VOC. Experiments showed that when the contact deviates too far away from Ohmic, VOC can be largely affected by the cathode work function.78,79 Such an observation is explained in terms of surface recombination. Under non-Ohmic contact, there is considerable surface recombination at the active layer–cathode interface, whereas under Ohmic contact, such surface recombination is greatly suppressed and can hence be neglected (the suppression of surface recombination in Ohmic contact devices and its mechanism for improving VOC have been demonstrated both theoretically and experimentally55,56).
If the original Fermi-level of the cathode is higher than the LUMO level of the acceptor, an Ohmic contact can easily be formed via electron transfer from the cathode to the acceptor. If the original Fermi-level of the cathode is lower than the LUMO level of the acceptor, electrons can only transfer into the acceptor via thermal activation: if the barrier is not very high (<0.2 eV), such transfer is sufficient to form an Ohmic contact, but if the barrier is high, thermal activation cannot generate enough electron transfer, and the contact is non-Ohmic. In case of Ohmic contact, once thermal equilibrium is reached, the Fermi level of the cathode will be levelled and pinned to the LUMO level of the acceptor.78 The same applies to the donor and anode, where the Fermi level of the anode is pinned to the HOMO level of the donor once an Ohmic contact forms. If the barrier for holes between the anode and the donor is very high, the contact is then non-Ohmic. In a device where both contacts are Ohmic, VOC will be mainly determined by the interfacial kinetics of the donor–acceptor interface,6 regardless of the work functions of the two electrodes. In other words, VOC is determined by eqn (11). This can explain the experimental observation described in the introduction of this article: only a weak increase of VOC was observed when the cathode of the device (with an active layer of MDMO-PPV blended with PCBM) varied from Al (4.3 eV) to Ca (2.8 eV). When Au acts as the cathode, its original Fermi level (5.1 eV) is much lower than the LUMO level of PCBM (3.9 eV), and thus the contact becomes non-Ohmic. As a result, surface recombination is enhanced and VOC drops accordingly (about 0.1 eV (ref. 1)). If both contacts are non-Ohmic, VOC is then determined by the difference in the work functions of the two electrodes, as predicted by the MIM model (Metal–Insulator–Metal).54

V
OC is not only influenced by the work function of the electrode,33 but also by the process by which the electrode is deposited. Metal on organic material, or organic material on metal, can make big difference, because metal on organic material is usually deposited by thermal evaporation at high temperature, and organic material on metal is often deposited by spin-coating or thermal evaporation at low temperature. The former can induce a lot of traps in the active layer by hot metal atoms with high kinetic energies. Hot metal atom induced traps were once an important issue in the P3HT/PCBM system, which can be suppressed by post thermal annealing.
The deposition process of the electrode, the interface between the electrode and the organic material, Fermi-level pinning, and band bending of organic materials can all influence VOC. The detailed effects of these factors can be found in ref. 52, 66–68.
3.4 Material microstructure
Microstructure in BHJ solar cells is difficult to quantify due to the difficulty in accurately measuring the three-dimensional morphology, phase separation, and the interaction between molecules in a working device. Vandewal et al.63 have reported that polymer crystallinity has quite a large effect on blend morphology and VOC. By controlling the thermal treatment temperature for a number of blend films (including P3HT:PCBM), the crystallinity of donor materials and hence the morphology of the blend film can be changed. The energy of charge transfer state (which will be discussed in the next section and is directly related to VOC) is found to vary linearly with the mass fraction of the donor in the form of crystalline nanofibers to the total donor (measured by Fourier-transform photocurrent spectroscopy). Guo and co-workers reported that regioregularity of P3HT can greatly influence charge recombination dynamics at the P3HT–PCBM interface in the blend.62 The change in recombination dynamics could affect VOC. Therefore controlling the morphology of the BHJ film favourably could be very beneficial to improving VOC,12,29 and researchers have been working extensively to develop such techniques. At present, thermal annealing23,51 of the blend film and using different solvents to deposit the blend film21,22,45 are the two most used and most efficient approaches.
Recently, Credgington and Durrant showed that the impact of film microstructure on VOC is determined by detailed recombination dynamics.100 By the transient photovoltage technique, the recombination rate (and hence lifetime) can be quantified, from which the saturation current density J0, and hence VOC (substituting J0 into eqn (5)), can be calculated. For a wide range of tested materials systems, the extracted VOC is very close to the measured one (the average deviation is less than 5 mV). In this way, they successfully related recombination dynamics to the influence of microstructure on VOC.
Meanwhile, Ray et al. stated that for a given material system, VOC is determined by the interface area of the bulk heterojunction (ABHJ).101VOC reduces monotonically with increasing ABHJ, i.e. there exists an upper limit of VBHJOC by controlling the morphology. It cannot exceed that of the corresponding planar heterojunction (PHJ) devices, VPHJOC, because ABHJ ≥ APHJ. Therefore, when an as-casted P3HT:PCBM film changes from homogeneous to phase-separated upon thermal annealing, VOC indeed increases. But because the dependence of VOC on ABHJ/APHJ is logarithmic, even a large value of ABHJ/APHJ can only result in a slight change of VOC.
In Credgington's review, it is mentioned that the difference in recombination rate for the same material system is very small, while it varies significantly among different systems. This is quite consistent with what Perez and co-workers found in their small molecular OSCs: the molecular composition and the degree of intermolecular interaction can significantly affect the recombination current, and hence VOC.31 These devices are based on a common acceptor, C60, and a series of donors with different structures (Fig. 8). For example, tetracene and rubrene have similar HOMO levels (5.1 eV for tetracene and 5.3 eV for rubrene), while VOC of the two corresponding devices differs significantly (0.55 V for tetracene and 0.92 V for rubrene). They found that J0 is the reason for this observation: J0 of rubrene is about two orders of magnitude lower than that of tetracene, resulting in a higher VOC according to eqn (5). Tetracene is a planar molecule consisting of fused conjugated aromatic rings, while rubrene has four additional phenyl groups connected to the tetracene core perpendicularly. Greater steric hindrance in the structure of rubrene leads to weaker interactions between adjacent rubrene molecules and between the tetracene core and C60, leading to a much lower J0 (the weaker molecular interactions in rubrene were proved by comparing the spectra of rubrene in solution and in thin film in their experiment).
 Fig. 8  Molecular structure and electron density distributions of tetracene and rubrene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
4 Charge transfer (CT) state
Another prevalent point of view on VOC is that there is a strong relationship between VOC and the emissive CT state.32,34,38,42 CT state complexes are interfacial electron–hole pairs residing at the donor–acceptor heterointerface, which are also called polaron pairs,82 charge transfer excitons64 or exciplexes.83 Huang et al.65 indicated that an exciplex can generally be regarded as a hybrid state with mixed CT and exciton character. The existence of CT states has been proved in a few polymer–fullerene blends and some polymer–polymer blends,50,84–86 by photo thermal deflection spectroscopy or highly sensitive measurement of the external quantum efficiency spectrum by means of Fourier transform photocurrent spectroscopy. It is demonstrated that CT states can be optically populated by subgap illumination39,53,87,88 or charge injection (electroluminescence).89,90
Due to the low oscillator strength of CT states, only a small fraction of CT states will be occupied under illumination. However, many recent experiments found that the photocurrent and VOC are strongly dependent on CT states,5,7,53 indicating there are alternative ways to populate them. In a donor–acceptor system, once an exciton photogenerated in the donor material reaches the donor–acceptor interface via diffusion, it faces two kinds of energy states: the acceptor singlet state and the CT state. If the energy of the acceptor singlet state is lower than that of the CT state, energy transfer from donor to acceptor will occur. In this case, CT states will not affect VOC. If the energy of CT state is lower, the exciton will populate the CT state, and the newly-formed CT exciton will then either decay to the CT ground state or dissociate into polaron pairs; in this case, CT states will affect VOC.37
4.1 Influence of the CT state on VOC
Based on the principle of Detailed Balance, a reciprocity relationship between photovoltaic quantum efficiency and electroluminescent emission was proposed by Rau for p–n junctions:36,48 ΦEL(E, V) = EQEPV(E)ΦBB(E)(exp(qV/kBT) − 1)(12)Here, ΦEL(E, V) is the excess EL intensity, EQEPV(E) is external photovoltaic quantum efficiency, and ΦBB(E) is the black-body spectrum at 300 K, integrated over all possible incidence angles.
Based on this relationship, the dark saturation current J0 can be deduced: (13)EQEEL is the overall EL external quantum efficiency, obtained by integrating EQEEL(E) over all photon energies. VOC can then be directly related to EQEEL, EQEPV(E) and ΦBB(E) by substituting eqn (13) into eqn (5). This relationship and principle also applies to organic donor–acceptor heterojunctions. After careful mathematical work, the following equation was derived to express VOC for organic donor–acceptor junction cells: (14)Here ECT is the free-energy difference between the CT complex ground state and the CT excited state, λ is the reorganization energy associated with the CT absorption process, f is a parameter which is proportional to the density of CT states, h is Planck’s constant, and c is the speed of light in a vacuum. At the right hand side of eqn (14), the second and third terms represent VOC loss from non-radiative recombination and radiative recombination, respectively. Detailed deduction of J0 and VOC can be found in the paper by Vandewal et al.7 Their experimental results agree quite well with what the model of CT states predicts (eqn (13) and (14)). They also successfully explained the dependence of VOC on temperature T and illumination intensity P0 based on the model of CT states.
4.2 Relationship between CT and DOS
Both the CT state and the DOS model can sufficiently explain eqn (1). In the CT state model, loss of VOC is attributed to carrier recombination at the donor–acceptor interface via CT states (radiative and non-radiative), which increases dark saturation current and causally reduces VOC according to eqn (5). Meanwhile in the DOS model, the loss of VOC is ascribed to gap tail states in donor and acceptor materials. In other words, the CT state model is based on the donor–acceptor interface, while the DOS model is based on bulk donor and acceptor materials. CT states only exist at the donor–acceptor interface, they are formed upon the formation of the interface due to donor–acceptor intermolecular interaction, whereas gap tail states are related to the properties of the material, and they are intrinsically the same across the whole donor (or acceptor) film.
For VOC, in both models the dominant recombination is bimolecular at the donor–acceptor interface. In the DOS model, the bimolecular recombination is mainly via electron tail states in the acceptor and hole tail states in the donor, whereas in the CT state model, the bimolecular recombination is directly through CT states at the donor–acceptor interface. Although the CT state model can reasonably explain VOC loss, it has been argued9 that so far it is unable to explain the super-bimolecular recombination behaviour observed in some BHJ OSCs,80,91,92 which can be interpreted by the DOS model. Further work is needed to gain a deeper understanding in both models.
5 Ways to improve VOC
Based on a fundamental understanding of the physical mechanisms of VOC we have discussed in the previous sections, there are ways to prevent various VOC losses and hence enhance VOCvia device engineering for given donor–acceptor combinations.
5.1 Enhancing the built-in potential
As we know, VOC is directly related to the built-in potential of a solar cell, and enlarging the built-in potential can obviously enhance VOC. In OSCs, exciton dissociation is strongly dependent on the electric field at the donor–acceptor interface; for given donor–acceptor junction, the larger the built-in electric field the better to exciton dissociation, and the higher the VOC. In Tada's work, a P3HT/PCBM bilayer device was fabricated through a simple film transfer method.93 They found that the VOC of the bilayer device could be greatly modified by inserting an aligned dipole monomolecular layer between P3HT and PCBM. Depending on the direction of the dipole moments (either weakening or strengthening the built-in field), VOC could be switched to 0.3 or 0.95 V from 0.5 V of the standard bilayer device. After thermal annealing, the dipole monomolecular layer is destroyed, randomly mixing into the P3HT and PCBM. The effect of the dipole-induced electric field then disappears, and VOC reverts to the standard value of 0.5 V. The concept of using dipole moments is a good method for improving VOC in OSCs.
Yuan et al. showed that a large, permanent, internal electric field can be produced by incorporating a ferroelectric polymer layer into the device.94 The electric field, of the order of 50 V μm−1, potentially induced by the ferroelectric layer is tens of times larger than that achievable by the use of electrodes with different work functions. They showed that ferroelectric layers enhanced the efficiency of several types of organic photovoltaic devices from 1–2% (without ferroelectric layers) to 4–5% (with ferroelectric layers). More research on using dipole layers to enhance VOC can be found in ref. 13, 18–20, 43 and 44.
5.2 Restricting the dark current
As shown in eqn (5), VOC is strongly related to JSC/J0, so suppressing dark saturation current density J0 is an important strategy to enhance VOC. An electron blocking layer between the active layer and the anode can effectively weaken surface recombination at the anode–active layer interface, and a hole blocking layer between the active layer and the cathode can effectively weaken surface recombination at the cathode–active layer interface. Dark current can thus be significantly suppressed due to reduced surface recombination. Li40et al. demonstrated in their tin(II) phthalocyanine (SnPc)/C60 bilayer device, that dark saturation current density J0 was reduced by over two orders of magnitude by inserting electron blocking layers (either organic or inorganic); as a result VOC was increased to 0.4 V from the original value of 0.16 V. A series of materials with deep HOMO levels were reported to act as hole (or exciton) blocking materials27,28,30,95–97 to suppress dark saturation current density J0 (and/or increase short circuit current density JSC). It is worth noting here that buffer layers with different functions are widely used in OSCs, and the electron and hole blocking layers mentioned here are among them. Buffer layers generally refer to the interfacial layers between active layers and electrodes,14–16,35,46 which are mainly used to perform the following functions: (1) minimize the energy barrier between the active layer and the electrode, (2) form a selective contact for electrons (holes),11 and (3) prevent electrode atoms from reacting with the active layer or diffusing into the active layer. The use of buffer layers in OSCs has been elaborated in Yang and Brabec's reviews.98,99
6 Conclusions
In OSCs, VOC is generally reported to scale linearly with the difference between the HOMO level of the donor material and the LUMO level of the acceptor material, and a loss of about 0.3 V is often found in practice. In this paper, research progress on the origin of such observations is reviewed. Based on the model of DOS, such VOC loss comes from two sources: disorder-induced gap tail states in the donor and acceptor materials, and bimolecular recombination at the donor–acceptor interface. The linear dependence of VOC on temperature, the logarithmic dependence of VOC on illumination intensity, and the effects of the work function of the electrode as well as material microstructure are summarized and fully discussed in this review. In addition, another important model—the CT state model, which is grounded on charge-transfer states at the donor–acceptor interface—is briefly introduced. At the end of the review, we outlined techniques used to enhance VOC in OSCs for given donor–acceptor junction cells; these techniques can either strengthen the built-in electric field or suppress dark saturation current, and hence improve VOC. This review attempts to give a brief but comprehensive summary on understanding the behaviour of VOC in OSCs.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 61072014 and 21021091), 973 Program (grant no. 2011CB932304) and Hundred-Talent Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Notes and references
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS .
C. Waldauf, M. C. Scharber, P. Schilinsky, J. A. Hauch and C. J. Brabec, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 104503 CrossRef .
W. J. Potscavage, Jr, S. Yoo and B. Kippelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 193308 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. V. Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cheyns, J. Poortmans, P. Heremans, C. Deibel, S. Verlaak, B. P. Rand and J. Genoe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 165332 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. V. Manca, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 125204 CrossRef .
B. P. Rand, D. P. Burk and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 115327 CrossRef .
J. C. Blakesley and D. Neher, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 075210 CrossRef .
W. J. Potscavage, Jr, A. Sharma and B. Kippelen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1758 CrossRef .
W. Tress, K. Leo and M. Riede, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2140 CrossRef CAS .
D. Credgington, R. Hamilton, P. Atienzar, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2744 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W.-Y. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, J. Yu, Z. Guan and Y. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 143301 CrossRef .
C. Kulshreshtha, J. W. Choi, J.-K. Kim, W. S. Jeon, M. C. Suh, Y. Park and J. H. Kwon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 023308 CrossRef .
J. Huang, J. Yu, W. Wang and Y. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 023301 CrossRef .
G. Garcia-Belmote and J. Bisquert, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 113301 CrossRef .
C.-T. Chou, C.-H. Lin, M.-H. Wu, T.-W. Cheng, J.-H. Lee, C.-H. J. Liu, Y. Tai, S. Chattopadhyay, J.-K. Wang, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 083104 CrossRef .
C. He, C. Zhong, H. Wu, R. Yang, W. Yang, F. Huang, G. C. Bazan and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2617 RSC .
S. O. Jeon, J.-H. Kim, J. W. Kim, Y. Park and J. Y. Lee, J. Phys. Chem., 2011, 115, 18789 CAS .
P. P. Boix, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem., 2011, 115, 15075 CAS .
D. M. Stevens, J. C. Speros, M. A. Hillmyer and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20806 CAS .
J. B. Kim, Z.-L. Guan, A. L. Shu, A. Kahn and Y.-L. Loo, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 11265 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garcia-Belmonte, P. P. Boix, J. Bisquert, M. Lenes, H. J. Bolink, A. L. Rosa, S. Filippone and N. Martín, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2566 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Thakur, G. Wantz, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert and L. Hirsch, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2131 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garcia-Belmonte, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2166 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Rand, J. Li, J. Xue, R. J. Holmes, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2714 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Lassiter, G. Wei, S. Wang, J. D. Zimmerman, V. V. Diev, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 243307 CrossRef .
C. W. Schlenker and M. E. Thompson, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3702 RSC .
K. L. Mutolo, E. I. Mayo, B. P. Rand, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8108 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Perez, C. Borek, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9281 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Benson-Smith, L. Goris, K. Vandewal, K. Haenen, J. V. Manca, D. Vanderzande, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 451 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, M. Ceder and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1835 CrossRef CAS .
D. Veldman, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1939 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Yip, S. K. Hau, N. S. Baek, H. Ma and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2376 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kirchartz and U. Rau, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2008, 205, 2737 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deibel, T. Strobel and V. Dyakonov, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4097 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maurano, R. Hamilton, C. G. Shuttle, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, B. O'Regan, W. Zhang, I. McCulloch, H. Azimi, M. Morana, C. J. Brabec and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4987 CrossRef CAS .
L. Goris, A. Poruba, L. Hod'ákova, M. Vaněček, K. Haenen, M. Nesládek, P. Wangner, D. Vanderzande, L. D. Schepper and J. V. Manca, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 052113 CrossRef .
N. Li, B. E. Lassiter, R. R. Lunt, G. Wei and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 023307 CrossRef .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Blakesley and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 034507 CrossRef .
J. Luo, H. Wu, C. He, A. Li, W. Yang and Y. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 043301 CrossRef .
Z. T. Liu, M. F. Lo, H. B. Wang, T. W. Ng, V. A. L. Roy, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 093307 CrossRef .
M.-S. Su, C.-Y. Kuo, M.-C. Yuan, U.-S. Jeng, C.-J. Su and K.-H. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3315 CrossRef CAS .
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, C.-W. Chu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073508 CrossRef .
C. M. Ramsdale, J. A. Barker, A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 4266 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rau, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 085303 CrossRef .
S. R. Cowan, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 245207 CrossRef .
H. Ohkita, S. Cook, Y. Astuti, W. Duffy, S. Tierney, W. Zhang, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3030 CrossRef CAS .
F. Padinger, R. S. Rittberger and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 85 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, A. Wan and A. Kahn, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 1 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, A. Gadisa, W. D. Oosterbaan, S. Bertho, F. Banishoeib, I. V. Severen, L. Lutsen, T. J. Cleij, D. Vanderzande and J. V. Manca, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2064 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lange, J. C. Blakesley, J. Frisch, A. Vollmer, N. Koch and D. Neher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 216402 CrossRef .
H. Bässler, Polym. Adv. Technol., 1998, 9, 402 CrossRef .
C. G. Shuttle, A. Maurano, R. Hamilton, B. O'Regan, J. C. de Mello and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 183501 CrossRef .
E. A. Katz, D. Faiman, S. M. Tuladhar, J. M. Kroon, M. M. Wienk, T. Fromherz, F. Padinger, C. J. Brabec and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 5343 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chirvase, Z. Chiguvare, M. Knipper, J. Parisi, V. Dyakonov and J. C. Hummelen, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3376 CrossRef CAS .
I. Riedel, J. Parisi, V. Dyakonov, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 38 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kemerink, J. M. Kramer, H. H. P. Gommans and R. A. J. Janssen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 192108 CrossRef .
J. Guo, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6154 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, W. D. Oosterbaan, S. Bertho, V. Vrindts, A. Gadisa, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. V. Manca, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 123303 CrossRef .
D. Veldman, Ö. İpek, S. C. J. Meskers, J. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, S. S. van Bavel, J. Loos and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7721 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, S. Westenhoff, I. Avilov, P. Sreearunothai, J. M. Hodgkiss, C. Deleener, R. H. Friend and D. Beljonne, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 483 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar, S. C. Jain, H. Kumar, S. Chand and V. Kumar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 183505 CrossRef .
H. Ishii, K. Sugiyama, E. Ito and K. Seki, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 605 CrossRef CAS .
S. Braun, W. R. Salaneck and M. Fahlman, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1450 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sueyoshi, H. Fukagawa, M. Ono, S. Kera and N. Ueno, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 183303 CrossRef .
O. Tal, Y. Rosenwaks, Y. Preezant, N. Tessler, D. K. Chan and A. Kahn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 256405 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Hulea, H. B. Brom, A. J. Houtepen, D. Vanmaekelbergh, J. J. Kelly and E. A. Meulenkamp, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 166601 CrossRef CAS .
K. Celebi, P. J. Jadhav, K. M. Milaninia, M. Bora and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 083308 CrossRef .
L. J. A. Koster, E. C. P. Smits, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 085205 CrossRef .
C. Groves and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 155205 CrossRef .
C. G. Shuttle, B. O'Regan, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 113201 CrossRef .
A. M. Goodman and A. Rose, J. Appl. Phys., 1971, 42, 2823 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoo, B. Domercq and B. Kippelen, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 103706 CrossRef .
V. D. Mihailetchi, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummelen and M. T. Rispens, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 6849 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummeln, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Shuttle, B. O'Regan, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, J. de Mello and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 093311 CrossRef .
V. D. Mihailetchi, J. K. J. van Duren, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen, J. M. Kroon, M. T. Rispens, W. J. H. Verhees and M. M. Wienk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 43 CrossRef CAS .
V. Dyakonov and E. Frankevich, Chem. Phys., 1998, 227, 203 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Morteani, P. Sreearunothai, L. M. Herz, R. H. Friend and C. Silva, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 247402 CrossRef .
M. A. Loi, S. Toffanin, M. Muccini, M. Forster, U. Scherf and M. Scharber, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Offermans, P. A. van Hal, S. C. J. Meskers, M. M. Koetse and R. A. J. Janssen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 045213 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, K. Tvingstedt, F. Zhang, C. Du, W.-X. Ni, M. R. Andersson and O. Inganäs, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3293 CrossRef CAS .
T. Drori, C.-X. Sheng, A. Ndobe, S. Singh, J. Holt and Z. V. Vardeny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 037401 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, L. Goris, I. Haeldermans, M. Nesladek, K. Haenen, P. Wagner and J. V. Manca, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 7135 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. Y. Kim, S. H. Park, K. Lee, Y. Jin, J. Kim and H. Suh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 183502 CrossRef .
M. Yamada, T. Akasaka, S. Nagase, K. Tvingstedt, K. Vandewal, A. Gadisa, F. Zhang, J. Manca and O. Inganäs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11819 CrossRef .
G. Garcia-Belmonte, P. P. Boix, J. Bisquert, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 366 CrossRef CAS .
G. Juska, K. Genevicius, N. Nekrasas, G. Sliauzys and G. Dennler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 143303 CrossRef .
A. Tada, Y. Geng, Q. Wei, K. Hashimoto and K. Tajima, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 450 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, T. J. Reece, P. Sharma, S. Poddar, S. Ducharme, A. Gruverman, Y. Yang and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 296 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Wu, Q. L. Song, M. L. Wang, F. Y. Li, H. Yang, Y. Wu, C. H. Huang, X. M. Ding and X. Y. Hou, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 8050 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans, V. Bulovic and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2650 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Song, F. Y. Li, H. Yang, H. R. Wu, X. Z. Wang, W. Zhou, J. M. Zhao, X. M. Ding, C. H. Huang and X. Y. Hou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 416, 42 CrossRef CAS .
R. Steim, F. R. Kogler and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2499 RSC .
L.-M. Chen, Z. Xu, Z. Hong and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2575 RSC .
D. Credgington and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1465 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ray, M. S. Lundstrom and M. A. Alam, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 013307 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Boyuan Qi	Boyuan Qi received his B. S. degree from the Department of Physics at Nankai University in 2008 and obtained his M. S. degree from the Department of Physics at Peking University in 2011. He is now a Ph.D student at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include device engineering and device physics in organic optoelectronics.
Jizheng Wang	Professor Jizheng Wang got both his B. S. degree (1994) and M. S. degree (1997) from the Department of Physics at Lanzhou University (majored in Semiconductor Device Physics), and earned a Ph.D degree from the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences (2001) in the area of inorganic electronics (III–V quantum dot/well lasers). He worked on organic electronics at Cavendish Laboratory as a post-doc guided by Professor Henning Sirringhaus and Professor Richard H. Friend (2002–2005). After that, he moved to the US in 2005 and worked in the same area at several institutions (Columbia University/Dupont, Arizona State University/US Army Flexible Display Centre). In 2010, he returned to the Chinese Academy of Sciences as a professor, and continues his research in organic electronics at the Institute of Chemistry.
VOC = (1/q)(|EHOMO,D| − |ELUMO,A| − 0.3 V)	(1)
VOC = (1/q)(EFn − EFp)	(2)
Jd = J0[exp(qV/kBT) − 1]	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Equivalent circuit of (a) an ideal solar cell and (b) a practical solar cell.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  A Si p–n junction: (a) before contact (b) after contact (c) junction under illumination.	 

 	Fig. 3  Models of bands: (a) crystalline Si, (b) amorphous Si and (c) organic material.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 4  Molecular structure and DOS scheme of DPM6 and PCBM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 5  Linear dependence of VOC on temperature simulated with eqn (11). The grey dashed line in (a) is the linear fitting line of VOC around room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 6  
V
OC
versus T for various donor–acceptor heterojunctions. The metal in parentheses in the legend indicates the cathode material for that device. The error bars displayed for the NPD/C60 (Ag) device are typical for all of the heterojunctions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2007 American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Logarithmic dependence of VOC on incident light intensity with slope kBT/e, cell temperature modulated. (b) Linear dependence of VOC on temperature in a PCDTBT:PC71BM solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2010 American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Molecular structure and electron density distributions of tetracene and rubrene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 
ΦEL(E, V) = EQEPV(E)ΦBB(E)(exp(qV/kBT) − 1)	(12)
	(13)
	(14)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
