A CdS/rGO QDs/TiO 2 nanolawn photoanode co-decorated with reduced graphene oxide quantum dots and CdS nanoparticles with photoinduced cathodic protect ...  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NJ03430A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ03430A
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 19915-19926A CdS/rGO QDs/TiO2 nanolawn photoanode co-decorated with reduced graphene oxide quantum dots and CdS nanoparticles with photoinduced cathodic protection characteristics of 316L SS and Cu

        
          
            Xuhong 
            Jiang
          
        
      acd, 
      
        
          
            Mengmeng 
            Sun
          
        
      *acd and 

        
          
            Zhuoyuan 
            Chen
          
        
      *b
aKey Laboratory of Marine Environmental Corrosion and Bio-fouling, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 Nanhai Road, Qingdao 266071, China. E-mail: sunmengmeng@qdio.ac.cn;  Fax: +86-532-82880498;   Tel: +86-532-82898731
bSchool of Materials Science and Hydrogen Energy, Foshan University, 18 Jiangwanyi Road, Foshan, 528000, China. E-mail: zychen@fosu.edu.cn
cOpen Studio for Marine Corrosion and Protection, Pilot National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology (Qingdao), No. 1 Wenhai Road, Qingdao, 266237, China
dCenter for Ocean Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 Nanhai Road, Qingdao 266071, China
Received 
      12th July 2022
    , Accepted 22nd September 2022First published on 23rd September 2022AbstractClean and sustainable photoelectric technology has been developed rapidly in many fields. One of which is the novel marine corrosion protection technology that directly utilizes the abundant solar energy falling on the ocean to provide photoinduced cathodic protection for metallic structures, and has received increasing attention year by year. Improving the photoelectrochemical conversion and photoelectric cathodic protection performance for metals under sunlight is vital for achieving effective protection. In particular, optimizing the multi-dimensional nanostructured photoanode to accelerate the collection and transfer of photogenerated electrons and to improve the photoelectric and cathodic protection performance is a promising method. Here, an ultrafine branched anatase TiO2 nanolawn (NL) photoanode co-decorated with CdS nanoparticles and reduced graphene oxide quantum dots (rGO QDs) was prepared. Compared with single CdS modified TiO2 NL, the three-phase junction CdS/rGO QDs/TiO2 NL shows further enhanced photoelectrochemical conversion performance under simulated sunlight and visible light irradiation, increased by 66.7% and 83.3% compared to that of CdS/TiO2 NL, respectively. The rGO QDs, which acted as a high-efficiency electron transporter, are uniformly deposited on the TiO2 NL, and further promote the transport efficiency of photogenerated electrons. CdS as a visible-light responder is responsible for broadening the spectral response, and the ultrafine branched TiO2 NL substrate greatly expands the photon capture area and increases the electron collection sites. Finally, the synergy of the above three aspects ensures that the ternary CdS/rGO QDs/TiO2 NL photoanode exhibits further enhanced simulated sunlight-driven and visible light-driven photoelectric conversion efficiency and a photoinduced cathodic protection effect on 316L stainless steel and pure copper.
1. Introduction
In order to satisfy the demand for clean energy, the direct use of sustainable solar energy has attracted widespread attention, especially the development of semiconductor materials with high-efficiency photoelectric conversion properties to collect solar photons and efficiently drive useful redox reactions, which has multi-advantages of being economic and environment-friendly and having high-efficiency.1–3 A major challenge in developing high-performance photoelectric conversion materials is to effectively separate and transport photogenerated electron–hole pairs.4–6 TiO2-based materials are the most widely used semiconductor materials due to their stable performance and low price.7–15 But their band gap is relatively wide, so they can only respond to ultraviolet light, and the photo-generated carriers easily recombine.7–9,16 For improving the separation and transfer of photogenerated charge carriers, the construction of photocatalysts with special structures and morphologies that can offer direct transportation channels for electrons has gained immense attention.17 TiO2 nanorods, nanotubes, nanotrees, etc. can provide large contact areas for loading other sensitizers and offer direct pathways for transporting photogenerated electrons, thereby reducing the grain boundaries efficiently and enhancing the charge collection efficiency.18–22 Many studies have also proved that special microstructures can bring synergistic effects to the overall performance of photoelectrochemical materials. Cho et al. reported a hierarchically branched TiO2 nanorod structure that can provide sufficient contact with the electrolyte, enhance the light trapping area, and serve as an efficient transport pathway for photogenerated electrons. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) reaches 67% at 380 nm with an applied bias of 0.6 V versus RHE, nearly two times higher than the bare nanorods without branches.23 Zheng et al. fabricated one-dimensional (1D) ZnO nanorods on the basis of a two-dimensional (2D) TiO2(001) nanosheet, and then modified them with a CdS sensitizer, thereby constructing a three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical heterostructure.24 Han et al. prepared CdS sensitized 1D ZnO nanorod arrays on a 2D graphene (GR) sheet.25 Wu et al. synthesized anatase TiO2 hierarchical nano-architecture arrays (HNAAs) on transparent FTO glass for the first time via a facile one-step hydrothermal method without any surfactant or template, which is composed of long TiO2 nanowire trunk and numerous short TiO2 nanorod branches.26 These architectures show excellent power conversion efficiency due to the higher specific surface area and superior light scattering capacity for boosting the light-harvesting efficiency.
In order to further elevate the charge transport capability of TiO2 based materials, a strategy has been tried to modify TiO2 with graphene. Graphene, due to its extraordinary electronic transport characteristics and physicochemical properties originating from its distinctive quasi-two-dimensional monolayer structure of sp2-bonded carbon atoms, has attracted increasing attention. Researchers found that reduced graphene oxide (rGO) will assist the electron transmission when incorporating rGO with other nanoarchitectures.27–30 Song et al. reported the sensitization effect of GO on the photoelectrochemical response of the TiO2 nanotube arrays, and its maximum photoelectric conversion efficiency was enhanced by about 15 times with the presence of GO.31 Zhai et al. prepared a ternary complex of an rGO modified Pt nanoflower-TiO2 nanotube array (Pt-TNTs/rGO) electrode, and the introduction of graphene nanosheets in the Pt-TNTs/rGO nanostructure promotes the transport of electrons to graphene followed by transport to the electrode.32 2D graphene would be a favorable choice to compound with other materials and form an interfacial combination. Yoon et al. adopted graphene quantum dots (GQDs) to modify CdSe-sensitized photoanodes.33 Compared with the case without GQDs, the photocurrent density was increased by 1.2× and remained almost unchanged after 300 min of irradiation. The reason is that the GQDs can help to release photogenerated holes that accumulated on the surface of CdSe QDs, thereby reducing the anodic corrosion of CdSe QDs. Then the visible light-driven photoelectrochemical (PEC) hydrogen generation activity was enhanced. Therefore, taking full advantage of the merits of GO and the high specific surface area of the nanostructure to optimize the TiO2 substrate synergistically is expected to improve the photogenerated charge transmission of the 3D nanostructured TiO2 photoanode, and then enhance the photoelectric conversion-related performance.
In this work, an ultrafine branched anatase TiO2 nanolawn (NL) substrate was prepared firstly, followed by a constant current reduction electrodeposition of GO QDs on this substrate to form an effective interfacial combination to increase the electron transport and PEC conversion performance. Then, CdS nanoparticles (NPs) were deposited onto rGO QDs/TiO2 NL (GT) and formed a ternary CdS/rGO QDs/TiO2 NL (CGT) photoanode. Compared with the single TiO2 NL, binary CdS/TiO2 NL (CT) and GT photoanodes, the rGO QDs in the ternary CGT photoanode further promoted the separation and transfer of photogenerated electrons and holes. Thus, the PEC conversion performance of the CGT photoanode was enhanced by the assistance of rGO QDs under both simulated sunlight and visible light illumination. Therefore, the CGT photoanode exhibits photoinduced cathodic protection performance for both 316L stainless steel (316L SS) and pure copper (Cu). Furthermore, the difference in the photoinduced cathodic protection performance for 316L SS and Cu was analyzed. This work can provide a valuable reference for optimizing and boosting the separation and transfer efficiency of the photogenerated charge carriers of the photoinduced cathodic protection materials under simulated sunlight illumination.
2. Experimental
2.1 Materials and reagents
All the chemical reagents used in the present work were analytically pure and used directly without further purification treatment. Potassium titanium oxalate (K2TiO(C2O4)2, PTO) was purchased from Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Co., Ltd. Cadmium nitrate (Cd(NO3)2), diethylene glycol (C4H10O3, DEG), n-butanol (CH3(CH2)3OH), acetylacetone (C5H8O2), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), disodium phosphate (Na2HPO4), sodium sulfide nonahydrate (Na2S·9H2O), anhydrous sodium sulfite (Na2SO3), sodium sulfate (Na2SO4), sodium chloride (NaCl), ethanol and acetone were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Titanium n-butoxide (C16H36O4Ti) and p-toluenesulfonic acid monohydrate (p-CH3C6H4SO3H·H2O, PTSH), were purchased from Aladdin Reagent (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. Graphene oxide quantum dot (GO QD) aqueous solution was purchased from Nanjing JCnano Technology Co., Ltd. The concentration of GO QDs is 1 mg mL−1, and the size and thickness of the GO sheet are about 3–6 nm and 0.33–1 nm, respectively. Another sheet-like graphene oxide gel from Aladdin Reagent (Shanghai) Co., Ltd (graphene oxide content: 1 wt%) was also used, with a size and thickness of about 0.8–3 μm and 0.8–1.2 nm, respectively. Transparent FTO conductive glass (FTO-P003) was purchased from Zhuhai Kaivo Optoelectronic Technology Co., Ltd.
2.2 Preparation of TiO2 NL, GT, CT and CGT photoanodes
The FTO glass was pretreated before growing TiO2 NL: cut into 1 × 2 cm2 pieces, ultrasonically cleaned with acetone and ethanol for 20 min, respectively, washed with deionized water and then dried in air and kept clean. The anatase TiO2 NL on FTO glass was prepared by the procedure shown in Fig. 1, which is described in detail below. Firstly, the TiO2 seed layer was deposited on the FTO glass substrate by a dip-coating method. The seed precursor sol was prepared as follows, similar to that described by Wu et al. and Scolan et al.26,34 Titanium n-butoxide (10 mL) was added slowly to a mixed solution of n-butanol (10 mL) and acetylacetone (12.32 mL), and the mixture was stirred at room temperature for 15 min. An exothermic reaction occurred and a yellow solution appeared. The clear yellow mixture was then hydrolyzed by dropwise addition of an aqueous acidic solution (PTSH) (1.113 g of PTSH in 5.4 mL of deionized water). The resulting solution was stirred for 10 min to get a yellow transparent sol with a pH of 2.3 ± 0.1. This colloid solution was heated overnight at 60 °C to obtain a wine red transparent colloid solution that can remain stable for several months. A cleaned FTO glass was dipped into the colloid solution for 30 s and then pulled out. The colloid seed layer coated FTO glass was dried at 80 °C for 20 min, and an even colloidal film was formed on the FTO glass. Eventually, the coated FTO glass was thermally treated at 500 °C for 30 min in ambient air at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1. Thus, a uniform TiO2 nanoparticle seed layer was prepared.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the preparation procedure of the CdS/rGO QDs/TiO2 NL photoanode. 
Then, the anatase TiO2 NL was prepared by a facile one-step solvothermal method. 2 mmol potassium titanium oxalate (K2TiO(C2O4)2) was added to the mixture solvent containing 30 mL of diethylene glycol (DEG) and 10 mL of deionized water. After 30 min of stirring, the mixture solution was transferred to a 50 mL Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave. The TiO2 seed-coated FTO glass was pre-placed at an angle against the wall of the Teflon-liner with the conducting side facing down. The solvothermal synthesis reaction was carried out at 180 °C for 9 h. After cooling to room temperature, the FTO glass was taken out, rinsed with deionized water, and dried at 60 °C. Finally, the obtained FTO glass was annealed in a muffle furnace at 450 °C for 2 h to obtain the anatase TiO2 NL substrate photoanode.
And then the GT photoanode was prepared by constant current reduction electrodeposition. A certain amount of GO QDs aqueous solution was dispersed in 50 mL of 1 M sodium hydrogen phosphate solution and the pH was adjusted to 9 with 0.1 M NaOH aqueous solution. The solution was sonicated for 1 h to uniformly disperse the GO QDs. Using the TiO2 NL substrate as the working electrode, and the above mixed solution as the electrolyte, the constant current reduction electrodeposition was performed at a constant cathodic current of 0.1 mA cm−2, with deposition times of 20, 30 and 40 min, respectively. Then, the GT photoanode was obtained. In addition, the sheet-like graphene oxide gel was also used to prepare an electrodeposition solution for the electrodeposition of rGO on TiO2 NL. The procedure was the same as that of electrodeposition in GO QD aqueous solution, and the obtained sample was labeled as rGO sheet/TiO2 NL.
Finally, the GT was further decorated with the CdS NPs through the successive ion layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) deposition technique, as described elsewhere.22 The prepared GT photoanode was immersed in the cation precursor (Cd(NO3)2 aqueous solution) and anion precursor (Na2S aqueous solution) for 20 seconds in sequence. After each immersion, the photoanode was rinsed with deionized water to remove the weakly bound ions on the surface. Repeat this dipping procedure 15 times until the desired amount of CdS NPs was incorporated.
For comparison, the GT and CT photoanodes modified by only rGO QDs or CdS nanoparticles were also prepared, which only used the single electrodeposition or single SILAR preparation process.
316L stainless steel (SS) and pure copper were used to prepare metal electrodes for testing the following photoinduced cathodic protection performance generated by the prepared photoanode under illumination. The metal electrode was prepared by embedding a cube (1 cm3) metal block into epoxy resin with an exposed area of 1 × 1 cm2. Then, the metal electrodes were polished with 800 and 2000 mesh silicon carbide papers, in turn, washed and dried with deionized water, and finally reserved in a desiccator for later use.
2.3 Characterization
The crystal structures of the prepared photoanodes were analyzed on an Ultima IV X-Ray Diffractometer (XRD) (Rigaku, D/max-500, Japan). SEM (Zeiss, ULTRA 55, Germany) and HRTEM (FEI, Tecnai G20, USA) were used to characterize the morphology and the microstructures of the prepared samples. Raman spectra were analyzed using an inVia Raman microscope (Renishaw MZ20-FC). The composition state and the bonding state of the synthesized CGT photoanode were detected by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) using an X-ray spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, ESCALAB 250Xi, USA), and the binding energies were calibrated according to C1s = 284.8 eV. The optical absorption properties were studied using a UV/Vis spectrophotometer (SHIMADZU, UV-2600, Japan) equipped with an integrating sphere. And the recombination rate of the photogenerated electrons and holes of the prepared photoanodes was estimated by the photoluminescence (PL) emission intensity on a fluorescence spectrometer (HORIBA Jobin Yvon, Fluoro Max-4, France).
2.4 PEC/electrochemical/photoinduced cathodic protection measurements
All the photoelectrochemical, electrochemical and photoinduced cathodic protection measurements were performed on a CHI 660D electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua Instrument Co., Ltd, China). The PEC conversion performance of the prepared photoanodes was measured by variations of the photoinduced current density under intermittent simulated sunlight or visible light. The light source was a CHF-XM-300W Xe arc lamp (Beijing PerfectLight Co. Ltd, China), with an AM1.5 filter added to obtain the simulated sunlight, and calibrated the light density to 100 mW cm−2 using an optical power meter (PM100D S302C, Thorlabs, USA). The light-sensing area of the photoanode was 1 cm2. The illumination is unfiltered or filtered (with 420 nm cut-off filter) simulated AM1.5 sunlight. Besides, the photoinduced Volt–ampere (i–V) curves under intermittent simulated sunlight were measured at a scan rate of 0.02 V s−1. The monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured to study the PEC conversion efficiencies of the photoanodes by adopting a monochromator. All the above measurements were tested under a three-electrode system, with the prepared photoanode as the working electrode, and the Pt electrode and Ag/AgCl (saturated KCl) as the counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively. The electrolyte is 0.25 M Na2S + 0.35 M Na2SO3 solution, which can efficiently prevent the light corrosion of CdS. The electrochemical performance was analyzed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The EIS was performed at open circuit potential (OCP) over the frequency range between 105 and 10−2 Hz, with an AC voltage magnitude of 5 mV. The flat band potential and the charge carrier density were estimated using Mott–Schottky plots in the potential range of −0.8 V to 0.4 V at a frequency of 1000 Hz, with an AC voltage magnitude of 10 mV. The EIS and Mott–Schottky tests were both conducted in 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution in a three-electrode system under dark conditions. The potentiodynamic (Tafel) polarization curves were measured from −250 to 250 mV (vs. OCP) in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution.
The photoinduced cathodic protection characteristics were measured using our previous method and the same experimental test device.35,36 Two electrolytic cells of the corrosion cell and photoelectrochemical cell are connected through the Nafion membrane. The solution in the corrosion cell is 3.5 wt% NaCl solution, and the solution in the photoelectrochemical cell is 0.35 mol L−1 Na2SO3 + 0.25 mol L−1 Na2S solution. The metal (316L SS or Cu) electrode and the photoanode are immersed respectively in the solutions of the corrosion cell and the photoelectrochemical cell. By coupling the metal (316L SS or Cu) electrode with the prepared photoanode under the simulated sunlight irradiation, the current density generated between the coupled photoanode and metal electrode was measured, i.e., the generated current density by the excitation of light irradiation at the photoanode flowed through the wire to the metal electrode. And the corresponding photoinduced mixed potential drop of this coupling was also measured. Then, the photoinduced cathodic protection performance of the prepared photoanode for the coupled metal electrodes was estimated.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Microstructure, morphology and component state analyses of the prepared photoanodes
XRD analysis was first adopted to characterize the phase composition and crystal structure of the prepared CGT, CT, GT and pure TiO2 NL photoanodes, as shown in Fig. 2(a). All the prepared samples show diffraction peaks at 25.3°, 48.1°, 53.9°, 55.1°, 62.7° and 75.0°, which are consistent with the (101), (200), (105), (211), (204) and (215) crystal planes of anatase TiO2 (JPCDS#21-1272),37 demonstrating the successful growth of the anatase TiO2 substrate film. Additionally, all the samples show diffraction peaks of FTO glass.22 For GT and CGT samples, no clear graphene-related diffraction peak was detected. This may be due to the (002) diffraction peak of graphene located at 26° being close to the diffraction peak of FTO glass,38–40 and the two peaks overlap and thus are difficult to identify. Besides, no diffraction peaks of CdS were found in CT and CGT samples, which may be due to the tiny size and small amount of rGO QDs and CdS particles deposited on the surface of TiO2 NL and the poor crystallinity of CdS particles deposited by the SILAR method.5 In the following, further characterization methods have been adopted to verify the deposited rGO QDs and CdS NPs.
 Fig. 2  XRD patterns of the prepared pure TiO2 NL, GT, CGT and CR samples (a); Raman spectra of the pure GO QD aqueous solution, pure TiO2 NL and GT photoanodes, as well as the GT photoanode over-deposited in GO QD aqueous solution (b). 
Raman spectra of the pure GO QD aqueous solution, TiO2 NL and GT photoanodes are depicted in Fig. 2(b). To better analyze the state of the deposited QDs, the Raman spectrum of the GT sample over-deposited in GO QD aqueous solution is also given and labeled as over-deposited GT. It can be seen that for the pure GO QD aqueous solution, two peaks located at around 1347 and 1590 cm−1 exist, assigned to the D and G peaks of the hexagonal carbon-type structure of graphene, respectively.41,42 The D peak near 1347 cm−1 is the defect peak, that is, the number of defects or the edge of the graphite layer. The G peak near 1590 cm−1 is the characteristic peak of sp2 hybrid carbon atoms, which reflects the average size of the sp2 domains and is also related to its symmetry and crystallinity.43,44 For the TiO2 NL sample, there is no obvious D peak or G peak observed. The GT sample shows a D peak at 1347 cm−1 with lower intensity, due to the little deposition amount of rGO QDs on the TiO2 surface. After excessive electrodeposition in the GO QD aqueous solution, for the over-deposited GT sample, an obvious D band peak at 1347 cm−1 appears, and the intensity of the G peak is weakened. Since the D/G intensity ratio is inversely proportional to the G peak intensity, the increase of the D/G ratio suggests a decrease in the average size of the sp2 domains upon reduction, i.e., rGO has a small size and a large number of edges, which act as defects and lead to an increase of the D peak.45–47 Thus, the reduction degree of GO QDs can be identified from the increased D/G intensity during the reduction process of the GO according to Raman spectra.48 The D/G intensity ratio of the over-deposited GT sample is much higher than that of the pristine GO QDs, indicating the high reduction degree of GO, implying the massive formation of rGO QDs on the TiO2 NL substrate. In addition, for the GT and over-deposited GT samples, a slight bulging can be seen at the band peak of 2720 cm−1 (2D band), also indicating the formation of reduced graphene on the TiO2 surface.41,49 Therefore, the Raman results reveal that most of the GO QDs were reduced to rGO QDs and successfully fabricated on the TiO2 photoanodes. The higher the reduction degree of GO is, the better the electronic conductivity is. Hence, the obtained CGT photoanode will improve the transfer ability of photogenerated electrons.
The SEM and TEM morphology of TiO2 NL (a, b, c), GO QDs (d, e, f), GT (g, g1, g2) and CGT (h, h1, h2) samples are presented in Fig. 3. From the SEM image of pure TiO2 NL in Fig. 3(a), the TiO2 NL is composed of numerous long and thin (diameter < 50 nm) nanowires interlaced with each other, with some thinner and shorter nanobranches on them. The inset in Fig. 3(a) shows the cross-sectional image of TiO2 NL, where the intertwined growth of nanowires on the TiO2 seed substrate can be seen, which looks like a nanolawn. The thickness of the TiO2 film is approximately 3 μm. Fig. 3(b) and (c) show the TEM images of TiO2 NL at different magnifications. For a single TiO2 nanowire, the diameter is only ∼10 nm and the length is about several hundred nanometers, both consistent with the SEM results. This result demonstrates that the nanolawn substrate prepared by this method is very slender, and is conducive to the rapid transmission of the generated electrons. The TEM and HRTEM images of the initial GO QD aqueous solution are depicted in Fig. 3(d)–(f). The GO QDs are well dispersed and uniform in size. Each QD consists of multilayer (2–3 layer) graphene oxide, with a diameter of about 2–3 nm. The lattice spacing in the enlarged HRTEM image in the inset of Fig. 3(d) is approximately 0.21 nm, corresponding to that of the graphene (100) plane.50 The further magnified HRTEM image of GO QDs in Fig. 3(f) displays the arrangement of carbon atoms in the hexagonal unit cell of a typical QD, which is consistent with previous literature.51–54Fig. 3(g) shows the TEM image of the GT photoanode, the slender TiO2 nanowires were also observed. However, the surface of the nanowire is not smooth and appears to be covered with a rough bark-like layer. Fig. 3(g1) and (g2) show the further enlarged HRTEM images. A lattice spacing of 0.352 nm on the nanowires is consistent with the (101) plane of anatase TiO2.55 Some QDs with a diameter of less than 5 nm can be observed around the nanowires (marked with white circles), with some showing a lattice spacing of 0.21nm, indicating the successful deposition of rGO QDs on TiO2 NL.50 The TEM and HRTEM results are in accordance with the above Raman data, confirming the successful fabrication of rGO QDs on the surface of TiO2 NL. Fig. 3(h)–(h2) show the TEM and HRTEM images of TiO2 NL co-decorated with CdS and rGO QDs. Compared with Fig. 3(g), more nanoparticles are attached to the slender TiO2 nanobranches. Lattice spacing values of 0.267 nm and 0.352 nm can be observed on the nanowire backbone, corresponding to the (110) and (101) planes of anatase TiO2, respectively.55,56 Besides, the HRTEM images also display well-resolved lattice spacings of 0.336 nm and 0.206 nm on the nanoparticles, which match well with the (111) and (220) planes of CdS.56,57 In addition, some lattice-inconspicuous QDs (at a diameter of around 5 nm, white circle) are also observed between the slender TiO2 branches and the CdS NPs, which resemble the rGO QDs in Fig. 3(g)–(g2). The nanosensitizer decoration and interfacial combination will ensure the high photo-response and light collection of the CGT photoanode.
 Fig. 3  SEM and TEM images of the pure TiO2 NL (a)–(c); TEM and HRTEM images of original GO QDs (d)–(f); TEM and HRTEM images of GT (g)–(g2) and CGT (h)–(h2) samples. 
The chemical composition of the CGT photoanode was also studied by XPS spectra. Fig. 4(a) shows the XPS total spectrum of CGT, which clearly shows the characteristic peaks of Ti, O, Cd and S elements. Fig. 4(b) shows the C1s XPS spectrum, and can be deconvoluted into several peaks. The main binding energy peak at 284.8 eV corresponds to the unoxidized C–C and CC bonds. Other peaks at 286.2 eV (C–O), 286.8 eV (CO) and 288.8 eV (–O–CO) are also observed.58–62 The peak intensity of the C–C bond is very high, while the peak intensity of oxygen-containing functional groups is low, indicating that most of the GO has been reduced to rGO.58,59,63Fig. 4(c) and (d) are the XPS high-resolution spectra of Cd 3d and S 2p, respectively. The two peaks at 411.7 and 404.9 eV in Fig. 4(c) correspond to the binding energy of Cd 3d,64,65 while the S 2p peak at 161.5 eV in Fig. 4(d) is attributed to the Cd–S bond.64 The results of Raman spectra, HRTEM images and XPS spectra co-confirm the successful deposition of rGO QDs and CdS NPs in the CGT photoanode.
 Fig. 4  XPS spectra of the prepared CGT photoanode: (a) the total survey spectrum; XPS high-resolution spectra of (b) C 1s, (c) Cd 3d and (d) S 2p. 
3.2 Photoelectrochemical performance of the prepared photoanodes
The photoelectrochemical performance of the prepared photoanodes was characterized by the photogenerated current density (i–t) and photoinduced i–V curves of the TiO2 NL, GT, CT and CGT photoanodes under chopped simulated sunlight (AM1.5) or visible light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation. The light used in this work was calibrated to standard solar light before measurements, just as mentioned in previous research studies.66–68Fig. 5(a) shows the variation of photogenerated current densities of the TiO2 NL, GT, CT and CGT photoanodes. The pure TiO2 NL photoanode generated a small current density under the simulated sunlight (about 50 μA cm−2) and visible light irradiation (∼3 μA cm−2), indicating the weak cathodic protection performance of TiO2 NL. The photogenerated current density of the GT photoanode increased to 100 μA cm−2 under the simulated sunlight, while the CT photoanode exhibited significantly increased photogenerated current densities of 2.1 mA cm−2 under the simulated sunlight and 1.2 mA cm−2 under the visible light. After the co-modification of CdS and rGO QDs, the photogenerated current densities of the CGT photoanode were further enlarged, which were 3.5 mA cm−2 and 2.2 mA cm−2 under the simulated sunlight and visible light irradiation, respectively, increased by 66.7% and 83.3% than those of the bi-phase junction CT photoanode. Fig. 5(b) shows the photoinduced i–V curves of the prepared photoanodes under intermittent simulated sunlight. At different bias voltages, the photogenerated current densities of the pure TiO2 NL photoanode were very low, while those of CT and CGT photoanodes were much more positive, which is consistent with the result in Fig. 5(a). CdS NPs significantly promoted the photoelectric conversion efficiency, and rGO QDs further promoted the electron transfer rate between CdS and TiO2 NL, thereby synergistically improving the photoelectric conversion of the ternary CGT photoanode.
 Fig. 5  (a) The photogenerated current densities of the TiO2 NL, CT, CGT and GT photoanodes under chopped simulated AM1.5 sunlight and visible light; (b) the photoinduced i–V curves of the TiO2 NL, CT and CGT photoanodes under chopped simulated AM1.5 sunlight; (c) the IPCE values of the TiO2 NL, CT and CGT photoanodes; and (d) photogenerated current densities of the CGT photoanodes prepared under different rGO deposition conditions. 
The IPCE results of TiO2 NL, CT and CGT photoanodes are depicted in Fig. 5(c) to characterize the photoelectrochemical conversion efficiency. The TiO2 NL photoanode only shows an optical response at an incident wavelength of 300–400 nm, and the IPCE values are much smaller, basically under 5% (except for the maximum value of 12.5% at 360 nm). Due to the visible light absorption property of CdS, the IPCE values of the CT photoanode were significantly enhanced, especially in the incident wavelength range of 380–520 nm. Compared with the CT photoanode, the CGT photoanode exhibits higher IPCE values at all the tested wavelengths, with the maximum reaching 30.5% at an incident wavelength of 320 nm. These results confirm that modifying the CT photoanode with rGO QDs further improved the photon-to-electron conversion efficiency. The rGO QDs acted as quantum-sized electron transmission bridge between CdS and TiO2 NL, and promoted the transfer of photogenerated electrons produced on the CdS and TiO2 NL under irradiation.69
Besides, the CGT samples synthesized with different amounts of GO QD aqueous solution and at different electrodeposition times were also analyzed to explore the optimal deposition conditions of rGO QDs. And the CGT sample prepared by electrodeposition reduction of sheet-like graphene oxide solution was also prepared, with the results shown in Fig. 5(d). It can be seen that the photogenerated current density of the CGT samples prepared with different GO QD addition amounts (50, 100 and 150 μL) in the electrodeposition solution decreases in the order of 100 μL > 50 μL > 150 μL. The optimal addition amount of GO QDs is 100 μL. By comparing the photogenerated current densities of the CGT samples prepared at different electrodeposition times (20, 30 and 40 min) in the same electrodeposition solution with 100 μL of GO QDs, 30 min was proved to be the optimal electrodeposition time. In addition to the adoption of GO QD solution in the electrodeposition, for comparison, the electrodeposition performed with the addition of a sheet-like graphene oxide gel in the solution was also carried out to obtain the CGT sample under the same optimal addition amount (100 μL) and electrodeposition time (30 min). It is found that the photogenerated current density of the CGT photoanode prepared with the adoption of the sheet-like graphene oxide gel was only 2.2 mA cm−2. Its photoelectric conversion performance was much lower than that of the CGT photoanode prepared under the same conditions with GO QD solution. Therefore, it can be concluded that the optimal deposition condition of rGO QDs is to add 100 μL of GO QD aqueous solution into the electrodeposition solution, and then conduct a 30 min electrodeposition.
3.3 Optical absorption and electrochemical performance of the prepared photoanodes
The UV-Vis absorption spectra of TiO2 NL, GT, CT and CGT samples are shown in Fig. 6(a). TiO2 NL shows a basic light absorption threshold at 387 nm in the ultraviolet region.22 For the GT photoanode, due to the deposition of rGO QDs, the light absorption intensity in the ultraviolet region was enhanced, but the light absorption threshold did not change. It has been reported that the increase of rGO content will lead to an increase in the optical absorption properties of composite materials.70–73 However, the light absorption threshold will not necessarily be broadened.74,75 Once the visible-light responsive CdS NPs were deposited onto the TiO2 NL, the CT photoanode showed significantly enhanced light absorption capacity in the visible light region of 390–520 nm, with a light absorption threshold at about 517 nm. Similarly, for the CGT photoanode, the light absorption threshold was also broadened to 517 nm, and the light absorption performance in the visible region of 390–520 nm was further enhanced due to the deposition of rGO QDs. So, for GT and CGT photoanodes, the overall light absorption intensities were further enhanced compared to those of TiO2 NL and CT, but the light absorption threshold did not change.76–78
 Fig. 6  UV/Vis absorption spectra (a), PL emission spectra (b), Mott–Schottky plots (c) and Bode plots (d) of the TiO2 NL, GT, CT and CGT photoanodes. 
Photoluminescence emission spectra were recorded to further study the recombination efficiency of the photogenerated charge carriers of the CGT photoanode. As shown in Fig. 6(b), the photoluminescence emission intensity of the CGT photoanode was lower than those of TiO2 NL and CT photoanodes, indicating that instead of recombining to produce fluorescence, the large number of photogenerated electrons and holes on the CGT photoanode were separated effectively. This means that the deposition of rGO QDs further reduced the recombination of photogenerated carriers. Therefore, the modification of the CT photoanode with rGO QDs can further promote the generation and transmission of photogenerated electrons and holes, and improve the photoelectrochemical conversion efficiency.
The changes in charge carrier density (ND) of the prepared photoanodes were analyzed using Mott–Schottky plots (Fig. 6(c)). The charge carrier density can be characterized by the slope of the tangent of the straight line part of Mott–Schottky plots. The tangent slopes of all the samples are positive, indicating the n-type semiconductive characteristics of all these prepared samples. Moreover, the carrier density ND is negatively correlated with the tangent slope.79 Compared with that of TiO2 NL, the tangent slope of the CT sample becomes smaller, indicating the increase of its charge carrier density, revealing that the CdS/TiO2 NL promoted the interfacial electron migration and enhanced the charge carrier density. And the tangent slope of the CGT sample was further reduced, resulting from the excellent conductivity of rGO QDs, inducing the further enhancement of the carrier density.
Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were further applied to study the conductivity of the prepared photoanodes, and the Bode plots of the TiO2 NL, GT, CT and CGT photoanodes are shown in Fig. 6(d). The impedance in the low frequency region in Bode plot reflects the resistance of the film (Rf).80 The intersection on the vertical axis corresponds directly to the value of Rf. Compared with other photoanodes, the CGT sample shows the smallest Rf value, indicating the lowest interfacial charge transfer impedance. This signifies that the conductivity was enhanced, the transport of photogenerated electrons was elevated, and the carrier-separation efficiency was promoted. The above PEC, optical and electrochemical results suggest that the CGT photoanode has more favorable application potential of photoinduced cathodic protection in marine environments.
3.4 Photoinduced cathodic protection performance of the prepared photoanodes
The photoinduced cathodic protection performance of the prepared photoanodes was explored, and two different metal materials (316L SS and Cu) were used as the under-protected objects. As shown in Fig. 7, the photogenerated current densities between the prepared photoanode and the coupled metal electrode, as well as the photoinduced potential changes of the coupling system under the chopped AM1.5 sunlight irradiation, were measured, respectively.
 Fig. 7  Under intermittent simulated AM 1.5 sunlight irradiation, (a) the photoinduced current density changes between the prepared photoanodes and the 316L SS electrode, (b) the photoinduced mixed potential changes of the 316L SS electrode coupled with the photoanodes, (c) the photoinduced current density changes between the prepared photoanodes and the Cu electrode, and (d) the photoinduced mixed potential changes of the Cu electrode coupled with the photoanodes. 

Fig. 7(a) shows the changes in the photogenerated current density between the photoanode and the 316L SS electrode. For the single TiO2 and GT photoanodes, the photoinduced cathodic protection current densities of 316L SS were 40 μA cm−2 and 60 μA cm−2 (shown in the inset in Fig. 7(a)), respectively, both exhibiting a weak cathodic protection effect. After modification with CdS NPs, the photoinduced cathodic protection current density of the CT photoanode for 316L SS was greatly improved to 0.56 mA cm−2. Further deposition of rGO QDs increased the photoinduced cathodic protection current density of the CGT photoanode to 0.72 mA cm−2, which was about 29% higher than that of CT. The photoinduced variations of mixed OCPs of the coupled photoanodes and 316L SS electrode under chopped light illumination in Fig. 7(b) are consistent with the results of photoinduced current density. The photoinduced potential drops of the CT-316L SS and CGT-316L SS were larger than those of TiO2 NL and GT photoanodes. The largest photoinduced potential drop of CGT-316L SS was 0.88 V (dropped from −0.37 V to −1.25 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)), indicating the better cathodic protection effect than the other photoanode. In Fig. 7(b), once the light was turned on/off, the mixed potential of the coupled CGT/CT photoanode and 316L SS electrode dropped/rose quickly, but the mixed potential of the coupled TiO2 NL/GT photoanode and 316L SS electrode dropped/rose slowly.

Fig. 7(c) and (d) show the photoinduced cathodic protection current densities and OCPs of the prepared photoanodes for the Cu electrode. Similar to the protective effect for 316L SS, the cathodic protection performance of both CT and CGT samples are significantly better than those of TiO2 and GT samples, and the CGT sample shows the largest photoinduced current density (1.45 mA cm−2) and photoinduced mixed potential drop (0.9 V). The TiO2 and GT photoanodes have lower photogenerated current densities (39 μA cm−2 and 61 μA cm−2, respectively) and smaller photoinduced OCP drops (only 0.1 V and 0.19 V, respectively). The CT photoanode can generate a large positive current density at the moment of switching the light on, but it dropped immediately and remained at approximately 1.12 mA cm−2. This is owing to the large number of photogenerated carriers generated under illumination excitation, but they recombined rapidly and cannot be effectively separated and utilized. Benefiting from the excellent electronic conductivity of rGO QDs, which can accelerate the transfer of photogenerated electrons to the coupled metal and promote the separation of photogenerated carriers, the photoinduced cathodic protection performance of the CGT photoanode was further enhanced.
Comparing the photoinduced cathodic protection results of the CT/CGT photoanodes for 316L SS and Cu, it is found that cathodic protection current densities of CT/CGT-Cu are about twice those of CT/CGT-316L SS, while the mixed potential drops of CT/CGT-Cu are almost equivalent to those of CT/CGT-316L SS. The photoinduced cathodic protection current densities of TiO2 NL and GT for Cu are closer to those for 316L SS, but the photoinduced potential drops are significantly lower than those of the coupling with 316L SS. This is mainly due to the difference in the characteristics of Cu and 316L SS electrodes. Compared with 316L SS, the higher surface catalytic activity and lower charge transfer barrier of Cu make the electrons on the Cu surface prone to participate in redox reactions with the surrounding electrolyte, leaving fewer electrons remaining and accumulating on the Cu surface, thus accompanied by a smaller potential drop for the Cu-couplings. Secondly, there is a difference in the self-corrosion potential for Cu and 316L SS. The open circuit potentials of the 316L SS and Cu without coupling with the photoelectrodes are given in Fig. 7(b) and (d). The open circuit potential of the 316L SS is about −0.12 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), and that of Cu is about −0.18 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). The self-corrosion potential of Cu is more negative than that of 316L SS, implying that the self-corrosion rate of Cu is larger than that of 316L SS. The above analysis also can be confirmed by the Tafel polarization curve of 316L SS and Cu in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution in the dark, as shown in Fig. 8. The open circuit potential of Cu is more negative than that of 316L SS, and the polarization current density is much higher than that of 316L SS. Therefore, to provide cathodic protection for Cu, it is necessary to provide larger cathodic protection current density, and maintain a greater cathodic polarization with a larger mixed potential drop.
 Fig. 8  The Tafel plots of the 316L SS and Cu electrodes measured in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution in the dark. 
Overall, compared with the TiO2, GT and CT photoanodes, the CGT photoanode shows the highest photoinduced cathodic protection current density and photoinduced cathodic protection potential drop for different metal materials under AM1.5 sunlight illumination, and can provide maximum photoinduced cathodic polarization for the coupled 316L SS and Cu metals with the optimal photoinduced cathodic protection performance.
The mechanism of the further enhanced photoinduced cathodic protection performance of the CGT photoanode co-decorated with CdS NPs and rGO QDs is shown in Fig. 9. Once under the simulated sunlight irradiation, the photoinduced electrons will be generated upon the excitation of the electrons from the VBs of CdS and TiO2 to their CBs, leaving photogenerated holes in their respective VBs. Due to the difference in energy band structures, the photogenerated electrons will transfer from the CB of CdS to the CB of TiO2; and the corresponding holes will transfer from the VB of TiO2 to the VB of CdS,22 followed by the reaction with the surrounding polysulfide electrolyte. In this way, the energy band potential gradient between CdS and TiO2 accelerates the separation efficiency of photogenerated electrons and holes. Additionally, the uniformly distributed rGO QDs at the interface of CdS/TiO2 as well as the ultrafine nanobranched TiO2 NL substrate co-reduce the charge transfer barrier and enhance the charge migration efficiency. Simultaneously, the nanobranched TiO2 NL provides a large number of light capture areas and photogenerated electron collection sites. Due to the large number of photogenerated electrons that gathered on the photoanode, the photoanode is polarized to a more negative potential. When the CGT photoanode is coupled with 316L SS or Cu, the surplus electrons will be transferred to the coupled metal to achieve equilibrium, thereby realizing the photogenerated cathodic protection of the metal.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the mechanism of the enhanced photoinduced cathodic protection performance of the CdS NP and rGO QD co-decorated TiO2 NL photoanode. 
4. Conclusions
An ultrafine nanobranched TiO2 NL photoanode co-decorated with CdS NPs and rGO QDs was constructed. Compared with a single CdS modified TiO2 NL photoanode, the obtained CGT photoanode shows further enhanced photoelectrochemical conversion performance under simulated sunlight and visible light irradiation. The rGO QDs with excellent conductivity were uniformly deposited on the TiO2 NL substrate and closely combined with the interface, which effectively promoted the collection and transmission of photogenerated electrons. The narrow band gap CdS sensitizer expanded the light response range and improved the light utilization efficiency. The band gradient constructed from the interfacial combination of TiO2 NL and CdS improved the separation efficiency of the photogenerated carriers. In addition, the ultrafine nanobranched TiO2 NL increased the light capture area and photogenerated electron collection sites. As direct electron transmission pathways, TiO2 NL also facilitated the rapid collection of photogenerated electrons. Finally, the prepared CGT photoanode exhibited efficient photoinduced cathodic protection performance for 316L SS and Cu under simulated sunlight. The maximum photoinduced cathodic protection current density for 316L SS was 0.72 mA cm−2, and the photoinduced mixed potential drop was 0.88 V; while for Cu, the current density was 1.45 mA cm−2 and the potential drop was 0.9 V. This work validates that the nanobranched TiO2 NL photoanode co-decorated with rGO QDs and a CdS NP sensitizer can synergistically boost the transfer efficiency of photogenerated electrons, which also provides a reference for the optimization of nanocomposite photoanodes.
Author contributions
Xuhong Jiang: investigation, methodology, formal analysis, writing – original draft, and data curation. Mengmeng Sun: investigation, methodology, supervision, writing – original draft, writing – review & editing, validation, and funding acquisition. Zhuoyuan Chen: funding acquisition, resources, project administration, supervision, methodology, validation, and writing – review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors highly acknowledge funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 42176049, 41976036).
References
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Increasing solar absorption for photocatalysis with black hydrogenated titanium dioxide nanocrystals, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates, Surface science studies of the photoactivation of TiO2 New photochemical processes, Chem. Rev., 2006, 38, 4428–4453 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Bao, N. Fu, Y. Qin, J. Lv, Y. Wang, J. He, Y. Hou, C. Jiao, D. Chen, Y. Wu and J. Y. Dai, Broadband plasmonic enhancement of high-Efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells by incorporating Au@Ag@SiO2 core–shell nanocuboids, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 538–545 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sun, Z. Chen, J. Jing and C. Feng, Effect of nanoscale graphene oxide on the sustained photoelectrochemical cathodic protection performance of the WO3 nanothorn clusters, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2021, 51, 739–752 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, M. Sun, Z. Chen, J. Jing and C. Feng, High-efficiency photoelectrochemical cathodic protection performance of the TiO2/AgInSe2/In2Se3 multijunction nanosheet array, Corros. Sci., 2020, 176, 108901 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Wu, J. Zhang, K. Chen, C. Huang, H. Chen and X. Qiu, Plasmonic MoO3−x nanosheets with tunable oxygen vacancies as efficient visible light responsive photocatalyst, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 490, 395–402 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, J. Iocozzia, L. Sun, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Inorganic-modified semiconductor TiO2 nanotube arrays for photocatalysis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2182–2202 RSC .
J. Su, L. Zhu, P. Geng and G. Chen, Self-assembly graphitic carbon nitride quantum dots anchored on TiO2 nanotube arrays: An efficient heterojunction for pollutants degradation under solar light, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 316, 159–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Crossland, N. Noel, V. Sivaram, T. Leijtens, J. A. Alexanderwebber and H. J. Snaith, Mesoporous TiO2 single crystals delivering enhanced mobility and optoelectronic device performance, Nature, 2013, 495, 215–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Heterogeneous photocatalyst materials for water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, A low-cost, high-efficiency solar cell based on dye-sensitized colloidal TiO2 films, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Titanium dioxide nanomaterials: Synthesis, properties, modifications, and applications, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Fu, X. Jiang, D. Chen, Y. Duan, G. Zhang, M. Chang, Y. Fang and Y. Lin, Au/TiO2 nanotube array based multi-hierarchical architecture for highly efficient dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Power Sources, 2019, 439, 227076 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liang, Y. Huang, F. Wu, J. Luo, X. Yi, J. Wang and X. Qiu, 
            In situ synthesis of g-C3N4/TiO2 with {001} and {101} facets coexposed for water remediation, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 487, 322–334 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, P. Wei, X. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Cao, H. Wang, H. Yu, F. Peng, L. Zhang, B. Zhang and K. Lv, High efficiency photocatalytic hydrogen production over ternary Cu/TiO2@Ti3C2Tx enabled by low-work-function 2D titanium carbide, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 97–107 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, N. Li, X. Chen, J. Jiang and X. Zhao, Surface oxygen vacancies promoted photodegradation of benzene on TiO2 film, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 511, 145597 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, I. Moraseró, A. F. De, J. Bisquert and P. Wang, Titanium dioxide nanomaterials for photovoltaic applications, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10095–10130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, Growth of oriented single-crystalline rutile TiO2 nanorods on transparent conducting substrates for dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, X. Liu, W. Wang, X. Wang, C. Liu, X. Qian, Z. Li and Z. Zhang, Enhanced photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic performance of TiO2 nanorod arrays/CdS quantum dots by coating TiO2 through atomic layer deposition, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 400–408 CrossRef .
C. Y. Zhai, M. S. Zhu, D. Bin, H. W. Wang, Y. K. Du, C. Y. Wang and P. Yang, Visible-light-assisted electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol using reduced graphene oxide modified Pt nanoflowers-TiO2 nanotube arrays, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17753–17761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Spanu, S. Recchia, S. Mohajernia, O. Tomanec, S. Kment, R. Zbořil, P. Schmuki and M. Altomare, Templated dewetting-alloying of NiCu bilayers on TiO2 nanotubes enables efficient noble metal-free photocatalytic H2 evolution, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5298–5305 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, M. Sun, Z. Chen, J. Jing and C. Feng, An ultrafine hyperbranched CdS/TiO2 nanolawn photoanode with highly efficient photoelectrochemical performance, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 816, 152533 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, R. K. Dong, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Branched TiO2 nanorods for photoelectrochemical hydrogen production, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, X. Wen, S. L. Zhi, Y. Lu and J. Wang, CdS sensitized 3D hierarchical TiO2/ZnO heterostructure for efficient solar energy conversion, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, Z. Chen, N. Zhang, J. C. Colmenares and Y. J. Xu, Hierarchically CdS decorated 1D ZnO nanorods-2D graphene hybrids: Low temperature synthesis and enhanced photocatalytic performance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 221–229 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Wu, B. X. Lei, H. S. Rao, Y. F. Xu, Y. F. Wang, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Hydrothermal fabrication of hierarchically anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on FTO glass for dye-sensitized solar cells, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1352 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z. Tang and Y. Xu, Graphene transforms wide band gap ZnS to a visible light photocatalyst. the new role of graphene as a macromolecular photosensitizer, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9777–9789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. T. Wang, L. Zhang and B. R. Hou, Preparation and photocathodic protection performance of CdSe/reduced graphene oxide/TiO2 composite, Corros. Sci., 2015, 94, 342–349 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Graphene-based composites, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
C. J. Liu, X. C. Huang, Y. Y. Wu, X. W. Deng, Z. L. Zheng, Z. Xu and D. Hui, Advance on the dispersion treatment of graphene oxide and the graphene oxide modified cement-based materials, Nanotechnol. Rev., 2021, 10, 34–49 CrossRef CAS .
P. Song, X. Zhang, M. Sun, X. Cui and Y. Lin, Graphene oxide modified TiO2 nanotube arrays: Enhanced visible light photoelectrochemical properties, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1800–1804 RSC .
C. Zhai, M. Zhu, D. Bin, H. Wang, Y. Du, C. Wang and P. Yang, Visible-light-assisted electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol using reduced graphene oxide modified Pt nanoflowers-TiO2 nanotube arrays, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17753–17761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Yoon, H. J. Ahn, M. J. Kwak, P. Thiyagarajan and J. H. Jang, Quantum Dots: Graphene quantum dot-protected cadmium selenide quantum dot-sensitized photoanode for efficient photoelectrochemical cells with enhanced stability and performance, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 978 CrossRef .
E. Scolan and C. Sanchez, Synthesis and characterization of surface-protected nanocrystalline titania particles, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 3217–3223 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, Z. Chen and Y. Bu, Enhanced photoelectrochemical cathodic protection performance of the C3N4@In2O3 nanocomposite with quasi-shell–core structure under visible light, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 618, 734–741 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Sun, Z. Y. Chen and Y. Y. Bu, Enhanced photoelectrochemical cathodic protection performance of H2O2-treated In2O3 thin-film photoelectrode under visible light, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2015, 266, 79–87 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Sun, Z. Y. Chen and J. Q. Yu, Highly efficient visible light induced photoelectrochemical anticorrosion for 304 SS by Ni-doped TiO2, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 109, 13–19 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, D. J. Chen, Z. G. Wang, F. Qi, X. J. Zhang, X. Q. Wang, Y. Hu, B. Wang, W. L. Zhang, Y. F. Chen, J. R. He and W. D. He, Mo2C quantum dots@graphene functionalized separator toward high-current-density lithium metal anodes for ultrastable Li–S batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125837 CrossRef CAS .
K. Satheesh and R. Jayavel, Synthesis and electrochemical properties of reduced graphene oxide via chemical reduction using thiourea as a reducing agent, Mater. Lett., 2013, 113, 5–8 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Wang, Y. Y. Zhang, R. Shan and H. W. Hu, Polydopamine interface encapsulating graphene and immobilizing ultra-small, active Fe3O4 nanoparticles for organic dye adsorption, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 3219–3231 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, L. Liu, X. Xie, Y. Cui, E. E. Oguzie and F. Wang, Synergetic effect of graphene and Co(OH)2 as cocatalysts of TiO2 nanotubes for enhanced photogenerated cathodic protection, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2020, 37, 55–63 CrossRef .
J. Ma, Y. Kong, S. C. Liu, Y. T. Li, J. B. Jiang, Q. Y. Zhou, Y. S. Huang and S. Han, Flexible phosphorus-doped graphene/metal–organic framework-derived porous Fe2O3 anode for Lithium-ion battery, ACS Appl. Energy Materfaces, 2020, 3, 11900–11906 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Ai, Y. L. Liu, L. H. Lu, X. L. Cheng and L. H. Huo, A novel strategy for making soluble reduced graphene oxide sheets cheaply by adopting an endogenous reducing agent, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3365–3370 RSC .
Y. Zhang, W. Q. Cui, W. J. An, L. Liu, Y. H. Liang and Y. F. Zhu, Combination of photoelectrocatalysis and adsorption for removal of bisphenol A over TiO2-graphene hydrogel with 3D network structure, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 36–46 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Guo, X. Y. Sun, Y. Liu, W. Wang, H. X. Qiu and J. P. Gao, One pot preparation of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) or Au (Ag) nanoparticle-RGO hybrids using chitosan as a reducing and stabilizing agent and their use in methanol electrooxidation, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2513–2523 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Min, C. J. Zhao, G. R. Chen and X. Z. Qian, One-pot hydrothermal synthesis of reduced graphene oxide/Ni(OH)2 films on nickel foam for high performance supercapacitors, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 115, 155–164 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Q. Wang, C. Zhao, S. Min and X. Qian, One-step hydrothermal synthesis of 3D petal-like Co9S8/RGO/Ni3S2 composite on nickel foam for high-performance supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4861–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Lu, W. Zhang, C. Lin and Z. Ren, Efficient photocathodic protection enabled by a multi-dimensional quaternary hybrid superstructure, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 421, 127858 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Park, J. S. Choi, J. H. Eom, H. Ha, H. Y. Kim, S. H. Lee, H. Shin and S. G. Yoon, Defect-free graphene synthesized directly at 150 °C via chemical vapor deposition with no transfer, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2008–2016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Xu, H. Liao, C. Yao, Y. Liu, Z. Li, Z. Chen, D. Pan, L. Sun and M. Wu, Gram-scale synthesis of single-crystalline graphene quantum dots with superior optical properties, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, S. W. Hwang, M. K. Kim, D. Y. Shin, D. H. Shin, C. O. Kim, S. B. Yang, J. H. Park, E. Hwang, S. H. Choi, G. Ko, S. Sim, C. Sone, H. J. Choi, S. Bae and B. H. Hong, Anomalous behaviors of visible luminescence from graphene quantum dots: Interplay between size and shape, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8203–8208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Feng and J. Li, Graphene oxide: Preparation, functionalization, and electrochemical applications, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6027–6053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Erickson, R. Erni, Z. Lee, N. Alem, W. Gannett and A. Zettl, Determination of the local chemical structure of graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4467–4472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Andre, A. W. Contryman, J. Silcox, D. A. Stewart, G. Eda, C. Mattevi, S. Miller and M. Chhowalla, Atomic and electronic structure of graphene-oxide, Nano Lett., 2009, 16, 1704–1705 Search PubMed .
X. Cui, H. Gu, Y. Guan, G. Ren, Z. Ma, Y. Yin, J. Liu, X. Cui, L. Yao and Y. Yin, Fabrication of AgInS2 nanoparticles sensitized TiO2 nanotube arrays and their photoelectrochemical properties, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 137, 101–106 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Sun, Y. Yu, H. Y. Pan, X. F. Gao, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, CdS quantum dots sensitized TiO2 nanotube-array photoelectrodes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bu, Z. Chen, W. Li and J. Yu, High-efficiency photoelectrochemical properties by a highly crystalline CdS-sensitized ZnO nanorod array, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5097–5104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yu, H. Q. Fang, Z. Q. Liu, H. Hu, X. T. Meng and J. S. Qiu, Chemically grafting graphene oxide to B,N co-doped graphene via ionic liquid and their superior performance for triiodide reduction, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 184–192 CrossRef CAS .
K. Krishnamoorthy, M. Veerapandian, K. Yun and S. J. Kim, The chemical and structural analysis of graphene oxide with different degrees of oxidation, Carbon, 2013, 53, 38–49 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. B. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Synthesis of graphene-based nanosheets via chemical reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, A. Velamakanni, G. Bozoklu, S. Park, M. Stoller, R. D. Piner, S. Stankovich, I. Jung, D. A. Field and C. A. Ventrice, Chemical analysis of graphene oxide films after heat and chemical treatments by X-ray photoelectron and Micro-Raman spectroscopy, Carbon, 2009, 47, 145–152 CrossRef CAS .
O. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, Photocatalytic reduction of graphene oxide nanosheets on TiO2 thin film for photoinactivation of bacteria in solar light irradiation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20214–20220 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kuai, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, P. Li, H. Li, Q. Xu, L. Tang, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, Rational construction of a CdS/reduced graphene oxide/TiO2 core–shell nanostructure as an all-solid-state Z-scheme system for CO2 photoreduction into solar fuels, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 88409–88413 RSC .
Z. D. Tian, N. Yu, Y. H. Cheng, Z. J. Wang, Z. G. Chen and L. S. Zhang, Hydrothermal synthesis of graphene/TiO2/CdS nanocomposites as efficient visible-light-driven photocatalysts, Mater. Lett., 2017, 194, 172–175 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Wang, P. Qu, Q. Xu, J. Zheng, S. Jia, J. Chen and Z. Zhu, A 2D/1D TiO2 nanosheet/CdS nanorods heterostructure with enhanced photocatalytic water splitting performance for H2 evolution, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 7388–7396 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Zhang, T. T. Yu, Y. Liu, M. Feng, X. J. Li, W. X. Sun and D. A. Wang, A new SiP QDs/TiO2 NRs composite catalyst with Al2O3 passivation layer for enhanced photoelectrochemical water splitting, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132248 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Zhang, M. Feng, Y. Liu and D. A. Wang, Ta2O5 NTs–TiO2 nanodots heterostructure photocatalyst material for enhanced photodegradation and photoelectrochemical performance under simulated solar light, J. Nanopart. Res., 2020, 22, 375 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. Feng, B. Zhang and D. Wang, Leaf-like MXene nanosheets intercalated TiO2 nanorod array photoelectrode with enhanced photoelectrochemical performance, J. Power Sources, 2020, 484, 229236 CrossRef .
J. Hou, H. Zhao, F. Huang, Q. Jing, H. Cao, Q. Wu, S. Peng and G. Cao, High performance of Mn-doped CdSe quantum dot sensitized solar cells based on the vertical ZnO nanorod arrays, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 438–445 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. R. Tang, X. Fu and Y. J. Xu, TiO2–graphene nanocomposites for gas-phase photocatalytic degradation of volatile aromatic pollutant: Is TiO2–graphene truly different from other TiO2–carbon composite materials?, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Min, Z. Kan, Z. Wei, F. C. Zheng, Y. C. Chen, Y. G. Zhang, Y. L. Min, Z. Kan, Z. Wei and F. C. Zheng, Enhanced chemical interaction between TiO2 and graphene oxide for photocatalytic decolorization of methylene blue, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 193-194, 203–210 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Preparation and enhanced visible-light photocatalytic H2-production activity of graphene/C3N4 composites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Li, H. M. Zhang, P. R. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Li and H. J. Zhao, Cross-linked g-C3N4/rGO nanocomposites with tunable band structure and enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity, Small, 2013, 9, 3336–3344 CAS .
J. Jing, M. Sun, Z. Chen, J. Li, F. Xu and L. Xu, Enhanced photoelectrochemical cathodic protection performance of the secondary reduced graphene oxide modified graphitic carbon nitride, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, C822–C830 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Min, X. F. Qi, Q. J. Xu and Y. C. Chen, Enhanced reactive oxygen species on a phosphate modified C3N4/graphene photocatalyst for pollutant degradation, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 1287–1295 RSC .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, P. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Li and H. Zhao, Cross-linked g-C3N4/rGO nanocomposites with tunable band structure and enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity, Small, 2013, 9, 3336–3344 CAS .
Y. Min, X. Qi, Q. Xu and Y. Chen, Enhanced reactive oxygen species on a phosphate modified C3N4/graphene photocatalyst for pollutant degradation, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 1287–1295 RSC .
N. Zhang, M. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y. Xu, Waltzing with the versatile platform of graphene to synthesize composite photocatalysts, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bu and Z. Chen, Effect of hydrogen treatment on the photoelectrochemical properties of quantum dots sensitized ZnO nanorod array, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 647–653 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Jiang, M. M. Sun, Z. Y. Chen, J. P. Jing, G. Y. Lu and C. Feng, Boosted photoinduced cathodic protection performance of ZnIn2S4/TiO2 nanoflowerbush with efficient photoelectric conversion in NaCl solution, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 876, 160144 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the preparation procedure of the CdS/rGO QDs/TiO2 NL photoanode.	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD patterns of the prepared pure TiO2 NL, GT, CGT and CR samples (a); Raman spectra of the pure GO QD aqueous solution, pure TiO2 NL and GT photoanodes, as well as the GT photoanode over-deposited in GO QD aqueous solution (b).	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM and TEM images of the pure TiO2 NL (a)–(c); TEM and HRTEM images of original GO QDs (d)–(f); TEM and HRTEM images of GT (g)–(g2) and CGT (h)–(h2) samples.	 

 	Fig. 4  XPS spectra of the prepared CGT photoanode: (a) the total survey spectrum; XPS high-resolution spectra of (b) C 1s, (c) Cd 3d and (d) S 2p.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The photogenerated current densities of the TiO2 NL, CT, CGT and GT photoanodes under chopped simulated AM1.5 sunlight and visible light; (b) the photoinduced i–V curves of the TiO2 NL, CT and CGT photoanodes under chopped simulated AM1.5 sunlight; (c) the IPCE values of the TiO2 NL, CT and CGT photoanodes; and (d) photogenerated current densities of the CGT photoanodes prepared under different rGO deposition conditions.	 

 	Fig. 6  UV/Vis absorption spectra (a), PL emission spectra (b), Mott–Schottky plots (c) and Bode plots (d) of the TiO2 NL, GT, CT and CGT photoanodes.	 

 	Fig. 7  Under intermittent simulated AM 1.5 sunlight irradiation, (a) the photoinduced current density changes between the prepared photoanodes and the 316L SS electrode, (b) the photoinduced mixed potential changes of the 316L SS electrode coupled with the photoanodes, (c) the photoinduced current density changes between the prepared photoanodes and the Cu electrode, and (d) the photoinduced mixed potential changes of the Cu electrode coupled with the photoanodes.	 

 	Fig. 8  The Tafel plots of the 316L SS and Cu electrodes measured in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution in the dark.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the mechanism of the enhanced photoinduced cathodic protection performance of the CdS NP and rGO QD co-decorated TiO2 NL photoanode.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
