Development of linseed oil–TiO 2 green nanocomposites as antimicrobial coatings  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TB00209E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TB00209E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 4458-4471Development of linseed oil–TiO2 green nanocomposites as antimicrobial coatings

        
          
            Ana M. 
            Díez-Pascual
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Angel L. 
            Díez-Vicente
          
        
      b
aAnalytical Chemistry, Physical Chemistry and Chemical Engineering Department, Faculty of Biology, Environmental Sciences and Chemistry, Alcalá University, E-28871 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: am.diez@uah.es;  Fax: +34 91 8854032;   Tel: +34 91 8856430
bAirbus Operations S. L., John Lennon s/n, 28906, Getafe, Madrid, Spain
Received 
      28th January 2015
    , Accepted 27th April 2015First published on 27th April 2015AbstractThis study deals with the preparation and characterization of acrylated epoxidized linseed oil (AELO) based bionanocomposites for antimicrobial coating applications. AELO was synthesized from epoxidized vegetable oils, crosslinked with an acrylic monomer, reinforced with anatase TiO2 nanoparticles and then subjected to UV irradiation to yield the cured nanocomposite coatings. The effect of TiO2 loading on the morphology, barrier, thermal, mechanical, tribological and antibacterial performance of the coatings has been comprehensively investigated. FT-IR spectra indicated the existence of strong TiO2–AELO hydrogen bonding interactions. The nanoparticles were randomly dispersed within the bioresin, significantly reducing its water absorption and gas permeability whilst increasing its thermal stability. They also promoted remarkable enhancements of both static and dynamic mechanical properties such as storage and Young's moduli, hardness, impact resistance and glass transition temperature. Strong reductions in the coefficient of friction and the wear rate were attained in the nanocomposites with the highest TiO2 loadings. The coatings were found to display antimicrobial activity even in the absence of UV light, and the bactericidal effect against Staphylococcus aureus was higher than on Escherichia coli. Furthermore, the antimicrobial activity improved with increasing nanoparticle concentration. The use of these “green” nanocomposite coatings could be a suitable and inexpensive method to prevent microbial proliferation in public places, particularly in medical centers where there is higher risk of infections.
Introduction
Over the last few years, there has been a growing interest in the utilization of renewable resources as an alternative to petroleum-based materials due to economical and environmental aspects. Vegetable oils are inexpensive, biodegradable, natural raw materials with low toxicity that have recently gained a lot of interest as renewable resources, especially in oleochemical products.1 Linseed, sunflower, castor, soybean, rapeseed, olive, cottonseed and jatropha are the most widely used in chemical industries for the manufacturing of coatings, surfactants, soaps, cosmetic products, lubricants and paints.2 Several derivatives of vegetable oils have been employed as polymerizable monomers in radiation-curable systems to provide flexible and tough resins like epoxy, urethane and polyester.3 In particular, epoxidized vegetable oils (EVO) such as soybean and palm have been used in UV-curable coating systems.2,4 Cationic polymerization of these EVO under heat or photo-irradiation conditions can be carried out to develop thermosetting biomaterials, ranging from elastomers to stiff engineering polymers, depending on the stoichiometry, the kind of plant oil and the monomers.5,6 Furthermore, the incorporation of nanofillers into EVO-based thermosetting polymers results in bionanocomposites with enhanced performance.7
Linseed oil (LO) is derived from the seeds of flaxseed (Linum usitatissimum L.), a plant widely cultivated in Europe for selected industrial applications, namely oils and fibers.8 Approximately 70% of all the linseed oil produced worldwide is destined for technical applications and 30% is for food production. Its typical fatty acid composition contains high levels of linolenic acid (53.2%) followed by oleic acid (18.5%), and linoleic acid (17.3%), while the dominant saturated acids are palmitic acid (6.6%) and stearic acid (4.4%) (Table 1). In comparison with other vegetable oils, LO possesses a higher content of α-linolenic acid, which has been recently regarded as vitally important to human organisms. However, the elevated content of α-linolenic acid is the main cause of the poor oxidation stability of linseed oil.9 The sustainability, low cost and ease of manufacture of this bioresin make it an attractive alternative to petroleum-based plastics. Thus, it has already been employed as a raw material for the synthesis of biopolymers10 as well as in paints and coatings,2 and it is beginning to be used in environmentally friendly industries like agriculture, food packaging and biomedicine. In this regard, the antibacterial activity of LO against Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus faecalis, Micrococcus luteus and Candida albicans has been recently reported.11
Table 1 Fatty acid composition of linseed oil




Fatty acids
Structure
%




Saturated
Palmitic
CH3(CH2)14COOH
C16:0
6.6


Stearic
CH3(CH2)16COOH
C18:0
4.4






Unsaturated
Oleic
CH3(CH2)7CHCH(CH2)7COOH
C18:1
18.5


Linoleic
CH3(CH2)4CHCH–CH2–CHCH(CH2)7COOH
C18:2
17.3


Linolenic
CH3–CH2–CHCH–CH2–CHCH–CH2–CHCH(CH2)7COOH
C18:3
53.2




Titanium oxide (TiO2) is an important semiconductor material suitable for a wide range of applications, including photocatalysis, environmental pollution control and solar energy conversion due to its strong oxidizing power, chemical inertness, non-toxicity, low cost, high refractive index, good mechanical properties, high thermal conductivity, intense UV absorption, very high hydrophilicity and strong antibacterial activity against a large variety of microorganisms, including algae, viruses, fungi and bacteria.12 TiO2 has been frequently employed in food, cosmetics, paints, coatings, food packaging materials, optical devices and particularly antimicrobials due to its strong photocatalytic disinfection ability.13 TiO2 exists in three crystalline polymorphs, namely rutile (tetragonal), anatase (tetragonal), and brookite (orthorhombic). Rutile is the most stable phase, whereas anatase and brookite are metastable at all temperatures and transform into rutile upon heating. The rutile phase has been extensively used for pigments owing to its good scattering effect that protects materials from UV light, whilst the anatase phase has been employed as a photocatalyst for photodecomposition and solar energy conversion due to its high photoactivity. One of the foremost applications of photocatalytic coatings, including anatase TiO2 nanoparticles, is to prevent microbial proliferation or, at least, reduce the amount of microorganisms that grow on indoor building materials.14 Indoor air pollution is a serious public health concern and a main cause of mortality worldwide. The existence of microorganisms in humid indoor environments is one of the major reasons for the degradation of interior air quality and contributes to the Sick Building Syndrome.15 Studies have shown that a correlation exists between mold growth and respiratory diseases in people who occupy damp or water-damaged buildings.15 Microorganisms can generate contaminants, i.e. aerial particles like spores, allergens, toxins and other metabolites, which can provoke health problems to occupants, namely allergic reactions, respiratory infections, asthma, pneumonitis, allergic alveolitis, chronic rhinosinusitis and allergic fungal sinusitis.
Numerous papers have been reported in recent years on the development of bio-derived polymer–TiO2 composite materials for application in diverse fields.16–19 However, research on TiO2-reinforced biopolymers as photocatalytic and/or antimicrobial coatings is very scarce.20–23 Kreetachat et al.20 studied the photocatalytic activity of biodegradable aliphatic polyester films incorporating TiO2 particles, and evaluated their efficiency for volatile organic compound removal. Tang21 prepared polycaprolactone–TiO2 nanocomposites via a solution-casting technique and analyzed their self-cleaning and mechanical properties. Rus et al.22 developed a coating based on a biopolymer derived from waste cooking oil doped with TiO2 fillers to be used as surface finish for outdoor and building applications. Nonetheless, the aforementioned studies did not investigate the antimicrobial properties of the films. In fact, to the best of our knowledge, there is only one previous study23 dealing with the synthesis of a vegetable oil-based biopolymer coating filled with TiO2 nanoparticles (0–0.5 wt%) that was tested for the antibacterial activity. Even so, the article is mainly focused on the corrosion behavior of the coatings deposited on mild steel when exposed to different environments, and the antimicrobial activity was only vaguely discussed. Furthermore, the biopolymer, a castor oil-based poly(urethane-esteramide),23 was synthesized using terephthalic acid, which has been recently reported to induce DNA strand breaking,24 and toluene-2,4-diisocyanate (TDI), a compound classified as a potential carcinogenic to humans that has been regulated for use in or around buildings.25
Herein, we report the development of biodegradable nanocomposites comprising an acrylated UV curable resin as a matrix and anatase TiO2 nanoparticles as a nanoreinforcement. Acrylated epoxidized linseed oil (AELO) has been synthesized from the epoxidized vegetable oil using acrylic acid as a ring opening agent, triethylamine as a catalyst and hydroquinone as a free radical inhibitor. The AELO resin was then crosslinked with an acrylic monomer along with a photoinitiator, an activator and the nanoparticles, and subjected to UV irradiation to obtain the cured nanocomposites. The influence of nano-TiO2 on various properties such as barrier, mechanical, thermal, tribological and antibacterial has been thoroughly investigated. These novel bionanocomposites with antimicrobial function show great potential to be used in the surface coating industry. For instance, they can be applied to commonly touched objects in public places like hospitals, schools, restaurants, public transportation, etc. In particular, they should be highly suitable as coating materials for hospital countertops, beds, and general medical equipment, and more especially in operating rooms where it is easier to get an infection. Although sanitization and disinfection of surfaces using chemical liquids such as chlorine or alcohol is a common practice to prevent transmission of diseases, many times such procedures are skipped, skimped or not practically feasible. Thus, these inexpensive, sustainable, and low-toxic nanocomposite coatings would be beneficial when used in any public place where it is desirable to prevent microbial infections.
Experimental
Materials
Linseed oil (LO) was supplied by Sigma-Aldrich, Spain, and used without purification. Its major properties are: listed iodine number = 177; oxidation level (PV) = 0.95; acid value = 0.8; saponification value = 190; d25°C = 0.93 g cm−3, Mw ∼ 890 g mol−1, and contains ∼6.4 double bonds per triglyceride molecule. Its fatty acid composition is given in Table 1. Titanium(IV) oxide nanopowder, TiO2 (99.8% anatase, <100 nm particle size, d25°C = 4.26 g cm−3 and specific surface area >14 m2 g−1); trimethylolpropane trimethacrylate (TMPTMA), C18H26O6; triethylamine (TEA), (C2H5)3N; benzophenone (BP), (C6H5)2CO; 2-dimethylaminoethanol (DMAE), C4NOH11; and acrylic acid (99%) were also supplied by Sigma-Aldrich. Formic acid (98%) and hydrogen peroxide (33%) were provided by Panreac Química S.L.U., Spain.
Synthesis of epoxidized linseed oil (ELO)
The epoxidation reaction was carried out in a four-necked glass flask equipped with a mechanical stirrer, a thermometer and a reflux condenser. LO and formic acid were initially mixed for 10 min at 500 rpm and 55 °C. To start the epoxidation, H2O2 was slowly added dropwise to the mixture for 1 h. 1:1.8 molar ratios of carbon double bonds to hydrogen peroxide (CC:H2O2) were used, and the reaction continued for 4 h at 55 °C. Then, the mixture was cooled down and the crude product was filtered and washed with distilled water repeatedly until a pH of 7.0 was obtained. The resin was finally dried with anhydrous sodium sulfate in an oven at 60 °C for 12 h. The synthesis procedure of ELO is shown in Scheme 1. The FT-IR spectra (Fig. 1) confirmed the success of the epoxidation reaction. The oxirane content (8.9%) was determined by titration of the epoxy groups with hydrobromic acid solution in glacial acetic acid.26
 Scheme 1  Synthesis procedure of epoxidized linseed oil (ELO) and acrylated epoxidized linseed oil (AELO). 
 Fig. 1  FT-IR spectra of TiO2, LO, ELO, AELO (both cured and uncured) and the nanocomposites with 1.0 and 7.5 wt% nanoparticle loading. The inset shows a zoom-in of the region around 1700 cm−1. 
Acrylation of ELO
Acrylated epoxidized linseed oil (AELO) was synthesized from ELO via ring opening of the oxirane group with acrylic acid using TEA as a catalyst and hydroquinone as a free radical inhibitor (Scheme 1). A mixture of ELO and acrylic acid in the ratio of 6:1 (w/w) was heated to 110 °C in the presence of TEA and stirred at 400 rpm. The reaction was monitored by measuring the acid value of the mixture at different time intervals through titration with KOH, following the ASTM D1639-90 standard. The acrylation process was allowed to proceed until an almost constant acid value of ∼8 mg KOH g−1 was reached after 30 h. Unreacted acrylic acid and TEA were then removed by petroleum ether/water extraction. Finally, the excess of petroleum ether was removed by rotary evaporation. The esterification extent (88%) was determined from the acid values obtained at the beginning and end of the reaction.
Preparation of nanocomposite coatings
Different UV curable formulations were prepared using the synthesized AELO resin, TMPTMA as the crosslinking monomer, BP as the photoinitiator along with DMAE as a catalyst and TiO2 as a nanofiller. Nanocomposites containing 1.0, 2.5, 5.0 and 7.5 wt% TiO2 were developed. The nomenclature and composition of the different nanocomposite coatings are shown in Table 2. The mixtures were then coated on glass plates and cured using a DYMAX UV lamp (400 W) that radiates at a wavelength of 365 nm with an intensity of 225 mW cm−2. The synthesized coatings had a film thickness in the range of 140–160 μm.
Table 2 Nomenclature and composition of the UV-curable nanocomposite coatings. The values in parenthesis indicate the weight percentage of TiO2




Sample Code
AELO (%)
MPTMA (%)
BP (%)
DMAE (%)
TiO2 (%)




c-AELO
70.0
25.0
3.5
1.5
—






c-AELO (1.0)
69.3
24.7
3.5
1.5
1.0


c-AELO (2.5)
68.2
24.4
3.4
1.5
2.5


c-AELO (5.0)
66.5
23.8
3.3
1.4
5.0


c-AELO (7.5)
64.8
23.1
3.2
1.4
7.5




Characterization techniques
The morphology of the nanocomposite coatings was examined using a SU8000 Hitachi scanning electron microscope (SEM) coupled to an Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) detector. X-Ray diffractograms (XRD) were recorded from 4 to 60° on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer using a Cu tube as an X-ray source (λ CuKα = 1.54 Å).
The attenuated total reflectance FT-IR spectra were recorded at room temperature on a Perkin–Elmer Spectrum One spectrometer equipped with a Universal ATR sampling accessory (diamond crystal) and a red laser excitation source (632.8 nm). Prior to analysis, the samples were dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C for 12 h. 4 scans were collected for each coating in the wavelength range between 4000 and 400 cm−1. Spectra were recorded with an incident laser power of 1 mW and a resolution of 4 cm−1.
The thermal stability of the coatings was analyzed by TGA using a TA Instruments Q50 thermobalance. Prior to the measurements, the samples were dried overnight at 80 °C. The temperature was scanned from room temperature to 550 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1, with a purge gas flow rate of 60 ml min−1.
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) experiments were performed on a Mettler DSC-30 system under a nitrogen flow. Samples were heated from 0 up to 150 °C, held at this temperature for 5 min, cooled to 0 °C and then reheated to 150 °C, all the steps at a rate of 10 °C min−1. Glass transition temperature (Tg) values were taken as the inflection point of the second heating scan.
To determine the water uptake, the coatings were dried in a desiccator at 0% RH for one week. Subsequently, they were submerged in distilled water at 25 ± 2 °C. At selected time intervals, the samples were taken out, dried gently with a tissue paper and weighed. Immediately, the samples were again placed in water. The water absorption was calculated as [(Wt − Wi)/Wi] × 100, where Wi and Wt are the initial and instantaneous weights of the samples, respectively. The mean value of five replicate tests is reported.
Water vapour permeability (WVP) was measured at 25 °C following the gravimetric method ASTM E96-95 standard using Payne permeability cups. The coatings were equilibrated at 54% RH by using magnesium nitrate-6-hydrate. WVP was calculated using the following expression: WVP = (Δm × l)/(A × t × ΔP), where Δm is the weight loss of each cup, l the thickness of the film, A the contact area, t the time and ΔP the partial pressure difference between the inside and outside of the cup. Tests were replicated four times, and average values and standard errors are reported.
Oxygen permeability (O2P) was evaluated at 25 °C on coatings equilibrated at 54% RH by measuring the oxygen transference rate (OTR) using a gas permeability tester (Ox-Tran 1/50 System), following the ASTM D3985-05 standard. O2P was calculated as: O2P = (OTR × l)/ΔP, where l is the average film thickness and ΔP the difference between oxygen partial pressures across the film. The results reported were calculated as the mean of three tests.
Dynamic mechanical properties were studied using a Mettler Toledo DMA/SDTA861e dynamic mechanical analyzer with a single cantilever bend mode. The measurements were performed from −125 to 100 °C at a frequency of 1 Hz and a heating rate of 2 °C min−1. The storage modulus, loss modulus and tanδ (ratio of the loss to storage modulus) were recorded as a function of temperature.
Indentation tests were performed at 23 °C and 40% RH on the cross-sectional surface of the coatings using a CSM Micro-Hardness Tester (CSM Instruments) with a Berkovich indenter and applying the instrumented indentation technique.27 In each test run, the indenter was driven into the specimen surface at a constant loading rate of 0.15 mN s−1 until a peak load of 4.0 mN was achieved and held for 5 s in order to minimize the effect of viscoelastic deformation. Subsequently, the indenter was unloaded at the same rate. At least 10 test runs were recorded on each sample. According to the method derived by Oliver and Pharr,27 the indentation hardness (H) value could be defined as: (1)where Pmax is the maximum applied load measured at the maximum depth of penetration (hmax) and Ac is the projected contact area at that load. In this procedure, the following relationship between the contact stiffness S, dP/dh, the reduced modulus Er, and Ac is proposed: (2)where (3)where β is a constant that depends on the geometry of the indenter (1.034 for a Berkovich indenter), E and ν are the elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio of the material, respectively, and Ei and νi are those of the indenter (1141 GPa and 0.07, respectively, for diamond).
The impact resistance of the coatings was measured using a falling dart impact tester, following the ASTM D-1709 standard. The measurements were performed at 23 ± 2 °C and 50 ± 5% RH. The presented data correspond to the average value of seven test specimens. A pencil hardness tester was used to measure the scratch hardness of the films following the ASTM D-3363 standard. For each sample, six specimens were tested to get an average value.
The tribological properties of the coatings were determined using a pin-on-disc tribometer (MT/10/SCM from Microtest) under a normal load of 1 N with a sliding speed of 0.15 m s−1. A 6 mm diameter 100Cr6 steel ball was used as a counterpart. The tests were run at room temperature without lubrication. The wear experienced by the flat substrate was determined through the measurement of the wear-track profile by using a profilometer with a resolution of ∼10 nm. For each coating, the tests were repeated three times to check for repeatability.
The antibacterial activity of the coatings was tested against two human pathogenic bacteria: Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus, strain ATCC 12600) and Gram-negative Escherichia coli (E. coli, strain ATCC 25922). Prior to the tests, the samples were sterilized in an autoclave and subsequently submerged in a 3-day-old nutrient broth of ∼2.0 × 106 colony forming units per ml (CFU per ml). After incubation at 37 °C for 48 h, the number of viable microorganism colonies was counted manually using a pen and a click-counter, and the results were expressed as mean CFU/sample. In one set of experiments, the coatings were irradiated with 365 nm UV light, and in the other set they were analyzed in the dark. The antibacterial activity (AA) was calculated as: AA = log(viable cell countcontrol/viable cell countcomposite), where a beaker containing bacteria without the sample was used as control. The measurements were performed in triplicate in order to get an average value.
Results and discussion
FT-IR study
FTIR spectroscopy has been widely applied in the characterization of vegetable oils since they exhibit characteristic absorption bands in the infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum.28Fig. 1 presents the ATR-FTIR spectra of LO, ELO, AELO (both uncured and cured), TiO2 and the nanocomposites with 1.0 and 7.5 wt% loadings. TiO2 shows an intense broad peak at ∼3400 cm−1 which corresponds to the OH stretching vibration of surface adsorbed water and hydroxyl groups on the nanoparticle surface, and the bending vibration of coordinated H2O as well as Ti–OH can be observed at 1630 and 1012 cm−1, respectively.29 The broad peak at ∼650 cm−1 is associated with the Ti–O–Ti stretching vibrations, and that at 1400 cm−1 is related to TiO2 lattice vibrations.30
Regarding the spectrum of LO, strong signals are found at 1745 and 1160 cm−1 attributed to the CO and C–O stretching of fatty acids, respectively.31 The bands at 3015, 1652 and 718 cm−1 arise from the stretching vibrations of double bonds, C–H, CC, and cis-CHCH, respectively. Moreover, the peaks at 2930 and 2860 cm−1 are ascribed to the asymmetric and symmetric C–H stretching vibrations in methylene groups, whereas their asymmetric and symmetric bending vibrations occur at 1462 and 1378 cm−1, respectively.31 In the spectrum of ELO, the C–O–C stretching modes of the oxirane ring are detected at 1242, 830 and 780 cm−1. Furthermore, the bands at 3015 and 1652 cm−1 are hardly visible, indicating the disappearance of double bonds during the epoxidation reaction. After the acrylation process, the intensity of the O–H stretching band considerably increases whilst the peaks related to the epoxy groups can scarcely be detected, and new bands appear at 1630, 1400 and 983 cm−1 corroborating the presence of the vinyl functionality (–CHCH2–) of the acrylated polymer.31 Furthermore, the CO stretching of the acrylated compound can be found at 1730 cm−1 (inset of Fig. 1). This confirms the success of the esterification reaction between ELO and acrylic acid. Upon curing, the bands related to carbon–carbon double bonds disappear, which indicates the occurrence of the cross-linking process.
The spectrum of the nanocomposite coatings is quite similar to that of cured AELO, with new peaks arising from TiO2. In addition, the band related to the O–H stretching vibration is wider and appears at higher wavenumbers compared to that of the neat bioresin, the upshift being about 45 and 80 cm−1 for the composites with 1.0 and 7.5 wt% nanoparticle loadings, respectively. Such a phenomenon has been ascribed to a change from intramolecular to intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions,29,32 and points towards H-bond formation with the carbonyl of the ester groups of AELO at the cost of breaking up the H-bonds between surface hydroxyl groups of the nanoparticles. Analogous changes in the OH band shape and position have been found in phenolic/polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) hybrids arising from the switch of intramolecular hydroxyl–hydroxyl to intermolecular hydroxyl–siloxane interactions, indicating H-bond formation between the OH groups of the phenolic resin and the siloxane moieties of POSS.33 Furthermore, the CO stretching band in the nanocomposites is broader and shifted to a lower wavenumber (inset of Fig. 1), the downshift being ∼12 and 24 cm−1 for the coatings with 1.0 and 7.5 wt% loadings, respectively, compared to that of the cured acrylated resin, also likely related to the formation of H-bonds with the hydroxyl moieties of the nanoparticles. A similar phenomenon of widening and shifting of the carbonyl band has been reported for poly(L-lactide) (PLLA)/poly(styrene-co-hydroxystyrene) (PSHS) hybrids due to hydrogen bonding interactions between the CO groups of PLLA and the OH moieties of PSHS chains.34 More importantly, the peak ascribed to the Ti–O–Ti stretching noticeably shifted to lower wavenumbers, at around 15 and 28 cm−1 for the aforementioned nanocomposites, an additional indication for the existence of strong TiO2–AELO interactions.
SEM and XRD characterization
The surface of the nanocomposite coatings was analyzed by SEM, and a typical image of AELO/TiO2 (7.5 wt%) is shown in Fig. 2. The micrograph reveals uniform coating without any visible cracks. A large number of quasi-spherical nanoparticles with a mean diameter of 40 nm appear as bright spots randomly and well dispersed within the epoxy matrix, and very few small clusters composed of several particles can be observed. An analogous morphology with uniformly distributed nanofillers was found for the other developed nanocomposites, pointing out that the interactions between the hydroxyl groups on the TiO2 surface and the polar groups of the resin prevent the formation of nanoparticle agglomerates. Thus, successful dispersion of the nanoparticles was attained without the use of particle surface treatments or interfacial modifiers, which makes the processing of these biomaterials simpler, cheaper and more environmentally friendly. Fig. 2 also shows the EDX spectrum of the composite film which confirms that the sample contains Ti, C, N and O elements. The peaks appearing at ∼0.3, 0.4 and 0.6 keV are related to C, N and O, respectively, whilst those at about 0.4, 4.5 and 4.9 keV correspond to Ti Lα, Ti Kα and Ti Kβ, respectively.35 The SEM/EDX results demonstrate that the TiO2 nanoparticles are entrapped within the cured epoxy network.
 Fig. 2  SEM micrograph (top) and EDX spectra (middle) of cured AELO/TiO2 (7.5 wt%) nanocomposite coating. Bottom: XRD patterns of TiO2 nanoparticles, cured AELO and AELO/TiO2 (7.5 wt%). 
On another note, the XRD patterns of TiO2 nanoparticles, cured AELO and the nanocomposite with 7.5 wt% loading are displayed in Fig. 2. The diffractogram of the bioresin shows a single broad reflection indicative of its amorphous character. Regarding the nanocomposite, the peaks appearing at 2θ values of 25.2°, 38.3°, 39.2°, 48.3°, 54.4° and 55.6° are assigned to the diffraction of the (101), (004), (112), (200), (105), and (211) crystalline planes, respectively, of the tetragonal structure of anatase TiO2.29 The appearance of these crystalline reflections further confirms the presence of TiO2 nanoparticles embedded within the cured acrylated resin and corroborates that the crystalline structure of the nanoparticles is maintained after the coating fabrication process. Nonetheless, the peaks in the nanocomposite exhibit a slight upshift compared to those of the bare nanoparticles, indicating a change in the dimensions of the anatase unit cell. Furthermore, the nanocomposite displays broader crystalline reflections, suggesting a smaller crystallite size. Similar diminution in the crystallite size of TiO2 has been reported for other nanocomposites based on amorphous matrices.29 The steric effect of the polymer chains adjacent to the nanoparticles might perturb their molecular packing, leading to the formation of smaller crystals.
Thermal properties
The effect of TiO2 nanoparticles on the thermal stability of the UV cured coatings was investigated by TGA, and their thermograms are shown in the top of Fig. 3. The initial degradation temperature at 2% weight loss (Ti) and the temperatures of the maximum rate of weight loss (Tmax1 and Tmax2) vs. the TiO2 content are displayed in the inset of the figure. It is found that the bare nanoparticles display two small weight losses: the first (∼3.8 wt%) below 300 °C is likely related to the removal of physically and chemically adsorbed water on their surface, while the second (∼3.2 wt%) with a maximum rate at ∼335 °C is attributed to the elimination of the residual organic material.29 Cured AELO is stable up to ∼300 °C, and also shows two degradation stages, as can be clearly observed from the differential thermogravimetric analysis (DTG) curves (bottom of Fig. 3); the first takes place in the range 300–360 °C, and is ascribed to the loss of functional groups and fragmentation of the polymeric chains, whereas the second occurs between 360 and 440 °C and corresponds to the decomposition of the resin backbone.36 An analogous two-step process is observed for the nanocomposites, hinting that the nanoparticles do not modify the degradation mechanism of the bioresin, albeit the TGA curves are shifted to higher temperatures. Thus, as can be observed in the inset of Fig. 3, Ti and both Tmax increase with increasing TiO2 content, the maximum increments being approximately 30, 27 and 34 °C, respectively, for the nanocomposite with 7.5 wt% loading. This thermal stability improvement is attributed to the barrier effect of the nanoparticles, which act as diffusion barriers and retard the transport of decomposition products. Moreover, the high thermal diffusivity of TiO2 would enable a better heat dissipation within the nanocomposite as the concentration of oxide increases, leading to a slow down of the ablation of the surface and the release of combustible volatiles. This explains that the increase in the degradation temperatures is significantly more pronounced at high nanoparticle loadings. Similar behaviour has been reported for LO-based composites filled with nanoclay37 or POSS.38
 Fig. 3  TGA (top) and DTG (bottom) curves under a nitrogen atmosphere for TiO2 nanoparticles, cured AELO and different nanocomposite coatings. The inset shows the initial degradation temperature, Ti (black squares), and the temperatures of the maximum rate of weight loss, Tmax1 and Tmax2 (red triangles and circles, respectively). 
Char formation during combustion prevents the evolution of combustible gases and smoke, reduces the exothermicity due to pyrolysis reactions, and in turn, retards the flammability of the materials.39 According to TGA curves, at 550 °C the char yield of the cured acrylated resin was only 0.4%, while that of the nanocomposite with 7.5 wt% TiO2 was ∼9%, indicating that the nanoscale interpenetrating network formed by uniformly dispersed nanoparticles can improve the flame resistance of the coatings. This enhancement should be related to the barrier effect of TiO2, as mentioned previously. The nanoparticles create a maze or tortuous path that can effectively retard the progress of the gas molecules through the cured resin. This behaviour is also related to the strong AELO–nanoparticle hydrogen bonding interactions, as well as to the high aspect ratio of the nanoparticles that results in a large nanofiller–matrix interfacial contact area, and these effects are exacerbated with increasing TiO2 loading.
The thermal properties of the cured AELO and the nanocomposites were also evaluated by means of DSC, and their heating thermograms are displayed in Fig. 4. No melting peak was detected in the DSC traces, corroborating that the matrix chains remain in the amorphous state. The acrylated oil shows the lowest glass transition temperature (Tg), about 28 °C; this low value is consistent with previously reported data for LO-based polyurethane coatings40 and acrylated epoxidized soybean oil.41 This transition temperature progressively increases with increasing TiO2 content, by about 5, 8, 12 and 13 °C for the nanocomposites with 1.0, 2.5, 5.0 and 7.5 wt% loadings, respectively, demonstrating that the nanoparticles efficiently restrain the mobility of the polymer chains. Nevertheless, it should be noted that it is difficult to determine the Tg values from DSC since the change in heat capacity is slightly ambiguous over the temperature range due to the effects of cross-linking and the complex relaxations of oil-based polymer chains,41 and consequently these have been more accurately determined using DMA.
 Fig. 4  DSC second heating thermograms for cured AELO and the nanocomposites. 
Water uptake and barrier properties
The permeability of coatings to water and oxygen are important parameters determining their corrosion stability. Hence, desirable requirements of protective coatings are low moisture absorption and low oxygen permeability. In this regard, the kinetics of water uptake of the nanocomposite coatings was analyzed, and the results are plotted in the top of Fig. 5. It is found that the water uptake of all the thermosetting coatings increases with increasing time, following a non-linear growth, and reaches the saturation stage (equilibrium condition) in approximately one month. Water uptake of cured AELO arises from the presence of free volume and the hydrophilic functional groups in its backbone structure. The resin tends to absorb water via hydrolysis of the acrylic ester groups, and it shows a water uptake of ∼3.7% at the equilibrium. The water molecules absorbed in AELO can exist as either bound water or unbound clusters. As can be observed in the inset of the figure, the incorporation of TiO2 greatly reduces the percentage of water absorption, by approximately 33% at 7.5 wt% loading. As the nanoparticle content of the coatings increases, more hydrogen bonds are formed between TiO2 and the epoxy matrix. Consequently, free water molecules do not interact as strongly with the nanocomposites compared to the neat resin. Moreover, the better moisture resistance of the composites is likely associated with the increased tortuosity of the transport path of water molecules due to the presence of titania nanoparticles. Similar behaviour was described for epoxidized soybean oil-based biocomposites reinforced with organically modified montmorillonite,42 where the water uptake dropped upon increasing the nanofiller content due to a stronger tortuosity effect.
 Fig. 5  Top: kinetics of water absorption for AELO–TiO2 nanocomposite coatings. The inset shows the water uptake at equilibrium vs. TiO2 loading. Bottom: water vapour permeability (WVP) and oxygen permeability (O2P) as a function of nanoparticle content. 
The water vapour permeability (WVP) and the oxygen permeability (O2P) were also investigated, and the results are displayed in the bottom of Fig. 5. Both WVP and O2P decrease with increasing nanoparticle loading, reaching minimum values (∼21 and 45% lower than those of AELO, respectively) at the nanofiller loading of 7.5 wt%. This behaviour reveals superior barrier properties to gases for the nanocomposite coatings in comparison to the bioresin, ascribed to the strong TiO2–AELO interactions and the formation of a tortuous path, as discussed above. Furthermore, the small sized nanoparticles can occupy the empty spaces of the epoxy network, hence reducing the gas permeability. Other researchers have also shown positive effects of TiO2 nanoparticles on the WVP of epoxy-based nanocomposites.43
Interestingly, the WVP decreases almost linearly with increasing nanoparticle content, while the O2P drops exponentially, similarly to the water uptake, and remains almost constant for nanoparticle contents above 5.0 wt%, likely due to the presence of small clusters at higher concentrations. Thus, the percentage of reduction in O2P is about double that in WVP, and this discrepancy could be explained based on the different molecular sizes and polarities of water and oxygen molecules. The diameter of water is about 2.75 Å, whilst that of oxygen is around 2.92 Å. Since water molecules are smaller, they would more easily permeate the coatings even in the presence of the nanoparticles, hence the WVP reduction is less pronounced compared to the O2P drop.
Elastic modulus and hardness
The top of Fig. 6 presents the elastic modulus (E) of the coatings as a function of the penetration depth. It is noteworthy that all the curves are approximately horizontal lines except at the initial stage, where a rapid E increase is found up to ≈50 nm. An analogous trend was found for the hardness (H) as a function of the indent path. This behaviour is likely related to a number of effects such as the tip rounding, indenter drift, determination of the zero point, surface roughness and instrument resolution. The coatings exhibited uniform mechanical properties through thickness, corroborating the absence of pores or microcracks. The average H and E values obtained from the indentation tests are plotted as a function of TiO2 loading in the bottom of Fig. 6. Cured AELO shows a low E of about 0.5 GPa, consistent with those previously reported for other acrylated vegetable oils,5 which increases progressively with increasing nanoparticle concentration, by about 94% at the highest loading tested. This outstanding enhancement is ascribed to the reinforcement effect of the rigid and homogeneously dispersed titania nanoparticles that restrict the polymer chain motion combined with the high nanoparticle specific surface area and the strong TiO2–AELO hydrogen bonding interactions, which strengthen the nanofiller–matrix interfacial adhesion, resulting in improved load transfer.
 Fig. 6  Top: elastic modulus versus indentation depth. Bottom: elastic modulus and hardness as a function of nanoparticle content. 
The elastic modulus of nanoparticle-reinforced polymer composites can be predicted by the Krenchel's rule of mixtures: E = (ηEf − Em)Vf + Em(4)where Ef and Em are the moduli of the nanoparticle and the matrix, respectively, Vf the nanoparticle volume fraction and η the strengthening efficiency coefficient that is assumed to be 1/5 for randomly oriented fillers. Considering the reported modulus for TiO2 (230 GPa),29 the theoretical E values for the nanocomposite coatings were evaluated using eqn (4), and the results are tabulated in Table 3. For nanoparticle loadings up to 5.0 wt%, the predicted values are in very good agreement with the experimental data (differences <4%). Taking into account that the model assumes individual nanoparticle dispersion and perfect nanofiller–matrix interfacial adhesion, the good correlation between theoretical and experimental data corroborates that at low concentrations TiO2 particles are indeed uniformly dispersed and strongly adhered to the cured acrylated resin. However, at 7.5 wt% loading, the experimental value is about 20% lower than the predicted one, likely due to the presence of small clusters that have a detrimental effect on the composite mechanical properties. Thus, it has been shown that clustered particles can act as crack initiation sites and even induce decohesion of the matrix–particle interface.44
Table 3 Mechanical data for different samples




Material

E
cal

 (GPa)

E
20°C′ (GPa)

T
g (°C)
FWHM (°C)
tanδarea (a.u.)
PHb
BIc
IRc (lb per in.)





E: elastic modulus; E′: storage modulus; Tg: glass transition temperature; FWHM: full-width at half maximum of the tanδ peak; tanδarea: area under the tanδ peak; PH: pencil hardness; BI: brittleness index; IR: impact resistance.a Values calculated through the Krenchel's rule of mixtures.b Pencil leads are ranked from the softest to the hardest as follows: 6B, 5B, 4B, 3B, 2B, B, HB, F, H, 1H, 2H, 3H, 4H, 5H, 6H.c Statistical analysis of the data was carried out by Student's t-test. Differences were considered not significant (P < 0.05). Data are presented as the mean values ± standard deviation.




c-AELO
—
0.51
24.9
22.4
10.9
H
0.084 ± 0.003
125 ± 4


c-AELO (1.0)
0.591
0.63
29.1
23.9
11.4
1H
0.080 ± 0.004
133 ± 3


c-AELO (2.5)
0.727
0.76
34.8
25.4
12.2
2H
0.078 ± 0.002
148 ± 5


c-AELO (5.0)
0.955
0.91
41.6
28.1
12.5
3H
0.076 ± 0.002
171 ± 3


c-AELO (7.5)
1.182
0.89
39.0
27.2
12.1
3H
0.072 ± 0.002
168 ± 5




With regard to the hardness, a noticeable increase is found at low nanoparticle loadings, the maximum increment being 73% at 5.0 wt% TiO2, which then marginally decreases. This behaviour is related to the hardening effect of the well dispersed nanoparticles, which impose better resistance to penetration under indentation. As the particle content increases, the interparticle distance is reduced whilst the AELO–TiO2 interactions become stronger, hence the hardening is more pronounced. However, the small reduction in H for the nanocomposite with the highest loading indicates its lower capability to withstand the applied load exerted by the indenter. Thus, at 7.5 wt% TiO2, the particles are dispersed less regularly in the matrix, hence the free volume of the crosslinked network can be increased, enabling higher polymer chain mobility. Consequently, there might be a competition between the reinforcing effect of nano-TiO2 and the mobility of the polymer molecules, and as a result, H is slightly reduced.
The brittleness index is defined as the ratio of H to E,45 and the values calculated for the different coatings are included in Table 3. Interestingly, this parameter drops slowly and regularly upon increasing the nanoparticle content, indicating improved tenacity. Coatings with hardness higher than 0.1 GPa and the brittleness index within the range of 0.06–0.08 are considered to have good mechanical properties, hence are useful for coating applications.45 On another note, the pencil hardness grade also improves upon increasing nanoparticle loading, levelling off for concentrations higher than 5 wt%. Thus, a good correlation is found between indentation hardness and pencil hardness, corroborating the uniformity of the coatings.
Dynamic mechanical properties
DMA experiments were performed to evaluate the viscoelastic properties of the cured coatings, namely the storage modulus E′ and the loss tangent (tanδ), and their temperature dependence at the frequency of 1 Hz is shown in Fig. 7. The Tg and E′ values at 20 °C are summarized in Table 3. E′ of the nanocomposite coating increases with increasing TiO2 content, corroborating that the mechanical load imposed on the nanocomposites is effectively transferred from the resin to the nanoparticles, and the stiffening effect is more pronounced at temperatures below Tg. Thus, at 20 °C, a maximum value of ∼0.9 GPa (about 80% increase compared to that of cured AELO) is attained for the nanocomposite with 5.0 wt% TiO2, whilst at 100 °C the improvement is only around 62%. However, when the nanofiller loading is further increased, E′ levels off, likely due to the competition of two factors. On the one hand, as the nanoparticle content increases, the free volume is reduced, which results in an improved modulus. On the other hand, as the concentration increases, the particle–particle interactions prevail over the particle–matrix ones, hence small clusters are formed which eventually reduce the effective surface area available for contact with the polymer chains and may cause a decrease in properties. Therefore, the combination of indentation and DMA results reveals that the optimum TiO2 concentration for improving the coating modulus is in the range of 5.0–7.5 wt%; higher loadings would lead to a stiffness drop due to the formation of agglomerates.
 Fig. 7  Top: storage modulus E′ as a function of temperature. Bottom: tanδ versus temperature. 
Tanδ vs. temperature curves show two relaxation peaks, in agreement with the results reported for other vegetable oil-based composites.41,46 The transition at the lowest temperature (β-transition) has been attributed to the motion of [–CH2–CH(OH)–CH2–] aliphatic segments from the ring opening of the epoxide, while that at the highest temperature (α-transition or Tg) is ascribed to Brownian motion of the polymeric chains during the transition from glassy to the rubbery state. The introduction of nano-TiO2 shifts the Tg and the β-transition towards higher temperatures and the intensity of the tanδ peak is reduced. In particular, Tg increases by ∼17 °C for the coating with 5.0 wt% loading compared to the value of cured AELO (Table 3). This behaviour can be explained in terms of increased AELO–nanoparticle interfacial interactions that restrict the chain mobility of the polymeric segments and result in decreased free volume and closer chain packing. Thus, the hard nanoparticles embedded into the bioresin would act as additional network nodes, hence the intermolecular friction is increased and the movement of macromolecular chains is restricted. However, when the TiO2 concentration is beyond 5.0 wt%, the Tg falls slightly and the height of tanδ increases, given that it is more difficult to disperse uniformly the higher amount of nanosized particles. It is important to note that the Tg values obtained from DMA are in good agreement with those derived from DSC (Fig. 4), and both sets of data follow a similar trend.
On another note, the wide molar mass distribution in vegetable oil-based polymers results in a broad Tg peak.41 Furthermore, a widening of the peak is found upon addition of the nanoparticles, principally for the nanocomposite with 5.0 wt% loading (Table 3), which show a full-width at half maximum (FWHM) value around 25% broader than that of AELO. This phenomenon could be understood taking into account that the physical properties of the polymer surrounding the nanoparticles are different from those of the bulk matrix, and also reflects a larger matrix–nanoparticle interfacial area.47 It is also noteworthy that the area under the tanδ peak (Table 3) is larger for the nanocomposites compared to that of the bioresin, with the highest increment of 15% at 5.0 wt% TiO2. Thus, coatings exhibiting the highest peak area should have an improved ability to absorb energy during deformation, associated with the impact resistance of the material.48 Therefore, DMA data help to explain the superior impact resistance found for the nanocomposites with TiO2 ≥ 3.0 wt% (Table 3), which show improvements in the range of 18–37%, related to their higher energy dissipation capability. Moreover, no crack on the coating or lost adhesion during the impact tests indicates good bonding between the coating and the substrate.
Tribological properties
Coatings are frequently used to reduce friction and protect the substrate surface from wear. In particular, the triglyceride structure of vegetable oils can produce high-strength lubricant films that interact strongly (chemically or/and physically) with metallic surfaces, decreasing both friction and wear.49 The performance of a lubricating coating depends on its dynamic properties and its interaction forces with the substrate. Poor interfacial adhesion leads to delamination of the coating, restricting its usefulness for application.50 Furthermore, the presence of pores/defects increases the water and oxygen permeability, hence reducing the tribological performance.

Fig. 8 shows the coefficient of friction (μ) and the specific wear rate (Wsp) of the nanocomposite coatings. μ falls progressively with increasing TiO2 loading, showing a minimum (about 57% drop compared to that of cured AELO) at 5.0 wt%, a concentration that corresponds to the maximum hardness (Fig. 6). This behaviour can be attributed to several factors, including the improvement in mechanical properties, the presence of homogenously dispersed inorganic nanoparticles that reduce the free volume and the mobility of the polymer chains, leading to more compact networks with enhanced performance, the strong TiO2–AELO interactions that result in good interfacial adhesion and high thermal conductivity of TiO2 that enables rapid heat dissipation, hence lower temperature in the sliding contact.
 Fig. 8  Top: the coefficient of friction and the wear rate of AELO–TiO2 nanocomposites. Bottom: SEM images of the worn surfaces of nanocomposite coatings containing 7.5 wt% (left) and 1.0 wt% (right) nanoparticle loadings. 
With regard to Wsp, a very strong reduction is found upon incorporation of the nanoparticles into the acrylated thermoset resin. In particular, the nanocomposite with the highest loading exhibits an almost 10-fold decrease in this parameter compared to the value of the cured acrylated bioresin. This exceptional enhancement in wear resistance should be related to the superior stiffness of this nanocomposite and the strong nanoparticle–resin interfacial adhesion, facts that usually lead to the formation of a thin and homogenous transfer film, hence improved tribological properties.50 This behaviour could also be attributed to the rolling effect of hard inorganic nanoparticles like TiO2 that reduces the shear stress. The individual particles act as rolling balls during sliding,51 and this effect can change the sliding friction into rolling friction between the counterpart and the coating. Such a rolling mechanism has been previously reported by Chang and Zhang52 for nano-TiO2 reinforced epoxy composites. Thus, it is believed that TiO2 not only acts as a load carrier in the nanocomposite but also helps to improve the bonding between the transfer film and the countersurface. This hypothesis of rolling particles is supported by the decreasing trend in the wear track deformation, as revealed by SEM images of the nanocomposite surfaces after the wear tests (Fig. 8, bottom). Thus, a close inspection of the worn surface of the coating with the lowest nanoparticle content shows the presence of numerous longitudinal grooves parallel to the wear direction and pits, together with a large amount of wear debris, suggesting that abrasive wear is the main damage mechanism.53 However, the surface of the sample with the highest loading is considerably smoother, with fewer grooves and rows of furrows and less wear debris. Clearly, the presence of the nanoparticles significantly improves the tribological performance of the bioresin.
Antibacterial activity
Hospital-acquired infections are frequently associated with invasive medical devices or surgical operations. It is exceptionally important to prevent bacterial proliferation in hospital environments, particularly in operation rooms, since bacterial infections are the sixth leading cause of death in both Europe and US. In order to assess the potential of the developed nanocomposites as antimicrobial coatings in the healthcare industry, their antibacterial activity was evaluated against Gram-negative bacteria E. coli and Gram-positive bacteria S. aureus, which represent 25% and 17% of the total hospital-acquired infections, respectively. Tests were carried out both in the presence and in the absence of UV light, and the results are displayed in Fig. 9. The ISO 22196:2007 specifies that efficient antibacterial activity should be higher than 2 (marked with a dotted line on the figure). Neat AELO elicits only a slight antimicrobial activity against E. coli and S. aureus, about 0.15 and 0.3, respectively, the effect being identical with and without UV illumination. This is consistent with previous studies that described the bactericidal activity of vegetable oils and found a more effective activity against Gram-positive bacteria.54 Furthermore, their bioactivity was found to be dependent on their content of certain phenolic compounds, besides their chain length and unsaturation degree – the longer the chain, the higher the bacterial inhibition was. Research has been carried out to elucidate the mechanism of antimicrobial activity of vegetable oils, and it was proposed that they could penetrate the cell wall, leading to leakage of the cell contents.55
 Fig. 9  Antibacterial activity of AELO–TiO2 nanocomposite coatings against S. aureus (left) and E. coli (right). The limit for efficient antibacterial activity is indicated by a dotted line. 
On another note, it can be observed that the antibacterial activity increases with increasing nanoparticle loading both in the presence and absence of UV light. In fact, higher contents of nano-TiO2 will increase the number of particles in contact with the bacterial membranes, and in turn, result in more toxicity. This agrees with the earlier research highlighting that the reduction in the distance between bacterial cells and TiO2 particles improves the photocatalytic disinfection process.56 Nonetheless, the bactericidal effect also depends on the nanoparticle state of dispersion – a very homogenous distribution is required to maximize the antibacterial properties. Thus, since the coating with 7.5 wt% loading presents small clusters, its antimicrobial activity is quite similar to that of the sample with 5.0 wt% loading, where the TiO2 distribution is more uniform. This corroborates that nanoparticle loading and the state of dispersion are two key factors determining the antibacterial properties of the coatings.
Under UV light, S. aureus activity is inhibited when TiO2 concentration is ≥2.5 wt%, while E. coli growth is suppressed only for nanoparticle loadings ≥5.0 wt%. This is in agreement with recent studies on TiO2–poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) PLGA composite biofilms that reported stronger antibacterial activity against Gram-positive bacteria.57 The efficiency of photocatalytic disinfection has been ascribed to the oxidative damage mainly induced by reactive oxygen species (ROS), including O2−, HO2 and HO radicals. ROS are produced by redox reactions between adsorbed species (i.e. water, oxygen) and electrons and holes photo-generated upon irradiation of TiO2 with UV light. OH radicals are believed to be the main reason for the bactericidal effect, even though direct oxidation by “holes” from the valence band on the TiO2 surface is also pointed out in several studies.58,59 Regarding the degradation process, it is assumed that ROS first damage the outer membrane (if present), and subsequently attack the cytoplasmic membrane, which loses its integrity and the cell lysis. The loss of cytoplasmic membrane integrity, which is involved in the process of cellular respiration, leads to the death of the cell. The different behaviour observed against the two bacteria tested is probably related to structural and chemical compositional differences in the cell surfaces.29 The Gram-positive cell wall consists of a thick and multilayered peptidoglycan sheath outside of the cytoplasmic membrane, whilst the wall of Gram-negative bacteria is more complex; it is composed of an outer membrane linked to a thin peptidoglycan layer which is placed within the periplasmic space between the outer and inner membranes. The outer membrane provides resistance to a variety of compounds, lessening the damage from oxidation radicals. Besides the oxidative stress caused by ROS on bacterial cells, contact with the TiO2 surface can result in the direct oxidation of the cells by photogenerated holes.58
On the other hand, the results demonstrate that the developed coatings also possess antibacterial activity under dark conditions, consistent with previous studies that explored the bactericidal activity of TiO2 without UV irradiation.60 Under such conditions, only the coating with the highest loading provokes a significant toxic effect on E. coli, whilst TiO2 contents ≥5.0 wt% lead to efficient antibacterial activity against S. aureus. These results reveal that besides the photocatalytic process, other phenomena take place in the bacterial inactivation. Several mechanisms have been suggested to account for this, including:13,60 nanoparticle adsorption onto the bacterial surface, leading to physicochemical interactions that cause cellular damage; redox reactions at the cell-nanoparticle interface involving the reduction of Ti(IV) to Ti(III) that results in oxidative degradation of the cell membrane; internalization of the nanoparticles in the cell and destruction of the bacteria from the interior; and phagocytosis of the nanoparticles by the microorganisms leading to cell death. In addition, direct evidence for free radical formation at the bacterial surface in the dark has been provided.61 Although the exact mechanism is not perfectly understood yet, the contact between bacteria and TiO2 seems to be crucial for improving the disinfection efficiency. Overall, the results reveal the great potential of the coatings with TiO2 loading ≥5.0 wt% as antibacterial products for building materials.
Conclusions
In this work, acrylated epoxidized linseed oil has been successfully synthesized, filled with anatase TiO2 nanoparticles and cured under UV irradiation to produce eco-friendly antimicrobial nanocomposite coatings. The influence of the nanoparticle concentration on their barrier, mechanical, thermal, tribological and antibacterial properties has been explored in detail. A uniform nanoparticle distribution within the cured bioresin was obtained, the dispersion being finer for coatings with lower TiO2 content. The existence of strong hydrogen bonding interactions between the ester moieties of the matrix and surface hydroxyl groups of TiO2 was inferred from FT-IR spectroscopy. The nanoparticles significantly enhanced the resin barrier performance, reducing its water uptake, and water and oxygen permeability, while increasing the onset of decomposition temperature, leading to highly thermally stable coatings. Besides, the incorporation of TiO2 was beneficial for improving the tribological performance of the bioresin. Superior mechanical properties were also attained, including storage and Young's modulus, indentation and pencil hardness, glass transition temperature and impact resistance. The optimum TiO2 concentration for simultaneously improving the stiffness, hardness, toughness and wear resistance of the matrix was found to be in the range of 5.0–7.5 wt%. The nanocomposite coatings displayed significant resistance to bacterial growth both in the absence and in the presence of UV light, and the effect on S. aureus was systematically stronger than on E. coli. With increasing nanoparticle content, the TiO2–bacteria distance is reduced, leading to a more efficient disinfection process. These sustainable and biodegradable nanocomposite coatings show great potential to prevent microbial proliferation on indoor building materials, particularly in the healthcare setting for sterilization of medical devices, linens and clothing in order to reduce the risk of acquiring infections.
Acknowledgements
Dr Ana Diez-Pascual wishes to acknowledge the Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (MINECO) for a “Ramón y Cajal” Senior Research Fellowship co-financed by the EU.
References
J.-M. Raquez, M. Deléglise, M.-F. Lacrampe and P. Krawczak, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 487–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Alam, D. Akram, E. Sharmin, F. Zafar and S. Ahmad, Arabian J. Chem., 2014, 7, 469–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. B. Samarth and P. A. Mahanwar, Open J. Org. Polym. Mater., 2015, 5, 1–22 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Gan and X. Jiang, Photo-cured Materials from Vegetable Oils, Green Materials from Plant Oils, RSC Green Chemistry Series, RSC Publishing, London,  2014, pp. 1–27 Search PubMed .
M. A. Mosiewicki and M. I. A. Aranguren, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 1243–1256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Miao, P. Wang, Z. Su and S. Zhang, Acta Biomater., 2014, 10, 1692–1704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, T. Schuman, R. R. Vuppalapati and K. Chandrashekhara, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 1871–1882 RSC .
A. Bayrak, M. Kiralan, A. Ipek, N. Arslan, B. Cosge and K. M. Khawar, Biotechnol. Biotechnol. Equip., 2010, 24, 1836–1842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Rudnik, A. Szczucinska, H. Gwardiak, A. Szulc and A. Winiarska, Thermochim. Acta, 2001, 370, 135–140 CrossRef CAS .
F. Seniha-Güner, Y. Yagci and A. Tuncer-Erciyes, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2006, 31, 633–670 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Kaithwas, A. Mukerjee, P. Kumar and D. K. Majumdar, Inflammopharmacology, 2011, 19, 45–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sunada, T. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, Photobiol. Chem., 2003, 156, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hochmannova and J. Vytrasova, Prog. Org. Coat., 2010, 67, 1–5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Verdier, M. Coutand, A. Bertron and C. Roques, Coatings, 2014, 4, 670–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Huang, L. Yang, R. Chen, W. Zou, X. Lin and J. Qu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 4639–4647 RSC .
J.-W. Rhim, H.-M. Park and C.-S. Ha, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1629–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Yin, L. Wu, H. G Yang and Y. H. Su, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4844–4858 RSC .

          A. Kubacka, M. Fernandez-Garcia, M. L. Cerrada and M. Fernandez-Garcia, Titanium Dioxide–Polymer Nanocomposites with Advanced Properties, in Nano-Antimicrobials, ed. N. Cioffi and M. Rai, Springer, Heidelberg,  2012, ch. 4, pp. 119–149 Search PubMed .
T. Kreetachat, J. Kruenate and K. Suwannahong, Appl. Mech. Mater., 2013, 390, 552–556 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Tang, Self-cleaning Polyurethane and Polyester Coatings, PhD thesis, University of Western Ontario, Electronic Thesis and Dissertation Repository, Paper 1098,  2013 Search PubMed .
A. Z. M. Rus, S. R. Mohid, S. Nurulsaidatulsyida and N. Marsi, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2013, 2013, 486253 Search PubMed .
M. R. Shaik, M. Alam and N. M. Alandis, J. Nanomater., 2015, 2015, 745217 Search PubMed .
M. G. Luciani-Torres, D. H. Moore, W. H. Goodson III and S. H. Dairkee, Carcinogenesis, 2015, 36, 168–176 CrossRef PubMed .

          U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, Toluene Diisocyanate (TDI) and Related Compounds Action Plan [RIN 2070-ZA14], April  2011 Search PubMed .
S. Dinda, A. V. Patwardhan, V. V. Goud and N. C. Pradhan, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 3737–3744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Diez-Pascual, M. A. Gómez-Fatou, F. Ania and A. Flores, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 67, 1–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Ferrão, L. Marder, A. B. da Costa and R. C. Schneider, Sensors, 2013, 28, 4258–4271 Search PubMed .
A. M. Diez-Pascual and A. L. Diez-Vicente, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 7502–7514 RSC .
A. M. Diez-Pascual and A. L. Diez-Vicente, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5561–5573 CAS .

          N. B. Colthup, L. H. Day and S. E. Wiberley, Introduction to Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy, Academic Press Inc., San Diego, 3rd edn,  1990 Search PubMed .
P. I. Nagy, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2014, 15, 19562–19633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Lee, S.-W. Kuo, W.-J. Huang, H.-Y. Lee and F.-C. Chang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2004, 42, 1127–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zuza, A. Lejardi, J. M. Ugartemendia, N. Monasterio, E. Meaurio and J. R. Sarasua, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 2423–2433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, S. I. Shah, M. Sung and C.-P. Huang, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 2002, 20, 2303–2308 CAS .
A. Sharma, D. Agarwal and J. Singh, Electronic J. Chem., 2008, 5, 904–913 CAS .
V. Sharma, J. S. Banait, R. C. Larock and P. P. Kundu, Polym. Compos., 2010, 31, 630–637 CAS .
G. Lligadas, J. C. Ronda, M. Galia and V. Cadiz, Biomacromolecules, 2006, 7, 3521–3526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. van Krevelen, Polymer, 1975, 16, 615–620 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Garrison, M. R. Kessler and R. C. Larock, Polymer, 2014, 55, 1004–1011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Grishchuk and J. Karger-Kocsis, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2011, 5, 2–11 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Sithique and M. Alagar, Malaysian Polym. J., 2010, 5, 151–161 Search PubMed .
T. S. Radoman, J. V. Džunuzović, K. B. Jeremić, B. N. Grgur, D. S. Miličević, I. G. Popović and E. S. Džunuzović, Mater. Des., 2014, 62, 158–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Deng and N. Chawla, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41, 5731–5734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. Mittal, Polymer Nanocomposite Coatings, CRC press-Taylor & Francis, Florida,  2014, p. 117 Search PubMed .
A. M. Diez-Pascual and A. L. Diez-Vicente, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17277–17288 CAS .
A. M. Diez-Pascual and A. L. Diez-Vicente, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2014, 15, 10950–10973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Díez-Pascual, C. Xu and R. Luque, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 3065–3078 RSC .
M. T. Siniawski, N. Saniei and P. Stoyanov, Lubr. Sci., 2011, 23, 301–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Friedrich and A. K. Schlarb, in Tribology of polymeric nanocomposites, ed. B. J. Briscoe, Tribology and Interface Engineering Series 55, Elsevier, Oxford,  2008 Search PubMed .
A. M. Diez-Pascual and M. Naffakh, Polymer, 2012, 53, 2369–2378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chang and Z. Zhang, Wear, 2006, 260, 869–878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Diez-Pascual and A. L. Diez-Vicente, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10132–10145 CAS .
E. Medina, A. de Castro, C. Romero and M. Brenes, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2006, 12, 4954–4961 CrossRef PubMed .

          A. Muñoz-Bonilla, M. L. Cerrada and M. Fernandez-Garcia, Polymeric Materials with Antimicrobial Activity: From Synthesis to Applications, RSC publishing, Oxford,  2014, ch. 11, p. 311 Search PubMed .
D. Gumy, C. Morais, P. Bowen, C. Pulgarin, S. Giraldo, R. Hajdu and J. Kiwi, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 63, 76–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Wu, C.-W. Li, C.-H. Tsai, C.-W. Chou, D.-R. Chen and G.-J. Wang, J. Nanomed. Nanotechnol., 2014, 10, 1097–1107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nadtochenko, N. Denisov, O. Sarkisov, D. Gumy, C. Pulgarin and J. Kiwi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 181, 401–407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, B. John, K. L. Yeung and G. Si, J. Environ. Sci., 2007, 19, 745–750 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dalai, S. Pakrashi, S. Chakravarty, S. Hussain, N. Chandrasekaran and A. Mukherjee, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2014, 37, 371–381 CrossRef CAS .
I. Fenoglio, G. Greco, S. Livraghi and B. Fubini, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 4614–4621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Saturated	Palmitic	CH3(CH2)14COOH	C16:0	6.6
Stearic	CH3(CH2)16COOH	C18:0	4.4


Unsaturated	Oleic	CH3(CH2)7CHCH(CH2)7COOH	C18:1	18.5
Linoleic	CH3(CH2)4CHCH–CH2–CHCH(CH2)7COOH	C18:2	17.3
Linolenic	CH3–CH2–CHCH–CH2–CHCH–CH2–CHCH(CH2)7COOH	C18:3	53.2

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis procedure of epoxidized linseed oil (ELO) and acrylated epoxidized linseed oil (AELO).	 

 	Fig. 1  FT-IR spectra of TiO2, LO, ELO, AELO (both cured and uncured) and the nanocomposites with 1.0 and 7.5 wt% nanoparticle loading. The inset shows a zoom-in of the region around 1700 cm−1.	 

c-AELO	70.0	25.0	3.5	1.5	—


c-AELO (1.0)	69.3	24.7	3.5	1.5	1.0
c-AELO (2.5)	68.2	24.4	3.4	1.5	2.5
c-AELO (5.0)	66.5	23.8	3.3	1.4	5.0
c-AELO (7.5)	64.8	23.1	3.2	1.4	7.5
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  SEM micrograph (top) and EDX spectra (middle) of cured AELO/TiO2 (7.5 wt%) nanocomposite coating. Bottom: XRD patterns of TiO2 nanoparticles, cured AELO and AELO/TiO2 (7.5 wt%).	 

 	Fig. 3  TGA (top) and DTG (bottom) curves under a nitrogen atmosphere for TiO2 nanoparticles, cured AELO and different nanocomposite coatings. The inset shows the initial degradation temperature, Ti (black squares), and the temperatures of the maximum rate of weight loss, Tmax1 and Tmax2 (red triangles and circles, respectively).	 

 	Fig. 4  DSC second heating thermograms for cured AELO and the nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 5  Top: kinetics of water absorption for AELO–TiO2 nanocomposite coatings. The inset shows the water uptake at equilibrium vs. TiO2 loading. Bottom: water vapour permeability (WVP) and oxygen permeability (O2P) as a function of nanoparticle content.	 

 	Fig. 6  Top: elastic modulus versus indentation depth. Bottom: elastic modulus and hardness as a function of nanoparticle content.	 
E = (ηEf − Em)Vf + Em	(4)


c-AELO	—	0.51	24.9	22.4	10.9	H	0.084 ± 0.003	125 ± 4
c-AELO (1.0)	0.591	0.63	29.1	23.9	11.4	1H	0.080 ± 0.004	133 ± 3
c-AELO (2.5)	0.727	0.76	34.8	25.4	12.2	2H	0.078 ± 0.002	148 ± 5
c-AELO (5.0)	0.955	0.91	41.6	28.1	12.5	3H	0.076 ± 0.002	171 ± 3
c-AELO (7.5)	1.182	0.89	39.0	27.2	12.1	3H	0.072 ± 0.002	168 ± 5

 	Fig. 7  Top: storage modulus E′ as a function of temperature. Bottom: tanδ versus temperature.	 

 	Fig. 8  Top: the coefficient of friction and the wear rate of AELO–TiO2 nanocomposites. Bottom: SEM images of the worn surfaces of nanocomposite coatings containing 7.5 wt% (left) and 1.0 wt% (right) nanoparticle loadings.	 

 	Fig. 9  Antibacterial activity of AELO–TiO2 nanocomposite coatings against S. aureus (left) and E. coli (right). The limit for efficient antibacterial activity is indicated by a dotted line.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
