Production of solar chemicals: gaining selectivity with hybrid molecule/semiconductor assemblies  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CC02487A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CC02487A
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6662-6680Production of solar chemicals: gaining selectivity with hybrid molecule/semiconductor assemblies

        
          
            Seán 
            Hennessey
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Pau 
            Farràs
          
        
      *
      School of Chemistry, Energy Research Centre, Ryan Institute, National University of Ireland, Galway (NUI Galway), University Road, H91 CF50 Galway, Ireland. E-mail: pau.farras@nuigalway.ie;  Web: http://www.nuigalway.ie/chemlight Web: http://www.twitter.com/chem_light
Received 
      27th March 2018
    , Accepted 15th May 2018First published on 15th May 2018AbstractResearch on the production of solar fuels and chemicals has rocketed over the past decade, with a wide variety of systems proposed to harvest solar energy and drive chemical reactions. In this Feature Article we have focused on hybrid molecule/semiconductor assemblies in both powder and supported materials, summarising recent systems and highlighting the enormous possibilities offered by such assemblies to carry out highly demanding chemical reactions with industrial impact. Of relevance is the higher selectivity obtained in visible light-driven organic transformations when using molecular catalysts compared to photocatalytic materials.
Pau Farràs and Seán Hennessey
Pau Farràs (left) received his research training at the Materials Science Institute of Barcelona (PhD, Prof. Teixidor), Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (PDRA, Prof. Llobet) and Newcastle University (Newton Fellow, Prof. Benniston). Since 2015, he has been Lecturer in Inorganic Chemistry at NUI Galway developing molecular and hybrid systems for the production of solar chemicals. He has 30 peer-reviewed publications and is leading SEAFUEL (EU-INTERREG). Seán Hennessey (right) was born in Liverpool in 1994 and moved to NUI Galway in 2012 where he received his BSc in 2016. He obtained first-class honours for an MSc (Dr Farràs) and a first peer-reviewed publication. He was awarded a PhD scholarship from NUI Galway to continue his work with Dr Farràs.
1. Introduction
Grand challenges for the 21st century include topics ranging from energy and artificial intelligence to health. Most relevant are the 17 Sustainable Development Goals proposed by the United Nations “to transform the world as part of the new sustainable development agenda”.1 To accomplish these goals, new technologies and a whole set of public attitudes, manufacturing practices and inter- and multi-disciplinary approaches need to be put in place. In the energy arena, a shift towards a low-carbon economy and use of renewable resources is envisaged as the best way to meet the targets set by the UN. From the pool of available resources, solar energy is the only resource which meets the requirements, namely being abundant, cheap and clean.2 However, the main limitations are its intermittency and unbalanced availability around the globe. For a widespread use of solar energy, there is the need for a cost-effective solution for its storage. In the seminal work by Bard et al.3 and more recently by Nocera,4 it has been asserted that “finding a technology that could store solar energy is one of the Holy Grails of modern science”. Moreover, there have been general publications highlighting the relevance of solar energy in the near future. As stated by Travis Bradford in his book “Solar Revolution”, “an innovative analysis shows how the shift to solar energy is both economically advantageous and inevitable, and will rival the information and communication technologies revolution in its transformative effects”.5 Already in 1999 the German author Hermann Scheer, President of Eurosolar (European Association for Renewable Energy), wrote the book “The Solar Economy: Renewable Energy for a Sustainable Global Future”, in which he predicted the global demand for solar energy and laid out the political and economic and a few technological challenges to overcome.6
There are currently two options for solar storage and, among other countries, Australia is leading the implementation of both thanks to their geographic advantage with excess solar and wind renewables. With a current production of 7 GW which could almost double in 2018,7 the country has opted for not only the installation of a 100 MW Tesla giant battery, but also the use of hydrogen as a chemical storage solution, with the potential to produce 20000 kg of hydrogen per day. With this amount of hydrogen and using a commercially available fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV) such as the Toyota Mirai, a total of about 26600 vehicles could be powered using free resources such as solar energy and water, with only water being the by-product of the vehicles.8 The potential of solar energy is not restricted anymore to alternative fuels such as hydrogen, but also to a wide range of chemicals that can be produced using sunlight. The main requirement for such applications is to obtain the desired selectivity to compete with traditional synthesis methods. On the other hand, industrial-scale processes able to produce valuable solar chemicals are an exciting area of research which opens up the manufacturing of chemicals to a new era of green chemistry using 100% renewable resources. Some authors have already suggested that the splitting of water into oxygen and hydrogen can potentially be unworthy given the low price of the products obtained, although similar systems to produce hypochlorite instead of oxygen could become more relevant for industrial applications.9 So far, though, most publications have focused on light-driven water splitting and CO2 reduction, following some of the equations shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Electrochemical reaction equations (all potentials vs. NHE at pH 0)




Oxidation reactions
Reduction reactions


Reaction

E
0

Eqn
Reaction

E
0

Eqn




H2O → HO˙ + 1H+ + 1e−
2.80
(1)
2H+ + 2e− → H2
0.00
(8)


2H2O → HOOH + 2H+ + 2e−
1.77
(2)








2H2O → HOO˙ + 3H+ + 3e−
1.67
(3)
CO2 + 1e− → CO2˙−
−1.49
(9)


2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−
1.23
(4)
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCO2H
−0.20
(10)








CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O
−0.12
(11)


2Cl− → Cl2 + 2e−
1.36
(5)
2CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2C2O4
−0.08
(12)


2Cl− + 2H2O → 2HClO + 2H+ + 2e−
1.63
(6)
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O
−0.07
(13)








CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O
0.03
(14)


N2 + H2O → N2O + 2H+ + 2e−
1.77
(7)
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
0.17
(15)












N2 + 6H+ + 6e− → 2NH3
0.55
(16)








N2 + 8H+ + 8e− → 2NH4+
0.27
(17)




The area of solar chemicals, also referred to as solar-driven chemistry, is gaining momentum in the scientific community within artificial photosynthetic devices and water splitting. In the past few years, many detailed reviews have been published focusing on different aspects. It is still unclear what the new technology will look like, and this has prompted scientists to study the whole variety of possible solutions; amongst them, we will highlight the following: (i) all material systems (including metal oxide semiconductors, composites with polymers, graphitic carbon nitride, graphene, layered hydroxides and metal sulphides);10,11 (ii) hybrid biochemical devices;12 and (iii) photo(electro)chemical hybrid molecules/materials (see Fig. 1).13–17 The scope of this article is based on hybrid molecule/semiconductor assemblies and, thus, we direct the reader towards recent specialised reviews for further information on purely material devices for photocatalysis. There, more emphasis is put on structure–electronic properties, enhancement of their selectivity using a variety of methods such as doping or co-catalysis, and advanced techniques to study material properties such as facet activity.18,19 Likewise, concepts such as interfacial engineering and charge transfer processes have been covered recently by Kumar et al. and Wang et al., respectively.20,21 Highlights include the role of surface states in and effects of incorporating molecular complexes on the kinetics of competing chemical reaction vs. recombination.
 Fig. 1  Schemes of the different architectures used in hybrid molecule/semiconductor devices, applied for both powder photocatalysts and supported photoelectrocatalysts: a semiconductor with an oxidation catalyst (OC) (a) and a reduction catalyst (RC) (d) in the presence of a sacrificial electron acceptor (SEA) or donor (SED), respectively, or attached to an electrode (EL); a semiconductor with both oxidation and reduction catalysts (b); a Z-scheme tandem configuration with a redox shuttle (RS) (e); a semiconductor as an electron conductor for a supported photosensitiser (PS) and a reduction catalyst (c); and a semiconductor acting as a support without any charge transfer process (f). 
Finally, another aspect to consider is the physical separation between oxidative and reductive reactions, similarly to the natural system of photosynthesis. Some groups have also studied membranes for artificial photosynthesis to avoid the mixing of the products obtained with potential issues of chemical incompatibility (explosive mixtures), the cross-over of products giving rise to unwanted reactions and the overall efficiency reduction of the device.22 Others have opted for a delayed generation of the products using redox mediators.23 Thus, what is clear is that no option is taking the lead and all of them are still open for consideration. This Feature Article focuses on hybrid photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical (PEC) molecule/semiconductor systems as a potential new technology for the production of solar chemicals. A summary of existing photoanodes and photocathodes containing semiconducting materials and, at least, molecular catalysts is covered in detail from their synthesis to PEC properties and catalytic activity. We have structured the article based on the type of reaction studied and the semiconductor used for the photo(electro)catalyst, namely oxidation and reduction reactions for the former, and metal oxides, metal chalcogenides and carbon-based semiconductors for the latter. The emphasis would be put on the overall structure of the hybrid photo(electro)catalyst rather than the molecular catalysts, on which extensive reviews can be found elsewhere.24–26 However, the presence of the molecular entity is crucial in all cases to obtain the selectivity sought in the chemical transformations. Early studies of light-driven water oxidation using molecular catalysts also need to be briefly mentioned due to their relevance for the preparation of active and selective photoanodes,27,28 as well as the first examples of hybrid photoanodes and photocathodes.29,30 We will conclude with some observations regarding incorporation of these systems into commercially viable PEC reactors and future prospects in the areas of solar-driven and light-driven chemistry.
2. Oxidation half-reaction
Achieving highly efficient, as well as economically viable, water oxidation systems has posed a barrier to researchers. As mentioned in the introduction, light-driven water oxidation is an area of growing interest in the renewable energy sector. The interest in the water oxidation reaction (eqn (18)) has grown due to the dual attraction of both the production and storage of hydrogen and further oxidation of the fuel to produce water, both being carbon-neutral and high in energy output. 2H2O → O2 + 2H2(18)Although many research attempts have focused on water oxidation in a homogeneous solution,26 herein we look at the application of a catalyst to be used in parallel with an active surface for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) (eqn (4)). The high kinetics of oxygen evolution (1.23 VNHE) result in a large overpotential required to drive the reaction. The overpotential for the photocatalytic splitting of water is standardized by the geometric surface of the photoanode, e.g. 0.5 mA cm−2, and the requirements are due to the intermediates that form during the oxidation process.26 In addition, ligand and surface oxidation are problems regarding the efficiency of the oxidation process, so the tailoring of catalyst ligands must also be considered when designing a photocatalytic process. In terms of semiconducting surfaces with metal catalysts attached, limitations still occur. For example, an electron–hole recombination reaction can require up to 400 mV overpotential beyond the 1.23 eV required for water splitting. This results in an energy requirement of >1.6 eV being necessary at a wavelength of <775 nm.31,32 As pointed out by Kirner et al., this is convenient in terms of photocatalysis, as this wavelength range includes around 60% of the solar power available at the earth's surface.32
2.1 Water oxidation

2.1.1 Metal oxides. 
One of the key focuses of this review is the different assemblies of materials that have been used for oxidation reactions in recent research. Metal oxide surfaces as semiconductors are an area of key interest and have been covered in several recent reviews.22,32,33 One of the most commonly used materials for these surfaces is the industrially used metal oxide TiO2. This was discovered to act as a semiconductor in the photocatalytic splitting of water by Fujishima and Honda in 1972.34 Their work was expanded on by the doping of the titania surface with carbon35,36 and nitrogen37 to increase the photocatalytic efficiency of the surface. A major drawback of these systems is the requirement of high energy UV light, due to the wide band gap energy of TiO2 (3.0–3.2 eV), which only absorbs in the UV region of <400 nm. However, this high energy demand has not prevented TiO2 from being by far the most studied semiconductor in recent photocatalytic research. The TiO2 surface has an ideal band gap edge for water splitting and much better stability in comparison to other systems such as hematite (α-Fe2O3).24Fig. 2 shows a selection of common semiconductors and their relative band positions, with the thermodynamic water redox positions highlighted.38,39 As an ideal band gap for water oxidation is in the 1.6–2.4 eV range, the TiO2 surface is shown to lie outside this range, so modifications must be made to circumnavigate this problem. This is achieved by the anchoring of molecular catalysts directly onto the metal oxide surface, or through a dye in a dye-sensitised PEC cell, to create a photoanode. This photoanode dye-sensitised photoelectrochemical (PA-DS-PEC) device is composed of a photosensitiser (PS), a water oxidation catalyst (WOC), a semiconducting surface, an electrolyte and a counter electrode. The assembly of the PS and catalyst into the oxide semiconductor is generally composed of 2 methods, examples of which are highlighted in Fig. 3. The simpler of the 2 strategies is co-loading both the PS and WOC, which gives little spatial separation between the semiconducting oxide and catalyst, improving electron back transfer.40 Alternatively, the PS and catalyst can be made up of one assembly, in the form of a single molecule,41 or with metal ions such as ZrIV acting as a bridging unit between the PS and catalyst.42 This chemical bridging between the two allows controlled spatial separation, and an improvement in electron back transfer. This incorporation of molecular catalysts onto a metal oxide surface, such as TiO2, was achieved by several groups in the past decade, but many had several catalytic and synthetic limitations.43 Based on the limitations of their own and previous studies, Francàs et al. suggested two methods, in both system design and synthetic procedures, to overcome the limitations of surface-bound molecular catalytic systems:44 (i) the replacement of the chemical oxidant, CeIV, and application of an electric potential directly to the metallic centres of the catalyst through a conducting solid support such as indium-tin oxide (ITO); and (ii) the replacement of the commonly used carboxylate ligand with a phosphonate group. This is known to be much more stable considering the oxidative degradation, which is a common side reaction of photocatalysis. Youngblood et al. used a [Ru(bpy)3]2+ sensitiser with phosphate anchoring groups bound to the surface of a TiO2 electrode in a DS-PEC cell.29,45 This DS-PEC cell utilised iridium-based nanoparticles (NPs) as a WOC, known to be very active, and resulted in a reduced reduction time. However, the drawbacks to such a system include a low quantum yield, due to the slow electron transfer from the iridium NPs to the oxidized dye and poor competition with the back-electron transfer from TiO2 to the dye. Improvements to the molecular system were suggested in terms of altering the redox potential of the dye and shortening the distance between the photosensitiser and the metallic oxide surface. Work by Li et al. utilised a water oxidation catalyst in a strongly acidic Nafion film on the TiO2 surface to enhance the overpotential of the water oxidation system.27 However, the efficiency of this system was relatively low, and this was subsequently improved by silane anchoring of the molecular catalyst onto a TiO2-sintered fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO).46 By anchoring a silicic group to the TiO2 surface, the electron recombination time between the metal oxide and the catalyst was reduced. This resulted in a turnover number (TON) of 498 and an average turnover frequency (TOF) of 1.0 s−1 for water splitting after 500 s of illumination, with an 83% faradaic efficiency (FE) for the production of O2. The resulting photoanode gave a significantly higher photocurrent density (1700 mA cm−2 with an external bias of 0.20 VNHE) for water splitting in comparison to the earlier system. This evidence, in tandem with similar work on the same photocatalyst by Ashford et al., shows that the stability of photoelectrocatalytic devices can be improved by increasing the efficiency of electron transport in the molecular system.13 Other phosphonate-anchored ruthenium photocatalysts were synthesised by Alibabaei et al. and subsequently anchored to a nanostructured TiO2/ITO assembly via atomic layer deposition (ALD).41 This nanoTCO-core–shell assembly was able to split water into O2/H2 with a photon conversion of 4.4%. This innovative core–shell molecular assembly approach offers a general platform for using chromophore–catalyst assemblies in hybrid photoanode systems. Similar work by this group has shown how using ALD can enhance the surface binding stability of a phosphonate-derived WOC over a pH range of 1–12.47 A wider pH range overcomes the usual limiting factor of a low pH being required to guarantee a high degree of stability for the WOC.
 Fig. 2  Calculated oxidation potential ϕox (red bars) and reduction potential ϕre (black bars) relative to NHE and vacuum energy levels for a series of semiconductors in solution at pH = 0, the ambient temperature 298.15 K, and pressure 1 bar. The water redox potentials ϕ(O2/H2O) and ϕ(H+/H2) (dashed lines) and the valence (green columns) and conduction (blue columns) band edge positions at pH = 0 are also plotted. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 3  Examples of photoanode assemblies for photoelectrochemical cells. (a) A one-layer anode system with photosensitiser and catalyst moieties kept separate from each other. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Covalently linked catalyst–photosensitiser anchored to metal oxide. Reproduced from ref. 41. Copyright (2013) National Academy of Science. 
Other techniques for the assembly of PEC cells include supramolecular assembly. This was investigated by Ding et al. who, by employing assembly techniques using this method, created a working photoanode, albeit with mediocre photocurrent densities.48 To improve the stability of the material, poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) was implemented as an auxiliary support and ruthenium catalysts were modified with long carbon chains which allows for improved immobilisation onto the photoanode surface. The DS-PEC device that was created overcame the shortfalls of the co-adsorption method, and exhibited excellent photoactivity and stability, with the photocatalyst remaining intact and active even after 1000 s of illumination.49 In a recent extensive review, the Ding group highlighted the importance of the design, assembly, and performance of photoanode-based DS-PEC cells.50 One of the main causes of poor stability is the detachment of molecular dyes and catalysts from the metal oxide surface. This was overcome by Fan et al. who recognised this and used a pyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid anchoring group for the molecular catalyst.51 This ligand displays exceptionally high binding affinity for the TiO2 in comparison with phosphonate anchoring groups. This resulted in no visible removal of the Ru-catalyst from the metal oxide surface over a wide pH range of 1–14. This photoanode, L0 + Ru1@TiO2, also showed both a high current density of 300 μA cm−2 and a low applied bias potential when utilised as a photoanode in a novel tandem photoelectrochemical device, which will be covered in more detail later. The stability of the hybrid system was shown by 70% photocurrent remaining after 200 s, which was much greater than those of similar literature systems. Using the same basic structure of the previous photocatalyst, but by electrochemically polymerizing the catalyst onto the oxide surface, the group was able to enhance the photocurrent density of the material.52 Using vinylpyridine ligands for facile anchoring via polymerisation, the group was able to create a device, poly-1 + RuP@TiO2, with a high photocurrent density (∼1.4 mA cm−2) at a neutral pH with 0.2 V external bias. This catalyst was also compared with a hematite surface, poly-1@Fe2O3, which showed a weaker photocurrent density (∼0.4 mA cm−2) in comparison to the TiO2 surface. However, the decomposition of the photosensitiser, which limited the stability of the entire device, was shown to be suppressed using the α-Fe2O3 in comparison to the TiO2 surface. Electropolymerization techniques for creating photoanodes have also been investigated.53,54 Recent work by Ashford et al. showed that using a prior surface-binding of the WOC, followed by electro-assembly formation, the photoanode, nTiO2-RuPdvb2+-poly1 (dvb = 5,5′-divinyl-2,2′-bipyridine), could be formed.55 This work has shown a new method to generate a chromophore–catalyst structure on metal oxide films, as well as resulting in a single-site mechanism for the water oxidation reaction, instead of the usual bimolecular system. The stability of this surface-immobilised photocatalyst was shown using absorption spectra, which displayed a 10% reduction in the surface coverage of the chromophore. This was a significant improvement over the nTiO2-RuP2+, which showed a 70% reduction in chromophore coverage. Overall, a 15-fold increase in stability was observed for the hybrid system.
In similar TiO2 systems, a semiconducting SnO2 layer has been used with the metal oxide to improve the photocurrent properties of the material. Recently, this has been at the centre of the ground-breaking work by Meyer and co-workers, involving the creation of photoanodes and their incorporation into DS-PEC cells.56–61 For instance, by using a core–shell nanoparticle oxide electrode substrate, the group was able to dramatically improve the performance of their DS-PEC cells.59 Over a 5 min photolysis period, the core/shell photoanode produced O2 with a FE of 22%. The relatively low value for the FE can be put down to the instability of the surface-bound chromophore, and its eventual detachment from the surface leading to a decrease in photocurrent. This photoanode was incorporated into a tandem device containing a Si-based photovoltaic electrode for dual O2/H2 production.60 With this p+n-Si junction the group was able to increase the photocurrent by 350 mV per e−, which is suitable to drive unbiased water splitting. These observations were made at a slightly acidic pH of 5.7 and with photocurrents approaching 100 μA cm−2 with an improved FE of 79% for O2 production. Their work has further shown how the use of a SnO2 core with a TiO2 shell aids in avoiding recombination to oxidised surface species after light driven charge separation. These SnO2/TiO2 photoanodes were used in the first purely solar-driven dye-sensitised photoanode based tandem photoelectrochemical cell.62 This photoanode involved a Ru-catalyst electro-assembly on a SnO2/TiO2 core–shell electrode. The light-driven water oxidation occurred with a FE of 22% with an applied bias of 0.4 VSCE at pH 7. This FE was shown to decrease over time and was attributed to a gradual desorption of surface film components and/or oxidative decomposition of the photo-oxidized Ru(III) form of the chromophore. Recent ‘bottom-up’ approaches have also been applied to immobilising catalysts on the surface of a TiO2/SnO2 photoanode.40 The photoanode assembly, FTO|SnO2/TiO2|-RuP2+-LO–C10-COM, gave a very promising 1.4 mA cm−2 photocurrent as well as a modest IPCE value of 24.8% at 440 nm and displayed no loss in photocurrent at pH 7, over 30 min. The assembly technique of ligand displacement between pre-bound ligands on the oxide surface and the catalysts was key to their stable assembly, and should give new strategies to photoanode assembly in future research.
Other hybrid systems have used more innovative techniques to improve photocatalytic water splitting. For example, Matheu et al. utilised carbon nanotubes (CNTs) to cover the surface of a TiO2 protected Si electrode.63 This hybrid photoanode contains a molecular precatalyst which is attached via π-stacking on CNTs, which is shown more clearly in Fig. 4. Further activation of the precatalyst led to the formation of the final photoanode, Si/TiO2/C/CNT/[1 + 1(O)]. Their work with this material showed the oxidation of water to O2 with a FE of over 90%. The Ru-based hybrid photoanode also displayed good stability for over an hour of operation at a current density of 1 mA cm−2 while also keeping the molecular precatalyst intact. This Si/TiO2/C surface allows facile anchoring of a molecular precatalyst onto its surface and allows monitoring of the species throughout the catalytic process.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of a cross section of a Si-based photoanode decorated with the molecular water oxidation precatalyst 1(O) (red circles). Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Moving away from TiO2 to other metal oxides, bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) has increased in popularity in regard to photocatalytic devices in recent years. BiVO4 has been shown to display high photoactivity,64 and as a result researchers have formed an n-type photoactive semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.4eV. Photoanode materials made of BiVO4 have demonstrated to have a record solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 5.2%.65 BiVO4 also has the advantage of being a relatively simple and cheap material to manufacture. A major limitation of using BiVO4 has been its modest efficiencies, generally generating photocurrents of <1 mA cm−2. This is due to its poor electron transfer properties and the high kinetic barrier for the water oxidation reaction. This was observed by Abdi et al. who noted that charge separation efficiency in BiVO4 semiconductors is limited by poor electron transport and not by the presence of bulk defect states, interface traps, or a Schottky junction at the back-contact.66 This inadequacy has been improved by several groups recently by incorporating WOCs onto the surface of the material.67,68 For example, Abdi et al. demonstrated how electrodeposition of a Co–Pi catalyst onto the surface of BiVO4 can lead to a 60% increase in water oxidation efficiency.69 This work has led to comparative studies of the catalytic enhancement of BiVO4, as outlined by Jia et al.70 Their work considered in situ photodeposited FeOOH and electrodeposited Co–Pi on a nanoporous BiVO4 photoelectrode. It was noted that the deposition of FeOOH onto the metal oxide did not affect its flat band potential but significantly enhanced the photoelectrochemical performance via reducing the interface resistance and promoting the electron transport. This is in contrast to the electrodeposited Co–Pi cocatalyst, shifting its flat band potential, which is beneficial for the photoelectrochemical water oxidation. As a result of these studies, it was understood that the Co–Pi/BiVO4 displayed better photoelectrochemical performance than the FeOOH/BiVO4 but the stability of Co–Pi is lower than that of FeOOH, which may be due to the low stability of the Co–Pi catalysts. The instability of the BiVO4 photoanodes was also investigated by Lee et al. who tuned the photostability by altering the electrolyte composition with a V5+-saturated electrolyte.71 In doing so, the group also discovered a vanadium-containing interfacial layer on the FeOOH/NiOOH film which was able to improve the water oxidation kinetics. Their electrolyte/semiconductor composition exhibited photostability over a long study time of 500 h, with only minor photodegradation of the BiVO4 surface shown via XRPD and SEM. Bi et al. recently developed a method for growing ultra-thin, highly crystalline β-FeOOH nanolayers on BiVO4 photoanodes.72 These modified photoanodes displayed an impressive photocurrent density of 4.3 mA cm2 at 1.23 VRHE under AM 1.5 G, which is roughly 2× higher than that of amorphous FeOOH. Under stability tests these photoanodes retained a photocurrent value over 2 h of permanent light irradiation, indicating its excellent photoelectric durability and structural stability for PEC water splitting. Ye et al. modified the surface of BiVO4 with a layered double hydroxide (LDH) to reduce electron/hole recombination.73 This was used in conjunction with a Co cubane-phosphonate WOC on the surface of the metal oxide and a partially oxidised graphene (pGO) layer which was utilised for charge transfer, as outlined in Fig. 5. The system showed a high solar to hydrogen (STH) efficiency (>2.0%) as well as an ultralow onset potential (0.17 V). This was with a high photocurrent of 4.45 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V, which was shown to exhibit superior stability to previous photoelectrodes. Systems bearing more unorthodox catalysts such as a Co-cubane WOC on a BiVO4 surface have also been investigated recently.74 Wang et al. determined how ligand tuning on a Co-cubane surface-bound catalyst can modify the PEC properties of the photoanode. Upon loading a new cubane complex featuring alkoxy carboxylato bridging ligands onto the semiconductor, a new high photocurrent density of 5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE for water oxidation was observed. This was in tandem with a very high STH efficiency of 1.84%, which is a 6-fold increase over unmodified BiVO4 semiconductors. The versatile nature of this tuning of ligands on the Co-cubane catalyst is a promising development in the pursuit of further selective solar chemical materials.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of an integrated BiVO4 photoanode system, CoPO3/pGO/LDH/BiVO4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Other metal oxide surfaces such as hematite (α-Fe2O3) have also been implemented for their use in photoanodes, and highlighted in similar studies.75 The high abundance, positive light absorption properties and low cost of hematite make it an attractive semiconductor, but it does possess high overpotentials for the OER.76 As a result, a co-catalyst is required to improve the kinetics, much like that of BiVO4. To overcome this, Zhong et al. paired a cobalt WOC with the metal oxide surface via electrodeposition to form an evenly distributed and stable photoanode.77,78 This surface bound catalyst was shown to be stable under a wide pH range and display strong oxygen evolving properties. Stable photocurrent densities of 1.0 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V and 2.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE measured under standard illumination and basic conditions were achieved; these photocurrent densities also displayed longevity and stability over 72 h, as well as no decrease in photocurrent after being stored at room temperature under O2.78 Wang et al. studied photoelectrode architectures based on α-Fe2O3 films which can work as a photoanode for light-driven water splitting.79 Ruthenium-bda catalysts with polythiophene anchoring groups were used on a hematite surface and displayed high and stable photocurrents of over 0.3 mA cm−2 under a relatively small bias of 0.8 VNHE. Recently, Cui et al. demonstrated an atomically dispersed hybrid catalyst which was formed in situ on a hematite semiconductor.80 This hematite semiconductor showed photoelectrochemical O2 evolution by electrostatic adsorption of soluble monomeric [Ir(OH)6]2−, which was coupled to positively charged NiOx sites. This NiOx is described as working as a ‘moveable bridge’ in relation to electron transfer from the catalytic iridium centre to the hematite surface. This catalyst hybrid demonstrated high catalytic activity and stability in alkaline electrolyte for >80 h of operation. Interestingly, photocatalytic enhancement, through an increased photocurrent and an ∼200 mV negative shift of the onset potential was achieved by the introduction of a Sn-doped hematite.
Tungsten oxide, WO3, has appropriate band edge energies and has shown promise when used as a photoanode for the oxidation of water. Seabold et al. used the cobalt catalysts utilised by Zhang on a WO3 substrate, which was shown to prevent the undesirable peroxo species from forming.81 Further research into using WO3 as nano-needles on a FTO surface was undertaken by Jin et al.82 A nickel-borate WOC was deposited onto the surface of the WO3, which resulted in improved photoactivity and photostability towards the evolution of molecular O2. This was shown by the catalyst-modified surface exhibiting a 1.6-fold improvement in IPCE. The stability of the hybrid material was shown by comparison of the free WO3 nanoneedles with the hybrid material. The photocurrent of the hybrid decreases by only 26% during the same working time as the free nanoneedles, which showed a decrease of 65% over 1800 s, suggesting greatly enhanced stability. H2O2 build-up on the surface of the semiconducting WO3 is one of the major problems of the material. To overcome this, Huang et al. developed a strategy of coating a thin layer of FeOOH onto the active sites of the WO3 surface.83 The hybrid anode displayed a max photocurrent of 1.3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE under simulated solar illumination (AM 1.5 G). The increased stability of the new material was confirmed by comparing the photocurrent of the bare WO3 after a period of 3 h. The photocurrent of the WO3 decreased by over 50% over this period, whereas that of the hybrid material remained at a constant value.


2.1.2 Other water oxidation materials. 
Although metal oxides are the main area of research in terms of molecular/semiconductor hybrid assemblies, there are other examples of hybrid materials used for selective oxidation reactions. One area of interest is the application of highly conductive materials in conjunction with metal oxide surfaces. This is shown in materials such as CNTs anchored onto semiconducting metal oxide surfaces, which we have discussed previously.63 Mori et al. highlighted the area of metal clusters as an area of research with an extensive review on hybrid photocatalysts that allow for both efficient and selective photochemical molecular transformations.84 For example, in the area of water splitting, early hybrid materials outlined by Domen et al., consisting of a Ni-loaded K4Nb6O17 photocatalyst gave a stable and high photocatalytic activity for water splitting.85 The use of other hybrid materials in conjunction with metal oxide surfaces has arisen in the form of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), which has been covered extensively in previous reviews.86,87 The porous nature of these frameworks allows potential encapsulation of WOCs and their strategic design allows facile anchoring to surfaces such as those of electrodes. Zhang et al. recently utilised a MOF on a TiO2 surface to act as a photosensitiser in the water-splitting reaction.88 This MOF showed nearly 100% improvement in efficiency (10 to 20 μA cm−2 at 0.75 VRHE, under visible light irradiation) in terms of photocurrent, over the TiO2 nanowire. This efficiency was increased further by harnessing the plasmonic properties of Au nanoparticles (NPs), which were adhered onto the surface of the framework. Similarly, Dou et al. created a zeolitic-imidazolate-framework which is capable of encapsulating the metal oxide, ZnO@M (M = Au, Pt, and Ag), to create a photocatalyst capable of splitting water.89 The gold-based catalyst showed affinity for the water oxidation reaction, showing a peak photocurrent density of 1.93 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V, as well as exhibiting a maximum efficiency of 0.80% at ∼0.15 V, over 0.20% more efficient than any of the other materials created. Again, this higher efficiency for Au-based materials can be attributed to the wider solar spectral harvesting ability of the Au. Carbon-based semiconductors have shown promising results in light-driven reactions. However, there are only a few examples of hybrid materials with molecular water oxidation catalysts. A recent publication by Choi et al. has demonstrated that carbon dots (CD) can be successfully linked to Co-based polyoxometalates (Co-POM) forming hybrid photocatalysts able to oxidise water using visible light. Self-assembled colloidal particles showing a 10-fold increase in oxygen generation compared to bare CD have been obtained. In addition, a comparison between a homogeneous system consisting of Co-POM and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as a sensitiser and the Co-POM/CD hybrid photocatalyst has shown that the first system quickly deactivates after the first cycle, whereas the hybrid system retained 73% activity even after the third cycle.90
Selectivity in water oxidation has been less studied although some examples exist in which molecular catalysts have been added to photocatalytic devices for the oxidation of water in the presence of salts (non-potable or seawater). The Swiegers group has been active in the production of hybrid conducting polymers with molecular catalysts to generate photoanodes capable of selectively oxidising seawater to oxygen.91–93 In their latest system, poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) (PEDOT) doped with a sulfonated manganese porphyrin showed oxygen formation after constant illumination for 24 h in a sealed cell with the generation of less than 2.3% of chlorine, showing a very high selectivity towards oxygen formation.93

2.2 Organic oxidation reactions
Although the oxidation of water is of key focus in many recent DS-PEC cells, oxidation of species other than water is also of interest in the production of solar chemicals. Song et al. showed how visible light can be used for the selective dehydrogenation of benzyl alcohol.94 Their photoanode was made up of mesoporous films of TiO2 nanoparticles/core–shell with indium-doped tin oxide NPs (nanoITO). The nanoITO/TiO2 core–shell structure was shown to cause a decrease of up to 2 orders of magnitude in back electron-transfer rates compared to TiO2. At the optimised shell thickness, a sustained absorbed photon to current efficiency of 3.7% was achieved for the dehydrogenation of benzyl alcohol, a 10-fold enhancement compared to bare TiO2. However, the FE of the nanoITO/TiO2 showed only a small increase in efficiency (37% up from 26%); this is due to the competing water oxidation reaction that also occurs. Pho et al. considered the selective oxidation of the alcohols using a DS-PEC cell to efficiently oxidise both phenol and benzyl alcohol.95 This system involved a terthiophene chromophore attached directly to the ruthenium catalyst via a covalent bridge. This is in contrast to other studies which have investigated the use of co-adsorption for the chromophore and catalyst onto TiO2.46 This covalent bridge allows facile electron transfer between the two units of the photoanode. In the light-driven phenol and benzyl alcohol oxidation experiments, sustainable photocurrents of 230 and 25 μA cm−2 were achieved, respectively. This inspired Jiang and co-workers to also attempt light-driven oxidation of alcohols.33 Using a chromophore–catalyst assembly on a TiO2 created using a layer-by-layer (LbL) methodology, the system showed a 28% higher photocurrent density after 250 s of continuous illumination, in comparison to previous LbL systems. The photocurrent measurements of the system showed positive results towards harvesting light energy to carry out the oxidation of organic substrates (PhOH and BnOH) and water. Oxidation of sulfide groups via a Ru-cat on a photoelectrocatalytic anode was also investigated by Farràs et al.96 The photoanode assembly, FTO/TiO2-P-bpy-RuII,2+, led to the selective oxidation of the sulfide to sulfoxide under sun simulated 1.5 AM G (100 mW cm−2) together with an external input of −0.43 VSSCE. The photoanode, TiO2-P-bpy-RuII,2+, was kinetically studied to show the mechanism of the formation of the oxidative species in combination with the catalyst, Ru(IV)–Ru(IV). This work led to a 2nd generation DS-PEC cell that was able to undertake the oxidation of alkenes to epoxides.97 A 0.30 VNHE bias was applied to a FTO/TiO2-P-bpy-Ru photoanode, and the epoxidation of 4-styrene sulfonic acid was observed, with a 70% selectivity towards the eventual diol formation in acidic solution and a 7% conversion yield (as in accordance with the catalyst selectivity). This represents a promising turnover number of 70 with a turnover frequency of 0.8 ks−1 for the oxidation of the organic substrate. This DS-PEC configuration exhibits a high degree of chemical versatility and selectivity, giving encouragement for the development of further PEC cells for the production of solar chemicals.
DS-PEC systems containing BiVO4 have also been used for the oxidation of organic materials. Recently, Patil et al. established a one-pot synthesis technique of a BiVO4/Ag/rGO hybrid photoanode on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass substrate using a simplistic and cost-effective hydrothermal method.98 This material was examined not only for the oxidation of water, but also for the degradation of the industrial dye, methylene blue (MB) and phenol. The photoanode was shown to exhibit a STH conversion efficiency of 0.9% as well as conversion at an IPCE of 3.5%. Under irradiation conditions, the photocatalytic MB degradation performance for the photocatalysts was drastically enhanced. The degradation rate constant for this photocatalyst (k = 1.03 × 10−2 min−1) was much larger than that of the pristine BiVO4 (0.59 × 10−2 min−1). The improved degradation was afforded due to the combined strong visible light absorption, improved charge separation–transportation and excellent surface properties of the new photoanode. The degradation of phenol was also performed under these conditions, with a first order rate constant of k = 0.192 × 10−2 min−1. Throughout these degradation processes, an insignificant deactivation of the photocatalyst or loss of photocatalytic activity was observed. This was the case after three consecutive photocatalytic cycles, showing much-improved stability of the photoanode material.
Mori et al. also investigated the use of a water oxidation catalyst on a mesoporous silica material, rather than that of a metal oxide surface for highly selective photooxidation.99 This photocatalyst was capable of selectively oxidising (E)-stilbene into benzaldehyde and 1-naphthol into 1,4-naphthoquinone in O2 at room temperature. The iridium catalyst utilised was completely recovered without the leaching of the active component, suggesting that the photooxidation process only proceeded when the complex was anchored to the mesoporous silica. These results show incredible developments in the area of organic transformations using hybrid systems and lay solid foundations to develop more selective photo(electro)catalysts in the near future.
3. Reduction half-reaction
Research into light-driven reduction reactions have mainly focused on proton and CO2 reduction. However, in the past few years, research has shifted towards other valuable chemicals and more systems have been developed for selective transformations. One of such systems is the reduction of atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia, one of the most manufactured chemicals worldwide. Although there has been development in the PEC synthesis of ammonia, to our knowledge, no publication using hybrid systems containing a molecular catalyst has been reported. Two reviews by Guo et al.100 and Chen et al.101 have recently been published on the design of novel PEC systems using a variety of materials and discussion about future prospects of the area. The main issue is the selectivity required for a process involving a multi-electron pathway, which could be solved by incorporating some of the reported molecular catalysts shown to be active for nitrogen fixation.102 Such photocathode architectures are expected to become the focus of attention in the coming months.
3.1 Metal oxides

Proton reduction. 
Hybrid photocathodes have been mainly generated using metal oxides, in particular NiO. As seen in Fig. 1, reduction reactions in photocathodes require a p-type semiconductor to transfer the holes from the liquid interface to the back electrode. The kinetics of hole transfer in NiO are slow for various reasons including hole traps, as studied by D’Amario et al.103 Understanding impurities in such material and how they affect the overall performance of the device is of great use to prepare more efficient photocathodes. In relation to this, the preparation method to synthesise NiO nanoparticles becomes a key stepping stone, as depending on the reaction conditions the amount and nature of impurities vary significantly.104 The use of molecular dyes improves the performance of NiO as a photocathode, in both solar cells and PEC cells, by extending the life-time of the charge separated state between the semiconductor and the dye. Further incorporation of a proton reduction catalyst allows the formation of active catalytic states from which hydrogen can be generated. The first example of hydrogen production using a hybrid NiO/dye/catalyst system was published by Li et al. in which the Co(dmgBF2)2(H2O)2 catalyst (where dmgBF2− is the difluoro-boryldimethylglyoximato anion) was used in solution, while NiO was sensitised by a triarylamine-type organic dye, giving a very modest TON of 2 based on the catalyst.30 The main drawback of the system was that the catalyst was not immobilised on the photocathode, causing very slow electron transfer kinetics from the photocathode to the catalyst. Later on, a system containing NiO/Ru-dye/Rh-cat (where Ru-dye was [Ru((PO3H2CH2)bpy)(bpy)2]2+; Rh-cat was ([Rh(bpy)2Cl2)]+) was developed since it was shown that the Rh-cat was very active for proton reduction under homogeneous conditions. However, the reduction potential of the Ru-dye was not sufficiently negative to reduce the catalyst to its active state, thus making the whole system not catalytic.105 To circumvent this, Gardner et al. studied, for the first time, the co-immobilisation of a photosensitiser and a proton reduction catalyst and demonstrated electron transfer from the photoreduced sensitiser to the Fe-based catalyst.106 The Fe catalyst was singly reduced, thus not enough to generate hydrogen, but the work paved the way towards other hybrid systems which could catalyse the reduction of protons. A similar problem was found for a NiO/NDI/Ni-cat system (where NDI is a naphthalene diimide scaffold; Ni-cat is a DuBois-type catalyst) in which the catalyst was added in solution.107 Under photocatalytic conditions, no photocurrent was observed nor hydrogen detected in the reaction even though the catalyst showed great performance under electrocatalytic conditions. Several reasons were suggested including poor electron transfer because of the aggregation of molecules on the surface, the charge recombination from the catalyst to the NiO, or the instability of the catalyst after the first reduction step.
An important aspect to consider is the attachment of the molecular catalyst to the semiconductor. Reynal et al. studied the kinetics of a TiO2 photoelectrode with three different cobaloxime-based proton reduction catalysts at different catalyst–surface distances.108 It was found that the photoinduced reduction of the catalysts was 104 times faster than the charge recombination, but most relevant was that they saw an exponential dependence on the distance between the semiconductor and the catalyst centre. The nature of the anchoring group plays a crucial role in such cases, so the study was conducted using very similar functional groups to immobilise the catalyst on the TiO2 surface. Another strategy used with cobaloxime-based proton reduction catalysts has been to take advantage of the axial coordination on the Co centre to promote supramolecular interactions with photosensitisers. This was first demonstrated by Ji et al. in which a NiO semiconductor was sensitised by a cyclometalated ruthenium dye containing carboxylic acid groups. These were used to immobilise on the semiconductor, although free pyridyl units could still interact with the cobalt catalyst via axial coordination.109 This supramolecular assembly was able to generate hydrogen under an applied external bias although the FE was only 68%. The low efficiency was not related to the low stability of the photocathode since photolysis experiments performed before and after the photoelectrocatalysis showed no signs of degradation.
A different approach, used in many molecular homogeneous systems, is the preparation of molecular photocatalysts (or dyads) containing a sensitiser and a catalytic unit in the same molecule. Such architectures allow better electron transfer between dye and catalyst but immobilisation on semiconducting surfaces should enhance further the charge separated states, mimicking the redox-active co-factors found in Photosystem II. Functionalisation of a Ru–Pt photocatalyst, [RuII(bpyMeP)2-tpphzPtCl2]2+ (where tpphz is tetrapyrido[3,2-a:2′,3′c:3′′,2′′,-h:2′′′,3′′′-j]phenazine), with phosphonic acid groups on the sensitiser side, allowed the immobilisation on NiO.110 The photocatalyst showed activity for proton reduction under homogeneous conditions but it was not tested on the NiO surface. Following the same strategy, Pati et al.111 and Kaeffer et al.112 have developed dyad systems containing an organic dye covalently bonded to a cobaloxime catalyst. The dyes in both publications consist of a push–pull triarylamine and an acceptor unit with enough reduction potential to reduce the Co-catalyst to its active state. Hydrogen production was measured in both systems with a low FE (10%) due to the competing reduction of bulk NiO on the electrode. Recently, Kamire et al. reported a NiO/perylene dye photocathode which, in conjunction with either a cobaloxime or a nickel (DuBois-type catalyst) proton reduction catalyst, was able to generate hydrogen under an applied external bias.113 The difference between both systems was the stability of the catalysts, from which the cobalt counterpart hydrolysed rapidly under the photocatalytic conditions, whereas the nickel catalyst produced higher amounts of hydrogen. The authors also proposed the use of atomic layer deposition (ALD) with Al2O3 to further protect the NiO electrode, which produced positive results as it slowed down charge recombination and stabilised surface-bound dyes and catalysts. Nevertheless, their champion system produced hydrogen corresponding to a TON of 1.5 with respect to the catalyst.
To fabricate a more stable photocathode, Meng et al. shifted from a molecular dye to a quantum dot (CdSe) as a light harvester to enhance the activity during photoelectrocatalysis. Both CdSe and the cobaloxime catalyst were co-immobilised onto NiO via appropriate anchoring groups and the system was tested under photocatalytic conditions.114 Photocurrent densities of over 100 μA cm−2 and a FE of 80% were obtained and maintained over several hours, in contrast to comparable systems which decayed quickly after a couple of seconds. Co-immobilisation of dye and catalyst leads to an increased stability of the photocathode while promoting electron transfer.
Other interesting architectures for NiO-based photocathodes have been described by Click and Gross. In the first case, Click et al. designed a novel organic photosensitiser mimicking the hydrophobic and hydrophilic properties of liquid bilayer membranes.115 The dye contains a hydrophobic protecting layer which prevents the electrolyte coming into contact with the NiO surface, improving the stability of the immobilisation even in acidic solutions. It also contains a polar head made of a perylene monoimide (PMI) acceptor that enhances the charge separated state within the dye by the length of the oligothiophene pi-linker. The proton reduction catalyst, Mo3S4 cluster, was added into the solution providing a photocurrent density at an applied external bias of 0 V of 183 μA cm−2, one of the highest values reported to date. The photocathode also shows extremely high stability under acidic conditions with no visible degradation of the photocathode being observed after 3 h in 1 M HCl. On the other hand, the work published by Gross et al. uses a strategy introduced by Meyer in photoanodes for water oxidation consisting of a layer-by-layer assembly of dye and catalyst.42,116 In this work, Gross et al. use a hexaphosphonated [Ru(P-bpy)3]2+ dye in combination with a tetraphosphonated Ni-DuBois catalyst assembled via a Zr4+ link. By placing the catalyst far away from the NiO surface, charge recombination between the catalyst and NiO is highly reduced, while the layer of Zr4+ acts as a protection to prevent the desorption of the dye. Hydrogen measurements under photocatalytic conditions prove the generation of hydrogen albeit with a low FE (10%). The authors suggest that fast recombination occurs between the oxidised NiO surface and bound reduced Ru-dye, preventing the formation of active reduced species of the catalyst, needed for proton reduction. Overall, NiO-based photocathodes for proton reduction have shown promising results with the different PEC architectures described above, although low photocurrents have been obtained so far. A main issue for p-type NiO systems remains as slow hole transfer kinetics largely affect the overall efficiency of the system. Further details on NiO-based photocathodes with and without molecular components are covered elsewhere.117,118
Given the existing problems found with NiO regarding photoinduced reduction,119 low faradaic efficiencies and low stability, Warnan et al. chose to work with TiO2. In their hybrid system they used a series of organic dyes (derivatives of diketopyrrolopyrrole, DPP) with very similar Co- and Ni-based catalysts as in the previous example. In this case, hydrogen production was achieved in a particulate system instead of a photoelectrode in the presence of a sacrificial electron donor (SED). In theory, the use of an n-type semiconductor such as TiO2 as a photocathode prevents creation of a full device for light-driven water splitting and there is the need for a source of electrons, either from a SED or from electrical current from a potentiostat. On the other hand, the main advantage is the higher stability of the system which gives a high TON and TOF, in particular for the TiO2/DPP/Ni-catalyst architecture with a TON of 100–200 with respect to the catalyst.120 A complete photophysical study on different derivatives compared to the common Ru(bpy)3-type of sensitiser revealed that DPP dyes have faster recombination kinetics, although it doesn’t hamper regeneration from the SED. Orchard et al. used a Type II dye to sensitise TiO2 nanoparticles, in which photoexcitation occurs directly from a surface-bound molecule to the semiconductor conduction band through ligand-to-metal charge transfer.121 The photocathode architecture used consists of an inverse opal ITO electrode functionalised by a phosphonated catechol dye which binds a TiO2 particle. In the presence of an electron acceptor, photocathodic currents of 70 μA cm−2 were obtained. The addition of a phosphonated Ni-DuBois catalyst, however, didn’t yield the formation of hydrogen, most probably due to the competing binding between the nickel catalyst and the dye, preventing any catalytically reduced species to be formed upon irradiation.
Very recently, a new p-type semiconductor has been used in photocathode assemblies for proton reduction. CuCrO2 is a wide bandgap p-type semiconductor (Eg = 3.11 eV) which can be prepared as a mesoporous material similarly to NiO. Creissen et al. used this material in combination with a diketopyrrolopyrrole-based organic dye and a phosphonated nickel catalyst as shown in Fig. 6.122 UV-vis spectroscopy and inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) measurements revealed a 2:1 ratio of the dye to catalyst on the surface of the electrode, which could be controlled based on the concentrations/ratios of the stock solutions. PEC measurements at an applied potential of 0 VRHE over 2 h generated hydrogen with a TON of 126 with respect to the catalyst, with a FE of 34%. Improvement of the photocathode can be accomplished by nano-structuring the material to enhance molecular loading and optimise the separation between the catalyst and semiconductor surface to reduce charge recombination, as shown in previous examples.108 Overall, CuCrO2 opens new avenues for novel photocathode architectures based on mixed metal oxides, and replace NiO-based hybrid systems.
 Fig. 6  Scheme of the photocathode composed of dye (DPP-P) and catalyst (NiP) co-immobilised on the CuCrO2 electrode with their molecular structures. [Ref. 122] – Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


CO2 reduction. 
Contrary to proton reduction, CO2 reduction represents a challenge from a selectivity perspective. As seen in Table 1, there is a wide variety of products which can be obtained upon CO2 reduction. Purely semiconducting materials lack the selectivity required to target a specific chemical, whereas molecular catalysts in homogeneous systems have shown great performance for CO and HCOOH while minimising the amount of hydrogen produced. An overall view on CO2 reduction can be found in a recently published book in which the authors highlight the relevance of hybrid molecule/semiconductor architectures to gain the selectivity required for such reactions.123
CO formation. 
From the pool of molecular catalysts, nickel and cobalt cyclams (where cyclam is 1,4,8,11-tetraazacyclotetradecane) stand out as being highly selective for CO formation, stable in water and having low onset potentials. A particulate system composed of ZrO2 nanoparticles (∅ ∼ 100–30 nm), a diphosphonate Ru-dye and a Ni-cyclam catalyst was fabricated showing CO conversion in aqueous solutions upon illumination.124 The work by Neri et al. represented the first example of a metal oxide hybrid system with high selectivity for CO with the unique property that ZrO2 has no role in the photoinduced reduction reaction. The metal oxide has been used as a support tool to ensure efficient electron transfer from the dye to the catalyst in the presence of a SED, and to bring stability to both the dye and catalyst. Given the high conduction band edge for ZrO2 (about −1.2 VNHE at pH 4), excited electrons on the Ru-dye are not able to inject into the semiconductor and are transferred to the SED. Since the energy levels between the reduced Ru-dye and ZrO2 don’t match, electrons are then transferred to a nearby Ni-cyclam molecule. The process is repeated once more to obtain the catalyst in the active oxidation state to reduce CO2 to CO via a 2-electron reduction, with an overall TON after 7 h of 4.8. Incorporation of such a system into a PEC device is not feasible but represents proof-of-concept for particulate systems for overall water splitting from H2O and CO2. An architecture that can and has been used in a PEC cell consists of a NiO/Ru–Re hybrid photocathode with high selectivity towards CO. Sahara et al. showed the generation of a photocathode with a ruthenium–rhenium dyad photocatalyst immobilised on a NiO electrode.125 The molecular photocatalyst showed great performance in solution126 and this was maintained after attachment to the semiconductor. Upon irradiation and in aqueous solution, the system produced CO with a TON of 32 after 12 h with a very high efficiency towards CO (91%). The photocathode also showed good stability, and only after 5 h, evidence of photocatalyst desorption was observed using cyclic voltammetry and X-photoelectron spectroscopy. The same group developed a new photocathode replacing NiO by CuGaO2.127 This is a new p-type semiconductor with superior properties for photoinduced reductions. It shows high conductivity (10−1–10−2 S cm−1) and a positive flat band potential, allowing efficient electron transfer from the valence band edge to the HOMO of the Ru-dye centre. The same Ru–Re dyad photocatalyst has been used to produce the photocathode CuGaO2/Ru–Re, from which under optimised conditions a TON of 125 in 15 h irradiation is observed with a FE of 81%. However, almost equivalent amounts of CO and H2 have been generated; further studies on the system are being conducted although the first hypothesis suggests that the formation of H2 comes from back electron transfer from photoexcited Ru–Re to the CuGaO2 surface.
HCOOH formation. 
Hybrid PEC systems for formic acid production are scarce and it has only been recently that a few papers have appeared. As seen in eqn (10) in Table 1, the thermodynamic potential for HCOOH formation is slightly more negative than CO (−0.20 vs. −0.12 VNHE). Nakada et al. used a selective ruthenium photocatalyst, shown previously to be very active under non-aqueous solution, in combination with a Ag-loaded TaON photoelectrocatalyst to generate the targeted compound with an impressive TONHCOOH of 750 in 24 h with respect to the catalyst.128 This novel architecture mimics the natural photosystem via a Z-scheme since both TaON and the Ru-dye are capable of absorbing light. As a result, a high reduction potential is achieved, which allows the catalytic unit to selectively reduce CO2 to HCOOH. The effect of reaction conditions is crucial; the best result is obtained at pH 7 and using Na2CO3 as an added salt, giving a selectivity for HCOOH of 85%. The main issue for the previous system is the use of TaON, with tantalum being a rare and expensive element. Sekizawa et al. recently published a new photocathode for CO2 reduction made of hematite, one of the most abundant and low-cost semiconductor materials. To transform hematite from an n-type to a p-type (required to be used as a photocathode), the semiconductor is doped with N3− and Zn2+, exhibiting a negative band edge shift of 0.9 V. The authors also introduce a layer of TiO2 above it and a layer of Cr2O3 beneath; the first is added to protect the unstable Fe2O3 surface from the aqueous electrolyte and improve electron transfer to the catalyst, while Cr2O3 is added to enhance hole transfer from the semiconductor to the conducting substrate through ohmic contact.129 A variety of Ru catalysts were tested, with [Ru(MeCN)CO2C3Py-P] exhibiting the best results (see Fig. 7). Under optimised reaction conditions, the new photocathode Ru(MeCN)CO2C3Py-P/TiO2/N,Zn-Fe2O3/Cr2O3 produced HCOOH with 63% FE compared to 30% for H2 generation. The use of a polypyrrole network on the backbone of the Ru catalyst improved the stability of the photocathode, which achieved a stable photocurrent of 150 μA cm−2 under an applied bias of 0.1 VRHE in a CO2 saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 solution.
 Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the photocathode used for CO2 reduction composed of a Ru complex/TiO2/N,Zn-Fe2O3/Cr2O3 photocatalyst and (b) its cross-sectional STEM image. Adapted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 


O2 reduction. 
H2O2 is a very versatile chemical, produced in large quantities. The selective 2-electron reduction of O2 to H2O2 is a very desirable light-driven reaction within the chemical industry. Photocatalytic systems made of inorganic semiconductors have shown to drive the reaction, but only under acidic or basic conditions, which make daily application challenging. This is a key reaction to introduce solar chemicals to an industrial scale, since PEC reactors can be built and distributed to third countries, in which H2O2 can be used to disinfect drinking water. Since the start of 2018, two publications have appeared making use of metal oxide semiconductors functionalised by molecular dyes and catalysts to drive the reaction. Jung et al. proposed a NiO photocathode sensitised by a porphyrin, coumarin-343 or Ru–N3 dye.130 In all cases, H2O2 is generated under 1 sun illumination but the photocathode NiO/coumarin gives an impressive 130 μA cm−2 photocurrent, which is one of the largest reported photocurrents with a NiO photocathode. Fig. 8 shows the mechanism of the reaction with the crucial step of superoxide formation, which disproportionates in water to give H2O2. A second paper by Apaydin et al. uses TiO2 nanotubes grown electrochemically on a Ti disk sensitised by a copper monocarboxylate tetraphenylporphyrin.131 The as prepared photocathode shows a photoresponse under illumination in an O2-saturated neutral aqueous solution. The generation of H2O2 is quantified by an indirect spectrophotometric method, which gives a total amount of 13.4 μgH2O2 mgCuTPP–COOH−1 h−1 at an applied potential of −0.3 V.
 Fig. 8  Energy diagram for Por/NiO/FTO electrodes, depicting the process of H2O2 formation. Adapted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 

3.2 Metal chalcogenides

Proton reduction. 
The use of metal chalcogenides as semiconducting materials for reduction reactions is a relatively new field. Quantum dots (QD) have been used in combination with metal oxides to produce photocathodes or functionalised by molecular catalysts to produce photoelectrocatalysts. The first example of a dot-sensitised photocathode for hydrogen evolution was reported by Nann et al. based on a hybrid system using [FeFe]-hydrogenase mimics and InP-QD.132 However, relevant to this section only a few examples of metal chalcogenide-QD photocathodes exist, and they have been covered recently in a review by Wu et al.133 To highlight the most relevant aspects, the authors give credit to the use of hybrid molecular/QD photocathodes to reduce the reaction activation energy for proton reduction. In addition, developing more efficient and stable co-catalysts, especially non-noble metal based, is also one of the key points of future research for photocathode construction. Careful design of the overall architecture of the photocathodes needs to be considered for efficient interfacial charge transfer and minimal recombination reactions.


CO2 reduction. 
Metal chalcogenide-QD have potentially some advantages over organic and organometallic dyes such as excellent solar-light response, adjustable band alignment and exceptional stability. These properties make them ideal inorganic dyes for photoreduction of CO2. So far, particulate hybrid photocatalysts have been constructed showing excellent performance in terms of both CO production and selectivity in aqueous solutions. Both systems are based on precious-metal free elements and have achieved catalytic activities comparable to the best precious-metal based inorganic semiconductors. In particular, a CdS/Ni(tpy) photocatalyst has been tested under photocatalytic reaction conditions, giving 90% selectivity towards CO production.134 This high selectivity has been ascribed to the nature of the molecular catalyst (also shows very high selectivity in homogeneous reactions) and the protection of the CdS surface, known to be responsible for H2 evolution. To ensure the full coverage of the QD surface, a co-adsorbent has been used to protect the whole surface of the CdS from coming into contact with the electrolyte, mercaptopropionic acid (MPA). In a second approach, Kuehnel et al. concentrated the efforts on a Cd-free system using ZnSe-QD. This hasn’t attracted much attention in the production of solar chemicals even though it shows very promising properties such as good band edge alignment to drive CO2 reduction. A phosphonated Ni-cyclam catalyst has been used in combination with a surface inhibitor (2-(dimethylamino)ethanethiol (MEDA)) to generate a photocatalyst capable of a TONCO of 283, but with only a 34% selectivity.135 High concentration of MEDA leads to the displacement of Ni-cyclam due to their competing binding to the QD surface. Therefore, under optimum conditions, only a partial coverage by MEDA can be achieved. Remarkably, the gas mixture generated contains a 2:1 H2:CO ratio, which is the ideal stoichiometry for industrial syngas processes, making this system a good example of solar syngas production.

3.3 Metal phosphides
Since the first example of an all-inorganic PEC cell was developed by Turner et al., many systems containing these inorganic photosensitisers have shown excellent efficiencies in solar cells and in proton reduction devices.136 Turner's group has recently surpassed their own world record efficiency for solar-to-hydrogen efficiency with a novel multi-junction PEC cell for solar water splitting reaching over 16%.137 Even with these promising results, only a few examples for hybrid architectures containing molecular catalysts have been published. Nann et al. produced the first example in 2010, as covered in Section 3.2.138 Since then, Moore's group in Arizona State University has been leading the topic with the use of a variety of p-type GaP substrates including GaP(100) and GaP(111) A and B faces. A cobaloxime proton reduction catalyst was immobilised on a polyvinylpyridine-modified GaP(100) through axial coordination of pyridine moieties to the Co metal centre. The photocathode was able to generate hydrogen using pH 4.5 aqueous solution but deactivated rapidly, among other reasons because of the weak binding of the catalyst to the semiconductor surface.139 Further studies were conducted on GaP(111), obtaining results comparable to those of the previous study. The same catalyst and immobilisation method were used, and at pH 7 a photocurrent density of 890 μA cm−2 was obtained at 0 VRHE.140 More recently, the authors have replaced the cobaloxime catalyst by cobalt and iron metalloporphyrins. Metalloporphyrins have shown excellent selectivity and activity in homogeneous systems, have the possibility of axial binding to the polyvinylpyridine protective coating in GaP and have low overpotentials. In the system by Beiler et al. shown in Fig. 9, the axial coordination of a cobalt porphyrin on the polymeric scaffold leads to the generation of hydrogen in neutral aqueous solutions with a high FE of 93%. This system is more stable than the cobaloxime counterpart, maintaining activity after 1 h, although the formation of hydrogen bubbles on top of the electrode reduces the efficiency and these bubbles need to be removed regularly.141 To improve the binding of the catalyst to the photocathode, Co- and Fe-metalloporphyrins have been synthesised bearing a 4-vinylphenyl moiety. Using the UV-induced immobilisation chemistry of olefins, the proton reduction catalyst can be covalently attached directly to a surface-treated GaP electrode to remove bulk surface oxide layers. Different photoactivities have been observed between Co- and Fe-catalysts; while GaP/Co-porphyrin shows great stability after 4 h of PEC measurements, giving 1.31 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE, the GaP/Fe-photocathode shows a rapid loss of photocurrent activity.142
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of the synthetic method used to prepare the PPy/GaP and CoTTP/PPy/GaP samples. Ref. 141 – Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic representation of the CoP/GaP and FeP/GaP constructs with covalent binding to the semiconductor. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
However, these architectures show promising results for the preparation of the first examples of hybrid metal phosphide photocathodes for CO2 reduction, since Fe- and Co-metalloporphyrins permit access to metalI/metal0 redox couples and are known catalysts for the electrochemical reduction of CO2. Coming back to Turner's research group, a p-type GaInP2 photoelectrode stabilised by an amorphous TiO2 coating and a cobaloxime molecular catalyst has shown excellent performance even after 20 h irradiation, in which at an applied external bias of 0 VRHE, a photocurrent of 8.2 mA cm−2 was obtained after 20 min, and a total TON of 139000 was achieved after 20 h.143
3.4 Carbon-based semiconductors

Proton reduction. 
Carbon-based semiconductors have been the topic of discussion in proton reduction systems for many years. Carbon nanotubes, graphitic surfaces and also graphene have been functionalised by molecular catalysts such as cobaloxime with very good performance under electrocatalytic conditions. However, photocatalytic devices are scarce and broadly related to the use of organic dyes or surface functionalisation of the electrode.144 One of the first systems was published by Chen et al., in which a photocathode made of a PEDOT:PSS/P3HT-C60/cobaloxime combination resulted in the generation of hydrogen. This represented proof of concept as it provided a small photocurrent of 3 μA cm−2 at −0.1 VNHE, due to the small electron transfer driving force (0.1 eV) between the fullerene and the catalyst.145 This limitation prompted authors to find other carbon-based semiconductors suitable for proton reduction.
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-CN) is an attractive metal-free semiconductor, with a low cost and an adjustable band gap depending on surface functionalisation. Kasap et al. generated a photocatalyst made of a cyanamide surface-functionalised melon-type carbon nitride and a molecular nickel(II) bis(diphosphine) H2-evolution catalyst. This photocatalyst enabled the production of H2 with concomitant selective oxidation of benzylic alcohols to aldehydes in high yield under purely aqueous conditions, at room temperature and ambient pressure.146 Cyanamide functionalisation provides the photocatalyst with the capacity to absorb in the visible range; while the incorporation of a selective proton reduction catalyst is crucial to observe H2 evolution, a photocatalyst without the Ni-catalyst doesn’t produce any hydrogen. As shown in Fig. 10, the system is highly selective to the oxidation to aldehydes and this is ascribed to surface functionalisation by cyanamide, and also by the presence of the nickel catalyst. This system represents a very good example of hydrogen production with simultaneous generation of a high value added chemical. Due to this, easy separation steps would be required to obtain the organic chemical in the pure form.
 Fig. 10  Schematic representation of the cyanamide functionalised carbon nitride, NCNCNx, for solar-driven simultaneous proton reduction and alcohol oxidation in aqueous solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 


CO2 reduction. 
Purely carbon-based semiconductors for CO2 reduction are also limited and based on g-CN functionalised by a molecular photocatalyst. Kuriki et al. reported one of the first examples of visible light driven photocatalytic CO2 reduction to formic acid using a carbon nitride photocatalyst.147 A series of ruthenium bipyridine photocatalysts for the selective formation of HCOOH were used, in which the immobilised phosphonated derivative provided the best results with a TON over 1000 and remained stable after 20 h irradiation, with a selectivity of 80%. Given the variability of results and methodologies to produce carbon nitride semiconductors, Walsh et al. studied three different precursors, namely urea, thiourea and dicyandiamide, in combination with an in situ prepared cobalt bipyridine catalyst.148 Surprising results were obtained where the selectivity towards CO production was enhanced when urea was used as the precursor, whereas H2 evolution was favoured with thiourea. Remarkably, it was found that the high activity of urea-derived materials correlated with a lower yield of long-lived deeply-trapped photogenerated charges, stressing the importance of defect and other potential charge trap sites in controlling the photochemistry of g-CN. On the other hand, following up with the excellent results obtained for CO2 conversion to CO found in the photocatalytic dyads made of ruthenium and rhenium developed by Ishitani, Wada et al. used carbon nitride nanosheets functionalised by rutile TiO2 nanoparticles incorporating the Ru–Re phosphonated dyad.149 The presence of TiO2 has a dual function: (i) to improve the interfacial charge transfer from the semiconductor to the photocatalyst; and (ii) to provide adsorption sites and suppress the undesirable desorption of the complex. The powder photocatalyst showed very good selectivity towards CO although the reaction was performed in an N,N-dimethylacetamide/triethanolamine mixture (4:1 v/v).

3.5 Other semiconductors
The widespread use of silicon solar panels has provided a significant price drop for crystalline Si over the past few years. Surprisingly, to our knowledge, only one paper has been published with a hybrid photocathode working under aqueous solution. Leung et al. used a mesoporous TiO2 layer to protect p-Si from water, known to form an insulating silica (SiOx) layer.150 Ni-DuBois and cobaloxime proton reduction catalysts have been immobilised onto the photocathode and tested under an acetic acid solution at pH 4.5. The p-Si/TiO2/Ni-catalyst photocathode assembly evolved hydrogen for 24 h with a TON of 646 with respect to the catalyst, although progressive deactivation was observed due to the desorption of the Ni-catalyst from the TiO2 surface. In contrast, the photocathode containing cobaloxime shows a rapid decline of photocurrent density in agreement with the known limited stability of cobaloxime due to ligand hydrogenation or the formation of ligand radical species. Nonetheless, this work shows a simple and promising solution for the use of protected p-Si photocathodes in aqueous solutions in combination with selective molecular catalysts.
Other types of materials which have seen an exponential growth in the production of solar chemicals have been porous materials, either metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) or covalent–organic frameworks (COFs). These materials have been the scope of recent reviews for light-driven reduction reactions, in which in some examples the presence of a molecular catalyst has provided the desired selectivity for the targeted reactions. In general, proton reduction and CO2 reduction have been the main focus of study so far. For the first, a recent review by Wen et al. summarises the most relevant work on MOFs for proton reduction, including their incorporation into semiconductors to generate a photocathode.151 In terms of CO2 reduction, Diercks et al. showed some designing principles making use of the secondary building blocks, bridging ligands and pores in such materials to fabricate high performing photocatalysts.152 Even though MOFs and COFs are hybrid materials by definition, only some of them have a purely molecular catalyst in the structure. Therefore, we have decided to show most relevant examples and direct the reader to recent reviews on the topic. COFs for proton reduction have been the topic of a review by Banerjee et al. in which the authors have discussed rational designing features to produce highly active photocatalysts.153
4. Tandem photoelectrochemical devices
Hybrid tandem PEC cells offer the advantage of achieving a wide bandgap using a Z-scheme strategy with an n-type and a p-type semiconductor. In combination with selective molecular catalysts, uphill reactions such as H2O and CO2 to produce H2 and CO can effectively be conducted without any external bias. Interestingly, any substrate can be used independently in each photoelectrode, opening an immense pool of solar chemicals to be produced, with the only requirement that one needs to be oxidised, while the other needs to be reduced. Compared to photoredox catalysis, one can easily envisage that immobilised selective molecular catalysts for organic transformations can be coupled to wide bandgap inorganic semiconductors and generate systems which can be scaled-up and incorporated into industrial processes.
A few examples exist in which hybrid tandem PEC cells have shown activity for H2 evolution. The group of Professor Licheng Sun created the first examples of Pt-free tandem PEC cells using a photoanode containing TiO2/Ru-catalyst and a photocathode made of NiO/dye/cobaloxime. The high activity of the photoanode allowed the production of enough current and protons on the anodic half-cell so that a photocathode made of NiO could indeed produce hydrogen. Still, the photocathodic reaction was the limiting step with photocurrents smaller than the anodic counterpart. The authors studied the effect of forward or back illumination, considering the different charge transfer kinetics of TiO2 and NiO. In addition, they also measured the photocurrents obtained using one or two light sources. As expected, the photocurrent using two light sources with back irradiation produced the highest values. Under 100 mW cm−2 irradiation, the first PEC containing a [Ru(bpy)3]2+ dye in the photocathode produced a modest photocurrent of 12 μA cm−2 that decayed after a few minutes.51 In the second attempt, using triarylamine-type organic dyes for both photoelectrodes, the hybrid tandem PEC cell produced 70 μA cm−2 with a FE of 55% with respect to H2 evolved.154 Both systems represent a stepping stone in the quest for tandem devices and lead the way for new systems to be created.
For CO2 reduction, Professor Ishitani's research group has very recently developed the first examples of hybrid tandem PEC cells able to selectively reduce CO2 to CO. Their first PEC cell contains a TaON/CoOx photoanode with a NiO/RuRe photocathode.125 Under optimal reaction conditions from which we highlight a different pH in both half-cells (pH 8.3 under Ar for the anode; pH 6.6 under CO2 for the cathode) and the application of an external bias of 0.3 V, FEs of 68% for O2 and 37% for H2 and CO have been obtained after 1 h irradiation. A second hybrid tandem cell has been constructed with the same photoanode as before and a CuGaO2/RuRe photocathode, as shown in Fig. 11.127 Of relevance, the same electrolyte (no chemical bias) has been used for both half-cells and no applied bias is needed. However, different light irradiation conditions have been used for the photoanode and photocathode to achieve sufficient photoexcitation of the loaded RuRe on the photocathode. Nonetheless, after 2 h the system produces reduction (H2 and CO) and oxidation (O2) products with total FEs of 72% and 70%, respectively. So far, this has been the only example of a bias-free hybrid tandem PEC cell for CO2 reduction, but has opened up the possibility for more efficient and broader scope devices to generate other solar chemicals with industrial relevance.
 Fig. 11  Schematic image of the hybrid PEC cell in a Z-scheme configuration containing a CoOx/TaON photoanode with a RuRe/CuGaO2 photocathode for CO2 reduction. Ref. 127 – Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Conclusions and outlook
The area of solar chemicals has experienced an exponential increase of attention in the past 5 years. A wide variety of approaches have been proposed, from fully inorganic to molecular systems. It has been a recurrent problem that many systems rely on sacrificial agents, which prevents a fully operational device from being built. To overcome this problem, PEC cells and powder photocatalysts have been generated so that both oxidation and reduction half-reactions could be coupled and the use of sacrificial chemicals could be avoided. Recently, some all-inorganic and hybrid systems have demonstrated excellent performance and stability for the production of the most common chemicals, O2 and H2. However, the scope of solar-driven reactions is much wider and the need for more selective systems is driving researchers to produce novel systems.155 In this Feature Article we have discussed most of the recent developments in hybrid molecule/semiconductor architectures for light-driven chemical transformations. We have focused on the type of semiconductor, the catalysts used and the targeted products and summarised the results obtained in terms of photocurrent, selectivity and efficiency. The synthetic methods for the preparation of the photocatalysts and photoelectrodes, for both semiconductors and molecules involved, have been briefly covered since other specific reviews can be found in the literature. As a general overview of the systems shown, TiO2 and NiO have governed photoanode and photocathode devices with the large majority of systems produced using these semiconductors. We have briefly explained the advantages and limitations, the latter being responsible for a new generation of photocatalysts and photoelectrodes using other materials.
Positive highlights of the work done so far in the area are incredible improvements of stability and activity for the most recent systems, largely due to a better understanding of the processes occurring after light irradiation. Basic concepts on photoelectrochemistry have been applied to fully understand charge transfer kinetics, solid–solid interfaces, solid–liquid interfaces and light-activated reaction mechanisms, among others. In addition, the use of advanced characterisation techniques for in situ and operando conditions has provided tremendous information about rate limiting steps, undesired reaction pathways and deactivation products, all of which have led to an improvement of the materials used. It has to be noted that, even though a lot of knowledge on solar cells can be applied to solar chemicals, the complexity of the latter has limited the advancement in the area until very recently.
In contrast, it needs to be noted that the application of hybrid systems for the large-scale production of solar chemicals is still a long-term objective. Many drawbacks need to be solved to fabricate devices that can operate for years, even more if we aim at fully earth-abundant element systems. Among our foremost concerns, the lack of a set of standard reaction conditions limits a proper comparative study of the architectures generated so far, even simple parameters such as light intensity, pH and the presence or absence of a membrane become crucial to analyse the results. Looking closely at the reasons for the loss of (photo)catalytic activity, one can decipher how to improve the hybrid system. A common weakness derives from the immobilisation of the molecular component on the semiconductor surface. It is well known that the molecular engineering of semiconductor surfaces greatly affects their electronic properties, and this becomes more pronounced in the presence of an aqueous (liquid interface) solution. Careful design of anchoring groups is fundamental to generate stable devices, which still is a challenge for the scientific community. Another important aspect to consider is the stability of the molecular component within the hybrid system. A common issue in homogeneous catalysis has been the decomposition under reaction conditions, which limits the applicability on the industrial scale. However, recent molecular catalysts for water oxidation, proton reduction, CO2 reduction and others have shown TONs exceeding those of comparable heterogeneous catalysts, mainly thanks to the very high TOFs achieved after careful ligand design. It has become certain that molecular catalysts can be used on large-scale chemical production, with the advantage that their immobilisation further stabilises the catalysts.
Despite a number of crucial challenges for hybrid devices in the production of solar chemicals, recent developments have proven the enormous potential of such technology on a wide number of chemical transformations. Solar-driven chemistry will play a critical role in areas such as clean energy technology, sustainable development and a green industry for a low-carbon future, all of them certainly related to the 17 Sustainable Development Goals set by the UN.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
S. H. thanks the College of Science at NUI Galway for its financial support. P. F. gratefully acknowledges the Royal Society for a Newton International Fellowship and for the financial support.
Notes and references
U. G. Assembly, Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 2018.
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 616–619 CrossRef PubMed .

          T. Bradford, Solar Revolution: The Economic Transformation of the Global Energy Industry, The MIT Press,  2008 Search PubMed .

          H. Scheer, The solar economy: renewable energy for a sustainable global future, Earthscan Publications, London,  2002 Search PubMed .
Australian Renewable Energy Agency Annual Report, Canberra, 2017.
Considering Australia's average of 13700 km per vehicle.
M. Antonietti and A. Savateev, Chem. Rec. DOI:10.1002/tcr.201700062 .
C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645–4660 RSC .
H. Pang, T. Masuda and J. Ye, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 127–142 CrossRef PubMed .
K. K. Sakimoto, N. Kornienko and P. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 476–481 CrossRef PubMed .
D. L. Ashford, M. K. Gish, A. K. Vannucci, M. K. Brennaman, J. L. Templeton, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 13006–13049 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Passalacqua, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 219–240 CrossRef .
F. Li, H. Yang, W. Li and L. Sun, Joule, 2018, 2, 36–60 CrossRef .
J. H. Montoya, L. C. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 70–81 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Xu, N. S. McCool and T. E. Mallouk, Nano Today, 2017, 14, 42–58 CrossRef .
S. Chu, W. Li, Y. Yan, T. Hamann, I. Shih, D. Wang and Z. Mi, Nano Futures, 2017, 1, 22001 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, A. Li, T. Yao, C. Ma, X. Zhang, J. H. Shah and H. Han, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4277–4305 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kumar, K. Ojha and A. K. Ganguli, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1600981 CrossRef .
X. Wang and C. Li, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2017, 33, 165–179 CrossRef .
S. Chabi, K. M. Papadantonakis, N. S. Lewis and M. S. Freund, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1320–1338 Search PubMed .
B. Rausch, M. D. Symes, G. Chisholm and L. Cronin, Science, 2014, 345, 1326–1330 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Berardi, S. Drouet, L. Francàs, C. Gimbert-Suriñach, M. Guttentag, C. Richmond, T. Stoll and A. Llobet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7501–7519 RSC .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 3 CrossRef .
J. D. Blakemore, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12974–13005 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, L. Duan, Y. Xu, M. Gorlov, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7307 RSC .
S. Roeser, P. Farràs, F. Bozoglian, M. Martínez-Belmonte, J. Benet-Buchholz and A. Llobet, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 197–207 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Youngblood, S. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, L. Duan, F. Wen, C. Li, M. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 988–990 RSC .
J. A. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 687–689 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Kirner and R. G. Finke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19560–19592 Search PubMed .
J. Jiang, B. D. Sherman, Y. Zhao, R. He, I. Ghiviriga, L. Alibabaei, T. J. Meyer, G. Leem and K. S. Schanze, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19529–19534 Search PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wu, T. Nishikawa, B. Ohtani and A. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4530–4537 CrossRef .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24–28 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Burda, Y. Lou, X. Chen, A. C. S. Samia, J. Stout and J. L. Gole, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1049–1051 CrossRef .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen and L. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef .
D. Wang, S. L. Marquard, L. Troian-Gautier, M. V. Sheridan, B. D. Sherman, Y. Wang, M. S. Eberhart, B. H. Farnum, C. J. Dares and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 719–726 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Alibabaei, M. K. Brennaman, M. R. Norris, B. Kalanyan, W. Song, M. D. Losego, J. J. Concepcion, R. A. Binstead, G. N. Parsons and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 20008–20013 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hanson, D. A. Torelli, A. K. Vannucci, M. K. Brennaman, H. Luo, L. Alibabaei, W. Song, D. L. Ashford, M. R. Norris, C. R. K. Glasson, J. J. Concepcion and T. J. Meyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12782–12785 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Liu, T. Cardolaccia, B. J. Hornstein, J. R. Schoonover and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2446–2447 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Francàs, X. Sala, J. Benet-Buchholz, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 321–329 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926–927 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gao, X. Ding, J. Liu, L. Wang, Z. Lu, L. Li and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4219–4222 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Vannucci, L. Alibabaei, M. D. Losego, J. J. Concepcion, B. Kalanyan, G. N. Parsons and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 20918–20922 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ding, Y. Gao, L. Zhang, Z. Yu, J. Liu and L. Sun, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2347–2350 CrossRef .
X. Ding, Y. Gao, L. Ye, L. Zhang and L. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3992–3995 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ding, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, A. Liu and Y. Gao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 357, 130–143 CrossRef .
K. Fan, F. Li, L. Wang, Q. Daniel, E. Gabrielsson and L. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 25234–25240 RSC .
F. Li, K. Fan, L. Wang, Q. Daniel, L. Duan and L. Sun, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3786–3790 CrossRef .
A. M. Lapides, D. L. Ashford, K. Hanson, D. A. Torelli, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15450–15458 CrossRef PubMed .
D. L. Ashford, A. M. Lapides, A. K. Vannucci, K. Hanson, D. A. Torelli, D. P. Harrison, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6578–6581 CrossRef PubMed .
D. L. Ashford, B. D. Sherman, R. A. Binstead, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 4860–4863 CrossRef .
L. Alibabaei, B. D. Sherman, M. R. Norris, M. K. Brennaman and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 5899–5902 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-R. Wee, B. D. Sherman, M. K. Brennaman, M. V. Sheridan, A. Nayak, L. Alibabaei and T. J. Meyer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2969–2975 Search PubMed .
B. D. Sherman, J. J. Bergkamp, C. L. Brown, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. A. Moore, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1812–1817 Search PubMed .
B. D. Sherman, D. L. Ashford, A. M. Lapides, M. V. Sheridan, K. R. Wee and T. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3213–3217 CrossRef .
M. V. Sheridan, D. J. Hill, B. D. Sherman, D. Wang, S. L. Marquard, K. R. Wee, J. F. Cahoon and T. J. Meyer, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2440–2446 CrossRef PubMed .
B. D. Sherman, Y. Xie, M. V. Sheridan, D. Wang, D. W. Shaffer, T. J. Meyer and J. J. Concepcion, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 124–128 CrossRef .
B. D. Sherman, M. V. Sheridan, K. R. Wee, S. L. Marquard, D. Wang, L. Alibabaei, D. L. Ashford and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16745–16753 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Matheu, I. A. Moreno-Hernandez, X. Sala, H. B. Gray, B. S. Brunschwig, A. Llobet and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11345–11348 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kudo, K. Ueda, H. Kato and I. Mikami, Catal. Lett., 1998, 53, 229–230 CrossRef .
L. Han, F. F. Abdi, R. Van De Krol, R. Liu, Z. Huang, H. J. Lewerenz, B. Dam, M. Zeman and A. H. M. Smets, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2832–2838 CrossRef PubMed .
F. F. Abdi and R. van de Krol, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9398–9404 Search PubMed .
T. H. Jeon, W. Choi and H. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21392–21401 RSC .
J. A. Seabold and K.-S. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2186–2192 CrossRef PubMed .
F. F. Abdi, N. Firet and R. Van de Krol, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 490–496 CrossRef .
A. Jia, M. Kan, J. Jia and Y. Zhaot, J. Semicond., 2017, 38, 3–9 Search PubMed .
D. K. Lee and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Energy, 2017, 3, 53–60 CrossRef .
Y. Bi, B. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Zhang and Y. Ding, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2248–2252 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ye, C. Ding, R. Chen, F. Fan, P. Fu, H. Yin, X. Wang, Z. Wang, P. Du and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3250–3256 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, F. Li, X. Zhou, F. Yu, J. Du, L. Bai and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6911–6915 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 3 CrossRef .
D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4202–4207 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759–1764 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, K. Fan, H. Chen, Q. Daniel, B. Philippe, H. Rensmo and L. Sun, Catal. Today, 2017, 290, 73–77 CrossRef .
C. Cui, M. Heggen, W. D. Zabka, W. Cui, J. Osterwalder, B. Probst and R. Alberto, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1341 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Seabold and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1105–1112 CrossRef .
T. Jin, P. Diao, D. Xu and Q. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 114, 271–277 CrossRef .
J. Huang, Y. Ding, X. Luo and Y. Feng, J. Catal., 2016, 333, 200–206 CrossRef .
K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 11122–11137 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Domen, A. Kudo, A. Tanaka and T. Onishi, Catal. Today, 1990, 8, 77–84 CrossRef .
W. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600371 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Meyer, M. Ranocchiari and J. A. van Bokhoven, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1923–1937 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, P. Cui, H. Yang, J. Chen, F. Xiao, Y. Guo, Y. Liu, W. Zhang, F. Huo and B. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2015, 3, 1–6 Search PubMed .
Y. Dou, J. Zhou, A. Zhou, J.-R. Li and Z. Nie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19491–19498 Search PubMed .
Y. Choi, D. Jeon, Y. Choi, J. Ryu and B.-S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13434–13441 Search PubMed .
R. Brimblecombe, J. Chen, P. Wagner, T. Buchhorn, G. C. Dismukes, L. Spiccia and G. F. Swiegers, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2011, 338, 1–6 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, P. Wagner, L. Tong, G. G. Wallace, D. L. Officer and G. F. Swiegers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1907–1910 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, P. Wagner, L. Tong, D. Boskovic, W. Zhang, D. Officer, G. G. Wallace and G. F. Swiegers, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2797 RSC .
W. Song, A. K. Vannucci, B. H. Farnum, A. M. Lapides, M. K. Brennaman, B. Kalanyan, L. Alibabaei, J. J. Concepcion, M. D. Losego, G. N. Parsons and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9773–9779 CrossRef PubMed .
T. V. Pho, M. V. Sheridan, Z. A. Morseth, B. D. Sherman, T. J. Meyer, J. M. Papanikolas, K. S. Schanze and J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9125–9133 Search PubMed .
P. Farràs, C. Di Giovanni, J. N. Clifford, E. Palomares and A. Llobet, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 304–305, 202–208 CrossRef .
P. Farràs, C. Di Giovanni, J. N. Clifford, P. Garrido-Barros, E. Palomares and A. Llobet, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 255–260 RSC .
S. S. Patil, M. G. Mali, M. A. Hassan, D. R. Patil, S. S. Kolekar and S. W. Ryu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Mori, M. Tottori, K. Watanabe, M. Che and H. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21358–21362 Search PubMed .
C. Guo, J. Ran, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 45–56 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, N. Li, Z. Kong, W.-J. Ong and X. Zhao, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 9–27 RSC .
B. D. Matson and J. C. Peters, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1448–1455 CrossRef .
L. D’Amario, J. Föhlinger, G. Boschloo and L. Hammarström, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 223–230 RSC .
C. J. Wood, G. H. Summers, C. A. Clark, N. Kaeffer, M. Braeutigam, L. R. Carbone, L. D’Amario, K. Fan, Y. Farré, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, L. A. Stevens, C. D. J. Parmenter, M. W. Fay, A. La Torre, C. E. Snape, B. Dietzek, D. Dini, L. Hammarström, Y. Pellegrin, F. Odobel, L. Sun, V. Artero and E. A. Gibson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 10727–10738 RSC .
C. E. Castillo, M. Gennari, T. Stoll, J. Fortage, A. Deronzier, M.-N. Collomb, M. Sandroni, F. Légalité, E. Blart, Y. Pellegrin, C. Delacote, M. Boujtita, F. Odobel, P. Rannou and S. Sadki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 5806–5818 Search PubMed .
J. M. Gardner, M. Beyler, M. Karnahl, S. Tschierlei, S. Ott and L. Hammarström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19322–19325 CrossRef PubMed .
B. van den Bosch, J. A. Rombouts, R. V. A. Orru, J. N. H. Reek and R. J. Detz, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 1392–1398 CrossRef .
A. Reynal, J. Willkomm, N. M. Muresan, F. Lakadamyali, M. Planells, E. Reisner and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12768–12771 RSC .
Z. Ji, M. He, Z. Huang, U. Ozkan and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11696–11699 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Braumüller, M. Schulz, D. Sorsche, M. Pfeffer, M. Schaub, J. Popp, B.-W. Park, A. Hagfeldt, B. Dietzek and S. Rau, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 5577–5586 RSC .
P. B. Pati, L. Zhang, B. Philippe, R. Fernández-Terán, S. Ahmadi, L. Tian, H. Rensmo, L. Hammarström and H. Tian, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2480–2495 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Kaeffer, J. Massin, C. Lebrun, O. Renault, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and V. Artero, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12308–12311 CrossRef PubMed .
R. J. Kamire, M. B. Majewski, W. L. Hoffeditz, B. T. Phelan, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 541–549 RSC .
P. Meng, M. Wang, Y. Yang, S. Zhang and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18852–18859 Search PubMed .
K. A. Click, D. R. Beauchamp, Z. Huang, W. Chen and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1174–1179 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Gross, C. E. Creissen, K. L. Orchard and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 5537–5546 RSC .
E. A. Gibson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6194–6209 RSC .
V. Nikolaou, A. Charisiadis, G. Charalambidis, A. G. Coutsolelos and F. Odobel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21077–21113 Search PubMed .
D. A. Hoogeveen, M. Fournier, S. A. Bonke, A. Nattestad, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle, L. Spiccia, A. J. Mozer and A. N. Simonov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 25836–25846 Search PubMed .
J. Warnan, J. Willkomm, J. N. Ng, R. Godin, S. Prantl, J. R. Durrant and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3070–3079 RSC .
K. L. Orchard, D. Hojo, K. P. Sokol, M.-J. Chan, N. Asao, T. Adschiri and E. Reisner, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12638–12641 RSC .
C. E. Creissen, J. Warnan and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 1439–1447 RSC .

          T. Morikawa, S. Sato and T. Arai, Molecular Devices for Solar Energy Conversion and Storage, Green Chemistry and Sustainable Technology, Springer, Singapore,  2018, pp. 259–280 Search PubMed .
G. Neri, M. Forster, J. J. Walsh, C. M. Robertson, T. J. Whittles, P. Farràs and A. J. Cowan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 14200–14203 RSC .
G. Sahara, H. Kumagai, K. Maeda, N. Kaeffer, V. Artero, M. Higashi, R. Abe and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14152–14158 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Sahara, R. Abe, M. Higashi, T. Morikawa, K. Maeda, Y. Ueda and O. Ishitani, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10722–10725 RSC .
H. Kumagai, G. Sahara, K. Maeda, M. Higashi, R. Abe and O. Ishitani, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4242–4249 RSC .
A. Nakada, T. Nakashima, K. Sekizawa, K. Maeda and O. Ishitani, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4364–4371 RSC .
K. Sekizawa, S. Sato, T. Arai and T. Morikawa, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1405–1416 CrossRef .
O. Jung, M. L. Pegis, Z. Wang, G. Banerjee, C. T. Nemes, W. L. Hoffeditz, J. T. Hupp, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, G. W. Brudvig and J. M. Mayer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4079–4084 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Apaydin, H. Seelajaroen, O. Pengsakul, P. Thamyongkit, N. S. Sariciftci, J. Kunze-Liebhäuser and E. Portenkirchner, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 1793 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Nann, S. K. Ibrahim, P.-M. Woi, S. Xu, J. Ziegler and C. J. Pickett, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1574–1577 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-L. Wu, X.-B. Li, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700684 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. Kuehnel, K. L. Orchard, K. E. Dalle and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7217–7223 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. Kuehnel, C. D. Sahm, G. Neri, J. R. Lee, K. L. Orchard, A. J. Cowan and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 2501–2509 RSC .
A. Heller and J. A. Turner, Science, 1984, 223, 1141–1148 Search PubMed .
J. L. Young, M. A. Steiner, H. Döscher, R. M. France, J. A. Turner and T. G. Deutsch, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17028 CrossRef .
T. Nann, S. K. Ibrahim, P.-M. Woi, S. Xu, J. Ziegler and C. J. Pickett, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1574–1577 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Cedeno, A. Krawicz, P. Doak, M. Yu, J. B. Neaton and G. F. Moore, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3222–3226 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Beiler, D. Khusnutdinova, S. I. Jacob and G. F. Moore, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10038–10047 Search PubMed .
A. M. Beiler, D. Khusnutdinova, B. L. Wadsworth and G. F. Moore, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 12178–12185 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Khusnutdinova, A. M. Beiler, B. L. Wadsworth, S. I. Jacob and G. F. Moore, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 253–259 RSC .
J. Gu, Y. Yan, J. L. Young, K. X. Steirer, N. R. Neale and J. A. Turner, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 456–460 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. T. Nishanthi, B. Venugopala Rao and K. Kailasam, Visible Light-Active Photocatalysis, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2018, pp. 329–363 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Chen and H. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11508–11511 RSC .
H. Kasap, C. A. Caputo, B. C. M. Martindale, R. Godin, V. W. Lau, B. V. Lotsch, J. R. Durrant and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9183–9192 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kuriki, K. Sekizawa, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2406–2409 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Walsh, C. Jiang, J. Tang and A. J. Cowan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 24825–24829 RSC .
K. Wada, C. S. K. Ranasinghe, R. Kuriki, A. Yamakata, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23869–23877 Search PubMed .
J. J. Leung, J. Warnan, D. H. Nam, J. Z. Zhang, J. Willkomm and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 5172–5180 RSC .
M. Wen, K. Mori, Y. Kuwahara, T. An and H. Yamashita, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 555–569 CrossRef .
C. S. Diercks, Y. Liu, K. E. Cordova and O. M. Yaghi, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 301–307 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Banerjee, K. Gottschling, G. Savasci, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 400–409 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, K. Fan, B. Xu, E. Gabrielsson, Q. Daniel, L. Li and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9153–9159 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Lanzafame, S. Abate, C. Ampelli, C. Genovese, R. Passalacqua, G. Centi and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4409–4419 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Pau Farràs and Seán Hennessey
	Pau Farràs (left) received his research training at the Materials Science Institute of Barcelona (PhD, Prof. Teixidor), Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (PDRA, Prof. Llobet) and Newcastle University (Newton Fellow, Prof. Benniston). Since 2015, he has been Lecturer in Inorganic Chemistry at NUI Galway developing molecular and hybrid systems for the production of solar chemicals. He has 30 peer-reviewed publications and is leading SEAFUEL (EU-INTERREG). Seán Hennessey (right) was born in Liverpool in 1994 and moved to NUI Galway in 2012 where he received his BSc in 2016. He obtained first-class honours for an MSc (Dr Farràs) and a first peer-reviewed publication. He was awarded a PhD scholarship from NUI Galway to continue his work with Dr Farràs.


H2O → HO˙ + 1H+ + 1e−	2.80	(1)	2H+ + 2e− → H2	0.00	(8)
2H2O → HOOH + 2H+ + 2e−	1.77	(2)	
	
	

2H2O → HOO˙ + 3H+ + 3e−	1.67	(3)	CO2 + 1e− → CO2˙−	−1.49	(9)
2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−	1.23	(4)	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCO2H	−0.20	(10)

	
	
	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	−0.12	(11)
2Cl− → Cl2 + 2e−	1.36	(5)	2CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2C2O4	−0.08	(12)
2Cl− + 2H2O → 2HClO + 2H+ + 2e−	1.63	(6)	CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O	−0.07	(13)

	
	
	CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O	0.03	(14)
N2 + H2O → N2O + 2H+ + 2e−	1.77	(7)	CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	0.17	(15)



	
	
	N2 + 6H+ + 6e− → 2NH3	0.55	(16)

	
	
	N2 + 8H+ + 8e− → 2NH4+	0.27	(17)

 	Fig. 1  Schemes of the different architectures used in hybrid molecule/semiconductor devices, applied for both powder photocatalysts and supported photoelectrocatalysts: a semiconductor with an oxidation catalyst (OC) (a) and a reduction catalyst (RC) (d) in the presence of a sacrificial electron acceptor (SEA) or donor (SED), respectively, or attached to an electrode (EL); a semiconductor with both oxidation and reduction catalysts (b); a Z-scheme tandem configuration with a redox shuttle (RS) (e); a semiconductor as an electron conductor for a supported photosensitiser (PS) and a reduction catalyst (c); and a semiconductor acting as a support without any charge transfer process (f).	 
2H2O → O2 + 2H2	(18)

 	Fig. 2  Calculated oxidation potential ϕox (red bars) and reduction potential ϕre (black bars) relative to NHE and vacuum energy levels for a series of semiconductors in solution at pH = 0, the ambient temperature 298.15 K, and pressure 1 bar. The water redox potentials ϕ(O2/H2O) and ϕ(H+/H2) (dashed lines) and the valence (green columns) and conduction (blue columns) band edge positions at pH = 0 are also plotted. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Examples of photoanode assemblies for photoelectrochemical cells. (a) A one-layer anode system with photosensitiser and catalyst moieties kept separate from each other. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Covalently linked catalyst–photosensitiser anchored to metal oxide. Reproduced from ref. 41. Copyright (2013) National Academy of Science.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of a cross section of a Si-based photoanode decorated with the molecular water oxidation precatalyst 1(O) (red circles). Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of an integrated BiVO4 photoanode system, CoPO3/pGO/LDH/BiVO4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Scheme of the photocathode composed of dye (DPP-P) and catalyst (NiP) co-immobilised on the CuCrO2 electrode with their molecular structures. [Ref. 122] – Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the photocathode used for CO2 reduction composed of a Ru complex/TiO2/N,Zn-Fe2O3/Cr2O3 photocatalyst and (b) its cross-sectional STEM image. Adapted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Energy diagram for Por/NiO/FTO electrodes, depicting the process of H2O2 formation. Adapted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of the synthetic method used to prepare the PPy/GaP and CoTTP/PPy/GaP samples. Ref. 141 – Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic representation of the CoP/GaP and FeP/GaP constructs with covalent binding to the semiconductor. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic representation of the cyanamide functionalised carbon nitride, NCNCNx, for solar-driven simultaneous proton reduction and alcohol oxidation in aqueous solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic image of the hybrid PEC cell in a Z-scheme configuration containing a CoOx/TaON photoanode with a RuRe/CuGaO2 photocathode for CO2 reduction. Ref. 127 – Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
