Recent progress on upgrading of bio-oil to hydrocarbons over metal/zeolite bifunctional catalysts  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CY00574A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CY00574A
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 2385-2415Recent progress on upgrading of bio-oil to hydrocarbons over metal/zeolite bifunctional catalysts

        
          
            Yanchun 
            Shi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Enhui 
            Xing
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kejing 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianlong 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mingde 
            Yang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yulong 
            Wu
          
        
      *ac
aInstitute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, PR China. E-mail: wylong@tsinghua.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Catalytic Materials and Reaction Engineering, Research Institute of Petroleum Processing, Sinopec, Beijing 100083, China
cBeijing Engineering Research Center for Biofuels, Beijing 100084, China
Received 
      24th March 2017
    , Accepted 2nd May 2017First published on 3rd May 2017AbstractUpgrading of bio-oil is of high necessity and popularity in converting biomass to high-quality hydrocarbons (transportation fuels and petrochemicals) to reduce the overall CO2 emissions of fossil based materials. There are hundreds of different oxygenated compounds identified in bio-oil, resulting in a high oxygen content (30% to 50%). This review focuses on recent progress in the upgrading of bio-oil over metal/zeolite bifunctional catalysts, with model compounds and real bio-oil included. Firstly, typical model compounds and corresponding reaction routes are summarized, based upon the composition of the bio-oil and a basic knowledge of chemical reactions. Secondly, careful analyses are conducted on the deoxygenation mechanisms over different metal active centers and acid-catalyzed reactions, such as isomerization and cracking, over zeolitic acid sites, respectively. Moreover, detailed analyses have focused on the effect of metal loadings on zeolites, the effects of zeolitic porosity and acidity on the metal, and their overall effects on reaction activity, selectivity and stability. Thirdly, the fundamental understanding of the interaction between the metal centers and zeolite acid sites in bifunctional catalysts and their influences on complex reaction networks, including deoxygenation and acid-catalyzed reactions, is analyzed. The metal/acid balance may be the key in improving the catalytic activity and product selectivity in the upgrading of bio-oil, which needs further careful design. Finally, the potential challenges and opportunities for the upgrading of bio-oil over metal/zeolite bifunctional catalysts are outlined.
1. Introduction
Importance of biomass energy
Demand for transportation fuels, which accounts for approximately one fifth of total energy consumption, and basic petrochemical products is high because of our daily consumption and the constantly increasing global economy and population. The rapid depletion of limited fossil fuel reserves has drawn political and economic concerns about its long-term availability. Environmental protectors often accuse fossil-based materials of not being environmentally benign, with emissions of CO2, S, and N pollutants. S and N compounds could be effectively eliminated from transportation fuels by pre- or post-treatment. However, CO2 emissions (carbon footprint), which is closely associated with global warming, can hardly be reduced because of its fossil essence. Therefore, it is necessary to seek for alternative and sustainable sources of transportation fuels and petrochemicals.1–3 Among potential sustainable energy sources, including solar, wind, and hydro power, biomass is regarded as one of the most promising renewable resources to reduce the overall carbon footprints of transportation fuels and petrochemicals in the future, because of its reproducibility, carbon neutrality, and environmental benignity.4 It has been recognized as the main part of future regenerative energy since 2000.5 In 2014, biomass energy accounted for approximately 10.3% of the primary energy consumption of the whole world, just inferior to fossil energy sources like petroleum (31.3%), coal (28.6%), and natural gas (21.2%).6 In spite of their contribution to the economy and our daily lives, the refining and petrochemical industries have been accused of non-sustainability for their fossil essence for a rather long period. Therefore, biomass availability throughout the world has been regarded as an ideal and practical substitute for fossil energy in the production of transportation fuels, petrochemicals, and carbon-based materials with limited overall carbon footprints.
Biomass and bio-oil
Generally, biomass is mainly categorized as follows: forest residues (sawdust, branches and bark), agricultural residues (husks and straws), aquatic biomass (microalgae and cyanobacteria), animal manure, and organic wastes. Lignocellulosic biomass is typically composed of the biopolymers cellulose (30–35 wt%), hemicellulose (15–35 wt%), and lignin (20–35 wt%).7–9 Biomass-derived liquid fuels can be produced via a series of conversion routes,10,11 as shown in Fig. 1, which mainly consists of bio-ethanol via fermentation of sugar, bio-diesel via transesterification of lipids, bio-oil from thermochemical conversions, and platform chemicals (such as furan and furfural) via catalytic conversions.12–16 Dark brown and free-flowing with a distinctive smoky odor, bio-oil is produced by thermochemical conversion of biomass, mainly including pyrolysis and hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL).10 Under conversion temperatures ranging from 300 to 700 °C in an anaerobic atmosphere, biomass feedstocks could be thermochemically decomposed into bio-oil, gas, and solid residue.17,18 Moreover, the specific composition of bio-oil depends on many kinds of factors, like the chemical compositions of biomass feedstocks, the temperature and residing time of the reaction process, heating rate, and the efficiency of the product removal system.4,19–22 Bio-oil typically contains a complex mixture of varied compounds, containing phenolics, carboxylic acids, aldehydes, ketones, furan derivatives, and poly-aromatics.
 Fig. 1  Biomass conversion routes and product application. 
The comparison of selected characteristics between bio-oil, the raw material in this review, and target liquid hydrocarbon fuels (mainly transportation fuels and petrochemicals) is shown in Fig. 2,10,11,19 indicating that the quality of bio-oil is inferior to that of liquid hydrocarbons. Although there have been several upgrading methods demonstrated on both the lab and industrial scale, such as aldol condensation,23–26 esterification,27,28 thermal/catalytic cracking29–33 and catalytic deoxygenation,19,34 it seems that removal of O atoms from bio-oil is the most important one. The poor properties of bio-oil are usually associated with its high oxygen content. More than 300 different types of oxygenated compounds have been identified in bio-oil, such as phenolics (phenol, cresols, anisoles, and guaiacols), carboxylic acids, aldehydes, ketones, furfurals/furans, and polyols, some representative compounds of which are presented in Fig. 3. A higher content of oxygenated compounds leads to a low heating value (less than 50% of that of conventional transportation fuels), serious corrosion (high acidity) to containers and pipes used for storage/transport/processing, and thermal and chemical instability (viscosity, and the presence of highly reactive organic compounds). Therefore, the upgrading of bio-oil into liquid hydrocarbons for high-quality fuels or chemicals via catalytic deoxygenation is a priority.
 Fig. 2  Comparison of selected characteristics between target liquid hydrocarbon fuels and bio-oil. 
 Fig. 3  The representative oxygenated compounds of bio-oil. 
Importance of deoxygenation and C-arrangement during bio-oil upgrading
Both thermal and catalytic cracking could remove O atoms from bio-oil effectively. However, they suffer from low hydrocarbon yields, high reaction temperature (>400 °C), incomplete elimination of O atoms, severe coke formation and so on. In most cases, hydro-treatment is best for the complete removal of O atoms at low temperature. Conventional hydro-treating catalysts like sulfided NiMo/γ-Al2O3 and CoMo/γ-Al2O3, noble metals (Pt, Pd, Ru, etc.)35–38 and non-noble metal catalysts (Ni, Co, and Mo, etc.)39–47 have been utilized for the upgrading of bio-oil model compounds (especially for phenols48–50 and carboxylic acids). The proposed catalytic deoxygenation reaction routes of phenol over metal catalysts are shown in Scheme 1a, and the final products are identified as benzene, cyclohexanol and cyclohexane, the actual product being determined by the catalyst utilized. According to Scheme 1b, catalytic deoxygenation of carboxylic acids over metal catalysts formed a range of diesel-like compounds,51–60 mainly C12–C18n-alkanes via three different routes (decarboxylation, decarbonylation and hydrodeoxygenation).60–62 From Scheme 1, different reaction pathways could lead to different product distributions, which are closely related to the selection of the catalysts. Also, from the principles of green chemistry, the hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) route is desirable because of the much lower C atom losses during conversion.
 Scheme 1  Reaction pathway deoxygenation of phenol (a) and carboxylic acids (b) over catalysts.48,60 
To be compatible with target fuels, such as gasoline, diesel, and jet fuels, further upgrading of bio-oil is needed to couple with the removal of O atoms (decrease in viscosity, corrosiveness and acidity) to meet the requirements on the C chain arrangement of hydrocarbons used as transportation fuels. A favorable C chain arrangement is important to the octane number and the distillation point for gasoline, as well as the cetane number, viscosity, the cloud point, and the freezing point for diesel fuels, and the freezing points for jet fuels (Table 1). For a more specific example, the products of catalytic deoxygenation were composed of only n-C12–n-C18 hydrocarbons, which could be efficiently generated over metal catalysts during the upgrading of carboxylic acids. For transportation fuels, especially for jet fuels with highly stringent international standards, branched alkanes are more desirable than n-alkanes to meet the requirements of sufficiently low freezing points to enable them to be used at −55 °C or even lower.63,64 Therefore, acid-catalyzed isomerization and cracking (C chain arrangement) also need to couple with catalytic deoxygenation to satisfy not only the requirement on the freezing point but also the distillation range during the upgrading of the bio-oil. If sufficiently high yields could be achieved, cyclohexane, benzene, toluene, xylene, and other hydrocarbons could be produced as petrochemicals via the combination of O atom removal and appropriate C chain arrangement.
Table 1 Typical properties of C chains for transportation fuels




Metal catalysts













Transportation fuel
Gasoline
Diesel
Jet fuel


Carbon number
5–12
10–22
10–15


Distillation range
30–180
180–350
140–180


Ideal component











Desired structure
Iso-alkane
Branched alkane
Branched alkane


Desired properties
High octane number
High cetane number, low freezing/cloud point
Low freezing point




In petroleum refining and petrochemical processes, arrangements of C–C bonds are usually catalyzed by acid catalysis, among which zeolite catalysts, being famous for their porous features, have found widespread applications and have been proven crucial to the successful development of these processes, such as fluid catalytic cracking (FCC), aromatics conversion, and olefin production. Recent investigations on zeolite-based catalytic materials have become an increasingly hot topic in academia and industry. So far, more than two hundred zeolitic frameworks have been defined, announced and confirmed by the International Zeolite Association, and each framework is described using a three-letter code. However, even with natural zeolites included, industrially applied zeolite-based catalysts, such as zeolites Y (FAU), ZSM-5 (MFI), mordeite (MOR), beta (BEA), MCM-22 (MWW), ZSM-22 (TON), and SAPO-34 (CHA), are given particular importance in petroleum refining and petrochemical processes. The most probable reason is their unique pore architectures that can provide a perfect match with the requirements of target reactions. In addition, their active sites are easily accessible by guest molecules, as described by a smart fit between cavity/channel and reactant/product/transitional states, thereby enhancing the activity and selectivity of the hydrocarbon conversion over zeolite-based catalysts; this property is called shape selectivity. Other acidic supports are not discussed in detail in this review because of the deficiency in upgrading hydrogenated products to desired hydrocarbons because of the absence of shape selectivity.
Catalytic cracking and deoxygenation with various zeolite catalysts is an alternative method for upgrading bio-oil to produce fuels. Cracking does not require H2, which is a significant advantage over deoxygenation over hydro-treating catalysts. Various zeolites have been used to upgrade bio-oil via cracking to achieve both the removal of O atoms and C chain arrangement. However, direct cracking of bio-oil over zeolites suffers from the following disadvantages in spite of its high conversion at higher temperature and without the requirement for H2: (1) very low hydrocarbon yields, (2) formation of oxygenates, which need further upgrading, (3) severe coke deposition and fast deactivation, (4) higher aromatic content in products, and (5) high temperature (>400 °C). In order to achieve the combination of these two different functions in one unit with better stability, yield and selectivity, bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts have been designed to realize the one-step conversion of bio-oil to target hydrocarbon products in refinery and laboratory research at much lower temperature.65,66 As for metal/zeolite catalysts, the zeolites not only act as the carrier of the metal phase to provide a large surface area and accommodation for small metal particles to achieve a better distribution of metal centers, but also act as catalysts for acid-catalyzed reactions. It is unequivocal that the commercial utilization of zeolite-based catalytic technologies has significantly promoted the development of bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts in petroleum refining and petrochemical processes, such as hydro-isomerization and hydro-cracking.
As is well known, liquid hydrocarbons which can be used as transportation fuels and petrochemicals are demanded in a vast volume and with a stable increase, and are necessary to make our daily life colorful and comfortable. However, since the new century began, they have been extensively accused of non-sustainability for their huge amount of CO2 emission because of their fossil origins. In this review, our aim is to highlight the latest developments and future prospects of the simultaneous catalytic deoxygenation and C chain arrangement of bio-oil to hydrocarbons (which can be used as transportation fuels and petrochemicals) over metal/zeolite bifunctional catalysts. Other upgrading methods, such as esterification and emulsification, are not discussed in this paper because there is no removal of O atoms. Aldol condensation could eliminate some O atoms from aldehydes; however, incomplete removal of O atoms limits their direct use as transportation fuels. From bio-oil to target destinations, such as transportation fuels and petrochemicals, O atoms should be efficiently eliminated over metal centers to couple with arrangement of the C chain over acidic zeolites to meet the requirements on transportation fuels and petrochemicals in heating value and other properties such as viscosity, acidity, and the cloud and freezing points. Recently, some researchers have adapted zeolites used in the conventional petroleum refining industry to support deoxygenation catalysts to achieve a one-step conversion from bio-oil to high-quality transportation fuels, including high octane number gasoline, diesel, and jet fuels. If sufficiently high yields in specific hydrocarbons such as cyclohexane, benzene, toluene, and xylene could be achieved, the production of petrochemicals from bio-oil could be realized.
Aim of this review
The aim of this review is to summarize recent progress in the hydro-conversion from bio-oil to high-quality transportation fuels over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts, as shown in Fig. 4. On one hand, active centers of bifunctional metal/zeolites are discussed from the point of view of chemical removal of O atoms from bio-oil: that is, reactant-driven improvements in bio-oil conversions. On the other hand, product-driven improvement in selectivity toward high-quality transportation fuels and petrochemicals is based on a summary of personal experience and knowledge of the classic petroleum refining processes.
 Fig. 4  Bifunctional catalysts for bio-oil upgrading. 
There have been several reviews on the upgrading of bio-oil;3,4,10,14,16,19 however, they have still focused on a general summary of the overall upgrading of bio-oil, and lack specific analysis of the process from raw material to target products based upon basic chemical knowledge. In this review, the upgrading process is focused on metal/zeolite bifunctional catalysts, and the destination is hydrocarbons for transportation fuels and petrochemicals, which has not been summarized in previous reviews. Different model compounds (e.g., phenolics and carboxylic acids) and real bio-oils are also discussed in each section, because the upgrading pathways and mechanisms vary with feedstock. Catalytic properties, such as metal activity, acidity, pour structure, and the interaction between metal and zeolites, are discussed in detail. Upgrading of bio-oil to hydrocarbons has been extensively proved to be a rather complicated network of reactions over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts. From the point of view of reaction chemistry, different combinations of hydrogenation and acid-catalyzed reactions could be achieved over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts via the careful design and modification of the properties of metal and zeolite. Also the influences of metal and zeolite on overall reaction pathways are given detailed analysis to find an efficient method to achieve better product distributions during the upgrading of bio-oil to hydrocarbons. A perspective on current challenges is also presented.
2. Phenolics upgrading
Lignocellulosic biomasses, which consist of cellulose, hemi-cellulose, and lignin, have attracted wide attention because of their environmental benign-by-design nature, and sustainability. After thermal chemical processing, a lignocellulosic biomass can be converted into bio-oil in the ranges of gasoline or jet fuel, amounting to 30 wt% phenolic compounds like phenols, anisols, guaiacols and their derivatives (some representative structures of phenolic compounds are presented in Fig. 5). In this section, a series of bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts are reviewed and summarized for the upgrading of phenolic bio-oil via integrated hydrogenation, hydrolysis, and acid-catalyzed reactions (dehydration, cracking, isomerization, transalkylation and so on). The metal centers, acid sites of zeolitic supports, and the interaction between these two active centers will be discussed in detail.
 Fig. 5  Typical phenolic compounds in bio-oil. 
2.1 Limitations of phenolics conversion over sole metal or zeolite

Metal catalysts. 
Noble metals (Pt, Pd and Ru) and transition metals (Ni and Co) have been widely utilized as active hydrogenation centers during the HDO of phenolics, because of their excellent hydrogenation capability, even with low metal loading (1–3 wt%). The conversion of phenol was observed over Pt/SiO2,67 Pt/Al2O3,67 Pd/Al2O3,68 Pd/C (ref. 69) and Ni/γ-Al2O3 (ref. 70) in acid-free conditions, and it was found that cyclohexanol was the main product (as shown in Table 2) produced when a small fraction of the phenol was converted into benzene via a direct deoxygenation route. The conversion of cresols over sole metal catalysts has also been widely studied to produce aromatic hydrocarbons.71–74 Similarly, oxygen removal realized through a direct deoxygenation route would produce toluene (small fraction); whereas the hydrogenation route would not remove the oxygen, which usually proceeded over metal centers with 3-methylcyclohexanol as the main product. As for anisoles, metal centers usually catalyzed the direct hydrogenation of anisole, resulting in the production of cyclohexanol and phenol, respectively (Table 2), as in the case of Ni-based, Mo-based and other catalysts.75–78 During the conversion of guaiacol, the primary products were phenol and cresol in the case of metal modified catalysts such as Pt/SiO2 (ref. 79) and Ni2P/amorphous silica–alumina,80 as in the case of eugenol conversion over a Pd/C catalyst81 with only the hydrogenation function observed (Table 2). However, D. E. Resasco et al.91,188 have also claimed that supported catalysts with oxophilic metal centers (such as Fe and Ru) exhibited promising activity and selectivity for aromatics during m-cresol conversion. In most cases, according to the above publications, the hydrogenated products were alcohols, which was a proof that hydrogenation of phenolics did not remove O atoms at low temperature (<400 °C).
Table 2 Conversion of phenolics over sole metal catalysts




Metal catalysts
Reactants
Reaction pathway and corresponding products
Ref.




Pt, Pd, Ni
Phenol
Hydrogenation, cyclohexanol (major)

67–70



Pt, Pd, Ni

m-Cresols
Hydrogenation, 3-methylcyclohexanol (major)

71–74



Pt, Ni, Mo
Anisole
Hydrogenation, cyclohexanol and phenol

75–78



Pt, Ni2P
Guaiacol
Hydrogenation, phenol and cresol

79, 80



Pd
Eugenol
Hydrogenation, alcohols

81







Zeolite catalysts. 
Many papers have reported that sole acidic zeolites did not possess deoxygenation and hydrogenation functions without metal centers during the conversions of phenol,82–85 anisoles78,86 and guaiacols81 at low reaction temperature (<400 °C). However, phenolics could be upgraded via acid-catalyzed reactions (like isomerization, transalkylation, cracking, hydride transfer and dehydration) over the sole acid sites of zeolites at high reaction temperature. For example, Resasco et al.87 carefully studied the conversion of m-cresol over HY and H-ZSM-5 (with the same Si/Al = 40) in the temperature range of 400–600 °C, and proposed the reaction pathway shown in Scheme 2. Clearly, m-cresol underwent a series of acid-catalyzed reactions over acid zeolites: isomerization, transalkylation, condensation, cracking and hydride transfer. The vast majority of m-cresol was induced to form a “surface phenolics pool”, and further led to the production of aromatic hydrocarbons, light fractions and graphite coke through cracking and H-transfer reactions with the “surface phenolics pool”. At quite low temperature, toluene was the main pool cracking product, while the selectivity towards benzene was increased with the rising temperature. That is, as for acid sites over zeolites, the reaction temperature plays a crucial role in influencing the selectivity of the final products during phenolics conversion regardless of low conversion. At low reaction temperature, the conversion of phenolics over acid zeolites was not obviously observed.
 Scheme 2  Proposed reaction pathway of m-cresol conversion over single acid sites of zeolite catalysts.87 
According to the above analysis, it could be seen that neither metal nor zeolite catalysts alone could convert phenolics into desired hydrocarbons at low temperature; however, it was easy to realize the dehydration of hydrogenated products such as alcohol over acid zeolites to speed the conversion of phenolics toward target hydrocarbons via a hydrogenation–dehydration–hydrogenation route in a cascade order. The combination of metal centers and acid sites in one material produces typical bifunctional catalysts, which could significantly influence the reaction pathways to enhance the conversion of phenolics and the product distribution via control of the reaction route. What is more, enhancing the conversion of phenolics was also beneficial for acid-catalyzed reactions over zeolites and the stability of the metal/zeolite catalysts. The key lies in the selection of reaction pathways to determine the selectivity of final hydrocarbons, like hydrogenation–dehydration–hydrogenation, hydrogenation–acid-catalyzed reactions (alkylation, cracking, transalkylation, and isomerization)–hydrogenation, and so on.

2.2 The synergistic effect between metal and zeolite
The synergistic effect of metal and zeolite in bifunctional catalysts could tailor the chemical reaction pathway, leading to an enhancement in phenolics conversion and the selectivity of the final products. There were similar results among the conversion of phenolics (phenols, anisoles, and guaiacols) over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts in several aspects: (i) hydrogenation over metal centers; (ii) acid-catalyzed reactions over acid sites combined with hydrogenation over metal centers; (iii) the influence of porosity on the dispersion of the metal and the accessibility of active centers.

The effect of metal centers. 
The types and properties of the metal centers affect hydrogenation activity and the selectivity of the final products. Usually, noble metal centers (like Pt, Pd, Ru) possess higher hydrogenation activity than non-noble metal centers (like Ni, Co, Mo, Fe). Moreover, the metal type significantly influenced the selectivity to final hydrocarbons over metal/zeolite catalysts. For example, Shafaghat et al. investigated the conversion of a simulated phenolic bio-oil, containing phenol (50 wt%), o-cresol (25 wt%) and guaiacol (25 wt%) over H-beta supporting Ni and Fe catalysts.88Scheme 3 presents the overall reaction network proposed for the transformation of the simulated phenolic bio-oil through HDO and acid-catalyzed reactions over these metal/acid bifunctional catalysts. Over Ni/H-beta, the selectivity to cycloalkanes (cyclohexane, cyclopentane, methyl-cyclopentane and methyl-cyclohexane) was enhanced through the hydrogenation of the benzene ring over Ni centers, which was in agreement with a study held by Bykova et al.89 As for Fe/H-beta, aromatic hydrocarbons (benzene, toluene, xylene and trimethylbenzene) were proven to be the main products via the hydrogenolysis (direct deoxygenation) of the simulated bio-oil, indicating that Fe metal centers were favorable to hydrogenolysis.90,91 From this example, the selection of metals was proven to be efficient in controlling the selectivity between benzene/cyclohexane via hydrogenolysis/hydrogenation–dehydration–hydrogenation routes.
 Scheme 3  Bio-oil over Ni, Fe and NiFe supported H-beta catalysts (HYD: hydrodeoxygenation over metal centers and acid sites; DDO: direct deoxygenation or hydrogenolysis over metal centers; DMO: demethoxylation; DME: demethylation over acid sites; AL: alkylation over acid sites; DHY: dehydration over acid sites).88 
In addition, the particle size and dispersion of the metal centers over the zeolites are also crucial factors influencing their catalytic activity and the selectivity of their products. Different zeolite supports possessed different topological structure and porosity, which directly affected the size and dispersion of metal particles for metal/zeolite bifunctional catalysts. The large pore sizes of zeolitic supports (such as HY, meso-beta, meso-USY, meso-H-ZSM-5)81,92–94 or mesoporous materials (Al-MCM-41, Al-MCM-48)93–96 for metal/zeolite bifunctional catalysts have been proven to be beneficial for the dispersion of metal centers and the diffusion of reactants/products to access/escape towards/from the active centers during the upgrading of phenolic compounds.


The effect of acidity. 
Bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts have been efficiently applied in the upgrading of phenolics. As shown in Table 3, hydrocarbons were obtained as the main products, disclosing the interaction between hydrogenation over metal centers and dehydration over acid sites of bifunctional catalysts at low reaction temperature. Taking as an example Ru/H-beta,97 the HDO of phenolics could occur through an aqueous phase under very mild conditions, even at 140 °C, which dramatically decreased the energy consumption during this process and was apt to favor industrial applications in future. Additionally, simultaneous HDO and hydroalkylation could proceed during phenol conversion over Pd/H-beta,69,82 and phenol could react with cyclohexanol/cyclohexene/cyclohexanone to form corresponding alkylation products (major) over acid sites of the H-beta support (Table 3), as in the case of phenol conversion over a mixture of metals and zeolites offering two respective functional active centers in a reactor.69,98–101 An analysis of the mechanism of phenol conversion disclosed the synergistic effect between the metal centers and the acid sites of the zeolite, as presented in Fig. 6.
Table 3 Conversion of phenolics over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts




No.
Metal
Zeolite
Reactants
Reaction pathway and corresponding products (major routes)
Ref.





a 2-Cyclohexylidene–cyclohexanone.





1
Pt
H-ZSM-5/H-beta/HY
Phenol
Hydrogenation–dehydration; cyclohexane

67



2
Pd
H-beta
Phenol
Hydrogenation–dehydration; cyclohexane

82



Phenol/cyclohexanol
Hydrogenation–dehydration, alkylation; cyclohexane, alkylation productsa


Phenol/cyclohexene


Phenol/cyclohexanone


3
Ru
H-ZSM-5/H-beta
Phenolic monomers and dimers
Hydrogenation–dehydration; alkanes

97, 102, 103



4
Ni
H-ZSM-5
Phenol
Hydrogenation–dehydration; cyclohexane

70, 83–85



5
Ga
H-beta

m-Cresol
Hydrogenation–dehydration, demethylation; methylcyclohexane, cyclohexane

87



6
Pt
H-beta
Anisole
Hydrogenation–dehydration; benzene, toluene and xylenes

86



7
Pt
Meso-zeolites
Guaiacol
Hydrogenation–dehydration, demethylation trans-alkylation; hydrocarbons

93, 94



8
Ni/Fe
H-beta
Phenol (50 wt%), o-cresol (25 wt%), guaiacol (25 wt%)
Hydrogenation–dehydration; hydrocarbons

88





 Fig. 6  Main products over metals, zeolites, and bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts during the upgrading of phenolics based upon previous publications in section 2. 
According to presented publications, similar reaction pathways could be obtained for cresols,87,104–107 anisoles,75–78,86 guaiacols79,81,92,95,96,108 and bibenzofuran93,94 conversion over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts, which underwent hydrogenation over metal centers and dehydration/acid-catalyzed reactions over acid sites to form the final hydrocarbons. Resasco et al.87 reported that the main products were cyclohexane and methyl-cyclohexene during the conversion of m-cresol over a bifunctional Ga/H-beta catalyst in Table 3 no. 5 (Fig. 6), which obviously differed in their product distributions, including toluene, benzene and xylene over the single zeolite catalysis (Scheme 2). Both methyl transfer and HDO of anisole were achieved with the formation of benzene, toluene and xylenes at significantly high rates, and the TOF over a bifunctional catalyst (0.330 s−1 over 1 wt% Pt/H-beta) was three times higher than that over a single metal catalyst (0.104 s−1 over 1 wt% Pt/SiO2), proving that the zeolite environment had a crucial role in improving the deoxygenation activity of Pt.86 In contrast, the overall conversion of guaiacol was complex over bifunctional catalysts, with various intermediates and products (Scheme 3).79,81,92,95,96,108 The acidic sites of the zeolite catalyzed the demethylation of the CArO–CH3 bond and methyl transfer reaction, while the deoxygenation was catalyzed by metallic sites which facilitated the hydrogenolysis of the CAr–OR bond. Therefore, bifunctional catalysts could convert guaiacol not only to benzene as a completely deoxygenated product, but also to other methylated aromatics as trans-alkylated products. All the above results strongly demonstrated that enhancement of the deoxygenation ability was significantly improved by the introduction of acid sites over zeolitic supports via a dehydration–hydrogenation process, which comprised hydrogenation in the first step and acid-catalyzed dehydration combined with hydrogenation in the second step.
From the results of phenolics conversion over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts, the amounts of acid and strength of the bifunctional catalysts strongly affected the HDO activity and the selectivity of the final products. For example, methyl-cyclopentane was also obtained over bifunctional Ni/H-ZSM-5 catalysts with different SiO2/Al2O3 ratios, since the acid sites of the zeolitic support catalyzed the isomerization of intermediates during phenol upgrading.63 Brønsted acid sites of the zeolitic supports could catalyze the dehydration of alcohols: for example, the dehydration rate of cyclohexanol on Ni/H-ZSM-5 (528 mmol g−1 h−1, 0.070 mmol g−1 concentrations of Brønsted acid sites) was much higher than that over Ni/Al2O3-H-ZSM-5 (354 mmol g−1 h−1, 0.045 mmol g−1 concentrations of Brønsted acid sites; Al2O3 as the binder).83–85 As for Lewis acid sites of the supports, there was no positive effect on the overall reactions but it led to the deactivation of the catalysts. Clearly, conversion of phenolics into hydrocarbons would undergo the cleavage of C–O bonds by the interaction of hydrogenation and acid-catalyzed reactions/dehydration. Usually the surrounding acid supports exercised a polarization effect on the interphase region through electron withdrawal, likely in the case of guaiacol conversion over acidic ReS/Al2O3 (ref. 109) or basic support, as over Ru/MgO.110 On the one hand, metal centers accelerated the rate of acid-catalyzed reaction/dehydration for phenolics over the Brønsted acid sites of the zeolite; on the other hand, Brønsted acid sites adjacent to the metal enhanced the HDO rate occurring in a bifunctional reaction. Therefore, a metallic function for hydrogenation and the Brønsted acid sites for dehydration/acid-catalyzed reactions were proven to be indispensable for phenolics conversion to hydrocarbons (Fig. 6): (i) it was easy to convert phenolics by forming alcohols over metal centers via hydrogenation of benzene rings, promoting the dehydration of alcohols over acid sites; (ii) simultaneously, the dehydration of alcohols over acid sites could enhance the conversion of phenolics into alcohols over metal centers; (iii) olefins formed via the dehydration of alcohols could be quickly converted into alkanes to desorb from the acid sites; (iv) hydrogenation of olefins over metal centers could significantly decrease the formation of cokes to deactivate catalysts to some extent.


The effect of porosity. 
The porosity of zeolites has exhibited a significant effect on the shape selectivity of products and the dispersion of metal centers, which could simultaneously improve the catalytic activity and selectivity of hydrocarbons. During the upgrading of phenol,67 the higher selectivity of bicyclics over Pt/HY (HY: 12 MR with supercages, 0.74 nm × 0.74 nm) (4.0%) and Pt/H-beta (H-beta: 12 MR without supercages, 0.66 nm × 0.67 nm & 0.56 nm × 0.56 nm) (4.1%) was higher than that over Pt/H-ZSM-5 (H-ZSM-5: 10 MR, 0.51 nm × 0.55 nm & 0.53 nm × 0.56 nm) (1.4%), which may suggest that a larger zeolitic cavity would provide sufficient space for the formation of molecules of larger sizes based upon the shape selectivity. Compared to microporous H-ZSM-5, Ru/meso-H-ZSM-5 exhibited excellent activity and alkane selectivity due to the abundant exposed acid sites within meso-H-ZSM-5,102 as in the cases of other phenolics conversions, such as cresols87,111 and guaiacols.80,81,88–96 In particular for meso-zeolites, for example, Lee et al.92 investigated the conversion of guaiacol over Pt-loaded zeolitic materials, such as H-ZSM-5, H-beta, meso-H-beta and Al-MCM-48, and found that Pt/H-beta and Pt/meso-H-beta exhibited higher guaiacol conversion than other catalysts, due to their larger pores and strong acid sites accessed by reactants. That is, a larger pore system was beneficial for active centers exposed over surfaces of catalysts to enhance the accessibility of active centers (metal centers and acid sites), and to decrease the diffusion restriction on reactants/products. Since a larger pore system showed greater efficiency in trapping phenolics and forming more carbonaceous deposits than a smaller pore system, on the one hand, high selectivity of alkylation products was yielded over zeolites with large pore sizes supporting metal centers;67,83 on the other hand, less products were released from the larger pore zeolites, leading to deactivation.

2.3 The steric effect of surface species
Besides the effects of metal and zeolites, the steric effect and adsorption of surface species are also important to the upgrading of bio-oil. Compared to phenol, the presence of a methyl group in cresol was apt to favor aromatic production, in good agreement with the report by Massoth et al.101 Generally the conversion of o-cresol was lower than that of m-cresol, because of the presence of steric hindrance during the adsorption of o-cresol on active centers, with the methyl group adjacent to the hydroxyl group. Product selectivity was dependent on the position of the methyl group in the cresol molecule. Recently, Foo et al.112 have investigated the steric effect and evolution of surface species in the HDO of anisole, m-cresol and guaiacol over bifunctional Pt/H-beta and H-beta catalysts. Because of the steric hindrance of C–O functional groups, the degree of HDO of anisole, m-cresol, and guaiacol over these two catalysts showed obvious differences; and the order of deoxygenation capability was as follows: anisole > m-cresol > guaiacol. The results also revealed that anisole and m-cresol could produce phenate and cresolate species on Lewis acid sites; however, guaiacol could chemisorb more strongly to form bidentate surface species. No deoxygenation products were observed over H-beta zeolite alone, indicating that zeolite alone did not induce a hydrogenation reaction. The interaction of anisole, m-cresol and guaiacol over the Lewis acid sites of H-beta is presented in Fig. 7 by FT-IR analysis.113–117 Phenol and catechol were formed, which was consistent with the fact that hydrogenolysis of the PhO–CH3 bond was the preferential step over metal centers like Pt catalysts.86,118–122 And then the acid support H-beta could transfer the cleaved CH3 to an aromatic ring, resulting in an intra- or inter-molecular rearrangement to form transalkylated or dealkylated products.
 Fig. 7  The interaction of anisole, m-cresol and guaiacol over Lewis acid sites of H-beta zeolite.112 
2.4 Catalytic stability of metal/zeolite catalysts
It is well known that deactivation of catalysts is a crucial effect during the upgrading of phenolics. As for bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts, the leaching and sintering of metal centers and the change in acid sites are considered to be two crucial factors resulting in deactivation. From the interaction between metal centers and acid sites of zeolites during phenolics upgrading, it is not difficult to find out that the deactivation of the metal/zeolite catalysts could cause the reduction in hydrogenation and acid-catalyzed reactions, which finally yielded less hydrocarbons. Thus, the study of deactivation over bi-functional metal/zeolite catalysts during the upgrading of phenolics, is valuable and required to favor future industrial applications.
Zhao et al.84 found that the addition of an Al2O3 binder could prevent Ni particles leaching from H-ZSM-5 and control Ni particle sintering to some extent. After four runs, Ni particles obviously increased at 2 nm per run for Ni/Al2O3-H-ZSM-5 and 18 nm per run for Ni/H-ZSM-5, and the distribution of Ni particle sizes broadened. Clearly, the growth of Ni particles over Al2O3-H-ZSM-5 was much slower than that over H-ZSM-5 (Fig. 8). Additionally, partial Brønsted acid sites of the support transformed into Lewis acid sites during recycling runs; however, Lewis acid sites did not have positive effects on phenol conversion, probably leading to the deactivation of the catalysts. The rate order of individual reaction steps during phenol conversion on bifunctional catalysts was studied and found to be as follow: r1 (phenol hydrogenation, determining step) < r2 (cyclohexanone hydrogenation) < r3 (cyclohexanol dehydration) ≪ r4 (cyclohexene hydrogenation),83–85 showing that dehydration over acid sites was much faster than hydrogenation over metal centers. Therefore, Zhao et al. concluded that Ni particle sintering was the crucial aspect leading to the decrease in catalytic activity during recycling runs, compared to the change in acid sites. A similar conclusion was reached by Resasco et al.86 during anisole conversion over a Pt/H-beta catalyst with bifunctional HDO and transalkylation, and the deactivation of hydrogenation over metal centers was stronger than transalkylation over acid sites. Furthermore, a Pt/H-beta catalyst showed better catalytic stability than a single H-beta, probably since metal centers could clean adjacent acid sites via hydrogenation of the coke precursor; and this result suggested that bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts would be effective catalysts for the upgrading of phenolics-rich bio-oil.
 Fig. 8  Metal particle size enhancing the stability of metal/zeolite catalysts also including the effect of zeolitic porosity.84 
Enhancing the stability of metal/zeolite catalysts also involved the effect of zeolitic porosity. Different zeolite supports possessed different topological structure and porosity, which directly affected the particle size and dispersion of metals for the metal/zeolite bifunctional catalysts. For example, well-dispersed metal centers were obtained over a larger pore system of zeolitic supports, like HY with a larger pore system (12 MR), meso-beta, meso-USY, meso-H-ZSM-5.68,81,92–94 On one hand, more accessibility of metal centers and higher adsorption capability for reactants/intermediates over a larger pore system were mainly responsible for the hydrogenation of reactants/intermediates. On the other hand, larger pores easily trapped larger sized molecules and formed more carbonaceous deposits, which formed a larger phenolics pool to cause pore blockage and quick deactivation.111 In summary, improving the catalytic stability of bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts involved so many kinds of impacts, such as porosity and acidity of zeolitic supports, dispersion of metal centers over zeolitic supports, the balance among metal centers, acidity and porosity, and even reactor engineering.
2.5 Summary
According to the above publications, it can be concluded that bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts are efficient for upgrading phenolics to hydrocarbons. On the one hand, the HDO of phenols generated the corresponding alcohols over metal centers; on the other hand, the dehydration of alcohols produced corresponding olefins over acid sites of zeolitic supports, and then the further hydrogenation of olefins to form alkanes over metal centers again. Furthermore, zeolites alone did not convert phenolics to the corresponding alcohols via hydrogenation; metal centers did not catalyze alcohols to hydrocarbons without the acid sites of zeolites. It can be clearly seen that the selectivity of alcohols was improved over metal centers alone. On the contrary, alkanes are the main products over bifunctional metal/acid sites catalysts. Furthermore, the acidity of the zeolitic supports is affected by the Si/Al ratio, the porosity of the zeolites, metal dispersion and so on. In addition, the pore size of the zeolitic supports influences the dispersion of the metal centers. An excellent bifunctional catalyst, which should possess well-dispersed metal centers throughout the zeolitic supports with appropriate and accessible acid sites, exhibits high conversion of phenolics and selectivity of hydrocarbon oil. The optimal ratio of metal/acid sites shows an efficient interaction on the metal centers and acid sites for upgrading phenolics to hydrocarbons. In summary, there are three aspects affecting the catalytic performance over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts as follows:
(1) The selection of the metal phase could significantly influence the reaction pathways toward different target hydrocarbons. Fe/zeolite catalysts favor the formation of benzene, toluene and xylene via the direct deoxygenation route by activating the Ar–OH bond. However, other metal/zeolites usually catalyzed the upgrading of phenolics to cyclohexane via the hydrogenation–dehydration route.
(2) The size and distribution of metal particles: smaller particle sizes and uniform distribution of metal catalysts are preferred. A smaller metal particle size (or higher metal dispersion) leads to the better intimacy and balance of metal sites and acid sites over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts, which favor higher carbon yields of target products and decreased hydrogenolysis over metal sites or cracking over acid sites, respectively.
(3) Acidity of zeolitic supports: generally, strong acid sites are favorable for HDO via dehydration for a C–O cleavage reaction or ring-opening reaction. However, strong acidity may lead to the side reactions of hydro-isomerization and hydrocracking. The balance between the metal sites and acid sites in HDO to yield more hydrocarbon oil is necessary.
(4) Porosity of zeolites: pores of zeolites not only provided accommodation for metal particles beneficial for dispersion of the metal, but also confined the space for HDO of oxygenates. A smaller pore size makes it difficult for the reactant molecules to enter the zeolitic channels. In contrast, a larger pore size promotes acid-catalyzed reactions like hydrocracking, hydro-isomerization and so on because of the better accessibility to acid sites. At the same time, the large cavity of the zeolites provides a space large enough for the formation of large molecules such as alkylated products. Only an appropriate match between the pore size of the zeolites and the reactants/products allows considerable diffusion of reactants/products within the zeolitic pores to exhibit excellent catalytic performances.
3. Carboxylic acids upgrading
As the primary fraction in bio-oil originated from lipids and microalgae, long-chain carboxylic acids, such as stearic acid (C18) and palmitic acid (C16), have been used as model compounds to investigate the upgrading of carboxylic acids to transportation fuels.123–125 Also, it was shown that corresponding triglycerides could be directly treated by hydro-treating catalysts in several studies,58,126 as well as their methyl esters.127–131 Bio-oil contains a very small amount of triglycerides and esters, because they are easily converted during the thermochemical processing of biomass. Triglycerides or the corresponding esters easily generate carboxylic acids via hydrogenolysis in the presence of H2 over hydrogenating catalysts. Triglycerides and esters are also summarized to provide good reference values for the upgrading of carboxylic acids. Generally, there are three pathways for the catalytic deoxygenation of carboxylic acids, as shown in Scheme 1b: hydrodeoxygenation (HDO: R–COOH + 3H2 → R–CH3 + 2H2O), hydro-decarbonylation (HDC: R–COOH + H2 → R–H + CO + H2O) and decarboxylation (DCX: R–COOH → R–H + CO2). Among the three routes, HDO is potentially considered to be the most promising one for bio-oil upgrading without carbon loss, in which oxygen is selectively removed in the form of H2O.
Conversion of carboxylic acids to high-quality transportation fuels (gasoline, diesel and jet fuels) also needs two consecutive processes: one is the catalytic deoxygenation of bio-oil to selectively remove O atoms from long-chain carboxylic acids; the other is the conversion of long-chain fatty hydrocarbons to light molecules with an iso-structure (gasoline), and to branched hydrocarbons (diesel and jet fuels) with lower viscosity and cloud and freezing points. In simple words, both chemical removal of O atoms and appropriate arrangements of the C chain should be achieved during the upgrading of carboxylic acids (Scheme 1b). The first process can be easily achieved over metal catalysts (both bulk and supported), which have been extensively investigated37,38,41,42,132–135 and reviewed.10,19,48,60 However, due to their low acidity, these metal catalysts suffer from poor capabilities in the arrangement of the C chain such as cracking and isomerization. Some researchers have adapted zeolites in the refining industry to support deoxygenation catalysts to achieve one-step conversion from carboxylic acids to high-quality transportation fuels, including high octane number gasoline, diesel, and jet fuels. The goal for this section is to summarize recent progress in the hydro-conversion of carboxylic acids and their precursors, such as triglyceride and esters, to high-quality transportation fuels over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts.
3.1 Metal centers
Usually bulk metal catalysts showed poor catalytic performance during the chemical removal of O atoms from carboxylic acids, and so did supported catalysts with a much higher metal loading.38,39 Therefore, supported metal catalysts were preferred to achieve a better distribution and smaller particle sizes of the metal phase.19,60 Conventional hydro-treating catalysts, such as sulfide-based NiMo/γ-Al2O3 or CoMo/γ-Al2O3, deactivated rapidly because of coke deposition and potential poisoning in an aqueous atmosphere in spite of their high activity.132,133 Both noble metal (Pt, Pd, Ru, etc.) and non-noble metal catalysts (Ni, Mo, etc.) were developed as efficient HDO catalysts for carboxylic acids.36–39,41,42,134,135 Some characteristics of the metals could have significant effects on their overall catalytic performances, which are listed as follows:
(1) The types of metal phase are important to the catalytic performance. For example, noble metals (Pt, Pd, Ru, etc.) are favorable HDO catalysts because of their easy activation of hydrogen, which spills over onto the interface of metal particles, with deoxygenation activities decreasing in the sequence Pd > Pt > Ni > Rh > Ir > Ru > Os.37 Also as for selectivity, Pd, Pt and Ni were proven to be more effective in activating C–C bonds, resulting in higher C atom loss.37,38,134,135
(2) The different states of metals show different activity and selectivity during the hydro-conversion of carboxylic acids. Here we take Ni and Mo as examples. Both Ni2P/SBA-15 and Ni/SBA-15 exhibited excellent catalytic performance toward the deoxygenation of carboxylic acid derivatives, such as methyloleate, in which the former led to a higher n-C18/n-C17 ratio than the latter.136 Bulk MoO2 showed much lower C atom loss and better activity than bulk MoO3, which increases HDO/HDC selectivity significantly during the upgrading of palmitic acid.125
(3) Particle size and distribution are important factors influencing the activity, selectivity and stability of metal catalysts. Besides the metal itself, the supports are at least as important or even more important to the distribution and the downsizing of metal particles than the metal itself. That is also the reason why supported metal catalysts are a favorable choice for the upgrading of carboxylic acids. Therefore, the effects of supports on the metal phase will be discussed in detail in the next section.
(4) Metal loading129,137 is another important factor for tailoring the catalytic performance of supported metal catalysts of similar particle sizes and distribution. Here we take two examples of Ni catalysts supported by SAPO-11 and beta. At a lower loading, the particle sizes could be similar until a certain loading led to an increase in particle sizes, which should result in non-positive effects. For example in Table 4, for Ni/SAPO-11, the conversion from methyl palmitate to diesel-like fuel and cracking products improved with an increase in Ni loading. However, increasing the loading from 7% to 9% led to a slight decrease in conversion, which probably resulted from the large particles formed due to the higher Ni loading.129 Also, as for beta with different Si/Al ratios, the increase in Ni loading from 5% to 10% enhanced the conversion (Table 5); however, decreased isomerization was catalyzed by the beta zeolites because of the blockage of pores and coverage of the acid sites.137
Table 4 HDO of methyl palmitate over Ni/SAPO-11 catalysts129




Ni loading (%)
Conversion (%)
Products distribution (mol%)


DME
CO
CO2
C1–C4
C5–C14
C15
C16
C16+


iso

n

iso

n

iso

n





2
60.0
4.38
1.33
0.00
0.84
0.00
1.05
0.00
48.04
0.00
35.26
9.09


5
93.0
1.58
1.54
0.00
3.20
0.00
2.35
0.00
48.35
0.00
37.50
0.67


7
99.8
1.12
0.83
0.01
2.21
0.00
2.60
0.18
47.45
2.89
39.59
3.11


9
99.2
1.30
1.36
0.04
2.88
0.08
2.96
0.18
47.76
3.41
37.26
2.74




Table 5 Comparison of stearic acid conversion over Ni/beta catalysts137




Ni loading (%)
Si/Al (mol/mol)

S
BET (m2 g−1)
Acid density (mmol g−1)
Conversion (%)
Selectivity (C%)



n-C18
iso-C18

n-C17
iso-C17
Cracking




5
75
603
0.188
96
66.5
15.0
13.8
3.8
0.7


10
75
586
0.171
100
72.6
10.1
14.8
1.6
0.6


5
180
565
0.069
96
82.8
6.0
10.2
0.2
0.4


10
180
523
0.053
98
84.6
5.2
9.5
—
0.4




Sometimes, the effects of supports on the metal phase are more important to the overall performance of supported metal catalysts than the metal phase itself. Generally speaking there are several main functions needed for a suitable support. (1) A large surface area and sufficient accommodation of small particles to achieve a better distribution of metal centers; (2) modification of metal catalysts via strong metal–support interactions;138 (3) activation of oxygen-compounds to facilitate the conversion of carboxylic acids;60,139–141 (4) modification of product selectivity via favorable reaction pathways: for example, if without acidity of supports, HDC were favored over metal catalysts. With acid centers, HDO was improved via hydration and hydrogenation of corresponding olefins to n-alkanes. Besides improvements in HDO/HDC selectivity, iso-structures and hydrocarbons with low molecular weight could be generated over acid centers to meet the requirements of transportation fuels.
3.2 Acid zeolites
As typical crystalline microporous aluminosilicates, zeolites have large enough micro surface areas and pores to accommodate small particles of metal via the interaction between zeolites and the supported metal phase. Also an anionic framework balanced by H+ offers micro environments to activate reactants to be hydrogenated and further transformed into desired hydrocarbons with iso-structures and low molecular weight via acid-catalyzed reactions (isomerization and cracking). Therefore, as acid-supports, zeolites exhibited typical factors to influence the catalytic performance of metal/zeolite catalysts: porosity (micropores and mesopores) and acidity.

Acidity of zeolites. 
As typical solid acid catalysts, the acidity of zeolites is a crucial factor in influencing the overall catalytic performance during the upgrading of carboxylic acids and their derivatives. The acidity is active in direct cracking or hydro-treatment. However, strong acidity often leads to poor product selectivity and fast deactivation during the cracking of carboxylic acids at higher temperature. The introduction of a metal phase into zeolites could significantly decrease the reaction temperature. However, poorer HDO/HDC selectivity was obtained over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts with stronger acidity. As for the acidity of zeolites, the Si/Al ratio, ion exchange depth (i.e. the alkaline cation content) and post-synthesis were the major factors influencing the acidity of the parents. The acidity density of Ni/ZSM-5 decreased remarkably with an increase in Si/Al ratio, which resulted in a decrease in acid-catalyzed reactions, such as cracking and isomerization, and the same tendency was also observed over Ni/beta catalysts. Also partial ion exchange was another effective method for tailoring the acidity of metal/zeolite catalysts.125 Moreover, post-treatment of zeolites by acids or alkalis was a common method to adjust the acidity of zeolites. Tian et al.126 tailored the acidity of SAPO-11 and ZSM-22 by post-treatment in acid or alkali. The results showed that post-treatment can adjust the acidity of zeolites, and then had important effects on the upgrading of soybean oil, especially the product selectivity, i.e. the acidity influenced the reaction pathways. In addition, over catalysts carried by weakly acidic supports, the temperature had to be much higher to obtain a complete conversion than over those supported by strongly acidic supports.
The acidity type, Brønsted or Lewis acid, also had different effects on the upgrading of carboxylic acids. For example, the Brønsted acidic sites on the Pt/zeolite catalyst were claimed to be responsible for the isomerization selectivity. The strong Lewis acid sites played a decisive role in HDC reactions. A bifunctional catalyst with more Brønsted and fewer strong Lewis acidic sites would promote the one-step upgrading process via HDO (major route), HDC (minor route) and isomerization. Also for NixP/ZSM-22, Brønsted acidic sites were thought to catalyze isomerization, while Lewis acids were usually used for cracking.154 As for the overall acidity of metal/zeolite catalysts, it became more complicated. One reason is that metal particles could significantly block the channels of the zeolites or be deposited on the acid sites to cover acidity. However, the acidity of the metal phase could also increase the acidity.


Shape selectivity of microporous zeolites. 
Because of their confined space around active centers and restricted access to and escape from the internal surface, zeolites facilitate only certain reactions between molecules with specific dimensions, called the concept of shape-selective catalysis by Weisz. Reactant selectivity, transition state selectivity and product selectivity are well known, according to the sizes of reactant/transition state/product, respectively.142–144 In recent years, bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts have been applied in the investigation of upgrading of carboxylic acids and their derivatives; and the effects of zeolites' channels on the catalytic performance of metal/zeolite were also mainly related to the relationship between the product distribution and zeolitic channels, which have been extensively proven in lab research and industrial application.145,146
Based upon Lercher's results,137 Ni/beta showed much higher conversion than Ni/ZSM-5 due to its larger pore sizes (0.67 nm × 0.67 nm) than ZSM-5 (0.51 nm × 0.55 nm & 0.53 nm × 0.56 nm), which meant reactant selectivity: that is, larger pore sizes offered more chances for reactants to penetrate inside for further reaction. Zuo et al.129 prepared Ni/SAPO-11, Ni/HZSM-5, and Ni/HY by incipient wetness impregnation for the HDO of methyl palmitate. The Ni/SAPO-11 catalysts with weak and medium acidity showed superior properties to the other catalysts, due to the interaction of metal Ni and the acidic support. A maximum yield of 93% for C15+ alkanes was observed over 7 wt% Ni/SAPO-11 under the mild reaction conditions of 493 K and 2 MPa, with selectivity to C1–C4 of about 2.21%, indicating its promising application in this reaction. While for Ni/ZSM-5 and Ni/HY with the same Ni loading, much more cracking products (selectivity to C1–C4) up to 34.56 and 45.43% were observed, respectively. As for superior hydro-isomerization catalysts, metal-supported SAPO-11 and H-ZSM-22 yielded much more iso-alkanes than beta, ZSM-5 and Y. With NixP as the metal phase, different supports were tested for methyl laurate upgrading by Chen's group.130 The main deoxygenated products were n-C11 and n-C12 hydrocarbons derived from the decarbonylation and HDO pathways, respectively. On one hand, the supports influenced the final phase of NixP. On the other hand, the catalytic performance was also changed. By the H2-TPR method from the precursors with an Ni/P ratio of 1.0, Ni2P was produced on SAPO-11, while Ni12P5 and Ni2P were formed on HY. The selectivity to C11 and C12 hydrocarbons fell in the order Ni2P/SAPO-11 > Ni2P–Ni12P5/HY, as did the C11/C12 molar ratio. This indicated that one-dimensional SAPO-11 was more suitable for the upgrading of bio-oil derivatives to generate less cracking products.
A single-step hydro-treatment of vegetable oil to produce high-quality diesel-range alkanes over Ni/SAPO-11, Ni/ZSM-22, Ni/ZSM-5, and Ni/SAPO-23 catalyst was reported by Tian's group.148 Over a 8 wt% Ni/SAPO-11 catalyst, 100% conversion of soybean oil and 100% alkane selectivity with more than 85% iso-alkane selectivity were obtained. Sufficient mesopores, a one-dimensional micropore channel of suitable pore size, together with the medium acidity of the support were responsible for good conversion, high liquid yield and superior isomerization selectivity. With Pt as the metal phase, SAPO-11 and ZSM-22 were used to upgrade vegetable oil.126 The pore diameters of SAPO-11 and ZSM-22 are about 0.40 nm × 0.65 nm and 0.46 × 0.57 nm, respectively, and the dynamic molecular diameter of the triglyceride is more than 0.6 nm. Thus, the soybean oil reactant cannot access the inside of the micropores, and the deoxygenation reaction is perhaps not carried out inside the micropores, but is more likely to occur over the outer surface of the small zeolite crystals or the amorphous phase of the g-Al2O3 binder. Once dehydrogenated, n-alkanes could easily penetrate into their channels to form iso-alkanes. Because of the much better fit between n-alkanes (0.38 nm) and ZSM-22 channels, this would generate more isomerization products, as it did for Ni/ZSM-22 in spite of the lower hydrocarbon yields. Cheng et al.147 carefully compared Ni–Mo/H-ZSM-5 and Ni–Mo/HY catalysts for the upgrading of soybean oil to jet fuel. Zeolite HY exhibited higher jet range (C8–C16) alkane selectivity (40.3%) and lower jet range aromatic hydrocarbon selectivity (23.8%) than zeolite HZSM-5 (13.8% and 58.9%). In a traditional refining process, more ZSM-5 additives usually crack gasoline to light olefins, resulting in a decrease in gasoline yield. Also the zig-zag channel and its pore size (0.51 nm × 0.55 nm & 0.53 nm × 0.56 nm), similar to the kinetic size of benzene, provide suitable space for the formation of aromatics. Also, ZSM-5 is an excellent aromatization catalyst for alkanes and alkenes. Thus, the soybean oil reactant cannot access the inside of the micropores, and the deoxygenation reaction was perhaps not carried out inside the micropores, but was more likely to occur over the outer surface of the small zeolite crystals or the amorphous phase of the γ-Al2O3 binder. Once hydrogenated, n-alkanes could easily penetrate into their channels to form iso-alkanes. Because of the much better fit between n-alkanes (0.38 nm) and ZSM-22 channels, it would generate more iso-products, as it did for Ni/ZSM-22 in spite of lower hydrocarbon yields.148,149
Based upon previous publications, Y zeolite was the key to success of the FCC process due to its 12 MR windows and supercages, which provided excellent space for bi-molecular cracking to generate gasoline (Table 6). ZSM-5 was usually used as an FFC additive to generate more propylene because of its selective cracking of n-alkanes/alkenes at the expense of gasoline yield (Table 6); also ZSM-5 is used as a de-waxing catalyst for long-chain n-alkanes via isomerization. SAPO-11 and ZSM-22 with one-dimensional pores have been proved to be excellent hydro-isomerization catalysts for long-chain n-alkanes. Besides the above mentioned zeolites,127,150–154 some other zeolites (NaA, SAPO-34, SAPO-31, and even mesoporous materials such as MCM-41 and SBA-15)128,131,155,156 have also been used to couple with the metal phase to form bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts for the upgrading of carboxylic acids. However, no comparisons were made between different zeolites. Therefore, it is hard to come to a clear conclusion on the effects of zeolitic channels. With mesoporous materials as comparisons, it could be proven that the acidity and pore sizes of zeolites could significantly contribute to the conversion of carboxylic acids into branched alkanes.
Table 6 Effects of zeolite micropores on the catalytic performance of carboxylic acids




Zeolites
Structure
Pore
Pore sizes (nm)
Favored reaction




Y
FAU
3D
0.74 × 0.74
Cracking


ZSM-5
MFI
3D
0.51 × 0.55, 0.53 × 0.56
Cracking aromatization


Beta
*BEA
3D
0.66 × 0.71, 0.56 × 0.56
—


ZSM-22
TON
1D
0.46 × 0.57
Isomerization


SAPO-11
AEL
1D
0.40 × 0.65
Isomerization






Effects of mesoporosity of zeolites. 
Besides the micropores of zeolites, the mesopores are also important in facilitating the diffusion of reactant/product onto/from the metal and acid sites, which are closely related to the catalytic activity and selectivity to target products. More importantly, mesopores of zeolites provide more opportunities for the formation of small particles and their uniform distribution. New methods for achieving a better distribution of metal particles have been developed by Zhao's group. The focus was on the selection of zeolitic supports to improve the diffusion of carboxylic acids within the micropores of zeolites, and moreover the introduction of mesopores into zeolites by different methods contributed to a higher loading amount and better distribution of metal particles. Single-crystal beta with mesopores, hierarchical beta and ZSM-5, and also interconnected hierarchical Y were selected as the supports. The formation of mesopores was desired to encapsulate Ni nanoparticles with high dispersion to prevent sintering during reaction. Also, an improvement in the diffusion properties of the catalysts was expected.145,146,157,158
Zhao et al.145 encapsulated the Ni nanoclusters (d = 5.6 nm) into/onto the uniform and inter-connected intra-mesopores (7–8 nm) of single-crystalline HBEA (HBEA-MS) via a deposition-precipitation method, and achieved a better dispersion of Ni nanoparticles (content: 40 wt%, dispersion: 3.5%) on the zeolites. As expected, the catalyst led to a significantly higher initial rate of 132 mmol g−1 h−1 (equivalent to 38 g g−1 h−1) and more selective octadecane formation (96% yield) from stearic acid with more iso-alkane formed than with commercial HBEA carriers, because the Ni nanoparticles were more commonly deposited on the limited external surface or inter-mesopores of commercial H-beta (Fig. 9). Also, high activity and stable durability were realized for four recycling runs. Since meso-HBEA showed better catalytic performance, the influence of mesopore formation on the loading, distribution of the metal and catalytic performance of Ni/H-beta were further investigated by Zhao et al., who showed four different methods of generating mesopores.146 The HBEA was carefully treated by TPAOH/NaOH to form open inter-mesopores of about 25 nm with a more homogeneous dispersion. With loading, the Ni/HBEA supported and dispersed more Ni nanoclusters of about 7.7 nm (Fig. 9) in inter-crystalline mesopores generated by controllable base leaching with higher accessibility towards large molecules (Fig. 10). This novel catalyst showed a significantly good performance in stearic acid conversion at 260 °C and 4 MPa H2, with high initial rate of 67 mmol g−1 h−1 (equivalent to 19 g g−1 h−1) for producing 85% n-C17/C18 and 11% iso-C17/C18 alkanes.
 Fig. 9  The distribution of Ni nanoparticles and TEM/SEM images of Ni/HBEA (a: mesoporous single-crystalline), Ni/HBEA (b: SiO2/Al2O3 = 20), and Ni/HBEA (c: SiO2/Al2O3 = 26).145 
 Fig. 10  Carboxylic acids reaction in the cross section of Ni/HBEA (up) and Ni/TPA-HBEA (down) catalysts.146 
Besides hierarchical H-beta, hierarchical ZSM-5 and Y which were prepared as acidic supports to carry Ni particles,151,152 Zhao et al. prepared Ni/ZSM-5 with excellent catalytic activity in the HDO of carboxylic acids. In particular, the mesoporous SiO2 matrices effectively prevented the nanoparticles from sintering to enhance stability during upgrading processes. The synthetic strategy provided a one-pot synthesis of metal nanoparticles on different zeolites. Abundant interconnected mesopores were formed within HUSY zeolites via a sequential steaming dealumination and mixed-alkali desilication (Fig. 11).158 HUSY-4 (prepared by initial high-temperature steaming) had a larger external surface area and a higher relative crystallinity with hierarchical mesopores. A high-content (35 wt%) of small Ni nanoparticles (4.9–1.2 nm) with better dispersion (5.5%) could be located onto and into the external surface areas and interpores of the hierarchical HUSY by the deposition–precipitation method. The Ni/HUSY-4 showed an ultra-high efficiency in the HDO of carboxylic acids, esters, and palm oil, with a high initial rate (60 g g−1 h−1) and a high C18 alkane selectivity (96%).
 Fig. 11  Mechanism and TEM images of dealumination and desilication on the HUSY zeolite (a-HUSY-1: Si/Al = 2.6; b-HUSY-2: HUSY-1 treated by vapor steaming; c-HUSY-3: HUSY-1 treated by TPAOH/NaOH alkali solution; d-HUSY-4: HUSY-1 treated by PI/NaOH alkali solution).158 

3.3 Interactivity between metal and zeolites

Physico-chemical properties. 
In most cases, bifunctional metal/zeolites are prepared by various methods with the wetness impregnation method as a comparison. Owing to the porous properties, the metal precursor was absorbed into pores of zeolites, and subject to calcination and a reduction process to form a hydro-active phase. There are obvious interactions between the metal and zeolites in bifunctional catalysts. On one hand, the metal has an influence on the zeolite support: the metal precursor penetrates into the pore channels, leading to the blockage of the channels and poorer accessibility of the acid centers, which are drawbacks for an acid-catalyzed reaction. According to the results of acidity characterization, the introduction of a metal into the zeolites will result in a significant decrease in acid density compared to the parent zeolites because of its blocking effects on pore channels. On the other hand, the zeolitic support has an important effect on metal properties, especially the size, dispersion, and loading of the metal particles. It is much more crucial than the influence of the metal on the zeolite support. The free space of the pore channels will inevitably show strong effects on the distribution of metal particles.
Here, we take Mo-doped ZSM-22 as an example.125 Reduced MoOx was generally considered for hydrogenation active centers for the upgrading of bio-acid. Firstly, (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O in water was well distributed over the zeolitic supports ZSM-22 (K-type and H-type). MoO3 was formed via calcination to sublime and penetrate into the ZSM-22 channels (0.46 nm × 0.57 nm) to increase the unit cell volumes, and to block most of the micropores and to cover the strong acid sites (usually Brønsted acid sites). The cations of ZSM-22 were an important factor in the above changes. H+ (ionic radius of 0.29 Å) showed a lower hindering effect on the distribution of MoOx species due to its much smaller radius than K+ (ionic radius of 1.33 Å), which led to the severe blockage of micropores, equal to a better distribution of Mo element, which resulted in a higher surface Mo/Si ratio. More importantly, H+ can reduce more Mo6+ to Mo4+, which improved the Mo4+/Mo6+ ratio on the surface of the reduced samples.
In addition to microporosity, the mesoporosity of zeolites has a strong influence on the particle sizes, metal loading and distribution of metal/zeolite catalysts. As introduced above, Zhao et al.145,146,157,158 investigated several methods to create mesopores on USY, beta and ZSM-5. Appropriate post-synthesis of parent zeolites would significantly enhance the metal loading content. The intra-mesoporosity of parent zeolites provided smart spaces to accommodate small Ni particles, which strongly improved the initial reaction rate of the Ni/zeolite catalysts. According to Lercher's results,159 the size and distribution of the Ni particles were important factors influencing the catalytic performance of the Ni/beta catalysts. The zeolites and preparation methods showed key effects on the final catalysts for the HDO of stearic acid and crude microalgae oil. Ni nanoparticles supported onto and/or into the HBEA zeolite prepared by four different methods were investigated (Fig. 12). Ni/HBEA catalysts prepared by deposition–precipitation (DP) and Ni nanoparticle (NP) grafting methods showed higher activities even after four runs due to their more accessible, uniformly dispersed, and sintering-resistant Ni nanoparticles than catalysts prepared by ion exchange/precipitation methods, although they had high initial reaction rates in their fresh samples. This indicates that smaller metal particles have better initial catalytic activity, better size uniformity and higher catalytic stability for longer utilization. This also emphasizes that the narrow distribution of particle sizes minimizes their growth into larger particles through Ostwald ripening.
 Fig. 12  Four preparation methods for Ni nanoparticle synthesis onto and/or into the HBEA zeolite.159 


From the point of view of complicated reaction pathways. 
The effects of metal active sites and acid centers on the overall reaction were suggested from the point of view of complicated reaction pathways. For simplicity, C16 acid upgrading is used as an example.125 Two consecutive reactions compose one parallel reaction, as presented in Fig. 13. Consecutive reaction I: C15CHO → n-C15 → cracking/iso-C15; consecutive reaction II: C15CHO → n-C16 → cracking/iso-C16. Under ideal conditions, a higher iso-alkanes/n-alkanes ratio was expected for diesel fuel and jet fuel production, and high cracking selectivity for gasoline production, which should be improved by the strong acid sites of the zeolitic supports. From the point of view of a comprehensive method to acquire more cracking products or iso-alkanes, appropriately stronger acidity is desired for the conversion of carboxylic acids to produce more cracked and branched hydrocarbons. However, it would inevitably lead to the direct cracking of carboxylic acids. Hence, better hydrogenation centers with suitable acidity were ideal bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts. Improvements in HDO would favor the enhancement in the concentration of n-alkanes, shifting the isomerization to form more iso-alkanes; an improvement in isomerization would decrease the concentration of n-alkanes, which would move hydro-deoxygenation forward. That is, the interaction between the hydrogenation of the metal active centers and the acid sites of the zeolitic supports accounts for their overall influence on reactions over bifunctional catalysts during the upgrading of carboxylic acids. This tendency is not only observed for Mo/ZSM-22 catalysts, but also for other metal/zeolite catalysts, such as Ni/ZSM-5, Ni/beta, Ni2P/SAPO-11, and Ni/SAPO-11 (sufficient hydrogenation capability often leads to HDC, which results in the C atom loss of the overall reaction, over acid sites).
 Fig. 13  Proposed reaction pathway for the upgrading of palmitic acid in the presence of H2 and isomerization of products over bifunctional Mo/ZSM-22 catalysts.125 

3.4 Catalytic stability
Generally, changes in active centers (metal centers and acid sites) over metal/zeolite catalysts are the crucial factors influencing the HDO activity and selectivity of the final products. The deactivation of bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts originates from the deactivation of metal and zeolites. Generally, metal centers were deactivated because of leaching and sintering, while zeolites were deactivated due to the coverage of acidic sites and the blockage of pores by cokes. For example, Chen et al.127 investigated carefully the deactivation of Ni/SAPO-11 and Ni2P/SAPO-11 during the HDO and hydro-isomerization of methyl laurate. (i) Sintering of Ni particles: they analyzed the aggregation of Ni or Ni2P particles over used bifunctional catalysts, as shown in Fig. 14. The sizes of Ni particles over SAPO-11 increased from 3.8 to 4.8 nm after the reaction, mainly because of the formation of H2O via the HDO route over Ni/SAPO-11 during the methyl laurate reaction; while the size of the Ni2P particles did not significantly increase before or after reaction, probably due to less H2O formation over Ni2P/SAPO-11. (ii) Carbonaceous deposit: there was an amount of carbonaceous deposit obtained over used Ni/SAPO-11 (3.6%) and Ni2P/SAPO-11 (4.3%), which caused a serious blockage of the pores (Table 7) and the coverage of acid sites mainly led to the deactivation of bifunctional catalysts. In view of these two aspects, they concluded that the deactivation of Ni/SAPO-11 is caused by the sintering of Ni particles and carbonaceous deposit, while Ni2P/SAPO-11 deactivation is mainly due to the carbonaceous deposit leading to a serious blockage of pores and acid sites.
 Fig. 14  TEM images and diameter distribution of bifunctional catalysts (a: fresh Ni/SAPO-11; b: used Ni/SAPO-11; c: fresh Ni2P/SAPO-11; d: used Ni2P/SAPO-11).127 
Table 7 Textural properties of SAPO-11, Ni/SAPO-11 and Ni2P/SAPO-11 catalysts before and after reaction127




Sample

S
BET (m2 g−1)

S
micro (m2 g−1)

S
exter (m2 g−1)

V
total (cm3 g−1)

V
micro (cm3 g−1)

V
meso (cm3 g−1)
Micropore width (nm)
Average pore diameter (nm)




SAPO-11
166
122
44
0.21
0.064
0.14
0.60
5.0


Ni/SAPO-11
121
80
40
0.18
0.042
0.13
0.57
5.8


Ni2P/SAPO-11
113
79
33
0.14
0.041
0.10
0.60
5.1


Used Ni/SAPO-11
28
0
28
0.11
0
0.11
—
15.9


Used Ni2P/SAPO-11
26
1.2
25
0.11
0.001
0.10
—
16.7




4. Upgrading of other oxygenated compounds
Besides phenolics and carboxylic acids, there are many other kinds of components in bio-oil, such as aldehydes, ketones, furans/furfurals, and polyhydric alcohols, which are closely related to the feedstock, processing method and parameters. This section will summarize the upgrading of these model compounds over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts.
Aldehydes
The HDO of aldehydes (benzaldehyde, 2-phenylpropionaldehyde, 3-phenylpropionaldehyde, cinnamaldehyde, 4-isopropylbenzaldehyde, heptanal) over a bifunctional Pd/H-ZSM-5 catalyst was investigated by Prochazkova et al.160 There were similar results to the upgrading of carboxylic acids: metal centers initiated the hydrogenation of aldehydes to form corresponding alcohols, which could be further converted to corresponding olefin via dehydration over the acid sites of the zeolitic supports and then hydrogenated over the metal centers again to obtain the final alkanes in a cascade way. Additionally, Perez-Ramirez et al.23–26 studied the application of alkali-metal (Li, Na, k, Rb or Cs) modified zeolites (USY, beta and ZSM-5) in the liquid- and gas-phase aldol condensation of propanal, and found that these base zeolites would also be effective catalysts with excellent activity and high selectivity in the upgrading of short-chain aldehydes. However, aldol condensation cannot completely remove the O atoms of bio-oil, which needed further upgrading to form hydrocarbons over metal with acidic supports. This review has focused on the upgrading of bio-oil into hydrocarbons over bifunctional catalysts with the hydrogenation of metal centers and acid-catalyzed reactions of zeolite. Therefore, base catalysts applied in the upgrading of bio-oil via aldol condensation are not discussed in detail.
Ketones
Hydrogenation and dehydration over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts were a potential approach for ketone deoxygenation to alkanes, following a similar reaction mechanism to that reported by Witsuthammakul et al.161 Metal centers could hydrogenate ketones to alcohols without hydrogenolysis; and zeolites could promote the dehydration of alcohol over acid sites. Finally, the corresponding olefins were hydrogenated to alkanes desorbing away from bifunctional catalysts. Bejblová et al.162 have reported the HDO of benzophenone over Pd loaded in different supports like active carbon, alumina, beta and ZSM-5 zeolites with different Si/Al ratios, and Al-MCM-41. According to their studies, bifunctional Pd/H-ZSM-5 and Pd/H-beta catalysts were found to be active in the HDO of benzophenone, and the acidity of the zeolitic supports influenced the initial rates of benzophenone conversion. The higher the amount of acid sites over the zeolitic supports, the faster the increase in the initial reaction rates.
Furans/furfurals and derivatives
During the pyrolysis of biomass, anhydrosugars are generated from the cellulose and hemicellulose in the biomass. These anhydrosugars then undergo dehydration to form furans/furfurals or their derivatives, so furans/furfurals often exist in bio-oil. The upgrading of furan/furfural based compounds has attracted significant attention in recent years because of their environmental, economic and strategic advantages.163,164
Abu-Omar et al.165 reported the catalytic upgrading of furfural derivatives to alkanes over a Pd/H-beta catalyst. Cheng et al.32 selected furan as a model compound of bio-oil for the CFP (catalytic fast pyrolysis) of wood, and research results show that the addition of Ga to ZSM-5 can increase the aromatics yield by 40% compared with the standard ZSM-5 zeolite. Ga/ZSM-5 is a typical bifunctional catalyst in this process, with the Ga species promoting the desired reactions (mainly referring to decarbonylation reactions and olefin aromatization), whereas the ZSM-5 zeolite catalyzes the other remaining reactions for the production of aromatics, such as oligomerization and cracking, as shown in Fig. 15.
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of furan conversion into aromatics over Ga/ZSM-5 catalysts.32 
Furfurals or their derivatives, such as 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (5-HMF), can react with other compounds via aldol condensation, then the aldol product is hydrodeoxygenated and finally long-chain hydrocarbon are obtained. This is an effective pathway for the conversion of furfurals or their derivatives into fuels. However, aldol condensation, the main reaction directly involving furfural derivatives, usually occurs over a solid base catalyst, such as zirconium carbonate (Zr(CO3)x) in the reaction of 5-HMF with acetone, and a metal/zeolite bifunctional catalyst, such as Pd/Zeolite-β, is only used to catalyze the HDO of the intermediate product obtained from aldol condensation.26 That is to say that O atoms could not be removed completely in aldol condensation alone, and O atoms could be effectively removed via the subsequent combination of dehydration and hydrogenation over an acid catalyst. Therefore, aldol condensation is beyond the scope of this paper in its consideration of directly involved reactants and catalyst types.
The best deoxygenation performance of furfurals was observed with high activity over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts possessing two active centers in cooperative catalysis.166 Li et al.167 have investigated that 2-methylfuran and lignocellulosic carbonyl compounds are converted to diesel and jet fuel range branched alkanes via HDO and alkylation over bifunctional Ni/H-ZSM-5, Ni/H-MOR and Ni/H-beta catalysts. Due to the balance of appropriate Ni/acid sites, pore size (10 MR) and better Ni dispersion, a bifunctional Ni/H-ZSM-5 catalyst showed obviously the best catalytic activity and efficiency. Pt/meso-Y and Pt/meso-ZSM-5 catalysts were developed to upgrade dibenzofuran, indicating that the combination of the strong acidity and mesopore structure of the zeolites was the crucial factor for better catalytic performance of HDO than that of Pt/micro-ZSM-5 or Pt/Si-MCM-48.93,94
Polyhydric alcohols
Zhang et al.168,169 developed a bifunctional Ni/H-ZSM-5 catalyst to produce iso-paraffin via the aqueous-phase reforming of sorbitol, and found that the reaction temperature (210–250 °C) and calcination temperature (400–700 °C) of the catalysts both affected their catalytic performance. With an increase in the reaction temperature, the yield of bio-gasoline increased; the yield of bio-gasoline increased with calcination temperature from 400 °C to 600 °C, and decreased at 700 °C, suggesting that the C–C hydrogenolysis of sorbitol may occur easily over Ni/H-ZSM-5 calcined at an appropriate temperature. As for the upgrading of xylitol over bifunctional (Pt/H-ZSM-5, Ni/H-ZSM-5 and Ni/H-MCM-22) catalysts, the reaction temperature, pressure and metal loading were crucial factors influencing xylitol conversion and pentane selectivity.170,171 With the metal loading increasing from 0 to 3 wt%, xylitol conversion and pentane selectivity both increased over Pt/H-ZSM-5 and Ni/H-ZSM-5, implying that higher metal loading could increase the rate of C–C bond cleavage as a competing hydrogenation reaction. Moreover, Ni/H-ZSM-5 exhibited higher activity for xylitol conversion and selectivity of pentane (95%), while Pt was apt to promote C–C bond cleavage to form C1–C4 lighter alkanes under identical conditions. Ni/H-MCM-22 also showed high activity and pentane yield (95%) due to the larger surface area and more mesopores of H-MCM-22. The reaction pathway of xylitol conversion over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts is shown in Scheme 4, summarized in the following steps: hydrogenation over metal centers, C–O bond cleavage by dehydration over acid sites, C–C bond cleavage by decarbonylation over metal centers, and C–C bond coupling by aldol-condensation over acid sites; which indicated that the metal centers and acid sites had an obvious interaction over bifunctional catalysts. Recently Tamiyakul et al.172 reported the conversion of glycerol to aromatic hydrocarbons over a bifunctional Zn/H-ZSM-5 catalyst. Generally glycerol was firstly converted to propenal, acetol, and acetaldehyde; propenal and acetol as the main intermediates of acid-catalyzed dehydration, while acetaldehyde was generated by the combination of dehydration and dissociation. The yield of aromatic hydrocarbons was impacted by the strong Brønsted acidity and hydrophobicity of the zeolitic supports; however, a high strong Brønsted acidity and affinity toward water molecules led to a lower yield of aromatics.
 Scheme 4  Reaction pathway of xylitol conversion to alkanes over bifunctional catalysts.170 
5. Real bio-oil upgrading
It is well known that real bio-oil is a complex mixture, and its physicochemical compositions are strongly influenced by many kinds of factors, like the chemical compositions of the biomass feedstocks, the temperature and residing time of the reaction process, heating rate, efficiency of the product removal system, etc.4,19–22Tables 8 and 9 present several kinds of real bio-oil composition derived from different feedstocks via different conversion routes. The main differences lie in the mean bio-oil molecular weight and the percentage of low-boiling compounds. The principal species of bio-oil derived from different feedstocks include: phenolics, carboxylic acids, aldehydes, ketones, sugars, esters, and furans, which contain 10–40 wt% oxygen.19 Therefore, deoxygenation has been proven to be the most usually adapted method to upgrade real bio-oil to high-quality transportation fuels or chemicals, which has been a hot and significant issue.
Table 8 Elemental analysis and higher heating value of several kinds of bio-oil via different conversion routes




No
Feedstock
Conversion route
C (%)
H (%)
N (%)
O (%)
S (%)
Water (%)
HHV (MJ kg−1)
Ref.




1
Scenedesmus
Hydrothermal liquefaction
72.6 ± 2.6
9.0 ± 0.3
6.5 ± 0.1
10.5 ± 2.7
1.4 ± 0.3
—
35.5

189



Slow pyrolysis
73.9 ± 2.3
9.3 ± 0.2
7.9 ± 0.3
8.1 ± 2.6
0.8 ± 0.1
—
36.7

189



2
Algae A
Pyrolysis
52.1
10.2
5.8
31.6
0.3
16.7
28.2

190



3
Algae B
Pyrolysis
58.8
10.6
4.0
26.4
0.2
19.4
29.3

190



4
Lignocell
Hydrothermal liquefaction
67–80
6–8
0–2
11–23
—
3–13
30–35

190



5
Wood
Pyrolysis
55.9
5.9
0.2
37.3
—
—
21

191



6
Microalgae
Pyrolysis
65–65.8
7.8–8.5
9.7–10.3
11.2–16.5
—
—
29–45.9

192



7
Algae (biocrude)
Hydrothermal liquefaction
77–80
10
4.0
5–8
0.3–0.5
2–8
35.4

193



8
Algae (aqueous)
Hydrothermal liquefaction
1.8–3.7
11–12
0.5–1.1
84–85
—
95–96
Negligible

192



9
Spirulina
Hydrothermal liquefaction
66.0
11.6
9.5
12.4
0.5
—
36.8

19



Pyrolysis
46.1
8.0
9.7
36.3
—
32.4
21.7

193



10

Dunaliella tertiolecta

Hydrothermal liquefaction
59.4
7.6
1.0
32.1
—
13–20
28.4

194





Table 9 Several kinds of bio-oil consumption in wt% on the basis of different biomass sources




No
Feedstock
Phenolics
Furan etc.
Acids
Aldehydes
Alcohols
Ketones
Water (%)
Unclassified
Ref.




1
Corn cobs
4
1
6
1
0
11
15
46

195



2
Pine
15
3
4
7
2
4
24
5

196



3
Softwood
2–3
0–2
3–10
1–17
0–1
2–4
29–32
24–57

197



4
Hardwood
2–3
0–1
5–7
0–5
0–4
7–8
20–21
47–58

197



5
Microalgae oil
—
30.4
51.3
—
2.76
4.85
—
—

194





In general, catalysts show important effects on the activity of a specific reactant; however, it is very difficult to devise a common rule covering all catalysts. Here, we take one specific catalyst as an example to show the different reactivities over a Co-MoS2/Al2O3 catalyst. According to a review of catalytic upgrading of bio-oil to transportation fuels,19Table 10 compares the reactivity of different kinds of functional groups in bio-oil and also includes the activation energy (EA), iso-reactivity temperature (Tiso) and H2 consumption over a Co-MoS2/Al2O3 catalyst. Clearly, ortho-substituted phenol, with the more complex bound or sterically hindered oxygen, usually requires a high EA and Tiso. The difficulty of upgrading oxygenated compounds in bio-oil is generally summarized as follows: dibenzofuran > benzofuran > diarylether ≈ o-phenol ≈ alkylfuran > phenol > m-/p-phenol ≈ naphtol > carboxylic acid > alkylether > ketone > alcohol.
Table 10 Activation energy (EA), iso-reactive temperature (Tiso) and H2 consumption for different kinds of oxygenated compounds in bio-oil over a Co-MoS2/Al2O3 catalyst19




No
Molecule/group

E
A (kj mol−1)

T
iso (°C)
H2 consumption




1
Dibenzofuran
143
417
∼8 H2/molecule


2
2-Ethylphenol
150
367
∼4 H2/molecule


3
4-Methylphenol
141
340
∼4 H2/molecule


4
Methoxyphenol
113
301
∼6 H2/molecule


5
Carboxylic acid
109
283
3 H2/molecule


6
Ketone
50
203
2 H2/molecule




With model compounds as a feedstock, it was easier to study the screening and reaction mechanism of metal/zeolite bifunctional catalysts. However, much still needs to be done with the upgrading of real bio-oil over metal/zeolite catalysts because of the complicated mixture of oxygenated compounds in real bio-oil. This section summarizes the reported literature on metal/zeolite catalysts in upgrading real bio-oil.
5.1 Metal centers
Detailed reaction networks (Scheme 1) for the upgrading of model compounds, such as phenol and carboxylic acids, have been discussed in detail in sections 2 and 3. For complicated reaction networks for the upgrading of real bio-oil, the selection of catalysts would be the most important factor in determining the catalytic activity and product distribution, as with selections of metal and zeolite. Without metal centers, most parent zeolites showed poor performance in the upgrading of bio-oil. For example, Shafaghat et al.88 found that no conversion of phenolics in simulated bio-oil was detected over H-beta under a hydrogen atmosphere. In most cases, a metal center was responsible for initiating the conversion of bio-oil to corresponding alcohols, which could be dehydrated over the acid sites of zeolites to achieve the elimination of O atoms. Therefore, both metal and zeolites needed to be within one material. Table 11 summarizes different metal-loaded zeolite catalysts with their main reaction pathways and products.
Table 11 The effect of different metals in zeolites on the upgrading of real bio-oil




No
Metal
Zeolite
Reactants
Reaction conditions
Dominant reactions
Major products
Selectivity (%)
Ref.




1
Fe
H-beta
Simulated phenolic bio-oil
300–450 °C; 4 h; 3.5 MPa
Aromatization
Aromatics
20.2

88



2
Ni
H-beta
Simulated phenolic bio-oil
300–450 °C; 4 h; 3.5 MPa
Hydrogenation
Cycloalkanes
21.4

88



3
Ga
ZSM-5
Pyrolysis bio-oil
450 °C; 1 h
Decarbonylation; oligomerization; dehydration
Aromatics; cyclic hydrocarbons; Polyaromatic
33.6

173



4
Ni
ZSM-5
35.7

173



5
Sn
ZSM-5
32.6

173



6
Cu
ZSM-5
30.7

173



7
Mg
ZSM-5
29.8

173



8
Co
HZSM-5
Sawdust derived bio-oil
450–650 °C; 30 min
Fast pyrolysis
Phenols
47.9

174



9
Zr
HZSM-5
Hydrocarbons
43.6

174



10
Zn
ZSM-5
Pyrolysis bio-oil; CH4
300–600 °C
Deoxygenation
High-quality bio-oil
<12

175



11
Ni
ZSM-5
Pipe derived bio-oil
500 °C
Deoxygenation
High aromatics yield
—

176



12
Ga
ZSM-5
Lignocellulosic
550–600 °C
Dehydrogenation
Olefin; aromatics
42.7

32





With H-beta as the parent zeolite, an Fe/zeolite catalyst could convert real bio-oil to aromatics via hydrogenolysis, while Ni showed superior capability in the hydrogenation of a benzene ring to proceed via hydrogenation–dehydration–hydrogenation to form cycloalkanes as the main products.88 Puertolas et al.173 conducted a careful investigation on the upgrading of the organic phase of pyrolysis bio-oil over ZSM-5 zeolites modified by different metal cations, such as Mg, Ni, Cu, Ga and Sn. The results showed a significant decrease in the viscosity and oxygen content of bio-oil. Also a higher HHV led to an increase in the aromatics. With the modification of different metals, several reaction pathways were proposed. For Ga-ZSM-5, a large amount of phenols could be transformed into aromatic hydrocarbons via decarbonylation and oligomerization of the pyrolysis vapors. Meanwhile, Ga-ZSM-5 showed the highest water yield, proving the high efficiency of O atom elimination via hydrogenation–dehydration. Ni-ZSM-5 also improved the formation of aromatics. The proposed decarboxylation mechanisms were associated with H2in situ formation with HDO reactions included. In the case of Sn-ZSM-5, a high aromatic yield was observed together with a high water content. The higher CO2 yield compared to CO yield accompanied by lower coke deposition implied that the decarboxylation mechanism may be the main reaction pathway. As for Cu-ZSM-5, most of the metal cations were located in ion exchange positions so that the decarbonylation was likely to be promoted by the copper sites rather than by the acidic sites of the zeolite. Finally, Mg-ZSM-5 showed a remarkable difference with the other metal-loaded ZSM-5. In this case, acid compounds are decreased with no formation of esters. In addition, this catalyst exhibited the lowest formation of both coke and polyaromatics among all the catalysts tested. This can be ascribed to the significant decrease in the strong acid sites. Among all the catalysts tested, Sn-ZSM-5 and Ni-ZSM-5 are potential candidates in the upgrading of bio-oil with high hydrocarbon and low coke formation yields.
According to Li et al.,174 the introduction of transition metals could favor decarbonylation/decarboxylation rather than dehydration, which led to increased amounts of CO/CO2 and less water. He et al.175 studied in situ catalytic upgrading of pyrolysis oil with methane over a metal-loaded ZSM-5 catalyst. Compared with other low-cost metals, including Fe, Co, Cu, Ni, Mn, Zr and Ce, Zn/ZSM-5 achieved the highest oil yield, because the highly dispersed Zn species can activate the CH4 carbon chain growth of the bio-oil. As for hierarchical zeolites, the metal also showed important effects on the overall performance of metal/zeolite catalysts. According to Veses et al.,177 the impregnation of the hierarchical zeolite with different metals (Sn, Cu, Ni, or Mg) showed an improvement in the depth of deoxygenation. In particular, the Mg-loaded hierarchical zeolite resulted in the best fuel qualities, according to its oxygen content and its acidity.
In summary, the conversion of bio-oil into aromatics needs deoxygenation over the synergism of metal centers and acid sites to form olefins, the cyclization of olefin over acidic sites to form cycloalkanes, and the dehydrogenation of cycloalkanes over metal centers to form final aromatics. Meanwhile, decarbonylation and decarboxylation could also occur. The selectivity between HDO/decarbonylation/decarboxylation could be monitored by H2O/CO2/CO content. Also for phenolic bio-oils, direct deoxygenation to form aromatics could be achieved over Fe catalysts, or over acid sites via a reaction pool mechanism (Scheme 2). Also ZSM-5 modified with different metals was investigated, among which Zn and Ga, especially Ga, showed superior capability in aromatization via dehydrogenation of cyclones, as they did in the upgrading of real bio-oil.
5.2 Acid zeolites

Acidity of zeolites. 
For active centers for dehydration, cracking, cyclization and so on, acidity is also the key factor influencing properties of metal/zeolite catalysts and the catalytic upgrading of real bio-oil. The acid properties could be determined by NH3-TPD (acid strength) and Py-FTIR (acid type: Brønsted and Lewis).
NH3-TPD profiles of the parent and different cation-loaded ZSM-5 are shown in Fig. 16, according to Puertolas' results.178 It seems that weak acids exhibited a similar desorption area around 180 °C. However, desorption ascribed to strong acids became less noticeable after metal modification. These results proved that the introduction of metals into ZSM-5 could decrease the amount of strong acids, especially Cu-ZSM-5 and Mg-ZSM-5. As for Cu-modified zeolites, Widayatno et al.179 reported the NH3-TPD profiles shown in Fig. 17. With the Cu loading amount increasing, the low-temperature peak shifted to a lower temperature, and such a shifting of the low-temperature peak may be due to the replacement of H+ cations with Cu2+. This was similar to Pereda-Ayo's work,180 in which isolated Cu species were possibly shown to be dominant at low Cu loading. When the Cu loading amount was increased to 1.00 wt%, a small peak at about 431 °C showed up and the low-temperature peak shifted more to a lower temperature. The change was observed more remarkably for a 3.00 wt% Cu loading amount, possibly due to the appearance of large Cu species clusters, which could generate excess metal/metal-oxide acid sites. Generally, the increase in the amount of active sites promoted the catalytic reaction. However, it may also generate some Lewis acid sites which could favor coking and lead to deactivation because the dehydration reaction produces a coke precursor.181,182 Li et al.174 found, after modification by metal (Fe, Co and Zr), that a signal corresponding to a weakly acidic center of HZSM-5 moved from 120 to 150 °C, and moreover, a signal of a strongly acidic center at around 475 °C appeared. These observations showed that the acidity of the zeolite increased obviously after modification by metal, and it can enhance catalyst activity. In particular, Fe was more effective than Co and Zr for the upgrading of bio-oil. Shafaghat et al.88 had similar results that the acidity property of a zeolite catalyst could be changed obviously by the introduction of a metal.
 Fig. 16  NH3-TPD profiles of the parent and cation-loaded ZSM-5.178 
 Fig. 17  NH3-TPD profiles of Cu-modified β-zeolites.179 
The different acid types, Brønsted and Lewis acid, usually catalyze different reactions in the upgrading of bio-oil. Veses's work177 indicated that Brønsted acid sites at the mesopore surface of hierarchical ZSM-5 played a critical role in aromatization reactions and the cracking reaction of oxygenated compounds, while the ketonization reactions of acids with aldehydes to form ketones could be promoted over the Lewis acid sites created on Mg-loaded hierarchical ZSM-5. In addition, there was a reversible conversion between two different types of acid site. Thus, incorporating metal cations into the specific exchange sites could obviously decrease the amount of Brønsted acid sites and create new Lewis acid sites. Therefore, after metal modification, Lewis-acid-catalyzed reactions could be significantly favored, such as dehydration.
Moreover, different metal-incorporated hierarchical ZSM-5 had obviously different reaction pathways in the upgrading process due to the change in acid properties. For example,177 for Cu-modified hierarchical ZSM-5, deoxygenation is suppressed, and decarbonylation of acids became the prevalent deoxygenation reaction. Similarly, the preferential pathway for O-removal over hierarchical Ni and Sn-ZSM-5 catalysts seems to proceed through decarbonylation, and decarboxylation at the Lewis acid sites which appeared after metal modification. Lower cation incorporation at ion exchange sites could explain the slightly lower deoxygenation rate. In addition, Mg cations at extra-framework positions could act as Lewis acid sites, and promote different deoxygenation reactions, including the ketonization of the bio-oil acid compounds. In all the cation-loaded ZSM-5 in this work, the incorporation of metallic species at the ion exchange positions reduces the production of aromatics, due to a lower amount of Brønsted acid sites.177 Also Yung et al.33 studied the upgrading of biomass pyrolysis vapors on Ga/ZSM-5 for the production of aromatic hydrocarbons, and their results showed that the addition of Ga may increase the Lewis acidity and change the acidity nature of Ga/ZSM-5. The Lewis acid sites provided by Ga enhance the dehydrogenation activity, which results in increased olefin formation, and then promotes the production of aromatics.
Although many researchers have favored the effects of Lewis acidic sites, there were some different views. Puertolas' work178 showed that the existence of Lewis acid sites in the catalysts did not seem to play an apparent role in upgrading of bio-oil.


Porosity of zeolites. 
The pore size and structure of the metal/zeolite are very important in regulating the traffic control of reactants and products in the upgrading of bio-oil. In Shafaghat's work,88 compared with Ni/HZSM-5 and Ni/HY, higher phenolic conversion and selectivity towards oxygen-free products were gained over Ni/H-beta: the yields of deoxygenated products from phenol over Ni/H-beta, Ni/HZSM-5 and Ni/HY were 22.2, 14.4 and 3.3 wt%, respectively. Different catalytic performances of the catalysts could result from the difference in pore size of the zeolites; pore sizes of ZSM-5, beta and Y zeolite supports are 5.1 × 5.5/5.3 × 5.6, 6.6 × 6.7/5.6 × 5.6 and 7.4 × 7.4 Å, respectively.183,184 Meanwhile, the large pores of HY could be the reason for the low activity of Ni/HY since the supercages with 12 MR openings of HY lead to coke formation. Therefore, H-beta with 12 MR pore size was regarded as a suitable catalyst support for the catalytic HDO of phenolics because it is supercage-free.88 ZSM-5 has shown remarkable capability in the aromatization of alkanes and olefins in refining processes because of the better match between its pore sizes and benzene rings.
Similar to Shafaghat's work,88 Widayatno's results179 showed that due to its medium pore size, HZSM-5 could effectively convert small oxygenates in the bio-oil, but completely failed in the handling of large-molecule oxygenates. HY zeolites with larger pores are more favorable for the conversion of large-molecule oxygenates.185 However, coke deposits easily occurred within the supercages of the HY zeolite with 12 MR openings.186 Compared to other zeolites, the supercage-free H-beta zeolite with 12 MR channels had high conversion, and high selectivity to hydrocarbons with low coke formation.
In addition, the pore size, structure and type of catalyst are also important in the upgrading of bio-oil. In recent years, hierarchically structured zeolites are becoming a hot topic in catalysis research. Pérez-Ramírez et al.187 proposed the concept of a hierarchy factor (HF, defined as Smeso × Vmicro/Stotal/Vtotal). Compared to thermal upgrading without a catalyst, Puertolas et al.178 found that over a threefold increase in the amount of valuable aromatics was achieved over bulk zeolites with a moderate Si/Al ratio (25–40), while a further increase up to 50% was observed over hierarchical zeolites prepared through desilication. The increased aromatics fraction, which corresponded to a decreased amount of oxygenates, had a positive correlation with the increased number of accessible Brønsted acid sites on the mesopore surface of hierarchical zeolites. Puertolas' work indicated that promotion of the formation of aromatics is believed to be due to the priority of decarbonylation reactions over hierarchical zeolites to dehydration transformations in the bulk zeolites.178

5.3 Interactivity between metal and zeolite
From the above, metals could significantly influence the acidity, and also acidity could affect the metals. As for upgrading, a more specific interaction between the metal centers and acidic sites was investigated and proven. These kinds of interactions can often improve the performance in the upgrading of bio-oil.
Widayatno et al.179 demonstrated that the interaction between the metal sites and the proton sites is important to the β-zeolites support benefitting catalytic performance. In the case of a moderate Cu loading amount, Cu species replaced some of the proton sites, leading to an interaction between the metal sites (isolated Cu species) and the remaining proton sites (H+ cations). To some extent, this synergy shifted the prior route from dehydration to decarbonylation. Herein, the remaining H+ cations could promote the dehydration as well as the decarboxylation of oxygenated compounds, while Cu species facilitate the decarbonylation reaction.173
He et al.175 investigated the performances of several low-cost metal (Fe, Co, Cu, Mn, Zr, Ni, Ce, and Zn) modified ZSM-5 for the in situ catalytic upgrading of pyrolysis bio-oil under an environment of methane. Among these, Zn/ZSM-5 showed the best performance. During the upgrading process, the ZSM-5 framework mostly facilitated the deoxygenation and improved the quality of the bio-oil; meanwhile, the highly dispersed Zn species mainly promoted the deactivation of cheap CH4 and allowed it to be introduced into the carbon chain of the bio-oil and increased the quantity of bio-oil. In this way, the interactions between the ZSM-5 framework and the Zn species were able not only to improve the quality of the bio-oil, but also to produce more oil products.
Yung et al.176 studied the upgrading of biomass pyrolysis vapors on Ni/ZSM-5 and indicated that the addition of Ni to ZSM-5 could increase the conversion of oxygenates and the yield of aromatic hydrocarbons. The addition of Ni helped to retain access to the zeolite pores, and preserved both the micropore and external surface of ZSM-5 by improving the hydrogenation of surface groups.
5.4 Catalytic stability
The stability of catalysts is more crucial to the upgrading of bio-oil than of model compounds, because of its complex composition. Generally, better dispersion, smaller particle size and higher loading of metals on the support could obviously enhance the catalytic activity and stability of metal/zeolite catalysts by promoting hydrogenation. According to Widayatno's work179 on the upgrading of bio-oil over Cu-loaded β-zeolites, when 0.50 wt% of the Cu is doped on it, its activity could be maintained for several reuses even without a regeneration process. Loading of Cu reduced the coke formation on the used catalyst; however, overloading of Cu led to an increase in coking and a reduction in catalyst activity and stability.
Yung et al.176 found that addition of Ni to ZSM-5 can improve catalyst stability via hydrogenation of coke precursors to avoid the formation of coke and pore blockage during the upgrading of biomass pyrolysis vapors over Ni/ZSM-5. Widayatno et al.179 found that the catalyst has good stability with less than 5% selectivity reduction when reused up to three cycles. Compounds with a carboxyl functional group (such as ether and phenols) began to appear in the light oil fraction of upgraded bio-oil over the reused catalyst, accompanied by a decrease in CO2 yield, indicating a reduction in activity for the decarboxylation reaction.
Upgrading of real bio-oil is important for practical applications. However, related works are limited. Much research is still focused on the use of model compounds. In addition, the results of published works often vary because of the complexity of bio-oil. Therefore, more research on the upgrading of real bio-oil should be conducted.
6. Summary and perspective
The upgrading of bio-oil to transportation fuels and petrochemicals requires two processes: chemical removal of O atoms and catalytic C–C bond arrangements. Chemical removal of O atoms from bio-oil could be efficiently conducted with a metal catalyst, while C–C bond arrangements could be achieved with zeolitic catalysts, which have been extensively utilized in the refinery and petrochemical industry. The main goal was to develop a one-step process with both functions. Therefore, bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts were designed for the upgrading of bio-oil to transportation fuels and chemicals. The properties of metals and zeolites could influence the overall reaction pathways during the upgrading of bio-oil. More importantly, the interaction between the metal centers and acid sites always played a key role in the selectivity toward the desired products. Hence, a careful design of the metal centers and acid sites should be given considerable attention. Moreover, in theory and in practical application, several aspects that might affect the upgrading process should be considered.
In summary, studies on the upgrading of bio-oil with bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts are still in the development stage. Great efforts should be focused on a series of factors before the upgrading of bio-oil can be used for industrial applications. The challenges and tasks in the coming years include the following:
Selection of metal and zeolites
Both the hydrogenation function and the arrangement of the C chain are needed for the upgrading of bio-oil to hydrocarbons, including transportation fuels and petrochemicals; therefore, the selection of metals and zeolites is important not only to the conversion of bio-oil, but also to the product distribution. In general, an improvement in hydrogenation capability and in acidity, especially Brønsted acidity, will enhance the overall upgrading of bio-oil by speeding hydrogenation and hydration, which could result in a decrease in reaction temperature. Also, the selection of the metal is the key to determining the final products formed. With benzene, toluene and xylene as final products, Ru, Cu, and Fe should be the favorable choices via direct deoxygenation. With alkanes as the target products, other metal catalysts could be used to achieve a hydrogenation–dehydration process. Also the selection of zeolites could influence the product distribution via the arrangement of C chains such as Y for gasoline formation via cracking, ZSM-5 for aromatic formation, and ZSM-22/SAPO-11 for the formation of jet fuels.
Mutual influence between metal centers and acid sites
Generally speaking, the metal phase could affect overall acidity in several ways. The acidity of the metal phase could enhance the acid sites; however, blockage of pores shows a reverse effect. More importantly, the activation of or even reaction with acidity probes would inevitably make the results of acidity more complicated. The effects of the zeolite on the metal phase resulted in a more difficult activation because the strong interaction exhibited more effects on the metal phase, such as states, location, and distribution of metal particles. More importantly, metal centers in confined channels have always been a challenging problem for researchers in this field.
Complicated reaction network
The upgrading of bio-oil over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts followed a complicated reaction network, consisting of metal-catalyzed hydrogenation of the benzene ring, –COOH, –CHO, CC, and so on, and acid-catalyzed dehydration, isomerization, cracking, and so on. Both consecutive and parallel reactions were included. Enhancement of the single function in bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts could simultaneously lead to an obvious change in selectivity toward different pathways, thermodynamically and kinetically. For example, enhancement in acidity could favor the dehydration of alcohols and direct cracking of carboxylic acids. Moreover, the complicated reaction network exhibited synergistic effects, and thus its investigation became even more difficult, requiring more carefully designed experiments.
Stability of bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts
Bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts are favorable for transforming bio-oil into high-quality transportation fuels via deoxygenation (metal-catalyzed hydrogenation and acid-catalyzed dehydration), isomerization, and cracking. During the upgrading process, the active stability of bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts is considered the principal requirement, with sufficient activity in HDO and high resistance toward carbon deposition. The type and loading of metal, the dispersion and state of metal centers over zeolitic supports, the amount and strength of acid sites, and other present functions must be optimally balanced for bifunctional metal/zeolites to achieve high and stable activity in future work. Significantly, the accessibility of active centers (metal and acid sites) is essential. The synthesis of excellent metal/zeolite catalysts with active centers that are easily accessible for reactants during the upgrading of bio-oil is recommended. Therefore, new acid-supports with mesoporosity will be investigated to replace traditional micro zeolites, which would exhibit several obvious superiorities of hierarchical pores as follows: 1) they would afford appropriate accommodation of the metal, 2) they would increase the accessibility of the active centers, 3) they would improve the diffusion of reactants/immediates, 4) they would avoid metal sintering and leaching, and 5) they would reduce carbon deposition.
H2 consumption
H2 consumption is an important aspect of the upgrading of bio-oil with bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts in the presence of H2. Usually H2 consumption drastically increases with the degree of deoxygenation because of the different relative reactivities of the compounds in bio-oil. For the more stable oxygen atoms, the more complex molecules are accompanied by an initial hydrogenation/saturation of the molecule. Therefore, the hydrogen consumption exceeds the stoichiometric ratio at high degrees of deoxygenation. With BTX as the target products, phenol derivatives, the hydrogenolysis of the C–O bond was desired rather than hydrogenation–dehydration to form cyclohexane. In addition, the development of H2 donors is important for reducing H2 consumption during the upgrading of bio-oil. Dehydrogenation and hydrogenation could be coupled to achieve a H2 balance between the H2 donor and acceptor.
Poly-generation system and flexibility of process products
The economic benefits and energy efficiency of the bio-oil upgrading process can be improved by combining targeted products (mainly liquid fuels) with marketable by-products (mainly chemicals). Fuels have strategic importance and a large market, and chemicals have high added value. With the aim of maximizing value, the ratio of fuels to chemicals can be adjusted according to the price of crude oil and market demand by changing the process parameters, such as the type of zeolite. For example, aromatic compounds, which are high-value-added chemicals in petroleum, are dominant with metal/ZSM-5 catalysts, whereas alkanes, which can be used as fuels, are the main products with a metal/H-beta catalyst. When the price of crude oil becomes very low, it is more practical to consider the production of value-added chemicals rather than fuels.
Bio-oil feedstock for upgrading
Most research still uses model compounds and mixtures of model compounds to represent the whole bio-oil as the upgrading feedstock. Whether a limited component mixture can adequately represent the complexity of bio-oil remains unclear, and the upgrading process of real bio-oil is highly important. In most cases, the catalytic upgrading step is integrated with the upstream bio-oil production, in which the raw biomass is catalyzed to form a pyrolysis vapor. Thus, cooling and heating of bio-oil are avoided. In some other cases, cooling liquid bio-oil is upgraded. However, often only a fraction of bio-oil, such as a light fraction or organic phase of bio-oil, rather than the whole bio-oil, is used as the feedstock for upgrading. In addition, most research is focused on terrestrial biomass derived from bio-oil, and algae-based bio-oil has been given limited attention.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported financially by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21376140, No. 21576155 and No. 21376136), Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (No. IRT13026), and Research Project of Guangdong Provincial Department of Science and Technology Department (No. 2015B020215004).
References
A. A. Upadhye, W. Qi and G. W. Huber, AIChE J., 2011, 57, 2292–2301 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghadiryanfar, K. A. Rosentrater, A. Keyhani and M. Omid, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 54, 473–481 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gallezot, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1538–1558 RSC .
G. W. Huber, S. Iborra and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4044–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hoogwijk, A. Faaija, R. van den Broek, G. Berndes, D. Gielen and W. Turkenburg, Biomass Bioenergy, 2003, 25, 119–133 CrossRef .

          IEA, 2016 Key World Energy Statistics,  2016 Search PubMed.
C. B. Field, J. E. Campbell and D. B. Lobell, Trends Ecol. Evol., 2008, 23, 65–72 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Zeng, Y. T. Ma and L. R. Ma, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 976–987 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Wu, Y. L. Wu, Y. Chen, H. Chen, J. L. Wang and M. D. Yang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1355–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Xiu and A. Shahbazi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 4406–4414 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dickerson and J. Soria, Energies, 2013, 6, 514–538 CrossRef CAS .
P. McKendry, Bioresour. Technol., 2002, 83, 37–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Demirbas, Appl. Energy, 2011, 88, 3473–3480 CrossRef CAS .
I. Graca, J. M. Lopes, H. S. Cerqueira and M. F. Ribeiro, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 275–287 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He and X. Wang, Catal. Sustainable Energy, 2013, 1, 28–52 CAS .
T. Ennaert, J. Van Aelst, J. Dijkmans, R. De Clercq, W. Schutyser, M. Dusselier, D. Verboekend and B. F. Sels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 584–611 RSC .
S. Yaman, Energy Convers. Manage., 2004, 45, 651–671 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balat, M. Balat, E. Kirtay and H. Balat, Energy Convers. Manage., 2009, 50, 3147–3157 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Mortensen, J. D. Grunwaldt, P. A. Jensen, K. G. Knudsen and A. D. Jensen, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 407, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demirbas, Fuel Process. Technol., 2007, 88, 591–597 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Bonelli, P. A. Della Rocca, E. G. Cerrella and A. L. Cukierman, Bioresour. Technol., 2001, 76, 15–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. He, P. Ye, B. C. English and J. A. Satrio, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 5305–5311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Keller, S. Isabettini, D. Verboekend, E. G. Rodrigues and J. Perez-Ramirez, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 677–684 RSC .
T. C. Keller, E. G. Rodrigues and J. Perez-Ramirez, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1729–1738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Keller, K. Desai, S. Mitchell and J. Perez-Ramirez, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5388–5396 CrossRef CAS .
B. Puertolas, T. C. Keller, S. Mitchell and J. Perez-Ramirez, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 184, 77–86 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. K. Gollakota, M. Reddy, M. D. Subramanyam and N. Kishore, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1543–1568 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hilten, J. Weber and J. R. Kastner, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 8357–8368 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Rezaei, H. Shafaghat and W. Daud, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 469, 490–511 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Iliopoulou, S. D. Stefanidis, K. G. Kalogiannis, A. Delimitis, A. A. Lappas and K. S. Triantafyllidis, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 127, 281–290 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Nolte and B. H. Shanks, Energy Technology, 2017, 5, 7–18 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Cheng, J. Jae, J. Shi, W. Fan and G. W. Huber, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1387–1390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Yung, A. R. Stanton, K. Iisa, R. J. French, K. A. Orton and K. A. Magrini, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 9471–9479 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Yang, R. Li, C. Cui, S. P. Liu, Q. Qiu, Y. G. Ding, Y. X. Wu and B. Zhang, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 3684–3699 RSC .
E. W. Ping, R. Wallace, J. Pierson, T. F. Fuller and C. W. Jones, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 132, 174–180 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Maier, W. Roth, I. Thies and P. V. Schleyer, Chem. Ber./Recl., 1982, 115, 808–812 CrossRef CAS .
M. Snare, I. Kubickova, P. Maki-Arvela, K. Eranen and D. Y. Murzin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 5708–5715 CrossRef .
B. X. Peng, C. Zhao, S. Kasakov, S. Foraita and J. A. Lercher, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 4732–4741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. X. Peng, X. G. Yuan, C. Zhao and J. A. Lercher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9400–9405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Liang, R. R. Ding, Y. L. Wu, Y. Chen, K. J. Wu, Y. Q. Meng, M. D. Yang and Y. W. Wang, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 411, 95–102 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Ding, Y. L. Wu, Y. Chen, J. M. Liang, J. Liu and M. D. Yang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2015, 135, 517–525 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Ding, Y. L. Wu, Y. Chen, H. Chen, J. L. Wang, Y. C. Shi and M. D. Yang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 2065–2076 CAS .
M. Peroni, G. Mancino, E. Barath, O. Y. Gutierrez and J. A. Lercher, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 301–311 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Nimkarde and P. D. Vaidya, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 3107–3112 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jeczmionek and K. Porzycka-Semczuk, Fuel, 2014, 131, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jeczmionek and K. Porzycka-Semczuk, Fuel, 2014, 128, 296–301 CrossRef CAS .
A. Srifa, K. Faungnawakij, V. Itthibenchapong and S. Assabumrungrat, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 278, 249–258 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jacobson, K. C. Maheria and A. K. Dalai, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 23, 91–106 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Senol, E. M. Ryymin, T. R. Viljava and A. O. I. Krause, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 277, 107–112 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Senol, T. R. Viljava and A. O. I. Krause, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 326, 236–244 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bezergianni, A. Dimitriadis, A. Kalogianni and P. A. Pilavachi, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 6651–6656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bezergianni, A. Dimitriadis, T. Sfetsas and A. Kalogianni, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 7658–7660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bezergianni, A. Kalogianni and A. Dimitriadis, Fuel, 2012, 93, 638–641 CrossRef CAS .
M. Toba, Y. Abe, H. Kuramochi, M. Osako, T. Mochizuki and Y. Yoshimura, Catal. Today, 2011, 164, 533–537 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liu, R. Sotelo-Boyas, K. Murata, T. Minowa and K. Sakanishi, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 4675–4685 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simacek, D. Kubicka, G. Sebor and M. Pospisil, Fuel, 2009, 88, 456–460 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kubicka and L. Kaluza, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 372, 199–208 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Huber, P. O'Connor and A. Corma, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 329, 120–129 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Gong, A. Shinozaki and E. W. Qian, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 13953–13960 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, T. Bruck and J. A. Lercher, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1720–1739 RSC .
E. Furimsky, Appl. Catal., A, 2000, 199, 147–190 CrossRef CAS .
P. Grange, E. Laurent, R. Maggi, A. Centeno and B. Delmon, Catal. Today, 1996, 29, 297–301 CrossRef CAS .

          H. J. Robota and J. C. Alger, US Pat., US 9012710B2,  2015 Search PubMed .
C. Y. Yang, R. F. Nie, J. Fu, Z. Y. Hou and X. Y. Lu, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 146, 569–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kong, Z. Luo, B. Li, L. Wu, M. He and C. Zhao, Zhongguo Kexue: Huaxue, 2015, 45, 510–525 CAS .
B. Ma, J. Zhang, H. Cui, M. He and C. Zhao, Zhongguo Kexue: Huaxue, 2015, 45, 350–360 CAS .
D. Y. Hong, S. J. Miller, P. K. Agrawal and C. W. Jones, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1038–1040 RSC .
S. Echeandia, B. Pawelec, V. L. Barrio, P. L. Arias, J. F. Cambra, C. V. Loricera and J. L. G. Fierro, Fuel, 2014, 117, 1061–1073 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, W. J. Song and J. A. Lercher, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2714–2723 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Zhang, T. J. Wang, L. L. Ma, Q. Zhang and T. Jiang, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 127, 306–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Zanuttini, C. D. Lago, C. A. Querini and M. A. Peralta, Catal. Today, 2013, 213, 9–17 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nie and D. E. Resasco, J. Catal., 2014, 317, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, G. Y. Chen, F. F. Yang, H. Wang, J. Y. Han, Q. F. Ge and X. L. Zhu, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2015, 135, 145–154 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shetty, K. Murugappan, T. Prasomsri, W. H. Green and Y. Roman-Leshkov, J. Catal., 2015, 331, 86–97 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Yang, C. Ochoa-Hernandez, V. A. D. O'Shea, P. Pizarro, J. M. Coronado and D. P. Serrano, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 145, 91–100 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Lee, Z. S. Wang, R. J. Wu and A. Bhan, J. Catal., 2014, 319, 44–53 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Li, R. J. Wang and J. X. Chen, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 854–863 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Zhu, R. G. Mallinson and D. E. Resasco, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 379, 172–181 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hellinger, H. W. P. Carvalho, S. Baier, D. Wang, W. Kleist and J. D. Grunwaldt, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 490, 181–192 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Oyama, T. Onkawa, A. Takagaki, R. Kikuchi, S. Hosokai, Y. Suzuki and K. K. Bando, Top. Catal., 2015, 58, 201–210 CrossRef .
J. Xing, L. Song, C. Zhang, M. D. Zhou, L. Yue and X. B. Li, Catal. Today, 2015, 258, 90–95 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao and J. A. Lercher, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 64–68 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, D. M. Camaioni and J. A. Lercher, J. Catal., 2012, 288, 92–103 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, S. Kasakov, J. Y. He and J. A. Lercher, J. Catal., 2012, 296, 12–23 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, Y. Z. Yu, A. Jentys and J. A. Lercher, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 132, 282–292 CrossRef .
X. L. Zhu, L. L. Lobban, R. G. Mallinson and D. E. Resasco, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 21–29 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ausavasukhi, Y. Huang, A. T. To, T. Sooknoi and D. E. Resasco, J. Catal., 2012, 290, 90–100 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shafaghat, P. S. Rezaei and W. Daud, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2016, 35, 268–276 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Bykova, D. Y. Ermakov, V. V. Kaichev, O. A. Bulavchenko, A. A. Saraev, M. Y. Lebedev and V. A. Yakovlev, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 113, 296–307 CrossRef .
R. N. Olcese, M. Bettahar, D. Petitjean, B. Malaman, F. Giovanella and A. Dufour, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 115, 63–73 CrossRef .
L. Nie, P. M. de Souza, F. B. Noronha, W. An, T. Sooknoi and D. E. Resasco, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2014, 388, 47–55 CrossRef .
E. H. Lee, R. S. Park, H. Kim, S. H. Park, S. C. Jung, J. K. Jeon, S. C. Kim and Y. K. Park, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2016, 37, 18–21 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Lee, B. R. Jun, H. Kim, D. H. Kim, J. K. Jeon, S. H. Park, C. H. Ko, T. W. Kim and Y. K. Park, Energy, 2015, 81, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Wang, Y. M. Fang, T. He, H. Q. Hu and J. H. Wu, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 1201–1205 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. T. Tran, Y. Uemura and A. Ramli, Procedia Eng., 2016, 148, 1252–1258 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. T. Tran, Y. Uemura, S. Chowdhury and A. Ramli, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 512, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yao, G. J. Wu, W. L. Dai, N. J. Guan and L. D. Li, Fuel, 2015, 150, 175–183 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shafaghat, P. S. Rezaei and W. Daud, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 33990–33998 RSC .
X. Nitsch, J. M. Commandre, P. Clavel, E. Martin, J. Valette and G. Volle, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 5459–5465 CrossRef CAS .
H. Egsgaard, J. Ahrenfeldt, P. Ambus, K. Schaumburg and U. B. Henriksen, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2014, 107, 174–182 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Massoth, P. Politzer, M. C. Concha, J. S. Murray, J. Jakowski and J. Simons, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 14283–14291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. Zhang, X. F. Yi, A. M. Zheng, F. Deng, C. Y. Chen, Y. Y. Ji, F. J. Liu, X. J. Meng and F. S. Xiao, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2727–2734 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Z. Chen, R. L. Liu, S. P. Wang, L. M. Chen and K. G. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 683–691 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Zanuttini, B. O. D. Costa, C. A. Querini and M. A. Peralta, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 482, 352–361 CrossRef CAS .
F. Anaya, L. Zhang, Q. H. Tan and D. E. Resasco, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 173–185 CrossRef CAS .
G. Z. Liu, Y. X. Zhao and J. H. Guo, Catalysts, 2016, 6, 15 CrossRef .
J. A. Hunns, M. Arroyo, A. F. Lee, J. M. Escola, D. Serrano and K. Wilson, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 2560–2564 CAS .
M. Hellinger, H. W. P. de Carvalho, S. Baier, L. Gharnati and J. D. Grunwaldt, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2015, 87, 1771–1780 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sepulveda, N. Escalona, R. Garcia, D. Laurenti and M. Vrinat, Catal. Today, 2012, 195, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sepulveda, R. Garcia, N. Escalona, D. Laurenti, L. Massin and M. Vrinat, Catal. Lett., 2011, 141, 987–995 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. To and D. E. Resasco, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 487, 62–71 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Foo, A. K. Rogers, M. M. Yung and C. Sievers, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1292–1307 CrossRef CAS .
A. Popov, E. Kondratieva, J. M. Goupil, L. Mariey, P. Bazin, J. P. Gilson, A. Travert and F. Mauge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15661–15670 CAS .
V. Krishnakumar, M. Kumar, N. Prabavathi and R. Mathammal, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2012, 97, 144–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Zhu, L. Nie, L. L. Lobban, R. G. Mallinson and D. E. Resasco, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 4104–4111 CrossRef CAS .

          N. B. Colthup, L. H. Daly and S. E. Wiberley, Introduction to Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy, Academic Press, Waltham, MA,  1990 Search PubMed .
E. P. Melian, O. G. Diaz, J. Arana, J. M. D. Rodriguez, E. T. Rendon and J. A. H. Melian, Catal. Today, 2007, 129, 256–262 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Gonzalez-Borja and D. E. Resasco, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 4155–4162 CrossRef CAS .
W. Mu, H. X. Ben, X. T. Du, X. D. Zhang, F. Hu, W. Liu, A. J. Ragauskas and Y. L. Deng, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 173, 6–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saidi, M. R. Rahimpour and S. Raeissi, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 3335–3344 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saidi, P. Rostami, H. R. Rahimpour, M. A. R. Fallah, M. R. Rahimpour, B. C. Gates and S. Raeissi, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 4990–4997 CrossRef CAS .
O. Jan, R. Marchand, L. C. A. Anjos, G. V. S. Seufitelli, E. Nikolla and F. L. P. Resende, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 1793–1800 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Zou, Y. L. Wu, M. D. Yang, C. Li and J. M. Tong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1073–1078 CAS .
A. Srifa, N. Viriya-Empikul, S. Assabumrungrat and K. Faungnawakij, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 3693–3705 CAS .
Y. Shi, Y. Cao, Y. Duan, H. Chen, Y. Chen, M. Yang and Y. Wu, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 4633–4648 RSC .
C. X. Wang, Z. J. Tian, L. Wang, R. S. Xu, Q. H. Liu, W. Qu, H. J. Ma and B. C. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1974–1983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, M. F. Li, Y. Chu and J. X. Chen, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 7122–7132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Yang, C. Ochoa-Hernandez, V. A. D. O'Shea, J. M. Coronado and D. P. Serrano, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 592–598 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Zuo, Q. Y. Liu, T. J. Wang, L. L. Ma, O. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 3747–3755 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, J. X. Chen, Y. Yang and S. S. Tian, Fuel Process. Technol., 2014, 118, 161–170 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. X. Chen and H. Shi, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 3400–3409 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Oyama, Catal. Today, 1992, 15, 179–200 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sotelo-Boyas, Y. Y. Liu and T. Minowa, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 2791–2799 CrossRef CAS .
P. Maki-Arvela, I. Kubickova, M. Snare, K. Eranen and D. Y. Murzin, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 30–41 CrossRef .
S. Lestari, P. Maki-Arvela, H. Bernas, O. Simakova, R. Sjoholm, J. Beltramini, G. Q. M. Lu, J. Myllyoja, I. Simakova and D. Y. Murzin, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 3842–3845 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Cecilia, A. Infantes-Molina, E. Rodriguez-Castellon, A. Jimenez-Lopez and S. T. Oyama, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 136, 140–149 CrossRef .
B. X. Peng, Y. Yao, C. Zhao and J. A. Lercher, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2072–2075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Rozmyslowicz, P. Maki-Arvela, S. Lestari, O. A. Simakova, K. Eranen, I. L. Simakova, D. Y. Murzin and T. O. Salmi, Top. Catal., 2010, 53, 1274–1277 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hasan, M. I. Zaki and L. Pasupulety, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 243, 81–92 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Hendren and K. M. Dooley, Catal. Today, 2003, 85, 333–351 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Dooley, A. K. Bhat, C. P. Plaisance and A. D. Roy, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 320, 122–133 CrossRef CAS .
V. J. Frilette, P. B. Weisz and R. L. Golden, J. Catal., 1962, 1, 301–306 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Weisz and V. J. Frilette, Spectrochim. Acta, 1960, 64, 382 CAS .
S. Teketel, L. F. Lundegaard, W. Skistad, S. M. Chavan, U. Olsbye, K. P. Lillerud, P. Beato and S. Svelle, J. Catal., 2015, 327, 22–32 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ma, J. B. Hu, Y. M. Wang and C. Zhao, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4610–4617 RSC .
B. Ma and C. Zhao, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1692–1701 RSC .
J. Cheng, T. Li, R. Huang, J. H. Zhou and K. F. Cen, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 158, 378–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Wang, Q. H. Liu, J. Song, W. Li, P. Li, R. S. Xu, H. J. Ma and Z. J. Tian, Catal. Today, 2014, 234, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, Y. Shi, J. Liang, Y. Wu, S. Huang, J. Wang, M. Yang and H. Hu, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2017, 158, 188–195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Liu, L. Yao, H. Xin, G. S. Wang, D. Li and C. W. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174, 504–514 CrossRef .
N. Chen, S. F. Gong, H. Shirai, T. Watanabe and E. W. Qian, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 466, 105–115 CrossRef CAS .
M. Herskowitz, M. V. Landau, Y. Reizner and D. Berger, Fuel, 2013, 111, 157–164 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ahmadi, E. E. Macias, J. B. Jasinski, P. Ratnasamy and M. A. Carreon, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2014, 386, 14–19 CrossRef CAS .
D. Verma, R. Kumar, B. S. Rana and A. K. Sinha, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1667–1671 CAS .
O. B. Ayodele, H. F. Abbas and W. Daud, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 5872–5881 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Kikhtyanin, A. E. Rubanov, A. B. Ayupov and G. V. Echevsky, Fuel, 2010, 89, 3085–3092 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Wang, B. Ma, B. Wang, C. Zhao and P. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15102–15105 RSC .
B. Ma, X. F. Yi, L. Chen, A. M. Zheng and C. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11330–11341 CAS .
W. J. Song, C. Zhao and J. A. Lercher, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 9833–9842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Prochazkova, P. Zamostny, M. Bejblova, L. Cerveny and J. Cejka, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 332, 56–64 CrossRef CAS .
A. Witsuthammakul and T. Sooknoi, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 3639–3648 CAS .
M. Bejblová, P. Zámostný, L. Červený and J. Čejka, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 296, 169–175 CrossRef .
A. Bohre, S. Dutta, B. Saha and M. M. Abu-Omar, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 1263–1277 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, R. J. M. Westerhof, D. H. Dong, L. P. Wu and C. Z. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 2562–2575 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bohre, B. Saha and M. M. Abu-Omar, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 4022–4029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, K. G. Wang, M. W. Nolte, Y. S. Choi, R. C. Brown and B. H. Shanks, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2608–2621 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Li, N. Li, G. Y. Li, L. Li, A. Q. Wang, Y. Cong, X. D. Wang, G. L. Xu and T. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 170, 124–134 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, K. Qiu, B. Li, T. Jiang, X. H. Zhang, L. L. Ma and T. J. Wang, Fuel, 2011, 90, 3468–3472 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. J. Wang, B. Li, T. Jiang, L. L. Ma, X. H. Zhang and Q. Y. Liu, Appl. Energy, 2012, 97, 509–513 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jiang, T. J. Wang, L. L. Ma, Y. P. Li, Q. Zhang and X. H. Zhang, Appl. Energy, 2012, 90, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jiang, Q. Zhang, T. J. Wang, Q. Zhang and L. L. Ma, Energy Convers. Manage., 2012, 59, 58–65 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tamiyakul, W. Ubolcharoen, D. N. Tungasmita and S. Jongpatiwut, Catal. Today, 2015, 256, 325–335 CrossRef CAS .
A. Veses, B. Puertolas, M. S. Callen and T. Garcia, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 209, 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, D. Li, H. P. Yang, X. H. Wang and H. P. Chen, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 3004–3013 CrossRef CAS .
P. He, W. P. Shan, Y. Xiao and H. Song, Top. Catal., 2016, 59, 86–93 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Yung, A. K. Starace, C. Mukarakate, A. M. Crow, M. A. Leshnov and K. A. Magrini, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 5259–5268 CrossRef CAS .
A. Veses, B. Puertolas, J. M. Lopez, M. S. Callen, B. Solsona and T. Garcia, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1653–1660 CrossRef CAS .
B. Puertolas, A. Veses, M. S. Callen, S. Mitchell, T. Garcia and J. Perez-Ramirez, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3283–3293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Widayatno, G. Q. Guan, J. Rizkiana, J. X. Yang, X. G. Hao, A. Tsutsumi and A. Abudula, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 186, 166–172 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pereda-Ayo, U. De La Torre, M. J. Illan-Gomez, A. Bueno-Lopez and J. R. Gonzalez-Velasco, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 420–428 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Diaz-Mendoza, L. Pernett-Bolano and N. Cardona-Martinez, Thermochim. Acta, 1998, 312, 47–61 CrossRef CAS .
P. Forzatti and L. Lietti, Catal. Today, 1999, 52, 165–181 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jae, G. A. Tompsett, A. J. Foster, K. D. Hammond, S. M. Auerbach, R. F. Lobo and G. W. Huber, J. Catal., 2011, 279, 257–268 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Mihalcik, C. A. Mullen and A. A. Boateng, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2011, 92, 224–232 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Lee, S. J. Choi, S. H. Park, J. K. Jeon, S. C. Jung, S. H. Joo and Y. K. Park, Energy, 2014, 66, 2–6 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Williams and P. A. Horne, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1995, 31, 39–61 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pérez-Ramirez, D. Verboekend, A. Bonilla and S. Abelló, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3972–3979 CrossRef .
Q. H. Tan, G. H. Wang, L. Nie, A. Dinse, C. Buda, J. Shabaker and D. E. Resasco, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6271–6283 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Vardon, B. K. Sharma, G. V. Blazina, K. Rajagopalan and T. J. Strathmann, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 109, 178–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chiaramonti, M. Prussi, M. Buffi, A. M. Rizzo and L. Pari, Appl. Energy, 2017, 185, 963–972 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raheem, W. A. K. G. Wan Azlina, Y. H. Taufiq Yap, M. K. Danquah and R. Harun, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 49, 990–999 CrossRef CAS .
U. Jena, K. C. Das and J. R. Kastner, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 6221–6229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chaiwong, T. Kiatsiriroat, N. Vorayos and C. Thararax, Biomass Bioenergy, 2013, 56, 600–606 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Zou, Y. L. Wu, M. D. Yang, C. Li and J. M. Tong, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 3753–3758 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Mullen, A. A. Boateng, N. M. Goldberg, I. M. Lima, D. A. Laird and K. B. Hicks, Biomass Bioenergy, 2010, 34, 67–74 CrossRef CAS .
A. Oasmaa and E. Kuoppala, Energy Fuels, 2003, 17, 1075–1084 CrossRef CAS .
A. Oasmaa and D. Meier, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2005, 73, 323–334 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Biomass conversion routes and product application.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of selected characteristics between target liquid hydrocarbon fuels and bio-oil.	 

 	Fig. 3  The representative oxygenated compounds of bio-oil.	 

 	Scheme 1  Reaction pathway deoxygenation of phenol (a) and carboxylic acids (b) over catalysts.48,60	 

Transportation fuel	Gasoline	Diesel	Jet fuel
Carbon number	5–12	10–22	10–15
Distillation range	30–180	180–350	140–180
Ideal component	

	

	


Desired structure	Iso-alkane	Branched alkane	Branched alkane
Desired properties	High octane number	High cetane number, low freezing/cloud point	Low freezing point

 	Fig. 4  Bifunctional catalysts for bio-oil upgrading.	 

 	Fig. 5  Typical phenolic compounds in bio-oil.	 

Pt, Pd, Ni	Phenol	Hydrogenation, cyclohexanol (major)	
67–70

Pt, Pd, Ni	
m-Cresols	Hydrogenation, 3-methylcyclohexanol (major)	
71–74

Pt, Ni, Mo	Anisole	Hydrogenation, cyclohexanol and phenol	
75–78

Pt, Ni2P	Guaiacol	Hydrogenation, phenol and cresol	
79, 80

Pd	Eugenol	Hydrogenation, alcohols	
81


 	Scheme 2  Proposed reaction pathway of m-cresol conversion over single acid sites of zeolite catalysts.87	 

 	Scheme 3  Bio-oil over Ni, Fe and NiFe supported H-beta catalysts (HYD: hydrodeoxygenation over metal centers and acid sites; DDO: direct deoxygenation or hydrogenolysis over metal centers; DMO: demethoxylation; DME: demethylation over acid sites; AL: alkylation over acid sites; DHY: dehydration over acid sites).88	 


1	Pt	H-ZSM-5/H-beta/HY	Phenol	Hydrogenation–dehydration; cyclohexane	
67

2	Pd	H-beta	Phenol	Hydrogenation–dehydration; cyclohexane	
82

Phenol/cyclohexanol	Hydrogenation–dehydration, alkylation; cyclohexane, alkylation productsa
Phenol/cyclohexene
Phenol/cyclohexanone
3	Ru	H-ZSM-5/H-beta	Phenolic monomers and dimers	Hydrogenation–dehydration; alkanes	
97, 102, 103

4	Ni	H-ZSM-5	Phenol	Hydrogenation–dehydration; cyclohexane	
70, 83–85

5	Ga	H-beta	
m-Cresol	Hydrogenation–dehydration, demethylation; methylcyclohexane, cyclohexane	
87

6	Pt	H-beta	Anisole	Hydrogenation–dehydration; benzene, toluene and xylenes	
86

7	Pt	Meso-zeolites	Guaiacol	Hydrogenation–dehydration, demethylation trans-alkylation; hydrocarbons	
93, 94

8	Ni/Fe	H-beta	Phenol (50 wt%), o-cresol (25 wt%), guaiacol (25 wt%)	Hydrogenation–dehydration; hydrocarbons	
88


 	Fig. 6  Main products over metals, zeolites, and bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts during the upgrading of phenolics based upon previous publications in section 2.	 

 	Fig. 7  The interaction of anisole, m-cresol and guaiacol over Lewis acid sites of H-beta zeolite.112	 

 	Fig. 8  Metal particle size enhancing the stability of metal/zeolite catalysts also including the effect of zeolitic porosity.84	 



2	60.0	4.38	1.33	0.00	0.84	0.00	1.05	0.00	48.04	0.00	35.26	9.09
5	93.0	1.58	1.54	0.00	3.20	0.00	2.35	0.00	48.35	0.00	37.50	0.67
7	99.8	1.12	0.83	0.01	2.21	0.00	2.60	0.18	47.45	2.89	39.59	3.11
9	99.2	1.30	1.36	0.04	2.88	0.08	2.96	0.18	47.76	3.41	37.26	2.74


5	75	603	0.188	96	66.5	15.0	13.8	3.8	0.7
10	75	586	0.171	100	72.6	10.1	14.8	1.6	0.6
5	180	565	0.069	96	82.8	6.0	10.2	0.2	0.4
10	180	523	0.053	98	84.6	5.2	9.5	—	0.4

Y	FAU	3D	0.74 × 0.74	Cracking
ZSM-5	MFI	3D	0.51 × 0.55, 0.53 × 0.56	Cracking aromatization
Beta	*BEA	3D	0.66 × 0.71, 0.56 × 0.56	—
ZSM-22	TON	1D	0.46 × 0.57	Isomerization
SAPO-11	AEL	1D	0.40 × 0.65	Isomerization

 	Fig. 9  The distribution of Ni nanoparticles and TEM/SEM images of Ni/HBEA (a: mesoporous single-crystalline), Ni/HBEA (b: SiO2/Al2O3 = 20), and Ni/HBEA (c: SiO2/Al2O3 = 26).145	 

 	Fig. 10  Carboxylic acids reaction in the cross section of Ni/HBEA (up) and Ni/TPA-HBEA (down) catalysts.146	 

 	Fig. 11  Mechanism and TEM images of dealumination and desilication on the HUSY zeolite (a-HUSY-1: Si/Al = 2.6; b-HUSY-2: HUSY-1 treated by vapor steaming; c-HUSY-3: HUSY-1 treated by TPAOH/NaOH alkali solution; d-HUSY-4: HUSY-1 treated by PI/NaOH alkali solution).158	 

 	Fig. 12  Four preparation methods for Ni nanoparticle synthesis onto and/or into the HBEA zeolite.159	 

 	Fig. 13  Proposed reaction pathway for the upgrading of palmitic acid in the presence of H2 and isomerization of products over bifunctional Mo/ZSM-22 catalysts.125	 

 	Fig. 14  TEM images and diameter distribution of bifunctional catalysts (a: fresh Ni/SAPO-11; b: used Ni/SAPO-11; c: fresh Ni2P/SAPO-11; d: used Ni2P/SAPO-11).127	 

SAPO-11	166	122	44	0.21	0.064	0.14	0.60	5.0
Ni/SAPO-11	121	80	40	0.18	0.042	0.13	0.57	5.8
Ni2P/SAPO-11	113	79	33	0.14	0.041	0.10	0.60	5.1
Used Ni/SAPO-11	28	0	28	0.11	0	0.11	—	15.9
Used Ni2P/SAPO-11	26	1.2	25	0.11	0.001	0.10	—	16.7

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of furan conversion into aromatics over Ga/ZSM-5 catalysts.32	 

 	Scheme 4  Reaction pathway of xylitol conversion to alkanes over bifunctional catalysts.170	 

1	Scenedesmus	Hydrothermal liquefaction	72.6 ± 2.6	9.0 ± 0.3	6.5 ± 0.1	10.5 ± 2.7	1.4 ± 0.3	—	35.5	
189

Slow pyrolysis	73.9 ± 2.3	9.3 ± 0.2	7.9 ± 0.3	8.1 ± 2.6	0.8 ± 0.1	—	36.7	
189

2	Algae A	Pyrolysis	52.1	10.2	5.8	31.6	0.3	16.7	28.2	
190

3	Algae B	Pyrolysis	58.8	10.6	4.0	26.4	0.2	19.4	29.3	
190

4	Lignocell	Hydrothermal liquefaction	67–80	6–8	0–2	11–23	—	3–13	30–35	
190

5	Wood	Pyrolysis	55.9	5.9	0.2	37.3	—	—	21	
191

6	Microalgae	Pyrolysis	65–65.8	7.8–8.5	9.7–10.3	11.2–16.5	—	—	29–45.9	
192

7	Algae (biocrude)	Hydrothermal liquefaction	77–80	10	4.0	5–8	0.3–0.5	2–8	35.4	
193

8	Algae (aqueous)	Hydrothermal liquefaction	1.8–3.7	11–12	0.5–1.1	84–85	—	95–96	Negligible	
192

9	Spirulina	Hydrothermal liquefaction	66.0	11.6	9.5	12.4	0.5	—	36.8	
19

Pyrolysis	46.1	8.0	9.7	36.3	—	32.4	21.7	
193

10	
Dunaliella tertiolecta
	Hydrothermal liquefaction	59.4	7.6	1.0	32.1	—	13–20	28.4	
194


1	Corn cobs	4	1	6	1	0	11	15	46	
195

2	Pine	15	3	4	7	2	4	24	5	
196

3	Softwood	2–3	0–2	3–10	1–17	0–1	2–4	29–32	24–57	
197

4	Hardwood	2–3	0–1	5–7	0–5	0–4	7–8	20–21	47–58	
197

5	Microalgae oil	—	30.4	51.3	—	2.76	4.85	—	—	
194


1	Dibenzofuran	143	417	∼8 H2/molecule
2	2-Ethylphenol	150	367	∼4 H2/molecule
3	4-Methylphenol	141	340	∼4 H2/molecule
4	Methoxyphenol	113	301	∼6 H2/molecule
5	Carboxylic acid	109	283	3 H2/molecule
6	Ketone	50	203	2 H2/molecule

1	Fe	H-beta	Simulated phenolic bio-oil	300–450 °C; 4 h; 3.5 MPa	Aromatization	Aromatics	20.2	
88

2	Ni	H-beta	Simulated phenolic bio-oil	300–450 °C; 4 h; 3.5 MPa	Hydrogenation	Cycloalkanes	21.4	
88

3	Ga	ZSM-5	Pyrolysis bio-oil	450 °C; 1 h	Decarbonylation; oligomerization; dehydration	Aromatics; cyclic hydrocarbons; Polyaromatic	33.6	
173

4	Ni	ZSM-5	35.7	
173

5	Sn	ZSM-5	32.6	
173

6	Cu	ZSM-5	30.7	
173

7	Mg	ZSM-5	29.8	
173

8	Co	HZSM-5	Sawdust derived bio-oil	450–650 °C; 30 min	Fast pyrolysis	Phenols	47.9	
174

9	Zr	HZSM-5	Hydrocarbons	43.6	
174

10	Zn	ZSM-5	Pyrolysis bio-oil; CH4	300–600 °C	Deoxygenation	High-quality bio-oil	<12	
175

11	Ni	ZSM-5	Pipe derived bio-oil	500 °C	Deoxygenation	High aromatics yield	—	
176

12	Ga	ZSM-5	Lignocellulosic	550–600 °C	Dehydrogenation	Olefin; aromatics	42.7	
32


 	Fig. 16  NH3-TPD profiles of the parent and cation-loaded ZSM-5.178	 

 	Fig. 17  NH3-TPD profiles of Cu-modified β-zeolites.179	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
