Advances in synthesis, properties and emerging applications of tin sulfides and its heterostructures  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00470G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00470G
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 516-556Advances in synthesis, properties and emerging applications of tin sulfides and its heterostructures

        
          
            Pratik 
            Shinde
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Chandra Sekhar 
            Rout
          
          
        
      *
      Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University, Jain Global Campus, Jakkasandra, Ramanagaram, Bangalore-562112, India. E-mail: r.chandrasekhar@jainuniversity.ac.in; csrout@gmail.com
Received 
      9th July 2020
    , Accepted 21st September 2020First published on 23rd September 2020AbstractThe tin sulfide (SnxSy) class of materials has attracted tremendous research interest in recent years owing to their intriguing physicochemical properties. Their inimitable optical, electronic, and mechanical properties open up windows for a broad range of promising applications. The precise design and tuning of the crystal phase, size, thickness, and composition holds excellent potential for utilizing them as crucial components of advanced devices. In this review, we explore the recent progress in their synthesis, properties, and applications. Initially, we outline the SnxSy class of materials briefly and discuss the recent developments in their phase and crystal dependent physicochemical properties. Numerous strategies have been portrayed for the preparation of single- to multi-layer, zero dimension to three dimension, and nano-sized to micro-sized materials. In-depth information on synthesis methods has been explored under the top-down and bottom-up approaches. The review includes the properties and synthesis of tin sulfides and also delivers exciting progress in various fields of applications. Finally, the prospects and opportunities in these exciting fields are discussed, based on their current progress.
Pratik Shinde
Pratik Shinde received his BSc (2015) and MSc (2017) degrees from Savitribai Phule Pune University, India. He is currently a PhD candidate at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University, India. His research interest is focused on the design and characterization of low-dimensional nanomaterials for electrochemical energy conversion and storage applications.
Chandra Sekhar Rout
Dr Chandra Sekhar Rout is an Associate Professor at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences (CNMS), Jain University. Before joining CNMS, He was a DST-Ramanujan Fellow at I. I. T. Bhubaneswar, India (2013–2017). He received his BSc (2001) and MSc (2003) degrees from Utkal University, and his PhD from JNCASR, Bangalore (2008) under the supervision of Prof. C. N. R. Rao. He did his postdoctoral research at the National University of Singapore (2008–2009), Purdue University, USA (2010–2012) and UNIST, South Korea (2012–2013). His research interests include 2D materials for sensors, supercapacitors and energy storage devices, field emitters and electronic devices.
1 Introduction
From the history of mankind's evolution, technology has been one of the undifferentiated parts of life. Since the nineteenth century, the frequency of the technology revolution has rapidly increased, and is growing day-by-day. The high dependence of technology on functional materials, in turn, calls for the development of materials chemistry. Over the past decade, the field of low-dimensional materials has brought a promising but inexperienced platform for studying diverse physicochemical phenomena that are scientifically intriguing and technologically relevant. Focused on this change is the exploration of the classes of low-dimensional materials like zero-dimensional (0D),1 one-dimensional (1D),2 and two-dimensional (2D)3 materials. These impactful “nano”-based classes blur the distinctions between advanced technologies and functionalized materials. The present era of nanotechnology is utterly based on shape- and size-controlled materials. Nanotechnology not only manipulates the material on the atomic, molecular, and supramolecular scale but also opens up new avenues in biological,4 sensing,5 photonics,6 and optoelectronics7 applications.
As a leader of the 2D material family, graphene has ignited intensive attention since it was first isolated by Novoselov and his co-workers in 2004.8 This isolation of monolayer graphene from bulk graphite reopened the field of low-dimensional materials. This environmentally stable 2D form of carbon has a honeycomb lattice structure, in which carbon atoms are covalently bonded with sp2 hybridization. Graphene has superior properties like large surface area, high charge-carrier mobility, high thermal conductivity, high optical activity, high mechanical strength and high Young's modulus.9 In particular, the lack of bandgap and low on/off ratio have made graphene unsuitable for optoelectronic applications and attracted more attention towards other materials.10,11 Nowadays, metal chalcogenides (MC's such as SnS, GeS, GaS), metal dichalcogenides (MDC's, such as MoS2, WS2, TaS2, SnS2, TiS2, etc.), metal oxides (MoO3, WO3, TiO2), hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), MXenes (Ti3C2Tx, V2CTx, Mo2CTx, etc.) and Xenes (phosphorene, germanene, silicene, bismuthene, etc.) are also the leading classes of material chemistry research.12–14 These materials have out-of-plane mirror symmetry and broken in-plane inversion symmetry. They show complementary characteristics similar to graphene and, in some cases, surpass graphene with extraordinary properties. Day-by-day, the growing materials family shows a vast spectrum of tunable electrical properties starting from insulating h-BN to semiconducting MoS2 and highly conducting graphene material.
In this regard, bulk and nanostructured groups IV–VI metal chalcogenide materials have attracted considerable interest due to their unique electronic and optoelectronic properties. Among these binary compounds are tin chalcogenides, which are generally represented as SnxZy, where Z is a chalcogen atom (such as S, Se, or Te), x is 1, 2, 3 and y is 1, 2, 3, 4. Tin (Sn) and chalcogens are cost-effective, exciting, and competitive candidates found abundantly in nature in the earth's crust. Thermodynamically, Sn forms compounds in both Sn(II) and Sn(IV) oxidation states.15 Due to the general electronic configuration ns2np4, the most common oxidation states of chalcogens are −2. In particular, the tin sulfides (SnxSy) are well-explored materials in comparison to selenide and telluride-based materials. SnS2 is the most studied material in this class of materials. Other materials like SnS, Sn2S3, Sn3S4, and Sn4S5 vary stoichiometrically, chemically, and electronically. The SnS and SnS2 are derived from a single oxidation state, while the remaining forms of tin sulfides consist of multivalent states. SnxSy show the van der Waals (vdWs) lamellar crystal structure along with a wide energy bandgap, which is in the visible frequency region. Also, their adaptable chemical behavior allows the fabrication of heterostructures, hybrids, and composites, as well as appropriate doping, and generates a synergistic effect, which make them suitable candidates in the energy storage, catalysis and sensing fields.16–18 The strong anisotropy of the optical properties, enhanced responsivity and switching ratio allow them to have a pro-future in nanoelectronics and optoelectronics. This class of materials holds the additional advantages for large scale applications with the low-cost, earth-abundance, and low environmental impact of their constituent elements.
In this unified review, we focus on the emerging SnxSy class of materials. At first, we highlight their unique generalized properties and then introduce the state-of-the-art material derivative composites/hybrids. We then introduce recent efforts and progress in top-down and bottom-up synthetic design strategies, along with their essential growth parameters. We have extended our outline to summarize the various potential applications and opportunities of the class of SnxSy compounds. This review also highlights some future outlooks, which shed light on the possible future directions for these emerging materials. Finally, this review closes with conclusions extracted from this in-depth study.
2 Crystal structure and properties
A deep understanding of the novel, unique, and unexpected properties of materials reveals several innovative opportunities. Every single SnxSy class of materials possesses some interesting properties that originate from their structural arrangements. Variation in the composition of the materials resolves their conductivity and demonstrates the type, such as a p-type or n-type semiconductor. Also, the existing range of electronic bandgap and physical appearances separate them from each other. Here, for better identification, we highlight the structural and electronic properties of each SnxSy material based on the available computational and experimental studies. The ground-state crystal structures of SnS, SnS2, and Sn2S3 are shown in Fig. 1, in which Sn atoms and S atoms are represented in grey and yellow, respectively.19
 Fig. 1  The ground-state crystal structures of SnS-Pnma, SnS2-P3m1 and Sn2S3-Pnma (Sn atoms are grey and S atoms are yellow). Reprinted with permission.19 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.1 SnxSy

2.1.1 SnS. 
Grey SnS is a well-explored group IV–VI binary compound that shares a similar layered-structure to that of germanium sulfide (GeS) and germanium selenide (GeSe). The layers link with each other by weak vdWs forces, leading to the dangling bond-free chemically inert surface.20,21 The two phases, α-SnS and β-SnS, are isolated from each other based on the Sn–S bond length. In β-SnS, the S atoms are bonded to the Sn atom with equal atomic distances, while in α-SnS, two bonds are slightly longer than the remaining two bonds. Out of several phases, α-SnS is the only stable phase at room temperature, while the remaining forms are stable at high temperatures.22 Including β-SnS, the α-SnS crystallizes in the orthorhombic herzenbergite structure having a rock salt arrangement and the space group of Pnma.23 This structure illustrates that Sn2+ ions coordinate to three S2− ions with active lone pairs of electrons [Sn2+ 5s2], occupying the last tetrahedral site. This highly distorted structure has lattice constants a = 1.1200 nm, b = 0.3987 nm, and c = 0.4334 nm, respectively.24 Due to the strong interlayer interaction and distinct perspective views along with axial directions, SnS exhibits an intense anisotropic nature. These structural parameters strongly influence the electronic nature of the SnS compound. The p-type conductivity of SnS is accompanied by the Sn(II) oxidation state and it displays a direct bandgap of 1.2–1.5 eV.25–27 and an indirect gap of 1.1 eV.28–30 Moreover, it has a high free carrier concentration of around 1017–1018 cm−3,31,32 and a high optical absorption coefficient >104 cm−1.33,34 Thus, these characteristic combinations of crystallographic and electronic properties render SnS suitable for a variety of optoelectronic applications.


2.1.2 SnS2. 
As a group IV–VI chalcogenide material, the golden-yellow-colored SnS2 has a similar configuration to other TMDs materials. It consists of two layers of close-packed sulfur atoms with Sn atoms sandwiched between them in a SnS6 octahedral coordination at their edges. This “three-layer” structure forms a layered cadmium iodide (CdI2) crystal structure (a = b= 0.3648 nm, c = 0.5899 nm, space group P3m1), which seizes n-type semiconducting properties.35 The sulfur layers are connected by strong covalent bonding, whereas the interlayer spacing between each monolayer is loosely linked via weak vdWs bonding. For this reason, SnS2 can form 2D building blocks like the surface structure of graphene and other 2D materials. With various identical S–Sn–S layer periodicity sequences, SnS2 exhibits rich polytypism including 2H, 4H, and 18R, as per their growth conditions.36 Also, it exists in various forms such as nanowires (1D),37 nanosheets (2D),38 nanoflowers/crystals (3D),39 and discrete molecular species,40 produced by several bottom-up or top-down techniques. Theoretical and experimental reports revealed the wide bandgap of SnS2 is about 2–2.6 eV,41,42 which is advantageous in electronic device systems that function at higher voltages, frequencies, and temperatures, eventually increasing the efficiency of such systems at a low price. Along with this nature, SnS2 has been predicted to have a high electron mobility of ∼230 cm2 V−1 s−1,43 high on/off ratio >106,43 high theoretical capacitance 645 mA h g−144 and low environmental toxicity. To use the potentiality of this inherent semiconducting SnS2, from both fundamental and practical points of view, the fabrication plays an important role.


2.1.3 Sn2S3. 
The shiny black Sn2S3 is another stable phase compound of the SnxSy class.45 It usually crystallizes in the orthorhombic phase by the space group Pnma, with lattice parameters of a = 0.8878 nm, b = 0. 3751 nm and c = 1.402 nm.46 The electronic structure of Sn2S3 has two different valence states; Sn atoms are present in both divalent [Sn(II)] and tetravalent [Sn(IV)] forms. In the crystal structure, each unit cell contains equal proportions of Sn(II) and Sn(IV). Due to the similarity to SnS in color and bandgap value, it is sometimes misidentified due to confusion. Sn2S3 behaves as an n-type semiconductor since sulfur vacancies are associated with the Sn(IV) state.47 The direct bandgap ranges from 0.85 eV to 2.4 eV48,49 and the indirect bandgap is about 1.0 eV.47 The high anisotropic conduction along the axes makes it a suitable material for p–n or p–i–n photovoltaic device applications.

2.2 Optical and electrical properties
SnxSy materials have garnered a lot of interest due to the fine-tuning of their physicochemical properties, including the bandgap, electrical conductivity, excitonic behavior, etc. These materials represent the unique combination of structural, electrical, and optical properties. Aside from these attractive properties, the materials are readily available, economical, and non-toxic.
Javed et al.50 studied the thickness-dependent optical and electrical properties of SnS thin films. Optical measurements showed that the films with lower thickness had higher absorption coefficients (>104 cm−1), and the direct energy bandgap increased from 1.70 eV to 1.74 eV with increasing film thickness. The electrical resistivity also increased with an increase in film thickness (1.592 × 103 Ω cm to 1.785 × 104 Ω cm). The results indicated that the optical response and electrical conductivity could be tuned through the appropriate variation of film thickness. Nabi et al.51 reported self-consistent calculations for the electronic and optical properties of the SnS structure with a full-potential linearized augmented plane wave (FP-LAPW) method within the local density approximation (LDA). From the calculations, the direct bandgap of SnS was found to be 0.52 eV with a valence bandwidth of 14.06 eV. Only two phonon processes were observed between 1.5 and 20 eV in the inter-band absorption coefficient calculation. As a result, the FP-LAPW method accurately predicted the electronic band structure of SnS. Basak et al.52 investigated the electrical characteristics such as carrier concentration, mobility, and conductivity of SnS thin films, obtained from Hall effect measurements. The films on glass/ZnO: Al showed better mobility (5.21 μ (cm2 V−1 s−1)) and less resistivity (1.46 × 10−6) than the films on other substrates. From the optical measurements, the bandgap values of the films were 1.19 eV for glass/ZnO: Al/SnS, 1.65 eV for glass/ITO/SnS and 1.43 eV for glass/CdS/SnS. The results showed that the optical and electrical characteristics vastly changed with the nature of the substrate. Mahdi et al.53 estimated that the direct energy bandgap varied from 1.64 eV to 1.1 eV for different SnS films grown by varying experimental growth parameters.
Hosny et al.54 showed that SnS2 nanoparticles have a wide absorption range in the UV-visible region. An obtained optical bandgap of 1.75 eV was found to be wider than the bulk bandgap of 1.33 eV, which makes it a more suitable material for light-emitting device applications. Kumar and co-workers55 investigated the optical absorption spectra of SnS2 films and reported that the extinction coefficient values varied from 0.48 to 0.55 for the films grown under different experimental conditions. However, transmittance and optical band gap (2.72 to 2.65 eV) values of SnS2 thin film were reported to decrease with increasing molar concentrations of the precursors during the synthesis process. The variations in properties suggest that this tunability makes the nanocrystalline SnS2 material suitable for solar cells and photodetector devices.
Wen et al.56 investigated the electronic properties of SnS2 monolayers (ML) and the effects of hydrogenation and mechanical tension were estimated by first-principles calculations based on the density-functional theory. The monolayers were stretched statically in biaxial directions to investigate the effect of tension. Calculated results showed that SnS2-0H-ML had the maximal band gap of 0.79 eV at ε = 1% with semiconducting characteristics at ε < 8%, and metallic characteristics when ε > 8%. Hence, the optical properties of pure SnS2 monolayer can be mechanically tuned from a semiconductor to metal. As shown in Fig. 2a, the bandgap of SnS2-1H-ML rapidly increases to 1.855 eV at ε = 2%, decreases with a further increase in tension, and finally converges to 1.773 eV at ε = 10%. Due to extended lattices, the bonding states of SnS2-1H-ML and SnS2-2H-ML are weaker as compared to SnS2-0H-ML. Moreover, the comparative investigation of the effect of tension on the electronic properties has demonstrated that SnS2-0H-MLs are stronger than those of SnS2-1H-ML and SnS2-2H-ML. Fig. 2b–e shows the band structures and partial density of states of SnS2-2H-ML at different tensions when the Fermi level position is at 0 eV. The calculations show that the electronic properties are strongly affected by hydrogenation and tension. Also, pure SnS2 monolayers can change from a semiconductor to metal by applying tension.
 Fig. 2  (a) Calculated band gaps of SnS2-nH-MLs (n = 1 and 2). Insets show the calculated bandgap of pure SnS2 monolayers as a function of tension. (b) and (c) Calculated band structures of SnS2-2H-ML at tensions of 2% and 10%, respectively. (d) and (e) Partial density of states of SnS2-2H-ML at tensions of 2% and 10%, respectively. Reprinted with permission.56 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) and (g) The charge density differences for pure SnS2 and Fe-doped SnS2. Reprinted with permission.64 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. 
Saroja et al.57 reported that Sn2S3 thin films showed optical absorption of 70% with an absorption coefficient of 104 cm−1 at 550 nm. The bandgap value was calculated to be 2.1 eV and over the visible region, the refractive index of film ranged between 2.7 to 2.4. The dielectric constant increased with an increase in frequency in the visible region. It was also observed that with an increase in temperature, the electrical resistivity decrease, which was of the order of 10−1 Ω cm, with a carrier concentration value of the order of 1016. Singh58 reported the optical and electronic properties of semiconducting Sn2S3 from first-principles calculations. The estimated indirect bandgap of 0.82 eV and the direct gap of 0.97 eV were reported. The onset value of strong optical absorption was reported to be ∼1.75 eV, due to the Sn2+ s and Sn4+ s characters of the valence and conduction band extrema. The electronic structure of Sn2S3 clearly shows that Sn occurs in both divalent and tetravalent forms in the compound. Also, the use of Sn2S3 as a solar absorber is not suitable from the points of view of the efficient absorption of solar radiation and the collection of holes and electrons, at least with simple device structures. Gnanamuthu et al.59 reported the minimum resistivity of 0.96 × 10−1 Ω cm for 2 wt% Ni-doped Sn2S3. The optical measurement revealed that 2 wt% Ni-doped Sn2S3 films exhibited a maximum transmittance of 75.23% and also, the bandgaps increased from 1.91 eV to 2.01 eV with Ni doping. Bletskan et al.60 calculated the energy band structure, total and local partial densities of states, and the spatial distribution of electron charge density of Sn2S3 by a density functional method. The optical and electrical characteristics highly depend on the structural, compositional, and morphological properties of SnxSy materials. More investigations of these materials can bring new opportunities in optoelectronic applications.
2.3 Electronic and magnetic properties
The alignment of the magnetic properties originates from the moving charges and spin of elementary particles. For the development of advanced applications, the understanding of magnetic functionalities is crucially important; therefore recognizing the electromagnetic properties of SnxSy materials may bring new and exciting directions.
Parveen et al.61 investigated the magnetic properties of pure and Fe-doped SnS by measuring the hysteresis loops via a vibrating sample magnetometer. The pure SnS exhibited a diamagnetic nature, while it showed ferromagnetism upon Fe-doping. The single-phase nano-crystalline diluted magnetic semiconductors responded to impinging frequencies with a stable Fe oxidation state and exhibited ferromagnetism at 300 K. The study revealed the potential of SnS material for data storage device applications. Ullah et al.62 investigated the effects of defects on the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of monolayer SnS based on first-principles calculations. To study the influence of doping on the electronic and magnetic properties of monolayer SnS, transition metals like Mn, Fe, and Co were doped at the Sn-site. The density of states calculations showed a semiconductor-to-metal transition with the creation of the vacancy at the Sn-site, and the S vacancy possesses a high vacancy migration barrier. The doping with metal transformed the non-magnetic monolayer SnS into a magnetic one with long-range ferromagnetic behavior and it showed a high spin state, which is useful for spin-filtering devices.
Liu et al.63 studied the effects of compressive and tensile biaxial strains on the electronic and magnetic properties of Fe-doped monolayer SnS2 with first-principles calculations. It was observed that the compressive strain, up to ∼6% or even more, dramatically enhanced the bandgap and caused the transformation from half-metal to semiconductor. The numerical results illustrate that the Fe-doped SnS2 compound was energetically favored under the S-rich conditions with respect to Sn-rich environments. In contrast, tensile strain causes the Fe-doped compounds to be transformed into metallic. The total magnetic moment induced was ∼1.986 μB and was observed to be robust under the affordable biaxial strain. Sun et al.64 studied the magnetic properties of Fe-doped SnS2 by using density functional theory calculations. Fe-doped SnS2 was found to be stable without any large structural deformation. With magnetic ground states, Fe-doped SnS2 was reported to be half-metal and the total induced magnetic moment was about 2.0 μB, mainly arising from the 3d orbitals of Fe atoms. In Fe-doped SnS2, a sulfur vacancy has a high impact on the magnetic properties, and room temperature ferromagnetism also available with Curie temperature Tc = 629 K. As shown in Fig. 2g, the optimal Fe–S bond length is shorter than the relaxed Sn–S bond length due to the electronegativity difference between Fe/S and Sn/S atoms. Fig. 2f and g shows the charge depletion and accumulation region represented by the blue and red colors, respectively. The charge density map for Fe-doped SnS2 also revealed that there existed strong covalent bonds between the dopant Fe and the neighboring S atoms. The effects like the substitutional doping of Fe, sulfur vacancy, and the 90° superexchange mechanism between two Fe atoms in sulfur-deficient SnS2 have a large impact on the magnetic behavior of SnS2.
Srivind et al.65 experimentally verified that the ferromagnetic ordering of pure SnS2 is improved by Fe doping. The results indicated that Fe-doped SnS2 nanopowders are well suited as diluted magnetic semiconductors. Li et al.66 studied the effect of Fe-doping on the magnetic properties of SnS2. It was revealed that the diamagnetic nature of pure SnS2 was transformed into the ferromagnetic nature after Fe doping and density functional theory calculations showed that long-range ferromagnetic ordering in the Fe-doped SnS2 monolayer was energetically stable. The experimental Curie temperature (∼31 K) was in good agreement with the predicted Curie temperature. The magnetic measurements were performed using a vibrating sample magnetometer with different types of applied magnetic fields, such as perpendicular to the sheet, e.g., parallel to the [001] direction (H⊥), and parallel to the sheet, e.g., perpendicular to the [001] direction (H‖). Magnetic hysteresis loops at 2 K for SnS2 and Fe–SnS2 are presented in Fig. 3a and b. As shown in Fig. 3b, the Fe–SnS2 sheets exhibited anisotropic nature at 2 K in both H⊥ and H‖ directions. The Fe–SnS2 monolayer exhibited half-metallic behavior, as per the total density of states calculation, and projected band structures also clarified that the impurity levels at the Fermi level came from the Fe atom and not from the Sn atoms (Fig. 3b). For the up-spin and down-spin channels, the projected band structures of Fe–SnS2 are shown in Fig. 3c and d. By first-principles calculations, Xiao et al.67 investigated the electronic and magnetic properties of the SnS2 monolayer doped with 4d transition metals. SnS2 doped with Y, Zr, and Pd remained as non-magnetic semiconductors; with Nb, Ru, Rh, Ag, and Cd doping, it resulted in half-metallic states, and with Mo and Tc dopants, magnetic semiconducting properties were observed. Furthermore, the Mo-doped system also provided good energetic stability, flexible mechanical stability, as well as remarkable dynamic and thermal (500 K) stability. The half-metallic Nb-doped and Mo doped magnetic SnS2 emerged as potential candidates for diluted magnetic semiconductor-based device applications. Ali et al.68 studied the effects of 5d transition metal doping on the electronic and magnetic properties of monolayer SnS2 material using the first-principles theoretical calculation approach. The non-magnetic monolayer SnS2 changed to magnetic after the doping of 5d transition metals and the magnetic moments were mainly due to the doping. However, similar results were observed for other metals like W, Re, Os, Ir, Au, or Hg, except for Pt. The metal-like W, Re, or Hg-doped monolayer SnS2 were reported to be magnetic semiconductors, whilst the Os, Ir, or Au-doped monolayer SnS2 were half-metallic magnets with wider bandgaps of 1.509 eV, 1.632 eV, or 1.383 eV, respectively. Xiao et al.69 studied the effects of the doping of non-magnetic elements of groups IA, IIA, and IIIA on the electronic and magnetic properties of the SnS2 monolayer by first-principles methods. SnS2 showed half-metallic nature upon IA and IIA element doping, while metallic nature was observed with group IIIA element doping. By the doping introduced, the cooperative effect of the Hund's rule coupling and the hole concentration affected the overall formation of the magnetic moment. The results show that it is possible to induce and control spin polarization in SnS2 monolayers by non-magnetic doping and tensile strain. Saroja et al.70 reported the diamagnetic to the ferromagnetic transformation of Sn2S3 by Mn doping. Several other reports based on the doping-dependent electronic and magnetic properties of SnxSy materials revealed that SnxSy-based materials have the potential for different electronics and spintronics device applications.71–73
 Fig. 3  (a) Magnetic hysteresis loops for SnS2 at 2 K. (b) Magnetic hysteresis loops for Fe–SnS2 at 2 K. (c) Projected band structures of the Fe–SnS2 monolayer for spin-up channels. (d) Projected band structures of the Fe–SnS2 monolayer for spin-down channels (the contributions of Sn and Fe atoms in the total band structure are shown by red and blue circles, respectively). Reprinted with permission.66 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
The results indicate that there is a need for more improvements in the electromagnetic performance of SnxSy materials. The magnetic moments created through defect engineering based on vacancies, adatoms, boundaries, and edges, as well as band structure engineering of SnxSy materials, will make them promising candidates for the design of spintronic devices. Also, the broadening of the theoretical investigations to the experimental level allows the expansion of SnxSy materials in numerous applications. Table 1 provides comparative information on the crystal structure, lattice constants, physical nature, electronic and magnetic properties of tin sulfides.
Table 1 SnxSy materials: crystal structure, lattice constants, physical nature, electronic and magnetic properties




SnxSy
Crystal structure
Colour
Space group
Lattice parameters (nm)
Electronic properties
Magnetic nature



a


b


c

Type
Bandgap (eV)




SnS
Orthorhombic
Dark grey

P

nma


1.1200
0.3987
0.4334
p-Type
1.2–1.5 (direct) and 1.1 (indirect)
Diamagnetic


SnS2
Hexagonal
Golden yellow

P
3m1

0.3648
0.3648
0.5899
n-Type
2 to 2.6
Diamagnetic


Sn2S3
Orthorhombic
Shiny black

P

nma


0.8878
0.3751
1.402
n-Type
0.85 to 2.4
Diamagnetic




3 Synthesis
The regulation of the morphology and thickness with the large specific area offers an ideal platform for fabricating on-demand materials for novel architecture systems. As such, the appropriate optimization of synthesis techniques as per their need for a particular application is a crucial step to concretely implicate material structures and properties. Several methods have been developed over the years to produce nanometer to large scale materials. These techniques are building the foundation for a specific application by preparing materials with the required size, purity, and composition. Nowadays, some of the techniques are widely adopted in the industries, but most of them are restricted only to fundamental research in the laboratory. The ability to produce materials by tailoring properties is making a huge impact in the fields of electronics and optoelectronics. Over the last few years, the fabrication of heterostructures, composites, and hybrids has attracted considerable attention for exploring their properties and applications in a more effective and tunable manner. Here, we briefly discuss some of the synthesis approaches extensively used for the preparation of SnxSy materials and their derivatives. The fabrication methods are classified according to the principle of assembling the materials, the so-called top-down approach, and the bottom-up approach. Every synthetic strategy has its own merits and demerits, as well as its possible abilities to synthesize the desired materials. Several synthetic approaches have shown their significance in the fabrication process of SnxSy materials and their derivatives (Fig. 4). This collective information will assist researchers in choosing an appropriate fabrication technique for their particular project in a controlled manner.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the different synthesis strategies of SnxSy class materials. 
3.1 Top-down approach
In the top-down approach, assemblies having larger dimensions are reduced to the desired nanoscale structures by the chemical-based or physical-based processes. These driving forces can be employed to break the vdWs interactions between the stacked layers of crystal. These skilled labor-operated methods are performed under ambient conditions, which are capable of producing dispersions of the single- and few-layer flakes/sheets. Liquid and mechanical exfoliations are widely used as the top-down strategies to synthesize SnxSy materials.

3.1.1 Mechanical exfoliation. 
The mechanical exfoliation technique is widely used to synthesize a single lattice unit or few-layered materials from their bulk crystals. The peeling of layers with mechanical force offers the highest quality materials without causing serious degradation. However, to increase the efficiency of the material production without degrading the material properties is of great interest.
Higashitarumizu and co-workers74 exfoliated SnS thin flakes by tape and Au-exfoliation and transferred them onto SiO2/n+-Si substrates. The Au-exfoliation offered an atomically flat surface of SnS flakes. The moderate oxygen annealing led to the formation of high-quality SnS layers along with thin layers of SnOx. The SnOx/SnS structure exhibited a thickness of 0.7 nm, which is close to the monolayer thickness. Fig. 5a shows an optical image of SnS flakes and in the atomic force microscopy (AFM) image (Fig. 5b), the flake thicknesses were observed to be 13.8 nm, 10.5 nm and 4.3 nm at the points A, B, and C, respectively. The cross-sectional high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image along the dashed line of Fig. 5b is shown in Fig. 5c. At point A, the amorphous SnOx is seen; at point B, the amorphous-SnOx/SnS heterostructure is observed; at point C, the amorphous SnOx is observed. De et al.75 employed the scotch-tape method to mechanically exfoliate SnS2 plate crystals in the form of nanomembranes and then transferred them onto a degenerately n-doped silicon wafer covered with a 200 nm layer of thermally grown silicon dioxide. The atomic force microscopy technique was used to measure the thickness of the SnS2 nano-membrane and the obtained thickness of ∼15 nm, corresponds to approximately 25 layers. Liu et al.76 mechanically exfoliated thin layer SnS2 crystals having a thickness of 36 nm (∼50 layers of SnS2) from the bulk SnS2. Li et al.66 exfoliated the Fe-doped SnS2 monolayer using a micromechanical cleavage method from synthesized bulk crystals.
 Fig. 5  (a) Optical image of SnS flakes via Au-exfoliation. (b) AFM topographic image of the square marked area of the optical image (inset: the height profile along the solid line). (c) Cross-sectional HAADF-STEM image of a SnS flake at point A in the AFM image. Reprinted with permission.74 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) TEM image of layered SnS nanosheets. (e) Raman spectra of bulk and ultrathin SnS nanosheets. (f) Atomic displacements corresponding to different Raman active modes of layered SnS. Reprinted with permission.79 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 


3.1.2 Liquid exfoliation. 
Liquid exfoliation seems to be a simple and versatile method, in which the vdWs energy is reduced by liquid–solid interface energy through liquid intercalation between layers. The exfoliation mainly proceeds with ultrasonic treatment, high shear processing, electrochemical, and chemical intercalation pathways.77 Although various solvents are available for exfoliation, the choice of energetic, efficient solvents is crucial. Due to the high yield production, economical and easy operation, the method has attracted attention to exfoliating carbon and metal chalcogenide-based compounds.77
Brent et al.78 produced SnS nanosheets in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone by ultrasonication treatment at 37 kHz frequency and 30% power for 24 h, below 30 °C. Sarkar et al.79 dissolved tin(II) sulfide in acetone solvent in nitrogen-flushed glass vials and ultrasonicated the mixture at room temperature for 20 h under 100 W power and 40 kHz frequency. Layered SnS sheets were obtained from the suspension of centrifuged material. The average sheet thickness of the sample was estimated to be 1.10 nm by AFM. The exfoliated SnS sheet-like structures were observed via transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images as shown in Fig. 5d. The inactive Raman modes of Ag and B3g of the bulk were found to be prominent with a significant shift (3.46 cm−1) in the Ag (1) mode under the transformation from bulk to ultrathin SnS nanosheets (Fig. 5e). Fig. 5f shows the atomic displacements corresponding to different Raman active modes of layered SnS. This significant shift is attributed to the evolution of coupling between electronic transitions and phonons. Zhao and co-workers80 successfully synthesized a SnS/graphene composite by a novel lithiation-assisted exfoliation and reduction method by using SnS2, n-butyllithium, and graphene oxide as the starting precursors. Qin et al.81 reported the preparation of 2D SnS2 material from its bulk SnS2 nanosheets, which were initially prepared by a simple hydrothermal approach. The nanosheets were exfoliated with n-Bu-Lithium solvent by continuous stirring at room temperature for 48 h. The thickness of the obtained SnS2 nanosheets was found to be ∼0.6 nm by tapping mode AFM analysis and the results also showed that the concentration of the solvent is the key factor to synthesize 2D materials by liquid exfoliation method.


3.1.3 Ion exchange method. 
The ion exchange reaction involves the rapid replacement of ions by solid-state diffusion for template nanoparticle materials. According to theoretical predictions, an ion-exchange reaction strictly depends on thermodynamic and kinetic factors. As such, this kinetically controllable, effective, and low-cost approach provides a promising method for fabricating the heterostructures, core–shell structures, and metastable phases.82 Cheng et al.83 successfully accessed Au@Sn2S3 and Au@SnS2 core–shell hybrid nanocrystals (HNCs) with the aqueous cation exchange-mediated growth strategy by using different phosphine ligands. Au@Sn2S3 HNCs were obtained by employing tri-n-butylphosphine (TBP) as a ligand, while Au@SnS2 HNCs were obtained by using tri-n-octylphosphine (TOP) ligand. The pre-grown shape- and size-controlled aqueous Au colloids were utilized as the starting materials. Firstly, Au@Ag2S core–shell HNCs were formed in aqueous solution by growing an Ag overlayer around the Au colloids and then converting it into Ag2S by reacting with the sulfur precursor mixture of S powder and Na2S. Then, the cation exchange step was performed in water using Sn2+ as the guest cation and different ligands like TBP or TOP (dissolved in methanol solution). The soft acid Ag+ cations in the Ag2S shell matrix were extracted by the soft base TBP or TOP in solution by forming Ag+–phosphine complexes, and were replaced by the harder acids Sn2+ (or Sn4+) to generate the desired SnSx shells.
Chen et al.84 proposed a general cation exchange reaction from SnS2 to MoS2. Firstly, the 2D layer compound was prepared by the liquid exfoliation of MoS2 and SnS2 in ethanol. Then, ion exchange reactions were carried out under N2 using the standard Schlenk technique. A mixture of few-layered SnS2 nanosheets, oleylamine, and 1-octadecene was added to a three-necked flask and degassed at 120 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere. Then, a mixture of MoCl5, oleic acid, and TOP was injected into the above-prepared precursor mixture. The reaction was kept at 320 °C and the reaction time was kept for 5 h. Finally, after the mixture cooled to room temperature, the products were collected by centrifugation.
Guan and coworkers85 synthesized hierarchical NiS/SnS2 heterogeneous nanowall arrays on carbon cloth (NiS/SnS2@CC) via a simple cation-exchange method using SnS2@CC as the precursor. Firstly, the SnS2 template was grown on carbon cloth using SnCl4·5H2O and thioacetamide as precursors, which dissolved in ethanol at room temperature. A piece of clean CC was immersed in an upright position in the autoclave. The prepared solution was heated at 160 °C in an electric oven for 6 h. After natural cooling, SnS2@CC was obtained by washing with distilled water and ethanol several times and then drying in air at 60 °C. Then, NiS/SnS2@CC was prepared via a simple cation-exchange reaction using the SnS2@CC as a precursor. In this process, NiCl2·6H2O was dissolved in 30 mL ethanol to form a clear solution and transferred into the autoclave. The as-prepared SnS2@CC was placed upright, and the autoclave was heated to 180 °C and kept for 6 h. For controlling the ratios of Ni and Sn in NiS/SnS2@CC, the cation-exchange reaction time was varied from 2 to 12 h, and after cooling, the product was washed with distilled water and ethanol and then dried air at 60 °C.

3.2 Bottom-up approach
In the bottom-up approach, the self-assembly of atomic or molecular dimensions into more complex nanoscale assemblies takes place and is based on an externally applied driving force. There are some challenges such as less control over atom deposition, impurity involvement during the reaction, and less uniformity for large scale preparation. Still, the flexibility to control chemical reactions, substantial control over morphology and the ability to produce porous structures with minimum waste show the potential of the bottom-up approach to produce systems for a multitude of applications.86–88 So far, several bottom-up approaches have been proposed for the fabrication of SnxSy materials and their derivatives.

3.2.1 Hydro/solvothermal. 
This method belongs to a wet chemical approach and is considered a promising route to directly obtaining the crystal and powder. Typically, the reaction is carried out in a pressurized reaction vessel, which is generally described as a Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave. The tightly sealed autoclave contains a homogeneous mixture of precursors in an aqueous solution or other solvents. The autoclave is heated above the ambient temperature and pressure, to obtain recrystallized products. In general, the temperature range for the reaction is 80–250 °C, and optimization of the temperature with other parameters like solution composition, solvent, pressure, and reaction time offers reliable control over the morphology and crystallinity of the products.89 It is one of the simple, easy-to-operate, relatively inexpensive, and highly efficient synthesis methods.
Bhorde et al.90 presented a simple solvothermal synthesis method for SnS nanorods with SnCl2·H2O and Na2S as the starting precursors and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) as the solvent. The homogeneous solution mixture in the autoclave was maintained at 200 °C in a muffle furnace for different periods such as 15, 30, 40, and 48 h. The orthorhombic SnS phase was reportedly formed in all the prepared samples by following the solvothermal method. For SnS nanoflowers, a simple thioglycolic acid (TGA)-assisted hydrothermal process was reported at 250 °C for 24 h with SnCl2·H2O and Na2S precursors.91 The pure orthorhombic phase SnS nanoparticles were synthesized with SnCl2·2H2O, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) and NH2CSNH2 at 180 °C for 24 h.92 The Tian group93 successfully synthesized SnS2 hexagonal nanoflakes with SnCl4·5H2O and NH2CSNH2 used as precursors in water as a solvent at 180 °C for 24 h. Guan et al.94 explored the formation mechanism of SnS2 nanostructures and found that the morphological evolution, phase transition, and composition changes occurred simultaneously during their growth process. A high-quality 3D SnS2 hierarchitecture was achieved by controlling parameters such as precursor concentration, reaction temperature, and time. SnCl4 and thiourea (Tu) were used as precursors with sodium dodecyl benzenesulfonate (SDBS) and ethanol. Three Sn/S molar ratios (1:4, 1:8, and 1:16) were transferred into a Teflon-lined autoclave and kept at 140–240 °C for different times. After washing six times with DI water and ethanol, the solid product was dried at 80 °C in a vacuum oven. For a comparative study, SnS2 nanoparticles were produced by the same route using SnCl2·2H2O as the tin source. The formation mechanism of 3D SnS2 nanoflowers is as shown in Fig. 6a. A part of the SnS2 nanosheets heavily aggregated to form a ball-Dahlia-like nanostructure, while some were loosely convoluted to produce a peony-Dahlia-like nanostructure. Xue and his co-workers95 reported the synthesis of CdS-Sn2S3@reduced graphene oxide eutectic cluster heterostructures along with the pristine Sn2S3 synthesis. The precursors used for the synthesis were SnCl4·5H2O, L-cysteine, glucose, and a sulfur source (L-cysteine), and the reaction was heated at 180 °C for 2 h to get Sn2S3. As per the requirements of the application, several SnxSy materials hybrids or nanocomposites with carbon, metal oxides, metal chalcogenides were reported by using this fruitful synthetic approach.96–99
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of SnS2 nanoflowers. Reprinted with permission.94 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. (b and c) SEM images of SnS2 nanowall arrays. Reprinted with permission.116 Copyright 2010, Elsevier Ltd. 


3.2.2 Spin coating. 
Spin coating is one of the suitable and well-known thin film fabrication techniques. The simple process encompasses the deposition of the material solution on a rotating substrate at high velocity. The centrally dispensed material solution is spread radially outward due to the centrifugal force and leaves a uniform layer. The excess solution is spun off at high speed and the remaining solution is swiftly evaporated, which results in the formation of the dry film. In general, promptly volatilized solvents are preferred for the making of homogeneous material solutions. Slight variations in parameters, like angular speed, surface tension, solution viscosity, solvent evaporation rate, and spin time, ultimately affect the thickness of the film.100,101 Although some significant drawbacks such as compatibility, incapability for large substrates, material loss during coating, and the lack of material efficiency exist, however, it is still an admirable technique at the laboratory scale.102
Banu et al.103 fabricated pure SnS thin films on a Mo-coated soda-lime glass substrate using two different kinds of precursors, a solution precursor, and a liquid precursor. The solution precursor was prepared using Sn(Ac)3 in pyridine, while [CH3(CH2)CH(C2H5)CO2]Sn (SnE) with [(CH3)2SO] (DMSO) liquids were used as the liquid precursor. The prepared precursors were coated on the substrate at 2000 rpm for 20 s using a spin coater. Pyridine, in the solution precursor, evaporated after the samples were dried on a hot plate at 150 °C for 3 min in air, while for the liquid precursor, no drying step was used. The effects of the annealing temperature, varying from 200–500 °C, and time for the as-deposited films using both types of precursors were studied. For the films prepared from the solution precursor, the sulfur source was placed inside the graphite box along with the samples during the subsequent annealing process. However, it was absent while annealing the liquid precursor samples during the annealing treatment. Reddy's group104 synthesized SnS thin films on soda-lime glass and Si/SiO2/Ti substrates by spin coating at 3000 rpm. The films were annealed in a tubular furnace at temperatures ranging from 300 °C to 500 °C under N2. The pure SnS phase with a thickness of 954 nm was obtained at 500 °C. Chaki et al.105 deposited SnS2 thin film on microscope glass slides and studied its thickness-dependence with a change in spin speed and spin time.


3.2.3 Electrodeposition. 
Electrodeposition is a simple approach for carrying out the deposition of metals and alloys on large areas. The deposition of the thin film occurs in a bath solution by applying an electric field by potentiostatic and galvanostatic processes. By controlling the parameters such as potential range, current densities, and time, the films are directly deposited on a substrate with optimized particle size, mass, thickness, and morphology.102 Thus, the electrodeposition method represents interesting characteristics like rapid, cheap, binder-free, large-area film deposition at low temperature with easy processing.106
Vikraman et al.107 reported the size and shape-tunable growth of SnS thin films on an indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) substrate using a conventional three-electrode electrodeposition setup. SnCl2 and Na2S2O3 were used as the precursors for the growth with the slow addition of dilute H2SO4 to adjust the pH of the solution with a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as the reference electrode and graphite rod as the counter electrode. The supporting electrolyte ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was mixed to alter the size of SnS. Kafashan et al.108 reported the growth of SnS thin films on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates by varying the deposition potential from −0.6 to −1.2 V, as well as the concentration of the solution bath. Several reports showed that the addition of an impurity metal to the SnS material created a special effect on the structural, optical and electrical properties of SnS.109,110 Lin et al.37 fabricated ordered SnS2 nanowire arrays by sulfurizing the Sn nanowires, which were embedded in the nanochannels of the anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) template. Lasisi et al.111 carried out the study of the electrodeposited SnS2 thin films on the ITO substrate by using SnSO4 and Na2S2O3 as precursors. Chen and co-workers112 reported the growth of 3D nanostructured Sn2S3 semiconductor films prepared on ITO-coated glass substrates by potentiostatic electrodeposition at −0.80 V (vs. SCE). SnCl2 and Na2S2O3 were used as sources of Sn and S, while K4P2O3 acted as a complexing agent and Na2SO3 as a stabilizing agent. The granular morphology of Sn2S3 showed that the particle sizes ranged from approximately 50 nm to 100 nm, with some cubic particles reaching a length greater than 300 nm. These results show that the tuning of the deposition parameters such as pH, applied potential, source concentration, and the supporting electrolyte play an important role in preparing highly crystalline materials with the desired shape and morphology.


3.2.4 Chemical bath deposition (CBD). 
Apart from the presently available more sophisticated and expensive physical deposition methods, the CBD method shows distinctiveness with its cost-effective methodology and ability to produce appreciable thin films.113 It possesses similarity to the electrodeposition technique, excluding the electric field parameter. Sometimes, it is also termed as controlled precipitation or simply chemical deposition. In this method, stationary substrates are suspended in a chemical bath containing the desired concentration of the solution, which is rotated on a magnetic hot-plate stirrer. It is possible to coat several substrates in parallel and the deposition is independent of the electrical conductivity of the substrate. The film deposition is highly sensitive to the pH and concentration of the solution, temperature, and stirring velocity.113 Compared to other deposition techniques, it is a simple and convenient method for the deposition of materials.
Chaki et al.114 deposited SnS thin film on a glass substrate at 70 °C and ambient temperature with SnCl2·2H2O and CH3CSNH2 as the sources of Sn and S, respectively. Triethanolamine was added to make a homogeneous solution of the Sn precursor and acetone to extract the Sn2+ ions and to reduce the speed of precipitate formation during the synthesis. When the sulfur source was mixed, the complexing agent triethanolamine regulated the reaction by slowly releasing Sn2+ ions for better deposition of the SnS thin films. Since pH plays a key role in the reaction speed, it was adjusted to 7 by adding an ammonia solution. Double-distilled water was used to make the final solution and the glass substrate was vertically immersed in this final solution bath for 12 h at ambient temperature. For comparison at 70 °C, the substrate was immersed in the above solution for 1 h. The average thickness at ambient temperature was reported to be 0.19 μm, while at 70 °C it was 0.23 μm. Gedi's group115 reported SnS based thin-film solar cells with SnS2 as a buffer layer grown by the CBD method. Liu et al.116 followed this CBD approach to deposit SnS2 nanowall arrays on copper foils to improve the electrochemical performance of the lithium-ion battery. The deposition was carried out at 80 °C for 1 h. Uniformly distributed and well-aligned SnS2 nanowall arrays were achieved on the copper foil as shown in Fig. 6b and c, with thickness less than 50 nm and a length of about 300–400 nm. Sn2S3 thin films were also grown on glass substrates by a simple CBD method at room temperature for various times (20 h, 22 h, and 24 h).117 The grain size of the thin films increased from 21.80 to 25.79 nm with an increase in the deposition time from 20 h to 24 h. Noppakuadrittidej et al.118 carried out the CBD approach for the synthesis of Mn2+ and Cu2+-doped Sn2S3 nanocrystals.


3.2.5 Chemical vapor deposition (CVD). 
The CVD method is an ideal way to form layered nanostructure materials due to its affordable-cost, large-area growth, high quality, and high efficiency in a short time. In the process, the precursors are activated to the gaseous phase at a high temperature and successively react over a catalyst or pre-templated surface (or substrates), to form nanosized materials. Although it is possible to prepare thin and large-scale materials by the CVD method, the well-controlled engineering of several parameters like temperature, substrate, precursor, gas flow, pressure, growth time and cooling rate, etc., is a challenging task.119 Each parameter directly affects the structure, composition, and properties of the formed nanostructures. Therefore, the skillful tuning of these factors offers a reliable route to preparing nanostructures of fine quality.
Price et al.120 reported the atmospheric pressure CVD growth of SnS, SnS2 and Sn2S3 films on a glass substrate by the reaction of SnCl4 with H2S by optimizing the temperature range. Tuning of the substrate temperature offers the growth of orthorhombic SnS films at 545 °C, hexagonal SnS2 films at 500 °C, and orthorhombic Sn2S3 films at 525 °C with standardized constant flow rates within 30 s. Guc and group121 deposited thin films of α-SnS and π-SnS polymorphs on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass substrates for photovoltaic applications by using an aerosol-assisted CVD process. The polymorphic forms of SnS were achieved by temperature control, with α-SnS growth at 300 °C and π-SnS at 375 °C, and a holding time of 100 min for both. Ahmet et al.122 fabricated α-SnS and π-SnS materials by aerosol-assisted-CVD using a single-source precursor. Yu et al.123 reported the growth of SnS flakes with a thickness of 139 nm and maximum lateral size of 371 μm on SiO2/Si substrates by using Sn and S sources under controlled conditions.
Large and uniform atomic layer thin crystals of SnS2 with size up to 410 μm were reported by Xu et al.124via a salt-assisted CVD method. SnS2 nanosheets were grown on SiO2/Si substrates by using SnO2 and S precursors at atmospheric pressure. The substrate was kept on a powder mixture of KI and SnO2 in an alumina boat heated to 650 °C and retained for 5 min. The alumina boat with S was kept at about 200 °C during the growth. Argon was used as a carrier gas and to maintain the inert atmosphere. Shao et al.125 reported the controllable growth of large-sized, uniform, and atomically thin 1T-SnS2 with multifarious morphologies like hexagons, triangles, windmills, dendrites, and coralloids by controlling the different temperature and precursor stoichiometric ratios with the assistance of potassium halides. Fig. 7 shows the growth mechanism of SnS2 flakes with multiple morphologies. As the temperature increased, the fractal dimension gradually increased from 1.03 to 1.26, when the amounts of sulfur powder and SnO2 were constant (Fig. 7a). As shown in Fig. 7b, as the amount of sulfur powder decreased at 670 °C, the fractal dimension increased from 1.02 to 1.62. Fig. 7c shows the edge formation energies (Eedge) of Sn-zigzag (Sn-zz), S-zigzag (S-zz), and Sn–S termination edges as a function of S chemical potential. The chemical potential of S (μs) is associated with the experimental growth factors (such as SnO2:S ratio, temperature, pressure, etc.) and the lower the Eedge, the better the stability of the edge. As shown in Fig. 7d, when the SnO2:S ratio (or temperature) increases (μs decreases), the Eedge of Sn-zz edge becomes smaller than the S-zz edge, which results in the shape change from hexagon (1 → 2) to triangle (2 → 3 → 4). Due to high stability, the Sn-zz edges of triangle films will grow very slowly, while due to instability, the Sn–S termination edges grow very fast. This results in three small triangle wings across the Sn-zz edges of the main triangle films (Fig. 7d-5) further translating to the triangle film to a windmill film (Fig. 7d 4 → 5 → 6). At the side edges of the windmill film (Fig. 7d-7), the residual small triangles with Sn-zz edges (indicated by triangle blue lines), grow similarly from triangle to windmill. Only marginal wings can grow across the Sn-zz edges of small triangles. These formed tiny branches make a special angle of ∼120° with respect to the main wings and form dendritic morphologies of SnS2 (Fig. 7d-8). Typical sizes of SnS2 crystals range from tens of micrometers to more than 500 μm, (Fig. 7d inset (i)) and on each branch of dendritic SnS2 (Fig. 7d inset (ii)), the secondary branches are aligned in parallel.
 Fig. 7  (a) Relationship between the fractal dimension and temperature of SnS2. (b) Relationship between the fractal dimension and the molar ratio of SnO2:S. (c) Edge formation energy (Eedge) of different edge morphologies as a function of S chemical potential. (d) Schematic and flowchart of the morphological changes from hexagon, triangle, and windmill to dendritic. (Inset: SEM images) of (i) dendritic SnS2 and (ii) branched SnS2. Reprinted with permission.125 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Chang et al.126 showed the CVD growth and morphology control of 2D SnS2 on CVD-grown WS2 layers and MoS2 layers. Fig. 8a schematically shows the growth of SnS2 on the WS2 monolayers. The precursor gas molecules first diffused into the boundary layer near the SiO2 substrate and were adsorbed onto the substrate surface. After the migration of adsorbed species to the growth sites by surface diffusion, the adsorbed species formed chemical bonds through edge attachment. Due to the high reaction temperature, the adsorbed species desorbed from the substrate into the gas phase. The growth of SnS2 was found to be more reactive at 450 to 470 °C temperature and was mediated by the surface and edges of WS2 monolayers. During the growth stage, the atomically flat and inert surface of the WS2 layers lowered the energy barrier of migration for adsorbed active species, resulting in epitaxially aligned crystals on the defect-free surface, whereas cluster growth appeared on the defect-rich surface (Fig. 8b). The defect-rich surface showed irregular microstructures, while the defect-free WS2 surfaces showed well-defined hexagonal-shaped SnS2 growth. Fig. 8c shows the details of the cluster growth of SnS2 on the domain boundary of WS2. The angle was measured between the {1120} plane of SnS2 crystals and the {1120} plane of WS2 monolayers (Fig. 8d). This phenomenon was also observed for MoS2. As shown in Fig. 8e, the SnS2 was stabilized on the defect-free MoS2 surface due to the smaller energy barrier of migration and the larger diffusion coefficient. To date, the fabrication of vdWs heterostructures of SnxSy materials using CVD growth have been largely investigated, including SnS/MoS2, SnS2/MoS2, and SnS2/WSe2.127–129
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustrations of the growth mechanism and each step during the second step SnS2 growth on the pregrown monolayer WS2. (b) Atomic configuration demonstrating the growth differences between SnS2 grown on defect-rich and defect-free areas in monolayer WS2. (c) SEM image of the cluster growth of SnS2 on the domain boundary of WS2. (d) Schematic illustration of the definition of the relative edge angle between the SnS2 and WS2 monolayers. (e) SEM image of the horizontal growth of SnS2 on the MoS2 surface. Reprinted with permission.126 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 


3.2.6 Atomic layer deposition (ALD). 
ALD is a process of thin-film deposition with the precise regulation of the specified thickness, uniformity, and crystallinity. This process is also termed as atomic layer epitaxy (ALE).130 It is distinct from other chemical gas-phase techniques such as CVD and chemical vapor transport (CVT). In ALD, two or more vapor-phase precursors are pulsed alternately into the reactor, one at a time, and the reactor is also evacuated by an inert gas with each purging of the vapor-phase. Due to the self-limiting nature of the subsequent chemisorption of the precursor onto the substrate surface, it allows the chemisorption of the monomolecular layer.131 The consecutive evacuation process forbids the excessive growth of left-over precursors and additionally forms volatile molecules during deposition. This results in a uniform build-up of growth material and every layer of growth highly depends on the existence of the reactive functional groups of the previously deposited layers. The uniformity of layer thickness is even independent of the substrate irregular geometry, which offers highly conformal layers. The only factor that limits the ALD scope is the size of the reaction chamber. The self-limiting growth mechanism of ALD ensures the growth of conformal thin films with reproducible thickness.130,131
Baek et al.132 used the ALD approach to synthesize SnS thin films on SiO2/Si wafers with bis(1-dimethylamino-2-methyl-2-propoxy) tin(II) as the Sn source and H2S as the S source. The growth temperature was varied with a wide temperature window from 90 to 240 °C and the purging times of Sn and S precursors were fixed at 10 and 20 s. Fig. 9a shows the low-magnification TEM image of SnS film grown at 240 °C, which clarified the formation of noncontinuous and very large SnS grains. The planes with an interspacing of 0.28 nm in Fig. 9b correspond to the (040) planes of plate-like orthorhombic SnS grains. Lee and co-workers133 reported a comparative study of the growth of SnS2 thin films on bare SiO2 substrate and buffered oxide etcher (BOE)-treated SiO2 substrates. At 150 °C chamber temperature, the ALD process was performed in four steps with ([(CH3)2N]4Sn) and H2S precursors. One cycle involved precursor 1 s – Ar purging 40 s – reactant 3 s – Ar purging 50 s, and in such a manner, 50 cycles were performed. The crystallinity of the as-deposited SnS2 thin films was further enhanced by annealing in a quartz tube furnace. The analytical techniques such as contact angle measurements, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and electron spin resonance (ESR) confirmed that the BOE-treated substrate was more hydrophilic than the bare substrate. Some other groups also reported the synthesis of SnS and SnS2 thin films by ALD by using different precursors and optimized growth conditions.134–138
 Fig. 9  (a) Low-magnification TEM of the SnS film grown at 240 °C. (b) HRTEM images of the SnS film grown at 240 °C. Reprinted with permission.132 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Top view of an AFM scan on an SnS epilayer deposited on a mica substrate. Reprinted with permission.150 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. (d) Interface model of SnS on GaAs(100). As atoms are shown as red and S atoms as yellow. (e) Interface model of SnS on Graphene. C atoms are shown as dark gray and S atoms as yellow. Reprinted with permission.151 Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics. 


3.2.7 Physical vapor deposition (PVD). 
In contrast to CVD, the PVD method is employed to directly deposit thin films on a substrate by the condensation of a vaporized form of the desired material. PVD includes the two most common physical processes, evaporation, and sputtering.139 The evaporation process involves the deposition of a thin film by an evaporating source in a vacuum environment and the vapor particles condense on the substrate in a solid-state. In the sputtering process, a strong electromagnetic field is applied to ionize a chemically inert gas (like argon), and these accelerated ions bombard the target material. This bombarding with target material ejects atoms or molecules and finally leads to condensation on the substrate surface as a thin film.
Sheini et al.140 deposited tin sulfide films on different metal (Ag, Au) buffer layer-coated SiO2 substrates. The average thicknesses of the deposited SnS sheets were measured for the SiO2 substrate (80 nm), Ag-coated SiO2 (37 nm) and Au-coated SiO2 (51 nm). SnS nanosheets were grown by Yuan and co-workers on mica substrates via a PVD approach with an average lateral size of 7 μm and a thickness of 12 nm.141 Argon gas was used for shielding and as a carrier gas. Shi et al.142 reported SnS2 thin film growth on soda-lime glass substrates by using SnS2 powder as a source. The as-grown SnS2 films were annealed at 300 °C, 350 °C, 400 °C and the values of the measured thicknesses by the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs were found to be 1.07 μm, 0.98 μm and 0.96 μm.


3.2.8 Chemical vapor transport (CVT). 
The CVT technique shows the potential for the growth of pure single-crystals and thin films. Typically, solid is volatilized in the presence of a gaseous transporting agent and then reassembled into solid form elsewhere inside the reactor. This process covers both top-down and bottom-up approaches, the first breakdown of the solid source into vapor, and then the conversion of the vapor phase to the solid phase.143 The growth can be controlled by tuning various parameters such as temperature, time, choice of transport agent, reactor shape, and the distance from the source to the substrate. The minor impurities present in the vapour phase also have less impact on the growth mechanism. Generally, iodine is used as a transporting agent in this synthesis approach.144 The advantageous doping alters the properties of materials and the CVT method offers greater control over quantitative doping.
Whittles and co-workers145 demonstrated this approach to specifically synthesize SnS, SnS2, and Sn2S3 single-crystal pure phases. The successfully employed iodine-assisted CVT method offers the growth of the dark grey SnS, yellow flakes of SnS2, and shiny black needles of Sn2S3 with a precise stoichiometric arrangement. The distinct peak shifting in the XPS spectra presents a clear identification of all three tin sulfide phases. L. Burton and his colleagues47 successfully synthesized all these phases of tin sulfides by the same CVT approach and reported a comparative study along with the electronic structure investigation of these phases. Liu et al.76 obtained bulk SnS2 crystals by sealing the quartz tube at 10−5 Pa with the mixture of Sn, S, and iodine and heating it in a two-zone furnace at a temperature of 600 °C for seven days. Further, for the transistor application, the crystals of SnS2 were exfoliated into thin layers by the mechanical exfoliation method. A similar kind of approach was also reported by the Ying group146 to study the high UV photodetector performance of the CVT-grown high-quality SnS2 flakes. Degrauw et al.147 prepared nanowire arrays of SnS/SnS2 p–n heterostructures catalyzed by Cu particles, which were successfully grown on transparent ITO coated-glass and Si/SiO2 substrates. They controlled the orientation and morphologies of the nanowires by optimizing the CVT conditions such as reaction temperature, flow rate, and reaction time.


3.2.9 Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). 
MBE is a well-known wafer-scale epitaxial layer fabrication technique; from the Greek term “epitaxy”, where epi means akin or upon and taxis means order or arrangement. The ordered growth of the atomic layer on a heated substrate was created by using atomic or molecular beams of evaporators in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) environment. This UHV environment restricts the contamination of impurities to a great extent, which results in the desired composition, interface, and purity of material formation. This elegant MBE growth transpired by various kinetic processes such as evaporation, sublimation, migration, adsorption, condensation, and dissociation.148,149 The method is highly advantageous with respect to reproducibility in the epitaxial growth of films, their thickness, doping concentration, and crystalline structure.149
Wang and colleagues150 reported the growth of SnS thin films on mica substrates by using 4N SnS as the evaporation source. The optimal growth temperature was found to be ∼270 °C by performing detailed experiments with a varied range of 150–300 °C. The SnS layer with a total film thickness of 300 nm was deposited with a growth rate of 0.6 μm h−1. At 270 °C, the lowest rms roughness (1.83 nm) for the surface morphology was observed by AFM analysis (Fig. 9c). The average step height of about 0.55 nm indicated a 2D layered structure for the SnS thin films. Furthermore, to control the lateral growth of the SnS, the utilization of a thin SnSe buffer layer deposited on the mica substrate was also investigated in the same report. To facilitate the growth of high-quality SnS films, Wang et al.151 used graphene as the buffer layer between the substrate and the SnS layer. The deposition of SnS films was carried on soda-lime glass, GaAs(100), and SiO2 substrates using SnS as the starting material. Fig. 9d and e show the interface model of SnS on GaAs(100) and graphene. The significant improvement in the crystallinity for the SnS thin films appeared from the weak vdWs interactions between the SnS film and the graphene buffer layer. Schlaf et al.152 deposited SnS2 thin films on a variety of layered semiconductor substrates such as SnSe2, WSe2, MoS2, MoTe2, GaSe, InSe as well as on a mica substrate. Sn and S sources were used to grow SnS2 thin films with the substrate growth temperature varying between 200 and 420 °C. Nebesny et al.153 reported the growth of the thin films of the SnS2 on a cleaved mica surface by using Sn and FeS2 sources.


3.2.10 Spray pyrolysis. 
Spray pyrolysis is a non-vacuum deposition technique that is extensively employed for the growth of nanomaterials due to its simplicity and affordability. In principle, it implicates the decomposition of particles or films on a heated substrate by droplets evaporated from a precursor solution. The processes like solvent evaporation, droplet spraying and decomposition occur sequentially. Morphology design can be structured by optimizing the substrate type, substrate temperatures, carrier gas, spray rate, nozzle diameter and pressure of the gas.154,155 Also, it is possible to tailor the physical and chemical properties by altering the types of precursor solution and their concentrations. Spray pyrolysis ensures the high feasibility and uniformity in purified large area deposition within a short period and is an easily scaled-up approach.
Sall's group156 proposed the preparation of SnS thin films with chemical spray pyrolysis by varying the substrate temperatures for photovoltaic applications. Thin films of SnS were obtained by using an aqueous solution containing SnCl2·2H2O, NH2CSNH2, and 10% alcohol to reduce the surface tension; 5 mL of homogeneous solution was sprayed at a rate of 1.5 mL min−1, with a distance of 25 cm from the substrate. The glass substrate temperature was varied (250 °C, 300 °C, 350 °C, 400 °C, and 450 °C) to achieve the high quality and pure phase of the films. X-ray diffraction studies revealed the polycrystalline nature of the SnS films with orthorhombic structure, but at high substrate temperature (450 °C), a crystalline phase corresponding to the Sn2S3 phase was observed. Thangaraju et al.157 also optimized glass substrate temperature as 350 °C and 275 °C to prepare thin films of SnS and SnS2 respectively with SnCl2·2H2O, NH2CSNH2 and dioxin solvent as precursors. Saroja et al.57 deposited Sn2S3 thin films on glass substrates at various substrate temperatures. The spray pyrolysis system is also used to precisely dope metals to SnxSy materials to enhance their properties. From the available literature, the doping of metals like Fe, Cu into SnS,158,159 V, W, Ag, Zn, Nd into SnS2160–163 and Ni, Co, Mg into Sn2S359,164,165 was achieved.


3.2.11 Radio frequency (RF) sputtering. 
The RF sputtering technique is generally used to grow high purity and large-area thin films. In this method, the sputtered ionized inert gas (for example, argon) bombards the target and the formed atoms generate layers on the substrate. Although deposition takes place with high intensity, nonuniformity in the films is a significant concern with this method. The quality of the films depends directly on the target composition, frequency power, operating pressure, and temperature.
Sousa et al.166 have grown single-phase SnS thin films on soda-lime glass (SLG) substrates by annealing RF-magnetron sputtered SnS2−x precursors in a closed graphite box. Son et al.167 reported the effect of working pressure on the properties of RF-sputtered SnS thin films. A single SnS target is used to form films on both soda-lime glass and Mo-coated soda-lime glass substrates (at 300 °C) by varying the working pressure from 0.6 Pa to 2.6 Pa. The thickness of the films was varied with different pressures at 0.6 Pa (790.9 nm), 1.3 Pa (821.5 nm), 2.0 Pa (833.0 nm) and for 2.6 Pa (778.0 nm). Fig. 10a shows the surface and cross-sectional field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images of SnS thin films grown at 2.6 Pa pressure. Arepalli et al.168 observed a reduction in film thickness and an increase in grain size with pressure in the one-step deposition process of the SnS thin films by RF sputtering. Ceylan169 deposited Sn thin film firstly on glass substrates by RF magnetron sputtering, followed by post-sulfidation under a high vacuum to achieve the SnS structure. Banai et al.170 reported the controlled synthesis of α-SnS thin films by using SnS2 as a target by optimizing the substrate and annealing temperature. Isik et al.171 fabricated SnS2 films on SLG substrates by the direct magnetron sputtering of the SnS2 target in high-purity Ar gas at 100 W RF power for 30 min at 300 K. Baby et al.172 prepared SnS and Sn2S3 thin films from a single SnS target by varying the RF power from 30 to 60 W and the in situ substrate temperature up to 500 °C for 1 h, followed by annealing in the temperature range of 400 to 700 °C. The film thickness of the single-phase SnS sample (at 40 W, substrate temperature of 400 °C) was found to be 1.34 μm, while for Sn2S3 (at 40 W, substrate temperature of 500 °C) the film thickness was 123 nm. Fig. 10b shows the FESEM surface morphology of a single phase of Sn2S3 film sputtered with RF power of 40 W and the inset shows a cross-sectional image. The AFM image and surface roughness profile (inset) of the Sn2S3 film are shown in Fig. 10c, indicating the formation of spherical nanoparticles with a decline in the particle size to 30 ± 1 nm and roughness of 5.40 nm.
 Fig. 10  (a) Surface and cross-sectional FESEM images of SnS thin films grown at 2.6 Pa. Reprinted with permission.167 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Ltd. (b) FESEM surface morphology of a single phase of Sn2S3 film sputtered with RF power of 40 W and in situ substrate temperature of 500 °C. The inset shows the cross-sectional image. (c) AFM image and surface roughness profile (inset) of Sn2S3 films. Reprinted with permission.172 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. 


3.2.12 Dip-coating. 
In the dip-coating approach, the film formation takes place on the substrate by immersing it in the material solution at a constant rate. The immersing or withdrawing rate control the thickness of the film. It is a compatible, low-waste, durable and easily reproducible approach to economically preparing thin films.173
Chaki et al.114 deposited SnS thin films by using SnCl2·2H2O and CH3CSNH2 as starting precursors, and acetone with triethanolamine as a solvent. Films with a thickness of 0.29 μm are achieved by dipping the glass substrate for 2 min with a speed of 5 mm s−1 and a withdrawal speed of 8 mm s−1. Jariwala et al.174 prepared SnS2 films (60 nm, single-dipped) on a glass substrate by dipping it into SnCl2, NH2CSNH2, and methanol solution. Panda and co-workers175 prepared SnS2 thin films by dipping the glass substrate firstly into the SnCl4·5H2O, CTAB, and ethanol solution, followed by annealing at 100–300 °C for 1–2 h in a static H2S/Ar gas mixture. Thin films of 60 nm thick SnS2 with golden-yellow color with good adherence to the substrate were achieved.


3.2.13 Template-assisted. 
Templating is one of the most important techniques for the fabrication of nanostructured materials with controllable size, shape, and porosity of structure. Generally, based on the difference in the template structure, the employed materials in template synthesis can be simply classified into soft templates and hard templates. The template synthesis is mainly accomplished in three steps: the preparation of the templates; the synthesis of the target material under the function of a template using some common approaches like hydro/solvothermal, precipitation, sol–gel, etc.; the removal of the template.176 According to the nature of the templates, one of the physical (dissolution) and chemical (calcination and etching) methods can be employed to remove the template after synthesis.177 In this entire process, the choice of template is a crucial factor in preparing materials with the desired properties.
Ren et al.178 grew SnS nanosheets on the surface of hollow Fe3O4 sphere templates prepared by using a solvothermal process. SnCl2·2H2O and CH3CSNH2 were added to the homogeneous mixture of polyvinylpyrrolidone, ethylene glycol, and Fe3O4 spheres and then heated at 160 °C for 12 h in a Teflon-lined autoclave. The prepared product, SnS@Fe3O4, was centrifuged with absolute ethanol and deionized water, followed by vacuum drying at 60 °C. Finally, for Fe3O4 etching, the SnS@Fe3O4 spheres were dispersed in 1 M HCl solution with 48 h of continuous stirring; the obtained SnS spheres were collected after centrifugation and drying for 12 h at 60 °C.
Liang et al.179 fabricated the Au@g-C3N4/SnS yolk–shell by a simple template-assisted strategy. Firstly, the prepared Au@SiO2 template was scattered in cyanamide, followed by stirring (2 h) and ultrasonic wave treatment (30 min at 60 °C), and then heating to 550 °C in a N2 atmosphere. A solution of Na2S in ethylene glycol was added dropwise to a solution of the obtained Au@SiO2@g-C3N4, L-cysteine, SnCl2·2H2O, and ethylene glycol. An ultrasonic dispersion was transferred to a Teflon-lined autoclave and heated at 200 °C for 10 h. After centrifugation, the template was removed by dispersing Au@SiO2@g-C3N4/SnS in 4 M NH4HF2 for 12 h. To collect the final product, Au@void@g-C3N4/SnS, centrifugation, and drying at 60 °C were performed. Xie et al.180 controllably designed Sn4+ self-doped hollow SnS microcubes by a template-assisted synthesis followed by reduction at low temperature.
Chen et al.181 reported the fabrication of aligned SnS2 nanotubes using the AAO as a template. In the solution of SnCl4, NH2CSNH2, and absolute alcohol, the AAO template was added and heated in an autoclave at 140 °C for 15 h. The collected sample was rinsed several times with distilled water and absolute alcohol. The AAO template was removed by putting the sample in a mixture of acid (6% H3PO4 and 2% H2CrO4) at 60 °C for 1 h. The final sample was obtained by dispersing it in absolute alcohol.
Liu et al.182 synthesized SnS2 nanosheets confined in carbon nanotubes (SnS2@CNTs), in carbon nanoboxes (SnS2@CNBs) and in carbon nanospheres (SnS2@CNSs), by using different templates in the reaction system. For the synthesis of SnS2@CNTs, the MnOx template was used, which was first dispersed in ethanol/water solvent by ultrasonication. Then, urea and K2SnO3·3H2O were added and the prepared suspension was maintained at 170 °C for 1 h in a sealed Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave. The centrifuged and washed MnOx@SnO2 nanorods were dispersed in a tris-buffer and dopamine solution and stirred for 5 h. After centrifugation and washing, the collected MnOx@SnO2@PDA was dispersed in 0.5 M oxalic acid solution for 1 h to eliminate the MnOx template. The resultant SnO2@PDA nanotubes were dried in an oven at 70 °C and annealed in argon flow for 6 h at 500 °C. Finally, the resulting SnO2@C nanotubes were sulfurized in the tube furnace with an H2S/Ar atmosphere for 4 h at 350 °C to obtain the SnS2@CNTs product. SnS2@CNBs were obtained via a similar kind of approach by using Fe2O3 as a template. While synthesizing SnS2@CNSs, before dispersing SiO2@SnO2 in tris-buffer and dopamine, the SiO2 template was removed using 2 M NaOH solution. The as-prepared SnO2@PDA hollow nanospheres were dried in an oven at 70 °C and then pyrolyzed in a tube furnace at 500 °C for 6 h under an argon flow. Finally, SnO2@C hollow nanospheres were sulfurized under an H2S/Ar atmosphere in the tube furnace at 350 °C for 12 h, to obtain the SnS2@CNSs product. Fig. 11 shows the schematic illustration of the multistep procedures for the preparation of SnS2@CNTs, SnS2@CNBs, and SnS2@CNSs, respectively.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the synthesis processes of SnS2@CNTs, SnS2@CNBs, and SnS2@CNSs. Reprinted with permission.182 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. 
Liang et al.183 synthesized ZnO–Sn2S3 core–shell nanorod heterostructures by a combination of the hydrothermal and sputtering methodologies. Here, hydrothermally synthesized high-density ZnO nanorods were used as templates. Sn2S3 shell layers were sputtered on a template by RF sputtering at 40 W power in pure Ar under ambient conditions, and the Sn2S3 thin film temperature was maintained at 250 °C. The fixed gas pressure of 10 mTorr of the Sn2S3 shell layers was maintained during the sputtering deposition.


3.2.14 Solution phase synthesis. 
Solution phase synthesis is an important approach for synthesizing inorganic nanocrystals, including semiconductors and metals. The method is simple and gives more control over the size, shape, and crystal structures. Kergommeaux et al.184 successfully synthesized 2D SnS nanoplatelets using tin tetrachloride pentahydrate, trioctylphosphine, oleic acid, and thioacetamide. Firstly, SnCl4·5H2O, 1-octadecene, trioctylphosphine, and oleic acid were mixed in a three-necked flask inside a glove box under an argon atmosphere. The mixture was then degassed under a primary vacuum (0.05 mbar) at 100 °C in one hour. The sulfur precursor solution was prepared with thioacetamide in oleylamine and was swiftly injected into the flask containing the heated (150 °C for 1 h in an argon atmosphere) tin salt solution. An instantaneous color change from transparent to black occurred and then the temperature was maintained for 3–60 min at 150 °C before cooling down with an ice bath. The SnS nanoplatelets were purified by precipitation with a chloroform/ethanol mixture, and centrifugation. The redispersion of chloroform, leading to a stable colloidal dark-brown solution and precipitate, was detected even after two years of storage at ambient temperature. Also, for the synthesis of SnS2 nanoparticles, SnCl4·5H2O, 1-octadecene, trioctylphosphine, and oleic acid were mixed in a three-necked flask and degassed under primary vacuum after 1 h at 100 °C. The temperature was then increased to 130 °C and a solution containing sulfur with oleylamine was injected under vigorous stirring and the temperature was maintained for 5 min. The mixture was cooled to room temperature with an ice bath and ethanol was added to precipitate the nanocrystals, which were then collected by centrifugation and dispersed in chloroform to form a stable yellow-orange colloidal solution. The well-calibrated square SnS nanoplatelets showed small dimensions, a thickness of 4–15 nm, and an edge length of 15–100 nm. Patra et al.185 reported the nucleation-density-controlled formation of highly monodisperse and size/shape tunable SnS nanostructures with narrow size distribution in a fast-chemical reaction. In a typical synthesis of monodisperse SnS nanocubes, initially, the sulfur precursor solution was prepared by dissolving thiourea in hexadecylamine (HDA). SnCl2 and HAD were mixed in a three-neck flask and the mixture was degassed at 100 °C by purging with Ar gas for 15 min. Then, 0.5 mL of tri-butylphosphine was injected into the flask at 100 °C and the temperature of the mixture was further raised to 150 °C. The solution turned brown immediately after the injection of the sulfur precursor and nanocubes of SnS were formed within 5 s. The size of the nanocubes was tunable by varying the tin and sulfur concentrations.
A comparison of the growth parameters of various synthetic approaches of SnxSy materials is provided in Table 2.
Table 2 Comparative details of the growth parameters of various synthetic approaches to SnxSy materials




Synthesis method and materials
Starting precursors
Substrate
Temperature
Time
Thickness
Ref.




Mechanical exfoliation


SnS
SnS
SiO2/n+-Si
—
—
0.7 nm

74



SnS2
SnS2
SiO2
—
—
∼15 nm

75







Liquid exfoliation


SnS
SnS
—
<30 °C
24 h
4.1 nm

78



SnS
SnS
—
Room temperature
20 h
1.10 nm

79



SnS2
SnS2
—
Room temperature
48 h
0.6 nm

81







Hydro/solvothermal


SnS nanoflowers
SnCl2: H2O and Na2S
—
250 °C
24 h
—

91



SnS nanparticles
SnCl2: 2H2O and NH2CSNH2
—
180 °C
24 h
—

92



SnS2 nanoflakes
SnCl4·5H2O and NH2CSNH2
—
180 °C
24 h
—

83



Sn2S3
SnCl4·5H2O and L-cysteine
—
180 °C
2 h
—

95







Spin-coating


SnS thin film
SnCl2·2H2O and SC(NH2)2
Mo-coated soda-lime glass
Ambient temperature
—
954 nm

104



SnS2 thin film
SnCl4·5H2O and NH2CSNH2
Microscope glass slide
Ambient temperature
—
2.48 μm

105







Electrodeposition


SnS thin film
SnCl2 and Na2S2O3
ITO
90 °C
30 min
828 nm

107



SnS2 nanowires
SnSO4 and S
AAO
500 °C
10 h
—

37



Sn2S3 films
SnCl2 and Na2S2O3
ITO
30 °C
20 min
—

112







CBD


SnS thin film
SnCl2·2H2O and CH3CSNH2
Glass
Ambient
12 h
0.19 μm

114



SnS2 nanowall arrays
SnCl4·6H2O and CH3CSNH2
Copper foil
80 °C
1 h
50 nm

116



Sn2S3 thin films
SnCl2·2H2O and CH3CSNH2
Glass
30 °C
20 h
—

117







CVD


SnS film
SnCl4
Glass
545 °C
30 s
—

120



SnS
Sn and S
SiO2/Si
200–675 °C
60 min
139 nm

123



SnS2 film
SnCl4
Glass
500 °C
30 s
—

120



SnS2 nanosheets
SnO2 and S
SiO2/Si
200–650 °C
5 min
1.5 nm

124



Sn2S3 film
SnCl4
Glass
525 °C
30 s
—

120







ALD


SnS thin film
Bis(1-dimethylamino-2-methyl-2-propoxy) tin(II) and H2S
SiO2
90-240 °C
—
<5 nm

132



SnS2 thin film
[(CH3)2N]4Sn) and H2S
SiO2
150 °C
—
∼0.6 nm

133







PVD


SnS sheet
SnS
SiO2
800 °C
2 h
80 nm

140



SnS sheet
SnS
Ag coated SiO2
800 °C
2 h
37 nm

140



SnS sheet
SnS
Au coated SiO2
800 °C
2 h
51 nm

140



SnS nanosheets
SnS
Mica
650 °C
65 min
12 nm

141



SnS2 thin film
SnS2
Soda-lime glass
400 °C
50 min
0.96 μm

142







CVT


SnS crystal
Sn and S
—
230 °C
200 min
—

145



SnS2 crystal
Sn and S
—
230 °C
300 min
—

145



Sn2S3 crystal
Sn and S
—
230 °C
500 min
—

145







MBE


SnS thin film
4N SnS
Mica
270 °C
—
300 nm

150



SnS2 thin film
Sn and FeS2
Mica
—
—
—

153







Spray Pyrolysis


SnS thin film
SnCl2·2H2O and NH2CSNH2
Glass
400 °C
—
912 nm

156



SnS2 thin film
SnCl2·2H2O and NH2CSNH2
Glass
275 °C
—
∼1 μm

157



Sn2S3
SnCl2·2H2O and NH2CSNH2
Glass
450 °C
—
576 nm

156



Sn2S3
SnCl2 and thiourea
Glass
400 °C
—
0.90 μm

57







RF sputtering


SnS thin film
SnS
Mo-coated soda-lime glass substrates
300 °C
—
778 nm

167



SnS2 films
SnS2
SLG
300 K
30 min
810 nm

171



Sn2S3
SnS
Si
500 °C
1 h
123 nm

172







Dip-coating


SnS thin film
SnCl2·2H2O and CH3CSNH2
Glass
Ambient
2 min
0.29 μm

114



SnS2 thin film
SnCl2 and NH2CSNH2
Glass
—
—
60 nm

174



SnS2 thin film
SnCl4·5H2O and H2S/Ar gas
Glass
—
—
60 nm

175






4 Applications
The ultimate purpose of tailoring the materials with precise structures, composition, crystal phase, and morphology is to modulate their physicochemical and optoelectronic properties to enhance the performance. To overcome the barriers of structural and electronic properties, the strategy of combining the SnxSy materials with multifunctional nanomaterials was explored. Currently, SnxSy and its derivatives are attracting considerable attention in various applications such as energy conversion, energy storage, sensors, photocatalysts, and so on. These applications hold great potential by taking full advantage of their excellent electrical, optical, chemical, and physical properties. In this section, we summarize the essential information of these applications and highlight the recent progress in the utilization of SnxSy materials for various applications (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of the applications of the SnxSy class in various fields. 
4.1 Energy conversion
The strong reliability of daily energy consumption and production on the depleting fossil fuels demands the design of renewable, sustainable, and environmentally friendly energy sources. Hydrogen has been recognized as a green and efficient energy source. The electrolysis of water is considered as a promising technology for generating hydrogen energy as compared to the steam reforming of fossil fuels.186 The steam reforming emits hazardous carbon dioxide gas along with clean hydrogen. Water electrolysis involves two half-cell reactions such as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) on the cathode and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) on the anode.

4.1.1 HER. 
The HER is a two electron-transfer process and platinum (Pt) is acknowledged as an efficient electrocatalyst. However, practical applications with Pt catalysts are limited due to its high cost and relatively low abundance on earth.187 As such, the substitution of Pt with other non-noble metal-based and earth-abundant catalysts will be favorable for the hydrogen economy.
Chia et al.188 investigated the comparative HER properties of SnS and SnS2 and reported that SnS2 possesses a higher HER efficiency than SnS on the GC electrode in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 13a, SnS2 requires a lower over-potential (0.73 V) as compared to SnS (0.88 V) to reach a current density of −10 mA cm−2. However, in comparison with the Pt/C, the performance of both the materials is very poor. Tafel plots in Fig. 13b elucidate the HER electrochemical mechanisms of Sn chalcogenides. The Tafel slope of SnS (96 mV dec−1) is lower than for SnS2 (150 mV dec−1). The Nyquist plots (Fig. 13c) clearly show a wider semicircle diameter for SnS than SnS2, which reflects the faster HER surface kinetics of SnS2. Liu et al.189 synthesized defect-rich SnS2 nanosheets decorated with a trace amount of Pt (0.37 wt%), which showed a low onset potential of 32 mV, over-potential of 117 mV at 10 mA cm−2, and a small Tafel slope of 69 mV dec−1. Defect-rich SnS2 nanosheets decorated with a trace amount of Pt exhibited greatly enhanced HER activity because it offers large amounts of unsaturated sulfur atoms and sorption sites for Pt atoms, which can finally act as active sites for HER catalysis. Shinde et al.190 revealed that SnS-N-doped graphene composites showed better HER performance with low over-potential (−125 mV), Tafel slope (38 mV dec−1), exchange current density (6.23 mA cm−2) and onset potential (59 mV). The high performance in the HER comes from the strong chemical/electronic coupling between SnS and N-doped graphene sheets. The small size and high dispersion of SnS on graphene without aggregation yielded numerous available edges that serve as active catalytic sites for the HER. Some groups optimized the HER performance of SnS2 modified with molybdenum dichalcogenides and achieved highly-efficient electrocatalysts. Hu et al.191 synthesized MoS2 NPs/SnS2 NS, Ali et al.192 grew SnS2 quantum dots on MoS2, and Chen et al.193 fabricated the MoSe2/SnS2 heterostructured electrocatalyst for HER applications. Among these, SnS2 quantum dots grown on MoS2 showed a lower over-potential of 240 mV at 10 mA cm−2 current density with a Tafel slope of 65 mV dec−1. The SnS2-engineered MoS2 composite with more Sn2+ species would generate amounts of sulfur vacancies on the basal planes, which can act as active sites for the HER.
 Fig. 13  (a) Linear sweep voltammograms (at 2 mV s−1) (b) Tafel plots and (c) Nyquist plots for the HER of SnS, SnS2, Pt/C, and glass carbon (GC) in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. (d) Linear sweep voltammograms for the OER on SnS and SnS2 at 2 mV s−1 in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. Reprinted with permission.188 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 


4.1.2 OER. 
As one of the half-reactionS, the performance of the OER directly affects the overall efficiency of water electrolysis. The four electron-proton coupled reaction requires higher energy as compared to the HER.194 The highly active, noble-metal-based oxides like ruthenium oxide (RuO2) and iridium oxide (IrO2) are limited due to their scarcity on earth, high price, and stability.194 Thus, improving the OER kinetics with efficient, durable, and non-noble metal-based OER catalysts ultimately favors the hydrogen economy. To date, limited research is available in the literature on the OER performance based on SnxSy materials.
To study the OER reactions, Jiang et al.195 directly grew Co-doped SnS2 nanosheets array on carbon fiber by a simple one-step solvothermal method. Co-doping improved the performance with an over-potential of 281 mV at a current density of 30 mA cm−2 and a low Tafel slope of 62 mV dec−1. This performance was reported to be far better than the pure SnS2, which showed an over-potential of 515 mV to drive a current density of 30 mA cm−2 with a Tafel slope of 125 mV dec−1. The high performance was attributed to the high intrinsic activity and super-aerophobic surface properties. Li et al.196 reported excellent OER activities of the TiO2/SnS2 heterojunction catalyst with a low over-potential of 570 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and a low Tafel slope of 107 mV dec−1 in 1 M NaOH solution, which is superior to the pure TiO2 nanobelts and SnS2 nanosheets. The influence of the electrolyte on the OER performance was studied in different electrolytes such as 0.2 M Na2SO4 and 0.5 M H2SO4. To achieve j = 10 mA cm−2, the TiO2/SnS2 heterojunction in 1 M NaOH required a lower over-potential as compared to the other two electrolytes. In alkaline solution, the improvement of the absorbability of Ti species for OH− and the release of the O2 bonded with the Sn atoms enhanced the OER performance. Also, the enhanced OER performance may be partly due to the formation of the crystal-exposed heterojunction, which was structurally formed by the TiO2 and SnS2. This unique heterojunction structure can provide a convenient path for reactants, a fast-radial electron transfer and also provide a sufficient contact area with electrolyte. Chia and co-workers188 determined the electrocatalytic performance of layered SnS versus SnS2. Fig. 13d shows the linear sweep voltammograms at a 2 mV s−1 scan rate for the OER on SnS and SnS2 in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. The high onset potentials and low current densities of both materials are reported due to the poor stabilities of SnS and SnS2 at high oxidative potentials.

4.2 Energy storage
Being confronted with the global energy crisis, the development of on-demand energy storage technologies is crucial for the efficient conversion of renewable and sustainable energy sources. There is a huge demand for the design and commercialization of economical, highly efficient, flexible, eco-friendly, and size-variable energy storage devices. The devices functioning on the electrochemical principles have the potential to fulfill these necessary capabilities. Supercapacitors and batteries have been extensively explored and are well-recognized platforms for energy storage applications.197,198 The modified SnxSy materials can provide high energy density at high power for storage devices. The properties like large surface area, chemically active surface, and vdWs gap between layered structures enhance the storage device performance.

4.2.1 Battery. 
Nowadays, batteries have entirely revolutionized the electrical fields since their first commercialization. These devices derive electrical energy by the conversion of chemical energy via spontaneous redox reactions. Batteries hold several advantageous properties like high energy density, high voltage, long cycle life, and no memory effect.199 However, they suffer from some intrinsic problems such as low power density, slow charge/discharge process, and long recharge times. As such, there is a need for new materials to overcome these obstacles and satisfy the ever-increasing demand for batteries. In recent years, SnxSy materials, especially SnS and SnS2 have received more attention in batteries due to their layered structure, relatively large interlayer spacing and large theoretical capacity.200–202
Tang et al.203 prepared Ti3C2 MXene@C@SnS hybrids as anode electrodes for lithium-ion batteries, which exhibited a superior capacity of 1473 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1, outstanding rate capability of 640 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1 and excellent long-cycle stability of 1050 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 over 350 cycles. The layered rock stratum structure with a large specific surface area provides abundant reaction active sites for electrochemical reactions and numerous nanopores through shortening the electrolyte transport path to facilitate lithium-ion diffusion. For Na storage, Qin et al.204 fabricated the SnS/Ti3C2Tx-O anode, which delivered a capacity of 565 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 after 75 cycles. The synthesized structure provides short ion-diffusion pathways and electron transport distance because of more accessible surface sites. Zhao et al.205 fabricated the sandwich-like C@SnS@TiO2 anode, which delivered a stable capacity of 660 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 and manifested an excellent rate capability of 357.2 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1 and an impressive capacity retention rate of 95.6% at 1 A g−1 after 2500 cycles. Fig. 14a and b presents charge–discharge curves and cross-section images of C@0.5SnS@TiO2 and pristine SnS electrodes in different states during the first cycling process. The inset images show the cross-sections in different states during lithiation and delithiation: (a1, b1) before cycling, (a2, b2) fully lithiation, and (a3, b3) fully delithiation. In this unique structure, the TiO2 core supplies robust support for the distribution and adhesion of SnS, and it is beneficial to ion conduction. The intermediate nano-layer of SnS not only provides a stable interface for the transmission of electrons and ions but also ensures the structural integrity of the electrode, while the carbon layer effectively improves electrical conductivity and relieves outward volume expansion during the charge/discharge process. Zhao et al.206 encapsulated SnS nanoparticles in sulfur-doped graphene bubble film for the Li-ion battery and showed a high cycling stability of 1462 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 0.1 A g−1 and 1020 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at 1 A g−1 and superior rate capabilities of 750 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1. Veerasubramani et al.207 synthesized ultrasmall SnS quantum dots (QDs) anchored onto nitrogen-enriched carbon nanospheres (NC) (SnS QDs@NC) for sodium-ion batteries. The material showed excellent cycling stability at 100 mA g−1 for the corresponding sodium-ion full cell. As shown in Fig. 14c, the discharge capacity of 182 mA h g−1 was achieved at the 50th cycle, which corresponded to 90.1% of its initial discharge capacity. The superior electrochemical performance is attributed to the synergistic effects of NC and SnS QDs, where NC serves as a conducting matrix to support SnS QDs and helps avoid structural degradation. Xia et al.208 prepared free-standing SnS/C nanofiber anodes for both lithium-ion and sodium-ion batteries. For the lithium-ion battery, it delivered high capacities of 648 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1, while it retained a capacity of 481 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 for the sodium-ion battery. The fine SnS nanoparticles dispersed in one-dimensional porous nanofibers with uniform diameters shortened the transport path of ions and electrons, and the presence of N-doped carbon enhanced the electrical conductivity, as well as relieved the volume change caused by the alloying/de-alloying reaction. Wang et al.209 fabricated SnS@C nanospheres coated with few-layer MoS2 nanosheets, and nitrogen, phosphorus-codoped carbon (SnS@C/MoS2@N, P-C) as robust sodium-ion battery anodes. It delivered a reversible capacity of 628 mA h g−1 with high initial Coulombic efficiency of 74.9%, and capacity retention of 59.8% over 2000 cycles at 5.0 A g−1. Based on the superior sodium-storage performance, it coupled with the homemade Na3V2(PO4)3@C (NVP@C) cathode and assembled full cells. After being charged to 3.5 V, the full cells can power a series of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and a small fan, as presented in Fig. 14d. The enhanced electrochemical performance is due to the interface effect of heterostructures, the synergistic effect of two active components, and double-layered carbon. This structure enhanced the charge transfer, accommodated the large volume expansion, and increased the structural stability.
 Fig. 14  (a) and (b) Charge–discharge curves of C@0.5SnS@TiO2 and SnS electrodes during the first cycle. The insets show cross-sectional images of electrodes in different states during lithiation/delithiation; (a1, b1) before cycling, (a2, b2) fully lithiation and (a3, b3) fully delithiation, respectively. Reprinted with permission.205 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) The cycling stability of the corresponding sodium-ion full cell at 100 mA g−1 and a schematic presentation of a sodium-ion cell presented in the inset. Reprinted with permission.207 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) The digital images of a small fan and a series of LEDs (10, 20, 30 LEDs) powered by the SnS@C/MoS2@N,PC//NVP@C full cells. Reprinted with permission.209 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Gao et al.210 designed cobalt-doped SnS2 anchored on N-doped carbon nanotube substrates with a sulfur cathode (S/NCNT@Co-SnS2) substrate using spray pyrolysis chemical vapor deposition (SPCVD) followed by a solvothermal reaction. For Li–S batteries, it delivered a high initial specific capacity of 1337.1 mA h g−1 (excluding the capacity contribution from Co-SnS2) and maintained 1004.3 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 1.3 mA cm−2. The cobalt-doped SnS2 can serve as an effective catalyst by facilitating the conversion reaction between polysulfides and Li2S, thereby promoting higher sulfur utilization and higher specific capacity. Jiang et al.211 reported the SnS2/graphene/SnS2 composite, which maintained the reversible capacity at 1357 mA h g−1 for the lithium-ion battery after 200 cycles and 1133 mA h g−1 for the sodium-ion battery after 100 cycles. The specific capacities of 844 mA h g−1 and 765 mA h g−1 were retained even at 10 A g−1. As the graphene sheet was sandwiched between the SnS2 layers, it improved the conductivity of the material, and effectively prevented the restacking of the SnS2 layer and kept the structural stability with ample buffer space. Bin et al.212 engineered the SnS2/graphene nanocomposite for the K-ion battery anode, which delivered a reversible capacity of 610 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 with the high-rate capability of 290 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1. Several other reports also revealed that the combination of carbon with SnxSy can improve the electrochemical performance for batteries.213–215 Nano-honeycomb-like SnS/SnS2 heterostructures grown on a carbon cloth exhibited a remarkably high capacity of >800 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 with 93% capacity retention after 500 cycles at 1 A g−1 for sodium-ion storage.216 The superior electrochemical performance can be ascribed to the coupling effect of SnS/SnS2 heterostructures and the hierarchical design of the electrode. Li et al.217 decorated the SnS2/Sn3S4 hybrid on Ti3C2 MXene, which showed a rate capability of 216.5 mA h g−1 at 5000 mA g−1 and stable cycling performance of 426.3 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles. The multilayered Ti3C2 improved the electron transport ability and also inhibited the aggregation and accommodated the volume change of SnS2/Sn3S4 nanoparticles during the charge/discharge process. The confinement of SnS2/Sn3S4 decreased the tendency toward layer restacking and improved the limited capacities of Ti3C2. Also, the decorated SnS2/Sn3S4 hybrid on Ti3C2 MXene with a high surface area enhanced the contact between the electrolyte and electrode, resulting in lithium-ion diffusion.


4.2.2 Supercapacitor. 
Supercapacitors, also known as electrochemical capacitors or ultracapacitors, provide the most promising approach for energy storage systems to resolve the current energy demand. They hold a quick charge and discharge process like a capacitor, with the ability to store a great deal of energy similar to a battery. Supercapacitors complete the bridge between conventional capacitors and batteries. The high electrochemical performance of supercapacitors is due to the rapid charging/discharging, high-power density, and long lifespan.218 In general, supercapacitors are classified into two types based on their energy storage mechanism. The first type is the electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs), where the charge storage mechanism happens via the polarization of charges at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces by the non-faradaic way. The second type is the faradaic pseudocapacitors, which chemically store their charges via redox reaction between the active electrode surface and the electrolyte. For SnxSy materials, the research in the supercapacitor field is far behind as compared to batteries.
Patil et al.219 designed an all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor (ASSCs) using β-MnO2 as a positive active electrode and orthorhombic (O-SnS) as a negative electrode material on a stainless-steel (β-MnO2/SS//O-SnS/SS) substrate with a poly(vinyl alcohol)-lithium perchlorate (PVA-LiClO4) solid gel polymer as the electrolyte and separator. Fig. 15a shows cyclic voltammograms (CV) of β-MnO2/SS and O-SnS/SS electrodes for different voltage ranges at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The grouping of these two electrodes in an asymmetric device achieves a large potential. Fig. 15b shows the comparative galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves of MnO2 and O-SnS electrodes and a β-MnO2/SS//O-SnS/SS ASSCs device. The asymmetric supercapacitor exhibited a specific capacitance of 122 F g−1, an energy density of 29.8 W h kg−1, a power density of 1.25 kW h kg−1, and capacity retention of 95.3% for up to 5000 charge–discharge cycles. Chauhan et al.220 developed binder-free two-electrode supercapacitor devices based on SnS nanorods with 2 M Na2SO4 as the electrolyte. The SnS nanorods exhibited a specific capacitance of ∼70 F g−1, an energy density of 1.49 W h kg−1, and a power density of 248.33 W kg−1. Reddy et al.104 prepared SnS thin films using a spin-coating method, which exhibited a superior specific capacitance of 42 F g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1, in a 0.2 M NaOH solution. Liu et al.221 fabricated SnS/S-doped graphene solid-state supercapacitors that exhibited a high areal capacitance of 2.98 mF cm−2 and good cycling performance of 99% for 10000 cycles. Among Ni, Co, Mn-doped SnS2-graphene aerogel supercapacitor materials, the Mn–SnS2-graphene aerogel exhibited the highest specific capacitance of 523.51 F g−1 at the scan rate of 5 mV s−1.222 The metal-ion doping introduced heterojunction and crystal defects, which highly improved the conductivity of the material and increased the electrochemical reactive sites. Hatui et al.223 synthesized SnS2@Cu2O/rGO nanoflowers using the hydrothermal route and tested them in both three- and two-electrode systems. In the three-electrode system (1 M KOH), the highest specific capacitance of 1800 F g−1 at 0.6 A g−1 and 1588 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 was obtained. In the two-electrode system (1 M TEABF4 in AN), the composite delivered a specific capacitance of 1290 F g−1 at the current density of 1 A g−1, the energy density of 458.67 W h kg−1, and power density of 1600 W kg−1. In the structure, the in situ electron transfer from Sn2+ to Cu2+ and the high conductivity (due to the presence of rGO) of the whole system can reduce the internal resistance which can in turn enhance the specific capacitance due to the high surface area of the hybrid nanocomposites. Lonkar et al.224 developed 2D–2D type SnS2 and graphene layered nanosheets (SnS2/G), which delivered a higher capacitance of 565 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in a three-electrode system using 2 M KOH electrolyte. Fig. 15c provides the schematics of the SnS2/G symmetric supercapacitor device and Fig. 15d shows the GCD curves of the corresponding fabricated device. The symmetric supercapacitor device delivered a capacitance of 262.5 F g−1, energy density of 23.5 W h kg−1 and power density of 880 W kg−1 at 1 A g−1. This high electrochemical performance is attributed to the synergistic interaction between SnS2 nanosheets uniformly embedded within the graphene layers, facilitating the ion transport and storage with the ability to withstand volume changes during cycling.
 Fig. 15  (a) CV curves of β-MnO2 and O-SnS electrodes at 100 mV s−1. (b) GCD curves of β-MnO2 and O-SnS electrodes and β-MnO2/SS//O-SnS/SS ASSCs device at the same current of 8 mA. Reprinted with permission.219 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematics of the fabricated SnS2/G symmetric supercapacitor device and (d) GCD curves of the SnS2/G symmetric device at different current densities. Reprinted with permission.224 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 

4.3 Photocatalyst
Photocatalysts are materials that catalyze reactions when a light source interacts with it. Photocatalysis is a green technology that is used for cleaning the air and wastewater, and for hydrogen production. The materials with semiconducting properties, weak vdWs interactions in the structures, tunable bandgaps, adequate optical properties, and large surface area have the potential to show high catalytic activity.225 Therefore, it is necessary to develop suitable eco-friendly, inexpensive, earth-abundant materials that have these essential properties and can absorb the full range of the solar spectrum for solving energy and environmental challenges.
Jiang et al.226 prepared a ternary Ag–SnS–TiO2 nanocomposite for wastewater treatment by using TiO2 nanobelts as templates. The enhancement in the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 comes from the co-loading of Ag and SnS nanoparticles with TiO2, which broadens the light absorption spectra as well as improves charge transfer through interfacial charge transfer. Xie et al.180 designed Sn4+ self-doped hollow SnS microcubes to effectively reduce the Cr(VI) and cyanide ions under visible light irradiation. Within 50 min, 99.6% of Cr(VI) was degraded, while cyanide was removed at a rate as high as 97.2%. The improved photocatalytic activity is attributed to the enhanced photoabsorption properties and effective separation of photoinduced charge carriers. Kadam et al.227 generated H2 from water under visible illumination with a rate of 0.136 mmole g−1 h−1, using the structural transformation of SnS2 into SnS with Mo-doping. The enhancement in the photocatalytic activity is due to the improved surface properties combined with suitable optical properties that maximize the absorbance of visible solar radiation.
Zhang et al.228 prepared a polyaniline/SnS2/N-doped reduced graphene oxide (PANI/SnS2/NRG) ternary composite for the reduction of aqueous Cr(VI) under irradiation with visible-light (λ > 420 nm). The ternary composites showed higher photocatalytic activity than SnS2 nanoplates, SnS2/PANI, and SnS2/NRG binary composites. The synergistic effects in the composite increased the absorption of visible light, as well as the separation and transfer of photogenerated electrons and holes, which contributed to the exceptionally high photocatalytic activity. Govindan and his group229 synthesized La and Zr-intercalated SnS2 nanostructures for the photodegradation of methylene blue dye. The observed superior performance was attributed to the enhanced surface charge carriers and fast electron transport inside the lattice of SnS2. Di et al.230 constructed a Z-scheme g-C3N4/SnS2 heterojunction for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Yin et al.231 constructed a MoS2/SnS2/r-GO heterojunction for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 and as a result, the heterojunction exhibited a CO formation rate of 68.53 μmol g−1 h−1 and a CH4 formation rate of 50.55 μmol g−1 h−1. This unique structure of the same family of metal sulfides increases defects and reduces electron transport barriers, thereby promoting the transfer of electrons at the interface through electron tunneling; therefore, the presence of more active sites reduces the barrier to the photocatalytic reduction of CO2.
Wang et al.232 reported a reduction of aqueous Cr(VI) under visible light irradiation using a photocatalyst of ultrasmall Sn2S3 porous nano-particles. The photocatalytic reduction of 50 mL of 1 × 10−3 M Cr(VI) aqueous solution under visible light irradiation in the presence of synthesized large-sized (∼100 nm) and sub-10 nm Sn2S3 porous nanoparticles, respectively, is shown in Fig. 16a and b. In Fig. 16a, with 100 nm Sn2S3 nanoparticles, the absorption band of Cr(VI) centered at about 362 nm drastically decreases with the exposure time and within 25 min of visible light irradiation, the Cr2O72− ions were completely reduced. With 10 nm Sn2S3 nano-particles, the absorption peak of Cr(VI) sharply decreased and within 8 min, the gradual color change of the solution from yellow to colorless was observed (Fig. 16b). The enhanced photocatalytic activity was due to the ultra-small porous-structure. The fabrication of CdS-Sn2S3@rGO heterostructures displayed strong durability in both photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) reduction.95Fig. 16c and d illustrates the tentative mechanism of charge transfer and separation on the CGS-2 composite before and after reconstruction. In the heterostructure, the rGO nanosheets provide superior electrical conductivity and accelerate the separation and transfer of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Huo et al.233 designed a Z-scheme porous g-C3N4/Sn2S3-diethylenetriamine (Pg-C3N4/Sn2S3-DETA) composite for the photocatalytic CO2 reduction. The performance was investigated for CO2 reduction to CH4 and CH3OH.
 Fig. 16  (a and b) Photocatalytic reduction of 50 mL of 1 × 10−3 M aqueous Cr(VI) solution containing 5 μL HCl under visible-light irradiation in the presence of the as-prepared large-sized and ultra-small Sn2S3 porous nanoparticles, respectively. Inset: Photographs of the gradual color change of the solution with irradiation time. Reprinted with permission.232 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c and d) Schematic representations of the charge transfer and separation for the CdS-Sn2S3@rGO composite under photocatalytic reactions for 0 h and 60 h, respectively. Reprinted with permission.95 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. 
4.4 Photodetectors
Photodetectors possess the ability to precisely transform an optical signal into an electrical signal, which is subsequently amplified by the preamplifier before further processing. The attributes like sensitivity, speed, noise, size, reliability, and cost decide on the overall performance of a photodetector. Flexibility and transparency are also critical features as per the demand for advanced and emerging technologies. Thus, optically sensitive and cost-effective, earth-abundant SnxSy materials have attracted attention in these fields.
Zhou et al.234 reported a high-performance near-infrared (NIR) photodetector based on SnS nanobelts prepared by the PVD method. The device showed an excellent photoresponsivity of 300 A W−1 under 800 nm light illumination with an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 4.65 × 104%, a detectivity of 6 × 109 Jones and fast rise (τrise) and decay times (τdecay) of 36 ms and 7 ms, respectively. Zhang et al.235 fabricated NIR photodetectors with SnS nanosheets, which exhibited a photoresponsivity of 365 A W−1, and EQE of 5.70 × 104% under 808 nm light illumination. After decoration with Au nanoparticles, the photoresponsivity and EQE improved to 635 A W−1 and 9.92 × 104%, respectively. The studied anisotropic photoresponse of the SnS nanosheets device along with the armchair direction and the zigzag direction showed that the conductivity and photoconductivity along the zigzag direction are greater than those along the armchair direction. By introduce defects into the SnS nanosheet using oxygen plasma, the anisotropic photoresponse of the nanosheet can be finely tuned by varying the oxygen plasma treatment time. Tian et al.236 fabricated visible NIR photodetectors based on hydrothermally synthesized SnS microbelts, which exhibits photoresponsivity of 329.9 mA W−1, EQE of 101.08%, detectivity of 1.85 × 108 Jones as well as rise time (1.1 ms) and decay time (1.3 ms) under illumination at the wavelength of 850 nm. Liu et al.237 reported photodetectors based on 2D SnS nanoflakes with a responsivity of 156.0 A W−1, EQE of 4.77 × 104%, and normalized detectivity of 2.94 × 1010 Jones. The rise and fall times under illumination with the 405 nm light was found to be 5.1 ms and 8.8 ms, respectively. Chang et al.238 reported SnS/CdS heterojunction-based low-temperature visible photodetectors under irradiation with 650 nm light. The device showed the responsivity of 10.4 mA W−1, detectivity of 3.56 × 1011 Jones, and response time of less than 30 ms. The SnS allows the detector to have strong visible light absorption and great photoelectric conversion efficiency, while the CdS nanorod structure with pyroelectricity can effectively modulate the behavior of photogenerated carriers at low temperatures. Sheini et al.239 fabricated a bilayer Bi2S3/SnS heterojunction photodetector with EQE of 45%. The short and long-time photoresponse behavior of the heterojunction was due to the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and the improved ability of the heterojunction photodetector to separate and combine the generated carriers.
Tian et al.93 reported a photodetector based on SnS2 nanoflakes, which exhibited a response time of 7.3 ms, decay time of 16 ms, photoresponsivity of 58.5 mA W−1, EQE of 17.9% and detectivity of 1.53 × 1010 Jones with a blue laser (405 nm). Under green laser (532 nm) illumination, the photoresponsivity was 4.64 mA W−1, detectivity was 1.2 × 109 Jones, and the fitted response and decay times were both 45 ms. Khimani et al.240 compared the photodetector performance of SnS2 thin films deposited by various techniques such as CBD, dip-coating, and spin-coating. The SnS2 nanosheets prepared by CVD showed a photoresponsivity of 1.1 × 103 A W−1, EQE of 3.2 × 105%, and a response time of 40 ms. Hosseini et al.241 investigated the photodetector performance of the SnS2/Si heterostructure, which showed high photoresponsivity (3740 A W−1), high quantum efficiency (490%), photodetectivity (4.1 × 1010 Jones) with fast photoresponse time (5–10 μs). The mechanism of the device can be clarified by a band-to-band tunneling model and band bending characteristics of the vdWs heterostructure due to an ultrathin depletion layer. Ying et al.146 reported high-performance UV photodetectors based on mechanically isolated 2H-SnS2 prepared from CVT grown single crystals. Li et al.242 fabricated a 2D h-BN/p-MoTe2/graphene/n-SnS2/h-BN p–g–n junction (Fig. 17a) with a responsivity of 2600 A W−1 and specific detectivity up to ≈1013 Jones in the ultraviolet-visible near-infrared spectrum. The optical image of a typically fabricated device is shown in Fig. 17b. Lei et al.243 designed and fabricated SnS2 thin films with a novel nanosheet/amorphous blended structure, which maintained over 90% of the initial photoelectric responsivity (40.8 mA W−1) even after 1000 bending-flattening cycles. Fig. 17c shows the current–voltage (I–V) curve (measured in the dark) of the flexible SnS2 photodetectors with typical resistance behavior. The upper-left inset shows a cross-sectional SEM image of the flexible SnS2 photodetector (thickness of the SnS2 thin film is ∼280 nm) and the bottom-right shows a photograph of a fabricated SnS2 flexible photodetector rolled onto a gloved finger. The combination of the MoTe2 and SnS2 provides complimentary bandgaps and the graphene interlayer enhances sensitivity and broadens the spectral range.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of the h-BN/MoTe2/graphene/SnS2/h-BN device configuration and the experimental setup. (b) Optical image of a typically fabricated h-BN/MoTe2/graphene/SnS2/h-BN device. Reprinted with permission.242 Copyright 2019, Wiley. (c) I–V curve of the flexible SnS2 photodetectors. The upper-left inset shows a cross-sectional SEM image of the flexible SnS2 photodetector and the bottom-right shows a photograph of a fabricated SnS2 flexible photodetector rolled onto a gloved finger. Reprinted with permission.243 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
4.5 Sensor
The device used to detect and respond to optoelectronic signals generated from the physical parameters of the surrounding environment is called a sensor. Currently, various types of sensors are available, which function for the detection of several physical parameters such as light, temperature, heat, pressure, gas, humidity, motion, or some other environmental phenomenon. The superiority of the performance of sensors is determined based on their sensitivity, quick response/recovery time, selectivity, and stability. The sensors that measure physical quantities are known as physical sensors, while the sensors that generate information based on the changes in chemical parameters are termed as chemical sensors. To date, SnxSy materials have been reported for glucose, gas, and humidity sensing applications.
Chung et al.244 reported the glucose-sensing properties of carbon-coated SnS (C-SnS) prepared by hydrothermal and CVD methods. The sensor showed an electron transformation rate of 7.46 s−1, high sensitivity of 43.9 mA M−1 cm−2 with a linear range from 0.03 to 0.7 mM for glucose. The large surface area material offers a favorable microenvironment for facilitating electron transfer between enzymes and the electrode surface. Rana et al.245 studied the size-dependent ethanol vapor sensing performance of SnS nanoparticles prepared by the chemical reduction route. The optimized sample prepared at 250 °C showed a response time of 29 s and a recovery time of 21 s. The highest percentage sensitivity of 61% was observed for the samples grown at 300 °C. The results revealed that the sensitivity, selectivity, and stability of the sensor mainly depend on the particle size, shape, morphology, and chemical compositions. Li et al.246 studied the surface acoustic wave (SAW) sensor performance of SnS colloidal quantum dots for NO2 gas detection. The sensor showed good performance for low concentrations of NO2 (1–10 ppm) with an increase in signal from 0.5 kHz to 1.8 kHz and response and recovery times of 180 s and 466 s, respectively. Afsar et al.247 reported the sensing performance of SnS nanoflakes for acetone and alcohol (methanol, ethanol, and 1-butanol). The SnS exhibited a high response for acetone (∼1000%) as compared to alcohol. The SnS-based sensors showed responses of ∼190%, ∼130%, and ∼140% for methanol, ethanol, and 1-butanol, respectively. The response times/recovery times for acetone (3 s/14 s), methanol (2 s/9 s), ethanol (2 s/9 s) and 1-butanol (3 s/45 s) were observed.
Yan et al.248 fabricated Schottky-contacted n-type SnS2 gas sensors by using mechanically exfoliated SnS2 nanosheets. The SnS2 sensor with Mn electrodes showed weaker responses for NH3 (4 ppm), CO2 (1000 ppm), H2S (4 ppm), and H2 (1000 ppm) gases as compared to the NO2 (4 ppm) gas (Fig. 18a). For NO2, the observed sensitivity was 13000% for 9 ppm and 97% for 1 ppb of NO2 at room temperature. Huang et al.249 reported flexible NO2 and NH3 gas sensors based on sulfonated rGO decorated with SnS2 (SnS2/S-rGO) composites. The device showed a 17% response to 125 ppb of NO2 and an 11% response to 1 ppm of NH3. Fig. 18b and c shows only ∼3% and ∼10% degradation in the response of the bent sensor and the twisted sensor when compared with the flat sensors on paper substrate. The twisted substrate caused deformation in two vertical directions due to the tensile force and shear force, while the bent substrate was deformed in only one direction, along the direction of the tension force. This deformation in the twisted substrate led to more changes in the graphene resistance and reduced sensitivity as compared to the bent and flat substrates. The high surface energy of SnS2 and the random arrangement of layers on the graphene surface to increase the roughness enabled the material to have superhydrophobic properties. Thus, the sensors displayed minimal fragility to high humidity, leading to improved stability in various environments. Bharatula et al.250 showed a sensitivity of ∼11300%, a response time of ∼85 s and a recovery time of 6 s for a SnS2 nanoflakes-based humidity sensor. The same material was also studied for methanol, ethanol, and isopropyl alcohol sensing applications. The methanol sensor showed a higher response of ∼1580 at 150 ppm with a response time of ∼67 s and a recovery time of ∼5 s. Several other groups also reported NO2 and NH3 sensors based on SnS2 and its derivatives with high sensitivity and fast response/recovery time.251–253 Zaki et al.254 used mixed tin sulfide oxides-Sn2S3 (MTO-Sn2S3) heterostructured thin film for methane gas detection, which showed a response time of 250 s and recovery time of 82 s.
 Fig. 18  (a) The dynamic response curves of the SnS2 sensor with Mn electrodes against a variety of gases. Reprinted with permission.248 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b and c) The dynamic responses of the SnS2/S-rGO sensing ink written on paper during bending and twisting by 180 degrees, respectively. Reprinted with permission.249 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
4.6 Solar cells
Solar cells, also called photovoltaic cells, directly convert light energy into electrical energy. The solar cell contains a junction of two materials with opposite carrier types, which induces a photovoltaic effect. Earth-abundant, non-toxic materials with adequate physical properties such as suitable optical bandgap, high optical absorption coefficient, and semiconducting properties are seen as being capable of application in solar cell devices.255 Many different materials and their combinations have been investigated over the years, however, massive conversion efficiency with low-cost is yet to be achieved.
Baby and co-workers172 prepared single-phase orthorhombic SnS and Sn2S3 thin films using RF magnetron sputtering for solar cells and observed variations in the different optical properties such as band edge shift, direct energy bandgap, absorption coefficient, extinction coefficient and refractive index of the films. Gedi et al.256 studied the photovoltaic performance of the orthorhombic SnS device with respect to different bath deposition temperatures. The optimized SnS device showed a high efficiency of 0.94%. Yun et al.257 showed that the TiO2/SnS heterojunction device exhibited the highest power conversion efficiency of ∼4.8% for solution-processed solar cells. The high performance is due to the change in the SnS thin film to a more uniform and denser layer during SnCl2 post-treatment, and the reduction of defects associated with the introduction of Cl− ions into the lattice.

Fig. 19a shows the schematic representation of the band alignment of flexible perovskite solar cell (PKSCs) devices based on the SnS2 electron transport layer (ETL).258 The current density vs. voltage (J–V) curves obtained under solar irradiation of 100 mW cm−2 are shown in Fig. 19b. The device showed a high-power conversion efficiency of 13.2% with a negligible hysteresis effect at the optimized SnS2 film thickness. Zhao's group259 achieved a power conversion efficiency of 13.63% using 2D SnS2 nanosheets perovskite solar cells as ETL. The high short-circuit current density of the perovskites results from the effective electron collection of the 2D SnS2 nanosheets from the perovskite layer and fast electron transport to the FTO.260 The Ag-doped SnS2 counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells showed an impressive photovoltaic conversion efficiency of 8.70%. The enhanced efficiency is attributed to the effectively improved electrocatalytic activity and mixed conductivity resulting from the Ag dopant.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the band alignment of flexible solar devices based on SnS2 ETL. (b) The J–V plots of (a) flexible PKSCs based on different SnS2 ETLs. Reprinted with permission.258 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of 2D SnS FETs; (d) surface SEM image of 2D SnS FET. Reprinted with permission.265 Copyright 2020, Wiley. 
Mohan et al.261 chemically deposited Sn2S3 thin-films and studied their prospects as solar cell absorbers. The Sn2S3 thin-film showed p-type electrical conductivity of 10−4–10−5 Ω cm−1, and its mobility-lifetime product was 6 × 10−6 cm2 V−1. Khadraoui et al.262 prepared (Sn2S3)x(Bi2S3)1−x composite thin films by the spray pyrolysis method, which exhibited the lowest electrical resistivity of 5.59 × 10−2 Ω cm.
4.7 Field-effect transistor (FET)
A transistor is an electronic switch device that regulates current or voltage flow and amplifies the electric signals. The field-effect transistor controls the electrical behavior of the device by using an electric field. In FET's, between the drain and source, conductivity alteration takes place after the application of voltage to the gate.
Higashitarumizu et al.74 studied the FET of a nine-layer SnS prepared via mechanical exfoliation, which exhibited ambipolar behavior due to p-type characteristics by Sn vacancies and n-type characteristics by S vacancies. Mudusu et al.263 fabricated a CVD-synthesized SnS nanowires FET device showing p-type conductivity along with a carrier density of 6 × 1018 cm−3, mobility of 1.47 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, and resistivity of 70.1 Ω cm. Mudusu's group264 also fabricated metal–insulator semiconductor FET (MISFET) devices using an active SnS layer sandwiched between aluminum and silver contacts with the Al2S3 layer as the interfacial layer. The device exhibited a turn-on voltage of +5.13 V, a high rectification factor of 1383 at a bias voltage of 6 V, and low leakage current of ∼10−9 A at 10 V. Wang et al.265 fabricated few-layer SnS-based FETs an on/off ratio of 3.41 × 106, a sub-threshold swing of 180 mV dec−1 and field-effect mobility of 1.48 cm2 V−1 s−1. Fig. 19c and d shows a schematic representation of 2D SnS FETs and the surface SEM image of 2D SnS FET, respectively. Aji et al.266 synthesized vertically stacked SnS-WS2 and SnS-MoS2 p-n heterojunctions by the two-step CVD method, in which SnS grains showed hole mobility of 15 cm2 V−1 s−1, and WS2 and MoS2 grains displayed a high on/off ratio of >106. Browning et al.134 grew WS2/SnS layered semiconductor heterojunctions via ALD, whereas SnS transistors showed a p-type conductivity with a hole mobility of 818 cm2 V−1 s−1 and WS2 displayed n-type behavior with mobility of 12 cm2 V−1 s−1. Bao et al.267 reported ferroelectric FET devices based on 2D SnS films.
Zhang et al.268 synthesized 2D SnS and SnS2 by the CVD method, in which SnS p-FET showed the Ion/Ioff ratio of 200 at 300 K with an extrinsic hole mobility of 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1, while SnS2 n-FET showed the Ion/Ioff ratio of 2 × 106 at 300 K with extrinsic electron mobility of 0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1. Xu et al.124 fabricated SnS2 nanosheet-based FETs with a high mobility of 2.58 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a high on/off ratio ≈108. Wang et al.269 fabricated WS2/SnS2 and Yang et al.270 fabricated WSe2/SnS2 heterostructures for high-performance FETs. Various kinds of insight into SnxSy materials can open-up more opportunities for these materials in the FETs field.
4.8 Field emitters
Field-emission, also known as Fowler–Nordheim (F–N) tunneling, is based on a physical phenomenon of quantum tunneling. The process involves electron emission from a highly energized surface of a material into the vacuum by tunneling through the energy barrier, in the presence of a high electric field. The design of emitters is based on the emission current density, high brightness, excellent stability, and performance reproducibility.271 Also, the physical properties of the material and the shape of the particular cathode have a high impact on emission. Emitters are widely applied in displays, X-ray devices, microwave generators, and other electronic devices;272 thus, researching advanced materials and designing novel devices are essential.
Bhorde et al.90 solvothermally synthesized a SnS nanorod emitter that showed good field emission performances such as low turn-on field (∼2.5 V μm−1 for 10 μA cm−2), high emission current density (∼647 μA cm−2 at 3.9 V μm−1), and superior current stability (∼5 h for ∼1 μA). Suryawanshi et al.273 showed that the SnS nanowire emitter delivers a high current density of ∼2.5 mA cm−2 at an applied electric field of ∼4.55 V μm−1. Suryawanshi's group274 also studied photo-enhanced field emission characteristics upon visible illumination for SnS2 nanosheets. After illumination, they showed nearly 2.5 times enhancement in the emission current and exhibited a lower turn-on field of ∼4.2 V μm−1, corresponding to an emission current density of ∼1 μA cm−2. Padmashree et al.275 synthesized SnS2 nanosheets by a one-step hydrothermal reaction and studied photosensitive field emission. For the turn-on field, the electric field required to obtain a current density of 1 μA cm−2 was found to be 5.9 V μm−1 in the dark, while after illumination it was reduced to 5.0 V μm−1. Zhong et al.35 found that the turn-on field was 6.9 V μm−1 for vertically aligned graphene-like SnS2 ultrathin nanosheet arrays.
Rout et al.276 reported field emission properties of p-doped graphene using SnS2. Fig. 20a and b shows the low magnification TEM image of SnS2 nanosheets and SnS2/RGO nanocomposite, respectively. The current density (J) versus applied electric field (E) plot (Fig. 20c) revealed that the threshold field for the SnS2/RGO composite is much lower (3.2 V μm−1) than that of SnS2 nanosheets (7.5 V μm−1). The turn-on field required to draw an emission current density of 1 μA cm−2 was significantly low (almost half the value) for the SnS2/RGO nanocomposite (2.65 V μm−1) as compared to pristine SnS2 (4.8 V μm−1) nanosheets. The F–N plot in Fig. 20d indicates emission from the nanometric geometry of the emitter and the obtained values of field enhancement factor (β) were ∼3200 cm−1 for SnS2 and ∼3700 cm−1 for the SnS2/RGO composite. The field emission current versus time plot in Fig. 20e shows good emission stability for the SnS2 and SnS2/RGO emitters. The typical field emission patterns of both materials taken during the long-term stability study are presented in Fig. 20f and g. Density functional theory calculations suggested that the SnS2/graphene composite showed enhanced field emission properties due to the doping effect, which in turn substantially lowered the SnS2 work function when in the presence of the substrate.
 Fig. 20  (a) Low-magnification TEM image of SnS2 nanosheets. (b) Low-magnification TEM image of the SnS2/RGO nanocomposite. (c) The applied electric field as a function of emission current density. (d) F–N plot showing non-linear behaviour, indicating emission current from the semiconducting emitter. (e) Long-term field-emission current stability testing indicates fairly stable emission currents for SnS2 and SnS2/RGO. (f) and (g) Typical field-emission patterns taken during the long-term stability study of SnS2 and SnS2/RGO, respectively. Reprinted with permission.276 Copyright 2014, American Institute of Physics. 
4.9 Electrochemical CO2 reduction
With rising levels of CO2 in the atmosphere, the design of efficient technologies capable of converting CO2 into beneficial products needs to be accelerated. Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction technologies offer the promise of recycling CO2 from various sources desirable for fuels and chemical manufacturing. The optimal catalysts used for CO2 reduction should exhibit enduring stability, fast kinetics, high selectivity, and low manufacturing cost.
Chen et al.277 used amino-functionalized carbon to regulate the electronic structure of tin-based catalysts to enhance the activity of CO2 electroreduction. The catalyst showed the highest formate Faraday efficiency of 92.6% and formate partial current density of 41.1 mA cm−2 at a moderate overpotential of 0.9 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode. SEM and HRTEM images of SnS/aminated-C are shown in Fig. 21a–e. The LSV curves are shown in Fig. 21f, which reveal that a larger current density was observed under CO2 as compared to the N2-saturated electrolyte for SnS/aminated-C. Also, SnS/aminated-C exhibits a larger current density and a more positive onset potential in CO2-saturated electrolyte, than that of SnS and aminated-C. From the DFT calculations, the calculated free-energy diagram of the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to formate over SnS and SnS/aminated-C is presented in Fig. 21g. The study suggested that superior activity is attributed to the synergistic effect among SnS and aminated-C, which accelerated the charge transfer rate and increased the adsorption energies of OCHO* and CO2*. Zheng et al.278 showed that the presence of sulfur atoms in the catalyst surface could promote undercoordinated sites, and thereby improve the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to formate. The DFT results showed that the incorporation of sulfur into tin may favor formate generation. Sn(S)/Au accelerated CO2 reduction at geometric current densities of 55 mA cm−2 at −0.75 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode, with a faradaic efficiency of 93%. Also, Sn(S) catalysts showed excellent stability without deactivation (<2% productivity change) following more than 40 hours of operation.
 Fig. 21  (a) and (b) SEM images of SnS/aminated-C. (c) TEM image of SnS/aminated-C; (d) an enlarged view of the image within the dotted lines in (c). (e) HRTEM images of SnS/aminated-C. (f) LSVs of SnS, aminated-C, and SnS/aminated-C in CO2/N2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte. (g) A calculated free-energy diagram of the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to formate over SnS and SnS/aminated-C. The differential charge diagram of SnS/aminated-C for (h) the top view, and (i) the front view; cyan and yellow indicate the depletion and accumulation of electrons, respectively. Reprinted with permission.277 Copyright 2020, Wiley. 
Zhang and coworkers, modified atomically thin SnS2 nanosheets with Ni doping, which significantly enhanced the current density and faradaic efficiency for a carbonaceous product relative to pristine SnS2 nanosheets.279 The 5% Ni-doped SnS2 nanosheets achieved a faradaic efficiency of 93% for a carbonaceous product with a current density of 19.6 mA cm−2 at −0.9 V. The mechanistic study revealed that the improved performance of SnS2 nanosheets by Ni doping originated from the increasing of the defect levels and lowered the work function of SnS2 nanosheets. This resulted in the promoted CO2 activation and improved performance of SnS2 in CO2 electroreduction.
The application performances based on SnxSy class materials are presented in Table 3. The presented applications based on the SnxSy class show significant outcomes but the desired performance is yet to be achieved.280–285 The materials have the potential to overcome the barriers and produce significant outputs.
Table 3 Performance of SnxSy materials in various applications




Application
Material
Synthesis method
Performance
Ref.










Overpotential
Tafel slope




HER
SnS-N-doped graphene
Hydrothermal
−0.125 V
∼38 mV dec−1

190



SnS2–MoS2
Hydrothermal
240 mV @10 mA cm−2
65 mV dec−1

192













Overpotential
Tafel slope




OER
Co-Doped SnS2
Solvothermal
281 mV @30 mA cm−2
62 mV dec−1

195



TiO2/SnS2
Hydrothermal
570 mV @10 mA cm−2
107 mV dec−1

196













Type
Capacity




Battery
Ti3C2 MXene@C@SnS
Hydrothermal and annealing
Lithium-ion
1473 mA h g−1 @0.1 A g−1

203



SnS/Ti3C2Tx-O
Precursor-guided sulfidation and annealing
Sodium-ion
565 mA h g−1 @0.1 A g−1

204



S/NCNT@Co-SnS2
SPCVD and solvothermal
Lithium–sulphur
1337.1 mA h g−1 @1.3 mA/cm2

210



SnS2/graphene/SnS2
Hydrothermal
Lithium-ion
1357 mA h g−1

211







Sodium-ion
1133 mA h g−1




SnS2/graphene
Hydrothermal
Potassium-ion
610 mA h g−1 @50 mA g−1

212



MXene decorated SnS2/Sn3S4 hybrid
Solvothermal and calcination
Lithium-ion
426.3 mA h g−1 @100 mA g−1

217













Type
Capacitance




Supercapacitor
(β-MnO2/SS//O-SnS/SS)
CBD
Asymmetric
122 F g−1 @5 mV s−1

219



SnS nanorods
Solvothermal
Two-electrode
∼70 F g−1

220



Mn-doped SnS2-graphene aerogel
Solvothermal
Three-electrode
523.51 F g−1 @5 mV s−1

222



SnS2@Cu2O/rGO
Hydrothermal
Three-electrode
1800 F g−1 @0.6 A g−1

223







Two-electrode
1290 F g−1 @1 A g−1














Activity
Rate




Photocatalyst
Sn4+ self-doped hollow SnS microcubes
Template-assisted
Cr(VI) reduction
99.6%

180







Cyanide reduction
97.2%




MoS2/SnS2/r-GO
Solvothermal
CO formation
68.53 μmol g−1 h−1

231







CH4 formation
50.55 μmol g−1 h−1














Responsivity
Efficiency




Photodetector
SnS nanobelts
PVD
300 A W−1
4.65 × 104%

234



Au decorated SnS nanosheets
PVD
635 A W−1
9.92 × 104%

235



SnS microbelts
Hydrothermal
329.9 mA W−1
101.08%

236



SnS nanoflakes
CVD
156.0 A W−1
4.77 × 104%

237



SnS2 nanosheets
CVD
1.1 × 103 A W−1
3.2 × 105%

240



SnS2/silicon
CVT and mechanical exfoliation
3740 A W−1
490%

241













Activity
Response/recovery




Sensor
SnS nanoparticles
Chemical reduction route
Ethanol
29 s/21 s

245



SnS CQDs
Spin coating
SAW NO2
180 s/466 s

246



SnS nanoflakes
Solid-state reaction
Acetone
3 s/14 s

247



SnS2 nanoflakes
Hydrothermal
Humidity
85 s/6 s

250







Methanol
67 s/5 s




MTO-Sn2S3
Thermal annealing
Methane
250 s/82 s

254













Power conversion efficiency
Conductivity




Solar cells
TiO2/SnS
Spin coating
∼4.8%
—

257



SnS2 nanosheets
Hydrothermal
13.63%
—

259



Sn2S3 film
CBD
—
10−4–10−5 Ω−1 cm−1

261













Mobility
On/off ratio




FET
SnS nanowires
CVD
1.47 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1
103

263



Few-layer SnS
Pulsed laser deposition
1.48 cm2 V−1 s−1
3.41 × 106

265



SnS2
CVD
0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1
2 × 106

268



SnS2 nanosheet
CVD
2.58 cm2 V−1 s−1
≈108

124













Turn-on field
Current density




Field emitter
SnS nanorods
Solvothermal
∼2.5 V μm−1
∼ 647 μA cm−2

90



SnS nanowires
Thermal evaporation
∼1.65 V μm−1
∼2.5 mA cm−2

273



SnS2 nanosheets
Hydrothermal
∼4.2 V μm−1
∼1 μA cm−2

274



SnS2/rGO
Hydrothermal
∼2.65 V μm−1
∼1 μA cm−2

276













Faraday efficiency
Overpotential




CO2 reduction
SnS/aminated-C
Template method
92.6%
0.9 V

277



Ni-Doped SnS2 nanosheets
Solvothermal
93%
—

279





5 Summary and future outlooks
The ever-increasing demand in scientific exploration and technology innovation requires revolutionary materials. In these aspects, the class of SnxSy materials has attracted significant interest in engineering next-generation devices. Herein, we have comprehensively discussed various aspects related to the synthesis, properties, and applications of the SnxSy class of materials. The different structures provide a robust platform for desired properties and further implementation. The physical and chemical synthetic methods can be used to prepare SnxSy materials with varying structural features, including dimensions in each direction, doping, alloying, vacancies, hybrids, and heterostructure fabrication. Each synthesis approach has its merits and demerits but as per the requirement of the device, it is possible to produce single- or multi-layered SnxSy materials with control of the size/thickness, chemical composition, crystal geometry, composites, and heterostructure. The elucidated results of the engineering and functionality of the materials are seen to be promising for novel applications. The unique characteristics or functionalities of the SnS, SnS2, and Sn2S3 promote the emergence of new designs of electronic devices, including energy conversion, energy storage, transistors, photodetectors, photocatalysts, solar cells, and field emitters. Therefore, this review provides profound insights into the fundamental properties, synthesis, and applications of the SnxSy class of materials.
Despite impressive improvements over the past few years, there are still several known and unknown phenomena that hinder their potential. Accordingly, there is a need for more efforts to reveal such interesting phenomena of the materials. The SnxSy class of materials vary stoichiometrically, chemically and electronically, but pure phase formation is still a crucial task. It is tricky to distinguish Sn2S3 from the SnS phase due to their similar physical appearance and nearly the same bandgaps. The research on the synthesis, characterization, and properties of Sn3S4 and Sn4S5 materials is far behind as compared to other materials of the class. Intensive research on pure phase formation and separation will help to blur the lines of different phases. The current progress illuminates the materials space in the coming era of wearable and flexible devices. In some applications like batteries, solar cells, and photodetectors, the research is intensively progressing, yet lots of other fields are missing the full potential of materials. Even more efforts are needed to reveal the poorly understood mechanism of the phase formation and its crucial role in functional devices. There is a need for more application-based studies of all phases with synthetic studies for a variety of optoelectronics fields. So far, most of the devices based on the SnxSy class of materials are still at the level of the laboratory-scale and are working with substandard stability. Thus, improving the scalability and stability of these structures in an ambient environment will have to be a top priority for future research. Being one step ahead of theorists for predicting the functionalities of materials can boost the research in the forward direction. The controllable scaling down of SnxSy class materials to the atomically thin layer is a great challenge, which may bring the next breakthrough in this class.
An in-depth understanding of the phase properties of SnxSy will ultimately help to unleash their productivity in large-scale applications. We have tried to uncover the wide range of structural, optoelectronic, and magnetic properties of the SnxSy class of materials but many other properties are yet to be explored. Moreover, to open up more exciting opportunities, it is even more important to develop suitable strategies for material synthesis. The appropriate doping or hybridization or heterostructure fabrication of the SnxSy class with tailored properties can utilize the full potential of each phase to generate new functionalities. In this context, the combination of computational and experimental studies can bring about novel and elite methods for designing materials. Here, we open-up the well-proposed synthesis strategies with their different parameters to generate SnxSy class materials. We have emphasized various applications that take advantage of the superior properties of materials, which increase day-by-day as discoveries are made regarding the strengths of the materials. All of these aptitudes suggest that there is great potential in the SnxSy class to develop cutting-edge, high-performance industrial applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Department of Science and Technology (DST)-SERB Early Career Research project (Grant No. ECR/2017/001850), DST-Nanomission (DST/NM/NT/2019/205(G), DST/TDT/SHRI-34/2018), Karnataka Science and Technology Promotion Society (KSTePS/VGST-RGS-F/2018-19/GRD No. 829/315).
References
H. Alehdaghi, E. Assar, B. Azadegan, J. Baedi and A. A. Mowlavi, Radiat. Phys. Investigation of optical and structural properties of aqueous CdS quantum dots under gamma irradiation, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2020, 166, 108476 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. Zou, T. Liu, N. Liang, F. Yu, Z. Pan, Y. Zhu, M. Miao and Q. Li, A comparison of the twisted and untwisted structures for one-dimensional carbon nanotube assemblies, Mater. Des., 2018, 146, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, I. Murtaza, H. Meng and W. Huang, Thin film transistors based on two dimensional graphene and graphene/semiconductor heterojunctions, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 17387–17397 RSC .
T. Liu and Z. Liu, 2D MoS2 nanostructures for biomedical applications, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1701158 CrossRef .
M. Pawar, S. Kadam and D. J. Late, High-Performance Sensing Behavior Using Electronic Ink of 2D SnSe2 Nanosheets, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 4068–4075 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, X. Zhou, X. Cheng, R. Qiao, Y. Cheng, C. Liu, Y. Xie, W. Yu, F. Yao, Z. Sun and F. Wang, Graphene photonic crystal fibre with strong and tunable light-matter interaction, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 754–759 CrossRef CAS .
E. Singh, P. Singh, K. S. Kim, G. Y. Yeom and H. S. Nalwa, Flexible molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) atomic layers for wearable electronics and optoelectronics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 11061–11105 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Graphene-like two-dimensional materials. Chemical reviews, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yavari, C. Kritzinger, C. Gaire, L. Song, H. Gulapalli, T. Borca-Tasciuc, P. M. Ajayan and N. Koratkar, Tunable bandgap in graphene by the controlled adsorption of water molecules, Small, 2010, 6, 2535–2538 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, J. Y. Choi, T. Kim, S. H. Ch and H. J. Chung, A role for graphene in silicon-based semiconductor devices, Nature, 2011, 479, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Koski and Y. Cui, The new skinny in two-dimensional nanomaterials, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3739–3743 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shukla, S. Y. Kang and S. Saxena, Synthesis and patterning of graphene: strategies and prospects, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2019, 6, 021311 Search PubMed .
A. Molle, Synthesis and patterning of graphene: strategies and prospects, ECS Trans., 2016, 75, 163 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Li and D. Gu, in Tin Oxide Materials, ed. M. O. Orlandi, Elsevier,  2020, ch. 10, pp. 281–320 Search PubMed .
K. Yao, J. Li, S. Shan and Q. Jia, One-step synthesis of urchinlike SnS/SnS2 heterostructures with superior visible-light photocatalytic performance, Catal. Commun., 2017, 101, 51–56 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Wang, X. Zhao, X. Li, Z. Wang, C. Liu, Z. Lu, W. Zhang and G. Cao, rGO/SnS2/TiO2 heterostructured composite with dual-confinement for enhanced lithium-ion storage, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 25056–25063 RSC .
D. Gu, X. Li, Y. Zhao and J. Wang, Enhanced NO2 sensing of SnO2/SnS2 heterojunction based sensor, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 244, 67–76 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Skelton, L. A. Burton, A. J. Jackson, F. Oba, S. C. Parker and A. Walsh, Lattice dynamics of the tin sulphides SnS2, SnS and Sn2S3: vibrational spectra and thermal transport, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 12452–12465 RSC .
H. Zhu, D. Yang, Y. Ji, H. Zhang and X. Shen, Two-dimensional SnS nanosheets fabricated by a novel hydrothermal method, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 591–595 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghazali, Z. Zainal, M. Z. Hussein and A. Kassim, Cathodic electrodeposition of SnS in the presence of EDTA in aqueous media. Solar energy materials and solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater Sol., 1998, 55, 237–249 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Banai, M. W. Horn and J. R. Brownson, A review of tin(II) monosulfide and its potential as a photovoltaic absorber, Sol. Energy Mater Sol., 2016, 150, 112–129 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, X. Li, Z. Ren and Q. Zhang, Recent progress towards high performance of tin chalcogenide thermoelectric materials, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2432–2448 RSC .
L. Ehm, K. Knorr, P. Dera, A. Krimmel, P. Bouvier and M. Mezouar, Pressure-induced structural phase transition in the IV–VI semiconductor SnS, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2004, 16, 3545 CrossRef CAS .
H. Noguchi, A. Setiyadi, H. Tanamura, T. Nagatomo and O. Omoto, Characterization of vacuum-evaporated tin sulfide film for solar cell materials, Sol. Energy Mater Sol., 1994, 35, 325–331 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Hegde, A. G. Kunjomana, K. A. Chandrasekharan, K. Ramesh and M. Prashantha, Optical and electrical properties of SnS semiconductor crystals grown by physical vapor deposition technique, Phys. B: Condens. Matter, 2011, 406, 1143–1148 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sorgenfrei, F. Hofherr, T. Jauß and A. Cröll, Synthesis and single crystal growth of SnS by the Bridgman-Stockbarger technique, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2013, 48, 193–199 CrossRef CAS .
W. Albers, C. Haas and F. Van der Maesen, The preparation and the electrical and optical properties of SnS crystals. Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids, J. Phys. Chem. Solids., 1960, 15, 306–310 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Elkorashy, Photoconductivity in tin sulphide single crystals, Phys. B: Condens. Matter, 1991, 168, 257–267 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zainal, M. Z. Hussein and A. Ghazali, Cathodic electrodeposition of SnS thin films from aqueous solution, Sol. Energy Mater Sol., 1996, 40, 347–357 CrossRef CAS .
W. Albers, C. Haas, H. J. Vink and J. D. Wasscher, Investigations on SnS, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 2220–2225 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Lambros, D. Geraleas and N. A. Economou, Optical absorption edge in SnS, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1974, 35, 537–541 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Reddy, N. K. Reddy and R. W. Miles, Photovoltaic properties of SnS based solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3041–3046 CrossRef .
C. Gao, H. Shen and L. Sun, Preparation and properties of zinc blende and orthorhombic SnS films by chemical bath deposition, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 6750–6755 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, G. Yang, H. Song, Q. Liao, H. Cui, P. Shen and C. X. Wang, Vertically aligned graphene-like SnS2 ultrathin nanosheet arrays: excellent energy storage, catalysis, photoconduction, and field-emitting performances, J. Phys. Chem., 2012, 116, 9319–9326 CAS .
B. Pałosz and E. Salje, Lattice parameters and spontaneous strain in AX2 polytypes: CdI2, PbI2 SnS2 and SnSe2, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 1989, 22, 622–623 CrossRef .
Y. T. Lin, J. B. Shi, Y. C. Chen, C. J. Chen and P. F. Wu, Synthesis and characterization of tin disulfide (SnS2) nanowires, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 694–698 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Seo, J. T. Jang, S. W. Park, C. Kim, B. Park and J. Cheon, Two-dimensional SnS2 nanoplates with extraordinary high discharge capacity for lithium ion batteries, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4269–4273 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, L. X. Yuan and Y. H. Huang, Acetylene black incorporated three-dimensional porous SnS2 nanoflowers with high performance for lithium storage, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3374–3383 RSC .
T. Jiang and G. A. Ozin, New directions in tin sulfide materials chemistry, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 1099–1108 RSC .
G. Ye, Y. Gong, S. Lei, Y. He, B. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Jin, L. Dong, J. Lou, R. Vajtai and W. Zhou, Synthesis of large-scale atomic-layer SnS2 through chemical vapor deposition, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2386–2394 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Smith, P. E. Meek and W. Y. Liang, Raman scattering studies of SnS2 and SnSe2, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1977, 10, 1321 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mutlu, R. J. Wu, D. Wickramaratne, S. Shahrezaei, C. Liu, S. Temiz, A. Patalano, M. Ozkan, R. K. Lake, K. A. Mkhoyan and C. S. Ozkan, Phase engineering of 2D tin sulfides, Small, 2016, 12, 2998–3004 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, C. Wang, G. Du, Y. J. Zhong and J. Z. Jiang, 
            In situ synthesis of SnS2@ graphene nanocomposites for rechargeable lithium batteries, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9494–9496 RSC .
A. K. Abass, K. J. Majeid, H. A. Jassim and W. A. Murad, Optical properties of chemically deposited tin disulfide coatings, Solid State Commun., 1986, 57, 805–808 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kniep, D. Mootz, U. Severin and H. Wunderlich, Structure of tin(II) tin(IV) trisulphide, a redetermination, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1982, 38, 2022–2023 CrossRef .
L. A. Burton, D. Colombara, R. D. Abellon, F. C. Grozema, L. M. Peter, T. J. Savenije, G. Dennler and A. Walsh, Synthesis, characterization, and electronic structure of single-crystal SnS, Sn2S3, and SnS2, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4908–4916 CrossRef CAS .
U. V. Alpen, J. Fenner and E. Gmelin, Semiconductors of the type MeIIMeIVS3, Mater. Res. Bull., 1975, 10, 175–180 CrossRef .
H. B. Salah, H. Bouzouita and B. Rezig, Preparation and characterization of tin sulphide thin films by a spray pyrolysis technique, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480, 439–442 CrossRef .
A. Javed, N. Khan, S. Bashir, M. Ahmad and M. Bashir, Thickness dependent structural, electrical and optical properties of cubic SnS thin films, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 246, 122831 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Nabi, A. Kellou, S. Mecabih, A. Khalfi and N. Benosman, Opto-electronic properties of rutile SnO2 and orthorhombic SnS and SnSe compounds, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2003, 98, 104–115 CrossRef .
A. Basak, A. Hati, A. Mondal, U. P. Singh and S. K. Taheruddin, Effect of substrate on the structural, optical and electrical properties of SnS thin films grown by thermal evaporation method, Thin Solid Films, 2018, 645, 97–101 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Mahdi, K. Ibrahim, A. Hmood, N. M. Ahmed and F. I. Mustafa, Control of phase, structural and optical properties of tin sulfide nanostructured thin films grown via chemical bath deposition, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 4227–4235 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Hosny and A. Dahshan, Synthesis, structure and optical properties of SnS2, CdS and HgS nanoparticles from thioacetate precursor, J. Mol. Struct., 2015, 1085, 78–83 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Kumar, S. Valanarasu, V. Tamilnayagam and L. Amalraj, Structural, morphological and optical properties of SnS2 thin films by nebulized spray pyrolysis technique, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 14209–14216 CrossRef .
S. Wen, H. Pan and Y. Zheng, Electronic properties of tin dichalcogenide monolayers and effects of hydrogenation and tension, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3714–3721 RSC .
A. M. Saroja, I. K. Punithavathy, S. J. Jeyakumar, S. J. Gnanamuthu and A. R. Balu, Substrate temperature influence on the optical and electrical properties of spray deposited Sn2S3 thin films, Optik, 2017, 130, 245–254 CrossRef .
D. J. Singh, Optical and electronic properties of semiconducting Sn2S3, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 032102 CrossRef .
S. J. Gnanamuthu, I. K. Punithavathy, S. J. Jeyakumar, K. Usharani and A. R. Balu, Properties of nanostructured Ni-doped Sn2S3 thin films-doping concentration effect, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2016, 20, 395–399 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Bletskan and D. I. Bletskan, Electronic structure of Sn2S3 compound with the mixed valency of tin, J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater., 2014, 16, 659–664 CAS .
B. Parveen, M. Hassan, S. Riaz, S. Atiq, S. Naseem, M. Irfan and M. F. Iqbal, Investigation of physical properties of SnS:Fe diluted magnetic semiconductor nanoparticles for spintronic applications, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2018, 460, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ullah, M. Noor-A-Alam, H. J. Kim and Y. H. Shin, Influences of vacancy and doping on electronic and magnetic properties of monolayer SnS, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 124, 065102 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, F. Wang, D. Kong, B. Hu and C. Xia, Effect of strain on electronic and magnetic properties of Fe-doped monolayer SnS2, J. Su, Phys. Lett. A, 2017, 381, 1732–1737 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, W. Zhou, Y. Liang, L. Liu and P. Wu, Magnetic properties in Fe-doped SnS2: density functional calculations, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2016, 117, 489–495 CrossRef CAS .
J. Srivind, S. Balamurugan, K. Usharani, D. Prabha, M. Suganya, V. S. Nagarethinam and A. R. Balu, Visible light irradiated photocatalytic and magnetic properties of Fe-doped SnS2 nanopowders, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 9016–9024 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, T. Xing, M. Zhong, L. Huang, N. Lei, N. J. Zhang, J. Li and Z. Wei, A two-dimensional Fe-doped SnS2 magnetic semiconductor, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–7 CrossRef .
W. Z. Xiao, G. Xiao, Q. Y. Rong, Q. Chen and L. L. Wang, Electronic and magnetic properties of SnS2 monolayer doped with 4d transition metals, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2017, 438, 152–162 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ali, J. M. Zhang, I. Muhammad, X. M. Wei, Y. H. Huang, M. U. Rehman and I. Ahmad, Effects of 5d transition metals doping on the structural, electronic and magnetic properties of monolayer SnS2, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 138045 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Xiao, G. Xiao, Q. Y. Rong and L. L. Wang, Electronic and magnetic properties of SnS2 monolayer doped with non-magnetic elements, Phys. E, 2018, 99, 182–188 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Sarojaa, I. K. Punithavathyb, S. J. Jeyakumarb and S. J. Gnanamuthub, Structural
and magnetic properties of Mn doped Sn2S3 thin film, Asia Pac. J. Res., 2016, 2320, 5504 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhao, Q. Lu, Y. Liu and M. Zhang, Tuned optical and magnetic properties of Ce3+ doped SnS2 quantum dots, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 072403 CrossRef .
D. Prabha, S. Ilangovan, S. Balamurugan, M. Suganya, S. Anitha, V. S. Nagarethinam and A. R. Balu, Spectroscopic, magnetic and antibacterial properties of Sr-doped SnS2 nanopowders, Optik, 2017, 142, 301–310 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. Zhu and M. Zhang, Magnetic and optical properties of two-dimensional SnS2 nanosheets doped with Ho ions, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 481, 1370–1376 CrossRef CAS .
N. Higashitarumizu, H. Kawamoto, M. Nakamura, K. Shimamura, N. Ohashi, K. Ueno and K. Nagashio, Self-passivated ultra-thin SnS layers via mechanical exfoliation and post-oxidation, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22474–22483 RSC .
D. De, J. Manongdo, S. See, V. Zhang, A. Guloy and H. Peng, High on/off ratio field effect transistors based on exfoliated crystalline SnS2 nano-membranes, Nanotechnology, 2012, 24, 025202 CrossRef .
J. Liu, C. Xia, H. Li and A. Pan, High on/off ratio photosensitive field effect transistors based on few layer SnS2, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 34LT01 CrossRef .
H. Tao, Y. Zhang, Y. Gao, Z. Sun, C. Yan and J. Texter, Scalable exfoliation and dispersion of two-dimensional materials-an update, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 921–960 RSC .
J. R. Brent, D. J. Lewis, T. Lorenz, E. A. Lewis, N. Savjani, S. J. Haigh, G. Seifert, B. Derby and P. O’Brien, Tin(II) sulfide (SnS) nanosheets by liquid-phase exfoliation of herzenbergite: IV–VI main group two-dimensional atomic crystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12689–12696 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Sarkar, A. Mushtaq, D. Kushavah and S. K. Pal, Liquid exfoliation of electronic grade ultrathin tin(II) sulfide (SnS) with intriguing optical response, NPJ 2D Mater. Appl., 2020, 4, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, F. Chen, Z. Wang, S. Huang, Y. Jiang and Z. Chen, Lithiation-assisted exfoliation and reduction of SnS2 to SnS decorated on lithium-integrated graphene for efficient energy storage, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17922–17932 RSC .
Z. Qin, K. Xu, H. Yue, H. Wang, J. Zhang, C. Ouyang, C. Xie and D. Zeng, Enhanced room-temperature NH3 gas sensing by 2D SnS2 with sulfur vacancies synthesized by chemical exfoliation, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 262, 771–779 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cho, Y. Park, Y. K. Hong and D. H. Ha, Ion exchange: an advanced synthetic method for complex nanoparticles, Nano Convergence, 2019, 6, 17 CrossRef .
X. Cheng, J. Liu, X. Wan, H. Wang, Y. Li, J. Liu, H. Rong, M. Xu, W. Chen and J. Zhang, Phosphine ligand-mediated kinetics manipulation of aqueous cation exchange: a case study on the synthesis of Au@SnSx core–shell nanocrystals for photoelectrochemical water splitting, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9993–9996 RSC .
H. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Ge, Z. Chi, H. Chen, H. Wu, C. Cao and X. Duan, General strategy for two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides by ion exchange, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 10019–10026 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guan, X. Fu, B. Zhang, M. Lei and Z. Peng, Cation-exchange-assisted formation of NiS/SnS2 porous nanowalls with ultrahigh energy density for battery-supercapacitor hybrid devices, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3300–3310 RSC .
D. Wang, Z. Pan, Z. Wu, Z. Wang and Z. Liu, Hydrothermal synthesis of MoS2 nanoflowers as highly efficient hydrogen evolution reaction catalysts, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Iqbal, M. Z. Iqbal, M. F. Khan, M. A. Shehzad, Y. Seo, J. H. Park, C. Hwang and J. Eom, High-mobility and air-stable single-layer WS2 field-effect transistors sandwiched between chemical vapor deposition-grown hexagonal BN films, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10699 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Z. Wang, X. Du, M. Safdar, C. Jiang and J. He, Atomic-layer triangular WSe2 sheets: synthesis and layer-dependent photoluminescence property, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 465705 CrossRef .
S. Feng and R. Xu, New materials in hydrothermal synthesis, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 239–247 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhorde, A. Pawbake, P. Sharma, S. Nair, A. Funde, P. Bankar, M. More and S. Jadkar, Solvothermal synthesis of tin sulfide (SnS) nanorods and investigation of its field emission properties, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2018, 124, 133 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, D. Yang and H. Zhang, Hydrothermal synthesis, characterization and properties of SnS nanoflowers, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 2686–2689 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Rajwar and S. K. Sharma, Characterization of hydrothermally synthesized SnS nanoparticles for solar cell application, AIP Conf. Proc., 2018, 1953, 030065 CrossRef .
H. Tian, C. Fan, G. Liu, Y. Zhang, M. Wang and E. Li, Hydrothermal synthesis and fast photoresponsive characterization of SnS2 hexagonal nanoflakes, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 2059–2065 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guan, J. Li, X. Gao, Y. Xie and C. Yuan, Growth characteristics and influencing factors of 3D hierarchical flower-like SnS2 nanostructures and their superior lithium-ion intercalation performance, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 658, 190–197 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xue, X. Yan, H. An, H. Li, J. Wei and G. Yang, Bonding CdS-Sn2S3 eutectic clusters on graphene nanosheets with unusually photoreaction-driven structural reconfiguration effect for excellent H2 evolution and Cr(vi) reduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 222, 157–166 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, L. Ma, X. Zhou, Y. Ling, X. Wang and M. Chen, Hierarchical flower-like SnS grafted with glucosamine-derived nitrogen-doped carbon with enhanced reversible Li-storage performance, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 458, 86–94 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Sun, Z. Gao, X. Hu, R. Ling, S. Cai, C. Zheng and W. Hu, A Simple One-Pot Strategy for Synthesizing Ultrafine SnS2 Nanoparticle/Graphene Composites as Anodes for Lithium/Sodium-Ion Batteries, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1549–1557 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhang, L. Yao, G. Zhang, D. D. Dionysiou, J. Li and X. Du, One-step hydrothermal synthesis of high-performance visible-light-driven SnS2/SnO2 nanoheterojunction photocatalyst for the reduction of aqueous Cr(VI), Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 730–738 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, R. Hu, J. Zhang, Z. Huang, H. Qiao, L. Gong and X. Qi, 2D/2D SnS2/MoS2 layered heterojunction for enhanced supercapacitor performance, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2020, 103, 1088–1096 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Mishra, N. Bhatt and A. K. Bajpai, in Nanomaterials-Based Coatings, ed. P. N. Tri, S. Rtimi and M. Claudiane, Elsevier,  2019, ch. 12, pp. 397–424 Search PubMed .

          S. K. Sahoo, B. Manoharan and N. Sivakumar, in Perovskite Photovoltaics, ed. S. Thomas and A. Thankappan, Academic Press,  2018, ch. 1, pp. 1–24 Search PubMed .

          B. S. Yilbas, A. Al-Sharafi and H. Ali, Self-Cleaning of Surfaces and Water Droplet Mobility, Elsevier,  2019 Search PubMed .
S. Banu, S. J. Ahn, Y. J. Eo, J. Gwak and A. Cho, Tin monosulfide (SnS) thin films grown by liquid-phase deposition, Sol. Energy, 2017, 145, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Reddy, M. C. Sekhar, S. P. Vattikuti, Y. Suh and S. H. Park, Solution-based spin-coated tin sulfide thin films for photovoltaic and supercapacitor applications, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 103, 13–18 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Chaki, H. J. Joshi, J. P. Tailor and M. P. Deshpande, Study of SnS2 thin film deposited by spin coating technique, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4, 076402 CrossRef .
U. S. Mohanty, Electrodeposition: a versatile and inexpensive tool for the synthesis of nanoparticles, nanorods, nanowires, and nanoclusters of metals, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 257–270 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vikraman, S. Thiagarajan, K. Karuppasamy, A. Sanmugam, J. H. Choi, K. Prasanna, T. Maiyalagan, M. Thaiyan and H. S. Kim, Shape-and size-tunable synthesis of tin sulfide thin films for energy applications by electrodeposition, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 479, 167–176 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kafashan, F. Jamali-Sheini, R. Ebrahimi-Kahrizsangi and R. Yousefi, Influence of growth conditions on the electrochemical synthesis of SnS thin films and their optical properties, Int. J. Miner., Metall. Mater., 2016, 23, 348–357 CrossRef CAS .
F. Niknia, F. Jamali-Sheini and R. Yousefi, Examining the effect of Zn dopant on physical properties of nanostructured SnS thin film by using electrodeposition, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2016, 46, 323–330 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jamali-Sheini, F. Niknia, M. Cheraghizade, R. Yousefi and M. R. Mahmoudian, Broad spectral response of Se-doped SnS nanorods synthesized through electrodeposition, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1478–1486 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Lasisi, O. A. Babalola, B. A. Taleatu, A. B. Alabi, E. Omotoso and T. Akomolafe, Synthesis and characterization of electrodeposited tin disulphide (SnS2) thin films for photovoltaic application, Int. J. Mater. Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, 188 CAS .
B. Chen, X. Xu, F. Wang, J. Liu and J. Ji, Electrochemical preparation and characterization of three-dimensional nanostructured Sn2S3 semiconductor films with nanorod network, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 400–402 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Pawar, B. S. Pawar, J. H. Kim, O. S. Joo and C. D. Lokhande, Recent status of chemical bath deposited metal chalcogenide and metal oxide thin films, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, 117–161 CrossRef .
S. H. Chaki, M. D. Chaudhary and M. P. Deshpande, SnS thin films deposited by chemical bath deposition, dip coating and SILAR techniques, J. Semicond., 2016, 37, 053001 CrossRef .
S. Gedi, V. R. Reddy, B. Pejjai, C. W. Jeon, C. Park and K. T. R. Reddy, A facile inexpensive route for SnS thin film solar cells with SnS2 buffer, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 372, 116–124 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, X. Yin, Q. Hao, M. Zhang, L. Li, L. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Wang and T. Wang, Chemical bath deposition of SnS2 nanowall arrays with improved electrochemical performance for lithium ion battery, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 2350–2353 CrossRef CAS .
E. Güneri, F. Göde, B. Boyarbay and C. Gümüş, Structural and optical studies of chemically deposited Sn2S3 thin films, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 3738–3742 CrossRef .
P. Noppakuadrittidej, V. Vailikhit, P. Teesetsopon, S. Choopun and A. Tubtimtae, Copper incorporation in Mn2+-doped Sn2S3 nanocrystals and the resultant structural, optical, and electrochemical characteristics, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 13973–13985 CrossRef CAS .

          P. V. Shinde, M. Saxena and M. K. Singh, in Fundamentals and Sensing Applications of 2D Materials, ed. M. Hywel, C. S. Rout and D. J. Late, Woodhead Publishing,  2019, ch. 11, pp. 407–436 Search PubMed .
L. S. Price, I. P. Parkin, A. M. Hardy, R. J. Clark, T. G. Hibbert and K. C. Molloy, Atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition of tin sulfides (SnS, Sn2S3, and SnS2) on glass, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 1792–1799 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guc, J. Andrade-Arvizu, I. Y. Ahmet, F. Oliva, M. Placidi, X. Alcobé, E. Saucedo, A. Pérez-Rodríguez, A. L. Johnson and V. Izquierdo-Roca, Structural and vibrational properties of α-and π-SnS polymorphs for photovoltaic applications, Acta Mater., 2020, 183, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
I. Y. Ahmet, M. Guc, Y. Sánchez, M. Neuschitzer, V. Izquierdo-Roca, E. Saucedo and A. L. Johnson, Evaluation of AA-CVD deposited phase pure polymorphs of SnS for thin films solar cells, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 14899–14909 RSC .
D. Yu, Q. Li, A. Wei, Y. Zhao, J. Liu and Z. Xiao, Synthesis and characterization of the ultra-thin SnS flakes and the micron-thick SnS crystals by chemical vapor deposition, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 10879–10885 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, P. Zhang, H. Jiang, X. Wang, F. Chen, Z. Hu, Y. Gong, L. Shang, J. Zhang, K. Jiang and J. Chu, Large-Scale Growth and Field-Effect Transistors Electrical Engineering of Atomic-Layer SnS2, Small, 2019, 15, 1904116 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shao, X. X. Xue, X. Zhou, J. Xu, Y. Jin, S. Qi, N. Liu, H. Duan, S. Wang, S. Li and M. Ouzounian, Shape-Engineered Synthesis of Atomically Thin 1T-SnS2 Catalyzed by Potassium Halides, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8265–8274 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Chang, Y. Sheng, T. Chen, N. Mkhize, Y. Lu, H. Bhaskaran and J. H. Warner, Morphology Control of Two-Dimensional Tin Disulfide on Transition Metal Dichalcogenides Using Chemical Vapor Deposition for Nanoelectronic Applications, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 4222–4231 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Olding, A. Henning, J. T. Dong, Q. Zhou, M. J. Moody, P. J. Smeets, P. Darancet, E. A. Weiss and L. J. Lauhon, Charge Separation in Epitaxial SnS/MoS2 Vertical Heterojunctions Grown by Low-Temperature Pulsed MOCVD, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40543–40550 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, Y. Yan, X. Song, A. Dong, J. Su and H. Jia, One-Step CVD Synthesis of Few-Layer SnS2/MoS2 Vertical Heterostructures, NANO, 2019, 14, 1950129 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zribi, L. Khalil, B. Zheng, J. Avila, D. Pierucci, T. Brulé, J. Chaste, E. Lhuillier, M. C. Asensio, A. Pan and A. Ouerghi, Strong interlayer hybridization in the aligned SnS2/WSe2 hetero-bilayer structure, NPJ 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leskelä and M. Ritala, Atomic layer deposition (ALD): from precursors to thin film structures, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 409, 138–146 CrossRef .
S. M. George, Atomic layer deposition: an overview, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 111–131 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Baek, J. J. Pyeon, Y. G. Song, T. M. Chung, H. R. Kim, S. H. Baek, J. S. Kim, C. Y. Kang, J. W. Choi, C. S. Hwang and J. H. Han, Synthesis of SnS thin films by atomic layer deposition at low temperatures, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8100–8110 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lee, G. Lee, H. Choi, H. Park, Y. Choi, K. Kim, Y. Choi, J. W. Kim, H. Yuk, O. Sul and S. B. Lee, Atomic layer deposition growth of SnS2 films on diluted buffered oxide etchant solution-treated substrate, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 496, 143689 CrossRef CAS .
R. Browning, P. Plachinda, P. Padigi, R. Solanki and S. Rouvimov, Growth of multiple WS2/SnS layered semiconductor heterojunctions, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2143–2148 RSC .
D. Guan, L. Ma, D. Pan, J. Li, X. Gao, Y. Xie, M. Qiu and C. Yuan, Atomic layer deposition of alumina coatings onto SnS2 for lithium-ion battery applications, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 242, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
W. Seo, S. Shin, G. Ham, J. Lee, S. Lee, H. Choi and H. Jeon, Thickness-dependent structure and properties of SnS2 thin films prepared by atomic layer deposition, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 56, 031201 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim and S. M. George, Tin monosulfide thin films grown by atomic layer deposition using tin 2,4-pentanedionate and hydrogen sulfide, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17597–17603 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ham, S. Shin, J. Park, H. Choi, J. Kim, Y. A. Lee, H. Seo and H. Jeon, Tuning the electronic structure of tin sulfides grown by atomic layer deposition, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8889–8896 CrossRef CAS .

          N. T. Nguyen, Micro and Nano Technologies, Oxford, William Andrew Publishing,  2012, ch. 4, pp. 113–161 Search PubMed .
F. Jamali-Sheini, M. Cheraghizade and R. Yousefi, SnS nanosheet films deposited via thermal evaporation: the effects of buffer layers on photovoltaic performance, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 154, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, G. Liu, H. Tian, C. Fan, M. Wang and E. Li, Facile synthesis of tin monosulfide nanosheets via physical vapour deposition and their near-infrared photoresponse, AIP Adv., 2019, 9, 095205 CrossRef .
C. Shi, Z. Chen, G. Shi, R. Sun, X. Zhan and X. Shen, Influence of annealing on characteristics of tin disulfide thin films by vacuum thermal evaporation, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 4898–4901 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Schmidt, M. Binnewies, R. Glaum and M. Schmidt, in Advanced Topics on Crystal Growth, ed. S. Ferreira, InTech, Rijeka, Croatia,  2013, ch. 9, pp. 227–305 Search PubMed .
A. Ubaldini and E. Giannini, Improved chemical vapor transport growth of transition metal dichalcogenides, J. Cryst. Growth, 2014, 401, 878–882 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Whittles, L. A. Burton, J. M. Skelton, A. Walsh, T. D. Veal and V. R. Dhanak, Band alignments, valence bands, and core levels in the tin sulfides SnS, SnS2, and Sn2S3: experiment and theory, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3718–3726 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ying, X. Li, Y. Wu, Y. Yao, J. Xi, W. Su, C. Jin, M. Xu, Z. He and Q. Zhang, High-performance ultra-violet phototransistors based on CVT-grown high quality SnS2 flakes, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 3973–3979 RSC .
A. Degrauw, R. Armstrong, A. A. Rahman, J. Ogle and L. Whittaker-Brooks, Catalytic growth of vertically aligned SnS/SnS2 p–n heterojunctions, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4, 094002 CrossRef .
D. J. Eaglesham, Semiconductor molecular-beam epitaxy at low temperatures, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 77, 3597–3617 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Ptak, in Handbook of Crystal Growth, ed. T. F. Kuech, North-Holland, 2nd edn,  2015, ch. 4, pp. 161–192 Search PubMed .
S. F. Wang, W. K. Fong, W. Wang and C. Surya, Growth of highly textured SnS on mica using an SnSe buffer layer, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 564, 206–212 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, K. K. Leung, W. K. Fong, S. F. Wang, Y. Y. Hui, S. P. Lau, Z. Chen, L. J. Shi, C. B. Cao and C. Surya, Molecular beam epitaxy growth of high quality p-doped SnS van der Waals epitaxy on a graphene buffer layer, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 093520 CrossRef .
R. Schlaf, D. Louder, O. Lang, C. Pettenkofer, W. Jaegermann, K. W. Nebesny, P. A. Lee, B. A. Parkinson and N. R. Armstrong, Molecular beam epitaxy growth of thin films of SnS2 and SnSe2 on cleaved mica and the basal planes of single-crystal layered semiconductors: reflection high-energy electron diffraction, low-energy electron diffraction, photoemission, and scanning tunneling microscopy/atomic force microscopy characterization, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1995, 13, 1761–1767 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Nebesny, G. E. Collins, P. A. Lee, L. K. Chau, J. Danziger, E. Osburn and N. R. Armstrong, Organic/inorganic-molecular beam epitaxy: formation of an ordered phthalocyanine/tin(IV) sulfide heterojunction, Chem. Mater., 1991, 3, 829–838 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Jung, S. B. Park and Y. C. Kang, Design of particles by spray pyrolysis and recent progress in its application, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2010, 27, 1621–1645 CrossRef CAS .
D. Perednis and L. J. Gauckler, Thin film deposition using spray pyrolysis, J. Electroceram., 2005, 14, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sall, B. M. Soucase, M. Mollar and J. A. Sans, SnS thin films prepared by chemical spray pyrolysis at different substrate temperatures for photovoltaic applications, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 1714–1719 CrossRef CAS .
B. Thangaraju and P. Kaliannan, Spray pyrolytic deposition and characterization of SnS and SnS2 thin films, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2000, 33, 1054 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sebastian, I. Kulandaisamy, S. Valanarasu, N. Soundaram, K. Paulraj, D. Vikraman and H. S. Kim, Investigations on Fe doped SnS thin films by nebulizer spray pyrolysis technique for solar cell applications, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 8024–8034 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Ninan, C. SudhaKartha and K. P. Vijayakumar, Synthesis Of Spray Pyrolysed Copper Doped Tin Sulfide (SnS:Cu) Thin Films By Optimizing The Anionic Precursor Molarity, Mater. Today: Proc., 2019, 8, 352–356 Search PubMed .
O. A. Yassin, A. A. Abdelaziz and A. Y. Jaber, Structural and optical characterization of V-and W-doped SnS2 thin films prepared by spray pyrolysis, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 38, 81–86 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Fadavieslam and A. Kazemi, Influence of Ag concentration on the structure, optical and electrical properties of SnS2:Ag thin films prepared by spray pyrolysis deposition, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 3970–3977 CrossRef CAS .
R. Etefagh, N. Shahtahmassebi, M. R. Benam and M. M. Mohagheghi, Effect of Zn-doping on absorption coefficient and photo-conductivity of SnS2 thin films deposited by spray pyrolysis technique, Indian J. Phys., 2014, 88, 563–570 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Arulanantham, S. Valanarasu, S. R. Rosario, A. Kathalingam, M. Shkir, V. Ganesh and I. S. Yahia, Investigation on nebulizer spray coated Nd-doped SnS2 thin films for solar cell window layer application, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 13964–13973 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Saroja, I. K. Punithavathy, S. J. Jeyakumar, A. R. Balu and S. J. Gnanamuthu, Effect of Co doping on the physical properties of Sn2S3 thin film, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 11464–11472 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Gnanamuthu, I. K. Punithavathy, S. J. Jeyakumar, P. J. Prabhakar, K. Parasuraman, V. S. Nagarethinam, K. Usharani and A. R. Balu, Investigations on the properties of nanostructured Mg-Doped Sn2S3 thin films towards photovoltaic applications, Acta Phys. Pol., A, 2018, 133 DOI:10.12693/APhysPolA.133.15 .
M. G. Sousa and A. F. da Cunha, High SnS phase purity films produced by rapid thermal processing of RF-magnetron sputtered SnS2−x precursors, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 472, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Son, D. Shin, Y. G. Son, C. S. Son, D. R. Kim, J. H. Park, S. Kim, D. Hwang and P. Song, Effect of working pressure on the properties of RF sputtered SnS thin films and photovoltaic performance of SnS-based solar cells, Superlattices Microstruct., 2018, 122, 253–261 CrossRef .
V. K. Arepalli, Y. Shin and J. Kim, Influence of working pressure on the structural, optical, and electrical properties of RF-sputtered SnS thin films, Superlattices Microstruct., 2018, 122, 253–61 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ceylan, Synthesis of SnS thin films via high vacuum sulfidation of sputtered Sn thin films, Mater. Lett., 2017, 201, 194–197 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Banai, J. C. Cordell, G. Lindwall, N. J. Tanen, S. L. Shang, J. R. Nasr, Z. K. Liu, J. R. Brownson and M. W. Horn, Control of phase in tin sulfide thin films produced via RF-sputtering of SnS2 target with post-deposition annealing, J. Electron. Mater., 2016, 45, 499–508 CrossRef CAS .
M. Isik, H. H. Gullu, M. Terlemezoglu, O. B. Surucu, M. Parlak and N. M. Gasanly, Investigation of band gap energy versus temperature for SnS2 thin films grown by RF-magnetron sputtering, Phys. B, 2020, 591, 412264 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Baby and D. B. Mohan, The effect of in situ and post deposition annealing towards the structural optimization studies of RF sputtered SnS and Sn2S3 thin films for solar cell application, Sol. Energy, 2019, 189, 207–218 CrossRef CAS .

          E. B. Gutoff and E. D. Cohen, in Multilayer Flexible Packaging, ed. J. R. Wagner Jr., William Andrew Publishing, 2nd edn,  2016, ch. 14, pp. 205–234 Search PubMed .
A. Jariwala, T. K. Chaudhuri, A. Toshniwal, S. Patel, V. Kheraj and A. Ray, SnS2 films deposited from molecular ink as Cd-free alternative buffer layer for solar cells, AIP Conf. Proc., 2018, 1961, 030026 CrossRef .
S. K. Panda, A. Antonakos, E. Liarokapis, S. Bhattacharya and S. Chaudhuri, Optical properties of nanocrystalline SnS2 thin films, Mater. Res. Bull., 2007, 42, 576–583 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, D. Kocaefe, C. Chen and Y. Kocaefe, Review of research on template methods in preparation of nanomaterials, J. Nanomater., 2016, 2016 DOI:10.1155/2016/2302595 .
Y. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Templated synthesis of nanostructured materials, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610–2653 RSC .
J. Ren, R. P. Ren and Y. K. Lv, Hollow spheres constructed by ultrathin SnS sheets for enhanced lithium storage, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 1–10 Search PubMed .
M. Liang, T. Borjigin, Y. Zhang, H. Liu, B. Liu and H. Guo, 
            Z-Scheme Au@Void@g-C3N4/SnS Yolk–Shell Heterostructures for Superior Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction under Visible Light, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34123–34131 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xie, H. Zhou, Z. Lv, H. Liu and H. Guo, Sn4+ self-doped hollow cubic SnS as an efficient
visible-light photocatalyst for Cr(VI) reduction and detoxification of cyanide, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6299–6309 RSC .
D. Chen, G. Z. Shen, K. B. Tang, Y. K. Liu and Y. T. Qian, Aligned SnS2 nanotubes fabricated via a template-assisted solvent-relief process, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2003, 77, 747–749 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Y. Yu, Y. Fang, X. Zhu, J. Bao, X. Zhou and X. W. Lou, Confining SnS2 ultrathin nanosheets in hollow carbon nanostructures for efficient capacitive sodium storage, Joule, 2018, 2, 725–735 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Liang, T. W. Lung and N. C. Xu, Photoexcited properties of tin sulfide nanosheet-decorated ZnO nanorod heterostructures, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kergommeaux, M. Lopez-Haro, S. Pouget, J. M. Zuo, C. Lebrun, F. Chandezon, D. Aldakov and P. Reiss, Synthesis, internal structure, and formation mechanism of monodisperse tin sulfide nanoplatelets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9943–9952 CrossRef .
B. K. Patra, S. Sarkar, A. K. Guria and N. Pradhan, Monodisperse SnS nanocrystals: in just 5 seconds, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3929–3934 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, K. Zhang, H. Lin, X. Li, H. C. Chan, L. Yang and Q. Gao, MoS2–Ni3S2 heteronanorods as efficient and stable bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall water splitting, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2357–2366 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T. K. Sham, L. M. Liu and G. A. Botton, Platinum single-atom and cluster catalysis of the hydrogen evolution reaction, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
X. Chia, P. Lazar, Z. Sofer, J. Luxa and M. Pumera, Layered SnS versus SnS2: valence and structural implications on electrochemistry and clean energy electrocatalysis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 24098–24111 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Y. Qiu, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Chen, M. Dai, D. Jia, Y. Zhou, Z. Li and P. Hu, Efficiently synergistic hydrogen evolution realized by trace amount of Pt-decorated defect-rich SnS2 nanosheets, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37750–37759 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shinde, A. Sami, D. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Nanostructured SnS-N-doped graphene as an advanced electrocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15716–15719 RSC .
L. Hu, X. F. Song, S. L. Zhang, H. B. Zeng, X. J. Zhang, R. Marks and D. Shan, MoS2 nanoparticles coupled to SnS2 nanosheets: The structural and electronic modulation for synergetic electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, J. Catal., 2018, 366, 8–15 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ali, X. Wang, K. Tang, Q. Li, S. Sajjad, S. Khan, S. A. Farooqi and C. Yan, SnS2 quantum dots growth on MoS2: Atomic-level heterostructure for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 300, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, X. Wang, M. Lao, K. Rui, X. Zheng, H. Yu, J. Ma, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Electrocatalytically inactive SnS2 promotes water adsorption/dissociation on molybdenum dichalcogenides for accelerated alkaline hydrogen evolution, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103918 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Electrocatalysis for the oxygen evolution reaction: recent development and future perspectives, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
M. Jiang, Y. Huang, W. Sun and X. Zhang, Co-doped SnS2 nanosheet array for efficient oxygen evolution reaction electrocatalyst, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 13715–13723 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, H. Liu, T. Lv and M. Ding, Synergistic effect of the valence bond environment and exposed crystal facets of the TiO2/SnS2 heterojunction for achieving enhanced electrocatalytic oxygen evolution, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3488–3499 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Song and Y. Xia, Electrochemical capacitors: mechanism, materials, systems, characterization and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5925–5950 RSC .
S. Wu, R. Ge, M. Lu, R. Xu and Z. Zhang, Graphene-based nano-materials for lithium–sulfur battery and sodium-ion battery, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 379–405 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Hou, A. Ciesielski and P. Samorì, 2D materials beyond graphene for high-performance energy storage applications, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600671 CrossRef .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, P. Yang, X. Xia, L. Liu, J. Wang, X. Fan, S. V. Savilov, J. Lin, H. J. Fan and Z. X. Shen, Array of nanosheets render ultrafast and high-capacity Na-ion storage by tunable pseudocapacitance, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–8 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, J. Peng, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Dai, M. Zhu, L. Xia and F. Yu, Two-dimensional SnS2@PANI nanoplates with high capacity and excellent stability for lithium-ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3659–3666 RSC .
K. Chang, Z. Wang, G. Huang, H. Li, W. Chen and J. Y. Lee, Few-layer SnS2/graphene hybrid with exceptional electrochemical performance as lithium-ion battery anode, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 259–266 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, R. Guo, M. Jiang, Y. Zhang, X. Lai, C. Cui, H. Xiao, S. Jiang, E. Ren and Q. Qin, Construction of Ti3C2 MXene@C@SnS with layered rock stratum structure for high-performance lithium storage, J. Power Sources, 2020, 462, 228152 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, L. Hao, X. Wang, Y. Jiang, X. Xie, R. Yang and M. Cao, Toward understanding the enhanced pseudocapacitive storage in 3D SnS/MXene architecture enabled by engineered surface reactions, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020 DOI:10.1002/chem.202000795 .
L. Zhao, G. Chen, T. Yan, J. Zhang, L. Shi and D. Zhang, Sandwich-Like C@SnS@TiO2 Anodes with High Power and Long Cycle for Li-Ion Storage, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 5857–5865 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, D. Song, Y. Ding, J. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Jiang and J. Zhang, Ultrastable Li-ion battery anode by encapsulating SnS nanoparticles in sulfur-doping graphene bubble film, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3941–3949 RSC .
G. K. Veerasubramani, M. S. Park, J. Y. Choi and D. W. Kim, Ultrasmall SnS Quantum Dots Anchored onto Nitrogen-Enriched Carbon Nanospheres as an Advanced Anode Material for Sodium-Ion Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7114–7124 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xia, L. Liu, S. Jamil, J. Xie, H. Yan, Y. Yuan, Y. Zhang, S. Nie, J. Pan, X. Wang and G. Cao, Free-standing SnS/C nanofiber anodes for ultralong cycle-life lithium-ion batteries and sodium-ion batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 17, 1–11 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, W. Kang, P. Ma, D. Cao, D. Cao, Z. Kang and D. Sun, SnS@C nanospheres coated with few-layer MoS2 nanosheets and nitrogen, phosphorus-codoped carbon as robust sodium ion battery anodes, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1212–1221 RSC .
X. Gao, X. Yang, M. Li, Q. Sun, J. Liang, J. Luo, J. Wang, W. Li, J. Liang, Y. Liu and S. Wang, Cobalt-Doped SnS2 with Dual Active Centers of Synergistic Absorption-Catalysis Effect for High-S Loading Li–S Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806724 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, D. Song, J. Wu, Z. Wang, S. Huang, Y. Xu, Z. Chen, B. Zhao and J. Zhang, Sandwich-like SnS2/graphene/SnS2 with expanded interlayer distance as high-rate lithium/sodium-ion battery anode materials, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9100–9111 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Bin, S. Y. Duan, X. J. Lin, L. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. S. Xu, Y. G. Sun, X. S. Tao, A. M. Cao and L. J. Wan, Structural engineering of SnS2/Graphene nanocomposite for high-performance K-ion battery anode, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 912–918 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. Zhou, W. Li, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Layered SnS2 cross-linked by carbon nanotubes as a high performance anode for sodium ion batteries, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 35197–35202 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Wen, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, 
            In situ reduction and coating of SnS2 nanobelts for free-standing SnS@polypyrrole-nanobelt/carbon-nanotube paper electrodes with superior Li-ion storage, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5259–5265 RSC .
L. Mei, C. Xu, T. Yang, J. Ma, L. Chen, Q. Li and T. Wang, Superior electrochemical performance of ultrasmall SnS2 nanocrystals decorated on flexible RGO in lithium-ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8658–8664 RSC .
J. Lu, S. Zhao, S. Fan, Q. Lv, J. Li and R. Lv, Hierarchical SnS/SnS2 heterostructures grown on carbon cloth as binder-free anode for superior sodium-ion storage, Carbon, 2019, 148, 525–531 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Han, Y. Li, J. Li, G. Zhu, X. Zhang, T. Lu and L. Pan, MXene-decorated SnS2/Sn3S4 hybrid as anode material for high-rate lithium-ion batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122590 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, F. Li, F. Zhu and O. G. Schmidt, Recent progress in micro-supercapacitor design, integration, and functionalization, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800367 Search PubMed .
A. M. Patil, V. C. Lokhande, U. M. Patil, P. A. Shinde and C. D. Lokhande, High performance all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor device based on 3D Nanospheres of β-MnO2 and Nanoflowers of O–SnS, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 787–802 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chauhan, M. K. Singh, S. A. Hashmi and S. Deka, Synthesis of surfactant-free SnS nanorods by a solvothermal route with better electrochemical properties towards supercapacitor applications, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 17228–17235 RSC .
C. Liu, S. Zhao, Y. Lu, Y. Chang, D. Xu, Q. Wang, Z. Dai, J. Bao and M. Han, 3D Porous Nanoarchitectures Derived from SnS/S-Doped Graphene Hybrid Nanosheets for Flexible All-Solid-State Supercapacitors, Small, 2017, 13, 1603494 CrossRef .
H. Chu, F. Zhang, L. Pei, Z. Cui, J. Shen and M. Ye, Ni,
Co and Mn doped SnS2-graphene aerogels for supercapacitors, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 767, 583–591 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hatui, G. C. Nayak, G. Udayabhanu, Y. K. Mishra and D. D. Pathak, Template-free single pot synthesis of SnS2@Cu2O/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanoflowers for high performance supercapacitors, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 2702–2716 RSC .
S. P. Lonkar, V. V. Pillai, S. P. Patole and S. M. Alhassan, Scalable in situ synthesis of 2D–2D-type graphene-wrapped SnS2 nanohybrids for enhanced supercapacitor and electrocatalytic applications, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4995–5005 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Burton, T. J. Whittles, D. Hesp, W. M. Linhart, J. M. Skelton, B. Hou, R. F. Webster, G. O'Dowd, C. Reece, D. Cherns and D. J. Fermin, Electronic and optical properties of single crystal SnS2: an earth-abundant disulfide photocatalyst, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1312–1318 RSC .
Y. Jiang, Z. Yang, P. Zhang, H. Jin and Y. Ding, Natural assembly of a ternary Ag–SnS–TiO2 photocatalyst and its photocatalytic performance under simulated sunlight, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 13408–13416 RSC .
S. R. Kadam, S. Ghosh, R. Bar-Ziv and M. Bar-Sadan, Structural Transformation of SnS2 to SnS by Mo Doping Produces Electro/Photocatalyst for Hydrogen Production, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 6679–6685 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, Z. Yang, D. D. Dionysiou and A. Zhu, Exceptional synergistic enhancement of the photocatalytic activity of SnS2 by coupling with polyaniline and N-doped reduced graphene oxide, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 236, 53–63 CrossRef CAS .
V. Govindan, L. Kashinath, D. J. Daniel and K. Sankaranarayanan, Sol–gel mediated microwave synthesis of pure, La and Zr doped SnS2 nanoflowers an efficient photocatalyst for the degradation of methylene blue, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 7963–7973 CrossRef CAS .
T. Di, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu and J. Xu, A direct Z-scheme g-C3N4/SnS2 photocatalyst with superior visible-light CO2 reduction performance, J. Catal., 2017, 352, 532–541 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yin, J. Li, L. Sun, X. Li, D. Shen, X. Song, P. Huo, H. Wang and Y. Yan, Construction of Heterogenous S–C–S MoS2/SnS2/r-GO Heterojunction for Efficient CO2 Photoreduction, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 15590–15601 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Wang, D. Wang and M. Chen, Ultra-small Sn2S3 porous nano-particles: an excellent photo-catalyst in the reduction of aqueous Cr(VI) under visible light irradiation, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 12286–12289 RSC .
Y. Huo, J. Zhang, K. Dai, Q. Li, J. Lv, G. Zhu and C. Liang, All-solid-state artificial Z-scheme porous g-C3N4/Sn2S3-DETA heterostructure photocatalyst with enhanced performance in photocatalytic CO2 reduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 528–538 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, L. Gan, Q. Zhang, X. Xiong, H. Li, Z. Zhong, J. Han and T. Zhai, High performance near-infrared photodetectors based on ultrathin SnS nanobelts grown via physical vapor deposition, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2111–2116 RSC .
Z. Zhang, J. Yang, K. Zhang, S. Chen, F. Mei and G. Shen, Anisotropic photoresponse of layered 2D SnS-based near infrared photodetectors, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11288–11293 RSC .
H. Tian, C. Fan, G. Liu, S. Yuan, Y. Zhang, M. Wang and E. Li, Ultrafast broadband photodetector based on SnS synthesized by hydrothermal method, Appl. Surf.
Sci., 2019, 487, 1043–1048 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Y. Li, B. Li, H. Tian, C. Fan, Y. Zhang, Z. Hua, M. Wang, H. Zheng and E. Li, High-performance photodetectors based on two-dimensional tin(II) sulfide (SnS) nanoflakes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10036–10041 RSC .
Y. Chang, J. Wang, F. Wu, W. Tian and W. Zhai, Structural Design and Pyroelectric Property of SnS/CdS Heterojunctions Contrived for Low-Temperature Visible Photodetectors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2001450 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jamali-Sheini, M. Cheraghizade and L. Heshmatynezhad, An efficient wide range photodetector fabricated using a bilayer Bi2S3/SnS heterojunction thin film, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2019, 34, 045008 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Khimani, S. H. Chaki, S. M. Chauhan and M. P. Deshpande, Influence of deposition techniques on quality and photodetection properties of tin disulfide (SnS2) thin films, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 13118–13133 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Hosseini, A. Esfandiar, A. Iraji Zad, S. H. Hosseini-Shokouh and S. M. Mahdavi, High-photoresponsive backward diode by two-dimensional SnS2/Silicon heterostructure, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 728–734 CrossRef CAS .
A. Li, Q. Chen, P. Wang, Y. Gan, T. Qi, P. Wang, F. Tang, J. Z. Wu, R. Chen, L. Zhang and Y. Gong, Ultrahigh-sensitive broadband photodetectors based on dielectric shielded MoTe2/Graphene/SnS2 p–g–n junctions, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805656 Search PubMed .
Y. Lei, J. Luo, X. Yang, T. Cai, R. Qi, L. Gu and Z. Zheng, Thermal evaporation of large area SnS2 thin films with a UV-to-NIR photoelectric response for flexible photodetector applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 24940–24950 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Chung, A. N. Wang and S. Y. Peng, An enzymatic glucose sensor composed of carbon-coated nano tin sulfide, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 39 CrossRef .
C. Rana, S. R. Bera and S. Saha, Growth of SnS nanoparticles and its ability as ethanol gas sensor, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 2016–2029 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. Li, H. Kan, C. Li, A. Quan, C. Fu, J. Luo, X. Liu, W. Wang, Z. Yang and Q. Wei, Surface acoustic wave NO2 sensors utilizing colloidal SnS quantum dot thin films, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2019, 362, 78–83 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Afsar, M. A. Rafiq and A. I. Tok, Two-dimensional SnS nanoflakes: synthesis and application to acetone and alcohol sensors, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 21556–21566 RSC .
W. J. Yan, C. Lv, D. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Zhang, C. O. Coileáin, Z. Wang, Z. Jiang, K. M. Hung, C. R. Chang and H. C. Wu, Enhanced NO2 sensitivity in Schottky contacted n-type SnS2 gas sensors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 26746–26754 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, W. Jiao, Z. Chu, S. Wang, L. Chen, X. Nie, R. Wang and X. He, High sensitivity, humidity-independent, flexible NO2 and NH3 gas sensors based on SnS2 hybrid functional graphene ink, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 997–1004 CrossRef .
L. D. Bharatula, M. B. Erande, I. S. Mulla, C. S. Rout and D. J. Late, SnS2 nanoflakes for efficient humidity and alcohol sensing at room temperature, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 105421–105427 RSC .
D. Gu, X. Wang, W. Liu, X. Li, S. Lin, J. Wang, M. N. Rumyantseva, A. M. Gaskov and S. A. Akbar, Visible-light activated room temperature NO2 sensing of SnS2 nanosheets based chemiresistive sensors, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 305, 127455 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Z. Wu, H. Ding, Y. Wei, W. Huang, X. Yang, Z. Li, L. Qiu and X. Wang, Flexible, 3D SnS2/Reduced graphene oxide heterostructured NO2 sensor, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 305, 127445 CrossRef CAS .
Q. X. Zhang, S. Y. Ma, G. J. Yang, R. Zhang, X. T. Wang, Q. Chen, L. Ma, S. T. Pei, K. M. Zhu, W. Q. Wang and Y. Tie, 3D SnS2 hierarchical micro-flowers synthesized by ZnSn(OH)6 for ultra-sensitive NH3 sensor, Mater. Lett., 2019, 236, 600–603 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Zaki, M. I. Abd-Elrahman, A. A. Abu-Sehly, N. M. Shaalan and M. M. Hafiz, Thermal annealing of SnS thin film induced mixed tin sulfide oxides-Sn2S3 for gas sensing: optical and electrical properties, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2018, 75, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Andrade-Arvizu, M. Courel-Piedrahita and O. Vigil-Galán, SnS-based thin film solar cells: perspectives over the last 25 years, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 4541–4556 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gedi, V. R. Reddy, S. Alhammadi, P. R. Guddeti, T. R. Kotte, C. Park and W. K. Kim, Influence of deposition temperature on the efficiency of SnS solar cells, Sol. Energy, 2019, 184, 305–314 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Yun, B. W. Park, Y. C. Choi, J. Im, T. J. Shin and S. I. Seok, Efficient Nanostructured TiO2/SnS Heterojunction Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901343 CrossRef .
W. Chu, X. Li, S. Li, J. Hou, Q. Jiang and J. Yang, High-Performance Flexible Perovskite Solar Cells with a Metal Sulfide Electron Transport Layer of SnS2 by Room-Temperature Vacuum Deposition, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 2, 382–388 CrossRef .
E. Zhao, L. Gao, S. Yang, L. Wang, J. Cao and T. Ma, 
            In situ fabrication of 2D SnS2 nanosheets as a new electron transport layer for perovskite solar cells, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 5913–5923 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, W. Xu, Z. Xie and Y. Wang, High-performance dye-sensitized solar cells based on Ag-doped SnS2 counter electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1908–1914 RSC .
R. N. Mohan, M. T. Nair and P. K. Nair, Thin film Sn2S3 via chemical deposition and controlled heating–Its prospects as a solar cell absorber, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 504, 144162 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khadraoui, R. Miloua, N. Benramdane, A. Bouzidi and K. Sahraoui, Synthesis and characterization of (Sn2S3)x(Bi2S3)1−x composite thin films for solar cell applications, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 169, 40–46 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mudusu, K. R. Nandanapalli, S. R. Dugasani, J. W. Kang, S. H. Park and C. W. Tu, Growth of single-crystalline cubic structured tin(II) sulfide (SnS) nanowires by chemical vapor deposition, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 41452–41459 RSC .
D. Mudusu, K. R. Nandanapalli, S. R. Dugasani, R. Karuppannan, G. K. Reddy, R. G. Subramanian and S. H. Park, Metal–insulator–semiconductor field-effect transistors (MISFETs) using p-type SnS and nanometer-thick Al2S3 layers, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 11111–11117 RSC .
W. Wang, T. Zhang, A. Seliverstov, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Wang, X. Peng, Q. Lu, C. Qin, X. Pan and Y. J. Zeng, Layer-dependent optoelectronic properties of 2D van der Waals SnS grown by pulsed laser deposition, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1901020 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Aji, M. Izumoto, K. Suenaga, K. Yamamoto, H. Nakashima and H. Ago, Two-step synthesis and characterization of vertically stacked SnS–WS2 and SnS–MoS2 p–n heterojunctions, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 889–897 RSC .
Y. Bao, P. Song, Y. Liu, Z. Chen, M. Zhu, I. Abdelwahab, J. Su, W. Fu, X. Chi, W. Yu and W. Liu, Gate-tunable in-plane ferroelectricity in few-layer SnS, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5109–5117 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Balaji, A. N. Mehta, M. Heyns, M. Caymax, I. Radu, W. Vandervorst and A. Delabie, Formation mechanism of 2D SnS2 and SnS by chemical vapor deposition using SnCl4 and H2S, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6172–6178 RSC .
J. Wang, R. Jia, Q. Huang, C. Pan, J. Zhu, H. Wang, C. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, H. Song and F. Miao, Vertical WS2/SnS2 van der Waals heterostructure for tunneling transistors, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–9 CrossRef .
T. Yang, B. Zheng, Z. Wang, T. Xu, C. Pan, J. Zou, X. Zhang, Z. Qi, H. Liu, Y. Feng and W. Hu, van der Waals epitaxial growth and optoelectronics of large-scale WSe2/SnS2 vertical bilayer p–n junctions, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhai, L. Li, Y. Ma, M. Liao, X. Wang, X. Fang, J. Yao, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, One-dimensional inorganic nanostructures: synthesis, field-emission and photodetection, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2986–3004 RSC .
G. Mittal and I. Lahiri, Recent progress in nanostructured next-generation field emission devices, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 323001 CrossRef .
S. R. Suryawanshi, S. S. Warule, S. S. Patil, K. R. Patil and A. A. More, Vapor–liquid–solid growth of one-dimensional tin sulfide (SnS) nanostructures with promising field emission behavior, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2018–2025 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Suryawanshi, S. S. Warule, N. S. Chaudhari, S. B. Ogale and M. A. More, Photo-enhanced field emission characteristics of SnS2 nanosheets, AIP Conf. Proc., 2014, 1591, 342–344 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Joshi, D. S. Joag, C. S. Rout and D. J. Late, Photosensitive field emission study of SnS2 nanosheets, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2015, 33, 03C106 Search PubMed .
C. S. Rout, P. D. Joshi, R. V. Kashid, D. S. Joag, M. A. More, A. J. Simbeck, M. Washington, S. K. Nayak and D. J. Late, Enhanced field emission properties of doped graphene nanosheets with layered SnS2, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 043109 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, X. Zhang, M. Jiao, K. Mou, X. Zhang and L. Liu, Engineering electronic structure of stannous sulfide by amino-functionalized carbon: toward efficient electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to Formate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903664 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, D. Luna, F. P. de Arquer, B. Zhang, N. Becknell, M. B. Ross, Y. Li, M. N. Banis, Y. Li, M. Liu and O. Voznyy, Sulfur-modulated tin sites enable highly selective electrochemical reduction of CO2 to formate, Joule, 2017, 1, 794–805 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhang, R. He, H. Li, Y. Chen, T. Kong, K. Li, H. Ju, J. Zhu, W. Zhu and J. Zeng, Nickel doping in atomically thin tin disulfide nanosheets enables highly efficient CO2 reduction, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 11120–11124 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Q. Zhao, Z. Wang, Y. Wu, X. Ma, Y. Zhu and C. Cao, Cobalt-doping SnS2 nanosheets towards high-performance anodes for sodium ion batteries, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 248–255 RSC .
K. Deng, F. Wang, W. Tian, Z. Hu, H. Zhang, K. Ma, C. Wang, H. Yue, Y. X. Zhang and J. Ji, Hierarchical Co-doped SnS2@Ni(OH)2 double-shell crystalline structure on carbon cloth with gradient pore distribution for superior capacitance, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 5067–5072 RSC .
F. Zhang, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, C. Ren, H. Gao and G. Tian, Hierarchical SnS2/CuInS2 nanosheet heterostructure films decorated with C60 for remarkable photoelectrochemical water splitting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces., 2019, 11, 9093–9101 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun and S. J. Park, Phosphorus-doped g-C3N4/SnS nanocomposite for efficient photocatalytic reduction of aqueous Cr(VI) under visible light, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 147325 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Mahdi, K. H. Latif, A. A. Jabor, K. Ibrahim, N. M. Ahmed, A. Hmood, F. I. Mustafa and M. Bououdina, Tin sulfide flower-like structure as high-performance near-infrared photodetector, J. Electron. Mater., 2020, 1–7 Search PubMed .
D. Liu, Z. Tang and Z. Zhang, Visible light assisted room-temperature NO2 gas sensor based on hollow SnO2@ SnS2 nanostructures, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 128754 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Pratik Shinde
	Pratik Shinde received his BSc (2015) and MSc (2017) degrees from Savitribai Phule Pune University, India. He is currently a PhD candidate at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University, India. His research interest is focused on the design and characterization of low-dimensional nanomaterials for electrochemical energy conversion and storage applications.

Chandra Sekhar Rout
	Dr Chandra Sekhar Rout is an Associate Professor at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences (CNMS), Jain University. Before joining CNMS, He was a DST-Ramanujan Fellow at I. I. T. Bhubaneswar, India (2013–2017). He received his BSc (2001) and MSc (2003) degrees from Utkal University, and his PhD from JNCASR, Bangalore (2008) under the supervision of Prof. C. N. R. Rao. He did his postdoctoral research at the National University of Singapore (2008–2009), Purdue University, USA (2010–2012) and UNIST, South Korea (2012–2013). His research interests include 2D materials for sensors, supercapacitors and energy storage devices, field emitters and electronic devices.

 	Fig. 1  The ground-state crystal structures of SnS-Pnma, SnS2-P3m1 and Sn2S3-Pnma (Sn atoms are grey and S atoms are yellow). Reprinted with permission.19 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Calculated band gaps of SnS2-nH-MLs (n = 1 and 2). Insets show the calculated bandgap of pure SnS2 monolayers as a function of tension. (b) and (c) Calculated band structures of SnS2-2H-ML at tensions of 2% and 10%, respectively. (d) and (e) Partial density of states of SnS2-2H-ML at tensions of 2% and 10%, respectively. Reprinted with permission.56 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) and (g) The charge density differences for pure SnS2 and Fe-doped SnS2. Reprinted with permission.64 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Magnetic hysteresis loops for SnS2 at 2 K. (b) Magnetic hysteresis loops for Fe–SnS2 at 2 K. (c) Projected band structures of the Fe–SnS2 monolayer for spin-up channels. (d) Projected band structures of the Fe–SnS2 monolayer for spin-down channels (the contributions of Sn and Fe atoms in the total band structure are shown by red and blue circles, respectively). Reprinted with permission.66 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 


SnS	Orthorhombic	Dark grey	
P

nma

	1.1200	0.3987	0.4334	p-Type	1.2–1.5 (direct) and 1.1 (indirect)	Diamagnetic
SnS2	Hexagonal	Golden yellow	
P
3m1
	0.3648	0.3648	0.5899	n-Type	2 to 2.6	Diamagnetic
Sn2S3	Orthorhombic	Shiny black	
P

nma

	0.8878	0.3751	1.402	n-Type	0.85 to 2.4	Diamagnetic

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the different synthesis strategies of SnxSy class materials.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Optical image of SnS flakes via Au-exfoliation. (b) AFM topographic image of the square marked area of the optical image (inset: the height profile along the solid line). (c) Cross-sectional HAADF-STEM image of a SnS flake at point A in the AFM image. Reprinted with permission.74 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) TEM image of layered SnS nanosheets. (e) Raman spectra of bulk and ultrathin SnS nanosheets. (f) Atomic displacements corresponding to different Raman active modes of layered SnS. Reprinted with permission.79 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of SnS2 nanoflowers. Reprinted with permission.94 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. (b and c) SEM images of SnS2 nanowall arrays. Reprinted with permission.116 Copyright 2010, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Relationship between the fractal dimension and temperature of SnS2. (b) Relationship between the fractal dimension and the molar ratio of SnO2:S. (c) Edge formation energy (Eedge) of different edge morphologies as a function of S chemical potential. (d) Schematic and flowchart of the morphological changes from hexagon, triangle, and windmill to dendritic. (Inset: SEM images) of (i) dendritic SnS2 and (ii) branched SnS2. Reprinted with permission.125 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustrations of the growth mechanism and each step during the second step SnS2 growth on the pregrown monolayer WS2. (b) Atomic configuration demonstrating the growth differences between SnS2 grown on defect-rich and defect-free areas in monolayer WS2. (c) SEM image of the cluster growth of SnS2 on the domain boundary of WS2. (d) Schematic illustration of the definition of the relative edge angle between the SnS2 and WS2 monolayers. (e) SEM image of the horizontal growth of SnS2 on the MoS2 surface. Reprinted with permission.126 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Low-magnification TEM of the SnS film grown at 240 °C. (b) HRTEM images of the SnS film grown at 240 °C. Reprinted with permission.132 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Top view of an AFM scan on an SnS epilayer deposited on a mica substrate. Reprinted with permission.150 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. (d) Interface model of SnS on GaAs(100). As atoms are shown as red and S atoms as yellow. (e) Interface model of SnS on Graphene. C atoms are shown as dark gray and S atoms as yellow. Reprinted with permission.151 Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Surface and cross-sectional FESEM images of SnS thin films grown at 2.6 Pa. Reprinted with permission.167 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Ltd. (b) FESEM surface morphology of a single phase of Sn2S3 film sputtered with RF power of 40 W and in situ substrate temperature of 500 °C. The inset shows the cross-sectional image. (c) AFM image and surface roughness profile (inset) of Sn2S3 films. Reprinted with permission.172 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the synthesis processes of SnS2@CNTs, SnS2@CNBs, and SnS2@CNSs. Reprinted with permission.182 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd.	 

Mechanical exfoliation
SnS	SnS	SiO2/n+-Si	—	—	0.7 nm	
74

SnS2	SnS2	SiO2	—	—	∼15 nm	
75



Liquid exfoliation
SnS	SnS	—	<30 °C	24 h	4.1 nm	
78

SnS	SnS	—	Room temperature	20 h	1.10 nm	
79

SnS2	SnS2	—	Room temperature	48 h	0.6 nm	
81



Hydro/solvothermal
SnS nanoflowers	SnCl2: H2O and Na2S	—	250 °C	24 h	—	
91

SnS nanparticles	SnCl2: 2H2O and NH2CSNH2	—	180 °C	24 h	—	
92

SnS2 nanoflakes	SnCl4·5H2O and NH2CSNH2	—	180 °C	24 h	—	
83

Sn2S3	SnCl4·5H2O and L-cysteine	—	180 °C	2 h	—	
95



Spin-coating
SnS thin film	SnCl2·2H2O and SC(NH2)2	Mo-coated soda-lime glass	Ambient temperature	—	954 nm	
104

SnS2 thin film	SnCl4·5H2O and NH2CSNH2	Microscope glass slide	Ambient temperature	—	2.48 μm	
105



Electrodeposition
SnS thin film	SnCl2 and Na2S2O3	ITO	90 °C	30 min	828 nm	
107

SnS2 nanowires	SnSO4 and S	AAO	500 °C	10 h	—	
37

Sn2S3 films	SnCl2 and Na2S2O3	ITO	30 °C	20 min	—	
112



CBD
SnS thin film	SnCl2·2H2O and CH3CSNH2	Glass	Ambient	12 h	0.19 μm	
114

SnS2 nanowall arrays	SnCl4·6H2O and CH3CSNH2	Copper foil	80 °C	1 h	50 nm	
116

Sn2S3 thin films	SnCl2·2H2O and CH3CSNH2	Glass	30 °C	20 h	—	
117



CVD
SnS film	SnCl4	Glass	545 °C	30 s	—	
120

SnS	Sn and S	SiO2/Si	200–675 °C	60 min	139 nm	
123

SnS2 film	SnCl4	Glass	500 °C	30 s	—	
120

SnS2 nanosheets	SnO2 and S	SiO2/Si	200–650 °C	5 min	1.5 nm	
124

Sn2S3 film	SnCl4	Glass	525 °C	30 s	—	
120



ALD
SnS thin film	Bis(1-dimethylamino-2-methyl-2-propoxy) tin(II) and H2S	SiO2	90-240 °C	—	<5 nm	
132

SnS2 thin film	[(CH3)2N]4Sn) and H2S	SiO2	150 °C	—	∼0.6 nm	
133



PVD
SnS sheet	SnS	SiO2	800 °C	2 h	80 nm	
140

SnS sheet	SnS	Ag coated SiO2	800 °C	2 h	37 nm	
140

SnS sheet	SnS	Au coated SiO2	800 °C	2 h	51 nm	
140

SnS nanosheets	SnS	Mica	650 °C	65 min	12 nm	
141

SnS2 thin film	SnS2	Soda-lime glass	400 °C	50 min	0.96 μm	
142



CVT
SnS crystal	Sn and S	—	230 °C	200 min	—	
145

SnS2 crystal	Sn and S	—	230 °C	300 min	—	
145

Sn2S3 crystal	Sn and S	—	230 °C	500 min	—	
145



MBE
SnS thin film	4N SnS	Mica	270 °C	—	300 nm	
150

SnS2 thin film	Sn and FeS2	Mica	—	—	—	
153



Spray Pyrolysis
SnS thin film	SnCl2·2H2O and NH2CSNH2	Glass	400 °C	—	912 nm	
156

SnS2 thin film	SnCl2·2H2O and NH2CSNH2	Glass	275 °C	—	∼1 μm	
157

Sn2S3	SnCl2·2H2O and NH2CSNH2	Glass	450 °C	—	576 nm	
156

Sn2S3	SnCl2 and thiourea	Glass	400 °C	—	0.90 μm	
57



RF sputtering
SnS thin film	SnS	Mo-coated soda-lime glass substrates	300 °C	—	778 nm	
167

SnS2 films	SnS2	SLG	300 K	30 min	810 nm	
171

Sn2S3	SnS	Si	500 °C	1 h	123 nm	
172



Dip-coating
SnS thin film	SnCl2·2H2O and CH3CSNH2	Glass	Ambient	2 min	0.29 μm	
114

SnS2 thin film	SnCl2 and NH2CSNH2	Glass	—	—	60 nm	
174

SnS2 thin film	SnCl4·5H2O and H2S/Ar gas	Glass	—	—	60 nm	
175


 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of the applications of the SnxSy class in various fields.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Linear sweep voltammograms (at 2 mV s−1) (b) Tafel plots and (c) Nyquist plots for the HER of SnS, SnS2, Pt/C, and glass carbon (GC) in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. (d) Linear sweep voltammograms for the OER on SnS and SnS2 at 2 mV s−1 in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. Reprinted with permission.188 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) and (b) Charge–discharge curves of C@0.5SnS@TiO2 and SnS electrodes during the first cycle. The insets show cross-sectional images of electrodes in different states during lithiation/delithiation; (a1, b1) before cycling, (a2, b2) fully lithiation and (a3, b3) fully delithiation, respectively. Reprinted with permission.205 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) The cycling stability of the corresponding sodium-ion full cell at 100 mA g−1 and a schematic presentation of a sodium-ion cell presented in the inset. Reprinted with permission.207 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) The digital images of a small fan and a series of LEDs (10, 20, 30 LEDs) powered by the SnS@C/MoS2@N,PC//NVP@C full cells. Reprinted with permission.209 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) CV curves of β-MnO2 and O-SnS electrodes at 100 mV s−1. (b) GCD curves of β-MnO2 and O-SnS electrodes and β-MnO2/SS//O-SnS/SS ASSCs device at the same current of 8 mA. Reprinted with permission.219 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematics of the fabricated SnS2/G symmetric supercapacitor device and (d) GCD curves of the SnS2/G symmetric device at different current densities. Reprinted with permission.224 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a and b) Photocatalytic reduction of 50 mL of 1 × 10−3 M aqueous Cr(VI) solution containing 5 μL HCl under visible-light irradiation in the presence of the as-prepared large-sized and ultra-small Sn2S3 porous nanoparticles, respectively. Inset: Photographs of the gradual color change of the solution with irradiation time. Reprinted with permission.232 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c and d) Schematic representations of the charge transfer and separation for the CdS-Sn2S3@rGO composite under photocatalytic reactions for 0 h and 60 h, respectively. Reprinted with permission.95 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of the h-BN/MoTe2/graphene/SnS2/h-BN device configuration and the experimental setup. (b) Optical image of a typically fabricated h-BN/MoTe2/graphene/SnS2/h-BN device. Reprinted with permission.242 Copyright 2019, Wiley. (c) I–V curve of the flexible SnS2 photodetectors. The upper-left inset shows a cross-sectional SEM image of the flexible SnS2 photodetector and the bottom-right shows a photograph of a fabricated SnS2 flexible photodetector rolled onto a gloved finger. Reprinted with permission.243 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) The dynamic response curves of the SnS2 sensor with Mn electrodes against a variety of gases. Reprinted with permission.248 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b and c) The dynamic responses of the SnS2/S-rGO sensing ink written on paper during bending and twisting by 180 degrees, respectively. Reprinted with permission.249 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the band alignment of flexible solar devices based on SnS2 ETL. (b) The J–V plots of (a) flexible PKSCs based on different SnS2 ETLs. Reprinted with permission.258 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of 2D SnS FETs; (d) surface SEM image of 2D SnS FET. Reprinted with permission.265 Copyright 2020, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Low-magnification TEM image of SnS2 nanosheets. (b) Low-magnification TEM image of the SnS2/RGO nanocomposite. (c) The applied electric field as a function of emission current density. (d) F–N plot showing non-linear behaviour, indicating emission current from the semiconducting emitter. (e) Long-term field-emission current stability testing indicates fairly stable emission currents for SnS2 and SnS2/RGO. (f) and (g) Typical field-emission patterns taken during the long-term stability study of SnS2 and SnS2/RGO, respectively. Reprinted with permission.276 Copyright 2014, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) and (b) SEM images of SnS/aminated-C. (c) TEM image of SnS/aminated-C; (d) an enlarged view of the image within the dotted lines in (c). (e) HRTEM images of SnS/aminated-C. (f) LSVs of SnS, aminated-C, and SnS/aminated-C in CO2/N2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte. (g) A calculated free-energy diagram of the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to formate over SnS and SnS/aminated-C. The differential charge diagram of SnS/aminated-C for (h) the top view, and (i) the front view; cyan and yellow indicate the depletion and accumulation of electrons, respectively. Reprinted with permission.277 Copyright 2020, Wiley.	 


	
	
	Overpotential	Tafel slope	

HER	SnS-N-doped graphene	Hydrothermal	−0.125 V	∼38 mV dec−1	
190

SnS2–MoS2	Hydrothermal	240 mV @10 mA cm−2	65 mV dec−1	
192




	
	
	Overpotential	Tafel slope	

OER	Co-Doped SnS2	Solvothermal	281 mV @30 mA cm−2	62 mV dec−1	
195

TiO2/SnS2	Hydrothermal	570 mV @10 mA cm−2	107 mV dec−1	
196




	
	
	Type	Capacity	

Battery	Ti3C2 MXene@C@SnS	Hydrothermal and annealing	Lithium-ion	1473 mA h g−1 @0.1 A g−1	
203

SnS/Ti3C2Tx-O	Precursor-guided sulfidation and annealing	Sodium-ion	565 mA h g−1 @0.1 A g−1	
204

S/NCNT@Co-SnS2	SPCVD and solvothermal	Lithium–sulphur	1337.1 mA h g−1 @1.3 mA/cm2	
210

SnS2/graphene/SnS2	Hydrothermal	Lithium-ion	1357 mA h g−1	
211


	
	Sodium-ion	1133 mA h g−1	

SnS2/graphene	Hydrothermal	Potassium-ion	610 mA h g−1 @50 mA g−1	
212

MXene decorated SnS2/Sn3S4 hybrid	Solvothermal and calcination	Lithium-ion	426.3 mA h g−1 @100 mA g−1	
217




	
	
	Type	Capacitance	

Supercapacitor	(β-MnO2/SS//O-SnS/SS)	CBD	Asymmetric	122 F g−1 @5 mV s−1	
219

SnS nanorods	Solvothermal	Two-electrode	∼70 F g−1	
220

Mn-doped SnS2-graphene aerogel	Solvothermal	Three-electrode	523.51 F g−1 @5 mV s−1	
222

SnS2@Cu2O/rGO	Hydrothermal	Three-electrode	1800 F g−1 @0.6 A g−1	
223


	
	Two-electrode	1290 F g−1 @1 A g−1	




	
	
	Activity	Rate	

Photocatalyst	Sn4+ self-doped hollow SnS microcubes	Template-assisted	Cr(VI) reduction	99.6%	
180


	
	Cyanide reduction	97.2%	

MoS2/SnS2/r-GO	Solvothermal	CO formation	68.53 μmol g−1 h−1	
231


	
	CH4 formation	50.55 μmol g−1 h−1	




	
	
	Responsivity	Efficiency	

Photodetector	SnS nanobelts	PVD	300 A W−1	4.65 × 104%	
234

Au decorated SnS nanosheets	PVD	635 A W−1	9.92 × 104%	
235

SnS microbelts	Hydrothermal	329.9 mA W−1	101.08%	
236

SnS nanoflakes	CVD	156.0 A W−1	4.77 × 104%	
237

SnS2 nanosheets	CVD	1.1 × 103 A W−1	3.2 × 105%	
240

SnS2/silicon	CVT and mechanical exfoliation	3740 A W−1	490%	
241




	
	
	Activity	Response/recovery	

Sensor	SnS nanoparticles	Chemical reduction route	Ethanol	29 s/21 s	
245

SnS CQDs	Spin coating	SAW NO2	180 s/466 s	
246

SnS nanoflakes	Solid-state reaction	Acetone	3 s/14 s	
247

SnS2 nanoflakes	Hydrothermal	Humidity	85 s/6 s	
250


	
	Methanol	67 s/5 s	

MTO-Sn2S3	Thermal annealing	Methane	250 s/82 s	
254




	
	
	Power conversion efficiency	Conductivity	

Solar cells	TiO2/SnS	Spin coating	∼4.8%	—	
257

SnS2 nanosheets	Hydrothermal	13.63%	—	
259

Sn2S3 film	CBD	—	10−4–10−5 Ω−1 cm−1	
261




	
	
	Mobility	On/off ratio	

FET	SnS nanowires	CVD	1.47 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1	103	
263

Few-layer SnS	Pulsed laser deposition	1.48 cm2 V−1 s−1	3.41 × 106	
265

SnS2	CVD	0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1	2 × 106	
268

SnS2 nanosheet	CVD	2.58 cm2 V−1 s−1	≈108	
124




	
	
	Turn-on field	Current density	

Field emitter	SnS nanorods	Solvothermal	∼2.5 V μm−1	∼ 647 μA cm−2	
90

SnS nanowires	Thermal evaporation	∼1.65 V μm−1	∼2.5 mA cm−2	
273

SnS2 nanosheets	Hydrothermal	∼4.2 V μm−1	∼1 μA cm−2	
274

SnS2/rGO	Hydrothermal	∼2.65 V μm−1	∼1 μA cm−2	
276




	
	
	Faraday efficiency	Overpotential	

CO2 reduction	SnS/aminated-C	Template method	92.6%	0.9 V	
277

Ni-Doped SnS2 nanosheets	Solvothermal	93%	—	
279


This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
