Developments in nanostructured LiMPO 4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Mn) composites based on three dimensional carbon architecture   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS15320C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS15320C
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5068-5080Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsDevelopments in nanostructured LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Mn) composites based on three dimensional carbon architecture†

        
          
            L. 
            Dimesso
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            C. 
            Förster
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            W. 
            Jaegermann
          
        
      ae, 
      
        
          
            J. P. 
            Khanderi
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            H. 
            Tempel
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Popp
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Engstler
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            J. J. 
            Schneider
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Sarapulova
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            D. 
            Mikhailova
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            L. A. 
            Schmitt
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Oswald
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            H. 
            Ehrenberg
          
        
      d
aTechnische Universität Darmstadt, Materials Science Department, Petersenstrasse 23, D-64287 Darmstadt, Germany. E-mail: ldimesso@surface.tu-darmstadt.de; jaegermann@surface.tu-darmstadt.de;  Fax: +49 6151 16-6308;   Tel: +49 6151 16-69667
bEduard-Zintl-Institut für Anorganische und Physikalische Chemie Anorganische Chemie I, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Petersenstr. 18, D-64287 Darmstadt, Germany. E-mail: joerg.schneider@ac.chemie.tu-darmstadt.de
cInstitut für Komplexe Materialien IFW Dresden, Helmoltzstrasse 20, D-01069 Dresden, Germany. E-mail: a.e.sarapulova@ifw-dresden.de
dKarlsruher Institut für Technologie (KIT)—Institut für Angewandte Materialien (IAM), Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, D-76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany. E-mail: helmut.ehrenberg@kit.edu
eCenter of Smart Intelligence, Darmstadt University of Technology, Petersenstrasse 32, D-64287 Darmstadt, Germany
Received 
      29th November 2011
    First published on 10th April 2012AbstractNanostructured materials lie at the heart of fundamental advances in efficient energy storage and/or conversion, in which surface processes and transport kinetics play determining roles. This review describes recent developments in the synthesis and characterization of composites which consist of lithium metal phosphates (LiMPO4, M = Fe, Co, Ni, Mn) coated on nanostructured carbon architectures (unordered and ordered carbon nanotubes, amorphous carbon, carbon foams). The major goal of this review is to highlight new progress in using different three dimensional nanostructured carbon architectures as support for the phosphate based cathode materials (e.g.: LiFePO4, LiCoPO4) of high electronic conductivity to develop lithium batteries with high energy density, high rate capability and excellent cycling stability resulting from their huge surface area and short distance for mass and charge transport.
Lucangelo Dimesso
Dr Lucangelo Dimesso (Taranto, Italy, 1963) Chemist, Materials Scientist. Senior Researcher at Darmstadt University of Technology (since 2009). He investigates lithium metal phosphates supported on bi- and three-dimensional carbon structures as cathode materials for high-voltage Li-ion batteries. He studied Industrial Chemistry at the University of Parma (Italy), DrPhil (1988), Specialization in Materials Science and Technology (1991). Post-doctoral fellow at Research Institute CNR-ITM (Milano, 1991–1993), Post-doctoral fellow in Japan (1993–1995). EU-fellowship at the Darmstadt University of Technology, Materials Science Department, Thin Films Division (1996–1998). Master in Industrial Engineering (1999). SusTech Darmstadt GmbH & Co KG, as Senior Researcher (2000–2008).
Jayaprakash Khanderi
Jayaprakash Khanderi has obtained an MSc degree in chemistry from Mangalore University and an MTech in Metallurgy from National Institute of Technology (NITK) Surathkal, Karnataka, India. After moving to Germany he obtained his PhD degree in 2006 in the field of Materials Chemistry under the guidance of Prof. Roland Fischer at Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany. He did post-doctoral work from 2006 to 2010 first with Prof. Stephan Schulz at University of Paderborn, Germany, in the area Organometallic chemistry of zinc as well as thermoelectric materials (e.g. Bi2Te3, Bi2Se3) and then with Prof. Jörg J. Schneider at Technische University Darmstadt, Germany, in the area of carbon nanotube based inorganic hybrid materials for lithium ion battery, gas sensors and catalysis. He has 5 years of industrial research experience and is currently a senior scientist at corporate research laboratory, Laird Technologies, India.
Hermann Tempel
Hermann Tempel obtained his Diploma (Dipl. Ing.) degree in 2008 in Chemistry from the Technische Universität Darmstadt where he worked on synthesis and organization of carbon nanotubes by ink jet printing techniques. He is currently pursuing his final studies towards a PhD degree in the group of Prof. J. J. Schneider at TU Darmstadt. In 2010 he took part in a three month research project on dye synthesized solar cells at MET University, Ankara, Turkey. His research interests are in the fields of nanostructured metal oxide materials, carbon nanotubes, hybrids of these materials as well as their functional properties in photocatalysis and energy storage (e.g. lithium ion batteries).
Angelina Sarapulova
Dr. Angelina Sarapulova, Chemist. She studied Inorganic chemistry at the Baikal Institute of Nature Management, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences (Ulan-Ude, Russia), PhD degree (2006). She worked as engineer and scientific researcher in the laboratory of hydro-geo ecological studies of Geological Institute, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences (Ulan-Ude, 2006–2009), and as a post-doctoral researcher in the group of Prof. Dr H. Ehrenberg, in the area of cathode composites for Li-ion batteries at IFW Dresden (Dresden, 2009–2012).
Daria Mikhailova
Daria Mikhailova has obtained a diploma of chemistry in 1996 and a PhD degree in 2000 at the Moscow State University, Russia. During her PhD she was dealing with synthesis and investigations of HgBa2Can−1CunO6+2n+d superconductors. From 2005 to 2007 she did a post-doctoral work in the group of Prof. Hartmut Fuess at the Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany, in the field of structure and magnetic characterization of new high-pressure complex metal oxides. From 2007 to 2011 she worked as a senior scientist at IFW Dresden, Germany, in the department of Prof. Dr Helmut Ehrenberg. Her research concentrated on transition-metal oxide materials for cathodes in Li-ion batteries. Currently she is a senior researcher at the Max-Planck Institute of Chemical Physics of Solids in Dresden.
1. Introduction and scope
Recent increase in demand for oil, associated price increases, and environmental issues are continuing to exert pressure on an already stretched world energy infrastructure. Significant progress has been made in the development of renewable energy technologies such as solar cells, fuel cells and biofuels. In the past, these types of energy sources have been marginalized, but as new technology makes alternative energy more practical and price competitive with fossil fuels, it is expected that the coming decades will usher in a long-expected transition away from oil and gasoline as our primary fuel. Although a variety of renewable energy technologies have been developed, they have not reached widespread use. One of the main challenges in using renewable energies is the need for an efficient, cheap and reliable storage device.
Solar radiation, wind and waves represent energy sources producing electrical power that are variable in time and diffuse in space. Nuclear reactors provide a constant energy source with associated problems of radioactive waste disposal. Geothermal energy is restricted in location. All these energy sources would benefit from electrical energy storage.
The energy carriers are the electricity grids and chemical energy. The most convenient form of energy storage is portable chemical energy, which is the reason for our addiction to fossil fuels for heat, propulsion, lighting, and communication. The battery provides the portability of stored chemical energy with the ability to deliver this energy as electrical energy with a high conversion efficiency and no gaseous exhaust. Whereas alternative energy sources are stationary, which allows other means of energy storage to be competitive with a battery, electrical vehicles require the portable stored energy of a fuel fed to a fuel cell or of a battery. Therefore, of particular interest is a low-cost, safe, rechargeable (secondary) battery of high voltage, capacity and rate capability.
The lithium-ion battery is a representative system for such electrochemical energy storage and conversion. At present, lithium-ion batteries are efficient, light-weight, and rechargeable power sources for consumer electronics.1 For most consumer devices, energy storage and operating time should be maximized, so the more the better, as, for example, in cell phones, laptop computers, and MP3 players. For some larger applications, such as the battery in hybrid electric vehicles (HEV), power is most important as the materials must be able to charge sufficiently fast to take advantage of regenerative braking; otherwise, much of the gas savings are lost. Even though the lithium-ion batteries are known for their high energy density,2 the power density of the lithium-ion batteries needs to be further improved to fulfil the specific requirements of the automotive industry.
A battery is a transducer that converts chemical energy into electrical energy and vice versa. It contains an anode, a cathode, and an electrolyte (Fig. 1). In a lithium-ion battery, anode and cathode materials are mixed electronic–ionic conductors, which accommodate electrons and lithium-ions upon charge–discharge processes. The electrolyte enables the transport of lithium ions between electrodes and in a perfect battery the lithium ion transport number will be unity in the electrolyte. Many electrochemically active materials are not good electronic conductors, so it is necessary to add an electronically conductive material such as carbon black. To physically hold the electrode together, a binder is also added. In these cases the electrochemical reaction can only occur at those points where the active material, the conductive diluent, and the electrolyte meet. Thus most electrodes are complex porous composites, which are designed to ensure fast charge transport and, therefore, high power capability.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a lithium-ion battery. 
The most common anode used in lithium-ion batteries is a graphitic carbon. Its properties, use as anode in lithium ion batteries and the very recent developments of this material have been discussed by Endo et al.3 The electrolyte solution commonly comprises a lithium salt dissolved in a mixture of organic solvents, examples include LiPF6 or LiBOB (the BOB is an anion with the boron coordinated by two oxalate groups) in an ethylene carbonate/dimethyl carbonate solvent; Xu4 has discussed deeply this subject. Although organic polymers containing lithium ions have been studied for several decades as possible electrolytes, their conductivity is still too low, and so they are only used when a liquid is added to give a plasticized state. In a few cases, solid electrolytes have been used for a few specialized applications such as for oil well logging where elevated temperatures are found. Though the ions flow through the electrolyte, the anode and cathode must be physically separated to prevent an electrical short. This is accomplished by using a porous separator material, which allows wetting by the electrolyte and the flow of lithium ions through it. Arora and Zhang5 have discussed these materials in detail.
Whittingham6 has discussed the key requirements for a material to be successfully used as a cathode in a rechargeable lithium battery. They can be summarized as follows: (1) the material should contain a readily reducible/oxidizable ion, for example a transition metal; (2) the material should react with lithium (i) in a reversible manner, (ii) with a high free energy of reaction, (iii) very rapidly both on insertion and removal; (3) the material should be a good electronic conductor; (4) the material should be stable (structurally and chemically); (5) the material should be of low cost and environmentally benign. The same author has also described the historical and scientific backgrounds of the birth of the cathode materials, and reported on the research and commercialization of them. He centered his attention on two classes of materials. The first contains layered compounds with an anion close-packed or almost close-packed lattice. This group is exemplified by first LiTiS2, followed by LiCoO2, LiNi1−yCoyO2, and today LiNiyMnyCo1−2yO2. The materials in the second group have more open structures, like many of the vanadium oxides and most recently the transition metal phosphates, such as the olivine LiFePO4. The discussion of the authors will focus on the LiMPO4 family (with M = Mn, Fe, Co and Ni) and their composites with ordered carbon nanostructures. Particularly, the attention will be focused on design and fabrication of three-dimensional carbon nanostructures as substrate material for the deposition of the active cathode material.
2. Examples of 3D carbon nanostructures for battery cathode applications
The performances and advantages of the lithium ion batteries as a power source in the 1990s were so significant that they replaced almost completely the Ni–Cd batteries. The thick metal plates of traditional batteries gave way to lithium-ion cells in which the anode, separator/electrolyte, and cathode were stacked, spiral wound or folded.2 Although the materials in today's battery differ from those of the displaced technologies and the energy density of the electrochemical cell is decidedly larger, the basic two-dimensional (2-D) character and layer-by-layer construction of the cells remain. Lithium-ion batteries use insertion processes for both the positive and the negative electrodes. The resulting transport of Li ions between the electrodes, usually arranged in a parallel-plate configuration, is 1-D in nature. To minimize power losses resulting from slow transport of ions or electrons, the thickness of the insertion electrodes, as well as the separation distance between them, is kept as small as possible. This approach may appear counterintuitive in the effort to produce a useful battery, because reducing the thickness of the electrode results in lower energy capacity (due to an higher amount of passive materials) and shorter operating time. Thus, battery design always trades off between available energy and the ability to release this energy without internal power losses. Improved battery performance can be achieved by reconfiguring the electrode materials currently employed in 2-D batteries into 3-D architectures. Improvements in energy per unit area and high-rate discharge capabilities are two of the benefits that may be realized for these 3-D cells.7 Among the examples of different 3-D architectures for charge-insertion batteries, the rod array of cylindrical anodes and the aperiodic “sponge” architecture can be effective. An inherent problem in designing cathode materials for Li-ion batteries is to find effective structures, morphologies which accumulate as much as possible of the electroactive storage material in a minimum volume of space. They should still maintain interfacial integrity during the multiphase design incorporating all necessary components, electrical contacts, electroactive material and electrolyte which build up the complete battery system. This set of requirements which has to be optimized to obtain best performance is not optimum for any type of 2D battery architecture, since a 2D structure is severely restricted for the amount of power which it can deliver per area, mass and volume. Out of this reason researchers have explored the third geometrical dimension for electrode configurations over the last few years in order to make use of what is called a minimized geometrical footprint of such an electrode (Fig. 2). By expanding electrode geometries into the third dimension, the internal volume of the electrode structure is expanded enormously when compared to a 2D configuration with equal footprint sizing. Therefore an areal footprint 3D design is advantageous for the critical performance properties for high performance batteries such as ion diffusion path length, effective mass usage energy and power densities. Consequently a number of design architectures based on such 3D electrode configurations have been explored both for cathodes and anodes and already realized on a research level.8 These were mainly based on microstructured assemblies of 3D cathode or anode architectures and the respective electroactive material.9,10
 Fig. 2  Examples of 3-D architectures for charge-insertion batteries: (a) array of interdigitated cylindrical cathodes and anodes; (b) interdigitated plate array; (c) rod array of cylindrical cathodes and anodes coated with a layer of conducting electrolyte; (d) sponge like architecture (reproduced with permission from ref. 7) Copyright © 2004 American Chemical Society). 
When going one step further and expanding the surface effect into the nanometre size range, one either wants to use nanoparticles (0D) in an arranged order of the electroactive compound or as vertically aligned 1D morphology as wires, rods or tubes to arrange the electroactive matter in the third dimension. For both avenues, carbon has played a crucial role since the most electroactive compounds are inherently bad electrical conductors and this situation could be diminished by introducing a certain amount of carbon or a defined carbon backbone structure.11,12
Electroactive nanoparticles like LiMPO4 (Fe, Co, Ni) carbon coatings can be introduced in a number of ways resulting in different material properties of these phosphoolivine–carbon composite materials. Ongoing efforts towards an optimization of the intrinsic properties of these oxides e.g. by doping,13–17 nanosized particle scaling18–21 and morphological control22,23 have been widely made to optimize cycling stability, capacity and cycle life of such oxides. Interestingly, a systematic investigation of core shell Carbon@LiMPO4 morphologies which offer such an intimate carbon coating has been rarely reported and only recently an influence on the microscopic level of such a close carbon contact to the surface states of LiFePO4 has been experimentally established for carbon coated nanoscaled LiFePO4 particles.24 In addition to the type and morphology of the carbon coating, its overall content in connection with the electroactive cathode material, e.g. LiFePO4, determines the electrical conductivity and the charge transport within the composite cathode. CNTs provide a unique opportunity for a further improvement of conductivity and charge transport, since they display good electrical conductivity along their tube axis and a high surface area for tethering of electroactive compounds, especially when they display a nanoparticulate morphology.
When arranging CNTs vertically into a 3D CNT array cathode architecture, as shown in Fig. 3, certain points have to be taken into account to exploit the benefit of such a 3D architecture fully. Firstly, the array should consist of multiwalled CNTs to assure sufficient mechanical stability. Secondly, some degree of chemical functionalization or intrinsic disorder in the structure of the CNT walls is helpful to tether the LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni) covalently to the CNT surface. Thirdly, the CNTs in the 3D array structure should be anchored securely to a conducting substrate which may serve as a current collector. However, in this regard it might be even advantageous to use a carbon structure where the CNTs were intergrown and therefore were attached on a thin carbon substrate during Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) synthesis. If this could be realized the resulting CNT–LiMPO4 (Fe, Co, Ni) 3D composite assembly could serve as a self-sustaining cathode which needs no further additional components. We have recently reported on studies on how the surface of a three dimensional CNT architecture with a defined interspatial area between individual CNTs can be employed to tether electrochemically active LiMPO4 (Fe, Co, Ni) nanoparticles alongside the surface of such individual CNTs in a 3D CNT battery cathode.25 An advantage of such a CNT–LiMPO4 3D CNT array composite architecture is that its unidirectional geometry should allow for a directed conductivity pathway.25 Finally, a process which gives access to such a 3D CNT array structure should be tailorable to a macrosized footprint area in order to allow for the possible integration into a microsized battery device structure. There have been a couple of intriguing approaches over the last few years to realize CNT network cathode structures which employ hybrid architectures composed of an electroactive compound and CNTs. In 1998, Ahn reported for the first time a significant improvement towards the necessary volume fraction of conducting material in the cathode, when using one dimensional conductive materials over 0D carbon particles.26 This effect was manifested for CNTs as conductive support in 2002 by Sakamoto and Dunn27 and in 2004 by Lin and Harb who could show that the active CNT conductive material could be diminished significantly in such cells while improving the electrochemical performance.28 A stochastically oriented network of multi-walled (MW)CNTs was introduced by Li and coworkers in which a web type structure of CNTs was introduced between macrosized LiFePO4 particles. A discharge capacity of 155 mA h g−1 at a C/10 rate was reported.29 In 2008, Ajayan and coworkers introduced for the first time an ordered array of 3D aligned CNTs as cathodic support structure for electroactive MnO2. Compared to sole MnO2 tubes such CNT–MnO2 composite electrode architecture exhibited a better reversible capacity. This effect was attributed to an improved structural contact between the CNTs and the MnO2 electroactive material.30
 Fig. 3  Scheme of a 3D aligned LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni)–CNT composite cathode architecture. 
Flexible cathodes for Li-ion batteries based on LiMn2O4–CNT composites were realized in 2011 by Guo, Wei and Lu who used an interpenetrating network of stochastically oriented CNTs and electroactive LiMn2O4 nanoparticles.31 It is interesting to note that compared to earlier work by Li et al.29 the electroactive metal oxide particles are now tailored to fit the nano size dimensions of the CNT architecture. This leads to flexible LiMn2O4–CNT cathodes in macroscopic dimensions displaying high current densities of 550 mA g−1 and a reasonable cycling stability after 50 subsequent cycles (80 mA g−1 at 1C) (Fig. 4).31 These results point towards the importance of tailoring particle of the electroactive material and CNT size into the nanometre size regime to obtain high electrochemical performance and flexibility with unique CNT electrode architectures.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of a flexible LiMn2O4–CNT nanocomposite cathode architecture, (b) photograph showing an as-synthesized flexible electrode (reproduced from ref. 31 with permission of RSC). 
3. Synthesis and alignment of 3D aligned carbon nanotube structures for battery cathode applications
Combining the results from the presented studies, a promising and unique composite cathode electrode configuration could be envisaged. It should consist of a low footprint 3D CNT cathode base structure employing highly aligned CNTs. Onto their outer surface nanoscaled LiMPO4 particles (M = Fe, Co, Ni) as electroactive particles are tethered.
A number of positive effects can be realized by using up to several tens of micrometres long multiwalled CNTs instead of unordered single walled CNTs in such architecture. First the active CNT surface could be maximized while retaining a high mechanical stability and flexibility. This should in principle allow for a high loading of LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni) particles compared to CNT architectures employed so far. With the presence of multiple defect sites on the CNT walls an effective tethering of LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni) particles would be realizable. These defect sites are achievable by chemical functionalization of the tube walls. They can also be introduced during the initial CNT synthesis process, since defects sites containing C–OH, CO or COOH groups are considered to favor the chemical attachments of the cathode materials on the surface of the CNTs.
Employing a template synthesis technique which introduces sufficient disorder in the CNT walls already during the initial CNT synthesis process for successful anchoring of the LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni) particles. This makes an additional extra step for chemical functionalization unnecessary. Porous alumina is unique in this regard it offers high thermal stability, high porosity, tunable pore dimensions and variable template size (Fig. 5).32,33 The alumina template pores can be filled with graphitic CNTs by a catalyst free CVD process using various carbon precursor gases (e.g. propene or ethane) followed by a complete template etching (Fig. 6). This technique allows adjusting the tube diameter and the distance to the upper nanometre size regime of 40–150 nm while allowing a macrosized footprint of the resulting CNT electrode of up to several mm2 in size.
 Fig. 5  Left: schematic drawing of a porous alumina template structure with hexagonal pore ordering. Right: SEM micrograph of the hexagonal cell arrangement and pore structure of an alumina template with ca. 40 nm pore diameter. 
 Fig. 6  Left: CNT–alumina composite obtained after CVD of ethene into the pores of alumina at 800 °C; middle: magnified view of the CNT part of the composite. The alumina template pore size is 250 nm; right: top view of the freestanding CNT structure after complete removal of the alumina template. 
Furthermore the CNT-CVD growth process can be tailored in such a way that the CNTs in the template are connected individually to each other on both sides of the structure by a few nanometres thick graphitic layer. The complete etching of the alumina template gives a vertical 3D-CNT network structure which ensures high flexibility of this architecture (Fig. 7). While the alumina pore walls are far from regular, the resulting CNTs, while being still graphitic, display a certain degree of disorder (Fig. 8). A graphical analysis of the Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) micrographs34 revealed that the length of the graphitic areas of the multiwalled CNTs are between 5 and 10 nm. This is certainly highly beneficial for tethering of LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni) electroactive nanoparticles (due to the high superficial reactivity) and making it unnecessary to apply an additional functionalization step. In addition a variable CNT distance in the 40–150 nm size regime which can be tuned by applying porous alumina templates with different pore diameter allows for a straightforward impregnation of the 3D CNT architecture with liquid precursor solutions of LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni) since the distance of the individual tubes in the network is of a similar size as the tube diameter due to the alumina template approach. If this distance would be significantly diminished, the 3D-CNT array could not be infiltrated to a sufficient extent with the electroactive material e.g. by employing a sol–gel route. The complete process of formation of a CNT–LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni) composite cathode architecture is shown in Scheme 1.
 Fig. 7  Left: photograph of the flexible 3D CNT architecture into which the LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni) material and the electrolyte can be infiltrated. The 3D CNT architecture is about 1 cm2 in size and 50 μm thick; right: side view of an etched 3D CNT array structure with top and bottom carbon layers to ensure high mechanical flexibility. 
 Fig. 8  Left: TEM micrograph of the graphitic wall structure of a typical multiwall CNT obtained by an alumina based template CVD growth process (CNT diameter 200 nm). The CNT walls display graphitic character, however only on a short range order ensuring numerous defect sites for tethering of LiMPO4 particles. From the TEM micrograph, image analysis algorithms allow to extract the number and size of the graphitic areas. The four picture series shows the computer generated thinning of the TEM information into a vectorised graphical image. From that a final model of the graphitic layer structure can be derived (outer right image of the four). 
 Scheme 1  Overall scheme for the synthesis of a 3D aligned LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni)–CNT composite cathode architecture. CNTs were deposited via CVD into porous alumina templates. After etching of the alumina template, the freestanding CNT array is dip infiltrated with a LiMPO4 sol. The cathode composite structure is finally calcined, infiltrated with the electrolyte and built into the battery cell architecture.30 
4. Deposition process of the cathode materials on the carbon nanostructures
Among the different deposition processes, the wet-chemistry technique offering improvement in terms of material preparation has been extensively used as a low-temperature synthesis route (T < 200 °C). The numerous advantages of low-temperature methods including intrinsic ease of use, low cost, versatility in terms of composition and structure manipulations, and ease of various processing steps following synthesis make them especially appealing for preparing solid-state ionic materials. The good stoichiometric control and production of submicron sized particles with narrow particle size distribution in relatively shorter processing time at a lower calcination temperature are the advantages of the method. These submicron-sized particles enable maximization of the particle surface area to volume ratio, the electrolyte–cathode material interfacial area and the particle to particle utilization uniformity during cycling, consequently improving the performances of these cathode materials. An example of the sol–gel method applied to prepare LiFePO4/C composites is shown in Fig. 9. The preparation of the pure LiFePO4 cathode material by this method is based on the acid–base reaction of the metal acetates with ammonium hydrogen phosphate in a polyol. A detailed description of the Pechini-assisted reverse polyol method has been previously reported.35,36
 Fig. 9  Scheme of the sol–gel process used to prepare the LiMPO4–C composites. As example the iron containing system has been chosen. 
As alternative, the sol–gel process can be carried out in organic solutions. The polyol method in the synthesis of the olivine particles consists of an acid–base reaction of metal acetates and ammonium hydrogen phosphate occurring under reflux conditions and vigorous stirring. It is well known that polyols play a useful role in producing metallic compounds from the metal salts due to the reducing environment at the boiling point.37 The polyols itself act not only as a solvent in the process, but also as a stabilizer, limiting the particle growth and prohibiting agglomeration.38
Because of the different processes used to prepare the LiMPO4–C-nanostructures composites (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Mn), this paragraph has been divided as follows:
(a) preparation of the LiMPO4–C-nanotubes composites in non-aqueous solutions (polyol);
(b) preparation of the LiMPO4–C-foams composites in aqueous solutions.
The results of the structural, morphological and electrochemical investigations of the prepared composites will be discussed more in detail in the following paragraphs.
The ethanol-based sol–gel method was established for apatite39 and adapted for the deposition of LiCoPO4 on carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as reported.40 At first triethyl phosphite was diluted in ethanol. The appropriate volume of ethanol solution with stoichiometric amounts of cobalt and lithium nitrates was added dropwise into triethyl phosphite solution. The hydrolyzed phosphorus sol was obtained due to hydrate water of starting reactants. The obtained solution was allowed to age for 24–72 h, before the solvents were driven off at 60 °C in Ar flow or vacuum until a viscous liquid was obtained. Further drying of the viscous liquid at 60 °C resulted in a white gel, which was subjected to different calcination temperatures from 400 to 800 °C in Ar flow. The best temperature range for synthesis of pure olivine phase was between 700 °C and 750 °C in Ar flow. To prepare a 2D LiMPO4–CNTs composite, nanotubes were added to the as prepared precursor solution for an ethanol-based sol–gel method before aging.40 The purity of the obtained (LiCoPO4–nanotubes) composite as a function of initial percent contents of active materials (LiCoPO4) was investigated with and without adding acetic acid as a catalyst. The most pure (LiCoPO4–nanotubes) composite was obtained for an approximately equal amount of active materials and nanotubes. The small quantity of acetic acid down to pH = 4 reduces the particle size and improves the purity of active materials in the composite. For the preparation of the 3D-LiCoPO4–CNT composites the sample preparation method was adapted as follows: coaxial nanotubes were stirred in the hydrolyzed precursor solution (0.1 M) flow during 3 days. After removal from solution they were annealed at 700 °C in Ar flow. An increase of the synthesis temperature up to 800 °C in Ar leads to a partial reduction of Co to the metallic state in the presence of CNTs. Finally in a recent work40 sol–gel technology was applied for the preparation of LiMPO4–CNTs composites (M = Co, Mn). The obtained morphologies and performance depend strongly on CNT's surface activation, precursor solution viscosity, infiltration of the CNT composite and limitations from additional carbon from the precursor solution.
The application of the ethanol-based sol–gel method resulted in an Mn3O4 impurity besides the LiMnPO4–CNTs composite, detected by X-ray diffraction. Therefore, glycolic acid was used as the reduction agent instead. The method (sol–gel 2) offered for preparation of LiMnPO441 was applied also for LiCoPO4 using lithium acetate dihydrate, manganese acetate tetrahydrate and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate as precursors. The starting materials were dissolved in distilled water at room temperature, and glycolic acid was used as a chelating agent. The pH of the resulting solution was adjusted to below 4 by the addition of concentrated HNO3. This solution was then heated to 60–75 °C to obtain a gel, and the latter was dried overnight at 120 °C before being heated for 10 h at 600 °C under Ar atmosphere. For obtaining 2D-LiMPO4–CNTs and 3D-LiMPO4–CNTs composites, nanotubes were added at the beginning to precursor solution.
4.1. LiFePO4–carbon nanostructures composites
The structural characterization of the LiFePO4/C-nanotubes composites has been performed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. The XRD patterns of the composites prepared by the sol–gel polyol process35 (shown in Fig. 10) indicate the LiFePO4 as main crystalline phase in the composites. All the diffraction peaks have been indexed with the olivine-type symmetry (Pnma), which confirms that the structure of the prepared composites corresponds to the orthorhombic LiFePO4. To prepare the composites, 10 wt% of functionalized carbon nano-fibers or 15 wt% of non-functionalized carbon nanotubes were added at the beginning of the synthesis.
 Fig. 10  XRD-patterns (Mo Kα1 radiation) of the LiFePO4–C-nanotubes composites, prepared by the sol–gel polyol method.35 
Both samples have been processed at 500 °C for 12 h under argon to yield the active olivine from the sol material. Fig. 11a shows the morphology of the LiFePO4 particles derived from a polyol process with tetraethylene glycol as solvent after deposition on unordered carbon nanotubes. The carbon nanotubes are homogeneously covered with agglomerates of small particles (Fig. 11b) that show pronounced sintering caused by the long term thermal annealing process that was, however, necessary in order to obtain the active phosphoolivine particles from the as-prepared nanoparticles. In fact, a post-annealing treatment under inert/reducing atmosphere is a still necessary step in order to enhance the electrochemical properties. The profile of the first discharge cycle for (a) the “as-prepared” LiFePO4 cathode material, (b) the LiFePO4 material and (c) LiFePO4–C nanotubes composites after annealing at 500 °C for 12 h under Ar atmosphere is shown in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 11  (a) SEM-micrographs of the LiFePO4–C-nanotubes composites, prepared by a polyol method; (b) the same composite at a higher magnification. The olivine particles cover the surface of the carbon fibers fairly homogeneously and show morphology based on the interconnection of the particles. 
 Fig. 12  Profile of the first discharge cycle for (a) “pure” as prepared LiFePO4; (b) “pure” LiFePO4 and (c) LiFePO4–C-nanotubes composites after annealing at 500 °C for 12 h in an argon atmosphere, measured at a discharge rate of 0.1 C and RT. The significantly enhanced electrochemical performance of the LiFePO4–C-nanotube composites occurs when the LiFePO4 olivine particle size is properly adjusted to complement the size of the CNTs. 
The treatment under inert/reducing atmosphere avoids the Fe2+/Fe3+ oxidation reaction which inhibits the kinetics of the deintercalation–intercalation processes of the lithium ions in the cathode material. Furthermore, a dramatic improvement of the electrochemical performances was observed. The specific capacity of pure LiFePO4 rises up to 84 mA h g−1 (at 0.1 C as discharge rate) while values as high as 154 mA h g−1 were reached by the LiFePO4-coated functionalized composites. The improved performance is probably due to the improved electronic conductivity of the cathode material due to morphology of the materials, particularly the smaller particle size. The nanosized materials shorten the diffusion paths for lithium ions, increase the diffusion rate and enable better kinetic conditions in the electrode material.
A dramatic enhancement in the electrochemical performances of the Li-ion battery can be achieved by reconfiguring the electrode materials currently employed in 2-D batteries into 3-D architectures. Improvements in energy per unit area and high-rate discharge capabilities are two of the benefits that may be realized for these 3-D cells. Among the examples of different 3-D architectures for charge-insertion batteries,7 the aperiodic “sponge” architecture can be effective. Efficient access of the electrolyte into the electrode pores is essential to harness the advantages that porous electrode materials might offer. Micropores, with diameters less than 2 nm, can produce very high surface areas.
However, they are easily blocked and may not allow efficient access of the electrolyte throughout the electrode. Electrode materials with slightly larger pores, mesopores in the range 2–50 nm, also offer high surface areas while potentially avoiding the permanent trapping of lithium ions that is possible with micropores.
A valid alternative is the use of commercially available carbon foams. The role of the carbon foams is: (i) they ensure good inter-particle conductivity and (ii) the continuous macroporous network allows an efficient transport route for the solvated ions to get to the mesopores and hence may offer superior battery performances. The micrographs in Fig. 13a and b show the morphological surface of the used foams. The porous architecture of the foams with hierarchical pore size distribution in micro-, meso-, and macropore ranges can be clearly recognized (Fig. 13a). While the carbon serves as an electron conductor, the pores, when filled with liquid electrolyte, serve as a source of Li+ ions. The micrograph of the Carbon foam/LiFePO4 (CF–LFP) composites prepared by soaking before and after annealing at 600 °C for 5 h under nitrogen is shown in Fig. 13b. The micrograph shows the filling of the pores on the surface of the foam. By soaking, the foam surface is covered by a continuous layer of liquid in which the Li+, Fe2+ and (PO4)3− ions are uniformly distributed. The slow evaporation of the solvent leads to the filling of the pores. The enhancement of the electrochemical properties for the composites was determined by the voltammetric curves measured in a potential range of 2.5–4.2 V at room temperature.42 The measurements indicated an improved kinetics of the lithium deintercalation–intercalation processes in the composites annealed at 600 °C. This is probably due to the fact that lithium diffusion and electrochemical kinetics reach an optimal state after the initial cycle.
 Fig. 13  SEM-micrographs of the LiFePO4–C-foam composites, prepared by a Pechini assisted sol–gel method (a) before and (b) after soaking into the solution and annealing at 600 °C for 10 h in a nitrogen atmosphere. The LiFePO4 cathode materials are filling the pores of the foam fairly homogeneously. 
The very small difference between oxidation and reduction potentials could indicate a very small polarization occurring in the composites. The electrochemical properties of the composites are dependent upon the annealing conditions as well (temperature, time). The specific capacity of LiFePO4–C-foams composites as a function of the cycle numbers (measured at a discharge rate of 0.1 C and RT) after annealing at 600 °C for different times is shown in Fig. 14. An increase of the specific capacity was observed after shorter annealing times (t ≤ 5 h) reaching a maximum of around 80 mA h g−1 for t = 5 h. At longer annealing times a slight decrease of the specific capacity was detected. This behavior was explained by the morphological changes and stabilization occurring in the LiFePO4–C-foams composites with the time.43 In the future, improvements to the electrochemistry may be achieved by optimizing the coating of lithium iron phosphate surrounding the carbon foam. This would increase the carbon–LiFePO4 interface and potentially improve the charge transfer kinetics.
 Fig. 14  Cyclability profiles of LiFePO4–C-foams composites, measured at a discharge rate of 0.1 C and RT, after annealing at 600 °C for different times under nitrogen atmosphere. The specific capacity increases for short annealing times, then decreases. 
4.2. LiCoPO4–carbon nanostructures composites
Among the LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Mn, Ni and Co) systems, Okada et al.44 have shown that LiCoPO4 has one of the highest redox potentials. LiCoPO4 is the only example of this class of materials which is suitable for 5 V batteries. However, studies on LiCoPO4 are scarce because the existing nonaqueous electrolytes are found to be unstable in the high-voltage range (≥4.8 V) where cobalt reduction–oxidation reactions can occur. Efforts toward improving nonaqueous electrolytes have made LiCoPO4 an attractive cathode to be explored in the high charge voltage regime, up to 5 V. Although the reversibility of lithium extraction–insertion from/into LiCoPO4 was demonstrated in a few reports,45 a severe capacity fading during cycling has limited the use of this material in practical applications.
The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of studied composites are depicted in Fig. 15. Most of the portion of active material is concentrated inside the CNTs. The electrochemical tests of the 3D-LiCoPO4/CNTs composite were performed in standard Swagelok cells. The composite materials were pressed on Al-meshes without adding carbon black and polymer binder. The cells were assembled with lithium foil as the anode, 1 M LiPF6 in ethylcarbonate (EC):dimethylcarbonate (DMC) = 1:1 as the electrolyte and a glass-fiber sheet as the separator. The best electrochemical performance was shown by the 2D-LiCoPO4/CNTs composite with addition of carbon black. The discharge capacity of this composite 105 mA h g−1 (or ca. 63% of the theoretical capacity) is close to the good discharge capacity of 123 mA h g−1 obtained for the nanoporous LiCoPO4–C composite microparticles synthesized by spray pyrolysis.46 Also cycle stability of the 2D-LiCoPO4–CNT composite with C black is better than for LiCoPO4 with addition of only C black and the 2D-LiCoPO4–CNT composite without addition of C black (Fig. 16). Similar results were reported previously,47 where the electrochemical performance of three different LiCoPO4–carbon composites was compared: (1) with vapor-grown carbon tubes only, (2) with a mixture of graphite and “carbon black”, representing disordered amorphous nanoparticles of graphite, and (3) with a mixture of carbon tubes and “carbon black”. The combination of tubes and carbon black was found to be beneficial for the high-power performance of the cathode mixtures due to a highly conductive network that connects well the active material particles with each other and with the current collector. The experimental results on Al-meshes for the 3D-LiCoPO4/CNTs composite show electrochemical properties in the same range as for the 2D-LiCoPO4/CNTs composite with carbon black. The poorer electrochemical properties can be also explained by trapping high amounts of active materials inside the nanotubes.
 Fig. 15  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (left) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (right) images of 2D-LiCoPO4–CNTs (above) and 3D-LiCoPO4–CNTs (below) composites showing the most portion of active material inside the CNTs. 
 Fig. 16  Capacity retention of a LiCoPO4–CNTs composite (C/10) obtained by two different sol–gel synthesis methods.47 
4.3. LiMPO4–carbon nanostructures composites (M = Co, Mn)
The method (sol–gel 2), offered for preparation of LiMnPO4, was applied to prepare LiMnPO4- and LiCoPO4-composites. This method provides better adhesion of particles to the CNTs surface (Fig. 17), but does not avoid agglomeration of active material that results in inhomogeneity of the composite. Despite identical values of theoretical discharge capacity (170 mA h g−1) for LiMnPO4 and LiFePO4, the behaviour of sol–gel synthesized LiMnPO4 cathodes was dramatically different.48 The sample LiMnPO4-SG (sol–gel) had a specific capacity that was one-fifth of the capacity of LiFePO4 SG at the same current density of 0.5 mA cm−2, even though both electrodes were synthesized in the same way and had the same structural and morphological characteristics. The positive aspect was that the capacity remains over repeated cycles. Such behaviour was related to the instability of the phase MnPO4 produced after Li+ extraction due to a cooperative Jahn–Teller distortion of the Mn3+ ions. As a result, the charging process produces an amorphous phase that is electrochemically inactive (and probably exhibits a low Li+ diffusivity). In recent experiments a better cycle stability was observed both for LiCoPO4/3D-CNT and LiMnPO4/3D-CNT obtained by a glycolic acid assisted method (sol–gel 2) in comparison with composites obtained by an ethanol based method (Fig. 16 and 18). Unfortunately, the value of specific discharge capacity for LiCoPO4–3D-CNT and LiMnPO4–3D-CNT was low and equal half of the specific discharge capacity for a LiCoPO4/2D-CNT/C black composite (105 mA h g−1).
 Fig. 17  SEM pictures of a 3D-LiCoPO4–CNT composite (a), LiCoPO4 carcass after removing the 3D-CNT by annealing in air (b); SEM pictures of a 3D-LiMnPO4–CNT composite (c, d). 
 Fig. 18  Capacity retention for 3D-LiMnPO4–CNTs composite (C/20) obtained by glycolic acid sol–gel methods. 
Several research groups have studied the cycling behavior of the pure LiMnPO4 compound.49,50 The results are controversial: Yamada and Chung49 related the inability to extract lithium from LiMnPO4 electrochemically to the thermodynamic instability of olivine-type MnPO4 due to the Jahn–Teller effect of Mn3+; Li et al.50 reported a reversible capacity of about 140 mA h g−1 for the reaction of LiMnPO4 to MnPO4. Recently Delacourt et al.51 studied the LiMnPO4 formed by direct precipitation and obtained a reversible capacity of 70 mA h g−1 after carbon coating by ball milling the materials with carbon black. This suggests that MnPO4 is more stable as proposed. Zhou et al.,52 using an advanced theoretical treatment, have calculated the open-circuit voltages and the band gap in these phosphates, and found that as expected they are very high. The open-circuit voltages are 3.5 V for LiFePO4, 4.1 V for LiMnPO4, 4.8 V for LiCoPO4 and 5.1 V for LiNiPO4, thus explaining the lack of electrochemical activity for LiNiPO4 within the normal cycling potential range.
5. Mechanism of Li extraction and insertion for LiMPO4
During last few years LiFePO4 is one of the favorable candidates for Li-ion battery cathode materials because of its low-cost and environmentally friendly properties. Firstly it was considered that lithium extraction from LiFePO4 and LiMnPO4 leads to the formation of completely delithiated compounds MPO4 (space group Pnma), which are isostructural to the initial phase LiMPO4.51,53 Thermal stability of heterosite FePO4 up to 620 °C was reported by Rousse et al.54 At higher temperatures there is a phase transformation into the quartz form of FePO4. Being mixed, both phases LiFePO4 and FePO4 transform into a new LixFePO4 olivine-like phase upon heating in an inert atmosphere (≥200 °C).55 This phase, with a partial occupancy of the lithium sites and mixed valence of Fe2+/Fe3+ sites, is not stable at temperatures higher than ∼500 °C and shows less thermal stability than LiFePO4 and FePO4. The oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+ is also the reason for less thermal stability of LiFePO4 in comparison with FePO4. A simple model for the delithiation of LiFePO4 was later corrected by Yamada et al.56 A careful X-ray powder diffraction revealed two narrow monophase regions (0 < x < 0.032 and 0.962 < x < 1, at room temperature) close to the end members FePO4 and LiFePO4, respectively. Chemical delithiation experiments57 and a flat two-phase region with open-circuit voltage 4.1 V58 confirmed a topotactic two-phase electrochemical mechanism between LiMnPO4 and the fully delithiated phase MnPO4 (a = 5.909(5) Å, b = 9.64(1) Å, and c = 4.768(6) Å). To better understand the factors responsible for the poor electrochemical performances of the olivine-type LiMnPO4, various experiments were carried out on both LiFePO4 and LiMnPO4.57 In conclusion the limiting factor in the MnPO4/LiMnPO4 electrochemical reaction is nested mostly in the ionic and/or electronic transport within the LiMnPO4 particles themselves rather than in charge transfer kinetics or structural instability of the MnPO4 phase.
The two step mechanism of lithium insertion–extraction was investigated in detail by Bramnik et al.59,60In situ synchrotron diffraction data for LiCoPO4 show that the electrochemical delithiation proceeds via the formation of an intermediate phase LizCoPO4, which transforms subsequently into CoPO4 (4.79 V, 4.87 V vs. Li/Li+). During discharge, the transformation of the phases proceeds in opposite directions in a reversible manner (4.78 V, 4.71 V vs. Li/Li+). The lithium content in the intermediate phase was estimated to be approximately z = 0.7 based on the unit cell volume differences for all three olivine-like phases (LiCoPO4, LixCoPO4, and CoPO4) and is supported by the analysis of voltage–composition curves for LiCoPO4. The coexistence of three olivine-like phases can be explained by slow kinetics of the lithiation–delithiation, especially for the first cycle. Besides, the delithiated phases are extremely thermally unstable and decompose upon heating in an inert atmosphere at temperatures below 200 °C, as was investigated by the synchrotron powder diffraction and thermal (DTA–TG) analysis. In the literature there are still various opinions about the mechanism of lithium insertion–extraction process.61–63 The cyclic voltammetry measurements61 revealed only one oxidation (5.1 vs. Li/Li+) and one reduction peak (4.8 V vs. Li/Li+), which are characteristic for a reversible one-step electrochemical process. For the charge curve of rheological phase production,62 it consists of two plateaus indicating a two-step mechanism of lithium extraction, one is ∼4.80 V and another is ∼4.90 V. However, the two-step character is not observed in the discharge curve. Both one-step and two-step mechanisms of lithium extraction have been observed.63
The ball milling of LiCoPO460 obtained by solid state reaction was shown to enhance the electrochemical performance and result in a better resolution of two steps upon galvanostatic cycling. Additionally, lowering of the annealing temperature and, hereby, particle size was found to increase the separation of the two steps in the charge–discharge curves for this compound (Fig. 19a–b). According to potentiodynamic cyclings with galvanostatic acceleration (PCGA), potentiostatic intermittent titration test (PITT) and cycling curve (specific intensity vs. Potential) plotted in constant-potential mode40,60,63 three kinds of Li extraction–insertion schemes, calculated from in situ synchrotron diffraction, are derived (Fig. 18). The second model for 2D-LiCoPO4/CNTs and 3D-LiCoPO4/CNTs composites has a two step–one step scheme, where the presence of two steps on an oxidation or reduction curve is determined by occurrence probability of the extended voltage region of metastability for LixCoPO4. This behaviour is explained by slow migration of Li ions inside the CNTs and accordingly small amount of LixCoPO4 phase. As described above an ethanol based sol–gel method led to the production of nanocomposites with a high amount of active material placed inside the nanotubes and with following scheme of Li extraction–insertion (Fig. 19c–d). The last scheme (Fig. 19e–f) shows the situation when Li extraction is too low, so that the CoPO4 phase is not obtained. This model is typical for fast charging and discharging rates and also for composites with poor contact between active materials and carbon nanotubes, like for 2D-70%LiCoPO4–CNTs, where a significant amount of active material is not in contact with nanotubes.
 Fig. 19  Pictures 19(a) and (b) represent data obtained from a fine powder composite, synthesized by a solid state reaction with ball milling.60 Potentiodynamic cycling galvanostatic acceleration for a 2D-40%LiCoPO4–CNTs–C black40 composite obtained by an ethanol based sol–gel method and determined phase content obtained from Rietveld refined in situ Synchrotron XRD data correspond to 3D-LiCoPO4–CNTs that are presented in 19(c) and (d). Fig. 19(e) represent a cycling curve plotted in constant-potential mode of a lithium storage battery comprising the LiCoPO4 compound obtained according to a particular embodiment of the invention with fast (100 mV h−1) scanning.63Fig. 19(f) corresponds to 2-D 70%LiCoPO4–CNTs composite low kinetic cycling (Copyright © 2007 American chemical Society). 
In order to determine the structure of lithiated Li2CoPO4F Hadermann et al.64 applied several TEM techniques like precession electron diffraction (PED), High angle annular dark field scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM) and high resolution TEM. They showed that cobalt is octahedrally coordinated by O2− and F− anions whereas the phosphor is tetrahedrally coordinated solely by O2− anions. Thereby the CoO4F2 octahedra represent infinite chains along the b-axis decreasing the lithium diffusion in this direction. Moreover Khasanova et al.65 showed that during delithiation of Li2Ni0.75Fe0.25PO4F only the occupancy of one lithium site decreased whereas the occupancies of the two other lithium sites remained almost unchanged.
Direct imaging of Li ions was also performed by Huang et al.66,67 Applying an Annular Bright Field (ABF)–STEM technique to LiMn2O4−δ66 and LiCoO267 present ions were clearly discernable in the ABF image. Findings were supported by ABF image simulation.67 Moreover a slight shift of the cations due to the presence of oxygen vacancies was observed.66 Gwon et al.68 examined the structure of the solid solution LiMn1/3Fe1/3Co1/3PO4 in the lithiated as well as delithiated state. Structural refinements of the XRD-data revealed the presence of the orthorhombic Pnma phase. The experimentally determined lattice parameters of the lithiated material are a = 10.31 Å, b = 5.99 Å and c = 4.70 Å which were in good agreement with the values obtained from first principle calculations. Delithiation induced a decrease of lattice parameters a and b to 9.95 and 5.94 Å, respectively, whereas the lattice parameter c increases to 4.88 Å. This fact is commonly known and has been widely reported in the literature. From lithiated to delithiated status a decrease in the cell volume from 290.26 to 277.56 Å3 was reported.68 Based on the continuous shift of reflections a one-phase reaction was suggested by them rather than the commonly observed two-phase Li insertion–extraction process.
Conclusions
Lithium ion batteries have made substantial and significant gains in the last 20 years from becoming a curiosity to becoming the dominant rechargeable battery for portable applications. However, the inability of lithium ion batteries to fully satisfy consumer electronics has been one of the principal motivations for the dramatic rise in fuel-cell research and development. As the dimensions of devices continue to shrink, the question arises as to how power sources of comparable scale will be fabricated. The 2-D configurations of traditional batteries may not be effective here, despite their high energy density. Three-dimensional batteries offer a different approach to the portable power field. In this work we have presented 3-D composite materials that emphasize power sources with small areal footprints but do not compromise power and energy density. So far this approach to solve the power needs for cell phones and laptop computers has remained unclear but it will probably have a significant impact on current and future generations of microdevices. In particular distributed sensor networks and wireless communication systems are representative areas where 3-D batteries would be welcomed enthusiastically because the power supplies currently in use are many times the size of the device.
This review has shown the preparation and characterization of composite materials composed of LiMPO4 (where M = Fe, Co, Ni, Mn) “supported” on a carbon nanostructure such as nanotubes or foams for application as cathode materials in lithium-ion batteries. The carbon nanotubes were either commercially available or synthesized with alumina templates in a catalyst free CVD process, while the carbon foams were obtained from commercial ones. Aqueous and non-aqueous sol–gel processes have been used to tether nanoscale phosphoolivine particles onto the nanoscale carbon structures. Electrochemical measurements on the obtained composites revealed a significant enhancement of the electrochemical performances of these materials in comparison with the isolated LiMPO4 phosphoolivine phase obtained under very similar conditions. The electrochemical measurements also demonstrated the good electrochemical stability of the composites consisting of the carbon nanostructure and particularly the Fe-containing phosphoolivine phase. Additionally, the first steps have been moved in the direction of composites with LiCoPO4, LiNiPO4 and LiMnPO4 as cathode materials. In addition to a literature survey two different methods for composite synthesis have been presented. The advantageous features of the ethanol based sol–gel method are the good infiltration of the nanotube samples due to low viscosity of precursor solution and a high value for the achieved composite discharge capacity. However, the second glycolic acid assisted water sol–gel method provides composites with small capacity, but with better cycle stability.
The 3D-LiCoPO4–CNTs composites show better electrochemical performance than LiCoPO4 with C black and is comparable with data for the 2D-LiCoPO4–CNTs–C black composite (105 mA h g−1). The basic disadvantage of 3D-LiCoPO4/CNTs composite synthesis by an ethanol based sol–gel method is the penetration of most of the active materials inside the nanotubes, hindering lithium migration. As a result of incomplete delithiation the samples reveal different schemes for the underlying lithiation–delithiation mechanism with different process steps, reflected in the electrochemical oxidation and reduction.
Further investigations are necessary to improve the stability of the composites during the cycling; for example the homogeneity of the particles of the phosphoolivine phases, the modification of the deposition process to ensure that the particles infiltrate the void space within the carbon nanostructures more effectively.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for the financial support of their individual projects during the work within the funding initiative SPP 1181 (SCHN 375/16-1-3, JA 859/14-2, EH 183/3). The authors thank Dr N. N. Bramnik for the discussions while preparing this review. Many thanks are due to the technical assistants (Ms C. Spanheimer, Mr J.-C. Jaud) for their valuable assistance during the experiments and characterizations (group of Prof. W. Jaegermann).
References

Advances in Lithium-Ion Batteries, ed. W. Van Schalkwijk and B. Scrosati, Springer, Berlin,  2002 Search PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS .
M. Endo, C. Kim, K. Nishimura, T. Fujino and K. Miyashita, Carbon, 2000, 38, 183 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303 CrossRef CAS .
P. Arora and Z. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4419 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Long, B. Dunn, D. R. Rolison and H. S. White, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4463–4492 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Arthur, D. J. Bates, N. Cirigliano, D. C. Johnson, P. Malati, J. M. Mosby, E. Perre, M. T. Rawls, A. L. Prieto and B. Dunn, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 523–531 CrossRef CAS .
W.-M. Jin and J. H. Moon, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14456–14460 RSC .
D. R. Rolison, J. W. Long, J. C. Lytle, A. E. Fischer, Ch. P. Rhodes, T. M. McEvoy, M. E. Bourg and A. M. Lubers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 226–252 RSC .
Yo. Wang, Ya. Wang, E. Hosono, K. Wang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., 2008, 120, 7571–7575 CrossRef .

Carbon for Electrochemical Energy Storage and Conversion Systems, ed. F. Beguin and E. Frackowiak, CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA,  2010 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Hu, P. Adelhelm, B. M. Smarsly, S. Hore, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1873 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamada, S. C. Chung and K. Hinokuma, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 148, A224 CrossRef .
K. S. Park, K. T. Kang, S. B. Lee, G. Y. Kim, Y. J. Park and H. G. Kim, Mater. Res. Bull., 2004, 39, 1803 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim and J. Kim, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A439 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gaberscek, R. Dominko and J. Jamnik, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2778 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, S.-C. Yin and L. F. Nazar, Electrochem. Solid–State Lett., 2001, 4, A170 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ravet, Y. Chouinard, J. F. Magnan, S. Besner, M. Gauthier and M. Armand, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 503 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1184 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Ong, Y.-K. Lin and J.-S. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A527 CrossRef CAS .
V. Palomares, A. Goni, I. Gil de Muro, I. de Meatza, M. Bengoechea, O. Miguel and T. Rojo, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 879 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Doherty, R. A. Caruso, B. M. Smarsly, P. Adelhelm and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5300 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, W.-l. Wang, D. Chen and W. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14680–14684 RSC .
J. J. Schneider, J. Khanderi, A. Popp, J. Engstler, H. Tempel, A. Sarapulova, N. N. Bramnik, D. Mikhailova, H. Ehrenberg, L. A. Schmitt, L. Dimesso, C. Förster and W. Jaegermann, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 2011, 4249–4259 CrossRef .
S. Ahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1998, 1, 111 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Sakamoto and B. Dunn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A26 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lin and J. N. Harb, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1115–A1119 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, F. Kang, X. Bai and W. Shen, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 663–666 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. M. Reedy, M. M. Shaijumon, S. R. Gowda and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(No. 3), 1002–1006 CrossRef .
X. Jia, C. Yan, Z. Chen, R. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Guo, F. Wei and Y. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9669–9671 RSC .
J. J. Schneider, J. Engstler, K. P. Budna, S. Franzka and C. Teichert, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2005, 2352 CrossRef CAS .

          J. J. Schneider, A. Popp and J. Engstler, Fundamentals and Functionality in Inorganic Wires, Rods and Tubes, in Nanotechnology, in Principles and Fundamentals, ed. G. Schmid, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,  2008, vol. 1, ISBN: 978-3-527-31732-5 Search PubMed .
M. Lillo-Rodenas, D. Carzorla-Amoros, A. Linares-Solano, F. Beguin, C. Clinard and J. Rouzard, Carbon, 2004, 42, 1305–1310 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Bhuvaneswari, N. N. Bramnik, D. Ensling, H. Ehrenberg and W. Jaegermann, J. Power Sources, 2008, 180, 553 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dimesso, C. Spanheimer, S. Jacke and W. Jaegermann, Ionics, 2011, 17(5), 429 CrossRef CAS .
L. Poul, S. Ammar, S. Jouini, F. Fievet and F. Villain, Solid State Sci., 2001, 3, 31 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiu, V. G. Pol, J. C. Moreno and A. Gedanken, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2005, 12, 243 CrossRef CAS .
D.-M. Liu, T. Troczynski and W. J. Tseng, Biomaterials, 2001, 22, 1721–1730 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sarapulova, D. Mikhailova, L. A. Schmitt, S. Oswald, N. Bramnik and H. Ehrenberg, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 62, 98–110 CrossRef CAS .
T. Drezen, N. H. Kwon, P. Bowen, I. Teerlinck, M. Isono and I. Exnar, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 949–953 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dimesso, C. Spanheimer, S. Jacke and W. Jaegermann, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(16), 6729 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dimesso, S. Jacke, C. Spanheimer and W. Jaegermann, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 3777 CrossRef CAS .
S. Okada, S. Sawa, M. Egashira, J.-i. Yamaki, M. Tabuchi, H. Kageyama, T. Konishi and A. Yoshino, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 430 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dimesso, G. Cherkashinin, C. Spanheimer and W. Jaegermann, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 516, 119–125 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, T. E. Conry, X. Song, L. Yang, M. M. Doeff and T. J. Richardson, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9984–9987 RSC .
I. V. Thorat, V. Mathur, J. N. Harb and D. R. Wheeler, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 673–678 CrossRef CAS .
M. Piana, B. L. Cushing, J. B. Goodenough and N. Penazzi, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 175, 233–237 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamada and S.-C. Chung, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A960 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, H. Azuma and M. Tohda, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, A135 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, P. Poizot, M. Morcrette, J.-M. Tarascon and C. Masquelier, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 93 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Zhou, M. Cococcioni, C. Marianetti, D. Morgan, M. Chen and G. Ceder, 12th International Meeting on Lithium Batteries, Electrochemical Society, Pennington, NJ,  2004, vol. 12, abstract 283 Search PubMed .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rousse, J. Rodríguez-Carvajal, S. Patoux and C. Masquelier, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4082 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, P. Poizot, J.-M. Tarascon and C. Masquelier, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 254 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamada, H. Koizumi, N. Sonoyama and R. Kanno, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A409 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, L. Laffont, R. Bouchet, C. Wurm, J.-B. Leriche, M. Morcrette, J.-M. Tarascon and C. Masquelier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A913–A921 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, H. Azuma and M. Tohda, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5(6), A135–A137 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Bramnik, K. Nikolowski, D. M. Trots and H. Ehrenberg, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11(6), A89–A93 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Bramnik, K. Nikolowski, C. Baehtz, K. G. Bramnik and H. Ehrenberg, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 908–915 CrossRef CAS .
A. Amine, H. Yasuda and M. Yamachi, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2000, 3, 178 CrossRef .
L. Tan, Z. Luo, H. Liu and Y. Yu, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 502, 407–410 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Patoux, C. Pagano, C. Bourbon and F. le Cras, US Pat. US2010/0028676 A1,  2010 Search PubMed .
J. Hadermann, A. M. Abakumov, S. Turner, Z. Hafideddine, N. R. Khasanova, E. V. Antipov and G. van Tendeloo, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3540 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Khasanova, A. N. Gavrilov, E. V. Antipov, K. G. Bramnik and H. J. Hibst, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 355 CrossRef CAS .
R. Huang, Y. H. Ikuhara, T. Mizoguchi, S. D. Findlay, A. Kuwabara, C. A. J. Fisher, H. Moriwake, H. Oki, T. Hirayama and Y. Ikuhara, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3053 CrossRef CAS .
R. Huang, T. Hitosugi, S. D. Findlay, C. A. J. Fisher, Y. H. Ikuhara, H. Moriwake, H. Oki and Y. Ikuhara, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 051913 CrossRef .
H. Gwon, D.-H. Seo, S.-W. Kim, J. Kim and K. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3285 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Part of a web theme on the topic of nanomaterials (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft SPP1181/Nanomaterials program).This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Lucangelo Dimesso
	Dr Lucangelo Dimesso (Taranto, Italy, 1963) Chemist, Materials Scientist. Senior Researcher at Darmstadt University of Technology (since 2009). He investigates lithium metal phosphates supported on bi- and three-dimensional carbon structures as cathode materials for high-voltage Li-ion batteries. He studied Industrial Chemistry at the University of Parma (Italy), DrPhil (1988), Specialization in Materials Science and Technology (1991). Post-doctoral fellow at Research Institute CNR-ITM (Milano, 1991–1993), Post-doctoral fellow in Japan (1993–1995). EU-fellowship at the Darmstadt University of Technology, Materials Science Department, Thin Films Division (1996–1998). Master in Industrial Engineering (1999). SusTech Darmstadt GmbH & Co KG, as Senior Researcher (2000–2008).

Jayaprakash Khanderi
	Jayaprakash Khanderi has obtained an MSc degree in chemistry from Mangalore University and an MTech in Metallurgy from National Institute of Technology (NITK) Surathkal, Karnataka, India. After moving to Germany he obtained his PhD degree in 2006 in the field of Materials Chemistry under the guidance of Prof. Roland Fischer at Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany. He did post-doctoral work from 2006 to 2010 first with Prof. Stephan Schulz at University of Paderborn, Germany, in the area Organometallic chemistry of zinc as well as thermoelectric materials (e.g. Bi2Te3, Bi2Se3) and then with Prof. Jörg J. Schneider at Technische University Darmstadt, Germany, in the area of carbon nanotube based inorganic hybrid materials for lithium ion battery, gas sensors and catalysis. He has 5 years of industrial research experience and is currently a senior scientist at corporate research laboratory, Laird Technologies, India.

Hermann Tempel
	Hermann Tempel obtained his Diploma (Dipl. Ing.) degree in 2008 in Chemistry from the Technische Universität Darmstadt where he worked on synthesis and organization of carbon nanotubes by ink jet printing techniques. He is currently pursuing his final studies towards a PhD degree in the group of Prof. J. J. Schneider at TU Darmstadt. In 2010 he took part in a three month research project on dye synthesized solar cells at MET University, Ankara, Turkey. His research interests are in the fields of nanostructured metal oxide materials, carbon nanotubes, hybrids of these materials as well as their functional properties in photocatalysis and energy storage (e.g. lithium ion batteries).

Angelina Sarapulova
	Dr. Angelina Sarapulova, Chemist. She studied Inorganic chemistry at the Baikal Institute of Nature Management, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences (Ulan-Ude, Russia), PhD degree (2006). She worked as engineer and scientific researcher in the laboratory of hydro-geo ecological studies of Geological Institute, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences (Ulan-Ude, 2006–2009), and as a post-doctoral researcher in the group of Prof. Dr H. Ehrenberg, in the area of cathode composites for Li-ion batteries at IFW Dresden (Dresden, 2009–2012).

Daria Mikhailova
	Daria Mikhailova has obtained a diploma of chemistry in 1996 and a PhD degree in 2000 at the Moscow State University, Russia. During her PhD she was dealing with synthesis and investigations of HgBa2Can−1CunO6+2n+d superconductors. From 2005 to 2007 she did a post-doctoral work in the group of Prof. Hartmut Fuess at the Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany, in the field of structure and magnetic characterization of new high-pressure complex metal oxides. From 2007 to 2011 she worked as a senior scientist at IFW Dresden, Germany, in the department of Prof. Dr Helmut Ehrenberg. Her research concentrated on transition-metal oxide materials for cathodes in Li-ion batteries. Currently she is a senior researcher at the Max-Planck Institute of Chemical Physics of Solids in Dresden.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a lithium-ion battery.	 

 	Fig. 2  Examples of 3-D architectures for charge-insertion batteries: (a) array of interdigitated cylindrical cathodes and anodes; (b) interdigitated plate array; (c) rod array of cylindrical cathodes and anodes coated with a layer of conducting electrolyte; (d) sponge like architecture (reproduced with permission from ref. 7) Copyright © 2004 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 3  Scheme of a 3D aligned LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni)–CNT composite cathode architecture.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of a flexible LiMn2O4–CNT nanocomposite cathode architecture, (b) photograph showing an as-synthesized flexible electrode (reproduced from ref. 31 with permission of RSC).	 

 	Fig. 5  Left: schematic drawing of a porous alumina template structure with hexagonal pore ordering. Right: SEM micrograph of the hexagonal cell arrangement and pore structure of an alumina template with ca. 40 nm pore diameter.	 

 	Fig. 6  Left: CNT–alumina composite obtained after CVD of ethene into the pores of alumina at 800 °C; middle: magnified view of the CNT part of the composite. The alumina template pore size is 250 nm; right: top view of the freestanding CNT structure after complete removal of the alumina template.	 

 	Fig. 7  Left: photograph of the flexible 3D CNT architecture into which the LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni) material and the electrolyte can be infiltrated. The 3D CNT architecture is about 1 cm2 in size and 50 μm thick; right: side view of an etched 3D CNT array structure with top and bottom carbon layers to ensure high mechanical flexibility.	 

 	Fig. 8  Left: TEM micrograph of the graphitic wall structure of a typical multiwall CNT obtained by an alumina based template CVD growth process (CNT diameter 200 nm). The CNT walls display graphitic character, however only on a short range order ensuring numerous defect sites for tethering of LiMPO4 particles. From the TEM micrograph, image analysis algorithms allow to extract the number and size of the graphitic areas. The four picture series shows the computer generated thinning of the TEM information into a vectorised graphical image. From that a final model of the graphitic layer structure can be derived (outer right image of the four).	 

 	Scheme 1  Overall scheme for the synthesis of a 3D aligned LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni)–CNT composite cathode architecture. CNTs were deposited via CVD into porous alumina templates. After etching of the alumina template, the freestanding CNT array is dip infiltrated with a LiMPO4 sol. The cathode composite structure is finally calcined, infiltrated with the electrolyte and built into the battery cell architecture.30	 

 	Fig. 9  Scheme of the sol–gel process used to prepare the LiMPO4–C composites. As example the iron containing system has been chosen.	 

 	Fig. 10  XRD-patterns (Mo Kα1 radiation) of the LiFePO4–C-nanotubes composites, prepared by the sol–gel polyol method.35	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) SEM-micrographs of the LiFePO4–C-nanotubes composites, prepared by a polyol method; (b) the same composite at a higher magnification. The olivine particles cover the surface of the carbon fibers fairly homogeneously and show morphology based on the interconnection of the particles.	 

 	Fig. 12  Profile of the first discharge cycle for (a) “pure” as prepared LiFePO4; (b) “pure” LiFePO4 and (c) LiFePO4–C-nanotubes composites after annealing at 500 °C for 12 h in an argon atmosphere, measured at a discharge rate of 0.1 C and RT. The significantly enhanced electrochemical performance of the LiFePO4–C-nanotube composites occurs when the LiFePO4 olivine particle size is properly adjusted to complement the size of the CNTs.	 

 	Fig. 13  SEM-micrographs of the LiFePO4–C-foam composites, prepared by a Pechini assisted sol–gel method (a) before and (b) after soaking into the solution and annealing at 600 °C for 10 h in a nitrogen atmosphere. The LiFePO4 cathode materials are filling the pores of the foam fairly homogeneously.	 

 	Fig. 14  Cyclability profiles of LiFePO4–C-foams composites, measured at a discharge rate of 0.1 C and RT, after annealing at 600 °C for different times under nitrogen atmosphere. The specific capacity increases for short annealing times, then decreases.	 

 	Fig. 15  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (left) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (right) images of 2D-LiCoPO4–CNTs (above) and 3D-LiCoPO4–CNTs (below) composites showing the most portion of active material inside the CNTs.	 

 	Fig. 16  Capacity retention of a LiCoPO4–CNTs composite (C/10) obtained by two different sol–gel synthesis methods.47	 

 	Fig. 17  SEM pictures of a 3D-LiCoPO4–CNT composite (a), LiCoPO4 carcass after removing the 3D-CNT by annealing in air (b); SEM pictures of a 3D-LiMnPO4–CNT composite (c, d).	 

 	Fig. 18  Capacity retention for 3D-LiMnPO4–CNTs composite (C/20) obtained by glycolic acid sol–gel methods.	 

 	Fig. 19  Pictures 19(a) and (b) represent data obtained from a fine powder composite, synthesized by a solid state reaction with ball milling.60 Potentiodynamic cycling galvanostatic acceleration for a 2D-40%LiCoPO4–CNTs–C black40 composite obtained by an ethanol based sol–gel method and determined phase content obtained from Rietveld refined in situ Synchrotron XRD data correspond to 3D-LiCoPO4–CNTs that are presented in 19(c) and (d). Fig. 19(e) represent a cycling curve plotted in constant-potential mode of a lithium storage battery comprising the LiCoPO4 compound obtained according to a particular embodiment of the invention with fast (100 mV h−1) scanning.63Fig. 19(f) corresponds to 2-D 70%LiCoPO4–CNTs composite low kinetic cycling (Copyright © 2007 American chemical Society).	 
Footnote
† Part of a web theme on the topic of nanomaterials (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft SPP1181/Nanomaterials program).

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
