Silicon diatom frustules as nanostructured photoelectrodes   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CC04470C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CC04470C
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10441-10444Silicon diatom frustules as nanostructured photoelectrodes†

        
          
            Soundarrajan 
            Chandrasekaran
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Martin J. 
            Sweetman
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Krishna 
            Kant
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            William 
            Skinner
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Dusan 
            Losic
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Thomas 
            Nann
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Nicolas H. 
            Voelcker
          
        
      *a
aMawson Institute, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes Blvd, Adelaide, SA 5095, Australia. E-mail: Nico.Voelcker@unisa.edu.au
bSchool of Chemical Engineering, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia
cIan Wark Research Institute, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes Blvd, Adelaide, SA 5095, Australia
Received 
      12th June 2014
    , Accepted 22nd July 2014First published on 22nd July 2014AbstractIn the quest for solutions to meeting future energy demands, solar fuels play an important role. A particularly promising example is photocatalysis since even incremental improvements in performance in this process are bound to translate into significant cost benefits. Here, we report that semiconducting and high surface area 3D silicon replicas prepared from abundantly available diatom fossils sustain photocurrents and enable solar energy conversion.
Although the use of renewable energy sources is on the rise, intermittent availability remains a major issue, which means that effective methods for energy storage are required. Beyond battery technologies, an attractive solution to this problem is to convert renewable energy into a fuel, which can be stored and used as required. This can be achieved by using photoelectrochemical (PEC) devices, which consist of an n-type semiconductor photoanode and a p-type semiconductor photocathode.1 Appropriately applied, such devices can mimic natural photosynthesis and are commonly referred to as artificial photosynthesis systems.2
In nature, organisms have developed unique solutions to complex optical problems through sophisticated control of structural features from the nano- to the micrometre scale.3 In diatoms – a major group of single cell photosynthetic algae – hierarchical porous silica structures have been optimized for enhanced light uptake and energy conversion using photosynthesis.3,4 Fuhrmann et al. have shown that diatom frustule structures couple incoming light into waveguides with distinct photonic bandgaps and therefore act as living photonic crystals.5 Chloroplasts are located in close proximity to the silica cell walls. In our previous work, we showed that a laser beam focused on a specific region on a live diatom could induce chloroplast luminescence across the entire diatom, suggesting a biological relevance of the diatom porous structure in light harvesting.4–6 Based on these examples, we surmised that exploiting low-cost, hierarchically structured natural fossilized diatoms could potentially revolutionize the way in which we fabricate photovoltaic, energy storage, and optoelectronic devices.
The principal reason why native diatom frustules are not currently used for solar energy conversion lies in the fact that the frustules are made of biomineralised silica,3b an insulator not suitable for use in PEC devices. Several approaches based on metal and nanoparticle coatings, chemical vapour deposition and atomic layer deposition have been explored to convert silica into materials with new and more efficient optical, electrical and magnetic properties.7 The concept of using diatom frustules as photovoltaic material for dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC) has been recently demonstrated using diatom silica coated with titanium dioxide (TiO2).8 The solar cell efficiency achieved was approximately 6.7%, which has been further improved recently using a plasma polymerized coating of TiO2.7a These coating examples show that the conversion of silica diatom frustules into nanostructured semiconducting materials is a viable approach. The obvious target semiconductor here would be silicon which has a band-gap in the range of 1.1 eV, shows broad solar absorption and is therefore highly suitable for solar energy conversion processes.9 In addition, engineered nanostructured forms of silicon such as porous silicon and silicon nanowires have previously been shown to improve photocatalytic hydrogen generation.10
Here, we report that nanostructured diatom frustules from Aulacoseira sp. can be converted into nanostructured silicon semiconductors for solar energy conversion to power water electrolysis. The inspiration came from work by Sandhage group who demonstrated, for the first time, conversion of diatom SiO2 into silicon using a magnesiothermic reduction process.11 Adapting and simplifying this process, we showed that converted silicon with diatom structures is an excellent electrode material for solar energy conversion. Our approach as presented in Scheme 1 involves several steps, including: shape-preserving reduction of diatom silica into nanostructured silicon using magnesiothermic reduction, surface modification of hydride-terminated diatom silicon with organic thiols via hydrosilylation, attachment of thiol-modified diatom frustules to a gold-plated electrode and assembly of the working electrode into a three electrode electrochemical cell for light conversion and photocurrent measurement.
 Scheme 1  Schematic representation of magnesiothermic conversion of diatom frustules to nanostructured silicon and their application for photo-electrochemical energy conversion. In the second step, thiol-modified silicon diatom frustules are attached to a gold electrode surface and used in a three-electrode cell set up to perform photocurrent measurements. 
In order to render the magnesiothermic reduction process more scalable for industrial applications, we avoided the original approach using sealed stainless steel ampoules reported by Bao et al.11 Instead, we heated the magnesium (Mg) source and the diatom silica in a tungsten boat inside of a furnace to 650 °C under argon gas flow. After cooling, the process was repeated to ensure complete conversion. In the original work, the Mg source was placed a certain distance apart to the diatom frustules at 2.5:1 molar ratio. We found that separating the reducing agent was not required and that thorough mixing of Mg turnings and silica diatom frustules achieved the same result. Furthermore, we observed that using a molar ratio of 2.5:1 Mg turnings to silica resulted in the formation of Mg2Si, altering the morphology of the diatom frustules when treated with hydrochloric acid (HCl) and hydrofluoric acid (HF) (Fig. 1S, ESI†). In contrast, a molar ratio of 1.25:1 Mg turnings to silica gave excellent shape-preserving conversion.
This approach does not require a sealed boat/cell design, nor heat scavengers.12Fig. 1 shows scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) of the shape-preserving, magnesiothermic conversion of silica to silicon diatom frustules. Fig. 1A and B show SEM images of an Aulacoseira sp. frustule before (A) and after (B) the conversion process. The conspicuous attenuation of the oxygen peak (compare Fig. 1C and D) confirms that the conversion was successful. The carbon and gold peaks in Fig. 1C and D are attributed to adventitious carbon and gold from the sample holder used, respectively.
 Fig. 1  Panels A and B show SEM images of an Aulacoseira sp. frustule before and after the magnesiothermic conversion process, respectively. The EDXS spectra confirm successful silica reduction, as seen from the attenuated intensity of the oxygen peak (D, after conversion) when compared to C (before conversion). 

Fig. 2 shows the corresponding X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the Aulacoseira sp. frustules before and after the magnesiothermic conversion. The weak amorphous SiO2 (JCPDS card number 29-0085) signal of the Aulacoseira sp. frustules before conversion is evident from Fig. 2A. Prominent silicon peaks (JCPDS card number 27-1402) are observed in the XRD spectrum for the converted diatom frustules, in Fig. 2B, which indicates that the SiO2 has been converted to silicon during the conversion reaction.
 Fig. 2  XRD spectra of the Aulacoseira sp. frustule before (A) and after (B) the magnesiothermic conversion process. A weak SiO2 amorphous peak (JCPDS card number 29-0085) was observed in spectrum (A). After magnesiothermic reduction, strong silicon peaks (JCPDS card number 27-1402) were observed in spectrum (B). 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Fig. 2S and the corresponding survey spectrum, Fig. 3S, ESI†) and Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 4S, ESI†) also confirmed the absence of silica after the magnesiothermic conversion process. Indeed, the only oxidized forms of Si present at the surface were residual Si sub-oxides and SiF species after HF treatment (Fig. 2SB and 3SB, ESI†).
Fourier transformed infrared (FTIR) spectra (Fig. 5SA and B, ESI†) of the Aulacoseira sp. frustules before and after magnesiothermic conversion further corroborated successful silica conversion. Thus, all structural and spectroscopic analyses confirmed that the magnesiothermic shape-preserving conversion process was effective. The results are consistent with the previous work by Bao et al.,11 although we have simplified the process further.
The generated silicon diatom frustules were then hydrosilylated with allyl mercaptan (AM),13 to prevent oxidation of the diatom surface and to present terminal thiols with high affinity for gold.14 The FTIR spectrum (Fig. 5SC, ESI†) of the AM hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules confirmed that the hydrosilylation had been taken place. The presence of free thiol (–SH) groups was shown by fluorescent labelling of the frustules using fluorecein-5-maleimide.15 Fluorimetry and fluorescence microscopy (Fig. 6S and 7S, ESI†) showed successful dye labeling of the hydrosilylated frustules, but not the bare silicon diatom frustules.
Electrode fabrication involved the attachment of hydrosilylated silicon diatoms via thiol groups onto gold-plated glass slides. Hydrosilylated diatoms adhered strongly to the gold surface whereas most bare silicon diatoms would easily wash off. Photoelectrolysis was performed using a sealed three-electrode Teflon electrochemical cell. Fig. 3 shows typical photocurrent measurements for a bare gold electrode (trace A), a gold electrode after exposure to bare silicon diatom frustules (trace B) and a gold electrode coated with hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules (trace C). The inset shows the result for the fabricated hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustule working electrode.
 Fig. 3  Photocurrent measurements in a three-electrode cell set up using PBS as electrolyte and Ag|AgCl as reference electrode at a bias potential of 0 V. Trace A shows the photocurrent density for bare gold electrode. Trace B shows the photocurrent density observed for gold electrode treated with bare silicon diatom frustules. Trace C shows the photocurrent density observed for the gold electrode coated with hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules with an open circuit potential of 0.066 V. The inset shows the fabricated gold electrode with hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules. The area (A) corresponds to the frustule-modified region whilst area (B) corresponds to the bare gold electrode surface. The SEM image shows the coating of the gold surfaces with hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules. 
The photocurrents were measured in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) using the working electrode at 0 V vs. an Ag|AgCl reference electrode over two light-dark cycles. In all experiments, the cell was irradiated with a calibrated light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 under air mass 1.5 conditions. The bare gold electrode (trace A) behaved as a p-type material, which can be attributed to the photoelectric effect. Trace B shows the photocurrents measured for the electrode treated with silicon diatom frustules. This electrode performed as an n-type semiconductor material, however the measured current was low as since most diatoms detached from the gold electrode before measurement. In contrast, the hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustule showed a stable photocurrent density of ∼80 nA cm−2 and behaved as an n-type semiconductor (trace C). This may be due to internal structural defects such as grain boundaries, crystal defects and as well to high affinity for oxygen.16
In order to improve the photocurrent density, cadmium sulfide (CdS) was used as a photocatalyst. CdS is one of the best known photocatalysts used for solar water splitting.17 We adapted the chemical bath deposition (CBD) technique of CdS from Lee et al.18Fig. 4 shows the photocurrents measured for hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules on a gold surface after 10 CdS deposition cycles. The inset shows SEM and EDXS data for the fabricated hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustule working electrode coated with CdS. At 0 V vs. Ag|AgCl, ∼4 μA cm−2 photocurrent density was achieved with an open circuit potential of 0.127 V, a 50 times higher density compared to the diatoms lacking CdS (Fig. 3, trace C). The application of a bias potential at a ramping rate of 500 mV further improved the photocurrent density approximately to 14 μA cm−2.
 Fig. 4  Photocurrent measurements after CdS deposition on hydrosilylated diatoms and dependence on bias potential which was increased in steps of 100 mV. The inset shows the SEM image of the arrangement of hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules coated with CdS on the fabricated electrode surface. Further, the high resolution SEM image and a corresponding EDXS confirm the presence of a CdS coating on the hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules. 
In conclusion, we have experimentally confirmed that silicon diatom frustules prepared via magnesiothermic conversion have photocatalytic properties. We have also demonstrated a strategy for sensitizing a silicon diatom frustule electrode to improve photocurrent generation. Experiments about doping of silicon diatom frustules with boron/arsenic dopants and coating graphene nano-sheets/quantum dots as photocatalysts to improve the solar conversion efficiency are in progress.19 Based on these results we propose that these low-cost, hierarchically-structured natural materials could provide an alternative platform for the fabrication of advanced photocatalytic devices that might find applications in water splitting and hydrogen generation.
The support from the Australian Research Council – ARC (Future Fellowships FT100100139 (TN) and FT110100711 (DL)), the University of South Australia, University of Adelaide, and Mount Sylvia Pty. Ltd. is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
A. Currao, Chimia, 2007, 61, 815 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014 10.1039/C3CS60378D .

  (a) C. E. Hamm, R. Merkel, O. Springer, P. Jurkojc, C. Maier, K. Prechtel and V. Smetacek, Nature, 2003, 421, 841 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Sumper and E. Brunner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 17 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Kröger and N. Poulsen, Annu. Rev. Genet., 2008, 42, 83 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) M. Hildebrand, Prog. Org. Coat., 2003, 47, 256 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) G. Di Caprio, G. Coppola, L. D. Stefano, M. D. Stefano, A. Antonucci, R. Congestri and E. D. Tommasi, J. Biophotonics, 2014, 7, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Losic, J. G. Mitchell and N. H. Voelcker, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2947 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fuhrmann, S. Landwehr, M. El Rharbi-Kucki and M. Sumper, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2004, 78, 257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. Gordon, D. Losic, M. A. Tiffany, S. S. Nagy and F. A. S. Sterrenburg, Trends Biotechnol., 2009, 27, 116 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Sumper, Science, 2002, 295, 2430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Toster, K. S. Iyer, W. Xiang, F. Rosei, L. Spiccia and C. L. Raston, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 873 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Yu, J. Addai-Mensah and D. Losic, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14068 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Y. D. Losic, M. Sin Aw, S. Simovic, B. Tierry and J. Addai-Mensah, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6323 RSC ; 
  (d) A. Jantschke, A.-K. Herrmann, V. Lesnyak, A. Eychmüller and E. Brunner, Chem. – Asian J., 2012, 7, 85 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) N. L. Rosi, C. S. Thaxton and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 116, 5616 CrossRef .
C. Jeffryes, J. Campbell, H. Li, J. Jiao and G. Rorrer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3930 CAS .

  (a) A. Goetzberger and C. Hebling, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 62, 1 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Goetzberger, C. Hebling and H. W. Schock, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2003, 40, 1 CrossRef .

  (a) S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, M. G. Walter, J. R. McKone, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) I. Oh, J. Kye and S. Hwang, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2011, 32, 4393 Search PubMed .
Z. Bao, M. R. Weatherspoon, S. Shian, Y. Cai, P. D. Graham, S. M. Allan, G. Ahmad, M. B. Dickerson, B. C. Church, Z. Kang, H. W. Abernathy Iii, C. J. Summers, M. Liu and K. H. Sandhage, Nature, 2007, 446, 172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Luo, X. Wang, C. Meyers, N. Wannenmacher, W. Sirisaksoontorn, M. M. Lerner and X. Ji, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2222 Search PubMed .

  (a) J. Nelles, D. Sendor, F.-M. Petrat and U. Simon, J. Nanopart. Res., 2010, 12, 1367 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Nelles, D. Sendor, A. Ebbers, F. Petrat, H. Wiggers, C. Schulz and U. Simon, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2007, 285, 729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamanoi, N. Shirahata, T. Yonezawa, N. Terasaki, N. Yamamoto, Y. Matsui, K. Nishio, H. Masuda, Y. Ikuhara and H. Nishihara, Chem. – Eur. J., 2006, 12, 314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Sweetman, C. J. Shearer, J. G. Shapter and N. H. Voelcker, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) 
            J. Meier, S. Dubail, R. Fluckiger, D. Fischer, H. Keppner and A. Shah, in Proceedings of the 1st World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, Hawaii, USA, 1994, p. 409; 
  (b) H. S. Hwang, M. G. Park, H. Ruh and H. Yu, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2010, 31, 2909 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. Baniasadi, I. Dincer and G. F. Naterer, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 455, 25 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Chen and W. Shangguan, Front. Energy, 2013, 7, 111 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) C.-H. Chang and Y. L. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 053503 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) C. F. Chi, Y. L. Lee and H. S. Weng, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 125704 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) M. Bacon, S. J. Bradley and T. Nann, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 415 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Kumeria, M. Bariana, T. Altalhi, M. Kurkuri, C. T. Gibson, W. Yang and D. Losic, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 6302 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and analytical data. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cc04470cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic representation of magnesiothermic conversion of diatom frustules to nanostructured silicon and their application for photo-electrochemical energy conversion. In the second step, thiol-modified silicon diatom frustules are attached to a gold electrode surface and used in a three-electrode cell set up to perform photocurrent measurements.	 

 	Fig. 1  Panels A and B show SEM images of an Aulacoseira sp. frustule before and after the magnesiothermic conversion process, respectively. The EDXS spectra confirm successful silica reduction, as seen from the attenuated intensity of the oxygen peak (D, after conversion) when compared to C (before conversion).	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD spectra of the Aulacoseira sp. frustule before (A) and after (B) the magnesiothermic conversion process. A weak SiO2 amorphous peak (JCPDS card number 29-0085) was observed in spectrum (A). After magnesiothermic reduction, strong silicon peaks (JCPDS card number 27-1402) were observed in spectrum (B).	 

 	Fig. 3  Photocurrent measurements in a three-electrode cell set up using PBS as electrolyte and Ag|AgCl as reference electrode at a bias potential of 0 V. Trace A shows the photocurrent density for bare gold electrode. Trace B shows the photocurrent density observed for gold electrode treated with bare silicon diatom frustules. Trace C shows the photocurrent density observed for the gold electrode coated with hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules with an open circuit potential of 0.066 V. The inset shows the fabricated gold electrode with hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules. The area (A) corresponds to the frustule-modified region whilst area (B) corresponds to the bare gold electrode surface. The SEM image shows the coating of the gold surfaces with hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photocurrent measurements after CdS deposition on hydrosilylated diatoms and dependence on bias potential which was increased in steps of 100 mV. The inset shows the SEM image of the arrangement of hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules coated with CdS on the fabricated electrode surface. Further, the high resolution SEM image and a corresponding EDXS confirm the presence of a CdS coating on the hydrosilylated silicon diatom frustules.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and analytical data. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cc04470c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
