Metal–organic framework thin films for protective coating of Pd-based optical hydrogen sensors  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TC31749H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TC31749H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 8146-8155Metal–organic framework thin films for protective coating of Pd-based optical hydrogen sensors

        
          
            P. Á. 
            Szilágyi
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            R. J. 
            Westerwaal
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            R. 
            van de Krol
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            H. 
            Geerlings
          
        
      ad and 

        
          
            B. 
            Dam
          
        
      a
aDelft University of Technology, Department of Chemical Engineering, Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage, Julianalaan 136, 2628 BL, Delft, The Netherlands
bCurtin University, Department of Imaging and Applied Physics, Hydrogen Storage Research Group, GPO Box U1987, Perth, WA 6845, Australia. E-mail: Petra.Szilagyi@curtin.edu.au
cHelmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie, Institute for Solar Fuels, Hahn-Meitner-Platz 1, 14109 Berlin, Germany
dShell Technology Centre, Grasweg 31 1031 HW, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Received 
      5th September 2013
    , Accepted 16th October 2013First published on 17th October 2013AbstractFor an economy with hydrogen as the major energy carrier, the development of affordable, reliable, sensitive and selective hydrogen sensors is indispensable. In principle, Pd-based optical-fibre sensors could meet such requirements if the cross-contamination effect of the Pd surface by e.g. oxygen, moisture or carbon monoxide can be prevented. Here, we propose the pioneering idea of using a metal–organic framework (MOF) thin film as a tuneable protective coating. As a proof of principle, we demonstrate that homogeneous and continuous MOF coatings can indeed be deposited on Pd surfaces without serious compromise of the sensor's response, opening the way for the optimisation of hydrogen-selective MOF thin films.
Introduction
With the increasing demands on fossil fuels, many industrialised countries are turning towards alternative sources of energy. The “hydrogen economy”, in which hydrogen is used as a “green” feedstock in fuel cells to power motor vehicles, homes, etc., has been highlighted as a potential solution to the energy problem. Challenges to be faced before this becomes a reality include the development of sustainable and fossil-free methods of hydrogen production, the safe and reversible storage and transport of hydrogen, the development of an affordable hydrogen fuel cell, as well as the development of efficient and reliable hydrogen sensors. The latter domain is of particular importance when it comes to applications, since hydrogen gas is undetectable by human senses, highly flammable and explosive, easily leaks and has a low ignition energy of only 17 μJ. Furthermore, hydrogen is combustible over a wide range of H2–air mixtures i.e. 4–75 vol%,1 highlighting the necessity for hydrogen sensors. Several types of hydrogen sensors are currently available, which exploit catalytic, electrochemical, mechanical, optical, acoustic, thermal conductivity, resistance and work-function related detection schemes.2 However, since hydrogen detection often takes place in an explosive environment, e.g. for leak detection or hydrogen-concentration measurements in gas streams, the use of optical hydrogen sensors has the major advantage of being intrinsically safe due to the lack of electric leads in the sensing area.3–5 Fibre-optic Pd-based thin-film hydrogen sensors are particularly attractive candidates. They represent a relatively cheap and reliable solution to this problem since they also allow for continuous sensing via remote hydrogen-gas detection, a key for personal and material safety.6
However, Pd-based sensors are prone to poisoning (for example by H2S, O2 and CO) due to the strong adsorption of these contaminants (see Fig. 1). This inhibits the dissociation of hydrogen on the catalyst surface, severely limiting the sensitivity of the device. Thus a key issue is to prevent contaminants from reacting with the Pd surface. To achieve this, it is imperative to develop a selective protective coating of Pd, which allows the absorption of hydrogen in the underlying metal layer under the desired conditions.
 Fig. 1  Reactions taking place on the Pd surface when the sensor is exposed to hydrogen, oxygen and carbon monoxide. At the palladium surface hydrogen and oxygen are split into hydrogen and oxygen atom, respectively (A + B). CO is physically adsorbed by the Pd-layer (1). Absorbed hydrogen atom can diffuse into the sensing layer (3), form hydrogen with another hydrogen atom (2) or react with hydroxyl to form water (4). H2 is rejected due to blocking of the available dissociation sites by adsorbed CO (5). Courtesy of Thijs Mak.7 
Several materials have been investigated for the development of a protective coating of the Pd film: amorphous carbon, titanium dioxide,8 and various polymers such as polyvinyl acetate, polyvinyl chloride, cellulose acetate, and polystyrene9 were tested against the negative effects of oxygen, while hexanethiolate was tested against ozone.10 In addition, Jakubik and co-workers studied the effect of a metal-free phthalocyanine coating against dry air (O2) and that of a polyethylene–phthalocyanine double layer against moist air (H2O and O2). They found that such a double coating may increase the sensor's selectivity not only in moist air but also in the presence of CO and NO2, albeit only at prohibitively high hydrogen concentrations.11 So far, there has been no viable way developed for a protective coating of Pd-based hydrogen sensors that would not seriously compromise its favourable properties such as detection limits and response time, relatively easy and affordable fabrication, low weight and portability, etc.
In this work, we present a feasibility study of a different approach by the deposition of a MOF based thin film on the Pd surface which could act as a protective layer.
Although there has been tremendous progress in the synthesis of inorganic and metal–organic membranes,12–20 these types of materials have been largely overlooked as the potential solution for the development of protective coatings for Pd-based optical fibre sensors. In particular, inorganic and metal–organic membranes are promising materials due to their high thermal, mechanical, and chemical stability. Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) display regular crystalline lattices with well-defined pore structures and high porosity. The combination of organic and inorganic building blocks offers a virtually infinite number of possible frameworks. Furthermore, a key advantage of these materials is that chemical functionalisation of the organic linkers in the MOF structures affords facile control over the pore size, pore shape and the chemical as well as physical properties, which makes them ideal candidates for the development of protective membranes.21–24 Such membranes are required to allow fast transport of hydrogen, to have sufficient robustness for reproducibility, and high selectivity. Highly tuneable MOF structures in combination with an anchoring monolayer (self-assembled monolayer, SAM) between the MOF and Pd layer might improve the sensor's properties by two different mechanisms. In an ideal case (see Graphical abstract), the metal–organic framework serves as a membrane layer allowing only hydrogen to reach the Pd sensing layer by diffusion; on the other hand, the SAM determines and possibly improves the hydrogenation kinetics.25
Successful fabrication of metal–organic framework thin films of adequate quality for gas separation is a challenging task, mainly due to the unfavourable heterogeneous nucleation and the relative weakness of the coordination bonds. However, despite these difficulties, progress has recently been made in the development of MOF thin films tailored for various purposes, such as gas storage, separation and sensing. This has been achieved using several techniques, such as epitaxial growth on a SAM by solvothermal synthesis or layer-by-layer deposition, microwave and electrochemical syntheses, etc.26–32
In addition to these efforts, attempts have been made to assemble MOF thin films onto metallic nanoparticles and their arrays to prepare practical integrated MOF-based sensing devices by making use of localised surface-plasmon resonances (LSPR)33 and surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS).34,35 In this work, we followed a similar strategy as far as the MOF deposition is concerned; however, our motivation was not to improve sensors through surface-plasmon effects, but to decorate and protect the surface layer of the optical-fibre sensor. To the best of our knowledge, the use of a continuous MOF thin film as a selective membrane for sensor protection has not been reported before.
We demonstrate that MOFs can be used as stable coatings for Pd-based optical sensors: the synthesis of a metal–organic framework thin film with high hydrogen permeability and recyclability is shown. This first step will enable us to fine-tune the MOF structure to obtain protective properties. To verify the hydrogenation properties of the detector material we made use of the phenomenon that the optical properties of a Pd thin film change upon hydrogen absorption.36–39 Consequently, we were able to monitor the hydrogen flow through the MOF and to determine properties such as its influence on the hydrogen-absorption kinetics, cyclability and sensor sensitivity towards O2 and H2O.40–43
We have chosen Cu-BTC (BTC = 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid, also known as HKUST-1) as the MOF material for the ease of its synthesis as a thin film using various techniques,44–51 for its stability and well-characterised physical properties52–57 and for its increased selectivity towards hydrogen gas adsorption when processed as a thin film.45,49,58
Experimental
Substrate preparation
Pd thin films with a thickness of 60 nm were deposited at room temperature on quartz substrates in an ultrahigh-vacuum (UHV) DC/RF magnetron sputtering system (base pressure 10−8 mbar, Ar deposition pressure 3 μbar). By using an additional 3 nm Ti interlayer, the adhesion of the sensing layer (Pd) to the quartz substrate is improved.39 The Pd thin-film thickness was determined using a profilometer (DekTak3).
HKUST-1 powder sample
All chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and were used without further purification. The synthesis of the powder sample was carried out in the same fashion as published by Chui and co-workers.57 The material was characterised without its activation by evaporating the solvent molecules from the pores.
Growth of Cu-BTC on Pd thin films
Metal–organic framework growth on the Pd surface was carried out using the layer-by-layer (LbL) deposition method on a self-assembled monolayer (SAM). We used glycine as the SAM (Fig. 2a). SAM deposition was carried out by soaking the Pd thin film overnight (ca. 16 h), at ambient temperature, in saturated solutions of glycine in a 1:1 ethanol:deionised water mixture. The substrate was subsequently washed in the same solvent mixture thoroughly in order to remove all unbound glycine molecules. The MOF thin film was deposited on the SAM using the LbL technique, as described by Shekhah et al.44 Cu-BTC was grown in cycles, where one cycle consisted of subsequent immersions in 1 mM ethanolic solutions of cupric acetate and benzenetricarboxylic acid. This procedure was repeated with rinsing and drying in nitrogen flow after each immersion (for illustration see Fig. 2b).
 Fig. 2  (a) Possible bonding modes of the glycine SAM on a Pd surface and (b) Cu-BTC thin film deposition using the layer-by-layer technique: (1) functionalisation of the Pd surface by a self-assembled monolayer of glycine, (2) layer-by-layer growth of Cu-BTC from ethanolic precursor solutions. 
The main text of the article should go here with headings as appropriate.
The number of MOF layers deposited ranged from 1–50. After deposition, the samples were immersed in ethanol for 24 hours, they were subsequently activated in vacuo at 100 °C and kept under vacuum (10−7 bar) until the hydrogenation experiments. Other characterisation techniques† were used after exposing the samples to air.
FTIR spectroscopy
FTIR spectroscopy was carried out on the powder sample as well as on the Pd thin-film substrates using a Perkin Elmer Spectrum One FTIR spectrometer, equipped with an ATR unit. IR spectra were acquired for all substrates: as synthesised, pure Pd, SAM-deposited and MOF thin-film containing ones. The substrates were placed on the ATR crystal upside down and the smallest force gauge possible was applied on them in order to avoid any damage of the thin films. For each thin-film containing substrate (including the SAM deposited), several spectra were acquired at various parts of the substrate in order to monitor the homogeneity of the thin film formation.
X-ray diffraction
Diffraction data were collected at ambient temperature on station I11 at the Diamond Light Source using an X-ray wavelength of 0.82637 Å. The sample with 10- and 50-cycles of Cu-BTC deposited on the SAM-functionalised Pd-coated glass substrate was placed on a flat-plate spinner, in such geometry that the incident X-ray beam made a 5° angle with the sample. Diffraction data were collected in the reflection mode for 15 minutes. The powder sample was loaded into a borosilicate capillary, spun throughout the experiment and diffraction data were collected in transmission mode for 15 minutes. A series of 5 multi-analysing crystal-detectors was used for data collection.59
Scanning electron microscopy-energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
The chemical composition and the morphology of thin films were further investigated by SEM-EDS (microscope JEOL JXA 8900R equipped with a combined wavelength and energy dispersive WD/ED microanalyser) using an electron beam energy of 15 keV and a beam current of 40 nA. The X-ray spectra were recorded using a Noran Pioneer Energy Dispersive Spectrometer, at 10 keV electron beam energy.
Images were acquired for samples with 10 cycles of LbL deposition of Cu-BTC.
Hydrogen sorption
Activation of Cu-BTC thin films was carried out in situ in the hydrogenography setup41 by the evacuation of the ethanol-containing samples at 100 °C, under vacuum (10−7 bar) for ca. 3 hours. Subsequently, hydrogenography was used to characterise the optical response induced in the MOF–Pd multilayer upon hydrogenation.
This technique allows for the efficient and accurate study of the hydrogenation behaviour (thermodynamics and kinetics) of a MOF–Pd thin film. The logarithm of the optical transmission, ln(T/T0), is a function of the hydrogen concentration in the Pd thin film and yields the so-called pressure–transmission isotherms.41–43
Using identical Pd thin films as substrates with different MOF coatings (1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 50 cycles of Cu-BTC), we were able to analyse the influence of the coating thickness simultaneously and under the same conditions. This approach provided an easy selection of the optimal MOF coating.
Gas mixture experiments
Optical response measurements were carried out in reflection mode in a flow setup. A controlled flux of a gas–argon mixture was applied to the MOF–Pd thin film while three additional mass flow controllers regulate the relative amounts of hydrogen, oxygen, methane, CO2, CO, etc. in the feed flow. Gas backflow was prevented by connecting the flow-cell outlet to a gas-wash bottle. A multimode optical fibre was used to guide the light of a tungsten-halogen light source towards the Pd thin film. An Ocean Optics USB4000 spectrometer was used to measure the change in the optical signal as a function of hydrogen concentration and gas mixture, connection between the spectrometer and the specimen was ensured by a fibre.
Results and discussion
Self-assembled monolayers are functionalised organic thin films that can be supported on a wide variety of substrates. By choosing the right synthetic conditions, highly ordered, 2D-like crystalline interfaces can be obtained. Their relative ease of preparation, spontaneous assembly, diverse functionality and ability to be patterned by microcontact-printing methods make SAMs a desirable interface for MOF growth.31 Our choice to use the small and relatively bulky glycine as the SAM is unusual, since normally long and flexible molecules are applied, such as functionalised undecanoic acids.60 However, we wanted to keep the Pd surface in close proximity to the MOF layer in order to limit sideward hydrogen diffusion. In addition, glycine is a cheap, non-toxic and easily available material, which offers the possibility to bind with both the amino- and carboxylate ends to the Pd surface, as shown by recent theoretical and experimental results for Au surfaces.61–63
Cu-BTC thin films have been successfully synthesised on SAMs by the LbL method44,49,51,64 and by liquid-phase epitaxy with and without grafting48,50,65,66 as well as on a Cu mesh,45 yielding thin films with different surface morphologies. In all cases, polycrystalline thin films were obtained. In addition, in some cases the thin-film growth was so detectable that its on-line monitoring was possible.67,68 It has to be noted that in the case of metal-supported SAMs, solvothermal MOF synthesis is not a very suitable method to prepare thin films given the relative fragility of the SAM–metal interface at the elevated temperatures typically applied. In fact, Bartual-Murgui et al. found that deposition of the ethyl-(4-pyridyl)disulphide anchoring layer optimally took place at −78 °C.69 Therefore we chose to employ the layer-by-layer technique at ambient temperature to deposit the Cu-BTC thin films.
Thin-film formation of Cu-BTC on a SAM-functionalised Pd-coated substrate was verified by the use of FTIR-ATR spectroscopy. After the second cycle of Cu-BTC deposition, bands, confirming the Cu-BTC formation, could be observed in the resultant spectra (see Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  FT-IR spectra of Cu-BTC, purple – 2-cycles and cyan – 10-cycles deposited on Pd and grey – as bulk. According to Classen and colleagues70 the following bands can be assigned as: (a) γ(C–H) 740 cm−1, (b) δ(CO⋯Cu) C–O⋯Cu bend in-plane 1370 cm−1, (c) νs(OCO) sym. OCO stretch in-plane 1420 cm−1 and (d) νs(OCO) asym. OCO stretch in-plane 1650 cm−1. 
FTIR spectra recorded at various parts of the samples suggest that MOF coverage was achieved at all parts of the substrates. However, from these measurements small-scale disruptions cannot be excluded. Due to the inherent fragility of MOFs, arising from the relative weakness of coordination bonds, it is rather difficult to obtain homogeneous and robust MOF thin films and membranes.19 Challenges to address are (i) poor bonding to the substrate, (ii) poor stability (under ambient conditions, which are often the required working conditions for sensors) and (iii) macroscopic crack formation in the course of the fabrication process. This latter issue is particularly grave in the case of gas separation. To test this, macroscopic techniques, such as FTIR, do not provide a sufficient resolution and microscopic methods need to be applied.
SEM images show the formation of rather smooth and homogeneous thin films of Cu-BTC on the Pd substrates‡ see Fig. 4a. In fact, our results are unique, unlike those seen in the literature,44–51 where Cu-BTC coatings were rather heterogeneous and did not uniformly cover the substrate. In addition, earlier results showed that depending on the film growth, surface morphologies were different: octahedral, pyramidal or trigonal in the case of epitaxial growth,46,47,51 such as LbL or liquid-phase epitaxy (LPE), while randomly scattered octahedra were present on the substrates when other synthesis strategies were applied.45,47,50 Such films consist of individual particles of variable orientation and size, which are not specifically bound to the substrate. However, for applications in sensor technology, in which the diffusion into the thin film or membrane layers plays a decisive role, granular and heterogeneous coatings exhibit a number of major drawbacks: due to the polycrystallinity and/or heterogeneity of the thin films, a homogeneous diffusion of the molecules into the MOF is impossible or highly limited. Furthermore, inhomogeneous films of strongly varying thickness, containing a number of pin-holes, are not very attractive, as these defects severely limit gas-separation efficiency for instance,32 and, in our case, could account for Pd-surface contaminations.
 Fig. 4  SEM images of the thin film of 10 cycles of Cu-BTC (a) without mechanical disruption and with it (b) at the disruption, (c) zoomed in on the border of disruption and (d) zoomed out showing areas of EDS scans. 
In order to verify the homogeneity of the thin film deposited, we mechanically disrupted the Cu-BTC membrane and recorded its SEM image (Fig. 4b) again. We selected three representative areas on the film (Fig. 4d), where EDS spectra were acquired in order to monitor the areas' copper content. We focused on the copper content as, unlike that of carbon and oxygen, it is only present in the MOF thin film.
We found that depending on whether the EDX spectrum was recorded in (1) the average thin film, (2) in an area where the MOF was piled up at, or (3) where it was removed from, the copper content changed significantly (see Table 1), confirming that the MOF film was indeed deposited as a continuous and homogeneous membrane.§
Table 1 EDS results of the Cu content at different areas on the mechanically disrupted Cu-BTC film




Area
Cu content, atom %
Cu content, atom%, error (sigma)




#1
1.17
±0.97


#2
14.99
±2.18


#3
0.39
±0.95




Interpenetration in MOF crystals changes the structures' symmetry and thus their X-ray pattern. In addition, controlling interpenetration in MOF thin films is also crucial in order to control the pore size, as Shekhah and co-workers have pointed out.66 This in turn is crucial for the gas-sorption and separation properties of the given MOFs.
For this reason, we have carried out XRD experiments on the Cu-BTC thin film deposited on the Pd-coated glass substrate (Fig. 5). The only diffraction peak observed in the pattern belongs to the [222] reflection and thus is indicative of Cu-BTC thin film growth [111] direction. However, the low diffraction intensity suggests that the thin film is largely in an amorphous phase.¶ The amorphous nature of the Cu-BTC thin film did not improve significantly upon increasing the film thickness. In contrast, the [222] diffraction peak was not much better resolved for the thin film with 50 cycles of Cu-BTC deposited on it than for that with only 10 cycles. It is known that the choice of substrate as well as the SAM influences greatly the resultant film morphology and orientation. Bein et al. demonstrated that choosing SAMs of equal length but different anchoring termini will trigger rather different preferential orientations. A –COOH terminus favoured the growth in the [001] direction, –CH2OH functional group in the [111] direction, while the –CH3 end was found not to interfere with the crystal growth and thus resulted in a randomly oriented film.51 Zacher and co-workers carried out similar experiments on a SiO2/Si substrate, comparing the effect on the thin-film epitaxy of SAMs with –COOH and –CF3 termini. Interestingly, they found that contrary to the observations of Bein and colleagues for a Au substrate, the –COOH terminus facilitated the Cu-BTC growth in the [111] direction on a SiO2/Si substrate, while the –CF3 terminated SAM was found to effectively inhibit the thin-film formation.47 Furthermore, in the same work, they also found that the Cu-BTC thin film spontaneously formed in the [100] direction, on sapphire surfaces, while when a SiO2/Si substrate was used it only assembled on a –COOH terminated SAM anchoring layer. It can be thus expected that upon varying the substrate and the SAM one can obtain different MOF thin-film growths and that the use of a new combination of the Pd substrate and glycine SAM (short and capable of bonding at different termini) leads to a different growth behaviour. In fact, since the glycine molecules may coordinate randomly with either termini to the Pd substrate, and the different termini allow for different MOF growths, the crystalline structure of the resultant thin film will be disrupted regularly, resulting in turn in the formation of an amorphous film rather than a crystalline one.
 Fig. 5  XRD patterns of Cu-BTC at ambient temperature as a blue line: HKUST-1 powder sample, red and black lines: 10 and 50 cycles of thin films, respectively. * Peak from the glass substrate. 
According to the HKUST-1 structure, published by Chui and co-workers,57 the [111] plane is packed so that there are no pores in it, that is all pores are parallel with the Pd substrate (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Packing of HKUST-1 as viewed along the [111] direction.57 Denotation of atoms: red = O, black = C, pink = H and blue = Cu. 
Interestingly, this should also mean that hydrogen molecules can only reach the Pd surface if they diffuse across the benzene rings, ca. 2.8 Å in inner diameter (the kinetic diameter of H2 is 2.89 Å). However, since the Cu-BTC is largely amorphous and the small crystalline fraction has the unfavourable [111] orientation, the degree of porosity is unclear. Undoubtedly, a certain degree of porosity is required for a protective coating of the Pd-based hydrogen sensor to be permeable for hydrogen gas. To test whether the amorphous polymorph allows for diffusion, hydrogen-absorption experiments were carried out at various pressures and temperatures.
To probe the diffusion of the hydrogen through the MOF and SAM, we determined the effect of hydrogen-pressure steps on the optical transmission Pd in various MOF–SAM–Pd configurations by hydrogenography. This enabled us to investigate the symmetry in the absorption–desorption kinetics and the optical response between the hydrogen-absorption and desorption processes. In Fig. 7a and b, the normalised transmission is shown for several hydrogen-pressure steps at 100 °C and at ambient temperature. The measurement at 100 °C was performed first. Between every pressure step, vacuum was maintained for 9000 s to fully de-hydrogenate the Pd thin film. Each pressure step was maintained for 7200 s to ensure equilibrium between the film and the hydrogen gas.
 Fig. 7  Hydrogen-sorption spectra of several MOF–SAM–Pd thin films with consecutive hydrogen pressure steps of 1000, 500 and 100 mbar at (a) 100 °C, (b) ambient temperature RT and (c) a zoom in on the hydrogen desorption from 1000 mbar to vacuum at RT. The cycle denotes the number of MOF layers, referring to the LbL deposition method, in which the reactants are added in cycles. 
For the 100 °C measurement, it is observed that all the samples show comparable hydrogenation characteristics, i.e. each pressure step is followed by a clear change in transmission ln(T/T0/ln(Tmax/T0)), see Fig. 7a. At low pressure (100 mbar) a negligible optical transition is found: this is obviously due to the fact that the equilibrium plateau pressure of Pd during absorption at 100 °C is 700 mbar (Fig. 8a). Thus the hydrogen absorption and desorption kinetics of Pd are independent of the coverage by glycine or the thickness of the HKUST layer. Hence we conclude that, under these conditions, the hydrogen diffusion through the MOF layer is not a limiting factor. Upon decreasing the temperature (to ambient temperature) the hydrogen-desorption becomes slower (see Fig. 7b), which is in good agreement with the literature on Pd films.71 For hydrogenation at ambient temperature the optical response, ln(T/T0), is much larger for all pressure steps. This is due to the fact that at room temperature the α–β phase transition occurs at an equilibrium plateau pressure of ca. 50 mbar (Fig. 8b). Furthermore, the Pd and SAM–Pd thin film have the same desorption times whereas the MOF coated SAM–Pd thin films are a bit slower. It is worth noting that the hydrogen-sorption kinetics do not show monotonous decrease with the MOF film's thickness. This behaviour can be due to two distinct phenomena, on the one hand the presence of micro or even macroscopic lattice defects may inflict such behaviour. On the other hand, it may also be possible that, while the diffusion throughout the MOF structure is not limited, the MOF–SAM connection may hamper kinetics. Thus, at lower temperatures the diffusion from the MOF layer into the SAM starts to dominate the overall kinetics (see Fig. 7c).
 Fig. 8  Pressure–transmission isotherms for several MOF–SAM–Pd thin films measured at (a) 100 °C and (b) room temperature. The H2 pressure was logarithmically increased from 1 to 1000 mbar and a stabilisation time of 400 s was applied for each pressure step to ensure equilibrium. The sweep time during both absorption and desorption was 37600 s, resulting in 94 individual pressure steps. 
Upon cycling the MOF–SAM–Pd thin films proved to be mechanically and thermally stable up to at least 100 °C and did not show any cracking, buckling or delamination. As an example, Fig. 9 featuring cycles 7–17 shows no signs of layer deterioration while cycling between 300 mbar of H2 pressure and vacuum at 100 °C. Although a decrease of the optical response in the loaded state upon cycling can be observed, this phenomenon also holds for the pure Pd thin film. This must be therefore due to the intrinsic hydrogenation properties of the Pd sensing layer rather than to that of the MOF coating layer.
 Fig. 9  Stability measurements as a function of cycling for the different MOF–Pd–SAM thin films showing the normalised transmission for cycles 7 to 17. For hydrogen absorption, a hydrogen pressure of 300 mbar was used at 100 °C, while hydrogen desorption took place under vacuum conditions. 
The presented hydrogenation behaviour of the MOF–Pd thin films shows that these types of protective MOF multilayers fulfil the main requirements for a fibre-optic hydrogen sensor, i.e. retention of a clear optical change, stability upon cycling, and limited influence on the kinetics.
In addition to the hydrogen diffusion through the MOF, the binding of the glycine SAM to the Pd surface is expected to determine to a large extent the hydrogenation kinetics. It is well known that CxHy-compounds can have a delaying effect on the hydrogenation behaviour due to the formation of palladium carbides72 and inhibit H2-dissociation and recombination reactions on the surface.73,74 In contrast, the addition of a sputtered PTFE coating layer improves the cycling stability of the sensing layer by preventing the water formation on the Pd layer surface.25 Thus the Pd–SAM interface usually has a crucial impact on the hydrogenation kinetics of the thin film. In contrast, our findings show that the growth of the SAM on the Pd surface does not influence the hydrogenation kinetics. Furthermore, we find that the growth of the MOF structure has only a minor effect on the hydrogen-desorption process at lower temperatures. This is in agreement with previous results that showed that the preparation of MOF thin films on SAMs from either precursor solutions or by the LbL method is not detrimental to their porosity, as seen for the Cp-allyl-Pd loading MOF-5,65 for the DMF loading of Fe-MIL-88B75 and for the irreversible ammonia loading of Cu-BTC.44 The major advantage of the SAM surface functionalisation and subsequent layer-by-layer MOF deposition is that the sensing system can be fully optimised. On the one hand, the catalytic surface properties can be customised by choosing the adequate SAM–Pd bonding. On the other hand, the selectivity of the MOF-based membrane layer can be tuned according to the desired application.
In order to probe the selectivity of the Cu-BTC thin films deposited on the SAM–Pd layer, adsorption and desorption of various gas mixtures (H2–CH4, H2–CO2, H2–O2, H2–H2O and H2–CO) have been carried out. The data shown for the H2–O2 mixture in Fig. 10 are highly representative for all gas mixtures.|| The MOF-containing sensors showed no deterioration upon repeated exposure to the methane, carbon dioxide and oxygen-containing mixtures. However, the exposure to a H2–H2O mixture led to much slower hydrogen adsorption kinetics, similar to the exposure to the CO–H2 mixture (Table 2). These results demonstrate that the MOF protection layer does not enhance the selectivity against CO and H2O. Therefore, to act as a gas selective membrane a better suited MOF needs to be employed.
 Fig. 10  A typical optical-response spectrum for a H2–O2 gas mixture. 
Table 2 Optical response measured for Pd and MOF-on-SAM-on-Pd thin films** from selected H2–gas mixtures




20 mbar H2 +
N/A (s)
2.5 mbar CO2 (s)
25 mbar CH4 (s)
50 mbar O2 (s)
0.013 mbar CO (s)b
95% RHa H2O (s)





a RH = relative humidity.
b The different values for the pure Pd film and that with the SAM and MOF layers on the top arise from different instrumental settings.





Pd
160
170
180
160
≫1200
≫1200


MOF–SAM–Pd
170
240
276
170
≫600
≫600




Our research provides a first step towards the realisation of a MOF-coated Pd thin-film based optical hydrogen sensor, wherein a suitable MOF may be selected to prevent the effect of contaminants such as CO.
Conclusions
We have presented the novel idea of developing protective metal–organic framework membranes for coating Pd-based fibre-optic hydrogen sensors. We demonstrated the feasibility of this idea by designing and manufacturing continuous and homogeneous thin films of Cu-BTC on SAM-functionalised Pd substrates using the layer-by-layer technique. In contrast to previously reported Cu-BTC thin films, we found that the thin film obtained was not highly crystalline and, consequently, displayed a much more homogeneous surface coverage. Most importantly, we were able to demonstrate that the thin-film coatings did not significantly change the hydrogen-sensing properties such as optical response and response time, an essential prerequisite for practical applications. We have observed that the glycine layer influences the Pd surface properties, while the MOF controls the diffusion of the gaseous species. Ultimately, both of these properties determine the effect of the coating. In addition, the prepared multilayer structures appeared to be quite robust upon repeated hydrogen cycling. Finally, the effect of various gas-mixtures on the hydrogen-sensing properties of the Pd thin film led us to identify which requirements a MOF thin film as protective layer needs for applications like optical sensors. On the one hand, the diffusion of gases through the MOF's pores does not limit the sensor's performance; on the other hand, the pore size of the Cu-BTC thin film does not allow for the desired selectivity, which makes it the limiting factor. It can be thus concluded that in order to optimise the MOF protective coating for Pd-based optical-fibre hydrogen sensors, MOF thin films with an accurate pore size for selective hydrogen adsorption need to be employed.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Agenstchap.nl (Energie Innovatie Funding Agency) for funding (ref nr. EOSLT07052) and the STFC for provision of synchrotron beamtime. Part of this research has been financed by a grant of the Energy Delta Gas Research (EDGaR) program. EDGaR is co-financed by the Northern Netherlands Provinces, the European Fund for Regional Development, the Ministry of Economic Affairs, Agriculture and Innovation and the Province of Groningen. Special thanks are due to Fatwa Firdaus Abdi (Delft University of Technology) for the SEM images and Julia Parker (Diamond Light Source) for all her help.
Notes and references

          R. D. McCarty, J. Hord and H. M. Roder, Selected Properties of Hydrogen (Engineering Design Data), NBS Monograph 168, National Bureau of Standards, Boulder, CO,  1981 Search PubMed .
T. Hübert, L. Boon-Brett, G. Black and U. Banach, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 157, 329 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Slaman, B. Dam, M. Pasturel, D. M. Borsa, H. Schreuders, J. H. Rector and R. Griessen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 123, 538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Slaman, B. Dam, H. Schreuders and R. Griessen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 1084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Westerwaal, N. Duim, I. Nieuwenhuijse, C. Perrotton, A. Dabirian, J. M. van Leeuwen, V. Palmisano and B. Dam, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 165, 88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Slaman, Device and method for optically detecting gas, patent WO2010117277, NL2002744,  2009 Search PubMed .

          T. Mak, Thin film based optical fiber hydrogen sensor, Master thesis, TU Delft,  2012 Search PubMed .
R. D. Smith II, R. Pitts, S.-H. Lee and E. Tracy, Prepr. Pap. – Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 2004, 49, 968 Search PubMed .
S. Bao, Y. Yamada, M. Okada and K. Yoshimura, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 6268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Ibañez and F. P. Zamborini, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 9789 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Jakubik, M. Urbańczyk and E. Maciak, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 127, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Campo, A. Tanaka, A. Mendes and J. M. Sousa, Advanced Membrane Science and Technology for Sustainable Energy and Environmental Applications, Woodhead Publishing Series in Energy,  2011, vol. 25, p. 56 Search PubMed .
M. A. Aroon, A. F. Ismail, T. Matsuura and M. M. Montazer-Rahmati, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2010, 75, 229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. C. Coterillo, A. M. U. Mendia and I. O. Uribe, in Membrane Science and Technology Series: Inorganic Membranes,  2008, vol. 13, p. 217 Search PubMed .

          T. Bein and S. Mintova, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis: Zeolites and Ordered Mesoporous Materials,  2005, vol. 157, p. 263 Search PubMed .

          A. Julbe, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis: Zeolites and Ordered Mesoporous Materials,  2005, vol. 157, p. 135 Search PubMed .

          M. Noack and J. Cao, Handbook of Porous Solids,  2002, vol. 4, p. 2433 Search PubMed .
K. Sumida, D. L. Rogow, J. A. Mason, T. M. McDonald, E. D. Bloch, Z. R. Herm, T.-H. Bae and J. R. Long, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shah, M. C. McCarthy, S. Sachdeva, A. K. Lee and H.-K. Jeong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 2179 CrossRef CAS .
J.-R. Li, R. J. Kuppler and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1477 RSC .
C. Janiak and J. K. Vieth, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 2366 RSC .
X. Lin, N. R. Champness and M. Schröder, Top. Curr. Chem., 2010, 293, 35 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Meek, J. A. Greathouse and M. D. Allendorf, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Burrows, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 3623 RSC .

          M. Slaman, Protective coating for metalhydride based devices, patent WO2007126313A11,  2007 Search PubMed .
D. Zacher, O. Shekhah, Ch. Wöll and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1418 RSC .
B. Chen, S. Xiang and G. Qian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zacher, R. Schmid, Ch. Wöll and R. A. Fischer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Shekhah, J. Liu, R. A. Fischer and Ch. Wöll, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1081 RSC .
D. Zacher, K. Yusenko, A. Bétard, S. Henke, M. Molon, T. Ladnorg, O. Shekhah, B. Schüpbach, T. de los Arcos, M. Krasnopolski, M. Meilikhov, J. Winter, A. Terfort, Ch. Wöll and R. A. Fischer, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 1448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bradshaw, A. Garai and J. Huo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2344 RSC .
H. Gliemann and Ch. Wöll, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 110 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Kreno, J. T. Hupp and R. P. Van Duyne, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 8042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sugikawa, Y. Furukawa and K. Sada, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3132 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, Y. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Xiong, J. Zheng, Y. Liu and Z. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fortunato, A. Bearzotti, C. Caliendo and A. D'Amico, Sens. Actuators, B, 1989, 16, 43 CrossRef CAS .

          F. A. Lewis, The Palladium Hydrogen System, Academic, New York,  1967 Search PubMed .
A. J. Perry, J. A. Sue and P. J. Martin, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1996, 81, 17 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Lewis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1995, 20, 587 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pivak, R. Gremaud, K. Gross, M. Gonzalez-Silveira, A. Walton, D. Book, H. Schreuders, B. Dam and R. Griessen, Scr. Mater., 2009, 60, 348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Gremaud, Hydrogenography: A Thin Film Optical Combinatorial Study of Hydrogen Storage Materials, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam,  2008 Search PubMed .
R. Gremaud, M. Slaman, H. Schreuders, B. Dam and R. Griessen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 231916 CrossRef .
R. Gremaud, C. P. Broedersz, D.  M. Borsa, A. Borgschulte, P. Mauron, H. Schreuders, J. H. Rector, B. Dam and R. Griessen, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2813 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, S. Kowarik, F. Schreiber, M. Paulus, M. Tolan, Ch. Sternemann, F. Evers, D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer and Ch. Wöll, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, G. Zhu, I. J. Hewitt and S. Qiu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Kreno, J. T. Hupp and R. P. Van Duyne, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 8042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zacher, A. Baunemann, S. Hermes and R. A. Fischer, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2785 RSC .
J. Gascon, S. Aguado and F. Kapteijn, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 113, 132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nan, X. Dong, W. Wang, W. Jin and N. Xu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ameloot, E. Gobechiya, H. Uji-i, J. A. Martens, J. Hofkens, L. Alaerts, B. F. Sels and D. E. De Vos, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Biemmi, C. Scherb and T. Bein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-Y. Na, R.-N. Hua, G.-L. Ning and X.-X. Ou, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2012, 28, 555 CAS .
L. H. Wee, M. R. Lohe, N. Janssens, S. Kaskel and J. A. Martens, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13742 RSC .
B. Mu and K. S. Walton, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22748 CAS .
M. Klimakowa, P. Klobesa, K. Rademannb and F. Emmerling, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 154, 113 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Millange, R. E. Osta, M. E. Medina and R. I. Walton, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 103 RSC .
S. S.-Y. Chui, S. M.-F. Lo, J. P. H. Charmant, A. G. Orpen and I. D. Williams, Science, 1999, 283, 1148 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Guerrero, Y. Yoo, M. C. McCarhty and H.-K. Jeong, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3938 RSC .
N. Tartoni, S. P. Thompson, C. C. Tang, B. L. Willis, G. E. Derbyshire, A. G. Wright, S. C. Jaye, J. M. Homer, J. D. Pizzey and A. M. T. Bell, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2008, 15, 43 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-A. Neouze and U. Schubert, Monatsh. Chem., 2008, 139, 183 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hamaguchi, H. Kawasaki and R. Arakawa, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 367, 167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Sandoval, J. M. Orts, A. Rodes and J. M. Feliu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 16439 CAS .
E. Podstawka, Y. Ozaki and L. M. Proniewicz, Appl. Spectrosc., 2005, 59, 1516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, T. Strunskus, P. Cyganik, D. Zacher, R. Fischer and Ch. Wöll, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hermes, F. Schröder, R. Chelmowski, Ch. Wöll and R. A. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, M. Paradinas, C. Ocal, B. Schüpbach, A. Terfort, D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer and C. Wöll, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. John, C. Scherb, M. Shöâeè, M. W. Anderson, M. P. Attfield and T. Bein, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6294 RSC .
V. Stavila, J. Volponi, A. M. Katzenmeyer, M. C. Dixon and M. D. Allendorf, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1531 RSC .
C. Bartual-Murgui, L. Salmon, A. Akou, C. Thibault, G. Molnár, T. Mahfoud, Z. Sekkat, J. A. Real and A. Bousseksou, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 2089 RSC .
T. Classen, M. Lingenfelder, Y. Wang, R. Chopra, C. Virojanadara, U. Starke and G. Costantini, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 12589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pasturel, R. J. Wijngaarden, W. Lohstroh, H. Schreuders, M. Slaman, B. Dam and R. Griessen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 624 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Ziemecki, G. A. Jones, D. G. Swartzfager, R. L. Harlow and J. Faber, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 4547 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Jung, K. Kusakabe, S. Morooka and S. D. Kim, J. Membr. Sci., 2000, 170, 53 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sheintuch and R. M. Dessau, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1996, 51, 535 CrossRef CAS .
C. Scherb, A. Schödel and T. Bein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† FTIR and XRD, since it was not possible for us to characterise the activated thin-film samples, as that would have required their handling under an inert atmosphere, we carried out the study of the powder samples on non-activated samples also, which allowed for a better comparison of the two systems.‡ In fact one can observe a negligible amount of crystalline particles in the SEM images. These particles are of similar shape as that indicative of a [111] Cu-BTC epitaxy,50 and this observation may account for the presence of the [222] diffraction peak in the XRD pattern, as discussed later in more detail.§ Although the possible presence of a low number of pin-holes cannot be excluded.¶ According to the PXRD data, the majority of the thin film is amorphous, which is why its denomination as HKUST-1 is not appropriate. However, the FTIR data show that the chemical environment in the thin film obtained is identical to that in HKUST-1, whence the composition of the thin film can be referred to as Cu-BTC.|| The results obtained provide additional information on the porosity of the Cu-BTC thin film, a further confirmation that the amorphous thin film has indeed a structure similar to the crystalline HKUST-1.** Since no dependency of the optical response time on the MOF-film thickness has been observed, this table displays typical values for various thin film sizes.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Reactions taking place on the Pd surface when the sensor is exposed to hydrogen, oxygen and carbon monoxide. At the palladium surface hydrogen and oxygen are split into hydrogen and oxygen atom, respectively (A + B). CO is physically adsorbed by the Pd-layer (1). Absorbed hydrogen atom can diffuse into the sensing layer (3), form hydrogen with another hydrogen atom (2) or react with hydroxyl to form water (4). H2 is rejected due to blocking of the available dissociation sites by adsorbed CO (5). Courtesy of Thijs Mak.7	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Possible bonding modes of the glycine SAM on a Pd surface and (b) Cu-BTC thin film deposition using the layer-by-layer technique: (1) functionalisation of the Pd surface by a self-assembled monolayer of glycine, (2) layer-by-layer growth of Cu-BTC from ethanolic precursor solutions.	 

 	Fig. 3  FT-IR spectra of Cu-BTC, purple – 2-cycles and cyan – 10-cycles deposited on Pd and grey – as bulk. According to Classen and colleagues70 the following bands can be assigned as: (a) γ(C–H) 740 cm−1, (b) δ(CO⋯Cu) C–O⋯Cu bend in-plane 1370 cm−1, (c) νs(OCO) sym. OCO stretch in-plane 1420 cm−1 and (d) νs(OCO) asym. OCO stretch in-plane 1650 cm−1.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of the thin film of 10 cycles of Cu-BTC (a) without mechanical disruption and with it (b) at the disruption, (c) zoomed in on the border of disruption and (d) zoomed out showing areas of EDS scans.	 

#1	1.17	±0.97
#2	14.99	±2.18
#3	0.39	±0.95

 	Fig. 5  XRD patterns of Cu-BTC at ambient temperature as a blue line: HKUST-1 powder sample, red and black lines: 10 and 50 cycles of thin films, respectively. * Peak from the glass substrate.	 

 	Fig. 6  Packing of HKUST-1 as viewed along the [111] direction.57 Denotation of atoms: red = O, black = C, pink = H and blue = Cu.	 

 	Fig. 7  Hydrogen-sorption spectra of several MOF–SAM–Pd thin films with consecutive hydrogen pressure steps of 1000, 500 and 100 mbar at (a) 100 °C, (b) ambient temperature RT and (c) a zoom in on the hydrogen desorption from 1000 mbar to vacuum at RT. The cycle denotes the number of MOF layers, referring to the LbL deposition method, in which the reactants are added in cycles.	 

 	Fig. 8  Pressure–transmission isotherms for several MOF–SAM–Pd thin films measured at (a) 100 °C and (b) room temperature. The H2 pressure was logarithmically increased from 1 to 1000 mbar and a stabilisation time of 400 s was applied for each pressure step to ensure equilibrium. The sweep time during both absorption and desorption was 37600 s, resulting in 94 individual pressure steps.	 

 	Fig. 9  Stability measurements as a function of cycling for the different MOF–Pd–SAM thin films showing the normalised transmission for cycles 7 to 17. For hydrogen absorption, a hydrogen pressure of 300 mbar was used at 100 °C, while hydrogen desorption took place under vacuum conditions.	 

 	Fig. 10  A typical optical-response spectrum for a H2–O2 gas mixture.	 


Pd	160	170	180	160	≫1200	≫1200
MOF–SAM–Pd	170	240	276	170	≫600	≫600
Footnotes
† FTIR and XRD, since it was not possible for us to characterise the activated thin-film samples, as that would have required their handling under an inert atmosphere, we carried out the study of the powder samples on non-activated samples also, which allowed for a better comparison of the two systems.
‡ In fact one can observe a negligible amount of crystalline particles in the SEM images. These particles are of similar shape as that indicative of a [111] Cu-BTC epitaxy,50 and this observation may account for the presence of the [222] diffraction peak in the XRD pattern, as discussed later in more detail.
§ Although the possible presence of a low number of pin-holes cannot be excluded.
¶ According to the PXRD data, the majority of the thin film is amorphous, which is why its denomination as HKUST-1 is not appropriate. However, the FTIR data show that the chemical environment in the thin film obtained is identical to that in HKUST-1, whence the composition of the thin film can be referred to as Cu-BTC.
|| The results obtained provide additional information on the porosity of the Cu-BTC thin film, a further confirmation that the amorphous thin film has indeed a structure similar to the crystalline HKUST-1.
** Since no dependency of the optical response time on the MOF-film thickness has been observed, this table displays typical values for various thin film sizes.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
