Organic photovoltaics and energy: general discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4FD90050B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4FD90050B
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2014, 174, 341-355Organic photovoltaics and energy: general discussion

        
          
            Justin 
            Hodgkiss
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gary 
            Conboy
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Graham 
            Hutchings
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Simon 
            Higgins
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ian 
            Galbraith
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Neil 
            Findlay
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rupert 
            Taylor
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Marc 
            Salle
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shuyu 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gitti 
            Frey
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ioan 
            Bâldea
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ifor 
            Samuel
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Bernd 
            Ebenhoch
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fred 
            Wudl
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ayse 
            Turak
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Bingqian 
            Xu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Enrico 
            Angioni
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ravindra 
            Venkatramani
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Uli 
            Lemmer
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dmitrii 
            Perepichka
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alexander 
            Kanibolotsky
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Peter 
            Skabara
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jack 
            Wildman
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Eli 
            Zysman-Colman
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Donal 
            Bradley
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Iain 
            McCulloch
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Joseph 
            McDouall
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sergey 
            Ponomarenko
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jenny 
            Nelson
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ji-Seon 
            Kim
          
        
      
First published on 18th November 2014

Justin Hodgkiss opened the discussion of the paper by Jenny Nelson: A viable explanation for the initial long-range charge separation step in organic photovoltaic cells is via extremely high non-equilibrium charge mobilities of charge pairs initially formed high in the density of states (DOS). In this model, charge separation would be enhanced by some degree of disorder, including possibly the disorder induced by the packing with the fullerene at the heterojunction.
Can you comment on the implications of your work on this model of charge separation? Do you see sufficient disorder higher in the DOS to expect high initial hole mobilities?

Jenny Nelson answered: The effect of enhanced disorder near the interfaces in driving charge away from the interfaces towards regions where the materials are more ordered and the electronic states lie deeper into the band gap seems a very plausible one to me. The model would be compatible with this because the deeper lying states result from more extended regions of conjugation that would be more likely to occur away from the interfaces, where the second material in a heterojunction is less able to disrupt packing. In the work done so far, we concentrated mainly on the polymer domain and so were not able to study the interfaces in detail. The model could however be applied to binary systems, and this effect of a destabilisation of the electronic states due to packing disorder close to the interface could be studied. The limiting factor will be the time taken to carry out molecular dynamics (MD) of many representative binary systems.

Donal Bradley queried: Did you assume that the P3HT polymer is 100% regioregular and, if so, what will happen if you consider a non-regioregular polymer structure?

Jenny Nelson responded: Yes, we modelled a 100% regioregular material. The case of the regiorandom material would be very interesting to study in comparison, but we have not done that yet. This is a good idea for further study.

Uli Lemmer asked: How much do you learn about the delocalisation of the wave functions using this approach?

Jenny Nelson replied: The approach delivers information on the delocalisation of the wavefunction, through the form of the eigenfunctions obtained from the tight binding Hamiltonian, and on the relationship between localisation and energy levels. This aspect of the approach is being studied in more detail in a follow-on project.

Bernd Ebenhoch said: There are the two concepts for the density of states: a Gaussian distribution and an exponential tail. Could you please explain the differences and implications for charge transport and recombination?

Jenny Nelson responded: The density of states could have a wide variety of different forms. Our results could be approximated by an exponential or a Gaussian depending on the range of energies considered. Both functional forms would lead to phenomena such as charge density-dependent mobility, but with different dependences. For example, an exponential tail leads to a power law in the density dependence of mobility, and a Gaussian leads to a more complex form. Qualitatively the effects would be similar. The best approach would be to use an approximation to the DOS that gives the best fit over the range of Fermi levels that is of interest experimentally.

Gitti Frey remarked: You showed that the tail in the DOS is due to torsion, which has a small activation energy. What is the effect of temperature (mainly working device conditions, 50–60 °C) on this DOS?

Jenny Nelson answered: The effect of temperature on the tail of the DOS is shown in Fig. 3 in the manuscript.1 The temperature dependence is very weak and no significant change is seen between 300 K and 400 K. This surprising result was attributed to the constraining effect of the close chain packing on the polymer conformation. However, there may be other factors than torsion affecting the DOS in real life, and those factors may be temperature-dependent.
1 J. M. Frost, J. Kirkpatrick, T. Kirchartz and J. Nelson, Faraday Discuss., 2014, DOI: c4fd00153b

Ifor Samuel asked: In your conclusion you said that intramolecular interactions in P3HT dominate over intermolecular interactions.1 How should that be reconciled with the considerable work by Spano and others explaining the properties of P3HT in terms of aggregate formation? Is it that you are studying different properties from those explained by aggregation?
1 J. M. Frost, J. Kirkpatrick, T. Kirchartz and J. Nelson, Faraday Discuss., 2014, DOI: c4fd00153b

Jenny Nelson answered: We decided to focus our attention on the more amorphous region of the P3HT film, as we expect these regions to dominate charge transport, and most experimental estimates of the DOS are obtained from methods that probe transport in some manner, and because we expect the amorphous regions to be rate limiting for charge transport. The result for intermolecular interactions may be different in regions with closer and more ordered packing. Also, the effect of packing on the energies of polaron states may be different from that on neutral excited states.

Ian Galbraith asked: Can you provide more details of the calculations which underpin the tight-binding parameters, and also whether changing the relative magnitude of these parameters would/could lead to a qualitative change in the calculated DOS?

Jenny Nelson responded: The electronic coupling between monomers and different chains is obtained by a projective method calculation where the HOMO of the first monomer is projected onto the HOMO of the second, see for example ref. 46 of the paper.1
The coupling between neighbouring monomers on the same chain is approximated by the formula J0cos T, where T is the torsion angle between the monomers and J0 is obtained by calculating the splitting of the HOMO for planar oligomers of increasing length and fitting the results to the form expected for a linear tight binding model. A change in the value of J0—that might result from using different quantum chemical methods or basis sets to calculate the energy levels of the oligomers—would result in a proportionate change in the energy scale of the density of states, for systems with no intrinsic energetic disorder.
1 J. Kirkpatrick, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2008, 108, 51–56.

Ravindra Venkatramani commented: The final result that the DOS profile for P3HT polymers is mostly defined by intra-chain couplings and not inter-chain couplings is very surprising and interesting. Since you are using a minimal basis set (INDO/S-based calculations), it is likely that the nearest neighbour couplings might be underestimated. Have you checked for the basis set size dependence of your results?

Jenny Nelson responded: INDO/S should not seriously underestimate the coupling for intermolecular transfer integrals. The molecular orbital overlap (MOO) implementation of INDO/S that is used to find the intermolecular couplings in this paper was previously tested in comparison with the projective method using a medium-sized basis set (6-31G(d)) in ref. 46 of the paper.1 That study found that the two methods agreed to within less than 10–20%.
1 J. Kirkpatrick, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2008, 108, 51–56.

Jack Wildman said: How valid is the assumption that the transfer integral and, thus, the hopping term, of intrachain coupling between monomer units depends solely on the dihedral angle between these units? Would you, for instance, expect any effect to arise due to sharp bends between monomers?

Jenny Nelson replied: In principle, yes, we would expect other factors such as the dihedral to affect the transfer integral. In the case of P3HT where the optimum configuration of neighbouring monomers is the same as the one with the highest J, then the effect of a bend and a high torsion on J would be similar (they would both reduce J), and there may not be much effect from neglecting bends, as a bend would typically coincide with a non-zero torsion. For other polymers with more complex structures, we would need to look at which other degrees of freedom are important.

Peter Skabara remarked: Can you introduce solvent molecules to emulate the effect of solvent annealing on conformation and self-assembly?

Jenny Nelson replied: In principle, yes, but I doubt if we could reliably model the different effects of different solvents at the present stage. It would nevertheless be a good idea to compare the structures generated with and without solvent molecules.

Rupert Taylor communicated: The use of hexadecamers was stated to be a compromise between reality and computational time. Were shorter chains simulated, and if so how consistent were the results? Was the length of 16 reached by a trial and error approach or selected due to known validity from previous studies?

Jenny Nelson communicated in reply: It was not possble to test the effect of the oligomer length in the limit of longer oligomers because of computer time constraints. We tested different lengths mainly to find an oligomer length at which the MD would equilibrate. We did not systematically test shorter oligomers, and we agree that this would be a very good idea for future work.

Gitti Frey opened the discussion of the paper by Ji-Seon Kim: What is the mechanism of the in situ conversion which requires the spacial accumulation of many molecules, their interaction, particle nucleation and growth? Does the required temperature, 160 °C, reflect the precursor decomposition or molecule assembly through the polymer film?

Ji-Seon Kim replied: The mechanism of decomposition and formation of the morphology has been discussed more fully previously using TGA and SEM.1 The decomposition occurs via a Chugaev rearrangement over the temperature range 50–150 °C. The first stage (loss of ethene) occurs below 100 °C and results in large CdS domains (~100nm), at higher temperature the other parts of the ligands are lost and the length scale of phase separation decreases with temperature. It is suggested that the evolution of gases during this later stage of decomposition ruptures the aggregates, leading to smaller domains.
1 S. Dowland, T. Lutz, A. Ward, S. P. King, A. Sudlow, M. S. Hill, K. C. Molloy and S. A. Haque, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2739–2744.

Gitti Frey commented: We have recently shown that inorganic nanoparticles can be formed inside P3HT pre-formed films without disturbing the ordered domains.1 This is done by ALD using ZnO precursors in the gas phase. The precursors, diethyl zinc and water, diffuse into a pre-formed P3HT film and in situ convert to ZnO. The diffusion is through the disordered domains of P3HT and hence the ordered domains are not disrupted.
1 S. Obuchovsky, I. Deckman, M. Moshonov, T. Segal-Peretz, G. Ankonina, T. J. Savenije and G. L. Frey, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8903–8910.

Fred Wudl noted: As shown by various techniques, PCBM will diffuse through a planar film device, as published recently by my colleague Michael Chabinyc.

Ji-Seon Kim responded: It is entirely possible that nanoparticles of CdS may be dispersed throughout the blend in addition to forming aggregated domains. This might explain the disruption of the polymer morphology, and is also expected to be detrimental to electron transport.

Simon Higgins asked: When you anneal at 160 °C to convert the Cd(xanthate)2 species to CdS, what happens to the organic residue? I assume there are gases produced? Does the outgassing also affect the film morphology?

Ji-Seon Kim responded: The products are C2H4, COS, and H2S, which are all volatile and not expected to remain in the film. This outgassing is probably a factor in the development of the film morphology; it correlates with a decrease in the size of the CdS aggregates and also the disruption of the P3HT molecular order described here.1,2
1. S. Dowland, T. Lutz, A. Ward, S. P. King, A. Sudlow, M. S. Hill, K. C. Molloy and S. A. Haque, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2739–2744.
2 H. C. Leventis, S. P. King, A. Sudlow, M. S. Hill, K. C. Molloy and S. A. Haque, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1253–1258.

Iain McCulloch commented: Can you pre-aggregate your solutions using a theta or non-solvent, rather than aggregate them during film formation and annealing?

Ji-Seon Kim responded: It is certainly worth considering this; generally the use of different solvents to control blend thin film morphology is under-exploited in the field. Our study begins to address this using a “poor solvent” to produce the polymer nanowires in solution before deposition, but we can also produce a similar effect using a non-solvent like cyclohexanone. I assume that we would see similar effects. The problem we have identified is that the thermal annealing step required to produce the inorganic component is the dominant step in determining the final morphology of the blend film, so we would have to combine solvent control with a different method of producing the CdS nanoparticles.

Graham Hutchings remarked: I am going to ask a naive question as this is not my field. However, I am very interested in the synthesis and use of nanoparticles for catalysis. In our case we use organic capping agents and we use reducing agents to form the nanoparticles at temperatures of ca. 70–80 °C.1 The nanoparticles can be thermally treated as well. In your case you are using temperature alone to form the nanoparticles and I am interested to know if you could trigger the formation of nanoparticles at a temperature lower than the 160 °C you use, as you indicate that high temperatures can have adverse effects on the polymer.
1 J. A. Lopez-Sanchez, N. Dimitratos, S. White, G. Brett, L. Kesavan, P. Miedziak, R. Tiruvalam, R. L. Jenkins, A. F. Carley, D. Knight, C. J. Kiely and G. J. Hutchings, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 551–556.

Ji-Seon Kim replied: The idea of triggering nanoparticle formation at lower temperatures is attractive for our study, since we have found that high temperatures are problematic for the polymer morphology. If this approach can be applied to our system (or a similar one), then it would be interesting to study. Our work clearly shows the need to develop novel approaches, so this suggestion presents a good option.

Graham Hutchings commented: In response to the point that you can trigger nanoparticle formation using photolysis, is this possible in your case as then the system could be irradiated at low temperature, and you could then probe the effect of temperature as a separate variable?

Ji-Seon Kim responded: Using light to trigger nanoparticle formation is also an attractive approach for decoupling the desired nanoparticle formation process from the undesirable high temperature. However, if it is the outgassing of volatile products that causes the disruption, this effect would not be overcome. We might also expect photodegradation of the polymer to become a significant effect: the precursor used here has a large energy gap so high energy photons would be needed, which pose a risk to the polymer.

Shuyu Zhang remarked: In the field of hybrid photovoltaics, several approaches have demonstrated impressive device efficiencies, such as the use of perovskite materials. So compared to other approaches, what is the advantage of this new P3HT:CdS blend-based photovoltaic material? Where will this work go in the future?

Ji-Seon Kim responded: Clearly perovskite (and other) approaches have yielded more impressive device efficiencies, but none of these satisfactorily meet the requirements of high efficiency, solution processability and good stability. The limitation for perovskites is stability, whilst the limitation for our approach is efficiency. Our work identifies the interaction between inorganic and organic materials as the key challenge to be addressed, particularly the morphology of the interface. If we are able to develop techniques to control this interface then we will unlock the potential of polymer/nanoparticle photovoltaics.

Iain McCulloch asked: What are the bottlenecks preventing hybrid devices from achieving high performance? Electron transport or voltage?

Ji-Seon Kim answered: It is hard to identify a single cause without a more detailed study of the device performance. Our devices have a reasonable Voc (around 0.8V) but poor Jsc and FF, which indicates that the problem is with charge generation and transport. The high degree of polymer disorder in our optimised devices would suggest that hole transport is going to be a big problem, so I would suggest that this is one of the primary factors to address.

Uli Lemmer commented: Would it be possible to build devices just using the cadmium xanthate precursor solution, i.e. without using any conjugated polymer?

Ji-Seon Kim replied: We know that the CdS absorption contributes to the photocurrent in the blend film and there is some evidence of excited state delocalisation in the CdS nanoparticles, so it might be worth a try.3,4 However, the lack of visible absorption would be limiting for solar cell applications.
3. S. A. Dowland, L. X. Reynolds, A. MacLachlan, U. B. Cappel and S. A. Haque, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13896.
4. N. Bansal, L. X. Reynolds, A. MacLachlan, T. Lutz, R. S. Ashraf, W. Zhang, C. B. Nielsen, I. McCulloch, D. G. Rebois, T. Kirchartz, M. S. Hill, K. C. Molloy, J. Nelson and S. A. Haque, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1531.

Gary Conboy opened the discussion of the paper by Joseph McDouall: These calculations work well with simplified, well established single crystal molecules. Do you envisage this technique being applicable to larger oligomeric molecules and, eventually, polymers?

Joseph McDouall responded: The treatment of polymers on a model surface is quite challenging but we are looking at ways that we might approach it, although we have nothing to report on it at the present time. For cluster-type calculations of mobilities in polymers (without a surface), a way to proceed is to perform a periodic calculation on the polymer and then remove “oligomeric” units for calculating the electronic couplings and reorganisation energies. This must involve some experimentation to ensure that in the cation calculation (necessary for evaluating the reorganisation energy), the size of the oligomeric unit is sufficiently large that it fully encapsulates the distribution of the cation charge.

Donal Bradley remarked: I would be grateful if you would confirm the role of the surface in your calculations. Is it primarily to provide a suitable dielectric environment? Or is there another reason? How is it included in the calculations?

Joseph McDouall replied: The role of the surface was to provide a dielectric platform for the clusters to sit on. Importantly, it has the property that as more units of pentacene are added to the surface, the energetically preferred mode of attachment is with the long axis of the molecule perpendicular to the surface. The first unit attaches itself parallel to the surface. The second unit still very slightly favours the face down arrangement, but for three units (or more) the preferred mode of attachment is to have the pentacene molecules perpendicular to the surface. This has been observed experimentally in thin films of pentacene and it is an important feature for the model surface to be able to reproduce it.

Ravindra Venkatramani commented: The reorganization energy calculation, as outlined in eqn (6a) and (6b),1 accounts for only inner sphere contributions. It has been shown that for solvent-accessible electronic sites, the outer sphere contribution is the dominant contribution to the overall reorganization energy.2 Neglecting the outer sphere contributions (from both neighboring molecules and the solvent) would significantly underestimate the reorganization energy cost and therefore over-estimate the calculated hole mobilities in Table 4.1 From the point of view of developing a computational framework to reliably estimate hole mobilities in a broad range of molecular clusters/aggregates, including outer-sphere contributions to reorganization energy calculations is very important.
1 R. A. Krawczuk, S. Tierney, W. Mitchell and J. J. W. McDouall, Faraday Discuss., 2014, DOI: c4fd00082j.
2 V. Tipmanee, H. Oberhofer, M. Park, K. S. Kim and J. Blumberger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17032–17040.

Joseph McDouall replied: The outer sphere reorganisation energy will certainly play a role. We have not included it in our calculations. The paper by Blumberger et al.1 refers to solvent rearrangement around a protein, and it may be expected that the solvent reorganisation will be rather greater in such a process than for the systems we have studied. However, it remains an important consideration and will need to be addressed to refine the model.
1 V. Tipmanee, H. Oberhofer, M. Park, K. S. Kim and J. Blumberger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17032–17040.

Ravindra Venkatramani remarked: The off-diagonal terms of the Fock matrix in eqn (10) in the manuscript1 are not directly the non-adiabatic electronic couplings. To extract the electronic couplings from eqn (10) a transformation has to be applied to make the diagonal energy terms equal. Can you verify this? The sentence below eqn (10) in the manuscript1 suggests that such a transformation was likely made ( was “symmetrically orthogonalized”).
1 R. A. Krawczuk, S. Tierney, W. Mitchell and J. J. W. McDouall, Faraday Discuss., 2014, DOI: c4fd00082j.

Joseph McDouall replied: The reference for the procedure used is Valeev et al,1 the pertinent equations in that paper being eqn (8) and (9). The symmetric orthogonalisation is applied to the back transformed Fock (or Kohn–Sham) matrix and then the electronic coupling is obtained. This step is essential otherwise a very large overestimate of the coupling will be obtained.
1 E. F. Valeev, V. Coropceanu, D. A. da Silva Filho, S. Salman and J.-L. Brédas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9882–9886.

Bingqian Xu said: The computation was obtained on a model surface. If you introduce defects on the surface, what will happen to the hole mobilities?

Joseph McDouall answered: We have not investigated that so far. It would certainly be possible to introduce geometric defects into the model surface, but it would probably require a much larger surface to be used in the calculations so that local defects did not preclude the formation of clusters away from the defect.

Dmitrii Perepichka commented: It is not very clear from Fig. 14 in your paper,1 and I would like to confirm whether the pentacene molecules in your calculated clusters are oriented with their long molecular axis perpendicular to the film plane.
1 R. A. Krawczuk, S. Tierney, W. Mitchell and J. J. W. McDouall, Faraday Discuss., 2014, DOI: c4fd00082j.

Joseph McDouall responded: The figure is slightly tilted to show some perspective on the pentacene units.1 In the global minimum the pentacene units are aligned perpendicular to the surface. There is however also a local minimum in which the monomers tilt a few degrees away from perpendicular.
1 R. A. Krawczuk, S. Tierney, W. Mitchell and J. J. W. McDouall, Faraday Discuss., 2014, DOI: c4fd00082j.

Dmitrii Perepichka commented: Do you use reorganization energies for individual molecules in the gas phase? Do you know how significantly would it change if calculated for a cluster?

Joseph McDouall replied: The reorganisation energies we use are for the individual molecules. We are investigating the reorganisation energy for the cluster but have nothing to report as yet.

Ayse Turak said: In your paper,1 you state that the monolayer structure that you used is representative of the bulk structure of the organic material. However, this is generally not the case, especially for small oligomers such as pentacene. See, for example, Hayakawa et al.,2 Casu et al.,3 Witte et al.,4 Durr et al.,5 Hiroshiba et al.,6 Krauss et al.,7 Koch et al.,8 Kury et al.,9 Amassian et al.,10 Brauer et al.,11 amongst many others. Given that the first monolayer is generally not representative of the overall film structure, is it possible to extend your calculations to the 2nd or 3rd layer, incorporating a change in the morphology above the first monolayer to give a more realistic model of the interfacial structure, and therefore a better basis to understand the charge transport?
1 R. A. Krawczuk, S. Tierney, W. Mitchell and J. J. W. McDouall, Faraday Discuss., 2014, DOI: c4fd00082j.
2 R. Hayakawa, A. Turak, X. Zhang, N. Hiroshiba, H. Dosch, T. Chikyow and Y. Wakayama, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 034706.
3 M. B. Casu, I. Biswas, B.-E. Schuster, M. Nagel, P. Nagel, S. Schuppler and T. Chassé, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 024103.
4 G. Witte and C. Wöll, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1889–1916.
5 A. C. Dürr, B. Nickel, V. Sharma, U. Täffner and H. Dosch, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 503, 127–132.
6 N. Hiroshiba, J. P. Hill, R. Hayakawa, K. Ariga, K. Matsuishi and Y. Wakayama, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 554, 74–77.
7 T. N. Krauss, E. Barrena, D. G. de Oteyza, X. N. Zhang, J. Major, V. Dehm, F. Würthner and H. Dosch, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4502–4506.
8 N. Koch, I. Salzmann, R. L. Johnson, J. Pflaum, R. Friedlein, J. P. Rabe, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 537–545.
9 P. Kury, K. R. Roos, D. Thien, S. Möllenbeck, D. Wall, M. Horn-von Hoegen and F.-J. Meyer zu Heringdorf, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 461–465.
10 A. Amassian, V. A. Pozdin, T. V. Desai, S. Hong, A. R. Woll, J. D. Ferguson, J. D. Brock, G. G. Malliaras and J. R. Engstrom, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5580–5592.
11 B. Bräuer, A. Virkar, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, D. P. Bernstein, R. Kukreja, K. W. Chou, T. Tyliszczak, Z. Bao and Y. Acremann, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3693–3697.

Joseph McDouall responded: It is certainly true that the first monolayer is not representative of the overall film structure. However, within the computational schemes that we have employed, we are limited to how many molecules we can treat and hence the number of layers we can treat. Our model surface is able to reproduce the well-known property of pentacene thin films that as the number of molecules adsorbed increases, the energetic balance favours the adsorption of the pentacenes end-on to the surface rather than face-down or edge-on. Much larger simulations of the thin film (monolayer) structure,1 obtained with classical force fields, also confirm this structural motif. The hole mobility, which we calculate is dependent on all nearest neighbour interactions, and small variations in specific monomer–monomer interactions will not significantly change the overall value. Additionally, in preparing organic field effect transistor (OFET) devices, engineers are often able to alter the characteristics of surfaces so that thin films form in particular motifs. Our calculations, while idealised, are nonetheless able to distinguish between synthetic targets, and which can be expected to yield good hole mobilities, and this is our principal aim in this work.
1 L. Viani, C. Risko, M. F. Toney, D. W. Breiby and J.-L. Brédas, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 690–700.

Ioan Baldea asked: In your approach, you use the intramolecular reorganisation energy λ computed according to the four-point scheme sketched in Fig. 7 in your manuscript:1

 

λ = λ1 + λ2,

        (1)
      
 

λ
1 = E0(Q+) ¬ E0(Q0),

        (2)
      
 

λ
2 = E+(Q0) ¬ E+(Q+).

        (3)
      

Considering differences between the total energies of the neutral (E0) and cationic (E+) species taken at the corresponding optimised geometries (Q = Q0 and Q = Q+, respectively), you (implicitly) assume that all molecular vibrational modes Q can be treated classically, or, rephrasing, that all vibrational modes reorganize classically. A fact on which extensive work drew attention to recently2–6 is that, in reality, only low frequency modes, which are thermally activated, can be considered as classically reorganizable. Higher frequency modes reorganize quantum mechanically. So, like in other cases,2–5 I would expect that, by using the above equations, you substantially overestimated the intramolecular reorganization energy λ. To properly estimate λ, you need an analysis of the individual vibrational modes.
Further, computing the rate of charge transfer W via your Marcus-type eqn (1),1 you (implicitly) assume a parabolic Q-dependence of E0,+. Based on previous experience,2–6 for the low-frequency intramolecular modes that reorganize classically I would expect substantial anharmonic contributions, resulting in a modified formula for W.
1 R. A. Krawczuk, S. Tierney, W. Mitchell and J. J. W. McDouall, Faraday Discuss., 2014, DOI: c4fd00082j.
2 I Bâldea, 2012, arXiv: 1204.4023v1.
3 I Bâldea, Europhys. Lett., 2012, 99, 47002.
4 I Bâldea, H. Köppel and W. Wenzel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1918–1928.
5 I Bâldea, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8676–8684.
6 I Bâldea, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 33257–33261.

Joseph McDouall responded: We have not applied the vibrational terms to our calculations at all, but I do accept that their treatment would alter the reorganisation energies. Similarly the Marcus treatment, which we employ, is based on parabolic surfaces which would again be modified by anharmonic terms. However, for our purposes, the net effect on the calculated mobilities is expected to be small. The difference in the vibrational frequencies is likely to be significant for only one or two modes, and so the net effect on the overall energy differences will be small.

Enrico Angioni remarked: In your work you have reported the values of some binding energies. Which method did you use to calculate these energies?

Joseph McDouall replied: The semiempirical PM7 method was used. All geometries of the clusters and surface were also obtained at this level. PM7 is parameterised to reproduce non-covalent interactions, as encountered in the S22 dataset, with some success and hence it is an appropriate choice.

Fred Wudl opened the discussion of the paper by Dmitrii Perepichka: Very nice work. I have three remarks. 1. In the case of your donor molecule, it should be more akin to an acceptor since pyridine is an electronegative moiety. 2. What was the conductivity of the solid? 3. The angle of the hydrogen bonds of the pyrrole components of the donor appear to be too wide, would a piperidine equivalent not be better?

Dmitrii Perepichka answered: 1. Indeed, pyridine nitrogen stabilizes both frontier orbitals of the compounds, making it a weaker electron donor and a stronger electron acceptor. However, owed to the presence of two electron-rich pyrrole rings, it still acts as an electron donor towards NDI. 2. The cocrystal solids are neutral materials and do not have intrinsic charge carriers to expect high conductivity. The conductivity value can be deduced from the off current of the OFET measurements. The two-probe conductivity of the OFET channel at zero gate voltage, as expected, shows non-Ohmic behavior and at 100V bias across a 50 μm channel is on the order of 10¬5 S cm−1 for DP-P2P:NDI-81. 3. If I correctly understand your idea to replace pyrrole rings with piperidine, it would lead to a more favorable direction of NH bonds but you would lose π-conjugation, which is necessary for the transport properties. In any case, stronger binding H-bond components with a suitable electronic structure could be designed (and we indeed are working on creating DDD⋯AAA pairs), however, I should comment that the strength of H-bonding is not at all a limiting factor for the applications of these materials. The complementary H-bonding in the current system is already sufficiently robust to ensure the interaction between both components in the solid state.

Gitti Frey remarked: Are there design rules to ensure that the H-bonding does not disturb the π-π interactions required to support charge transport?

Dmitrii Perepichka replied: Our approach was based on making the H-bonding functionality a part of the π-conjugated framework. In this case H-bonding interactions occur in the direction perpendicular to the π-stacking and thus are not expected to disturb it.

Gitti Frey asked: Self assembly of small molecules directs nanostructures that are useful for FETs, but it is difficult to form the continuous films necessary for PV devices. Are there design rules to direct the formation of thin films from self-assembled small molecule structures?

Dmitrii Perepichka responded: Yes, there are standard design rules used to improve the solubility/processability of π-conjugated materials. We introduced long branched alkyl chains on both the donor and the acceptor components, and are currently in the process of investigating the device properties of the H-bonded donor/acceptor films prepared by spin-coating. Inducing liquid-crystalline behavior in these materials, needed for finer control of molecular organization, is in our future plans.

Eli Zysman-Colman said: Is it your long term plan to make bifunctional materials with donor/acceptor units on both sides of the molecule?

Dmitrii Perepichka answered: We do not have immediate plans to prepare covalently linked donor–acceptor molecules with H-bonding functionality, if that's what you mean. Covalent D–A dyads have been studied as potential photovoltaics materials since the late 1990s, with very limited success. What we do work on is the synthesis of larger donor and acceptor oligomers with complementary H-bonding. This should allow us to improve light absorption in the NIR region and increase the separation between the hole and the electron, to slow down charge recombination, which is essential for photovoltaic applications.

Eli Zysman-Colman responded: Assuming you are able to do this, how easily will the materials be processable? How will you address this point?

Dmitrii Perepichka responded: You are quite right, processability is an important limitation while working with organic semiconductors. We are addressing the issue through the most standard approach: putting branched long chain substituents on both the donor and acceptor components. Thus, our latest donor–acceptor co-assemblies, based on π-extended perylenediimide, are fully soluble for spin-coating film processing.

Neil Findlay asked: Have you looked at OFET device measurements for the thiophene and furan analogues of DP-P2P?

Dmitrii Perepichka responded: We have indeed attempted to measure field mobility for some difuryl- and dithienyl-P2P cocrystals. We have seen low electron mobility in a few devices, but never observed ambipolar transport as for DP-P2P. Since our X-ray crystallographic studies showed mixed stacking for these cocrystals, good transport properties were not expected, and we have not pursued it further.

Alexander Kanibolotsky asked: You have got proton donor and acceptor groups in the molecule of the semiconductor, which can facilitate the formation of charge carrier traps. Did you observe any hysteresis in the transfer characteristics of your OFETs? In other words, did you notice any difference in the characteristics when sweeping the voltage forward and backwards? For an OFET with hysteresis, the calculated values of charge carrier mobility and threshold voltage can depend heavily on whether one uses forward or reverse scanning.

Dmitrii Perepichka replied: We almost always observe some hysteresis, even in OSCs without labile protons. We have not paid close attention to the extent of hysteresis in this specific case (the mobility value was calculated for the forward IV scan), and I agree that it can provide additional information about possible charge trapping in our H-bonded systems. However, because the measured electron mobility for disubstituted NDI-R2 (without labile protons) was similar to that of NDI-R1 and NDI⋯P2P, we concluded that charge trapping due to proton transfer is not significant.

Iain McCulloch remarked: Can you comment on whether you have the optimal geometry to facilitate the hydrogen bonding required to form the dimer molecule. The molecule has a fused structure with a fixed distance between bonding sites, with no rotational/conformational freedom. In nature, this is not the case, for example in proteins. Is this the ideal geometry or could hydrogen bonding be increased?

Dmitrii Perepichka replied: Finding a molecular structure with an optimal geometry for three-point H-bonding to NDI was an essential part of this work. I believe that the dipyrrolopyridine structural motif is not too far from that optimum geometry. From X-ray structural analysis, the N⋯H hydrogen bond with the pyridine nitrogen is ca. 1.8 Å which is quite short (Table 2 in the manuscript1). Indeed, as was suggested by Prof. Wudl, the geometry of the five-membered pyrrole rings places the NH hydrogen bond donors a little too far from the CO acceptors (O⋯H distance 2.0–2.2 Å). However, the overall DAD⋯ADA hydrogen bonding in the P2P/NDI pairs is sufficiently strong to provide reliable binding. In fact, the calculated gas-phase binding energy of P2P/NDI (19.6 kcal mol¬1) exceeds that of the A⋯T nucleobase pairing (16.2 kcal mol¬1). It is also stronger than the binding of NDI with diaminopyridine (17.2 kcal mol¬1), which does have a perfect geometric match with NDI (but less acidic NH protons).
Regarding the flexibility of naturally-occurring H-bonding systems, this is certainly true at the macromolecular level, such as in DNA or proteins. However, the elementary multicenter H-bonding motifs, such as nucleobases or individual amides are in fact as rigid as our structures. When we start incorporating our H-bonding semiconducting motif in polymers and other soft materials, I agree that some conformational flexibility between the building blocks will need to be designed for the self-assembly to take place.
1 H. T. Black, H. Lin, F. Bélanger-Gariépy and D. F. Perepichka, Faraday Discuss., 2014, DOI: c4fd00133h.

Eli Zysman-Colman asked: Why did you choose these donor/acceptor units in particular? There are many examples of donor/acceptor motifs in the literature, some with more favourable binding than your system. Can you describe more precisely the criteria for your choice of donor and acceptor molecules?

Dmitrii Perepichka responded: Our choice was dictated by (i) simplicity and (ii) the established semiconducting properties of the selected components, because we wanted to ensure the crystallinity of the co-assembled solids (for X-ray structural analysis) and to be able to correlate their structure with the charge transport properties. Naphthalenediimides (NDI, and related rylene dyes) are some of the most established and synthetically most accessible n-type organic semiconductors, which have an intrinsic (but hidden) three-point hydrogen bonding motif. They are expected (and known) to form complementary H-bonding with diaminopyridine. Thus, we rationalized that synthetically accessible dipyrrolopyridine should also form complementary H-bonding with NDI and would have a sufficiently extended and rigid π-electron structure to support effective hole transport.
Certainly, there are stronger H-bonding motifs that could be used in D⋯A coassembly, but I do not think this is required. The binding should be strong enough to ensure the D⋯A contacts in the solid state (and it already is in our systems), but not too strong, so that the dynamics of association/dissociation are fast and the self-assembly pathway with defect-corrections can be followed.

Marc Salle remarked: Firstly, a key issue with the system presented is that it relies on H-bond interactions. Are there any data available to quantify the magnitude of this interaction in solution, for instance from an Isothermal Microcalorimetry (ITC) study? Secondly, a two-step experimental procedure is used to grow single crystals of the CT complex. Why not use a direct diffusion method of both components in solution?

Dmitrii Perepichka replied: We have studied the binding in solution by fitting NMR and UV-Vis data at different concentrations. The data analysis is somewhat complicated by the coexistence of H-bonding and π-stacking association, however, we can tell that the binding constant is on the order of 100 M¬1 in chloroform, as expected for such DAD⋯ADA complementary H-bonding. Regarding the second question, we can easily grow crystals by the simple mixing of hot solutions of the individual components, followed by cooling to room temperature. However, the size and quality of the resulting crystals is not adequate for either X-ray analysis or OFET fabrication. Generally speaking, vapor transport almost always produces higher quality crystals.

Dmitrii Perepichka opened the discussion of the paper by Sergei Ponomarenko: Your molecular design replaces an unstable vinylene hydrogen with an alkyl group R. However, the high acidity of the α-methylene in this group R, brought about by resonance stabilization of the corresponding anion by two CN groups, potentially creates another site of chemical vulnerability. Could you please comment on that?

Sergey Ponomarenko replied: I would compare the oxidation stability of these two units with their oxygen precursors: aldehyde and acetyl groups. It is well known that the former can be easily oxidized to the carboxyl group, but the latter is much more stable to oxidation. It probably comes from the fact that the oxidation proceeds through the formation of radical rather then anionic species. Perhaps under basic conditions, the alkyl-substituted molecules are indeed less stable to oxidation, but we have not observed it under normal conditions. Moreover, all alkyl-substituted molecules have higher oxidation potentials, indicating their better stability to oxidation as compared to their analogs without alkyl groups containing vinylene hydrogens.

Iain McCulloch remarked: From the DFT model it appears that the LUMO is on the periphery of the molecule and the HOMO in the centre. Is this the preferred way/optimal design for a small donor molecule?

Sergey Ponomarenko replied: If we are talking about amorphous materials, like most of the molecules considered in this paper, it does not actually matter whether they have the LUMO or HOMO on the periphery, since there is efficient contact between the acceptor and donor phases with different orientations of the star-shaped molecules. However, if we are going to make a columnar phase from such molecules, having the HOMO in the center could be helpful for efficient hole transfer through such a column to the anode. However, there might be a problem with the charge separation between the columns of the donor and acceptor phases, if the donor molecules form columns with the HOMO in the centre. In this sense it would also be interesting to check this molecular design for small acceptor molecules.

Rupert Taylor communicated: Can the central silicon atom in the tetrahedral oligothiophene silanes be replaced by other group 4 atoms (C, Ge, Sn...), and how would this alter the properties of the molecules?

Sergey Ponomarenko communicated in reply: Star-shaped oligothiophene silanes with central C atoms are known up to quaterthiophenes in one arm on the molecule, albeit their synthesis is more complicated then the corresponding oligothiophene silanes. However, neither their semiconducting or photovoltaic properties have been reported so far. Similar molecules with a central Ge atom have not been reported yet, but I expect that they can be easily synthesized, similar to the oligothiophene silanes. In a hypothetical series of star-shaped oligothiophenes with C, Si and Ge central atoms, I would expect an increased red shift when going from C to Ge for the same arm conjugation length. Therefore, such molecules with Ge could show improved semiconducting and photovoltaic properties, as some other Ge-containing organic semiconductors do.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:


λ = λ1 + λ2,
	
        (1)
      


λ
1 = E0(Q+) ¬ E0(Q0),
	
        (2)
      


λ
2 = E+(Q0) ¬ E+(Q+).
	
        (3)
      

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
