Strongly coupled inorganic–nano-carbon hybrid materials for energy storage   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35307E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35307E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3088-3113Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsStrongly coupled inorganic–nano-carbon hybrid materials for energy storage†

        
          
            Hailiang 
            Wang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Hongjie 
            Dai
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA. E-mail: hdai1@stanford.edu
Received 
      1st August 2012
    First published on 29th January 2013AbstractThe global shift of energy production from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources requires more efficient and reliable electrochemical energy storage devices. In particular, the development of electric or hydrogen powered vehicles calls for much-higher-performance batteries, supercapacitors and fuel cells than are currently available. In this review, we present an approach to synthesize electrochemical energy storage materials to form strongly coupled hybrids (SC-hybrids) of inorganic nanomaterials and novel graphitic nano-carbon materials such as carbon nanotubes and graphene, through nucleation and growth of nanoparticles at the functional groups of oxidized graphitic nano-carbon. We show that the inorganic–nano-carbon hybrid materials represent a new approach to synthesize electrode materials with higher electrochemical performance than traditional counterparts made by simple physical mixtures of electrochemically active inorganic particles and conducting carbon materials. The inorganic–nano-carbon hybrid materials are novel due to possible chemical bonding between inorganic nanoparticles and oxidized carbon, affording enhanced charge transport and increased rate capability of electrochemical materials without sacrificing specific capacity. Nano-carbon with various degrees of oxidation provides a novel substrate for nanoparticle nucleation and growth. The interactions between inorganic precursors and oxidized-carbon substrates provide a degree of control over the morphology, size and structure of the resulting inorganic nanoparticles. This paper reviews the recent development of inorganic–nano-carbon hybrid materials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, including the preparation and functionalization of graphene sheets and carbon nanotubes to impart oxygen containing groups and defects, and methods of synthesis of nanoparticles of various morphologies on oxidized graphene and carbon nanotubes. We then review the applications of the SC-hybrid materials for high performance lithium ion batteries, rechargeable Li–S and Li–O2 batteries, supercapacitors and ultrafast Ni–Fe batteries, and new electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions.
Hailiang Wang
Hailiang Wang received his bachelor's degree in chemistry from Peking University in China in 2007. He obtained his PhD degree in chemistry from Stanford University in the United States in 2012 (advisor: Professor Hongjie Dai). He is currently a Philomathia postdoctoral fellow at the University of California at Berkeley in the United States. His research interests are: (1) design and synthesis of advanced nanomaterials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, and (2) nanoscale and molecular-level understanding of catalytic reactions and electrochemical processes at gas/solid and liquid/solid interfaces.
Hongjie Dai
Hongjie Dai is the J. G. Jackson and C. J. Wood Professor of Chemistry at Stanford University. His research interfaces with chemistry, physics, materials science and biological and medical sciences. Thus far, his group has made advances to the basic science of carbon nanotubes and graphene and potential applications in the areas of nanoelectronics, nanobiotechnology, nanomedicine, energy storage and catalysis. He has published more than 200 journal papers that have been cited over 50000 times. He is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He is also the chief editor of the journal Nano Research.
1. Introduction
Energy is critical to life. Both industrial production and human evolution are dependent on conversion and utilization of energy. Sufficient and sustainable production of energy is one of the top important issues that our society faces on its way to the future. Thus far more than 80% of the energy for human activities has been derived from fossil fuels such as oil, coal and natural gas, none of which is renewable. Energy supply should be shifted to sustainable sources before the fossil fuels are completely consumed. In fact, the shrinkage of the Earth's total non-renewable energy sources has begun to be felt, causing energy shortages and pushing up the price of energy usage.
It is preferable to produce energy from renewable natural sources such as solar, wind, hydro and geothermal heat. However, these energy sources are intermittent in time and localized in space, making energy production difficult to match the pattern of energy demand. Employing electrochemical energy storage devices would allow storage of the surplus energy when electricity supply is higher than demand and release of it when demand becomes higher than supply.1–4 This would make the grid more efficient, reliable and potentially lower-cost. Grid scale energy storage requires electrochemical devices with desired energy and power output characteristics, long cycle life, high efficiency and low cost. On the other hand, electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices are currently actively pursued for propelling electric vehicles, with a goal of consuming less oil and emitting less greenhouse gas in transportation.5–8 For such electric vehicles to conquer the automobile market, first of all, the electrochemical devices will have to be safe. Secondly, the energy density of the devices needs to be high enough to provide a comparable driving range to that of a tank of gasoline or diesel. The devices should also be durable and inexpensive enough to keep the sale price and maintenance cost of the electric vehicles competitive.
It is almost impossible to find one kind of device that fulfills all the requirements posed by numerous practical applications. A possible solution is to develop various types of electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices with different energy and power capabilities and combine them in creative ways.
Lithium ion batteries are a type of rechargeable battery based on lithium ion shuffling between two electrodes.9–12 During charging the lithium ions and electrons move from the cathode to the anode, and the process reverses in discharging. Due to a relatively high energy density and efficiency, lithium ion batteries are now the dominant power supply devices for portable electronic devices such as laptops, cell phones, digital cameras and so on.9–12 However, in order to power electric vehicles independently, lithium ion batteries need to improve in energy density, cycle life, cost and safety.6,13,14
Using lithium metal as anode and oxygen or sulfur as cathode, lithium air batteries and lithium sulfur batteries can deliver much higher specific energy than Li ion batteries, but the existing devices suffer from low efficiency, low charging–discharging rate performance, short cycle life, high cost, and safety risks.8,15–17
Supercapacitors are electrochemical capacitors that can deliver much higher capacitance than conventional capacitors.9,18–21 Unlike traditional capacitors where two metal plates are separated by a dielectric layer, a supercapacitor device is made of two electrodes of high surface area or redox active materials separated by an electrolyte layer. While a conventional capacitor stores charge by polarization of the dielectric between the two plates, in a supercapacitor, the charge is stored in the electrodes themselves. Based on the charge storage mechanism, they can be divided into two categories. One type of supercapacitor stores charge from ion adsorption and desorption. They are named electric double layer capacitors. The other type of supercapacitor stores charge by Faradic reactions, and are thus named pseudocapacitors. Supercapacitors can also be divided into symmetrical and asymmetrical supercapacitors depending on whether the two electrodes of the device are identical. With excellent charging–discharging rate capability, supercapacitors are appealing devices for power quality applications.9,18–21 But the energy density of supercapacitors remains much lower than that of batteries.9,18–21
Recently, we showed that it is possible to develop ultra-fast rechargeable batteries using safe and low-cost aqueous electrolytes. This could be a new type of energy storage device bridging the specific energy and power gaps between Li ion batteries and supercapacitors.22 The ultra-fast batteries exhibited up to 3 orders of magnitude increase in rate capability while retaining the specific energy of conventional batteries. A key to such ultra-fast batteries is the development of strongly coupled inorganic–nano-carbon hybrid materials, with nano-carbons being either graphene or carbon nanotubes.
Graphene is a one atomic layer of graphite comprising sp2 hybridized carbon atoms. Interaction of electrons with the honeycomb lattice results in unique charge carriers with zero effective mass and pseudo spin, as described by a two dimensional analog of the Dirac equation.23,24 High quality graphene allows interesting quantum electrodynamics phenomena to be probed even at room temperature.23–28 Graphene is able to retain high mobility at high doping levels, promising for high performance electronics.29–32 Graphene is also a novel material with high electrical and thermal conductivity, large surface area (∼2600 m2 g−1), light weight, and both high mechanical strength and flexibility.31,33,34 These properties make graphene a desirable component of electrode materials and electrocatalysts for electrochemical energy storage and conversion. Chemical exfoliation of natural graphite is a promising approach to producing graphene at large scales.35–37 Chemically derived graphene sheets contain functional groups that can interact with inorganic materials.35–37 The chemical and physical properties of exfoliated graphene can be controlled to certain degrees by varying chemical functionalization conditions, affording various types of graphene sheets as substrates to build hybrid materials for energy applications.
In recent years we and others have taken much effort to design and synthesize graphene hybrid nanomaterials as advanced electrode materials and electrocatalysts for electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices.38–43 Such hybrid materials contain inorganic nanoparticles strongly anchored on oxidized graphene sheets by nucleation and growth on oxidized graphene (Fig. 1). The same idea has been extended to carbon nanotubes oxidized by the same method as making graphene oxide (GO). Selective and uniform distribution of the anchored inorganic materials on the nano-carbon surface affords strong coupling between electrochemically active materials and carbon, which fundamentally differs from traditional electrodes and electrocatalysts in which the active inorganic materials are typically physically mixed with a certain form of carbon to render electrical conductivity.
 Fig. 1  A schematic of SC-hybrid of inorganic nanoparticles and graphene (a form of nano-carbon) for - batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells and water splitting electrocatalysts. 
In this review, we will show that inorganic electrochemically active nanomaterials directly nucleated and grown on oxidized graphene or carbon nanotubes exhibit superior electrochemical performance compared to simple physical mixtures with conducting carbon, suggesting strong coupling effects between graphene and the active materials. Spectroscopy evidence of possible chemical bonding between inorganic nanoparticles and oxidized carbon will be shown. It is important to emphasize that these materials are referred to as ‘strongly coupled hybrid’ or ‘SC-hybrid’ to differentiate from ‘graphene composites’ or ‘nanotube composites’ made by physical mixing methods. Synthesis of inorganic particles on oxidized nano-carbon substrates to afford SC-hybrid also differs from free particle growth in solution, in that the interactions between the inorganic precursor and the oxidized carbon substrate can be utilized to gain a certain degree of control over the morphology, size and structure of the resulting inorganic particles, which is interesting and novel. The SC-hybrid materials are highly electrically conducting, exhibit good stability, and can potentially generate synergistic catalytic sites. Compared to conventional electrodes based on physical mixtures, SC-hybrid based electrodes show higher capacity/capacitance, enhanced charging–discharging rate capability, higher catalytic activity and improved cycling stability. The SC-hybrid approach could provide a new way of making electrochemically active materials for high performance batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, water splitting cells and other types of energy storage and conversion devices (Fig. 1).
2. Making of GO and oxidized carbon nanotubes
Pristine graphene was isolated from graphite by a mechanical cleavage method in 2004.27 This method, also known as the peel-off method, has been producing graphene with the highest quality.29–31,33,34 Synthesis of graphene on a metal surface by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is another widely used method to prepare graphene without introducing appreciable chemical functional groups. Chemical exfoliation of graphite by oxidation methods is a high-yield, low-cost and scalable way of making graphene.35–37 These chemically derived graphene sheets often contain abundant oxygen functional groups and remain electrically conducting, albeit with much lower electrical conductivity than pristine graphene. The combined good electrical conductivity high surface area, light weight, excellent mechanical strength and flexibility, and importantly, chemical reactivity make chemically derived graphene interesting for building SC-hybrid materials.
The most frequently used process to exfoliate graphite chemically is through oxidation of graphite to graphite oxide and sonication to obtain many single layer GO sheets suspended in solution. There are three main ways to prepare graphite oxide, developed more than fifty years ago by Staudenmaier, Hofmann and Hummers respectively.44,45 The Staudenmaier method uses fuming nitric acid, potassium chlorate and concentrated sulfuric acid as oxidants for graphite.45 The Hofmann method uses concentrated nitric acid, potassium chlorate and concentrated sulfuric acid.45 The Hummers method is the most popular method to oxidize graphite and uses sodium nitrate, potassium permanganate and concentrated sulfuric acid as oxidants.44
The functional groups on GO sheets have been characterized by infrared (IR) spectroscopy and 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.46,47 It has been reported that the main functional groups on GO are hydroxyls, epoxides (Fig. 2a),46,47 carbonyls and carboxyl acid groups (Fig. 2a). The carboxyl groups on GO have been decorated with metal species and imaged by transmission electron microscopy (TEM).48,49 The atomic structure of GO has been imaged by aberration corrected TEM.50,51 A GO sheet typically contains disordered domains with functional groups, relatively ordered graphitic domains and regions with holes and other defects (Fig. 2b).50,51 The oxygen functional groups on GO can also be imaged with atomic resolution by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) using the annular dark field detector to distinguish O atoms from C atoms by Z contrast.52
 Fig. 2  Schematic chemical structures of (a) GO, (c) reduced GO and (e) chemically exfoliated graphene sheets. Dark grey balls: carbon atoms; red balls: oxygen atoms; blue balls: hydrogen atoms. Hydrogen atoms on carbon atoms were omitted. (b), (d) and (f) are aberration corrected TEM images of (b) GO, (d) reduced GO and (f) chemically exfoliated graphene (H. Wang and H. Dai, unpublished results). 
GO contains a high percentage of oxygen atoms in the structure (Fig. 2a).35–37 The C/O atomic ratio is often between 10 and 1, depending on the oxidation method.53,54 GO can lose up to 40% of mass in thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) due to removal of oxygen containing functional groups.55 This is also consistent with the C 1s spectra measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The component at binding energy <285 eV corresponds to graphitic carbon atoms with sp2 hybridization, and the component at binding energy >285 eV is attributed to sp3 hybridized carbon atoms bonded with oxygen atoms.36,55 In Raman spectra, GO shows a D peak (a defect peak due to inter-valley scattering) with comparable intensity to the G peak (the doubly degenerate E2g phonon).53,55 The G peak of GO is broadened by the emergence of a D′ peak (a defect peak due to intra-valley scattering).53,55 The 2D peak (the second order of zone-boundary phonons) of GO is often quite weak.53,55 Single layer GO sheets deposited onto SiO2 substrates show a thickness of ∼1 nm as measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM), greater than that of pristine graphene sheets prepared by mechanical peel-off (∼0.6–0.8 nm) due to the interaction of the protruding functional groups of GO with the SiO2 surface.35
The functional groups of GO provide chemically reactive sites to interact with other chemicals and anchor materials onto GO sheets. However, in order to be used as electrode materials or electrocatalysts, it is desirable to render higher electrical conductivity to GO by means such as chemical reduction. GO can be reduced by simple thermal annealing in inert atmospheres such as nitrogen and argon.56–59 Reducing gases including hydrogen, ammonia and hydrazine have also been used to reduce GO.60–65 In the solution phase, soaking GO in hydroxide solutions can result in a certain degree of reduction.66 More often, reducing reagents such as hydrazine, sodium borohydride and ascorbic acid are used for solution phase reduction of GO.53,67–74 Photochemical, hydrothermal/solvothermal and microwave reduction of GO have also been reported.54,75–79
The aqueous suspension of as made GO is brown colored, and turns visibly black upon reduction. This provides a simple way to identify reduced GO from non-reduced GO.55 Reduced GO exhibits higher absorbance in the UV–Vis–NIR range compared to as made GO.54,55 The absorption peak of the aromatic π → π* transition also shifts to a higher wavelength upon reduction, indicating a partially restored conjugated system.54,55 Reduction can decrease the percentage of oxygen in GO to as low as a few percent.36,53 Nevertheless, there are still oxygen functional groups remaining in reduced GO (Fig. 2c), even though the number is significantly reduced. It is often observed that reduced GO shows an even higher D/G intensity ratio in Raman spectra than as made GO, indicating an increased number of small graphitic domains upon GO reduction.53,55 In the C1s XPS spectra, reduced GO also shows a drastically reduced high-binding-energy component compared to as made GO due to removal of oxygen functional groups.36,55
Reduced GO are electrically conducting. A single reduced GO sheet often shows a two dimensional conductivity ranging from 105 to 107 Ohm, as measured with two-terminal single-sheet devices.53,80 The current–voltage curves of a reduced GO device show clear nonlinear characteristics that fit well with the two dimensional variable-range hopping model, suggesting the existence of considerable defective regions between graphene domains.53,80 This is consistent with the structural picture of reduced GO (Fig. 2d).50 The mobility of reduced GO sheets is often below 10 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature.53,80 Nevertheless, unlike high performance electronic devices, reduced GO with lower electrical conductivity than pristine graphene can be utilized for energy storage devices such as batteries, supercapacitors and fuel cells.
Other than the GO route, there have been a number of chemical methods reported in the literature to produce graphene sheets with higher quality than reduced GO. In the liquid exfoliation method, organic solvents with high affinity to graphene, such as N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP) and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), are used to exfoliate and disperse graphene sheets from graphite by sonication.81,82 This method gives graphene sheets with a yield of a few percent, most of which are thicker than single layer. Another method involves acid treatment of graphite followed by molecular intercalation, and graphene sheets are then exfoliated and suspended in DMF with the assistance of polymer surfactant and sonication.83,84 This method gives single layer graphene sheets in a yield of a few percent. The obtained graphene sheets after further reduction show comparable conductivity with graphene made by peel-off or CVD growth methods.53 These methods give graphene sheets with significantly higher quality than reduced GO (Fig. 2e and f), allowing for study of graphene hybrid materials prepared from graphene sheets with different degrees of oxidation and structural qualities. However, the GO route is still favored for production of graphene hybrid materials at a large scale due to its simplicity.
Recently, we performed oxidation of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) using modified Hummers method to obtain chemically functionalized CNTs.22,85 In particular, few-walled and multi-walled CNTs were used for such oxidation, and the idea was to introduce oxygen functional groups on the outer-walls of CNTs similar to those on GO, while utilizing the high electrical conductivity of the inner walls of CNTs that remain largely intact through the oxidation process. The oxidized CNTs were found to be more advantageous over GO in making SC-hybrids in some cases, as reviewed below.
3. Making of strongly coupled inorganic–nano-carbon hybrids
GO sheets and oxidized CNTs contain carboxylic, hydroxyl, epoxide and other hydrophilic functional groups on the surface, and in contrast to pristine graphene and CNTs, can be homogeneously suspended as individual identities in aqueous solutions and used as substrates for growth of inorganic nanoparticles to afford SC-hybrids. The resulting product contains nanoparticles nucleated, grown and anchored on GO sheets or CNTs that remain suspended in solution or aggregated to a degree depending on the type of inorganic material synthesized and the type of solvent.
Our group has developed a general two step method to synthesize metal hydroxides and oxides on GO or oxidized CNTs via hydrolysis of metal precursor salts selectively on oxidized carbon as the first step.54,77,86–88 The method applies to both GO and oxidized CNTs oxidized by the Hummers process, and we will use GO as an example to describe the method below.
In the first step, metal ions are added to GO in a solution to interact with oxygen functional groups on GO and adsorb onto these groups. At these adsorbed sites, hydrolysis of metal ions is initiated to nucleate and grow metal hydroxides or oxides. Nucleation and growth could also take place in free solution, which would compete with selective nanoparticle nucleation and growth on GO and is undesired. We have found that there are several important parameters in the synthesis process to ensure selective growth of metal hydroxides or oxides on GO over free growth in solution. Using mixture solvents such as DMF–water and ethanol–water could suppress the hydrolysis reaction rate in free solution.54,77,86,87 DMF and ethanol are both good solvents in which GO can be well dispersed to avoid aggregation and fully expose the surface areas of the sheets for interacting with metal ions and hosting nanoparticles. Increasing or decreasing the DMF–water or ethanol–water ratio can slow down or increase the rate of metal ion hydrolysis. Reaction temperature is also important to the rate of the hydrolysis reaction.54,77,86,87 At too high a temperature, hydrolysis reactions would be too rapid to maintain the selectivity of nanoparticle growth on the GO surface, causing free nanoparticle growth off graphene sheets (a process we refer to as ‘free growth’). Various additives could affect the reaction rate as well. In the synthesis of TiO2–GO, sulfuric acid was added to slow down the hydrolysis of Ti(OEt)4 and afford selective growth of TiO2 nanoparticles on GO.87 In the synthesis of Co3O4–GO, ammonia was added to coordinate with Co2+, which lowered the hydrolysis rate and led to Co3O4 nanoparticles with smaller size on GO.77
The first step hydrolysis reaction is designed to selectively coat GO or oxidized CNTs with hydrolyzed metal ion products, after which a second reaction step by either hydrothermal/solvothermal treatment or thermal annealing in the gas phase is employed to convert the coating into crystalline metal hydroxides or oxides with the desired phases accompanied by reducing GO to a certain extent.54,60,77,86,87,89,90 Hydrothermal/solvothermal treatment provides a high-temperature and high-pressure environment for nanoparticles on GO to undergo re-crystallization. Temperature and solvent type are two parameters that can be adjusted to tune the morphology, size and phase of the nanocrystals grown. Higher temperatures and aqueous solvents tend to facilitate re-crystallization of nanoparticles on GO. Another type of reaction following hydrolysis is thermal annealing in the gas phase, and the annealing temperature and atmosphere can impact the phase, size and morphology of the materials grown on GO. For example, hydrolysis of iron salts in aqueous solutions under ambient conditions produces Fe(OH)3 or Fe2O3·xH2O, and subsequent annealing in air leads to Fe2O3 while annealing in an inert atmosphere produces Fe3O4.60,90 To synthesize FeO nanoparticles on graphene, hydrolysis of an Fe(II) salt under oxygen free conditions followed by annealing in an inert atmosphere is a plausible way. For high temperature annealing, nanoparticles on graphene may be subjected to a certain degree of aggregation.
Metal chalcogenides hybridized with GO can be synthesized by reacting metal ions with chalcogen precursors in GO-containing solutions under controlled conditions. The interaction between metal ions and GO can initiate the nucleation process to afford selective growth of metal chalcogenides on GO.61,91,92 Our group has reported a two-step method to grow cobalt sulfide nanoparticles on GO,91 and the method can also be used to synthesize other metal sulfides such as copper sulfide, zinc sulfide, cadmium sulfide and metal selenides on GO or oxidized CNTs. Similar approaches can be used to synthesize other graphene hybrids such as CaCO3–graphene and FePO4–graphene.93,94 Decomposition of thiometallates in GO-containing solutions is another way to make metal sulfides on graphene, and the synthetic parameters can be tuned to ensure selective growth of the metal sulfides on GO. Our group has developed the synthesis of a MoS2–GO hybrid material with this approach.95
It is challenging to synthesize a SC-hybrid of graphene with inorganic nanoparticles of more complicated compositions such as lithium metal phosphates useful for lithium ion batteries. Conventionally, hydrothermal, solvothermal or solid state reactions are used to synthesize composites of lithium metal phosphates with carbon, through which all the precursors including carbon are mixed together to undergo the reaction steps. We have shown that transforming an intermediate hybrid material through controlled reaction steps is an effective way to grow lithium metal phosphates selectively on graphene. We first synthesized Fe2O3·xH2O–GO and Mn3O4–GO by controlled hydrolysis and then used them as intermediates to transform into LiFePO4–GO and LiMnPO4–GO SC-hybrids respectively. The transformation takes place through a solvothermal reaction of the intermediate hybrid with LiOH, H3PO4 and ascorbic acid in a solution of water–DMF at a ratio as low as 1:50, designed to suppress free growth of nanoparticles off the graphene sheets. Using this method, we have synthesized a LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 nanorods–graphene hybrid material (Fig. 3).74 Note that the same synthesis steps in free solution without using any GO sheets lead to growth of large particles with irregular shapes, suggesting the morphology-directing role of GO.
 Fig. 3  Growth of LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 nanorods on graphene (reduced GO). (a) A schematic structure (left) and SEM image (right) of GO. (b) A schematic structure (left) and SEM image (right) of Fe-doped Mn3O4 precursor nanoparticles grown on GO after the first step of reaction at 80 °C. (c) A schematic structure (left) and SEM image (right) of LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 nanorods grown on graphene after the second step of solvothermal reaction at 180 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright (2011) by Wiley-VCH. 
We have shown that for nanomaterials chemically grown on graphene via nucleation and growth at oxygen functional group sites, the morphology of the nanomaterials could be affected and tuned by the oxidation degree of graphene. We found that the same synthesis could produce totally different morphologies of nanoparticles on mildly oxidized graphene versus on heavily oxidized GO. For example, Ni(OH)2 precursors on mildly oxidized graphene sheets with low-concentrations of oxygen functional groups and defects are able to diffuse across the graphitic surface to re-crystallize into large Ni(OH)2 nanoplates in hydrothermal reactions (Fig. 4a).86 In contrast, the same synthesis of Ni(OH)2 on heavily oxidized graphene sheets produces small nanoparticles (Fig. 4b), suggesting that the Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles nucleated and grown on the abundant defect sites are pinned by the high-concentration oxygen functional groups and defects from crystallization into larger nanoplates.86 Recent theoretical calculations have revealed that the diffusion barrier of an isolated Ni adatom on the oxygenated graphene surface is much greater than that on the pristine graphitic surface, confirming the possibility of using graphene with controlled oxidation as a soft template for synthesis of hybrid nanomaterials.96 Similar phenomena have been observed for other graphene hybrid materials such as Fe2O3–graphene (Fig. 4c and d) and CoO(OH)–graphene (Fig. 4e and f).86
 Fig. 4  Nanomaterials grown on only mildly oxidized chemically exfoliated graphene sheets (a, c, e) and more oxidized reduced GO sheets (b, d, f), with their morphology and size dependent on the oxidation degrees of graphene sheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86, Copyright (2010) by American Chemical Society. 
Various graphene hybrid materials have been intensively investigated over the past few years. A series of such materials has been developed to hybridize graphene with metals,57,64,73,75,76,79,97–120 metal oxides,54,56,58–60,62,65,67–70,77,87–90,121–188 metal hydroxides,86,189–198 metal nitrides,199–201 metal chalcogenides,61,91,92,95 silicon,48,202–204 sulfur,205–207 metal salts74,93,94,115,208–219 and polymers,220–227 aimed at energy storage, catalysis, electronics, biological imaging, disease therapy and environmental protection. Strong hybridization with graphene is an effective way of enhancing the performance of functional materials through graphene substrate mediated control of nanoparticle morphology and size, enhanced electron transport, and tuning of electronic structures by charge transfer.
Metal–graphene hybrids have been synthesized by various methods. Chen et al. reacted K2PdCl4 with GO in aqueous solutions, through which the Pd precursor was reduced by GO to form ∼2 nm Pd nanoparticles on the GO sheets.106 This reaction avoided free growth of Pd off the GO sheets as GO was used as a reactant.106 Another method to prepare graphene metal hybrids in the solution phase is by reducing metal precursors to their metal states in the presence of GO. Reducing agents such as N2H4, NaBH4, HCOOH, ascorbic acid and citrate are used. Ethylene glycol could also reduce precursors to form noble metal nanoparticles through high temperature solution reactions, with ethylene glycol serving as both the solvent for the precursors and reducing agent. Such reactions also result in reduction of the starting GO materials. Metal nanoparticles could also be attached to GO sheets functionalized with molecules that are strongly interacting with the target nanoparticles. For example, Chai et al. functionalized GO with amine terminated ionic liquid or polyethylenimine to bind negatively charged AuPd nanoparticles via electrostatic interactions.120 Ji et al. prepared thiol terminated graphene sheets to selectively bond Au and Ag nanoparticles.102 Graphene metal hybrid materials could also be synthesized by microwave, photochemical or electrochemical methods.64,75,76,79,103,104,117
Controlled transformation reactions utilizing readily obtained graphene hybrid materials allow for the synthesis of other types of hybrid materials. Pd–graphene could be made from Cu–graphene via a galvanostatic replacement reaction.228 Metal oxide–graphene hybrids could be obtained from thermal decomposition of metal hydroxide–graphene precursors.150 Annealing of metal oxide–graphene or metal hydroxide–graphene hybrid materials in an ammonia atmosphere could produce metal nitride–graphene hybrids.199,201 Metal sulfide–graphene could be prepared by transforming metal oxide–graphene or metal hydroxide–graphene through reactions with H2S either in the gas phase or in the solution phase.229,230 Metal oxide–graphene could also be transformed to lithium metal oxide–graphene by either solid state or solution phase reaction with LiOH.214,215
4. SC-hybrids as electrode materials for lithium ion batteries
Li ion batteries, since their invention in the 1970's, have dominated the market of power source for portable electronic products.5,10,12,231 With relatively high gravimetric and volumetric energy density, Li ion batteries are widely used in consumer electronics such as cell phones, laptops, cameras and power tools. Li ion batteries are also considered promising for large scale applications including electric vehicles. A Li ion battery is comprised of an anode (negative) electrode, a cathode (positive) electrode, and a non-aqueous liquid electrolyte layer containing Li ions in between the two electrodes. In the charging process, Li ions are extracted from the cathode material, migrate through the electrolyte, and are inserted into the anode material. Meanwhile, electrons flow in the external circuit from the cathode to the anode. The electrode reactions are reverted during discharging in which Li ions are intercalated into the cathode material and Li ion de-intercalation takes place in the anode material.
Much higher energy density than that affordable by the present Li ion batteries is required to propel electric cars.6,8,13,14,232 In order to compete with gasoline or diesel powered cars in the market, future electric cars must provide a satisfactory driving range (>300 miles) in a single discharge while keeping the cost (including the cost of building the electric car and the maintenance cost during its life time) at least comparable to regular cars. For Li ion batteries to succeed in the transportation market, the specific energy of the batteries needs to be increased several times from the current technology. The cost of making the batteries also needs to be lowered. Meanwhile, the batteries should meet certain cycle life and safety requirements. Thus far, much effort has been devoted to developing new electrode materials with higher performance for future Li ion batteries.
Hybrid nanomaterials with graphene represent a new approach to electrode materials for lithium ion batteries over traditional electrode materials containing active materials physically mixed with conductive carbon. Strongly coupled inorganic–graphene hybrid electrode materials afford higher specific capacity, enhanced charging–discharging rate capability and improved cycling stability owing to the desired morphology of active inorganic nanoparticles and enhanced electron transport resulted from strong coupling between the active materials and graphene.
4.1. Graphene hybrids as anode materials for Li ion batteries
With high abundance, low cost, good stability and reversible chemistry of Li+ intercalation, graphite is the anode material for the present commercial Li ion batteries. In the charging process, Li ions are intercalated into the layered structure of graphite to form LiC6. This electrode reaction gives a theoretical specific capacity of ∼372 mA h g−1. Replacing graphite with other higher-capacity anode materials could improve the specific capacity and energy of Li ion batteries.
Oxides of transition metals such as cobalt, manganese, iron, nickel, copper and molybdenum are one type of high capacity anode materials for Li ion batteries. Li ion storage and release with these materials are based on the following conversion reaction:MxOy + 2yLi+ + 2ye− ↔ xM + yLi2O,where M stands for metal. In the charging process, Li ions react with metal oxides to form metals and lithium oxide. During discharging the reverse reaction takes place and metal oxides are recovered. Based on the conversion reaction, transition metal oxides have theoretical specific capacities as high as ∼1000 mA h g−1. However, most of these metal oxides are electrically insulating, which often causes low capacity and rate capability. The large volume change associated with the conversion reaction could cause pulverization and aggregation of the active materials, decreasing the reversible capacity over cycling. We and others have shown that it is highly desirable to grow small metal oxide nanoparticles on graphene to afford short diffusion length of ions and enhance electron transport, leading to high capacity and rate capability. The graphene sheets also afford good dispersion of small nanoparticles with a strong anchoring effect, which could lead to improved stability over repeated charge–discharge cycling.
Co3O4–graphene is one of the most studied graphene hybrid materials as the anode of Li ion batteries.89,129–131,133–135 By anchoring Co3O4 nanoparticles on graphene sheets through in situ synthesis or assembly, Co3O4–graphene hybrid materials with high specific capacity, rate capability and cycling stability have been developed. Yang et al. modified Co3O4 nanoparticles with an amine-terminated molecule (aminopropyltrimethoxysilane) to render them positively charged under acidic conditions.131 The functionalized nanoparticles were then assembled with negatively charged GO sheets via electrostatic interactions.131 The resulting Co3O4–GO hybrid material showed a high reversible specific capacity of ∼1100 mA h g−1 at a low current density of 74 mA g−1, which remained at ∼1000 mA h g−1 after 130 cycles.131 In contrast, lower specific capacity and cycling performance were observed for a mechanically blended mixture of Co3O4 nanoparticles and GO, highlighting the synergistic effect inherited from the hybrid structure.131 Chen and Wang synthesized a Co3O4–graphene hybrid material with a sheet-on-sheet structure.133 This hybrid material exhibited excellent high rate performance. A specific capacity of 931 mA h g−1 was achieved at a rate of 5 C (corresponding to a current density of ∼4.5 A g−1 and a full charge/discharge time of ∼12 min).133 The sheet-on-sheet Co3O4–graphene hybrid material showed higher capacity at various rates than either the Co3O4 sheets or the graphene sheets alone.133 The sheet-on-sheet Co3O4–graphene hybrid significantly outperformed the particle-on-sheet Co3O4–graphene hybrid, indicating that the morphology and size of nanomaterials grown on graphene could affect the performance of the hybrid materials.133
Compared to Co3O4, Mn3O4 is an attractive anode material for Li ion batteries due to the high abundance, low cost and environmental benignity of Mn. However, the low electrical conductivity (∼10−7–10−8 S cm−1) of Mn3O4 had seriously limited its electrochemical performance. Even with Co-doping to increase electrical conductivity, the specific capacity was lower than 400 mA h g−1, well below the theoretical capacity of ∼936 mA h g−1 for Mn3O4.233 We were the first to achieve the theoretical capacity of the Mn3O4 anode by selectively growing small nanoparticles of Mn3O4 on GO sheets via a two-step solution phase reaction (Fig. 5a).54 The Mn3O4 nanoparticles grown on graphene afforded an unprecedented high specific capacity of ∼900 mA h g−1 at 40 mA g−1, which remained 780 mA h g−1 at 400 mA g−1 (Fig. 5b).54 The Mn3O4–graphene showed stable capacity over 40 cycles (Fig. 5b).54 The unprecedented capacity of the highly insulating Mn3O4 anode material by our graphene hybrid approach was made possible by the ideal morphology, size and dispersion of the Mn3O4 nanoparticles and their strong coupling with graphene. Later, Li et al. demonstrated a Mn3O4–graphene hybrid anode material with a specific capacity of ∼900 mA h g−1.139
 Fig. 5  A Mn3O4–graphene hybrid material as the anode for Li ion batteries. (a) A SEM image of Mn3O4–graphene. (b) Cycling performance of the Mn3O4–graphene anode at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, Copyright (2010) by American Chemical Society. 
FeOx–graphene is another hybrid anode material attractive for its high capacity, high abundance, low cost and low toxicity.60,152,153,155,159,160,234 By assembling Fe3O4 nanoparticles onto graphene sheets, Behera demonstrated a Fe3O4–graphene hybrid material that could deliver a specific capacity of 1120 mA h g−1 at 0.2 C and 860 mA h g−1 at 4 C.234 The hybrid anode could last as long as 800 cycles without significant capacity decay.234 Compared to Fe3O4, Fe2O3 is much more insulating. It is thus more important to establish intimate interactions between Fe2O3 and graphene as well as to control the size of the Fe2O3 nanoparticles. Zhu et al. synthesized a Fe2O3–graphene hybrid material with a microwave-assisted solution phase reaction.152 The hybrid exhibited specific capacity higher than 1000 mA h g−1 over 50 cycles.152 Other transition metal oxide hybrid nanomaterials including CuO–graphene,121–125 NiO–graphene,59,148 MoO2–graphene69 and MnO–graphene141 have also been synthesized and investigated as anode materials for Li ion batteries.
Li4Ti5O12 is a promising anode material for Li ion batteries owing to its good reversibility over Li ion intercalation–de-intercalation, high rate performance, excellent cycling stability and safety. The structural parameters of Li4Ti5O12 remain almost unchanged during Li ion insertion and extraction, allowing for fast and reversible charging and discharging in a Li ion battery. This is attractive even though the theoretical specific capacity of Li4Ti5O12 is only 175 mA h g−1. The operating potential of Li4Ti5O12 is about 1.55 V vs. Li+/Li, which avoids the Li plating problem at the anode but at the cost of lower voltage of the fuel cell. Hybridizing Li4Ti5O12 with graphene affords optimization of the electrochemical properties of the anode material.217,218 Kim et al. transformed TiO2–graphene into Li4Ti5O12–graphene via a hydrothermal reaction with LiOH (Fig. 6a).216 The Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticles thus grown were ∼10–15 nm in size (Fig. 6b)216 and exhibited superior electrochemical performance. At a rate of 1 C, the potential difference between the charging and discharging voltage plateaus was less than 30 mV (Fig. 6c), suggesting excellent reversibility of the Li ion intercalation and de-intercalation reactions taking place.216 At a high rate of 50 C (1.2 min of charging/discharging time), the specific capacity was 128 mA h g−1, ∼83% of that at 1 C rate (Fig. 6c).216 Zhu et al. have also demonstrated a Li4Ti5O12–graphene hybrid anode which retained 90% of its initial capacity after 1200 cycles.217
 Fig. 6  A Li4Ti5O12–graphene hybrid material as the anode for Li ion batteries. (a) An XRD spectrum of Li4Ti5O12–graphene. (b) A SEM image of Li4Ti5O12–graphene. (c) Charge–discharge voltage profiles of the Li4Ti5O12–graphene anode at various C rates. (d) Cycling performance of the Li4Ti5O12–graphene anode at 1 C (black) and 10 C (red) rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 216, Copyright (2010) by Elsevier. 
Over the past few years, Si has generated renewed interest as an anode material for lithium ion batteries with ultrahigh specific capacity. Si can alloy with up to 4.4 times of Li to form Li4.4Si, affording a theoretical specific capacity of ∼4200 mA h g−1, more than 10 times that of graphite. Si is the second most abundant element in the Earth's crust and can be produced at a large scale at a low cost. A major problem of using Si as the anode for Li ion batteries is the fast capacity decay during cycling, which is associated with the large volume change up to 3 times during charging and discharging. Large volume change could cause pulverization of the Si anode material and loss of electrical contact of some fragments with the current collector. Utilizing Si–graphene hybrid materials could be an approach to mitigating this problem, as the graphene sheets can form a three dimensional conductive porous network to accommodate the Si particles.48,203,204,235–237
Chou et al. fabricated a Si–graphene hybrid material by mixing Si nanoparticles with solvothermally synthesized graphene using a mortar (Fig. 7b).235 The Si nanoparticles supported on graphene showed an initial specific capacity of ∼3000 mA h g−1 which decreased to ∼2100 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles (Fig. 7a).235 In contrast, the capacity of Si nanoparticles without graphene decreased from ∼3000 mA h g−1 to ∼350 mA h g−1 within 30 cycles (Fig. 7a).235 By a filtration method, Zhao et al. assembled a Si–graphene hybrid material that exhibited an initial capacity of 3200 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1,48 and retained 83% of the capacity after 150 cycles (Fig. 7c and d).48 Xin et al. employed GO sheets as substrates to grow SiO2 nanoparticles, which were further reduced to Si nanoparticles by Mg.237 The intermediate Si@graphene was further assembled with GO sheets to afford the final Si–graphene hybrid material.237 A specific capacity of ∼1000 mA h g−1 was achieved over 30 cycles.237
 Fig. 7  Si–graphene high-capacity anode materials for Li ion batteries. (a) Specific capacity and (b) SEM image of a Si–graphene hybrid material. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235, Copyright (2010) by Elsevier. (c) Specific capacity and (d) schematic structure of a Si–graphene hybrid material. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48, Copyright (2011) by Wiley-VCH. 
Despite the progresses, the electrochemical performance of the Si–graphene hybrid materials is still lower than those of the best Si based anode materials.238–241 This is partly due to the fact that the current Si–graphene hybrid materials are mostly physical mixtures. Further work is needed to render strong chemical interactions between Si nanoparticles and graphene and control the fine structures of the hybrids, which could lead to improved electrochemical performance of the Si–graphene anodes.
Other graphene hybrid anode materials for Li ion batteries include Sn–graphene,114 Sn–Sb–graphene,57 SnO2–graphene,67,162–165 SnS2–graphene,92,229 SnSe2–graphene242 and MoS2–graphene.243,244 SnO2 nanorods grown on graphene sheets showed a specific capacity of ∼900 m Ah g−1 with a decay of ∼0.3% per cycle over 50 cycles.164 MoS2 nanosheets grown on graphene showed a specific capacity of ∼1200 mA h g−1 and were stable over 100 cycles.243
4.2. Graphene hybrids as cathode materials for Li ion batteries
LiCoO2 (Fig. 8a) is a traditional cathode material for commercial Li ion batteries. To achieve stable cycling, only half of the Li ions can be extracted from LiCoO2 during charging (cut-off voltage of 4.2 V vs. Li+/Li), which gives a specific capacity of ∼150 mA h g−1.10,245,246 Although LiCoO2 has been the dominant cathode material in the market of Li ion batteries, it is expensive (low abundance of Co), more toxic than Fe and Mn compounds, and less safe (exothermic heat generated from reaction with electrolyte).10,245,246 LiCoO2 is also subject to capacity decay especially when overcharged, caused by structural instability and dissolution of Co3+ in the electrolyte.10,245,246
 Fig. 8  Schematic crystal structures of three types of cathode materials for Li ion batteries. (a) LiCoO2. (b) LiMn2O4. (c) LiFePO4. 
LiMn2O4 (Fig. 8b) is another commercially used cathode material for Li ion batteries. Mn is less expensive and more abundant and environmentally benign than Co. LiMn2O4 exhibits higher rate capability and thermal stability than LiCoO2.10,245,246 The electrochemical performance of LiMn2O4 could be further enhanced by growing nanoparticles of LiMn2O4 on graphene.214,215 Bak et al. synthesized a LiMn2O4–graphene hybrid via a two-step solution reaction where graphene sheets were first coated with MnO2 nanoparticles by reacting with KMnO4 and then the MnO2–graphene was transformed to LiMn2O4–graphene by a microwave assisted hydrothermal reaction with LiOH.214 The resulting LiMn2O4–graphene hybrid exhibited excellent rate performance. A specific capacity of 137 mA h g−1 was obtained at 1 C rate, and remained at 117 mA h g−1 and 101 mA h g−1 at 50 C and 100 C respectively.214 Notably, the LiMn2O4 nanoparticles synthesized on graphene by this low temperature microwave assisted hydrothermal reaction showed similar crystallinity and local atomic structure to bulk LiMn2O4 crystals.214 The hybrid structure also reduced Jahn–Teller distortion of LiMn2O4.214
LiFePO4 (Fig. 8c) has attracted much interest in the past fifteen years since it was first suggested as a cathode material for Li ion batteries.10,245–247 LiFePO4 has been used commercially due to its excellent cycle life, high rate capability, high thermal and chemical stability, low overpotential, low cost and environmental benignity. Low electronic and ionic conductivities are disadvantages of LiFePO4, which could slow down electron transport and Li ion diffusion within the active material and thus limit the charging–discharging performance.10,245–247 This obstacle could be overcome by reducing the particle size of LiFePO4 to the nanoscale, applying a conductive carbon coating, and doping with other metal cations.10,245–247 Growing LiFePO4 on graphene could be an effective way for controlling the size of LiFePO4 particles and providing a three dimensional conducting network to support the LiFePO4 nanoparticles.209–211 Kim et al. used a solution phase reaction followed by a solid state reaction to synthesize LiFePO4 nanoparticles on graphene.209 The resulting hybrid material showed higher specific capacity than the bulk LiFePO4 at various rates. At a rate of 0.08 C, a specific capacity of ∼160 mA h g−1 (the theoretical capacity of LiFePO4 is 170 mA h g−1) was achieved by the LiFePO4 nanoparticles on graphene, and the capacity remained at 100 mA h g−1 at 12 C, compared to only 55 mA h g−1 for bulk LiFePO4 at the same discharge rate of 12 C.209 Zhou et al. employed spray drying followed by a solid state reaction to synthesize LiFePO4 nanoparticles on graphene sheets, which further formed micron sized secondary particles, allowing for a high tapping density of the material.211 The LiFePO4 nanoparticles grown on graphene afforded higher capacity and rate capability than carbon coated LiFePO4 nanoparticles.211 It was observed that applying a carbon coating to the LiFePO4–graphene hybrid could further improve its electrochemical performance especially at high rates,211 which is in agreement with other studies.210
LiMnPO4 is another attractive cathode material and possesses all the advantages that LiFePO4 has. Moreover, the Li+ extraction potential for LiMnPO4 is 4.1 V vs. Li+/Li compared to 3.4 V for LiFePO4, promising a ∼20% gain of energy density over LiFePO4. Importantly, the 4.1 V operating potential of LiMnPO4 is compatible with the currently used liquid electrolytes. However, a problem is that the electrical conductivity of LiMnPO4 is even lower than that of LiFePO4 by 5 orders of magnitude (10−14 S cm−1 compared to 10−9 S cm−1), making it highly challenging to achieve high capacity at high rates for LiMnPO4 cathode materials. To meet this challenge, we used Fe-doped Mn3O4 nanoparticles grown on GO as an intermediate to synthesize Fe-doped LiMnPO4 (LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4) nanorods on graphene sheets (Fig. 9).74 The nanorod morphology and small size of the LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 nanocrystals were due to interactions with the graphene template and drastically differed from large irregular particles made by free growth.74 The Li ion diffusion channel ([010] direction of the LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 crystal) was along the radial direction of the nanorods, allowing for fast Li ion diffusion in the material (Fig. 9c).74 The LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 nanorods grown on graphene exhibited comparable rate performance as some of the best LiFePO4 materials reported, with a higher average discharging potential than that of the LiFePO4 materials.74 Stable capacities of 132 mA h g−1 and 107 mA h g−1 were achieved at high discharging rates of 20 C and 50 C, respectively (Fig. 9e), compared to 155 mA h g−1 at C/2, exhibiting the fastest discharging rate performance among all reported Fe-doped LiMnPO4 cathode materials.74 Such high performance is due to the ideal morphology of the LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 nanorods and their strong electrochemical coupling with the graphene substrate. X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) study revealed the chemical interaction between the LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 nanorods and graphene via possible Mn/Fe–O–C and P–O–C covalent bonding.248 Such bonding strongly anchored the nanorods on the graphene sheets. The high rate performance of the hybrid was also associated with Li4P2O7-like surface modification of the LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 nanorods grown on graphene.248
 Fig. 9  A LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4–graphene hybrid material as the cathode for Li ion batteries. (a) SEM image of LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4–graphene. (b) TEM image of LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4–graphene. (c) High resolution TEM image of a LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 nanorod grown on graphene. (d) Representative charge (black) and discharge (red) curves of the LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4–graphene cathode at a rate of C/2. (e) Discharging curves of the LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4–graphene cathode at various C rates. Charging was performed at a rate of C/2 followed by a constant voltage step at 4.2 V till a current of C/20 was reached. (f) Cycling performance of the LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4–graphene cathode at C/2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright (2011) by Wiley-VCH. 
Li3V2(PO4)3–graphene has also been reported as a cathode material for lithium ion batteries.212 There have also been studies of other graphene hybrid cathode materials such as FePO4–graphene,94,213 V2O5–graphene175,176 and BiO0.5F2–graphene,186 but these materials are all in their fully charged states and need to be pre-lithiated or paired with lithiated anode materials in order to be used in Li ion batteries. For high voltage cathode materials, stability of the functionalized nano-carbons at high anodic potentials should be considered.
5. SC-hybrids as electrode materials and catalysts for rechargeable Li–S and Li–O2 batteries
In order for an electric car to deliver a driving range of ∼300 miles with a single charge, the battery pack of the electric car should have a specific energy of ∼450 W h kg−1 or higher, based on the current technology of electric vehicles.8 The theoretical specific energy of Li ion batteries using graphite as the anode and LiCoO2 as the cathode is <400 W h kg−1, which calls for higher energy electrode materials of Li ion batteries8 or new types of batteries with higher energy densities. Li–S and Li–O2 batteries are two types of high-energy-density rechargeable batteries that have been attracting more and more interest in recent years.8,15–17
Li–S batteries use S as the cathode and Li metal as the anode. During discharging, Li is oxidized to Li+ at the anode, and the Li+ ions travel through the electrolyte to react with reduced S at the cathode.8,17 The fully discharged cathode product is Li2S. During charging, Li2S is oxidized back to S and Li+ is plated onto the Li anode.8,17 Li–S batteries operate in the voltage range of 2.5–1.7 V vs. Li+/Li, with a theoretical specific capacity of 3830 mA h g−1 for the Li anode and 1670 mA h g−1 for the S cathode, affording a theoretical specific energy of 2570 W h kg−1. However, the problems are that S is a material with low intrinsic electrical conductivity; the polysulfide intermediates generated during the discharging process at the cathode could dissolve in the electrolyte, shuttle to the anode and cause side reactions; volume changes of the cathode material could pulverize the electrode. These problems can cause low capacity, low efficiency and short cycle life of Li–S batteries.8,17
Various carbon materials including graphene have been utilized to form hybrid structures with S particles to mitigate these problems. Simple mixing of graphene sheets with S particles could render the S particles electrically conducting and increase their specific capacity, but the cycling stability of the composite was as poor as S without graphene, likely due to unconfined dissolution and diffusion of polysulfides. The structure of S–graphene needs to be carefully designed in order to achieve high capacity and good stability. Our group employed a solution assembly method to wrap polyethyleneglycol (PEG) coated sulfur particles with graphene sheets (Fig. 10a and b). The graphene wrapping could afford electrical conducting paths to the S particles and confine the polysulfides.205 The PEG coating reduced the size of the S particles to the submicron scale, and inserted a molecular cushion between the S particles and graphene wrapping, which could better accommodate the volume expansion during discharge and trap polysulfides.205 The S–graphene hybrid with PEG exhibited a stable specific capacity of ∼600 mA h g−1 at C/2 rate with ∼10% decay per 100 cycles (Fig. 10c and d).205
 Fig. 10  A sulfur–graphene hybrid material as the cathode for Li–S batteries. (a) A schematic structure of the S–graphene hybrid. (b) A SEM image of S–graphene. (c) Charge–discharge voltage profiles of the S–graphene cathode at various rates. (d) Cycling performance of the S–graphene cathode at various rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205, Copyright (2011) by American Chemical Society. 
Li et al. used reduced GO sheets to wrap a carbon–sulfur composite, affording a hybrid material with a specific capacity of 1064 mA h g−1 and 37% decay over 200 cycles at 0.95 C.249 Ji et al. synthesized a S–graphene hybrid using a microemulsion method and obtained a stable capacity of 950 mA h g−1 over 50 cycles at a low rate of 0.1 C (Fig. 11a).206 X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) measurements at the carbon K-edge of the S–GO hybrid compared to the GO control sample revealed that GO was reduced in the process of S incorporation as evidenced by better resolved π* and σ* states as well as decreased X-ray absorption features corresponding to C–O bonding (as marked by “C” in Fig. 11b). An increased absorption associated with C–S bonding (as marked by “B” in Fig. 11b) was reported for the S–GO hybrid. Both the reduction of GO and chemical interactions between S and GO could be responsible for the higher electrochemical performance of the S–GO hybrid.
 Fig. 11  A sulfur–GO hybrid material as the cathode for Li–S batteries. (a) Cycling performance of the S–GO cathode. Inset shows a SEM image of the S–GO. (b) X-ray absorption spectra at the carbon K-edge of the S–GO and GO. “A”, “D” and “E” mark the absorption features of π*, excitonic and σ* states respectively. Features “B” and “C” are attributed to C–S and C–O bonding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206, Copyright (2011) by American Chemical Society. 
Li–O2 batteries use O2 as the cathode and Li metal as the anode. For an ideal Li–O2 cell with an aprotic electrolyte, Li metal is oxidized at the anode and O2 is reduced at the cathode during discharging, yielding Li2O2 at the cathode.8,15,16 In the charging process, Li2O2 is supposed to be oxidized to release O2 at the cathode while Li is deposited onto the anode.8,15,16 Such Li–O2 batteries operate at a voltage of ∼3 V vs. Li+/Li, with a theoretical specific capacity of 3830 mA h g−1 for the Li anode and 1670 mA h g−1 for the O2 cathode, affording a theoretical specific energy of 3500 W h kg−1 for the Li–O2 battery. However, Li–O2 batteries fabricated thus far are far from ideal in terms of rechargeability and round trip efficiency, partially due to the sluggish kinetics of the oxygen reactions at the cathode despite various catalysts that have been developed and tested.8,15,16,250–254 In order to produce high performance Li–O2 batteries, it is essential to investigate the basic principles of the chemical reactions and physical processes taking place during the operation of Li–O2 batteries, and to develop new catalyst materials with high activity and stability for the oxygen cathode.
While graphene materials could catalyze the discharging reaction of Li–O2 batteries and often achieve high specific capacity due to the porous structures with high surface area and pore volume, graphene by itself is not an active catalyst for the charging reaction of Li–O2 batteries.251,255,256 Graphene catalyzed Li–O2 cells are often non-rechargeable.251,255,256 Hybridizing GO with metal oxides and metal nitrides could lead to new oxygen catalysts with higher electrochemical performance for Li–O2 batteries.136,201,257 Our group improved the performance of Li–O2 batteries by utilizing a strongly coupled MnCo2O4–graphene hybrid material as the cathode catalyst (Fig. 12).257 The resulting Li–O2 cell showed an average discharging voltage of ∼2.95 V and an average charging voltage of ∼3.75 V at a current density of 100 mA g−1 (0.05 mA cm−2, Fig. 12c), which was among the lowest overpotentials reported for Li–O2 cells at comparable gravimetric current densities in similar electrolytes. When discharged to 2 V, the MnCo2O4–graphene catalyzed Li–O2 cell achieved a specific capacity of 3784 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and 2743 mA h g−1 at 800 mA g−1, suggesting high rate capability (Fig. 12e). The cell could deliver a specific capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 for 40 cycles without an obvious increase in charging–discharging overpotential (Fig. 12d). The high cell performance was attributed to the excellent catalytic activity originated from the strong coupling between the MnCo2O4 nanoparticles and the N-doped graphene sheets in the hybrid catalyst.
 Fig. 12  A MnCo2O4–graphene hybrid as a cathode catalyst for Li–O2 batteries. (a) Schematic structure of a Li–O2 coin cell with the MnCo2O4–graphene catalyst. (b) A TEM image of MnCo2O4–graphene. (c) Charge–discharge voltage profiles of the Li–O2 coin cell catalyzed by MnCo2O4–graphene at various current densities. A cut-off time of 5 h was applied for each charge/discharge segment. (d) Specific discharge capacity of the cell over 40 cycles at 400 mA g−1. A cut-off capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 was applied for each charge/discharge segment. Inset shows the cell voltage upon completion of each discharge (black) and charge (red) segment over the 40 cycles. (e) Discharging voltage profiles of the cell at various current densities. A cut-off voltage of 2.0 V was applied. Reproduced from ref. 257. 
By comparing the performance of Li–O2 cells fabricated with different cathode catalysts, we found that the catalytic activity for the charging reaction in non-aqueous Li–O2 cells was not directly correlated with that for the oxygen evolution reaction in aqueous solutions. On the other hand, a correlation could be established between the catalytic activity of the cathode catalyst for the discharging reaction in non-aqueous Li–O2 cells and that for the oxygen reduction reaction in both non-aqueous and aqueous solutions.257 This result suggested that the high catalytic activity of MnCo2O4–graphene for the oxygen reduction reaction facilitated the discharging reactions in non-aqueous Li–O2 cells. However, the reverse charging process appeared to differ from the oxygen evolution reaction, the details of which are currently unknown. It is important for future work to understand the chemical reactions involved in the charging process of the Li–O2 cells in order to guide the design and synthesis of cathode catalysts for high performance Li–O2 batteries.
In a related work, Dong et al. grew MoN nanoparticles on graphene sheets via a hydrothermal reaction followed by a thermal annealing step in an NH3 atmosphere.201 The Li–O2 cell catalyzed by the MoN–graphene hybrid catalyst exhibited considerably lower overpotential than the graphene catalyzed cell.201 At a current density of 0.08 mA cm−2, the MoN–graphene cell showed an average discharging voltage of ∼3.1 V and an average charging voltage of ∼4.05 V.201 A specific capacity of 1100 mA h g−1 could be delivered over 9 cycles.201 While carbonate based electrolytes were used in the above-mentioned studies, it has been reported that carbonate could undergo irreversible side reactions during the discharging and charging processes of Li–O2 batteries.136,201,257,258 Therefore, it is important to identify a suitable non-aqueous electrolyte for Li–O2 batteries, besides the effort in seeking for efficient and stable catalysts.
6. SC-hybrids as electrode materials for supercapacitors and ultra-fast batteries
Supercapacitors are an important type of energy storage devices due to high power performance and excellent cycling stability.1,9,18–20 Supercapacitors can be used as emergency power supplies where fast energy delivery is needed. They are also useful in grid applications such as load following and frequency regulation where short response time is desired. In electric vehicles, supercapacitors could provide transient power assistance to batteries and fuel cells, and recuperate energy from braking. There are in general two kinds of supercapacitor materials with different energy storage mechanisms, namely electrical double layer (EDL) capacitive materials based on adsorption and desorption of ions, and pseudocapacitive materials based on electrochemical redox reactions.1,9,18–20 Pseudocapacitive materials often exhibit much higher specific capacitance values than the EDL capacitive materials, but with lower rate performance and shorter cycle life. Recently, intensive effort has been devoted to develop supercapacitor materials with improved specific energy without sacrificing the high specific power and excellent cycling stability. Such effort has brought out numerous novel materials including graphene based materials for supercapacitors. Like batteries, supercapacitors are composed of two electrodes and an electrolyte. While symmetrical supercapacitors have two identical electrodes made of the same materials, asymmetrical supercapacitors are comprised of two different electrodes including a positive electrode and a negative electrode.
Graphene by itself is a good EDL capacitive material owing to its high surface area and electrical conductivity.114,259,260 To prepare a graphene supercapacitor electrode with high electrochemical performance, it is important to control the pore structure of the graphene material, which is determined by the relative positions of each individual graphene sheet. Lv et al. prepared graphene sheets by exfoliating graphite oxide under high vacuum at low temperature, which afforded a graphene supercapacitor electrode with the highest specific capacitance of 279 F g−1 at a cyclic voltammetry (CV) scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in aqueous KOH solutions.260 In contrast, graphite oxide exfoliated in ambient pressure at high temperature showed much lower (by more than 2 times) specific capacitance than the graphene produced at low temperature, even though the surface area and oxygen functionality were similar.260 By drying reduced GO in a fluidized-bed-like oven, Liu et al. obtained curved graphene sheets that showed a specific capacitance of 100–250 F g−1 in ionic liquids.261 With a specific capacitance of 154.1 F g−1 and a voltage range of 4 V, the supercapacitor based on curved graphene showed a specific energy of 85.6 W h kg−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1, comparable to that of nickel metal hydride batteries but with much shorter charging–discharging time.261 At 8 A g−1, an energy density of 53.1 W h kg−1 was achieved with a power density of 9.8 kW kg−1.261 Zhu et al. reported a high surface area (∼3100 cm2 g−1) carbon material obtained from KOH activation of microwave exfoliated graphite oxide.262 This carbon material showed a specific capacitance of ∼166 F g−1 with a voltage range of 3.5 V in the organic electrolyte, affording a specific energy of ∼70 W h kg−1 of the symmetrical supercapacitor.262 97% of the capacitance was retained after 10000 cycles.262
Assemblies of graphene and various forms of carbon materials such as carbon spheres,191,263 activated carbon (AC)264,265 and carbon nanotubes (CNTs)266–269 could enhance the capacitive properties of carbon nanomaterials. In these assemblies, the stacking of graphene sheets could be modulated by other carbon materials serving as spacers between the graphene layers, which could render the pore structures of the hybrids more accessible to electrolytes and thus allow for higher capacitance and rate capability. Wang et al. employed a hydrothermal treatment to assemble a CNT–graphene hybrid material in which the CNTs prevented the restacking of graphene sheets (Fig. 13a).266 The effective specific capacitance of graphene in the CNT–graphene hybrid (1:1 ratio) measured by the supercapacitor device (Fig. 13b and c) was 318 F g−1 in the KOH electrolyte (Fig. 13d and e) compared to only 190 F g−1 for a pure graphene material without CNT added.266 Zhang et al. prepared an AC–graphene hybrid material by carbonizing a resorcinol–formaldehyde/graphene resin which was made by in situ polymerization.264 With an optimized AC/graphene ratio, the hybrid material showed a specific capacitance of 397 F g−1 in 6 M KOH and 316 F g−1 in 2 M H2SO4 at a current density of 1 A g−1.264 Jha et al. also reported a CNT–graphene hybrid which exhibited a high specific capacitance of 222 F g−1 with a voltage range of 3.5 V in an ionic liquid electrolyte, affording a specific energy as high as 94 W h kg−1.270 Notably, CNTs and graphene alone only showed specific capacitance of 66 F g−1 and 6 F g−1, respectively, highlighting the synergistic effect in the CNT–graphene assembly.270
 Fig. 13  CNT–graphene hybrid nanomaterials for supercapacitors. (a) The schematic structure of an idealized CNT–graphene hybrid. (b) A picture of assembled supercapacitor coin cells. (c) Schematic structure of a CNT–graphene supercapacitor. (d) Charge–discharge voltage profiles of a CNT–graphene (mass ratio = 1:10) supercapacitor. (e) Effective specific capacitance of graphene in the CNT–graphene hybrids with various CNT–graphene mass ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 266, Copyright (2011) by American Chemical Society. 
Pseudocapacitive materials include but are not limited to metal oxides, metal hydroxides and conducting polymers. As pseudocapacitance arises from reversible redox reactions, it is highly desirable to reduce the size and increase the surface area of the active materials so that the diffusion length for electrons and ions in a single particle is shortened and a higher flux of electrons and ions is allowed. Oxidized graphene and CNTs are useful substrates to grow pseudocapacitive materials and control the morphology, size, and dispersion of the materials. Since most of the metal hydroxides and metal oxides are insulators, SC-hybrids with graphene or CNT through nucleation and growth on these substrates could be an effective way of producing advanced pseudocapacitor materials.271 Cycling stability is especially important for pseudocapacitive materials. Capacitance decay could be due to agglomeration of small nanoparticles of active materials or fractions of the active materials losing electrical contact with the current collectors. Graphene sheets or CNTs in the SC-hybrids could disperse and stabilize the nanoparticles of active materials via strong chemical interactions and provide a three dimensional conducting network for the active materials.
We synthesized single crystalline β-Ni(OH)2 nanoplates with hexagonal shapes on graphene sheets by a two-step solution phase reaction.86,271 In 1 M KOH, the β-Ni(OH)2 nanoplates grown on graphene exhibited a specific capacitance of 1267 F g−1 at a CV scan rate of 5 mV s−1, which decreased to 877 F g−1 at 40 mV s−1.271 The theoretical limit of capacitance for β-Ni(OH)2 was ∼1900 F g−1 over a voltage range of ∼0.55 V. When measured by galvanostatic charging and discharging, specific capacitances of 1335 F g−1 and 935 F g−1 [based on the mass of active β-Ni(OH)2] were achieved at a current density of 2.8 A g−1 and 45.7 A g−1, respectively, demonstrating excellent rate capability.271 The capacitance was stable over 2000 cycles.271 Such high electrochemical performance was attributed to the intimate interactions between the graphene sheets and the β-Ni(OH)2 nanoplates as well as the ideal morphology and size of the β-Ni(OH)2 nanoplates, which is a direct result of nucleation and growth of β-Ni(OH)2 on highly conducting graphene sheets.
More recently, we found that the performance of the Ni(OH)2 electrode was further improved by growing Ni(OH)2 nanoplates on oxidized multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs).22 MWNTs with controlled oxidation could provide even better substrates than graphene sheets for producing SC-hybrid with Ni(OH)2 because the outer walls of the MWNTs could be oxidized to desired degrees to impart functional groups needed to couple with Ni(OH)2, while the inner walls remained intact and could serve as conducting wires for charge transport. Although composite materials of carbon nanotubes have been widely reported in the previous literature, nanotubes in most prior work are used as simple additives to enhance electric conductivity. Controlled nucleation, growth and selective anchoring of active materials on functional groups of carbon nanotubes to form SC-hybrids have not been established previously. The knowledge developed from our inorganic–graphene hybrid materials, such as controlled oxidation and functionalization of graphitic carbon, selective and uniform growth on oxidized graphitic carbon and avoidance of free growth, is now being applied to carbon nanotubes to form inorganic–CNT hybrid materials that outperform inorganic–graphene counterparts for at least some of the inorganic materials.
Lee et al. synthesized α-Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles on graphene in an ethylene glycol solution.189 With an optimized Ni(OH)2 to graphene ratio, the α-Ni(OH)2–graphene hybrid material showed a specific capacitance of 1215 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 of cyclic voltammetry (CV) scan rate, which decreased to 521 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1 scan rate.189 After an endurance test of 1000 CV cycles, the capacitance of the hybrid decayed by 12.1%, which could be associated with the structural instability of α-Ni(OH)2. Yang et al. developed another α-Ni(OH)2–graphene hybrid in which the α-Ni(OH)2 nanosheets self-assembled into spherical flowers on graphene.190 The hybrid showed a specific capacitance of 1761 F g−1 at a CV scan rate of 5 mV s−1, and 1026 F g−1 at a galvanostatic current density of 5.7 A g−1.190 Only slight capacitance decay was observed after 1000 CV cycles.190 Wang et al. assembled Co–Al layered double hydroxide (LDH) nanosheets with GO.272 Although the hybrid showed a high specific capacitance of 1031 F g−1 at a low current density of 1 A g−1, the capacitance significantly decreased to 250 F g−1 at a high current density of 20 A g−1, to only 24% of that at 1 A g−1, likely due to the electrically insulating nature of the non-reduced GO sheets.272 Using reduced GO sheets, Zhang et al. prepared a Co–Al-LDH–graphene hybrid with good rate capability.195 A specific capacitance of 517 F g−1 was achieved at 10 A g−1, 73% of that measured at 1 A g−1.195 Other hybrid materials in this category including Co(OH)2–graphene,194 Ni–Al-LDH–graphene,192 NiO–graphene149,151 and NiCo2O4–graphene138 have also been developed.
Graphene hybrids with hydroxides and oxides of Ni/Co operate in the positive potential range (vs. Ag/AgCl) in alkaline electrolytes due to reversible redox reactions between Ni/Co(II) and Ni/Co(III) in this range. Materials based on FeOx–graphene and Bi2O3–graphene electrodes operate in the negative potential ranges in alkaline electrolytes for reversible reactions between metal oxides and corresponding metals. Qu et al. synthesized FeOOH nanorods on graphene, affording a reversible Fe3O4–graphene electrode with a specific capacitance of ∼320 F g−1 stable over 1000 galvanostatic cycles in a 1 M LiOH electrolyte.161 Our group developed a FeOx–graphene hybrid with specific capacitance as high as 1131 F g−1 in 1 M KOH.22 A Bi2O3–graphene hybrid material prepared with a solvothermal method showed a specific capacitance of 825 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 757 F g−1 at 10 A g−1 based on the mass of the Bi2O3 nanoparticles.185
RuO2 is a well known pseudocapacitive material with high specific capacitance, good electrical conductivity, and fast and reversible charging–discharging capability. The cost of RuO2 is high and it is desirable to synthesize well dispersed small RuO2 nanoparticles to fully utilize the active material. Wu et al. used graphene sheets as growth substrates to anchor RuO2 nanoparticles through a solution phase reaction.62 In 1 M H2SO4, the hybrid material containing 38.3 wt% of Ru exhibited a specific capacitance of 570 F g−1 at a CV scan rate of 1 mV s−1, which was comparable to pure RuO2 but with the advantage of higher rate performance.62 The RuO2–graphene hybrid also showed much higher cycling stability than pure RuO2 (2.1% vs. 60% decay of capacitance over 1000 cycles) as the interactions between the RuO2 nanoparticles and graphene sheets stabilized the active material.62 RuO2–graphene electrodes operate in both acidic and basic solutions.62,65,78,187,188 Our group developed a RuO2–graphene hybrid material with a specific capacitance of 367 F g−1 at a CV scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 1 M KOH electrolyte.65
MnO2 is another attractive pseudocapacitive material due to its reversible redox capability, low cost, high abundance and environmental compatibility. Various MnO2–graphene hybrid materials have been developed to enhance the electrochemical performance of MnO2 electrodes.142–146 Chen et al. synthesized MnO2 nano-needles on GO sheets to afford a MnO2–GO hybrid with a specific capacitance of ∼200 F g−1, which was much higher than that of bulk MnO2 and comparable to that of nano-MnO2.142 Yan et al. employed a microwave method to grow MnO2 nanoparticles on graphene sheets (GO was reduced).144 The resulting MnO2–graphene showed a specific capacitance of 310 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 CV scans, and lower 228 F g−1 at an ultrahigh scan rate of 500 mV s−1, which suggested excellent rate capability.144 The capacitance of the hybrid material was stable for 15000 cycles. Li et al. utilized a positively charged polymer to modulate the layer-by-layer assembly of negatively charged MnO2 sheets and functionalized graphene sheets, producing a MnO2–graphene hybrid material with a specific capacitance of 263 F g−1 at a current density of 0.283 A g−1.146 Note that MnO2–graphene electrodes were often used in neutral solutions.146,142–144
Besides RuO2–graphene and MnO2–graphene, other hybrid materials such as MOOH–graphene,147 Mn3O4–graphene,140 Co3O4–graphene,132 Fe3O4–graphene,156,188 TiO2–graphene,188 SnO2–graphene,166,187 ZnO–graphene,166,174 Cu2O–graphene126 and MoO3–graphene182 have been synthesized and investigated as electrodes for pseudocapacitors. Shi et al. reported a Fe3O4–graphene hybrid material showing a specific capacitance of 890 F g−1 and 480 F g−1 at current density of 1 A g−1 and 5 A g−1 respectively.156
The graphene hybrid materials of RuO2–graphene and MnO2–graphene all behave like capacitor electrodes characterized by nearly square-shaped CV curves and nearly linear galvanostatic charge–discharge curves, indicating that the pseudocapacitance of these materials arises from fast redox reactions on the surfaces of the oxides. In contrast, other materials such as Ni(OH)2–graphene and Co(OH)2–graphene exhibit clear electrochemical redox behaviors like battery electrodes, with well resolved redox peaks in CV curves and potential plateaus in galvanostatic charge–discharge curves, as the reactions are limited by diffusion. These battery-like electrodes could be used as supercapacitor electrodes when they are paired with capacitor-like electrodes in asymmetrical supercapacitors.
Conducting polymers such as polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole (PPY) and polyethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT) are an important category of pseudocapacitive materials. Incorporation of graphene sheets into these polymers could form hybrid materials with enhanced specific capacitance, rate capability and cycling stability.220–225,227,273 Yan et al. coated graphene sheets with PANI by an in situ polymerization method, affording a hybrid supercapacitor material with specific capacitance as high as 1046 F g−1 in 6 M KOH.221 Without the graphene template, PANI formed nanobar-like structures with specific capacitance lower than 200 F g−1.221 Utilizing GO as a growth substrate and template, Xu et al. synthesized vertically aligned PANI nanowires on GO sheets.222 In 1 M H2SO4, the resulting PANI–GO hybrid exhibited higher specific capacitance as well as higher capacitance retention after 2000 cycles than PANI without GO.222 A PPY–graphene hybrid material prepared by Zhang et al. showed a specific capacitance of 482 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4, and 222F g−1 at 5 A g−1.225 The PPY sample without any graphene added showed much lower specific capacitance with faster decay over cycling.225 Alvi et al. reported a PEDOT–graphene hybrid material with a specific capacitance of 261 F g−1 in 2 M H2SO4.227
A supercapacitor device is comprised of two electrodes, and the performance of a supercapacitor is determined by the electrochemical properties of its two electrodes combined. Different from symmetrical supercapacitors in which the two electrodes are made of the same material,78,114,188 asymmetrical supercapacitors are fabricated using two different electrode materials aimed at achieving improved electrochemical performances.65,145,274 Our group demonstrated an asymmetrical supercapacitor (Fig. 14c and d) made of a battery-like β-Ni(OH)2–graphene electrode (Fig. 14a) and a capacitor-like RuO2–graphene electrode (Fig. 14b).65 The device delivered an energy density of 48 W h kg−1 at a power density of 0.23 kW kg−1, and a power density of 21 kW kg−1 at an energy density of 14 W h kg−1 in 1 M KOH (Fig. 14f).65 This asymmetrical supercapacitor significantly outperformed symmetrical RuO2 supercapacitors in specific energy and power. The capacitance of our asymmetrical supercapacitor was stable over 5000 cycles (Fig. 14e). The pairing of Ni(OH)2–graphene with RuO2–graphene was highly novel in not only increasing the cell voltage to ∼1.5 V, but also resulting in a higher cell capacitance. The battery-like Ni(OH)2–graphene electrode was charged and discharged with voltage plateaus, allowing the capacitor-like RuO2–graphene electrode to be charged and discharged to its full capacity. In a symmetrical supercapacitor, the cell voltage would be evenly divided by two electrodes, only utilizing half the capacity of each electrode.
 Fig. 14  An asymmetrical supercapacitor made by pairing of a battery-like Ni(OH)2–graphene electrode and a capacitor-like RuO2–graphene electrode in 1 M KOH. (a) Charge–discharge voltage profile of the Ni(OH)2–graphene electrode. (b) Charge–discharge voltage profile of the RuO2–graphene electrode. (c) CV curves of the asymmetrical supercapacitor at various scan rates. (d) Charge–discharge voltage profiles of the asymmetrical supercapacitor at various current densities. (e) Cycling performance of the asymmetrical supercapacitor. (f) Ragone plot of the asymmetrical supercapacitor made of Ni(OH)2–graphene and RuO2–graphene compared to supercapacitors with other electrode configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65, Copyright (2011) by Tsinghua University Press and Springer. 
Wu et al. paired a MnO2–graphene hybrid electrode and a graphene electrode to form an asymmetrical supercapacitor with an operating voltage of 2 V in a 1 M aqueous Na2SO4 electrolyte (Fig. 15a), comparing favorably to ∼1 V symmetrical graphene or MnO2–graphene supercapacitors (Fig. 15b).145 The asymmetrical supercapacitor delivered an energy density of 30.4 W h kg−1 at a power density of ∼0.1 kW kg−1, and a power density of 5 kW kg−1 at an energy density of 7.0 W h kg−1 based on total mass of active materials.145 Fan et al. fabricated an asymmetrical supercapacitor with a MnO2–graphene hybrid electrode and an activated carbon nanofiber (ACN) electrode.274 The resulting asymmetrical supercapacitor showed an energy density of 51.1 W h kg−1 at a power density of 0.1 kW kg−1 and a power density of 16.5 kW kg−1 at an energy density of 8.2 W h kg−1 with a cell voltage of 1.8 V in 1 M Na2SO4.274 The asymmetrical supercapacitor showed considerably improved electrochemical performance than symmetrical supercapacitors based on MnO2–graphene or ACNs.274
 Fig. 15  A graphene vs. MnO2–graphene asymmetrical supercapacitor. (a) CV curves of the MnO2–graphene hybrid and graphene. Electrolyte: 1 M Na2SO4. CV scan rate: 10 mV s−1. (b) Ragone plot of the graphene vs. MnO2–graphene asymmetrical supercapacitor compared to the MnO2–graphene vs. MnO2–graphene and the graphene vs. graphene symmetrical supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145, Copyright (2011) by American Chemical Society. 
Recently, we paired a Ni(OH)2–MWNT hybrid with a FeOx–graphene to form an ultrafast Ni–Fe battery.22 The battery used Ni(OH)2–MWNT as the cathode, FeOx–graphene as the anode and 1 M aqueous KOH solution as the electrolyte (Fig. 16a). During charging, Ni(OH)2 was oxidized to NiOOH at the cathode and FeOx was reduced to Fe at the anode. Electrons flowed from the cathode to the anode through the external circuit and hydroxide ions diffused in the electrolyte from the anode to the cathode, which was reversed during discharging. The resulting Ni–Fe battery exhibited high charging–discharging rate performance, due to the ideal morphologies of the nanoparticles grown on graphitic nano-carbon substrates and their strong electrochemical coupling within the hybrid structures. With similar capacity, our new Ni–Fe battery made of inorganic–nano-carbon hybrids was nearly 1000 times faster than traditional Ni–Fe batteries originally invented by Thomas Edison more than a century ago. It was able to be fully charged and discharged at minute and second scale (Fig. 16b). The device delivered a specific energy of ∼120 W h kg−1 at a specific power of ∼15 kW kg−1 based on the total mass of active materials (Fig. 16c), making it an attractive electrochemical energy storage device for power quality applications.
 Fig. 16  An ultrafast Ni–Fe battery made of a Ni(OH)2–MWNT hybrid and a FeOx–graphene hybrid. (a) A schematic drawing of the battery. (b) Discharging curves of the battery at various current densities. Charging was performed at 3.7 A g−1 until the voltage reached 1.67 V. (c) Ragone plot (power density vs. energy density) of the battery based on the total mass of the active electrode materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22, Copyright (2012) by Nature Publishing Group. 
7. SC-hybrid nanomaterials for electrocatalysis
Electrocatalysis is important to reduce the overpotential for a number of reactions vital to renewable energy applications including fuel cells, metal-air batteries and water splitting cells.9,275–279 Tremendous effort has been devoted to develop electrocatalysts for fuel oxidation reactions, oxygen reduction reactions (ORR), oxygen evolution reactions (OER) and hydrogen evolution reactions (HER), with a goal of obtaining electrocatalysts with high activity and stability at low costs. In order to achieve optimal catalytic effects, the size and surface structures of the catalyst particles should be controlled. Unlike the surfactant or other capping agents that could block the active sites on the catalyst surface, oxidized graphene and CNTs could be used as clean growth substrates to tune the morphology and size of the catalyst particles and serve as an electrically conducting substrate to enhance charge transport in electrocatalysis.
Noble metals including Pt, Au, Pd and Ru are well known catalysts for oxidation reactions of methanol, ethanol and formic acid. Nanoparticles of these metals formed on graphene have shown higher activity than commercially available metal/carbon catalysts in fuel oxidation reactions.72,98,101,106,111,116,117,120,226,228,280,281 Luo et al. synthesized branched Pt nanowires on graphene by a solution phase reaction in which formic acid was used to reduce the Pt precursor and GO sheets.111 The Pt–graphene hybrid catalyst showed higher mass activity and specific activity for methanol oxidation reaction than a commercial Pt/C catalyst.111 Wang et al. employed a microwave method to grow uniform PtRu nanoparticles with an average size of ∼2 nm on graphene, affording an electrocatalyst with four times higher peak current density for the methanol oxidation reaction than a commercial PtRu/C catalyst.117 Using a direct reaction between GO and K2PdCl4, Chen et al. synthesized Pd nanoparticles with a uniform size of ∼3.5 nm on GO.106 The resulting Pd–GO hybrid showed significantly higher catalytic activity towards the ethanol oxidation reaction and formic acid oxidation reaction than a commercial Pd/C catalyst.106 Rao et al. reported a Pt–graphene hybrid as a more active anode catalyst than a commercial Pt/C for direct formic acid fuel cells.116 With a PtAu–graphene hybrid as the anode catalyst, the open circuit voltage and maximum power of the fuel cell could be further enhanced.116
The oxygen reduction reaction at the cathode is vital to fuel cells. Metal air batteries also utilize oxygen as the cathode active material, and can be considered as a special type of fuel cells that use metal as fuels.16 The sluggish kinetic of ORR at the cathode seriously limits the power output and efficiency of fuel cells. Thus far, Pt and its alloys have been the most active ORR catalysts, despite their high cost. Graphene has been used as a support for Pt based ORR catalysts.109,110,118,119,282 Guo and Sun reported a 3.7–4.5 times ORR activity increase when FePt nanoparticles were assembled onto graphene sheets compared to Ketjen carbon.119 Seger and Kamat reported a fuel cell with a Pt/GO as the cathode catalyst outperforming that with an unsupported Pt cathode catalyst.110
Due to the scarcity and prohibitive price of noble metals for large scale application of fuel cells, non-precious metal ORR catalysts have been actively pursued.283–286 We prepared a Co3O4–graphene hybrid material for ORR through a two-step solution reaction. We added ammonia in our synthesis steps to mediate the nanocrystal growth, maintain small nanoparticle size and achieve N-doped on the carbon support simultaneously. The amount of Co3O4 in our hybrid materials was 70 wt%, as revealed by thermal-gravimetric measurements. Electron microscopy imaging revealed that Co3O4 nanocrystals were uniformly grown on GO sheets, and their size was estimated to be around 5 nm. The crystalline spinel structure of Co3O4 was confirmed by XRD. We found that by growing Co3O4 nanoparticles on N-doped graphene, we obtain an ORR electrocatalyst with comparable activity but higher stability than Pt–C in alkaline solutions (Fig. 17a–c).77
 Fig. 17  A Co3O4–graphene hybrid for ORR catalysis. (a) Rotating disk voltammograms of Co3O4–graphene in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH with a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1. Catalyst loading was 0.1 mg cm−2. (b) The Koutecky–Levich plot (J−1vs. ω−0.5) at different potentials corresponding to the rotating disk voltammograms in (a). (c) Oxygen reduction currents of Co3O4–graphene and a commercial Pt/C catalyst dispersed on Teflon coated carbon fiber papers as measured in O2-saturated 1 M KOH. Inset shows the stability of the ORR currents over time at 0.70 V vs. RHE. Catalyst loading was 0.24 mg cm−2. (d) C K-edge XANES of Co3O4–graphene compared to graphene without Co3O4. (e) O K-edge XANES of Co3O4–graphene compared to Co3O4 without graphene. (f) Co L-edge XANES of Co3O4–graphene compared to Co3O4 without graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright (2011) by Nature Publishing Group. 
We investigated the electrocatalytic activity of the Co3O4–graphene hybrid in KOH solutions. While free Co3O4 nanocrystals, N-doped graphene sheets and their physical mixture exhibited poor ORR activity, the Co3O4–graphene hybrid showed high ORR activity with an ORR onset potential of ∼0.9 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) from the RDE voltammogram (Fig. 17a). The SC-hybrid approach led to the most active ORR catalysts based on Co3O4, suggesting synergetic coupling effects between two catalytically non-active components in the SC-hybrid. The electron transfer number was calculated to be ∼4.0 at 0.60–0.75 V from the slopes of Koutecky–Levich plots (Fig. 17b), indicating that Co3O4–graphene favors a four-electron oxygen reduction process, similar to ORR catalyzed by a high quality commercial Pt–C benchmark. Importantly, our hybrid exhibited superior durability than the Pt/C catalyst in the alkaline solution with little decay in ORR activity over 25000 s of continuous operation (Fig. 17c, inset). In contrast, the Pt/C catalyst exhibited 20% activity loss in the same measurement.
The high ORR electrochemical performance of the Co3O4–graphene hybrid catalyst was attributed to the strong chemical bonding effects between the Co3O4 nanoparticles and graphene sheets as well as the favorable size and morphology of the nanoparticles. We performed XANES measurements to glean the interactions between Co3O4 and the carbon support (Fig. 17d–f) and observed possible formation of interfacial covalent Co–O–C and Co–N–C bonds in the Co3O4–graphene hybrid. We suggest that bond formation between Co3O4 and the carbon support and changes in the chemical bonding environment for C, O and Co atoms in the hybrid material led to synergistic coupling effects between Co3O4 and the carbon support for electrocatalysis.77
A π* transition at ∼286 eV was observed near the C K-edge for the GO sample without Co3O4, confirming that the graphitic framework was restored after solvothermal treatment of GO. This also indicated that good electrical conductivity could be expected for the graphene sheets in the Co3O4–graphene hybrid material. The π* transition near the C K-edge showed a reduced intensity for the Co3O4–graphene hybrid sample due to interactions between graphene and Co3O4 at the interface. Since the π* transition intensity was proportional to the unoccupied density of states, a reduced intensity of π* transition could be evidence of electron transfer from Co3O4 to graphitic π* states. The Co3O4–graphene hybrid sample showed an increased absorption intensity at ∼289 eV near the C K-edge, which was assigned to the carbon–oxygen and carbon–nitrogen bonds.77 This further confirmed that the Co3O4 nanoparticles were strongly bonded to the functional groups of the N-doped graphene sheets, leading to perturbed C–O and C–N bonding environments as revealed by XANES. Such bonding afforded electrical wiring of the insulating Co3O4 nanoparticles to the conducting graphene sheets. A higher Co L-edge absorption and a decreased unoccupied O(2p)–Co(3d) hybridized state (∼532 eV) of the hybrid sample were observed compared to the free Co3O4 nanoparticle sample, suggesting electron transfer from Co to O in the hybrid material.
In more recent studies, we found that the ORR catalytic activity of SC-hybrid based catalysts could be further improved by substituting half of the Co(III) in the spinel structure of Co3O4 with Mn(III).88 In a related work, we synthesized a Co1−xS–graphene hybrid material by a solution phase reaction followed by a thermal annealing step.91 The Co1−xS–graphene catalyst exhibited high ORR activities in both acidic and basic electrolytes, representing the most active ORR catalyst among reported cobalt chalcogenide materials.91 Yang et al. prepared a carbon nitride coated graphene material using SiO2–GO as an intermediate template.287 Through optimizing the pyrolysis temperature for the carbon nitride on graphene, a hybrid catalyst with high activity for 4-electron ORR in the alkaline electrolyte was obtained.287 Zhang et al. developed a Fe–tetrasulfophthalocyanine–graphene hybrid material with high ORR catalytic activity in buffered solution.288 A microbial fuel cell with the hybrid as the cathode catalyst exhibited comparable performance to a Pt/C catalyzed cell.288 The Fe-tetrasulfophthalocyanine–graphene catalyzed cell significantly outperformed cells catalyzed by either Fe-tetrasulfophthalocyanine or graphene alone, indicating the synergistic effect of the hybrid structure.288 Other graphene hybrid ORR catalysts such as Au–graphene,97 Co(OH)2–graphene196 and Fe-N–graphene289 have also been reported.
Electrochemical water splitting or water electrolysis involves OER and HER. Thus far, there have been several reports on graphene hybrid based electrocatalysts for water oxidation and reduction reactions only. The Co3O4–graphene and MnCo2O4–graphene hybrids synthesized by our group exhibited high OER electrocatalytic activities in alkaline solutions.77,88 Interestingly, the OER performance of the SC-hybrid of Co3O4–graphene was similar or only slightly higher than that of the Co3O4 and graphene mixture, highlighting that strong coupling between Co3O4 and graphene is particularly important to ORR and less critical to OER. We also developed a MoS2–graphene hybrid synthesized by a solvothermal method.95 The MoS2–graphene hybrid was the most active HER catalyst among all MoS2 based catalysts, even though its activity was considerably lower than that of Pt.95
8. Summary and outlook
In summary, systematic effort has been taken to design and synthesize SC-hybrid nanomaterials as advanced electrode materials and electrocatalysts for electrochemical energy storage and conversion.22,38,40,54,77,271 Such hybrid materials contain inorganic nanoparticles strongly anchored on oxidized graphene sheets or carbon nanotubes, formed through direct nucleation and growth of nanoparticles on oxidized nano-carbon under well controlled synthetic conditions without free particle growth in solution. This approach was initially developed for graphene, and recently applied to carbon nanotubes oxidized by the same method as for making GO.22 In some cases, the SC-hybrids of carbon nanotubes and inorganic nanomaterials turn out to be more advantageous over graphene counterparts, owing to the ability of oxidizing the outer-walls of multi-walled nanotubes for generating abundant functional groups and defects needed for nucleation and growth of nanoparticles, while maintaining the high electrical conductivity of nanotubes afforded by the relatively undamaged inner-tubes. Selective and uniform distribution of the anchored inorganic materials on the nano-carbon surface affords strong coupling between electrochemically active materials and nano-carbon, which fundamentally differs from the traditional way of making battery materials and electrocatalysts for which the active inorganic materials are typically mixed physically with conducting carbon to render electrical conductivity.
We have shown that inorganic electrochemically active nanomaterials (including oxides, hydroxides, sulfides, phosphates, etc.) directly nucleated and grown on oxidized graphene or carbon nanotubes exhibit superior electrochemical performance to simple physical mixtures with conducting carbon. Such performance enhancement is attributed to two main factors. The first is strong coupling effects between nano-carbon and the active inorganic nanomaterials. Evidences of possible chemical bonding between inorganic nanoparticles and oxidized carbon are obtained. Such strong coupling has been lacking in inorganic–carbon composites obtained by mixing or without intentional control to maximize nanoparticle–carbon interactions, and is largely responsible for enhancing charge transport and increasing the rate capability of electrochemical materials without sacrificing specific capacity. The second factor is that nano-carbon with various degrees of oxidation provides a novel substrate for nanoparticle nucleation and growth. Synthesis of inorganic particles on oxidized nano-carbon substrates differs from free particle growth in solution. The interactions between inorganic precursor and carbon substrate present a degree of control over the morphology, size and structure of the resulting inorganic particles. This is interesting and novel from the material chemistry point of view. The SC-hybrid approach represents a new way of making electrochemically functional materials for high-performance batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, water splitting cells and other types of energy storage and conversion devices.
The field of SC-hybrid nanomaterials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion has been growing rapidly and has significantly improved the performance of existing electrochemical materials. Further efforts are needed to fully investigate the synthesis, structure and properties of SC-hybrid nanomaterials. In particular, a better understanding of the chemical and physical interactions and the nature of bonding between graphene or nanotubes and inorganic nanomaterials is needed. Such interactions strongly affect the morphology, size and crystalline structure of the materials grown on graphene or CNTs, and could lead to synergistic effects not present in either material alone. It is also worthwhile to study the electronic and chemical structures at the interface of graphene or CNTs and the materials grown on it, in order to understand the charge transfer process of graphene or CNT hybrid nanomaterials in electrochemical reactions. Mass loading and packing density of the hybrid materials in electrodes should be further improved to realize high energy and power density at the device level. Moreover, attention should be paid to the safety of using flammable nano-sized materials in electrochemical energy storage devices. Lastly, future effort should be devoted to develop currently unknown materials and their SC-hybrids with nano-carbons to potentially revolutionize batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells and water splitting systems.
References
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-G. Guo, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878–2887 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, A. V. Murugan, A. Sarkar and T. Muraliganth, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 621–638 CAS .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS .
B. Scrosati, J. Hassoun and Y.-K. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3287–3295 CAS .
O. K. Park, Y. Cho, S. Lee, H.-C. Yoo, H.-K. Song and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1621–1633 CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4269 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4301 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243–3262 CAS .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, S. T. Kim, R. Cao, N. S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34–50 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji and L. F. Nazar, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9821–9826 RSC .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
M. Inagaki, H. Konno and O. Tanaike, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7880–7903 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, Y. Dou, D. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828–4850 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Liang, M. Gong, Y. Li, W. Chang, T. Mefford, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and F. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 917 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Zhang, Y. W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Morozov, H. L. Stormer, U. Zeitler, J. C. Maan, G. S. Boebinger, P. Kim and A. K. Geim, Science, 2007, 315, 1379 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Young and P. Kim, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 222–226 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov, M. I. Katsnelson, F. Schedin, D. C. Elias, J. A. Jaszczak and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 016602 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, I. Skachko, A. Barker and E. Y. Andrei, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 491–495 CrossRef CAS .
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, J. Hone, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 096802 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liao, Y. C. Lin, M. Q. Bao, R. Cheng, J. W. Bai, Y. A. Liu, Y. Q. Qu, K. L. Wang, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nature, 2010, 467, 305–308 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Z. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, X. D. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
D. A. C. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4873–4885 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
B. Luo, S. Liu and L. Zhi, Small, 2012, 8, 630–646 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, Y. Shao, M. W. Ellis, R. B. Moore and B. Yi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15384–15402 RSC .
M. Pumera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 668–674 CAS .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Hofmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Poh, F. Šaněk, A. Ambrosi, G. Zhao, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3515–3522 RSC .
A. Lerf, H. Y. He, M. Forster and J. Klinowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4477–4482 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cai, R. D. Piner, F. J. Stadermann, S. Park, M. A. Shaibat, Y. Ishii, D. Yang, A. Velamakanni, S. J. An, M. Stoller, J. An, D. Chen and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2008, 321, 1815–1817 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1079–1084 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yuge, M. Zhang, M. Tomonari, T. Yoshitake, S. Iijima and M. Yudasaka, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1865–1870 CrossRef CAS .
K. Erickson, R. Erni, Z. Lee, N. Alem, W. Gannett and A. Zettl, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4467–4472 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pacile, J. C. Meyer, A. F. Rodriguez, M. Papagno, C. Gomez-Navarro, R. S. Sundaram, M. Burghard, K. Kern, C. Carbone and U. Kaiser, Carbon, 2011, 49, 966–972 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Mkhoyan, A. W. Contryman, J. Silcox, D. A. Stewart, G. Eda, C. Mattevi, S. Miller and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1058–1063 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, X. Li and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9910–9911 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, L. F. Cui, Y. A. Yang, H. S. Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, P. Solis-Fernandez, A. Martinez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascon, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 5957–5968 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, D. Choi, J. Li, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, R. Kou, D. Hu, C. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907–914 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, P. Chen, M. Wu, D. Pan and Y. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1302–1306 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, D. Geng, J. Liu, M. N. Banis, Y. Zhang, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18330–18337 CAS .
Y. Zou and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2615–2620 RSC .
G. Zhou, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, L. Zhang, N. Li, Z.-S. Wu, L. Wen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306–5313 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jia, D.-H. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, A.-W. Xu and H.-Q. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11466–11473 CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, D.-W. Wang, W. Ren, J. Zhao, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3595–3602 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, H. Sanchez, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15939–15944 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, Z. Yin, Q. He, G. Lu, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15973–15979 CAS .
H. L. Wang, Y. Y. Liang, T. Mirfakhrai, Z. Chen, H. S. Casalongue and H. J. Dai, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 729–736 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, W. Peng, Y. Li, X. Li, S. Wang, G. Zhang and F. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4490–4493 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Paek, E. Yoo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 72–75 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Lambert, C. A. Chavez, B. Hernandez-Sanchez, P. Lu, N. S. Bell, A. Ambrosini, T. Friedman, T. J. Boyle, D. R. Wheeler and D. L. Huber, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19812–19823 CAS .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo and Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7100–7107 CrossRef CAS .
D. Du, J. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Cui and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8032–8037 RSC .
B. Li, H. Cao, J. Shao, H. Zheng, Y. Lu, J. Yin and M. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3159–3161 RSC .
J. Yang, C. Tian, L. Wang and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3384–3390 RSC .
H. Chen, Y. Li, F. Zhang, G. Zhang and X. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17658–17661 RSC .
H. L. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Y. Liang, L. F. Cui, H. S. Casalongue, Y. G. Li, G. S. Hong, Y. Cui and H. J. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7364–7368 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moussa, G. Atkinson, M. SamyEl-Shall, A. Shehata, K. M. AbouZeid and M. B. Mohamed, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9608–9619 RSC .
S. S. J. Aravind, V. Eswaraiah and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17094–17097 RSC .
Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Jiang, H. Li and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4009–4015 CAS .
D. Marquardt, C. Vollmer, R. Thomann, P. Steurer, R. Muelhaupt, E. Redel and C. Janiak, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1326–1332 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Kaiser, C. Gomez-Navarro, R. S. Sundaram, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1787–1792 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS .
P. Blake, P. D. Brimicombe, R. R. Nair, T. J. Booth, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, L. A. Ponomarenko, S. V. Morozov, H. F. Gleeson, E. W. Hill, A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1704–1708 CrossRef .
X. Li, G. Zhang, X. Bai, X. Sun, X. Wang, E. Wang and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538–542 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Wang, X. Li and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 336–342 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Zhou, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, F. Wei, J. C. Idrobo, S. J. Pennycook and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol, 2012, 7, 394–400 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, J. T. Robinson, G. Diankov and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3270–3271 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liang, H. L. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Z. Chen and H. J. Dai, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 701–705 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Wen, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187–3194 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Song, X.-H. Jia, N. Li, X.-F. Yang and H. Tang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 895–902 RSC .
H. L. Wang, Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li and H. J. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10969–10972 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang, Z. Wang, G. Huang, H. Li, W. Chen and J. Y. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 259–266 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, S. H. Ku, S. Y. Lim, J. H. Kim and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2009–2014 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, S.-W. Kim, J. Hong, H.-D. Lim, H. S. Kim, J.-K. Yoo and K. Kang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A930–A935 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, L. M. Xie, Y. Y. Liang, G. S. Hong and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, D. W. Wang, L. C. Yin, N. Li, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3214–3223 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, H. Yang, C. Shan, Q. Zhang, D. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4022–4025 RSC .
C. Xu, X. Wang and J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19841–19845 CAS .
H. Li, L. Han, J. J. Cooper-White and I. Kim, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1355–1361 RSC .
X. Huang, S. Li, Y. Huang, S. Wu, X. Zhou, S. Li, C. L. Gan, F. Boey, C. A. Mirkin and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 292 CrossRef .
B. G. Choi, M. H. Yang, T. J. Park, Y. S. Huh, S. Y. Lee, W. H. Hong and H. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3208–3213 RSC .
J. Ji, G. Zhang, H. Chen, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14498–14501 RSC .
M. A. H. Hassan, V. Abdelsayed, A. E. R. S. Khder, K. M. AbouZeid, J. Terner, M. S. El-Shall, S. I. Al-Resayes and A. A. El-Azhary, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3832–3837 RSC .
G.-h. Moon, Y. Park, W. Kim and W. Choi, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3454–3462 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, G. Zhang, M. Zhang, S. Guo and Z.-H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 376–381 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, G. Wu, J. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Xie and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3693–3695 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, D. Nackashi, W. Lu, C. Kittrell and J. M. Tour, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5695–5699 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Shi and J.-J. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6008–6013 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Si and E. T. Samulski, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6792–6797 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7990–7995 CAS .
Z. Luo, L. Yuwen, B. Bao, J. Tian, X. Zhu, L. Weng and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7791–7796 RSC .
H. Jabeen, V. Chandra, S. Jung, J. W. Lee, K. S. Kim and S. Bin Kim, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3583–3585 RSC .
Z. Xu, H. Li, G. Cao, Z. Cao, Q. Zhang, K. Li, X. Hou, W. Li and W. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8230–8232 RSC .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, C. Wang, M. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13103–13107 CAS .
J. H. Warner, M. H. Ruemmeli, A. Bachmatiuk, M. Wilson and B. Buechner, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 470–476 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Rao, C. R. Cabrera and Y. Ishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21963–21970 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, S. P. Jiang and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3338–3344 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, Q. Yue, G. Chen, Y. Zhai, L. Wang, H. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Liu, J. Jia and H. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 379–389 CAS .
S. Guo and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2492–2495 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chai, F. Li, Y. Hu, Q. Zhang, D. Han and L. Niu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17922–17929 RSC .
B. Wang, X.-L. Wu, C.-Y. Shu, Y.-G. Guo and C.-R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10661–10664 RSC .
J. Zhou, L. Ma, H. Song, B. Wu and X. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1357–1360 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Lu and Y. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 82–85 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Mai, X. L. Wang, J. Y. Xiang, Y. Q. Qiao, D. Zhang, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2306–2311 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Lu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17916–17921 RSC .
B. Li, H. Cao, G. Yin, Y. Lu and J. Yin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10645–10648 RSC .
S. Wu, Z. Yin, Q. He, G. Lu, X. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3467–3470 RSC .
S. Wu, Z. Yin, Q. He, X. Huang, X. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11816–11821 CAS .
B. Li, H. Cao, J. Shao, G. Li, M. Qu and G. Yin, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 1628–1632 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tao, J. Zai, K. Wang, H. Zhang, M. Xu, J. Shen, Y. Su and X. Qian, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 230–235 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, X. Feng, S. Ivanovici and K. Muellen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8408–8411 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, T. Wei, W. Qiao, B. Shao, Q. Zhao, L. Zhang and Z. Fan, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6973–6978 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Chen and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9735–9739 RSC .
J. Zhu, Y. K. Sharma, Z. Zeng, X. Zhang, M. Srinivasan, S. Mhaisalkar, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8400–8406 CAS .
S. Yang, G. Cui, S. Pang, Q. Cao, U. Kolb, X. Feng, J. Maier and K. Mullen, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 236–239 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Zhao, Y. H. Lu, M. W. Xu, D. W. Zhang, R. S. Ruoff, K. J. Stevenson and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1379–A1382 CrossRef CAS .
K.-H. Chang, Y.-F. Lee, C.-C. Hu, C.-I. Chang, C.-L. Liu and Y.-L. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7957–7959 RSC .
H.-W. Wang, Z.-A. Hu, Y.-Q. Chang, Y.-L. Chen, H.-Y. Wu, Z.-Y. Zhang and Y.-Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10504–10511 RSC .
L. Li, Z. Guo, A. Du and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3600–3605 RSC .
J. W. Lee, A. S. Hall, J.-D. Kim and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1158–1164 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Hsieh, C.-Y. Lin and J.-Y. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 8861–8867 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Zhu, X. Wu, Q. Han and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2822–2830 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, J. Li, L. Jiang, H. Dong, X. Wang and W. Hu, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 433–437 RSC .
J. Yan, Z. Fan, T. Wei, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3825–3833 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5835–5842 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. Wang, X. Liu, S. Liu, J. Ou and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3397–3403 RSC .
L. Wang and D.-L. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5010–5015 CrossRef CAS .
I. R. M. Kottegoda, N. H. Idris, L. Lu, J.-Z. Wang and H.-K. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5815–5822 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, J. Song, P. Liu, W. Xu, T. Fang, Z. Jiao, H. Zhang and Y. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18792–18798 RSC .
M. Latorre-Sanchez, P. Atienzar, G. Abellan, M. Puche, V. Fornes, A. Ribera and H. Garcia, Carbon, 2012, 50, 518–525 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Wu, Y.-P. Lin, C.-H. Lin and J.-T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2442–2448 RSC .
X. Zhu, Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stollers and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3333–3338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, J. Kan and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20747–20753 CAS .
Y. Xue, H. Chen, D. Yu, S. Wang, M. Yardeni, Q. Dai, M. Guo, Y. Liu, F. Lu, J. Qu and L. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11689–11691 RSC .
J. Su, M. Cao, L. Ren and C. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14469–14477 CAS .
W. Shi, J. Zhu, D. H. Sim, Y. Y. Tay, Z. Lu, X. Zhang, Y. Sharma, M. Srinivasan, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3422–3427 RSC .
V. Chandra, J. Park, Y. Chun, J. W. Lee, I.-C. Hwang and K. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3979–3986 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, J. Fan, D. Ma, L. Zhang, C. Leung and H. L. Chan, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3139–3144 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, D. Lei, X. Yin, L. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Wang and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5538–5543 RSC .
B. Li, H. Cao, J. Shao and M. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10374–10376 RSC .
Q. Qu, S. Yang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5574–5580 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, R. Kou, D. Choi, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, J. Li, L. V. Saraf, D. Hu, J. Zhang, G. L. Graff, J. Liu, M. A. Pope and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS .
L.-S. Zhang, L.-Y. Jiang, H.-J. Yan, W. D. Wang, W. Wang, W.-G. Song, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5462–5467 RSC .
C. Xu, J. Sun and L. Gao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 975–979 RSC .
M. Zhang, D. Lei, Z. Du, X. Yin, L. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Wang and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1673–1676 RSC .
T. Lu, Y. Zhang, H. Li, L. Pan, Y. Li and Z. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4170–4173 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, G. Liu, C. Zhen, F. Li, L. Zhang and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1717–1722 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7426–7435 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, X. Huang, L. Xie, J. Yu and P. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17729–17736 RSC .
H. Zhang, X. Lv, Y. Li, Y. Wang and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380–386 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, Y. Jing, J. Zeng, Q. Qi, C. Wang, D. Goldfeld, C. Xu, Y. Zheng and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18174–18179 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3670–3678 RSC .
B. Kumar, K. Y. Lee, H.-K. Park, S. J. Chae, Y. H. Lee and S.-W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4197–4204 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Chen, Z.-A. Hu, Y.-Q. Chang, H.-W. Wang, Z.-Y. Zhang, Y.-Y. Yang and H.-Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2563–2571 CAS .
H. Liu and W. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4000–4008 CAS .
X. Rui, J. Zhu, D. Sim, C. Xu, Y. Zeng, H. H. Hng, T. M. Lim and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4752–4758 RSC .
J. Qin, M. Cao, N. Li and C. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17167–17174 RSC .
H. Pang, Q. Lu and F. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11772–11774 RSC .
S. Yang, X. Feng, L. Wang, K. Tang, J. Maier and K. Muellen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4795–4799 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-M. Wang, W. Wang, N. Coombs, N. Soheilnia and G. A. Ozin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7437–7450 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, L. Qiu, K. Wang, Y. Zeng, T. Williams, Y. Huang, M. Tsapatsis and H. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2249–2251 RSC .
J. Hu, A. Ramadan, F. Luo, B. Qi, X. Deng and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15009–15014 RSC .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17229–17235 RSC .
D. Joung, V. Singh, S. Park, A. Schulte, S. Seal and S. I. Khondaker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24494–24500 CAS .
H.-W. Wang, Z.-A. Hu, Y.-Q. Chang, Y.-L. Chen, Z.-Q. Lei, Z.-Y. Zhang and Y.-Y. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 8974–8980 CrossRef CAS .
D. Oh, X. Dang, H. Yi, M. A. Allen, K. Xu, Y. J. Lee and A. M. Belcher, Small, 2012, 8, 1006–1011 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Rakhi, W. Chen, D. Cha and H. N. Alshareef, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16197–16204 RSC .
A. K. Mishra and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14006–14013 CAS .
J. W. Lee, T. Ahn, D. Soundararajan, J. M. Ko and J.-D. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6305–6307 RSC .
S. Yang, X. Wu, C. Chen, H. Dong, W. Hu and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2773–2775 RSC .
C. X. Guo and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4504–4507 CAS .
Z. Gao, J. Wang, Z. Li, W. Yang, B. Wang, M. Hou, Y. He, Q. Liu, T. Mann, P. Yang, M. Zhang and L. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3509–3516 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. He, D.-W. Bai, X. Yang, J. Chen, X.-Z. Liao and Z.-F. Ma, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 570–573 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Zhu and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11829–11834 CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Shen, B. Gao, L. Hao, X. Lu, F. Zhang, B. Ding and C. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 395–401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, D. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Wan and B. Hou, J. Power Sources, 2012, 198, 122–126 CrossRef CAS .
X.-l. Huang, J. Chai, T. Jiang, Y.-J. Wei, G. Chen, W.-q. Liu, D. Han, L. Niu, L. Wang and X.-b. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3404–3410 RSC .
B. Li, H. Cao and G. Yin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13765–13768 RSC .
K. Zhang, H. Wang, X. He, Z. Liu, L. Wang, L. Gu, H. Xu, P. Han, S. Dong, C. Zhang, J. Yao, G. Cui and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11916–11922 RSC .
Z. Wen, S. Cui, H. Pu, S. Mao, K. Yu, X. Feng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5445–5450 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Dong, X. Chen, K. J. Zhang, L. Gu, L. X. Zhang, X. H. Zhou, L. F. Li, Z. H. Liu, P. X. Han, H. X. Xu, J. H. Yao, C. J. Zhang, X. Y. Zhang, C. Q. Shang, G. L. Cui and L. Q. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11291–11293 RSC .
Z. Lu, J. Zhu, D. Sim, W. Zhou, W. Ship, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5293–5295 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Z. Wang, C. Zhong, S.-L. Chou and H.-K. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1467–1470 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lee, K. B. Smith, C. M. Hayner and H. H. Kung, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2025–2027 RSC .
H. L. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Y. Liang, J. T. Robinson, Y. G. Li, A. Jackson, Y. Cui and H. J. Dai, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2644–2647 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, M. Rao, H. Zheng, L. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Duan, J. Guo, E. J. Cairns and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18522–18525 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Z. Wang, L. Lu, M. Choucair, J. A. Stride, X. Xu and H.-K. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7030–7034 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, P. Chen and M. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4529–4536 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, H. Kim, S.-W. Kim, K.-Y. Park, J. Kim, S. Jeon and K. Kang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 1966–1971 CrossRef CAS .
C. Su, X. Bu, L. Xu, J. Liu and C. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 64, 190–195 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Wang, Y. Zhu and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3353–3358 RSC .
H. Liu, P. Gao, J. Fang and G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9110–9112 RSC .
Y. Yin, Y. Hu, P. Wu, H. Zhang and C. Cai, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2137–2139 RSC .
S.-M. Bak, K.-W. Nam, C.-W. Lee, K.-H. Kim, H.-C. Jung, X.-Q. Yang and K.-B. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17309–17315 RSC .
X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner and H. H. Kung, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17297–17303 RSC .
H.-K. Kim, S.-M. Bak and K.-B. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1768–1771 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhu, W. Liu, M. Xue, Z. Xie, D. Zhao, M. Zhang, J. Chen and T. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5813–5818 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, L. Wen, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8610–8617 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yin, L. Wu, Z. Li, J. Ren and X. Qu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 400–404 RSC .
A. V. Murugan, T. Muraliganth and A. Manthiram, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5004–5006 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, T. Wei, B. Shao, Z. Fan, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 487–493 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, K. Wang, S.-Z. Zu, B.-H. Han and Z. Wei, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5019–5026 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, X. S. Zhao and J. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1392–1401 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, J. Sun and L. Gao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11253–11258 RSC .
D. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, P. Yu, C. Wang and Y. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5990–5996 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, L. Zhan, J. Tian, S. Nie and Z. Ning, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1967–1972 CrossRef CAS .
F. Alvi, M. K. Ram, P. A. Basnayaka, E. Stefanakos, Y. Goswami and A. Kumar, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 9406–9412 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, J. Yang, L. Wang, C. Tian, B. Jiang and H. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2014–2016 RSC .
B. Luo, Y. Fang, B. Wang, J. Zhou, H. Song and L. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5226–5230 CAS .
K. Wang, Q. Liu, X.-Y. Wu, Q.-M. Guan and H.-N. Li, Talanta, 2010, 82, 372–376 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marom, S. F. Amalraj, N. Leifer, D. Jacob and D. Aurbach, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9938–9954 RSC .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6688–6694 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pasero, N. Reeves and A. R. West, J. Power Sources, 2005, 141, 156–158 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Behera, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10371–10373 RSC .
S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, M. Choucair, H.-K. Liu, J. A. Stride and S.-X. Dou, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 303–306 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, X. Zhao, J. Wu, H. D. Jang, H. H. Kung and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1824–1829 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xin, X. Zhou, F. Wang, X. Yao, X. Xu, Y. Zhu and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7724–7730 RSC .
M.-H. Park, M. G. Kim, J. Joo, K. Kim, J. Kim, S. Ahn, Y. Cui and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3844–3847 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, L. Gu, C. Zhu, S. Tsukimoto, P. A. van Aken and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2247–2250 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kovalenko, B. Zdyrko, A. Magasinski, B. Hertzberg, Z. Milicev, R. Burtovyy, I. Luzinov and G. Yushin, Science, 2011, 333, 75–79 CrossRef .
D. Chen, X. Mei, G. Ji, M. Lu, J. Xie, J. Lu and J. Y. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2409–2413 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, J. Jin, I. G. Jung, J. M. Kim, H. J. Kim and S. U. Son, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5241–5243 RSC .
K. Chang and W. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4720–4728 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang and W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4252–4254 RSC .
B. L. Ellis, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 691–714 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pitchai, V. Thavasi, S. G. Mhaisalkar and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11040–11051 RSC .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188–1194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, J. Wang, L. Zuin, T. Regier, Y. Hu, H. Wang, Y. Liang, J. Maley, R. Sammynaiken and H. Dai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9578–9581 RSC .
N. Li, M. Zheng, H. Lu, Z. Hu, C. Shen, X. Chang, G. Ji, J. Cao and Y. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4106–4108 RSC .
A. Debart, J. Bao, G. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1177–1182 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Li, J. J. Wang, X. F. Li, D. S. Geng, R. Y. Li and X. L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9438–9440 RSC .
Y. C. Lu, Z. C. Xu, H. A. Gasteiger, S. Chen, K. Hamad-Schifferli and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12170–12171 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Thapa, K. Saimen and T. Ishihara, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A165–A167 CrossRef CAS .
L. Trahey, C. S. Johnson, J. T. Vaughey, S. H. Kang, L. J. Hardwick, S. A. Freunberger, P. G. Bruce and M. M. Thackeray, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A64–A66 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, B. Wang, D. W. Su, L. D. Xiao, H. Ahn and G. X. Wang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 727–733 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, D. Mei, X. Li, W. Xu, D. Wang, G. L. Graff, W. D. Bennett, Z. Nie, L. V. Saraf, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5071–5078 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, G. Zheng, Y. Li, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7931–7935 CAS .
S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen, Z. Peng, J. M. Griffin, L. J. Hardwick, F. Barde, P. Novak and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8040–8047 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, D.-M. Tang, Y.-B. He, C.-H. You, Z.-Q. Shi, X.-C. Chen, C.-M. Chen, P.-X. Hou, C. Liu and Q.-H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3730–3736 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, N. Christov and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1866–1873 CAS .
K. Zhang, B. T. Ang, L. L. Zhang, X. S. Zhao and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2663–2670 RSC .
F. Meng, X. Zhang, B. Xu, S. Yue, H. Guo and Y. Luo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18537–18539 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Huang, F. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23192–23197 CAS .
S.-Y. Yang, K.-H. Chang, H.-W. Tien, Y.-F. Lee, S.-M. Li, Y.-S. Wang, J.-Y. Wang, C.-C. M. Ma and C.-C. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2374–2380 RSC .
X. Lu, H. Dou, B. Gao, C. Yuan, S. Yang, L. Hao, L. Shen and X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5115–5121 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Aboutalebi, A. T. Chidembo, M. Salari, K. Konstantinov, D. Wexler, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1855–1865 CAS .
N. Jha, P. Ramesh, E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis and R. C. Haddon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 438–444 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Y. Liang and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472–7477 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, D. Wang, X. Y. Dong, Z. J. Zhang, X. F. Pei, X. J. Chen, B. Chen and J. Jin, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3556–3558 RSC .
S. Biswas and L. T. Drzal, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5667–5671 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, T. Wei, L. Zhi, G. Ning, T. Li and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2366–2375 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Zhong, J. Luo, B. Fang, B. N. Wanjala, P. N. Njoki, R. Loukrakpam and J. Yin, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 062001 CrossRef .
B. Winther-Jensen and D. R. MacFarlane, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2790–2798 CAS .
X. Zhao, M. Yin, L. Ma, L. Liang, C. Liu, J. Liao, T. Lu and W. Xing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2736–2753 CAS .
P. P. Edwards, V. L. Kuznetsov, W. I. F. David and N. P. Brandon, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 4356–4362 CrossRef .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Gao, L. Ci, C. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1124–1130 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wen, S. Yang, Y. Liang, W. He, H. Tong, L. Hao, X. Zhang and Q. Song, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 139–144 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kou, Y. Shao, D. Mei, Z. Nie, D. Wang, C. Wang, V. V. Viswanathan, S. Park, I. A. Aksay, Y. Lin, Y. Wang and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2541–2547 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Feng and N. Alonso-Vante, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2008, 245, 1792–1806 CrossRef CAS .
N. Alonso-Vante, ChemPhyschem, 2010, 11, 2732–2744 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Gewirth and M. S. Thorum, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 3557–3566 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, D. Higgins, A. P. Yu, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3167–3192 CAS .
S. Yang, X. Feng, X. Wang and K. Muellen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339–5343 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, G. Mo, X. Li and J. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2012, 197, 93–96 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Byon, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3421–3428 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Part of the chemistry of functional nanomaterials themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Hailiang Wang
	Hailiang Wang received his bachelor's degree in chemistry from Peking University in China in 2007. He obtained his PhD degree in chemistry from Stanford University in the United States in 2012 (advisor: Professor Hongjie Dai). He is currently a Philomathia postdoctoral fellow at the University of California at Berkeley in the United States. His research interests are: (1) design and synthesis of advanced nanomaterials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, and (2) nanoscale and molecular-level understanding of catalytic reactions and electrochemical processes at gas/solid and liquid/solid interfaces.

Hongjie Dai
	Hongjie Dai is the J. G. Jackson and C. J. Wood Professor of Chemistry at Stanford University. His research interfaces with chemistry, physics, materials science and biological and medical sciences. Thus far, his group has made advances to the basic science of carbon nanotubes and graphene and potential applications in the areas of nanoelectronics, nanobiotechnology, nanomedicine, energy storage and catalysis. He has published more than 200 journal papers that have been cited over 50000 times. He is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He is also the chief editor of the journal Nano Research.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic of SC-hybrid of inorganic nanoparticles and graphene (a form of nano-carbon) for - batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells and water splitting electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic chemical structures of (a) GO, (c) reduced GO and (e) chemically exfoliated graphene sheets. Dark grey balls: carbon atoms; red balls: oxygen atoms; blue balls: hydrogen atoms. Hydrogen atoms on carbon atoms were omitted. (b), (d) and (f) are aberration corrected TEM images of (b) GO, (d) reduced GO and (f) chemically exfoliated graphene (H. Wang and H. Dai, unpublished results).	 

 	Fig. 3  Growth of LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 nanorods on graphene (reduced GO). (a) A schematic structure (left) and SEM image (right) of GO. (b) A schematic structure (left) and SEM image (right) of Fe-doped Mn3O4 precursor nanoparticles grown on GO after the first step of reaction at 80 °C. (c) A schematic structure (left) and SEM image (right) of LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 nanorods grown on graphene after the second step of solvothermal reaction at 180 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright (2011) by Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Nanomaterials grown on only mildly oxidized chemically exfoliated graphene sheets (a, c, e) and more oxidized reduced GO sheets (b, d, f), with their morphology and size dependent on the oxidation degrees of graphene sheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86, Copyright (2010) by American Chemical Society.	 
MxOy + 2yLi+ + 2ye− ↔ xM + yLi2O,

 	Fig. 5  A Mn3O4–graphene hybrid material as the anode for Li ion batteries. (a) A SEM image of Mn3O4–graphene. (b) Cycling performance of the Mn3O4–graphene anode at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, Copyright (2010) by American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  A Li4Ti5O12–graphene hybrid material as the anode for Li ion batteries. (a) An XRD spectrum of Li4Ti5O12–graphene. (b) A SEM image of Li4Ti5O12–graphene. (c) Charge–discharge voltage profiles of the Li4Ti5O12–graphene anode at various C rates. (d) Cycling performance of the Li4Ti5O12–graphene anode at 1 C (black) and 10 C (red) rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 216, Copyright (2010) by Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Si–graphene high-capacity anode materials for Li ion batteries. (a) Specific capacity and (b) SEM image of a Si–graphene hybrid material. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235, Copyright (2010) by Elsevier. (c) Specific capacity and (d) schematic structure of a Si–graphene hybrid material. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48, Copyright (2011) by Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic crystal structures of three types of cathode materials for Li ion batteries. (a) LiCoO2. (b) LiMn2O4. (c) LiFePO4.	 

 	Fig. 9  A LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4–graphene hybrid material as the cathode for Li ion batteries. (a) SEM image of LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4–graphene. (b) TEM image of LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4–graphene. (c) High resolution TEM image of a LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4 nanorod grown on graphene. (d) Representative charge (black) and discharge (red) curves of the LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4–graphene cathode at a rate of C/2. (e) Discharging curves of the LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4–graphene cathode at various C rates. Charging was performed at a rate of C/2 followed by a constant voltage step at 4.2 V till a current of C/20 was reached. (f) Cycling performance of the LiMn0.75Fe0.25PO4–graphene cathode at C/2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright (2011) by Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  A sulfur–graphene hybrid material as the cathode for Li–S batteries. (a) A schematic structure of the S–graphene hybrid. (b) A SEM image of S–graphene. (c) Charge–discharge voltage profiles of the S–graphene cathode at various rates. (d) Cycling performance of the S–graphene cathode at various rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205, Copyright (2011) by American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  A sulfur–GO hybrid material as the cathode for Li–S batteries. (a) Cycling performance of the S–GO cathode. Inset shows a SEM image of the S–GO. (b) X-ray absorption spectra at the carbon K-edge of the S–GO and GO. “A”, “D” and “E” mark the absorption features of π*, excitonic and σ* states respectively. Features “B” and “C” are attributed to C–S and C–O bonding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206, Copyright (2011) by American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  A MnCo2O4–graphene hybrid as a cathode catalyst for Li–O2 batteries. (a) Schematic structure of a Li–O2 coin cell with the MnCo2O4–graphene catalyst. (b) A TEM image of MnCo2O4–graphene. (c) Charge–discharge voltage profiles of the Li–O2 coin cell catalyzed by MnCo2O4–graphene at various current densities. A cut-off time of 5 h was applied for each charge/discharge segment. (d) Specific discharge capacity of the cell over 40 cycles at 400 mA g−1. A cut-off capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 was applied for each charge/discharge segment. Inset shows the cell voltage upon completion of each discharge (black) and charge (red) segment over the 40 cycles. (e) Discharging voltage profiles of the cell at various current densities. A cut-off voltage of 2.0 V was applied. Reproduced from ref. 257.	 

 	Fig. 13  CNT–graphene hybrid nanomaterials for supercapacitors. (a) The schematic structure of an idealized CNT–graphene hybrid. (b) A picture of assembled supercapacitor coin cells. (c) Schematic structure of a CNT–graphene supercapacitor. (d) Charge–discharge voltage profiles of a CNT–graphene (mass ratio = 1:10) supercapacitor. (e) Effective specific capacitance of graphene in the CNT–graphene hybrids with various CNT–graphene mass ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 266, Copyright (2011) by American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  An asymmetrical supercapacitor made by pairing of a battery-like Ni(OH)2–graphene electrode and a capacitor-like RuO2–graphene electrode in 1 M KOH. (a) Charge–discharge voltage profile of the Ni(OH)2–graphene electrode. (b) Charge–discharge voltage profile of the RuO2–graphene electrode. (c) CV curves of the asymmetrical supercapacitor at various scan rates. (d) Charge–discharge voltage profiles of the asymmetrical supercapacitor at various current densities. (e) Cycling performance of the asymmetrical supercapacitor. (f) Ragone plot of the asymmetrical supercapacitor made of Ni(OH)2–graphene and RuO2–graphene compared to supercapacitors with other electrode configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65, Copyright (2011) by Tsinghua University Press and Springer.	 

 	Fig. 15  A graphene vs. MnO2–graphene asymmetrical supercapacitor. (a) CV curves of the MnO2–graphene hybrid and graphene. Electrolyte: 1 M Na2SO4. CV scan rate: 10 mV s−1. (b) Ragone plot of the graphene vs. MnO2–graphene asymmetrical supercapacitor compared to the MnO2–graphene vs. MnO2–graphene and the graphene vs. graphene symmetrical supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145, Copyright (2011) by American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  An ultrafast Ni–Fe battery made of a Ni(OH)2–MWNT hybrid and a FeOx–graphene hybrid. (a) A schematic drawing of the battery. (b) Discharging curves of the battery at various current densities. Charging was performed at 3.7 A g−1 until the voltage reached 1.67 V. (c) Ragone plot (power density vs. energy density) of the battery based on the total mass of the active electrode materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22, Copyright (2012) by Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  A Co3O4–graphene hybrid for ORR catalysis. (a) Rotating disk voltammograms of Co3O4–graphene in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH with a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1. Catalyst loading was 0.1 mg cm−2. (b) The Koutecky–Levich plot (J−1vs. ω−0.5) at different potentials corresponding to the rotating disk voltammograms in (a). (c) Oxygen reduction currents of Co3O4–graphene and a commercial Pt/C catalyst dispersed on Teflon coated carbon fiber papers as measured in O2-saturated 1 M KOH. Inset shows the stability of the ORR currents over time at 0.70 V vs. RHE. Catalyst loading was 0.24 mg cm−2. (d) C K-edge XANES of Co3O4–graphene compared to graphene without Co3O4. (e) O K-edge XANES of Co3O4–graphene compared to Co3O4 without graphene. (f) Co L-edge XANES of Co3O4–graphene compared to Co3O4 without graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright (2011) by Nature Publishing Group.	 
Footnote
† Part of the chemistry of functional nanomaterials themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
