Expanding the toolbox of photon upconversion for emerging frontier applications  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1MH01654G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1MH01654G
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 1167-1195Expanding the toolbox of photon upconversion for emerging frontier applications

        
          
            Jinshu 
            Huang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Long 
            Yan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Songbin 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lili 
            Tao
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Bo 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Fiber Laser Materials and Applied Techniques, Guangdong Engineering Technology Research and Development Center of Special Optical Fiber Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510641, China. E-mail: zhoubo@scut.edu.cn
bGuangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Photonics Technology, School of Materials and Energy, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China. E-mail: taoll@gdut.edu.cn
Received 
      10th October 2021
    , Accepted 10th January 2022First published on 27th January 2022AbstractPhoton upconversion in lanthanide-based materials has recently shown compelling advantages in a wide range of fields due to their exceptional anti-Stokes luminescence performances and physicochemical properties. In particular, the latest breakthroughs in the optical manipulation of photon upconversion, such as the precise tuning of switchable emission profiles and lifetimes, open up new opportunities for diverse frontier applications from biological imaging to therapy, nanophotonics and three-dimensional displays. A summary and discussion on the recent progress can provide new insights into the fundamental understanding of luminescence mechanisms and also help to inspire new upconversion concepts and promote their frontier applications. Herein, we present a review on the state-of-the-art progress of lanthanide-based upconversion materials, focusing on the newly emerging approaches to the smart control of upconversion in aspects of light intensity, colors, and lifetimes, as well as new concepts. The emerging scientific and technological discoveries based on the well-designed upconversion materials are highlighted and discussed, along with the challenges and future perspectives. This review will contribute to the understanding of the fundamental research of photon upconversion and further promote the development of new classes of efficient upconversion materials towards diversities of frontier applications in the future.
Jinshu Huang
Jinshu Huang received his BE degree from Northwestern Polytechnical University in 2017 and is currently a PhD candidate at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, under the supervision of Prof. Bo Zhou. He is currently working on the upconversion properties of lanthanide-doped nanomaterials.
Bo Zhou
Prof. Bo Zhou earned his PhD degree in optics from the City University of Hong Kong in 2011 and then worked as a postdoctoral researcher at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University and as a scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR, Singapore. In 2016, he joined the faculty of South China University of Technology as a full professor. He has authored and co-authored over 60 peer-reviewed papers in journals including Nature Photonics, Nature Nanotechnology, and Advanced Materials. His research interests focus on upconversion mechanisms, lanthanide-based luminescent materials, and nanophotonics.
1. Introduction
As a typical nonlinear anti-Stokes emission, photon upconversion can effectively convert the near-infrared (NIR) external optical stimuli into ultraviolet/visible emissions,1,2 and has recently gained increasing attention due to promising applications ranging from super-resolution imaging3 to three-dimensional (3D) volumetric displays,4in vivo biological imaging5 and other advanced frontier fields.6–8 Among the versatile luminescent materials, the lanthanide-doped upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) are one of the ideal candidates for controllable and efficient upconversion (Fig. 1a).2,9 The abundant and discrete energy levels of lanthanide ions enable multiple emission bands in a broad spectral range from ultraviolet to visible and short-wavelength NIR light (Fig. 1b and c). Benefiting from the parity-forbidden 4f–4f optical transitions of lanthanide ions, photon upconversion emissions feature sharp profiles with long decay times, consequently laying solid foundations for diversities of frontier applications.10–12
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of a single UCNP nanoparticle featuring anti-Stokes emission. λex and λem represent the excitation wavelength and emission wavelength, respectively. (b) Partial energy level diagrams of trivalent lanthanide ions with typical energy levels (marked in blue color) contributing to the upconversion emissions. (c) Typical upconversion emission wavelengths of lanthanide ions covering a large spectral range from UV to Vis and NIR. (d) The upconversion mechanisms involved in different upconversion systems. ESA, PA, ETU, EMU, and IET represent the excited state absorption, photon avalanche, energy transfer upconversion, energy migration upconversion and interfacial energy transfer, respectively. S, A, L, M stand for sensitizer, activator, the ladder-like ion and migratory ion, respectively. (c) Reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2015. (d) Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2018. 
During the past decades, mechanistic research has greatly promoted the optical manipulation and fundamental understanding of the upconversion of lanthanide ions. In general, the upconversion mechanisms include excited-state absorption (ESA),13 energy transfer upconversion (ETU),1 photon avalanche (PA),14 energy migration upconversion (EMU)15 and interfacial energy transfer (IET),16 see Fig. 1d. The concept of photon upconversion can date back to the idea of the infrared quanta counter proposed by Bloembergen in 1959,13 and was then experimentally observed in LaCl3:Pr in 1961.17 Shortly afterwards in the mid-1960s, the upconversion luminescence of more lanthanides (Er3+, Tm3+, and Ho3+) was realized through ETU.1 Here, it should be pointed out that the success in the chemical synthesis of high-quality nanomaterials has brought forward remarkable advances in the development of photon upconversion. By constructing the EMU channel in the migratory NaGdF4@NaGdF4 core–shell nanostructure, photon upconversion from the lanthanides ions without physically existing intermediate energy levels (e.g., Eu3+, Tb3+, Dy3+, Sm3+, and Ce3+) can also become available. Recently, we found that the construction of an IET channel in a core–shell nanostructure permits a more general strategy for the smart control of the upconversion of lanthanide ions through spatially manipulating their ionic interactions,18,19 further contributing to the realization of the second near-infrared region (NIR II)-responsive upconversion from a set of lanthanides.20 Another important recent progress is the observation of photon avalanche upconversion in lanthanide-doped nanoparticles, which was observed earlier in bulk crystals such as LaCl3:Pr.14 Photon avalanche features a weak ground-state absorption (GSA) from the ground state to the intermediate energy level nonresonantly, followed by a strong resonant ESA process from the intermediate state to the upper emissive state. The initial weak GSA leads to a superburst of the emission light based on the much higher population of the excited ions in the intermediate state, together with the positive optical feedback process.21,22 As such, it is hardly observed in nanomaterials.23,24
Mechanistic investigation of upconversion processes involving lanthanide-based materials is important for both optical manipulation and their applications. Theoretical modelling and simulation often trigger some ideas and solutions to the existing problems. First-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) can be performed to explain the formation of NaYF4 nanocrystals.25 DFT also proved the re-alignment of energy levels by impurity-ion doping.26 Very recently, DFT presented a mechanistic understanding of X-ray-activated persistent nanocrystals.27,28 Specific models were proposed to investigate energy migration and quenching processes via rate equations and Monte Carlo simulation.29,30 Numerical simulations can suggest more details for the non-steady-state upconversion4 and photon avalanche mechanism.21 The 3D finite-difference-time-domain (3D-FDTD) simulation could give a prediction on the distribution of the electromagnetic field.31 These help us to get a better mechanistic understanding of photon upconversion.
Many new strategies regarding the optical modulation of photon upconversion emerged just recently. One of the major challenges to upconversion is how to amplify light intensity. The newly developed local confinement of the electronic field32 and photon avalanching21 open up new possibilities for light enhancement. Multiplexing modulation in the wavelength domain was also achieved by the artificial control of atomic vacancies33 and smart opto-electrochemical manipulation.34 In addition, lifetime-tuning in the temporal domain creates unprecedented chances for optical multiplexing in the temporal dimension by editing the energy flow in core–shell nanoparticles.35,36 We also recently constructed a new mechanistic concept for the NIR II-responsive upconversion from a set of lanthanide ions (e.g., Yb3+, Tm3+, Gd3+, Tb3+, and Eu3+) under 1530 nm excitation to reduce unwanted scattering in biological tissues.20 At the same time, various external stimuli have been explored for upconversion manipulation, such as the thermal field.37 These latest developments significantly strengthen the functional properties of nanomaterials on spatial and temporal scales, providing new opportunities for cutting-edge applications, including nanophotonics,38 biological imaging,5 information storage6 and anti-counterfeiting.39 However, it should be noted that reviews published in the past few years were mainly about upconversion amplification through the traditional method (e.g. core–shell structure design, wide band sensitization and impurity ion-doping).12,22,40 There is still a lack of relevant review papers focusing on the state-of-the-art progress and, in particular, the latest breakthroughs. Therefore, a review on the latest advances in new strategies for upconversion manipulation together with their latest frontier applications is of great importance to the development of upconversion materials.
In this review, we focus on the recent advances in both fundamental research and practical applications of photon upconversion. We begin with a comprehensive summary and discussion of the new mechanistic strategies of upconversion manipulation, including upconversion light enhancement, tuning of emission colors and lifetimes, and constructing new concepts toward NIR II-responsive upconversion. The newly emerging applications spanning from nanophotonics to diversities of frontiers such as integrated optical imaging toolboxes are highlighted and discussed, along with the challenges of the current research and outlooks. This review provides much deeper insight into the upconversion mechanism, contributes to the smart optical manipulation of upconversion, and promotes its frontier applications.
2. Optical manipulation of upconversion
Multiple energy levels of tri-valent lanthanide ions and parity-forbidden transition properties of the 4f electrons enable upconversion materials to produce emission profiles in a wide wavelength range with long decay times. The successful manipulation of upconversion both in emission profiles and lifetime provides possibilities for their applications. In recent years, core–shell structure engineering and dye sensitization proved effective for upconversion enhancement while the emission colors are sensitive to activators and excitation conditions. Recent progress has shown that management of the electromagnetic field enables giant upconversion amplification.32,41 Orthogonal UCNPs present the flexible control of emission colors by the suitable alignment of external stimulus, or other smart methods.42,43 Upconversion with distinguishable lifetimes creates an additional temporal coding dimension for data storage.36 In this section, we summarize the recent progress on upconversion materials concerning upconversion enhancement and the tuning of emission colors and lifetimes, which helps in gaining an in-depth understanding of the optical manipulation of upconversion.
2.1 Boosting upconversion luminescence
Suffering from heavy surface quenching effects, it is necessary to enhance the upconversion emission light intensity of UCNPs. Conventional methods for upconversion enhancement including core–shell engineering, wide band sensitization and other chemical controls have been reviewed elsewhere.22,44,45 Recent works indicate that the management of electromagnetic field enables giant amplification under given photon budgets, which provides an efficient alternative strategy for boosting upconversion luminescence.32,41 This subsection mainly provides a summary of the new insights into upconversion amplification through the newly emerging methods of surface plasmon resonance (SPR), photonic crystals engineering, superlens design, photon avalanching, and so on.

2.1.1 SPR enhanced upconversion. 
SPR is a plasmonic modulation method and has been widely used for upconversion amplification in recent years. When illuminated by incident light, noble metals such as Ag (or Au) with specific scattering and absorption bands create the collective oscillation (namely the surface plasmon) of electrons to allow for resonant electromagnetic behaviour because of the confinement of the conduction electrons to a small volume (Fig. 2a).46,47 The SPR can be classified into emission resonance mode and excitation resonance mode, which increases the radiative transition rate of emitters and amplifies the excitation light, respectively.48 The SPR of a single metal nanoparticle generates a relatively wide resonant band while the collective coupling of metal arrays with sub-wavelength spacing sustains narrow lattice plasmonic resonance.49,50 The resonance of metal materials involves spectral overlap with the absorption or emission band of lanthanide ions, resulting in upconversion emission amplification as evident in the plasmonic sandwich platform with UCNPs and Ag nanoparticles.51 The disordered array of plasmonic metal is capable of trapping the NIR excitation wavelength, leading to the enhancement of upconversion luminescence by three orders of magnitude.51 To suppress the non-radiative quenching, the UCNPs are usually separated from metals at nanometer lengths by using SiO2 spacers, performing several (or dozens of)-fold enhancement in most cases.52,53 The polarization dependence of emission is also demonstrated as companied by the single Au nanorod.54
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic showing the use of SPR to enhance upconversion emission by strengthening electromagnetic local density. (b and c) Schematic of upconversion luminescence of pixel arrays with different diameters of periodical Al nanodisks. (d) Schematic showing the use of the surface plasmon photonic crystal structure to combine the UCNPs. (e) Upconversion lifetimes of NaYF4:Yb/Er film, NaYF4/AuNRs hybrids, NaYF4/OPCs hybrids, and NaYF4/AuNRs/OPCs hybrids. AuNRs and OPCs represent gold nanorods and opal photonics crystals, respectively. (f) Enhancement factor versus excitation power density for NaYF4/AuNRs/OPCs hybrids. (g) Schematic of the use of superlens to enhance upconversion emission by concentrating the wavefront of optical fields. (h) Photographic image of the synthesized microlens by the microfluidic technique. The inset shows LED beams converging into a small focal spot through the microlens. (i) The enhancement factor for PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) films containing NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4 and NaGdF4:Yb/Tm@NaGdF4:Eu nanoparticles. (j) Schematic of photon avalanching upconversion in a Tm3+-doped system. (k) Upconversion intensity at 800 nm versus excitation intensity for NaYF4:Tm(x; x = 1, 4, 8 mol%@NaYF4:Gd(20 mol)) nanocrystals (top) and rise times for NaYF4:Tm(8 mol%)@NaYF4:Gd(20 mol%) nanoparticles. GSA, ESA, MPR and CR represent ground state absorption, excited state absorption, cross-relaxation and multi-phonon relaxation, respectively. (b and c) Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2019. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2016. (g) Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (h,i) Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019. (j and k) Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. 
It should be noted that the SPR-mediated amplification of upconversion emission is usually limited by the constraints of current wet chemistry techniques.55–57 The precise control of the distance and orientation between emitters and plasmon remains a daunting challenge for a bottom-up method. Improving the fabrication techniques for metallic periodic arrays such as electron beam lithography and atomic layer deposition can expand the toolboxes for exploring plasmonic modulations.49 For example, a metal–insulator–metal nanoplatform fabricated lithographically showed an upconversion enhancement of over 1000-fold.58 Another example is the gap plasmonic mode consisting of emitters embedded in a vertical gap between metals. The UCNPs sandwiched between an Al film and Al nanodisks show tunable resonator-upconverted emission by the coupling between plasmon and lanthanide emitters, which leads to a large Purcell factor, thus intensifying photon upconversion by two orders of magnitude (Fig. 2b and c).41 The on-chip, site-specific integration of UCNPs within gold nanotrenches also works in a gap mode plasmonic manner.59 The design of a gap mode plasmonic nanoresonator can also dramatically shorten the upconversion lifetime by accelerating spontaneous emissions, benefitting rapid nonlinear image scanning nanoscopy.60 Cross-shaped plasmonic nanocavities and indium nanocrystals were confirmed useful for enhancing the violet/blue emissions of Tm3+.61,62


2.1.2 Photonic crystals enhanced upconversion. 
Photonic crystals are characterized by periodically arranged dielectrics with specific refractive indices.63,64 The periodical structures form photonic bandgaps, inhibiting light propagation in a specific frequency window due to Bragg scattering (Fig. 2d). The photon wavelengths at the bandgap edges experience slow photon effects,65 being confined in the building blocks during extended temporal domains. Therefore, photonic crystals enable the inhibition and redistribution of light, providing the possibility for upconversion enhancement.66 For instance, the coupling of NaYF4:Yb/Er with PMMA (polymethylmethacrylate) photonic crystals led to more than a 32-fold enhancement of upconversion.67 By designing the device comprising NaYF4, gold nanorods and photonic crystals, upconversion enhancement by three orders of magnitude was achieved. The variation in lifetime is less than 15%, implying that such upconversion enhancement is due to the excitation resonance mode (Fig. 2e and f).68 Enhanced single-band green and red upconversion was observed in specific detecting directions by using photonic crystals as the photon separator and amplifier.69 Infiltrating UCNPs into photonic beads via microfluidic technique leads to 6.5-fold intensification in microcavity resonator due to slow photon effect.70 Silicon photonic crystal slabs resulted in 500-fold upconversion amplification for NaYF4:Yb/Er and the estimation of the local electrical field with a nanoscale resolution, further bringing advances in electromagnetic field sensors.71


2.1.3 Microlens-mediated upconversion. 
The multiphoton effect of upconversion requires sufficiently high pump power for upconverting emission observation. However, numerous practical applications, especially associated with biological sensing and imaging, cannot afford such a high power density. Transparent dielectric microbeads made of polymers with high refractive indices or special natural materials can serve as superlenses to concentrate incident light into a subwavelength region, thereby providing a dramatically intensified light density of excitation (Fig. 2g). Recently, an enhancement by up to 5 orders of magnitude was reported for the UCNPs by superlens modulation. PMMA microbeads modify the wavefront of optical fields, creating an optical hotspot to boost emission (Fig. 2h). The microlens focus distance is related to the refractive indices and diameter, which can be modelled by 3D-FDTD simulation. Such microlens-mediated upconversion is strongly dependent on upconversion population processes because multi-photon upconversion tends to be more sensitive to excitation powers. Power-dependent studies suggested that the red/green emission of Er3+ (540/654 nm) is a two-photon process, blue emission of Tm3+ (450 nm) is a four-photon process and red emission of Eu3+ (614 nm) is a five-photon process. Therefore, Eu3+ emission enhancement was too much higher than that of Er3+ and Tm3+ under identical conditions. The 5D0 → 7F2 transition of Eu3+ was enhanced by up to 103000 folds under excitation power density of 1.5 W cm−2 (Fig. 2i). Mechanistic investigation revealed that this strategy does not accelerate the spontaneous emission rate, being different from the traditional dielectric optical antennas and plasmonic modulation.31 Similar results were observed in the microlens arrays.72 Recent work shows that it readily boosts the upconversion intensity by over four orders of magnitude by cascading the microlens arrays and plasmonic effect.32 Interestingly, some natural materials can also work as light modulators to confine incident light as shown in live yeast as natural bio-microlens.73


2.1.4 Photon avalanche upconversion. 
Photon avalanche is an efficient way to obtain intense upconversion. However, it is seldom observed in lanthanide-doped nanoparticles because of its stringent preconditions for establishing an avalanche regime.24 Recent works show that highly doped nanocrystals can demonstrate positive feedback to specific energy levels under suitable excitation conditions towards photon avalanche upconversion. It was proved that highly Tm3+-doped UCNPs could act as energy-looping nanoparticles to support the upconversion, which exhibited a photon-avalanche-like process with nonlinear orders less than 7.3,74,75 To search for better photon-avalanching nanoparticles, Lee et al. combined four key elements to design the NaYF4:Tm(8 mol%)@NaYF4:Gd(20 mol%) nanocrystals capable of photon avalanche with giant nonlinear orders above 22.21 The ratio of ESA to GSA exceeded 104 under 1064 nm excitation and a critical value was observed from the emission intensity versus pumping intensity curve (Fig. 2j and k). The combination of ESA and cross-relaxation generated two excited ions during an energy cycle.76 The photon avalanching nanoparticles offer the possibility for super-resolution imaging under low excitation intensity without the requirement of complex post-processing. Without the design of a photon avalanche, the upconversion of Tm3+ in these nanoparticles is extremely weak or even not observed because of heavy cross-relaxation, and/or is non-responsive to the excitation.8


2.1.5 Other methods. 
Other methods have also been effective at manipulating upconversion in recent years. Editing energy transfer in unconventionally engineered nanostructures generally contributes to brighter upconversion and an energy-confined structure indeed benchmarked our ability towards this strategy. Confined energy transfer was initially confirmed to be useful for the efficient multiphoton emission of Tm3+ in NaYF4@NaYbF4:Tm@NaYF4.77 An energy-concentrating zone in NaYF4:Gd@NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4:Yb/Nd enhanced the upconversion of Er3+.78 The sub-20 nm architecture of β-NaYbF4@NaYF4:Gd/Er@NaYF4:Gd exhibited brighter upconversion as compared to the conventional ones at the ensemble and individual particle level.79 By taking advantage of suppressed cross-relaxation and IET in the α-NaYF4:Er@NaYbF4@NaYF4 nanostructure, violet emission from Er3+ was enhanced by 100-fold as compared with that in the regular nanostructure.80 The violet emission from Er3+ became dominant in the spectrum by introducing the micro-ring resonator-assisted excitation scheme that can be ascribed to the increase in photon absorption by evanescent fields of the waveguides.81 Other physical manipulations have also been utilized for upconversion enhancement. Raising the temperature was a convenient method for obtaining brighter emission in the thermal field as a result of the release of surface-absorbed moisture,82 negative thermal expansion83 and surface phonon-mediated energy transfer.37 The magnetic field intensified upconversion by unlocking light confinement in a transparent dielectric heterogeneous core–shell structure.84 The manipulation of the external electric field and stress can also produce tunable emissions.85,86 These novel methods have been promoting the efforts towards upconversion enhancement.

2.2 Smart control of upconverting emission colors
The abundant transitions of lanthanides allow for a diversity of emission bands at different wavelengths that produce rich color output. Conventional chemical approaches produce color-tunable emissions with stringent modification of either matrix selection or doping composition.22 Recently, the manipulation of excitations such as power density,87 pulse width4 and excitation wavelength88 was proved useful for tunable colors. For a certain system, Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) between UCNPs and energy acceptor enabled multicolor editing.34 In this section, we summarize the main strategies for the smart control of upconversion emission colors, which is of fundamental importance for various applications.
The host matrix provides the physical platform to facilitate the upconversion, contributing to their emission color tuning. A lot of emission colors were easily obtained in the NaYF4 matrix by controlling the crystal phase, size as well as composition.89 NaErF4 produces strong red emission due to cross-relaxation between Er3+ ions while the regular NaYF4:Yb/Er (20/2 mol%) generates green luminescence. The red emission of the Er3+ lattice is much enhanced by introducing impurity ions as energy trapping centres.26,90 By controlling the Na+/F− dose in the epitaxial shell growth process to introduce artificial fluoride atomic vacancies, the change in the coordination number in NaErF4 allows for multiplexing emission, which is independent of inert shell thickness and matrix composition.33 The LiLnF4 matrix is also efficient for upconversion, particularly for the multiphoton upconversion in the short-wavelength range.91,92 Upconversion emission featuring a single band was also demonstrated in lanthanide-doped KMnF3 nanoparticles.93 The specific materials such as binary nanoparticle superlattice94 and rechargeable nanocomposites were also demonstrated for spectral tuning.95
Excitation manipulation is another convenient way to tune the upconversion emission colors. As a non-linear process, upconversion is sensitive to the pumping power density, and the multi-photon upconversion luminescence tends to be more dependent on the excitation power. Multicolor emissions in NaGdF4:Yb/Tm/Er@NaGdF4:Eu@NaYF4 nanoparticles were observed by altering the excitation laser power.87 It was reported that NaYF4@NaYbF4:Ho@NaYF4 nanoparticles can amplify power sensitivity and directly visualize electromagnetic hotspots.96 In some cases, concentration quenching also shows power-dependent properties. The use of ultrahigh excitation intensity (106 W cm−2) can adequately depress the concentration quenching, showing promise for single-molecule imaging and sensing.97
More interestingly, it was recently found that designing pulse excitation sources with suitable temporal alignment provided an efficient way to modulate the upconversion emission colors. By the temporal control of the ionic interactions involving upconversion processes, full-color output was realized in the NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4:Yb/Nd@NaYF4@NaYF4:Yb/Ho/Ce@NaYF4 multilayer core–shell nanostructure under switchable steady-state and non-steady-state excitations.4 In this design, the Ce3+-mediated upconversion of Ho3+ plays a key role because it needs different rise times for red and green emissions under 980 nm excitation (Fig. 3a and b), and Tm3+ is used to produce the blue emission under 808 nm continuous wave (c.w.) excitation. Note that the sample structure is complex, which may increase the risk of failure during the synthetic process. Further studies suggested that pulse excitation can also endow tunable upconversion emissions in the Yb3+/Er3+ codoped system and Er lattice.88,98 We found that the ionic interaction between Er3+ and Yb3+ exhibited unique temporal properties, being capable of generating switchable upconversion output through precisely tuning the excitation pulse width (Fig. 3c and d).88
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of red and green emissions from the Yb3+/Ho3+/Ce3+-doped layer under 980 nm pulse excitation, and (b) emission profiles of Ho3+ for the (a) sample under different pulse-widths. (c) CIE chromatic coordinates of the NaErF4:Tm(0.5 mol%)@NaYbF4 core–shell UCNPs under 980 nm pulse excitation with a tuning of the pulse widths. (d) Proposed mechanism involving the (c) sample toward the red-to-green upconversion emission color change. (e) A schematic illustration of the energy dissipation upconversion process in NaErF4@NaYF4@NaGdF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%)@NaGdF4:Yb(20 mol%)@NaGdF4:Nd/Yb(50/10 mol%)@NaYF4@NaGdF4:Yb/Tm(80/1 mol%)@NaYF4 multilayer nanoparticles and the photographs obtained at the corresponding excitation wavelengths. (f) A schematic of the multilayer core–shell structure design and proposed energy transfer processes for realizing RGB emissions under c.w. 980/808 nm excitations and HAADF-STEM images of the as-synthesized NaYF4:Nd/Yb(20/20 mol%)@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/0.5 mol%)@NaYF4@NaYbF4:Ho(1 mol%)@NaYF4 (left). CIE chromaticity coordinates of the emission colors. Inset images show the corresponding photographs (right). (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2015. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2021. (e) Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. (f) Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2019. 
Excitation–emission orthogonal upconversion is an interesting phenomenon for upconversion nanomaterials, which shows different emission colors by switching the excitation wavelengths. This feature provides great potential in emerging applications including multi-level anti-counterfeiting,42 3D volumetric displays,4 rewritable optical memory99 and the programmable activation of light-gated channels.100 The multilayer core–shell nanostructure is a general method for orthogonal emission because it can artificially control the dopant distribution and their complex interactions. Inert isolating interlayer and filtration shell layers should be thick enough to avoid any undesirable crosstalk between different luminescent layers.101 This design such as the NaYF4:Er(10 mol%)@NaYF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/0.5 mol%)@NaYF4 nanostructure can easily show two different colors (e.g., blue and green) by switching the c.w. excitation wavelengths.99 More complex core–shell nanostructures usually enable multicolor emission, while the synthesis of such a sample is labor-intensive work. For example, the NaErF4@NaYF4@NaGdF4:Yb/Er(20/2mol%)@NaGdF4:Yb(20 mol%)@NaGdF4:Nd/Yb(50/10 mol%)@NaYF4@NaGdF4:Yb/Tm(80/1 mol%)@NaYF4 nanostructure can generate blue, green and red color emissions separately by switching the excitation wavelengths (Fig. 3e).102 Alternatively, by designing the photon blocking effect, we further realized the red/green/blue (RGB) switchable color output with dual c.w. excitation at 980 and 808 nm with a simpler nanostructure and excitation conditions (Fig. 3f).101 Here, we should note that the construction of a complicated multilayer core–shell nanostructure is time-consuming and synthetically difficult in experiment. Recent work showed that some specially designed nanostructures allow for orthogonal emission through identical emitters by simply adjusting the excitation wavelengths.100,103,104 These new advances offer new possibilities for the development of efficient but convenient orthogonal upconversion systems. Despite this, one should also note that it is still challenging to search for more facile alternative approaches to the achievement of orthogonal upconversion.
2.3 NIR II-responsive upconversion
In most conventional upconversion systems, Yb3+ is used as a sensitizer to facilitate the incident light absorption through its 2F5/2 ← 2F7/2 absorption transition at around 980 nm, together with efficient subsequent energy transfer to the activators. To minimize the overheating effect at 980 nm excitation caused by the absorption of water molecules, the Nd3+/Yb3+ coupled upconversion was developed to shift the excitation wavelength to the NIR I window like at 808 nm. This process greatly contributes to the bioapplications.10,105,106 However, the short NIR excitation light still limits the penetration depth of tissues and restricts high-resolution imaging due to strong scattering. On the other hand, the fundamental research also requires the further expansion of the excitation wavelengths towards the infrared region, particularly at the second near-infrared (NIR II) window. It was reported that Tm3+ could be excited non-resonantly with a 1064 nm pump laser with the engagement of energy looping or photon avalanche in highly doped nanocrystals.21,74 Tm3+ and Ho3+ could also work as sensitizers to activate Er3+ under 1208 and 1150 nm laser, respectively.107,108 Despite the progress, the upconversion intensity still suffers from a small absorption cross-section at these excitation wavelengths, and more importantly, these pump schemes fail in the observation of the upconversion from more lanthanides ions.
Recently, the NaErF4 lattice showed efficient NIR II responsive upconversion at the 1530 nm wavelength because of its 4I13/2 ← 4I15/2 absorption transition.26,90 However, the Er lattice cannot work well as a host matrix to realize the upconversion of other lanthanides due to the deleterious quenching interactions between Er3+ and other lanthanide emitters. To overcome this intrinsic limit, we designed a multilayer core–shell nanostructure in which a migratory nano-interlayer was introduced between the Er3+ and the emitter (Fig. 4a and b). This design can effectively isolate any direct interfacial interactions between Er3+ and the emitter but still allow the migratory pathway for energy transport. The experimental results confirmed that this conceptual model is applicable to Tm3+, Ho3+, Gd3+, Tb3+ and Eu3+ upon excitation with a 1530 nm laser. Moreover, this model enables the anti-Stokes shift of over 1200 nm in wavelength (Fig. 4c), which is unavailable for the conventional upconversion systems with the 980 or 808 nm excitations. By introducing subtle amounts of Ce3+ into the Er lattice to tune the populations at each excited state, we further demonstrated an NIR I quasi-single-band upconversion of Tm3+ at around 802 nm, showing great promise in the biological applications (Fig. 4d).20
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the conceptual model of the NIR II-responsive upconversion by constructing a migratory NaYbF4 sublattice interlayer in a core–shell nanostructure. Ex, Em, ET, and EM stand for the excitation, emission, energy transfer and energy migration, respectively. (b) TEM image (top), high-resolution TEM image (left bottom) and Fourier-transform diffraction pattern (right bottom) of the NaErF4:Yb/Y(10/40mol%)@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(50/1mol%)@NaYF4 multi-layer core–shell UCNPs. (c) Upconversion emission spectra of NaErF4:Yb/Y(10/40mol%)@NaYF4, NaErF4:Yb/Y(10/40mol%)@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(50/2mol%)@NaYF4, NaErF4:Yb/Y(10/40 mol%)@NaYbF4@NaGdF4:Yb/Tm(50/1mol%)@NaYF4 and NaErF4:Yb/Y(10/40mol%)@NaYbF4@NaGdF4:Yb/Tm(50/1mol%)@NaYF4:A (A = Eu, Tb; 5mol%) UCNPs under 1530 nm excitation. (d) Integrated upconversion intensity percentage (γ) of 802nm emission as a function of Ce3+ concentration in NaErF4:Yb/Y/Ce(10/40/x;x = 0–1.0mol%)@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(49/1mol%)@NaYF4 UCNPs. The inset shows the integrated intensity percentage of the 0.4 mol% Ce3+-doped sample with increasing pump power density. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020. 
2.4 Tuning lifetimes
The parity forbidden 4f–4f transition property of lanthanide ions qualifies them with decay times from microseconds to milliseconds, which are much longer as compared to organic dyes and quantum dots. This feature makes it more easily distinguished from the background or noise signal. The upconversion luminescence lifetimes can be tuned by artificially manipulating energy transfer processes between lanthanide ions or interparticles. For instance, the Tm3+-doped nanoparticles with distinct lifetimes can be created by controlling cross relaxations occurring at its blue-emitting 1G4 level (Fig. 5a).8,109 A gradient doping strategy was proposed to realize the independent control of upconversion emission intensity and lifetime by manipulating the excitation energy dynamics (Fig. 5b).36 Minimizing surface quenching also results in the tuning of the lifetime of upconverting emissions as shown in the nanoparticles with variable NaLuF4 shell thickness (Fig. 5c).110 Control of the surface quenching effect also results in lifetime tuning from 33 μs to 2.2 ms for “zero-Stokes” luminescence in time-resolved detection.111 It is interesting to note that the migration-mediated multi-shell nanostructure becomes an intelligent platform for controlling the lifetime by manipulating the energy transport channels. The presence of migratory NaYF4:Yb relay layers in a core–shell nanostructure endows variable lifetimes with orders of magnitudes. The lifetime of Tm3+ at its 3H4 state (808 nm emission) in the NaYF4@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4 nanocrystals was precisely tuned from 78 to 2157 μs by controlling the thickness of the migratory NaYbF4 layer and Yb3+ concentration in this layer (Fig. 5d and e).112 This method is also applicable to down-shifting emissions. The lifetime of Er3+ in its 4I13/2 state (1525 nm emission) shows an extension from 5.8 μs to 20.9 ms, and the tunable lifetime of Nd3+ (1060 nm), Ho3+ (1155 nm), Pr3+ (1289 nm), and Tm3+ (1475 nm) was also achieved.35,113,114 Plasmonic modulation also contributes to lifetime tuning due to the interactions between UCNPs and noble metal nanoparticles. For example, it can accelerate the spontaneous emission by 166 fold through coupling gap plasmonic modes to upconversion emitters, providing an emission superburst with a lifetime of less than 2 μs.60 The introduction of transition metals like Mn2+ by the coprecipitation method or cation exchange could further provide long-lived upconversion lifetimes, leading to a binary temporal information encryption without the requirement of the complicated time-gating technique.39,115 The upconversion lifetimes are more tolerant of the ambient environment and independent of absolute spectral intensity, which provide additional optical encoding dimensions in the temporal domain.
 Fig. 5  (a) Decay curves of NaYF4:Yb/Tm nanoparticles with high and low doping concentrations of Tm3+ (top) and the pseudo-color image of the NaYF4:Yb/Tm(20/x; x = 4, 2, 1, 0.5, 0.2 mol%) equipped with distinctive lifetimes from left to right (bottom). (b) Schematic of the independent tuning of the luminescence intensity and lifetime by a gradient doping strategy in the core–shell nanostructure (top). The middle panels show the emission intensity-tuning with a constant lifetime. The bottom panels show the lifetime-tuning with constant emission intensity. (c) Decay curves of Er3+ at 540 nm for NaYF4:Yb/Er(33/5 mol%)@NaLuF4 nanoparticles with increasing the inert shell thicknesses under pulse 980 nm excitation. (d) Schematic of the energy transfer processes in the NaYF4@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4 nanostructure. (e) Decay curves of Tm3+ at 808 nm in (d) the nanostructure with the tuning of Yb3+ concentration in the energy transfer upconversion layer. (a) Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2014. (b) Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2021. (c) Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. 
3. Emerging photonic applications
Over the past few years, upconversion materials have been demonstrating their advantageous potential in photonic applications. These new advances irrefutably confirm the overwhelming potential of photon upconversion in nanophotonics when integrated with specific nanoplatforms. In this section, we focus on the key developments of upconversion lasers, 3D volumetric displays, information storage, information security and anti-counterfeiting, which update the insights into emerging photonic applications.
3.1 Upconversion lasers
The development of micro- or nano-sized laser cavities enables on-chip integration and is comparable to photoelectronic equipment, potentially providing an opportunity for biomolecule tracking, remote sensing and in vivo cellular imaging. In principle, a laser works through the process of light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. Three preconditions need to be met for laser operation: gain medium, optical cavity and population inversion (Fig. 6a). UCNPs are one kind of gain media that can generate population inversion to enable stimulated radiation when the optical cavity provides positive feedback with respect to losses.116 By designing special laser cavities and applying appropriate pump schemes, UCNPs-based upconversion lasers were achieved under pulse and c.w. pumping schemes.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the construction of a whispering gallery mode (WGM) to support upconversion lasing in the UCNPs-decorated microsphere. λex, λem, E0, E1, and E2 stand for the excitation wavelength, emission wavelength, ground state, first and second excited states, respectively. (b) Upconversion lasing spectra of the Fabry–Perot cavity (D = 80 μm) consisting of NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4 UCNPs under a 3-pulse 980 nm excitation scheme at room temperature. Insets show the image of the Fabry–Perot cavity (left) and its emission color images in different spectral ranges (right). (c) Ultraviolet upconversion lasing spectra of NaYF4@NaYbF4:Tm/Gd (1/30 mol%)@NaYF4 under 5-pulse 980 nm pumping scheme. (d) Microcavity emission intensity and spectral line-width of NaYF4:Gd/Tm(20/1.75 mol%)@NaGdF4 at 807 nm under c.w. 1064 nm pump laser power density. (e) Schematic illustration of the upconversion laser through subwavelength plasmons by coating the NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/20 mol%)@NaYF4 on periodically arranged Ag metal. (f) Upconversion lasing spectra from lattice plasmon resonances at λ = 664 nm as a function of c.w. 980 nm excitation power density. (b) Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013. (c) Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2016. (d) Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (e, f) Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019. 
Early studies on upconversion lasers were concentrated on the lanthanide-doped crystals (e.g., Er:YAG crystal)117 and fibers (e.g., ZBLAN fiber).118 Upconversion lasing is not observed in nanomaterials because of their large energy loss. In 2013, Zhu et al. designed a bottle-like microcavity consisting of UCNPs to activate the upconversion lasing behaviour using a 3-pulse excitation scheme.119 The NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4 nanoparticles dispersed in a bottle-like microcavity form a whispering gallery mode to support visible lasing under ultrahigh pump power density (Fig. 6b). Random lasing action is also demonstrated with the assistance of phonon120 or core–shell nanostructures.121 Afterwards, the ultraviolet upconversion laser was realized by confining excitation energy in the Yb sublattice.77 The pump threshold is 86 mJ cm−2 with a Q-factor of 2800 through a 5-pulse excitation scheme (Fig. 6c). The engagement of suppressed radiative recombination in the laser cavity can also enhance the multiphoton upconversion by an order of magnitude to support an ultraviolet B (UVB) microlaser,122 as shown in periodically arranged SiO2 arrays coated by LiYbF4:Tm@LiYbF4@LiLuF4.123 A waveguide was generated to suppress undesirable electronic transitions in the short-wavelength region, enabling the 289 nm UVB laser under 9.28 mJ cm−2 pumping flux (Q = 4800). The threshold was almost reduced by an order of magnitude as compared to the reported deep ultraviolet laser. Note that these upconversion lasers can only work under pulse excitation at ultrahigh pump power densities.
More interestingly, recent work showed that c.w. lasers could also cause upconversion lasing in a microcavity.75 In order to reduce the threshold and shrink the volume of a laser cavity, Levy et al. designed a low-threshold microcavity by anchoring the Tm3+-doped energy looping nanoparticles (NaYF4:Gd/Tm@NaGdF4) on the surface of polystyrene microspheres (∼5 μm in size). The total internal reflection produced an excellent whispering gallery mode by non-resonant excitation upon a 1064 nm c.w. laser. The NIR upconversion lasing operation at 800 nm has a low threshold of 14 kW cm−2 with Q factors ranging from 103 to 104 (Fig. 6d). The 1064 nm c.w. laser causes less catastrophic thermal damage and deep tissue penetration, thus the microcavity tends to be stable and biocompatible. Further study suggests that optimizing the assembly process helps lower the laser thresholds to 1.7 ± 0.7 kW cm−2 (Q = 103),124 which can be imagined under tissue-mimicking phantoms. Recent work showed that the threshold of the microcavity laser can be reduced to ∼150 W cm−2, and lasing emission was also demonstrated from a single upconversion nanocrystal.7 Very recently, it was demonstrated that atomic-scale disorder in the host matrix caused by liquid-quenching could facilitate population inversion, leading to c.w. upconversion lasing with a sub-10 W cm−2 threshold (4.7 W cm−2).125 Plasmonic modulation can also enable upconversion lasers under c.w. excitation. The lattice plasmonic mode provides spectrally selective upconversion amplification of Er3+ transitions, resulting in a much lower threshold of 70 W cm−2 (Q > 200) (Fig. 6e and f).126 The well-designed cavities together with rational pumping schemes markedly reduce laser thresholds under pulse and even c.w. excitation. These efforts shed new light on the possibility of upconversion lasers based on nanocrystals and can promote biological and other relevant applications.
3.2 Full-color 3D volumetric displays
The smart control of upconversion emission colors is attractive for 3D displays because of the sharp emission bands and chemical stability of lanthanide ions. Three primary color solid-state displays were already investigated in early 1996, despite the constrained color pixels.127 Important progress lies in the full-color observation in the core-multishell nanostructures. In this design, the Ho3+/Ce3+ codoped layer can generate red to green switchable upconversion emission colors by the fine-tuning of the 980 nm excitation pulse widths while the Tm3+-containing core produces blue emissions under 808 nm c.w. excitation. The full-color is easily obtainable by modulating the excitation wavelengths and pulse widths. The nanocrystals dispersed in PDMS enable a full-color 3D display with a high resolution and color gamut (Fig. 7a and b). The mixture of three conventional RGB nanoparticles only resulted in a white colour.4 Abundant emission colors across the visible spectral region were achieved according to the excitation wavelength and power. The full-color emission can be obtained by a synchronous 1530/980/808 nm scanning process. Full-color 3D display with the pattern of Olympic rings in the nanocrystal/PDMS substrate was demonstrated (Fig. 7c and d).102 Our report of RGB color upconversion through the photon-blocking effect in the multilayer core–shell nanoparticles under dual c.w. laser excitations instead of pulsed ones may provide an alternative for more compact and convenient full-color 3D displys.101
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the experimental set-up for a 3D volumetric display and (b) demonstration images through the UCNPs/PDMS composite under a temporal control excitation laser. Scale bars, 1 cm. (c) Schematic of the synchronous galvanometric scanning system using tri-wavelength of 1532, 980 and 808 nm lasers. (d) Photographs of the obtained nanocrystal/PDMS substrate and full-color 3D display of Olympic rings. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2015. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. 
3.3 Optical storage
The launch of the information explosion makes an appeal for up-to-date information storage technology with large capacity and low cost, and optical information storage can gradually replace magnetic information storage.128 In general, physicochemical changes or energy transfer are induced to improve the sensibility of photoswitchable molecules for semiconductor storage.129 The CdSe–ZnSe–ZnS double-shell quantum dots can enable a storage capacity of 540 GB per disc.130 The non-uniform illumination can create rewritable optical storage in LiNbO3 crystals by incorporation in photoisomerization materials.131 However, semiconductor storage can hardly read out information with sub-diffraction resolution due to a lack of the reversible manipulation of fluorescence. The power consumption for semiconductor storage is high.129 In this subsection, we mainly focus on optical storage using upconversion nanomaterials.
Photochromic materials have attracted substantial attention due to their potential for application in information storage. Dithienylethene (DTE) is convenient for converting between ring-open (colorless) and ring-closed (blue) photoisomers under visible or blue/UV light. Changing excitation power was proved effective to control photoisomers of DTE.132 Precisely tuning upconversion colors through photoresponsive molecules makes data rewritable. A composite film medium for information storage was constructed by the assembly of NaYF4:Yb/Er and diarylethene derivatives. Nondestructive information erasing and rewriting are readily performed by using UV irradiation and visible irradiation. The data density was estimated to be ca. 0.95 Mb cm−2 as a result of unsatisfactory uniformity in the storage medium (Fig. 8a).52 It was found that the rewritable optical memory by orthogonal upconversion nanomaterials has a high spatiotemporal resolution. A suitable thickness of the NaYF4:Yb/Tm inner shell layer cut off the energy channel of 980 nm to Er3+ and the inert interlayer suppresses unwanted interfacial energy transfer or surface quenching, which guarantee the high spectral purity of the upconversion emission output. The intensity of upconversion light from such orthogonal nanoparticles leads to a photostationary state of DTE molecules within 2 min, so the reversible erase and rewrite process can be completed in a short time (Fig. 8b and c).99 Another nanoscale optical writing method was demonstrated by the fine control of resonance energy transfer from upconversion nanomaterials to graphene oxide. Inspired by the STED super-resolution, an inhibition illumination with a doughnut shape was spatially overlapped with the 980 nm writing irradiation in the focal plane that can create a confined local reduction of graphene oxide in the nanoscale. The graphene oxide quenches UV/blue emission by an overlap of the absorption band to make the light intensity change on the substrate, enabling a lateral subdiffraction resolution of around 50 nm. This strategy enabled a storage capacity of 700 terabytes on a 12-centimeter optical disk, comparable to single-layer Blue-ray disks (storage capacity of 28000), which provided a cheap method for the next-generation optical disks (Fig. 8d and e).6,133 Such optical storage has seldom been seen for semiconductor storage. Another advantage for optical storage using upconversion nanomaterials is their compatibility for the large-scale production of optical devices.129
 Fig. 8  (a) Luminescence images of (i) the initial state, (ii) erasing, (iii) rewriting, and (iv) nondestructive readout processes in the assembly of NaYF4:Yb/Er and diarylethene derivatives for optical storage. (b) A schematic of rewritable information memory based on NaYF4:Er(10 mol%)@NaYF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/0.5 mol%)@NaYF4 orthogonal UCNPs combined with diarylethene molecules. (c) A time-dependent color change process demonstrated for localized information writing and erasing by adjusting the irradiation wavelength. (d) Schematic of nanoscale optical writing and inhibition using NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/4 mol%) and graphene oxide. GO and rGO stand for graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide, respectively. (e) Information readout after diffraction-limited writing (black) and nanoscale optical writing (red). (a) Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2010. (b and c) Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2018. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from the AAAS, Copyright 2021. 
On the other hand, tunable lifetimes allow information storage in the temporal domain. The NaYF4:Yb/Tm τ-dots can be used for temporal optical nanoprobes because they have distinguishable lifetimes of blue emission at different Tm3+ concentrations. Optical multiplexing codes with lifetimes from microseconds (4% Tm3+, 48 μs) to milliseconds (0.2% Tm3+, 668 μs) can be accurately separated by fast scanning.8 This temporal encryption experiences enough signal-to-noise ratio without the requirements of intricate color compensation, superior to the conventional fluorescent color codes. The engineered τ-Dots demonstrated information storage and document security with high capacity. More information about temporal multiplexing can be found in the information security and anti-counterfeiting section.
3.4 Information security and anti-counterfeiting
Counterfeiting in currency,134 microelectronics,135 and even nongenuine medicines is pervasive nowadays, leading to financial loss and perniciousness in human health. As counterfeit goods spread in the marketplace, information security and anti-counterfeiting techniques have attracted increasing attention. The controllable synthesis of upconversion nanomaterials with distinguishable optical properties in the spatiotemporal dimension has promoted the development of next-generation counterfeiting inks.136
Initially, single-NIR excitation wavelength-responsive upconversion nanomaterials were demonstrated for red/green/blue (RGB) encoding. A series of colors can be produced by precisely mixing different inks.137 Introducing other sensitizers or downconverters can further expand the luminescent anti-counterfeiting modes.138–141 Power-dependent nanomaterial inks showed abundant emission colors under different excitation power densities with inkjet printing.87 Orthogonal upconversion nanomaterials enable distinctive color output by switching excitations, resulting in the decoding of concealed information by a special excitation mode.43,142 Importantly, we recently designed a simple migratory core–shell nanostructure with orthogonal upconversion towards information security. By controlling energy migration in the ytterbium sublattice and Er3+–Yb3+ interactions in the temporal domain, a gradual red-to-green color change was readily achieved under both steady-state and non-steady-state excitations (Fig. 9a).88 The color-tunable upconversion of the holmium sublattice also suggests the promising potential for anti-counterfeiting.143 We recently developed a type of migratory core–shell nanoparticles that also presented the switchable control of emission colors with the assistance of energy migration in the ytterbium sublattice. The pattern of “dragonfly-on-lotus” was decoded under 1530 nm excitation while there was only an observation of dazzle light under the commonly used 980 nm irradiation (Fig. 9b).20
 Fig. 9  (a) Distinguishing the concealed butterfly pattern through the 1530 nm irradiation from a dazzle light under 980 nm irradiation (left). Decoding the detailed information on the wings of the butterfly pattern by 1530 nm irradiation (middle). Color-switchable output under 980 nm steady-state excitation and non-steady-state excitation (right). (b) Distinguishing the concealed pattern of the “dragonfly-on-lotus” by using the 1530 nm irradiation while only a dazzle light was observed under conventional 980 nm irradiation. The patterns were prepared using NaErF4@NaYbF4, NaYF4:Yb/Ho/Ce(20/2/10mol%)@NaYF4, NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/2mol%)@NaYF4 and NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/1mol%)@NaYF4. (c) A general-design pattern with various UCNPs generates multicolors under steady-state irradiation. Mn2+-doped UCNPs show a green-colored tail with dynamic scanning (top). Distinctive patterns were recorded under different irradiation conditions (bottom). (d) Imaging PDMS beads equipped with NaYF4:Yb/Tm(x/1 mol%; x = 19,29,49)@NaYF4 co-doing (top) or NaYF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(x/1 mol%)@NaYF4:Yb(y mol%)@NaYF4 (x/y = 20:50, 50:20, 80:5) gradient doping (bottom) UCNPs. (e) Temperature-responsive information security with the assistance of thermally enhanced UCNPs. Blue and green were provided by NaYF4:Yb/Tm(49/1 mol%) and NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%), respectively. (a) Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2021. (b) Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020. (c) Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2017. (d) Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2021. (e) Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. 
Besides luminescence signals, the temporal manipulation of lifetimes also offers the possibility for optical anticounterfeiting. Different Tm τ-dots with distinguishable lifetimes enable encoded document security. Multiplexing information hidden in overlapped space was decoded by time-resolved scanning.8 A set of shortwave infrared temporal images was collected through scattering media at specially defined delay times. The intrinsic difference in the lifetimes of lanthanide ions lays a solid foundation for time-gating information decoding.16,42 The introduction of the ultralong-lifetimes of Mn2+ into upconversion nanomaterials is helpful for multilevel anti-counterfeiting (Fig. 9c).39 The combination of versatile spectral and lifetime binary encoding can further improve the capacity for information security. Note that a time-resolved imaging scanning system can decode barcodes in the luminescence and lifetime mode.35 Very recently, independent luminescent lifetime and intensity modulation was demonstrated (Fig. 9d), further contributing to the practical encoding capacity in the binary mode.36
The luminescence in thermal fields may present a change in light intensity or emission colors. Unlike conventional thermal quenching as a result of accelerated non-radiative relaxation, the thermal enhancement of the upconversion process was observed, which provides an additional factor for promoting information encryption application.37,82,83 The anticounterfeiting barcodes comprising Yb3+/Tm3+ co-doped upconversion nanomaterials exhibited weak emission at room temperature while becoming apparent when heated to 140 °C (Fig. 9e) due to surface phonon-mediated energy transfer.37 However, a complete understanding of thermal enhancement calls for further investigations.
3. Integrated optical imaging toolboxes
Spectral-domain imaging is capable of the real-time visualization of biological substances with low cost, high resolution and quick feedback and is extensively used in the bioscience discipline. Conventional visible nanoprobes are subjected to strong tissue scattering involving in vivo biological imaging, producing very small tissue-penetrating depth. NIR emissions from upconversion materials located in biological windows are suitable for optical imaging with excellent biocompatibility, non-photobleaching, great tissue penetration depth and low scattering.144,145 The intrinsic forbidden transitions of the 4f states feature slow decaying dynamics, resulting in the long lifetimes of the excited energy levels. The lifetime tunability endows the possibility for optical imaging in the temporal domain with high spatiotemporal resolution.146 Other advanced achievements such as super-resolution imaging21 further proved the promising prospects in optical imaging for upconversion nanomaterials. In this section, we provide detailed discussions on the integrated optical imaging toolboxes based on upconversion nanomaterials, expanding from super-resolution imaging to NIR II spectral imaging, lifetime imaging, as well as single-particle imaging and tracking, NIR optogenetics and in vivo nanothermometers.
4.1 Super-resolution imaging
Super-resolution microscopy, including stimulated emission depletion microscopy (STED),147 single-molecule localization nanoscopy148 and structured illumination microscopy (SIM),149 provides sub-diffraction spatial resolution, which circumvents the limitations set by optical diffraction on traditional wide-field confocal microscopy. Super-resolution imaging contributes further to the investigation of individual biomolecules on the nanoscale accuracy. Current super-resolution microscopy based on organic dyes is usually limited by the relatively high depletion light and photobleaching.150,151 Recent works suggested that upconversion nanomaterials create additional possibilities for super-resolution microscopy imaging due to their finely controllable and amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) properties.
In 2017, a new strategy for super-resolution nanoscopy through the amplified stimulated emission in upconversion nanomaterials via a dual-laser confocal system was reported.3 The 808 nm quenching beam with a doughnut shape modulates the excitation profiles, spatially producing combined super-resolution. Such an optical imaging system succeeded in the detection of a single nanoparticle with a resolution of 28 nm (1/36th of excitation wavelength) at 0.19 MW cm−2 excitation (Fig. 10a). The optical layout containing a dual-laser is much simpler than the reported super-resolution microscopy based on upconversion nanomaterials.152 Note that the highly Tm3+-doped nanoparticles support the photon avalanche behavior, which favors population inversion to decrease the saturation intensity. However, much more pixel dwelling time than the convention super-resolution microscopy was required due to the longer fluorescence lifetime of lanthanide ions, which needs compensation for low emission rates. Another work suggested that the depletion efficiency of 455 nm upconversion luminescence approached 96% in NaYF4:Yb/Tm (810 nm depletion power of 17.7 MW cm−2), leading to the imaging of immunostained cytoskeleton structures of fixed cells with a resolution of 82 nm (1/10th of excitation wavelength, 17.7 MW cm−2).153 Encouragingly, the imaging acquisition time became much shorter (pixel dwelling time is 100 μs).
 Fig. 10  (a) A schematic of stimulated emission depletion with the Gaussian excitation beam and doughnut-shaped depletion beam profiles (upper panel) and images of the 40 nm 8 mol% Tm-doped UCNPs with confocal (left) or super-resolution microscopy (right) (bottom). (b) NIRES imaging, 455 nm and 800 nm imaging of 93 μm depths of a mouse liver tissue slice. The emission intensity and FWHM (full-width at half-maximum) versus imaging depth are also provided. The resolution of NIRES is 49.6 ± 11.1 nm (0 μm), 42.4 ± 6.2 nm (15 μm), 42.4 ± 7.2 nm (55 μm), 48.0 ± 7.3 nm (75 μm), 38.2 ± 14.3 nm (93 μm). (c) The uSEE microscopy image of the NaYF4:Yb/Tm(20/8 mol%) endocytosed neuronal cell with a lateral resolution of 210 nm and axial resolution of 450 (right). Confocal imaging is also provided (left). (d) A comparison of wide-field microscopy (left) and upconversion nonlinear structured illumination microscopy (U-NSIM). (e) PASSI image using photon avalanching nanoparticles. (f) Super-resolution image of UCNPs at 55.9 μm depth inside the spheroid using NIRB. (a) Reproduced from ref. 3 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2017. (b) Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (c) Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019. (d) Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (e) Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. (f) Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. 
The intrinsic nonlinear response of upconversion process provides the possibility for super-resolution under NIR excitation by unlocking the square root law. Near-infrared emission saturation (NIRES) microscopy provides single nanoparticle imaging with a resolution of sub 50 nm (1/20th of excitation wavelength) through 93 μm thick biological tissues under 4 MW cm−2 excitation (Fig. 10b).154 The saturation curve determines the resolution. High-excitation flux could easily unlock the optical diffraction limitation based on the lab-made NIRES setup (3 MW cm−2 excitation). NIRES presents a similar optical resolution with the engagement of simple setups. Taking advantage of the super-linear dependence of the upconversion on pumping power, conceptually different super-linear excitation–emission (uSEE) microscopy can image the nanoparticles endocytosed by neuronal cells with a resolution of 210 nm (1/4.7th of excitation wavelength; 1.7 mW μm−2) in the lateral direction and 450 nm in the axial direction (Fig. 10c).155 The 455 nm emission is governed by a 5-photon process, suggesting super-linear excitation–emission properties. High nonlinear properties means narrower full-width at half-maximum according to the square root law. The confocal microscopy mode can be easily switched to SEE by controlling the excitation power. This provides a 3D sub-diffraction imaging resolution without subsequent imaging post-processing as required in conventional confocal microscopy. The nonlinear response of the upconversion process also creates a chance for structured illumination microscopy (U-NSIM) with a resolution of 131 nm (1/7th of the excitation wavelength, 4 kW cm−2) at a high imaging rate (Fig. 10d).156 Facilitated by high-frequency harmonics, the NIR emission pattern could be successfully transferred without sacrificing structural information by Fourier analysis in thick tissue. Very recently, sub-wavelength resolution was achieved using the giant nonlinear optical responsive photon-avalanching upconversion nanomaterials. The photon-avalanche single-beam super-resolution imaging (PASSI) exploits the nonlinear response of photon-avalanching, with the full-width at the half-maximum scaling inversely with the square root of the nonlinearity. The nonlinear order even exceeded 22 under the non-resonant excitation wavelength of 1064 nm. The PASSI concept leads to a 70 nm resolution without the requirement of complex post-processing (Fig. 10e).21
Shaping for the point spread function of excitation light is another choice for super-resolution. The heterochromatic nonlinear optical responses of upconversion nanomaterials exhibit super-resolution nanoscopy with improved imaging quality and speed by engineering the point spread function.157 A Bessel beam is created by interference, and will not be affected by a few scattered wavelets because of their characteristics. The scattering in biological tissues can be moderated in Bessel beam nanoscopy to improve the imaging depth. NIR excitation can further improve penetration depth in tissues. The combination of these two merits enables good inhibition of biological scattering for NIR Bessel-beam emission saturation nanoscopy (NIRB). NIRB permits a resolution of 37 nm (1/26th of excitation wavelength) at 10.88 MW cm−2 excitation,158 allowing for access to the mapping of single nanoparticles inside spheroids with a resolution of 98 nm at 55.9 μm depth (Fig. 10f). A single-beam doughnut illumination also enables the super-resolution imaging of heterogeneous functional nanorods by a well-tailored shape of excitation wavelength.159
4.2 NIR II spectral imaging
The imaging depth and resolution of visible or conventional NIR biomarkers are limited by the small penetration in tissues. The second NIR light (NIR II, ∼1000–1700 nm) in the transparent biological window160 can outperform the visible or conventional NIR wavelength due to much lower light scattering and absorption in complex biological structures, showing potential for fluorescence imaging with less auto-fluorescence background and higher resolutions. Traditional NIR II imaging probes are based on quantum dots, dyes or carbon nanotubes (CNT), and suffer from brightness, biocompatibility and toxicity, which impede clinical translation,144 whereas lanthanide-doped nanoprobes possess excellent biocompatibility and low toxicity under low excitation power. In recent years, lanthanide-based NIR II imaging probes have been attracting ever-increasing attention.161 Considering the bright NIR II emission of Er3+ at around 1530 nm, we mainly focus on the Er3+-activated bioprobes in this subsection.
In 2013, a systematic investigation of the lanthanide-based NIR II fluorescent imaging was performed by preparing the NaYF4:Yb/X@NaYF4 (X = Tm3+, Pr3+, Ho3+, Er3+) nanoparticles (Fig. 11a and b),162 which showed brighter NIR light than that of CNT or organic dyes under identical measurement conditions. This probe exhibits anatomical resolution during in vivo multispectral imaging and tumor detection. Other upconversion nanomaterials (low activators and sensitizers doped) were also studied for the NIR II luminescence imaging.163–166
 Fig. 11  (a) NIR II emission spectra of NaYF4:Yb/X@NaYF4 (X = Tm3+, Pr3+, Ho3+, Er3+) nanoparticles. (b) Schematic of a portable NIR II imaging prototype for in vivo multispectral imaging and lesion detection. (c) Color photographs of a test mouse (left) and the enhanced NIR II fluorescent biological dynamical image of arterical blood flow with the β-NaYbF4:Er/Ce@NaYF4 nanoprobe (right). (d) Schematic of distinguishable fluorescence emission channels using the time-gating technique to realize the selective excitation and emission collection of NaYbF4:Er/Ce/Zn@NaYF4 nanoparticles and PbS quantum dots. (e) Two-plex molecular imaging of a mouse bearing a CT-26 tumor (right top) of mixed ErNPs-aPDL1 (left top) and PbS-aCD8 (left bottom) at 24 h post-intravenous injection. ErNPs-aPDL1 and PbS-aCD8 stand for conjugating anti-PD-L1 (programmed cell death-1 ligand-1) mAb (atezolizumab) to UCNPs, and conjugating anti-CD8α mAb (clone 2.43) to PbS quantum dots, respectively. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2013. (c) Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2017. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019. 
For maximum absorption of excitation light flux, pure NaYbF4 was also investigated for nanoprobes. For instance, β-NaYbF4:Er/Ce@NaYF4 nanoparticles show enhanced NIR II emission by minimizing their upconversion through Ce3+-mediated cross relaxations. Such bright nanoprobes enable dynamical cerebrovascular imaging in living mice with short exposure times (20 ms per frame), providing access for quantitatively detecting the velocity of blood flow in the mouse brain (Fig. 11c).167 It should be noted that the NIR emission intensity decreases markedly for the nanoparticles from hydrophobic into hydrophilic, which limits the spatial resolution. The functionalized NaYbF4:Er/Ce/Zn@NaYF4 nanoparticles can be used as theranostic agents for molecular in vivo imaging and immunotherapy under low excitation flux (<100 mW cm−2). By integrating PbS quantum dots with emission at around 1600 nm, it also leads to a response to immunotherapeutic treatment dynamically in two distinct detecting channels (Fig. 11d and e).5 NIR II nanoprobes also offer a ratiometric channel for high-accuracy in vivo inflammation bioimaging.168,169 Very recently, vascular imaging noninvasively based on NaErF4 was also demonstrated under 808 nm excitation.170,171
4.3 Lifetime imaging
The lifetimes of lanthanide ions can be manipulated from microseconds to milliseconds by controlling the upconversion process, providing an additional encoding dimension.8 The spectral encodings are usually limited by the unavoidable spectral crosstalk and background interfaces due to the crowded NIR II spectral region of lanthanide emitters and the distinct extinction coefficient of biological tissues. Complex color compensation is indispensable for fluorescence imaging.172,173 In contrast, the lifetime encoding is independent of the absolute emission intensity and is insensitive to the surrounding environment. Therefore, lifetime coding has been adopted in more situations with much-reduced autofluorescence backgrounds and other disadvantages. Note that down-shifting and zero-Stokes luminescence is also included in this subsection because of the deep penetration depth and high quantum yield.
Controlling the dopants concentration in blue-emitting NaYF4:Yb/Tm nanoparticles engineered a series of well-separated lifetime dots, potentially offering solutions for multichannel bioimaging and high-throughput cytometry quantification.8 Introducing an energy migration lattice in a nanoparticle can tune the lifetime of upconversion emissions. The NaYF4@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4 nanoparticles exhibit tunable lifetimes by modifying the thicknesses of the energy migration layer and Yb3+ concentration in the energy transfer upconversion region for in vivo upconversion imaging (Fig. 12a and b).112 This method also offers a solution for the lifetime tuning of down-shifting emissions, as evidenced in NaGdF4@NaGdF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4:Yb@NaNdF4:Yb nanoparticles to carry identifiable codes in the time-domain to quantitatively realize cancer diagnostics in living mice, which outperforms conventional methods.113 Temporary coding also enables deciphering through a scattering medium as shown in the NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYbF4@NaYF4@NaYF4:Nd nanostructure.114 Here, the inert NaYF4 interlayer impedes energy cross-talk from Nd3+ to Yb3+ under 808 nm excitation. Wavelength and lifetime binary encoding was also demonstrated.35,146 Tm3+-sensitized nanoparticles with NIR II excitation and emission provides a new transplantable multiplexing encoding perspective for in vivo deep-tissue imaging.107
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of purpose-built temporal imaging system. (b) Upconversion intensity (left) and lifetimes (right) decoded by time-resolved spectroscopy after subcutaneous injection of NaYF4@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4 into the abdomen. (c) A comparison of the imaging performance in different modalities. Excitation and detection models are summarized on the left. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (c) Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. 
Unlike lanthanide emitters, the sensitizer Yb3+ can also be used for lifetime imaging, as shown in α-NaYbF4@CaF2 nanoparticles.111 The zero-Stokes shift nanoprobes have a high quantum yield (>60%) enabling deep imaging in vivo under power densities as low as 1.1 mW cm−2, which is much brighter than conventional upconverting or downshifting nanoparticles (Fig. 12c). This provides a leap forward in long-time in vivo tracking. One important issue associated with optical temporal imaging is how to decode concealed messages precisely and quickly. Fast decoding algorithms and optimized detection channel configurations may address this problem in the microsecond lifetime range.174
4.4 Single-particle imaging and tracking
The research on photon upconversion emission in single-particle imaging boosts the emerging photovoltaic and biological applications due to advancing progress in the single-particle spectroscopy of upconversion nanomaterials with special functions.175,176 Tracking nanoparticles in real-time provides insight into the mechanism of cellular functions, shedding light on interactions between nanoparticles and cellular organelles in biological environments.177,178 Benefiting from stable luminescence and non-photobleaching, upconversion nanomaterials are treated as excellent labels for single-particle tracking in extended time domains. A key issue for single-particle imaging is how to greatly enhance the luminescence intensity.
Despite the improved signal-to-noise ratio and reduced tissue scattering, it is still challenging to decrease the excitation laser intensity of upconversion nanomaterials-mediated multiphoton probes for bioimaging at levels that are nondestructive to living cells.179,180 Exploring the parameters such as chemical composition, ultrahigh excitation power density and imaging modality would benefit the single-nanoparticle study. As shown in NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/20 mol%), it can produce continuing increases in upconversion by increasing the pump power to 106 W cm−2, which can effectively depress the concentration quenching effect and is thus important for single-particle imaging (Fig. 13a).181
 Fig. 13  (a) Upconversion of luminescence intensity of a single 8 nm-sized NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/20 mol%) (blue circles) and NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%) (red circles) versus excitation power density (left). Confocal luminescence images of NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/20 mol%) (blue dashed lines) and NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%) (red dashed lines) under different excitation power densities (right). (b) 3D representation of the upconversion light brightness from a single NaYF4@NaYbF4:Er(8 mol%)@NaYF4 nanoparticle at different excitation power densities. The bottom images from left to right are wide-field images of a 22 nm-sized NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%) core, 27 nm-sized NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%) core, 29 nm-sized NaYF4:Er(20/2 mol%)@NaYF4, and 29 nm-sized NaYF4@NaYbF4:Er(8 mol%)@NaYF4 (CSS, 8% Er) at 625 W cm−2. (c) Visualizing intra-neuronal motor protein transport using NaLuF4:Yb/Er. Top images from left to right are the fluorescence microscopy image of neurons, the accumulation of UCNPs (red dots) and the capture of UCNPs inside the axons (right top). The bottom schematic shows the two-compartment microchamber connected by microchannels. (d) Schematic of the purpose-built imaging systems for single-particle tracking by the naked eye and CCD camera. SPAD stands for a single-photon avalanche detector. (a) Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2014. (b) Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (c) Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2019. (d) Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. 
Alloy nanoparticles with optimizing sensitizers and activators in a core-inert-shell structure show brighter light than the conventional counterparts across a wide range of imaging intensities.182 Quantitative single-nanoparticle measurement and dynamic modelling uncovered different photophysical processes in alloyed nanoparticles. The protein-sized alloyed nanoparticles led to successful imaging of deep tissue in mice at a power density of 0.1 W cm−2 with signal-to-background ratios (SBR) above 25. It also experienced shorter decay lifetimes, which may open up a way to construct new modes of confocal microscopy to avoid luminescence blurring.183 The core–shell-shell NaYF4@NaYbF4:Er@NaYF4 nanostructure constructed a reliable test platform for investigating the upconversion intensity, power-dependent profile and quantum efficiency of an isolated particle across a large range of power densities.184 The optimal nanomaterials exhibited significant upconversion enhancement by 150-fold at 8 W cm−2 power density with a quantum efficiency of 5.4% (Fig. 13b), and 100 ms exposure time was enough to get a reliable signal-to-noise ratio.
Cathodoluminescent imaging with inherent nanoscale resolution is favorable for individual molecule localization and visualization. Quantum dots or fluorescent dyes are susceptible to photobleaching and decomposition under strong electron irradiation.185,186 Biocompatible cathodoluminescent nanoparticles with controllable size (<20 nm) synergistically demonstrate cathodoluminescent imaging and secondary electron imaging.187 NaGdF4:Eu3+ (5 mol%) nanoparticles were used for the optimum cathodoluminescent nanoprobe at the single-particle level. Such cathodoluminescent nanoprobes provide the chance for multicolor single-nanoparticle imaging and specific protein labeling, although they are still in the infancy stage.
In a real long-term tracking study, the intracellular movements of nanoparticles were observed for as long as 6 h in the living HeLa cells.188 Exocytosis leads to signal loss without the interference of photobleaching. The release of nanoparticles by exocytosis can be addressed by synergistic research of the spatiotemporal distribution and intracellular transport of internalized nanoparticles during a prolonged continuous observation window of 24 h.177 The 3D description of cellular dynamics was also investigated using wide-field epi-fluorescence microscopy.189 The out-of-focus nanoparticles were naturally removed during reconstruction processes. The 3D tracking in real-time gains deep insight into the understanding of cellular dynamics hidden in plane projection. Reporting cytoplasmic dynein movement and visualizing retrograde axonal transport allows for the non-invasive diagnosis of neurodegenerative disease associated with intra-neuronal motor proteins (Fig. 13c).190
In general, the observation of individual nanoparticles was far beyond human capability only with the aid of a microscope eyepiece. Importantly, recent work showed that human eyes could track a single bright nanoparticle to recognize the location and color from clusters based on the purpose-built imaging system (Fig. 13d).191 The naked eye observation requires nanoparticles to emit over 4000 photons per 100 ms, resulting in a very low pumping density (12 kW cm−2) than that of the two-photon microscopy.192 Note that a power density of 320 W cm−2 is enough for camera detection. Highly Tm3+-doped upconversion nanomaterials were sensitive to the excitation power, therefore enabling a new channel for simultaneous imaging and tracking. Integrating super-resolution nanoscopy and single-particle tracking provides insight into a new mode of high-throughput multiplexing imaging and barcoding with ameliorative resolution and speed.193,194
4.5 NIR optogenetics
The optogenetic technique provides an alternative dimension for biological research on the nervous system level by precisely manipulating the targeted neuronal function, making it convenient for the study and treatment of neurological disorders.195 Conventional neuromodulation through visible light suffers from serious absorption and scattering.196 The fiber insertion excitation can deliver light to neurons in deep tissue, however, it causes significant injury.197 So far, it is imperative to perform optogenetics wirelessly and noninvasively for in vivo study. Upconversion nanomaterials can convert NIR excitation into visible emission to activate distinct opsin. The visible emission wavelengths can be finely tailored to overlap with the absorption band of opsin, which can overcome the lack of genetic NIR light sensors in biological tissues.198
In 2015, Hososhima et al. demonstrated upconversion nanomaterials-based NIR optogenetics at the cellular level. In the patch-clamp study, the NIR-induced response of neural cells can conduct cation fluxion.199 The nerve impulses, being an indicator of optogenetic modulation, were also observed in the in vitro approach via shrinking in the nanoparticle size (Fig. 14a).200 Upconversion nanomaterials with blue light emissions allow for the in vivo control of the movement of C. elegans. One problem of the in vivo study was avoiding catastrophic damage to biological tissues at high environmental temperatures. The rationalized manipulation of the excitation scheme is helpful in in vivo studies via decreasing the heating effect. It showed that the quasi-continuous-wave excitation can overcome the overheating effect without impacting the luminescence intensity.201 Optogenetic manipulation of C. elegans was also successfully demonstrated under 808 nm excitation by introducing Nd3+. The adverse overheating effect did not make an impact on the observation of in vivo behaviors under 808 nm excitation.202
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the whole-cell patch-clamp research mediated by NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/0.2 mol%)@NaYF4 for the in vitro approach. A polymer-UCNP hybrid scaffold is used for neuronal culture. UCNPs convert NIR light into blue emission to enable NIR-mediated neuronal activation. (b) In vivo fluorescence imaging with (NIR(+)) and without (NIR(−)) NIR light treatment in zebrafish incubated with DBCO/Cy5.5-UCNs and PAA/Cy5.5-UCNs. RHOD-3 AM is used to monitor Ca2+ and is analyzed by pseudo-color imaging. DBCO, PAA and Cy5.5 stand for dibenzyl cyclooctyne, polyacrylic acid and NIR dye, respectively. The scale bar is 400 μm. (c) Schematic principle of noninvasive optogenetic modulation based on NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/0.5 mol%)@NaYF4@SiO2. The blue emission from UCNPs opens up cation channels under NIR excitation towards deep optical manipulation in the brain. (d) Characterization of upconversion-facilitated optical stimulation in neurons expressing channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2). The voltage-clamp traces (top) of neurons from the VTA slice under different NIR stimulation intensities, and current-clamp traces (bottom) of ChR2-expressing dopamine (DA) neurons under different frequencies. (a) Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. (b) Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2017. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from the AAAS, Copyright 2018. 
The modulation of biological processes associated with membranes in vivo was also achieved in the zebrafish model.203 The integrated optogenetic toolset was used to perform in vivo metabolic glycan labeling. The pseudo-colored imaging of Ca2+ distribution confirmed the feasibility of remote optogenetic regulation with spatiotemporal accuracy (Fig. 14b). Orthogonal upconversion nanomaterials can selectively activate the light-gated channels and cause ion (Ca2+ or Cl−) influx across the membrane, resulting in membrane depolarization or hyperpolarization. Programmable photoactivation was also available by shifting the excitation wavelength and power/duration.100
Transcranial NIR irradiation evokes the excitation of ventral tegmental area (VTA) dopamine neurons, enabling NIR deep-brain stimulation.204 Neuronal inhibition was shown to be effective by activating archaerhodopsin in response to green fluorescence. The improved precision and minimal invasiveness for deep-brain stimulation provide insight into the clinical translation (Fig. 14c and d). Very recently, Liu et al. proposed voltage nanosensors for the real-time monitoring of neuronal activities in intact mice by FRET between nanoparticles and dipicrylamine (DPA) embedded in the membrane.205 The mouse infrared pattern vision was also enabled by ocular injectable-photoreceptor-binding with upconversion nanomaterials, showing great promise for mammalian vision repair and night vision.206 The ultralow pump power density (1.62 mW cm−2) from the LED enabled mouse infrared vision due to the extremely high detection sensitivity of rod cells to green light. The sensitive and selective NIR biosensing of potassium and neurotransmitters allow the NIR optogenetics to be close to practical applications.207,208
4.6 
          In vivo nanothermometer
Temperature is a basic physical quantity that is determined by the internal thermal properties of materials. Monitoring and reporting local temperature, as well as its variation and distribution, are indispensable for a series of frontier applications from automotive to biomedicine and fluid dynamics. Conventional contact thermometers are not suitable for precise measurement in miniaturized devices and suffer from electromagnetic noise.209,210 Benefiting from temperature-dependent luminescence intensity or intensity ratios, the phosphors enable the highly accurate and noninvasive measurement of temperature based on spectroscopic technique.211 Upconversion nanomaterials are leading a large movement to advance contactless thermometers due to their stable narrow emission bands and temperature-dependent emission profiles.
In general, the thermometer works by detecting the changes in a characteristic luminescence parameter such as the light intensity of an emission (or the intensity ratio of dual emissions), spectral shift of emissions, and lifetime (Fig. 15a).211 The basic concepts can be found in the recent literature.211–216 Taking Er3+ as an example, it has thermally coupled energy levels of 2H11/2 and 4S3/2 with resultant thermo-sensitive green emissions from these two levels; thus, the use of the intensity ratio can exclude the unwanted artifact influence, such as excitation source fluctuations217 and medium absorption.218 For instance, the peasecod-like hollow LiZrF4:Yb/Er nanocrystals show a relative sensitivity (Sr) of 5.65% K−1 (at 123 K).219 The emission from other lanthanide ions such as Nd3+ and Eu3+ (or Eu2+) are also available. The sensitivity of Nd3+-based nanothermometers can be improved by controlling the upconversion via core–shell nanostructural design.220–223 The phase transition-based luminescence nanothermometry in LiYO2:Eu shows the Sr up to 12.5% K−1.224 Ratiometric temperature detection can also be achieved by combining different luminescent ions. The Eu2+/Eu3+-codoped Sc2O3 nanoparticles provide inherent calibration emission of Eu2+, enabling high performance in nanothermometry.225 The Sr4Al14O25:Mn/Tb shows temperature-independent Tb3+ emission and thermally quenched Mn4+ emission, resulting in Sr of 2.8% °C−1 at 150 °C.226 The hybrids comprising quantum dots and UCNPs allow for dual-excitation decoding with a minimum systematic error of ∼2.3 °C at 35 °C.227 In a nanostructure combining the thermally enhancing (Yb3+/Nd3+) and thermally quenching (Yb3+/Er3+) systems, the sensitivity is indeed better than that of a simple thermally coupled system.228
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of temperature sensing using different luminescence characteristics. (b) Schematic of surficial and intratumoral monitoring in vivo (left); in vivo images through a 2 mm pork tissues slice under 865 nm excitation combined with PbS correction unit. (c) Ratiometric thermometry based on TTA-Nd-NPs in an inflammatory mode. TTA, triplet–triplet annihilation. (d) Thermal images obtained by dividing the luminescence imaging at 1000 and 1200 nm during heating (upper panel) and relaxation processes (bottom panel). (e) Temperature sensing and programmed combination therapy in vivo. Upper panel: a plot of Ln(I545/I525) from NaLuF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%) versus 1/T to calibrate local temperature in the tissue phantom. Bottom panel: photos of tumor-bearing mice before and after programmable therapy. (f) Thermographic luminescence lifetime imaging of the optimized nanoprobes in the inflamed and normal mice. (b) Reproduced from ref. 240 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020. (c) Reproduced from ref. 241 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (d) Reproduced from ref. 245 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2017. (e) Reproduced from ref. 247 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (f) Reproduced from ref. 252 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2020. 
Recently, efforts on expanding the temperature sensing range of nanothermometry were performed. The use of the Stark-peaks and thermally coupled emissions of Gd3+ in YAl3(BO3)4:Pr/Gd allows for reporting temperatures over a wide temperature range (30–800 K) under 450 nm excitation.229 In silica-coated NaYF4:Yb/Er nanoparticles, the sensing temperature can be up to 900 K without thermal decomposition.230 Other temperature-independent intensities from Eu3+ or Ho3+ further provide the possibility for contactless temperature sensing and 2D mapping in a wide temperature range with the combined merits of the chemically stable emission of lanthanide ions and quantitative modelling.231–233
Upconversion-based thermometers have a big advantage for accurately detecting the temperature of biological tissues.234 A series of standardization guidelines for luminescence nanothermometry in biological applications have been discussed in recent reviews.235,236 Decorating nanoparticles on the surface of spider silks works well to monitor the temperature in a single cell.237 Quantitative monitoring of mitochondrial thermal dynamics in living cells is also available.238 Hybrid organic–inorganic materials are also explored for in vivo nanothermometry. Periodic mesoporous organosilica (PMOs) or mesoporous silica (mSiO2) combining NaGdF4:Yb/Er allows for physiological thermometry at 20–60 °C (Sr =1.31% K−1). PMOs and mSiO2 show high biocompatibility with biological tissues and the voids provide the additional possibility for thermometry and drug delivery.239 By constructing the hybrid with PbS quantum dots and Tm3+-doped nanoparticles, its dual-emission ratiometric signal at around 810 nm can improve the in vivo thermal sensitivity and resolution by a time-resolved technique due to their different decay times (Fig. 15b).240 Incorporating NaYF4:Nd nanoparticles into a thermal-sensitive triplet–triplet annihilation system as a correction unit can enable an in vivo monitoring temperature with high sensitivity (∼7.1% K−1) and resolution (∼0.1 K) (Fig. 15c).241 Photothermal therapy (PTT) provides a new way for cancer treatment with improved therapeutic accuracy in recent years.242 Intratumoral thermal sensing provides paramount guidance for parameter control during PTT for minimizing unwanted excessive heating.243,244 In recent research, the LaF3:Yb/Er@LaF3:Yb/Tm-based nanothermometers operated in biological windows with a sensitivity of 5% K−1, providing time-resolved 2D thermal images of small animals invasively (Fig. 15d).245 NaLuF4:Yb/Er@NaLuF4@Carbon nanocomposite can be used to report the microscopic temperature in vivo during the PTT process to avoid unfavorable thermal damage to neighboring normal tissues.246 By combining with chemotherapy (CT), the therapeutic efficacy can be further improved by arranging the treatment schemes based on microscopic temperatures (Fig. 15e).247 The 3D optical manipulation of thermal-sensing nanoparticles presented a thermal gradient in HeLa cancer cells with high-sensitivity in microsized systems.248
Despite being invasive and cost-effective for lanthanide-based nanothermometry biomedical research, the tissue-induced spectral distortions usually result in the concern of sensing reliability due to the thermal dependence of light absorption and scattering in tissues.249 Recently, joining multiparametric sensing and multiple regression has contributed to a tenfold improvement in thermal sensitivity (∼50% K−1) and resolution (∼0.05 K) by using Ag2S nanoparticles, providing the precise detection of tiny temperature fluctuations in living tissues.250 Ag2S-based nanothermometry could also provide a reliable absolute thermal reading of the liver with a newly designed thermal readout procedure, which can promote diagnosis and therapy.251
The lifetime has been used for temperature sensing because it is independent of light scattering, reflection and intensity fluctuations of excitation wavelength,211 being important for in vivo biological applications (see Fig. 15a). For instance, the NaYF4@NaYF4:Yb/Nd@CaF2-based nanothermometer is capable of consistently resolving temperature changes at depths of up to 4 mm in biological tissues with a sensitivity of 1.4–1.1% °C−1 in the range of 10–64 °C (Fig. 15f).252 The phonon-assisted energy transfer in Yb/Nd couples is also capable of enabling NIR lifetime nanothermometry.253 Recent work suggests that the decay time of the 3H4 state of Tm3+ can improve the nanothermometry in the first biological window.254 These optical parameters have been well utilized for temperature sensing, however, it should be noted that further improving thermal sensitivity is still a challenge.
4. Other frontier applications
In addition to the frontier applications discussed above, photon upconversion also shows promise in emerging fields such as optical detection and sensing.255 Based on the FRET mechanism, UNCPs-conjunct systems outperform traditional optical nanoprobes without background interference and constraint in the depth of penetration. A photoelectrochemical enzyme immunoassay in UCNPs composites shows good reproducibility and selectivity in detecting alpha-fetoprotein.256,257 Chromophore-conjugated UCNPs could report real-time hepatotoxicity in vivo by using the interactions with ONOO−.258 Straightforward fluorescence visualization in an initiation-input-transduction platform is capable of detecting phosgene with greatly improved sensitivity.259 Other detections for Hg2+ and explosive residues also benefit from controllable upconversion.78,104 Very recently, the identification of a single molecule photoreaction was demonstrated based on intraparticle-surface energy transfer (i-SET) spectroscopy.260
Upconversion nanoparticles enable deeper penetration than conventional photodynamic therapy (PDT), and this has been demonstrated with enhanced PDT efficacy because of the simultaneous activation of two photosensitizers.261 More recently, the dual-model upconversion and downconversion facilitated an all-in-one theranostic nanoplatform capable of bioimaging, chemodynamics and PDT, resulting in highly efficient tumour theranostics.262
Highly doped upconversion nanomaterials can result in optical trapping forces enhanced by orders of magnitude for low-refractive-index nanoscale objects, providing the possibility for the intracellular manipulation of organelles by optical tweezers.38 With the ability to convert low-energy infrared photons into visible ones, upconversion nanomaterials unlock the energy mismatch to increase the power conversion efficiency of solar cells by tuning the cell absorption spectral range.263,264 Lanthanide-doped perovskite was also used as a downconverter for power conversion efficiency enhancement by taking advantage of the quantum cutting effect.265,266 These efforts further promote the application of photon upconversion.
5. Challenges and outlook
Photon upconversion has witnessed extensive breakthroughs in both mechanistic understanding and frontier application over the past few years. The on-demand property of lanthanide-based materials is readily accessible based on the design and tunable characteristics of the nanostructure and external stimulus, enriching relevant application prospects. Upconversion materials exhibit crucial potential for nanophotonics, including upconversion lasers, 3D display, information storage, information security and anti-counterfeiting. In a parallel development, these luminescent materials have enabled biological imaging with improved resolution among other relevant fields like cancer therapy. They can also be used for in vivo nanothermometers. Smart luminescent nanomaterials are gradually shaping the nanoworld.
Despite the great progress achieved, there remain many challenges in this field:
(i) Further enhancement of photon upconversion remains a daunting challenge. The practical application is still being greatly hindered by the low upconversion light intensity and quantum efficiency inherited from the non-linear process and deleterious surface quenching. Despite the advantages, there are shortcomings to be considered for the methods discussed in the sections above. Local electromagnetic manipulation decouples the dependency of the excitation power density on a certain photon budget but it is far from being satisfied. For SPR, SiO2 is usually used as a spacer but it may quench the luminescence;267 thus, other spacers should be explored. Heat dissipation is also an inevitable drawback associated with SPR. In particular, the novel plasmonic platforms enabling multiphoton amplification towards the short-wavelength upconversion need to be taken into consideration.61,62 All-dielectric materials including photon crystals and microlens may address this problem. Besides the electromagnetic field, more external stimuli should be explored such as temperature. The newly developed thermally enhanced upconversion may help address the attenuation of the signals of current nanothermometers with increasing temperature and need to be further explored.37
(ii) A general and simple strategy for editing the upconversion emission profiles remains a challenge. Orthogonal upconversion has been confirmed to be an easy method for emission color tuning, however, it usually requires the multi-layer core–shell nanostructure design, which is technically difficult in the experiments. The emission light intensity might be attenuated in the energy migratory structure. An alternative method should be explored, such as molecule-assisted opto-electrochemical manipulation. It is easy to overlook the intrinsic correlation between luminescence intensity and lifetime. A large tunable capacity in the temporal domain is generally achieved at the cost of very weak intensity. There are few strategies reported to extend the lifetime of lanthanide ions beyond the intrinsic value. The independent luminescence lifetime and light intensity tuning may provide new opportunities for temporal applications.
(iii) Numerous considerations should be addressed for in vivo biological applications, especially for surface chemistry and biocompatibility. Surface functionalization is indispensable for specific biological purposes. For instance, graphene oxide modification and supramolecular engineering are proved useful for molecular recognition268 and agent accumulation at tumor lesions.269 However, hydrophilic nanoparticles witness weak light intensity due to surface quenching, setting high demands on upconversion intensity. Upconversion nanomaterials are controlled to be as small as possible to be completely eliminated from the body but luminescent efficiency decreases heavily with reducing the size. Brighter light in small nanoparticles is urgently needed. Biodegradable upconversion nanomaterials also attract attentions270 The biotoxicity of nanoparticles has been a long-term concern for optogenetics neuromodulation, which should be understood before clinical practice. The detection and imaging devices also need further development.
(iv) Close attention should be paid to nanohybrids. Due to optical stability and the chemical functional surface of UCNPs, upconversion hybrids comprising perovskite, metal–organic frameworks (MOF) and organic dyes could broaden their practical applications. The coupling of all-inorganic perovskite quantum dots can enable their NIR response through energy transfer from UCNPs to perovskites, leading to a tunable full-spectrum emission,271 as well as high-level information encryption.272 The use of an electric field can manipulate energy transfer from UCNPs to perovskites in chiral nematic liquid crystals to amplify upconverted circularly polarized emission.273 The UCNPs@MOF core–shell structures provide a smart platform for photodynamic therapy.274,275 The UCNPs with specific DNA and aggregation-induced emission luminogen modifications enable a library of in vivo biological applications such as cellular clearance and drug delivery.276–279 Creating an UCNPs-based superlattice also has attractive interests. The spatial patterning of nanoparticles in large-area ordered photonic arrays opens a potential path for novel nonlinear optical devices. A deep mechanistic understanding of interactions between UCNPs in the nanometer scale promotes the controllable arrangement during assembly.280,281 Capillary force282 and ligand design283 are common strategies for designing UCNPs building blocks. Very recently, a perovskite-type superlattice (CsPbBr3–NaGdF4) demonstrated superfluorescence.284 These efforts benchmark the ability of UCNPs towards nanophotonic applications. However, the distance between UCNPs and other functional units should be precisely tuned to avoid degradation, and considerable attention should be paid to hybrid connections.
(v) New functions of upconversion nanomaterials should be explored. With the tendency toward nanotechnology commercialization and interdisciplinary cooperation, numerous new functions of nanomaterials have emerged. Just recently, X-ray-activated persistent luminescence nanocrystals were achieved for high-resolution extension imaging,28 NIR II imaging27 and multidimensional optical information storage.285 The underlying mechanism is addressed by DFT. The downshifting from lanthanide-doped nanomaterials also enables STED imaging with a resolution below 20 nm in NIR spectral bands (850–900 nm).286 Non-invasive in vivo digital light processing helps to produce personalized tissue products with a high spatial resolution by computer-aided design.287 However, these studies involving optics, physics and materials science are complex. This may benefit from theoretical modelling and simulation as evident by DFT25–28 and Monte Carlo methods.29,30 Interdisciplinary cooperation truly contributes to the advances of lanthanide-based nanocrystals, to which we should pay ongoing attention.
In conclusion, we have summarized the state-of-the-art progress of investigations regarding the fundamentals of optical manipulation in upconversion nanomaterials and their emerging applications. The results have demonstrated that the considerable tuning capability in spectral (e.g., intensity and wavelength) and lifetime domains lay a solid foundation for their frontier applications. We hope that this review will contribute to both the fundamental research of lanthanide-based materials and their diversities of cutting-edge applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51972119, 51702101), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2020ZYGXZR100), the State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices (Skllmd-2021-01), the Guangdong Pearl River Talents Program, (2017GC010278), the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Photonics Technology (2020B121201011), and the Local Innovative and Research Teams Project of Guangdong Pearl River Talents Program (2017BT01X137).
Notes and references
F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou, B. Shi, D. Jin and X. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 924–936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Lu, X. Yang, X. Zheng, S. Wen, F. Wang, X. Vidal, J. Zhao, D. Liu, Z. Zhou, C. Ma, J. Zhou, J. A. Piper, P. Xi and D. Jin, Nature, 2017, 543, 229–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Deng, F. Qin, R. Chen, W. Huang, M. Hong and X. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 237–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhong, Z. Ma, F. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, X. Zhao, J. Li, H. Du, M. Zhang, Q. Cui, S. Zhu, Q. Sun, H. Wan, Y. Tian, Q. Liu, W. Wang, K. C. Garcia and H. Dai, Nat. Biotechnol., 2019, 37, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lamon, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, X. Liu and M. Gu, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabe2209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shang, J. Zhou, Y. Cai, F. Wang, A. Fernandez-Bravo, C. Yang, L. Jiang and D. Jin, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 6156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, J. Zhao, R. Zhang, Y. Liu, D. Liu, E. M. Goldys, X. Yang, P. Xi, A. Sunna, J. Lu, Y. Shi, R. C. Leif, Y. Huo, J. Shen, J. A. Piper, J. P. Robinson and D. Jin, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 32–36 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haase and H. Schäfer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5808–5829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qin, J. Xu, Y. Wu and X. Liu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 29–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, R. Deng, Q. Gu, L. Ni, U. Huynh, J. Zhang, Z. Yi, B. Zhao, H. Tamura, A. Pershin, H. Xu, Z. Huang, S. Ahmad, M. Abdi-Jalebi, A. Sadhanala, M. L. Tang, A. Bakulin, D. Beljonne, X. Liu and A. Rao, Nature, 2020, 587, 594–599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wen, J. Zhou, K. Zheng, A. Bednarkiewicz, X. Liu and D. Jin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2415 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Bloembergen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1959, 2, 84–85 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chivian, W. E. Case and D. D. Eden, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1979, 35, 124–125 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, R. Deng, J. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Han, H. Zhu, X. Chen and X. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 968–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou, J. Huang, L. Yan, X. Liu, N. Song, L. Tao and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806308 Search PubMed .
M. R. Brown, H. Thomas, J. M. Williams, R. J. Woodward and W. A. Shand, J. Chem. Phys., 1969, 51, 3321–3327 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhou, L. Yan, L. Tao, N. Song, M. Wu, T. Wang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700667 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhou, Q. Li, L. Yan and Q. Zhang, J. Rare Earths, 2020, 38, 474–482 CrossRef .
B. Zhou, L. Yan, J. Huang, X. Liu, L. Tao and Q. Zhang, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 760–766 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, E. Z. Xu, Y. Liu, A. Teitelboim, K. Yao, A. Fernandez-Bravo, A. M. Kotulska, S. H. Nam, Y. D. Suh, A. Bednarkiewicz, B. E. Cohen, E. M. Chan and P. J. Schuck, Nature, 2021, 589, 230–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dong, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1608–1634 RSC .
H. Deng, S. Yang, S. Xiao, H.-M. Gong and Q.-Q. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2032–2040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lahoz, I. R. Martín and D. Alonso, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 045115 CrossRef .
F. Wang, Y. Han, C. S. Lim, Y. Lu, J. Wang, J. Xu, H. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Hong and X. Liu, Nature, 2010, 463, 1061–1065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, X. Xie, B. Huang, L. Liang, S. Han, Z. Yi, Y. Wang, Y. Li, D. Fan, L. Huang and X. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7605–7609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pei, Y. Chen, C. Sun, Y. Fan, Y. Yang, X. Liu, L. Lu, M. Zhao, H. Zhang, D. Zhao, X. Liu and F. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 1011–1018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ou, X. Qin, B. Huang, J. Zan, Q. Wu, Z. Hong, L. Xie, H. Bian, Z. Yi, X. Chen, Y. Wu, X. Song, J. Li, Q. Chen, H. Yang and X. Liu, Nature, 2021, 590, 410–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zuo, D. Sun, L. Tu, Y. Wu, Y. Cao, B. Xue, Y. Zhang, Y. Chang, X. Liu, X. Kong, W. J. Buma, E. J. Meijer and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3054–3058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, Z. Li, Q. Li, J. Yuan, L. Tu, L. Ning and H. Zhang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2021, 10, 105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liang, D. B. L. Teh, N.-D. Dinh, W. Chen, Q. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Chowdhury, A. Yamanaka, T. C. Sum, C.-H. Chen, N. V. Thakor, A. H. All and X. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1391 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ji, W. Xu, N. Ding, H. Yang, H. Song, Q. Liu, H. Ågren, J. Widengren and H. Liu, Light: Sci. Appl., 2020, 9, 184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, J. Li, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, Z. Yu, B. Ling, X. Yang and Y. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5236–5242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, J. Xu, X. Qin, J. Xu and X. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Fan, R. Wang, X. Li, L. Fan and F. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12824–12829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Z.-H. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Fan and F. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7041–7045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, S. Wen, J. Liao, C. Clarke, S. A. Tawfik, W. Ren, C. Mi, F. Wang and D. Jin, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 154–158 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shan, F. Wang, D. Wang, S. Wen, C. Chen, X. Di, P. Nie, J. Liao, Y. Liu, L. Ding, P. J. Reece and D. Jin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 531–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Li, Z. Yi, R. Deng, L. Liang, X. Xie, D. T. B. Loong, S. Song, D. Fan, A. H. All, H. Zhang, L. Huang and X. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 899 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, M. J. Y. Ang, M. Sun, B. Huang and X. Liu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2019, 52, 383002 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Xu, H. Wang, Y. Liu, Q. Ruan, Y. Wu, X. Liu and J. K. W. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807900 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Dong, L. D. Sun, W. Feng, Y. Gu, F. Li and C. H. Yan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3289–3297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Z. Guo, T. Zhao, Y. Lu, L. Zhou, D. Zhao and F. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2464–2469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, L. Liu and F. Zhang, Nano Today, 2019, 25, 68–84 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wen, J. Zhou, P. J. Schuck, Y. D. Suh, T. W. Schmidt and D. Jin, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 828–838 CrossRef CAS .
W. Park, D. Lu and S. Ahn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2940–2962 RSC .
W. Xu, X. Chen and H. Song, Nano Today, 2017, 17, 54–78 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen and F. Wang, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 427–439 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sujan, C. Kathrine and W. Nianqiang, Nanophotonics, 2019, 8, 2065–2089 Search PubMed .
D. Wang, J. Guan, J. Hu, M. R. Bourgeois and T. W. Odom, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2997–3007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kwon, G. Y. Lee, K. Jung, H. S. Jang, J.-S. Park, H. Ju, I. K. Han and H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7899–7909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. P. Zhou, L. Y. Liao, W. Feng, W. Sun, Z. X. Li, C. H. Xu, C. J. Fang, L. D. Sun, Y. W. Zhang and C. H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 633–637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, L. Sudheendra, J. Zhao, J. Fu, D. Jin, I. M. Kennedy and E. M. Goldys, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 325604 CrossRef PubMed .
J. He, W. Zheng, F. Ligmajer, C.-F. Chan, Z. Bao, K.-L. Wong, X. Chen, J. Hao, J. Dai, S.-F. Yu and D. Y. Lei, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e16217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yuan, Y. H. Lee, M. K. Gnanasammandhan, Z. Guan, Y. Zhang and Q.-H. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5132–5137 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Li, I. A. Ivanov, Y. Qu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2865–2868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, B. Chen, W. Yu, Y. Zhu, T. Liu, S. Xu, X. Min, X. Bai and H. Song, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 13525–13532 RSC .
A. Das, C. Mao, S. Cho, K. Kim and W. Park, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4828 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, Z. Dong, M. Asbahi, Y. Wu, H. Wang, L. Liang, R. J. H. Ng, H. Liu, R. A. L. Vallée, J. K. W. Yang and X. Liu, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 3044–3051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, J. Xu, E. T. Poh, L. Liang, H. Liu, J. K. W. Yang, C.-W. Qiu, R. A. L. Vallée and X. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 1110–1115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. El Halawany, S. He, H. Hodaei, A. Bakry, M. A. N. Razvi, A. Alshahrie, N. J. J. Johnson, D. N. Christodoulides, A. Almutairi and M. Khajavikhan, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 13999–14009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, S. Guo, D. Liu, J. He, J. Zhou, K. Zhang, Y. Wei, Y. Pan, C. Gao, Z. Yuan, D. Lei, X. Xie and L. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901242 CrossRef .
S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2486–2489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2059–2062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Chu, O. Voskoboynikov and C. P. Lee, Microelectron. J., 2005, 36, 282–284 CrossRef .
S. Wu, H. Xia, J. Xu, X. Sun and X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803362 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yin, Y. Zhu, W. Xu, J. Wang, S. Xu, B. Dong, L. Xu, S. Zhang and H. Song, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3781–3783 RSC .
Z. Yin, H. Li, W. Xu, S. Cui, D. Zhou, X. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Qin and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2518–2525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, Z. Meng, S. Wu, Y. Wu and S. Zhang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 616–623 RSC .
N. Aravindakshan, E. Eftekhari, S. H. Tan, X. Li, J. St John, N. T. Nguyen, H. Zhao, D. Zhao and Q. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1901537 CrossRef CAS .
C. Würth, P. Manley, R. Voigt, D. Ahiboz, C. Becker and U. Resch-Genger, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 6682–6689 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liu, H. Liu, D. Li, W. Qiao, G. Chen and H. Ågren, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 14070–14078 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Liu, X. Yang, H. Lei, Y. Zhang and B. Li, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10672–10680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Levy, C. A. Tajon, T. S. Bischof, J. Iafrati, A. Fernandez-Bravo, D. J. Garfield, M. Chamanzar, M. M. Maharbiz, V. S. Sohal, P. J. Schuck, B. E. Cohen and E. M. Chan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8423–8433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fernandez-Bravo, K. Yao, E. S. Barnard, N. J. Borys, E. S. Levy, B. Tian, C. A. Tajon, L. Moretti, M. V. Altoe, S. Aloni, K. Beketayev, F. Scotognella, B. E. Cohen, E. M. Chan and P. J. Schuck, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 572–577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Meijerink and F. T. Rabouw, Nature, 2021, 589, 204–205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Jin, W. Kong, T. Sun, W. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Fan, S. F. Yu and F. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. Chen, X. Xie, Y. Li, D. Chen, Z. Chao, C. Liu, H. Ma, Y. Liu and H. Ju, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12117–12122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Siefe, R. D. Mehlenbacher, C. S. Peng, Y. Zhang, S. Fischer, A. Lay, C. A. McLellan, A. P. Alivisatos, S. Chu and J. A. Dionne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16997–17005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou, B. Tang, C. Zhang, C. Qin, Z. Gu, Y. Ma, T. Zhai and J. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, Y. Li, W. L. Ho, Q. Zhu, X. Chen, L. Jin, H. Zhu, B. Huang, J. Lin, B. E. Little, S. T. Chu and F. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1811 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Shao, G. Zhang, L. Ouyang, Y. Hu, Y. Dong and J. Jiang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12132–12141 RSC .
L. Lei, J. Xia, Y. Cheng, Y. Wang, G. Bai, H. Xia and S. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11587–11592 RSC .
Y. Liu, J. Vanacken, X. Chen, J. Han, Z. Zhong, Z. Xia, B. Chen, H. Wu, Z. Jin, J.-Y. Ge, J. Huang, L. Meng, X. Duan, Y. Huang, Q. Peng, V. V. Moshchalkov and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806341 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Wisser, M. Chea, Y. Lin, D. M. Wu, W. L. Mao, A. Salleo and J. A. Dionne, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1891–1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ying, A. Xw, A. Hy, B. Yl and Y. A. J. J. O. A. Xi, Compounds, 2019, 770, 214–221 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, L. Yang, J. Zhao, B. Liu, M.-Y. Han and Z. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11531–11535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, L. Yan, S. Liu, N. Song, Q. Zhang and B. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009796 CrossRef CAS .
H.-X. Mai, Y.-W. Zhang, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13721–13729 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, B. Zhou, N. Song, X. Liu, J. Huang, T. Wang, L. Tao and Q. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 17949–17957 RSC .
S. Liu, J. Huang, L. Yan, N. Song, P. Zhang, J. He and B. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 4007–4017 RSC .
V. Mahalingam, F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, A. Speghini and J. A. Capobianco, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4025–4028 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, F. Wang, C. Wang, Z. Liu and X. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10369–10372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Deng, L. Xu, X. Guo, X. Wu, Y. Liu, Z. Zhu, Q. Li, Q. Zhan, C. Li and Z. Quan, Small, 2020, 16, 2002066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, Y. Fan, L. Liu, X. Li, B. Zhao, R. Wang, P. Wang, A. M. El-Toni and F. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700680 CrossRef .
B. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Xiao, X. Chen, Y. Li, M. Li, X. Qiao, X. Fan and F. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4916–4921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, D. Jin, E. P. Schartner, Y. Lu, Y. Liu, A. V. Zvyagin, L. Zhang, J. M. Dawes, P. Xi, J. A. Piper, E. M. Goldys and T. M. Monro, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 729–734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, H. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Pan, L. Huang, F. Song and W. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1320 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zheng, S. Han, X. Zeng, Y. Wu, S. Song, H. Zhang and X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801726 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Mei, A. Bansal, M. K. G. Jayakumar, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Huang, D. Yu, C. J. A. Ramachandra, D. J. Hausenloy, T. W. Soong and Y. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4416 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wu, L. Yan, T. Wang, B. Zhou and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1804160 CrossRef .
X. Liu, H. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Si, H. Zhang, X. Li, Z. Zhang, B. Yan, S. Jiang, F. Wang, S. Weng, W. Xu, D. Zhao, J. Zhang and F. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tang, X. Zhu, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Q. Mei, J. Zhang, M. Wu, J. Liu and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 10405–10418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lei, X. Ling, Q. Mei, S. Fu, J. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, N. Gao, R. Deng, Q. Sun, Q.-H. Xu and X. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12608–12611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liang, X. Qin, K. Zheng and X. Liu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 228–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Fan, P. Pei, C. Sun, L. Lu and F. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10153–10157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cheng, H. Ge, Y. Wei, K. Zhang, W. Su, J. Zhou, L. Yin, Q. Zhan, S. Jing and L. Huang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10992–10999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Deng and X. Liu, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 10–12 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fischer, N. D. Bronstein, J. K. Swabeck, E. M. Chan and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7241–7247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gu, Z. Guo, W. Yuan, M. Kong, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Gao, W. Feng, F. Wang, J. Zhou, D. Jin and F. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 525–531 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. Tan, X. Wang, F. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Zhao, C. Yang and G. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2023–2030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, P. Wang, Y. Lu, R. Wang, L. Zhou, X. Zheng, X. Li, J. A. Piper and F. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 941–946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tan, F. Li, X. Wang, R. Fan and G. Chen, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6532–6538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, X. Qin, Z. An, Y. Zhu, L. Liang, Y. Han, W. Huang and X. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Maiman, Nature, 1960, 187, 493–494 CrossRef .
T. Danger, J. Koetke, R. Brede, E. Heumann, G. Huber and B. H. T. Chai, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 76, 1413–1422 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, R. K. Jain and M. Hossein-Zadeh, Opt. Lett., 2014, 39, 4458–4461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, X. Chen, L. M. Jin, Q. J. Wang, F. Wang and S. F. Yu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11420–11426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, W. Zhang, D. Yang, W. Lu, J. Qiu and S. F. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8045–8050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Haider, H.-I. Lin, K. Yadav, K.-C. Shen, Y.-M. Liao, H.-W. Hu, P. K. Roy, K. P. Bera, K.-H. Lin, H.-M. Lee, Y.-T. Chen, F.-R. Chen and Y.-F. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11847–11859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Jin, X. Chen, C. K. Siu, F. Wang and S. F. Yu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 843–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jin, Y. Wu, Y. Wang, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Chen, W. Zhang, S. Xiao and Q. Song, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807079 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, A. Teitelboim, A. Fernandez-Bravo, K. Yao, M. V. P. Altoe, S. Aloni, C. Zhang, B. E. Cohen, P. J. Schuck and E. M. Chan, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1508–1519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-S. Moon, T. K. Lee, W. C. Jeon, S. K. Kwak, Y.-J. Kim and D.-H. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fernandez-Bravo, D. Wang, E. S. Barnard, A. Teitelboim, C. Tajon, J. Guan, G. C. Schatz, B. E. Cohen, E. M. Chan, P. J. Schuck and T. W. Odom, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1172–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Downing, L. Hesselink, J. Ralston and R. Macfarlane, Science, 1996, 273, 1185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gu, X. Li and Y. Cao, Light: Sci. Appl., 2014, 3, e177 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gu, Q. Zhang and S. Lamon, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16070 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. M. Chon, P. Zijlstra, M. Gu, J. van Embden and P. Mulvaney, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5514–5516 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kawata, H. Ishitobi and S. Kawata, Opt. Lett., 1998, 23, 756–758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Boyer, C.-J. Carling, B. D. Gates and N. R. Branda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15766–15772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Liu, Science, 2021, 371, 901 CrossRef .
E. L. Prime and D. H. Solomon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3726–3736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Pfeuffer, J. Caldwell, J. T. Shelley, S. J. Ray and G. M. Hieftje, Analyst, 2014, 139, 4505–4511 RSC .
W. Ren, G. Lin, C. Clarke, J. Zhou and D. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1901430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. You, M. Lin, S. Wang, X. Wang, G. Zhang, Y. Hong, Y. Dong, G. Jin and F. Xu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10096–10104 RSC .
T. Sun, B. Xu, B. Chen, X. Chen, M. Li, P. Shi and F. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2701–2705 RSC .
J. Zuo, Q. Li, B. Xue, C. Li, Y. Chang, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Tu, H. Zhang and X. Kong, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7941–7946 RSC .
M. Ding, B. Dong, Y. Lu, X. Yang, Y. Yuan, W. Bai, S. Wu, Z. Ji, C. Lu, K. Zhang and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, L. Yan, Q. Li, J. Huang, L. Tao and B. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125451 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jia, D. Li, D. Zhang, Y. Dong, S. Ma, M. Zhou, W. Di and W. Qin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 4402–4409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Huang, S. Liu, J. Huang, H. Liu, Z. Hu, L. Tao and B. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 4812–4820 RSC .
S. He, J. Song, J. Qu and Z. Cheng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4258–4278 RSC .
Kenry, Y. Duan and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802394 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Ortgies, M. Tan, E. C. Ximendes, B. del Rosal, J. Hu, L. Xu, X. Wang, E. Martín Rodríguez, C. Jacinto, N. Fernandez, G. Chen and D. Jaque, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4362–4368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Hell and J. Wichmann, Opt. Lett., 1994, 19, 780–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Rust, M. Bates and X. Zhuang, Nat. Methods, 2006, 3, 793–796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. L. Gustafsson, J. Microsc., 2000, 198, 82–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Resch-Genger, M. Grabolle, S. Cavaliere-Jaricot, R. Nitschke and T. Nann, Nat. Methods, 2008, 5, 763–775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hanne, H. J. Falk, F. Görlitz, P. Hoyer, J. Engelhardt, S. J. Sahl and S. W. Hell, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kolesov, R. Reuter, K. Xia, R. Stöhr, A. Zappe and J. Wrachtrup, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 153413 CrossRef .
Q. Zhan, H. Liu, B. Wang, Q. Wu, R. Pu, C. Zhou, B. Huang, X. Peng, H. Ågren and S. He, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1058 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, F. Wang, S. Wen, Q. P. Su, M. C. L. Wu, Y. Liu, B. Wang, D. Li, X. Shan, M. Kianinia, I. Aharonovich, M. Toth, S. P. Jackson, P. Xi and D. Jin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3290 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Denkova, M. Ploschner, M. Das, L. M. Parker, X. Zheng, Y. Lu, A. Orth, N. H. Packer and J. A. Piper, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3695 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, C. Chen, X. Di, J. Liao, S. Wen, Q. P. Su, X. Shan, Z.-Q. Xu, L. A. Ju, C. Mi, F. Wang and D. Jin, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 4775–4781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, B. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Liao, X. Shan, F. Wang and D. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, F. Wang, H. Lu, G. Fang, S. Wen, C. Chen, X. Shan, X. Xu, L. Zhang, M. Stenzel and D. Jin, Small, 2020, 16, 1905572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wen, Y. Liu, F. Wang, G. Lin, J. Zhou, B. Shi, Y. D. Suh and D. Jin, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 6047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Welsher, Z. Liu, S. P. Sherlock, J. T. Robinson, Z. Chen, D. Daranciang and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 773–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, A. Gulzar, P. Yang, H. Bi, D. Yang, S. Gai, F. He, J. Lin, B. Xing and D. Jin, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 381, 104–134 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Naczynski, M. C. Tan, M. Zevon, B. Wall, J. Kohl, A. Kulesa, S. Chen, C. M. Roth, R. E. Riman and P. V. Moghe, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, D. Wang, A. Kuzmin, A. Pliss, W. Shao, J. Xia, J. Qu and P. N. Prasad, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701142 CrossRef .
W. Shao, G. Chen, A. Kuzmin, H. L. Kutscher, A. Pliss, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy and P. N. Prasad, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16192–16195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Deng, X. Li, Z. Xue, M. Jiang, Y. Li, S. Zeng and H. Liu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9393–9400 RSC .
R. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhou and F. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12086–12090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhong, Z. Ma, S. Zhu, J. Yue, M. Zhang, A. L. Antaris, J. Yuan, R. Cui, H. Wan, Y. Zhou, W. Wang, N. F. Huang, J. Luo, Z. Hu and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 737 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Fan, A. M. El-Toni, M. S. Alhoshan, D. Li and F. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2418–2427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, S. Wang, B. Zhao, P. Pei, Y. Fan, X. Li and F. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7518–7522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cao, N. Wu, W. Yuan, Y. Gu, J. Ke, W. Feng and F. Li, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 8248–8254 RSC .
H. Li, X. Wang, X. Li, S. Zeng and G. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3365–3375 CrossRef CAS .
I. L. Medintz, H. T. Uyeda, E. R. Goldman and H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 435–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, J. Lu, J. Zhao, J. Cusido, F. M. Raymo, J. Yuan, S. Yang, R. C. Leif, Y. Huo, J. A. Piper, J. Paul Robinson, E. M. Goldys and D. Jin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, A. I. Chizhik, S. Chu and D. Jin, Nature, 2020, 579, 41–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dong, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, Nano Today, 2020, 35, 100956 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Bae, Y. I. Park, S. H. Nam, J. H. Kim, K. Lee, H. M. Kim, B. Yoo, J. S. Choi, K. T. Lee, T. Hyeon and Y. D. Suh, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 9080–9086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bhatia, S. Arumugam, M. Nasilowski, H. Joshi, C. Wunder, V. Chambon, V. Prakash, C. Grazon, B. Nadal, P. K. Maiti, L. Johannes, B. Dubertret and Y. Krishnan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1112–1119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Denk, J. H. Strickler and W. W. Webb, Science, 1990, 248, 73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Horton, K. Wang, D. Kobat, C. G. Clark, F. W. Wise, C. B. Schaffer and C. Xu, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 205–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Gargas, E. M. Chan, A. D. Ostrowski, S. Aloni, M. V. P. Altoe, E. S. Barnard, B. Sanii, J. J. Urban, D. J. Milliron, B. E. Cohen and P. J. Schuck, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 300–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tian, A. Fernandez-Bravo, H. Najafiaghdam, N. A. Torquato, M. V. P. Altoe, A. Teitelboim, C. A. Tajon, Y. Tian, N. J. Borys, E. S. Barnard, M. Anwar, E. M. Chan, P. J. Schuck and B. E. Cohen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3082 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Pichaandi, J.-C. Boyer, K. R. Delaney and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19054–19064 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. S. Peng, T. Yang, L.-M. Joubert and S. Chu, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 548–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Fisher, W. S. Wessels, A. B. Dietz and F. G. Prendergast, Opt. Commun., 2008, 281, 1901–1908 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mahfoud, A. T. Dijksman, C. Javaux, P. Bassoul, A.-L. Baudrion, J. Plain, B. Dubertret and M. Kociak, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4090–4094 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Prigozhin, P. C. Maurer, A. M. Courtis, N. Liu, M. D. Wisser, C. Siefe, B. Tian, E. Chan, G. Song, S. Fischer, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, E. S. Barnard, L.-M. Joubert, J. Rao, A. P. Alivisatos, R. M. Macfarlane, B. E. Cohen, Y. Cui, J. A. Dionne and S. Chu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 420–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Nam, Y. M. Bae, Y. I. Park, J. H. Kim, H. M. Kim, J. S. Choi, K. T. Lee, T. Hyeon and Y. D. Suh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6093–6097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Jo, Y. H. Song, J. Park, E. J. Jo, Y. Goh, K. Shin, M. G. Kim and K. T. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19397–19402 RSC .
X. Zeng, S. Chen, A. Weitemier, S. Han, A. Blasiak, A. Prasad, K. Zheng, Z. Yi, B. Luo, I.-H. Yang, N. Thakor, C. Chai, K.-L. Lim, T. J. McHugh, A. H. All and X. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9262–9268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, S. Wen, H. He, B. Wang, Z. Zhou, O. Shimoni and D. Jin, Light: Sci. Appl., 2018, 7, 18007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. E. Moerner and D. P. Fromm, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2003, 74, 3597–3619 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jin, P. Xi, B. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Enderlein and A. M. van Oijen, Nat. Methods, 2018, 15, 415–423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Balzarotti, Y. Eilers, K. C. Gwosch, A. H. Gynnå, V. Westphal, F. D. Stefani, J. Elf and S. W. Hell, Science, 2017, 355, 606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishizuka, M. Kakuda, R. Araki and H. Yawo, Neurosci. Res., 2006, 54, 85–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Jacques, Phys. Med. Biol., 2013, 58, R37–R61 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, V. Gradinaru, A. R. Adamantidis, R. Durand, R. D. Airan, L. de Lecea and K. Deisseroth, Nat. Protoc., 2010, 5, 439–456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. All, X. Zeng, D. B. L. Teh, Z. Yi, A. Prasad, T. Ishizuka, N. Thakor, Y. Hiromu and X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hososhima, H. Yuasa, T. Ishizuka, M. R. Hoque, T. Yamashita, A. Yamanaka, E. Sugano, H. Tomita and H. Yawo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shah, J. J. Liu, N. Pasquale, J. Lai, H. McGowan, Z. P. Pang and K. B. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16571–16577 RSC .
A. Bansal, H. Liu, M. K. Jayakumar, S. Andersson-Engels and Y. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 1732–1743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ao, K. Zeng, B. Yu, Y. Miao, W. Hung, Z. Yu, Y. Xue, T. T. Y. Tan, T. Xu, M. Zhen, X. Yang, Y. Zhang and S. Gao, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3373–3386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ai, L. Lyu, Y. Zhang, Y. Tang, J. Mu, F. Liu, Y. Zhou, Z. Zuo, G. Liu and B. Xing, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3031–3035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, A. Z. Weitemier, X. Zeng, L. He, X. Wang, Y. Tao, A. J. Y. Huang, Y. Hashimotodani, M. Kano, H. Iwasaki, L. K. Parajuli, S. Okabe, D. B. L. Teh, A. H. All, I. Tsutsui-Kimura, K. F. Tanaka, X. Liu and T. J. McHugh, Science, 2018, 359, 679–684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, R. Zhang, C. Shang, Y. Zhang, Y. Feng, L. Pan, B. Xu, T. Hyeon, W. Bu, J. Shi and J. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7858–7867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, J. Bao, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Zhou, C. Wan, L. Huang, Y. Zhao, G. Han and T. Xue, Cell, 2019, 177, 243–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, L. Pan, C. Shang, B. Lu, R. Wu, Y. Feng, W. Chen, R. Zhang, J. Bu, Z. Xiong, W. Bu, J. Du and J. Shi, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaax9757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Rabie, Y. Zhang, N. Pasquale, M. J. Lagos, P. E. Batson and K.-B. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806991 CrossRef PubMed .
S. W. Allison and G. T. Gillies, Rev. Sci.
Instrum., 1997, 68, 2615–2650 CrossRef CAS .

          J.-C. G. Bünzli, in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, ed. J.-C. G. Bünzli and V. K. Pecharsky, Elsevier,  2016, vol. 50, pp. 141–176 Search PubMed .
C. D. S. Brites, S. Balabhadra and L. D. Carlos, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801239 CrossRef .
M. D. Dramićanin, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 128, 040902 CrossRef .
M. Suta and A. Meijerink, Adv. Theory Simul., 2020, 3, 2000176 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jaque and F. Vetrone, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4301–4326 RSC .
C. D. S. Brites, P. P. Lima, N. J. O. Silva, A. Millán, V. S. Amaral, F. Palacio and L. D. Carlos, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4799–4829 RSC .
B. del Rosal, E. Ximendes, U. Rocha and D. Jaque, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600508 CrossRef .
J. C. Martins, A. R. N. Bastos, R. A. S. Ferreira, X. Wang, G. Chen and L. D. Carlos, Adv. Photonics Res., 2021, 2, 2000169 CrossRef .
L. Labrador-Páez, M. Pedroni, A. Speghini, J. García-Solé, P. Haro-González and D. Jaque, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22319–22328 RSC .
H. Fu, C. Liu, P. Peng, F. Jiang, Y. Liu and M. Hong, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wawrzynczyk, A. Bednarkiewicz, M. Nyk, W. Strek and M. Samoc, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6959–6961 RSC .
S. Balabhadra, M. L. Debasu, C. D. S. Brites, L. A. O. Nunes, O. L. Malta, J. Rocha, M. Bettinelli and L. D. Carlos, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17261–17267 RSC .
L. Marciniak, A. Pilch, S. Arabasz, D. Jin and A. Bednarkiewicz, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8288–8297 RSC .
P. Huang, W. Zheng, D. Tu, X. Shang, M. Zhang, R. Li, J. Xu, Y. Liu and X. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802282 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Marciniak, W. Piotrowski, M. Szalkowski, V. Kinzhybalo, M. Drozd, M. Dramicanin and A. Bednarkiewicz, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131941 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, X. Xie, Q. Huang, C. Gao, Y. Wang, L. Wang, B. Yang, H. Su, L. Huang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705256 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Piotrowski, K. Trejgis, K. Maciejewska, K. Ledwa, B. Fond and L. Marciniak, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 44039–44048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yu, J. Xu, X. Shang, W. Zheng, P. Huang, R. Li, D. Tu and X. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mi, J. Zhou, F. Wang, G. Lin and D. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 9480–9487 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, H. Li, D. Zhang, Q. Zhang, A. Meijerink and M. Suta, Light: Sci. Appl., 2021, 10, 236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Geitenbeek, P. T. Prins, W. Albrecht, A. van Blaaderen, B. M. Weckhuysen and A. Meijerink, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3503–3510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Trejgis, A. Bednarkiewicz and L. Marciniak, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4667–4675 RSC .
T. P. van Swieten, D. Yu, T. Yu, S. J. W. Vonk, M. Suta, Q. Zhang, A. Meijerink and F. T. Rabouw, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2001518 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. van Swieten, T. van Omme, D. J. van den Heuvel, S. J. W. Vonk, R. G. Spruit, F. Meirer, H. H. P. Garza, B. M. Weckhuysen, A. Meijerink, F. T. Rabouw and R. G. Geitenbeek, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 4208–4215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, A. Zamarrón, A. Juarranz de la Fuente, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, L. Martinez Maestro, E. Martín Rodriguez, D. Jaque, J. García Solé and J. A. Capobianco, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3254–3258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bednarkiewicz, L. Marciniak, L. D. Carlos and D. Jaque, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 14405–14421 RSC .
A. Bednarkiewicz, J. Drabik, K. Trejgis, D. Jaque, E. Ximendes and L. Marciniak, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2021, 8, 011317 CAS .
Z. Gong, T. Wu, X. Chen, J. Guo, Y. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1469–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Di, D. Wang, J. Zhou, L. Zhang, M. H. Stenzel, Q. P. Su and D. Jin, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1651–1658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Kaczmarek, M. Suta, H. Rijckaert, A. Abalymov, I. Van Driessche, A. G. Skirtach, A. Meijerink and P. Van Der Voort, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003101 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qiu, Q. Zhou, X. Zhu, Z. Wu, W. Feng and F. Li, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, X. Zou, Q. Su, W. Yuan, C. Cao, Q. Wang, X. Zhu, W. Feng and F. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2698 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Jaque, L. Martínez Maestro, B. del Rosal, P. Haro-Gonzalez, A. Benayas, J. L. Plaza, E. Martín Rodríguez and J. García Solé, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9494–9530 RSC .
E. Carrasco, B. del Rosal, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, Á. J. de la Fuente, P. H. Gonzalez, U. Rocha, K. U. Kumar, C. Jacinto, J. G. Solé and D. Jaque, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 615–626 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Ximendes, W. Q. Santos, U. Rocha, U. K. Kagola, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, N. Fernández, A. D. S. Gouveia-Neto, D. Bravo, A. M. Domingo, B. del Rosal, C. D. S. Brites, L. D. Carlos, D. Jaque and C. Jacinto, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1695–1703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Ximendes, U. Rocha, T. O. Sales, N. Fernández, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, I. R. Martín, C. Jacinto and D. Jaque, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702249 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, W. Feng, J. Chang, Y.-W. Tan, J. Li, M. Chen, Y. Sun and F. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, J. Li, X. Qiu, Y. Liu, W. Feng and F. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2176 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Rodríguez-Sevilla, Y. Zhang, P. Haro-González, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, F. Jaque, J. G. Solé, X. Liu and D. Jaque, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2421–2426 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shen, J. Lifante, N. Fernández, D. Jaque and E. Ximendes, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4122–4133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Maturi, C. D. S. Brites, E. C. Ximendes, C. Mills, B. Olsen, D. Jaque, S. J. L. Ribeiro and L. D. Carlos, Laser Photonics Rev., 2021, 15, 2100301 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lifante, Y. Shen, I. Zabala Gutierrez, I. Rubia-Rodríguez, D. Ortega, N. Fernandez, S. Melle, M. Granado, J. Rubio-Retama, D. Jaque and E. Ximendes, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2003838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tan, F. Li, N. Cao, H. Li, X. Wang, C. Zhang, D. Jaque and G. Chen, Small, 2020, 16, 2004118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maciejewska, A. Bednarkiewicz and L. Marciniak, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 4918–4925 RSC .
M. E. Raab, S. L. Maurizio, J. A. Capobianco and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2021, 125, 13132–13136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, S. Shikha, J. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Mei and Y. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 548–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, Q. Qi, L. Zhang, R. Zeng, L. Su and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 4149–4156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, L. Zhang, R. Zeng, L. Su and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 9568–9575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, A. Samanta, X. Zeng, S. Han, L. Wang, D. Su, D. T. B. Loong, N.-Y. Kang, S.-J. Park, A. H. All, W. Jiang, L. Yuan, X. Liu and Y.-T. Chang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4165–4169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, L. Wang, X. Yuan, Y. Gong, H. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and W. Tan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 695–699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, C. Li, D. Li, X. Liu, Z. Mu, W. Gao, J. Qiu and R. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Idris, M. K. Gnanasammandhan, J. Zhang, P. C. Ho, R. Mahendran and Y. Zhang, Nat. Med., 2012, 18, 1580–1585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, R. Shi, G. Chen, S. Dong, P. Yang, Z. Zhang, N. Niu, S. Gai, F. He, Y. Fu and J. Lin, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 9613–9625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liang, Y. Liu and X.-Z. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3958–3960 RSC .
J. de Wild, J. K. Rath, A. Meijerink, W. G. J. H. M. van Sark and R. E. I. Schropp, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2395–2398 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, D. Liu, G. Pan, X. Chen, D. Li, W. Xu, X. Bai and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704149 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhou, R. Sun, W. Xu, N. Ding, D. Li, X. Chen, G. Pan, X. Bai and H. Song, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6904–6913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, L. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Liu and Y. Xiong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3291–3296 CrossRef CAS .
X. Song, S. Li, H. Guo, W. You, X. Shang, R. Li, D. Tu, W. Zheng, Z. Chen, H. Yang and X. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18981–18986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhao, B. Li, P. Wang, L. Lu, Z. Zhang, L. Liu, S. Wang, D. Li, R. Wang and F. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804982 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Peng, N. Wu, L. Ye, F. Jiang, W. Feng, F. Li, Y. Liu and M. Hong, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 16672–16680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zheng, P. Huang, Z. Gong, D. Tu, J. Xu, Q. Zou, R. Li, W. You, J.-C. G. Bünzli and X. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3462 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lin, C. Yang, P. Huang, S. Wang, M. Liu, N. Jiang and D. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 395, 125214 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, M. Zhou, Y. Wang and P. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Yang, Y. Sun, J. Song, N. G. Rudawski, X. Chen and W. Tan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7407–7413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. He, Q. Ni, J. Mu, W. Fan, L. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Li, W. Tang, Y. Liu, Y. Cheng, L. Tang, Z. Yang, Y. Liu, J. Zou, W. Yang, O. Jacobson, F. Zhang, P. Huang and X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6822–6832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, A. Samanta, X. Xie, L. Huang, J. Peng, S. J. Park, D. B. L. Teh, Y. Choi, Y.-T. Chang, A. H. All, Y. Yang, B. Xing and X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700244 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Qu, X. Wu, S. Li, M. Sun, L. Xu, H. Kuang and C. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mao, F. Hu, Z. Yi, Kenry, S. Xu, S. Yan, Z. Luo, W. Wu, Z. Wang, D. Kong, X. Liu and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb2712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Di, B. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Gu, Y. Zhao and L. Li, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba9381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fang, M. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1903351 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Liu and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2074–2101 RSC .
Y. Wu, J. Xu and X. Liu, J. Rare Earths, 2020, 38, 546–551 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Elbert, W. Zygmunt, T. Vo, C. M. Vara, D. J. Rosen, N. M. Krook, S. C. Glotzer and C. B. Murray, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabf9402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Cherniukh, G. Rainò, T. Stöferle, M. Burian, A. Travesset, D. Naumenko, H. Amenitsch, R. Erni, R. F. Mahrt, M. I. Bodnarchuk and M. V. Kovalenko, Nature, 2021, 593, 535–542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhuang, D. Chen, W. Chen, W. Zhang, X. Su, R. Deng, Z. An, H. Chen and R.-J. Xie, Light: Sci. Appl., 2021, 10, 132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liang, Z. Feng, Q. Zhang, T. D. Cong, Y. Wang, X. Qin, Z. Yi, M. J. Y. Ang, L. Zhou, H. Feng, B. Xing, M. Gu, X. Li and X. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 975–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Liu, S. Wang, J. Tao, Y. Huang, W. Wu, Y. Li, K. Zhou, X. Wei, S. Chen, X. Li, X. Xu, L. Cardon, Z. Qian and M. Gou, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba7406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Jinshu Huang
	Jinshu Huang received his BE degree from Northwestern Polytechnical University in 2017 and is currently a PhD candidate at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, under the supervision of Prof. Bo Zhou. He is currently working on the upconversion properties of lanthanide-doped nanomaterials.

Bo Zhou
	Prof. Bo Zhou earned his PhD degree in optics from the City University of Hong Kong in 2011 and then worked as a postdoctoral researcher at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University and as a scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR, Singapore. In 2016, he joined the faculty of South China University of Technology as a full professor. He has authored and co-authored over 60 peer-reviewed papers in journals including Nature Photonics, Nature Nanotechnology, and Advanced Materials. His research interests focus on upconversion mechanisms, lanthanide-based luminescent materials, and nanophotonics.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of a single UCNP nanoparticle featuring anti-Stokes emission. λex and λem represent the excitation wavelength and emission wavelength, respectively. (b) Partial energy level diagrams of trivalent lanthanide ions with typical energy levels (marked in blue color) contributing to the upconversion emissions. (c) Typical upconversion emission wavelengths of lanthanide ions covering a large spectral range from UV to Vis and NIR. (d) The upconversion mechanisms involved in different upconversion systems. ESA, PA, ETU, EMU, and IET represent the excited state absorption, photon avalanche, energy transfer upconversion, energy migration upconversion and interfacial energy transfer, respectively. S, A, L, M stand for sensitizer, activator, the ladder-like ion and migratory ion, respectively. (c) Reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2015. (d) Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic showing the use of SPR to enhance upconversion emission by strengthening electromagnetic local density. (b and c) Schematic of upconversion luminescence of pixel arrays with different diameters of periodical Al nanodisks. (d) Schematic showing the use of the surface plasmon photonic crystal structure to combine the UCNPs. (e) Upconversion lifetimes of NaYF4:Yb/Er film, NaYF4/AuNRs hybrids, NaYF4/OPCs hybrids, and NaYF4/AuNRs/OPCs hybrids. AuNRs and OPCs represent gold nanorods and opal photonics crystals, respectively. (f) Enhancement factor versus excitation power density for NaYF4/AuNRs/OPCs hybrids. (g) Schematic of the use of superlens to enhance upconversion emission by concentrating the wavefront of optical fields. (h) Photographic image of the synthesized microlens by the microfluidic technique. The inset shows LED beams converging into a small focal spot through the microlens. (i) The enhancement factor for PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) films containing NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4 and NaGdF4:Yb/Tm@NaGdF4:Eu nanoparticles. (j) Schematic of photon avalanching upconversion in a Tm3+-doped system. (k) Upconversion intensity at 800 nm versus excitation intensity for NaYF4:Tm(x; x = 1, 4, 8 mol%@NaYF4:Gd(20 mol)) nanocrystals (top) and rise times for NaYF4:Tm(8 mol%)@NaYF4:Gd(20 mol%) nanoparticles. GSA, ESA, MPR and CR represent ground state absorption, excited state absorption, cross-relaxation and multi-phonon relaxation, respectively. (b and c) Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2019. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2016. (g) Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (h,i) Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019. (j and k) Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of red and green emissions from the Yb3+/Ho3+/Ce3+-doped layer under 980 nm pulse excitation, and (b) emission profiles of Ho3+ for the (a) sample under different pulse-widths. (c) CIE chromatic coordinates of the NaErF4:Tm(0.5 mol%)@NaYbF4 core–shell UCNPs under 980 nm pulse excitation with a tuning of the pulse widths. (d) Proposed mechanism involving the (c) sample toward the red-to-green upconversion emission color change. (e) A schematic illustration of the energy dissipation upconversion process in NaErF4@NaYF4@NaGdF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%)@NaGdF4:Yb(20 mol%)@NaGdF4:Nd/Yb(50/10 mol%)@NaYF4@NaGdF4:Yb/Tm(80/1 mol%)@NaYF4 multilayer nanoparticles and the photographs obtained at the corresponding excitation wavelengths. (f) A schematic of the multilayer core–shell structure design and proposed energy transfer processes for realizing RGB emissions under c.w. 980/808 nm excitations and HAADF-STEM images of the as-synthesized NaYF4:Nd/Yb(20/20 mol%)@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/0.5 mol%)@NaYF4@NaYbF4:Ho(1 mol%)@NaYF4 (left). CIE chromaticity coordinates of the emission colors. Inset images show the corresponding photographs (right). (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2015. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2021. (e) Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. (f) Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the conceptual model of the NIR II-responsive upconversion by constructing a migratory NaYbF4 sublattice interlayer in a core–shell nanostructure. Ex, Em, ET, and EM stand for the excitation, emission, energy transfer and energy migration, respectively. (b) TEM image (top), high-resolution TEM image (left bottom) and Fourier-transform diffraction pattern (right bottom) of the NaErF4:Yb/Y(10/40mol%)@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(50/1mol%)@NaYF4 multi-layer core–shell UCNPs. (c) Upconversion emission spectra of NaErF4:Yb/Y(10/40mol%)@NaYF4, NaErF4:Yb/Y(10/40mol%)@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(50/2mol%)@NaYF4, NaErF4:Yb/Y(10/40 mol%)@NaYbF4@NaGdF4:Yb/Tm(50/1mol%)@NaYF4 and NaErF4:Yb/Y(10/40mol%)@NaYbF4@NaGdF4:Yb/Tm(50/1mol%)@NaYF4:A (A = Eu, Tb; 5mol%) UCNPs under 1530 nm excitation. (d) Integrated upconversion intensity percentage (γ) of 802nm emission as a function of Ce3+ concentration in NaErF4:Yb/Y/Ce(10/40/x;x = 0–1.0mol%)@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(49/1mol%)@NaYF4 UCNPs. The inset shows the integrated intensity percentage of the 0.4 mol% Ce3+-doped sample with increasing pump power density. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Decay curves of NaYF4:Yb/Tm nanoparticles with high and low doping concentrations of Tm3+ (top) and the pseudo-color image of the NaYF4:Yb/Tm(20/x; x = 4, 2, 1, 0.5, 0.2 mol%) equipped with distinctive lifetimes from left to right (bottom). (b) Schematic of the independent tuning of the luminescence intensity and lifetime by a gradient doping strategy in the core–shell nanostructure (top). The middle panels show the emission intensity-tuning with a constant lifetime. The bottom panels show the lifetime-tuning with constant emission intensity. (c) Decay curves of Er3+ at 540 nm for NaYF4:Yb/Er(33/5 mol%)@NaLuF4 nanoparticles with increasing the inert shell thicknesses under pulse 980 nm excitation. (d) Schematic of the energy transfer processes in the NaYF4@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4 nanostructure. (e) Decay curves of Tm3+ at 808 nm in (d) the nanostructure with the tuning of Yb3+ concentration in the energy transfer upconversion layer. (a) Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2014. (b) Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2021. (c) Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the construction of a whispering gallery mode (WGM) to support upconversion lasing in the UCNPs-decorated microsphere. λex, λem, E0, E1, and E2 stand for the excitation wavelength, emission wavelength, ground state, first and second excited states, respectively. (b) Upconversion lasing spectra of the Fabry–Perot cavity (D = 80 μm) consisting of NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4 UCNPs under a 3-pulse 980 nm excitation scheme at room temperature. Insets show the image of the Fabry–Perot cavity (left) and its emission color images in different spectral ranges (right). (c) Ultraviolet upconversion lasing spectra of NaYF4@NaYbF4:Tm/Gd (1/30 mol%)@NaYF4 under 5-pulse 980 nm pumping scheme. (d) Microcavity emission intensity and spectral line-width of NaYF4:Gd/Tm(20/1.75 mol%)@NaGdF4 at 807 nm under c.w. 1064 nm pump laser power density. (e) Schematic illustration of the upconversion laser through subwavelength plasmons by coating the NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/20 mol%)@NaYF4 on periodically arranged Ag metal. (f) Upconversion lasing spectra from lattice plasmon resonances at λ = 664 nm as a function of c.w. 980 nm excitation power density. (b) Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013. (c) Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2016. (d) Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (e, f) Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the experimental set-up for a 3D volumetric display and (b) demonstration images through the UCNPs/PDMS composite under a temporal control excitation laser. Scale bars, 1 cm. (c) Schematic of the synchronous galvanometric scanning system using tri-wavelength of 1532, 980 and 808 nm lasers. (d) Photographs of the obtained nanocrystal/PDMS substrate and full-color 3D display of Olympic rings. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2015. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Luminescence images of (i) the initial state, (ii) erasing, (iii) rewriting, and (iv) nondestructive readout processes in the assembly of NaYF4:Yb/Er and diarylethene derivatives for optical storage. (b) A schematic of rewritable information memory based on NaYF4:Er(10 mol%)@NaYF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/0.5 mol%)@NaYF4 orthogonal UCNPs combined with diarylethene molecules. (c) A time-dependent color change process demonstrated for localized information writing and erasing by adjusting the irradiation wavelength. (d) Schematic of nanoscale optical writing and inhibition using NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/4 mol%) and graphene oxide. GO and rGO stand for graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide, respectively. (e) Information readout after diffraction-limited writing (black) and nanoscale optical writing (red). (a) Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2010. (b and c) Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2018. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from the AAAS, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Distinguishing the concealed butterfly pattern through the 1530 nm irradiation from a dazzle light under 980 nm irradiation (left). Decoding the detailed information on the wings of the butterfly pattern by 1530 nm irradiation (middle). Color-switchable output under 980 nm steady-state excitation and non-steady-state excitation (right). (b) Distinguishing the concealed pattern of the “dragonfly-on-lotus” by using the 1530 nm irradiation while only a dazzle light was observed under conventional 980 nm irradiation. The patterns were prepared using NaErF4@NaYbF4, NaYF4:Yb/Ho/Ce(20/2/10mol%)@NaYF4, NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/2mol%)@NaYF4 and NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/1mol%)@NaYF4. (c) A general-design pattern with various UCNPs generates multicolors under steady-state irradiation. Mn2+-doped UCNPs show a green-colored tail with dynamic scanning (top). Distinctive patterns were recorded under different irradiation conditions (bottom). (d) Imaging PDMS beads equipped with NaYF4:Yb/Tm(x/1 mol%; x = 19,29,49)@NaYF4 co-doing (top) or NaYF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm(x/1 mol%)@NaYF4:Yb(y mol%)@NaYF4 (x/y = 20:50, 50:20, 80:5) gradient doping (bottom) UCNPs. (e) Temperature-responsive information security with the assistance of thermally enhanced UCNPs. Blue and green were provided by NaYF4:Yb/Tm(49/1 mol%) and NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%), respectively. (a) Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2021. (b) Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020. (c) Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2017. (d) Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2021. (e) Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) A schematic of stimulated emission depletion with the Gaussian excitation beam and doughnut-shaped depletion beam profiles (upper panel) and images of the 40 nm 8 mol% Tm-doped UCNPs with confocal (left) or super-resolution microscopy (right) (bottom). (b) NIRES imaging, 455 nm and 800 nm imaging of 93 μm depths of a mouse liver tissue slice. The emission intensity and FWHM (full-width at half-maximum) versus imaging depth are also provided. The resolution of NIRES is 49.6 ± 11.1 nm (0 μm), 42.4 ± 6.2 nm (15 μm), 42.4 ± 7.2 nm (55 μm), 48.0 ± 7.3 nm (75 μm), 38.2 ± 14.3 nm (93 μm). (c) The uSEE microscopy image of the NaYF4:Yb/Tm(20/8 mol%) endocytosed neuronal cell with a lateral resolution of 210 nm and axial resolution of 450 (right). Confocal imaging is also provided (left). (d) A comparison of wide-field microscopy (left) and upconversion nonlinear structured illumination microscopy (U-NSIM). (e) PASSI image using photon avalanching nanoparticles. (f) Super-resolution image of UCNPs at 55.9 μm depth inside the spheroid using NIRB. (a) Reproduced from ref. 3 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2017. (b) Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (c) Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019. (d) Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (e) Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. (f) Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) NIR II emission spectra of NaYF4:Yb/X@NaYF4 (X = Tm3+, Pr3+, Ho3+, Er3+) nanoparticles. (b) Schematic of a portable NIR II imaging prototype for in vivo multispectral imaging and lesion detection. (c) Color photographs of a test mouse (left) and the enhanced NIR II fluorescent biological dynamical image of arterical blood flow with the β-NaYbF4:Er/Ce@NaYF4 nanoprobe (right). (d) Schematic of distinguishable fluorescence emission channels using the time-gating technique to realize the selective excitation and emission collection of NaYbF4:Er/Ce/Zn@NaYF4 nanoparticles and PbS quantum dots. (e) Two-plex molecular imaging of a mouse bearing a CT-26 tumor (right top) of mixed ErNPs-aPDL1 (left top) and PbS-aCD8 (left bottom) at 24 h post-intravenous injection. ErNPs-aPDL1 and PbS-aCD8 stand for conjugating anti-PD-L1 (programmed cell death-1 ligand-1) mAb (atezolizumab) to UCNPs, and conjugating anti-CD8α mAb (clone 2.43) to PbS quantum dots, respectively. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2013. (c) Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2017. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of purpose-built temporal imaging system. (b) Upconversion intensity (left) and lifetimes (right) decoded by time-resolved spectroscopy after subcutaneous injection of NaYF4@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4 into the abdomen. (c) A comparison of the imaging performance in different modalities. Excitation and detection models are summarized on the left. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (c) Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Upconversion of luminescence intensity of a single 8 nm-sized NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/20 mol%) (blue circles) and NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%) (red circles) versus excitation power density (left). Confocal luminescence images of NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/20 mol%) (blue dashed lines) and NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%) (red dashed lines) under different excitation power densities (right). (b) 3D representation of the upconversion light brightness from a single NaYF4@NaYbF4:Er(8 mol%)@NaYF4 nanoparticle at different excitation power densities. The bottom images from left to right are wide-field images of a 22 nm-sized NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%) core, 27 nm-sized NaYF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%) core, 29 nm-sized NaYF4:Er(20/2 mol%)@NaYF4, and 29 nm-sized NaYF4@NaYbF4:Er(8 mol%)@NaYF4 (CSS, 8% Er) at 625 W cm−2. (c) Visualizing intra-neuronal motor protein transport using NaLuF4:Yb/Er. Top images from left to right are the fluorescence microscopy image of neurons, the accumulation of UCNPs (red dots) and the capture of UCNPs inside the axons (right top). The bottom schematic shows the two-compartment microchamber connected by microchannels. (d) Schematic of the purpose-built imaging systems for single-particle tracking by the naked eye and CCD camera. SPAD stands for a single-photon avalanche detector. (a) Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2014. (b) Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (c) Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2019. (d) Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the whole-cell patch-clamp research mediated by NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/0.2 mol%)@NaYF4 for the in vitro approach. A polymer-UCNP hybrid scaffold is used for neuronal culture. UCNPs convert NIR light into blue emission to enable NIR-mediated neuronal activation. (b) In vivo fluorescence imaging with (NIR(+)) and without (NIR(−)) NIR light treatment in zebrafish incubated with DBCO/Cy5.5-UCNs and PAA/Cy5.5-UCNs. RHOD-3 AM is used to monitor Ca2+ and is analyzed by pseudo-color imaging. DBCO, PAA and Cy5.5 stand for dibenzyl cyclooctyne, polyacrylic acid and NIR dye, respectively. The scale bar is 400 μm. (c) Schematic principle of noninvasive optogenetic modulation based on NaYF4:Yb/Tm(30/0.5 mol%)@NaYF4@SiO2. The blue emission from UCNPs opens up cation channels under NIR excitation towards deep optical manipulation in the brain. (d) Characterization of upconversion-facilitated optical stimulation in neurons expressing channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2). The voltage-clamp traces (top) of neurons from the VTA slice under different NIR stimulation intensities, and current-clamp traces (bottom) of ChR2-expressing dopamine (DA) neurons under different frequencies. (a) Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. (b) Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2017. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from the AAAS, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of temperature sensing using different luminescence characteristics. (b) Schematic of surficial and intratumoral monitoring in vivo (left); in vivo images through a 2 mm pork tissues slice under 865 nm excitation combined with PbS correction unit. (c) Ratiometric thermometry based on TTA-Nd-NPs in an inflammatory mode. TTA, triplet–triplet annihilation. (d) Thermal images obtained by dividing the luminescence imaging at 1000 and 1200 nm during heating (upper panel) and relaxation processes (bottom panel). (e) Temperature sensing and programmed combination therapy in vivo. Upper panel: a plot of Ln(I545/I525) from NaLuF4:Yb/Er(20/2 mol%) versus 1/T to calibrate local temperature in the tissue phantom. Bottom panel: photos of tumor-bearing mice before and after programmable therapy. (f) Thermographic luminescence lifetime imaging of the optimized nanoprobes in the inflamed and normal mice. (b) Reproduced from ref. 240 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020. (c) Reproduced from ref. 241 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (d) Reproduced from ref. 245 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2017. (e) Reproduced from ref. 247 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (f) Reproduced from ref. 252 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2020.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
