A review of solar and visible light active oxo-bridged materials for energy and environment  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CY00116A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CY00116A
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 2153-2164A review of solar and visible light active oxo-bridged materials for energy and environment

        
          
            Lagnamayee 
            Mohapatra
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Kulamani 
            Parida
          
          
        
      *b
aQatar Environment and Energy Research Institute (QEERI), Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Qatar Foundation, Doha, Qatar. E-mail: mlagnamayee@gmail.com; lmohapatra@qf.org.qa
bCentre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha ‘O’Anusandhan University, Bhubaneswar-751030, Odisha, India. E-mail: paridakulamani@yahoo.com; kulamaniparida@soauniversity.ac.in
Received 
      19th January 2017
    , Accepted 18th April 2017First published on 18th April 2017AbstractIn efficient solar energy conversion for environmental and energy applications, the use of visible-light-active photocatalysis as a green and sustainable technology has become a promising technology. A visible-light-active photocatalyst (λ > 400 nm) for efficiently harvesting solar energy and addressing a recent primary concern has been designed and fabricated. An effective separation of photo-generated electron hole pairs and their rapid transport to the semiconductor surface is required for high-efficiency solar photocatalysis; therefore, significant efforts have been devoted to designing and developing hetero-binuclear oxo-bridged systems, owing to their unique physical and electronic properties, which make them promising candidates for photocatalysis. These materials exhibit excellent light-harvesting properties, due to metal-to-metal charge-transfer (MMCT) excitation, and possess band-gap energies that are more suitable for solar light absorption. Recently, hetero-binuclear oxo-bridged systems have facilitated the rapid progress in enhancing photocatalytic efficiency under visible light irradiation; therefore, this mini-review aims to provide a systematic study of heteronuclear oxo-bridged systems for environmental decontamination and artificial photosynthesis (water splitting and photocatalytic CO2 reduction). This review provides a few perspectives on the challenges hindering the further advancement of oxo-bridged materials for application in photocatalysis.Lagnamayee MohapatraDr. Lagnamayee Mohapatra completed her PhD degree from the CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, in Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), India under the guidance of Prof. Kulamani Parida. She received DST-DFG awards for selection in the meeting of 63rd Nobel laureates & students held at Lindau, Germany. Dr. Mohapatra's research topics deal with the development of highly efficient materials as photocatalysts for environmental remediation, and the production of clean energies as well development of electrochemical Redox Flow Batteries (RFB) by using modified/unmodified carbonaceous materials for energy storage application. Currently, she is working as a Post-Doctor Research Associate in Energy storage group, Qatar Environment and Energy Research Institute (QEERI) at Qatar.Kulamani ParidaProf. Kulamani Parida was working as a Chief Scientist at CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, India and also a Professor at the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India. Now he is working as professor in Chemistry and Director in Center for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University, Bhubaneswar, India where he is leading the efforts to develop novel catalytic materials for heterogeneous catalysis. His research interests include the design and development of advanced materials such as metal oxides/phosphates/sulfates, cationic and anionic clays, perovskites, carbonaceous based materials and naturally occurring materials for catalysis, energy and environmental applications. He has published more than 350 research articles in international journals and 27 national and international patents.
1. Introduction
In the 21st century, energy- and environment-related problems are becoming increasingly alarming.1 One of the ways to effectively address the challenges is the fabrication of novel semiconductor-based materials and using them for harvesting solar energy and for pollution abatement. Since the discovery of the photo-electrochemical dissociation of water using the TiO2 photo anode by Fujishima and Honda, many semiconductor photocatalysts have been reported for water decomposition, producing H2 as a clean energy source, and for the degradation of organic pollutants.2 However, most of these catalysts are active under ultraviolet (UV) light and their efficiencies are low in visible light for practical applications. UV light has a narrow wavelength range (4% of the solar spectrum), which is the driving force behind the utilization of the more abundant (43% of solar spectrum) visible light for photocatalytic reactions. There are a lot of technical challenges involved in using such photocatalytic systems for artificial photosynthesis and water treatment,3,4 and attention has been focused on designing new semiconducting materials for visible light photocatalysis that can maximally utilize the clean, safe, and abundant solar energy. A crucial challenge is the design of a photocatalyst with an extensive absorption range of solar illumination, high mobility, and prolonged lifetime for charge carriers, and a small number of recombination centers that can enhance the redox catalytic activity.
The dispersion of TiO2 nanoclusters in mesoporous silica has resulted in superior photocatalytic activities, compared to that of bulk TiO2; nevertheless, MCM-41 is photo-inactive, but can still be stimulated by modification with a semiconductor or doping of the transition metals. Our group has also investigated the metal/metal oxide functionalized mesoporous materials towards photocatalysis in detail,5 and it was concluded that the unique arrangement of the localized charges in the ordered mesoporous structure of MCM-41 leads to a considerably prolonged lifetime of electron–hole pairs, compared to traditional metal ion doped semiconductors. However, when two metals are incorporated and the second metal element introduced as a donor can closely link to the first metal element by forming an oxo-bridging linkage, this is supposed to result in a robust chromophore induced by metal-to-metal charge- transfer (MMCT). The metal pairs used in the MMCT complexes anchored in the mesoporous silica were reported for the first time by the Frei group.6,7
In materials chemistry, metal oxo-clusters have diverse applications including catalysis and molecular magnetism,8–11 and several oxo-systems have been developed. To generate oxidizing and reducing intermediates, an oxo-bridged hetero-binuclear charge-transfer system is required to absorb visible light. Hetero-binuclear mixed-valence complexes have been extensively studied, due to their possible application in different photo-functionalized materials such as photo-magnets,12 opto-electronic devices,13 photovoltaic cells,14 and photochemical reactions.15 In addition, binuclear complexes containing organic linkages such as pyridine, cyclopentane, and cyano groups have been synthesized.16–18 For photo-induced redox reactions, the exchange of an electron between two metal ions is possibly the most important step. Using an oxo-bridged system center is a promising strategy for developing a visible-light-active photocatalyst with control of redox potential and visible light absorption. Over the last decade, the properties of the hetero-binuclear oxo-bridged system have been tailored to produce materials designed for fulfilling specific requirements for photocatalysis; moreover, this system is used as a photo-induced redox center for photocatalysis.19
Although a large number of reviews have focused on photocatalysis and photocatalytic materials,20–22 this article summarizes the most recent advances in the smart design and development, in addition to primarily focusing on the new research strategies for photocatalysis using inorganic semiconductors, particularly the oxo-bridged hetero-binuclear system. In particular, varieties of inorganic oxo-bridged systems, which can be obtained by different synthetic routes, are reviewed. Therefore, this study may serve as a basic guideline in the field of semiconductor photocatalysis.
The aim of this article is to explain the concept of oxo-bridged systems and to summarize the latest progress related to the development of the versatile photo-redox applications for environmental decontamination and artificial photosynthesis (water splitting and photoreduction of CO2). This mini-review explains all the major physical concepts available in literature to understand the mechanisms in their appropriate context. In addition, we aim to introduce the metal-to-metal charge-transfer (MMCT) spectra with optical properties in the oxo-bridged system. Overall, this study provides the perspectives and conclusions present in literature.
2. Oxo-bridged system
2.1 Basic concept and nature of MMCT spectra in an oxo-bridged system
The photochemical electron transfer processes involving coordination compounds are categorized into two types: intra- and intermolecular electron transfer. The intramolecular photo-redox processes of metal complexes are known as direct optical charge transfer (CT) excitation processes, consisting of metal centers and ligands that represent redox sites. According to the redox sites, the optical CT transitions are classified as ligand-to-metal (LMCT), metal-to-ligand (MLCT), ligand-to-ligand (LLCT), and MMCT.23a
If the charge transfer arises from the ligand molecular orbitals (σ, σ*, π, π* and nonbonding) to the empty or partially filled metal d-orbitals, then there is the possibility of LMCT spectra [Fig. 1(a)]. Furthermore, LMCT transitions result in the reduction of the metal. In the case of MLCT transitions, the metal should be in a low oxidation state and be electron rich, the ligand should possess low-lying empty orbitals (e.g., CN- or CO), and the transitions should allow for coordination compounds having π-acceptor ligands. In the presence of light, electrons in the metal orbitals are excited to the ligand π* orbitals and result in intense bands as well as forbidden d–d transitions [Fig. 1(b)]. However, photophysical dynamic studies show that the systems possess metal-to-metal charge transfer (MMCT), also known as intervalence charge transfer (IVCT). The binuclear or polynuclear complexes that contain reducing and oxidizing metal ions absorb the MMCT band. The used metal ions should either be bridged by a suitable ligand (MA–L–MD) or connected by a direct, but polar metal–metal bond (MA–MD). In addition, the CT state may induce non-radiative transitions.23b In the oxo-bridged system, the O2 ligands of particular metals are significantly more stable. Therefore, the linking of a second metal center (donor) to the first metal by an oxo-bridge could offer a robust chromophore. The oxo-bridged MMCT moieties absorb visible/near-infrared light. Thus, the properties and functions of the oxo-bridged system strongly depend on their donor–acceptor pairs.
 Fig. 1  (a) Ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) involving an octahedral d6 complex. (b) Metal to ligand charge transfer in a d5 octahedral complex. 
According to Robin and Day,24a mixed-valence compounds are divided into three classes. In class 1 compounds, the two sites are very different from each other and the valences are strongly localized. In addition, the properties of the complex are the sum of the properties of constituting ions. Since the optical MMCT transitions are at high energy, this type of compound performs as an insulator. Class II compounds include two complimentary redox active centers (donor and acceptor) connected with bridging ligands, which provide the electron coupling between the two centers and create metal–metal-charge-transfer spectra. In the class III type, the two sites are indistinguishable and the element has a non-integral oxidation state (delocalized valence).
For asymmetric class II hetero-binuclear complexes [MA–O–MD], the MMCT energy (Eop) equals the free energy difference (ΔG0) between MA and MD, where ΔG0 can be calculated from the difference in the one-electron redox potential (E0) of MA and MD (ΔG0 = −ΔE0F) and the reorganization energy of the electron transfer reaction. The energies of MA and MD can be easily obtained by electrochemical methods.17,24b The absorption energies (Eop) of the hetero-binuclear complexes and redox potential at their photo-exited states can be rationally designed by pre-setting the E0 of the donor and acceptor metal ions; therefore, this class of compounds is advantageous for tailoring ideal photochemical redox centers according to the requirements of the photocatalytic reaction. In asymmetric mixed valence compounds, the product of MMCT is clearly unstable and is measurable over less time. Visible/near-infrared probe spectroscopy has been used to characterize the electronic excited MMCT states. As previously discussed, inorganic semiconductor contact with a molecule creates interfacial charge-transfer absorption (ICTA), and ΔG0 can be calculated from the optically induced electron transfer of an electron donor to the ith level in the conduction band of the semiconductor as follows: ΔG0 = −e(EiCB − E0) = εiCB − e(ECBbot − E0)(1)where ECBi and ECBbot are the potentials of the semiconductor for electron transfer to the ith level of the conduction band and to the bottom level of the conduction band, respectively. εCBi is the difference between the energy of the ith level and the bottom level of the conduction band, E0 is the potential of the redox couple. The system studied indicates that the total absorbance is the sum of the contributions from all of the transitions to (from) the individual levels and the absorption profile for each individual transition.24c
The charge transfer transition is completely different from the d–d transition. To understand the differences in these transitions we must identify their origins. From molecular orbital energy diagrams for transition metals, we find that the pi donor ligands lie lower in energy than the pi acceptor ligands. From the spectrochemical series data, it can be determined whether a ligand is π accepting or π donating. When the ligand is more π donating, its own orbitals are lower in energy than the t2g metal orbitals and produce π* (for t2g) and σ* (for eg) orbitals. This is in contrast to the π accepting ligands, which involve a bonding pi (t2g) and an antibonding σ* (eg) orbital. Therefore, pi acceptor ligand complexes are higher in energy than the pi donor ligand and the transitions of π acceptor ligands are of a higher frequency than the π donor ligands. Based on the Laporte selection rules, these transitions appear as weakly intense, whereas the CT absorptions in the UV/vis region are intense and selection rule allowed, and CT can be observed as an internal oxidation–reduction process.24d
In coordination chemistry, an oxo-group connected to a metal is generally denoted as MO, producing two lone pairs of electrons, which are associated with oxygen.25 A dozen oxo-bridged systems anchored by silica surface have been reported by the Frei group.6,26–28 From the literature, it is concluded that the donor groups signify the furthermost upper row transition metals (IIIA-VIA), whereas the acceptor groups are d0 elements in the periodic table.29–38 The oxo-compound depends on the electron density of the oxygen atom. Furthermore, an oxo-bridged product can be produced by a donor–acceptor reaction with an appropriate electron deficient partner. The oxo-ligand, an oxygen atom that binds only to one or more metal centers with different oxidation states [MA–O–MD, where MA and MD are electron acceptor and donor], forms hetero-binuclear oxo-bridged complexes. Oxo-ligands are stabilized at high oxidation states of a metal.39–41
The hetero-bimetallic oxo-bridged systems can drive photocatalytic activities, and their high flexibility in metal combinations allows the design and fabrication of a wide range of molecular-based inorganic materials for particular reactions. One of the most interesting phenomena associated with this class of compounds is the electron transfer process that happens under photo-induced MMCT.42 Their spectroscopic properties are highly important for photo-redox processes.43–45
It has been reported that the mineral humite is the first reported inorganic MMCT chromophore, consisting of Ti–Fe mixed oxide and with edge sharing TiIVO6 and FeIIO6 octahedra, providing a visible TiIV–O–FeII → TiIII–O–FeIII absorption. The MMCT band is not restricted to only oxo-bridged systems, but also appears in the spectra of polynuclear complexes that contain direct, polar metal–metal bonds with different electronegativities. In homo- and hetero-binuclear complexes, the bridging ligand of rhenium and ruthenium containing 4-pyridinealdazine allows significant electronic communication between the metal centers. The absorption spectrum of the abovementioned material may be attributed to the ReI → RuI MMCT band.46 Mixed-valence cyanide-bridged complexes are receiving increasing attention in recent times, due to their MMCT properties.47–52
In the photocatalysis process, finding a catalyst that possesses long-lived photoinduced charge separated at excited states is an important factor. The ability of most binuclear oxo-bridged systems to drive MMCT induced redox reactions results in surprisingly long lifetimes of the excited charge transfer state, which is attributed to the optical excitation of the MMCT transition.53 In this scenario, Frei and coworkers have developed some ideas to analyze the back electron transfer kinetics of all inorganic as well as oxo-bridged heteronuclear groups covalently anchored to mesoporous silica surface, by using transient optical absorption spectroscopy, aiming to better clarify the photocatalytic mechanisms operating in multi electron catalysts. Intended for these first transient absorption experiments, TiMn-SBA-15 powders are suspended in an index matching liquid in order to allow probing in transmission mode. For the spectroscopic study, the MnIIOTiIV → MnIIOTiIII unit in SBA-15 shows an unusually long-lived excited state of about 1.8 μs. This is because of the intersystem crossing at the excited manganese site, which results in a spin-trapped excited state.34 Also, the CO2 reduction over the ZrIV–O–CoII system showed a sufficiently long lifetime of the excited MMCT state for electron transfer to the reactant or the multi-electron catalyst,30 taking advantage of the intramolecular MMCT featuring a long charge separated excited state lifetime (1 ns). Visible/near-infrared (NIR) pump-probe spectroscopy has been successfully used to identify and characterize short-lived electronically excited MMCT states of the cyano bridged mixed valence state.17 According to investigations by Weare and co-authors, the oxo-bridging complexes are focused on MMCT because the μ-oxo bridged metals on surfaces have been shown to contain long lifetimes and act as a bridge between donor and acceptor in the catalysis process. Moreover, in hetero-bimetallic systems, the opportunity to form excited states where relaxation to the ground state will have to occur via spin-forbidden relaxation mechanisms provides another means to extend lifetimes.53
2.2 What makes the oxo-bridged system a unique photocatalyst?
The oxo-bridged system is used for photocatalysis due to its specific electronic properties. This system is partially different from the traditional photocatalytic system. In the traditional photocatalytic system, when light energy higher than the band-gap energy falls on a catalyst, an electron is promoted from the valence band to the conduction band, thus creating a hole (h+) in the valence band. The holes and electrons diffuse or migrate from their respective bands to the semiconductor, subsequently acting as reducing/oxidizing agents to drive the reduction/oxidation reaction on the catalyst surface. For water splitting, water molecules are reduced by the electrons to form H2 and are oxidized by the holes to form O2. For effective water splitting, the bottom level of the semiconductor CB has to be more negative than the redox potential of H+/H2 (0 V vs. NHE), whereas the top level of the semiconductor VB should be more positive than the redox potential of O2/H2O (1.23 V vs. NHE). To photocatalytically degrade pollutants, holes of the VB can react with surface-adsorbed H2O to produce hydroxyl radicals. In addition, the CB electrons react with surface-adsorbed O2 to form superoxide radicals. The hydroxyl and superoxide radicals have strong oxidation power, almost oxidizing all the organic pollutants. Furthermore, the bottom of the energy level of the conduction band should be more negative than the reduction potential of CO2 to photoreduce CO2.18,54,55
In the oxo-bridged system, the oxo-bridged bimetallic linkages are connected via two neighboring octahedrons. In this system, the two metal ions differ in oxidation state (M1m–O–M2n) with the oxo-bridged linkages absorbing visible light. When light falls on the surface of the catalyst, an electronic excitation occurs from one metal to the other in the MMCT spectra because M1m–O–M2n → M1m+1–O–M2n−1 reduces O2 to produce O2−˙, which is a powerful oxidizing species that can degrade organic compounds, and H+ ions are scavenged by the excited electrons in the conduction band to form H2 gas. The main advantage of these structures is that they offer electron transport properties for photocatalytic reaction systems through oxo-bridging, resulting in an efficient charge separation and the creation of long-lived electrons and holes to initiate redox reactions. In the traditional photocatalytic system, both the electrons and holes participate in the reaction, but in the oxo-bridged system only MMCT electrons participate in the reaction. Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the interaction of light in both systems for photocatalysis.19
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of a semiconductor particle based photo catalyst (adapted with permission from ref. 19 @Copyright 2016 Royal Chemical Society). (b) Schematic illustration of oxo-bridged system based photocatalyst that can be used for water splitting and pollutant degradation. 
3. Oxo-bridged systems for organic pollutant degradation
In recent times, many studies have been focused on the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants because of its promising practical industrial applications. A photocatalyst primarily degrades carcinogenic noxious organic pollutants present in industrial effluents. However, to achieve this, the catalyst should remain stable during light illumination. For environmental applications, the stability offered by the oxo-bridged system is considered the best, and therefore, it is the most suitable photocatalyst.
3.1 Supported oxo-bridged system
Mesoporous silica such as SBA-15, MCM-41, and silica nanoparticles are suitable supports for inorganic polynuclear units because they have high surface area, providing enough surface reactive sites with nanoscale channels to facilitate the transfer of photo-generated charge carriers to the surface. The authors developed a new class of MMCT chromophores, viz., mixed-valence complexes, which have an oxygen linkage constructed on the inner walls of the ordered mesoporous silica.56 Furthermore, they synthesized Ni(II) and Ru(III) ammine complex-grafted MCM-41 that contain isolated Ti(IV) centers, resulting in the formation of Ti(IV)–O–Ni(II) moieties, which are of special interest for photochemical applications. On irradiation with visible light, MMCT absorption leads to photoactivation of Ti centers of the surface-anchored Ti(IV)–O–Ni(II) moiety. In the Ti silicate sieve framework, Ni(II) acts as a reducing site for the photosynthetic reactions. However, UV photons are required for Ti(III), which are generated by LMCT from O2 to the Ti(IV) framework, which absorbs only at wavelengths shorter than 300 nm. However, because Ti(IV)–O–Ni(II) has a second metal as the electron donor, it allows MMCT chromophores. Furthermore, Nakamura and Hashimoto57 reported site-specific grafting of electron-donating elements of FeII, NiII, and MnII–TiIV centers on the pores of ordered mesoporous silica (SBA-15). This complex is arranged as Ti(IV)–O–Fe(II) oxo-bridged mixed-valence binuclear complexes. The appearance of the Ti(IV)/Fe(II) → Ti(III)/Fe(III) MMCT band was confirmed by diffuse reflectance UV-vis spectra.
Frei et al.26 surveyed new photocatalysts by paying attention to the crystal structure, where Ti(IV)–O–Cu(I) and Ti(IV)–O–Sn(II) groups were grafted onto a mesoporous MCM-41 silicate sieve. The grafted moieties were localized, and the two-center chromophores covered a large fraction of the visible spectrum. Because CuI or SnII contains the d8 or s2 system, they showed low-energy LMCT bands that may complicate the absorption spectra in the visible region. Therefore, the bimetallic materials that are featured in Ti(IV)–O–Cu(I) and Ti(IV)–O–Sn(II) act as a MMCT chromophore that affords the photoactivation of Ti centers as photo-reduction of TiIV to TiIII with long wavelengths. Difference optical spectra and FT-IR spectroscopy were used to identify MMCT chromophores.
In general, opal mesoporous silica is chosen as a support due to its highly interconnected hierarchical porous structures. Hashimoto et al.58 successfully reported the visible light-induced MMCT for hetero-bimetallic Ti(IV)–O–Ce(III) assemblies on the pores of mesoporous silica MCM–41. The Ti(IV)–O–Ce(III) oxo-bridged bimetallic linkages of Ti(IV) and Ce(III) ion, as constituting elements, exhibited an intense MMCT absorption band. The photo-generated Ti3+via the excitation of TiIV–O–CeIII → TiIII–O–CeIV reduced O2 to O2−˙. Under visible light irradiation, the redox potentials of E0 (Ce4+/Ce3+) = 1.72 V and E0 (TiO2/Ti3+) = 0.67 V were suitable to drive the photocatalytic oxidative decomposition of 2-propanol into acetone and CO2. Moreover, the Ti/Ce assembly is an attractive metal combination for constructing photosynthetic units because the Ce(IV) ion is an effective oxidant.59 Furthermore, an efficient visible light photocatalyst has been developed by matching the energy levels of surface-grafted and bulk-doped ions with similar energy states; for example, the Fe(III) surface graft of Fe(III)-doped TiO2. Under visible light irradiation, the photo-generated electrons in the doped Fe(III) states are transferred to the surface-grafted Fe(III) ions, which act as co-catalysts. The doped Fe(III) ions' bulk-produced energy levels below the conduction band of TiO2 were well-matched with the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple potential in the surface-grafted Fe(III) ions and they served as a novel photocatalyst for gaseous organic compound decomposition.60 Similarly, Zhang et al. reported the fabrication of a visible light active photocatalyst, which was based on the inverse opal mesoporous silica co-incorporated with uniformly dispersed Cr(VI) and Ti(IV) species, using a simple soaking-calcination method for AO7 degradation.61 Likewise, Klabunde et al. synthesized a Ti-loaded, Cr-incorporated MCM-48 (Ti–Cr-MCM-48) visible light photocatalyst by a post-impregnation method for the photocatalytic degradation of acetaldehyde.62
Graphene oxide possesses large amounts of active OH groups like mesoporous silica; therefore, efforts have been made to assemble MMCT moieties onto graphene oxide in the place of mesoporous MCM-41 and SBA-15. To the best of our knowledge, for the first time, Shi et al. reported novel hybrids such as (Ti/Ce) MMCT moieties with GO materials exhibiting enhanced photoactivity during rhodamine B (RhB) degradation. The enhanced activity can be attributed to (i) the visible light absorption band for the TiIV/CeIII → TiIII/CeIV MMCT transition, (ii) well-dispersed covalently assembled Ti/Ce MMCT moieties on the surface of GO that favor the reduction of the fast electron–hole recombination, (iii) the photo-generation of Ti3+ ions under visible light irradiation via the excitation of TiIV–O–CeIII → TiIII–O–CeIV, reducing O2 to the superoxide anion radical, which oxidizes RhB to form the degraded products.63
3.2 Doped oxo-bridged system
Heterogeneous photocatalysis on TiO2, ZnO, and SrTiO3 with the doping of various transition metals is potentially advantageous for extending the photoactive region to visible light via narrowing the band-gap.64–66 For photocatalytic water splitting in the presence of sacrificial agents, the transition metal-doped semiconductors, particularly Cr-doped SrTiO3, have been extensively studied by Wang et al.67 as efficient visible light-driven photocatalysts. The calculations of the electronic structure of SrTiO3 revealed that the top of the valence band is predominantly made up of the O2p states and the bottom of the conduction band is determined by the Ti 3d states. Doping Cr cations at either the Sr2+ or Ti4+ sites in SrTiO3 transforms the electronic structures. Furthermore, properly doping Cr3+ cations at the Sr2+ site is an alternative approach for SrTiO3 to show photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution under visible light irradiation.68,69 However, a considerable gap still exists between the traditional semiconducting photocatalysis theories and photocatalytic behaviors of metal-doped semiconductors for organic compound decomposition. Therefore, for the first time, Lin et al.70 fabricated transition metal (Fe)-doped SrTiO3, in which an isolated energy level was created by the dopant in the forbidden band-gap. Analysis of the photo-physical and photocatalytic properties of pure SrTiO3 and Fe-doped SrTiO3 materials revealed that the Fe-doped SrTiO3 exhibited higher photocatalytic activity than pure SrTiO3 for RhB degradation under visible light irradiation. The UV-vis spectra indicated that doping Fe cations into the SrTiO3 lattice led to the formation of an absorption tail toward the visible region, due to oxo-bridged MMCT moieties of mixed metal oxides. The presence of Ti(IV)–O–Fe(II) MMCT was more clearly revealed by ODS. Under visible light irradiation, the generated TiIII in the excitation of Ti(IV)–O–Fe(II) → Ti(III)–O–Fe(III) could reduce the adsorbed O2 molecule to form superoxide radicals. Therefore, Ti(IV)–O–Fe(II) linkages in the Fe-doped SrTiO3 behave as the active sites for the visible light-induced photocatalytic pollutant degradation.
3.3 Solid solutions system
Lin et al.71 systematically studied the ZrO2–CeO2 solid solutions with the composition of Zr1–xCexO2 (x = 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3). The oxo-bridged bimetallic Zr(IV)–O–Ce(III) linkage constructed in solid solution acts as a visible light-induced redox center to drive a photocatalytic reaction for RhB and 2,4-dichorophenol degradation in an aqueous solution under visible light irradiation. The host cation Zr(IV) is structurally related to the foreign cation Ce(IV) in the Zr1−xCexO solid solution. The foreign Ce cations substitute a part of the host Zr cations forming a homogeneous solid solution of Zr1−xCexO2, constructing an oxo-bridged bimetallic linkage Zr–O–Ce between two neighboring flattened tetrahedrons of the solid solution. The ODS spectra clearly show that the optical absorption spectra of the Zr1−xCexO2 solid solutions significantly shift to longer wavelengths, compared to pure CeO2, for the MMCT transition of Zr(IV)–O–Ce(III) → Zr(III)–O–Ce(IV) (Fig. 3). This visible light-induced MMCT transition resulted in the generation of superoxide anion radicals. Furthermore, the ESR measurements confirmed the generation of additional Ce(IV) and superoxide radicals. The Zr(III) species are generated during visible light irradiation and scavenged by the adsorbed O2 molecules, forming superoxide radicals. The enhancement in the superoxide radical intensity suggests that Zr(III) species can only originate from the visible light-induced MMCT transitions.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of an ideal structure of a solid solution. (b) Optical difference spectrum of the solid solution Zr1−xCexO2 (x = 0.2) after 420 nm irradiation for 1 h in the presence of O2. (c) ESR spectra (recorded at 77 K) of the solid solution (a) before and (b) after visible-light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation for 1 h. (d) Schematic illustration of the oxo-bridged bimetallic ZrIV–O–CeIII constructed between two neighboring flattened tetrahedrons as a visible-light induced redox centre (adapted with permission from ref. 71 @Copyright 2016 Royal Chemical Society). 
Moreover, significant attention has been paid to the effective utilization of MnO2 toward catalysis when the basic structural unit is the [MnO6] octahedron. In manganese oxides, the cations exist in three oxidation states (Mn2+, Mn3+, and Mn4+). Similar to Mn4+ of the MnO6 octahedron in the MnO2 lattice, Lin et al.72 developed an interesting solid material, SrTi1–xMnxO3, where Mn4+ was substituted for Ti4+ of the TiO6 octahedron in the crystal structure for RhB degradation. The visible light-induced MMCT of the bimetallic linkage Mn(III)–O–Ti(IV) formed in the SrTi1−xMnxO3 solid solution played a crucial role in the photocatalytic activity. According to the oxidation states of Mn cations in the bimetallic linkages, the visible light-induced MMCT of Ti(IV)–O–Mn(III) → Ti(III)–O–Mn(IV) is supposed to occur in the solid solutions of SrTi1−xMnxO3 and covers the visible range. Optical difference spectroscopy and the ESR measurement verified the visible light-induced MMCT. The visible light-induced MMCT promoted the formation of Mn4+ from Mn3+ in the solid solution, again leading to the instant movement of the Mn3+ cations to their original position, reducing O2 to O2−˙. The superoxide anion radical O2−˙ is also a powerful oxidizing species that can degrade organic compounds.
3.4 Layered double hydroxide systems
Because the metal octahedra in layered double hydroxides (LDH) bind to each other through metal oxo-bridging, our group73 previously attempted to design a dozen different oxo-bridged-based LDH photocatalysts. The MMCT transitions of these units exhibited absorption deep in the visible region. The flexibility of using brucite layer cations in the LDHs is advantageous for the redox potential of the catalyst, which is very important for the absorption of photon energy. For the first time, we developed a series of modified Zn2+/Y3+ LDH materials for organic pollutant degradation. In this system, the interaction between Zn2+ as host and Y3+ as foreign ions could be described as an oxo-bridged bimetallic linkage of Zn(II)–O–Y(III) in a corner sharing octahedron. The “Y” cations in the bimetallic linkages induced the MMCT of Zn(II)–O–Y(III) → Zn(I)–O–Y(IV), contributing to the absorption extending to the visible range (Fig. 4). By the excitation of Zn(II)–O–Y(III) → Zn(I)–O–Y(IV) under visible light irradiation, the surface-adsorbed O2 molecules could be reduced to superoxide radicals, which are a powerful oxidizing species responsible for dye degradation. Furthermore, a series of Cu–Co/Cr ternary LDHs was prepared, establishing that the oxo-bridged bimetallic linkages of Cr(III)–O–Cu(II) and Cr(III)–O–Co(II) function as a visible light-induced catalytic redox center.74 The presence of Cr(III)–O–Cu(II) and Cr(III)–O–Co(II) MMCT was confirmed by using optical difference spectroscopy; the EPR spectrum of this material measured with O2 under visible irradiation (λ > 400 nm) showed a signal for O2−˙. Due to the flexibility in the choice of transition metal for preparing oxo-bridged LDHs, MII/Cr–CO3 (MII = Zn, Cu, Co, and Ni), LDHs were prepared by the co-precipitation method and their activities for methyl orange dye degradation were studied under solar light irradiation.75
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of anchored Zn(II)/Y(III) bimetallic oxo-linkage on the Zn/YLDH and its photocatalysis driven by the photoinduced MMCT. (b) Optical difference spectra of LDH material after 420 nm irradiation for 5 h in the presence of O2 (inset: UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of Zn/Y LDH before and after exposure to 420 nm irradiation for 5 h in the presence of O2) (adapted with permission from ref. 73 @Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). 
In addition to using first and second row transition metals in the oxo-bridged system, we fabricated Zn/Bi–LDH, where bismuth is a pentavalent post-transition metal featuring the edge-sharing octahedra of BiO6 with ZnO6, which were connected to each other by oxo-bridged linkages. The optical diffuse reflectance spectra revealed that Zn(II)–O–Bi(III) → Zn(I)–O–Bi(IV) MMCT absorption extended from the UV to the visible region. The visible light-induced MMCT Zn(II)–O–Bi(III) → Zn(I)–O–Bi(IV), formed from the interaction of Bi(III) with the adsorbed O2, resulted in the formation of superoxide radicals that are responsible for the degradation of common organic pollutants such as malachite green, rhodamine 6G, and 4-chloro2-nitrophenol.76
4. Artificial photosynthesis for solar energy conversion
In solar photocatalysis, it is of great interest to convert CO2, with H2O as an electron source, into readily transportable hydrocarbon fuels for reducing the level of atmospheric CO2 and for partly relieving the imbalance between energy supply and demand within the present fossil fuel infrastructure. Besides different photocatalysts, oxo-bridged binuclear MMCT have been used in selective photocatalytic reactions because the binuclear charge-transfer unit itself can act as a redox site; it is very important to match the redox potentials for these reactions. Excitation of transition metal ions such as CoIII, CrIV, CeIV, and MnIII produces MMCT units with redox potentials suitable for driving water oxidation and CO2 reduction. Frei et al. developed different synthesis methods for assembling and anchoring oxo-bridged binuclear MMCT units on mesoporous silica for CO2 reduction and water oxidation.6 Thus far, no other study has reported the assembly of covalently anchored Zr(IV) with Cu(I) moieties on the pore surface of the MCM-41 silicate sieve for the splitting of CO2 to CO.77 Optical difference spectroscopy revealed that the irradiation induced an MMCT transition of Zr(IV)–O–Cu(I) → Zr(III)–O–Cu (II). Iridium oxide nanoclusters are efficient catalysts for the electrochemical oxidation of water, and CrVI acts as a visible light absorbing species; therefore, the same groups demonstrated the visible light-active binuclear TiOCr charge transfer chromophore coupled to iridium oxide in MCM-41 silica pores toward O2 evolution from water oxidation with a minimum quantum efficiency of 13%.78
When the TiIV–O–CrIII → TiIII–O–CrIV charge-transfer units are excited, superoxide radicals are formed by trapping O2 in the TiIII center, resulting in efficient photocatalytic water oxidation. Manganese is used as an attractive donor and for driving photocatalytic reactions because it has different oxidation states and possesses different redox potentials. Therefore, a different robust, visible, active hetero-binuclear charge-transfer chromophore consisting of TiIV oxo-bridged to a Mn center on the surface of silica pores of MCM-41 material has been developed, which is an attractive charge-transfer chromophore in a solar fuel generating system. The TiIV–O–MnII to TiIII–O–MnIII MMCT transition leads to the transfer of an electron from donor to acceptor center, sufficiently creating the charge separation for water oxidation and CO2 reduction.79 The oxo-bridged heteronuclear units such as Zr(IV)–O–Co(II) are covalently anchored to silica surfaces and used for CO2 reduction by irradiation of an MMCT chromophore, extending the spectral range toward visible light. The Co(III) formed by MMCT excitation possesses sufficient oxidation potential for water oxidation without the need for a sacrificial agent, and showed the long lifetimes of the excited MMCT state for electron transfer to the reactant or the multi-electron catalyst.30
Followed by Frei et al., we reported a series of novel visible light active Ni–Zn/Cr–CO3 LDHs. The oxo-bridged system of Zn(II)/Ni(II)–O–Cr(III) was supposed to function as a visible light-induced catalytic redox center. LDH systems serve as water splitting sites because of the metal–O2–metal sites. The visible light-induced MMCT transition of Zn(II)/Ni(II)–O–Cr(III) → Zn(I)/Ni(I)–O–Cr(IV) played a crucial role in this improved catalytic activity. Due to the MMCT transition, the oxo-bridged system was shifted in the visible light range. On exposure to visible light (λ > 400 nm), the H+ ions in the conductance band were scavenged by the excited electrons via the reductant-to-band charge-transfer and produced hydrogen gas as shown in Fig. 5(a) and this is confirmed by optical difference spectra following exposure of the material at 420 nm irradiation for 6 h in the presence of O2 [inset of Fig. 5(b)].80
 Fig. 5  (a) Total mechanism for hydrogen evolution over Ni + Zn/Cr LDH under visible light irradiation. (b) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of LDH4 before and after exposure to 420 nm irradiation for 5 h in the presence of O2 (adapted with permission from ref. 80 @Copyright 2016 Royal Chemical Society). 
Furthermore, Wei et al.81 prepared a series of M2+ (Ni, Zn, Mg)/Ti-layered hydroxide that established oxo-bridged bimetallic linkages of the M2+–O–Ti4+ network for water splitting; TiO2 was weakly absorbed in the visible region. Kang et al.82 developed Ti-embedded (Ni/Ti) LDH and (Cu/Ti) LDH as water oxidation catalysts under visible light. XPS analyses revealed that the LDHs are composed of two metal-centered octahedra that are bonded to each other by a metal oxo-bridge. The structure of LDHs and the bonding nature for a mixed oxide structure of LDHs can oxidize water molecules in the visible range. An iron-based LDH promoted photocatalytic water oxidation to produce O2 from aqueous silver nitrate solution under visible light irradiation because of the existence of the iron–oxo-bridged linkage. In the case of Fe-centered corrole, a TiO4 site was photo-excited in the presence of monochromatic light, leading to electron transfer from TiO4 to the Fe corrole catalyst via an oxo-bridged Ti–O–Fe bimetallic linkage.83
Furthermore, Kang et al. attempted to prepare LDH-containing Co–Fe with cobalt and iron ratios of 2.23, 3.33, and 4.16 using a co-precipitation method for water oxidation under visible light. The UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra showed that the peak at approximately 500 nm corresponds to MMCT and results in efficient water oxidation.84
5. Outlook and perspectives
In this updated review, the status of oxo-bridged system applications for photocatalytic processes has been summarized, including the non-selective processes for pollutant degradation and water splitting to H2 and oxygen gas evolution. In particular, we have discussed some key features of the oxo-bridged system, the nature of MMCT spectra in the oxo-bridged system, and their photocatalytical applications. These materials have great potential to address various environmental and energy-related issues. Therefore, the high flexibility in metal combination offers the opportunities to design and fabricate hetero-bimetallic oxo-bridged inorganic photocatalysts depending on the need of the target reactions. Each photocatalytic site consists of a hetero-binuclear unit acting as a visible light charge-transfer pump driving a multi-electron transfer catalytic process. The charge separation strategies have primarily been centered on the use of oxo-structured semiconductor materials. The hetero-binuclear oxo-bridged structure with MMCT transitions is an effective approach for obtaining high charge separation. This enhances the separation of electrons and holes, drastically reduces the chance of recombination, and significantly increases the lifetime of the photo-excited charge carriers. This effect is a major contributor that enhances the photocatalytic efficiency.
Over the past decades, great progress has been made in the use, tailoring, and properties of hetero-binuclear oxo-bridged systems; however, a large area remains to be explored. Therefore, further research is warranted to study the mechanism of MMCT of hetero-binuclear oxo-bridged systems because it is quite complicated and the reported studies are quite scattered.
Solar photosynthesis and photocatalytic processes are carried out under different experimental conditions depending on their applications. The photocatalyzed pollutant degradation originates from a single electron transfer process in the presence of oxygen and results in the generation of reactive oxygen species for the degradation and mineralization of organic substrates. On the other hand, a multi-electron transfer process mediates the photocatalytic water splitting for H2 evolution in the absence of oxygen; the presence of O2 obstructs the photocatalytic production of H2. A photocatalyst may not be efficiently optimized for both purposes, therefore, it is quite challenging to prepare a good photocatalyst for both systems under different reaction conditions. Recently, a selective dual functional photocatalyst was reported for the mineralization of organic pollutants and H2 evolution by using a Cr2O3/Rh/SrTiO3 (ternary system) photocatalyst under de-aerated conditions.85 Furthermore, the dual functional photocatalytic activity of Pt/GO/TiO2-F (ternary system) was reported for the simultaneous H2 production as well as the degradation of 4-CP.86 Another promising area for future advances in photochemistry is supramolecular photocatalysts constructed of redox photosensitizers for photocatalysis. Mesoporous organo-silica acts as a light harvesting material and can combine with photosensitizers like Ru1 or Re1 for CO2 reduction, which might show enhanced properties.87
There are other attractive materials such as LDH oxo-bridged systems, where the binuclear MMCT groups demonstrate covalent anchoring through the metal–oxygen bonds on the brucite layer. Due to the flexibility of the oxidation states of the metals, they act as a solar light absorbing chromophore. Undoubtedly, LDH-based oxo-bridged systems have great potential for being robust materials to address various environmental and energy-related issues. The research field of oxo-bridged-LDH systems for application in the fields of energy and environment is a very promising one, and the rapid progress in this field has yet to be fully exploited.
Overall, the aim of this mini-review was to provide further insight regarding the fabrication and photocatalytic use of this unique class of fascinating hetero-bimetallic oxo-bridged systems. We believe that this study should be of great interest for extending the traditional photocatalytic theories and will offer encouraging strategies for emerging new visible-light photocatalysts.
References
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniecc and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Sahoo, D. Rath, B. Nanda and K. M. Parida, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 83707–83724 RSC .
W. Lin and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1610–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lin and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4929–4935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. J. Farrauto and C. H. Bartholomew, Fundamentals of Industrial Catalytic Progress, Blackie Academic & Professional, New York,  1997 Search PubMed .

          R. A. Sheldon and J. K. Kochi, Metal-Catalyzed Oxidations of Organic Compounds, Academic Press, New York,  1981 Search PubMed .
J. Ipaktschi, P. Rooshenas, T. Klotzbach, A. Dülmer and E. Hüseynova, Organometallics, 2005, 24, 1351–1354 CrossRef CAS .
N. W. Waggoner, B. Saccoccia, I. A. Ibarra, V. M. Lynch, P. T. Wood and S. M. Humphrey, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 12674–12676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Sato, T. Iyoda, A. Fujishima and K. Hashimoto, Science, 1996, 272, 704–705 CAS .
K. Szacilowski, W. Macyk and G. Stochel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4550–4551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khoudiakov, A. R. Parise and B. S. Brunschwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4637–4642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Kadish, L. Femond, Z. Ou, J. Shao, C. Shi, F. C. Anson, F. Burdet, C. P. Gros, J. Barge and R. Guilard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5625–5631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Watson, H. S. Tan, E. Schreiber, C. J. Mordas and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 3261–3267 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Macpherson, P. V. Bernhardt, A. Hauser, S. Pages and E. Vauthey, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 5530–5536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Chen, J. F. Endicott and P. G. McNamarra, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 6748–6760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mohapatra and K. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10744–10766 CAS .
T. Hua, O. Shuxin, B. Yingpu, U. Naoto, O. Mitsutake and Y. Jinhua, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef PubMed .
L. G. Devi and R. Kavitha, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140, 559–587 CrossRef .
M. M. Khin, A. S. Nair, V. J. Babu, R. Murugana and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8075–8109 CAS .

  (a) S. P. Mc Glynn, T. Azunai and D. Kumar, Chem. Rev., 1981, 81, 475–494 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Matin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. B. Robin and P. Day, Adv. Inorg. Chem. Radiochem., 1967, 8, 391–444 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) N. S. Husk, Prog. Inorg. Chem., 1967, 8, 391–444 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) B. S. Brunschwig, C. Creutz and N. Sutin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 168–184 RSC ; 
  (d) S. Dey, R. A. Ricciardo, H. L. Cuthbert and P. M. Woodward, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 4394–4399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Grätzel, Photosensitization and Photocatalysis Using Inorganic and Organometallic Compounds, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  1993 Search PubMed .
H. Han and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8391–8399 CAS .
H. Han and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16156–16159 CAS .
W. Kim, E. Edri and H. Frei, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1634–1645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kim, B. A. McClure, E. Edri and H. Frei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3221–3243 RSC .
D. Zhao, J. Feng, Q. Huo, N. Melosh, G. H. Fredrickson, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Science, 1998, 279, 548–552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Maschmeyer, F. Rey, G. Sankar and J. M. Thomas, Nature, 1995, 378, 159–162 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Macnaughtan, H. S. Soo and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7874–7885 CAS .
H. S. Soo, M. L. Macnaughtan, W. W. Weare, J. Yano and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24893–24905 CAS .
T. Cuk, W. W. Weare and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9167–9172 CAS .
H. Han and H. Frei, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 103, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nakamura and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10668–10669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nakamura, A. Okamoto, H. Osawa, H. Irie and K. Hashimoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9596–9597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Okamoto, R. Nakamura, H. Osawa and K. Hashimoto, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7011–7017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Holm, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1990, 100, 183–221 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Holm, Chem. Rev., 1987, 87, 1401–1449 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Holm and J. M. Berg, Acc. Chem. Res., 1986, 19, 363–370 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Vogler and H. Kunkely, Light Induced Electron Transfer of Metal Complex, Elsevier Science Publishers,  1992, vol. 78, pp. 32–43 Search PubMed .

          V. Arnd and K. Horst, Photochemistry of Transition Metal Complexes Induced by Outer-Sphere Charge Transfer Excitation, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg,  1990 Search PubMed .
G. Blasse, Optical Electron Transfer between Metal Ions and its Consequences, Struct. Bonding, 1991, 76, 153–187 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, N. Sabbatini and F. Scandola, Chem. Rev., 1986, 86, 319–337 CrossRef CAS .
A. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cattaneo, F. Fagalde and N. E. Katz, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 127–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, S. M. Hu, C. H. Tan, C. J. Shen, Q. L. Zhu, Y. H. Wen, R. B. Fu, T. L. Sheng and X. T. Wu, Polyhedron, 2012, 41, 86–91 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, S. M. Hu, C. H. Tan, Y. H. Wen, Q. L. Zhu, C. J. Shen, T. L. Sheng and X. T. Wu, Dalton. Trans., 2012, 41, 12163–12169 RSC .
X. Ma, C. S. Lin, H. Zhang, Y. J. Lin, S. M. Hu, T. L. Sheng and X. T. Wu, Dalton. Trans., 2013, 42, 12452–12459 RSC .
X. Ma, S. M. Hu, C. H. Tan, Y. F. Zhang, X. D. Zhang, T. L. Sheng and X. T. Wu, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 11343–11350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, C. S. Lin, S. M. Hu, C. H. Tan, Y. H. Wen, T. L. Sheng and X. T. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 1–13 CrossRef .
X. Wu, T. Huang, T. T. Lekich, R. D. Sommer and W. W. Weare, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 5322–5328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, S. Ouyang, L. Liu, P. Reunchan, N. Umezawa and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12642–12661 CAS .
F. Fresno, R. L. Portela, S. Suárezc and J. M. Coronado, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2863–2884 CAS .
B. Dominik and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8547–8556 Search PubMed .
A. Okamoto, R. Nakamura, H. Osawa and K. Hashimoto, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7011–7017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nakamura, A. Okamoto, H. Osawa, H. Irie and K. Hashimoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9596–9597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, H. Liab and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8475–8505 CAS .
M. Liu, X. Qiu, M. Miyauchi and K. Hashimoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10064–10072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu, F. Teng, S. Tapas, D. Qi, L. Wang and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rodrigues, K. T. Ranjit, S. Uma, I. N. Martyanov and K. J. Klabunde, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2467–2471 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, Z. Shu and J. Shi, Catal. Commun., 2013, 33, 24–28 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nakamura, T. Tanaka and Y. Nakato, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 10617–10620 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. McEvoy and G. W. Brudvig, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4455–4483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Min, Q. Xiaoqing, M. Masahiro and H. Kazuhito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10064–10072 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, J. Ye, T. Kako and T. Kimura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 32(110), 15824–15830 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhanga and J. Lin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 3896–3905 RSC .
Y.-J. Cho, G.-H. Moon, T. Kanazawa, K. Maedab and W. Choi, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9636–9639 RSC .
T.-H. Xie, X. Sun and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9753–9759 CAS .
C. Zhanga and J. Lin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 3896–3905 RSC .
X. Sun and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4970–4975 CAS .
L. Mohapatra, K. Parida and M. Satpathy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13063–13070 CAS .
K. Parida, L. Mohapatra and N. Baliarsingh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22417–22424 CAS .
N. Baliarsingh, K. M. Parida and G. C. Pradhan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 3834–3841 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mohapatra and K. M. Parida, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16985–16996 RSC .
L. Wenyong and F. Heinz, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 207–213 CrossRef .
R. Nakamura and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10668–10669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, W. W. Weare and H. Frei, Dalton Trans., 2009, 10114–10121 RSC .
N. Baliarsingh, L. Mohapatra and K. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4236–4243 CAS .
Y. Zhao, P. Chen, B. Zhang, D. S. Su, S. Zhang, L. Tian, J. Lu, Z. Li, X. Cao, B. Wang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 11949–11958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, J. H. Choi, H. J. Jeon, K. M. Choi, J. W. Lee and J. K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 914–920 CAS .
A. Okamoto, R. Nakamura, H. Osawa and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19777–19783 CAS .
S. J. Kim, Y. Lee, D. Ki Lee, J. W. Lee and J. K. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4136–4139 CAS .
Y.-J. Cho, G.-H. Moon, T. Kanazawa, K. Maedab and W. Cho, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9636–9639 RSC .
Y.-J. Cho, H.-I. Kim, S. Lee and W. Choi, J. Catal., 2015, 330, 387–395 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ueda, H. Takeda, T. Yui, K. Koike, Y. Goto, S. Inagaki and O. Ishitani, Chem. Sus. Chem., 2015, 8, 439–442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Lagnamayee Mohapatra	Dr. Lagnamayee Mohapatra completed her PhD degree from the CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, in Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), India under the guidance of Prof. Kulamani Parida. She received DST-DFG awards for selection in the meeting of 63rd Nobel laureates & students held at Lindau, Germany. Dr. Mohapatra's research topics deal with the development of highly efficient materials as photocatalysts for environmental remediation, and the production of clean energies as well development of electrochemical Redox Flow Batteries (RFB) by using modified/unmodified carbonaceous materials for energy storage application. Currently, she is working as a Post-Doctor Research Associate in Energy storage group, Qatar Environment and Energy Research Institute (QEERI) at Qatar.
Kulamani Parida	Prof. Kulamani Parida was working as a Chief Scientist at CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, India and also a Professor at the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India. Now he is working as professor in Chemistry and Director in Center for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University, Bhubaneswar, India where he is leading the efforts to develop novel catalytic materials for heterogeneous catalysis. His research interests include the design and development of advanced materials such as metal oxides/phosphates/sulfates, cationic and anionic clays, perovskites, carbonaceous based materials and naturally occurring materials for catalysis, energy and environmental applications. He has published more than 350 research articles in international journals and 27 national and international patents.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) involving an octahedral d6 complex. (b) Metal to ligand charge transfer in a d5 octahedral complex.	 
ΔG0 = −e(EiCB − E0) = εiCB − e(ECBbot − E0)	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of a semiconductor particle based photo catalyst (adapted with permission from ref. 19 @Copyright 2016 Royal Chemical Society). (b) Schematic illustration of oxo-bridged system based photocatalyst that can be used for water splitting and pollutant degradation.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of an ideal structure of a solid solution. (b) Optical difference spectrum of the solid solution Zr1−xCexO2 (x = 0.2) after 420 nm irradiation for 1 h in the presence of O2. (c) ESR spectra (recorded at 77 K) of the solid solution (a) before and (b) after visible-light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation for 1 h. (d) Schematic illustration of the oxo-bridged bimetallic ZrIV–O–CeIII constructed between two neighboring flattened tetrahedrons as a visible-light induced redox centre (adapted with permission from ref. 71 @Copyright 2016 Royal Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of anchored Zn(II)/Y(III) bimetallic oxo-linkage on the Zn/YLDH and its photocatalysis driven by the photoinduced MMCT. (b) Optical difference spectra of LDH material after 420 nm irradiation for 5 h in the presence of O2 (inset: UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of Zn/Y LDH before and after exposure to 420 nm irradiation for 5 h in the presence of O2) (adapted with permission from ref. 73 @Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Total mechanism for hydrogen evolution over Ni + Zn/Cr LDH under visible light irradiation. (b) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of LDH4 before and after exposure to 420 nm irradiation for 5 h in the presence of O2 (adapted with permission from ref. 80 @Copyright 2016 Royal Chemical Society).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
