Nanoscale triplet exciton diffusion via imaging of up-conversion emission from single hybrid nanoparticles in molecular crystals   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR01569K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR01569K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 10653-10661Nanoscale triplet exciton diffusion via imaging of up-conversion emission from single hybrid nanoparticles in molecular crystals†

        
          
            Kaishi 
            Narushima
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shuzo 
            Hirata
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Martin 
            Vacha
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1 Ookayama, Meguro, Tokyo 152-8552, Japan. E-mail: hirata.s.af@m.titech.ac.jp; vacha.m.aa@m.titech.ac.jp
Received 
      3rd March 2017
    , Accepted 19th May 2017First published on 23rd May 2017AbstractUp-conversion materials composed of donor and acceptor molecules which convert low energy photons into higher energy ones by triplet–triplet annihilation can improve the sensitivity of photocatalysts or the efficiency of solar cells. The use of crystalline materials can lead to a decrease in the up-conversion threshold intensity due to increased diffusion length LT of triplet excitons. Here, we demonstrate direct microscopic imaging of triplet exciton diffusion in polycrystalline films. The generation of high local density of triplet states is achieved by functionalizing alumina nanospheres with donor molecules and dispersing them in the acceptor films. Diffusion of the triplet excitons and up-converted emission are reflected in enlarged microscopic images of the nanoparticles. Analysis provides the average LT values of 491 nm for the acceptor of polycrystalline anthracene and 172 nm for polycrystalline 9,10-diphenylanthracene, and reveals large distributions of the diffusion characteristics. These average values are more than an order of magnitude larger than LT obtained by a conventional method, and highlight the need for accurate nanoscale characterization of the up-conversion materials.
Introduction
Photon up-conversion (UC) materials convert lower energy photons into higher energy ones.1–3 The UC photophysical process has a strong potential towards improving the sensitivity of photocatalysts4 or the energy efficiency of solar cells.5 Recently, the UC mechanism based on energy transfer between organic donor and acceptor molecules followed by triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) has shown rapid progress in increasing the quantum yield of UC emission.6–11 Solutions,6,7 gels,8,9 conjugated polymers,10 and deposited bilayers11 with TTA based UC characteristics have been reported. A high quantum yield has been reported in a variety of soft materials such as solutions and gels. Despite the high UC quantum yield in these materials, one of the remaining obstacles towards widespread applications is a large irradiation intensity threshold Ith for the generation of the UC emission. Because of the large Ith, the process does not work under weak continuous irradiation such as sunlight. One of the crucial factors to achieve low Ith is an increase of the diffusion length LT of triplet excitons of the acceptor molecules because Ith is theoretically inversely proportional to LT. Large values of LT are related to fast diffusion (large diffusion coefficient) of the acceptor triplet excitons and to the triplet lifetime. In soft UC materials the triplet exciton diffusion is limited by Brownian diffusion of the acceptor molecules themselves,12 which places severe restrictions on the achievable values of LT. Recently, several approaches have been reported to decrease Ith using binary crystals consisting of donor molecules doped into acceptor crystals.13–17 In crystalline UC materials, the diffusion coefficient of triplet excitons of the acceptor, which is determined by triplet–triplet energy transfer in the acceptor crystal, is typically larger than that based on Brownian motion of acceptor molecules in soft materials.12,18–20 Therefore, accurate measurement of LT in UC crystals will be very important in the development of the state-of-the-art UC materials working under a weak continuous light such as sunlight.
In homogeneous soft samples such as liquid-state UC materials and UC gels, LT can be determined from the relationship between UC emission intensity and excitation light intensity, using an absorption coefficient of donor molecules (α) and the efficiency of T–T energy transfer from the donor molecules to the acceptor molecules (ΦET).12,21 However, accurate measurements of α and ΦET are generally difficult in UC crystals because the donor molecules can be dispersed inhomogeneously in the acceptor crystals. Although the LT of single-component aromatic crystals has been reported using a variety of measurement techniques, there are large differences in LT values obtained by each method even for the same aromatic crystalline structures.22 Such differences may be partly attributed to the indirect nature of some of the above methods. Direct measurement of triplet exciton diffusion by recording the spatial decrease of delayed fluorescence intensity has been demonstrated more than 50 years ago.23 Recently, more advanced microscopic techniques that use such delayed fluorescence imaging18,24,25 as well as techniques employing transient absorption imaging19,20 have been reported. Time-dependent information18–20 of the delayed fluorescence images as well as the transient absorption images have provided more accurate information regarding the LT for some aromatic crystals. However, in the context of nanoscale characterization, these methods are limited by the optical resolution of the microscope because triplet excitons are generated in the whole diffraction-limited volume and any sub-diffraction size structures and heterogeneities are averaged out by the excitation light. To study truly localized nanoscale triplet diffusion processes an ideal method would be microscopic imaging using a localized point-like triplet exciton generator with size much smaller than the diffraction-limited volume. However, single donor molecules cannot be utilized as individual triplet exciton generators because the very long lifetimes of triplet excited states and the necessity for large local density of the generated triplet excitons preclude a detection of an adequate amount of photons using conventional photodetectors. In addition to the question of resolution, in multi-component donor–acceptor systems the application of the above methods requires homogeneous dispersion of the donor molecules within the acceptor matrices. As will be shown below, imperfect dispersion can lead to erroneous values of the exciton diffusion lengths that can differ from the correct values by orders of magnitude.
Here, to overcome these problems, we propose direct observation of LT in UC crystalline systems consisting of donor-functionalized nanoparticles and acceptor molecules. In these systems, individual hybrid donor nanoparticles (HDPs) prepared by chemically attaching donor molecules together with fluorescence dyes to an alumina nanosphere were doped into acceptor molecular crystals to serve as localized point-like triplet exciton generators with sizes corresponding to the size of the nanosphere. In microscopic single-particle fluorescence images under green laser excitation, individual HDPs in the film generated red emission due to fluorescence of the fluorescence dyes as well as blue UC emission due to fluorescence of the acceptor molecules. The emission was spectrally separated, and blue-region as well as red-region emission images were simultaneously recorded side-by-side on a CCD camera, enabling the analysis of the different color emission patterns from individual HDPs at the same time. Comparative analysis of the two images enabled direct determination of LT in the acceptor UC crystals. The directly determined LT was 10 times larger than that determined by conventional methods, a difference that is discussed in terms of aggregation of donor molecules in the binary UC crystals which lead to an underestimation of LT in the conventional methods.
Results and discussion
Schematic outline of the method to observe LT directly is shown in Fig. 1. The HDP nanoparticles with donor and fluorescent molecules attached were dispersed into an UC material consisting of polycrystalline films of acceptor molecules. Excited fluorescent dyes attached to the alumina nanoparticles emit fluorescence at the position of HDP because they have been chosen so that they do not transfer energy to acceptor molecules.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration to explain the visualization LT. LHDP and LUC are the size of down-conversion fluorescence from FD and the size of UC emission from acceptor molecules, respectively. LUC is larger than LHDP due to the triplet exciton diffusion. 
The size LHDP of this fluorescence light spot in the microscopic image is determined only by convolution of the microscopic point spread function (PSF) and the actual size of the HDP (30 nm). On the other hand, excited donor molecules undergo efficient intersystem crossing and can transfer their triplet energy to acceptor molecules, resulting in the generation of triplet excitons of acceptor molecules around the HDP. These generated triplet excitons can diffuse in the polycrystal of acceptor molecules by triplet–triplet energy transfer. When two of these triplet excitons collide with each other, TTA can occur and an up-converted fluorescence photon is generated in the vicinity of HDP. As a result, the size LUC of the UC emission light spot is larger than that of down-converted fluorescence due to the triplet exciton diffusion, and the value of LT can be extracted from the microscopic images as shown below.
The chemical structures of the donor, acceptor and fluorescent molecules, their basic spectral characterization and a schematic diagram of the energy levels and relevant photophysical processes are shown in Fig. 2. Pt(II) Mesoporphyrin IX (D1) and Mesoporphyrin IX-dihydrochloride (FD1) were used as the donor and fluorescent molecules, respectively. Anthracene (AC) or 9,10-diphenylanthracene (DPA) were used as the acceptors. The D1 and FD1 contain carbonyl groups for chemical attachment to the hydroxyl-functionalized alumina nanoparticles to form the HDP. Fig. 2b and c show absorption and emission spectra of the compounds in a tetrahydrofuran (THF) solution. D1 absorbs at 532 nm and undergoes intersystem crossing with 100% efficiency to form triplet excited states.26 These triplet states generate phosphorescence at 650 nm, as seen in Fig. 2b. The triplet energy states of AC and DPA are lower than those of D1 (Fig. 2d),1 enabling efficient triplet–triplet energy transfer from D1 to both types of acceptor molecules. Diffusion of the acceptor triplet excitons and the consequent TTA result in the generation of singlet excitons of the acceptors and further in up-converted fluorescence characterized by the spectra shown in Fig. 2c. In addition to D1, the molecules of FD1 also absorb at 532 nm. However, since FD1 is a metal-free analogue its intersystem crossing is inefficient27 and the molecule emits the usual (down-converted) fluorescence at 625 nm, as shown in Fig. 2b. This fluorescence from FD1 is used to localize the HDPs in the microscopic images and to measure the reference size of the emission spot in the absence of triplet diffusion.
 Fig. 2  (a) Chemical structures of D1, FD1, AC, and DPA. (b) Absorption and emission spectra of D1 and FD1 in THF. (c) Absorption and emission spectra of AC and DPA in THF. (d) Energy diagram in the UC material composed of HDP and acceptor crystals. 
For a sample using AC polycrystalline films as the acceptor, examples of the emission microscopic images of fluorescence from FD1 attached to the HDP and of UC emission from AC in the vicinity of HDP are shown in Fig. 3a and b, respectively. It is apparent that the size of the light spot in the UC emission image is larger than that in the fluorescence image. It should be noted that in both images a substantial contribution to the spot size arises from the PSF which itself is larger for the fluorescence because of the longer-wavelength spectral region. Therefore, in Fig. 3c which shows horizontal cross-sections at the center of the two images, and in the subsequent analysis, the PSF in the fluorescence region at 625 nm was corrected to the corresponding region of the peak of UC emission to obtain the correct PSF (see the ESI† for details).
 Fig. 3  Analysis of up-conversion emission and fluorescence from HDPs. (a–d) AC acceptor films; (e–h) DPA acceptor films. (a, e) Images of a spot of the fluorescence from a single HDP. (b, f) Images of a spot of the UC emission from a single HDP. (c, g) One-dimensional intensity cross-sections of the spots of UC emission and fluorescence. Black lines represent fits of the UC emission cross-section to eqn (4). (d, h) Histograms of LT (bars) for AC (d) and DPA (h). The red dotted lines are Gaussian fits to the distributions. The red solid lines in (h) represent a histogram of crystal grain sizes of DPA as analyzed from SEM images of the films. 
The larger size of the UC emission spot results from diffusion of the triplet excitons within the AC films and the subsequent TTA which gives rise to the UC emission. One-dimensional density of triplet excitons nT(x) along the direction x can be obtained as a solution of the diffusion equation24 as follows: nT(x) = T0exp(−x/LT),(1)where T0 is a constant and LT is the exciton diffusion length. Eqn (1) was obtained from a general rate equation under steady state conditions upon the assumption that the contribution from the source of triplet excitons and the contribution due to TTA could be neglected. Under such conditions, that is, far from the source of triplet excitons the dynamics is dominated by exciton diffusion as described by eqn (1). In our experiments, the size of the triplet source (30 nm, much less than 1 pixel of the CCD image) is much smaller than the typical sizes of the images (such as in Fig. 3). The measurements and analysis were thus done mostly in regions that are far distant from the triplet source and the use of eqn (1) as well as the following eqn (2) is justifiable. Since the density of singlet excitons ns(x) resulting from the TTA process is proportional to the square of the triplet exciton density, the UC emission ‘length’ LUC which is a characteristic parameter in the singlet exciton density diffusion equation ns(x) ∼ S0exp(−x/Luc)(2)is related to LT as LT = 2LUC(3)where in eqn (2)S0 is a constant.
Even though the triplet excitation source (the HDP) is very small, the images of UC emission from acceptor molecules as well as of fluorescence from FD1 molecules are determined by the resolution of the microscope (light diffraction limit) which can be expressed using the PSF. In other words, if there was no triplet diffusion present, the size of the emission spot would still be given by the size of the PSF (and not HDP). In order to estimate the triplet exciton diffusion length correctly, the size of the PSF has to be taken into account. Therefore, the image of emission from FD1 was first used to determine the PSF, and the image size of UC emission was determined from the convolution of the density of singlet excitons ns(x) and the PSF. The convolution can be expressed using the UC emission intensity distribution Iuc(x) in the emission spot as: Iuc(x) = ns(x) × fPSF(x)(4)where fPSF(x) is the PSF. In the subsequent analysis, the CCD images (such as those in Fig. 3b) were fitted with the two-dimensional convolution function Iuc(x, y) (see the ESI† for details) to obtain directly the LUC values as fitting parameters. Generally, the UC emission spots were slightly asymmetric reflecting the anisotropic nature of the triplet diffusion process, and the 2D fitting resulted in different values of LUC along two orthogonal directions. For the purpose of comparison with bulk measurements (described later in this work), values of LUC taken as an average of the two directions were used to calculate the LT values using eqn (3). The LT values obtained in this way by measuring UC emission in the vicinity of 46 individual HDPs are summarized in the histogram in Fig. 3d. For reference, histograms of LT values constructed separately from the LUC values along the two orthogonal directions are shown in the ESI as Fig. S1.†
From the histogram in Fig. 3d, the mean triplet exciton diffusion length LT in AC polycrystalline films was determined to be 491 nm. Triplet diffusion lengths of the order of 10 μm have been reported before,22 but to achieve such long-distance transport, anthracene has to be highly purified and perfect mm-sized polished crystals have to be used to minimize defects and surface quenching. In this context, the value of 0.49 μm is reasonable given that the polycrystalline films are composed of micrometer-sized flakes and have sub-micron thickness, as seen from scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. S2, ESI†). We note that triplet diffusion lengths of the order of 0.6 μm have recently been reported in thin films of tetracene by using a similar optical method.18
It should be further noted that the distribution of the diffusion lengths LT in Fig. 3d is large, with a substantial fraction of measurement spots showing an LT of ∼ 800 nm. This distribution directly reflects the inhomogeneous nature of the polycrystalline AC film. The approach taken here of using a point-like source of triplet excitons in the form of the functionalized HDPs doped into the single-component acceptor medium and measuring the LT locally in different nanoscale environments is crucial to obtain information on this kind of inhomogeneity of the triplet diffusion process.
For comparison, we next used DPA polycrystalline films as the acceptor medium. DPA is a prototypical acceptor molecule that has been used in a number of recent reports.1,6,8,17,28Fig. 3e and f show again examples of the microscopic images of fluorescence from FD1 and of UC emission from DPA in the vicinity of HDP, respectively. Fig. 3g shows horizontal cross-sections of Fig. 3e and f after correction for the different wavelength regions. The profile of UC emission from DPA is just slightly larger than that of fluorescence. By analyzing data from 37 individual HDP spots using eqn (4), we obtained a histogram of LT as shown in Fig. 3h. From Fig. 3h, the mean triplet exciton diffusion length LT in DPA was 172 nm.
The different values of the mean triplet diffusion lengths LT obtained for AC and DPA, i.e., 491 nm and 172 nm, respectively, can be ascribed to differences in microscopic and mesoscopic structures of the acceptor films. Microscopically, there is a difference in the π orbital overlap in the triplet state between AC and DPA due to the different crystal structure. As seen in Fig. S3a and 3c,† electrons in the T1 state of both AC and DPA are localized on the anthracene part. However, DPA has a twisted structure of the side phenyl groups (Fig. S3c, ESI†) which prevents the DPA molecules from optimal stacking, whereas the lack of phenyl groups in AC enables more efficient overlap of the π orbitals. As a result, the Dexter triplet–triplet energy transfer which is the underlying mechanism of the exciton diffusion in these crystals is more efficient in the AC films. In addition, SEM reveals large differences in the structure of the polycrystalline films. The AC film is composed of flat crystal flakes with a size of a few micrometers (Fig. S2a, ESI†). On the other hand, the crystal grain size in DPA films was of the order of tens to hundreds of nanometers (Fig. S2b, ESI†). Size analysis of the DPA crystals measured by SEM is shown as an overlaid histogram in the Fig. 3h. There is a good correspondence between the two histograms, and the peak of the size histogram at 213 nm is comparable to the observed value of LT = 172 nm. This comparison suggests that the triplet excitons in DPA are quenched after reaching the grain boundary and that the crystal grain size is the limiting factor in the triplet exciton diffusion process. We note that the LT for DPA is smaller than the diffraction limit of confocal excitation. Therefore, the point-like triplet exciton generation and the detection of UC emission using the HDPs (of the size of 30 nm) were important to obtain more accurate values of the LT for DPA.
We note that the different microscopic structures of the AC and DPA films could potentially lead to different side effects of scattering, particularly for the small grain sizes of DPA. Scattering can be separated into scattering of excitation and scattering of emission light. The excitation was done in a wide-field epi-fluorescence mode and care was taken to carefully filter out all the excitation light. In addition, the excitation process itself takes place only at the location of the HDPs, and secondary scattering of the excitation light does not cause the excitation process to happen in other locations of the sample. On the other hand, scattering of emission can influence the results in the form of increased background, especially in the case of the short wavelength UC emission. However, when we compared the emission background in the image of large-crystal AC with the background in the image of small-grain DPA, the levels were comparable. This result led us to conclude that additional scattering from the DPA films could be neglected.
We also note that, in principle, these experiments may be affected by the polarization of the excitation light. In our samples, we assume that donor molecules were attached to the spherical alumina nanoparticles randomly and covering all their surface. The excitation of the HDPs was done with a circularly polarized light, ensuring homogeneous excitation of the attached donor molecules. As a result, the HDPs are assumed to be homogeneous isotropic sources of triplet excitons. On the other hand, the acceptor molecules form crystal grains in which the UC photons could be emitted along the direction of the radiative transition dipole moment of the acceptor molecules. However, we have not measured the polarization state of the UC emission because the rapid degradation of the samples would make it difficult to obtain enough data points for the various polarization angles.
In the following, we attempt to compare the direct imaging method with measurements by conventional techniques. One such conventional method measures the relationship between UC emission intensity and excitation light intensity. The HDP-doped acceptor films were not suitable for this type of experiment because photobleaching of single HDPs did not allow measurements over a sufficient range of excitation intensities. Instead, we followed the conventional approach and prepared binary UC crystals in which donor molecules are dispersed into the acceptor films of AC or DPA. The triplet diffusion length LT was determined using the following equations for the threshold intensity Ith and LT,12 (5) (6)where ΦET is the efficiency of triplet–triplet energy transfer from the donor to the acceptor, a is an interaction distance of a triplet pair of the acceptor molecules, DT is a diffusion coefficient of the triplet exciton of the acceptor and τ is its lifetime. The donor absorption cross-section α is calculated from the following equation, α = εcln10,(7)where ε is the molar extinction coefficient of the donor D1 and c is its concentration. The value of τ is determined from the measured decay time τUC of the UC emission to be τ = 2τUC.(8)
Furthermore, assuming that each donor molecule inside the crystalline film is fully surrounded by acceptor molecules, ΦET in eqn (5) can be approximated as 1. The value of a = 9.1 Å was taken from ref. 12, and a value of ε = 5 × 104 M−1 cm−1 of D1 in THF solution was used. The c value was calculated by assuming a density of acceptor molecules of 1.25 g cm−3. Given these theoretical considerations, the diffusion length LT can be estimated from experimentally measured Ith and τUC using eqn (5)–(8).
The dependence of UC emission intensity on the excitation intensity in the binary UC crystals is shown in Fig. 4a. Both AC and DPA show two distinct slopes of the dependence in different excitation intensity regions. In the region of low excitation intensity, the slope of the linear dependence had the value of 2 (Fig. 4a). This is because TTA is a second-order process involving two excitation photons per emitted photon. In the region of higher excitation intensity, on the other hand, the (steady-state) concentration of triplet excitons becomes high. Therefore, when an additional acceptor molecule is excited to its triplet state, it can interact with a nearby existing exciton to produce a UC photon. This leads to a change in the linearity slope from 2 to 1. The Ith was determined from an intersection of the two slopes, and its values were 5.5 × 101 mW cm−2 and 4.4 × 103 mW cm−2 for the AC and DPA systems, respectively.
 Fig. 4  UC emission characteristics. (a) UC emission intensity as a function of excitation power. Ith was taken at the cross points of the dotted lines. (b) Lifetime of UC emission under pulsed excitation at 532 nm. 
The crossover from 2 to 1 linearity is observed for both AC and DPA. However, the values of Ith are different and there are other differences in the shapes of the curves between the two samples. Compared with DPA, overlap of the π orbitals in AC is more efficient. Therefore, triplet excitons of AC can diffuse much longer and interact with faraway excitons, resulting in a lower value of Ith. In the measurement of Ith, we were careful not to cause degradation of the sample by starting the irradiation from low excitation intensity values and using short irradiation times. However, under air conditions (such as those used here), the existence of the triplet sensitizer can cause singlet oxygen to be generated easily. Singlet oxygen then leads to the formation endoperoxide, resulting in degradation of the sample. In the region of high excitation intensity, the number of experimental data points for the DPA sample was larger than that for the AC sample. Therefore, DPA was possibly partly degraded in the high intensity region contributing to the observed differences in the intensity dependences.

Fig. 4b shows temporal intensity decays of the UC emission. Analysis of the decays was done using multi-exponential fitting. Three longest components obtained from the fitting were used to calculate average decay times τUC of 7.4 × 10−5 s and 1.8 × 10−4 s for AC and DPA, respectively. Using these values in eqn (5) and (6), the LT of AC and DPA were estimated to be 50 nm and 4.9 nm, respectively. The multicomponent nature of the decay may partly reflect spatial inhomogeneities of the crystalline samples. We considered the average lifetime values to reduce the effect of such inhomogeneities and to estimate the maximum possible value of the triplet exciton diffusion length. We note that in the literature29 the longest component alone is often used to estimate the LT values. For reference, the analysis using the longest component can be found in the ESI.† By taking the averages of decay times, we reduced the underestimation of triplet exciton diffusion length in this conventional method.
A comparison with the direct method shows that the LT values measured by this conventional method were about an order of magnitude smaller than those obtained by the direct imaging method. One possible reason for this large discrepancy between results obtained by the two methods is a non-uniform distribution of the donor molecules in the acceptor crystal films. The application of the conventional method as described above is based on the assumption of a uniform dispersion of the donor molecules. However, if the donor D1 molecules were not dispersed uniformly and formed aggregates, the triplet energy of such aggregates would be lower than that of isolated D1 molecules. In addition, H-type aggregation of porphyrins leads to increased non-radiative quenching of excitations, which results in lower efficiency of triplet–triplet energy transfer to acceptor molecules. Therefore, such D1 aggregates absorb light but ultimately contribute considerably less to the UC emission than their monomer counterparts. To verify the presence of D1 aggregates we measured the transmission spectrum of the UC sample using a microscope, and found that the absorption spectrum of D1 was red-shifted compared with that of D1 in solution (Fig. S4, ESI†). Therefore, the UC emission occurs primarily from the region of the sample where there D1 is molecularly dispersed. From these considerations it is evident that the concentration c of D1 in eqn (7), which was calculated assuming no aggregation, was largely overestimated. The overestimation of c, i.e., overestimation of α, leads to underestimation of LT, as seen in eqn (5). Therefore, it is conceivable that the values of LT determined using a conventional method are underestimated due to inaccurate measurement of the donor absorption cross-section. To accurately measure α, it is necessary to measure the optical path which is, however, difficult in polycrystalline sample such as binary UC crystals. Here, the present method of imaging LT in UC crystals which uses direct optical localization of a well-characterized triplet-exciton nanoscale point-like source provides physically reliable results and can overcome the shortcomings of the conventional methods.
Conclusions
Direct microscopic imaging of triplet exciton diffusion in polycrystalline up-conversion materials was demonstrated. A key feature of the method is that excitation of the donor molecules and generation of high local density of triplet states are confined to spatial locations much smaller than the diffraction limit of light and can thus be regarded as point-like sources of triplet excitons. These point-like sources are dispersed in the acceptor medium so that they can be distinguished and identified at the single-particle level. As a result, the triplet exciton diffusion in the single-component acceptor medium can be studied individually and nanoscale location-dependent characteristics of the exciton diffusion process can be obtained. Since the donor molecules are dispersed in the acceptor medium in a well-controlled form of functionalized nanoparticles, the method is free of artefacts related to inhomogeneous distribution or aggregation of the donor molecules. Such artefacts present in conventional methods can lead to underestimation of the exciton diffusion length by more than an order of magnitude. Therefore, the direct imaging method using individual point-like triplet exciton generators has potential for accurate nanoscale characterization of crystalline up-conversion materials.
Experimental
The UC crystalline film samples containing HDPs were prepared as follows. D1 (Frontier Scientific) and FD1 (Frontier Scientific) were dissolved in THF and ethanol, respectively, at the concentration of 10−4 M. A THF solution of D1, an ethanol solution of FD1 and an ethanol solution of hydroxyl-functionalized alumina nanoparticles (30 nm, C.I. KASEI) were mixed in 3:1:1 volume ratio and stirred for 12 hours. After that, HDPs were separated from the solution by centrifuging (120 rpm, 10 minutes) and re-dispersed in 1 mL of THF. This solution was further diluted 1000 times with a 10−1 M THF solution of AC (Tokyo Chemical Industry). The solution was spin-coated on a glass substrate (3000 rpm, 30 s) to form UC polycrystalline films of AC doped with HDPs. UC polycrystalline films consisting of DPA (Tokyo Chemical Industry) and HDPs were prepared in a similar way. The reference samples of binary UC crystals consisting of D1 and acceptor molecules were prepared by dissolving D1 and acceptor molecules in THF at 1:1000 molar concentration ratio and drop-casting the solution on a glass substrate.
Bulk absorption and emission spectra were measured using a standard UV-visible/NIR spectrophotometer (V-760, Jasco) and a real-time multichannel spectrometer (PMA-12 C10027-01, Hamamatsu Photonics), respectively. Lifetimes were measured using a fluorescence lifetime analysis system (Quantaurus-Tau C11367-24, Hamamatsu Photonics), using a flash lamp as the excitation light (C11567-02, Hamamatsu Photonics) with a bandwidth of about 30 nm. The detection bandwidth was 5 nm.
Microscopic measurements (ESI, Fig. S5†) were carried out with an inverted fluorescence microscope (IX 71, Olympus). The excitation light was provided by a continuous wave laser (TDG532-500, Changchun New Industries Optoelectronics Tech.) at 532 nm. Emission from the sample was collected by an oil immersion objective lens (×100 UPLSAPO, N.A. 1.3, Olympus) with a dichroic mirror (FF552-Di01-25-25 × 36, Semrock) and a Notch filter (NF01-532U-25, Semrock). The emission was further divided spectrally by an image splitter (Optosplit II, Cairn) equipped with a dichroic mirror (FF 532-Di02-25 × 36, Semrock), into a short-wavelength part corresponding to the UC emission from acceptor molecules, and a long-wavelength part corresponding to the fluorescence from FD1-attached HDP. The UC emission and fluorescence were further filtered with a short-pass filter (FF01-492/SP-25, Semrock) and a long-pass filter (590 nm, Nikon), respectively, and imaged side-by-side on an electron-multiplying (EM) CCD camera (iXon, Andor Technology). To measure microscopic emission from the reference samples of binary crystals consisting of D1 and acceptor molecules, the same optical setup was used except for using only the short-pass filter (FF01-492/SP-25, Semrock) for imaging.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the JSPS and NSF under the JSPS-NSF International Collaborations in Chemistry (ICC) and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP26107014 in Scientific Research on Innovative Areas “Photosynergetics”.
References
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2560–2573 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zou, C. Visser, J. A. Maduro, M. S. Pshenichnikov and J. C. Hummelen, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 560–564 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baluschev, K. Katta, Y. Avlasevicha and K. Landfester, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 478–486 RSC .
Z. Zhang, W. Wang, W. Yin, M. Shang, L. Wang and S. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 101, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Cheng, B. Fückel, R. W. MacQueen, T. Khoury, R. G. C. R. Clady, T. F. Schulze, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley, B. Stannowski, K. Lips and T. W. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6953–6959 CAS .
S. Baluschev, T. Miteva, V. Yakutkin, G. Nelles, A. Yasuda and G. Wegner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 143903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Murakami, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 516, 56–61 CrossRef CAS .
P. Duan, N. Yanai, H. Nagatomi and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1887–1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Murakami, Y. Himuro, T. Ito, R. Morita, K. Niimi and N. Kiyoyanagi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 120, 748–755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Jankus, E. W. Snedden, D. W. Bright, L. V. Whittle, J. A. G. Williams and A. Monkman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 384–393 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, D. N. Congreve, M. W. B. Wilson, J. Jean, N. Geva, M. Welborn, T. Van Voorhis, V. Bulovic, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Baldo, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 10, 31–34 CrossRef .
A. Monguzzi, J. Mezyk, F. Scotognella, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2008, 78, 195112 CrossRef .
S. Baluschev, V. Yakutkin, G. Wegner, B. Minch, T. Miteva, G. Nelles and A. Yasuda, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 023101 CrossRef .
H. Goudarzi and P. E. Keivanidis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14256–14265 CAS .
R. Karpocz, S. Puzinas, V. Gulbinas, A. Vakhnin, A. Kadashchuk and B. P. Rand, Chem. Phys., 2014, 429, 57–62 CrossRef .
M. Hosoyamada, N. Yanai, T. Ogawa and N. Kimizuka, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 2060–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kamada, Y. Sakagami, T. Mizokuro, Y. Fujiwara, K. Kobayashi, K. Narushima, S. Hirata and M. Vacha, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 83–87 RSC .
G. M. Akselrod, P. B. Deotare, N. J. Thompson, J. Lee, W. A. Tisdale, M. A. Baldo, V. M. Menon and V. Bulovć, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3646 CAS .
Y. Wan, Z. Guo, T. Zhu, S. Yan, J. Johnson and L. Huang, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 785–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhu, Y. Wan, Z. Guo, J. Johnson and L. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7539–7547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jortner, S. Choi, J. L. Katz and S. A. Rice, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1963, 11, 323–326 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Mikhnenko, P. W. M. Blom and T.-Q. Nguyen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1867–1888 Search PubMed .
P. Avakian and R. E. Merrifield, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1964, 13, 541–543 CrossRef CAS .
P. Irkhin and I. Biaggio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 017402 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Irkhin, I. Biaggio, T. Zimmerling, M. Döbeli and B. Batlogg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 063302 CrossRef .
A. K. Bansal, W. Holzer, A. Penzkofer and T. Tsuboi, Chem. Phys., 2006, 330, 118–129 CrossRef CAS .
D. Eastwood and M. Gouterman, Mol. Spectrosc., 1970, 35, 359–375 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Islangulov, D. V. Kozlov and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1, 3776–3778 RSC .
P. Duan, D. Asthana, T. Nakashima, T. Kawai, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 196, 305–316 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The relationship between the exciton diffusion length and microscopically observable parameters, additional supporting histogram of LT, scanning electron microscopy images, additional data from quantum calculations, absorption spectrum of D1 doped in a polycrystalline film, and details of the experimental setup for microscopic imaging. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr01569kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration to explain the visualization LT. LHDP and LUC are the size of down-conversion fluorescence from FD and the size of UC emission from acceptor molecules, respectively. LUC is larger than LHDP due to the triplet exciton diffusion.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Chemical structures of D1, FD1, AC, and DPA. (b) Absorption and emission spectra of D1 and FD1 in THF. (c) Absorption and emission spectra of AC and DPA in THF. (d) Energy diagram in the UC material composed of HDP and acceptor crystals.	 

 	Fig. 3  Analysis of up-conversion emission and fluorescence from HDPs. (a–d) AC acceptor films; (e–h) DPA acceptor films. (a, e) Images of a spot of the fluorescence from a single HDP. (b, f) Images of a spot of the UC emission from a single HDP. (c, g) One-dimensional intensity cross-sections of the spots of UC emission and fluorescence. Black lines represent fits of the UC emission cross-section to eqn (4). (d, h) Histograms of LT (bars) for AC (d) and DPA (h). The red dotted lines are Gaussian fits to the distributions. The red solid lines in (h) represent a histogram of crystal grain sizes of DPA as analyzed from SEM images of the films.	 
nT(x) = T0exp(−x/LT),	(1)
ns(x) ∼ S0exp(−x/Luc)	(2)
LT = 2LUC	(3)
Iuc(x) = ns(x) × fPSF(x)	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
α = εcln10,	(7)
τ = 2τUC.	(8)

 	Fig. 4  UC emission characteristics. (a) UC emission intensity as a function of excitation power. Ith was taken at the cross points of the dotted lines. (b) Lifetime of UC emission under pulsed excitation at 532 nm.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The relationship between the exciton diffusion length and microscopically observable parameters, additional supporting histogram of LT, scanning electron microscopy images, additional data from quantum calculations, absorption spectrum of D1 doped in a polycrystalline film, and details of the experimental setup for microscopic imaging. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr01569k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
