Enhanced triplet–triplet annihilation in bicomponent organic systems by using a gap plasmon resonator   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR02813B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR02813B
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12828-12832Enhanced triplet–triplet annihilation in bicomponent organic systems by using a gap plasmon resonator†

        
          
            Jun Kue 
            Park
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Gi Yong 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kinam 
            Jung
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Doo-Hyun 
            Ko
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Il Ki 
            Han
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Hyungduk 
            Ko
          
        
      *a
aNanophotonics Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 136-791, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kohd94@kist.re.kr
bKorea Multi-purpose Accelerator Complex, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Gyeongju 780-904, Republic of Korea
cDepartment of Applied Chemistry, Kyung Hee University, Yongin 446-701, Republic of Korea
Received 
      30th April 2015
    , Accepted 30th June 2015First published on 3rd July 2015AbstractThe triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) efficiency in bicomponent organic systems is investigated by employing a gap plasmon resonator. In our structure, strong absorption peaks arising from coupling between localized surface plasmons and surface plasmon polaritons closely overlap the Q band of porphyrin, leading to higher triplet concentrations within the film. We find that at ultralow excitation intensities on the order of watts per square centimeter (W cm−2), TTA becomes predominant for the organic system on a gap plasmon resonator. A strong surface-enhanced Raman scattering intensity is observed in this substrate, verifying the near-field enhancement.
Photon upconversion phenomena have recently been suggested as alternatives to overcome the Shockley–Queisser solar power conversion limit.1–7 Studies on upconversion in bicomponent organic systems leading to the upconversion have thus been widely pursued owing to its potential application in photovoltaic devices and photocatalytic electrochemical cells.1–4 The upconversion mechanism in bicomponent systems is associated with the triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) process, in which a combination of two molecules in excited triplet states gives rise to both ground state and higher-energy singlet products.1,3,5 In solid-state systems, however, the upconversion efficiency is markedly decreased (by a factor ∼103) compared to that in solutions.2,6,7 The low efficiency in solid-state systems is mainly the result of the much lower molecular mobility in solid-state systems than in solutions. The lower molecular mobility results in a short exciton diffusion length, limiting the energy transfer as well as TTA, in turn causing a low quantum yield.2,4,6,7 Thus, realization of efficient solid-state systems showing upconversion remains an important goal.
Plasmonic nanostructures have been widely studied to improve the optical properties of the emission intensity of fluorophores through excitation of localized surface plasmons (LSPs) or propagation of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs).4,5 In particular, in recent years, the metal-nanostructure-induced upconversion luminescence has been extensively studied to enhance the emission intensity.5,8,9 However, there have been few reports on the plasmon-enhanced TTA process, whereas most plasmonic studies have examined lanthanide phosphors.8,9 Poorkazem et al. recently reported plasmon-enhanced TTA using Ag nanoplates in which higher overall triplet concentrations were observed.5 They explained that the strong overlap between the LSP bands and the Q band of porphyrin improves absorption in the film owing to local field enhancement near metal nanoparticles.1,5 However, research on the LSP-induced upconversion luminescence, including studies of lanthanide phosphors and the TTA process, has not yielded a notable luminescence enhancement. Therefore, stronger local field enhancement in the excitation wavelength range is required to increase the absorption in the fluorophore.
In this study, we investigated the TTA efficiency in thin films containing platinum octaethylporphyrin (PtOEP) as a triplet sensitizer and 9,10-diphenylanthracene (DPA) as a fluorescent emitter on the plasmon substrates deriving the gap plasmon resonance. In this structure, the constructive interference that gives rise to standing-wave resonances is expected to exhibit a more enhanced absorption cross section than the resonance of only LSPs or SPPs.10–12 If the absorption bands with strong resonance can be well matched with the Q band of porphyrin, higher triplet concentrations can be created in the film, enhancing the upconversion luminescence.4,5 As a result, we demonstrate that the upconversion luminescence is efficiently increased by realizing an optimized gap plasmon mode overlapping the Q band of porphyrin by fabricating a metal–insulator–metal (MIM) structure based on an array of triangular silver nanoplates (silver nanoplate array, AgNA).

Fig. 1a schematically shows the structure of the bicomponent organic film formed on the gap plasmon resonator. It is composed of a DPA:PtOEP film, AgNA, SiO2 film, and Ag thin film. As shown in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image in Fig. 1b, the AgNA appears to be periodically well-aligned, and the nearest-neighbor distance between two particles in the AgNA is around 240 nm, which is consistent with the designed schematic, as indicated in Fig. 1a. The AgNAs are 50 nm thick with diameters of ∼120 nm. The particles are plate-like in structure and pseudotriangular in shape. Unlike in the case of spherical nanoparticles, the anisotropic shape of the AgNAs may shift the position of the LSP resonance band toward the visible region, producing larger near-field enhancements.5,13,14
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a gap plasmon resonator (AgNA/SiO2/Ag). (b) SEM image of AgNA on a SiO2 spacer (40 nm) and Ag film. (c) Surface morphology of the gap plasmon resonator obtained by AFM. Lower graph shows cross section of the Ag array along the red line. The average height of the silver nanoparticles is 50 ± 10 nm, and the nearest-neighbor distance between the particles is ∼240 nm, which is consistent with that in (a). (d) Absorption spectra of the DPA:PtOEP film, SiO2/Ag, and AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrates. The AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrate exhibits double bands centered at ∼455 and ∼530 nm. Vertical arrow denotes the excitation wavelength of λexc = 532 nm for photoluminescence measurement. 
To study the bicomponent organic film on the nanostructured surfaces, our proposed structure was compared with those on glass and SiO2/Ag substrates. The absorption spectra for the DPA:PtOEP film, SiO2/Ag, and AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrates are shown in Fig. 1d. The AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrate clearly exhibits a strong plasmon resonance band centered at 530 nm.4,5,15 Among the AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrates, the one with a 40 nm thick spacer exhibits the strongest absorption (see, Fig. S1†). The absorption peak for the AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrate at a wavelength of 530 nm closely overlaps the Q band of the DPA:PtOEP film centered at 540 nm. Thus, the AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrate is expected to efficiently yield near-field enhancement at the excitation wavelength of 532 nm, critically increasing the density of the excited triplet states in the DPA:PtOEP film.5 In addition, the AgNA in the MIM structure is expected to produce efficient scattering due to plasmon resonant coupling with the excitation wavelength, enhancing the absorption in the DPA:PtOEP film as a result of the increased optical path length.10
To ensure the plasmon resonance feature of the AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrate, we analyzed the electromagnetic field distribution of the AgNA MIM structure using the three-dimensional (3D) finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method (FDTD Solutions, Canada). AgNA patterns that were modeled to have flat and rounded corners based on the SEM images in Fig. 1b were imported into the FDTD model. Because of the symmetries along the x and y axes of the plasmonic AgNA structure and the imposed plane-wave source in the structure, antisymmetric or symmetric boundary conditions (BCs) were applied to the x and y axes by considering the periodicities of the structure. For the transverse magnetic (TM) or x-polarized case, we set the antisymmetric BC on the x axis and the symmetric BC on the y axis; for the transverse electric (TE) or y-polarized case, we set the antisymmetric BC on the y axis and the symmetric BC on the x axis. A perfectly matched layer BC was implemented in the z direction for TE and TM simulations to absorb all of the back-reflected electromagnetic waves from the boundary. By averaging the E-field intensities (|E|2) for normal incident TE and TM polarized plane-wave sources in the visible range of 350–700 nm propagating in the −z direction above the plasmonic structure, we could realize unpolarized light conditions for the FDTD simulation. Two-dimensional power monitors that record the amount of normalized power transmitted through them were used in the model to evaluate the absorption spectra of the structure. We also employed a 3D field profile monitor to detect the electromagnetic field distribution of the plasmonic structure.
The simulated absorption profile of the AgNA MIM in Fig. 2c has two prominent surface plasmon peaks at wavelengths of 435 and 570 nm, which coincide well with the experimental UV-vis absorption peaks in Fig. 1d. Near-field enhancement around the plasmonic structures interacting with normal incident light at the two distinctive plasmon resonances is depicted in Fig. 2b. At the first broad peak of λ = 435 nm, the near-field intensity of the plasmonic MIM structure in the xy and xz planes is highly confined to a nanoscopic area at the rounded corners of the triangular patterns owing to interactions between the LSP from the AgNA and the incident light.5 Moreover, from the near-field profile in the xy plane at the second narrow peak at λ = 570 nm, concentrated local fields around the triangular pattern are observed. Further, from the electric field in the xz plane around the nanoplates at a wavelength of 570 nm, we can observe a much stronger local electric field inside the SiO2, which arises from the gap plasmon mode. It is thus evident that the absorption peak around the wavelength of 530 nm is a result of the strong gap plasmon resonance mode, which closely overlaps the excitation wavelength.4,10,11,13–17 Therefore, when an upconverting DPA:PtOEP film is formed on the plasmonic MIM substrate, the AgNA MIM substrate is expected to effectively absorb and scatter the incident photons of the excitation wavelength within the medium. This would critically increase the density of the excited triplet states of the DPA:PtOEP molecules and extend the optical path length inside the molecules.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of a 3D electromagnetic simulation model for a AgNA MIM plasmonic structure with pitches in the x and y axes when unpolarized light is irradiated along the −z axis. (b) Simulated absorption spectrum of the AgNA MIM structure showing two distinct surface plasmon resonances at λ = 435 and 570 nm. (c) Simulated E-field distribution of AgNA MIM: at λ = 435 nm in xy (top left) and xz planes (bottom left), and at λ = 570 nm in xy (top right) and xz planes (bottom right). 

Fig. 3 shows the upconversion luminescence and phosphorescence of DPA:PtOEP on three different types of substrates under excitation at a wavelength of 532 nm. Fig. 3a clearly shows that the intensity of the upconversion luminescence of the sample on a gap plasmon resonator is strongly enhanced. The emission was up to ∼75 times higher than that of the sample on the bare substrate. The emission intensity of the sample on the SiO2/Ag substrate was also greater than that of the sample on the bare substrate. The fluorescence and phosphorescence of PtOEP appear at ∼565 and 650 nm, as denoted by I and II, respectively, in Fig. 3b. The highest ratio of fluorescence intensity to the phosphorescence intensity of PtOEP is obtained for the gap plasmon resonator, whereas the lowest appears for the bare substrate. The highest intensity for the gap plasmon resonator is attributed to the enhanced absorption band due to coupling between LSPs and SPPs, which closely overlaps the Q band of porphyrin.5,15,18 Direct transfer of the excited triplet level in PtOEP molecules to the triplet state of the blue-emitting molecules is followed by effective TTA between the triplet states of the blue-emitting molecules (see Fig. 3c). When the triplet energy transfer is more efficient between the two molecules, the phosphorescence emission becomes weaker than the fluorescence emission from the singlet state in the PtOEP molecule.19,20 Therefore, a higher ratio of the fluorescence intensity to the phosphorescence intensity of PtOEP on the gap plasmon resonator indicates efficient triplet energy transfer between the molecules, which in turn increases the upconversion luminescence. In addition, Fig. S2† shows that the TTA efficiency depends on the thickness of the spacer; the substrate with a 40 nm thick spacer shows more efficient upconversion via TTA than the other substrates. The higher upconversion intensity relative to the phosphorescence intensity indicates a higher triplet concentration in the film, which causes more efficient triplet energy transfer.19,20
 Fig. 3  Emission spectra of samples on SiO2/Ag, AgNA/SiO2/Ag, and bare substrates showing both (a) DPA fluorescence originating from TTA and (b) PtOEP fluorescence (I) and phosphorescence (II). (c) Schematic energy level diagram of the TTA-supported upconversion process.1,6,20 The similar triplet levels of PtOEP (1.91 eV) and DPA (1.78 eV) permit highly probable triplet energy transfer.20 S, sensitizer; E, emitter; S0, ground state; S1, first excited singlet state; T1, first excited triplet state; ISC, intersystem crossing; TET, triplet energy transfer; and TTA, triplet–triplet annihilation. 
The low extinction coefficient of the Q band for porphyrins results in low triplet concentrations and TTA efficiency.2,5,6 Thus, the main deactivation channel is unimolecular in nature with negligible TTA. At low excitation powers, a unimolecular triplet decay yields a quadratic dependence on the excitation power, whereas at high excitation powers, TTA becomes favored, leading to a more linear dependence on the excitation power.5,6 To probe the dependence of the TTA process on the PtOEP triplet concentration, the power dependence of all the samples was measured. Fig. 4 shows the excitation power dependence of the upconversion intensity versus the phosphorescence intensity. The excitation power was controlled by using six different combinations of neutral density filters. Because the phosphorescence intensity depends linearly on the excitation power, the plots in Fig. 4 indicate the efficiency of the TTA process, correcting additionally for any photobleaching that may occur at the high power density used.5,6 In Fig. 4a, the slope of the best-fit line for DPA:PtOEP on the bare substrate shows a roughly quadratic dependence of the TTA process. The value obtained is comparable to the value of 1.83 reported in previous work.5 The slope for the sample on the AgNA substrate shows a decrease, suggesting that a greater concentration of the triplets decay via TTA than via unimolecular triplet decay.5,21 In Fig. 4c, the slope for the sample on the gap plasmon resonator is lower than that of the sample on SiO2/Ag, which is consistent with an increased level of light absorption for the gap plasmon resonator compared to the SiO2/Ag substrate, as shown in Fig. 1d. The best-fit line for the sample on the gap plasmon resonance substrate has a slope of 1.03 ± 0.12, indicating a nearly linear dependence of the TTA process. The respective upconversion luminescence and phosphorescence as a function of the excitation power are displayed in Fig. S3;† DPA upconversion luminescence resulting from the TTA process is clearly observed for the system on the gap plasmon resonator in particular.
 Fig. 4  Obtained power dependence of samples on (a) bare, (b) SiO2/Ag, and (c) AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrates. Upconversion and phosphorescence peak intensities were measured at 430 and 650 nm, respectively. 
To directly probe the electromagnetic field enhancement near the nanostructure surface, we employed Raman spectroscopy, which specifies the vibration peaks of adsorbed molecules.17,22 Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) may show an increased scattering intensity by tens of orders of magnitude compared to Raman scattering due to a weak process.4,13,17 In Fig. 5, the Raman bands for the DPA:PtOEP sample on the gap plasmon resonator clearly appear. Most of the Raman bands indicated in Fig. 5 appear to occur at approximately the same position (≤15 cm−1) as those observed for Ni- or Ir-octaethylporphyrin.23–25 The Raman line at 677 cm−1 is intensified for the octahedral structure of porphyrin but not for a square pyramidal structure owing to the breathing-like motion of the 16-membered macrocycle.24,26 The SERS intensity from the gap plasmon resonator at the strongest peak of 677 cm−1 is 25 times greater than that of the SiO2/Ag substrate, whereas no Raman scattering signal was observed from the bare substrate. The gap plasmon resonator with a 40 nm thick spacer shows the highest SERS intensity compared to the other ones, which is consistent with the efficiency of the TTA process (Fig. S4 and S5 in the ESI†).
 Fig. 5  Raman spectra of DPA:PtOEP on bare, SiO2/Ag, and AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrates. Spectra of samples on bare and SiO2/Ag substrates were magnified by the indicated values to identify the peaks. To clarify the Raman signal, the fluorescence backgrounds were removed for the samples on AgNA/SiO2/Ag and SiO2/Ag substrates. The measurement was made with 532 nm excitation under the same conditions for all the samples. 
Experimental section
To fabricate this structure, Ti (5 nm)/Ag (100 nm) layers were first deposited on a Si substrate using a thermal evaporator. Then, a bottom layer of SiO2 with a controlled thickness of 20, 40, 60, 80, or 100 nm was deposited on the Ti/Ag layers using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition. To generate the AgNA, polystyrene (PS) spheres 420 nm in diameter were dispersed in a single layer onto the SiO2 spacer; then 50 nm of Ag was deposited on the PS sphere array by thermal evaporation. Finally, the PS spheres covered with Ag were removed, yielding gap plasmon resonators (AgNA/SiO2/Ag). For comparison, a separate bare substrate and a SiO2/Ag substrate were also prepared.27,28
The fraction of PtOEP in the DPA:PtOEP dissolved in dichloromethane solvent was typically 2 wt%, at which PtOEP aggregations rarely influence the TTA efficiency.29 Thin films of DPA:PtOEP composites were prepared by spin-coating onto quartz, SiO2/Ag, and AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrates in a glove box to avoid oxygen contamination. The thickness of the DPA:PtOEP films for all the samples was carefully controlled to be 250 ± 50 nm, and all the PL intensities measured were the average of 5 separate samples. The emission spectra were measured at room temperature under vacuum conditions (<10−3 Torr) using a 532 nm continuous-wave laser. A six-step calibrated neutral density filter was used to control the pumping power, which was adjusted from ∼5 to ∼110 mW. The laser was focused on the sample with a spot size of ∼0.02 mm2. The photoluminescence spectra for the upconversion process were recorded by using a visible photomultiplier tube coupled with a monochromator. Steady-state absorption spectra were acquired with a UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer with an integrating sphere in the 300–900 nm wavelength range. SEM was performed on a Hitachi microscope operated at 80 keV. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were obtained using an XE-100 instrument.
Conclusions
In summary, we investigated the efficiency of the TTA process on a gap plasmon resonator. The strong resonance band of this substrate with a periodically patterned Ag array overlaps the Q band of a porphyrin well, increasing the absorption of light by the sensitizer. The deactivation channel of the gap plasmon resonance substrate under ultralow excitation intensity becomes primarily bimolecular triplet decay, greatly enhancing the efficiency of the TTA process. SERS shows highly increased Raman bands of octaethylporphyrin, verifying electromagnetic field enhancement near the AgNAs in the gap plasmon resonator.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Pioneer Research Center Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT, & Future Planning (NRF-2013M3C1A3065040).
Notes and references
S. Baluschev, T. Miteva, V. Yakutkin, G. Nelles, A. Yasuda and G. Wegner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 143903 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monguzzi, M. Frigoli, C. Larpent, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mezyk, R. Tubino, A. Monguzzi, A. Mech and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 087404 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chu, M. G. Banaee and K. B. Crozier, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Poorkazem, A. V. Hesketh and T. L. Kelly, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6398 CAS .
A. Monguzzi, J. Mezyk, F. Scotognella, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B:Condens. Matter, 2008, 78, 195112 CrossRef .
P. B. Merkel and J. P. Dinnocenzo, J. Lumin., 2009, 129, 303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Escribano, B. J. López, J. P. Aragó, E. Cordoncillo, B. Viana and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 23 RSC .
S. Schietinger, T. Aichele, H.-Q. Wang, T. Nann and O. Benson, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jung, T. Søndergaard and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Phys. Rev. B:Condens. Matter, 2009, 79, 035401 CrossRef .
T. Søndergaard and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2008, 245, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
S. I. Bozhevolnyi and T. Søndergaard, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 10869 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chu, D. Wang, W. Zhu and K. B. Crozier, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 14919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Kim and X. Cheng, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 17234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Du, X. Zhang, T. Mei and X. Yuan, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 1959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pors, M. G. Nielsen, T. Bernardin, J.-C. Weeber and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Light: Sci. Appl., 2014, 3, e197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, X. Li, X. Ren, L. Yang and J. Liu, Analyst, 2014, 139, 4799 RSC .
J. S. Lissau, J. M. Gardner and A. Morandeira, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23226 CAS .
S. Baluschev, F. Yu, T. Miteva, S. Ahl, A. Yasuda, G. Nelles, W. Knoll and G. Wegner, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Baluschev, V. Yakutkin, G. Wegner, B. Minch, T. Miteva, G. Nelles and A. Yasuda, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 023101 CrossRef PubMed .
P. C. Boutin, K. P. Ghiggino, T. L. Kelly and R. P. Steer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4113 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qian, C. Ni, W. Yu, W. Wu, H. Mao, Y. Wang and J. Xu, Small, 2011, 7, 1801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. B-Wijnoltz, B. J. Palys, W. Visscher and J. A. R. van Veen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1996, 406, 195 CrossRef .
M. Abe, T. Kitagawa and Y. Kyogoku, J. Chem. Phys., 1978, 69, 4526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Li, R. S. Czernuszewicz, J. R. Kincaid, P. Stein and T. G. Spiro, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 47 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kitagawa, M. Abe, Y. Kogoku, H. Ogoshi, E. Watanabe and Z. Yoshida, J. Phys. Chem., 1976, 80, 1181 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, S. Ren, X. Xu, L. Liu, H. Wang and J. Yu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 126, 113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tagliabue, C. Holler, H. Eghlidi and D. Poulikakos, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10274 RSC .
P. E. Keivanidis, S. Baluschev, G. Lieser and G. Wegner, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr02813bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a gap plasmon resonator (AgNA/SiO2/Ag). (b) SEM image of AgNA on a SiO2 spacer (40 nm) and Ag film. (c) Surface morphology of the gap plasmon resonator obtained by AFM. Lower graph shows cross section of the Ag array along the red line. The average height of the silver nanoparticles is 50 ± 10 nm, and the nearest-neighbor distance between the particles is ∼240 nm, which is consistent with that in (a). (d) Absorption spectra of the DPA:PtOEP film, SiO2/Ag, and AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrates. The AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrate exhibits double bands centered at ∼455 and ∼530 nm. Vertical arrow denotes the excitation wavelength of λexc = 532 nm for photoluminescence measurement.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of a 3D electromagnetic simulation model for a AgNA MIM plasmonic structure with pitches in the x and y axes when unpolarized light is irradiated along the −z axis. (b) Simulated absorption spectrum of the AgNA MIM structure showing two distinct surface plasmon resonances at λ = 435 and 570 nm. (c) Simulated E-field distribution of AgNA MIM: at λ = 435 nm in xy (top left) and xz planes (bottom left), and at λ = 570 nm in xy (top right) and xz planes (bottom right).	 

 	Fig. 3  Emission spectra of samples on SiO2/Ag, AgNA/SiO2/Ag, and bare substrates showing both (a) DPA fluorescence originating from TTA and (b) PtOEP fluorescence (I) and phosphorescence (II). (c) Schematic energy level diagram of the TTA-supported upconversion process.1,6,20 The similar triplet levels of PtOEP (1.91 eV) and DPA (1.78 eV) permit highly probable triplet energy transfer.20 S, sensitizer; E, emitter; S0, ground state; S1, first excited singlet state; T1, first excited triplet state; ISC, intersystem crossing; TET, triplet energy transfer; and TTA, triplet–triplet annihilation.	 

 	Fig. 4  Obtained power dependence of samples on (a) bare, (b) SiO2/Ag, and (c) AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrates. Upconversion and phosphorescence peak intensities were measured at 430 and 650 nm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Raman spectra of DPA:PtOEP on bare, SiO2/Ag, and AgNA/SiO2/Ag substrates. Spectra of samples on bare and SiO2/Ag substrates were magnified by the indicated values to identify the peaks. To clarify the Raman signal, the fluorescence backgrounds were removed for the samples on AgNA/SiO2/Ag and SiO2/Ag substrates. The measurement was made with 532 nm excitation under the same conditions for all the samples.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr02813b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
