Plasmonic and catalytic Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes for highly efficient photocatalytic reactions   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CP01153D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CP01153D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 13189-13197Plasmonic and catalytic Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes for highly efficient photocatalytic reactions†

        
          
            Juan 
            Xu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Haiying 
            Xu‡
ac, 
      
        
          
            Lihui 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qifeng 
            Ruan
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Xingzhong 
            Zhu
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Caixia 
            Kan
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Daning 
            Shi
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Physics, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China. E-mail: xzzhu@nuaa.edu.cn; cxkan@nuaa.edu.cn; shi@nuaa.edu.cn
bMIIT Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Materials and Physics, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China
cCollege of Mathematics and Physics, Nanjing Institute of Technology, Nanjing, 211167, China
dEngineering Product Development, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore 487372, Singapore
Received 
      14th March 2023
    , Accepted 18th April 2023First published on 19th April 2023AbstractHeterogeneous metal nanostructures with excellent plasmonic performance and catalytic activity are urgently needed to realize efficient light-driven catalysis. Herein, we demonstrate the preparation of hollow Au nanobipyramid (NBP)@AgPd nanostructures by employing Au NBP@Ag nanorods as templates. The products could transform from Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes to nanocages, along with the redshift and broadening of the plasmon wavelength. Particularly, the plasmon intensity of these nanostructures remained considerable among the shape evolution process. Based on the selective absorption of CTAB, the Ag atoms on the side surfaces of the Au NBP@Ag nanorods were employed as the sacrificial templates to reduce Pd atoms through galvanic replacement. The reduced Pd and Ag atoms produced through the reduction reaction were preferably co-deposited on the corners and edges at the early stage and later deposited directly on the defect sites of the side facets, as more Ag atoms were released. The discontinued distribution of the Pd atoms gives an opportunity to etch away the Ag atoms in the cores, leading to the formation of hollow Au NBP@AgPd nanostructures after the etching process. It is worth noting that the deposition of the ultrathin AgPd nanoframe had little influence on the plasmonic properties of Au NBPs, as verified by electrodynamic simulations. The Au NBP@AgPd nanoframe showed great photocatalytic activity toward Suzuki coupling reactions under laser irradiation. Taken together, these results suggest that the hot electrons successfully transfer from Au NBP to the AgPd nanoframes to participate in the photocatalytic reactions. This study affords a promising route for the synthesis of anisotropic bimetallic nanostructures with excellent plasmonic performances.
Introduction
Solar energy is a clean, abundant, and economical energy source and has received intensive attention in fields, such as solar cells, photocatalysis, and photothermal conversion.1–7 Due to the scarcity of non-renewable resources nowadays, it is particularly important to develop methods to further improve the utilization efficiency of solar energy. The use of sunlight to drive chemical reactions through photocatalysis is one of the most promising approaches employed in various industrial chemical processes.8–10 Noble metal nanostructures, especially those made of Au and Ag, with strong plasmonic absorption in the solar spectrum can greatly convert light energy to hot electrons, which are perfect candidates for photocatalysis.11–16 Unfortunately, due to the insufficient catalytic activity of Au and Ag nanostructures, the efficiency of hot electrons injected into the reactants is not satisfactory.17–32 Hybridizing Au and Ag nanoparticles with catalytic metals, such as Pd and Pt, to form hetero-nanostructures is one of the feasible ways to improve catalytic activity.33–35
So far, a few types of Au–Pd nanostructures, such as Pd-tipped Au nanorods and Pd-tipped Au nanoplates, have been constructed to drive photocatalytic reactions. In addition, the Au NBP/Pd nanostructures fabricated in our previous work showed excellent photocatalytic performance in the Suzuki coupling reaction.36–38 However, the Au–Pd core–shell nanostructure is the most common morphology synthesized in previous works. Such nanostructures are limited and suffer from two drawbacks, which lead to the undesired dissipation of the hot electrons. On the one hand, the deposition of Pd atoms on the surface of the Au nanostructures causes the damping and broadening of plasmonic absorptions compared with those of the original Au nanostructures.39,40 Because the generation of hot electrons is seriously dependent on the intensity and peak position of the absorption wavelength, the damping of the plasmonic absorption causes a dramatic reduction in hot electrons at the original generation stage.41–45 On the other hand, due to the considerably larger electron–phonon coupling constant of Pd compared with Au, the large Au/Pd interface in the Au–Pd nanostructures leads to fast decay of the hot electrons, decreasing the efficiency of the hot electrons. These obstacles have severely hindered their light-energy conversion ability and utilization efficiency. Therefore, the synthesis of Au–Pd nanostructures with excellent plasmonic properties and catalytic activity is still in urgent demand.
In this work, we fabricated Au NBP-embedded AgPd (Au NBP@AgPd) nanoframes with excellent plasmonic properties by titrating aqueous H2PdCl4 and the Au NBP-embedded Ag (Au NBP@Ag) nanorod solution with the assistance of CTAB. The reduced Pd atoms deposited on both the edges and surface of the Au NBP@Ag nanorods as the volume of aqueous H2PdCl4 increased, leading to the transformation of the nanostructures from Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes to nanocages. The growth mechanism was further analyzed in accordance with the ICP measurements. Additionally, the plasmon peaks of the Au NBP@AgPd hollow nanostructures were systematically examined as functions of the distribution site of the Pd atoms, which were highly concordant with the electrodynamic simulations. The photocatalytic activity of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes was systematically examined as a function of the laser intensity using the Suzuki coupling reaction as the model reaction. The mechanism of plasmon-assisted photocatalysis is discussed in accordance with the experimental and simulation results.
Experimental section
Chemicals
HAuCl4·3H2O (99%), PdCl2 (99%), NaBH4 (98%), trisodium citrate (99%), ascorbic acid (99%) and AgNO3 (99%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. CTAB (98%) was obtained from Alfa Aesar. The H2O2 solution (30 wt% in water), cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC, 97%), NaOH (96%), NH3·H2O solution (25 wt% in water) and HCl solution (37 wt% in water) were purchased from Aladdin. Deionized water with a resistivity of 18.2 MΩ cm produced by a Direct-Q 5 ultraviolet water purification system was used in all experiments.
Growth of the Au NBPs
The Au NBPs were prepared using the seed-mediated growth method, as described in previous works.46 Briefly, a freshly prepared, ice-cold NaBH4 solution (0.15 mL, 0.01 M) was injected quickly into a pre-made aqueous solution containing HAuCl4 (0.125 mL, 0.01 M), trisodium citrate (0.25 mL, 0.01 M) and water (9.625 mL). The resultant seed solution was kept at room temperature for 2 h. The seed solution (0.6 mL) was injected into the growth solution, which was prepared in advance by mixing CTAB (40 mL, 0.1 M), HAuCl4 (2 mL, 0.01 M), AgNO3 (0.4 mL, 0.01 M), HCl (0.8 mL, 1 M) and ascorbic acid (0.32 mL, 0.1 M). The reaction solution was kept at room temperature for the growth of Au NBPs. The purification of the as-prepared Au NBPs was conducted using a depletion-induced separation method.
Growth of the Au NBP@AgPd hollow nanostructures
In a typical synthesis reaction, purified Au NBPs (10 mL) were centrifuged at 7000 rpm for 10 min. The precipitate was redispersed in a CTAC solution (10 mL, 0.08 M), followed by the addition and mixing of AgNO3 (250 μL, 0.01 M) and ascorbic acid (125 μL, 0.1 M) under gentle shaking. The mixture solution was placed in an air-bath shaker (65 °C) for 4.5 h to allow the formation of the Au NBP@Ag core–shell nanorods. The resultant sample was centrifuged and redispersed in a CTAB solution (4 mL, 0.05 M), followed by the sequential addition of NaOH (1 mL, 0.2 M) and ascorbic acid (1 mL, 0.1 M) under gentle shaking. Aqueous H2PdCl4 (2.5 mL, 0.1 mM) was titrated into the above solution using a syringe pump at a rate of 20 μL min−1 for the growth of Pd on the surface of the Au NBP@Ag nanorods. The resultant sample was centrifuged and redispersed in a mixture of CTAB (0.3 mL, 0.1 M), H2O2 (4 mL, 6 wt%) and NH3·H2O (0.2 mL, 28 wt%) for the etching of Ag atoms. The nanocages were obtained as the volume of H2PdCl4 increased. The final product was centrifuged and redispersed in water for further use and characterization.
The Suzuki coupling reactions
The Suzuki coupling reactions were carried out in a quartz cuvette with an optical path length of 2 cm. The temperature of the reaction system was carefully controlled with a water bath (30 °C) in the dark or under laser irradiation. Iodobenzene (8.9 μL, 0.08 mmol) was added to H2O (0.75 mL), followed by the addition of m-tolylboronic acid (16.4 mg, 0.12 mmol), K2CO3 (0.25 mL, 1 M), and the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes (1 mL). The mixture solution was kept under the irradiation of an 808 nm laser for 1 h. The reaction solution was mixed with 6 mL ethanol and centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Agilent 1290/6420).
Instrumentation
The extinction spectra were measured on a Shimadzu UV-3600 Plus ultraviolet/visible/near-infrared spectrophotometer using plastic cuvettes with a 0.5 cm optical path length. TEM imaging was carried out on an FEI Tecnai 12 microscope operated at 120 kV. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) and elemental mapping were performed on an FEI Tecnai F20 microscope operated at 200 kV and equipped with an Oxford energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis system. Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) measurements were performed on an Agilent ICP-MS 7500a system.
Electrodynamic simulations
Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations were performed to simulate the optical properties of the nanostructures using FDTD Solution 8.24 (Lumerical Solution). During the simulations, an electromagnetic pulse in the spectral range from 300 nm to 1400 nm was launched into a box containing the target nanostructure. A mesh size of 0.5 nm was employed for calculating the extinction spectra of the Au NBP@AgPd nanostructures. The refractive index of the surrounding medium was set at 1.33, which is the refractive index of water. The dielectric function of Au was obtained by fitting the data of Johnson and Christy, and that of Pd was fitted using Palik's data. The size of the Au NBPs and the Au NBP-based nanostructures were set according to the TEM images. The direction of light incidence was set to be perpendicular to the length, with the electric field axis aligned along the length of the nanostructures. The optical properties were focused on the behaviors of the longitudinal surface plasmon resonance.
Results and discussion
The Au NBP sample was prepared through seed-mediated growth and subsequent depletion force-induced purification.46 The selective deposition of Ag atoms on the longitudinal axis of the Au NBPs promoted the fabrication of Au NBP@Ag nanorods, with the Au NBPs encapsulated at the center (Fig. S1, ESI†). In the typical synthesis process, the H2PdCl4 precursor solution was titrated with an aqueous suspension containing the Au NBP@Ag nanorods, H2Asc, NaOH and CTAB at an initial pH of 11.6. The reduced Pd atoms were deposited on the surface of the Au NBP@Ag nanorods, leading to the formation of Au NBP@Ag@Pd nanorods. After selective etching of the Ag component, the Au NBP@AgPd hollow nanostructures were successfully fabricated. As shown in Fig. 1a, the longitudinal plasmon peak of the Au NBP@AgPd nanostructures slightly red-shifted as the volume of the Pd precursor increased, which was accompanied by peak broadening. In addition, the intensity of the plasmon peaks of the Au NBP@AgPd nanostructures was similar to that of the original Au NBPs, indicating that the presence of the Pd nanostructures had little influence on the Au NBPs. The longitudinal plasmon peak position and FWHMs are plotted in Fig. 1b as a function of the added H2PdCl4 volume. It is clear that the FWHM displayed an almost identical variation trend to the plasmon peaks. Furthermore, the TEM images of the fabricated Au NBP@AgPd nanostructures with different volumes of H2PdCl4 are shown in Fig. 1c–h. All samples showed uniform size and shape distributions due to the high purity of the Au NBPs. When the volume was 1.2 mL, the reduced Pd atoms were too few to form robust Pd nanostructures (Fig. 1c). A portion of the formed Pd particles was attached to the head of the Au NBPs, causing an obvious broadening of the plasmon resonance. As the volume reached 1.8 mL, the deposition of Pd atoms on both the head and edges of the Au NBP@Ag nanorods promoted the formation of an intact AgPd nanoframe after selective etching of the Ag component. The weak nanoframes became robust with the continuous deposition of Pd atoms (Fig. 1d–f). Particularly, the Pd atoms began to appear at the side facets, leading to the formation of Au NBP@AgPd nanocages when the volume of H2PdCl4 was increased to 5 mL (Fig. 5g). The density of Pd atoms obviously increased as the volume of Pd precursor increased (Fig. 5h). It is worth noting that the deposition of Pd atoms on the Au NBP@Ag nanorods was incomplete with pores because of the high bonding energy of Pd–Pd, thus providing access to etching of the Ag component and form hollow nanocages. Compared with the extinction spectrum of the original Au NBP@Ag@Pd nanorods, the disappearance of the characteristic peak of Ag at 400 nm indicated that the Ag atoms were almost etched in the nanocage structure (Fig. S2, ESI†).
 Fig. 1  Au NBP@AgPd nanostructures with different amounts of H2PdCl4. (a) The extinction spectra of the Au NBP@AgPd nanostructure samples produced with different amounts of H2PdCl4. (b) Variations of the longitudinal plasmon wavelength and FWHM as a function of the volume of added H2PdCl4. (c–h) The TEM images of the Au NBP@AgPd nanostructure samples. 
To further confirm the deposition and distribution of the Pd atoms, HAADF-STEM imaging and elemental mapping were employed to characterize the detailed configuration of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes. Elemental mapping clearly showed that the Au atoms were located at the center of the nanostructures with a bipyramid shape (Fig. 2a). Besides, the Ag and Pd elements were located mostly at the head and middle of the surrounding nanoframes. Specifically, the metal component of the nanoframes was the AgPd alloy, as evidenced by the complete overlap of the elemental distributions of Ag and Pd on the EDX maps. HRTEM imaging (Fig. 2b and c) further confirmed the concentration of Pd atoms on the heads and edges of the nanorods, leading to the formation of hollow nanoframes after etching. It is clear that the Au NBPs and the AgPd nanoframes were connected by residual Ag atoms present in the gaps between the nanoframes and the middle of the Au NBPs. The diameter of the edge of each nanoframe was about 2 nm, improving the catalytic property because of its abundant active sites.
 Fig. 2  HAADF and HRTEM imaging of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes. (a) The HAADF-STEM and elemental mapping images of a single 1.8 mL Au NBP@AgPd nanoframe. The rightmost image is the overlapped image of the Au, Ag, and Pd elemental maps. The elemental mapping images have the same size scale as the HAADF-STEM image. (b) The HRTEM image of a single 1.8 mL Au NBP@AgPd nanoframe. (c) The HRTEM image recorded in the region indicated by the white box in (b). 
To understand the mechanistic details involved in the reaction systems, inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-OES) was employed to determine the Au, Ag and Pd contents in the as-prepared solids and supernatant samples when the Au NBP@Ag nanorods were reacted with different volumes of H2PdCl4. As shown in Fig. 3a, the amount of Pd in the solid (red points) linearly increased as the titration volume of added H2PdCl4 increased from 1.2 to 5 mL (the dotted line in Fig. 3a). It was evident that the amounts of Pd in the solids obtained at different titration volumes were close to the experimental values. In addition, there was rarely any Pd content in the supernatant, indicating that all the added Pd precursor was reduced to form Pd atoms, which were deposited on the surface of the Au NBP@Ag nanorods. Additionally, because the Au and Ag contents in the supernatant were below the detection limit during the course of synthesis, there was little loss of Au and Ag from the Ag nanorods. The Ag+ ions released from the {100} facets of the Au NBP@Ag nanorods were reduced by HAsc− to form Ag atoms, which were then deposited back on the Au NBP@Ag nanorods with the Pd atoms. The Ag and Au contents in the solids were also retained during the titration process (Fig. 3b). This result suggests that the content of Au and Ag in the original Ag nanorods remained stable, and all the added Pd atoms were deposited on the surface of the Ag nanorods.
 Fig. 3  The ICP-MS data of (a) Pd and (b) Au and Ag in the corresponding products (solids and supernatant) prepared by titrating H2PdCl4 with a suspension of the Au NBP@Ag nanorods. The data points labeled as “added“ correspond to the amounts of Pd added in the reaction. 
Based on the above results, a growth mechanism is proposed for deciphering the selective deposition of Pd atoms on the Au NBP@Ag nanorods. At the beginning of the reaction, the added PdCl42− is easily converted to PdBr42− due to the much higher stability constant in the presence of CTAB.47 Because Br− selectively binds to the {100} facets of the Ag nanorods, that is the side surfaces, higher concentrations of the PdBr42− complex in the vicinity of {100} facets cause these sites to be preferentially activated toward oxidation.48 During the titration of H2PdCl4, the side facets act as the anode for the initiation of the galvanic replacement reaction between the Ag atoms and the PdBr42− species. The released Ag+ ions complex with Br− to form AgBr2− in the solution. Meanwhile, at the initial pH value of the reaction (11.69), H2Asc is neutralized to the ascorbic monoanion (HAsc−), a strong reducing agent.49 Under the cooperation of these two types of reactions, both PdBr42− and AgBr− in the solution are quickly reduced by HAsc− to form Pd and Ag atoms, respectively, followed by their deposition on the Ag nanorods. At a low volume of H2PdCl4, the reduced Pd atoms prefer to deposit on the edges with a higher surface energy, leading to the formation of the Au NBP@Pd nanoframes after selective etching of the Ag component, which is in accordance with our previous work.50,51 As the titration volume of the Pd precursor increases, the galvanic replacement reaction becomes more significant, causing the dissolution of more Ag atoms into the reaction solution. In particular, the side {100} facets with more defect sites attract the newly formed Pd and Ag atoms such that they get deposited directly on these surfaces.52 In addition, due to the high bonding energy of Pd atoms, Pd-based nanostructures synthesized under ambient conditions are often characterized by incomplete coverage and a rough surface, providing an opportunity for the etching of the Ag component of the cores. As a consequence, Au NBP@AgPd nanocages were obtained with increasing titration volume of the Pd precursor.
To further understand the nearly identical plasmon resonance of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes and the plasmon shift as a structural evolution, finite-different time-domain (FDTD) simulations were performed to ascertain the plasmonic properties of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes and nanocages. For the purpose of simplification, pure Pd was used to represent the Pd-enriched AgPd alloy. The geometrical models utilized in the simulations were set according to the shapes observed in the TEM images (Fig. S3, ESI†). The length and waist diameter of the Au NBP were set to 96 and 30 nm, respectively. The ultrathin Pd nanoframe has pentagonal symmetry with the ridge dimensions 2 nm × 2 nm × 120 nm. The side surfaces of the hollow nanocages were covered by Pd nanodisks whose radius and thickness were 3 and 1.6 nm, respectively. The extinction light direction was perpendicular to the length axis, with the electric field polarized along the length axis. Therefore, only the longitudinal plasmon mode was excited. The longitudinal plasmon peak exhibited gradual red shift and broadening during the transformation from nanoframe to nanocage (Fig. 5a and b), which is in agreement with the experimental observations of the plasmon wavelengths. It is worth noting that the construction of the outer Pd nanostructures had a great influence on light scattering by the Au NBP rather than absorption (Fig. S4, ESI†). Lower absorption leads to a decrease in the photo-generation of hot electrons, thus influencing the photocatalytic ability of the Au NBP@AgPd nanostructures. Significantly, the simulated peak of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframe was as excellent as that of the Au NBP. In contrast, the Pd nanoframe showed no plasmon resonance under extinction, suggesting that the addition of the Pd nanoframe has little effect on the plasmon resonance of the Au NBPs (Fig. 5c). In addition, the longitudinal plasmon mode of the Au NBP caused maximal electric field enhancement at the two ends, while the single Pd nanoframe exhibited weak enhancement (Fig. 4d). The largest electric field enhancement was still located at the two ends of the Au NBP in the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframe even under longitudinal excitation. Meanwhile, the nanoframe segments adjacent to the two ends of the Au NBPs also showed remarkable electric field enhancement when the Au NBP was embedded. As a consequence, the plasmon performance of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframe originates from the Au NBP rather than the AgPd nanoframe. The hot electrons could be generated from the Au NBP and easily transferred to the Pd nanoframe, followed by injection into the reactions, thereby promoting the photocatalytic process.
 Fig. 4  The schematic illustrating the synthetic process. 
 Fig. 5  FDTD simulations. (a) The simulated extinction spectra of the Au NBPs and the models. (b) Variations in the longitudinal SPR and longitudinal dipolar plasmon linewidths as functions of the model. The point of model 0 represents the Au NBPs. (c) The simulated extinction spectra of the Au NBP, Pd nanoframe and Au NBP@Pd nanoframe. (d) The simulated electric field enhancement contours under longitudinal extinction at 800 nm: the Au NBP (left), Pd nanoframe (middle), and Au NBP@Pd nanoframe (right). The field enhancement contours are drawn to the logarithmic scale. 
The obtained Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes successfully combine excellent plasmon performance with great catalytic properties, making them suitable candidates for investigating the spatial distribution of plasmonic hot charge carriers on metal nanostructures and its effect on the photocatalytic activity. The photocatalytic activities of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes were evaluated using the Suzuki coupling reaction between iodobenzene and m-tolylboronic acid (Fig. 6a), which is one of the most important and fundamental reactions in industrial syntheses. Because the longitudinal plasmon mode of the as-prepared catalyst was much stronger than the other plasmon mode, only the longitudinal plasmon mode was considered to excite the photocatalytic reaction. Under the irritation of an 808 nm laser, the Au NBP core functioned as a plasmonic antenna to effectively absorb light, and the AgPd nanoframes served as catalysts for the Suzuki coupling reaction. The connection between the Au NBP and AgPd nanoframes allowed the efficient transformation of electrons between these two components. In general, no product molecules can be detected for Suzuki coupling reactions that use pure Pd nanoparticles as photocatalysts under reaction conditions similar to those used in this work.52 For the coupling reaction between iodobenzene and m-tolylboronic acid, the reaction rate depends on the breaking of the C–I bond of the iodobenzene molecules adsorbed on the AgPd nanoframes. This step is known as the oxidation addition, wherein electrons are transferred from the AgPd nanoframes to the adsorbed iodobenzene molecules, thereby weakening the C–I bond. In the plasmon-driven Suzuki coupling reaction, the plasmon-excited hot electrons first travel from the Au NBP to the surface of an AgPd nanoframe. Electrons with energies matching the energy level of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of an adsorbed iodobenzene molecule are subsequently injected into the unoccupied orbital, thereby forming an excited adsorbate state and potentially inducing the breaking of the C–I bond.
 Fig. 6  Plasmonic photocatalysis. (a) The equation of the Suzuki coupling reaction chosen in our study. (b) The photocatalytic activity of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes and Au NBP@Pd core–shell nanoparticles under the irradiation of an 808 nm laser at different optical intensities. 
In order to facilitate the comparison of the photocatalytic activities of the Au NBP@AgPd nanostructures, the Au NBP@AgPd core–shell nanoparticles with weaker plasmon performance were employed as the catalyst (Fig. S5, ESI†). The amount of Pd content and the absorption peak position in both the nanostructures employed as catalysts were adjusted to be identical in order to facilitate the comparison of catalytic ability (Fig. S6 and Table S1, ESI†). After the Suzuki coupling reaction, the Au NBP-Pd nanostructures were recovered through centrifugation. The supernatant was analyzed using HPLC to measure the amount of residual iodobenzene. Because m-tolylboronic was in excess, and the point of the Suzuki coupling reaction was to break the C–I bond, we chose the conversion percentage of iodobenzene as the indicator of plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic activity (Fig. 6b). To disregard the thermal effect caused by plasmonic photothermal conversion, the temperature of the reaction solution was carefully maintained at 30 °C. As shown in Fig. 6b, the conversion percentage of iodobenzene using the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes was 20%, while that achieved using the Au NBP@AgPd core–shell nanoparticles was almost 0% in dark conditions without light, indicating that the high specific surface area of the Pd nanoframe is beneficial to the catalytic process. Moreover, the conversion percentage of iodobenzene gradually increased as the Au NBP@AgPd nanostructure transformed from nanoframe to nanocage (Fig. S7, ESI†). The increased specific surface area of the outer Pd nanostructures plays an effective and critical role in enhancing the catalytic activity of the Au NBP@AgPd nanostructures. To examine the plasmonic effect, we determined the photocatalytic activities of both nanostructures as a function of the laser light intensity. Upon laser irradiation, the conversion percentage of both nanostructures were linearly dependent on the irradiation light power. Particularly, the conversion percentages of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes, which achieved the highest value of up to 85%, were larger than those of the Au NBP@Pd core–shell nanoparticles. The different trends might be explained by the stronger plasmonic and catalytic performances of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes. In addition, the increase in the catalytic rate of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes with the laser power was clearly faster than that of the Au NBP@Pd nanoparticles. Although the contact area between the Au NBP and the Pd nanoframe is smaller than in the Au NBP@Pd nanoparticles, more hot electrons are transferred in the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframe and participate in the photocatalytic reaction. This difference in trend might be explained by the better plasmonic property of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes. In particular, upon replacing iodobenzene with bromobenzene, which is steadier, the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframe still showed great photocatalytic performance with the conversion percentage reaching up to 82% (Fig. S8, ESI†).
Conclusions
Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes with excellent plasmonic performance and catalytic activity were successfully fabricated. When the volume of the Pd precursor was increased, the obtained Au NBP@AgPd structures transformed from nanoframes to nanocages, along with the redshift and broadening of the plasmon wavelength. Meanwhile, all the Au NBP@AgPd nanostructures exhibit unchanged plasmon performance. The added Pd precursor was reduced through galvanic replacement and reduction reactions, followed by deposition on the surface of the Ag nanorods. In addition, the contents of Au and Ag in the original Ag nanorods were sustained during the titration process. At low volumes of the Pd precursor, the reduced Pd and Ag atoms were preferably deposited on the heads and edges of the Ag nanorods to form Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes after selective etching of the Ag component. When the volume of the Pd precursor increased, the defects on the side facets attracted more Pd atoms because of the significant galvanic replacement reaction, leading to the formation of Au NBP@AgPd nanocages. Particularly, the deposition of the Pd nanoframes on the Au NBPs had little influence on the plasmons of the Au NBPs, as verified by FDTD simulations. A comparison of the photocatalytic activities of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes and core–shell nanoparticles toward the Suzuki coupling reaction shows that the high specific surface area of the nanoframe promotes photocatalytic activity. The hot electrons from the Au NBP under laser irritation are easily transferred to the AgPd nanoframes, promoting the photocatalytic conversion percentage. Taken together, our findings open up a route for combining the plasmon performance and catalytic properties of two components into a heterostructure toward meeting the efficiency requirements of photocatalytic reactions.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. NS2021055 and NC2022008) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11874220, 11974182 and 52202099). This work was also supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20191472) and Foundation of key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Material and Physics (No. XCA22047-07).
References
L. Y. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Wang, G. Q. Xu, A. Döring, W. A. Daoud, J. B. Xu, A. L. Rogach, Y. Xi and Y. L. Zi, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10359–10369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Xu, Z. D. Li, Y. H. Jiang, G. X. Xu, M. W. Zhu, W.-C. Law, K.-T. Yong, Y. S. Wang, C. B. Yang, B. Q. Dong and F. Xing, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25571–25600 RSC .
Y. C. Wang, J. Tang, Z. Peng, Y. H. Wang, D. S. Jia, B. Kong, A. A. Elzatahry, D. Y. Zhao and G. F. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3668–3673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Zhang, J. S. Jie, X. J. Zhang, X. M. Ou and X. H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34527–34543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Luo, X. H. Ren, H. W. Lin, H. Song and J. H. Ye, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 5701–5719 RSC .
Y. Yang, R. Q. Zhao, T. F. Zhang, K. Zhao, P. S. Xiao, Y. F. Ma, P. M. Ajayan, G. Q. Shi and Y. S. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 829–835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, M. O. Tadé and Z. P. Shao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5371–5408 RSC .
J. B. Cui, Y. J. Li, L. Liu, L. Chen, J. Xu, J. W. Ma, G. Fang, E. B. Zhu, H. Wu, L. X. Zhao, L. Y. Wang and Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6295–6301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shiraishi, M. Hashimoto, K. Chishiro, K. Moriyama, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7574–7583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Wang, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1921–1924 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sánchez-Iglesias, N. Winckelmans, T. Altantzis, S. Bals, M. Grzelczak and L. M. Liz-Marzán, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 107–110 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jauffred, A. Samadi, H. Klingberg, P. M. Bendix and L. B. Oddershede, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 8087–8130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Han, X. Q. Gao, L. Shi, Y. L. Zheng, K. Hou, J. W. Lv, J. Guo, W. Zhang and Z. Y. Tang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6083–6089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-F. Tsai, S.-H. G. Chang, F.-Y. Cheng, V. Shanmugam, Y.-S. Cheng, C.-H. Su and C. S. Yeh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5330–5342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Chen, F. Wang, K. Li, K. C. Woo, J. F. Wang, Q. Li, L.-D. Sun, X. X. Zhang, H.-Q. Lin and C.-H. Yan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7162–7171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. F. Ruan, L. Shao, Y. W. Shu, J. F. Wang and H. K. Wu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 65–73 CrossRef .
X. Z. Zhu, X. L. Zhuo, Q. Li, Z. Yang and J. F. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 341–352 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Neal, R. A. Hughes, A. S. Preston, S. D. Golze, T. B. Demille and S. Neretina, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 12974–13012 RSC .
G. Kang, M. Yang, M. S. Mattei, G. C. Schatz and R. P. V. Duyne, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2106–2113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, F. Ji, Y. Xu, L. He, Y. F. Mi, F. Bao, B. Q. Sun, X. H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7201–7206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Luo, H. W. Huang, S.-I. Choi, C. Zhang, R. R. D. Silva, H.-C. Peng, Z.-Y. Li, J. Y. Liu, Z. K. He and Y. N. Xia, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10523–10532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Chow, N. N. Li, X. P. Bai, X. L. Zhuo, L. Shao and J. F. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2136–2146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Zhang, S. A. Winget, Y. R. Wu, D. Su, X. J. Sun, Z.-X. Xie and D. Qin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2607–2616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Keller, H. Kang, C. L. Haynes and R. R. Frontiera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40577–40584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Y. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. N. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, J. J. Miao, T. H. Peng, H. Lv, J.-G. Wang, K. Li, Y. Zhu and D. Li, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2507–2513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, J. Chen, J. R. Mcbride and T. Lian, Science, 2015, 349, 6248 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Shi, Y. H. Cao, Y. J. Bao, Y. F. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, Z. Y. Fang, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung, Y. D. Yin and T. R. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700803 CrossRef PubMed .
C. G. Silva, R. Juárez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595–602 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Peerakiatkhajohn, T. Butburee, J.-H. Yun, H. J. Chen, R. M. Richards and L. Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20127 RSC .
F.-X. Xiao, Z. P. Zeng and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10735–10744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Ha, J.-H. Kim, M. You, Q. Li, C. H. Fan and J.-M. Nam, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 12208–12278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Su, H. Q. Jiang, H. Y. Zhu, J.-J. Lv, G. H. Yang, B. Yan and J.-J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12494–12502 RSC .
T. Chen, F. X. Tong, J. Enderlein and Z. K. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3326–3330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. X. Wu, K. Qin, D. Yuan, J. Tan, L. Qin, X. J. Zhang and H. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12954–12959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Fang, T. Bi, Q. Ding, Z. Q. Cui, N. Yu, X. X. Xu and B. Y. Geng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20117–20124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, Y. Zhang, L. Shi, Y. F. Zhu, M. F. Mideksa, K. Hou, W. S. Zhao, D. W. Wang, M. Zhao, X. F. Zhang, J. W. Lv, J. Q. Zhang, X. L. Wang and Z. Y. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17964–17972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Zhu, H. K. Yip, X. L. Zhuo, R. B. Jiang, J. L. Chen, X.-M. Zhu, Z. Yang and J. F. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13837–13846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Zhu, H. L. Jia, X.-M. Zhu, S. Cheng, X. L. Zhuo, F. Qin, Z. Yang and J. F. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700016 CrossRef .
C. H. Fang, G. L. Zhao, Z. J. Zhang, J. P. Zheng, Q. Ding, X. X. Xu, L. Shao and B. Y. Geng, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2018, 1800258 CrossRef .
S. Rodel-Cedeira, V. Montes-García, L. Polavarapu, D. M. Solís, H. Heidari, A. L. Porta, M. Angiola, A. Martucci, J. M. Taboada, F. Obelleiro, S. Bals, J. Pérez-Juste and I. Pastoriza-Santos, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 9169–9180 CrossRef .
P. J. Straney, N. A. Diemler, A. M. Smith, Z. E. Eddinger, M. S. Gilliam and J. E. Millstone, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 1084–1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, C. H. Li, H. J. Chen, R. B. Jiang, L.-D. Sun, Q. Li, J. F. Wang, J. C. Yu and C.-H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5588–5601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. X. Yang, W. X. Wang, K. D. Gilroy and Y. N. Xia, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5682–5687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nazemi, S. R. Panikkanvalappil, C.-K. Liao, M. A. Mahmoud and M. A. El-Sayed, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 10241–10252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, X. L. Zhuo, S. Li, Q. F. Ruan, Q.-H. Xu and J. F. Wang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 801–812 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Sun, X. Yang, Y. Ding, D. Su and D. Qin, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15107–15114 RSC .
J. Ahn, D. Wang, Y. Ding, J. W. Zhang and D. Qin, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 298–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, J. J. Cullen and G. R. Buettner, Biochem. Biophys. Acta, 2012, 1826, 443–457 CAS .
X. Z. Zhu, J. Xu, H. Zhang, X. M. Cui, Y. Z. Guo, S. Cheng, C. X. Kan and J. F. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 3198–3207 RSC .
J. Xu, Q. R. Yun, H. Zhang, Y. Z. Guo, S. L. Ke, J. F. Wang, X. Z. Zhu and C. X. Kan, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 8332–8335 RSC .
L. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Ahn, X. Wang and D. Qin, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1057–1065 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TEM images and extinction spectra of the obtained nanostructures. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cp01153d‡ The authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Au NBP@AgPd nanostructures with different amounts of H2PdCl4. (a) The extinction spectra of the Au NBP@AgPd nanostructure samples produced with different amounts of H2PdCl4. (b) Variations of the longitudinal plasmon wavelength and FWHM as a function of the volume of added H2PdCl4. (c–h) The TEM images of the Au NBP@AgPd nanostructure samples.	 

 	Fig. 2  HAADF and HRTEM imaging of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes. (a) The HAADF-STEM and elemental mapping images of a single 1.8 mL Au NBP@AgPd nanoframe. The rightmost image is the overlapped image of the Au, Ag, and Pd elemental maps. The elemental mapping images have the same size scale as the HAADF-STEM image. (b) The HRTEM image of a single 1.8 mL Au NBP@AgPd nanoframe. (c) The HRTEM image recorded in the region indicated by the white box in (b).	 

 	Fig. 3  The ICP-MS data of (a) Pd and (b) Au and Ag in the corresponding products (solids and supernatant) prepared by titrating H2PdCl4 with a suspension of the Au NBP@Ag nanorods. The data points labeled as “added“ correspond to the amounts of Pd added in the reaction.	 

 	Fig. 4  The schematic illustrating the synthetic process.	 

 	Fig. 5  FDTD simulations. (a) The simulated extinction spectra of the Au NBPs and the models. (b) Variations in the longitudinal SPR and longitudinal dipolar plasmon linewidths as functions of the model. The point of model 0 represents the Au NBPs. (c) The simulated extinction spectra of the Au NBP, Pd nanoframe and Au NBP@Pd nanoframe. (d) The simulated electric field enhancement contours under longitudinal extinction at 800 nm: the Au NBP (left), Pd nanoframe (middle), and Au NBP@Pd nanoframe (right). The field enhancement contours are drawn to the logarithmic scale.	 

 	Fig. 6  Plasmonic photocatalysis. (a) The equation of the Suzuki coupling reaction chosen in our study. (b) The photocatalytic activity of the Au NBP@AgPd nanoframes and Au NBP@Pd core–shell nanoparticles under the irradiation of an 808 nm laser at different optical intensities.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TEM images and extinction spectra of the obtained nanostructures. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cp01153d
‡ The authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
