Enhanced photoactivity and conductivity in transparent TiO 2 nanocrystals/graphene hybrid anodes    - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA01425B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA01425B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9307-9315Enhanced photoactivity and conductivity in transparent TiO2 nanocrystals/graphene hybrid anodes†‡

        
          
            C. 
            Ingrosso§
*a, 
      
        
          
            G. V. 
            Bianco§
b, 
      
        
          
            V. 
            Pifferi
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Guffanti
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            F. 
            Petronella
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            R. 
            Comparelli
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Agostiano
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Striccoli
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            I. 
            Palchetti
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            L. 
            Falciola
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            M. L. 
            Curri
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            G. 
            Bruno
          
        
      b
aCNR-IPCF Sez. Bari, c/o Dip. di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Bari, via Orabona 4, 70126, Bari, Italy. E-mail: c.ingrosso@ba.ipcf.cnr.it
bCNR-NANOTEC, c/o Dip. di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Bari, via Orabona 4, 70126, Bari, Italy
cDip. di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Milano, via Golgi 19, 20133, Milano, Italy
dDip. di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Bari, via Orabona 4, 70126, Bari, Italy
eDip. di Chimica Ugo Schiff, Università degli Studi di Firenze, via della Lastruccia 3-13, 50019, Sesto Fiorentino (FI), Italy
Received 
      15th February 2017
    , Accepted 14th April 2017First published on 2nd May 2017AbstractAn optically transparent and UV-light active anode, characterized by high (photo)conductivity, charge mobility and exciton lifetime, based on graphene, grown by CVD, decorated with colloidal TiO2 nanocrystals (NCs), has been fabricated, by a direct and facile solution-based procedure. TiO2 NCs anchor onto graphene by means of π–π stacking interactions occurring between the pyrene-1-butyric acid (PBA) surface coating ligand and the 2-D platform and assemble in a highly interconnected multilayered layout, by means of interligand π–π forces, retaining composition and geometry, along with the graphene structure. Remarkably, the PBA-coated TiO2 NCs on the graphene increase its electrical conductivity, electroactivity, and capacitive behavior, as well as photoelectrical response under UV-light, resulting in a 50% enhanced photoelectroactivity and a long exciton recombination lifetime. The photoanodes can be integrated into solar cells as optically transparent electrodes, in photodetectors, FETs and (bio)sensors.
Introduction
Graphene, a 2-D polycrystalline and flexible material, based on a honeycomb sp2-hybridized carbon atom structure, possesses unique structural properties, including optical transparency from visible to infrared, excellent thermal and electrical conductivity, a high surface area, good biocompatibility, high flexibility and environmental stability.1–3 Graphene based composites are increasingly investigated as effective structural materials to integrate into field-effect transistors (FETs), sensors, supercapacitors, touch panels, lithium-ion batteries, field emitters and solar cells.4–7
The high reactivity of the graphene platform offers diverse routes for the fabrication of hybrid composites by means of diverse nanostructured compounds, thus enabling the implementation of a great variety of decoration approaches. Such composites exhibit unique properties originating from the synergic combination of the single components, resulting in a material with novel functionalities not intrinsically exhibited by bare graphene, such as light harvesting in the visible and infrared spectral range and selective molecular recognition abilities, improved electrical, mechanical and thermal properties and enhanced (photoelectro)catalytic and photoelectrical conversion properties.8
Organic capped nanocrystals (NCs), prepared by means of solution-based colloidal chemistry routes, are functional nanomaterials exhibiting unique size- and shape-dependent properties, that are extremely suitable for chemically decorating graphene, and for conveying therein the original NC functionalities, ultimately holding great promise for advanced technological applications. The surface of the colloidal NCs, coordinated by surfactant molecules, can be chemically engineered by means of flexible post synthesis functionalization procedures, thus enabling a suitable tuning of the NC mutual and NC-substrate interactions. NC surface functionalization has been demonstrated to be very effective in the fabrication of multilayered assemblies and hierarchical structures, as well as in the realization of hybrid composites, exhibiting multiple functionalities with great potential in a variety of applications in (bio)sensing, photovoltaics and photocatalysis.9
In this work, a direct method has been used to functionalize graphene, grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD), with pyrene-1-butyric acid (PBA)-coated TiO2 NCs. CVD grown graphene is a scalable material, suitable for large-scale applications. CVD graphene finds application in a variety of technologies, since it can be transferred onto several substrates (i.e. glass, silicon or polymer substrates) also in multilayers, showing different physical and chemical properties.10
On the other hand, TiO2 is a wide band gap semiconductor and, in the NC form, it is widely used in electrochemical sensors, solar cells and photocatalytic systems due to its low toxicity, optical transparency in the visible range, low cost, biocompatibility, and photostability and because of its relevant photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical performance.11–13
The synergic combination of properties of the TiO2 NCs and the carbon based nanostructures has been demonstrated to be particularly suited to create hybrid materials with enhanced electrical conductivity, photoelectrical conversion efficiency, photocatalytic properties and environmental stability.14 Indeed, in these composites, while the charge scavenger properties of carbon based compounds decrease the recombination rate of photogenerated hole–electron pairs in TiO2, the photoexcited charge, transferred to the carbon nanostructure, improves its charge transport properties.15
The interphase between graphene and TiO2 NCs is expected to play an essential role in determining the electron coupling of the components. Here, pre-synthesized TiO2 NCs, natively coated with oleic acid, have been surface functionalized with PBA. The hybrid material has been fabricated by exposing the graphene film to a dispersion of the PBA surface coated TiO2 NCs. Such a ligand, effectively coordinating the NC surface by means of the carboxylic group, is able to electrically interconnect the NCs and chemically bind them to graphene, by means of π–π stacking interactions. Moreover, pyrene acts as a channel at the interface for hole transfer in the hybrid, which leads to the p-doping of graphene.16
The prepared hybrid material has been characterized by scanning microscopy and Raman spectroscopy, along with Hall and (photo)electrochemical measurements for investigating the morphology, chemistry, structure, and electrical and photoelectrical properties. The decoration of graphene with the PBA-coated TiO2 NCs has effectively resulted in a hybrid material able to combine the electron acceptor and ballistic charge transport capability of graphene with the UV-light harvesting behaviour of TiO2 NCs. The hybrid is optically transparent and concomitantly exhibits enhanced electroactivity and photoelectrical conversion with respect to bare graphene, overall resulting in long recombination lifetimes. Therefore, the great potential of such a material can be envisioned as a UV-light photoactive component for optically transparent electrodes to integrate into solar cells, photodetectors, FETs and sensors.
Experimental section
Materials
All chemicals were used at the highest purity available and as received. Oleic acid (OLEA, 90%), titanium tetraisopropoxide (Ti(OiPr)4 or TTIP, 98.9%) and trimethylamino-N-oxide dihydrate ((CH3)3NO·2H2O or TMAO, 98%) were purchased from Fluka. 1-Pyrene butyric acid (PBA), methanol and chloroform were purchased from Aldrich.
Synthesis of oleic acid (OLEA)-capped TiO2 NCs
Spherical shaped oleic acid (OLEA)-capped TiO2 NCs were synthesized with a diameter of 6 nm under an N2 atmosphere using a standard air free technique,17 starting from dried and degassed reactants. The synthesis of the NCs is performed at a low temperature (80–100 °C), by the hydrolysis of the TTIP precursor in the OLEA surfactant, and in the presence of ethylene glycol and the TMAO base which catalyses the polycondensation reaction of the precursor. The as-prepared OLEA-coated TiO2 NCs were isolated from the reaction mixture by precipitation with methanol, and finally were dispersed in chloroform for obtaining optically transparent solutions.
Preparation of the 1-pyrene butyric acid (PBA)-coated TiO2 NC modified graphene based hybrid material

Capping exchange of OLEA-capped TiO2 NCs with 1-pyrene butyric acid (PBA). 
For the ligand exchange procedure, the as-synthesized TiO2 NCs were repeatedly washed with methanol to remove the excess of the OLEA ligand coordinating the NC surface. The chloroform solutions of PBA were added to the washed 5 × 10−2 M TiO2 NC solution in a 1:5 TiO2/PBA molar ratio, and the mixture was left to stir overnight at room temperature. The NCs were then washed with methanol to remove the excess aromatic ligand and then dispersed in chloroform. The transparent solutions of PBA-capped TiO2 NCs can be achieved (10−3 M), that are stable over months without further addition of PBA molecules.


Graphene growth by chemical vapour deposition (CVD). 
Monolayer graphene with 50–110 μm2 grain sizes was grown by CVD on 25 μm thick copper foils (Alfa Aesar, item no. 13382) in a typical quartz tube CVD reactor at 1000 °C using CH4/H2 as precursors. The prepared graphene was then transferred onto 300 nm SiO2/Si or ITO/glass substrates by using a thermal release tape and an aqueous solution of ammonium persulfate (0.1 M) as a copper etchant. Before graphene transfer, the SiO2/Si substrates were treated with O2 plasma for improving adhesion. Bilayer graphene samples were fabricated by transferring additional graphene layers onto the monolayer graphene. All graphene samples were dipped in a toluene/ethanol/anisole (1/1/1) solution for removing any organic impurities of thermal tape traces.


Functionalization of CVD grown graphene with 1-pyrene butyric acid (PBA)-coated TiO2 NCs. 
Large area monolayer graphene transferred onto the SiO2/Si substrate or ITO was incubated in a 10−3 M chloroform solution of PBA-capped TiO2 NCs for 48 h and finally rinsed with chloroform to remove NCs which are not specifically adsorbed.

Characterization and measurements

Spectroscopic characterization. 
Steady state UV-Vis absorption spectra were recorded with a Cary 5000 (Varian) UV/Vis/NIR spectrophotometer. All optical measurements were performed at room temperature. Mid-infrared spectra were acquired with a Varian 670-IR spectrometer equipped with a DTGS (deuterated triglycine sulfate) detector. The spectral resolution used for all experiments was 4 cm−1. For attenuated total reflection (ATR) measurements, the internal reflection element (IRE) used was a one-bounce 2-mm diameter diamond microprism. The solution or suspension of interest (3–5 μL) was cast directly onto the internal reflection element, on the upper face of the diamond crystal.
The Raman spectra of graphene were collected using a LabRAM HR Horiba-Jobin Yvon spectrometer with a 532 nm excitation laser source. The measurements were carried out under ambient conditions at a low laser power (1 mW) to avoid laser-induced damage. The Raman band recorded from a silicon wafer at 520 cm−1 was used to calibrate the spectrometer, and the accuracy of the spectral measurement was estimated to be 1 cm−1.
Transmittance spectra of CVD graphene as bare and modified with PBA and PBA-coated TiO2 NCs were recorded by means of an optical setup composed of a white light source, a light collecting system and an optical spectrometer (HR4000 from Ocean Optics).


Transmission electron microscopy (TEM). 
The TEM analyses were performed by using a Jeol Jem-1011 microscope, operated at 100 kV. The TEM images were acquired using a Quemesa Olympus CCD 11 Mp Camera. The TEM images of organic-coated TiO2 NCs were collected by dipping a 300 mesh amorphous carbon-coated Cu grid in chloroform solutions of TiO2 NCs and leaving the solvent to evaporate. Statistical analyses of the size (NP average size and size distribution) of the samples were performed using a freeware ImageJ analysis program. At least 150 NCs were counted for each sample.


Scanning electron microscopy (SEM). 
Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) was performed by using a Zeiss Sigma microscope operating in the range of 0–10 keV and equipped with an in-lens secondary electron detector and an INCA Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) detector. Samples were mounted onto stainless-steel sample holders using double-sided carbon tape and ground with silver paste.


Atomic force microscopy (AFM). 
Topography and phase mode AFM measurements were performed in air and at room temperature, by means of a PSIA XE-100 SPM system operating in tapping mode. A silicon SPM sensor for noncontact AFM (Park Systems), having a spring constant of 42 N m−1 and a resonance frequency of 330 kHz, was used. Micrographs were collected on six distinct areas of samples, with a scan size area of 5 μm × 5 μm, by sampling the surface at a scan rate between 1.0 and 0.5 Hz and a resolution of 256 × 256 pixels. The AFM topography images were processed by using XEI software to obtain statistical data.


Electrical measurements. 
Electrical measurements were carried out using a four-probe contact geometry in the van der Pauw configuration on a sample area of 4 × 4 mm2 using a fully automated Hall system (MMR Technologies, Inc.).


Electrochemical measurements. 
Electrochemical measurements were made in a three electrode cell, by using an Autolab PG-Stat 30 (EcoChemie B.V., The Netherlands) potentiostat/galvanostat, equipped with Nova 2.0 software for the result analysis. A platinum wire was used as the counter electrode, a saturated calomel electrode as the reference electrode and a modified ITO glass as the working electrode. The ITO glass supporting electrode was modified by the transfer of CVD graphene, as a monolayer and bi-layer, also functionalized with the PBA-coated TiO2 NCs.
In each electrochemical experiment, 0.1 M NaClO4 (Aldrich, ACS reagent, ≥98.0%) was used as the supporting electrolyte, while 3 mM [Ru(NH3)6]Cl3 and 3 mM K4[Fe(CN)6] (Sigma-Aldrich) were chosen as electrochemical probes for electrode characterization.
Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) was performed scanning the potential between −0.3 V and 1.2 V (SCE), with a 0.005 V step potential at different scan rates (from 0.01 V s−1 to 0.75 V s−1). Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) was performed at four different potentials (−0.1 V, 0.1 V, 0.25 V and 1 V) in the absence of chemical probes; frequencies between 65000 Hz and 0.1 Hz were explored and a sinusoidal potential curve with an amplitude of 10 mV was applied in all the cases. The impedance data were processed by using Z-View 3.1 software.
Photocurrent measurements, performed according to the method already optimized in the literature,18,19 were carried out at 1 V, illuminating the working electrode at definite times with an UV Jelosil HG500 iron halogenide lamp, having a power density of 45 mW cm−2 and placed at a distance of 40 cm from the sample. All the measurements have been carried out in an N2 atmosphere after degassing the cell with nitrogen flow for at least 10 min. Results were normalized subtracting the lower photocurrent curve in order to compare the different photoelectrochemical responses.
The photocurrent transients were treated according to the method reported in the literature18,19 in order to extract the time values τ for charge recombination processes.

Results and discussion
Preparation and morphological investigation of the PBA-coated TiO2 NC surface modified CVD graphene
The oleic acid (OLEA)-coated TiO2 NCs have been synthesized by means of the colloidal chemistry route reported in ref. 17 and, then, the surface was modified with pyrene-1-butyric acid (PBA). The pyrene functionality has been selected as its chemistry is expected to connect the TiO2 NCs to graphene via π–π interactions, and concomitantly to coordinate the NC surface by means of its end carboxyl moiety.16
The morphology, optical properties and surface chemistry of the organic-coated TiO2 NCs have been investigated before and after the ligand exchange, in order to assess the effective NC surface chemistry modification and any possible change in their spectroscopic and structural properties.
Both the morphology and the spectroscopic characteristics of the NCs were preserved after surface treatment with PBA (see panel A of Fig. S1 of the ESI‡). Indeed, the PBA-coated NCs retain their spherical shape, with a diameter of 6.0 ± 0.3 nm, maintain the featureless absorption in the UV and near visible spectral region, typical of the high band gap nanostructured semiconductor17 and are stable in solution without any aggregation phenomena.
The infrared spectroscopy spectra (Fig. S1 in the ESI,‡ panel B) demonstrate the binding of pyrene molecules to the surface Ti4+ Lewis sites by means of the carboxylate anions in a chelating bidentate binding mode20,21 (panel A of Fig. 1) and also attest to the presence of residual pristine OLEA ligand molecules coordinated at the surface of the TiO2 NCs. Although a complete displacement of such a ligand has been found to occur upon multiple ligand exchange steps, such a procedure has resulted in a loss of stability of the NCs in solution, due to aggregation phenomena (data not shown), and therefore it has not been considered viable.
 Fig. 1  (A) Scheme of functionalization of CVD grown graphene with PBA-coated TiO2 NCs, with close-up views of the chemical interactions of PBA coordinated at the TiO2 NC surface and of pyrene anchored on graphene. (B) SEM picture, (C) EDS spectrum in the range of 0–6 keV, (D) AFM 2-D topography image and (E) cross-sectional line profile taken along the red line of panel (D) of CVD monolayer graphene functionalized with PBA-capped TiO2 NCs. 
After decoration of the CVD graphene with the PBA-capped TiO2 NCs, the surface morphology and chemical composition of the hybrid have been studied by Scanning Electron Microscopy, Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy and Atomic Force Microscopy (see panels A–D of Fig. 1).
While the surface morphology of the bare CVD graphene appears flat (see SEM and AFM images in Fig. S2‡), the secondary electron microscopy image points out that the morphology of the hybrid is mainly characterized by the presence of nanostructures at the graphene surface (panel A in Fig. 1). Such structures are also evident in the AFM topography image reported in panel C, which shows an interconnected layout of grain-type structures up to 50 nm high. The consideration of the actual NC size, as estimated by TEM (panel A in Fig. S1‡), and of the dimension of the features imaged in panel C, clearly indicates a multilayered arrangement of the PBA-coated TiO2 NCs.
The EDS analysis of the prepared samples on a silicon wafer, reported in the range between 0 and 6 keV (panel B of Fig. 1), shows a typical Kα line of O (0.525 keV) and Ti (4.512 keV) elements, supporting the effective functionalization of graphene with the PBA-capped TiO2 NCs.
The organization of the PBA-coated TiO2 NCs in nanostructured assemblies, formed of tens of nm high multilayers, can be reasonably ascribed to concomitant phenomena, namely (i) multiple and cooperative π–π stacking interactions between the pyrene linker coordinating the TiO2 NC surface and the graphene platform16 (see panel A in Fig. 1), (ii) π–π interactions among the PBA molecules capping the NC surface and (iii) interdigitation taking place between the alkyl chains of the residual OLEA ligand, with possible concomitant cross-linking of its –CC– bonds.22
Spectroscopical and electrical investigation of the PBA-coated TiO2 NC surface modified CVD graphene
Raman and UV-VIS spectroscopy along with Hall measurements have been performed for investigating the structural and electrical properties of the CVD graphene films, decorated with the PBA-capped TiO2 NCs. Fig. 2 reports the Raman spectra of the monolayer CVD-graphene transferred onto the SiO2/Si substrate, before (black line) and after functionalization with the PBA-capped TiO2 NCs (blue line).
 Fig. 2  (A) Raman spectra of CVD graphene transferred onto SiO2/Si as bare and functionalized with PBA-capped TiO2 NCs. (B) Transmittance spectra of CVD graphene as bare and modified with PBA and PBA-coated TiO2 NCs. 
The spectra of the bare graphene show the typical G and 2D peaks at 1583 cm−1 and 2678 cm−1, respectively. In addition, the figure shows that at ca. 1350 cm−1, the bare graphene does not exhibit the D peak, thus attesting to the very low density of C-sp3 defects and, hence, for the high structural quality of the material. After decoration with the PBA-coated TiO2 NCs, the D mode still shows a negligible contribution, as expected from the non-covalent nature of the graphene/PBA-capped TiO2 NC chemical interaction. Conversely, the G and 2D peak positions, as well as the ratio between their intensities, drastically change after immobilization of the NCs. Namely, the stiffening of the Raman G and 2D modes from 1583 cm−1 to 1592 cm−1, and from 2678 cm−1 to 2684 cm−1, attests to the occurrence of charge transfer processes from graphene to the PBA-coated TiO2 NCs.16
Finally, three new peaks marked by stars in panel A of Fig. 2 appear, which are accounted for by the typical Raman peaks of the pyrene rings.23 The charge transfer from graphene to the PBA-coated TiO2 NCs has been also assessed using Hall measurements.
The Hall measurement of the pristine CVD monolayer graphene shows a slight hole-doping that is typically accounted for by the adsorption of air contaminants, such as H2O and CO2, acting as electron-withdrawing species.24 We found a hole concentration, n, of 1.06 × 1012 cm−2 which provides a shift of the graphene Fermi level (ΔEF, referring to the Dirac point) of 0.12 eV, as derived by the following equation:23ΔEF = hvF (n/4π)1/2where vF is the Fermi velocity of 1.1 × 108 cm s−1.
After the decoration of graphene with PBA-coated TiO2 NCs, the hole-doping further increases up to 2.13 × 1012 cm−2, providing a ΔEF of 0.17 eV and a decrease of the graphene sheet resistance from 1670 ohm per sq to 834 ohm per sq, without any substantial effects on the material charge carrier mobility (around 3500 cm2 V−1 s−1). Similar results have been previously reported by Liu et al.25 for a TiO2/graphene hybrid system, where the TiO2 nanoparticle based film was directly deposited on graphene by radio frequency magnetron sputtering. Therefore, for the investigated hybrid system, the p-doping can be rationalized by hole transfer from the nano-oxide to graphene, which is induced by the work function mismatch between graphene (≈4.50 eV) and the TiO2 semiconductor (≈5.58 eV).
An essential role in such a hole transfer process is played by the short chain aromatic pyrene linker16 which acts as a channel of the charge coupling between the two materials. Indeed, in the PBA-capped TiO2 NCs, holes are expected to be decoupled from the excited states and stabilized by the π ring system of pyrene by the formation of a charge-separated complex, and then transferred to graphene or other TiO2 NCs. The interligand interactions, occurring among adjacent NCs, can increase the charge mobility along the NC film, thus favouring the hole transfer also from the NCs not directly bound to graphene. The optical transmission spectra have been collected for studying the spectroscopic properties of the hybrid material in the visible and near-UV spectral range. In particular, panel B of Fig. 2 compares the transmittance spectra of the bare graphene samples with those functionalized with PBA and with the PBA-coated TiO2 NCs. The comparison of the spectra points out that the optical transparency of graphene in the visible range is not affected by the anchoring of the PBA ligand. After decoration with the NCs, it is only slightly reduced by the immobilized TiO2 NCs,17 namely it decreases down to 7.5% in the near UV spectral region.
Electrochemical properties of the PBA-coated TiO2 NC functionalized CVD graphene
The electrochemical, electrical and structural properties at the PBA-coated TiO2 NC/graphene junction of the hybrid material have been studied by Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) and Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS). For such a purpose, both mono and bilayer graphene films have been decorated with PBA-coated TiO2 NCs, by means of the same procedure described for the monolayer graphene films.
Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) electrodes have been modified with the prepared PBA-coated TiO2 NC functionalized graphene. Namely, PBA-capped TiO2 NC functionalized monolayer and bilayer graphene films (hereon indicated as G1TiO2 NCs and G2TiO2 NCs, respectively) have been manufactured, by transferring the CVD grown graphene onto ITO, as described in the Experimental section. Additionally, ITO electrodes, as bare and modified with both pristine monolayer (G1) and pristine bilayer graphene (G2), respectively have been tested.
The obtained working electrodes have been characterized by cyclic voltammetry (CV) at different scan rates, in a three-electrode cell by using 0.1 M NaClO4 as a supporting electrolyte. With a potential window ranging between −0.3 V and 1.2 V (SCE), a 0.005 V step potential and a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, the cyclic voltammograms (CVs) reported in panel A of Fig. 3 provide evidence that the anodic potential window limit of graphene is affected by the immobilization of the TiO2 NCs, anticipating the oxidation of the medium. Such a down-shift of the anodic potential (ca. 0.16 V) can be reasonably ascribed to the shift of the graphene Fermi level ΔEF of ca. 0.17 eV, caused by the enrichment of holes transferred from the TiO2 NCs, which makes the oxidation of the medium more energetically favourable. Panel A shows also that the down-shift of the anodic potential in the G1 and G2 graphene based electrodes is comparable.
 Fig. 3  CVs of bare (1) ITO glass, (2) monolayer graphene (G1), (3) bilayer graphene (G2) based reference electrodes and of (4) G1TiO2 NC and (5) G2TiO2 NC modified ITO glass electrodes. In (A) background windows registered at 100 mV s−1 in 0.1 M NaClO4. In (B) peak-shaped CVs of the outer-sphere 3 mM [Ru(NH3)6]Cl3 probe and (inset) sketch of the planar semi-infinite diffusion mechanism. In (C) peak- and step-shaped CVs for the inner-sphere 3 mM K4[Fe(CN)6] probe and (in the insets) sketches of planar semi-infinite (on the top) and convergent (on the bottom) diffusion mechanisms. 
The cyclic voltammetry profiles have been recorded in the presence of an outer- and an inner-sphere probe, namely [Ru(NH3)6]Cl3 and K4[Fe(CN)6], respectively, in order to study the electron transfer and the structural quality of the prepared hybrid material based working electrodes. Panel B of Fig. 3 shows the CVs of modified electrodes recorded in the presence of the outer-sphere probe ([Ru(NH3)6]Cl3). Such a molecule acts as an electron transfer redox probe exhibiting an electrochemical behaviour, which is affected by the electronic DOS of the electrode material.26–28
As can be noticed from the figure, all the CVs of panel B present peak-shaped curves attesting to the fabrication of a continuous monolayer graphene film by CVD and to its effective and safe transfer onto the ITO glass supporting electrode. In addition, the CV line-shape is explained by a semi-infinite diffusion mechanism of the redox probe molecule towards the electrode (inset of panel B), which, hence, behaves as a “macroelectrode”.26–28 The different electrodes do not show peculiar differences, as only a very slight increase in the peak currents can be detected, probably due to an increase in the available electrode active surface.
Finally, the more electrochemically reactive bilayer graphene film has been found sensitive to the decoration with the PBA-capped TiO2 NCs. Indeed, an enhancement of the current density, after the NC decoration, has been observed, probably due to the increase of the active surface, because of the nanoporous structure, consistent with the results of the morphological investigation.
The modified electrodes have been voltammetrically characterized also in the presence of the inner-sphere probe (K4[Fe(CN)6]), a molecule characterized by an electrochemical behaviour that is more sensitive to the chemistry (oxygen containing functionalities, impurities, and adsorption sites) and structure of the electrode material surface, rather than its electronic density of states (DOS).25,26,29 The corresponding CVs, reported in panel C of Fig. 3, show a different electrochemical behaviour for the mono and bilayer G films. In particular, the monolayer based electrodes show the peak-shaped curves, characteristic of the electrochemically inert side basal plane of a high quality and almost “perfect” monolayer graphene. As shown in the figure, such peak-shaped curves are characterized by a more reversible electrochemical behaviour (i.e. an increased electron transfer rate) with respect to that of the bare ITO.30 Conversely, the interaction of the inner-sphere redox probe with the bilayer graphene based electrodes leads to step-shaped voltammograms.28 This result is explained by the sensitivity of the probe to the electro-active carbon–oxygen functionalities at the defects of the separated graphitic islands (grain boundaries, wrinkles, folded edges, peripheral edges, missing atoms, and dangling bonds), which grow on the underlying continuous monolayer. Such islands are responsible for a convergent diffusion mechanism of the redox probe molecule to the electrode and result in the observed sigmoidal CVs typical of a “microelectrode”.26,27
Upon immobilization of the PBA-coated TiO2 NCs, neither the line-shape nor the current densities, reported in panel C, are affected, and this finding shows that the decoration procedure does not lead to structural defects on the graphene platform.
The electrical properties of the PBA-coated TiO2 NC modified graphene hybrid material have also been studied by Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) in 0.1 M NaClO4 in a three electrode cell configuration.
Panel A of Fig. 4 reports the EIS Bode-phase plot of the working electrodes obtained in the dark at the potential of −0.1 V in the frequency range of 0.1–10000 Hz, while the corresponding Nyquist plots are reported in Fig. S2 of the ESI.‡
 Fig. 4  EIS Bode-phase plots of G1, G2, G1TiO2 NCs and G2TiO2 NCs in the dark at the potential of −0.1 V in 0.1 M NaClO4. (B–C) Equivalent circuits used for fitting the spectra of panel (A). In (B) G1 and in (C) G2 based circuits. (D) Values of the equivalent parameters of the circuits of panels B and C, estimated by fitting the EIS spectra. 
The G1 and G2 based working electrodes exhibit a different electrical behaviour, as sigmoidal and peak-shaped EIS curves, respectively, have been recorded. Such curves have been fitted by using the Z-view software and the equivalent circuits reported in panels B and C of Fig. 4 have been achieved.
For the G1 electrode, the fitted equivalent circuit relays on the resistance RΩ of the solution, in series with a capacitance C1, which is ascribed to the “Debye layer”, that is an accumulation of ions in proximity of the electrode, thus behaving as a parallel-plate capacitor, for compensating the charge accumulated at the graphene surface (panel B of Fig. 4).
Conversely, the equivalent circuit of the G2 based electrodes (panel C of Fig. 4) presents, in parallel with the interfacial capacitance C1, a resistance R, which originates mostly from the turbostratic regions that are the graphitic islands of the second layer of graphene, which are not aligned with the underlying monolayer graphene basal plane. Such a misalignment leads to a contact resistance R, between the graphene layers, that can vary by more than one order of magnitude, depending on the angular alignment of the two graphene lattices.31 In addition, in series with such a contact resistance R, the circuit in panel C also presents a capacitance C2, originating from the charge separation between two graphene layers of the turbostratic regions.
The fitting procedure of the EIS Bode-phase plots reported in Fig. 4 allows the estimation of the values of the resistance and capacitance of the equivalent circuits, which are reported in panel D. Namely, the capacitance has been modelled as constant phase elements (CPEs) by the following equation:CPE = [(Ciω)α]−1where C is the capacitance, i the complex number, ω the frequency and α the parameter of deviation from the pure-capacitance behaviour.
The model provides for α = 1, a perfect flat and continuous working electrode which behaves as a pure capacitor. On the other hand, if 0.5 < α < 1, a non-ideal capacitor behaviour is expected due to the non-homogenous porous electrode surface.
The values of the resistance and capacitance reported in panel D clearly show the different electrical properties of the manufactured working electrodes, evidencing the role of the immobilized PBA-coated TiO2 NCs on the parameters describing the equivalent circuits.
In the case of the G1 electrodes, an interfacial capacitance (or electrical double layer capacitance) C1, of ca. 7.04 μF cm−2, has been estimated with an α1 value very close to 1, namely 0.92, attesting to the high quality of capacitors based on monolayer graphene.
With the introduction of the second graphene layer, the electrodes still provide a capacitive behaviour, but the estimated value of C1 is lower, namely ca. 3.80 μF cm−2.
After immobilization of the PBA-coated TiO2 NCs, the graphene electrodes present the same behaviour with smaller C1 values with respect to monolayer graphene, and a slight increase passing from mono- to bi-layer (5.43 μF cm−2 and 6.77 μF cm−2, respectively).
Such results are consistent with the recent report,32 describing the capacitance as composed of two serial parts: the Helmholtz layer capacitance (CH) and a quantum capacitance (CQ), intrinsic to graphene. The two capacitive components act in different ways: CH decreases while CQ rises with the increasing number of layers, resulting in a total capacitive behaviour presenting a maximum for intermediate layers. Moreover, CQ is strongly influenced by the carrier density of graphene, i.e. by TiO2 p-doping in our case. The resulting total capacitance depends on the balance of the variation of the previous described capacitances. According to these considerations, in our experiment, it seems that CH variations prevail in the case of bare graphene, while for PBA-coated TiO2 NCs the CQ variations start to influence the total capacitive behaviour.
In the case of the G2, the TiO2 NC decoration also results in a decrease of the estimated resistance R between the two CVD graphene layers of the misaligned turbostratic regions, as well as an increase in the relative capacitance C2. Such an evidence attests to an improvement of the graphene film structural quality, which can be related to the beneficial role of the pyrene capping ligand of the NCs in behaving as patches on the graphene discontinuities or defect regions,33 as also confirmed by the α2 value, which increases passing from 0.68 to 0.87.
Photoelectrochemistry of the PBA-coated TiO2 NC functionalized CVD graphene
The photoelectrochemical properties of the PBA-coated TiO2 NC surface modified CVD graphene have been studied by performing photocurrent measurements of the hybrid material under UV-light illumination. Panel A of Fig. 5 reports the photocurrent response of the manufactured working electrodes formed of bare and of PBA-coated TiO2 NC functionalized graphene, under illumination with an UV-lamp (λ = 356 nm) at the bias voltage of 1 V in 0.1 M NaClO4. All the I–t curves appear anodic, thus accounting for the oxidation of the medium, with concomitant transfer of photogenerated electrons from the photoanode hybrid material to the ITO supporting electrode. In addition, the bare graphene based working electrodes show a photocurrent signal originating from the π–π* transition of the graphene –CC– bond34 that takes place under UV-irradiation. In particular, the G2 shows a photocurrent density higher than that of G1, namely 0.30 μA cm−2 against 0.15 μA cm−2 that can be explained by the linear increase of the broadband absorption of graphene, for increasing number of layers. Low photocurrent density signals have been recorded for the PBA decorated G1 and G2 electrodes, namely about 0.11 μA cm−2 (see Fig. S4 of the ESI‡). A negligible contribution to the photoresponse of graphene electrodes has been observed also elsewhere for graphene electrodes modified with other pyrene compounds.35
 Fig. 5  (A) Photocurrent transient measurements collected under UV-light (λ = 365 nm) irradiation at the bias voltage of 1 V in 0.1 M NaClO4 and (B) normalized plot of the current–time dependence of ITO electrodes modified with G1, G2 and PBA-coated TiO2 NC functionalized G1 and G2 (G1TiO2 NCs and G2TiO2 NCs). (Inset of B) Transient time constants of the normalized plot of current–time dependence. 
In contrast, the TiO2 NC decorated graphene electrodes show an increase of the photocurrent density that has been found particularly evident in the case of the G2TiO2 NCs, whose value increases up to 0.45 μA cm−2. This finding can be ascribed to the intrinsic UV-light activity of the TiO2 NC film, which generates and keeps the electron–hole pairs separated that can then be transferred to graphene, through the pyrene mediated electron coupling.
Indeed, the pyrene linker stabilizes the photoelectrons by its π ring system and transfers them to graphene, where they can be stored in the extended π–π network of the aromatic platform. In addition, the Fermi level of graphene that lies in between the conduction band of TiO2 and that of ITO, decreases the injection barrier at the ITO/TiO2 NC interface. Finally, graphene, behaving as a charge acceptor and fast transporter, facilitates further photoelectron withdrawal from the TiO2 NC film to the ITO supporting electrode, suppressing both the hole/electron recombination processes at the defect sites of the NC film and the back reactions at the interface with the electrolyte36 finally resulting in an increase of the photocurrent.
It is worth pointing out that the photoresponsivity detected for the PBA-coated TiO2 NC surface decorated CVD graphene is strongly related to the specific morphological and structural properties of the investigated hybrid and, hence, cannot be compared to results reported for analogous graphite based structures,37–39 as such a characteristic represents a peculiarity of the material, depending on the graphene fabrication technique and on the synthetic strategy of the hybrid, along with the experimental conditions used for the investigation.37–40
The photoelectric properties of the prepared working electrodes and the charge recombination behaviour of the bare graphene and of the PBA-coated TiO2 modified graphene electrodes have been further investigated, by studying the transient photocurrent decay that occurs immediately after UV-light illumination.
Panel B of Fig. 5 compares the logarithmic plots of the photocurrent transient decay D of the bare graphene based working electrodes with those of the PBA-coated TiO2 NC modified homologues at the applied bias of 1 V. The transient decay time τ of the recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs is defined as the slope of the ln(D) vs. t curves18 and it is reported in the inset of panel B.
Due to its high charge mobility, the pristine graphene based electrodes present extremely long electron recombination lifetimes τ, namely ca. 105 ± 1 s for the monolayer and 214 ± 4 s for the bilayer, suggesting an efficient separation of the photogenerated carriers. After immobilization of the PBA-capped TiO2 NCs on graphene, the electron recombination lifetimes of photogenerated electrons appear preserved, showing that the current leaking, due to recombination phenomena within the hybrid film and at the film/electrolyte interface, is limited and thus photoelectrons can be transported out quickly by graphene, improving the anodic photocurrent. Thus, the hybrid shows an excellent merging of functionalities of both the components that are the highly conducting charge transport properties of graphene and the UV-light harvesting behaviour of the NC TiO2, which result in an overall improved photoelectric conversion efficiency.
Conclusions
A straightforward and facile solution-based approach has been used to fabricate an optically transparent and UV-light active anode, integrating a hybrid material formed of a large area CVD grown monolayer graphene film, chemically decorated with a dense multilayered nanoporous coating of 1-pyrene butyric acid (PBA)-coated TiO2 NCs.
The TiO2 NC film acts as a p-doping and UV-light harvesting layer, increasing graphene electrical conductivity, electrocatalytic activity and light-to-energy conversion. The assembling of the NCs is mediated by the stacking of pyrene, which acts as a beneficial patch of the graphene surface defects and preserves the excellent charge mobility and extremely long exciton lifetimes (ca. 185 ± 2 s) of graphene.
The manufactured photoanode has a relevant potential for integration in solar cells, photodetectors, catalytic systems, FETs and photoelectrochemical and capacitive sensors. Finally, the proposed strategy also represents an interesting model system for the functionalization of graphene or other carbon based nanostructures with different types of nanoparticles, thus opening the venue to original classes of hybrid materials, relevant for a wide range of applications in different technological fields.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the National Project (PRIN 2012 prot. 20128ZZS2H) and the EU project TWINFUSYON (Horizon 2020, research and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 692034).
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhass, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Morales-Narváez, L. F. Sgobbi, S. A. S. Machado and A. Merkoçi, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 86, 1 CrossRef .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Han, B. H. Jeong, S. H. Seo, K. C. Roh, S. Kim, S. Choi, J. S. Woo, H. Y. Kim, J. I. Jang, D.-C. Shin, S. Jeong, H. J. Jeong, S. Y. Jeong and G.-W. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2491 Search PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Kei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Georgakilas, J. N. Tiwari, K. C. Kemp, J. A. Perman, A. B. Bourlinos, K. S. Kim and R. Zboril, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 5464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Curri, R. Comparelli, M. Striccoli and A. Agostiano, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 11197 RSC .
Q. Yu, L. A. Jauregui, W. Wu, R. Colby, J. Tian, Z. Su, H. Cao, Z. Liu, D. Pandey, D. Wei, T. F. Chung, P. Peng, N. P. Guisinger, E. A. Stach, J. Bao, S. S. Pei and Y. P. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Pifferi, G. Soliveri, G. Panzarasa, S. Ardizzone, G. Cappelletti, D. Meroni and L. Falciola, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 71210 RSC .
G. Soliveri, V. Pifferi, G. Panzarasa, S. Ardizzone, G. Cappelletti, D. Meroni, K. Sparnacci and L. Falciola, Analyst, 2015, 140, 1486 RSC .
C. Chen, W. Cai, M. Long, B. Zhou, Y. Wu, D. Wu and Y. Feng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Jeong, H. Y. Kim, H. Jeong, J. T. Han, S. Y. Jeong, K.-J. Baeg, M. S. Jeong and G.-W. Lee, Small, 2014, 10, 2057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Han, B. J. Kim, B. G. Kim, J. S. Kim, B. H. Jeong, H. J. Jeong, S. Y. Jeong, J. H. Cho and G.-W. Lee, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ingrosso, G. V. Bianco, M. Corricelli, R. Comparelli, D. Altamura, A. Agostiano, M. Striccoli, M. Losurdo, M. L. Curri and G. Bruno, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15494 CAS .
P. D. Cozzoli, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dholam, N. Patel, A. Santini and A. Miotello, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 9581 CrossRef CAS .
F. Spadavecchia, G. Cappelletti, S. Ardizzone, M. Ceotto, M. S. Azzola, L. Lo Presti, G. Cerrato and L. Falciola, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23083 CAS .
P. J. Thistlethwaite and M. S. Hook, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 4993 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nara, H. Torii and M. Tasumi, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 19812 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Odian, Principles of Polymerization, Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 4th edn,  2004, pp. 737–738 Search PubMed .
H. Shinohara, Y. Yamakita and K. Ohno, J. Mol. Struct., 1998, 442, 221 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lafkioti, B. Krauss, T. Lohmann, U. Zschieschang, H. Klauk, K. v. Klitzing and J. H. Smet, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, S. Ryu, M. R. Tomasik, E. Stolyarova, N. Jung, M. S. Hybertsen, M. L. Steigerwald, L. E. Brus and G. W. Flynn, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, R. Cong, L. Cao, S. Liu and H. Cui, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 2362 RSC .
D. A. C. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6944 RSC .
L. R. Cumba, C. W. Foster, D. A. C. Brownson, J. P. Smith, J. Iniesta, B. Thakur, D. R. do Carmo and C. E. Banks, Analyst, 2016, 141, 2791 RSC .
D. A. C. Brownson and C. E. Banks, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15825 RSC .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2053 CAS .
S. Paulson, A. Helser, M. Buongiorno Nardelli, R. M. Taylor, M. Falvo, R. Superfine and S. Washburn, Science, 2000, 290, 1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ji, X. Zhao, Z. Qiao, J. Jung, Y. Zhu, Y. Lu, L. L. Zhang, A. H. MacDonald and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3317 Search PubMed .
M. Zhang, R. R. Parajuli, D. Mastrogiovanni, B. Dai, P. Lo, W. Cheung, R. Brukh, P. L. Chiu, T. Zhou, Z. Liu, E. Garfunkel and H. He, Small, 2010, 6, 1100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, X. Zheng, J. Wang, Q. Sun and Q. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 144 CAS .
S. C. Feifel, K. R. Stieger, H. Lokstein, H. Luxc and F. Lisdata, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12188 CAS .
N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Nouri, M. R. Mohammadi and P. Lianos, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 38 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, S. Zhang, P.-C. Juan, T.-Y. Liu, Z.-F. Du and D.-L. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 41092 RSC .
R. Raja, M. Govindaraj, M. D. Antony, K. Krishnan, E. Velusamy, A. Sambandam, M. Subbaiah and V. W. Rayar, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21, 891 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: UV-vis absorption and ATR-FTIR spectra and TEM micrographs of OLEA- and PBA-coated TiO2 NCs. SEM and AFM images of CVD graphene transferred onto SiO2/Si. EIS Nyquist plots of ITO electrodes modified with monolayer graphene and bilayer graphene, as bare and functionalized with PBA-TiO2 NCs. Photocurrent response of PBA surface coated mono and bilayer graphene. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta01425b§ C. Ingrosso and G. V. Bianco contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) Scheme of functionalization of CVD grown graphene with PBA-coated TiO2 NCs, with close-up views of the chemical interactions of PBA coordinated at the TiO2 NC surface and of pyrene anchored on graphene. (B) SEM picture, (C) EDS spectrum in the range of 0–6 keV, (D) AFM 2-D topography image and (E) cross-sectional line profile taken along the red line of panel (D) of CVD monolayer graphene functionalized with PBA-capped TiO2 NCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Raman spectra of CVD graphene transferred onto SiO2/Si as bare and functionalized with PBA-capped TiO2 NCs. (B) Transmittance spectra of CVD graphene as bare and modified with PBA and PBA-coated TiO2 NCs.	 
ΔEF = hvF (n/4π)1/2

 	Fig. 3  CVs of bare (1) ITO glass, (2) monolayer graphene (G1), (3) bilayer graphene (G2) based reference electrodes and of (4) G1TiO2 NC and (5) G2TiO2 NC modified ITO glass electrodes. In (A) background windows registered at 100 mV s−1 in 0.1 M NaClO4. In (B) peak-shaped CVs of the outer-sphere 3 mM [Ru(NH3)6]Cl3 probe and (inset) sketch of the planar semi-infinite diffusion mechanism. In (C) peak- and step-shaped CVs for the inner-sphere 3 mM K4[Fe(CN)6] probe and (in the insets) sketches of planar semi-infinite (on the top) and convergent (on the bottom) diffusion mechanisms.	 

 	Fig. 4  EIS Bode-phase plots of G1, G2, G1TiO2 NCs and G2TiO2 NCs in the dark at the potential of −0.1 V in 0.1 M NaClO4. (B–C) Equivalent circuits used for fitting the spectra of panel (A). In (B) G1 and in (C) G2 based circuits. (D) Values of the equivalent parameters of the circuits of panels B and C, estimated by fitting the EIS spectra.	 
CPE = [(Ciω)α]−1

 	Fig. 5  (A) Photocurrent transient measurements collected under UV-light (λ = 365 nm) irradiation at the bias voltage of 1 V in 0.1 M NaClO4 and (B) normalized plot of the current–time dependence of ITO electrodes modified with G1, G2 and PBA-coated TiO2 NC functionalized G1 and G2 (G1TiO2 NCs and G2TiO2 NCs). (Inset of B) Transient time constants of the normalized plot of current–time dependence.	 
Footnotes
† The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: UV-vis absorption and ATR-FTIR spectra and TEM micrographs of OLEA- and PBA-coated TiO2 NCs. SEM and AFM images of CVD graphene transferred onto SiO2/Si. EIS Nyquist plots of ITO electrodes modified with monolayer graphene and bilayer graphene, as bare and functionalized with PBA-TiO2 NCs. Photocurrent response of PBA surface coated mono and bilayer graphene. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta01425b
§ C. Ingrosso and G. V. Bianco contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
