Perspectives on ab initio molecular simulation of excited-state properties of organic dye molecules in dye -sensitised solar cells  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP42031G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP42031G
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12044-12056Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPerspectives on ab initio molecular simulation of excited-state properties of organic dye molecules in dye-sensitised solar cells

        
          
            Saurabh 
            Agrawal
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Niall J. 
            English
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            K. Ravindranathan 
            Thampi
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            J. M. D. 
            MacElroy
          
        
      
The SFI Strategic Research Cluster in Solar Energy Conversion and the Centre for Synthesis and Chemical Biology, School of Chemical and Bioprocess Engineering, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. E-mail: niall.english@ucd.ie; ravindranathan.thampi@ucd.ie
Received 
      18th June 2012
    , Accepted 4th July 2012First published on 31st July 2012AbstractIn this mini-review, we summarise and critique the emerging field of quantum-based molecular simulation of dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs), with particular focus on the deployment of organic-based dyes therein. We assess the underlying methodologies, including developments, pitfalls and challenges, whilst gauging predictive performance vis-à-vis experimental performance. The predictive capabilities of simulation methods with respect to elucidation of underlying methods is considered in the light of progress towards the ultimate goal of predictive in silico design of DSSCs, to complement hand-in-hand experimental approaches in the development of state-of-the-art DSSC devices.
Introduction
The search for low-cost, efficient solar cells has inspired a great deal of interest in dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs), based on sensitisers (dyes) adsorbed to the surfaces of inexpensive transition metal oxides, such as TiO2.1 The more established family of dyes are coordination complexes of ruthenium; however, given the expense of such dyes and their less than environmentally friendly nature, the focus in emerging DSSC technologies has shifted more recently towards the use of more inexpensive and versatile organic dyes as possible replacements for Ru-dyes.
A unique distinguishing feature of DSSCs from conventional inorganic photovoltaic (PV) systems, such as Si solar cells, is that light absorption and charge carrier generation are effected by the sensitiser, and are effectively independent from the nature of the semiconductor, whose primary function is charge separation and electron transport. Therefore, the electron- and hole-transporting functions are spatially separated, leading to significantly suppressed charge recombination and hence more efficient device charge collection.1 DSSCs can be designed by the appropriate choice of sensitiser to absorb selected spectral regions of solar radiation whilst still maintaining a high level of transparency in the remaining wavelength range.2,3
A typical DSSC is composed of a mesoporous semiconductor metal oxide, an adsorbed layer of dye on the semiconductor surface, an electrolyte, and a counter electrode.1–3 The surface-adsorbed sensitisers are excited by the incident light of suitable energy. The excited dye then injects an electron into the conduction band of the semiconductor, leaving the oxidised sensitiser molecule to gather an electron from the surrounding electrolyte. The electron in the conduction band is taken through the external circuit where it performs external electric work before reaching the platinised counter electrode. The sensitiser returns to its neutral ground state by accepting an electron from the I−/I3− redox couple present in the electrolyte.4 In turn, the redox couple receives an electron from the counter electrode and completes the electrical circuit. Although this mechanism seems straightforward, it involves a high level of complexities and disparate timescales. A recent review by Hagfeldt et al.5 provides a brief description of the intricacies involved in the process.
The overall cell efficiency depends on several factors. For instance, the electron from the conduction band can recombine with the photo-oxidised dye molecule or the redox mediator in the electrolyte solution, thereby reducing cell performance.5,6 Also, the efficiency of electron transfer from sensitiser to the semiconductor's conduction band depends upon the excited-state redox potential, and the nature of electron flow from the donor to the acceptor moieties of the sensitiser. The complexity of the system also provides several ways to improve the performance of the cell. For example, the introduction of π-conjugated ring(s) or a push–pull type electron flow improves the stability as well as the performance of the sensitiser.7 In addition, improved electronic coupling between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of the sensitiser and conduction band of the semiconductor may improve charge transfer between the dye and titania.8,9
In this review, we will concentrate on the molecular mechanisms of photo-excitation in the DSSC core, namely the dye-sensitised mesoporous semiconductor oxide film, and explore the key charge injection processes taking place at the dye–metal oxide interface, with a particular focus on progress and challenges in quantum molecular simulation10 to model these processes.
Dyes
In DSSCs, a monolayer of sensitiser is adsorbed on the semiconductor surface. Among various proposed dyes, state-of-the-art ruthenium-based sensitisers have high-energy conversion efficiencies exceeding 11%.11–13 However, ruthenium-based dyes are expensive and generally possess a much lower molar absorption coefficient (ε) compared to organic dyes. Dyes with a higher absorption coefficient allows for the fabrication of DSSCs with thinner light-absorbing semiconductor-dye layers. To reduce the manufacturing cost of DSSCs, various metal-free, organic sensitisers are now being proposed and investigated; these organic dyes are advantageous due to their adjustable light harvesting and electrochemical properties.14,15 A typical organic sensitiser consists of a donor moiety (an electron-donating group), an acceptor moiety (an electron-accepting group), together with a linker moiety, as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of an organic dye structure. 
To design new efficient organic dyes for DSSCs some general criteria must be observed,5,14 as listed below:
(a) A dye must absorb light completely in the visible region and also a good part of the near-IR part of the terrestrial solar spectrum.
(b) The molar extinction coefficient (ε) of the dye should be sufficiently high to absorb essentially all of the light within a narrow path length.
(c) The dye should have its highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) localised at the donor moiety and its lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) localised at the anchor/acceptor part, which is important for efficient charge separation, leading to ‘a push–pull effect’.5,14
(d) The HOMO of the dye cation should be situated at a lower energy compared to the redox mediator, such that rapid regeneration of the dye is easily achievable.
(e) The adsorbed dye may be desorbed from TiO2 due to the presence of trace amounts of water present in the electrolyte. To prevent such desorption, and concomitant accompanying cell instability, the dye must have peripheral hydrophobic groups.
(f) Electron back-transfer from the semiconductor conduction band to the dye cation can occur, leading to lower incident photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (IPCE or external quantum efficiency, EQE). The probability for this electron back-transfer could be reduced by locating a net positive charge at the donor moiety of the dye cation. As the donor moiety is placed away from the titania–dye interface and much closer to the redox mediator in the electrolyte, this dye architecture also facilitates rapid reduction of the cation, and, hence, dye regeneration.
(g) The dye should adsorb only as a monolayer on the semiconductor surface and must not aggregate.
In accordance with these guidelines, an appreciable number of new organic dyes have been designed, synthesised and studied as DSSC sensitisers, with a number of different donor and acceptor groups and linkers. In particular, commonly used donor groups include N,N-dimethylaniline,16,17 coumarins,7,18–23 tetrahydroquinolines,24,25 pyrrolidine,26 carbazoles,27 diphenylamines,28 triphenylamines.29–32 A linker moiety is a spacer added between the donor and acceptor moieties. Different π-conjugated linker groups have been investigated in many new dye structures, such as (–CC–) chains,7,16–19,22,30 thiophene units (and derivatives).7,20,22–28,32,33 Thiophene linkers are favored over methine units (CC double bonds) due to the increased possibility of the latter forming isomers, which might lead to instability of the dye in the long term. In particular, two types of acceptor/anchor groups are used widely in organic dye synthesis, namely cyanoacrylic acid7,16–32 and carboxylic acid.34–36 Apart from carboxylic acid anchors, rhodamine-3-acetic acid37 and sulphonate (−SO3−)38,39 have also been studied. Here, we will discuss some of the organic dyes comprising these moieties.
Very recently, Yella et al. have reported a record DSSC efficiency of around 12% in mesocopic porphyrin-sensistised solar cells with a cobalt II/III-based electrolyte, which makes use of the iodide/triiodide redox couple mechanism.40 The use of porphyrin dyes offers a more cost-effective solution than Ru dyes, as do organic dyes, and this is an important future avenue of research, along with the optimisation of electrolyte and redox mechanism for long-term performance, durability and DSSC operational lifetime.
Semiconductors
By far, the most commonly used semiconductor in DSSCs is TiO2, but ZnO,41 SnO242–44 and Nb2O545–47 have also been studied to a limited extent. Some ternary oxides, namely SrTiO348 and Zn2SnO4,49 have also been reported. Apart from these, core–shell structures like ZnO-coated SnO2 are also under investigation.5 All of these metal oxides have wide band gaps and absorb light only in the ultra violet (UV) region of the solar spectrum. Although research is continuously underway to find alternative metal oxides for deployment in DSSCs, TiO2 has given the best solar cell efficiencies to date.
TiO2 semiconductor
O'Regan and Grätzel1 used mesoporous TiO2 for dye sensitisation for the first time in 1991, and since then it has been widely seen as the best semicondcutor oxide for DSSCs. TiO2 has found widespread use in various products like sunscreen UV absorber creams, paints, toothpastes and food (E171).5 TiO2 is found naturally in mainly three crystalline forms namely, rutile (tetragonal, a = b = 4.587 Å, c = 2.953 Å),50 anatase (tetragonal, a = b = 3.782 Å, c = 9.502 Å) and brookite (rhombohedral, a = 5.436 Å, b = 9.166 Å, c = 5.135 Å).51 Apart from these three, one other form called cotunnite52 is also formed and is reported as the hardest polycrystalline material available. Among these forms, only rutile (cf.Fig. 2) and anatase (cf.Fig. 3) are the most adopted forms for solar energy conversion applications. In fact, brookite transforms to the rutile form even at low temperature. In rutile, as well as in anatase structures, one titanium atom binds with six surrounding oxygen atoms.
 Fig. 2  Rutile unit cell. 
 Fig. 3  Anatase unit cell. 
The p-orbitals of oxygen and the d-orbitals of titanium each contribute to the both the bonding orbital and anti-bonding orbital, which correspond respectively to the HOMO and LUMO (cf.Fig. 4). The energy difference between the valence band (VB) or the HOMO and the conduction band (CB) or the LUMO is called the band gap or the energy gap. Anatase has a higher conduction band edge and larger band gap of 3.2 eV compared to the 3.0 eV band gap of rutile. Further, the band gap for very small nanoparticles and clusters is higher than that of the bulk material. This shift in the band (ΔEg) can be approximated using the following quantum mechanical model53  where R is the radius of nanoparticle, μ is reduced mass of the exciton and ε is the dielectric constant of the material. Using this quantum mechanical model, Kormann et al.54 interpreted quantitatively a band gap shift of 0.15 eV (i.e., a band gap of 3.35 eV) for a TiO2 nanoparticle of 1.2 nm radius compared to bulk anatase. Furthermore, two independent studies by Khoudiakov et al.55 and Weng et al.56 reported absorption spectra for 2 nm and 3 nm size TiO2 nanoparticles, respectively. These spectra yielded band gaps of approximately 3.2–3.4 eV and 3.4–3.65 eV for 2 nm- and 3 nm-size TiO2 nanoparticles, respectively.
 Fig. 4  Molecular orbital diagram of titania. 
Dye adsorption on TiO2
Kalyanasundaram and Grätzel57 have summarised six modes of adsorption of dyes on metal oxide surfaces. These modes are: (1) direct attachment of dye on the surface via covalent bonding/attachment; (2) electrostatic interactions occurring due to ion exchange, ion-pairing or donor–acceptor interactions; (3) hydrogen bonding; (4) self-assembly of hydrophobic groups of long-chain fatty acid derivatives; (5) physisorption of dye on the surface via van der Waals interactions; and (6) physical entrapment. The adsorption mode of carboxylic group on TiO2 is important to insure efficient charge transfer from the donor group.
In this section, we will focus mainly on studies relevant to the dye adsorption through the carboxylic acid anchor groups on the anatase (101) surface. Dye adsorption through carboxylic acid anchors can take place mainly through chemisorption.5,58,59 On TiO2 surfaces, chemisorption occurs through acidic dissociation. Here, a hydrogen atom dissociates from the carboxylic acid group and bond formation takes place between the carboxylate oxygen atoms and the surface titanium atoms of the metal oxide. Binding through chemisorption can be of a monodentate ester type, bidentate chelating or bidentate bridging types.5,59
Experimental studies of dye adsorption on TiO2
Finnie et al.60 studied the adsorption of Ru(II) dyes on anatase nanocrystallites with crystallite sizes ranging from 15 to 25 nm through two carboxylic acid groups of bi-isonicotinic acid moieties, using IR and Raman spectroscopic techniques. They found that the carboxylic acid anchor binds through bidentate bridging (type d) or chelating (type c) coordination modes on anatase. In addition, Nazeeruddin et al.59 reported FTIR results showing that ruthenium dyes (N3, N719 and N712) adsorb on anatase in the bidentate bridging mode (type d).
Another FTIR study by Falaras et al.61 on ruthenium–polypyridyl complexes containing two carboxylic acid anchor groups suggests chemisorption via the formation of an ester-like (type b (cf.Fig. 5)) linkage with TiO2. A further study by Duffy et al.62 on ruthenium complexes suggests bidentate bridging (type d) as the mode for carboxylate group adsorption on TiO2.
 Fig. 5  Different modes reported for carboxylic acid and carboxyl groups. 
A recent FTIR study by Schiffmann et al.63 on various ruthenium-based dyes suggests bidentate bridging (type d) in the absence of (surface) protons and a mixed bidentate bridging or chelating (one of the two binding carboxylic acids bind in each form) in the presence of (surface) protons. The study suggests that both monodentate and bidentate forms are favourable and can interconvert from one to the other. This study also reports that the bidentate bridging form is energetically more stable than the monodentate form, but in presence of protons, the single monodentate (one of the two binding carboxylic acids) form can be stabilised firmly.
Findings of a study by Ma et al.64 supported both the bidentate chelating (type c) and bidentate bridging (type d) modes for two porphyrin derivatives they studied. Further, Weng et al.65 used interface-sensitive transient triplet-state molecular probe methods for adsorption studies of all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) adsorption on TiO2 nanoparticles. This study suggests adsorption occurs through anions (type a) and hydrogen bonding (type e, f) by about 3%, through the ester form (type b) by about 63% and through chelating (type c) and bridging (type d) by about 34%.
In contrast, an FTIR study by Hara et al.22 showed that coumarin-based NKX-2311 dye was adsorbed on TiO2 in a bidentate carboxylate mode. Another study by the same group also shows that a N,N-dimethylaniline donor based NKX-2553 dye adsorbs on TiO2 in the bidentate carboxylate mode.16 An FTIR study by Srinivas et al.58 on cyanoacrylic acid adsorption on TiO2 rules out the possibility of physisorption, and authors suggest that cyanoacrylic acid adsorption occurs through bidentate bridging mode.
In view of these reports, it is appropriate to consider that the mode of adsorption is significantly influenced by the type of dye as well as on the presence of various other additives in the system. However, the commonly observed bridging mode in most efficient DSSC systems so far is the bidentate mode and it may be considered therefore as the optimal case for DSSC performance.
Theoretical studies on dye adsorption on TiO2
Apart from experimental studies, a few theoretical studies58,66–69 for adsorption of carboxylic acid derivatives on TiO2 surface have also been reported. Vittadini et al.67 studied formic acid (HCOOH) and sodium formate (HCOONa) adsorption on an anatase-(101) surface using a Car–Parrinello (CP) approach with generalised gradient approximation (GGA) functionals and ultrasoft (US) pseudopotentials. Their results suggest monodentate-binding for formic acid and bidentate-bridging binding for sodium formate with a two-fold coordinated oxygen atom on dry anatase surfaces. However, on hydrated anatase surfaces, formate ions favour binding in the bidentate-bridging mode and acid favors the monodentate-binding mode. The authors also reported that the bidentate-chelating mode is unstable.
Along with the experimental work (discussed in the previous section), Srinivas et al.58 also investigated the theoretical aspects of adsorption using the Perdew–Wang 1991 (PW91) exchange-correlation functional and US pseudopotentials, and concluded that bidentate-bridging modes bind best on anatase-(101), which coincides with their experimental findings. Persson et al. used periodic Intermediate Neglect of Differential Overlap (INDO) semi-empirical quantum methods for binding studies of bi-isonicotinic acid on anatase (101) surfaces.70 Their results suggest the bidentate bridging (type d) has the least binding energy (most stable) compared to bidentate bridging and monodentate ester-type adsorption modes.
Howie et al.68 reported a DFT study with 6-31G* on three indoline dyes, namely D149,71 D102 and D139.72 Their results suggest that all three dyes adsorbed in a bidentate-bridging mode on the TiO2 surface. Furthermore, Pastore et al.69 also reported a study on D102 and D149 dyes. They performed optimisation of the dye–titania complex using the CP approach, with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional, plane-wave basis set and US pseudopotentials followed by single-point MP2 and DFT calculations with the 6-31G* basis set and the Conductor-like Polarisable Continuum (CPCM) solvation model. This study also suggests a bidentate binding mode for carboxylic acid anchor based indoline dyes adsorbed on anatase (101) nanoparticles. The findings of these theoretical investigations point to the predominance of bidentate-bridging types, as concluded above for experimental observations.
Theoretical methodologies for ab initio molecular simulation of DSSCs
The Kohn–Sham (KS) ansatz73–75 is one of the most popular versions of Density Functional Theory, and has been used primarily in the literature for DFT approaches to modeling DSSCs. This states that the system of non-interacting electrons is described by an anti-symmetric wavefunction of the Slater determinant type constructed by single electrons. The total density functional can then be written as (1)where the EXC is the exchange-correlation (XC) functional which contains all effects not present in the first non-interacting kinetic and potential energy functionals. It is expected that the EXC contribution to the total energy is small enough to approximate this term. The corresponding total energy functional is given as (2)which leads to the Kohn–Sham energy functional via substitution of eqn (1) into (2): (3)In order to take into account the long-range Coulombic interaction in eqn (3), the local density approximation (LDA) for the exchange-correlation energy, EXC, assumes that this is a local, or semi-local, functional of charge density, treating the local density as a uniform electron gas. LDA works well for homogenous and reasonably well for inhomogeneous systems, with a measurable error margin for properties. However, it overestimates the binding energies of molecules and cohesive energies of solids.65–67 This overestimation results in underestimation of bond lengths. The core electron density description tends to be poor, due to self-interaction errors in the exchange term. Molecular dissociation energies in LDA are predicted to be very high due to incorrect spin prediction or the non-correlation problem. Since dynamic, non-local correlation is ignored or predicted incorrectly, there can be problems with dispersion corrections. Properties that require correct description of inhomogeneous densities, are poorly predicted, such as hydrogen bonded molecular systems, which renders the application of LDA less suitable for DSSC systems.
In the Generalised Gradient Expansion (GGA), the inhomogeneity in electron density is accounted for via expansion of the density in terms of the gradient and higher order derivatives, and the second-order gradient expansion of the exchange-correlation energy functional65–67 tends to be the most popular (as applied to modeling of DSSCs), and can be written as (4)Eqn (4) cannot be solved directly, and it is a requirement that the functional exhibits a form that carries out re-summation to infinite order; various functional forms have been proposed to verify these required conditions.76–78 Some well-known functionals imposing these conditions are the popular Becke–Lee–Yang–Parr (BLYP) and Perdew–Ernzenhof–Burke (PBE), and their derivatives.76–78 The geometries and energies (including HOMO/LUMO, or the band, gap) tend to be better predicted as well as dynamical correlation properties; weakly bonded cluster systems (e.g., hydrogen bonds) are also better represented. Use of GGA-type functionals has been more prevalent in the DFT simulation of DSSC systems. The exchange term in GGA does not fully represent its non-local nature and strongly-correlated systems are less well reproduced. Also, the self-interaction problem in the Hartree term is not compensated. To tackle these limitations, one can take the fourth-order gradient expansion of the exchange-correlation energy. The semi-local representation of the density through the Laplacian of the kinetic energy density is the concept behind meta-GGA formulation;79 one distinct advantage is that this recovers the exact linear response function.
Another approach is to employ DFT correlation with HF exchange, viz. (5)where the free parameter α is chosen to fit some property of a molecule. One particular example is the B3LYP functional80 that reproduces geometries and the binding energies of molecules at the correlated level (say via MP2 or CI methods). The procedure is different from the Kohn–Shan ansatz in that it does not minimise the expected value of the kinetic energy, but involves minimisation of another functional via wavefunction construction from Slater determinants. The use of GGA and B3LYP has been quite prevalent in the literature on DSSCs.
Over the years, very many functionals have been developed, and corresponding variations and improvements have taken place. These benchmarks for these exchange-correlation functionals has been described by Perdew and Schimdt as a ‘Jacob's ladder’.79 There are significant drawbacks and limitations associated with the DFT framework, however, and many of these factors are particularly present in the description of DSSCs. One major difficulty lies in the representation of Coulombic interactions between electrons – arising due to the approximations and conditions used to construct the exchange-correlation functional, and called the self-interaction error (SIE). This SIE is not present in the HF method, as it is cancelled by the exchange term. The shortcoming of this cancellation in DFT manifests itself in incorrect prediction of KS eigenvalues; therefore, ionisation energies are incorrect, activation barriers tend to be less than reliable, especially for SN2 type of reactions, along with proton transfer reactions, band gap (HOMO–LUMO gap) prediction and dissociation energies. To address this shortcoming, Perdew and Zunger have introduced a self-interaction correction (SIC) to the KS orbitals.81 The optimised effective potential and the average density SIC (ADSIC) are other approaches. However, none of these methods tackle the problem of self-energy prediction sufficiently. This requires Green's Function (GW) methods (vide infra) to address satisfactorily.
Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory (TD-DFT) has become in recent years a particularly important technique for molecular simulation of excited-state properties of DSSCs. Here, the evolution of the wavefunction is given by the time-dependent Schrödinger equation (6)The Hamiltonian is basically similar to the Hohenberg–Kohn formalism of DFT, but in a time-dependent external potential.82 The time-dependent density is given by, n(r,t) = N∫d3r2……∫d3rN|ψ(r,r2,……rN), t|2(7)Assuming that a solution exists for the initial time, t = 0, with various potentials V(r,t), we obtain a map from this potential to the corresponding wavefunctions in time t as ψ(t), and their corresponding densities as n(r,t). The Runge–Gross theorem states that such densities evolving from a common initial state differ if the potentials differ by more than a purely time-dependent (and position-independent) function and that there is a one-to-one mapping between the densities and potentials.83 Therefore, the exchange-correlation potential can be defined as vKS(r,t) = vext(r,t) + vH(r,t) + vXC(r,t)(8)which is known as the time-dependent Kohn–Sham (TDKS) equation.84 The most popular, and important, application of TD-DFT, particularly of simulation of dyes and DSSCs, has been in extracting the absorption spectrum. To this end, linear response theory has had a certain degree of success in TD-DFT. Here, a perturbation is applied at t = 0 with a weak electric field, and the system propagated using the accumulated dipole moment; Fourier transformation yields the optical spectrum.84 The linear response to the ground-state perturbation can be defined via a point-wise-susceptibility χ[nGS](r,r′,t–t′) incorporated into the change in density as δn(r,t) = ∫dt′∫d3r′χ[nGS](r,r′,t–t′)δvext(r′,t′)(9)A small change in external potential at point r′ and time t′, χ tells us how density will change at point r and later time t.82 The solution to this density change with that of an interacting system results in frequency-dependent TD-DFT linear-response theory in a Dyson-like equation with respect to the ground state, and is given by (10)Then, the non-interacting KS response function is given by (11)where ψ the unperturbed KS orbitals, f, are their Fermi occupation numbers, ε are the orbital energies, and η is positive infinitesimal. When ω matches the transition frequency of the system, the response function χ attains a pole as a function of ω. However, numerically, in order to find these poles, it is necessary to solve Casida's equation as a non-linear eigenvalue equation82 as (12)where the Rqq′ matrix contains the elements of frequency and the Fourier transform of the XC functional. Vertical excitation energies are given by Ω and the oscillator strengths are given by the eigenvectors of eqn (12). The major drawback in solving Casida's equation is that both occupied and unoccupied orbitals are required, although use of the Sternheimer approach84 uses only the occupied orbitals and scales computationally as O(N2), rendering it considerably cheaper to compute. However, the algorithm does not converge quickly around the resonances or excitations. The spectra can be obtained using similar methods for a real space.
More recently, DSSC simulation has seen the application of Many-Body Perturbation Theory (MBPT) to account for electron–electron correlation, via perturbing the HF wavefunction. Møller–Plesset (MP) second-order perturbation is the most popular. MBPT is a rigorous approach to compute excited states and its properties of solids or condensed-matter systems based on the Green's Function (GW) methods. This requires knowledge of the quasiparticle self-energy, Σ, which is a non-Hermitian, non-local, energy dependent operator describing exchange and correlation effects beyond the HF approximation. The self-energy can be expanded linearly in terms of G and W by85 Σ ≈ GW(13)Quasiparticles (QP) are “dressed” particles containing an oppositely charged cloud than the core charge and which interact with each other via weak Coulombic interactions. An electron can be represented as a core negative charge surrounded by a charged positive polarisation cloud, the interaction between which is now screened and is different from the bare Coulombic interaction. The QP lifetime is finite as compared to the infinite lifetime of electrons. The residual interaction energy is complex, the imaginary part of which is reciprocal of the QP lifetime. By solving for the one and two particle Greens function one can compute the quasi-particle spectrum. The poles of a Green's function predict the electron addition and removal energies. The exact Green's function is described by the Dyson equation85 G−1(1,2) = G−10(1,2) – Ĵ(1)δ(1,2) – Σ(1,2)(14)where Ĵ is a scalar potential operator, and Σ is the self-energy operator. 1 = {r1,t1,σ1}, represents the real space-, time- and spin-coordinates. The Green's function is called the single-particle propagator and describes the dynamics of the particle/hole added to the many-body N-particle system. It can also be regarded as a dynamical one-particle density matrix. The two-particle Green's function describes the creation and annihilation of pairs of particles (electron and hole) and propagation in space and time from (r1,t1) to (r2,t2) and is given by (15)where  are the annihilation (creation) operators in the Heisenberg representation,  is the time-ordering operator and Û arises via the assumption that the polarisation can be considered as a linear response to the time-dependent external potential, U.85 One can write down the higher order equation of motion G2, G3,… etc. whose solutions can be approximated via Wick's theorem and can be explained by using diagrammatic-approximation. The most implemented method is that of Hedin, which solves the Dyson equation (eqn (14)) iteratively.85,86 These computations can now be linked to optical properties and spectral evaluations via the Bethe–Salpeter–Edwin (BSE) equation. The expression can now written as Σ(1,2) = ΣH(1,2) + iG(1,2)W(1+,2)(16)Most computations solve the Dyson equation at the GW level non-self consistently by finding the poles of the Green’s function for the quasiparticle energies while retaining the DFT wavefunctions. This is the so-called G0W0 scheme, as a first-order perturbation to the Kohn–Sham energy (QP energies).87
The BSE method was developed originally as a two-particle bound-state quantum field theory, and is a general calculation of two-particle excited states. It is linked to the GW approximation for the calculation of one-particle excited states within the same theoretical framework, and is termed the GW-BSE scheme. It has yielded correct optical spectra for nanostructures, bulk semiconductors, surfaces, polymers and nanotubes.88 The simplest form of BSE can be represented as (17)where Γ is the Bethe–Salpeter amplitude or vertex function, K is the interaction kernel and S is the propagator of the two particles. The BSE equations describe the interaction between two particles (treated as bound states), which produces the correct values for band gaps. It has been proven formally that TD-DFT and BSE response functions may both be used to extract optical spectra with reasonable accuracy.89
An exciting recent development in GW methods, which may be expected to have an impact on the simulation of DSSCs, lies in the ‘GWL’ method,90,91 which obviates explicit representation of one-electron states. Here, an optimal basis set for the polarisability operator allows for a dramatic reduction in size of this operator, while maintaining converged plane-wave accuracy, via expressing the matrix elements of the irreducible-polarisability and self-energy operators as a set of linear-response equations, which are solved very efficiently using a Lanczos-chain algorithm for imaginary frequencies. This increases the computational efficiency of GW methods very substantially.
A further methodology which has found much profitable application in DSSC simulation is that of non-adiabatic molecular dynamics, to model charge injection from the dye into the semiconductor.92 Here the electron density ρ(r,t) is written using the representation of KS orbitals φp(r,t) as (18)where Ne is the number of the electrons and φp(r,t) are single-electron KS orbitals. The evolution of the electron density is determined by the time-dependent variational principle,92 leading to a set of single-particle equations for the evolution of the KS orbitals (19)where p = 1, 2, … , Ne, and Ne are the number of electrons. These single-electron equations are coupled, because the DFT functional H depends on the sum of the densities of all occupied KS orbitals. The Hamiltonian H is time-dependent through the external potential created by the motion of the atoms. The single-electron orbitals in eqn (19) are expressed in the basis of the adibatic KS orbital p(r,R(t)) (20)Inserting eqn (20) into eqn (19) leads to a description of the evolution of the adiabatic states expansion coefficients92 (21)where εk is the energy of the adiabatic state k, and djk is the non-adiabatic (NA) coupling between states k and j. The coupling is created by atomic motion that generate parametric dependence of the time-independent adiabatic KS orbitals on atomic coordinates and, hence, on time. The NA coupling represents the interaction of the electronic degrees of freedom with phonons. It is given by (22)The photo-excited electron density (from dye excitation) may be propagated by solving eqn (22) using, e.g., a second-order differencing scheme,92 which allows electron transfer (and back-transfer) timescales to be established.
The overview thus far of the methodologies in use (or of obvious potential for imminent use) in the ab initio simulation of DSSCs requires some further remarks as to the strengths and drawbacks of each method. Although ground-state DFT-like methods, particularly of the KS variety, are very useful for establishing the optimised geometry of (chemically) adsorbed binding motifs/modes, as well as approximate distribution of charge, they are of little use in establishing (photo-) absorption spectra, excitation energies or electron transfer kinetics. TD-DFT is the most widespread method for such predictions (apart from the latter). However, care must be taken vis-à-vis the appropriate selection of functionals in DFT and TD-DFT. There has been widespread use of the B3LYP functional applied to dyes and DSSCs, and less critical examination of alternative functionals – this is a key shortcoming and more accurate functionals are needed, e.g., perhaps of the Coulomb long-range corrected/attenuated type.73 Dreuw et al. have investigated long-range charge-transfer excited states in TD-DFT and concluded that non-local exchange is sine qua non, given that electrostatic attraction between separated charges in long-range exictations is non-local, ipso facto.93 However, as remarked previously, the (TD-)DFT community has focused to a very large extent on B3LYP for such a hybrid-functional approach. Peach et al. have performed a comparative and diagnostic investigation of excitation energies with B3LYP and CAM-B3LYP for a set of 59 excitations of local, Rydberg, and intramolecular charge-transfer character in 18 theoretically challenging main-group molecules.94 It was found that CAM-B3LYP performed best overall, displaying no systematic error vis-à-vis corresponding experimental results. Very recently, Dev et al. have performed a very focused study on a suite of different functionals (PBE, M06L, B3LYP, M06, CAM-B3LYP, and wB97), representing the various classes of approximations that are currently being used to study material properties, and applied these towards the estimation of TD-DFT excitation energies for a variety of different organic dyes, such as 4-(N,N-dimethylamino)benzonitrile, alizarin, squaraine and polyene-linker dyes.95 It was found that CAM-B3LYP performs best in general, and a quantitative measure of orbital overlap was developed to aid in the a priori selection of the most appropriate functional to use in TD-DFT applications.
In addition to considerations of an adroit choice of functional for (TD-)DFT, computational expense and expediency is another key consideration. Although NAMD can offer much insight into real-time electron injection dynamics, along with associated electron–phonon coupling and energy transfer relaxation processes, full-scale MD simulation can be computationally expensive. Even so, in view of the rich information that NAMD offers, this is clearly a highly attractive methodology on the kinetic and dynamic aspects of understanding and manipulating charge transfer mechanisms. GW methods have the drawback of being extremely computationally expensive, but can offer substantially improved absorption spectra and excitation energies, etc. the recent development of the GWL methodology is very promising in this respect.
Charge transfer mechanism
Charge injection from the dye's donor region to the semiconductor's conduction band is one of the key processes determining DSSCs' performance. Therefore, several studies have documented the electron transfer (ET) or charge transfer (CT) rates. Here, we will discuss some of these key studies.96–106 Hannappel et al.96 reported sub-25 fs ET timescales from ruthenium-based dyes [ruthenium(II) cis-di(isothiocyanato)-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate)] to a colloidal anatase TiO2 film. Ellingson97 reported ∼50 fs ET times for [Ru(4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine)2(NCS)2] (N3) dyes adsorbed on TiO2 films using pump-probe spectroscopy. Lian and coworkers reported the CT time for some Ru-based dyes to TiO2 in sub-100 fs time windows.98,99 Rehm et al.100 reported sub-200 fs ET times from coumarin dye (C343) to TiO2 nanoparticles using ultrafast fluorescence dynamics. Ghosh et al.101 reported a 125 ± 25 fs ET time for the same system using transient IR absorption spectroscopy. Huber et al.102 reported a very fast CT on a 6 fs timescale from alizarin to TiO2 using transient absorption spectroscopy. Further, Schnadt et al.103 reported even faster CT times for bi-isonicotinic acid adsorbed on to TiO2, using resonant photoemission spectroscopy. Slower CT rates have also been observed more recently by O'Regan and co-workers.104–109
The CT rates from the dye to surface rely on electronic coupling between the dye and the metal oxide surface orbitals. Among these, the dye acts as the electron donor and the metal oxide acts as the electron acceptor. To investigate the effect of electronic coupling on charge transfer, Asbury et al.98 introduced CH2 spacer groups between the bipyridine donor and carboxylate anchor groups of the “Re(L1)(CO)3 Cl(ReC1A)” dye. This introduction of the CH2 spacer groups leads to the reduction of electronic coupling between the dye and semiconductor, which serves ultimately to increase the electron injection time upon the increase in the number of spacers.
The CT rate is also determined by the density of states (DOS) of metal oxide coupled with the dye. Asbury et al.99 reported that the CT rate depends on the type of semiconductor orbital involved in the conduction band formation. The conduction band of semiconductors formed from d-orbitals has a higher bulk-DOS compared to the conduction band formed from s-orbitals; therefore, the former leads to stronger coupling with dye and faster ET.98,103 Furthermore, the electronic nature of the conduction band also influences the coupling between the dye and semiconductor. Asbury et al.98 reported femtosecond-time scale CT for a ruthenium-based dye when complexed with TiO2, while the CT time increases when coupled with ZnO or SnO semiconductors on the sub-picosecond scale. Asbury et al., suggested that this could be due to the better overlap between the π* orbital of bipyridine group of a dye with π-symmetry d-orbital of TiO2 conduction band compared to the 4s orbital of ZnO and SnO.99 This led to the conclusion that, if the dye states mix with the conduction band formed form the d-orbitals of semiconductors such as TiO2, WO3 and Nb2O3, faster ET is likely to occur.
Direct and indirect CT mechanisms
In DSSCs, CT can occur through two most likely routes classified as “direct” and “indirect” CT mechanisms. In the direct mechanism, CT takes place in one step from ground state of the dye to the conduction band of the semiconductor. However, in the indirect mechanism, CT takes place in two steps: firstly, from the ground state of the dye to an excited state localised on the dye itself and then to the conduction band of the semiconductor. In direct CT, a new band may appear in the absorption spectrum of the dye–surface complex, which is neither present in the absorption spectrum of the free state of the dye nor that of the semiconductor surface. The origin of the new absorption peak also suggests a strong electronic interaction between the dye and the semiconductor.110,111 Contrary to the direct mechanism, in indirect CT, a new excitation peak does not appear in the absorption spectrum. According to the nature of CT mechanisms, DSSCs can be distinguished into two types. In type-I DSSCs, CT takes place indirectly, whereas in type-II DSSCs, CT occurs via the direct mechanism.
Various theoretical studies have discussed CT mechanisms for N719 Ru(II), [Fe(CN)64−, catechol, alizarin, perylene and coumarin dyes adsorbed on TiO2.112–121 De Angelis et al.115 found for N719 dye, localisation of the HOMO on the dye and the localisation of LUMO, mostly on the titania nanoparticle, led to a small contribution from the dye for the highest excitation in the absorption spectrum. In the absence of a new or shifted absorption band, and on the basis of considering MOs, these authors deduced a direct injection mechanism for N719 dye on TiO2 nanoparticles. De Angelis et al.116 reported a direct CT for the [Fe(CN)6]4−/TiO2 complex due to the localisation of LUMO on TiO2 nanoparticles. The absorption spectrum for this complex also does not show a new peak. Another study by Angelis et al.,117 on perylene dyes adsorbed on TiO2 nanoparticles, suggests non-adiabatic CT for one dye (Dye 1) and direct CT for another dye (Dye 2). Here, the results suggest the localisation of unoccupied MO involved in the photo-excitation on the dye 1 itself. For dye 2, the LUMO is localised on the dye as well as on the surface, suggesting a strong coupling between the dye and the nanoparticle. For dye 1, the absorption spectra shows a λmax at approximately the same energy for both the complexed and the free state of the dye with the absorption spectrum of the complex showing only a slight red shift.
TD-DFT estimation of absorption spectra
The application of TD-DFT towards the calculation of absorption spectra, typically via the linear-response approach outlined above in eqn (10)–(12), has become widespread in the past decade or so. However, it is important to note that linear-response is often inappropriate in intense electric fields, for multi-photon processes, or frequency mixing, where other approaches are necessary.82 Many of the articles cited above, for instance, have also applied TD-DFT to estimate the absorption spectra (typically via the linear-response approach), and comparison with experimental results is always necessary to gauge the quality of the computational spectrum. The key challenges in calculation of absorption spectra lie in the correct prediction of frequency modes (excitation energies) and oscillator strengths; the difficulties of ensuring numerical accuracy in the correct calculation of the eigenvalues of Casida's equation (eqn (12)) have been remarked upon above, along with convergence problems in the more computationally expedient O(N2) Sternheimer approach around resonances or excitations. Naturally, the fundamental challenge of using a reasonable functional has already been discussed (vide supra); as remarked, many in the community use the B3LYP functional essentially exclusively, although the validation of functionals (either a posteriori or, better still, a priori) is a matter of rather existential importance underling the utility and interpretation of TD-DFT spectra. Another important matter affecting the direct comparison with respect to experiment (quite apart from the challenges of experiment per se, e.g., synthesis and securing high purity, etc.) is the correct identification and interpretation of modes from UV/vis spectra, i.e., the correct deconvolution procedure (e.g., Lorentzian/Gaussian) to determine separate excitation modes and their heights and widths – to some extent, this may be subjective, and close communication between the simulator and the experimental data analyst is often necessary.
Bearing these points in mind, it is perhaps appropriate to discuss some examples of work where TD-DFT estimation of spectra has been an important component, although this is by no means intended to be a wholly representative survey of this fast-growing field; indeed, it is not. Catechol and alizarin are very well studied model dye systems and have been profoundly used for the functionalisation of TiO2via ab initio methods.110,112,118–121 Free catechol shows absorbance below 300 nm, while upon adsorption on TiO2 a new absorption band appears at ca. 400 nm. This new absorption band appears due to a strong electronic coupling between catechol and titania as well as due to the direct CT mechanism. In the case of alizarin dye, a red shift has been reported when it is adsorbed on TiO2 (ca. 500 nm) compared to the free state of the dye (ca. 440 nm). On the basis of absorption spectrum and MOs, an indirect CT is envisaged for alizarin to TiO2.
Agrawal et al. have studied via TD-DFT the mechanism of coumarin122 and polyene123 dye CT to titania surfaces. The absorption spectra and deprotonation of the NKX-2311 and NKX-2593 coumarin dyes at titania surfaces were investigated.122 The effect of deprotonation of the sensitisers' carboxylic groups during adsorption on the titania surface was investigated and the excited state electronic properties of the resulting species. The NKX-2553, NKX-2554 and NKX-2569 polyene dyes were also studied123 in terms of performance, in isolation as well as upon their absorption on TiO2 nanoparticles. The performance of the NKX-2569–titania complex was optimal because of the longer linker group. These three dyes123 showed a non-intuitive trend in their respective efficiencies; although NKX-2554 has an additional donor group, it is less efficient compared to the simpler NKX-2553 dye, that contains only one donor group. When the NKX-2554 structure is slightly modified by lengthening the linker group, one obtains the most efficient dye among this set, namely, NKX-2569. It was shown that changes in the donor moiety had very little or no effect on the efficiency of these dyes, but the improved performance of the NKX-2569–titania complex could be understood to be as a result of the longer linker group.123 In both of these studies,122,123 the role of continuum solvation approaches within the modelling was found to lead to markedly better agreement with corresponding experimental spectra.
Conclusions
It has been seen that ab initio simulation of DSSCs has progressed in the past decade or so underpinned by increased computer power and developments in more accurate DFT functionals and theoretical methodologies. In particular, the proper incorporation of dispersive and Coulombic interactions is a key challenge for DFT and TD-DFT. It is hoped that more widespread application of the latest developments in long-range-corrected and hybrid functionals will help advance the more accurate ab initio modelling of DSSCs. Despite the increase in computing power, there remains the inherent problem of DFT to handle larger systems, which is a key drawback to the more realistic modelling of DSSCs, especially for larger dyes where a corresponding larger surface area is needed. Also, given the problems in inherent accuracy of DFT and system sizes that may be simulated, the correct identification of ground-state (chemical) adsorption binding modes and finite-temperature (entropic) effects regarding stability of adsorption modes is also a key challenge. The agreement of absorption spectra (e.g., from TD-DFT) with experiment (e.g., UV-vis spectra) is often challenging to achieve quantitatively, but developments in GW methods (particularly the more efficient GWL technique) offer some encouraging signs for more accurate agreement with experimental data. The role of (continuum) solvation approaches within ab initio modelling should also be emphasised in order to afford a more realistic comparison with experimental conditions vis-à-vis in vacuo calculations; the use of explicit solvation remains a rather elusive computational challenge. Likewise, NAMD techniques are of promising use for characterising and investigating CT dynamics in DSSCs. Therefore, in order for ab initio simulation to mature to the point of being a genuinely predictive in silico molecular design tool, further progress is needed in computational scaling with system size for DFT, TD-DFT and GW methods, together with more accurate functionals. The progress to date in the past decade is certainly encouraging, but a strong reliance on careful calibration with experimental measurement is still essential before this ambitious goal could ever become a more routine reality.
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon works supported by the Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) with the Solar Energy Conversion Strategic Research Cluster under Grant No. [07/SRC/B1160]. We acknowledge useful discussions with Drs Ritwik Kavathekar, Pratibha Dev, Run Long, Damian Mooney, Oleg Prezhdo and Paolo Umari.
References
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, A low-cost, high-efficiency solar cell based on dye-sensitized colloidal TiO2 films, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liska, K. R. Thampi, M. Grätzel, D. Brémaud, D. Rudmann, H. M. Upadhyaya and A. N. Tiwari, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 203103 CrossRef .

          K. R. Thampi, D. Kuang, S. Ito, P. Liska, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Proceedings of the 22nd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, WIP-Renewable Energies, Munich,  2007, p. 182 Search PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110(11), 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yum, P. Chen, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Recent developments in solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1(8–9), 699–707 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, M. Kurashige, Y. Dan-oh, C. Kasada, A. Shinpo, S. Suga, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Design of new coumarin dyes having thiophene moieties for highly efficient organic-dye-sensitized solar cells, New J. Chem., 2003, 27(5), 783–785 RSC .
M. Miyashita, K. Sunahara, T. Nishikawa, Y. Uemura, N. Koumura, K. Hara, A. Mori, T. Abe, E. Suzuki and S. Mori, Interfacial electron-transfer kinetics in metal-free organic dye-sensitized solar cells: combined effects of molecular structure of dyes and electrolytes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(52), 17874–17881 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pastore and F. D. Angelis, Aggregation of organic dyes on TiO2 in dye-sensitized solar cells models: An ab initio investigation, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(1), 556–562 CrossRef CAS .
N. Martsinovich and A. Troisi, Theoretical studies of dye-sensitised solar cells: from electronic structure to elementary processes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4473–4495 CAS .
M. Grätzel, Conversion of sunlight to electric power by nanocrystalline dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164(1–3), 3–14 CrossRef .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Grätzel, Combined experimental and DFT-TDDFT computational study of photoelectrochemical cell ruthenium sensitisers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127(48), 16835–16847 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphrybaker, E. Muller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, Conversion of light to electricity by cis-X2bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate) ruthenium(II) Charge-transfer sensitisers (X = Cl−, Br−, I−, CN−, and SCN−) on nanocrystalline TiO2 electrodes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115(14), 6382–6390 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, M. K. Fischer and P. Bauerle, Metal-free organic dyes for dye-sensitized solar cells: from structure: property relationships to design rules, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48(14), 2474–2499 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Tian and F. Meng, Organic Photovoltaics: Mechanisms, Materials, and Devices, ed. S.-S. Sun and N. S. Sariciftci, CRC, London,  2005 Search PubMed .
K. Hara, M. Kurashige, S. Ito, A. Shinpo, S. Suga, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Novel polyene dyes for highly efficient dye-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Commun., 2003,(2), 252–253 RSC .
K. Hara, T. Sato, R. Katoh, A. Furube, T. Yoshihara, M. Murai, M. Kurashige, S. Ito, A. Shinpo, S. Suga and H. Arakawa, Novel conjugated organic dyes for efficient dye-sensitized solar cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15(2), 246–252 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, K. Sayama, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpo, S. Suga and H. Arakawa, A coumarin-derivative dye sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cell having a high solar-energy conversion efficiency up to 5.6%, Chem. Commun., 2001,(6), 569–570 RSC .
K. Hara, Y. Tachibana, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpo, S. Suga, K. Sayama, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, Dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cells based on novel coumarin dyes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 77(1), 89–103 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, Z. S. Wang, T. Sato, A. Furube, R. Katoh, H. Sugihara, Y. Dan-Oh, C. Kasada, A. Shinpo and S. Suga, Oligothiophene-containing coumarin dyes for efficient dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(32), 15476–15482 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, K. Miyamoto, Y. Abe and M. Yanagida, Electron transport in coumarin-dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 electrodes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(50), 23776–23778 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, T. Sato, R. Katoh, A. Furube, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpo, S. Suga, K. Sayama, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, Molecular design of coumarin dyes for efficient dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 597–606 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wang, Y. Cui, Y. Dan-oh, C. Kasada, A. Shinpo and K. Hara, Thiophene-Functionalized coumarin dye for efficient dye-sensitized solar cells: Electron lifetime improved by coadsorption of deoxycholic acid, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(19), 7224–7230 CAS .
R. K. Chen, X. C. Yang, H. N. Tian and L. C. Sun, Tetrahydroquinoline dyes with different spacers for organic dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2007, 189(2–3), 295–300 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Chen, X. C. Yang, H. N. Tian, X. N. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, Effect of tetrahydroquinoline dyes structure on the performance of organic dye-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19(16), 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qin, X. Yang, R. Chen, L. Sun, T. Marinado, T. Edvinsson, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Influence of [pi]-conjugation units in organic dyes for dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(4), 1853–1860 CAS .
Z.-S. Wang, N. Koumura, Y. Cui, M. Takahashi, H. Sekiguchi, A. Mori, T. Kubo, A. Furube and K. Hara, Hexylthiophene-functionalized carbazole dyes for efficient molecular photovoltaics: Tuning of solar-cell performance by structural modification, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20(12), 3993–4003 CrossRef CAS .
K. Thomas, J. Lin, Y. Hsu and K. Ho, Organic dyes containing thienylfluorene conjugation for solar cells, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4098–4100 RSC .
S. Hwang, J. H. Lee, C. Park, H. Lee, C. Kim, C. Park, M.-H. Lee, W. Lee, J. Park, K. Kim, N.-G. Park and C. Kim, A highly efficient organic sensitiser for dye-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4887–4889 RSC .
W. Xu, B. Peng, J. Chen, M. Liang and F. Cai, New triphenylamine-based dyes for dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(3), 874–880 CAS .
W. H. Liu, I. C. Wu, C. H. Lai, P. T. Chou, Y. T. Li, C. L. Chen, Y. Y. Hsu and Y. Chi, Simple organic molecules bearing a 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene linker for efficient dye-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Commun., 2008,(41), 5152–5154 RSC .
D. P. Hagberg, T. Marinado, K. M. Karlsson, K. Nonomura, P. Qin, G. Boschloo, T. Brinck, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Tuning the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of organic chromophores for dye sensitized solar cells, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72(25), 9550–9556 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, K. Miyamoto, Y. Abe and M. Yanagida, Electron transport in coumarin-dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 electrodes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(50), 23776–23778 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tan, J. Zhai, H. Fang, T. Jiu, J. Ge, Y. Li, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Novel carboxylated oligothiophenes as sensitisers in photoelectric conversion systems, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11(21), 6272–6276 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, K. Takimiya, T. Otsubo, K. Kawabuchi, S. Kajihara and Y. Harima, Development and photovoltaic performance of oligothiophene-sensitized TiO2 solar cells, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35(6), 592–593 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yum, P. Walter, S. Huber, D. Rentsch, T. Geiger, F. Nuesch, F. De Angelis, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Efficient far red sensitization of nanocrystalline TiO2 films by an unsymmetrical squaraine dye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129(34), 10320–10321 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Li, K.-J. Jiang, K.-F. Shao and L.-M. Yang, Novel organic dyes for efficient dye-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2792–2794 RSC .
Z.-S. Wang, F.-Y. Li and C.-H. Huang, Highly efficient sensitization of nanocrystalline TiO2 films with styryl benzothiazolium propylsulfonate, Chem. Commun., 2000, 2063–2064 RSC .
Z.-S. Wang, F.-Y. Li and C.-H. Huang, Photocurrent enhancement of hemicyanine dyes containing RSO3− group through treating TiO2 films with hydrochloric acid, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105(38), 9210–9217 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Porphyrin-sensitized solar cells with cobalt (II/III)–based redox electrolyte exceed 12 percent efficiency, Science, 2011, 334(6056), 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, A. Du Pasquier, G. Saraf, J. Zhong and Y. Lu, Dye-sensitized solar cells using ZnO nanotips and Ga-doped ZnO films, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2008, 23, 045004 CrossRef .
S. Chappel and A. Zaban, Nanoporous SnO2 electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells: improved cell performance by the synthesis of 18 nm SnO2 colloids, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 71, 141–152 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ramasamy and J. Lee, Ordered mesoporous SnO2–based photoanodes for high-performance dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(50), 22032–22037 CAS .
N. N. Dinh, M.-C. Bernard, A. Hugot-Le Goff, T. Stergiopoulos and P. Falaras, Photoelectrochemical solar cells based on SnO2 nanocrystalline films, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 676–683 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ghosh, M. K. Brennaman, T. Uher, M.-R. Ok, E. T. Samulski, L. E. McNeil, T. J. Meyer and R. Lopez, Nanoforest Nb2O5 photoanodes for dye-sensitized solar cells by pulsed laser deposition, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3(10), 3929–3935 CAS .
K. Jaehwan and K. Jongsung, Fabrication of dye-sensitized solar cells using Nb2O5 blocking layer made by sol–gel method, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11(8), 7335–7338 CrossRef .
E. Barea, X. Xu, V. González-Pedro, T. Ripollés-Sanchis, F. Fabregat-Santiago and J. Bisquert, Origin of efficiency enhancement in Nb2O5 coated titanium dioxide nanorod based dye sensitized solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3414–3419 CAS .
I. Hod, M. Shalom, Z. Tachan, S. Rühle and A. Zaban, SrTiO3 Recombination-inhibiting barrier layer for type II dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(21), 10015–10018 CAS .
B. Tan, E. Toman, Y. Li and Y. Wu, Zinc stannate (Zn2SnO4) dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129(14), 4162–4163 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Grant, Properties of rutile (titanium dioxide), Rev. Mod. Phys., 1959, 31(3), 646–674 CrossRef CAS .

          G. V. Samsonov, The Oxide Handbook, IFI/Plenum,  1982 Search PubMed .
L. S. Dubrovinsky, N. A. Dubrovinskaia, V. Swamy, J. Muscat, N. M. Harrison, R. Ahuja, B. Holm and B. Johansson, Materials science: The hardest known oxide, Nature, 2001, 410, 653–654 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brus, Electronic wave functions in semiconductor clusters: experiment and theory, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90(12), 2555–2560 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kormann, D. W. Bahnemann and M. R. Hoffmann, Preparation and characterization of quantum-size titanium dioxide, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92(18), 5196–5201 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khoudiakov, A. R. Parise and B. S. Brunschwig, Interfacial electron transfer in FeII(CN)6-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticles: A study of direct charge injection by electroabsorption spectroscopy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125(15), 4637–4642 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Weng, Y.-Q. Wang, J. B. Asbury, H. N. Ghosh and T. Lian, Back electron transfer from TiO2 nanoparticles to FeIII(CN)63−: Origin of non-single-exponential and particle size independent dynamics, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104(1), 93–104 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Grätzel, Applications of functionalized transition metal complexes in photonic and optoelectronic devices, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 177(1), 347–414 CrossRef CAS .
K. Srinivas, K. Yesudas, K. Bhanuprakash, V. J. Rao and L. Giribabu, A combined experimental and computational investigation of anthracene based sensitisers for DSSC: Comparison of cyanoacrylic and malonic acid electron withdrawing groups binding onto the TiO2 anatase (101) surface, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(46), 20117–20126 CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Liska and M. Grätzel, Investigation of sensitiser adsorption and the influence of protons on current and voltage of a dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 Solar Cell, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107(34), 8981–8987 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Finnie, J. R. Bartlett and J. L. Woolfrey, Vibrational spectroscopic study of the coordination of (2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid)ruthenium(II) complexes to the surface of nanocrystalline titania, Langmuir, 1998, 14(10), 2744–2749 CrossRef CAS .
P. Falaras, Synergetic effect of carboxylic acid functional groups and fractal surface characteristics for efficient dye sensitization of titanium oxide, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 53(1–2), 163–175 CrossRef CAS .
N. W. Duffy, K. D. Dobson, K. C. Gordon, B. H. Robinson and A. J. McQuillan, 
            In situ infrared spectroscopic analysis of the adsorption of ruthenium(II) bipyridyl dicarboxylic acid photosensitisers to TiO2 in aqueous solutions, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 266(5–6), 451–455 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schiffmann, J. VandeVondele, J. Hutter, R. Wirz, A. Urakawa and A. Baiker, Protonation-dependent binding of ruthenium bipyridyl complexes to the anatase(101) surface, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(18), 8398–8404 CAS .
T. Ma, K. Inoue, K. Yao, H. Noma, T. Shuji, E. Abe, J. Yu, X. Wang and B. Zhang, Photoelectrochemical properties of TiO2 electrodes sensitized by porphyrin derivatives with different numbers of carboxyl groups, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 537(1–2), 31–38 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Weng, L. Li, Y. Liu, L. Wang and G.-Z. Yang, Surface-binding forms of carboxylic groups on nanoparticulate TiO2 surface studied by the interface-sensitive transient triplet-state molecular probe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107(18), 4356–4363 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ahdjoudj and C. Minot, A theoretical study of HCO2H adsorption on TiO2 (110), Catal. Lett., 1997, 46(1), 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vittadini, A. Selloni, F. P. Rotzinger and M. Grätzel, Formic acid adsorption on dry and hydrated TiO2 anatase (101) surfaces by DFT calculations, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104(6), 1300–1306 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Howie, F. Claeyssens, H. Miura and L. M. Peter, Characterization of solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells utilizing high absorption coefficient metal-free organic dyes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(4), 1367–1375 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pastore and F. De Angelis, Aggregation of organic dyes on TiO2 in Dye-sensitized solar cells models: An ab initio investigation, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(1), 556–562 CrossRef CAS .
P. Persson, R. Bergström and S. Lunell, Quantum chemical study of photoinjection processes in sensitized TiO2 nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 10348 CrossRef CAS .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, K. Sumioka and S. Uchida, High Efficiency of Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells Based on Metal-Free Indoline Dyes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126(39), 12218–12219 CrossRef CAS .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura and S. Uchida, Highly-efficient metal-free organic dyes for dye-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Commun., 2003, 3036–3037 RSC .

          J. Kohanoff, Electronic structure calculations for solids and molecules: theory and computational methods, Cambridge University Press,  2006 Search PubMed .

          F. Jensen, Introduction to Computational Chemistry, Wiley, 2nd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .

          A. Szabó and N. S. Ostlund, Modern quantum chemistry: introduction to advanced electronic structure theory, Dover Publications,  1996 Search PubMed .
C. Filippi, C. J. Umrigar and M. Taut, Comparison of exact and approximate density functionals for an exactly soluble model, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 100, 1290 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77(18), 3865 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, 
            et al., Density-functional theory for fractional particle number: derivative discontinuities of the energy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1982, 49(23), 1691 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew and K. Schmidt, Jacob's Ladder of density functional approximations for the exchange-correlation energy, AIP Conf. Proc., 2001, 577(1), 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Becke, A new mixing of Hartree–Fock and local density functional theories, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 1372–1377 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew and A. Zunger, Self-interaction correction to density-functional approximations for many-electron systems, Phys. Rev. B, 1981, 23(10), 5048 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Marques, Time-dependent density functional theory, Springer,  2006 Search PubMed .
E. Runge and E. K. U. Gross, Density-functional theory for time-dependent systems, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 52(12), 997 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sternheimer, On Nuclear Quadrupole Moments, Phys. Rev., 1951, 84(2), 244 CrossRef CAS .

          W. G. Aulbur, L. Jönsson and J. W. Wilkins, Quasiparticle Calculations Solids, in State Physics, ed. E. Henry and S. Frans, Academic Press,  1999, pp. 1–218 Search PubMed .
L. Hedin, New Method for calculating the one-particle Green's function with application to the electron-gas problem, Phys. Rev., 1965, 139(3A), A796 CrossRef .
F. Aryasetiawan and O. Gunnarsson, The GW method, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1998, 61(3), 237 CrossRef CAS .
G. Onida, L. Reining and A. Rubio, Electronic excitations: density-functional versus many-body Green's-function approaches, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2002, 74(2), 601 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sottile, V. Olevano and L. Reining, Parameter-free calculation of response functions in time-dependent density-functional theory, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91(5), 056402 CrossRef .
P. Umari, G. Stenuit and S. Baroni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 201104R CrossRef .
P. Umari, G. Stenuit and S. Baroni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 115104 CrossRef .
S. V. Kilina, C. F. Craig, D. S. Kilin and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4871 CAS .
A. Dreuw, J. L. Weisman and M. H. Head-Gordon, Long-range charge-transfer excited states in time-dependent density functional theory require non-local exchange, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 2943 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Peach, P. Benfield, T. Helgaker and D. J. Tozer, Excitation energies in density functional theory: An evaluation and a diagnostic test, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 044118 CrossRef .
P. Dev, S. Agrawal and N. J. English, Determining the appropriate exchange-correlation functional for time-dependent density functional theory studies of charge-transfer excitations in organic dyes, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 224301 CrossRef .
T. Hannappel, B. Burfeindt, W. Storck and F. Willig, Measurement of ultrafast photoinduced electron transfer from chemically anchored Ru-dye molecules into empty electronic states in a colloidal anatase TiO2 Film, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101(35), 6799–6802 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Ellingson, J. B. Asbury, S. Ferrere, H. N. Ghosh, J. R. Sprague, T. Lian and A. J. Nozik, Dynamics of electron injection in nanocrystalline titanium dioxide films sensitized with [Ru(4,4-dicarboxy-2,2- bipyridine)2(NCS)2] by infrared transient absorption, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102(34), 6455–6458 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, R. J. Ellingson, H. N. Ghosh, S. Ferrere, A. J. Nozik and T. Lian, Femtosecond IR study of excited-state relaxation and electron-injection dynamics of Ru(dcbpy)2(NCS)2 in solution and on nanocrystalline TiO2 and Al2O3 Thin Films, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103(16), 3110–3119 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, E. Hao, Y. Wang, H. N. Ghosh and T. Lian, Ultrafast electron transfer dynamics from molecular adsorbates to semiconductor nanocrystalline thin films, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105(20), 4545–4557 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Rehm, G. L. McLendon, Y. Nagasawa, K. Yoshihara, J. Moser and M. Grätzel, Femtosecond electron-transfer dynamics at a sensitizing dye–semiconductor (TiO2) interface, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100(23), 9577–9578 CrossRef .
H. N. Ghosh, J. B. Asbury and T. Q. Lian, Direct observation of ultrafast electron injection from coumarin 343 to TiO2 nanoparticles by femtosecond infrared spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 6482 CrossRef CAS .
R. Huber, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and J. Wachtveitl, Real time Observation of photoinduced adiabatic electron transfer in strongly coupled dye/semiconductor colloidal systems with a 6 femtosecond time constant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 6494–6499 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schnadt, P. A. Bruhwiler, L. Patthey, J. N. O'Shea, S. Sodergren, M. Odelius, R. Ahuja, O. Karis, M. Bassler, P. Persson, H. Siegbahn, S. Lunell and N. Martensson, Experimental evidence for sub-3-fs charge transfer from an aromatic adsorbate to a semiconductor, Nature, 2002, 418(6898), 620–623 CrossRef CAS .
A. Listorti, C. Creager and P. Sommeling, 
            et al., The mechanism behind the beneficial effect of light soaking on injection efficiency and photocurrent in dye sensitized solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3494–3501 CAS .
A. Listorti, B. O'Regan and J. R. Durrant, 
            et al., Electron transfer dynamics in dye-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3381–3399 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Anderson, P. R. F. Barnes and J. R. Durrant, 
            et al., Quantifying regeneration in dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2439–2447 CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson and J. R. Durrant, 
            et al., Simulation and measurement of complete dye sensitised solar cells: including the influence of trapping, electrolyte, oxidised dyes and light intensity on steady state and transient device behaviour, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 5798–5816 RSC .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson and M. Juozapavicius, 
            et al., Factors controlling charge recombination under dark and light conditions in dye sensitised solar cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 3547–3558 RSC .
P. R. F. Barnes and B. C. O'Regan, Electron recombination kinetics and the analysis of collection efficiency and diffusion length measurements in dye sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19134–19140 CAS .
W. R. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, Theoretical studies of photoinduced electron transfer in dye-sensitized TiO2, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58(1), 143–184 CrossRef CAS .
P. Persson, R. Bergstrom and S. Lunell, Quantum chemical study of photoinjection processes in dye-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104(44), 10348–10351 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Duncan, W. M. Stier and O. V. Prezhdo, 
            Ab Initio Nonadiabatic molecular dynamics of the ultrafast electron injection across the alizarin–TiO2 interface, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127(21), 7941–7951 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, Electronic structure and spectra of catechol and alizarin in the gas phase and attached to titanium, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(1), 365–373 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nawrocka and S. A. Krawczyk, Electronic excited state of alizarin dye adsorbed on TiO2 nanoparticles: A Study by electroabsorption (Stark effect) spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(27), 10233–10241 CAS .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, E. Mosconi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Absorption spectra and excited state energy levels of the N719 dye on TiO2 in dye-sensitized solar cell models, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(17), 8825–8831 CAS .
F. De Angelis, A. Tilocca and A. Selloni, Time-dependent DFT study of [Fe(CN)(6)](4-) sensitization of TiO2 nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126(46), 15024–15025 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Angelis, Direct versus indirect injection mechanisms in perylene dye-sensitized solar cells: A DFT/TDDFT investigation, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 493(4–6), 323–327 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sanchez-de-Armas, M. San-Miguel, J. Oviedo and J. F. Sanz, Direct versus indirect mechanisms for electron injection in DSSC: Catechol and alizarin, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2011, 975, 99 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sanchez-de-Armas, J. Oviedo, M. A. San-Miguel, J. F. Sanz, P. Ordejon and M. Pruneda, Real-time TD-DFT simulations in dye sensitized solar cells: The electronic absorption spectrum of alizarin supported on TiO2 nanoclusters, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2010, 6(9), 2856–2865 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sánchez-de-Armas, J. Oviedo, M. A. San Miguel and J. F. Sanz, Direct vs indirect mechanisms for electron injection in dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(22), 11293–11301 Search PubMed .
R. Sánchez-de-Armas, J. Oviedo, M. A. San Miguel and J. F. Sanz, Coumarin derivatives for dye sensitized solar cells: a TD-DFT study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 225–233 RSC .
S. Agrawal, P. Dev, N. J. English, K. R. Thampi and J. M. D. MacElroy, First-principles study of the excited-state properties of coumarin-derived dyes in dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(30), 11101 RSC .
S. Agrawal, P. Dev, N. J. English, K. R. Thampi and J. M. D. MacElroy, A TD-DFT study of the effects of structural variation on the photo-chemistry of polyene dyes, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3(2), 416–424 RSC .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of an organic dye structure.	 

 	Fig. 2  Rutile unit cell.	 

 	Fig. 3  Anatase unit cell.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  Molecular orbital diagram of titania.	 

 	Fig. 5  Different modes reported for carboxylic acid and carboxyl groups.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
n(r,t) = N∫d3r2……∫d3rN|ψ(r,r2,……rN), t|2	(7)
vKS(r,t) = vext(r,t) + vH(r,t) + vXC(r,t)	(8)
δn(r,t) = ∫dt′∫d3r′χ[nGS](r,r′,t–t′)δvext(r′,t′)	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
Σ ≈ GW	(13)
G−1(1,2) = G−10(1,2) – Ĵ(1)δ(1,2) – Σ(1,2)	(14)
	(15)
Σ(1,2) = ΣH(1,2) + iG(1,2)W(1+,2)	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
	(21)
	(22)

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
