Recent emergence of photon upconversion based on triplet energy migration in molecular assemblies  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CC00089D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CC00089D
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5354-5370Recent emergence of photon upconversion based on triplet energy migration in molecular assemblies

        
          
            Nobuhiro 
            Yanai
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Nobuo 
            Kimizuka
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Center for Molecular Systems (CMS), Kyushu University, 744 Moto-oka, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan. E-mail: yanai@mail.cstm.kyushu-u.ac.jp; n-kimi@mail.cstm.kyushu-u.ac.jp
bPRESTO, JST, Honcho 4-1-8, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan
Received 
      5th January 2016
    , Accepted 22nd February 2016First published on 7th March 2016AbstractAn emerging field of triplet energy migration-based photon upconversion (TEM-UC) is reviewed. Highly efficient photon upconversion has been realized in a wide range of chromophore assemblies, such as non-solvent liquids, ionic liquids, amorphous solids, gels, supramolecular assemblies, molecular crystals, and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). The control over their assembly structures allows for unexpected air-stability and maximum upconversion quantum yield at weak solar irradiance that has never been achieved by the conventional molecular diffusion-based mechanism. The introduction of the “self-assembly” concept offers a new perspective in photon upconversion research and triplet exciton science, which show promise for numerous applications ranging from solar energy conversion to chemical biology.
Nobuhiro Yanai
Nobuhiro Yanai received his PhD degree from Kyoto University in 2011 with Prof. Susumu Kitagawa and Dr Takashi Uemura on polymer properties in coordination nanospaces. He was a postdoctoral research fellow with Prof. Steve Granick at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, working on the self-assembly of MOF colloids. In 2012, he became an assistant professor at Kyushu University, where he has been an associate professor since 2015. Since 2014, he has also been a researcher of the PRESTO program in JST. His current research interests are in materials chemistry for photon upconversion and new triplet science.
Nobuo Kimizuka
Nobuo Kimizuka received his PhD degree in 1990 on the excitonic chromophore interactions in molecular self-assemblies with Prof. Toyoki Kunitake at Kyushu University. After working as a postdoc with Prof. Helmut Ringsdorf at Mainz University, he was promoted to an associate professor in 1992 and to a full professor in 2000. He was a principal investigator of JST CREST (2007–2014) and is currently the director of Center for Molecular Systems, Kyushu University (CMS). His work encompasses the synthesis, structure, properties and functions of molecular self-assemblies and nanomaterials with recent focus on photon energy conversion, supramolecular ferroelectrics and soft-ionics.
Introduction
Photon upconversion (UC) is a process that converts lower energy (longer wavelength) photons to higher energy (shorter wavelength) photons. It is technologically important for a variety of applications ranging from energy to biology. This Feature Article sheds light on a recently emerged promising strategy, triplet energy migration-based photon upconversion (TEM-UC). We start with the brief statements of potential applications, then describe the basic idea and proof-of-concept examples of TEM-UC, and finally conclude with state-of-the-art materials designs and future directions.
The efficiency of renewable energy production using solar energy can be enhanced by implementing the UC process. Solar cells suffer from the spectral mismatches between the solar emission and the bandgaps, and overcoming the Shockley–Queisser limit remains one of the essential challenges.1 While efficient solar cells based on crystalline silicon can utilize near-infrared (NIR) light up to 1100 nm, they suffer from a relatively high production cost on a large scale due to the tedious processing conditions. To reduce the processing cost and also increase the energy conversion efficiency, there is tremendous interest in the development of new generation solar cells based on mixed organic–inorganic perovskites.2–4 However, the bandgap of perovskite solar cells limits their absorption to the visible light region (<800 nm) and consequently photons of the near infrared (NIR) region are wasted. It has been estimated that recovering these wasted NIR photons by UC leads to an efficiency improvement of up to 50%.5 Likewise, photocatalytic water splitting for hydrogen production, a promising solution for the global energy issues, requires deep-blue/UV photons, where most of the solar photons (95%) are lost without effective utilization.6 By implementing the UC mechanism, a large efficiency enhancement of up to 100% was estimated for photocatalytic water-splitting.5 Recent progress in organic photochemistry allows the use of visible light to synthesize high-value complex chemicals.7 Since it utilizes only the short wavelength region of the visible light (mostly blue light), its efficiency will be significantly boosted by upconverting long wavelength visible light (green and red light) and even NIR light. Another interesting contribution of UC can be found in the solar fuel that stores thermal energy in chemical bonds and/or latent heat of phase transitions.8,9
As NIR light over 700 nm can penetrate biological tissues such as skin and blood, the NIR-to-visible UC will be of significant importance in the bioimaging and phototherapy fields. The large anti-Stokes shift of UC emission and the absence of UC materials in natural tissues allow for high signal-to-noise ratio bioimaging without any autofluorescence.10 Meanwhile, the low permittivity of visible light in biological tissues limits the current visible-light-based photodynamic therapy (PDT) to the treatment of tumours just under skin or on the lining of organs that can be reached using a visible light source. The implementation of NIR-to-visible UC would enable PDT to treat deep and large cancers.
Currently, UC mechanisms that can utilize weak excitation intensity such as sunlight are limited to those based on the triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) of molecules (Fig. 1).10–24 The other UC systems being actively investigated are based on two-photon absorption and multistep excitation of lanthanides, which however suffer from a fateful flaw of requiring high excitation intensities (W cm−2 – MW cm−2). Note that the solar irradiance is 100 mW cm−2 in the whole wavelength range and only a few mW cm−2 at the usually selected excitation wavelength with ca. 10 nm wavelength width. The TTA-based UC process occurs in association with the multistep photochemical events (Fig. 1).10–24 First, a triplet excited state of a donor (sensitizer) is formed by intersystem crossing from the photoexcited singlet state and acceptor (emitter) excited triplets are populated by triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET) from the donor triplets. When two acceptor triplets diffuse and come into collision during their lifetimes, a higher energy singlet S1 (and a ground state S0) is formed by TTA, which consequently produces the delayed upconverted fluorescence. The excitation and emission wavelengths of TTA-UC can be regulated by independent selection of sensitizers and emitters. A comprehensive library of donor/acceptor combinations can be found in recent reviews.10,12,18,25
 Fig. 1  Scheme of the mechanism of TTA-based UC. The system includes donor (triplet sensitizer) and acceptor (emitter) molecules (S = singlet, T = triplet). Green and blue arrows represent the excitation and emission processes, respectively. 
Triplet energy migration-based UC (TEM-UC)
The most efficient TTA-based UC has been achieved for donor–acceptor pairs molecularly dissolved in organic solvents because they allow fast diffusion of the excited molecules (blue box in Fig. 2). However, the problem begins with the fact that the diffusion constant even in such low-viscosity solvents is not high enough to achieve maximum UC efficiency at solar irradiance. In addition, they suffer from the overwhelming deactivation of excited triplets by dissolved oxygen, which severely limits their operation to strictly deaerated conditions. A few reports have been published on TTA-based UC under aerated conditions by employing specific solid polymers or viscous liquids as matrices to block oxygen. However, such thick matrices inevitably restrict the diffusion of excited triplet molecules, resulting in the use of high-power incident light to ensure effective concentration of excited triplet states.
 Fig. 2  Scheme of the concept of triplet energy migration-based photon upconversion (TEM-UC). The blue box shows a scheme of the conventional UC mechanism based on molecular diffusion. The objects marked D and A represent triplet donor and acceptor molecules, respectively. The triplet state of the donor, formed by intersystem crossing (ISC) from the photo-excited (green arrow) singlet state, diffuses and collides with the acceptor, resulting in donor-to-acceptor TTET. Two acceptor excited triplets again diffuse, collide, and annihilate to form a higher-energy excited singlet, which consequently produces upconverted delayed fluorescence (blue arrow). The green box represents a schematic image of assembly formation of the donor and acceptor. The cross-fertilization between UC chemistry and self-assembly chemistry produces TEM-UC (orange box), where excitation (green arrow) of donor molecules is followed by a sequence of TTET, TEM in the acceptor arrays, TTA between the excited acceptors, and higher energy UC emission (blue arrow). 
To solve these fundamental issues in molecular diffusion-based UC, we introduced the concept of molecular self-assembly to illustrate a promising mechanism “triplet energy migration-based photon upconversion (TEM-UC)” in organized molecular systems (Fig. 2). Although the singlet energy migration in various molecular self-assemblies has been demonstrated to exert efficient light harvesting properties,26–31 TEM-UC in designed molecular self-assemblies has been an unexplored frontier. Here, the donor molecules are integrated with the densely accumulated acceptor molecules. The excitation of donor molecules is followed by a sequence of donor-to-acceptor TTET, TEM in the acceptor arrays, TTA between the excited acceptors, and higher energy UC emission. The critical difference between TEM-UC and previously reported molecular-diffusion-based UC is favorable donor-to-acceptor as well as acceptor-to-acceptor triplet energy transfer processes in the absence of free molecular diffusion, which are enabled by proximate preorganization of donor–acceptor and acceptor–acceptor arrangements as explained below.
TEM-UC allows highly efficient, low-excitation-intensity, and air-stable UC. The UC quantum yield ΦUC is described by the following equation:16

 

(1)where ΦISC, ΦET, ΦTTA, and ΦFL represent the quantum efficiencies of donor ISC, donor-to-acceptor TTET, acceptor–acceptor TTA, and acceptor fluorescence, and f is the statistical probability of obtaining the singlet excited state after the annihilation of two triplet states. The factor 1/2 originates from the stoichiometry of the TTA process where two excited triplets are required to generate one singlet excited state with higher energy. As the quantum yield is generally defined as the ratio of the number of emitted photons to the number of absorbed photons, the theoretical maximum of UC quantum yield is naturally considered as 50%.16,25,32 While some reports set 100% as the maximum UC quantum yield, by considering that UC phenomena would be increasingly implemented in various applications, the definition of 50% maximum is more straightforward and reasonable. In any case, the definition should be clearly written on each UC paper.
To achieve high ΦUC in TEM-UC, ΦET and ΦFL are the key factors. As is obvious, donors are desired to show quantitative ΦISC. The ΦTTA value often approaches 100% at high excitation intensities where the triplet concentration become sufficiently high so that TTA provides the main relaxation channel.16,33,34 Thus, it is essential that the ΦUC is maximized at excitation intensities as low as possible, as will be discussed later. It is understood that the triplet energy transfer occurs via the electron exchange mechanism (Dexter energy transfer, Fig. 3a).35 It requires an overlap of wave functions between donors and acceptors, and consequently, it has a much steeper exponential dependence on the distance compared to that displayed by the dipole–dipole coupling mechanism (Förster resonance energy transfer, FRET), which occurs over distances considerably exceeding the sum of their van der Waals radii.35–37 Therefore, to attain high ΦET, donor molecules should be almost in contact with acceptor moieties (Fig. 3b). Note that a high ΦET value can be obtained in both molecular-diffusion-based UC and TEM-UC, and a high triplet diffusion constant is required in each case. Meanwhile, the molecular design and conditions are different in many aspects. In the case of molecular-diffusion-based UC, a large molecular diffusion constant is available only in low-viscosity media. The acceptor concentration needs to be high to secure the high collisional rate with the donor triplets. This is often hampered by the low solubility of large aromatic molecules. On the other hand, in TEM-UC, acceptor molecules are designed to give ordered molecular assemblies in which acceptor chromophores are regularly aligned. To achieve efficient donor-to-acceptor energy transfer, donor molecules are pre-organized in the vicinity (<1 nm) of the acceptor arrays. In these donor–acceptor self-assembled systems, the excited triplets are locally accumulated and the rapid migration of excited triplet states leads to efficient UC in given media. Although this approach requires the design and synthesis of self-assembling chromophore systems, it allows the use of lower acceptor concentrations and these features would expand the applications of UC to the solution-based photocatalysis, bioimaging and photodynamic therapy.
 Fig. 3  (a) Scheme of the Dexter energy transfer mechanism as a correlated electron transfer. (b) A scheme of the general strategy of highly efficient, low-power, air-stable TEM-UC systems. Donor–acceptor and acceptor–acceptor orbital overlaps are important for efficient TTET and fast TEM, respectively. The donor–acceptor co-assemblies need be protected from oxygen quenching as they are embedded in dense barrier networks. 
The molecular as well as assembly structure of acceptor molecules should be carefully controlled to achieve the high ΦFL value. One useful way is to introduce steric hindrance in the acceptor units. For example, 9,10-diphenyl anthracene38 has two phenyl rings that have the twisted configuration against the anthracene aromatic plane, and this effectively avoids the so-called concentration quenching22,23,39,40 as well as the photochemical side reactions.41 The relationship between the f factor and the structure of chromophore assemblies is still not clear and it remains an interesting question for future studies.
To achieve efficient UC under weak excitation like sunlight, it is important to understand the parameters that determine the required excitation intensity for efficient UC. There is a useful figure-of-merit of TTA-based UC, threshold excitation intensity Ith, at which ΦTTA becomes 0.5.42 The TTA-based UC emission intensity generally shows quadratic and first-order dependencies on the incident light intensity in the low- and high-intensity ranges, respectively. The Ith value is experimentally determined as the intersection point of these two lines.34,42 The threshold is expressed as a function of the system's fundamental parameters using the equation:42

 

(2)where α is the absorption coefficient at the excitation wavelength, ΦET is the donor-to-acceptor TTET efficiency, DT is the diffusion constant of acceptor triplet, a0 is the annihilation distance between acceptor triplets (usually around 1 nm), and τT is the lifetime of the acceptor triplet.42 Having the high ΦET value is essential not only for attaining the high UC quantum yield, but also for the low Ith. The lifetime of excited triplets is also important, but already the common TTA-based UC acceptors show long millisecond-scale lifetimes. It is then crucial to achieve high DT. In conventional molecular diffusion-based UC, this DT value was not high enough to make Ith low and to maximize the UC quantum yield at solar irradiance. This could be overcome by achieving fast TEM in densely assembled acceptor molecules. Similar to the donor-to-acceptor TTET, the excited triplet energy is transferred between acceptors by the Dexter mechanism.37 Therefore in the acceptor assemblies, the neighbouring acceptors are desired to have large orbital overlaps between them (Fig. 3b). We note that the molecular assembly structure should be carefully designed to achieve both fast TEM and high fluorescence quantum yield ΦFL. Although there were no guiding principles for this important issue, our recent studies have demonstrated that it is actually possible to achieve them at the same time, as described later in this review.22,23
The UC emission is sensitive to air because the triplet excited state is readily quenched by molecular oxygen. Recent studies show that this can be avoided by several methods. One simple yet powerful method is to make dense amorphous acceptor assemblies in which oxygen concentration might be low.20,39,40 The UC emission could be retained after many days, although it is not perfect in terms of long-term stability. Another method is to develop dense intermolecular interaction networks such as hydrogen bonds and coordination bonds, which effectively prevents oxygen intrusion.23,43–46 It is interesting that these strategies have been widely used in polymers with excellent oxygen barrier properties. The necessary characteristics of a barrier polymer include a high inter-chain cohesive energy density (high polarity and hydrogen bonding), high glass transition temperature, and low free volume.47 The higher the polymer's cohesive energy density, the more difficult it is for the polymer chains to make voids which allow oxygen to pass.47 The glass transition temperature should be well higher than room temperature to reduce the polymer mobility. The reduction of free volume leads to a decrease in gas mobility in the glassy polymer.48 It should also be promising to enclose the whole TEM-UC system in such oxygen barrier polymers. The implementation of singlet oxygen scavengers provides another interesting method to avoid oxygen quenching. For example, the in-air UC emission was observed in oleic acid and linoleic acid having unsaturated double bonds49 and in hyperbranched unsaturated polyphosphates.50
Based on the TEM-UC concept, a variety of molecular systems with unique UC characteristics have been developed. They range from flexible to rigid materials with different degrees of structural order. From the next section, we start to overview condensed (solventless) liquid and ionic liquid systems, then move to amorphous solids, gels, supramolecular membranes, and finally crystalline solids and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). In most cases, to demonstrate the proof-of-concept, the benchmark combination of the triplet donor Pt(II) octaethylporphyrin (PtOEP) and the acceptor 9,10-diphenylanthracene (DPA) has been employed. Rational extension of these TEM-UC systems will cover other wavelength ranges such as NIR-to-visible and visible-to-UV conversions.
TEM-UC in solvent-free liquids
The transparent nature of liquids is suitable for making optically active materials. The first example of UC in a solvent-free liquid has been reported by our group (Fig. 4).20 The modification of aromatic chromophores with branched alkyl chains gives nonvolatile fluorescent liquids.51–56 Nakanishi et al. reported a series of DPA-based molecular liquids with high fluorescence quantum yield.56 We synthesized a donor Pt(II) porphyrin modified with branched alkyl chains, and dissolve it in the DPA-based acceptor liquid.20 When PtOEP was used as a donor, it was not molecularly dissolved in the acceptor liquid, and irregular crystalline structures were observed under a polarized optical microscope. Meanwhile, the donor having branched alkyl chains was homogeneously miscible with the liquid in the examined concentration range up to donor/acceptor = 1 mol% (Fig. 5a). The acceptor liquid showed a high fluorescence quantum yield of 68%, while it was quenched upon increasing the molar ratio of the donor notably above 0.1 mol%, indicating the occurrence of acceptor-to-donor singlet–singlet back energy transfer. Accordingly, the low donor/acceptor ratio of 0.01 mol% was employed in the UC experiments.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the solvent-free liquid TEM-UC system. Donor molecules (red) in acceptor liquid (yellow) are excited by long-wavelength green light. This is followed by a sequence of TTET from the donor to the acceptor, TEM among acceptor networks, TTA, and delayed blue fluorescence from the upconverted singlet state of the acceptor. Adopted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 5  Photographs of the doped liquid (donor/acceptor = 0.01 mol%) upon exposure to (a) white light and (b) a 532 nm green laser (the incident laser direction is indicated by a green arrow). Bright blue luminescence is due to UC emission, and green spots are the scattered incident laser. (c) Photoluminescence spectra of the doped liquid with different incident intensities of the 532 nm laser in air. (d) Dependence of UC emission intensity at 433 nm on the incident light intensity. The dashed lines are the fitting results with slopes of 1.83 (purple) and 0.85 (green) in the low- and high-power regimes, respectively. Adopted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Very interestingly, blue UC emission was clearly observed from the donor-doped liquid upon excitation by a 532 nm green laser (Fig. 5b and c).20 It is noteworthy that the donor phosphorescence at 660 nm was completely quenched regardless of the excitation power, indicating the quantitative TTET from the donor to the surrounding acceptor liquid. The excitation intensity dependence of UC emission intensity showed the quadratic-to-linear transition. In addition, the UC emission of the donor-doped liquid showed a decay in the millisecond time scale. These results prove the TTA-based UC mechanism which occurs via long-lived triplet states. It is noteworthy that the crossover threshold intensity Ith was observed at a relatively low excitation intensity of around 50 mW cm−2, which is comparable to those reported for the solvent-free polymer systems,34,35 but higher than the solar irradiance of 1.6 mW cm−2 at 532 ± 5 nm. Remarkably, the donor-doped liquid showed a high UC quantum yield of 14% (theoretical maximum = 50%) at around 300 mW cm−2. The observed remarkably high quantum yield is close to the highest records reported for solvent-free UC systems,57,58 showing great potential of the liquid TEM-UC system.
In contrast to the general oxygen quenching behavior of UC emission in solution, the UC properties of the deaerated liquid TEM-UC system were almost identical to those obtained in air.20 There was no obvious loss in the quantum efficiency within 20 days of air exposure, and a good quantum yield as high as 7.5% was still observed even after a longer period of 80 days. These results are explicable by suppressed diffusion of oxygen molecules into dense and highly viscous liquid chromophores.
Ionic liquid TEM-UC systems
The above liquid-phase UC material has many advantages such as nonvolatility and transparency, but it unfortunately required a relatively high excitation-light intensity to optimize the TTA-UC processes.20 This is due to the bulky alkyl chains introduced onto the acceptors which impeded effective triplet energy migration among them.
To attain a much closer arrangement of acceptor molecules and the formation of continuous chromophore networks that facilitate the diffusion of excited triplet states, we employed ionic liquids (ILs). Several reports on imidazolium-cation-based ILs showed that the polar charged moieties form interconnected three-dimensional ionic networks by segregation from the nonpolar alkyl chains.59–63 Inspired by this bicontinuous ionic-molecular network arrangement, we formed interconnected arrays of acceptor chromophores in an IL that serve as effective pathways for TEM (Fig. 6).40
 Fig. 6  Chemical structures of the IL and Pt(II) octaethylporphyrin (PtOEP) and a schematic representation of nonvolatile TEM-UC systems in continuous acceptor networks. Adopted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
The presence of specific interactions between chromophores in the IL was indicated by a red-shifted and broadened absorption spectrum and a red-shifted fluorescence band detected for the solvent-free IL state as compared to that recorded for the methanol solution. Interestingly, the fluorescence quantum yield in the neat IL state (70%) is even slightly higher than that in methanol (67%). This may be ascribed to the small overlap between the absorption and emission bands, that is, less self-absorption in the neat IL state. Thus, the chromophoric ILs satisfies both of the interchromophore interactions and the high quantum yield, which make them suitable for TEM-UC.
Being doped with the donor PtOEP, the IL showed a clear UC emission at 450 nm.40 This is the first example of UC emission using chromophoric ILs that contain ionic acceptors. In this system, the phosphorescence of the donor PtOEP at 650 nm was not detected regardless of the excitation power, indicating the quantitative donor-to-acceptor TTET process. A double logarithmic plot for the UC emission intensity as a function of incident-light intensity clearly showed the quadratic-to-linear transition. Remarkably, the obtained Ith value of 3.0 mW cm−2 is much lower than that obtained for the neutral solvent-free liquid system shown above (50 mW cm−2),20 and it is comparable to the solar irradiance of 1.6 mW cm−2 at 532 ± 5 nm (Fig. 7a). In agreement with the low Ith value, the UC quantum yield also saturated at a low excitation intensity of around 20 mW cm−2 (Fig. 7b). The saturated UC quantum yield of 5.6% (theoretical maximum = 50%) is relatively high for solvent-free upconversion materials.
 Fig. 7  (a) Dependence of UC emission intensity of IL–PtOEP at 450 nm on the incident light intensity. (b) TTA-UC quantum yield measured as a function of incident light intensity. Note that the theoretical maximum of UC quantum yield is 50%. Adopted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
To understand the origin of the low Ith value in the IL system, the triplet diffusion constant DT was estimated using eqn (2). It turned out that the DT value of 1.6 × 10−6 cm2 s−1 in the IL is significantly high for an amorphous material.37 A triplet diffusion length in the IL was estimated as LT = (DTτT)0.5 = 0.63 μm. This is relatively large for amorphous materials, confirming the superior potential of chromophoric ILs as triplet diffusion media. Considering the viscosity of the IL (2760 Pa s) and the molecular size of DPA (0.45 nm), the diffusion constant of the anion is estimated to be 1.76 × 10−12 cm2 s−1 from the Stokes–Einstein equation. This value is six orders of magnitude smaller than the above DT value, indicating that the triplet excitons generated in IL diffuse predominantly by energy migration rather than by molecular diffusion. This was further confirmed by the temperature dependence of DT in the IL, where no drastic difference in the rate of increase of triplet diffusivity between the glassy and liquid states was observed. Although some contributions of local molecular reorientation should be involved in the liquid state, these results are reasonably explained by the formation of contiguous ionic chromophore arrays that provide efficient TEM pathways in the IL. While all the above described measurements of the IL system were carried out under deaerated conditions to properly evaluate the effect of chromophore arrangement on TTA-UC, it is notable that the UC emission was clearly detected even after being exposed to air for many days, similar to the nonionic upconverting liquid,20 showing the advantage of condensed liquid UC systems.
Amorphous solid TEM-UC systems
The mechanism of TEM-UC in soft UC systems can be proved by measurements in the low-temperature glassy state. Fig. 8 shows the temperature dependence of UC emission intensity observed for the solvent-free liquid UC system (Fig. 4 and 5).20 The relative UC emission intensity at 433 nm decreased with the decrease in temperature. It is noteworthy that the UC emission is observed even below the glass transition temperature (−59 °C), with ca. 20% of the intensity preserved compared to those observed at ambient temperatures. This result clearly demonstrates that the triplet energy migrates among frozen acceptor molecules in the glass phase, without the help of molecular diffusion. This is a remarkable feature contrasting strongly with the previous solution/polymer dispersion systems in which UC emissions were completely suppressed below the frozen temperature of matrices.64 The temperature dependence (Fig. 8) demonstrates that the TEM processes are thermally facilitated. As explained before, the donor-to-acceptor triplet energy transfer and interacceptor TEM occur via the electron exchange Dexter mechanism (Fig. 3). Therefore it is expected that the reorientation of excited triplet molecules is required to maximize the overlap of wave functions between the neighboring molecules.
 Fig. 8  Temperature-dependent UC emission intensity at λem = 433 nm (λex = 532 nm) of the donor-doped acceptor liquid shown in Fig. 4 and 5. The UC emission is clearly observed even below the glass transition temperature (−59 °C). Adopted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
When the glass transition temperature is higher than room temperature, it is possible to produce upconverting room temperature glass. Weder and Simon et al. reported that a hydroxymethyl-modified DPA forms the glass state at room temperature and the triplet donor (PdOEP/PtOEP)-doped molecular glass shows a blue UC emission upon green laser excitation in air (Fig. 9a and b).39 While a rapid cooling of a melt from 250 °C to 25 °C afforded the molecular glass state, thermal annealing above the crystallization temperature (140 °C) formed the crystal state. Therefore, interestingly, the effect of different phases can be studied using the identical material composition including the donor–acceptor ratio. It was found that the glass state gives much stronger UC emission compared with the crystal state (Fig. 9c). By monitoring the donor phosphorescence, this was primarily attributed to the better donor dispersibility in the glass than in the crystal. Although the regular molecular packing in the crystal state is promising for fast TEM, the homogeneous dispersion of the donor in acceptor crystals remains challenging,16 as described later in this review.
 Fig. 9  (a) Picture of 0.7 mol% PdOEP-doped molecular glass, 9-(4-hydroxymethylphenyl)-10-phenylanthracene. (b) A picture of the molecular glass containing 0.025 mol% PdOEP irradiated with a 2 mW green HeNe laser. The blue UC emission is observable through a 500 nm short pass filter alongside with reflected laser light. (c) Emission spectra of premixed solid, molecular glass and crystallized states in the presence of 0.025 mol% of PdOEP (scale bars 100 mm) when irradiated with a 2 mW 543 nm green HeNe laser. Adopted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
With the aim of applying TTA-based UC in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), Morandeira and co-workers systematically studied the UC properties of the donor and the acceptor on mesoporous metal oxide surfaces (Fig. 10).65–68 As a model system of nanostructured TiO2 photoanodes in DSSCs, basic UC properties were investigated using mesoporous ZrO2 film that has a higher conduction band energy and does not affect the UC processes. To modify the surface of metal oxide, a carboxylate group-containing Pt(II) porphyrin- and DPA-based donor and acceptor were used.68 The UC emission was successfully observed on ZrO2 film. The system did not reach the saturated regime because of insufficient excitation intensity, and thus the system's maximum UC quantum yield is unclear. In donor–acceptor systems assembled by coordination bonds on the ZrO2 surface, Hanson et al. reached the saturated regime with stronger excitation intensity but the UC quantum yield was very low (0.23%) because of the acceptor-to-donor singlet–singlet back energy transfer.69 In addition, to reach this quantum yield, it required much higher excitation intensity (2.5 W cm−2) than solar irradiance (1.6 mW cm−2 at 532 ± 5 nm) probably because of the slow TEM among the disordered acceptor alignment and low absorbance at the excitation wavelength. Nevertheless, this strategy will be important for UC-based DSSCs if these limitations are solved by optimizing the chemical and assembly structures of surface-bound chromophores.
 Fig. 10  Donor (sensitizer) and acceptor (emitter) on the surface of mesoporous ZrO2. Adopted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Excellent processability of organic polymers has motivated several research groups to make upconverting plastics.70–77 Two representative polymer architectures are conjugated polymers having acceptor moieties in the main chain and non-conjugated polymers containing acceptor units as the side chains (Fig. 11). Donors are dispersed in the polymer films or covalently modified to the polymer chains. Baluschev et al. employed conjugated polymers such as poly(fluorene) as acceptors and doped donor PtOEP molecules in acceptor polymer films.70,72 The aggregation of donors in polymer films made the donor-to-acceptor TTET inefficient, which remains a challenging issue. A relatively good UC efficiency of 6% was obtained using the poly(p-phenylene vinylene) copolymer doped with PdTPBP by Jankus and co-workers, but the main upconversion efficiency loss mechanism is still the exciton recombination in donor aggregates.74 Although the conjugated polymers were covalently modified by donors, the full conjugation between donors and acceptors and the relative energetic proximity of donor and acceptor triplet states resulted in undesirable back TTET from the acceptor to the donor.71,76 An alternative strategy is to covalently attach donors and acceptors as side chains of polymers.73,77 However, it remains challenging to precisely control molecular orientations and sequences of donor–acceptor pairs both in solutions and films, and the segregation of donors in the solid state is a common issue in solid-state UC systems. As described in the latter section, these problems have been solved in the coordination polymer “metal–organic framework (MOF)” systems, in which controlled integration of donors to acceptor MOFs and the very fast TEM among regular acceptor arrangements lead to the observation of maximum UC quantum yield below solar irradiance.
 Fig. 11  Main-chain-type and side-chain-type polymers for TEM-UC. 
TEM-UC in supramolecular assemblies
The molecular self-assembly provides a powerful means to precisely control the alignment of chromophores, which has potential to solve the above-mentioned issues of the amorphous systems and to realize efficient TTET and fast TEM. The first supramolecular TEM-UC system has been reported by us.23 In contrast to the extensive studies of singlet energy transfer and migration in supramolecular assemblies,26–31 those on triplet exciton migration have been limited. Therefore it is imperative to develop molecular designs for achieving fast TEM and reducing the collision with oxygen molecules. We have designed a novel amphiphilic acceptor that possesses a solvophobic multiple-amide-substituted DPA unit and solvophilic ether-linked alkyl chains that are connected viaL-glutamate connectors (Fig. 12). The amide group-enriched L-glutamate connector has been employed to impart chirality and hydrogen bonding networks that improve the control of molecular orientation.28,29 This acceptor self-assembled in organic media to form monolayer membranes in which donor PtOEP molecules were spontaneously taken up, giving supramolecular donor–acceptor nanohybrids.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the basic self-assembly structure. Acceptor molecules spontaneously self-assemble in solution and donor molecules (PtOEP) efficiently bind to the self-assemblies by solvophobic interaction. Upon photoexcitation of donor molecules by green light, donor-to-acceptor TTET is followed by TEM among the acceptor networks. It leads to efficient TTA between acceptor triplets and consequent upconverted blue emission from the acceptor excited singlets. Adopted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
The UC emission in these supramolecular assemblies was found to be very efficient and air-stable. Under excitation at 532 nm of donor–acceptor chloroform solution, upconverted blue emission was clearly observed around 440 nm (Fig. 13a). The almost no donor phosphorescence at 650 nm indicates that the TTET efficiency ΦET is nearly 1. Importantly, the UC emission was clearly detected even at 77 K, well below the melting point of the solvent (Fig. 13b). This is in contrast to that observed for the molecular dispersion of non-substituted DPA under identical conditions. No upconverted emission was detected from the frozen chloroform solution of DPA–PtOEP at 77 K (Fig. 13b), indicating that the TTET and TTA processes are significantly limited in the absence of molecular diffusion. These results confirm the advantages of self-assembly-directed TEM-UC.
 Fig. 13  (a) Photoluminescence spectra of the supramolecular system (Fig. 12) in deaerated chloroform ([acceptor] = 10 mM, [PtOEP] = 10 μM) with different excitation light intensities of the 532 nm laser at room temperature. (b) Photoluminescence spectra of the supramolecular system (red, [acceptor] = 10 mM, [PtOEP] = 10 μM) and of DPA–PtOEP (blue, [DPA] = 10 mM, [PtOEP] = 10 μM) in air-saturated chloroform at 77 K under 532 nm excitation (excitation intensity = 982 mW cm−2). (c) Dependence of UC quantum yield on the excitation light intensity under deaerated conditions at room temperature (theoretical maximum = 50%). (d) Dependence of UC emission intensity at 440 nm on the excitation intensity under deaerated conditions at room temperature. Adopted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
Significantly, the UC quantum yield ΦUC of the supramolecular system reached 30% (theoretical maximum = 50%),23 exceeding the previous highest record of 26% reported for the DPA–PtOEP pair.16 The ΦUC is described by eqn (1). In the current supramolecular system, ΦISC and ΦET are regarded as 1, and ΦTTA can be assumed to be 1 in the saturated regime where ΦUC is maximum and constant.16,33,34 Thus the f value is calculated as 0.68, which is larger than the reported f value of 0.52 for DPA, presumably because of the high T2 energy level and/or specific dye arrangement. The TTA process is mediated by the formation of collisional complexes of singlet, triplet and quintet multiplicities, where the weighted statistical probability of formation of these states is 1:3:5. Schmidt and coworkers reported that the pure statistical factor f = 1/9 can be enlarged to f = 2/5, because the quintet state of polyaromatic organic compounds is usually energetically inaccessible and the higher energy triplet product T2 decays back to T1.33 This limit can be further broken when the T2 energy is even slightly higher than twice of the T1 energy, as is the case for DPA (f = 0.52).16 The f value may also be affected by the mutual distance and orientation of adjacent acceptor moieties, since the interchange rate from the T1–T1 dimer to the S1–S0 state may be dependent on the intermolecular electronic coupling.78
The supramolecular system showed a relatively low Ith of 8.9 mW cm−2 (Fig. 13d). This is because of the fast TEM (DT = 1.4 × 10−5 cm2 s−1) in the controlled acceptor assemblies, which is comparable to the diffusion of DPA in a low-viscosity solvent (1.2 × 10−5 cm2 s−1).36 We found that more than 80% of the UC emission of the supramolecular system remained even in air-saturated dispersions. That is, the local concentration of oxygen molecules in the monolayer membranes is considerably lower than that in the bulk solution, indicating the oxygen barrier property revealed by the developed hydrogen bonding networks. While the excitation light intensity to maximize the UC quantum yield was still higher (ca. 100 mW cm−2, Fig. 13c) than the solar irradiance (1.6 mW cm−2 at 532 ± 5 nm), it should be low enough for many biological applications. The rational extension of the highly efficient, low-power and air-stable supramolecular TEM-UC to aqueous systems is promising. Furthermore, the potential of the supramolecular strategy can be extended beyond the solution-dispersion systems. We have demonstrated that air-stable UC emission can be achieved in supramolecular gels and solid cast films.23
TEM-UC in oxygen-barrier matrices (eg. gels)
One of the significant advantages of the TEM-UC strategy is that it allows composite formation with any matrix. As the triplet excited state is readily quenched by molecular oxygen, it is important to employ oxygen barrier matrices. The covalent introduction of oxygen-blocking hydrogen bonding moieties to chromophores is an excellent approach in terms of controlling their molecular arrangements,23 but it usually involves synthetic efforts. As an alternative approach, we have shown that self-assembled nanofibers serve as adaptive nanohosts in organic media, which accommodate donor and acceptor molecules to provide air-stable, upconverting gels via solvophobic glutamic diamide (LBG) (Fig. 14). The LBG can gelatize a wide variety of nonpolar or polar solvents by forming stable hydrogen bond networks with the aid of aligned alkyl chains.79 Supramolecular LBG gels were formed in DMF in the presence of the donor PtOEP and the acceptor DPA. Very interestingly, even in the air-saturated state, strong blue upconverted emission was observed by the naked eye from the PtOEP/DPA/LBG ternary gel upon excitation of a 532 nm green laser (Fig. 15a). The observed air stability of UC emission comes from the adoptive accommodation of donor and acceptor molecules in LBG nanofibers, which was fully supported by scanning electron microscopy, rheology, calorimetry and UC emission lifetime measurements. This was further confirmed by using the prominent thermoresponsive properties of supramolecular gels. The heating of supramolecular gels induces a gel-to-sol transition which is accompanied by the disassembly of fibrous gel networks, whereas the heat-dissociated components are reassembled reversibly by cooling the solution. Upon heating above the gel-to-sol transition temperature (45 °C), the UC emission intensity largely decreased, and the UC emission intensity recovered reversibly upon cooling to 25 °C (Fig. 15b). This reversible process can be repeated. The decrease in UC emission intensity observed for the sol phase is ascribed to the quenching of excited triplet species by dissolved oxygen. Remarkably, the low Ith value of 1.5 mW cm−2 was observed for air-saturated cogels, which reflects the fast TEM (DT = 6.5 × 10−4 cm2 s−1). The contribution of TEM was confirmed by clear UC emission at 77 K, with a high donor-to-acceptor TTET efficiency ΦET of 70%. The synergistic integration of donor–acceptor pairs in bilayer nanofibers is reminiscent of the biological photon-harvesting apparatuses in which excitation light energy is effectively harvested and converted in the array of photosynthetic pigments embedded in biomembranes.
 Fig. 14  Schematic representation of the unit structure of the upconversion gel system. Donor (red) and acceptor (blue) molecules are incorporated in the LBG nanofibers as extended domains. The donor molecules are excited by long-wavelength light, followed by a sequence of TTET, TEM, TTA and delayed fluorescence from the upconverted singlet state of acceptor molecules. Adopted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 15  (a) Pictures of the PtOEP/DPA/LBG ternary gel shaped in a mold under a 532 nm green laser. No filter was used to take the pictures. (b) UC emission intensity of the PtOEP/DPA/LBG ternary gel in air-saturated DMF at 435 nm in the heating–cooling cycles. Adopted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
To generalize the concept of nanomatrix-assisted TTA-UC, three additional different UC pairs were introduced in the nanofiber of LBG gels in DMF: PdPc(OBu)8/rubrene for NIR-to-visible UC,80 PtTPBP/BPEA for red-to-cyan UC,81 and Ir(C6)2(acac)/DBP for visible-to-UV UC.21 In air-saturated DMF solutions, all of the three UC pairs showed no UC emission in the absence of LBG. However, when they are introduced in LBG gels in DMF, all the ternary gels exhibited strong UC emissions even under air-saturated conditions (Fig. 16). It should be pointed out that the physical gelation does not always provide air-stable UC. The liquid part of gels behaves basically similar to bulk solution, and therefore the UC based on molecular diffusion in the liquid part suffers from severe oxygen quenching.82,83 As exemplified by the adaptive self-assembly in the supramolecular gel system, the dense arrangement of donor and acceptor chromophores in oxygen-barrier matrices is an indispensable feature to realize air-stable, low-power, highly efficient UC.
 Fig. 16  Photographs of the UC cogels containing typical UC pairs in air-saturated DMF. Short pass filters were used to remove the scattered excitation lights. Adopted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
TEM-UC in molecular crystals
As triplet excitons effectively diffuse in molecular crystals, crystalline materials with high triplet diffusivity are expected to provide important platforms to achieve efficient TEM-UC.16,39,84–88 However, donor molecules doped in acceptor crystals have been shown to aggregate in the crystalline phase.16,39,86 For example, when PtOEP was doped in crystalline DPA, aggregation of donors in the solid mixtures caused poor TTET efficiency.16 Apparently, to molecularly accommodate donor molecules, a new design principle is required for the acceptor crystals.
We have recently reported a rational molecular design to disperse donor molecules in acceptor crystals without aggregation.88 This was achieved by introducing multiple flexible alkyl chains to the acceptor anthracene chromophores (Fig. 17a), which significantly enhanced their compatibility with the donor PtOEP. The donor-doped acceptor crystals were prepared by simply casting the mixed chloroform solutions (PtOEP/acceptor = 0.1 mol%), in which crystallinity of the specimens was retained even after the doping of PtOEP. To investigate the molecular environment of PtOEP, absorption and phosphorescence spectra of PtOEP doped in mixed cast films were measured. A chloroform solution of PtOEP showed a Q band at 536 nm (Fig. 17b), whereas this band showed a large redshift to 552 nm in bulk PtOEP due to the intermolecular interactions in the aggregates. As a control experiment, PtOEP was doped in a cast solid of DPA. The Q band in the PtOEP–DPA cast solid has a shoulder peak close to that observed for the bulk PtOEP, indicating partial aggregation of PtOEP in DPA crystals. A similar segregation behavior was observed in the cast film of the acceptor having a single alkyl chain (A1). Notably, the Q bands of PtOEP in the acceptors with multiple alkyl chains (A2 and A3) were found to be close to those in solution, suggesting that the donor was molecularly dispersed. In the photoluminescence spectra under excitation at 532 nm, PtOEP doped in DPA and A1 cast films showed emission peaks at 780 nm (Fig. 17c), which are ascribed to the triplet dimers in PtOEP aggregates.39,86 In stark contrast, the PtOEP–A2 and PtOEP–A3 cast films did not show any peaks at 780 nm, which is consistent with the absence of aggregated PtOEP molecules. Therefore, it is demonstrated that the introduction of flexible moieties into acceptors as exemplified by the multiple alkyl chains can resolve the long-standing donor aggregation issue in acceptor crystals.
 Fig. 17  (a) Chemical structures of acceptors A1–A3 and donor PtOEP. (b) Absorption spectra of (A) PtOEP in chloroform ([PtOEP] = 25 μM) and cast films of (B) PtOEP, (C) PtOEP–DPA, (D) PtOEP–A1, (E) PtOEP–A2, and (F) PtOEP–A3 (PtOEP/acceptor = 0.1 mol%). (c) Normalized photoluminescence spectra of PtOEP–DPA, PtOEP–A1, PtOEP–A2, and PtOEP–A3 cast films (PtOEP/acceptor = 0.1 mol%) sealed under an Ar atmosphere (λex = 532 nm). Adopted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
It is important to point out a remaining challenge of TEM-UC in molecular crystals. Although the donor PtOEP was homogeneously dispersed in acceptor crystals of A2 and A3, the UC quantum yield of the donor-doped films remains low (ΦUC ∼ 0.1%). In eqn (1), the ΦISC of donor is regarded as 1. Thanks to the homogeneous donor dispersion, a significantly high ΦET of 80% was observed in PtOEP–A2. The ΦFL value of solid A2 was found to decrease from 0.57 to 0.31 in the presence of PtOEP, suggesting the formation of non-radiative deactivation sites and singlet–singlet back energy transfer to PtOEP. It is also possible that the deactivation sites tend to collect triplet excitons without giving high ΦTTA values. Unknown deactivation pathways after TTA, such as the unfavorable T2 energy level, might also decrease the f value. We have observed a similar problem in other donor–acceptor combinations (unpublished). Further efforts are required to understand and solve the underlying problems in these molecular crystalline systems.
Aggregation-induced photon upconversion (iPUC)
There should be advantages of UC based on multi-exciton phenomena, which cannot be attained by the usual single-exciton phenomena. Our group has recently found a good example; an infinite ON/OFF switching ratio for UC emission.89
Molecules showing aggregation-induced emission (AIE) or aggregation-induced enhanced emission (AIEE) are particularly attractive for making solid-state UC materials, because they are highly emissive even in the neat solid state.90–93 However, the studies on AIE phenomena have largely been focused on the excited singlet states of molecular aggregates, and their triplet photochemistry especially in relation to UC phenomena has been unexplored. Our group has reported the first example of aggregation-induced photon upconversion (iPUC), which is based on the controlled potential energy landscape of the excited triplet state (Fig. 18).89 We tried different systems and found that one of the best-known structural motifs for AIE/AIEE, cyano-substituted oligo(p-phenylenevinylene),91,94–97 is suitable as an acceptor for iPUC. When triplet states of this acceptor were populated by a triplet donor PtOEP in solution, the TTA-UC emission was not observed. In contrast, crystalline powder samples obtained after drying this mixed solution showed a clear UC emission (Fig. 19a). The previous AIE systems in molecular crystals show fluorescence based on single-excitation processes, which naturally have a finite ON/OFF ratio between the solid and solution states. Meanwhile, since the UC emission requires two triplet excitons to meet, the complete OFF state can be realized in the common excitation power regime. Theoretical studies unveiled an underlying mechanism: in solution, an enhanced conformational twisting around the double bond and photoisomerization in the excited triplet state T1 result in immediate intersystem crossing to the ground state S0 (Fig. 19b), whereas this large structural change is effectively prohibited in the solid state. Together with control examinations using 1,4-distyrylbenzene without cyano substituents and with methyl substituents, the steric hindrance around the CC bond is found to be the key for barrier-free T1-to-S0 transition, which is responsible for the unique iPUC phenomena.
 Fig. 18  Schematic representation of aggregation-induced photon upconversion (iPUC). Adopted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 19  (a) Photoluminescence spectra (λex = 532 nm) of the PtOEP/acceptor pair in deaerated THF (blue) and in the solid powder under vacuum (red). (b) Potential energy curves of S0 at its optimized structures (light blue line), S0 at T1 optimized structures (S0(T1structure), dark blue line), and T1 at its optimized structures (red line) as a function of the torsional angle θ(C1C2C3C4) around the C2–C3 bond for the acceptor in THF. All the energy levels were calculated relative to the energy of S0 at the most-stable S0 structure (θ = 178°). Adopted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
TEM-UC in metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)
Making the impossible possible is one of the most exciting pursuits of science.98 In the field of TTA-based UC, it was difficult to achieve maximum UC quantum yield at solar irradiance, because the diffusion constant of chromophores in common low-viscosity solvents, i.e. the rate constant of TTA, is not high enough. Our group overcame this difficulty for the first time, by employing metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)99–108 as a model platform to precisely control the spatial arrangements of donor and acceptor chromophores (Fig. 20a).22
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic representation of TEM-UC in MOFs. The self-assembly of bridging ligands containing an acceptor moiety (cyan) with metal ions and co-ligands forms crystalline MOF structures in which the acceptor units are regularly arranged. Crystal structures of MOFs 1 (b), 2 (c) and 3 (d). Arrangements of the acceptor ligand in MOFs 1 (e), 2 (f) and 3 (g). Gray, red, and green sticks/balls represent carbon, oxygen, and zinc atoms, respectively. Different interpenetrated networks are shown in different colours (yellow and pink). Hydrogen atoms and guest molecules are omitted for clarity. Adopted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
The structure–property relationships were systematically investigated by controlling the spatial arrangements of the acceptor ligands in the MOFs. By combining the DPA-based dicarboxylate ligands, diamagnetic Zn ions and co-ligands, we synthesized MOFs 1–3 with different acceptor arrangements (Fig. 20b–g). To precisely characterize the TEM properties in MOFs, the MOF crystals were dispersed in a benzene solution containing the donor PtOEP, and the mixtures were deaerated using repeated freeze–pump–thaw cycles. Interestingly, all the MOF dispersions showed upconverted blue emission around 440 nm on irradiation with 532 nm light. This was the first observation of TTA-based UC in MOFs. From experimental parameters and eqn (2), triplet diffusion constants DT of 1.2 × 10−3, 2.4 × 10−3 and 1.6 × 10−4 cm2 s−1 were obtained for MOF 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The triplet diffusion lengths LT were then determined as 9.3 μm (MOF 1), 13 μm (MOF 2) and 4.0 μm (MOF 3). Significantly, all the DT values in MOFs were larger than the diffusivity of DPA in the low-viscosity solvent (1.2 × 10−5 cm2 s−1).36 MOF 2 showed the highest diffusivity among the three MOFs show the largest overlap between the anthracene cores and the short centre-to-centre intermolecular distance of 4.8 Å. These observations highlight the importance of controlling the intermolecular distance, spatial organization, and orbital overlap to achieve a fast TEM. Note that significantly long, μm-scale diffusion lengths were realized thanks to the combination of the long sub-ms-scale triplet exciton lifetime in the crystalline framework and the fast TEM among the chromophores, whose spatial alignments were controlled appropriately.
As a solution for the most important challenge of solid-state TEM-UC systems, that is, successful donor integration into ordered acceptor architectures, we modified the surface of MOF nanocrystals with donor molecules (Fig. 21a).22 To have a large surface-to-volume ratio for large triplet concentration in the crystals, nanosized MOF crystals were synthesized (Fig. 21b). In accordance with the non-covalent surface immobilization method,109,110 we modified surfaces by dispersing the MOF particles in a solution of donor having carboxylate groups (PdMesoIX). With this structure, efficient donor-to-acceptor TTET (ΦET = 61%) occurred at the crystal surfaces, followed by fast TEM and quantitative TTA in the nanocrystals. Remarkably, stable UC emission was observed by dispersing the donor-modified MOF nanocrystals in a film of a typical high-Tg polymer PMMA (Fig. 21c). Having all the parameters optimized, eqn (2) gave a notably low Ith of 0.049 mW cm−2, which is more than 30 times lower than the solar irradiance value at the excitation wavelength (1.6 mW cm−2 at 532 ± 5 nm). Strikingly, as expected from the very low Ith, the UC quantum yield ΦUC was maximized at solar irradiance for the first time (Fig. 21e). While the ΦUC value needs to be improved by employing MOFs with enhanced fluorescence efficiency ΦFL or by implementing a next-generation mechanism as described below, the long-standing problem in UC, namely, requiring too high excitation light intensity to obtain the systems' best ΦUC in systems, was solved by combining the controlled donor integration and the fast TEM in the optimized chromophore arrangements. This concept is of course not limited to MOFs; our demonstration encourages the exploration of other ordered architectures in which similar mechanisms may be at play.111
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic representation of TEM-UC in donor-modified MOF nanocrystals. (b) Transmission electron microscopy image of the MOF 3 nanocrystals. (c) Photoluminescence spectra of the PdMesoIX-modified MOF 3 nanocrystals in PMMA with different incident power densities of the 532 nm laser. (d) UC emission intensity for the PdMesoIX-modified MOF 3 nanocrystals in PMMA as a function of the excitation intensity. The linear fit with slope 1 is shown. (e) UC quantum yield of the PdMesoIX-modified MOF 3 nanocrystals in PMMA with different incident light intensities of the 532 nm laser (theoretical maximum = 50%). Adopted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
Conclusions and future directions
The research of UC materials has entered a new era by the demonstration of TEM-UC in varied molecular assembly systems. It would be meaningful to provide an overview of these developments from a new perspective. We classify the state-of-the-art efficient TEM-UC systems into three categories from the viewpoint of acceptor assembly structures; condensed amorphous materials, ordered self-assemblies, and solid crystalline systems (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  Three categories of state-of-the-art TEM-UC systems. (Left) amorphous TEM-UC includes solvent-free liquids, ionic liquids and glassy solids. Vapor-deposited films and heavily doped chromophores in soft/rigid matrixes would also join this category. Donors are dissolved or dispersed in acceptor structures. Highly efficient and air-stable UC emission can be obtained under moderate excitation intensity. (Middle) acceptor ordered assemblies via multiple intermolecular interactions can accommodate or co-assemble with donor. In-solution, air-stable TEM-UC would be beneficial for photocatalytic and biological applications. (Right) MOFs and molecular crystals are prepared using acceptor moieties and donors are modified at the crystal surface or doped inside the crystals. Efficient donor-to-acceptor TTET and fast TEM allow the UC quantum yield maximization below solar irradiance. Triplets in crystals are easily quenched by oxygen, but this can be avoided by dispersing nanocrystals in oxygen-barrier matrices, which gives air-stable transparent films. 
Amorphous materials include solvent-free liquids, ionic liquids and solids. Amorphous solids can be molecular glasses, polymers, and surface-adsorbed dyes. Vapor-deposited films and heavily doped chromophores in molecular or polymeric matrices would also join this category. Only when donors are molecularly dissolved or dispersed in acceptor structures, the triplet energy can be efficiently transferred to the neighboring acceptor moieties. In such cases, high UC quantum yield at relatively low excitation intensity is obtainable. Some of them were found to show stable UC emission in air. Although they currently require higher excitation intensities than solar irradiance, their high processability and air-stability would be advantageous to a wide range of non-solar applications.
The second category involves ordered self-assemblies. Representative examples are molecular membranes formed by multiple intermolecular interactions such as solvophobic interactions, hydrogen bonding and elecrostatic interactions. Other soft molecular assemblies including low-molecular weight gels and liquid crystals may also fall into this category. Other soft molecular assemblies including low-molecular weight gels and liquid crystals may also fall into this category. Donors can be accommodated in the acceptor structures. When donors are modified with self-assembling moieties similar to acceptors, donor–acceptor co-assemblies with efficient and robust TTET will be achieved. Molecular self-assemblies have features distinct from the condensed amorphous systems, as demonstrated by the molecular membranes and supramolecular gels which showed high ΦUC and triplet diffusivities, depending on the supramolecular architecture. In these systems, more refined control over the whole molecular organization would be required, which holds a key to enhance their triplet diffusivities, thereby lowering Ith. The excited triplets in these systems can be protected against oxygen quenching by designing dense intermolecular interaction networks such as hydrogen bonding.
The third category is the solid crystalline systems such as MOFs and molecular crystals. Donors can be modified on the crystal surface or doped inside the crystals. The effective use of sunlight is expected in ordered molecular systems, in which the fast and long-range TEM allows for the maximization of UC quantum yield below solar irradiance. The crystalline MOF system provides a superior means to control the molecular arrangement, unveiling the structure–property relationship based on single-crystal X-ray structures, and the overriding triplet diffusivity. Together with the precise donor integration ability, MOFs offer an outstanding model platform to develop material design guidelines for achieving the maximum and high UC quantum yield under weak sunlight. Although bulk polycrystalline materials generally suffer from the poor processability and strong light scattering that are unsuitable for making optically active films, these problems can be circumvented by downsizing the crystals to a nanoscale and by dispersing them into polymer matrices to produce transparent nanocomposite films. Another appealing direction is the controlled growth of crystalline thin films.
As the basic concept of TEM-UC has been established, it's time to rationally extend the concept in many ways. By changing the donor/acceptor combinations, application-directed wavelength conversions such as NIR-to-visible and visible-to-UV UC can be explored. In such applications, a large anti-Stokes shift is desired, and thus donors with less energy loss, such as small S1–T1 gap molecules and inorganic quantum dots, will play an important role.87,112,113
Beyond TEM-UC, future directions will involve a next-generation mechanism “Triplet Energy Migration, annihilation and UPconverted singlet energy COllectioN (TEM-UPCON)” (Fig. 23). Although a large overlap of acceptor orbitals is required for fast TEM, it may decrease the acceptor fluorescence efficiency, as we encountered in the MOF system. This trade-off issue would be solved by modifying the donor–acceptor hybrids with a third component, a singlet energy collector, which has a high fluorescence quantum yield. This TEM-UPCON strategy allows the high quantum yield UC emission. When it comes to using the upconverted energy for applications, the singlet energy collector may have other functionalities, such as photovoltaic, photocatalytic, sensing, sensitizing (eg. PDT) and active (eg. drug)-releasing materials. This direct energy harvesting strategy, rather than the conventional UC emission-reabsorption route, would make the total process more efficient. Further by designing the spatial organization of the molecular systems and integration with the other functionalities, we envisage that the self-assembly-directed TEM-UPCON would enjoy a wide spectrum of applications in many disciplines.
 Fig. 23  Scheme of the UC mechanisms based on (a) molecular diffusion and collision, (b) triplet energy migration (TEM) and (c) triplet energy migration, annihilation and upconverted singlet energy collection (TEM-UPCON). In TEM-UC, donors are homogeneously dispersed in acceptor assemblies or modified at the surface of acceptor assemblies. In TEM-UPCON, several donor/acceptor/collector architectures are conceivable, for example, donors in acceptor assemblies and collectors at the surface of acceptor assemblies, and multi-layered structures. Collectors are highly fluorescent or functional (photovoltaic, photocatalytic, sensing, sensitizing and active-releasing materials). 
Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported by a Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (S) (25220805), JST CREST, JST PRESTO, a Grants-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B) (26810036), a Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Area (26104529) from the Ministry of Education, Culture Sports, Science and Technology of Japan, and the JSPS-NSF International Collaborations in Chemistry (ICC) program. We thank collaborators and co-workers whose work is cited herein, including Angelo Monguzzi, Yuki Kurashige, Steve Granick, Melinda Sindoro, Pengfei Duan, Prasenjit Mahato, Taku Ogawa, Hisanori Nagatomi, Shota Hisamitsu, Masanori Hosoyamada, Teppei Yamada, Shigenori Fujikawa, Masa-aki Morikawa and Kazumi Matsuno.
References
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2812–2824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hoseinkhani, R. Tubino, F. Meinardi and A. Monguzzi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4020–4024 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
D. M. Schultz and T. P. Yoon, Science, 2014, 343, 1239176 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Börjesson, D. Dzebo, B. Albinsson and K. Moth-Poulsen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8521–8524 Search PubMed .
K. Ishiba, M.-a. Morikawa, C. Chikara, T. Yamada, K. Iwase, M. Kawakita and N. Kimizuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1532–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Q. Liu, W. Feng, Y. Sun and F. Y. Li, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 395–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Baluschev, T. Miteva, V. Yakutkin, G. Nelles, A. Yasuda and G. Wegner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 143903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2560–2573 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, K. Inafuku and Y. Chujo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4378–4380 RSC .
Y. Murakami, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 516, 56–61 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Zhao, S. M. Ji and H. M. Guo, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 937–950 RSC .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino, S. Hoseinkhani, M. Campione and F. Meinardi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4322–4332 RSC .
J. H. Kim and J. H. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17478–17481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Simon and C. Weder, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20817–20830 RSC .
T. F. Schulze and T. W. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 103–125 CAS .
P. Duan, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19056–19059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Duan, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13111–13113 RSC .
P. Mahato, A. Monguzzi, N. Yanai, T. Yamada and N. Kimizuka, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 924–930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ogawa, N. Yanai, A. Monguzzi and N. Kimizuka, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Amemori, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 22557–22560 RSC .
V. Gray, D. Dzebo, M. Abrahamsson, B. Albinsson and K. Moth-Poulsen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 10345–10352 RSC .
A. Ajayaghosh, V. K. Praveen and C. Vijayakumar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 109–122 RSC .
N. Kimizuka and T. Kunitake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 3758–3759 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kunitake, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1992, 31, 709–726 CrossRef .
T. Nakashima and N. Kimizuka, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1113–1116 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Wasielewski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1910–1921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Würthner, T. E. Kaiser and C. R. Saha-Möller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3376–3410 CrossRef PubMed .
T. W. Schmidt and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 4062–4072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Cheng, T. Khoury, R. G. C. R. Clady, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley and T. W. Schmidt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 66–71 RSC .
A. Haefele, J. Blumhoff, R. S. Khnayzer and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .

          N. J. Turro, V. Ramamurthy and J. C. Scaiano, Modern Molecular Photochemistry of Organic Molecules, University Science Books, Sausalito, CA,  2010 Search PubMed .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 155122 CrossRef .
A. Köhler and H. Bässler, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 66, 71–109 CrossRef .
R. R. Islangulov, D. V. Kozlov and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3776–3778 RSC .
R. Vadrucci, C. Weder and Y. C. Simon, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2837–2841 RSC .
S. Hisamitsu, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11550–11554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hisamitsu, N. Yanai, S. Fujikawa and N. Kimizuka, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 908–910 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monguzzi, J. Mezyk, F. Scotognella, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 195112 CrossRef .
P. Duan, N. Yanai, H. Nagatomi and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1887–1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shirakawa, N. Fujita, T. Tani, K. Kaneko and S. Shinkai, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4149–4151 RSC .
R. Nishiyabu, C. Aimé, R. Gondo, T. Noguchi and N. Kimizuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9465–9468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Svagan, D. Busko, Y. Avlasevich, G. Glasser, S. Baluschev and K. Landfester, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8198–8207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Miller and J. M. Krochta, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 1997, 8, 228–237 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Maeda and D. R. Paul, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 1987, 25, 1005–1016 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, B. R. Yin, T. S. Yang, Y. C. Yang, Z. Shen, P. Yao and F. Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5029–5037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Marsico, A. Turshatov, R. Peköz, Y. Avlasevich, M. Wagner, K. Weber, D. Donadio, K. Landfester, S. Baluschev and F. R. Wurm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11057–11064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Maya, J. S. Shirk, A. W. Snow and G. L. Roberts, Chem. Commun., 2001, 615–616 RSC .
T. Michinobu, T. Nakanishi, J. P. Hill, M. Funahashi and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10384–10385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nowak-Krol, D. Gryko and D. T. Gryko, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 904–909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hirata, K. Kubota, H. H. Jung, O. Hirata, K. Goushi, M. Yahiro and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 889–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Babu, J. Aimi, H. Ozawa, N. Shirahata, A. Saeki, S. Seki, A. Ajayaghosh, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3391–3395 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Babu, M. J. Hollamby, J. Aimi, H. Ozawa, A. Saeki, S. Seki, K. Kobayashi, K. Hagiwara, M. Yoshizawa, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 19969 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kim, F. Deng, F. N. Castellano and J. H. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2250–2252 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monguzzi, F. Bianchi, A. Bianchi, M. Mauri, R. Simonutti, R. Ruffo, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 680–686 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. A. Canongia Lopes and A. A. H. Pádua, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 3330–3335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Weingärtner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 654–670 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Pott and P. Méléard, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 5469–5475 RSC .
O. Russina, A. Triolo, L. Gontrani and R. Caminiti, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 27–33 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimizu, C. E. S. Bernardes and J. N. Canongia Lopes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 567–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Singh-Rachford, J. Lott, C. Weder and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12007–12014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lissau, J. M. Gardner and A. Morandeira, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23226–23232 CAS .
J. S. Lissau, D. Nauroozi, M. P. Santoni, S. Ott, J. M. Gardner and A. Morandeira, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14493–14501 CAS .
J. S. Lissau, D. Nauroozi, M. P. Santoni, T. Edvinsson, S. Ott, J. M. Gardner and A. Morandeira, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4550–4564 CAS .
J. S. Lissau, D. Nauroozi, M. P. Santoni, S. Ott, J. M. Gardner and A. Morandeira, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25792–25806 CAS .
S. P. Hill, T. Banerjee, T. Dilbeck and K. Hanson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4510–4517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Keivanidis, S. Baluschev, T. Miteva, G. Nelles, U. Scherf, A. Yasuda and G. Wegner, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2095–2098 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baluschev, J. Jacob, Y. S. Avlasevich, P. E. Keivanidis, T. Miteva, A. Yasuda, G. Nelles, A. C. Grimsdale, K. Müllen and G. Wegner, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1250–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wegner, S. Baluschev, F. Laquai and C. Y. Chi, Macromol. Symp., 2008, 268, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Boutin, K. P. Ghiggino, T. L. Kelly and R. P. Steer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4113–4118 CrossRef CAS .
V. Jankus, E. W. Snedden, D. W. Bright, V. L. Whittle, J. A. G. Williams and A. Monkman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 384–393 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Yu, X. Cao, X. P. Chen, N. Ayres and P. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 588–591 RSC .
R. Andemach, H. Utzat, S. D. Dimitrov, L. McCulloch, M. Heeney, J. R. Durrant and H. Bronstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10383–10390 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Lee, D. C. Thevenaz, C. Weder, Y. C. Simon and J. Polym. Sci. A, Polym. Chem., 2015, 53, 1629–1639 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Yost, J. Lee, M. W. B. Wilson, T. Wu, D. P. McMahon, R. R. Parkhurst, N. J. Thompson, D. N. Congreve, A. Rao, K. Johnson, M. Y. Sfeir, M. G. Bawendi, T. M. Swager, R. H. Friend, M. A. Baldo and T. Van Voorhis, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 492–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Duan, Y. G. Li and M. H. Liu, Sci. China: Chem., 2010, 53, 432–437 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 3550–3556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Baluschev, V. Yakutkin, T. Miteva, G. Wegner, T. Roberts, G. Nelles, A. Yasuda, S. Chernov, S. Aleshchenkov and A. Cheprakov, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 013007 CrossRef .
K. Sripathy, R. W. MacQueen, J. R. Peterson, Y. Y. Cheng, M. Dvořák, D. R. McCamey, N. D. Treat, N. Stingelin and T. W. Schmidt, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 616–622 RSC .
R. Vadrucci, C. Weder and Y. C. Simon, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 120–124 RSC .
S. Baluschev, V. Yakutkin, G. Wegner, B. Minch, T. Miteva, G. Nelles and A. Yasuda, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 023101 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, J. Y. Zheng, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4959–4961 RSC .
H. Goudarzi and P. E. Keivanidis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14256–14265 CAS .
M. Wu, D. N. Congreve, M. W. B. Wilson, J. Jean, N. Geva, M. Welborn, T. Van Voorhis, V. Bulović, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Baldo, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hosoyamada, N. Yanai, T. Ogawa and N. Kimizuka, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 2060–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Duan, N. Yanai, Y. Kurashige and N. Kimizuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7544–7549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Luo, Z. L. Xie, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Cheng, H. Y. Chen, C. F. Qiu, H. S. Kwok, X. W. Zhan, Y. Q. Liu, D. B. Zhu and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1740–1741 RSC .
B. K. An, S. K. Kwon, S. D. Jung and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14410–14415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. Z. Tang and A. Qin, Aggregation-Induced Emission: Applications, Wiley, Singapore,  2013 Search PubMed .

          B. Z. Tang and A. Qin, Aggregation-Induced Emission: Fundamentals, Wiley, Singapore,  2013 Search PubMed .
D. Oelkrug, A. Tompert, J. Gierschner, H. J. Egelhaaf, M. Hanack, M. Hohloch and E. Steinhuber, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 1902–1907 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kunzelman, M. Kinami, B. R. Crenshaw, J. D. Protasiewicz and C. Weder, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 119–122 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirose and K. Matsuda, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5832–5834 RSC .
S. J. Yoon, J. H. Kim, J. W. Chung and S. Y. Park, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18971–18973 RSC .
S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10686–10687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Yaghi, M. O'Keeffe, N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi and J. Kim, Nature, 2003, 423, 705–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kitagawa, R. Kitaura and S.-i. Noro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2334–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Uemura, S. Horike and S. Kitagawa, Chem. – Asian J., 2006, 1, 36–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Férey and C. Serre, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1380–1399 RSC .
M. D. Allendorf, C. A. Bauer, R. K. Bhakta and R. J. T. Houk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1330–1352 RSC .
K. Sumida, D. L. Rogow, J. A. Mason, T. M. McDonald, E. D. Bloch, Z. R. Herm, T. H. Bae and J. R. Long, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 724–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Li, J. Sculley and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 869–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Furukawa, J. Reboul, S. Diring, K. Sumida and S. Kitagawa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5700–5734 RSC .
T. Zhang and W. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5982–5993 RSC .
M. C. So, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. E. Mondloch, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3501–3510 RSC .
M. Kondo, S. Furukawa, K. Hirai and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5327–5330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yanai and S. Granick, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5638–5641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Simon and C. Weder, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 864–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Huang, X. Li, M. Mahboub, K. M. Hanson, V. M. Nichols, H. Le, M. L. Tang and C. J. Bardeen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5552–5557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Wu, D. N. Congreve and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 031103 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Nobuhiro Yanai
	Nobuhiro Yanai received his PhD degree from Kyoto University in 2011 with Prof. Susumu Kitagawa and Dr Takashi Uemura on polymer properties in coordination nanospaces. He was a postdoctoral research fellow with Prof. Steve Granick at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, working on the self-assembly of MOF colloids. In 2012, he became an assistant professor at Kyushu University, where he has been an associate professor since 2015. Since 2014, he has also been a researcher of the PRESTO program in JST. His current research interests are in materials chemistry for photon upconversion and new triplet science.

Nobuo Kimizuka
	Nobuo Kimizuka received his PhD degree in 1990 on the excitonic chromophore interactions in molecular self-assemblies with Prof. Toyoki Kunitake at Kyushu University. After working as a postdoc with Prof. Helmut Ringsdorf at Mainz University, he was promoted to an associate professor in 1992 and to a full professor in 2000. He was a principal investigator of JST CREST (2007–2014) and is currently the director of Center for Molecular Systems, Kyushu University (CMS). His work encompasses the synthesis, structure, properties and functions of molecular self-assemblies and nanomaterials with recent focus on photon energy conversion, supramolecular ferroelectrics and soft-ionics.

 	Fig. 1  Scheme of the mechanism of TTA-based UC. The system includes donor (triplet sensitizer) and acceptor (emitter) molecules (S = singlet, T = triplet). Green and blue arrows represent the excitation and emission processes, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Scheme of the concept of triplet energy migration-based photon upconversion (TEM-UC). The blue box shows a scheme of the conventional UC mechanism based on molecular diffusion. The objects marked D and A represent triplet donor and acceptor molecules, respectively. The triplet state of the donor, formed by intersystem crossing (ISC) from the photo-excited (green arrow) singlet state, diffuses and collides with the acceptor, resulting in donor-to-acceptor TTET. Two acceptor excited triplets again diffuse, collide, and annihilate to form a higher-energy excited singlet, which consequently produces upconverted delayed fluorescence (blue arrow). The green box represents a schematic image of assembly formation of the donor and acceptor. The cross-fertilization between UC chemistry and self-assembly chemistry produces TEM-UC (orange box), where excitation (green arrow) of donor molecules is followed by a sequence of TTET, TEM in the acceptor arrays, TTA between the excited acceptors, and higher energy UC emission (blue arrow).	 


	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Scheme of the Dexter energy transfer mechanism as a correlated electron transfer. (b) A scheme of the general strategy of highly efficient, low-power, air-stable TEM-UC systems. Donor–acceptor and acceptor–acceptor orbital overlaps are important for efficient TTET and fast TEM, respectively. The donor–acceptor co-assemblies need be protected from oxygen quenching as they are embedded in dense barrier networks.	 


	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the solvent-free liquid TEM-UC system. Donor molecules (red) in acceptor liquid (yellow) are excited by long-wavelength green light. This is followed by a sequence of TTET from the donor to the acceptor, TEM among acceptor networks, TTA, and delayed blue fluorescence from the upconverted singlet state of the acceptor. Adopted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photographs of the doped liquid (donor/acceptor = 0.01 mol%) upon exposure to (a) white light and (b) a 532 nm green laser (the incident laser direction is indicated by a green arrow). Bright blue luminescence is due to UC emission, and green spots are the scattered incident laser. (c) Photoluminescence spectra of the doped liquid with different incident intensities of the 532 nm laser in air. (d) Dependence of UC emission intensity at 433 nm on the incident light intensity. The dashed lines are the fitting results with slopes of 1.83 (purple) and 0.85 (green) in the low- and high-power regimes, respectively. Adopted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Chemical structures of the IL and Pt(II) octaethylporphyrin (PtOEP) and a schematic representation of nonvolatile TEM-UC systems in continuous acceptor networks. Adopted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Dependence of UC emission intensity of IL–PtOEP at 450 nm on the incident light intensity. (b) TTA-UC quantum yield measured as a function of incident light intensity. Note that the theoretical maximum of UC quantum yield is 50%. Adopted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Temperature-dependent UC emission intensity at λem = 433 nm (λex = 532 nm) of the donor-doped acceptor liquid shown in Fig. 4 and 5. The UC emission is clearly observed even below the glass transition temperature (−59 °C). Adopted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Picture of 0.7 mol% PdOEP-doped molecular glass, 9-(4-hydroxymethylphenyl)-10-phenylanthracene. (b) A picture of the molecular glass containing 0.025 mol% PdOEP irradiated with a 2 mW green HeNe laser. The blue UC emission is observable through a 500 nm short pass filter alongside with reflected laser light. (c) Emission spectra of premixed solid, molecular glass and crystallized states in the presence of 0.025 mol% of PdOEP (scale bars 100 mm) when irradiated with a 2 mW 543 nm green HeNe laser. Adopted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Donor (sensitizer) and acceptor (emitter) on the surface of mesoporous ZrO2. Adopted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Main-chain-type and side-chain-type polymers for TEM-UC.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the basic self-assembly structure. Acceptor molecules spontaneously self-assemble in solution and donor molecules (PtOEP) efficiently bind to the self-assemblies by solvophobic interaction. Upon photoexcitation of donor molecules by green light, donor-to-acceptor TTET is followed by TEM among the acceptor networks. It leads to efficient TTA between acceptor triplets and consequent upconverted blue emission from the acceptor excited singlets. Adopted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photoluminescence spectra of the supramolecular system (Fig. 12) in deaerated chloroform ([acceptor] = 10 mM, [PtOEP] = 10 μM) with different excitation light intensities of the 532 nm laser at room temperature. (b) Photoluminescence spectra of the supramolecular system (red, [acceptor] = 10 mM, [PtOEP] = 10 μM) and of DPA–PtOEP (blue, [DPA] = 10 mM, [PtOEP] = 10 μM) in air-saturated chloroform at 77 K under 532 nm excitation (excitation intensity = 982 mW cm−2). (c) Dependence of UC quantum yield on the excitation light intensity under deaerated conditions at room temperature (theoretical maximum = 50%). (d) Dependence of UC emission intensity at 440 nm on the excitation intensity under deaerated conditions at room temperature. Adopted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic representation of the unit structure of the upconversion gel system. Donor (red) and acceptor (blue) molecules are incorporated in the LBG nanofibers as extended domains. The donor molecules are excited by long-wavelength light, followed by a sequence of TTET, TEM, TTA and delayed fluorescence from the upconverted singlet state of acceptor molecules. Adopted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Pictures of the PtOEP/DPA/LBG ternary gel shaped in a mold under a 532 nm green laser. No filter was used to take the pictures. (b) UC emission intensity of the PtOEP/DPA/LBG ternary gel in air-saturated DMF at 435 nm in the heating–cooling cycles. Adopted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Photographs of the UC cogels containing typical UC pairs in air-saturated DMF. Short pass filters were used to remove the scattered excitation lights. Adopted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Chemical structures of acceptors A1–A3 and donor PtOEP. (b) Absorption spectra of (A) PtOEP in chloroform ([PtOEP] = 25 μM) and cast films of (B) PtOEP, (C) PtOEP–DPA, (D) PtOEP–A1, (E) PtOEP–A2, and (F) PtOEP–A3 (PtOEP/acceptor = 0.1 mol%). (c) Normalized photoluminescence spectra of PtOEP–DPA, PtOEP–A1, PtOEP–A2, and PtOEP–A3 cast films (PtOEP/acceptor = 0.1 mol%) sealed under an Ar atmosphere (λex = 532 nm). Adopted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic representation of aggregation-induced photon upconversion (iPUC). Adopted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Photoluminescence spectra (λex = 532 nm) of the PtOEP/acceptor pair in deaerated THF (blue) and in the solid powder under vacuum (red). (b) Potential energy curves of S0 at its optimized structures (light blue line), S0 at T1 optimized structures (S0(T1structure), dark blue line), and T1 at its optimized structures (red line) as a function of the torsional angle θ(C1C2C3C4) around the C2–C3 bond for the acceptor in THF. All the energy levels were calculated relative to the energy of S0 at the most-stable S0 structure (θ = 178°). Adopted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic representation of TEM-UC in MOFs. The self-assembly of bridging ligands containing an acceptor moiety (cyan) with metal ions and co-ligands forms crystalline MOF structures in which the acceptor units are regularly arranged. Crystal structures of MOFs 1 (b), 2 (c) and 3 (d). Arrangements of the acceptor ligand in MOFs 1 (e), 2 (f) and 3 (g). Gray, red, and green sticks/balls represent carbon, oxygen, and zinc atoms, respectively. Different interpenetrated networks are shown in different colours (yellow and pink). Hydrogen atoms and guest molecules are omitted for clarity. Adopted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic representation of TEM-UC in donor-modified MOF nanocrystals. (b) Transmission electron microscopy image of the MOF 3 nanocrystals. (c) Photoluminescence spectra of the PdMesoIX-modified MOF 3 nanocrystals in PMMA with different incident power densities of the 532 nm laser. (d) UC emission intensity for the PdMesoIX-modified MOF 3 nanocrystals in PMMA as a function of the excitation intensity. The linear fit with slope 1 is shown. (e) UC quantum yield of the PdMesoIX-modified MOF 3 nanocrystals in PMMA with different incident light intensities of the 532 nm laser (theoretical maximum = 50%). Adopted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 22  Three categories of state-of-the-art TEM-UC systems. (Left) amorphous TEM-UC includes solvent-free liquids, ionic liquids and glassy solids. Vapor-deposited films and heavily doped chromophores in soft/rigid matrixes would also join this category. Donors are dissolved or dispersed in acceptor structures. Highly efficient and air-stable UC emission can be obtained under moderate excitation intensity. (Middle) acceptor ordered assemblies via multiple intermolecular interactions can accommodate or co-assemble with donor. In-solution, air-stable TEM-UC would be beneficial for photocatalytic and biological applications. (Right) MOFs and molecular crystals are prepared using acceptor moieties and donors are modified at the crystal surface or doped inside the crystals. Efficient donor-to-acceptor TTET and fast TEM allow the UC quantum yield maximization below solar irradiance. Triplets in crystals are easily quenched by oxygen, but this can be avoided by dispersing nanocrystals in oxygen-barrier matrices, which gives air-stable transparent films.	 

 	Fig. 23  Scheme of the UC mechanisms based on (a) molecular diffusion and collision, (b) triplet energy migration (TEM) and (c) triplet energy migration, annihilation and upconverted singlet energy collection (TEM-UPCON). In TEM-UC, donors are homogeneously dispersed in acceptor assemblies or modified at the surface of acceptor assemblies. In TEM-UPCON, several donor/acceptor/collector architectures are conceivable, for example, donors in acceptor assemblies and collectors at the surface of acceptor assemblies, and multi-layered structures. Collectors are highly fluorescent or functional (photovoltaic, photocatalytic, sensing, sensitizing and active-releasing materials).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
