Recent progress in quantum dot-sensitized solar cells employing metal chalcogenides  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA10557C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA10557C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26205-26226Recent progress in quantum dot-sensitized solar cells employing metal chalcogenides

        
          
            Donghao 
            Wang†
, 
      
        
          
            Feifei 
            Yin†
, 
      
        
          
            Zhonglin 
            Du
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Dongni 
            Han
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jianguo 
            Tang
          
        
      *
      College of Materials Science and Engineering, The National Base of International Science and Technology Cooperation on Hybrid Materials, Qingdao University, 308 Ningxia Road, Qingdao 266071, PR China. E-mail: duzhonglin@qdu.edu.cn; jtang951@163.com
Received 
      24th September 2019
    , Accepted 28th October 2019First published on 31st October 2019AbstractAs one of the most promising third-generation photovoltaics devices, quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) have attracted increasing attention due to their easy fabrication, low cost, potential high efficiency, etc. Thus, substantial efforts have been taken to boost their photoelectrical conversion efficiencies (PCEs) and device stability consistently by precisely optimizing the structure of materials and device architecture. Throughout the development of QDSCs, it is noteworthy to mention that metal chalcogenide-based semiconductors have been key materials in capturing sunlight as sensitizers, catalytic electrolyte reduction as counter electrodes (CEs), and interface charge transport as interface modification layers. Herein, we systematically review the recent progress on metal chalcogenide-based QDSCs in practical applications from three main functional points, specifically, QD sensitizers, counter electrodes (CEs), and interface modification layers. Besides, we have outlined the fundamental structure, operation principle, and brief history of these sensitized solar cells. Finally, the state of existing challenges and future prospects for QDSCs employing various metal chalcogenides are also discussed.
1. Introduction
With the rapidly increasing economy and population, the need for energy sources is becoming increasingly urgent. The search for renewable and clean energy sources over fossil fuel is preferred for the sustainable development of society. Solar energy is regarded as one of the most environmental-friendly, low-carbon resources with scalability, no environmental pollution, and inexhaustible advantages without geographical constraints.1 More importantly, solar energy can be converted into electricity to meet the ever-growing global demand. Nowadays, solar photovoltaics (PVs) are the most widespread and direct solar-to-electric technology in the fields of basic research and industrialization.2 Since the first solar cell was assembled successfully in Bell's lab in 1954, various types of solar cells have emerged.3 Currently, solar PVs fall into three categories, including first-generation silicon-based solar cells, second-generation thin-film solar cells, and third-generation emerging thin-film PV technology.4 The first and second-generation solar cells have dominated the PV market with a total market share of over 95%, and both types of photoelectrical conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have exceeded 20%. The third-generation emerging PVs have emerged followed by great R&D efforts in material discovery and device engineering. Based on the differences in sunlight-harvesting materials, the third-generation emerging PVs mainly consist of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), organic solar cells, perovskite solar cells (PSCs), and quantum dot-based solar cells (QDSCs).5 These emerging solar PVs can achieve the desired optical and electronic properties by simple optimization design for nanostructured materials. Meanwhile, the abundance of Earth-abundant materials sources and relatively simple processing technologies portend the possibility of flexible or mass production. Although these technologies are immature due to the development of basic materials and early commercialization to large-scale application, the emerging PVs provide potential characteristics, such as visual transparency, high weight-ratio power and flexible shape, which pave way to the fresh applications. In the long term, if assuming improvements in PCEs and device long-term stability are realized, the emerging solar PVs may overcome several limitations of commercial technologies at low cost and easy fabrication. Therefore, enormous R&D efforts have been devoted to developing the emerging solar PVs in the past few years.
Among the emerging solar PVs, QDSCs have attracted enormous attention due to their potential of boosting the PCEs beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit of 33% due to their special multiple exciton generation (MEG) characteristic.6–8 More importantly, as one of the potential sunlight-harvesting materials, inorganic QDs display distinct advantages, such as size-tunable effect, large molar extinction coefficient, and high light-thermal stability, which make them promising candidates for the exploration of renewable energy.9–12 With the advances in the precise synthesis of QDs, surface passivation, and device architecture optimization, rapid progress has been achieved in boosting the PCEs and stability consistently.13–16
The history of the development of QDSCs can be traced back to the 1980s when colloidal semiconductor crystallites or QDs were firstly suggested as sunlight-harvesting materials.17 In 1998, Nozik et al. firstly assembled an InP-sensitized TiO2 photoanode, which paved the way for the development of QDSC devices.18 However, up to 2006, the reported PCEs of QDSCs was below 1%. Subsequently, Nozik continued to fabricate InAs-based QDSC devices and achieved a PCE of 1.7%.19 Afterwards, Toyoda and co-workers fabricated a CdSe-sensitized inverse opal TiO2 photoanode and achieved the highest PCEs of 2.7% at that time.20 In 2008, Peng et al. deposited CdS QDs into TiO2 nanotube arrays and boosted the final PCEs to 4.15%.21 They continued to improve the deposition of QDs on the surface of mesoporous films and increased the PCEs to 4.92%.22,23 However, the obtained PCEs did not exceed 5% before 2012, which lagged far behind that of DSCs. In 2012, Kamat et al. employed Mn2+-doped CdS/CdSe QDs as sensitizers and obtained PCEs of QDSCs of over 5%.24 Mn2+-doped QDs could facilitate the charge separation and transfer process. Besides, Klimov et al. adopted quaternary CuInSe1−xSx QDs as sensitizers coated with a CdS passivating layer and achieved PCEs of 5.5% in the QDSCs.25 Most impressively, Zhong et al. proposed a series of performance optimization strategies, which resulted in a rapid evolution of PCEs from 5% to nearly 14% in QDSCs during the past few years, which make them comparable with other emerging solar PVs.26–32 Although the record certificated PCE still lags with a theoretically maximum thermodynamic conversion efficiency of 44%, with unremitting efforts, QDSCs are expected to achieve higher PCEs under various improvement strategies in the near future.
The structure and operation principle of QDSCs are very similar to that of DSCs with the exception that QD materials replace dye molecules to capture sunlight. As shown schematically in Fig. 1, QDSCs are imaged as a ‘sandwich” structure, including four essential elements, namely, QD sensitizers, semiconductor metal oxides, electrolyte, and counter electrodes (CEs).33 The operational principle of a QDSC starts when the device is irradiated under sunlight, where the QD sensitizers absorb sunlight and then generate electron–hole pairs. The obtained electrons are excited from the valence band (VB) to the conduct band (CB) of the QDs. After excitation, electrons are quickly injected from the QDs to the CB of TiO2 mesoporous films. The photo-generated carriers accumulated in the photoanode are transferred from the external circuit to CEs.34–36 Under the catalytic effect of CEs, the redox couple in the electrolyte finally mediates electron transfer to regenerate oxidized QDs into their original ground state. As noted, the PCE of a QDSC dramatically depends on the moderate alignment and close cooperation with each component.36 Among them, ideal QD sensitizers should meet several requirements, such as wide light absorption region, proper matching energy gap with metal oxides, strongly anchored on the surface of metal oxides, and sufficient stability in electrolyte.37 According to their representative metal ions, the widely chosen QD sensitizers in QDSCs can be classified as Cd- and Pb-heavy metal ion-based sensitizers, Cu- and Ag-eco-friendly metal ion-based sensitizers, and other metal ion-based sensitizers. Semiconductor metal oxides not only play a role of loading QDs for capturing sunlight, but also transfer photo-generated electrons to conductive substrates. Therefore, the preferred metal oxides should offer enough surface area for the loading of QDs and smooth electrical channels for facilitating charge transportation. The redox electrolyte plays a role as an intermediator in a QDSC device, which can regenerate QD sensitizers back to their ground state through electron transfer from CEs to the oxidized QDs. An ideal electrolyte should guarantee the fast diffusion of charge carriers and good interfacial contact with the photoanode and CE. Besides, the electrolyte should provide long-term photochemical stability and prevent corrosion in QD sensitizers. Currently, according to the physical form and composition, the electrolyte in QDSCs can be classified as liquid electrolyte, quasi-solid, and solid-state electrolyte. Additionally, CEs are responsible for accelerating the reduction of the redox mediator. Therefore, an efficient CE should have exceptional catalytic activity towards electrolytes and good conducting property.37 CEs are also classified into metal-based, chalcogenide-based, carbon-based, conducting polymer-based, and hybrid materials.38 Among them, metal chalcogenides, specially CuxS, are considered promising materials in CEs for QDSCs.39
 Fig. 1  Scheme of the typical structure and operation principle of a QDSC device. 
2. Role of metal chalcogenides in QDSCs
Metal chalcogenides are widely considered as admirable light-absorbing materials in photovoltaic cells, benefitting from their large absorption coefficients with wide sunlight wavelength region and high sunlight irradiated stability. In QDSCs, almost all types of metal chalcogenides such as binary, ternary, and quaternary materials have served as sunlight-harvesting materials. Great efforts have been made mainly in the synthesis and manipulation of metal chalcogenides, deposition process, and surface design with doping and coating, to enhance the PCEs of the resultant devices.13,15,37,40,41 Originally, the choices of metal chalcogenides as sensitizers were CdS and CdSe QDs. Then some complex structure QDs such as alloyed CdSexTe1−x QDs and core/shell CdSe/CdS were employed.42,43 In addition, binary QDs (PbS, PbSe, etc.) with a narrow bandgap were also used as sensitizers in QDSCs.44–47 Considering the high toxicity of Cd- and Pb-heavy metal ion-based QDs, Cu- and Ag-eco-friendly metal ion-based QDs, such as CuInS2, CuInSe2, and AgInS, have attracted much attention in the fabrication of “green” QDSCs.29,48–69 As QD sensitizers used for capturing sunlight, metal chalcogenides are usually synthesized via the well-known heating-up and hot-injection methods in organic solvents, guaranteeing high crystallinity, tunable size and phase composition, uniform morphology, etc. Besides, some other approaches such as aqueous synthesis, ion exchange, successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR), electrodeposition, and microwave heating have also been employed to synthesize metal chalcogenides as QD sensitizers in QDSCs.70–72 Currently, according to the element composition and configuration, metal chalcogenides as sensitizers can be divided into binary compounds, ternary and quaternary structure, consisting of core–shell, alloyed, and doped structures.15 Meanwhile, the role of metal chalcogenides in QDSCs is not limited to sensitizers since several metal chalcogenide-based nanocrystals have been also widely used as CEs in QDSCs, benefiting from their guaranteed excellent electro-catalytic activity towards polysulfide electrolyte, low cost and good chemical stability. Metal chalcogenides as CE materials usually possess a rather high surface area and abundant catalytic active sites. All types of nanostructured metal chalcogenides (such as compositional and morphological manipulations, and composites with other catalytic materials) have been designed in the search for high electro-catalytic CE materials for QDSCs.37,39,73–75
Additionally, metal chalcogenides are usually used as interface modification layers, consisting of an interface passivation layer and hole transport layer. On one hand, in order to passivate a high density of trap states in the surface of QDs, metal chalcogenides (typically ZnS, CdS, and ZnSe) are usually used to overgrow as a shell and further induce probable charge recombination.26,57,76–78 On the other hand, several metal chalcogenides have also been used as a buffer layer to facilitate the transfer of holes from the photoanode to polysulfide electrolyte.51,79,80 Generally, because this interface modification layer is thin, metal chalcogenides are fabricated via the simple ionic exchange and SILAR methods. In this review, as shown in Fig. 2, we summarize the recent progress of metal chalcogenide nanocrystals and their essential functions as QD sensitizers, CEs and interface modification layers in QDSCs.
 Fig. 2  Functional classification of metal chalcogenides employed in QDSCs. 
3. Recent progress on QDSCs employing metal chalcogenides
3.1 QD sensitizers based on metal chalcogenides
Metal chalcogenides with size-dependent properties possess large absorption coefficients (104 to 105 cm−1), wide absorption thresholds and continuous energy bands, easy-controllable size effect, and photo-chemical stability, which make them very promising as sunlight-harvesting materials and broadly used in various types of PV technologies. Specifically, almost all QD sensitizers are chosen from metal chalcogenides in QDSCs.11,81 QD sensitizers are anchored on the surface of a semiconductor metal oxide (usually TiO2 and ZnO). An ideal QD sensitizer should possess an appropriate band gap match with the semiconductor oxide substrate, guaranteeing efficient electron injection. The common metal chalcogenides as QD sensitizers can be mainly classified into three types as follows: (i) Cd- and Pb-based heavy metal-based chalcogenides, including CdX and PbX (X = S, Se, and Te) and their hybrid structures (alloyed or core–shell),82–93 (ii) Cu- and Ag-based eco-friendly metal chalcogenides, including Cu–In–X2 and Ag–In–X2 (X = S and Se),29,48–59,94–98 and (iii) other metal-based chalcogenides.18,99–103 The recent progress on QD sensitizers employing metal chalcogenides is summarized in detailed as follows.

3.1.1 Cd- and Pb-based metal chalcogenides as sensitizers. 
Despite the diversity of Earth-abundant metal chalcogenides, the most widely used are confined to Cd- and Pb-metal chalcogenides. Cd- and Pb-based metal chalcogenides display high photoluminescence in the visible (Cd-) and near infrared (Pb-) range. Thus, CdX and PbX QDs have been successfully employed as vital sunlight-harvesting components of solar cells.
Cd-based chalcogenides. 
Currently, Cd-based chalcogenides (such as CdS and CdSe) are preferred in QDSCs due to their simple synthesis, easy surface modification and excellent stability.104 However, for single-component binary chalcogenides, it is contradictory to enhance their sunlight harvesting and electron injection efficiency simultaneously. Excessively decreasing the bandgap to guarantee sunlight harvesting may induce a loss in Voc, thus decreasing the device performance. For instance, although the absorption wavelength range of CdSe can extend to over 700 nm, the electron injection efficiency of CdSe-based QDSCs is inferior to that of CdS QD-based QDSCs. Therefore, designing complex QD systems combined with both wide absorption range and high electron injecting efficiency is essential to improve the performance of QDSCs. As shown in Fig. 3a, Lee and co-workers first combined inverted type-I CdS/CdSe co-sensitizers and achieved a much higher PCE of 4.22% than that of the single CdS and CdSe sensitizers, benefitting from their wide sunlight absorption range and high charge injection rate.22,105 Besides, CdTe QDs seem preferred as sensitizers in QDSCs due to their moderate CB with TiO2. Unfortunately, CdTe QDs have poor chemical stability in polysulfide electrolyte.89 To address these issues, a series of complex QDs including core–shell, doped and alloyed structures were designed as sensitizers to improve the PCEs of Cd-based QDSCs. For instance, stepwise-structure CdS/CdSe QDs were widely used as co-sensitizers to boost the PCEs in QDSCs. Their gradient Fermi level alignment not only accelerated electron injection from the QDs to TiO2, but also induced hole recovery of the QDs themselves. Lee et al. systematically studied the influence of deposition sequence of CdS/CdSe on the performance of co-sensitized QDSCs, and achieved higher PCEs of up to 4.22% than that of the single CdS-sensitized devices.105 Moreover, a series of core/shell QDs was used as sensitizers in QDSCs to provide fast charge separation and transport channels, reduce the charge recombination rate, and thus improve the PCEs. As shown in Fig. 3b, Zhong et al. designed type-II core/shell CdTe/CdSe QDs and achieved a record PCEs of 6.76%.42 The higher PCEs mainly benefited from the formation of an exciplex state between the VB of CdTe and CB of CdSe. Subsequently, they continued to synthesize ZnTe/CdSe core–shell QDs, which exhibited an even higher PCE of 7.17% than that of the CdTe/CdSe-based QDSCs, as shown in Fig. 3c, due to their larger CB offset compared to that of CdTe/CdSe (1.22 vs. 0.27 eV).27 Although the resultant PCEs have exceeded 7%, the further improvement of Cd-based core/shell sensitizers in QDSCs is limited due to their rather narrow light absorption range. In comparison with core–shell structures, alloyed structure QDs are superior alternatives since their band-gap can be easily tuned by changing their composition to obtain a wide sunlight harvesting range and suitable band-gap alignment for effective charge injection.106 Zhong et al. first selected CdSexTe1−x sensitizers with NIR absorption to fabricate high-efficiency QDSCs. High-quality NIR absorption CdSexTe1−x-alloyed QDs were prepared via a non-injection organometallic high temperature pyrolysis route. Compare to CdSe and CdTe QDs with the same size, the CdSexTe1−x QDs possessed a wider excitonic absorption onset of over 800 nm. The oil-dispersible QDs were exchanged into the water-soluble phase and tethered onto TiO2 films with use of the bifunctional linker molecule mercaptopropionic acid (MPA). Finally, the record PCE of 6.36% based on CdSexTe1−x QDs was achieved under full 1 sun illumination, which benefited from their intrinsic superior optoelectronic properties.42 As shown in Fig. 3d, Meng et al. first synthesized CdSexTe1−x/CdS QDs via a microwave-assisted aqueous method and obtained PCEs of 5.04%. The composite CdSexTe1−x/CdS structure not only expanded the light absorption range, but also strengthened its interfacial charge transfer property.107 They further introduced a thin Mn-modified CdSe layer coating on the surface of the CdSexTe1−x QDs via a chemical bath deposition (CBD) method. The Mn-doped CdSe layer not only improved the absorption range, but also reduced the charge recombination and worked as a passivation layer.108
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic drawing of the proposed band edge structure of the TiO2/CdS/CdSe electrode after redistribution of electrons between the CdS and CdSe interface.52 (b) Scheme of the band edge alignment for inverted type-I CdS/CdSe QDs.43 (c) Scheme of type-II ZnTe/CdSe and CdTe/CdSe QDs and the corresponding J−V curves of the resultant QDSCs.27 (d) Structure and band arrangement of CdTe/CdS and CdTe/CdSeS core/shell QDs.109 
Pb-based chalcogenides. 
PbS and PbSe are considered excellent sunlight-harvesters with full spectral absorption, especially in the NIR regime, due to their narrow bandgap (1.41 eV), relatively large absorption coefficient (up to 105 cm−1), and large Bohr exciton radius (18 nm).45–47 As shown in Fig. 4a, Etgar et al. was the first to fabricate solid-state PbS QDs/TiO2 heterojunction solar cells by depositing PbS QDs on thin mesoscopic TiO2 films, and obtained a PCE of 3.5% under AM 1.5 illumination.110 Currently, Pb-based chalcogenides are widely used in various types of QDs-based solar cells, and the record PCE of over 12% was recently reported for PbS QD-based depleted heterojunction solar cells. Currently, there are also many preliminary explorations in Pb-based QDSCs. As shown in Fig. 4b, Lee et al. fabricated PbS QDSCs and achieved a high Jsc value of 24.17% via successive ionic layer absorption and reaction (SILAR) method.111 Besides, by introducing Hg2+ into the lattice gap of PbS QDs, Park et al. fabricated Hg2+:PbS-based QDSCs and achieved the highest Jsc of 30 mA cm−2. Although PbS and PbSe can achieve rather high Jsc values, the PCE of the resultant QDSCs is much lower than that of other types. The serious surface defect states on the surface of Pb-based QDs can serve as trapping states for photo-generated carriers, which deteriorate the performance of liquid-junction PbS QDSCs. Thus, to solve the serious surface recombination, CdSe and CdS with lattice match were introduced on the surface of Pb-based solar cells. For example, Mora-Seró et al. inhibited electron recombination by coating a layer of CdS on the surface of PbS QDs, and obtained a PCE of 4.2% with higher Jsc and better stability (Fig. 4c).112 Besides, Zhong et al. also synthesized PbS/CdS core–shell structure QDs and then loaded them into TiO2 mesoporous films via the ligand-induced self-assembly method. Finally, the PbS/CdS sensitized QDSCs achieved the optimal PCE of 7.19% under AM 1.5 G sun illumination, as shown in Fig. 4d, benefitting from the reduction in charge recombination at the interface of the TiO2/QDs/electrolyte.44 Besides, as shown in Fig. 4e, pre-synthesized PbS QDs deposited on a photoanode film using L-glutathione (GSH) as linker ligands, achieved a PCE of 1.1%.113
 Fig. 4  (a) Device architecture (left) and energy level diagram (right) of PbS/TiO2 photovoltaic device.110 (b) Deposition process of PbS:Hg QDs on mesoporous TiO2 nanostructure using SILAR method, and J−V curve and IPCE spectrum (inset) of PbS:Hg QD-sensitized solar cell.111 (c) J−V curve (left) of PbS-based solar cells and schematic process (right) of QD deposition via the EPD method.112 (d) Schematic illustration of the possible charge transfer mechanism in PbS/CdS-based QDSCs and the resultant J−V curves.44 (e) Schematic illustration of the possible charge transfer mechanism of PbS-GSH-based QDSCs.113 


3.1.2 Cu- and Ag-based eco-friendly chalcogenides as sensitizers. 
Recently, Cu- and Ag-based multicomponent QDs have attracted significant attention for emerging PV technologies due to their broad sunlight harvesting range into NIR region, which can guarantee the capture of a large amount of sunlight and obtain a high Jsc value. More importantly, these eco-friendly metal ion-based chalcogenides can replace the toxic elements such as Cd- and Pb-metal ions, which is required for commercial application and manufacturing processes in the future. Although Cu- and Ag-based alloyed QDs are excellent sunlight harvesting materials, the obtained PCEs are limited mainly due to their high density of trap states in the inner and surface of QDs, which act as recombination centers and decrease the performance. The key factors for PV applications of their QDs are their size, composition, and surface state. In this subsection, we will focus on the control of size and composition, surface passivation and other strategies for reducing the trap states of Cu- and Ag-based eco-friendly chalcogenides.
Cu-based chalcogenides. 
Currently, highly toxic Cd- and Pb-based chalcogenides have been successfully used as sensitizers for QDSCs. However, their lucrative optical and photovoltaic properties are compensated by the acute toxicity of their heavy metal ions. Therefore, the development of “green” alternatives based on Cd- and Pb-free devices is essential and meaning.114 Among the eco-friendly QDs, Cu-based chalcogenides are considered the most promising candidates as eco-friendly sensitizers in QDSCs, benefitting from their excellent optical properties and convenient controllable composition. Therefore, Cu-based chalcogenides provide a unique opportunity to control the excitation-state dynamics and charge transfer process by adjusting the composition and surface chemical properties, and further manipulating the internal and surface defects of QDs, which is particularly important for QDSCs to enhance their sunlight harvesting ability and ensure efficient charge injection.
As a class of eco-friendly alternatives to Cd- and Pb-based QDs, Cu-based chalcogenides, especially CuInS2 and CuInSe2, are regarded as the most promising candidates as sunlight-harvesting materials in QDSCs.29,48–59 Initially, the simple binary Cu2−xS (x = 1 and 0.03) was first grown on the surface of TiO2 photoanode films via the SILAR method, and used to assemble QDSCs devices.115 Although the resultant PCEs were rather low, the Cu2−xS based QDs were efficient as sensitizers by broadening the sunlight absorption range. Recently, a series of modified Cu2−xS sensitizers (such as alloyed, core–shell, and doped structures) were developed and utilized as sensitizers in QDSCs. Among them, CuInX2 (X = S and Se) has attracted widespread attention in QDSCs due to its high absorption coefficient (∼105 cm−1) and near-optimal bulk band gap energy (1.5 eV). Effective strategies such as synthesis and deposition method, size and composition adjustment, introducing an interfacial buffer layer, and co-sensitization with other QDs have been developed to enhance the PCEs of these eco-friendly QDSCs.95–98 On one hand, as is known, the size and structure of QDs can have a major impact on their optical and electronic properties, and thus determine their performance in QDSCs. Compared with large-sized QDs, small-sized QDs possess a relatively higher conduction band and stronger electron injection efficiency, but weaker sunlight absorption ability. For instance, as shown in Fig. 5a, Kamat et al. deposited CuInS2 QDs with different sizes between 2.9 and 5.3 nm onto TiO2 films via an electrophoretic deposition method. The resultant PCEs in the QDSC devices increased firstly and then reduced with an increase in the size of the QDs.116 Meanwhile, Chen et al. synthesized a series of CuInS2 QDs with different sizes and then fabricated a QDSC device. The J−V curve revealed that the CuInS2 QDs with a size of 3.5 nm had higher PCEs than that of the others.117 Therefore, it is essential to choose QDs with a moderate size to fabricate high-efficiency QDSCs. On the other hand, due to the high surface atom ratio and low synthetic temperatures of CuInX2 QDs, they contain lots of trap-state defects in their inside and surface, which easily induce charge recombination and relatively poor performance of QDSCs. Thus, it is an opportunity to further improve the PCEs by maximum restraining the trap-state defects of CuInX2 QDs. Currently, several effective methods have been developed to boost the PCEs of CuInX2-based QDSCs by controlling the charge recombination. Firstly, the introduction of some functional materials to modified CuInX2 QDs is an effective strategy for enhancing the PCEs in QDSCs. For instance, Teng et al. designed CuInS2/CdS heterojunction structure QDs, and obtained a high PCE of 4.2% due to the enlarged light absorption and the reduced charge recombination by introducing a CdS interface layer.55 To address this issue, Zhong et al. synthesized DDT-free CuInS2 QDs with absorption in the NIR region through a high-temperature cation exchange approach, followed by coating a ZnS thin layer to form type-I CuInS2/ZnS core–shell QDs.26 Benefitting from the wide absorption range of the CuInS2 QDs and type-I core/shell structure, the highest certified PCE of 6.66% was achieved under AM 1.5G one sun irradiation. However, alloyed structure QDs were superior to the type-I core–shell configuration as sensitizers because the alloying process can result in a homogeneous electronic structure surrounding the QD surface. Furthermore, Zhong et al. continued to develop Zn–Cu–In–S alloyed QDs with a better PCE of 8.55%, which was ascribed to the faster charge injection rate and more effective restraint of charge recombination than that of plain CuInS2 and core/shell CuInS2/ZnS QDs.57 Besides, Zhong et al. further incorporated Ga metal ions into CuInSe2 QDs and achieved a PCE of 11.49%. The incorporation of Ga ions effectively improved the band gap of CuInSe2 QDs and further improved the Jsc and Voc values in QDSC devices.58 As shown in Fig. 5b, Meng et al. achieved a PCE of 8.54% based on CuInS2 QDs with Cu/In non-stoichiometric ratios. Their experimental results revealed that the surface defects of CuInS2 QDs were significantly reduced with an increase in In content.118 CuInSe2 QDs are considered more promising alternatives as sensitizers in QDSCs, benefitting from their larger exciton Bohr radius and narrower bandgap, which can extend the light absorption range to the near-infrared region (NIR).77 Hyeon et al. prepared CuInSe2 QDs via a Lewis acid–base reaction, and a PCE of 4.3% was achieved for the Cd-free based QDSCs.119 Remarkably, Zhong et al. explored alloyed Zn–Cu–In–Se QDs with an absorption onset extending to 1000 nm and achieved high-efficiency QDSCs with certified PCEs of 11.61% (Fig. 5c).29 The notable photovoltaic performance benefited from the broad light harvesting range, reduced charge recombination rate and fast electron extraction from the special alloyed structure. As shown in Fig. 5d, Klimov et al. prepared CuInSe1−xSx QDs and achieved a PCE of 5.5% by adjusting the amount of Se to adjust the bandgap, followed by surface cation exchange.25,120,121 Afterwards, Zhong et al. revealed that the Cu content in alloyed Zn–Cu–In–Se QDs have a vital influence on the optical properties and the resulting photovoltaic performance. The highest PCE of 12.57% was achieved based on Zn–Cu–In–Se QDs with a Cu/In ratio of 0.7 under one full sun illumination.122 Additionally, Zhang et al. prepared high-quality Zn–Cu–In–Se QDs with ascorbic acid (AA) as a capping ligand and obtained a PCE of 13.85% with titanium mesh-based CEs. The results revealed that the introduction of AA could increase the Zn content inside the QDs, and then enlarge the band gap and suppress charge recombination.123 Constructing an interface modification layer adopting ZnS and CdS is also commonly regarded as an effective method and widely used to restrain the recombination in CuInX2 QDSCs. This important content will be discussed in detail in the following section.
 Fig. 5  (a) J−V and IPCE spectra and relative picture of QD-loaded TiO2 photoanode.116 (b) Schematic diagrams of the energy levels between TiO2 and CuInS2 QDs with different Cu/In precursor ratios.118 (c) Schematic diagrams of the energy levels of ZnCuInSe compared with that of CuInSe2 QDs and J−V curves of the corresponding QDSCs.29 (d) EQE spectra of the synthesized CuInSexS1−x and CuInS2 QDs.92 (e) Surface configurations and interaction potential of QDs in single and bicomponent solvents, and Gibbs free energy diagram of QDs in a direct absorption process.124 (f) Scheme of the deposition of QDs on TiO2 photoanode via secondary deposition strategy.125 
Besides, increasing the loading amount of CuInX2-based QDs on the surface of a TiO2 film is an inevitable route for enhancing the PCEs in QDSCs. As shown in Fig. 5e, Zhong et al. explored the modified oil-soluble QDs absorption process with bicomponent solvents.124 By adjusting the solvent polarity, a high QD loading and resultant excellent PCEs were obtained. Besides, Li et al. fabricated co-sensitized based QDSCs combining Zn–Cu–In–Se QDs with high extinction coefficient CdSe QDs (Fig. 5f). Benefitting from their synergistic effect, the champion PCE of up to 12.75% (Voc = 0.752 V, Jsc = 27.39 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.619) was achieved.30 Significantly, Li et al. continued to provide secondary deposition strategies for further increasing the QD-loading amount on TiO2 films using ammonium cationic surfactants, and achieved a higher Jsc value and new record PCE of over 13%.125
Besides CuInX2-based QD sensitizers, Earth-abundant multi-component alloyed Cu2ZnSnS4 and Cu2ZnSnSe4 QDs are also promising alternatives due to their suitable band gap, high absorption coefficient, and good photostability.127,128 For example, Wu et al. first reported defect-free quaternary Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs as sensitizers to assemble QDSC devices and obtained a PCE of 3.29%.129 Next, they continued to prepare type-II Cu2ZnSnS4/CdSe core/shell QDs in QDSCs and obtained a higher PCE of 4.70% because of the removal of the long hydrocarbon chains and surface passivation.130 Meanwhile, Angaiah et al. prepared Cu2ZnSnSe4 QDs with an average size of ∼5 nm and deposited them onto the surface of porous TiO2 nanofibers, which resulted in a PCE of 3.61%, and especially an enhanced Jsc.131
Although the performance of Cu-based QDSCs has significantly improved, there are still many limitations that should be addressed, such as the synthesis of high-quality QDs, carrier transport, and absolute energy level positions. In addition, difficult removal and exchange reactions for switching long pristine ligands with short incoming ligands on the surface of QDs are still limited. Thus, it is expected that future attention on the understanding of QD surface chemistry will be considered to yield high quality Cu-based eco-friendly QDs (Table 1).
Table 1 Overview of Cu-based eco-friendly metal chalcogenides used as sensitizers in QDSCs




QDs
Photoanode–electrolyte–CE

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Ref.




Cu1.97S
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Au
0.11
28.1
18.9
0.90

115



CuInS2
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Pt
0.56
4.51
0.41
1.06

132



CuInS2
TiO2 NPs–Sn2//S2−/In2S3–Cu2S
0.50
6.49
0.50
1.62

52



CuInS2
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2S
0.57
7.72
0.418
1.84

133



CuInS2
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2S
0.66
6.02
0.463
1.85

134



CuInS2
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–CuxS
0.72
2.41
0.61
1.05

135



CuInS2
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–CuxS
0.63
2.57
0.582
0.95

136



CuInS2/ZnS/ZnS
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2S
0.58
22.61
0.515
6.79

77



CdS/CuInS2
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–C
0.49
8.12
0.37
1.47

137



CuInS2/CdS
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/ZnO/S2−–CuxS
0.35
5.89
0.36
0.74

138



CuInS2/Mn:CdS/ZnS
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–CuS
0.58
19.29
0.48
5.38

53



CuInS2/CdS
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–CuS
0.56
16.9
0.45
4.20

55



ZnS/CuInS2/CdS/ZnS
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Pt
0.36
0.22
0.326
0.26

139



CuInS2/CdSe/ZnSe
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Pt
0.58
17.00
0.465
4.55

140



CuInS2/CdSe
ZnO–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2ZnSnS4–MoS2
0.67
13.52
0.506
4.58

141



CuInS2/BTF
TiO2 NPs–I−–Pt
0.77
14.54
0.65
7.20

142



ZnCuInSe
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2S
0.56
6.83
0.56
2.01

143



CuInSe2/ZnS
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2S
0.53
26.93
0.57
8.1

144



ZnCuInSe
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–MC/Ti
0.745
25.49
0.627
11.91

29



ZnCuInSe/CdSe
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–MC/Ti
0.752
27.39
0.619
12.75

145



CuInGaSe
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–MC/Ti
0.740
25.01
0.621
11.49

58



ZnCuInSe/AA
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–MC/Ti
0.608
27.71
0.620
10.44

123



ZnCuInSe
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–MC/Ti
0.745
27.71
0.654
13.50

125



ZnCuInSe/ZnCuInS
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–MC/Ti
0.762
25.93
0.657
12.98

126



Cu2ZnSnSeS
TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2S
0.47
17.48
0.40
3.29

116





Ag-based chalcogenides. 
In contrast to the discussed Cu-based QDs, Ag-based eco-friendly QDs have also been utilized as sensitizers for QDSCs. Due to its optimal bandgap of ∼1.1 eV, binary Ag2X (S and Se) was originally used as a sunlight-harvesting material in PV devices.146,147 Lee et al. firstly fabricated Ag2S-based QDSCs, which exhibited an effective sunlight response in a wide spectral range.146 However, despite several efforts, due to the narrow bandgap, thermalization carrier cooling, and radiative recombination of simple Ag2X QDs, the achieved PCEs in the corresponding QDSC device were rather low and difficult for continued ascension. Therefore, the development of ternary and quaternary Ag-based chalcogenides with suitable metal ions is one of the efficient methods to enhance the PCEs in QDSCs. Among them, ternary AgInX2 (X = S and Se) QDs have attracted increasing attention due to their wide absorption up to the NIR region with high extinction coefficient.60–69 For example, Prasad et al. first fabricated AgInS2-based QDSCs and obtained a PCE of 0.05% with low Jsc of 0.49 mA cm−2 and Voc of 0.24 V.148 Subsequently, Ramakrishna et al. prepared orthorhombic AgInS2 nanocrystals via a hot-injection method and fabricated crack-free AgInS2 thin films. The final assembled AgInS2 QDSCs presented a PCE of 0.5% with Au CEs.62 Nag et al. adopted post-synthesis annealing strategies to prepare ligand-free AgInS2 nanocrystals and obtained higher PCEs (∼0.8%) than previous reports owing to the increased charge transport rate and reduced defect states.67 Wang et al. first prepared an AgInS2-QDs/In2S3 co-sensitized photoanode combining the aqueous-phase synthesis route and CBD method, and obtained a PCE of 0.7% with Jsc of 7.87 mA cm−2.65 It was found that the PCEs of their AgInS2-based QDSCs were less than 1%. However, as noted by Clark, the low performance of QDSCs is a design issue, not a fundamental one.149 Therefore, it is essential to optimize and design the device structure of AgInS2-based QDSCs as a whole. Chang et al. presented a combined fabrication approach using aqueous AgInS2 QDs and thiol co-adsorbents for improving the PCEs in QDSCs.150 Recently, Huang et al. prepared high-quality AgInS2 QDs with a high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) (∼74%) by modulating the Ag/In ratio, and achieved a PCE of 2.91% with Cu2S/brass CEs.63 However, it should be noted that these previous reported PCEs lagged significantly behind that of CuInS2-based QDSCs, stemming mainly from the severe surface trap-state defects of AgInX2-based QDs. This is still a critical and challenging target for the development of this type of QDSC. One of the most efficient approaches is to develop quaternary alloyed Zn–Ag–In–S QDs. The introduction of Zn2+ ions can effectively reduce surface trap-state density and facilitate electron transport.61 Kamat et al. prepared alloyed (AgInS2)x–(ZnS)1−x (for x = 0.67) QDs and utilized them as sensitizers in solar cells. Their broad emission and strong interaction with TiO2 could effectively promote electron injection and achieve higher PCEs.151 Initially, Zn–Ag–In–S QDs were first applied as sensitizers by immobilizing them on a ZnO nanorod substrate, which resulted in PCEs of less than 1%. Similarly, Zhang et al. prepared Zn–Ag–In–S alloyed QDs with high PL intensity by introducing Zn2+ ions into Ag–In–S2, which exhibited a PCE of 4.50% with high Jsc of 13.94 mA cm−2. On the other hand, Ag–In–Se2 QDs have a higher sunlight-absorption intensity and wider sunlight absorption range than that of Ag–In–S2 QDs.60 Bhattacharyya et al. synthesized Zn–Ag–In–Se QDs by altering the ratio of Zn/(Ag + In) and finally attained a PCE of 3.57%. Zn2+ diffusion could effectively suppress the charge recombination at the interface of the TiO2/QDs/electrolyte.152 Chang et al. prepared aqueous glutathione-stabilized AgInSe2 QDs with a broad absorbance spectrum and red emission, and achieved the excellent PCE of 5.69%.153 However, despite the aforementioned efforts, the PCEs based on Ag-based chalcogenides are still limited due to their internal atom vacancies and lattice sites at Ag and other ions, further inducing the existence of defect states, which reduce the crystallinity, electrical conductivity and carrier mobility in ternary QDs. Meanwhile, these high-density trap states can act as recombination centers, and thus decrease the Voc and PCEs. Currently, the research on this type of eco-friendly QD is still immature and needs to be further improved. Nevertheless, the realization of high-performing Ag-based colloidal QD-based solar cells still remains challenging, and thus more work should focus on the synthesis of QDs and manufacturing process of solar cells.
Other metal chalcogenides as sensitizers. 
With the development of QDs and resultant photovoltaics devices, many other metal chalcogenides such as In2S3, BiSx, and AgBiS have been used as sun-harvesting materials in photovoltaics devices.99–103 Firstly, In2S3 is considered a promising sun-harvesting material due to its high carrier mobility, large exciton Bohr radius and wide absorption range. Tang et al. reported a PCE of 1.30% based on In2S3 QDs via repeated deposition.102 Besides In2S3, Bi2S3 QDs were also used as sensitizers in QDSCs. Compared to In2S3, Bi2S3 QDs possess rather low toxicity, narrow band gap and large absorption coefficient. Their band gap and conduction band level can be controlled by tuning the size of the NPs. For example, Díaz et al. reported Bi2S3-based QDSCs via SILAR and showed a PCE of 0.84%.101 Rosa et al. reported the combined TiO2/CdS/Bi2S3/ZnS configuration and obtained a PCE of 2.52%, which benefited from the augmented absorption spectral range and the suitable energy level diagram.100 Besides, as a type of I–V–VI semiconductor, AgBiS2 was also used as a sensitizer in QDSCs. Lee et al. first presented ternary AgBiS2 sensitizers via the SILAR procedure twice.103 Although the obtained PCE was lower than 1%, it was considered the first AgBiS2-based solar cell. Overall, several new types of QDs were developed and used as sensitizers in QDSCs, but only a small number of reported used these extra metal chalcogenides in QDSCs, and more efforts should be made to boost their final performance.

3.2 CEs based on metal chalcogenides
As the energetic component of QDSC devices, CEs have a great influence on determining the photovoltaic performance. CEs mainly collect electrons from an external circuit and then reduce the oxidizing species in the electrolyte. Therefore, suitable materials as CEs should have high conductivity to reduce series resistance, excellent catalytic activity towards the reduction of Sn2−, and proper corrosion resistance in polysulfide electrolyte. In the past few years, significant efforts have been made to propose a variety of candidates as CEs. Metal chalcogenides have emerged as one of the most common and suitable CE materials in QDSCs. Metal chalcogenides possess a large specific surface area and high electrocatalytic activity towards polysulfide electrolyte.37,39,73–75 In this section, the different types of metal chalcogenides (Cu2S, CuS, CuSe, PbS, CoS, NiS, FeSx and their composites) will be introduced and discussed based on the PCEs and charge transfer resistance of PV devices.

3.2.1 Cu-based chalcogenides as CE materials. 
Nanostructured Cu-based chalcogenides are the most widely-used efficient materials as CEs in QDSCs, which mainly benefit from their superior catalytic ability towards the reduction of Sn2− to S2−. In addition, Cu-based chalcogenides possess the required large surface areas, low cost and easy fabrication process. Currently, depending on the pioneering work, Cu-based chalcogenides as CEs in QDSCs mainly include CuxS, CuxSe, CuInS2, Cu2SnS3 and CuZnSnS, and their composites with other catalytic materials.37,39,75,154–158 In particular, p-type CuxS materials are the most widely used CEs in QDSCs, due to their excellent catalytic activity and good stability. Besides, different morphologies (including nanowires, nanoplates, nanoflowers, and nanocages) of Cu-based chalcogenides were deigned and deposited on conductive substrates.
As a typical p-type CuxS semiconductor, Cu2S is active in the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte and is widely used in QDSCs.159 Initially, Hodes et al. reported that Cu2S-based electrodes were active in polysulfide in photo-electrochemical cells, which opened up their wide application in QDSCs.160 The widely-used Cu2S CEs are obtained by immersing brass foil into polysulfide electrolyte for a few minutes. However, this type of CE suffers from chemical instability and further ruins the device stability. To solve this problem, the most common fabrication is to deposit these chalcogenides on the surface of conductive glass. For instance, Zhong et al. developed flower-like Cu2S/FTO CEs via electrodeposition, followed by sulfidation. As shown in Fig. 6a, the nanoflower-like Cu2S structure on FTO glass not only provided a large surface area for high catalytic activity, but also displayed better stability in the electrolyte.161 Furthermore, Peng et al. designed Cu2S-nanorod arrays as CEs to fabricate QDSCs. The obtained PCE of 4.14% was achieved by employing this type of CE, which benefited from its large interface area and porous surface structure.162 Hu et al. designed firstly hierarchical ITO nanowire arrays via the CVD method, followed by surface overgrowth of a Cu2S nanocrystal shell (Fig. 6b). Finally, the assembled QDSCs achieved an elevated PCE of 6.12% and Voc of 0.688 V due to the provided small charge transfer resistance and high catalytic activity of ITO@Cu2S CEs.163
 Fig. 6  SEM images of several typical CuxS nanostructures as CE materials in QDSCs. (a) Cu2S nanoflakes,161 (b) hierarchical ITO nanowire arrays/Cu2S,163 (c) hierarchical CuS,164 (d) Knit-coir-mat-like CuS,165 (e) CuS nanosheets,153 (f) skeletal Cu7S4 architecture,166 (g) Cu7S4 nanotubes,167 (h) Cu1.8S nanosheets168 and (i) CuS and Cu1.8S composites.169 
According to the previous work, the Cu2S phase is relatively unstable in stoichiometric compounds and easily degraded into Cu-deficient phases, such as CuS, Cu1.8S, and Cu1.75S due to the formation of Cu vacancies.170–173 Therefore, it is necessary to intensively analyze CuxS materials and search for special CuxS CEs with excellent catalytic activities and low charge resistance. Besides Cu2S, CuS was also applied as a CE material in QDSCs due to its rather good conductivity and stability. Several novel structures of CuS-like nanoflakes, nanoplatelets, and nanopods were prepared and introduced to further improve the PCEs. For example, Wang et al. fabricated hierarchical CuS/FTO CEs via an electrochemical deposition process, as shown in Fig. 6c.164 Compared with Cu2S/brass and Pt CEs, the QDSCs based on the CuS CEs exhibited higher PCEs and stability. For instance, Prabakar et al. prepared knit-coir-mat-like-structured CuS thin films via chemical bath deposition (Fig. 6d), which were used CEs in QDSCs.165 Besides, as shown in Fig. 6e, Zhao et al. fabricated transparent CuS nanosheet films via a low-temperature hydrothermal method. The final QDSCs obtained the PCE of 3.65% under one sun illumination by optimizing the thickness of the CuS nanosheet film.174 More interestingly, the CuS-based CEs exhibited the optical transmission and surface plasmonic resonance effect. Xu et al. firstly prepared dual-functional CuS nanostructure CEs, and then introduced them to fabricate full-spectrum operating QDSCs.175 The resultant PCEs were significantly enhanced due to the plasmonic resonance absorption and catalytic activity of the CuS nanostructures.
Other CuxS materials with a non-stoichiometric structure were also explored and employed as CEs in QDSCs.176 For instance, Chen et al. designed novel Cu1.75S nanocages and utilized them as CE materials in QDSCs.166 As shown in Fig. 6f, electrochemical characterization exhibited that the three-dimensional hollow structure of the Cu1.75S nanocages presented better catalytic activity and stability than that of Cu2S/brass CEs. Meanwhile, Qian et al. fabricated hierarchical Cu7S4 nanotubes as CEs and obtained a high PCE of 4.53% (Fig. 6g). Kim et al. prepared CuxS NPs with various stoichiometries and then deposited them onto FTO substrates via the CBD method (Fig. 6h).168 The experimental results indicated that the electrocatalytic activity and stability of CuxS strongly depend on its chemical composition. Among them, Cu-deficient CEs (such as CuS and Cu1.12S) possessed higher PCEs and better stability than that of Cu-rich CEs (such as Cu1.75S and Cu1.8S) due to their surface anti-oxidation effect. As shown in Fig. 6i, Zhang et al. also prepared a CuS/Cu1.8S mixture via a solvothermal reaction followed by screen-printing onto FTO substrates to form CEs for CdSe-based QDSCs.169
Although CuxS is currently considered the preferable CE material in QDSCs, other Cu-based chalcogenides, such as CuxSe and CuZnSnS, have also been explored as CEs.177 For instance, Choi et al. investigated eight different types of metal chalcogenides and fabricated the corresponding photovoltaic devices in QDSCs.178 The maximum PCE of 5.01% revealed that the Cu1.8Se CEs possess better catalytic activity than that of other metal selenide functional CEs (such as PbSe, and Ag2Se). Meanwhile, Zhu et al. deposited transition metal chalcogenides inks such as FeSe2, Cu1.8S and CuSe onto a conductive substrate by first drop-casting, followed by thermal treatment.179 In particular, the prepared CuSe films exhibited better catalytic activity and obtained higher PCEs of 4.94% than that of films based on Pt and Cu2S CEs. Besides, Chen et al. developed hierarchical Cu2−xSe nanotubes and used them as efficient CEs for QDSCs.180 The relative higher PCE of 6.25% was obtained when adopting the nanotube-based CEs, which benefited from favorable catalytic activity and conductivity. Besides, Bai et al. manipulated Cu2−xSe CEs in size and composition towards optimizing the performance of QDSCs. The non-stoichiometric Cu2−xSe CEs possessed better conductivity and resulted in PCEs of up to 7.11%, benefitting from the partial oxidization of the stoichiometric Cu2Se CEs. Meanwhile, Zhang et al. achieved the highest PCE of 8.72% for CdSeTe QDSCs by adjusting the composition and structure of CuSe-based CEs. Their results exhibited that a low Cu/Se molar ratio (1.20–1.38) resulted in better conductivity and electrochemical catalytic activity.181
Besides the aforementioned binary Cu-based chalcogenides, ternary and quaternary chalcogenides were also introduced as CE materials in QDSCs due to their superb catalytic activity towards polysulfide electrolyte and good chemical stability. For instance, Cu2ZnSnS4-based CEs, which were non-toxic and inexpensive, were also incorporated as CE materials in QDSCs and exhibited comparable PCEs. Lee et al. synthesized Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 NPs and applied them as CEs in QDSCs.182 The electrochemical results exhibited that the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 NPs exhibited remarkable electrocatalytic activity for the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte, and obtained the highest PCE of 3.01%, which was superior to that using Pt (1.24%). Besides, Xu et al. prepared Cu2ZnSnS4 microspheres as CEs via the solvothermal approach and obtained a PCE of 3.73%.183 Shi et al. applied Cu2ZnSnS4-based thin films via a facile pyrolysis procedure, and obtained a PCE of 2.56% in QDSCs.184 Later, Zhang et al. also prepared copper-deficient Cu2ZnSnS4 NPs through the hot-injection method, and then assembled CdSeTe-sensitized QDSCs. Finally, the PCE of 7.64% was obtained due to their good conductivity and excellent catalytic activity.185
Overall, considering their encouraging performance (effective conductivity and excellent catalytic activity), Cu-based chalcogenides are considered as the most efficient CE materials in QDSCs. With the on-going studies on Cu-based chalcogenides as CE materials, more and more efficient CEs for QDSCs will be developed, which will further boost the final performance.


3.2.2 Other metal chalcogenides as CE materials. 
Among the different types of materials used as CEs for QDSCs, metal chalcogenides usually possess the required abilities including high conductivity, good catalytic activity, and excellent corrosion resistance. Besides Cu-based chalcogenides, other metal chalcogenides (typically CoS, PbS, NiS, and MoS2) were further investigated and applied as CE materials to fabricate QDSC devices.155,156,186–192 These metal chalcogenides also have excellent catalytic ability towards polysulfide electrolyte. Although the electrocatalytic activity based on these CEs is inferior to that of Cu-based chalcogenides, these materials usually have other special functions and novel applications in the field of QDSCs. With regards to other metal chalcogenides, PbS materials have been utilized as CEs due to their excellent catalytic activity. More importantly, unlike other metal chalcogenides, PbS has also been the focus due to its light-harvesting and exciton-generation abilities.193,194 It is meaningful that PbS CEs can generate the Jsc by absorbing wasted sunlight as well as transferring electrons to the polysulfide electrolyte.194–198 Meanwhile, p-type PbS CEs can increase the Voc owing to the introduction of another Fermi level alignment. The results of Lin et al. exhibited that adopting PbS CEs could achieve both higher Jsc and Voc than that of other CEs.56
Besides PbS, Earth-abundant metal chalcogenides (typically CoS, NiSx, FeSx and their hybrid structures) were also applied and investigated as alternatives to reduce polysulfides.199 For example, Chang et al. fabricated low-cost CoS CEs via the CBD method and fabricated CdS/CdSe QDSCs.200 According to their results, the CoS-based CEs exhibited better stability and greater reflectance than that of the CuS CEs. Yuan et al. fabricated remarkable catalytic CoS films on ITO/PEN flexible substrates via the electrodeposition method.201 The obtained CoS/ITO CEs offered remarkable electrocatalytic activity compared to CoS/ITO or CoS/FTO CEs with the CBD method. Recently, a series of CoS-based flexible CEs such as CoS nanorod array/graphite paper, CoS nanowires/Au networks, and CoS nanotube array/carbon fiber were prepared to design full-flexible QDSC devices. These prepared CoS-based CEs displayed excellent catalytic activity and dramatic mechanical bending stability. Similarly with CuxS, NiSx displayed simple binary compounds that have rich phase diagrams with various stable crystal structures and stoichiometry. Currently, many different stoichiometric NiSx structures, such as NiS, Ni3S2, and NiS2, have been widespread applied in sensitized solar cells due to their superior chemical activity, low cost, remarkable conduction, easy-fabrication, and various valence states.186,188,202 Prabakar et al. synthesized nano-rice structured NiS/FTO CEs in QDSCs, which exhibited a better PCE of 2.97% than that of Pt CEs (1.45%), which benefited from their elevated catalytic activity towards polysulfide electrolyte.202 Meanwhile, NiS was grown in situ on FTO substrates via the CBD method. Finally, the highest PCE of 3.47% was achieved by using acetic acid and optimizing the deposition time. Electrochemical characterization revealed that the improved PCEs benefited from the superior electrocatalytic activity of the NiS CEs towards polysulfide electrolyte reduction. FeSx has also attracted increasing attention as a promising candidate for capturing sunlight in solar cells due to its special merits including suitable bandgap, earth abundance, high absorption coefficient, and high carrier mobility.203–208 Besides, FeSx has also been used as an efficient CE for QDSCs. Lee et al. reported the synthesis of honeycomb-like mesoporous pyrite FeS2 microspheres via a simple solvothermal reaction and obtained a PCE of 3.50%, which exhibited low charge transfer resistance and excellent electrochemical catalytic activity in catalyzing the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte.190 Kim et al. fabricated FeS CEs and thoroughly investigated their electrochemical behavior and impact of different preparation conditions on their performance. Their regular interwoven structure enhanced the Voc and FF.204 Li et al. first fabricated stable and efficient FeS/nickel foam CEs. Among them, due to the excellent catalytic ability of FeS and special scaffold network structure of Ni foam, the resultant QDSCs achieved a high FF of 0.58 and PCE of 4.39%.209 It should be noted that almost all of the reported PCEs with additional metal chalcogenides were compared with that of Pt-based CEs, which were not suitable for catalyzing reduction of polysulfide electrolyte. To the best of our knowledge, there are no reported comparisons with the most widely-used active CuxS CEs, thus making it impossible to evaluate their catalytic activity towards polysulfide electrolyte and future application as CEs in QDSCs. However, various novel metal chalcogenides with multi-functionality have enriched the alternatives as CEs.


3.2.3 Composites with other materials as CEs. 
Currently, besides metal chalcogenides, numerous excellent materials, including metal, carbon derivatives, and polymers have been developed and applied as CEs in QDSCs. Generally, different CEs cannot meet the unlimited requirement and make it work in their best state. Therefore, composites with other materials in integrated CEs have been considered. Diverse combinations of metal chalcogenides/metal, metal chalcogenides/carbon, metal chalcogenides/carbon derivates, and metal chalcogenides/polymers were synthesized in a valid combination of two different types of CE materials. For example, the integrated CEs with composite materials, such as CuS/Pt, Cu2S/reduced graphene oxide (RGO), CuS/CoS, PbS/carbon black, CuS/metal organic framework (MOF), CuS/graphene, and CuInS2/carbon composite, have been investigated.210–221 For instance, Kamat et al. reported Cu2S/RGO as CEs and obtained the impressive PCE of 4.4% based on CdS/CdSe QDSCs, which took advantage of the high surface area of RGO and accelerated shuttling of electrons.213 Meanwhile, Meng et al. prepared PbS/carbon black composite CEs on FTO substrate and obtained a PCE of 3.91%.214 Zhang et al. incorporated CuS NPs into graphene hydrogels (GHs) and fabricated CuS/GHs/Ti mesh CEs. The assembled device based on this novel composite CE obtained a PCE of 10.71%, much higher than that of the pristine GHs/Ti mesh CEs, which was attributed to the synergistic effects of the water-rich 3D porous structure GH with high conductivity and highly catalytic activity of CuS NPs.215 Meanwhile, Li et al. fabricated high-efficiency QDSCs with bimetallic (Zn and Co) zeolite-type-metal organic frameworks (MOFs) as CEs and obtained the impressive PCE of 9.12% due to the derived MOFs with homogeneously dispersed active dopants of Co and N atoms, large hydrophilic surface area, and good conductivity.222 Cu-based chalcogenides used as CEs in QDSCs were overviewed in Table 2.
Table 2 Overview of the copper metal-based chalcogenides used as CEs in QDSCs




CE
Photoanode–QDs–electrolyte

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Ref.




CuS nanosheets
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.60
17.43
0.50
5.23

172



CuS
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.56
14.46
0.52
4.38

223



CuS
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.578
17.57
0.514
5.22

224



CuS
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.550
16.05
0.489
4.32

164



CuS
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.554
15.2
0.56
4.75

225



CuS
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.566
14.58
0.5457
4.53

226



CuS
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.51
15.08
0.51
3.95

227



CuS
TiO2 NPs–CdS-Sn2−/S2−
0.645
6.938
0.32
1.3

228



CuS
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.510
16.34
0.44
3.67

174



CuS/Ti sheets
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.515
14.11
0.610
4.59

229



Knit-coir-mat-like CuS
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.57
14.58
0.55
4.57

226



Cu1.8S nanosheets arrays
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.50
16.07
0.41
3.30

168



Cu7S4 nanotubes
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.48
19.09
0.49
4.49

167



3D opening skeletal Cu7S4
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.51
18.45
0.47
4.42

166



Cu2S nanoflakes
TiO2 NPs–CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.59
16.04
0.56
5.30

161



Cu2S
TiO2 NPs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.51
7.13
0.48
1.83

230



Cu2S
TiO2 NTs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.54
6.2
0.53
1.8

231



Cu2S
TiO2 NPs–CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.65
7.59
0.56
2.80

232



Cu2S
TiO2 NPs–Mn:CdSeTe–Sn2−/S2−
0.687
20.88
0.655
9.4

233



Cu2S
TiO2NWAs/CuInS2/CdS/ZnS–Sn2−/S2
0.592
16.72
0.417
4.13

162



Cu2S/brass
TiO2 NPs–CdSe-Sn2−/S2−
0.577
6.27
0.576
5.41

161



Cu2S
TiO2 NPs–CdS/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.525
10.6
0.467
2.60

234



CuxS
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.5
11.89
0.533
3.17

235



Cu2S
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.51
14.3
0.51
3.75

236



Cu2S/brass
TiO2 NPs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.60
15.1
0.55
4.97

237



ITO@Cu2S nanowires
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.56
15.55
0.520
4.53

238



ITO@Cu2S-III
TiO2 NPs–CdSexTe1−x/ZnS–Sn2−/S2
0.688
15.23
0.584
6.12

163



CuxS
TiO2 NPs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2
0.611
16.97
0.593
6.28

169



Cu2−xS
TiO2 NPs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−–PEG
0.643
15.91
0.670
6.81

239



Cu1.8Se nanosheets
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.54
20.50
0.50
5.53

178



Cu2−xSe nanotubes
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.56
18.85
0.59
6.23

240



Cu2−xSe NPs
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.57
21.39
0.59
7.19

241



CuSySe1−y NPLs
ZnO–ZnSe/CdSe/ZnSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.77
15.69
0.42
5.07

167



Cu2SnS3 hierarchical microspheres
ZnO–ZnSe/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.81
11.46
0.44
4.08

168



Cu2SnSe3 NPs
TiO2 NPs–CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.56
16.29
0.54
4.93

169



Cu2ZnSn4 hierarchical microspheres
ZnO NWs–ZnSe/CdSe/ZnSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.82
11.06
0.41
3.72

170



Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.55
12.71
0.43
3.01

171



CuAgSe nanotubes
TiO2 NPs-CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.58
17.57
0.55
5.60

181



Cu:CoS nanosheets
TiO2 NPs–CdSe0.45Te0.55/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.57
18.20
0.59
6.12

176



CuS/carbon nanofibers
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.521
14.60
0.507
3.86

242



RGO/Cu2S
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.556
15.85
0.44
3.85

243



Cu2S/carbon
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.593
13.69
0.48
3.87

244



CuAgSe nanotubes
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.581
17.57
0.55
5.61

245



Cu2ZnSn(S0.5Se0.5)4
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.55
12.71
0.43
3.01

246



Cu2ZnSnS(Se)4
TiO2 NPs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.54
15.49
0.52
4.35

156



Cu2ZnSnS4
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.520
12.96
0.38
2.56

184



Cu2SnS3
ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.81
11.46
0.437
4.06

155



Cu2SnSe3
TiO2 NPs–CdSe-Sn2−/S2−
0.565
16.45
0.55
4.99

247



CuInS2/carbon
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.512
14.16
0.60
4.32

154



CuS/PbS
ZnO NRs/CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.72
7.58
0.41
2.22

248



Nano-Cu2S/carbon
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.497
10.68
0.581
3.08

249



Pt/CuS
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
15.31
600
0.46
4.22

221



Cu2S/RGO
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−
0.52
18.40
0.46
4.40

213



CuS NPs/carbon nanofibers
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.52
14.46
0.51
3.83

242



CuS NPs/3D graphene frameworks
TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.59
16.19
0.53
5.06

250



Cu1.18S/GO nanoribbon
TiO2 NPs–CdTe/CdS/CdS–Sn2−/S2−
0.63
20.55
0.53
6.86

251



Cu2S/Ni foam
TiO2 NPs–CdSeTe–Sn2−/S2−
0.65
20.22
0.68
8.94

252



Au/CuS nanosheets
TiO2 NPs–PbS/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.42
24.17
0.56
5.68

253



ITO@Cu2S-III nanowire arrays
TiO2 NPs–CdSeTe–Sn2−/S2−
0.69
15.23
0.58
6.10

163



Cu2ZnSnSe4 NPs/carbon nanotubes
TiO2 NPs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−
0.53
17.04
0.51
4.61

254



CuS/active carbon
TiO2 NPs–CdSeTe–Sn2−/S2−
0.653
22.12
0.58
8.38

255



Graphene hydrogel/CuS
TiO2 NPs–CdSeTe–Sn2−/S2−
0.786
20.69
0.660
10.74

215






3.3 Interface modification layers based on metal chalcogenides
As the key component of QDSCs, QD sensitizers have the function of absorbing solar photons to generate electrons and injecting photo-generated electrons into semiconductor metal oxides, which directly determine the photovoltaic performance. According to the device structure and working principle of QDSCs, QDs form electron–hole pairs when excited under sunlight. The photo-generated electrons are transferred to the surface of TiO2, and the photo-generated holes are reduced by the electrolyte. However, photo-generated electrons have serious compounding problems in the surface separation and interface transport of QDs, which have become a bottleneck restricting the further improvement of the photovoltaic performance in QDSCs.40 As shown in Fig. 7, charge recombination occurring in the device mainly includes four types, including the inner and surface of QDs, QDs/TiO2 interface, QDs/electrolyte interface, and TiO2/electrolyte interface, among which involve the most severe forms of internal recombination of devices and are directly related to QDs.256,257 The reason for the above main charge recombination is that on the one hand, there are serious defect states in the inside and on the surface of QDs, and photo-generated electrons are easily captured by the defect state and pass back through the defect state. On the other hand, the migration rate of holes on the surface of QDs is relatively slow, which is 2–3 orders of magnitude lower than that of electrons. This relatively slow transport rate results in the accumulation of holes, and excessive holes easily capture electrons, thus affecting the normal operation of the entire photovoltaic device.
 Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of the interface modification layers (consisting of surface passivation layer and hole-transporting layer) towards high-efficiency QDSCs. 

3.3.1 Surface passivation layer. 
As is known, due to the high proportion of surface atoms, uncertain composition, and complex VCB value, there are high trap-state densities on the surface and inside of QD sensitizers, which usually induce charge carrier recombination and further limit the performance improvement of QDSCs. Therefore, it is necessary to reduce the internal and surface defect states of QDs. Metal chalcogenides are regarded as useful materials as electron–hole acceptors and transport media in emerging PV devices, especially high-density trap-state QD-based solar cells.
Currently, coating wide band-gap metal chalcogenides on the shell of QDs, typically ZnS, ZnSe, and CdS, is an effective and indispensable surface passivation procedure.76 The existence of a protective shell not only passivates the surface trap states, but also hinders charge carrier recombination at the interface between the electrolyte and photoanode.44,77 Additionally, the shell layer can prevent the corrosion of the polysulfide electrolyte towards the inner QDs. Wide band-gap ZnS shell overgrowth on the surface of the photoanode is considered as the most widely-used surface passivation procedure.258 For example, Yang et al. firstly fabricated PbS/CdS QDs photo-electrochemical cells over-coating three monolayers of ZnS via the SILAR method. The obtained PCEs, and especially Voc, increased remarkably, which indicated the ZnS surface treatment could suppress charge recombination. Subsequently, a ZnX (X = S and Se) treatment strategy was widely adopted and the performance improvement mechanism was also studied deeply. From the results of their research, ZnS treatment not only passivated the surface states of the QDs, but also suppressed electron charge recombination in the surface trapping process.259 Therefore, photo-generated electrons could transfer smoothly into TiO2, and thus improve the final PCEs. A ZnS or ZnSe surface passivation layer to restrain surface recombination and improve interfacial charge transfer was constructed in QDSCs through several effective methods, including (i) forming a ZnX passivation layer on the surface of QDs via the SILAR method, (ii) designing type II core/shell QD structure, and (iii) core/shell ZnS QDs layer directly grown on the surface of QDs by partial cation exchange. As shown in Fig. 8a, Chang et al. fabricated CuInS2-based QDSCs and obtained a PCE of 1.84% via the ex situ synthesis of QDs and following in situ formation of a ZnS passivation layer.133 Besides the ZnS shell, the ZnSe shell is also usually used as a shell material owing to its closely matched lattice constant.144 Peng et al. displayed that Cu–In–S2 QDSCs with a ZnSe surface passivation layer achieved higher PCEs than that of ZnS.134 To develop high-efficiency CuInX2 (X = S or Se)-based QDSCs, Zhong et al. used ZnS and ZnSe as shell materials and designed a type-I core/shell structure.26,57,77 The enhanced PCE was attributed to the efficient passivation towards surface defects and accelerated charge transfer from the QDs to TiO2 films. Furthermore, Hyeon et al. increased the PCEs of CuInSe2 QDSCs up to 8.1%, especially the Jsc value as high as 26.93 mA cm−2 by controlling the thickness of the ZnS passivation layer.144 Additionally, organic passivation layers were also synergistically utilized with ZnS on QD-sensitized photoanodes to restrain charge resistance and promote the PCEs. As shown in Fig. 8b, Mora-Seró et al. explored the surface modification method on CdSe-sensitized photoanodes via both ZnS coating and molecular dipole treatment (DT). The experimental results showed that the obtained devices based on the sequence of surface treatment (DT + ZnS) achieved the highest PCEs compared to the reference electrode. The combined DT/ZnS surface treatment increased the charge injection from the QDs into the TiO2 matrix and reduced the recombination of the QDs-sensitized photoanodes.260
 Fig. 8  (a) Scheme of the fabrication CuInS2-sensitized photoanode via the SILAR process with ZnS passivation layer.33 (b) Different sensitized photoanodes treated with ZnS coating and DT grafting.260 (c) Schematic processes for preparing CuInS2-QDs/In2S3-anchored TiO2 electrode on FTO.52 (d) Schematic illustration of the synthetic route for off-stoichiometric Mn:In2S3:CuInS2 QDs prepared with varying Cu/In feed molar ratios.96 (e) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer mechanism in core–shell CuInS2–Mn:CdS QDSCs.53 
In2S3 is well known as a typical n-type semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.0–2.3 eV and commonly used as a buffer layer coated on the surface of QDs. It has been reported that the In2S3 buffer layer has a positive impact on reducing the carrier recombination by adjusting the match between the energy levels on QDs and TiO2, thus enhancing the PCEs significantly.96,261–263 For instance, Chang et al. fabricated the In2Se3/CIS/CdSe/ZnSe multiple-layer configuration and achieved PCEs of up to 4.55%. The existence of an In2Se3 hole-transporting layer between TiO2 and CuInS2 significantly improved the Voc and Jsc.140 As shown in Fig. 8c, Wang et al. displayed a well-aligned In2S3 buffer layer on the surface of a CuInS2-sensitized photoanode via the CBD method, and achieved a PCE of 1.62%.52 Meanwhile, Xu et al. deposited the an In2S3 layer at the interface between CuInS2 and TiO2 through the SILAR method. The experimental results revealed that the In2S3 layer both reduced the surface defect states of CuInS2 and slowed down the interface electron recombination.264 As shown in Fig. 8d, Chang et al. fabricated aqueous Mn:In2S3/CuInS2 QDs via a one-pot synthetic method and obtained the highest PCE of 8.0%, which was attributed to the synergistic effect of In2S3 and Mn2+. The combination of In2S3 and Mn2+ not only accelerated the electron injection rates, but also prolonged the electron lifetime.96
Besides, CdS has also been used as a shell over-coating QDs to passivate surface defects, and meanwhile act as a co-sensitizer to extend the sunlight absorption range. For instance, a CdS thin layer was coated on CuInS2 QDs sensitized TiO2 nanotubes via the SILAR method. The final PCE of 7.3% was much higher than that of pristine CdS/TiO2 (3.3%), which is attributed to the energy barrier layer of the CdS shell.265 As shown in Fig. 8e, Meng et al. prepared CuInS2 QDs followed by coating a transition metal Mn2+ ion-doped CdS layer, and finally obtained a PCE of up to 5.38%.53 The Mn2+ ion-doped QDs displayed a prolonged carrier lifetime than that of the pristine QDs. Usually, to boost the PCEs, ZnS passivation treatment is also carried out after CdS is deposited on the surface of the photoanode via the SILAR method. For example, Li et al. fabricated CuInS2-based QDSCs and achieved a PCE of 3.65% via a two-step passivation process by coating CdS and ZnS shell.266 Overall, surface passivation treatment plays a vital role of inhibiting charge recombination and successfully improving the PCEs in QDSCs. However, exploring more effective approaches to inhibit charge recombination is still an important way to improve the performance of the corresponding QDSC devices.


3.3.2 Hole-transporting layer. 
According to the working mechanism of QDSCs, photo-excited electrons can be injected from QDs into TiO2, and subsequently photo-generated holes are transported to redox species in the polysulfide electrolyte and then reach the CEs. Electron injection usually occurs at the picosecond level, whereas hole transfer typically occurs on the nanosecond time scale. The hole transfer rate is almost two or three orders of magnitude slower than that of the electron injection rate. Additionally, an excessively thick passivation layer can further reduce the separation-transport rate of electron–hole pairs. The excess accumulation of holes not only can result in the anodic corrosion of QDs itself, but also cause more serious charge recombination, which can have a negative effect on the device performance. Therefore, it is essential to overcome the limitations of slow hole transfer for improving the stability of QDs themselves and boosting the PCEs of QDSCs.267 The methodology and mechanistic aspects of accelerating hole transfer in QDSCs are discussed.
As introduced, Cu-based chalcogenides are considered the most promising candidates for CEs of QDSCs. Besides, Cu-based chalcogenides, typically CuxS, are also used as the hole-transporting materials for QDSCs due to their intrinsic p-type conductivity. As shown in Fig. 9, Kamat et al. deposited a CuxS layer onto the surface of CdS/CdSe via the SILAR method and achieved a PCE of 6.6%.79 The experimental results demonstrated that the CuxS thin layer played a role in facilitating interfacial hole transfer from the QDs to the polysulfide electrolyte and reducing the charge recombination as a hole mediator, not as a sensitizer. Chang et al. also introduced a Cu2S buffer layer between TiO2 and CuInS2 QDs via the SILAR method, followed by overcoating a ZnSe shell as the surface passivating layer, in which a PCE of 2.52% was achieved.51 Ghosh et al. introduced a p-type CuS hole-transporting layer via a partial cation exchange method to fabricate a CdSSe-sensitized photoanode. The resultant QDSCs with CuS hole-transporting layer achieved a PCE of 4.03% with mainly an enhancement in Voc and FF.80 The formation of the CuS layer reduced the interfacial recombination through smoothing the hole transfer to the redox species in the polysulfide electrolyte. Therefore, the configuration of the hole-transporting layer with metal chalcogenides is an efficient strategy for accelerating the hole transfer and further improving the final performance in QDSCs.
 Fig. 9  Transfer of holes from CdSe to CuxS was monitored by following the transient absorption of the respective radical species (Se−˙ and S−˙) arising from hole trapping on CdSe and CuxS, respectively.79 

4. Summary, challenges, and outlook
As the most promising third-generation PVs technologies, QDs-based solar cells have been systematically investigated and made great progress in the last few decades. Substantial efforts have been devoted to designing and synthesizing QD absorbers, searching for existing efficient catalysts, and constructing feasible interface modification layers to enhance charge separation. The current record PCE of over 13% in QDSCs has been achieved. Specifically, metal chalcogenides play an important role in plans to harvest sunlight, catalyze electrolyte reduction, and modify the interface in the development of high-performance QDSCs. This review outlined the recent progress on metal chalcogenides employed in QDSCs in the past decade. We introduced metal chalcogenides from three key modules consisting of QD sensitizers, CE materials, and interface modification layer. Almost all the QD sensitizers were chosen from metal chalcogenides. Based on the basic metal ions, metal chalcogenides as sensitizers were classified into three types, Cd- and Pb-heavy metal ion-based chalcogenides, Cu- and Ag-eco-friendly metal ion-based chalcogenides, and other metal ion-based chalcogenides. Each type of metal chalcogenide has its own merits. Cd- and Pb-heavy metal ion-based QDs are most widely used as sensitizers owing to their unique optical properties, easy-tunable photo-luminescence, strong sunlight absorption ability, and excellent chemical stability. However, the high toxicity of the Cd or Pb elements seriously restricts their practical application and commercialization. To overcome this issue, Cu- and Ag- eco-friendly metal ion-based QDs were developed and realized higher PCEs in QDSCs. However, some issues, such as large amounts of inner and surface trap defects, slow electron injection rate, and poor chemical stability, retard their further development. Secondly, metal chalcogenides have been widely employed as CE materials in QDSCs and dramatically exhibited electrocatalytic properties. The complexity of metal chalcogenides in composition, morphology, crystal phase, and defects make it difficult to investigate deeply the influence and mechanism towards polysulfide electrolyte. Therefore, there are still great challenges to further improve the performance of QDSCs.
There are still great challenges to further improve the PCEs of QDSCs. Based on the recent progress on metal chalcogenides in QDSCs, to further improve the PCEs and stability of QDSCs, it is urgent to develop highly efficient surface chemical reconstruction strategies, effectively solving the contradiction between surface passivation and transport of electron–hole pairs. Future research will attract much more attention from the following aspects.
(1) Focusing on internal and surface defect state passivation strategies for QDs. Commonly, metal chalcogenides as QD sensitizers have a low conduction band, abundant internal and surface defects, and poor chemical stability. At present, the widely-used surface passivation treatment method is to grow a thin layer of ZnS or ZnSe with wide band gap in the sensitized photoanode epitaxial layer via SILAR method. This method not only effectively reduces the charge recombination between various surfaces in devices, but also avoids the introduction of toxic materials. However, this method also has some limitations, that is, it can only passivate the defect states on the surface of QDs, not their internal defect states. Meanwhile, it is difficult to accurately regulate the thickness of the passivating layer. Therefore, it is necessary to find a technical route that can reduce the defect states inside and on the surface of QDs synchronously.
(2) Research on electron–hole separation transmission regulation. Although the surface passivation technology of QDs can effectively inhibit charge recombination, too many passivation procedures can easily reduce the electron–hole separation transfer rate. The charge transfer rate is another important aspect affecting charge recombination, which has attracted increasing attention. Kamat et al. constructed hole-transport layers such as CuxS and In2Se3via the SILAR method, and improved the PCEs of QDSCs. This most widely-used construction method can accelerate electron–hole separation and transmission, inhibit electron–hole recombination, and thus effectively improve the performance. However, this construction method is difficult to accurately regulate the layer thickness and deeply study the charge transmission at the surface of QDs. Meanwhile, too thick interface layers on the surface of QDs may hinder the transport of photo-generated electrons. Therefore, it is expected that the above issues can be effectively avoided by using a hole-delocalizing ligand shell to promote hole–electron separation and transport in QDs.
(3) Exploration of metal chalcogenides combined with perovskite QDs. As is known, the emerging inorganic perovskite QDs have attracted increasing attention due to their high optical absorption coefficient, optical tuning properties, carrier transportation characteristics, etc. Thus, combining conventional QDs with perovskite QDs seems to be an excellent strategy to obtain high absorption ability, suppress recombination and improve the stability of devices. This approach, in our opinion, has significant benefits for performance improvement.
Besides, research towards improvement in the stability of devices is essential for the commercialization of QDSCs. It can be expected that this review will provide effective theoretical and technical guidance for the final industrial application of QDSCs, and provide reference for other types of solar cells in this field.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant 51802169), Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (Grant ZR2018BEM007), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Funded Project (Grant 2018M632614), Qingdao Innovation Program Applied Basic Research Fund (18-2-2-8-jch), and Applied Research Project for Postdoctoral Researchers in Qingdao.
References
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, 1920 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Polman, M. Knight, E. C. Garnett, B. Ehrler and W. C. Sinke, Science, 2016, 352, 4424 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Chapin, C. S. Fuller and G. L. Pearson, J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 25, 676–677 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jean, P. R. Brown, R. L. Jaffe, T. Buonassisi and V. Bulović, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1200–1219 RSC .
M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther and A. J. Nozik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 951–954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rühle, M. Shalom and A. Zaban, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2290–2304 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tang and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 12–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tada, M. Fujishima and H. Kobayashi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4232–4243 RSC .
S. Emin, S. P. Singh, L. Han, N. Satoh and A. Islam, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1264–1282 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hetsch, X. Xu, H. Wang, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1879–1887 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17778–17787 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sharma, R. Jha and S. Kumar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 155, 294–322 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 908–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Du, M. Artemyev, J. Wang and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2464–2489 RSC .
Z. Du, F. Yin, D. Han, S. Mao, J. Wang, A. R. Aleem, Z. Pan and J. Tang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 5917–5924 CrossRef CAS .
L. Spanhel, H. Weller and A. Henglein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 6632–6635 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zaban, O. I. Mićić, B. A. Gregg and A. J. Nozik, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3153–3156 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yu, K. Zhu, A. G. Norman, S. Ferrere, A. J. Frank and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25451–25454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, J. Kobayashi and T. Toyoda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 023116 CrossRef .
W.-T. Sun, Y. Yu, H.-Y. Pan, X.-F. Gao, Q. Chen and L.-M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Lee and Y.-S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604–609 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, X. Guo, X. Huang, S. Huang, D. Li, Y. Luo, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and Q. Meng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4659–4667 RSC .
P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2508–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. McDaniel, N. Fuke, N. S. Makarov, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2887 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Pan, I. Mora-Sero, Q. Shen, H. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9203–9210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiao, Q. Shen, I. Mora-Sero, J. Wang, Z. Pan, K. Zhao, Y. Kuga, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 908–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Du, Z. Pan, F. Fabregat-Santiago, K. Zhao, D. Long, H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhong, J. S. Yu and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3103–3111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, Z. Du, J. S. Hu, Z. Pan, Q. Shen, J. Sun, D. Long, H. Dong, L. Sun, X. Zhong and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4201–4209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, W. Feng, J. Du, W. Xue, L. Zhang, L. Zhao, Y. Li and X. Zhong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705746 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, K. Cheng, Y. M. Hou, Z. Fang, Z. X. Pan, W. J. Wu, J. L. Hua and X. H. Zhong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11235–11237 RSC .
Y. Lin, H. Song, H. Rao, Z. Du, Z. Pan and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4974–4979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1906–1915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. A. Christians and J. G. Radich, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 5716–5725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 908–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kusuma and R. Geetha Balakrishna, Sol. Energy, 2018, 159, 682–696 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Sun, Y. Jiang, X. Zhong, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 130–156 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Shiraz and F. R. Astaraie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20849–20862 RSC .
S. Wang and J. Tian, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 90082–90099 RSC .
G. Halder, D. Ghosh, M. Y. Ali, A. Sahasrabudhe and S. Bhattacharyya, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 10197–10216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Kim and D. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 85–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, I. Mora-Seró, Z. Pan, K. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Feng, G. Yang, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15913–15922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pan, H. Zhang, K. Cheng, Y. Hou, J. Hua and X. Zhong, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3982–3991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiao, J. Wang, Q. Shen, Y. Li and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7214–7221 RSC .
G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 683–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, D. V. Talapin, M. A. Loi, F. Cordella, G. Hesser, M. I. Bodnarchuk and W. Heiss, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3029–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Pietryga, R. D. Schaller, D. Werder, M. H. Stewart, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11752–11753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Booth, A. P. Brown, S. D. Evans and K. Critchley, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2064–2070 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. P. Leach and J. E. Macdonald, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 572–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-T. Kuo, D.-M. Liu, S.-Y. Chen and C.-C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6780–6788 RSC .
J.-Y. Chang, L.-F. Su, C.-H. Li, C.-C. Chang and J.-M. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4848–4850 RSC .
Y.-q. Wang, Y.-c. Rui, Q.-h. Zhang, Y.-g. Li and H.-z. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11858–11864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, H. Wei, Q. Huang, X. Hu, H. Zhao, R. Yu, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3881–3883 RSC .
X. Hu, Q. Zhang, X. Huang, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15903–15905 RSC .
T.-L. Li, Y.-L. Lee and H. Teng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5315–5324 RSC .
C.-Y. Lin, C.-Y. Teng, T.-L. Li, Y.-L. Lee and H. Teng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1155–1162 RSC .
L. Yue, H. Rao, J. Du, Z. Pan, J. Yu and X. Zhong, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 3637–3645 RSC .
W. Peng, J. Du, Z. Pan, N. Nakazawa, J. Sun, Z. Du, G. Shen, J. Yu, J. S. Hu, Q. Shen and X. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5328–5336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, J. Xu, X. Zhang, S. Shi, H. Yang, Z. Mo, L. Li and S. Yin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 16978–16984 CrossRef CAS .
P.-N. Li, A. V. Ghule and J.-Y. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 354, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kobosko, D. H. Jara and P. V. Kamat, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33379–33388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Halder and S. Bhattacharyya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11746–11755 RSC .
C. Cai, L. Zhai, Y. Ma, C. Zou, L. Zhang, Y. Yang and S. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 341, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jagadeeswararao, A. Swarnkar, G. B. Markad and A. Nag, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 19461–19469 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6185–6192 RSC .
T. Kameyama, Y. Douke, H. Shibakawa, M. Kawaraya, H. Segawa, S. Kuwabata and T. Torimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 29517–29524 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kadlag, P. Patil, M. Jagadeeswara Rao, S. Datta and A. Nag, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 3605–3612 RSC .
R. Bose, G. Manna, S. Jana and N. Pradhan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3074–3077 RSC .
A. Guchhait and A. J. Pal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4181–4189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Coughlan, M. Ibáñez, O. Dobrozhan, A. Singh, A. Cabot and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5865–6109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-M. Chen, H.-G. Xue and S.-P. Guo, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 368, 115–133 CrossRef CAS .
O. Stroyuk, A. Raevskaya and N. Gaponik, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5354–5422 RSC .
M. Ye, X. Gao, X. Hong, Q. Liu, C. He, X. Liu and C. Lin, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1217–1231 RSC .
K. Meng, G. Chen and K. R. Thampi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23074–23089 RSC .
I. Hwang and K. Yong, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 634–653 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dana, S. Maiti, V. S. Tripathi and H. N. Ghosh, Chem, 2018, 24, 2418–2425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Pan and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1649–1655 RSC .
L. Zhang, H. Rao, Z. Pan and X. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41415–41423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Radich, N. R. Peeples, P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16463–16471 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maiti, F. Azlan, P. Anand, Y. Jadhav, J. Dana, S. K. Haram and H. N. Ghosh, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 50–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 796–806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi, R. Nicolaescu, S. Paek, J. Ko and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9238–9245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Baker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 805–811 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shalom, S. Rühle, I. Hod, S. Yahav and A. Zaban, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9876–9877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Becker, J. G. Radich, B. A. Bunker and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1575–1582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Farrow and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11124–11131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 877–885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhou, G. Chen, X. Zhang, L. Cheng, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 20, 97–100 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1467–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ning, H. Tian, H. Qin, Q. Zhang, H. Ågren, L. Sun and Y. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15184–15189 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ning, H. Tian, C. Yuan, Y. Fu, H. Qin, L. Sun and H. Ågren, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1536–1538 RSC .
Z. Ning, C. Yuan, H. Tian, Y. Fu, L. Li, L. Sun and H. Ågren, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6032–6037 RSC .
X.-Y. Yu, B.-X. Lei, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1396–1400 RSC .
P. K. Santra, P. V. Nair, K. George Thomas and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 722–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, C. Cai, L. Zhai, J. Wang, F. Kong, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, C. Zou and S. Huang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 39443–39451 RSC .
Y.-H. Chiang, K.-Y. Lin, Y.-H. Chen, K. Waki, M. A. Abate, J.-C. Jiang and J.-Y. Chang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9629–9641 RSC .
S. Higashimoto, M. Murano, T. Arase, S. Mukai, M. Azuma and M. Takahashi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 169, 203–209 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, M. T. Sajjad, P. H. Jouneau, A. Ruseckas, J. Faure-Vincent, I. D. Samuel, P. Reiss and D. Aldakov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 827–837 RSC .
S. Yang, P. Zhao, X. Zhao, L. Qu and X. Lai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21922–21929 RSC .
D. Esparza, I. Zarazúa, T. López-Luke, R. Carriles, A. Torres-Castro and E. D. l. Rosa, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 180, 486–492 CrossRef CAS .
I. Zumeta-Dubé, V.-F. Ruiz-Ruiz, D. Díaz, S. Rodil-Posadas and A. Zeinert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11495–11504 CrossRef .
J. Duan, Q. Tang, B. He and L. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 139, 381–385 CrossRef CAS .
P.-C. Huang, W.-C. Yang and M.-W. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18308–18314 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Yun, T. Paik, B. Diroll, M. E. Edley, J. B. Baxter and C. B. Murray, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14692–14700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Lee, B.-M. Huang and H.-T. Chien, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6903–6905 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Verma, R. Verma, N. Li, D. Xiong, S. Tian, W. Xiang, Z. Zhang, Y. Xie and X. Zhao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 161–170 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, H. Wei, F. Li, Q. Huang, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3464–3466 RSC .
G. Wang, H. Wei, Y. Luo, H. Wu, D. Li, X. Zhong and Q. Meng, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 266–273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16553–16561 RSC .
L. Etgar, T. Moehl, S. Gabriel, S. G. Hickey, A. Eychmüller and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3092–3099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, J.-D. Hong and N.-G. Park, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6448–6450 RSC .
N. Parsi Benehkohal, V. González-Pedro, P. P. Boix, S. Chavhan, R. Tena-Zaera, G. P. Demopoulos and I. Mora-Seró, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16391–16397 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Jumabekov, F. Deschler, D. Böhm, L. M. Peter, J. Feldmann and T. Bein, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5142–5149 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, S. Zeng, B. Zhang, M. T. Swihart, K. T. Yong and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12234–12327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-C. Lin and M.-W. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1376–1378 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Jara, S. J. Yoon, K. G. Stamplecoskie and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7221–7228 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, Y. Liu, W. Shu, K. Chen and W. Chen, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 32, 5239–5244 CrossRef .
G. Wang, H. Wei, J. Shi, Y. Xu, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J.-Y. Kim, J. H. Yu, T.-Y. Ahn, H. Lee, T.-S. Choi, Y.-W. Kim, J. Joo, M. J. Ko and T. Hyeon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20517–20525 RSC .
H. McDaniel, A. Y. Koposov, S. Draguta, N. S. Makarov, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16987–16994 CrossRef CAS .
H. McDaniel, N. Fuke, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 355–361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Pan, W. Wang, J. Du, Z. Ren, Q. Shen and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21442–21451 RSC .
H. Zhang, W. Fang, W. Wang, N. Qian and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6927–6936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, H. Rao, W. Fang, H. Zhang, M. Zhou, Z. Pan and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 229–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, L. Zhao, Y. Wang, W. Xue, F. He, Y. Xie and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4300–4307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pan, L. Yue, H. Rao, J. Zhang, X. Zhong, Z. Zhu and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 190369 Search PubMed .
K. Chen, J. Zhou, W. Chen, Q. Zhong, T. Yang, X. Yang, C. Deng and Y. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12470–12478 RSC .
M. Abdellah, F. Poulsen, Q. Zhu, N. Zhu, K. Zidek, P. Chabera, A. Corti, T. Hansen, Q. Chi, S. E. Canton, K. Zheng and T. Pullerits, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12503–12508 RSC .
B. Bai, D. Kou, W. Zhou, Z. Zhou and S. Wu, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4377–4382 RSC .
B. Bai, D. Kou, W. Zhou, Z. Zhou, Q. Tian, Y. Meng and S. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 318, 35–40 CrossRef CAS .
N. Singh, V. Murugadoss, S. Nemala, S. Mallick and S. Angaiah, Sol. Energy, 2018, 171, 571–579 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, S. Yuan, J. Fan, Z. Hou, W. Zhou, Z. Du and S. Wu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 652 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Chang, J. K. Chen, C. P. Chen, C. H. Yang and J. Y. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11296–11306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, Y. Liu, W. Shu, K. Chen and W. Chen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 586, 85–90 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, Y. Liu, K. Chen, G. Yang and W. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 244, 335–342 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, K. Chen, Y. Cheng, V. Kovalev and W. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 587, 613–617 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, Q. Zhang, X. Huang, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15903 RSC .
D. Aldakov, M. T. Sajjad, V. Ivanova, A. K. Bansal, J. Park, P. Reiss and I. D. W. Samuel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19050–19060 RSC .
G. Xu, S. Ji, C. Miao, G. Liu and C. Ye, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4890 RSC .
J. Y. Chang, J. M. Lin, L. F. Su and C. F. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8740–8752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Barpuzary, A. Banik, G. Gogoi and M. Qureshi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14378–14388 RSC .
F. Guo, J. He, J. Li, W. Wu, Y. Hang and J. Hua, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 408, 59–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Guijarro, E. Guillen, T. Lana-Villarreal and R. Gomez, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 9115–9122 RSC .
J.-Y. Kim, J. Yang, J. H. Yu, W. Baek, C.-H. Lee, H. J. Son, T. Hyeon and M. J. Ko, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11286–11295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, W. Feng, J. Du, W. Xue, L. Zhang, L. Zhao, Y. Li and X. Zhong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705746 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Tubtimtae, K.-L. Wu, H.-Y. Tung, M.-W. Lee and G. J. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1158–1160 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, D. Pan, Z. Zhang, T. Chen, H. Xie, J. Gao and X. Guo, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 766, 925–932 CrossRef CAS .
K.-C. Cheng, W.-C. Law, K.-T. Yong, J. S. Nevins, D. F. Watson, H.-P. Ho and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 515, 254–257 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Margraf, A. Ruland, V. Sgobba, D. M. Guldi and T. Clark, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 2434–2438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Chang, C. H. Li, Y. H. Chiang, C. H. Chen and P. N. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18878–18890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Kobosko, D. H. Jara and P. V. Kamat, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33379–33388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, W. Fang, Y. Zhong and Q. Zhao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 547, 267–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-N. Li, A. V. Ghule and J.-Y. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 354, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Huang, Y. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Gong, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5954–5960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, X. Yang, T.-L. Wong and C.-S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6537–6542 RSC .
X. Zeng, W. Zhang, Y. Xie, D. Xiong, W. Chen, X. Xu, M. Wang and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 359–362 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Kumar, M. Deepa and P. Ghosal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13303–13313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, X. Lin, Y. Wang and T. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19638–19656 RSC .
V. H. Vinh Quy, J.-H. Kim, S.-H. Kang, C.-J. Choi, J. A. Rajesh and K.-S. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2016, 316, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes, J. Manassen and D. Cahen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 544–549 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, H. Yu, H. Zhang and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5683–5690 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, K. Chen, Y. Cheng and W. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 135, 276–283 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, B. B. Yu, J. Liu, Z. H. Li, J. K. Sun, X. H. Zhong, J. S. Hu, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3088–3095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, H. Dong, J. Pan, J. Li, Q. Li and D. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19589–19598 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Savariraj, K. K. Viswanathan and K. Prabakar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19702–19709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, M. Wang, T. Qian, H. Cao, S. Huang, Q. He, N. Liang, C. Wang and J. Zai, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 186–196 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, W. Chen, J. Zai, S. Huang, Q. He, W. Zhang, Q. Qiao and X. Qian, J. Power Sources, 2015, 299, 212–220 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ye, X. Wen, N. Zhang, W. Guo, X. Liu and C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9595–9600 RSC .
H. Zhang, H. Bao and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6557–6564 RSC .
R. Xia, S. Wang, W. Dong, X. Fang, L. Hu and J. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 205, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 318, 128–135 CrossRef CAS .
M. Venkata-Haritha, C. V. V. M. Gopi, L. Young-Seok and H.-J. Kim, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 45809–45818 RSC .
M. Mousavi-Kamazani, Z. Zarghami and M. Salavati-Niasari, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2096–2108 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ke, G. Fang, H. Lei, P. Qin, H. Tao, W. Zeng, J. Wang and X. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 809–815 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, H. Wang, X. Liu, D. Wu, K. Jiang, Q. Li and D. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800136 CrossRef .
L. Liu, C. Liu, W. Fu, L. Deng and H. Zhong, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 771–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhou, Y. Huang, J. Zhou, H. Niu, L. Wan, Y. Li, J. Xu and J. Xu, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 16587–16595 RSC .
H. M. Choi, I. A. Ji and J. H. Bang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2335–2343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, J. Zhu, L. Hu, B. Zhang, J. Yao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6315–6323 RSC .
X. Q. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Bai, Q. Sun, L. Z. Wang and S. X. Dou, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 1055–1063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, C. Wang, W. Peng, C. Yang and X. Zhong, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 60–69 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, Y. Xiao, J.-Y. Jung, H.-D. Um, S.-W. Jee, H. M. Choi, J. H. Bang and J.-H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 479–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, X. Yang, Q.-D. Yang, T.-L. Wong and C.-S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19718–19723 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, C. Shi, X. Dai, F. Liu, X. Fang and J. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 118, 41–44 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Q. F. Zhao and H. Zhang, Chin. J. Inorg. Chem., 2016, 32, 968–974 CAS .
C. V. Thulasi-Varma, C. V. V. M. Gopi, S. S. Rao, D. Punnoose, S.-K. Kim and H.-J. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 11419–11429 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Thulasi-Varma, S. S. Rao, K. D. Ikkurthi, S.-K. Kim, T.-S. Kang and H.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10195–10206 RSC .
H.-J. Kim, H.-D. Lee, S. S. Rao, A. E. Reddy, S.-K. Kim and C. V. Thulasi-Varma, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 29003–29019 RSC .
F. Bo, C. Zhang, C. Wang, S. Xu, Z. Wang and Y. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14585–14592 RSC .
J. Xu, H. Xue, X. Yang, H. Wei, W. Li, Z. Li, W. Zhang and C.-S. Lee, Small, 2014, 10, 4754–4759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Tsai, K. Dehvari, W.-C. Ho, K. Waki and J.-Y. Chang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801745 CrossRef .
V. H. V. Quy, E. Vijayakumar, P. Ho, J.-H. Park, J. A. Rajesh, J. Kwon, J. Chae, J.-H. Kim, S.-H. Kang and K.-S. Ahn, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 260, 716–725 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Yeon, S. M. Lee, Y. H. Jo, J. Moon and Y. S. Cho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20112–20117 RSC .
V. Kosyak, M. A. Karmarkar and M. A. Scarpulla, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 263903 CrossRef .
N. R. Mathews, C. Ángeles-Chávez, M. A. Cortés-Jácome and J. A. Toledo Antonio, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 99, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
A. Slonopas, N. Alijabbari, C. Saltonstall, T. Globus and P. Norris, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 151, 140–149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Carrillo-Castillo, R. C. Ambrosio Lázaro, A. Jimenez-Pérez, C. A. Martínez Pérez, E. C. de la Cruz Terrazas and M. A. Quevedo-López, Mater. Lett., 2014, 121, 19–21 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sakthi Sudar Saravanan, M. Meena, D. Pukazhselvan and C. K. Mahadevan, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 627, 69–77 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Jin, G. Q. Zhang, S. Y. Kong, X. Quan, H. S. Huang, Y. Liu, J. H. Zeng and Y. F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6823–6831 RSC .
Z. Yang, C. Y. Chen, C. W. Liu and H. T. Chang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5485–5487 RSC .
H. Yuan, J. Lu, X. Xu, D. Huang, W. Chen, Y. Shen and M. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 9, 624–629 CrossRef .
H.-J. Kim, D.-J. Kim, S. S. Rao, A. D. Savariraj, K. Soo-Kyoung, M.-K. Son, C. V. V. M. Gopi and K. Prabakar, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 127, 427–432 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, S. Wang, W. Dong, X. Fang, J. Shao, J. Zhu and X. Pan, Sol. Energy, 2016, 133, 429–436 CrossRef CAS .
R. Seenu, C. V. V. M. Gopi, S. S. Rao, S.-K. Kim and H.-J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 204, 255–262 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kilic, S. Turkdogan, O. C. Ozer, M. Asgin, O. Bayrakli, G. Surucu, A. Astam and D. Ekinci, Mater. Lett., 2016, 185, 584–587 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kilic, S. Turkdogan, A. Astam, O. C. Ozer, M. Asgin, H. Cebeci, D. Urk and S. P. Mucur, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Wang, D. Y. Wang, Y. T. Jiang, H. A. Chen, C. C. Chen, K. C. Ho, H. L. Chou and C. W. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2013, 52, 6694–6698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shukla, N. H. Loc, P. P. Boix, T. M. Koh, R. R. Prabhakar, H. K. Mulmudi, J. Zhang, S. Chen, C. F. Ng, C. H. A. Huan, N. Mathews, T. Sritharan and Q. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10597–10605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Geng, L. Zhu, W. Li, H. Liu, L. Quan, F. Xi and X. Su, J. Power Sources, 2015, 281, 204–210 CrossRef CAS .
C. Justin Raj, K. Prabakar, A. Dennyson Savariraj and H.-J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 103, 231–236 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, C.-Y. Chen, C.-W. Liu, C.-L. Li and H.-T. Chang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 259–264 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. V. M. Gopi, M. Venkata-Haritha, S. Ravi, C. V. Thulasi-Varma, S.-K. Kim and H.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 12514–12528 RSC .
J. G. Radich, R. Dwyer and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2453–2460 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, L. Zhu, H. Sun, X. Huang, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6162–6168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Du, D. Pan and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1614–1622 RSC .
Q. Pei, Z. Chen, S. Wang, D. Zhang, P. Ma, S. Li, X. Zhou and Y. Lin, Sol. Energy, 2019, 178, 108–113 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hong, Q. Liu, X. Gao, C. He, X. You, X. Zhao, X. Liu and M. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11384–11391 RSC .
D. Wu, Y. Wang, F. Wang, H. Wang, Y. An, Z. Gao, F. Xu and K. Jiang, Carbon, 2017, 123, 756–766 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. V. Muralee Gopi, S. Ravi, S. S. Rao, A. Eswar Reddy and H. J. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 46519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. P. Liu, H. Teng and Y.-L. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23146–23157 RSC .
S. Srinivasa Rao, I. K. Durga, T.-S. Kang, S.-K. Kim, D. Punnoose, C. V. V. M. Gopi, A. Eswar Reddy, T. N. V. Krishna and H.-J. Kim, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 3450–3463 RSC .
Y. Li, L. Zhao, Z. Du, J. Du, W. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Zhao, X.-M. Cao and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2129–2138 RSC .
H.-J. Kim, J.-H. Kim, C. S. S. Pavan Kumar, D. Punnoose, S.-K. Kim, C. V. V. M. Gopi and S. Srinivasa Rao, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2015, 739, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, L. Myung-Sik, C. V. Gopi, M. Venkata-Haritha, S. S. Rao and S. K. Kim, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 11340–11351 RSC .
C. S. Kim, S. H. Choi and J. H. Bang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22078–22087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Savariraj, K. K. Viswanathan and K. Prabakar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19702–19709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ye, X. Wen, N. Zhang, W. Guo, X. Liu and C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9595–9600 RSC .
A. D. Mani, M. Deepa, P. Ghosal and C. Subrahmanyam, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 139, 365–373 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, J. Xiao, J. Dong, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 127, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gimenez, I. Mora-Sero, L. Macor, N. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal, R. Gomez, L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and J. Bisquert, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 295204 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Shen, A. Yamada, S. Tamura and T. Toyoda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 123107 CrossRef .
M. Samadpour, S. Giménez, P. P. Boix, Q. Shen, M. E. Calvo, N. Taghavinia, A. I. zad, T. Toyoda, H. Míguez and I. Mora-Seró, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 75, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Li, Q. Shen, T. Izuishi, Z. Pan, K. Zhao and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 877–886 RSC .
K. Meng, P. K. Surolia, O. Byrne and K. R. Thampi, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 218–223 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lim, D. Y. Lee, S. A. Patil, N. K. Shrestha, S. H. Kang, Y.-C. Nah, W. Lee and S.-H. Han, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 148, 562–568 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Selopal, I. Concina, R. Milan, M. M. Natile, G. Sberveglieri and A. Vomiero, Nano Energy, 2014, 6, 200–210 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shen, L. Sun, Z. Y. Koh and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2807 RSC .
Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, Q. Q. Ge, B. B. Yu, Y. G. Zou, W. J. Jiang, J. S. Hu, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15448–15455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, X. Meng, K. Zhao, Y. Li and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17091–17097 RSC .
X. Q. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Bai, Q. Sun, L. Z. Wang and S. X. Dou, Chem, 2015, 21, 1055–1063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, C. Han, X. Chen, H. Yu, X. Zong, Z. Li and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 609–619 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, P. Zhu, S. Peng, M. Srinivasan, Q. Yan, A. S. Nair, B. Liu and S. Samakrishna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16526–16535 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ye, C. Chen, N. Zhang, X. Wen, W. Guo and C. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301564 CrossRef .
D.-M. Li, L.-Y. Cheng, Y.-D. Zhang, Q.-X. Zhang, X.-M. Huang, Y.-H. Luo and Q.-B. Meng, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 120, 454–461 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Chen, Y. Bai, Z. Li, L. Z. Wang and S. X. Dou, ChemPlusChem, 2016, 81, 414–420 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, Y. Xiao, J. Y. Jung, H. D. Um, S. W. Jee, H. M. Choi, J. H. Bang and J. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 479–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, J. Zhu, Y. Li, J. Wei, M. Lv, Y. Xu, L. Zhou, L. Hu and S. Dai, J. Power Sources, 2015, 292, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
M. Eskandari, V. Ahmadi and R. Ghahary, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 151, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
M. Deng, Q. Zhang, S. Huang, D. Li, Y. Luo, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and Q. Meng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 986–990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, H. Cui, S. Jia, J. Zheng, P. Yang, Z. Wang and Z. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 208, 288–295 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ghosh, G. Halder, A. Sahasrabudhe and S. Bhattacharyya, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10632–10641 RSC .
Z. Du, J. Tong, W. Guo, H. Zhang and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11754–11761 RSC .
S. D. Sung, I. Lim, P. Kang, C. Lee and W. I. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6054–6056 RSC .
X. Zeng, D. Xiong, W. Zhang, L. Ming, Z. Xu, Z. Huang, M. Wang, W. Chen and Y. B. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6992–6998 RSC .
W. Guo, Z. Du, Q. Zhao, H. Zhang and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16500–16506 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shen, D. Fichou and Q. Wang, Chem.–Asian J., 2016, 11, 1183–1193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Punnoose, C. S. S. Pavan Kumar, H. W. Seo, M. Shiratani, A. E. Reddy, S. Srinivasa Rao, C. V. Thulasi-Varma, S.-K. Kim, S.-H. Chung and H.-J. Kim, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 3423–3431 RSC .
Q. Wu, J. Hou, H. Zhao, Z. Liu, X. Yue, S. Peng and H. Cao, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 2214–2221 RSC .
J. Sun, J. Zhao and Y. Masumoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 053119 CrossRef .
E. M. Barea, M. Shalom, S. Giménez, I. Hod, I. Mora-Seró, A. Zaban and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6834–6839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lenzmann, M. Nanu, O. Kijatkina and A. Belaidi, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451, 639–643 CrossRef .
M. Tang, Q. Tian, X. Hu, Y. Peng, Y. Xue, Y. Xue, Z. Chen, J. Yang, X. Xu and J. Hu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1825–1832 RSC .
S. Ghosh, M. Saha, V. D. Ashok, A. Chatterjee and S. K. De, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 155708 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xu, Q. Wan, C. Luan, F. Mei, Q. Zhao, P. An, Z. Liang, G. Xu and J. A. Zapien, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10605–10613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, G. Ali, S. H. Yoo, J. M. Kum and S. O. Cho, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16430 RSC .
Y.-Y. Yang, Q.-X. Zhang, T.-Z. Wang, L.-F. Zhu, X.-M. Huang, Y.-D. Zhang, X. Hu, D.-M. Li, Y.-H. Luo and Q.-B. Meng, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 44–50 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. A. Christians and J. G. Radich, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 5716–5725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Scheme of the typical structure and operation principle of a QDSC device.	 

 	Fig. 2  Functional classification of metal chalcogenides employed in QDSCs.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic drawing of the proposed band edge structure of the TiO2/CdS/CdSe electrode after redistribution of electrons between the CdS and CdSe interface.52 (b) Scheme of the band edge alignment for inverted type-I CdS/CdSe QDs.43 (c) Scheme of type-II ZnTe/CdSe and CdTe/CdSe QDs and the corresponding J−V curves of the resultant QDSCs.27 (d) Structure and band arrangement of CdTe/CdS and CdTe/CdSeS core/shell QDs.109	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Device architecture (left) and energy level diagram (right) of PbS/TiO2 photovoltaic device.110 (b) Deposition process of PbS:Hg QDs on mesoporous TiO2 nanostructure using SILAR method, and J−V curve and IPCE spectrum (inset) of PbS:Hg QD-sensitized solar cell.111 (c) J−V curve (left) of PbS-based solar cells and schematic process (right) of QD deposition via the EPD method.112 (d) Schematic illustration of the possible charge transfer mechanism in PbS/CdS-based QDSCs and the resultant J−V curves.44 (e) Schematic illustration of the possible charge transfer mechanism of PbS-GSH-based QDSCs.113	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) J−V and IPCE spectra and relative picture of QD-loaded TiO2 photoanode.116 (b) Schematic diagrams of the energy levels between TiO2 and CuInS2 QDs with different Cu/In precursor ratios.118 (c) Schematic diagrams of the energy levels of ZnCuInSe compared with that of CuInSe2 QDs and J−V curves of the corresponding QDSCs.29 (d) EQE spectra of the synthesized CuInSexS1−x and CuInS2 QDs.92 (e) Surface configurations and interaction potential of QDs in single and bicomponent solvents, and Gibbs free energy diagram of QDs in a direct absorption process.124 (f) Scheme of the deposition of QDs on TiO2 photoanode via secondary deposition strategy.125	 

Cu1.97S	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Au	0.11	28.1	18.9	0.90	
115

CuInS2	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Pt	0.56	4.51	0.41	1.06	
132

CuInS2	TiO2 NPs–Sn2//S2−/In2S3–Cu2S	0.50	6.49	0.50	1.62	
52

CuInS2	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2S	0.57	7.72	0.418	1.84	
133

CuInS2	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2S	0.66	6.02	0.463	1.85	
134

CuInS2	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–CuxS	0.72	2.41	0.61	1.05	
135

CuInS2	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–CuxS	0.63	2.57	0.582	0.95	
136

CuInS2/ZnS/ZnS	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2S	0.58	22.61	0.515	6.79	
77

CdS/CuInS2	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–C	0.49	8.12	0.37	1.47	
137

CuInS2/CdS	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/ZnO/S2−–CuxS	0.35	5.89	0.36	0.74	
138

CuInS2/Mn:CdS/ZnS	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–CuS	0.58	19.29	0.48	5.38	
53

CuInS2/CdS	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–CuS	0.56	16.9	0.45	4.20	
55

ZnS/CuInS2/CdS/ZnS	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Pt	0.36	0.22	0.326	0.26	
139

CuInS2/CdSe/ZnSe	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Pt	0.58	17.00	0.465	4.55	
140

CuInS2/CdSe	ZnO–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2ZnSnS4–MoS2	0.67	13.52	0.506	4.58	
141

CuInS2/BTF	TiO2 NPs–I−–Pt	0.77	14.54	0.65	7.20	
142

ZnCuInSe	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2S	0.56	6.83	0.56	2.01	
143

CuInSe2/ZnS	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2S	0.53	26.93	0.57	8.1	
144

ZnCuInSe	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–MC/Ti	0.745	25.49	0.627	11.91	
29

ZnCuInSe/CdSe	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–MC/Ti	0.752	27.39	0.619	12.75	
145

CuInGaSe	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–MC/Ti	0.740	25.01	0.621	11.49	
58

ZnCuInSe/AA	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–MC/Ti	0.608	27.71	0.620	10.44	
123

ZnCuInSe	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–MC/Ti	0.745	27.71	0.654	13.50	
125

ZnCuInSe/ZnCuInS	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–MC/Ti	0.762	25.93	0.657	12.98	
126

Cu2ZnSnSeS	TiO2 NPs–Sn2−/S2−–Cu2S	0.47	17.48	0.40	3.29	
116


 	Fig. 6  SEM images of several typical CuxS nanostructures as CE materials in QDSCs. (a) Cu2S nanoflakes,161 (b) hierarchical ITO nanowire arrays/Cu2S,163 (c) hierarchical CuS,164 (d) Knit-coir-mat-like CuS,165 (e) CuS nanosheets,153 (f) skeletal Cu7S4 architecture,166 (g) Cu7S4 nanotubes,167 (h) Cu1.8S nanosheets168 and (i) CuS and Cu1.8S composites.169	 

CuS nanosheets	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.60	17.43	0.50	5.23	
172

CuS	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.56	14.46	0.52	4.38	
223

CuS	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.578	17.57	0.514	5.22	
224

CuS	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.550	16.05	0.489	4.32	
164

CuS	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.554	15.2	0.56	4.75	
225

CuS	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.566	14.58	0.5457	4.53	
226

CuS	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.51	15.08	0.51	3.95	
227

CuS	TiO2 NPs–CdS-Sn2−/S2−	0.645	6.938	0.32	1.3	
228

CuS	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.510	16.34	0.44	3.67	
174

CuS/Ti sheets	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.515	14.11	0.610	4.59	
229

Knit-coir-mat-like CuS	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.57	14.58	0.55	4.57	
226

Cu1.8S nanosheets arrays	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.50	16.07	0.41	3.30	
168

Cu7S4 nanotubes	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.48	19.09	0.49	4.49	
167

3D opening skeletal Cu7S4	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.51	18.45	0.47	4.42	
166

Cu2S nanoflakes	TiO2 NPs–CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.59	16.04	0.56	5.30	
161

Cu2S	TiO2 NPs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.51	7.13	0.48	1.83	
230

Cu2S	TiO2 NTs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.54	6.2	0.53	1.8	
231

Cu2S	TiO2 NPs–CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.65	7.59	0.56	2.80	
232

Cu2S	TiO2 NPs–Mn:CdSeTe–Sn2−/S2−	0.687	20.88	0.655	9.4	
233

Cu2S	TiO2NWAs/CuInS2/CdS/ZnS–Sn2−/S2	0.592	16.72	0.417	4.13	
162

Cu2S/brass	TiO2 NPs–CdSe-Sn2−/S2−	0.577	6.27	0.576	5.41	
161

Cu2S	TiO2 NPs–CdS/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.525	10.6	0.467	2.60	
234

CuxS	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.5	11.89	0.533	3.17	
235

Cu2S	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.51	14.3	0.51	3.75	
236

Cu2S/brass	TiO2 NPs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.60	15.1	0.55	4.97	
237

ITO@Cu2S nanowires	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.56	15.55	0.520	4.53	
238

ITO@Cu2S-III	TiO2 NPs–CdSexTe1−x/ZnS–Sn2−/S2	0.688	15.23	0.584	6.12	
163

CuxS	TiO2 NPs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2	0.611	16.97	0.593	6.28	
169

Cu2−xS	TiO2 NPs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−–PEG	0.643	15.91	0.670	6.81	
239

Cu1.8Se nanosheets	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.54	20.50	0.50	5.53	
178

Cu2−xSe nanotubes	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.56	18.85	0.59	6.23	
240

Cu2−xSe NPs	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.57	21.39	0.59	7.19	
241

CuSySe1−y NPLs	ZnO–ZnSe/CdSe/ZnSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.77	15.69	0.42	5.07	
167

Cu2SnS3 hierarchical microspheres	ZnO–ZnSe/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.81	11.46	0.44	4.08	
168

Cu2SnSe3 NPs	TiO2 NPs–CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.56	16.29	0.54	4.93	
169

Cu2ZnSn4 hierarchical microspheres	ZnO NWs–ZnSe/CdSe/ZnSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.82	11.06	0.41	3.72	
170

Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.55	12.71	0.43	3.01	
171

CuAgSe nanotubes	TiO2 NPs-CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.58	17.57	0.55	5.60	
181

Cu:CoS nanosheets	TiO2 NPs–CdSe0.45Te0.55/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.57	18.20	0.59	6.12	
176

CuS/carbon nanofibers	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.521	14.60	0.507	3.86	
242

RGO/Cu2S	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.556	15.85	0.44	3.85	
243

Cu2S/carbon	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.593	13.69	0.48	3.87	
244

CuAgSe nanotubes	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.581	17.57	0.55	5.61	
245

Cu2ZnSn(S0.5Se0.5)4	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.55	12.71	0.43	3.01	
246

Cu2ZnSnS(Se)4	TiO2 NPs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.54	15.49	0.52	4.35	
156

Cu2ZnSnS4	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.520	12.96	0.38	2.56	
184

Cu2SnS3	ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.81	11.46	0.437	4.06	
155

Cu2SnSe3	TiO2 NPs–CdSe-Sn2−/S2−	0.565	16.45	0.55	4.99	
247

CuInS2/carbon	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.512	14.16	0.60	4.32	
154

CuS/PbS	ZnO NRs/CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.72	7.58	0.41	2.22	
248

Nano-Cu2S/carbon	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.497	10.68	0.581	3.08	
249

Pt/CuS	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	15.31	600	0.46	4.22	
221

Cu2S/RGO	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe–Sn2−/S2−	0.52	18.40	0.46	4.40	
213

CuS NPs/carbon nanofibers	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.52	14.46	0.51	3.83	
242

CuS NPs/3D graphene frameworks	TiO2 NPs–CdS/CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.59	16.19	0.53	5.06	
250

Cu1.18S/GO nanoribbon	TiO2 NPs–CdTe/CdS/CdS–Sn2−/S2−	0.63	20.55	0.53	6.86	
251

Cu2S/Ni foam	TiO2 NPs–CdSeTe–Sn2−/S2−	0.65	20.22	0.68	8.94	
252

Au/CuS nanosheets	TiO2 NPs–PbS/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.42	24.17	0.56	5.68	
253

ITO@Cu2S-III nanowire arrays	TiO2 NPs–CdSeTe–Sn2−/S2−	0.69	15.23	0.58	6.10	
163

Cu2ZnSnSe4 NPs/carbon nanotubes	TiO2 NPs–CdSe/ZnS–Sn2−/S2−	0.53	17.04	0.51	4.61	
254

CuS/active carbon	TiO2 NPs–CdSeTe–Sn2−/S2−	0.653	22.12	0.58	8.38	
255

Graphene hydrogel/CuS	TiO2 NPs–CdSeTe–Sn2−/S2−	0.786	20.69	0.660	10.74	
215


 	Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of the interface modification layers (consisting of surface passivation layer and hole-transporting layer) towards high-efficiency QDSCs.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Scheme of the fabrication CuInS2-sensitized photoanode via the SILAR process with ZnS passivation layer.33 (b) Different sensitized photoanodes treated with ZnS coating and DT grafting.260 (c) Schematic processes for preparing CuInS2-QDs/In2S3-anchored TiO2 electrode on FTO.52 (d) Schematic illustration of the synthetic route for off-stoichiometric Mn:In2S3:CuInS2 QDs prepared with varying Cu/In feed molar ratios.96 (e) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer mechanism in core–shell CuInS2–Mn:CdS QDSCs.53	 

 	Fig. 9  Transfer of holes from CdSe to CuxS was monitored by following the transient absorption of the respective radical species (Se−˙ and S−˙) arising from hole trapping on CdSe and CuxS, respectively.79	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
