Insights into the nanoscale lateral and vertical phase separation in organic bulk heterojunctions via scanning probe microscopy   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR08765A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR08765A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3629-3637Insights into the nanoscale lateral and vertical phase separation in organic bulk heterojunctions via scanning probe microscopy†

        
          
            R. 
            Chintala
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            J. G. 
            Tait
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Eyben
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            E. 
            Voroshazi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Surana
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            C. 
            Fleischmann
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            T. 
            Conard
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            W. 
            Vandervorst
          
        
      ab
aIMEC, Kapeldreef 75, B-3001, Leuven, Belgium. E-mail: chintala@imec.be; ravichandra.chintala@gmail.com
bInstituut voor Kern-en Stralingsfysica, (IKS), Celestijnenlaan 200D, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium
cKU Leuven, ESAT, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, B-3001, Leuven, Belgium
Received 
      9th December 2015
    , Accepted 14th January 2016First published on 15th January 2016AbstractSolution processed polymer (donor) and fullerene (acceptor) bulk heterojunctions are widely used as the photo active layer in organic solar cells. Intimate mixing of these two materials is essential for efficient charge separation and transport. Identifying relative positions of acceptor and donor rich regions in the bulk heterojunction with nanometer scale precision is crucial in understanding intricate details of operation. In this work, a combination of Ar+2000 gas cluster ion beam and scanning probe microscopy is used to examine the lateral and vertical phase separation within regio-regular poly(3-hexylthiophene)(P3HT):phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) bulk heterojunction. While the Ar+2000 gas cluster ion beam is used as a sputter tool to expose the underneath layers, scanning probe microscopy techniques are used to obtain two-dimensional (2D) electrical maps (with sub-2 nm lateral resolution). The electrical mapping is decoded to chemical composition, essentially producing lateral and vertical maps of phase separation. Thermal stress causes large PCBM-rich hillocks to form, and consequently affecting the balance of P3HT:PCBM heterojunctions, hence a negative impact on the efficiency of the solar cell. We further developed a method to analyze the efficiency of exciton dissociation based on the current maps and a loss of 20% in efficiency is observed for thermally degraded samples compared to fresh un-annealed samples.
1. Introduction
Over the last 15 years, there has been an increased attention towards solution-processed, polymer-based bulk hetero junction (BHJ) organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells, because of their potential applicability as a complementary low-cost technology to the present inorganic solar cells.1,2 The progress made in the control of material properties3 and fabrication process4–6 as well as in the ingenuity of using various characterization techniques7,8 has led to deeper understanding of the fundamental details in the operation of these solar cells. As a consequence, the power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of OPV cells have crossed 12%9 and is getting closer to the efficiencies of amorphous–Si solar cells.10 Further progress in the device performance and their stability essentially needs increased understanding on the material properties at the nanometer scale which requires concurrent advances in higher resolution characterization techniques.
Organic solar cells fabricated using regio-regular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (RR-P3HT) as the donor material and phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as the acceptor material have been studied extensively as the most prominent materials in polymer solar cells. Several works have reported reproducible efficiencies of 3–4%.11 Upon light absorption in the photo active layer, a bound electron–hole pair, i.e. an exciton is created which can be separated at a donor–acceptor interface. For efficient charge separation, such interfaces should be within the typical exciton diffusion lengths of around 10 nm.12 Hence, development of optimal morphology of these devices requires information regarding the size of the acceptor and donor domains and their relative positions at nanometer scale in the depth of the film. Furthermore, one of the significant shortcomings for the OPV cells is their performance degradation during their operational lifetime.13–15 We envisage that thermal degradation can be linked to morphological changes that occur in the bulk of the photo-active material mixture. Therefore, there is a need for metrological methods which enable the 3D characterization of the composition at the nm-scale.
Several metrology techniques have enabled the probing of OPV materials in depth. In recent years, application of X-ray based scattering techniques to organic thin films have yielded tremendous results. Using grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) and grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS), one can probe molecular packing of the material.16,17 By varying the angle of incidence of the X-ray beam, the nanoscale structure inside the film can be studied. The advantages of GISAXS are that it is a non-destructive technique that can be applied in situ and in-operando, and the results have a statistical significance as the information is averaged over an area of cm2. However, for GISAXS, synchrotron facilities are needed which limits access to these techniques, making them expensive and inaccessible for routine measurements. Other techniques such as electron tomography based on transmission electron microscopy (TEM)18 to acquire 3D information of the morphology, X-ray based techniques to obtain vertical composition using near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS),19 as well as gas cluster ion beam (GCIB) sputtering techniques using time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS)20 to probe the depth profile of the material composition have been reported. However, the lateral resolution achieved in these techniques (apart from TEM and X-ray scattering techniques) has been so far limited to few tens of nanometers.
Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) based techniques are ideally suited due to their excellent lateral resolution and variety of information that can be extracted. In the recent past, conductive AFM (C-AFM),21 kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM)22 and photo conductive AFM (PC-AFM)23 have been used to study the nanostructure of BHJ. However, since SPM techniques probe only the surface, information as a function of depth cannot be obtained. Even though there have been reports of SPM techniques being employed to study the vertical cross section of OPV devices,24 this is nevertheless a 2D characterization of the BHJ material.
The aim of this work is to demonstrate the feasibility of 3D-analysis with nm-lateral resolution using a combination of SPM and GCIB-sputtering, to identify the material composition in the bulk of the BHJ devices. Using C-AFM, we propose an ex situ methodology to unambiguously identify domains of P3HT and PCBM in the BHJ mixture with sub-2 nm lateral resolution. Although, the phase distinction is based on the intrinsic electrical response of P3HT and PCBM domains in the particular configuration used in our study, the methodology can be extended to other similar systems as well.
2. Experimental
2.1. Materials
Indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates were purchased from TFD (RS = 20 Ω sq−1). The rr-P3HT (4002-EE) was purchased from Rieke Metals, while [60]PCBM was purchased from Nano-C. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) dispersion was purchased as Clevios P VP Al 4083 from Heraeus Clevios GmbH. All solvents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
2.2. Sample fabrication
All the substrates were cleaned before use in sequential ultrasonic bathes of detergent, deionized water, acetone, and 2-propanol. Samples with PEDOT:PSS layers were first treated in an O2 plasma for 5 minutes, spin coated with as-received PEDOT:PSS in ambient conditions, and annealed at 130 °C for 10 minutes, resulting in 30 nm thick layers. The photoactive materials was dissolved in ortho-dichlorobenzene at 70 °C for at least 4 hours, filtered through a 5 μm PTFE filter, and spin coated in a N2 environment to attain 250 nm thick layers.
Since the fabricated OPV cells have no top electrode, bearing in mind that the surface is sensitive to oxygen and water, care is taken to not expose them to ambient atmosphere. Only duration the samples were exposed to air was during sample loading and transferring for the crater formation using TOF-SIMS.
2.3. Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy
Craters were made using the Argon gas cluster ion beam gun mounted at an angle of 45° with respect to the sample surface in a time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometer (TOF-SIMS 5) from IONTOF. Sputtering was carried out with a focused ion beam with an energy of 5 keV and a mean cluster size of ∼2000 atoms. The Ar+2000 beam was rastered over an area of 300 × 300 μm2. The depth of the craters was varied by varying the dose of the sputter beam. Composition depth profile information using TOF-SIMS is shown in ESI (S5).†
2.4. Atomic force microscopy
All AFM measurements were acquired using Bruker Dimension ICON in an inert Argon atmosphere (H2O and O2 levels <0.1 ppm). A total of 5 scans of 1 μm × 1 μm are made for each crater (300 μm × 300 μm) and at least 10 craters were probed for both fresh and degraded samples. The measurements were repeated for another set of samples. Softer cantilevers were used, in order to have precise control on the applied forces.
KPFM measurements were performed in peak-force KPFM (PF-KPFM) mode. Commercially available SCM-PIT cantilevers with spring constant (k) = 1–5 N m−1 were used. KPFM is a dual pass technique, where topography is acquired in the first pass using peak-force tapping mode followed by a surface potential map in the second pass, once the AFM tip is lifted.
Commercially available SCM-PIC cantilevers with spring constant (k) = 0.2 N m−1 are chosen for C-AFM measurements. Using these cantilevers and the measurement ambience in Argon atmosphere, stable measurements were achieved at forces as low as ∼500 pN.
3. Results and discussion
The BHJ solar cell architecture studied in this work is shown in the Fig. 1a. The photoactive layer is a mixture of P3HT (donor) and PCBM (acceptor), spin coated on PEDOT:PSS with ITO as cathode. Fig. 1b shows surface topography of the fresh sample acquired using the peak-force AFM (PF-AFM)25 technique. The RMS roughness of the surface is ∼10 nm. Although, the active layer is composed of acceptor and donor material, the topographical information appears not representative of the material composition. The electrical properties of P3HT and PCBM are used to identify each component in the BHJ mixture and thus to deduce their spatial location within the photoactive layer. For that purpose we collect a surface potential map using peak-force KPFM (PF-KPFM) technique.26 A histogram of the observed contact potential difference (CPD) (Fig. 1c) over the surface shows a single band of values, suggesting that the surface is composed of one single homogenous material. The peak position of the obtained distribution shows that the most probable value of the surface potential difference is ∼(600 ± 100) mV, which corresponds to the difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of P3HT and the work function (WF) of Pt/Ir coated AFM tips (for calibration of WF of the tips, refer S1 in ESI†) used to obtain the potential map (shown in Fig. 1d). This confirms that the surface is P3HT-rich. Earlier reports on composition profiling on similar architecture devices have demonstrated that the surface of the active layer is P3HT-rich.27–29 The predominant presence of P3HT layer on the surface can be explained by the fact that the P3HT/air interface has a lower surface energy (ϒ) difference compared to the PCBM/air interface (ϒP3HT = 26.9 mN m−2, ϒPCBM = 37.8 mN m−2).28
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of X-section of the BHJ solar cell. The photoactive layer (P3HT:PCBM) is spin coated on PEDOT:PSS/ITO/glass substrate. (b) Surface topography of the spin coated blend (1 μm × 1 μm) acquired using PF-AFM technique. The RMS surface roughness is ∼10 nm. (c) Histogram associated with the surface potential map. It depicts that the most probable value of the difference in the contact potential between the tip and the surface is ∼600 mV, confirming that the surface is P3HT rich. (d) Energy levels of P3HT, PCBM with respect to the AFM tip. 
We investigate the effect of high temperature annealing on the nanoscopic morphological changes in the photo-active material by ex situ characterization of samples annealed at 130 °C for 1 h. To eliminate the impact of thermal-oxidation the annealing was performed inside a glovebox with N2 atmosphere. Such annealing conditions are used to simulate either accelerated aging conditions or the thermal budget during packaging and system integration steps of OPV cells. We observe that the thermal annealing degrades the surface morphology, resulting in the formation of micron-sized hillocks (refer S2 in ESI†). PF-AFM topography of the surface shows that the hillocks are typically 3–5 μm in diameter with a peak height of ∼500 nm. Earlier studies on morphological effects30 resulting from annealing at elevated temperatures on similar devices (analyzed using X-TEM/EDS) have revealed the presence of similar PCBM rich hillocks. Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy of spin coated P3HT:PCBM blend samples showed that the detected PL intensity increases (almost doubled) after thermal annealing (refer ESI S4†). This means that the PL quenching decreases after annealing the blend. The increase in the PL intensity is a direct measure of increase in the phase separation of the acceptor and the donor materials, leading to larger areas of P3HT and PCBM which leads to less efficient exciton dissociation into electron and hole pair. Obviously, more detailed information and in-depth analysis is needed to unravel and understand thermally induced degradation mechanisms and the origin of these morphological modifications in this material.
As SPM is restricted to a 2D-map, we explore the use of ion beam sputtering followed by electrical SPM-analysis to generate composition maps at various depths. It is critical that the ion beam sputtering process should not change the spatial distribution of the constituents nor influence their chemical/electronic state making the SPM analysis otherwise incorrect. Within the TOF-SIMS community exploring depth profile analysis of organic systems, it has been established that using an Ar GCIB cluster beam for the erosion process enables to maintain the chemical identity of the constituents and also to remove layers in a well-controlled manner.31–34 Mouhib et al. have proved that the use of Ar cluster beam causes relatively less damage compared to other ion sources such as Cs+ or C60.31 Further, Fleischmann et al. have shown that the sputter rate for pure PCBM material is ∼3 times higher than that of pure P3HT and varies non-linearly with the material composition.20 Although these sputter rates are different, steady state sputter yields are observed in the TOF-SIMS depth profile, for both the materials. This indicates controlled material removal (refer S5 in ESI†). Furthermore, AFM topography maps of all the sputtered craters are analyzed and the RMS roughness of the floors of the craters was found to be similar to the top surface, confirming that the material removal is uniform and Ar GCIB sputtering does not affect the surface morphology (refer S3 in ESI†). In this work, we use Ar+2000 as bombarding species making several craters of (300 μm × 300 μm). The depth of the first crater was ∼5 nm and the rest of the craters were made with incremental depth steps of 15–20 nm. Subsequently, SPM analysis is performed in each crater to understand the compositional 2D distribution at the corresponding depth.
An example of the SPM measurements of thermally degraded sample in one of the craters is shown in Fig. 2. From the PF-AFM topography map (Fig. 2a), bumps or hillocks of various sizes can be observed on the surface, which precisely correspond to regions of different adhesion compared to the surrounding regions (cf. Fig. 2b). Thus, we can infer that the observed bumps have a different material composition compared to the surrounding regions. A surface potential map using PF-KPFM (Fig. 2c) also illustrates a clear contrast between the bumps and the surrounding regions. A line cross-section of the CPD (Fig. 2d) shows a difference of ∼1 eV between the two regions which coincides with the difference between the active energy levels of the acceptor and donor materials i.e. the HOMO of P3HT and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of PCBM. Hence we interpret the regions with different CPD as regions of respectively P3HT or PCBM and conclude that the bumps are PCBM rich and embedded in a P3HT-rich surrounding matrix. The presence of PCBM bumps is consistent with the earlier reported crystallization of PCBM into small particles through diffusion in the P3HT matrix during thermal treatments, and their subsequent merger into bigger clusters through Ostwald ripening mechanism.35 On the other hand, the very first in-operando studies on the morphological degradation in P3HT:PCBM systems were performed by Schaffer et al.36 using μGISAXS, and they did not observe formation of such large PCBM hillocks. This was attributed to the relatively lower operating temperature (<45 °C) used their work.36 In our work, however, accelerated degradation is performed at 130 °C for 1 h and our measurement is carried ex situ. Note that similar in-depth SPM analysis on fresh samples (not annealed) did not show PCBM crystallites emphasizing the link to the thermal budget.
 Fig. 2  SPM measurements in a crater made using Ar GCIB. Simultaneous (a) topographical, (b) mechanical adhesion and (c) electrical surface potential maps (2 μm × 2 μm, 256 × 256 pixels) of sample that was thermally annealed at 150 °C for 1 h, (d) line cross section of surface potential map. Surface potential map is acquired using PF-KPFM mode. The lift height used in this scan is 75 nm. Adhesion and surface potential maps are color coded to show P3HT (red) and PCBM (blue). 
As KPFM is a non-contact mode, the necessary lift height of the tip (i.e. the distance between the AFM tip and sample surface) leads to spatial signal averaging and thus reduced lateral resolution such that features less than 20 nm cannot be distinguished. A resolution limit smaller than the exciton diffusion length (EDL) (<10 nm) is however needed if we want to study the link between the intermixing of donor and acceptor materials, and the efficiency of the BHJ mixture. In order to achieve better spatial resolution in identifying acceptor and donor regions, a contact mode technique i.e. C-AFM is employed. In C-AFM, one records the spatial distribution of the current at a fixed bias voltage targeting an identification of the P3HT and PCBM regions through the local differences in observed current.
In order to understand the feasibility of this approach, local I–V spectroscopy studies are performed in the crater shown in Fig. 2. During the I–V spectroscopy studies, the AFM tip remains in contact with the surface and the current through the system is recorded while the applied voltage is linearly swept from −10 V to +10 V. Observations of I–V spectroscopy curves (Fig. 3) denote that for negative sample bias (with respect to the AFM tip) current recorded on PCBM-rich domains is negligible compared to the current recorded on P3HT-rich domains. This can be linked to the very high electron injection barrier between PEDOT:PSS and the LUMO of PCBM. A pictorial representation of the charge injection barrier (negative sample bias) for electrons coming from PEDOT:PSS to PCBM and holes from the AFM tip to P3HT is shown in Fig. 3b and c, respectively. Therefore, the low current (<1 pA) in this bias configuration is used as a signature to identify PCBM while any detectable current is deemed to originate from P3HT since the BHJ mixture is composed of P3HT and PCBM. On the other hand, when the sample is biased positively with respect to the AFM tip, no significant barriers are present and (large) charge conduction is observed in both P3HT and PCBM domains and no discrimination between both can be made. It has to be noted that even though the existence of three phase system has been accepted for P3HT:PCBM BHJ films,37 using C-AFM electrical response, one can only identify whether the material is polymer or fullerene but cannot comment on the phase of the materials. The current is averaged over each pixel, if this area is P3HT rich, the pixel shows conductance and if it is PCBM rich, no detectable current is noticed.
 Fig. 3  (a) Local I–V characteristics on P3HT and PCBM rich areas. For negative sample bias (with respect to the AFM tip), no detectable current is noticed in PCBM rich areas. The charge injection barrier when ITO is biased negatively w.r.t the AFM tip for (b) PCBM showing direction of electrons (blue) (b) P3HT showing direction of holes (red). The electron injection barrier from PEDOT:PSS to LUMO of PCBM (blue) is very high compared to hole injection barrier from AFM tip to HOMO of P3HT (red). 
With the AFM tip in contact with the surface and a negative bias applied to the sample, current maps were acquired using C-AFM in each crater. In these measurements, the scan area is (1 μm × 1 μm), consisting of (512 pixels × 512 pixels) rendering the area of each pixel (2 nm × 2 nm). Even though the macroscopic radius of the AFM tip is ∼20 nm, the low loading forces (<1 nN) employed in the measurements lead to very low indentation into the sample (<0.15 nm), creating the physical contact area contributing to the electrical signal less than the actual radius of the AFM tip.21 As such a sub-2 nm resolution can be achieved using this method. The area corresponding to number of pixels of high current in the current maps can be used as a direct measure of the areal coverage of P3HT in the analyzed crater. By performing this analysis in the GCIB sputtered craters of varying depths, compositional changes in the depth of the layer are revealed. Fig. 4 shows examples of current maps recorded at different depths of a fresh sample whereby the regions of P3HT (red) and PCBM (blue) are color coded. These maps clearly verify, the variations in the concentration of the acceptor and donor materials with depth. From detailed quantitative analysis of the 2D current maps the concentration of P3HT and PCBM as a function of the depth of the sample can be obtained and a trend can be interpolated, as is shown in Fig. 5a and b for fresh and thermally degraded sample, respectively.
 Fig. 4  2D current maps for fresh sample using C-AFM of (1 μm × 1 μm) at various depths (z) (a) z = 5 nm (b) z = 30 nm (c) z = 80 nm (d) z = 156 nm. The current maps are color coded to represent P3HT (red) and PCBM (blue). 
 Fig. 5  Compositional depth profile of P3HT (red) and PCBM (blue) in (a) fresh sample (b) degraded sample. The grey hashed area represents the range in the variation of the composition percentage in the scanned area. 
In agreement with the PF-KPFM measurements, C-AFM measurements also indicate that the surface of both the fresh and degraded samples is P3HT-rich. The presence of P3HT layer on the surface has been examined earlier using cross-sectional TEM by Favia et al.30 Immediately beneath the surface layer, a PCBM-rich layer is observed. The presence of a thin P3HT layer (<5 nm) on the top surface of the active layer in a conventional device architecture with the top electrode as an electron collector, is detrimental for the efficiency of the solar cell. However, the presence of a layer of PCBM immediately underneath the P3HT layer allows electrons to find percolation paths to reach the top electrode.38 Previous investigations of vertical composition analysis with XRR by Ruderer et al.39 have observed similar trend that a thin layer of P3HT does not hinder the performance of the solar cell. On the other hand, inverse stratification of P3HT on the top and PCBM at the bottom result in lower efficiencies.
Further into the depth of the photo-active layer, we observe that the freshly prepared sample has a uniform distribution of concentration of P3HT and PCBM. Examining individual current maps and the trend of percentage of P3HT and PCBM, we can conclude an intimate intermixing of P3HT and PCBM in the active layer. On the other hand, for the thermally degraded sample, large fluctuations in the concentration can be observed in depth. This can be directly associated with the formation of the large micron-sized PCBM hillocks leading to in-homogeneities in the composition of P3HT and PCBM. The PCBM hillocks formed by crystallization of smaller PCBM particles, have a stronger influence on the lateral phase separation, leading to larger domain sizes of individual materials.
To quantify the effect of the domain sizes and understand the impact of these nanometer-scale changes in phase separation on the device performance, the efficiency of exciton dissociation (ηED) is estimated based on the information garnered by the C-AFM technique. Excitons that are photo-generated are dissociated at a donor/acceptor junction such as that between P3HT and PCBM. The dissociated charges are subsequently transported to the electrodes. Thus, exciton dissociation and the subsequent charge collection efficiency is directly related to the PCE of the solar cell. For the solar cell architecture and materials considered in this work, the typical EDL is around 10 nm. Thus, for efficient exciton dissociation, a P3HT:PCBM junction has to be present within an EDL. From the 2D current maps (cf. Fig. 4) which yield the relative position of acceptor and donor materials with ∼2 nm resolution, we can estimate whether a generated exciton will dissociate into an electron–hole pair or not. As a first order approximation, the neighborhood of every pixel is examined within a radius of ∼10 nm to estimate whether the pixel would contribute to the creation of an electron–hole (cf. Fig. 6b) pair in case an exciton is created at that pixel. Assuming equal optical absorption for P3HT and PCBM, using neighborhood search algorithm in MATLAB, the ηED is calculated. For fresh sample, the calculated ηED in all the craters is in the range of 80–95% as shown in the Fig. 6c. The average ηED over the entire depth is ∼90%. This indicates an almost perfect and uniform intermixing of P3HT and PCBM throughout the depth of the fresh sample. Similar analysis for thermally degraded samples over the analyzed sample depth yields ηED to be only ∼70% on average. The loss in ηED can be understood from the morphological changes presented earlier. In thermally degraded samples, the hillocks are formed by accumulating PCBM from the surrounding BHJ matrix, thereby reducing the density of P3HT/PCBM junctions and increasing the average distance an exciton must diffuse before finding such a junction. Our results indicate that through the depth resolved C-AFM approach one clearly can identify some of the mechanisms contributing to the change in the cell performance during degradation. Through the high resolution capabilities of C-AFM in combination with the method to probe the photo-active layer in depth allows to correlate the nanometer-scale morphological variations in electrical performance.
 Fig. 6  (a) An example of a current map displaying the regions rich in P3HT (red) and PCBM (blue). (b) The neighborhood of each pixel is examined for a donor:acceptor junction, which is required for the exciton to dissociate into electron and hole. A pixelated schematic to show the procedure to find out if an exciton can dissociate into charge carrier or not based on a known diffusion length. (c) An output map, after processing whether an exciton can dissociate (grey) or not (black), assuming 10 nm diffusion length to a donor:acceptor heterojunction. (d) Based on these tomographic dissociation maps, exciton dissociation efficiency is formulated and shown plotted vs. depth into the BHJ for fresh and thermally degraded samples. 
4. Conclusions
Photoactive layer comprising of P3HT and PCBM have been one of the workhorses for organic solar cells to obtain reproducible PCE. We have presented here a methodology to locally resolve (sub-2 nm) P3HT and PCBM domains in BHJ mixture using SPM techniques. P3HT rich surface is noticed for both fresh and thermally degraded samples. A combination of Ar+2000 GCIB sputtering and high resolution mapping capabilities of C-AFM, allows to characterize the vertical phase separation in the photo active layer. Formation of large domains of PCBM rich hillocks are noticed in thermally degraded samples. The compositional changes which occur in the thermally degraded sample have a negative impact on the performance of the solar cell. Using the depth resolved C-AFM current maps, an approach is presented to identify one of the potential mechanism for the reduced cell performance i.e., the decreased efficiency of exciton dissociation due to the formation of larger domains and the larger diffusion length required for charge separation. For instance in the case studied the efficiency of exciton dissociation drops by ∼20% for thermally degraded samples linking the loss to the thermal budget.
References
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Efficient Tandem Polymer Solar Cells Fabricated by All-Solution Processing, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Polymer Photovoltaic Cells: Enhanced Efficiencies via a Network of Internal Donor–Acceptor-Heterojunctions, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch and C.-S. Ha, 
            et al., A Strong Regioregularity Effect in Self-Organizing Conjugated Polymer Films and High-Efficiency Polythiophene: fullerene Solar Cells, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Nanoscale Morphology of Conjugated Polymer/Fullerene-Based Bulk-Heterojunction Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005–1011 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, Morphology of Polymer/fullerene Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45–61 RSC .
S. S. van Bavel, M. Bärenklau, G. de With, H. Hoppe and J. Loos, P3HT/PCBM Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells: Impact of Blend Composition and 3D Morphology on Device Performance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1458–1463 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Vaynzof, D. Kabra, L. Zhao, L. L. Chua, U. Steiner and R. H. Friend, Surface-Directed Spinodal Decomposition, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 329–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yu, W. Lin, W. Wang, S. Iida, S. Chen, Ќ. C. Liu, C. Kuo, S. Lee, W. Kao and G. Yen, 
            et al., Effect of Fabrication Parameters on Three-Dimensional Nanostructures of Resolution Scanning ToF-SIMS, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 833–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Heliatek Press Release. http://www.heliatek.com/wpcontent/uploads/2013/01/130116_PR_Heliatek_achieves_record_cell_effiency_for_OPV.pdf.
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics: Res. Appl., 2014, 22, 1–9 CrossRef .
F. Padinger, R. S. Rittberger and N. S. Sariciftci, Effects of Postproduction Treatment on Plastic Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H.-Y. Wang, B.-R. Gao, L. Wang, Z.-Y. Yang, X.-B. Du, Q.-D. Chen, J.-F. Song and H.-B. Sun, Exciton Diffusion and Charge Transfer Dynamics in Nano Phase-Separated P3HT/PCBM Blend Films, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2280–2285 RSC .
E. Voroshazi, B. Verreet, T. Aernouts and P. Heremans, Long-Term Operational Lifetime and Degradation Analysis of P3HT:PCBM Photovoltaic Cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1303–1307 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Ayzner, D. D. Wanger, C. J. Tassone, S. H. Tolbert and B. J. Schwartz, Room to Improve Conjugated Polymer-Based Solar Cells: Understanding How Thermal Annealing Affects the Fullerene Component of a Bulk Heterojunction Photovoltaic Device, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18711–18716 CAS .
T. Wang, A. J. Pearson, D. G. Lidzey and R. A. L. Jones, Evolution of Structure, Optoelectronic Properties, and Device Performance of Polythiophene: fullerene Solar Cells during Thermal Annealing, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1383–1390 CrossRef CAS .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, The Active Layer Morphology of Organic Solar Cells Probed with Grazing Incidence Scattering Techniques, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7692–7709 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Ruderer and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Morphology of Polymer-Based Bulk Heterojunction Films for Organic Photovoltaics, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5482–5493 RSC .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, The Effect of Three-Dimensional Morphology on the Efficiency of Hybrid Polymer Solar Cells, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818–824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xue, B. Vaughan, C.-H. Poh, K. B. Burke, L. Thomsen, A. Stapleton, X. Zhou, G. W. Bryant, W. Belcher and P. C. Dastoor, Vertical Stratification and Interfacial Structure in P3HT:PCBM Organic Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15797–15805 CAS .
C. Fleischmann, T. Conard, R. Havelund, A. Franquet, C. Poleunis, E. Voroshazi, A. Delcorte and W. Vandervorst, Fundamental Aspects of Arn+SIMS Profiling of Common Organic Semiconductors, Surf. Interface Anal., 2014, 46, 54–57 CrossRef CAS .
D. Moerman, N. Sebaihi, S. E. Kaviyil, P. Leclère, R. Lazzaroni and O. Douhéret, Towards a Unified Description of the Charge Transport Mechanisms in Conductive Atomic Force Microscopy Studies of Semiconducting Polymers, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10596–10603 RSC .
E. J. Spadafora, R. Demadrille, B. Ratier and B. Grévin, Imaging the Carrier Photogeneration in Nanoscale Phase Segregated Organic Heterojunctions by Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3337–3342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. C. Pingree, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Electrical Scanning Probe Microscopy on Active Organic Electronic Devices, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 19–28 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saive, M. Scherer, C. Mueller, D. Daume, J. Schinke, M. Kroeger and W. Kowalsky, Imaging the Electric Potential within Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5854–5860 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Pittenger, N. Erina and C. Su, Quantitative Mechanical Property Mapping at the Nanoscale, PeakForce QNM. Bruker Appl. Note #128,  2011.

          C. Li, S. Minne, Y. Hu, M. Ji, J. He, H. Mittel, V. Kelly, N. Erina, S. Guo and T. Mueller, PeakForce Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy, Bruker Appl. Note #140,  2013, 1–14.
D. S. Germack, C. K. Chan, R. J. Kline, D. A. Fischer, D. J. Gundlach, M. F. Toney, L. J. Richter and D. M. DeLongchamp, Interfacial Segregation in Polymer/Fullerene Blend Films for Photovoltaic Devices, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3828–3836 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Germack, C. K. Chan, B. H. Hamadani, L. J. Richter, D. A. Fischer, D. J. Gundlach and D. M. DeLongchamp, Substrate-Dependent Interface Composition and Charge Transport in Films for Organic Photovoltaics, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 233303 CrossRef .
Z.-L. Guan, J. B. Kim, H. Wang, C. Jaye, D. A. Fischer, Y.-L. Loo and A. Kahn, Direct Determination of the Electronic Structure of the poly(3-Hexylthiophene):phenyl-[6,6]-C61 Butyric Acid Methyl Ester Blend, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1779–1785 CrossRef CAS .
P. Favia, E. Voroshazi, P. Heremans and H. Bender, Investigation of Aged Organic Solar Cell Stacks by Cross-Sectional Transmission Electron Microscopy Coupled with Elemental Analysis, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 2908–2919 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mouhib, C. Poleunis, N. Wehbe, J. J. Michels, Y. Galagan, L. Houssiau, P. Bertrand and A. Delcorte, Molecular Depth Profiling of
Organic Photovoltaic Heterojunction Layers by ToF-SIMS: Comparative Evaluation of Three Sputtering Beams, Analyst, 2013, 138, 6801–6810 RSC .
S. Ninomiya, K. Ichiki, H. Yamada, Y. Nakata, T. Seki, T. Aoki and J. Matsuo, Molecular Depth Profiling of Multilayer Structures of Organic Semiconductor Materials by Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry with Large Argon Cluster Ion Beams, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2009, 23, 3264–3268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Niehuis, R. Möllers, D. Rading, H.-G. Cramer and R. Kersting, Analysis of Organic Multilayers and 3D Structures Using Ar Cluster Ions, Surf. Interface Anal., 2013, 45, 158–162 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Smentkowski, G. Zorn, A. Misner, G. Parthasarathy, A. Couture, E. Tallarek and B. Hagenhoff, ToF-SIMS Depth Profiling of Organic Solar Cell Layers Using an Ar Cluster Ion Source, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2013, 31, 030601 Search PubMed .
B. Conings, S. Bertho, K. Vandewal, A. Senes, J. D′Haen, J. Manca and R. A. J. Janssen, Modeling the Temperature Induced Degradation Kinetics of the Short Circuit Current in Organic Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 163301 CrossRef .
C. J. Schaffer, C. M. Palumbiny, M. A. Niedermeier, C. Jendrzejewski, G. Santoro, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, A Direct Evidence of Morphological Degradation on a Nanometer Scale in Polymer Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6760–6764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. a. Collins, J. R. Tumbleston and H. Ade, Miscibility, Crystallinity, and Phase Development in P3HT/PCBM Solar Cells: Toward an Enlightened Understanding of Device Morphology and Stability, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3135–3145 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, E. D. Gomez, J. Kim, Z. Guan, C. Jaye, D. a. Fischer, A. Kahn and Y.-L. Loo, Device Characteristics of Bulk-Heterojunction Polymer Solar Cells Are Independent of Interfacial Segregation of Active Layers, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2020–2023 CrossRef CAS .
M. a. Ruderer, S. Guo, R. Meier, H. Y. Chiang, V. Körstgens, J. Wiedersich, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Solvent-Induced Morphology in Polymer-Based Systems for Organic Photovoltaics, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3382–3391 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr08765aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of X-section of the BHJ solar cell. The photoactive layer (P3HT:PCBM) is spin coated on PEDOT:PSS/ITO/glass substrate. (b) Surface topography of the spin coated blend (1 μm × 1 μm) acquired using PF-AFM technique. The RMS surface roughness is ∼10 nm. (c) Histogram associated with the surface potential map. It depicts that the most probable value of the difference in the contact potential between the tip and the surface is ∼600 mV, confirming that the surface is P3HT rich. (d) Energy levels of P3HT, PCBM with respect to the AFM tip.	 

 	Fig. 2  SPM measurements in a crater made using Ar GCIB. Simultaneous (a) topographical, (b) mechanical adhesion and (c) electrical surface potential maps (2 μm × 2 μm, 256 × 256 pixels) of sample that was thermally annealed at 150 °C for 1 h, (d) line cross section of surface potential map. Surface potential map is acquired using PF-KPFM mode. The lift height used in this scan is 75 nm. Adhesion and surface potential maps are color coded to show P3HT (red) and PCBM (blue).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Local I–V characteristics on P3HT and PCBM rich areas. For negative sample bias (with respect to the AFM tip), no detectable current is noticed in PCBM rich areas. The charge injection barrier when ITO is biased negatively w.r.t the AFM tip for (b) PCBM showing direction of electrons (blue) (b) P3HT showing direction of holes (red). The electron injection barrier from PEDOT:PSS to LUMO of PCBM (blue) is very high compared to hole injection barrier from AFM tip to HOMO of P3HT (red).	 

 	Fig. 4  2D current maps for fresh sample using C-AFM of (1 μm × 1 μm) at various depths (z) (a) z = 5 nm (b) z = 30 nm (c) z = 80 nm (d) z = 156 nm. The current maps are color coded to represent P3HT (red) and PCBM (blue).	 

 	Fig. 5  Compositional depth profile of P3HT (red) and PCBM (blue) in (a) fresh sample (b) degraded sample. The grey hashed area represents the range in the variation of the composition percentage in the scanned area.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) An example of a current map displaying the regions rich in P3HT (red) and PCBM (blue). (b) The neighborhood of each pixel is examined for a donor:acceptor junction, which is required for the exciton to dissociate into electron and hole. A pixelated schematic to show the procedure to find out if an exciton can dissociate into charge carrier or not based on a known diffusion length. (c) An output map, after processing whether an exciton can dissociate (grey) or not (black), assuming 10 nm diffusion length to a donor:acceptor heterojunction. (d) Based on these tomographic dissociation maps, exciton dissociation efficiency is formulated and shown plotted vs. depth into the BHJ for fresh and thermally degraded samples.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr08765a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
