Hybrid materials science: a promised land for the integrative design of multifunctional materials  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR01788A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR01788A
(Feature Article)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6267-6292Hybrid materials science: a promised land for the integrative design of multifunctional materials

        
          
            Lionel 
            Nicole
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Christel 
            Laberty-Robert
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Laurence 
            Rozes
          
        
      abc and 

        
          
            Clément 
            Sanchez
          
        
      *abc
aSorbonne Universités UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7574, Chimie de la Matière Condensée de Paris, F-75005, Paris, France. E-mail: clement.sanchez@upmc.fr; christel.laberty@upmc.fr; laurence.rozes@upmc.fr; lionel.nicole@upmc.fr;  Fax: +33-144271504;   Tel: +33-144271501
bCNRS, UMR 7574, Chimie de la Matière Condensée de Paris, F-75005, Paris, France. E-mail: clement.sanchez@upmc.fr; christel.laberty@upmc.fr; laurence.rozes@upmc.fr; lionel.nicole@upmc.fr;  Fax: +33-144271504;   Tel: +33-144271501
cCollège de France, UMR 7574, Chimie de la Matière Condensée de Paris, F-75005, Paris, France. E-mail: clement.sanchez@college-de-france.fr; christel.laberty@upmc.fr; laurence.rozes@upmc.fr; lionel.nicole@upmc.fr;  Fax: +33-144271504;   Tel: +33-144271501
Received 
      2nd April 2014
    , Accepted 30th April 2014First published on 16th May 2014AbstractFor more than 5000 years, organic–inorganic composite materials created by men via skill and serendipity have been part of human culture and customs. The concept of “hybrid organic–inorganic” nanocomposites exploded in the second half of the 20th century with the expansion of the so-called “chimie douce” which led to many collaborations between a large set of chemists, physicists and biologists. Consequently, the scientific melting pot of these very different scientific communities created a new pluridisciplinary school of thought. Today, the tremendous effort of basic research performed in the last twenty years allows tailor-made multifunctional hybrid materials with perfect control over composition, structure and shape. Some of these hybrid materials have already entered the industrial market. Many tailor-made multiscale hybrids are increasingly impacting numerous fields of applications: optics, catalysis, energy, environment, nanomedicine, etc. In the present feature article, we emphasize several fundamental and applied aspects of the hybrid materials field: bioreplication, mesostructured thin films, Lego-like chemistry designed hybrid nanocomposites, and advanced hybrid materials for energy. Finally, a few commercial applications of hybrid materials will be presented.
Hybrid chemistry history in short
Hybrid Organic–Inorganic Materials (HOIM) are generally described as the combination, at the nanoscale, of an inorganic component and an (bio-)organic one and thus fall within the category of nanocomposite materials. Historically, such intimate mixings were not performed by mankind but have been successfully experienced by Nature over billion years of evolution leading to multi-functional and hierarchical multi-scale systems.1,2 It is only very recently, at the geologic time scale, that the first HOIM made by humanity appeared. Due to their high natural availability and their intrinsic properties (high adsorption ability, interesting ion-exchange capacity, and good thermal, mechanical and chemical stabilities), HOIM based on organically modified clays have been part of human existence and were used along history for artistic, societal, environmental, industrial and commercial uses.3–5 Probably one of the first uses of clay-based HOIM was a long time before antiquity, in the Mediterranean region, where clay and soil were mixed with decaying urine to enhance laundry processes. Over the course of human history, the use of hybrid clays spread progressively all over the world. In China for example, hybrid clays permitted production of very thin ceramics (eggshell porcelain) thanks to the intercalation of urea inside interlayer space which facilitated their further delamination improving plasticity.6 In America, pre-Colombian civilisations left us, in particular in their frescoes, a well-known pigment, the Maya blue, which was intertwined with their artistic and religious life. This pigment resulted in the incorporation of a natural organic dye (blue indigo) within the channels of micro-fibrous clay (palygorskite).7,8 The resulting hybrid is characterised by a strong blue colouring much more stable towards weathering and biodegradation than the fragile indigo dye alone. The stabilisation of the organic dye by the mineral part allows us to admire vestiges 12 centuries old (frescoes, sculptures, codices, etc.) and thus to know these lost civilisations better.
These first historical examples summarise core principles of HOIM: coupling at the nanoscale of (bio)organic and inorganic components, synergistic effects of this coupling, (multi)functionality, outstanding processability and applicability, and strong links with civil society. Over the 20th century, HOIM had a strong industrial and commercial development.9,10 For example, in the 1940s, silicones and hybrid nano-pigments, and a few years later, organically templated zeolites provided a huge set of functional hybrid materials that have found interest in automotive, aeronautic, construction, medical and paint industries and for catalytic transformations of primary resources in gas and oil. However, the name “hybrid materials” was not mentioned at that time. Mixed organic–inorganic materials nucleated in the middle of 1980s with the expansion of “chimie douce”.11–16 Then the concept of “hybrid organic–inorganic” nanocomposites exploded in the 1990s when a pluridisciplinary school of thought was created under the strong impulse of the European actors of the research.17,18
Without any doubt, David Avnir was one of the early pioneers who understood that the mild and versatile synthetic conditions offered by the sol–gel process allow the mixing of inorganic and organic components at the nanometric scale and in an extremely wide chemical composition range and shapes, therefore offering a wide range of possibilities to elaborate tailor-made advanced functional materials.13 The hybrid materials processed by D. Avnir provided many opportunities in very diverse fields associated with optics,13,19–21 catalysis,22–24 sensors,25–28 biocatalysis,29,30 functional microcapsules,31–38etc. Besides a wide and varied academic career, D. Avnir founded in 1997 with Alon Seri-Levy the Sol-Gel Technologies Company Ltd, a society which develops dermatological drug products based on sol–gel microcapsules (see chapter entitled “Commercial applications of hybrid materials”).31–38
His work reflects perfectly the increasing development of HOIM during the last 30 years in both academia and industry and their growing implication in our daily life.9,10,39–41 Indeed, the strength of these materials lies in the existence of an extended organic–inorganic interface at the nanoscale and versatile chemical O–I bonds, from weak interactions to strong chemical bonds.9,10,18,39,40,42 Another fundamental characteristic of these materials, which has allowed their noticeable industrial development, consists of the easiness of their processing fully compatible with existing industrial processes, leading to films, membranes, fibres, powders, monoliths, micro- and nano-patterns.10,43–45 The coupling of hybrid materials chemistry with industrial processing methods constitutes a versatile route that facilitates both multifunctionality and device integration. More recently, integrative sol–gel chemistry based strategies allow the design of hierarchically organised materials from nanometre to centimetre ranges, exhibiting additional functionalities and outstanding properties. These multiscale hybrid materials have more and more impact several fields of applications such as optics, catalysis, energy and nanomedicine. In this short feature article we cannot cover all aspects of the large field of hybrid materials chemistry and the interested reader is referred to some excellent reviews, special issues and books.18,39,40,46–66 Therefore we will emphasize more particularly our discussions on bioreplication, mesostructured thin films, hybrid nanocomposites designed via Lego-like chemistry, and advanced hybrids for energy and finally we will describe a few commercial applications of hybrid materials.
Interfaces with soft matter & bioreplication
Nature has provided an astonishing diversity of smart and complex architectures for millions of years.1,2,67 During that period, numerous concepts and vital solutions have been tested through a “trials and errors” strategy resulting in highly optimised biological organisms displaying an impressive ability to adapt to their environment. To this end, Nature has had to manage, with the minimum of materials available and energy consumption, a set of various vital properties without optimising a single function, which could be summarised as a compromise between cost and efficiency. Such a compromise often results in the presence of controlled disorder at each scale of natural hierarchical architectures.68–71 In other words, natural architectures are characterised by average perfection and multifunctional optimisation.72 This explains that natural structures are often far from ideal, displaying a structural disorder, which finally strengthens all the properties at the macroscopic scale and which is called “robustness” of effects.69,72,73 At this stage, it is worth mentioning that such lessons from Nature (compromise between cost and efficiency and multifunctional optimisation) are also relevant for the commercial/industrial developments of materials and devices as we will see in the chapter entitled Commercial applications of hybrid materials.
These general considerations on Nature could be easily illustrated by natural photonic structures of butterfly wings.69,71–73 First of all, a brief description of butterfly wings is necessary since they present several particular features. With regard to the multi-scale structure, a five-level observation method has been adopted to describe butterfly wings (Fig. 1).72 The first level is the macroscopic one and concerns the whole wing (centimetre scale). The second level deals with the scales covering wings (roughly hundreds of micrometres). The third level is about striae or ridges on scales (roughly a few micrometres). The fourth level is in the range of 50–100 nm and concerns the structure of striae and inter-striae spacing. The last level is the molecular one and is about the chitinous matrix; this matrix is composed of chitin macromolecules which are organised into microfibrils coated with proteins. Secondly, from a multifunctional point of view, the structure of butterfly wings, besides the main obvious function i.e. allowing to fly, participates in several other vital functions such as regulation of body temperature,74 superhydrophobic and self-cleaning properties,75–78 and intra- and inter-specific communications (reproduction, camouflage, limited predation, etc.). And finally, concerning the average perfection of the architecture of butterfly wings, the topological disorder is characterised by variations at each level: thickness of lamellae, inter-lamellae and inter-ridges' distances, ridges' linearity, deformation and orientation of scales, static and dynamic deformation of wings (Fig. 1).69,72,73 This multi-scale controlled disorder allows Morpho butterflies to remain blue over a wide range of angles of incidence in contrast to similar human-made perfect structures.69,72,73
 Fig. 1  The different scales used to observe butterfly wings and their units of measure72 (courtesy of Pr. Serge Berthier). 
One of the relevant issues for materials scientists concerning natural and complex architectures is to reproduce such multi-scale structures and their topological disorder with human-made materials. The lack of cost-effective engineering techniques able to artificially produce such hierarchical structures with their optimised imperfections could explain the growing importance of bioreplication, biomineralisation, and biotemplating areas in nanotechnologies.1,79 Bioreplication consists of the direct replication of a natural structure and could be achieved via either a biomineralisation or a biotemplating approach. Generally, biomineralisation gives rise to a positive or direct (true) replica since natural structures serve as scaffolds, while biotemplating induces a negative or inverse one since natural structures are used as moulds. Various chemical and physical routes have been investigated for replicating butterfly wings including physical vapour deposition (PVD),80,81 chemical vapour deposition,82 atomic layer deposition (ALD),83,84 and the most widely studied approach: chemical solution deposition, which will be briefly developed below. Since a complete description of the bioreplication topic is beyond the scope of this chapter, the readers are referred to more-specialised reviews.67,85–90
Three main methods involving biomineralisation or biotemplating approaches have been investigated for replicating butterfly wings. Biotemplating of butterfly wings has been performed via imprinting lithography78,91–94 and sol infiltration95,96 methods, and involves capillarity as the driving force. On the other hand, a biomineralisation-based approach has been achieved through a double-step procedure implying first an adsorption step of molecular precursors on the butterfly wings followed by hydrolysis/condensation or nucleation/growth reactions, depending on the chemical nature of molecular precursors.88,97–99 It is worth mentioning that this last strategy which leads to positive replica could be viewed as a more or less biomineralisation process depending on both pre-treatment and adsorption steps. In other words, determining the penetration rate of inorganic precursors inside the chitinous structure is not a straightforward issue, especially when the “thickness” of the inorganic replica is of the same order of magnitude than the natural fine structure of butterfly wings (below 100 nm). These strategies have permitted the fabrication of numerous replicas of various compositions: TiO2:Eu3+,92 Y2O3:Eu3+,92,93 Pb0.91La0.09(Zr0.65Ti0.35)0.9775O3,94 mesoporous SiO2,95,100 TiO2,86,96,101 ZnO,102 ZrO2,103 SnO2,104 Cu-doped WO3,105 Fe2O3,106,107 Fe3O4,107 Bi2WO6,108 CdS,109 metallic replicas (Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Pd, Ag, Pt, Au),110,111etc.
Biotemplating – imprinting lithography
This approach consists of the coating of the biotemplate with “liquid” materials (polydimethylsiloxane – PDMS78,91 or TiO2-, Y2O3- and lead lanthanum zirconate titanate-based wet films92,94) to form a negative replica after a curing step. Once the removal of the biotemplate achieved, the negative mould could be used to pattern another material. This method should be the most suitable technique for the replication of biomaterials at the macroscopic scale since the whole fragile structure of wings is supported by a substrate. However, fine structures of scales are hardly accessible due to low infiltration of highly viscous materials inside the nanometric striae structure of wings which limits the use of this approach to the replication of simple structures located at the upper surface of the biotemplate (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  (a) General drawing of the cross-section of a scale (Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH). Examples of (b) quasi-1D (courtesy of Pr Serge Berthier), (c) 2D (Copyright 2005 Science) and (d) 3D photonic structures of butterfly scales (Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Biotemplating – sol infiltration
This method, initially developed by Galusha et al.112,113 for replicating beetle scales, has been employed for the replication of butterfly wings presenting a 3D photonic crystal structure (3D PhC).95,96 This method implies first a pre-treatment step (ethanol cleaning) in order to eliminate loosely bound proteins and lipids on the wings' surface.95,96 The pretreated biotemplates were next clamped between two substrates followed by injection of sol–gel precursor solutions at the edge of the assembly. This strategy implies thus to work with highly volatile solvents (such ethanol) presenting a low surface tension and thus a high wetting ability (we have to keep in mind that these natural structures present intrinsically a superhydrophobic behaviour).78 Moreover, it has been observed that the “sandwich” capillary method limited drastically the excess of inorganic materials around biotemplates, favouring selected infilling since only the interior of the scale (3D PhC) was filled by the sol and not the upper structure (ridges and cross-ribs – Fig. 2d).95 This observation underlines the main advantage of the sol infilling strategy: this approach is self-limited since once air voids are filled by sol–gel materials no more capillary diffusion could occur. However, sol infiltration presents two main drawbacks: (i) shrinkage of replicas (which could reach up to 50% of the original biotemplate) due to high temperature treatments required for biotemplate removal and eventually inorganic crystallisation and (ii) fragmentation of the macroscopic samples which limits the size of the final materials. Interestingly, a solution limiting the macroscopic fragmentation of replicas and involving sol–gel solution containing surfactant was successfully tested.95 Besides an improvement of the structural integrity of the replica at the macroscopic scale, this solution led to mesostructured replicas (wormlike mesophase) providing thus a new scale of organisation to the replica compared to the biotemplate.
Biomineralisation-based approach
This approach could be divided into three steps: (i) pretreatment, (ii) adsorption of precursors and (iii) post-treatment. The pretreatment step is of particular importance in this approach since it allows the removal of proteins from natural structures and promotes active side-groups at the chitinous interface, favouring thus further adsorption and penetration of precursors inside the smallest gaps of the biological structure. After the pre-treatment step, the wings are aged in the precursor solution (anhydrous alcohol or hydro-alcoholic), then washed and dried. Interestingly this approach could be automated, controlled by using a computer, allowing, thus, the thickness of the replica to be increased by increasing the number of deposition cycles.97–99 The natural structure is usually removed by a thermal treatment at high temperatures. In order to retain the whole structure of the wing, the thermal treatment is usually performed at low heating rate (1 °C min−1) with the coated biostructure clamped between two glass substrates in order to keep the coated wing as flat as possible. The thermal treatment results in the crystallisation of the inorganic network of replicas with a size reduction of about 50% due to shrinkage at high temperature (usually above 500 °C). Usually performed in air, the heat treatment could be done under reducing conditions leading to magnetophotonic replica (Fe3O4)107 and nanocomposite replica (Fe nanoparticles embedded in a glassy carbon matrix).110 Interestingly this nanocomposite replica was used as a master for PDMS-based imprinting lithography.110 Alternatively, in the case of metallic replicas, a long immersion at room temperature of the metal-coated scales was performed in highly concentrated phosphoric acid. This alternative treatment was preferred because of the high surface energies of metallic nanoparticles which favour the formation of coarse precipitates at high temperature reducing thus the quality of metallic replicas.111 This procedure led to full positive bioreplicas from the macroscopic to the nanometric scale. Although replicas are rather brittle, they can still be handled with tweezers. Moreover, the thickness of the inorganic replica (below 100 nm) and thus its quality could be adjusted by modifying the concentration in inorganic precursors and the immersing time in the precursor solution.114 For example, it has been observed that a high concentration of inorganic precursors and a long immersion time led to the collapse of the fine structure.108
Mesostructured thin films
Among O–I hybrid materials, periodically organised mesoporous materials (POMMs) occupy a special place and have been extensively studied for 20 years.66,115–120 Historically developed for catalysis,115 their intrinsic characteristics, such as a high surface area, large open porosity, a monomodal narrow pore size distribution, a wide range of the chemical nature of the network (purely inorganic, hybrid, amorphous or crystallised, etc.), their ability to be doped or functionalised, have allowed their important development in various domains (e.g. separation techniques, sensors, catalysis, fuel cells, batteries, photovoltaic cells, micro-optic and photonic devices, microelectronics, protective coatings, biomaterials, drug delivery, etc.).66,115–119
Various synthetic routes have been developed leading to POMMs,66,115–120 however the evaporation-induced self-assembly approach (EISA)121–123 appears to be the most convenient pathway for designing efficiently POMMs shaped as thin films,119 micro- or nano-patterns,124–126 membranes127–129 and spherical submicronic particles.130,131 Indeed, the EISA has previously demonstrated a high compatibility with processing techniques commonly used in the industry (dip-, spin-, spray-coatings, ink-jet printing, micropen lithography, aerosol-assisted writing process, replica moulding, spray-drying, etc.), permitting thus the design of POMMs with the most suited shape for a given application.119,124,126,130–134 The versatility of the EISA is not limited to the easiness of materials processing. This pathway has allowed the elaboration of numerous materials presenting a wide range of chemical compositions (silica-based, non-silica oxides, non-oxides and class I/II hybrid O–I materials) and mesophases (worm-like, 2D-hexagonal, 3D-hexagonal, cubic and lamellar).119,131,135,136
Another advantage of the EISA, which could be of great importance for further industrial developments, is related to: (i) the intrinsic rapidity of processing techniques which is highly compatible with the mesostructuration process (materials shaping and mesostructuration could take place in a few seconds in the case of spray-dried mesostructured submicronic spheres131,137 up to several minutes for thin films)119,122 and (ii) the high reproducibility of materials with perfect control over the stoichiometry of the final materials, which is equal to the composition, in non-volatile species, of the initial solution.
However, despite these numerous advantages, several limitations inherent to the EISA exist and could hinder a further scaling-up to industrial levels: (i) use of flammable and, to a certain extent, non-environmentally friendly solvents hardly compatible with the industrial environment for safety and regulation reasons, (ii) (quite long) post-treatment steps often implying high temperatures which could be incompatible with some substrates (metals as aluminium alloys, polymers and composite materials) and/or industrial processing (short curing step at relatively low temperature), and (iii) final film thicknesses usually limited to several hundreds of nanometres due to the apparition of cracks and delamination during thermal treatment for thicker films.
Two approaches recently reported could circumvent such disadvantages by temporally separating the mesostructuration process and film formation: mesostructuration taking place before the complete film formation for the first one and film formation occurring before mesostructuration for the second one. The first one, involving dip-coating at ultra-low withdrawal speed and at moderate temperature (between 40 and 80 °C)138 followed by a simple flash treatment (5 minutes at 500 °C), allowed the synthesis of anatase mesoporous thin films from purely aqueous solutions.139 This simple approach seems to be particularly well-suited for the preparation of crack-free (crystallised) mesoporous thick films through a limited multilayer stacking processing (1.8 μm thick after 4 deposition cycles). However, since the starting solution is purely aqueous, this strategy is rather dedicated to the synthesis of (crystallised) mesoporous thick films from hydrophilic precursors, excepted if micelles are already present in the initial solution, solubilising thus hydrophobic species. The second one, called light-induced self-assembly (LISA),140–142 is also very attractive since no solvents are required and since the initial solution is stable in the absence of UV light. Briefly, LISA involves an initial solution, composed of commercial poly(dialkoxysiloxane) precursors, amphiphilic block copolymers and a photoacid generator (PAG), which was deposited on a substrate using an automatic film applicator. After the deposition step, the coated substrate was UV-irradiated (2.3 s) at room temperature and at low relative humidity (RH = 30%) resulting in micrometres-thick vermicular mesostructured films. This strategy takes advantage of both non-volatile silica-based oligomer precursors which act as a solvent and ensure good wetting properties and PAG which triggers inorganic condensation and mesostructuration processes. The LISA approach seems to be particularly well-adapted to the fast elaboration of micrometres-thick silica-based mesostructured films and fulfils common industrial requirements.
Considering now the main applications of periodically organised mesoporous thin films (POMTFs), one could observe easily that they are, most of the time, based on their textural properties, implying thus the removal of surfactant. Indeed, the presence of a wide interconnected mesoporous network provides an efficient diffusion of chemical species inside POMTFs and then an important accessibility towards reactive functions present at their inner surface, leading thus to an exalted reactivity which is a crucial property in a wide range of applications (sensors, catalysis, drug delivery, photocatalysis, etc.).119,131,143–151
However, the removal of templating agents, as mentioned previously, could be detrimental in practical applications. Fortunately, surfactant removal is not a prerequisite for the diffusion of chemical species inside such materials.151–160 First of all, studies dealing with hybrid O–I mesostructured thin films (POMTFs with surfactants) showed that the placement of guest molecules depends on their chemical nature.161,162 Indeed, the structure of hybrid mesophases could be divided into three main regions: (i) the inorganic framework, (ii) the aqueous interface composed of silanols/silanolates, H2O and polar heads of surfactant and (iii) the hydrophobic core of micelles. The localisation of embedded molecules is mainly governed by the “philicity” concept (or “like” dissolves “like”).163,164 It means that the solubilisation of lipophilic molecules occurs in the hydrophobic micelle core and the placement of hydrophilic molecules either in the aqueous interface or in the framework. However this tendency does not reflect the motion of molecules at the nanoscale.159 It has been shown that molecules could migrate from the hydrophobic core of micelles towards the aqueous interface (and reciprocally) depending on the Brownian motion154,159,165 or chemical reactions (protonation–deprotonation of guest molecules).28,166,167 Moreover, molecular motion is not limited to the nanoscale since a single dye could explore the mesostructure over a wide range in a relatively short time (up to several tens of microns in a few minutes).153–158 Guest molecules could diffuse inside hybrid O–I mesostructured thin films through (i) a well-ordered hybrid channel network, (ii) defects between adjacent channels, and (iii) even at the film top surface (Fig. 3).153–156
 Fig. 3  Schematic drawings of molecular diffusion of a single fluorescent dye inside a mesostructured thin film.155 Straight (a) and curved (b) segments. (c) Domain boundaries forcing molecules to turn back. (d) Molecular travel stopped in less ordered regions. (e) Lateral motion between neighbouring channels (Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group). 
Numerous parameters could impact the diffusion of guest molecules inside mesostructured thin films: (i) for guest molecules: size, charge and hydrophilic/hydrophobic balance of guest molecules, intra- or intermolecular interactions, and (ii) for host matrices: type of mesostructure (lamellar, 2D-hexagonal, wormlike, cubic, etc.), pore size, nature of surfactant, amount of silanols/silanolates at the pore surface, amount of water/solvent inside materials, pore surface organically modified or not, and pore interconnectivity.153–156,158,159,165 A general trend about mass transport in mesostructured thin films could be summarised as follows: a molecule will diffuse more easily if weak interactions exist between guest molecules and the host matrix. Indeed it has been established that the molecule motion along pores is not continuous and consists of a succession of adsorption/desorption and diffusion events.153,157,159,165,168 Briefly, molecules solubilised in the hydrophobic part of micelles (which acts as a solvent) will diffuse faster than molecules in interactions with reactive binding sites at the aqueous interface (silica surface and/or surfactant polar heads).159,165 The diffusion of guest molecules could thus be facilitated by surface functionalisation which aims to hide reactive sites of the pore surface156,158 or by increasing the amount of water inside thin films158,159,165 and/or the ionic strength of the aqueous interface (addition of NaCl).156
Hybrids by Lego like chemistry
Among the different strategies to design nanostructured hybrid materials, probably the most developed one consists of the incorporation of inorganic nano-objects into an organic polymeric matrix.169–180 The most widely used inorganic nano-components in both academic and industrial worlds are metal oxides and silica nanoparticles and nanoclays. Common features usually improved are mechanical, gas barrier, electrical insulation, and flame retardancy properties compared to the unloaded polymer. Besides oxide-based nanoparticles and nanoclays, other inorganic nano-objects such as oxo-clusters, polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS), nanoMOFs, and quantum dots have also been investigated.44,170,181–185 Whatever the nature of inorganic nano-objects, the crucial point is to achieve a dispersion of individual nano-objects as high as possible into the polymer matrix. In this sense, the high versatility and the control of surface chemistry of well-defined oxo-clusters offer great potentialities for the elaboration of advanced materials or hybrid assemblies.60,62,186 Hence, the aim in the chemical design of “Lego-like” hybrid systems is to prepare clusters bearing organic surface functionality that create a compatible interface between the organic matrix and the inorganic component.
This section will report first on the versatility of the hybrid architectures that could be obtained with clusters. Second, the nature of the links at the hybrid interface will be discussed. Next, the accurate monitoring of nano-building blocks functionalisation will be presented in agreement with the requirement of the organic matrix synthesis. Finally, the more relevant properties of the resulting hybrids will be presented.
Cluster-based hybrid architectures
The use of clusters in the build-up of hybrid materials allows perfect control over the number of functional groups, for further reactions this is difficult to control with nanoparticles. The types of architectures that can be achieved depend on the cluster functionality. The simplistic solution consists of the polymerisation of classical monomers in the presence of the inorganic building blocks bearing unreactive groups. Alternatively, the inorganic component can be introduced into a prepared polymer matrix by physical mixing. This method produces class 1 materials, where clusters are just embedded in a polymer phase without strong interactions between the polymer matrix and the nano-building block (Fig. 4a).
 Fig. 4  (a) Embedded NBBs in polymers, (b) linear polymeric backbones with pendant inorganic domain nanobuilding blocks formed with NBBs which bear one functional group as a single double bond, (c) linear block copolymer from difunctional NBBs, (d) three-dimensional hybrid networks made from multifunctional NBBs which crosslink macromolecular chains, (e) star-like architecture (divergent or convergent approach), and (f) crystalline highly porous three-dimensional networks. 
Therefore, nanocomposite materials based on a hybrid organic–inorganic network, in which tungsten heteropolyoxometalates [PW12O40]3−, [SiW12O40]3−, and [W10O32]4− are entrapped, have been synthesised with electrochemical and photochromic properties.187 The organically modified metal oxide clusters [Ti6O4(C6H5COO)8(OR)8] (R = Et, Prn, Bun) dispersed in ORMOCER® matrices are also reported, which lead to a homogeneous, photo-patternable hybrid system with matching refractive index.188
In order to increase the cluster/polymer ratio without aggregation, preparation of class 2 hybrid materials can be promoted by the copolymerisation of an organic monomer, with the nano-building blocks bearing the same or similar functional groups at the surface of the inorganic oxo-core. Depending on whether the species has one or several polymerisable functional groups, it can become either a pendant group181 (Fig. 4b), part of the polymer chain189–191 (Fig. 4c) or a cross-linker. Furthermore, the building units may also act as polymer initiators, and can form star shaped hybrid architectures192–194 (Fig. 4d). Nano-building blocks, such as RSi(C6H11Si)7O12 (with R: styryl, 3-propyl methacrylate, or 2-ethylnorbornyl) which all bear a single double bond, yield upon polymerisation to linear polymeric backbones with pendant silsesquioxane cubes.181 From difunctional NBBs, hybrid organic–inorganic alternated block copolymers of general formula [BuSn12O14(OH)6[OOCCH2(OCH2CH2)nOCH2COO]m processed as coatings have been elaborated.195 Titanium and zirconium oxo-based clusters demonstrate the ability of multifunctional nano-building blocks to crosslink polymers efficiently.196–198
Another type of inorganic–organic hybrid material based on a metallic oxo-cluster is crystalline metal–organic framework structures which are obtained by coordinating multifunctional organic ligands to cluster units.60 Cluster-based networks are a sub-class of metal–organic framework (MOF) structures where clusters are expanded connectors or secondary building blocks (SBUs). Yaghi et al.199 reviewed 131 transition-metal carboxylate clusters which are potentially building blocks for MOFs. This compilation of the geometries of building blocks, with different compositions, structures and connectivities, shows the great ability of this approach for the construction of cluster-based metal–organic framework structures (Fig. 4e).200
Cluster-based hybrid interface
In addition to the type of architectures, the nature of the hybrid interface, i.e. the nature of the link between the organic matrix and the inorganic nanobuilding block can be tuned from covalent bonds to ionic bonds via iono-covalent bonds (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  (a) Covalent interface with POSS and POM; (b) ionic interface with [(RSn)12O14(OH)6]X2; (c) ionocovalent interface with Ti or MOF. 
As for sol–gel derived and the other types of hybrid materials, silicon is likely the most studied element in NBB-based hybrid materials. Because of the hydrolytic stability of the Si–C bond, silicon offers a very large variety of organic functionalisation yielding class 2 hybrids with covalent bonds located at the interface (Fig. 5a). The RSiO3/2 backbone may be readily prepared, from random polymers through ladder polymers to more highly ordered discrete molecular species with the general formula (RSiO3/2)n where n is commonly 6, 8, or 18. These nano-building blocks have become known as polyhedral oligosilsesquioxanes and the name POSS has been trademarked by Hybrid Plastics.10 Significant applications have been found in polymers and in nanocomposite materials, which have been reviewed extensively.181,201 Polyoxometalates, POMs, formed by transition metals in a high oxidation state (WVI, MoVI) surrounded by oxo-ligands afford unsaturated organic groups can thus be attached to the cluster core through W–O–Si–C covalent linkages.202 Jointly, tin shares with silicon a M-Csp3 bond that is stable with respect to nucleophilic agents. These bonds offer strong covalent links between tin–oxo clusters and functional organic moieties. The [BuSnO(O2CC6H4NH2)]6 cluster exhibits on its periphery six amino groups amenable to subsequent reactions. It can be functionalised, via reaction with OCN(CH2)3Si(OEt)3, to yield quantitatively a dendrimer-like compound with peripheral ethoxy functions.203 Another interesting tin nanobuilding block is the oxo cluster [(RSn)12O14(OH)6]X2. This cluster can be assembled through organic networks by using the covalent interface provided by the Sn–C bond204 or by using the ionic interface associated with the charge compensating anions X (Fig. 5b). The macrocation can be functionalised with 2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonate (AMPS), affording nanobuilding blocks with two polymerizable groups.205–207 The direct homopolymerisation of such functionalised oxo-hydroxo butyltin clusters was successfully performed. [(BuSn)12O14OH6](AMPS)2] can also be copolymerized with vinylic monomers to produce gels with ionic interactions at the hybrid interface that are responsible for reversible cross-linking of the organic polymers.
Employing other types of inorganic clusters, especially those of the transition metals, can considerably broaden the range of properties and potential applications. With transition metal cluster the links at the hybrid interface have an iono-covalent character (Fig. 5c). The functional groups can either be introduced during a cluster “one pot synthesis” or grafted onto a pre-formed cluster. The first method has been successfully used to generate a variety of carboxylate and β-diketonate-substituted metal-oxo clusters. This includes monometallic clusters of Ti, Zr, Hf, Nb and Ta of various shapes as well as mixed-metal Ti/Zr(Hf) or Ti/Y oxo-clusters.186,198,208–216 Clusters with different sizes and shapes and different degrees of substitution can be obtained by varying the metal alkoxide/carboxylic acid ratio and the kind of alkoxo groups of the metal alkoxides. As for carboxylate derivatives, the hydrolysis and condensation reactions of β-diketonate substituted titanium217,218 and zirconium219 alkoxides are used to prepare metal oxo-clusters. Derivatives by reaction with phosphorus based acids have received much less attention than the reactions of Ti(OR)4 with other complexing ligands (carboxylic acids or β-diketone), but there are some promising results especially with phosphonic and phosphinic acids.220,221
On the other hand, the post-modification of well-defined preformed nano-building blocks offers the possibility of real control over the design of new hybrid architectures. Nevertheless, the post-modification approach requires labile surface organic groups, and simultaneously balancing charge and coordination number during substitution of these groups. Post-synthetic exchange of non-functional ligands against functional ligands is reported by reaction of [Ti16O16(OEt)32] with 2-hydroxyethyl-methacrylate or vinylphenol, resulting in a selective and controlled exchange of the ethoxo groups, and [Ti16O16(OEt)24(OCH2CH2OMc)8]196 or [Ti16O16(OEt)32−x(OC6H4CHCH2)x] (x = 4, 8, 16)197 was obtained. A manganese oxide cluster with polymerisable carboxylate ligands was also prepared by exchanging the acetate ligands in [Mn12O12(OOCCH3)16] against acrylate or methacrylate.222,223
For cluster-based MOF structures, the synthesis strategies differ also by the synthetic pathway of the clusters. The first relies on “one pot” formation of the cluster units, while the second exploits preformed clusters as SBUs.224 In this second approach, clusters with monofunctional ligands bonded to the surface atoms are employed, which are then exchanged by the bi- or multifunctional linkers to connect the cluster units without loss of their integrity with each other. Such an approach can be illustrated by the iron(III) acetate [Fe3O(OAc)6L3]X cluster. When the iron cluster reacts with dicarboxylic acids, acetic acid is liberated and the MOF structure (MIL88) is produced with retention of the trinuclear cluster units.225 More recently, the exchange of the methacrylate ligands against muconate or terephthalate ligands of the cluster [Zr6O4(OH)4(OMc)12] resulted in the formation of a porous network with retention of the cluster units.226 Despite the versatility of structures encountered in titanium oxo-clusters, the formation of a 3D hybrid solid from established titanium inorganic bricks connected by organic linkers has never been demonstrated. To date, the only highly porous MOF constructed from titanium-oxo-clusters and dicarboxylate linkers reported is denoted MIL-125 with the formula [Ti8O8(OH)4(OOC–C6H4–CO2)6]. The octameric SBUs of metal octahedra was never been encountered in three-dimensional MOFs before and never in titanium oxo-clusters chemistry. It was however found previously in a molecular chromium(III) hydroxoacetate.227 Nevertheless, isostructural NH2-MIL-25(Ti) or with mixed aminated/non-aminated-linkers have been performed by the substitution of terephthalate ligands by amino-terephthalate ligands.228,229
Generation of weak interactions between organic and inorganic NBBs has also been investigated. An approach combining inorganic NBBs and supramolecular interactions, designing by a titanium oxo-cluster [Ti16O16(OEt)32] modified by hydrogen bond acceptors and a telechelic PDMS with two hydrogen bond donors, has been recently published.230 With simple components, it has been demonstrated that well-chosen supramolecular interactions can be used to obtain new hybrid dynamers having the intrinsic properties of the inorganic component (such as photochromism) and improved mechanical properties, due to the supramolecular cross-linking of the polymer chains.230 A ligand exchange using thioether, HO(CH2)4SCH3, results in the successful thiofunctionalisation of the [Ti16O16(OEt)32] cluster.231 High resolution XPS and STM (Scanning Transmission Microscopy) demonstrated that the sulfide-functionalised cage, [Ti16O16(OEt)24(O(CH2)4SCH3)8], underwent connection to Au surfaces, forming a monolayer of adsorbed species in which the molecular integrity had been preserved.
Functionality of the clusters
The organic functionality through the organic ligands should be managed in agreement with the polymer formation. Most cluster-based hybrid polymers were prepared by free-radical polymerisation of (meth-)acrylate or styryl-substituted metal oxo clusters and organic co-monomers. It was shown, however, that other polymerisation reactions can be applied as well, provided that the cluster ligands have suitable functionalities. Some functionalities encountered in the literature are summarised in Table 1. Clusters containing strained-ring unsaturated ligands were employed in ring-opening metathesis polymerisation reactions,214,232 clusters with 4-pentynoate ligands for alkyne–azide click reactions,216 2-bromo-iso-butyrate- or trichloroethoxo-substituted clusters as an initiator for atom-transfer radical polymerisation,192–194 clusters with 3-mercaptopropionate ligands for thiol–ene reactions,215 and polyoxometallates modified by aminopropyl silane for the preparation of cluster-crosslinked polyimides.233 Cluster-based extended networks were also prepared by oxidation of the [W6S8] octahedral tungsten clusters functionalised with thiophene derivatives.234
Table 1 Some organic ligands for further polymerisation




Organic ligands


Polymerisation










Free radical polymerisation




































ROMP







Click reaction








ATRP







Photothiol–ene polymerisation








Polyaddition
















Oxidative polymerisation




Impact on the properties: from mechanical properties to multifunctional materials
Most of the cluster-based hybrid polymers are highly crosslinked, even when small cluster proportions are employed, because of the large number of reactive ligands. The materials properties of cluster-based polymers do not only depend on the polymerisation conditions and the cluster proportion, but also on the cluster nature.
Some properties are distinctly different to that of the parent polymers and are brought about by the clusters acting as multifunctional crosslinkers as well as inorganic (nano)fillers. Property changes include: (i) cluster-crosslinked polymers are no longer soluble in organic solvents, but swell instead, as expected for crosslinked polymers, (ii) thermal stability is higher compared with the native polymers, (iii) thermomechanical properties are improved and mechanical properties (strength, hardness, brittleness, scratch resistance, etc.) are changed.
A less exploited option is to combine these property changes with properties that are inherent to the cluster, such as special magnetic,222,223 dielectric properties,235 redox189,236 or optical properties as refractive index.188 As an example, fabrication of optical transparent polyimide hybrid films with ultra-low dielectric constant (k = 1.22) has been proposed based on the basis of the copolymerisation of organically modified POM clusters that are incorporated into polyimide chains.233 Synthesis and characterization of magnetic organic–inorganic nanocomposites based on the [Mn2O12(CH2C(CH3)COO)16(H2O)4] building block have also been proposed.222,223 Organic–inorganic hybrid materials based on the copolymerisation of the methacrylate-functionalised chromium–nickel wheel with methyl methacrylate [(n-C3H7)2NH2]–[Cr7NiF8(O2C4H5)16] present interesting dielectric materials for applications in microelectronic devices.235 [Ti17O24(OPri)20] clusters functionalised with catechol and isonicotinic acid have been proposed as models for the sensitizer/semiconductor interfaces in dye-sensitized solar cells.237,238 Catalysis properties are exemplified by a series of new di-, tri- and penta-nuclear titanium oxo-clusters prepared with bidentate ligands (2,2′-biphenol and 1,1′-binaphthol). Some of them were found to be effective catalysts for the formation of phthalate diesters.239
If a multitude of functional hybrid materials with a very large set of structures, textures and chemical compositions have been described, less attention is paid to cluster based hybrid materials. Nevertheless, the modular approach, from nano-bricks to macroscopic networks, presents a number of advantages. The step-by-step development of the material allows better control over structure at the mesoscale. Prefabricated nano-objects often show reduced reactivity compared to that of molecular precursors; the inorganic component is monodisperse allowing for the development of more well-defined structures, facilitated characterization and an enhanced quality, especially high optical transparency in the final material. But the most important highlights are to combine the wealth of properties proposed by the polymer chemistry with well-defined architectures and specific hybrid interfaces encountered in oxo-clusters to design a novel class of hybrid materials. Applications can be suggested for the elaboration of materials with high optical transparency for optics (photochromism, electrochromism or refractive index matching) or adaptive materials (shape memory or self-healing). For this last purpose, a broad range of self-healing materials has emerged over the last decade.240–242 Such systems, when they have been damaged, heal themselves either spontaneously or with the aid of a stimulus. Several of these materials draw their inspiration from the design of biological materials.243 As an example, the bio-reparation of mussel byssal threads proceeds by the reconnection after damage of sacrificial cross-links constituted by clustered distribution of catecholato-iron chelate complexes distributed in a polymeric scaffold.244,245 Different approaches to build self-healing polymers have been described.240–243,246,247 Especially, repeated healing processes can be achieved with systems based on reversible systems, that either uses covalent248,249 and non-covalent bonds, mainly involving bioinspired strategies based on supramolecular chemistry with hydrogen-bonding or metal coordination chemistry.230,250,251 In addition, self-healing materials have been designed by hybridization of polymers with structurally well-defined nanobuilding units. The controlled design of cross-linked poly(n-butyl acrylate) (pBuA) has been performed by introducing a very low amount of a specific tin–oxo cluster.252 Sacrificial domains developed at the hybrid interface and involving ionic bonds play a double role. Indeed, ionic interactions are strong enough to cross-link the polymer, which consequently exhibits rubber-like elasticity behaviour and labile enough to enable, after severe mechanical damage, dynamic bond recombination leading to an efficient healing process (more than 75% of recovery of the mechanical properties). The strategy is based on the preparation of elastomeric nanocomposites from a cheap and common organic monomer copolymerized with metallic oxo-clusters. Indeed, the small size of the inorganic component and the elastomeric behaviour of the host matrix have been selected to facilitate matter transport towards the damage site. Moreover, to reach the expected properties, fine-tuning of the nature of the hybrid interface is achieved by the choice of organic ligands, which surround the metallic oxo-core of clusters based on ionic interactions as sacrificial cross-links in order to prepare dynamic systems and facilitate the subsequent reconnection of local bonds after damage at the mesoscale, which results in a macroscopic effect.252
Advanced hybrids for energy
Hybrid organic–inorganic materials have attracted wide attention because of their potential to combine desirable properties of different nanoscale building blocks to improve both mechanical and transport properties. These strategies have been mainly used to develop composite polymer electrolytes for use in lithium batteries253,254 and fuel cells.255
Li-ion batteries
Progress in Li-ion batteries relies on replacement of the conventional liquid electrolyte by an advanced solid polymer electrolyte.256 The PEO–LiX membranes that consist of poly(ethylene oxide)-based (PEO-based) solid polymer electrolytes combined with a lithium salt meet in principle the main requirements (i.e. low cost, good chemical stability, and safety) as efficient electrolyte separators. Unfortunately, the ionic conductivity of the membranes remains at high levels only at temperatures above 70 °C and this is the main issue which has so far prevented their wide practical use. More importantly, the conductivity is due to the motion of the anion (the lithium transference number is generally low, of the order of 0.2–0.4) and often results in concentration polarization that limits the power of the battery. Many studies have been carried out to overcome these drawbacks.
Some progress has been achieved by dispersing within the polymer matrix nanoparticle ceramic fillers, such as TiO2, Al2O3, and SiO2.256 Literature data reported that the role of the ceramic fillers is multiple. Ceramic fillers act as a solid plasticizer for PEO, by inhibiting chain crystallisation upon annealing in the amorphous state at 70 °C.257,258 It promotes an enhancement of the lithium-ion transference number.259,260 Enhancement has been proven by many laboratories and depends on the chemistry of the surface state. This behaviour has been demonstrated through experiments performed with a sulfate-promoted superacid zirconia (S-ZrO2) ceramic filler, having a high density of acidic sites (both Lewis and Brønsted type) at the surface of the oxide.261,262 The obtained hybrid organic–inorganic membranes exhibit unique transport properties, as the transference number is 0.81 ± 0.05; that is, a value almost 100% greater than that of the ceramic-free electrolyte (0.42 ± 0.05) (see Fig. 6).262,263 The improvement of the performances is also demonstrated on the properties of full devices. Comparison of cells containing the PEO20LiClO4 electrolyte with and without S-ZrO2 indicates that cells containing a hybrid organic–inorganic separator exhibit a higher cycling capacity, a lower capacity decay upon cycling and in particular, a more stable charge–discharge efficiency. This point highlights a less reactive lithium–electrolyte interface which is favourable for long-term use.
 Fig. 6  (a) Conductivity Arrhenius plots of composite s-ZrO2-added electrolyte and of a S-ZrO2-free electrolyte, both based on the same PEO8LiBF4 combination.257 (b) Capacity versus charge–discharge cycles for the Li/P(EO)20LiClO4 + 5% S-ZrO2/LiFePO4 battery (upper curve) and the Li/P(EO)20LiClO4/LiFePO4 battery (lower curve). Temperature 90 °C; rate: C/7. The capacity values refer to the cathode.277 
The design of hybrid organic–inorganic membranes allows widening of the useful range of temperature but not yet to a level that makes the PEO–LiX membranes suitable for batteries expected to the ones operating at ambient and sub-ambient temperatures. These hybrid organic–inorganic membranes integrating ceramic stiffening additives,256 such as silica powder,264 are mainly used in batteries integrating the energetically attractive metallic Li electrode to limit the risk of dendrite formation265 caused by non-uniform Li-plating.
The development of the polymer electrolyte continues to hold industrial interest and some compromise approaches have been adopted while breakthrough in solvent free membranes must be achieved. These membranes should transport mainly cations and are solvent free. Attempts, mainly directed toward immobilization of anions in the polymer structure has been reported, but with modest success, as this approach generally depresses the ionic conductivity. So far, the best compromise has involved the use of solid–liquid hybrids formed by trapping typical liquid lithium ion solutions (e.g. LiPF6-carbonate solvent mixtures), in a polymer matrix, e.g. poly(acrylo nitrile), PAN or poly(vinylidene fluoride), PVdF, to form gel-type polymer electrolytes, PGEs. The PVDF–HFP based membrane, developed at Bellcore, paved the way for the evolution of these polymer membranes.266,267 Ceramic fillers such as SiO2, Al2O3, TiO2 and BaTiO3 have also been incorporated along with the host polymer in order to obtain composite polymer electrolytes with improved electrical and mechanical properties.256,268–271 The ceramic fillers promote electrochemical properties, but only by physical action without directly contributing to the lithium ion transport process. By suitable surface modification of the ceramic particles, they can also act as the source of charge carriers.272–274 An interesting approach, which leads to an enhancement of the transport properties of the polymer gel electrolyte, is based on the dispersion of core–shell SiO2(Li+) particles. This design promotes enhancement of the lithium-ion transference number (0.35 versus 0.48), associated with the electrolyte uptake.275
Another, an emerging class of electrolytes is that based on ionic liquids (ILs), namely, low temperature molten salts having important specific properties. Typically, ILs are formed by the combination of a weakly interacting, large cation, e.g. of the imidazole type and a flexible anion, e.g. N,N-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl), imide (TFSI).276 ILs are non-volatile, non-flammable, highly conductive, and environmentally compatible and they can be safely operated in a wide temperature range. This unique combination of favorable properties makes ILs very appealing materials as stable and safe electrolyte media in lithium batteries.276 But, these solutions have a poor cathodic stability limit associated with the tendency of imidazolium-based cations to be reduced around 1.5 V vs. Li. This apparently prevents the use of IL-based solutions with common low voltage anode materials, such as lithium metal, graphite or even Li4Ti5O12. Many studies are underway to circumvent this issue by developing ILs based on cations more resistant to reduction than those of the imidazolium family.
Fuel cells


In fuel cells
, Nafion is the most commonly used electrolyte because of its good conductivity, good chemical stability and safety.278 However, there are also problems associated with these materials. Their conductivity are low at temperatures above 120 °C and low humidity conditions, which narrow the range of practical applications for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs). Conductivity in Nafion is due mainly to the motion of hydrated protons and may result in a large ohmic drop when devices work at high temperature and low humidity limiting the power of the fuel cells.279,280 Accordingly, many attempts have been made to overcome these drawbacks. An interesting approach, which leads to enhancement of the transport properties of Nafion, is based on the dispersion of nanoparticle fillers, such as SiO2, TiO2 and SnO2 within the polymer matrix. It has been demonstrated that one of the roles of the filler is that of aiding to retain water into the hydrophilic part of Nafion.255,281–286 This water retention maintains water around the sulfonic groups and leads to an increase in the useful range of electrolyte conductivity. Furthermore, the ceramic filler promotes enhancement of the number of moles of water around the sulfonic groups, associated with the Lewis-base interactions occurring between the –OH groups present at the surface of the ceramic filler and the water.
With a few exceptions, these effects have been confirmed by many laboratories. The degree of enhancement depends on the choice of the ceramic filler, the particle size, and its morphology and, in particular, of the nature of its surface states. This has been demonstrated by the results obtained on a sulfonate-promoted superacid SiO2 ceramic filler.287–289 The treated SiO2 has a strong acid strength, associated with the presence of a phenyl group between the sulfonate group and the carbonyl chain attached to the surface of the SiO2. This phenyl group has a high electron-accepting ability, the latter being enhanced by the proximity of the charge withdrawing sulfate groups. Thus at the surface of the oxide, a high density of sulfonate acidic sites are present.
Owing to its high acidity, this modified-SiO2 ceramic material proved to be an ideal candidate to test the model. Indeed, its dispersion in the state of the art, Nafion, has led to nanocomposite membranes having unique properties.
Another approach to design hybrid organic–inorganic membranes is to exploit the polar/nonpolar nanophase-separated morphologies of Nafion perfluorinated ionomer membranes, as interactive templates to direct the hydrolysis/condensation reactions of inorganic alkoxides and organoalkoxysilanes.290–294 In contrast with pre-formed particles, these polar domains serve as “nanoreactors”, and give rise to an inorganic oxide network well-distributed in the hydrophobic organic network. Because in situ polymerisation occurs, this approach allows better dispersion of the inorganic network in the polymeric matrix compared to the dispersion of pre-formed nanoparticles. The inorganic nanoparticles produced via the sol–gel route are homogeneously distributed on an Angstrom scale versus sub-micrometer length scales for the particle composites. Most often, these hybrids are tailored at the nanoscopic scale. This means that two or more phases have at least one dimension that is less than 100 nm, although length scales ∼100 Å are encountered in some cases.
It is important to point out that the development of polymer electrolytes that conduct only protons and are solvent free is considered to be of prime importance in order to progress fuel cells.295–299
Attempts, mainly directed to avoid Nafion, have been reported in the past, with some success, as this approach generally mimics the phase separation in Nafion, where discrete hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions are present. In this hybrid organic–inorganic design, the hydrophilic regions contain the ionic groups and are supported by the functionalised, mesostructured silica network, while the hydrophobic regions contain the fluorocarbon backbone of the polymer. The most difficult issue in these hybrid organic–inorganic membranes is to provide the conditions necessary for an efficient proton transfer; that is to say, the formation of percolating, hydrogen-bonded networks under low-humidity conditions, or percolating networks of water filled channels under wet conditions. The properties of these multi-scale membranes are very complex and depend on their structural features and composition, as well as on their inherent dynamic properties. These characteristics can be tuned through the processing approach and various technologies have been used to fabricate organic–inorganic hybrids. In various processing approaches, solvent evaporation differences directly influence the repartition of the different components. More specifically, the phase separation between the hydrophilic and hydrophobic domains can be tuned through this evaporation giving rise to hybrid membranes with various microstructures exhibiting different transport properties. Maneeratana et al. have shown that the hybrid functionalised SiO2–PVDF membrane synthesised by the electrospinning approach exhibited a peculiar and different microstructure and an enhancement of the proton transport compared to the membrane fabricated by casting. The electrospun membrane has a high proton conductivity at 120 °C and low humidity in addition to improved mechanical properties (Fig. 7).300 More importantly, the proton conductivity of these membranes is about 0.1 S cm−1 at 80 °C under 100% humidity.
 Fig. 7  (a) Conductivity of the hybrid membrane synthesized by electrospinning and casting approaches. (b) Comparison of the microstructure of the electrospun and cast hybrid membranes.300 
Hybrid organic–inorganic approach for electrodes in electrochemical devices
So far, a hybrid organic–inorganic strategy has also been developed for electrodes in Li-ion batteries to stabilize the SEI (solid electrolyte interface) at the surface of carbon,301 to maintain the contact between silicon particles and graphite flakes302 or carbon nanotubes,303 and to increase the cycle life by limiting the electrolyte decomposition at the surface of the positive active material. An interesting approach consists of modifying the surface of carbon by covalent attachment of mono- or multi-aryl layers to their surface via diazonium chemistry.304–306 The aromatic layer forms a stable and uniform solid electrolyte interface that improves the electrochemical behaviour of graphite.307 This enhancement is demonstrated in Fig. 8 which compares the specific capacity for the original graphite electrode and the modified graphite anode. Clearly, the modified graphite anode retains at least 98% of its initial capacity after 30 cycles.
 Fig. 8  (a) HR-TEM observations of the silicon/carbon nanotube composite (MWCNTs-ϕ-Si), (b) the corresponding scheme and (c) specific capacity vs. cycle number when cycled at a constant current of 500 mA g−1.303 
In the electrochemical capacitor field, molecular functionalisation of carbon has been used to provide a novel type of electrical double layer and to increase energy densities. Surface modification with electroactive molecules such as anthraquinone increases the performance of carbon electrodes by adding a faradaic contribution to the double layer capacitance.305,307 The modification is also carried out by using the diazonium cation electrochemical reduction method developed by Pinson and coworkers.308,309 This method involves the formation of aryl radicals, which subsequently react with the carbon surface by forming grafted layers. The addition of redox species to the surface of the carbon with a formal potential close to either the cathodic limit of the carbon or to the anodic limit one provided extra energy and power (Fig. 9b). The use of these modified carbon electrodes (anode during discharge) in a carbon supercapacitor has been shown to provide a 40% enhancement, on average, in capacitance and 5–86% increase in energy density.305 Martin et al. have also shown the grafting of aminophenyl groups on the graphite-flake surface followed by subsequent grafting of silicon nanoparticles via the diazotization of the second amine group. At the end, the bonding of silicon and graphite by a phenyl molecular bridge has been achieved.303 Such a covalent linkage is efficient in retaining capacity galvanostatic cycling of the composite material in a lithium cell, with 52% capacity retention after 50 cycles as compared to 38% for a simple mixture of silicon nanoparticles and graphite flakes even when drastic cycling conditions are used.
 Fig. 9  (a) Cycling performance of the composites in 1 M of LiTFSI in TMS electrolyte with C/10 current density for the voltage range between 1.0 and 3.0 V vs. Li. for mesoporous SBA-15, carbon and MOF.312 (b) Chemical modification of carbon by spontaneous reduction of the anthraquinone diazonium cations. (c) Representative cyclic voltammogram for an AQ-modified carbon giving the double layer voltammetric charge (QDL) as well as the voltammetric charge associated with the AQ-grafted groups (QAQ).307 
A hybrid organic–inorganic approach based on a metal–organic framework (MOF) has been successfully used in the field of electrode materials for Li-ion batteries.306,310–312 This solid combines inorganic metal clusters or coordination centres with organic linkers to yield a diversity of three-dimensional structures with porosities. Their properties are highly dependent on their chemical composition and can be tuned either by tuning the mixed valence metallic centres or the redox of the organic linkers. Insertion of redox active species into the pores of Fe3+–MOFs has been studied to determine whether they represent possible positive electrode materials in lithium cells and whether it is possible to take advantage of the large pores in the structure as empty spaces to host lithium cations.306 The electrochemical reactivity is due to the reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ along with the simultaneous insertion of Li+ in the structure. Up to 0.6 lithium cation per iron Fe3+ is inserted into the MIL-53(Fe) structure at a C/40 rate without any structural alteration to the framework. Despite these good properties, neither the volumetric (mA h cm−3) nor the gravimetric (mA h g−1) electrochemical capacities were very high, because of both the low density of the material and the limited number of inserted Li+. Limited cyclability at high energy density is due to the poor electronic conductivity of the structure. This poor electronic conductivity was rationalized in terms of interactions between Fe3+ and Fe2+ sites, which do not allow any electronic delocalization.313 To push back these two limits, an increase in capacity was achieved through the adsorption of an electro-active molecule, i.e., 1,4-benzoquinone. These molecules can theoretically accept two electrons per molecule and can also play a role as a redox mediator enhancing the electronic transfer in the MIL-53(Fe) structure. Unfortunately, the enhancement of the electrochemical performances, due to the redox properties of the quinone molecules, was observed for the first 2 cycles. An exchange between both the quinone and the electrolyte molecules is proposed to account for the capacity decay in subsequent cycles. More recently, Demir-Cakan et al. used the mesoporous chromium trimesate metal–organic framework (MOF) named MIL-100(Cr) as a host material for sulfur impregnation in Li–S batteries (Fig. 9).312
They reported a marked increase in the capacity retention, of Li–S cathodes. Complementary analyses demonstrated the reversible capture and release of the polysulfides by the pores of the MOF during cycling and evidenced a weak binding between the polysulphides and the oxygenated framework.
Hybrid organic–inorganic design has also been explored in the development of new photo-electrochemical cells in which light-driven water oxidation to oxygen occurs at the photoanode and reduction of water to hydrogen at the cathode.314–318 In this field, the design of the hybrid organic–inorganic electrode is often derived from natural photosynthesis. In general, development of water splitting electrochemical devices occurs through the development of the two half reactions, through the combination of a photosensitizer with a suitable catalyst for either the oxidation or the reduction of water. To design efficient electrodes, this implies the parallel development of (i) efficient and stable electrocatalysts, based on noble and non-noble metals, for accelerating the multi-electronic processes at work at each electrode, (ii) efficient and stable photosensitizers for absorbing visible light and generating a charge separation state with redox potentials compatible with water splitting. Different designs have been proposed for synthesizing efficient electrodes based on the hybrid approach. The electrocatalyst such as cobaloxime and the photosensitizer were grafted via the phosphonated group onto TiO2 nanoparticles with the aim of taking advantage of the ultrafast electron injection from the excited state of the photosensitizer into the conduction band of TiO2 from which e− can be further transferred to the catalyst (Fig. 10a).315,316 H2 is evolved when the system is placed at pH = 7 in TEOA aqueous buffer and irradiated with visible light. However, this strategy will suffer from the photo-instability dye.317,319 Alternatively, the co-grafting of an iron-based catalyst has also been demonstrated with evidence for light-driven electron transfer from the excited dye to the catalyst.318
 Fig. 10  (a) Structure of the TiO2-based material for H2 photoproduction using immobilized hydrogenase as a catalyst. (b) Structure of the TiO2-based material for H2 photoproduction using a surface-immobilized cobaloxime catalyst.315,316 
Another approach consists of the use of a core–shell nanostructured photoanode (core: a high surface area conductive metal oxide film indium tin oxide or antimony tin oxide-coated, shell: TiO2 formed by atomic layer deposition) where a “chromophore-catalyst assembly” 1,[(PO3H2)(2)(bpy)(2)Ru(4-Mebpy-4-bimpy)Rub(tpy)(OH2)](4+), which combines both the light absorber and the water oxidation catalyst in a single molecule is grafted onto the surface via the phosphonate group. Visible photolysis of the resulting core–shell assembly structure (Fig. 10b) with a Pt cathode resulted in water splitting into hydrogen and oxygen with an absorbed photon conversion efficiency of 4.4 at peak photocurrent.
Commercial applications of hybrid materials
Commercial applications of hybrid materials should not be considered only from a purely scientific point of view. The commercial development of hybrid materials could be achieved if a number of general economic, technical, practical and regulation requirements are fulfilled. As stated previously, observation of the general functioning of the industrial world and Nature reveals that both of them are subject to the same general rules and new approaches to be developed imply the same kind of compromise: cost versus efficiency. If we consider systems developed by Nature, they involve the use of raw materials easily available in a given environment, leading to complex, robust and multifunctional architectures through smart and particularly well-suited “manufacturing” processes. Besides, they are characterised by an acceptable level of disorder (see chapter entitled “Interfaces with soft matter – Bioinspired surfaces”), a high level of integration into a given ecosystem and a high adaptability to their environment and are most of the time highly competitive. At the same time, commercially developed hybrid materials are elaborated from quite inexpensive precursors greatly available at the industrial scale. Furthermore, the way of hybrid materials processing is highly compatible with proven industrial processing, and final materials have an added value compared to previous materials. Finally, they fulfil safety and regulation requirements. In other words, hybrid materials are integrated in an overall process and their economic viability depends on external and internal factors. External factors include generally availability and cost of chemical precursors, law of supply and demand, competition with other strategies and materials, and regulatory constraints such as REACH and RoHS directive. In the near future these factors could favour the development of new approaches by banning the current ones. For example, approaches involving bisphenol-A based materials, chromates and Ni-based phosphate conversion coatings will be avoided. Internal factors imply knowledge of the chemistry involved in the elaboration of new materials, capacity to process new materials with efficient, proven and inexpensive processing, compliance with technical specifications and safety rules, corporate strategy, etc.
From a chemical point of view, commercial hybrid materials involve most of the time (bio)polymers or (bio)molecules as organic part, nano-objects (oxides nanoparticles and nanoclays), microcapsules or inorganic molecular precursors as inorganic counterparts and functional organosilanes acting as coupling agents and/or hybrid O–I matrices.10 The design of hybrid materials clearly follows a bottom-up approach (Fig. 11). Starting from molecular precursors or well-defined nanobuilding blocks, the materials are processed directly as particles, fibres, coatings, foams or monoliths. They can additionally be obtained with peculiar micropatterning or with hierarchical structures by coupling colloidal fluids with the physical chemistry of complex fluids, soft matter and top down processing strategies.10,45 Among these various shapes, films and coatings are some of the most widespread forms that display hybrid materials on the market. Films and coatings concern mainly hybrid materials based on sol–gel processes involving mainly functional organosilanes species and are prepared through the chemical solution deposition route. This could be explained by the easiness and rapidity to add new functionalities to a substrate with a quite low amount of starting materials and with a satisfactory reproducibility. Furthermore, liquid-deposition devices which are widespread in industry (dip-, spin-, spray-coaters, etc.) are less expensive than physical-based deposition methods (atomic layer deposition – ALD, physical vapor deposition – PVD, etc.) and usually entail less stringent processing conditions. Bulky materials (monoliths, membranes, etc.) are also widely present on the market and imply mainly polymers as organic parts. Organic polymers provide hybrid materials with an easy shaping and a better processing ability via well-known plastic processing techniques (injection, rotational, blow moulding, thermoforming, etc.) while the inorganic components increase their mechanical and thermal stability in addition to giving new specific functionalities (gas barrier, magnetic, electronic, redox, optical properties, etc.).42,320
 Fig. 11  Arborescence representation of hybrid materials on both the academic and industrial scene.10 
This coupling between chemistry and processing techniques (and eventually templating strategy) allows hybrid materials for entering a variety of markets covering various fields such as environment, energy, housing, health, automotive, optics, electronics, etc. As a detailed description dealing with applications of hybrid materials is out of scope of this chapter, the readers are referred to more specialised reviews and books.9,10,39–41,44 In the following part, some applications of hybrid materials already on the market will illustrate the previous remarks.
Multifunctional hybrid coatings
Optical coatings are probably the most common examples among hybrid coating applications. As stated previously, the commercial development of (hybrid) materials is partly based on a multifunctional approach, meaning that coatings often display several additional properties. For example, Schott, a pioneer company of sol–gel optical coatings, has developed transparent and easy-to-clean coated glass specifically designed for glass panes of oven baking trays.321 The SCHOTT® CleanPlus product based on Ormocer is covering glass panes and offers durable hydrophobic properties due to functional hydrophobic siloxanes embedded in an inorganic network layer, withstanding high temperatures and household utensil abrasion. Another instructive example of optical coatings is provided by coatings on ophthalmic plastic lenses (Fig. 12). Here again, multifunctionality is required since ophthalmic plastic lenses should present various properties such as transparency, anti-abrasion, anti-smudge, and anti-dust combined with the possible variation of transmission with the intensity of light. In this case, multifunctionality is generally achieved through several coatings combined with hybrid chemistry.322,323 Concerning anti-scratch properties, the coating consists of a compromise: greater surface hardness to limit abrasion caused by fine dust particles and greater flexibility to increase the resistance towards larger particles or macroscopic objects. An effective solution has been found by applying a hybrid O–I nanocomposite coating to the surface of the lens via dip- or spin-coating techniques.323 These varnishes composed of both organic acrylates based polymers, organosilane coupling agents and mineral nanoparticles (silica for example) solve the problem of abrasion due to their two-fold properties: resistance to fine scratches due to the hardness of their inorganic component and resistance to large scratches due to the flexibility of their organic component. Besides improving the mechanical properties of the coating, the small size of the inorganic nanoparticles eliminates any risk of light scattering and ensures perfect transparency. Moreover, the chemical composition of this first coating provides high adhesion properties on both the plastic substrate and subsequent anti-reflective inorganic layers. From a mechanical point of view, this anti-scratch layer ensures a mechanical transition by filling the gap between the mechanical properties of the soft plastic-based lenses and those of the hard anti-reflective mineral layers. Anti-smudge and anti-dust treatments can be additionally performed. The first effect is reached by using in hybrid coatings fluorinated polysilazanes that possess radicals that can react on the silica component yielding good adherence to the coating. Polysilazanes also possess a rich pattern of fluorine that exhibits a strong chemical repulsion to water and oily matter. The second effect requires deposition of anti-static coatings that can be processed by inclusion of transparent conductive components (conductive nanoparticles, ionic species, selected conductive polymers, etc.) to avoid charge accumulation and so the coatings do not attract dust. Moreover these hybrid coatings can be compatibilised with organic dyes as chromens or spyro-oxazines to yield photochromic lenses, whose transmission varies with the intensity of light and thus adapt to diverse lighting conditions.
 Fig. 12  Structure of an ophthalmic lens (courtesy of Essilor International). 
The last example concerns commercialised hybrid protective coatings such as conversion layers. Conversion layers have been developed in the last decade in both aeronautics and automotive domains (for aeronautics: AC-130/AC-131 products of 3M Aerospace Sealants, Socogel B0102/B0202 sold by Socomore, DesoGel products of PPG Aerospace and for automotive: Zircobond® products provided by PPG industries, Oxsilan® products of Chemetall, etc.). The development of these new conversion layers is mainly due to a tightening of legal regulations which aims to ban highly toxic chromate- and nickel-based conversion layers. Besides compliance with regulations, such coatings should also fulfil several technical and economical requirements. They should present a satisfactory adhesion to metallic alloys enhancing thus passive corrosion resistance and should favour high adhesion ability to the organic-based resins constituting primers and/or topcoats. In addition to that, the composition of conversion layers should be adapted to accommodate thermal expansion of both metallic substrates and top-layers, minimising thus the formation of cracks as far as possible over a wide range of temperatures. Such water-based products are typically made of an organozirconium and organosilane mixture. The Zr-based precursor bonds covalently with the metal surface (Zr–O bond is stronger than Ti–O or Si–O bonds) while the organosilane coupling agent holding a reactive functional group preferentially grafts with the adhesive or matrix resin subsequently deposited. The organic moiety of the siloxane precursor is favorably chosen regarding the resin type, for example glycidoxy-alkylsilane for epoxy or urethane matrixes and primary amine such as amino-alkylsilane for polyimide-based resins. Another advantage of hybrid conversion layers concerns the versatility of the deposition step. Indeed, coating and curing processes of hybrid conversion layers are highly compatible with existing automotive pretreatment and coating lines, limiting thus the extra-cost of this new technology. Moreover, these new hybrid coatings can be deposited by spraying instead of dipping, which is more adapted to the coating of large aircraft components and which allows for reducing solution amounts and wastes.
Hybrid (nano)particles for body care and pharmaceutical applications
The area of research concerning nanopharmacy/nanomedicine has really exploded during the past decade. The surge of smart hybrid nanomaterials has yielded a few products that have entered in the real market.324,325 Indeed, hybridized inorganic nanoparticles are found in applications as active pharmaceutical ingredients, as vectors or with an enabling function. Some others are used for in vitro diagnosis as in lateral flow devices (immunochromatography) or in delivery systems (drug delivery, as implantable biomaterials, vaccine adjuvants). Many new hybrids are already developed as prototypes or in early preclinical trials fitting the reality of production and regulatory difficulties inherent to the entry of any new commercial product into, in particular, markets associated with human health and medicine.324
For example, Sol-Gel Technologies company has developed a set of class I hybrid compounds which some of them are sold by Merck KgaA (Eusolex® UV-Pearls™) and EMD Chemicals Inc. (Fig. 13).326 These new hybrid compounds target the field of cosmetics and controlled release of “active ingredients” and, in particular, for applications concerning skin care and protection.327,328 Undesirable skin alterations and melanomas created by sun induced premature skin aging need the use of efficient but biocompatible sunscreens. Hybrids developed by Sol-Gel Technologies are based on the encapsulation of active organic components within nanoporous silica micro-capsules. They present several advantages compared to current commercial sunscreens. Indeed, by encapsulating the active organic UV filters (80 w/w% of the final product) in silica micro-capsules, the contact of these chemicals with the skin is reduced, and damage from free radicals that may get trapped within the porous host preventing radical damage to the DNA. In particular, these “UV-pearls” incorporated into a suitable cosmetic vehicle to achieve high Sun Protection Factors (SPF), while affording an improved safety profile as the penetration of the UV absorbers is markedly reduced, have already been adopted by companies for sunscreens and daily wear cosmetics.326 The same company has also developed silica rainbow pearls containing organic dyes for cosmetic applications and silica active-pearls (“cool pearls”) containing an effective acne medicament as benzoyl peroxide, which are as effective as antibiotics but do not cause bacterial resistance or stomach upset. Benzoyl peroxide, in direct contact with skin, provokes skin irritations, dryness and hyper-pigmentation in many patients. Sol–gel active-pearls have undergone successful commercial development because embedding the benzoyl peroxide active ingredient in a silica shell prevents it from coming into contact with epidermis while gradually delivering it to the follicular region where acne bacteria are located.
 Fig. 13  Encapsulation of drugs/organic UV filters in protective silica micropearls for acne treatment and sunscreens (courtesy of Sol-Gel Technologies and Merck Chemicals respectively). 
Another approach based on the physical intrinsic properties of the inorganic part of hybrid materials involves hybridized inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) such as (ultrasmall) superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs (SPIO/USPIO), gold-based core–shell NPs (silica core of about 100 nm and a gold shell of 20 nm – AuroShell®), crystallised hafnium oxide-based NPs (NanoXray®) or gold-based NPs (TobacAlert™), etc.10,325 Briefly, magnetic iron oxide particle formulations (SPIO, USPIO) are used for in vivo imaging through Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and for thermal cancer therapy via hyperthermia. Gold shell NPs yield photothermal cancer therapy nanodevices that operate using thermal ablation; the heat associated with their characteristic plasmonic response (AuroShell®). Both hyperthermia and thermal ablation are therapies related to the use of heat as a way of action to kill pathophysiological tissues. Another possibility concerns the use of locally generated reactive radicals through X-ray excited inorganic nano-absorbers to destroy the tumour (NanoXray®).
Hybrid aerogels and polymer nanocomposites
Unsuccessfully commercialised in the 1940s to 90s by several companies (Monsanto, BASF, etc.), silica-based aerogels have been re-commercialised in the 2000s. This was achieved thanks to the research developed in the 1980s to 90s and focused on both chemistry and processing of aerogels. These developments allowed fabrication of aerogels more compatible with industrial and commercial requirements. Aerogel manufacturing on a larger scale has become safer, faster and less expensive thanks to the development of both supercritical drying with technically less constraining and non-flammable supercritical CO2 fluid and the ambient-pressure drying which is based on a series of solvent-exchange processes and chemical surface modification with an hydrophobic organosilane.329–331 It is interesting to notice that the supercritical drying has been selected by Aspen Aerogels® for producing composite materials while the ambient-pressure drying is currently used by several companies for producing translucent hydrophobic silica-based aerogel granules (for example Cabot Corporation under the tradename Nanogel™ or Dow Corning under the product name VM 2270 Aerogel Fine Particles – Fig. 14).10
 Fig. 14  Some commercial products based on hybrid O–I aerogels. Aerogel products: various hybrid aerogel products commercially available (top: Aspen Aerogel® flexible composite blankets/down: Nanogel™ translucent granules and fine particles – Cabot Corporation®). 
Despite the amazing intrinsic characteristics and properties of aerogels, most as-made aerogels present a poor mechanical behaviour: they are often highly brittle and fragile. This represents a serious drawback for their commercial applications. O–I hybridization of aerogels overcomes this lack of mechanical properties. Several strategies have been developed resulting in an increase of mechanical properties and facilitating their further handling. One of these strategies is based on the co-condensation of a flexible polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) with TEOS332 or involves methyltrimethoxysilane as a unique precursor.333,334 Gels obtained present a rubber-like flexibility and display high compression capability. In addition to the improvement of mechanical properties, these aerogels are highly hydrophobic (contact angle > 160°) and could absorb 10–20 times their own weight in (toxic) apolar liquids (petrol, kerosene and diesel for example). Interestingly, this last property i.e. oil absorption capability allowed Dow Corning company and Cabot Corporation to commercialise methylsilylated aerogel as fragrance delivery and retention materials, thickener, sebum absorber and soft focus agent for personal care and as oil spill management respectively.
Another interesting way to enhance the mechanical properties of aerogels consists of the doping/reinforcing of aerogels by crosslinking organic polymers on the original gel skeletons. Based on the observation that polymers could be reinforced by inorganic fillers, Leventis et al. successfully increase the mechanical properties of aerogels by doping fillers (i.e. aerogels) with polymers.335–337 However, when the mechanical properties (strength, stiffness, flexibility, etc.) are usually enhanced by the organic polymerisation, the insulating ability, optical transparency, and surface area are at the same time reduced.
The last way to increase the mechanical properties of aerogels and leading to a commercial development is based on another type of reinforcement. Like steel bars reinforce concrete in buildings, aerogels could be reinforced by microfibers. Using this approach, Aspen Aerogels started to fabricate in the early 2000s flexible fiber–hydrophobic silica aerogel composite blankets via a sol impregnation process followed by supercritical drying with CO2. Depending on the formulation of composites (for example the type of fibers, organic or inorganic), aerogel-based insulation blankets were designed for cryogenic applications (Cryogel®), for clothing and apparel (Pyrogel®/Spaceloft®) or for high-temperature applications (Pyrogel®) allowing insulation from −265 °C to 650 °C. Moreover, due to their low thickness, flexibility and easy handling features, they could easily insulate any type of plant's equipment (piping, towers, tanks, etc.) even in confined spaces. Their products are now found in subsea oil pipelines (pipe in pipe insulation), refineries, winter apparel, building and construction.
Considering now the high optical transparency of aerogels in addition to their insulation properties (thermal and acoustic), Cabot Corporation incorporated its Nanogel® granules in daylighting systems providing an enhancement of insulation while maintaining optimal light transmission. Aerogel granules/particles could be incorporated in many existing daylighting systems (structural composite panels, structural polycarbonate systems, U-channel glass, insulated glass units, etc.).
Another important development leading to commercial products concerns hybrid polymer nanocomposites (PNCs). Basically, PNCs could be described as the combination of a polymer matrix with inorganic or hybrid nano-objects that have at least one dimension in the nanometer range (length scale below 100 nm). Considering the extensive variety of both nano-objects (oxide-based particles, oxo-clusters, POSS, clays, nanoMOFs, metals, quantum dots, carbon nanotubes, etc.) and existing polymers, their potential combinations and thus the synergetic properties of the resulting PNCs are essentially endless. Generally, PNCs imply low-volume additions (1–10%) of nano-objects which provide mechanical properties (like elastic stiffness and strength) enhancements with respect to the neat polymer that are comparable to that achieved by conventional loadings (15–40%) of traditional micrometer-scale inorganic fillers. This is generally explained by the large surface area to volume ratio of nano-objects when compared to the micro- and macro-additives. In addition to that, the lower particle loading facilitates processing and reduces the component weight. Most important are the unique value-added properties and property combinations, normally not possible with traditional fillers, such as barrier resistance, optical clarity, scratch/wear resistance, flame retardancy, oxidation, and ablation resistance. This incredible versatility in terms of chemistry combined with easy and existing processing could easily explain the abundance of articles, patents and finally commercial products related to PNCs over the past 20 years.
Commercial developments of PNCs involve mainly two types of nano-objects: oxide-based particles (silica-based particles most of the time) and clays due to their commercial availability and their relatively low cost. Although several strategies have been investigated to prepare PNCs depending on the starting states of both organic and inorganic materials,170,173–175,178,338–344 in practice, the majority of commercial developments involves preformed nano-objects. These nano-objects could be incorporated into the polymer matrix by (i) melt processing (direct mixing of nano-objects with the polymer melt), (ii) solution processing (a common solvent is used to disperse nano-objects in a polymer solution), and (iii) an in situ polymerisation reaction (dispersion of nano-objects directly in the monomer or monomer solution). From a chemical point of view, these inorganic nano-objects (clays and oxide-based particles) usually present hydrophilic characteristics which could seriously impede homogeneous dispersion in the organic polymer phase leading to materials presenting properties similar to traditional micro-composites. Functionalisation of these nano-objects requires molecules able to both bond to the particle surface and to interact with the polymer matrix. They should then present anchoring groups interacting with the inorganic particles through covalent, coordinative, electrostatic or hydrogen bonding and an organic part capable of forming covalent bonds (through a polymerisation process) to the polymer matrix or interacting via van der Waals forces.170,173–175,178,338–347
The example concerning “green tyres” is of particular interest since its impact on our environment and on the industrial production is significant. The wear resistance of filled rubber is essentially determined by the filler characteristics, especially surface activity and morphology. High surface area carbon black, giving a large interfacial area between the filler and the polymer combined with its high affinity towards rubber (through van der Waals forces), induces strong interaction with the hydrocarbon polymer used in tyres, resulting in improved wear resistance. In the beginning of 1990s, a collaboration between Michelin and Rhodia allowed the incorporation of “highly dispersive silica” (HDS) nanoparticles into tyre tread. In order to minimise filler–filler interactions, while at the same time for favouring polymer–filler interactions, surface-modification of the nanoparticles was necessary. It was achieved by their functionalisation with a coupling agent, bis(3-triethoxysilylpropyl)tetrasulfane (TESPT), which allows covalent bonding between organically modified nanoparticles and SBR (styrene–butadiene rubber) polymer chains during the vulcanization process.348 This functionalisation was essential since bare silica nanoparticles show very weak polymer–filler interactions leading to a strong tendency to agglomerate. In terms of processing, this innovation implied the adaptation of tyre manufacturing and especially the mixing step. In the case of black carbon, the mixing step consists of essentially decreasing the size of aggregates (around 80 nm). In contrast, silica nanoparticles are added to mixers before organic modification and particle functionalisation takes place in mixers. A careful control of both temperature and mixing time is needed to first organically modify nanoparticles and next to covalently bond these modified nanofillers to the polymers during the vulcanization process.348 This example of nanofillers in tyre manufacturing, carbon black versus silica nanoparticles, is not only related to their reinforcing ability i.e. improvement of mechanical properties of the final nanocomposites. It emphasises also the importance of additional intrinsic properties of nanofillers. In contrast to HDS nanoparticles, carbon black presents anti-UV properties and a deep black colour which masks the coloured oxidised forms of anti-oxidative agents present in tyre composition.349 These additional properties combined with its lower costs explain the essential part of carbon black as a nanofiller.
Another well-known commercial application of PNCs related to the automotive industry was developed by researchers of Toyota in the early 1990s and concerned clay-based PNCs.174,350–353 Since this pioneering work, research and commercial developments about clay-based PNCs have exploded over the past 20 years. However, preparations of clay-based PNCs are not straightforward. Indeed, the layered structure of clays deeply influences the final properties of PNCs. Depending on the compatibility between organic polymers and clays, clays could display an intercalated or exfoliated structure into the PNCs. From an industrial point of view, three main properties of clay-based PNCs have been commercially exploited: improvement of mechanical properties of polymers, gas barrier performance, and fire/heat resistance. Thus markets concerned by clay-based PNCs are mainly automotive and food/beverage packaging.
The first commercial application of these materials was the use of clay/nylon-6 nanocomposites as timing belt covers for Toyota cars (the “Starlet” passenger car), in collaboration with Ube Ind. in 1989.174 Shortly after this first commercialisation, Unitika Ltd. introduced nylon-6 nanocomposites for engine covers on Mitsubishi's gasoline direct injection (GDI) engines.354 However for cost reasons, these early applications were unable to retain their position in the highly competitive automotive markets. It was not until the 2000s that new clay-based materials re-entered in the automotive industry (PP and TPO-based PNCs). In 2002, General Motors, in cooperation with Basell North America and Southern Clay Products, developed an exterior step assist component for its GMC Safari and Chevrolet Astro models. This component was made with a PP-based nanocomposite containing 2.5% of nano-clay in place of 15% talc. The PNC presented numerous advantages compared to the talc-based composite: it was lighter in weight, stiffer, more robust at low temperatures and more recyclable. It helped also to reduce paint delamination, and improved knit-line appearance, colourability, grain patterns, and scratch and mar resistance. In terms of processing, it presented the advantage to be moulded in the same tool as that used for the talc-based composite. However, specific modifications of the moulding tool were performed to avoid clay agglomeration during processing. Engineers optimised several processing parameters such as the clay infeed position at the extruder, screw design, screw speed, temperature, and pressure. Optimisation of the clay dispersion into the polymer matrix was also achieved by chemical improvements in the nano-clays' surface modification and polymer formulation, leading to a high rate of exfoliation. Progress in both chemical and processing domains has allowed a development of PNC use in the automotive field. Interestingly, Pirelli has developed a new tyre involving two PNCs in the tread of high performance tyres series (winter 240 Sottozero for example – Fig. 15). Briefly, this tyre series utilises cap and base technology that combines two different compounds in the tread. The upper part (cap) of the tread that comes into contact with the road surface uses silica-based PNCs (as previously mentioned with Michelin's tyres) providing greater stability under both wet and dry conditions. The sub-part of tread in contact with the casing (base) uses organically modified nano-clays dispersed throughout the polymer and provides the stiffness that enhances the stability and driving precision and an equal performance in longitudinal and lateral directions.
 Fig. 15  Pirelli's tyres based on cap (hybrid silica nanoparticle-based PNCs) and base (nanoclay-based PNCs) technology (courtesy of Pirelli®). 
Besides automotive applications, clay-based PNCs have also been employed in food and beverage packaging as well as for barrier liners in storage tanks and fuel lines due to their excellent barrier properties. These properties are commonly explained by the formation of a labyrinth resulting from the spatial dispersion of nano-clay platelets within the polymeric structure, which physically delays the passage of gas and vapour. Examples of applications concern modified atmosphere packaging for food (meats, cheese, confectionery, cereals and boil-in-the-bag), extrusion-coating applications in association with paperboard for fruit juice and dairy products, together with co-extrusion processes for the manufacture of beer and carbonated drink bottles.
Conclusion, perspectives, and future of hybrid materials
Hybrid materials being at the interface of organic (biologic) and inorganic realms are highly versatile offering a wide range of possibilities to elaborate tailor-made materials in terms of processing, chemical and physical properties. Today, a multitude of functional hybrid materials span a very large and diverse set of structures, textures and chemical compositions. In addition they present a high versatility with regard to shaping. As a consequence they are extremely competitive candidates for numerous applications such as those already described in the present article and in several other review articles.9,10,41 The growth and importance of this multidisciplinary scientific domain can be illustrated by a respectable number of international conferences, themed issues published in high impact journals and books, scientific articles (in green) and patents (in orange) (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Number of papers (Isi Web of KnowledgeSM) and patents (WIPO) that use the concept of sol–gel derived hybrids, hybrid materials, O–I nanocomposites, bionanocomposites, ormocers, ormosils, coordination polymers and metal–organic frameworks. 
Future research will give birth to more complex bioinspired hybrid materials and systems. These new generation of hybrid materials will combine many interesting features such as miniaturization, hierarchical organizations, resistance, recognition, self-repairing properties and adaptability. Tomorrow, as in living organisms hybrid materials will be integrated in smart devices that will present homeostatic abilities, maintaining tight control of their local environment through interconversions of chemical, electrochemical and mechanical energy and self-regulating feedback loops organized hierarchically across many length scales.355 Let us have a dream: these innovative hybrid materials will be fully recyclable or they even will be able to self-replicate.
Notes and references
B. Bhushan, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A: Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., 2009, 367, 1445–1486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Fratzl and R. Weinkamer, Progr. Mater. Sci., 2007, 52, 1263–1334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rytwo, Macla, 2008, 9, 15–17 Search PubMed .
E. Ruiz-Hitzky, P. Aranda, M. Darder and G. Rytwo, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9306–9321 RSC .

          F. Bergaya and G. Lagaly, Handbook of Clay Science, Elsevier Science,  2013 Search PubMed .
A. Weiss, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1963, 2, 697–703 CrossRef .
M. S. Del Rio, P. Martinetto, C. Reyes-Valerio, E. Dooryhee and M. Suarez, Archaeometry, 2006, 48, 115–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Berke, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 15–30 RSC .
C. Sanchez, B. Julian, P. Belleville and M. Popall, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3559–3592 RSC .
C. Sanchez, P. Belleville, M. Popall and L. Nicole, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 696–753 RSC .

          J. Livage, Le Monde,  26 October 1977.
N. Gharbi, C. Sanchez, J. Livage, J. Lemerle, L. Nejem and J. Lefebvre, Inorg. Chem., 1982, 21, 2758–2765 CrossRef CAS .
D. Avnir, D. Levy and R. Reisfeld, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 5956–5959 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schmidt, H. Scholze and A. Kaiser, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1984, 63, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
J. Livage, M. Henry and C. Sanchez, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1988, 18, 259–341 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, J. Livage, M. Henry and F. Babonneau, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1988, 100, 65–76 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez and F. Ribot, Proceedings of the First European Workshop on Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Materials, New J. Chem., 1993, 18, 987–988 Search PubMed .
C. Sanchez and F. Ribot, New J. Chem., 1994, 18, 1007–1047 CAS .
D. Avnir, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
D. Avnir, V. R. Kaufman and R. Reisfeld, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1985, 74, 395–406 CrossRef CAS .
D. Levy, S. Einhorn and D. Avnir, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1989, 113, 137–145 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gelman, J. Blum and D. Avnir, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14460–14463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Aouat, G. Marom, D. Avnir, V. Gelman, G. E. Shter and G. S. Grader, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 22325–22330 CAS .
L. Shapiro and D. Avnir, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 2195–2198 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zusman, C. Rottman, M. Ottolenghi and D. Avnir, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1990, 122, 107–109 CrossRef CAS .
B. Iosefzon-Kuyavskaya, I. Gigozin, M. Ottolenghi, D. Avnir and O. Lev, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1992, 147–148, 808–812 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rottman, M. Ottolenghi, R. Zusman, O. Lev, M. Smith, G. Gong, M. L. Kagan and D. Avnir, Mater. Lett., 1992, 13, 293–298 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rottman, A. Turniansky and D. Avnir, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1998, 13, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
S. Braun, S. Rappoport, R. Zusman, D. Avnir and M. Ottolenghi, Mater. Lett., 1990, 10, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
D. Avnir, T. Coradin, O. Lev and J. Livage, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1013–1030 RSC .

          D. Avnir and L. D. Cohen, IL 120022, US 6,159,453, EP 0973493, WO/1998/031333,  2000 .

          N. Lapidot, S. Magdassi, D. Avnir, C. Rottman, O. Gans and A. Seri-Levy, US 6,238,650, EP 1181001, WO/2000/072806,  2001 .

          S. Magdassi, D. Avnir, A. Seri-Levy, N. Lapidot, C. Rottman, Y. Sorek and O. Gans, IL 141411, US 6,303,149, EP 1104287, WO/2000/009652,  2001 .

          N. Lapidot, S. Magdassi, D. Avnir, C. Rottman, O. Gans and A. Seri-Levy, US 6,436,375, EP 1181000, WO/2000/071084,  2002 .

          N. Lapidot, S. Magdassi, D. Avnir, C. Rottman, O. Gans and A. Seri-Levy, US 6,468,509,  2002 .

          N. Lapidot, S. Magdassi, D. Avnir, C. Rottman, O. Gans and A. Seri-Levy, US 7,758,888,  2010 .

          N. Lapidot, S. Magdassi, D. Avnir, C. Rottman, O. Gans and A. Seri-Levy, US 8,039,020,  2011 .

          N. Lapidot, S. Magdassi, D. Avnir, C. Rottman, O. Gans and A. Seri-Levy, US 8,449,918,  2013 .

Functional Hybrid Materials, ed. P. Gómez-Romero and C. Sanchez, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004 Search PubMed .

Hybrid Materials: Strategies, Syntheses, Characterization and Applications, ed. G. Kickelbick, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2007 Search PubMed .
H. Schmidt, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 115–130 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mammeri, E. Le Bourhis, L. Rozes and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3787–3811 RSC .

Sol-Gel Technologies for Glass Producers and Users, ed. M. A. Aegerter and M. Mennig, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston/Dordrecht/New York/London,  2004 Search PubMed .

Polymer Nanocomposites Handbook, ed. R. K. Gupta, E. Kennel and K.-J. Kim, CRC Press – Taylor & Francis Group,  2010 Search PubMed .
M. Faustini, C. Boissiere, L. Nicole and D. Grosso, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 709–723 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, Functional hybrid materials, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3543–3556 RSC .
J. Long and O. Yaghi, Metal Organic Frameworks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1201–1508 RSC .
P. Rabu and A. Taubert, Advanced Hybrid Materials, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9263–9562 RSC .

Hybrid materials Chemical Society Reviews, ed. C. Sanchez, S. Kitagawa and K. Shea,  2011, vol. 40, pp. 453–1152 Search PubMed .
S. Mann, S. L. Burkett, S. A. Davis, C. E. Fowler, N. H. Mendelson, S. D. Sims, D. Walsh and N. T. Whilton, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2300–2310 CrossRef CAS .

Hierarchically Structured Porous Materials: From Nanoscience to Catalysis, Separation, Optics, Energy, and Life Science, ed. B.-L. Su, C. Sanchez and X.-Y. Yang, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2011 Search PubMed .
F. Hoffmann, M. Cornelius, J. Morell and M. Froba, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 265–288 CAS .
F. Hoffmann and M. Froba, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 608–620 RSC .
D. A. Loy and K. J. Shea, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 1431–1442 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Shea and D. A. Loy, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3306–3319 CrossRef CAS .
B. Boury and R. J. P. Corriu, Chem. Commun., 2002, 795–802 RSC .
M. Barboiu, A. Cazacu, M. Michau, R. Caraballo, C. Arnal-Herault and A. Pasc-Banu, Chem. Eng. Process., 2008, 47, 1044–1052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Ozin, Chem. Commun., 2000, 419–432 RSC .
W. D. Wang, J. E. Lofgreen and G. A. Ozin, Small, 2010, 6, 2634–2642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 575–582 RSC .
Y. Chujo and T. Saegusa, Adv. Polym. Sci., 1992, 100, 11–29 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, G. Soler-Illia, F. Ribot, T. Lalot, C. R. Mayer and V. Cabuil, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3061–3083 CrossRef CAS .
U. Schubert, N. Husing and A. Lorenz, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 2010–2027 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. P. Corriu, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, Série IIC, 1998, 1, 83–89 CAS .
C. Sanchez, C. Boissiere, S. Cassaignon, C. Chaneac, O. Durupthy, M. Faustini, D. Grosso, C. Laberty-Robert, L. Nicole, D. Portehault, F. Ribot, L. Rozes and C. Sassoye, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 221–238 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, C. Sanchez, B. Lebeau and J. Patarin, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4093–4138 CrossRef PubMed .
T. X. Fan, S. K. Chow and D. Zhang, Progr. Mater. Sci., 2009, 54, 542–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Parker, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., 2000, 2, R15–R28 CrossRef .
L. P. Biro and J. P. Vigneron, Laser Photonics Rev., 2011, 5, 27–51 CrossRef .
J. Boulenguez, S. Berthier and F. Leroy, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2012, 106, 1005–1011 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Ingram and A. R. Parker, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, 2008, 363, 2465–2480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Berthier, Photonique des Morphos, Springer-Verlag, Paris,  2010 Search PubMed .
S. Kinoshita and S. Yoshioka, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1442–1459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Berthier, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2005, 80, 1397–1400 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Zheng, X. F. Gao and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 178–182 RSC .
G. D. Bixler and B. Bhushan, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 11271–11284 RSC .
S. Nishimoto and B. Bhushan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 671–690 RSC .
T. Saison, C. Peroz, V. Chauveau, S. Berthier, E. Sondergard and H. Arribart, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2008, 3, 046004 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Parker and H. E. Townley, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 347–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Martin-Palma, C. G. Pantano and A. Lakhtakia, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 083901 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Lakhtakia, R. J. Martin-Palma, M. A. Motyka and C. G. Pantano, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2009, 4, 034001 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Cook, P. L. Timms and C. Goltner-Spickermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 557–559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Huang, X. D. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2325–2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Gaillot, O. Deparis, V. Welch, B. K. Wagner, J. P. Vigneron and C. J. Summers, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2008, 78, 031922 CrossRef .
S. Sotiropoulou, Y. Sierra-Sastre, S. S. Mark and C. A. Batt, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 821–834 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Jorgensen and M. H. Bartl, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10583–10591 RSC .
D. P. Pulsifer and A. Lakhtakia, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2011, 6, 031001 CrossRef PubMed .

          D. Zhang, Morphology Genetic Materials Templated from Nature Species, Zhejiang University Press – Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,  2012 Search PubMed .
H. Zhou, T. X. Fan and D. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1344–1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yu, T. Fan, S. Lou and D. Zhang, Progr. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 825–873 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Kang, T. Y. Tai and T. H. Fang, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2010, 10, 625–630 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Silver, R. Withnall, T. G. Ireland and G. R. Fern, J. Mod. Opt., 2005, 52, 999–1007 CrossRef CAS .
J. Silver, R. Withnall, T. G. Ireland, G. R. Fern and S. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 095302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, J. Zhou, R. L. Zong, M. Fu, Y. Bai, L. T. Li and Q. Li, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 2298–2300 CAS .
C. Mille, E. C. Tyrode and R. W. Corkery, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9873–9875 RSC .
C. Mille, E. C. Tyrode and R. W. Corkery, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3109–3117 RSC .
J. P. Vernon, Y. N. Fang, Y. Cai and K. H. Sandhage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7765–7768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Vernon, N. Hobbs, Y. Cai, A. Lethbridge, P. Vukusic, D. D. Deheyn and K. H. Sandhage, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10435–10437 RSC .
M. R. Weatherspoon, Y. Cai, M. Crne, M. Srinivasarao and K. H. Sandhage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7921–7923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Jorgensen, B. P. Yonkee and M. H. Bartl, Scr. Mater., 2011, 65, 954–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, D. Zhang, T. X. Fan, J. J. Gu, R. Ding, H. Wang, Q. X. Guo and H. Ogawa, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 33–40 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, D. Zhang, T. X. Fan, J. Ding, Q. X. Guo and H. Ogawa, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2006, 92, 227–233 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. J. Gu, S. M. Zhu, T. X. Fan, D. Zhang and Q. X. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 053901 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Song, H. L. Su, J. Han, D. Zhang and Z. X. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 495502 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Zhu, X. Y. Liu, Z. X. Chen, C. J. Liu, C. L. Feng, J. J. Gu, Q. L. Liu and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9126–9132 RSC .
W. H. Peng, C. L. Zhu, S. M. Zhu, F. Yao, Y. Li and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 4336–4344 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Peng, S. M. Zhu, W. L. Wang, W. Zhang, J. J. Gu, X. B. Hu, D. Zhang and Z. X. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2072–2080 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yao, Q. Q. Yang, C. Yin, S. M. Zhu, D. Zhang, W. J. Moon and Y. S. Kim, Mater. Lett., 2012, 77, 21–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, H. L. Su, D. Zhang, J. J. Chen and Z. X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8741–8746 RSC .
Z. W. He, W. Zhang, W. L. Wang, M. Tassin, J. J. Gu, Q. L. Liu, S. M. Zhu, H. L. Su, C. L. Feng and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 1673–1677 RSC .
Y. W. Tan, J. J. Gu, X. N. Zang, W. Xu, K. C. Shi, L. H. Xu and D. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8307–8311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Galusha, L. R. Richey, M. R. Jorgensen, J. S. Gardner and M. H. Bartl, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1277–1284 RSC .
J. W. Galusha, C. K. Tsung, G. D. Stucky and M. H. Bartl, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4925–4930 CrossRef CAS .
F. Song, H. L. Su, J. Han, J. Q. Xu and D. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 145, 39–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Beck, J. C. Vartuli, W. J. Roth, M. E. Leonovicz, C. T. Kresge, K. D. Schmitt, C. T. W. Chu, D. H. Olson and E. W. Sheppard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 10834–10843 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, J. Feng, Q. Huo, N. Melosh, G. H. Fredrickson, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Science, 1998, 279, 548–552 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Goltner and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 431–436 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hoffmann, M. Cornelius, J. Morell and M. Fröba, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3216–3251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sanchez, C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, C. Laberty and L. Nicole, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 682–737 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia and O. Azzaroni, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1107–1150 RSC .
C. J. Brinker, Y. Lu, A. Sellinger and H. Fan, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 579–585 CrossRef CAS .
D. Grosso, F. Cagnol, G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, E. L. Crepaldi, H. Amenitsch, A. Brunet-Bruneau, A. Bourgeois and C. Sanchez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 309–322 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brinker, MRS Bull., 2004, 29, 631–640 CrossRef CAS .
P. Innocenzi, T. Kidchob, P. Falcaro and M. Takahashi, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 607–614 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guillemin, M. Etienne, E. Sibottier and A. Walcarius, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5313–5322 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Doshi, N. K. Huesing, M. C. Lu, H. Y. Fan, Y. F. Lu, P. K. Simmons, B. G. Potter, A. J. Hurd and C. J. Brinker, Science, 2000, 290, 107–111 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, E. L. Crepaldi, D. Grosso, D. Durand and C. Sanchez, Chem. Commun., 2002, 20, 2298–2299 RSC .
G. Xomeritakis, C. M. Braunbarth, B. Smarsly, N. Liu, R. Kohn, Z. Klipowicz and C. J. Brinker, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2003, 66, 91–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Malfatti, T. Kidchob, P. Falcaro, S. Costacurta, M. Piccinini, M. C. Guidi, A. Marcelli, A. Corrias, M. F. Casula, H. Amenitsch and P. Innocenzi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 103, 113–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, H. Fan, A. Stump, T. L. Ward, T. Rieker and C. J. Brinker, Nature, 1999, 398, 223–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, A. Chaumonnot, L. Nicole and C. Sanchez, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 599–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Fan, Y. F. Lu, A. Stump, S. T. Reed, T. Baer, R. Schunk, L. V. Perez, G. P. Lopez and C. J. Brinker, Nature, 2000, 405, 56–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Yang, G. Wirnsberger, H. C. Huang, S. R. Cordero, M. D. McGehee, B. Scott, T. Deng, G. M. Whitesides, B. F. Chmelka, S. K. Buratto and G. D. Stucky, Science, 2000, 287, 465–467 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Pang, J. N. Stuecker, Y. B. Jiang, A. J. Bhakta, E. D. Branson, P. Li, J. Cesarano, D. Sutton, P. Calvert and C. J. Brinker, Small, 2008, 4, 982–989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Nicole, C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, A. Quach and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3598–3627 RSC .
P. Innocenzi, L. Malfatti, T. Kldchob and P. Falcaro, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2555–2564 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, H. Amenitsch, A. Gibaud, A. Coupe, N. Baccile and C. Sanchez, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2798–2799 RSC .
D. Grosso, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17033–17038 RSC .
N. Krins, M. Faustini, B. Louis and D. Grosso, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6218–6220 CrossRef CAS .
H. De Paz, A. Chemtob, C. Croutxe-Barghorn, S. Rigolet and B. Lebeau, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 151, 88–92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. De Paz-Simon, A. Chemtob, F. Crest, C. Croutxe-Barghorn, L. Michelin, L. Vidal, S. Rigolet and B. Lebeau, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 11944–11952 RSC .
H. De Paz-Simon, A. Chemtob, C. Croutxe-Barghorn, S. Rigolet, L. Michelin, L. Vidal and B. Lebeau, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 1963–1969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Melde and B. J. Johnson, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2010, 398, 1565–1573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wagner, S. Haffer, C. Weinberger, D. Klaus and M. Tiemann, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4036–4053 RSC .
T. H. Tran-Thi, R. Dagnelie, S. Crunaire and L. Nicole, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 621–639 RSC .
P. Innocenzi and L. Malfatti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4198–4216 RSC .
B. J. Melde, B. J. Johnson and P. T. Charles, Sensors, 2008, 8, 5202–5228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vallet-Regi, F. Balas and D. Arcos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7548–7558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Manzano, M. Colilla and M. Vallet-Regi, Exp. Opin. Drug Delivery, 2009, 6, 1383–1400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Walcarius, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4098–4140 RSC .
J. Michaelis and C. Brauchle, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4731–4740 RSC .
F. M. Ye, M. M. Collinson and D. A. Higgins, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 66–82 RSC .
C. Jung, C. Hellriegel, J. Michaelis and C. Brauchle, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 956–960 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kirstein, B. Platschek, C. Jung, R. Brown, T. Bein and C. Brauchle, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 303–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zurner, J. Kirstein, M. Doblinger, C. Brauchle and T. Bein, Nature, 2007, 450, 705–709 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Lebold, C. Jung, J. Michaelis and C. Brauchle, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2877–2883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jung, J. Kirstein, B. Platschek, T. Bein, M. Budde, I. Frank, K. Mullen, J. Michaelis and C. Brauchle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1638–1648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lebold, L. A. Muhlstein, J. Blechinger, M. Riederer, H. Amenitsch, R. Kohn, K. Peneva, K. Mullen, J. Michaelis, C. Brauchle and T. Bein, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1661–1672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, F. M. Ye, W. G. Sanders, M. M. Collinson and D. A. Higgins, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 9164–9170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lebold, J. Michaelis and C. Brauchle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 5017–5033 RSC .
R. Hernandez, A.-C. Franville, P. Minoofar, B. Dunn and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1248–1249 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Melosh, P. Lipic, F. S. Bates, F. Wudl, G. D. Stucky, G. H. Fredrickson and B. F. Chmelka, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 4332–4342 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Minoofar, R. Hernandez, S. Chia, B. Dunn, J. I. Zink and A. C. Franville, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14388–14396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Minoofar, R. Hernandez, A. C. Franville, S. Y. Chia, B. Dunn and J. I. Zink, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2003, 26, 571–575 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Ye, D. A. Higgins and M. M. Collinson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6772–6780 CAS .
C. Rottman, G. Grader, Y. De Hazan, S. Melchior and D. Avnir, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 8533–8543 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rottman and D. Avnir, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 5730–5734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jung, C. Hellriegel, B. Platschek, D. Wohrle, T. Bein, J. Michaelis and C. Brauchle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5570–5579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Y. Jeon and J. B. Baek, Materials, 2010, 3, 3654–3674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Althues, J. Henle and S. Kaskel, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1454–1465 RSC .
T. Hanemann and D. V. Szabo, Materials, 2010, 3, 3468–3517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. C. Camargo, K. G. Satyanarayana and F. Wypych, Materials Research-Ibero-American Journal of Materials, 2009, 12, 1–39 CAS .
F. Hussain, M. Hojjati, M. Okamoto and R. E. Gorga, J. Compos. Mater., 2006, 40, 1511–1575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Okada and A. Usuki, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2006, 291, 1449–1476 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Ray and M. Okamoto, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2003, 28, 1539–1641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vollath and D. V. Szabo, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2004, 6, 117–127 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kickelbick, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2003, 28, 83–114 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Vaia and J. F. Maguire, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2736–2751 CrossRef CAS .
W. Caseri, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2000, 21, 705–722 CrossRef CAS .
W. Caseri, Chem. Eng. Commun., 2009, 196, 549–572 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Zhang and A. H. E. Muller, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1121–1162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Kuo and F. C. Chang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 1649–1696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bradshaw, A. Garai and J. Huo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2344–2381 RSC .
N. Stock and S. Biswas, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 933–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tomczak, D. Janczewski, M. Han and G. J. Vancso, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 393–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Schubert, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 730–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Judeinstein and H. Schmidt, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1994, 3, 189–197 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cochet, L. Rozes, M. Popall and C. Sanchez, Mater. Sci. Eng,. C, 2007, 27, 1401–1405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Judeinstein, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 4–7 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Mayer, R. Thouvenot and T. Lalot, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 257–260 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Mayer, R. Thouvenot and T. Lalot, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 4433–4437 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kickelbick, D. Holzinger, C. Brick, G. Trimmel and E. Moons, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4382–4389 CrossRef CAS .
F. Perineau, S. Pensec, C. Sassoye, F. Ribot, L. Van Lokeren, R. Willem, L. Bouteiller, C. Sanchez and L. Rozes, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4470–4475 RSC .
F. Perineau, G. J. Hu, L. Rozes, F. Ribot, C. Sanchez, C. Creton, L. Bouteiller and S. Pensec, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 2636–2644 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ribot, A. Lafuma, C. Eychenne-Baron and C. Sanchez, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1496–1499 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trabelsi, A. Janke, R. Hassler, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, G. Fornasieri, S. Bocchini, L. Rozes, M. Stamm, J. F. Gerard and C. Sanchez, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 6068–6078 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rozes, G. Fornasieri, S. Trabelsi, C. Creton, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, M. Stamm and C. Sanchez, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2005, 33, 127–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Schubert, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3487–3494 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Tranchemontagne, J. L. Mendoza-Cortes, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1257–1283 RSC .
G. Ferey, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3084–3098 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Cordes, P. D. Lickiss and F. Rataboul, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2081–2173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
‘Hybrid Materials’ special issue, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 453–1152 Search PubMed .
F. Ribot, D. Minoux and C. Sanchez, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2000, 628, CC2.2 Search PubMed .
B. Jousseaume, M. Lahcini, M. C. Rascle, F. Ribot and C. Sanchez, Organometallics, 1995, 14, 685–689 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ribot, F. Banse, C. Sanchez, M. Lahcini and B. Jousseaume, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1997, 8, 529–533 CAS .
L. Angiolini, D. Caretti, R. De Vito, F. T. Niesel, E. Salatelli, C. Carlini, F. Ribot and C. Sanchez, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 1997, 7, 151–162 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ribot, D. Veautier, S. J. Guillaudeu and T. Lalot, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3973–3978 RSC .
G. Kickelbick and U. Schubert, Chem. Ber./Recl., 1997, 130, 473–477 CrossRef CAS .
G. Trimmel, B. Moraru, S. Gross, V. Di Noto and U. Schubert, Macromol. Symp., 2001, 175, 357–366 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, N. R. Choudhury, J. Matisons, U. Schubert and B. Moraru, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4522–4529 CrossRef CAS .
B. Moraru, N. Husing, G. Kickelbick, U. Schubert, P. Fratzl and H. Peterlik, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2732–2740 CrossRef CAS .
V. Torma, N. Huising, H. Peterlik and U. Schubert, C. R. Chim., 2004, 7, 495–502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, F. R. Kogler and U. Schubert, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 6586–6591 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, F. R. Kogler, H. Peterlik and U. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3268–3276 RSC .
F. Faccini, H. Fric, U. Schubert, E. Wendel, O. Tsetsgee, K. Mueller, H. Bertagnolli, A. Venzo and S. Gross, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3297–3307 RSC .
P. Heinz, M. Puchberger, M. Bendova, S. O. Baumann and U. Schubert, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 7640–7644 RSC .
P. Toledano, M. In and C. Sanchez, C. R. (Dokl.) Acad. Sci. URSS, 1991, 313, 1247–1253 CAS .
P. D. Moran, C. E. F. Rickard, G. A. Bowmaker, R. P. Cooney, J. R. Bartlett and J. L. Woolfrey, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 1417–1419 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, M. In, P. Toledano and P. Griesmar, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1992, 271, 669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Guerrero, M. Mehring, P. H. Mutin, F. Dahan and A. Vioux, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1999, 1537–1538 RSC .
M. Mehring, G. Guerrero, F. Dahan, P. H. Mutin and A. Vioux, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 3325–3332 CrossRef CAS .
F. Palacio, P. Oliete, U. Schubert, I. Mijatovic, N. Husing and H. Peterlik, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1873–1878 RSC .
S. Willemin, B. Donnadieu, L. Lecren, B. Henner, R. Clerac, C. Guerin, A. Meyer, A. V. Pokrovskii and J. Larionova, New J. Chem., 2004, 28, 919–928 RSC .
M. Dan-Hardi, C. Serre, T. Frot, L. Rozes, G. Maurin, C. Sanchez and G. Ferey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10857–10859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Serre, F. Millange, S. Surble and G. Ferey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6286–6289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Guillerm, S. Gross, C. Serre, T. Devic, M. Bauer and G. Ferey, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 767–769 RSC .
M. Eshel, A. Bino, I. Felner, D. C. Johnston, M. Luban and L. L. Miller, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 1376–1380 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Fu, D. R. Sun, Y. J. Chen, R. K. Huang, Z. X. Ding, X. Z. Fu and Z. H. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3364–3367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Hendon, D. Tiana, M. Fontecave, C. Sanchez, L. D'Arras, C. Sassoye, L. Rozes, C. Mellot-Draznieks and A. Walsh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10942–10945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Perineau, S. Pensec, C. Sanchez, C. Creton, L. Rozes and L. Bouteiller, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2785–2788 RSC .
S. Eslava, A. C. Papageorgiou, S. K. Beaumont, G. Kyriakou, D. S. Wright and R. M. Lambert, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5174–5178 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Constable, A. J. Lesser and E. B. Coughlin, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 1276–1282 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, L. Xie, H. Lu and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1258–1261 RSC .
S. Perruchas, S. Flores, B. Jousselme, E. Lobkovsky, H. Abruna and F. J. DiSalvo, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 8976–8987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Di Noto, A. B. Boeer, S. Lavina, C. A. Muryn, M. Bauer, G. A. Timco, E. Negro, M. Rancan, R. E. P. Winpenny and S. Gross, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3226–3236 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Kuznetsov, O. Kameneva, N. Bityurin, L. Rozes, C. Sanchez and A. Kanaev, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 1248–1257 RSC .
J. B. Benedict and P. Coppens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2938–2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. I. Snoeberger, K. J. Young, J. Tang, L. J. Allen, R. H. Crabtree, G. W. Brudvig, P. Coppens, S. B. Victor and J. B. Benedict, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8911–8917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Corden, W. Errington, P. Moore, M. G. Partridge and M. G. H. Wallbridge, Dalton Trans., 2004, 1846–1851 RSC .
M. D. Hager, P. Greil, C. Leyens, S. van der Zwaag and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5424–5430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Bergman and F. Wudl, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 41–62 RSC .
K. A. Williams, D. R. Dreyer and C. W. Bielawski, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 759–765 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Youngblood, N. R. Sottos and C. Extrand, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 732–741 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Harrington, A. Masic, N. Holten-Andersen, J. H. Waite and P. Fratzl, Science, 2010, 328, 216–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Krauss, T. H. Metzger, P. Fratzl and M. J. Harrington, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 1520–1528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. White, N. R. Sottos, P. H. Geubelle, J. S. Moore, M. R. Kessler, S. R. Sriram, E. N. Brown and S. Viswanathan, Nature, 2001, 409, 794–797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Yang, M. W. Keller, J. S. Moore, S. R. White and N. R. Sottos, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 9650–9655 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Chen, M. A. Dam, K. Ono, A. Mal, H. B. Shen, S. R. Nutt, K. Sheran and F. Wudl, Science, 2002, 295, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rekondo, R. Martin, A. Ruiz de Luzuriaga, G. Cabanero, H. J. Grande and I. Odriozola, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 237–240 RSC .
J. Fox, J. J. Wie, B. W. Greenland, S. Burattini, W. Hayes, H. M. Colquhoun, M. E. Mackay and S. J. Rowan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5362–5368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cordier, F. Tournilhac, C. Soulie-Ziakovic and L. Leibler, Nature, 2008, 451, 977–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Potier, A. Guinault, S. Delalande, C. Sanchez, F. Ribot and L. Rozes, Polym. Chem., 2014 10.1039/c1034py00172a .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gomez-Romero, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 163–174 CrossRef CAS .
C. Laberty-Robert, K. Valle, F. Pereira and C. Sanchez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 961–1005 RSC .
F. Croce, G. B. Appetecchi, L. Persi and B. Scrosati, Nature, 1998, 394, 456–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Croce, R. Curini, A. Martinelli, L. Persi, F. Ronci, B. Scrosati and R. Caminiti, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 10632–10638 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Croce and B. Scrosati, in Advanced Membrane Technology, ed. N. N. Li, E. Drioli, W. S. W. Ho and G. G. Lipscomb,  2003, vol. 984, pp. 194–207 Search PubMed .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. B. Appetecchi, F. Croce, L. Persi, F. Ronci and B. Scrosati, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 1481–1490 CrossRef CAS .
F. Croce, L. Settimi and B. Scrosati, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 364–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Bolis, G. Magnacca, G. Cerrato and C. Morterra, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 888–894 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Gillespi, Acc. Chem. Res., 1968, 1, 202–209 CrossRef .
G. Liu, M. T. Reinhout and G. L. Baker, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 175, 721–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dolle, L. Sannier, B. Beaudoin, M. Trentin and J. M. Tarascon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, A286–A289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon, A. S. Gozdz, C. Schmutz, F. Shokoohi and P. C. Warren, Solid State Ionics, 1996, 86–88, 49–54 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Song, Y. Y. Wang and C. C. Wan, J. Power Sources, 1999, 77, 183–197 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Borghini, M. Mastragostino, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2118–2121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fan and P. S. Fedkiw, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 399–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Das, S. S. Mandal and A. J. Bhattacharyya, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1391–1399 CAS .
E. Strauss, D. Golodnitsky and E. Peled, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 115–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Choi, Y. M. Lee, B. H. Lee, J. A. Lee and J. K. Park, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 167, 293–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, P. Bayley, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 7083–7090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nordstrom, A. Matic, J. Z. Sun, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 2293–2299 RSC .
Y. S. Lee, S. H. Ju, J. H. Kim, S. S. Hwang, J. M. Choi, Y. K. Sun, H. Kim, B. Scrosati and D. W. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 17, 18–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fernicola, B. Scrosati and H. Ohno, Ionics, 2006, 12, 95–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Alberti and M. Casciola in Membrane Technology, Membranes for Energy Conversion, ed. K. V. Peinemann and S. P. Nunes, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008, vol. 2 Search PubMed .
C. Stone, T. S. Daynard, L. Q. Hu, C. Mah and A. E. Steck, Journal of New Materials for Electrochemical systems, 2000, 3, 43–50 CAS .

          P. Gómez-Romero and C. Sanchez, Functional Hybrid Materials, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004 Search PubMed .

          E. Ruiz-Hitzky, K. Ariga and Y. M. Lvov, Bio-inorganic Hybrid Nanomaterials, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
J. I. Bregman and R. S. Braman, Journal of Colloid Science, 1965, 20, 913–922 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Alberti, Semaine sur la thème Membranes Biologiques et Artificielles et la Desalination de l'eau,  1975 Search PubMed .
G. Alberti, M. Casciola, U. Costantino and G. Levi, J. Membr. Sci., 1978, 3, 179–190 CrossRef CAS .
G. Alberti, M. Casciola and U. Costantino, J. Membr. Sci., 1983, 16, 137–149 CrossRef CAS .
G. Alberti, M. Casciola, R. Palombari and A. Peraio, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 58, 339–344 CrossRef CAS .
G. Alberti and R. Palombari, Solid State Ionics, 1989, 35, 153–156 CrossRef .
H. T. Wang, B. A. Holmberg, L. M. Huang, Z. B. Wang, A. Mitra, J. M. Norbeck and Y. S. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 834–837 RSC .

          F. Niepceron, H. Galiano, J.-F. Tassin, Particules inorganiques organomodifiees, procede de preparation de celles-ci et utilisation dans un materiau composite pour membrane de pile a combustible, Fr. Pat. 0755957,  2007 Search PubMed .
F. Niepceron, B. Lafitte, H. Galiano, J. Bigarre, E. Nicol and J. F. Tassin, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 338, 100–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Mauritz, I. D. Stefanithis, S. V. Davis, R. W. Scheetz, R. K. Pope, G. L. Wilkes and H. H. Huang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1995, 55, 181–190 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Mauritz, Macromolecules, 1989, 22, 4483–4488 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Deng, R. B. Moore and K. A. Mauritz, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 2259–2268 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Deng, W. Jarrett, R. B. Moore and K. A. Mauritz, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1996, 7, 177–190 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Mauritz and M. K. Hassan, Polym. Rev., 2007, 47, 543–565 CrossRef CAS .
K. Valle, P. Belleville, F. Pereira and C. Sanchez, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 107–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Sel, C. Laberty-Robert, T. Azais and C. Sanchez, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3733–3741 RSC .
F. Pereira, A. Chan, K. Valle, P. Palmas, J. Bigarre, P. Belleville and C. Sanchez, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 1217–1224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Sel, A. Soules, B. Ameduri, B. Boutevin, C. Laberty-Robert, G. Gebel and C. Sanchez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1090–1098 CrossRef CAS .
O. Sel, T. Azais, M. Marechal, G. Gebel, C. Laberty-Robert and C. Sanchez, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 2992–3000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Maneeratana, J. D. Bass, T. Azais, A. Patissier, K. Valle, M. Marechal, G. Gebel, C. Laberty-Robert and C. Sanchez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2872–2880 CrossRef CAS .
P. Verma and P. Novak, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2599–2614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Martin, M. Alias, F. Christien, O. Crosnier, D. Belanger and T. Brousse, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4735–4741 CAS .
C. Martin, O. Crosnier, R. Retoux, D. Belanger, D. M. Schleich and T. Brousse, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3524–3530 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pandurangappa, N. S. Lawrence and R. G. Compton, Analyst, 2002, 127, 1568–1571 RSC .
K. Kalinathan, D. P. DesRoches, X. R. Liu and P. G. Pickup, J. Power Sources, 2008, 181, 182–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. de Combarieu, M. Morcrette, F. Millange, N. Guillou, J. Cabana, C. P. Grey, I. Margiolaki, G. Ferey and J. M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1602–1611 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pognon, T. Brousse and D. Belanger, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1340–1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Delamar, R. Hitmi, J. Pinson and J. M. Saveant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 5883–5884 CrossRef CAS .
D. Belanger and J. Pinson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3995–4048 RSC .
A. Morozan and F. Jaouen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9269–9290 CAS .
A. Banerjee, U. Singh, V. Aravindan, M. Srinivasan and S. Ogale, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1158–1163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Demir-Cakan, M. Morcrette, F. Nouar, C. Davoisne, T. Devic, D. Gonbeau, R. Dominko, C. Serre, G. Ferey and J. M. Tarascon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16154–16160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kitagawa, R. Kitaura and S. Noro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2334–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Song, Z. F. Chen, C. R. K. Glasson, K. Hanson, H. L. Luo, M. R. Norris, D. L. Ashford, J. J. Concepcion, M. K. Brennaman and T. J. Meyer, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 2882–2890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhao, J. R. Swierk, J. D. Megiatto, B. Sherman, W. J. Youngblood, D. D. Qin, D. M. Lentz, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15612–15616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, X. Ding, J. H. Liu, L. Wang, Z. K. Lu, L. Li and L. C. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4219–4222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Ji, M. F. He, Z. J. Huang, U. Ozkan and Y. Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11696–11699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Gardner, M. Beyler, M. Karnahl, S. Tschierlei, S. Ott and L. Hammarstrom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19322–19325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, L. L. Duan, F. Y. Wen, C. Li, M. Wang, A. Hagfeld and L. C. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 988–990 RSC .
P. Judeinstein and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 1996, 6, 511–525 RSC .

          www.schott.com
        .
C. Sanchez, B. Lebeau, F. Chaput and J. P. Boilot, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1969–1994 CrossRef CAS .

          Essilor, Materials & Treatments, Ophthalmic Optics Files, http://www.varilux-university.org,  2010 Search PubMed .
P. Rivera Gil, D. Huhn, L. L. del Mercato, D. Sasse and W. J. Parak, Pharmacol. Res., 2010, 62, 115–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Laurent, D. Forge, M. Port, A. Roch, C. Robic, L. V. Elst and R. N. Muller, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2064–2110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Sol-Gel Technologies, http://www.sol-gel.com.
N. Lapidot, O. Gans, F. Biagini, L. Sosonkin and C. Rottman, Eurocosmetics, 2000, 1, 20 Search PubMed .
N. Lapidot, O. Gans, F. Biagini, L. Sosonkin and C. Rottman, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2003, 26, 67–72 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Aegerter, N. Leventis and M. M. Koebel, Aerogels Handbook, Springer,  2011 Search PubMed .

          R. Deshpande, D. M. Smith and C. J. Brinker, WO/1994/25149,  1994 .
D. M. Smith, R. Deshpande and C. J. Brinker, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1992, 271, 567–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kramer, F. Rubio-Alonso and J. D. Mackenzie, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1996, 435, 295–300 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanamori, M. Aizawa, K. Nakanishi and T. Hanada, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1589–1593 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Rao, N. D. Hegde and H. Hirashima, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 305, 124–132 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Leventis, C. Sotiriou-Leventis, G. H. Zhang and A. M. M. Rawashdeh, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 957–960 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. B. Meador, E. F. Fabrizio, F. Ilhan, A. Dass, G. H. Zhang, P. Vassilaras, J. C. Johnston and N. Leventis, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1085–1098 CrossRef CAS .
U. F. Ilhan, E. F. Fabrizio, L. McCorkle, D. A. Scheiman, A. Dass, A. Palczer, M. B. Meador, J. C. Johnston and N. Leventis, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3046–3054 RSC .
A. B. Morgan, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2006, 17, 206–217 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zou, S. S. Wu and J. Shen, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 3893–3957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, J. R. G. Evans, H. C. Greenwell, P. Boulet, P. V. Coveney, A. A. Bowden and A. Whiting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 568–594 RSC .
E. P. Giannelis, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alexandre and P. Dubois, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2000, 28, 1–63 CrossRef .
E. T. Thostenson, C. Y. Li and T. W. Chou, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2005, 65, 491–516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Tjong, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2006, 53, 73–197 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. M. Hofman-Caris, New J. Chem., 1994, 18, 1087–1096 CAS .
E. Bourgeat-Lamy, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2002, 2, 1–24 CrossRef PubMed .

          E. Bourgeat-Lami, in Encyclopedia of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, ed. H. S. Nalwa, American Scientific Publishers,  2004, vol. 8, pp. 305–332 Search PubMed .
M. Daniel and C. Janin, Actual. Chim., 2010, 8–13 CAS .
C. Janin, Actual. Chim., 1999, 67–71 CAS .
Y. Fukushima and S. Inagaki, J. Inclusion Phenom., 1987, 5, 473–482 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Okada, Y. Fukushima, M. Kawasumi, S. Inagaki, A. Usuki, S. Sugiyama, T. Kurauchi and O. Kamigaito, US 4739007,  1987 .
Y. Kojima, A. Usuki, M. Kawasumi, A. Okada, Y. Fukushima, T. Kurauchi and O. Kamigaito, J. Mater. Res., 1993, 8, 1185–1189 CrossRef CAS .
A. Usuki, Y. Kojima, M. Kawasumi, A. Okada, Y. Fukushima, T. Kurauchi and O. Kamigaito, J. Mater. Res., 1993, 8, 1179–1184 CrossRef CAS .
C. Edser, Plast. Addit. Compd., 2002, 4, 30–33 Search PubMed .
A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7072–7085 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The different scales used to observe butterfly wings and their units of measure72 (courtesy of Pr. Serge Berthier).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) General drawing of the cross-section of a scale (Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH). Examples of (b) quasi-1D (courtesy of Pr Serge Berthier), (c) 2D (Copyright 2005 Science) and (d) 3D photonic structures of butterfly scales (Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic drawings of molecular diffusion of a single fluorescent dye inside a mesostructured thin film.155 Straight (a) and curved (b) segments. (c) Domain boundaries forcing molecules to turn back. (d) Molecular travel stopped in less ordered regions. (e) Lateral motion between neighbouring channels (Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Embedded NBBs in polymers, (b) linear polymeric backbones with pendant inorganic domain nanobuilding blocks formed with NBBs which bear one functional group as a single double bond, (c) linear block copolymer from difunctional NBBs, (d) three-dimensional hybrid networks made from multifunctional NBBs which crosslink macromolecular chains, (e) star-like architecture (divergent or convergent approach), and (f) crystalline highly porous three-dimensional networks.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Covalent interface with POSS and POM; (b) ionic interface with [(RSn)12O14(OH)6]X2; (c) ionocovalent interface with Ti or MOF.	 



	

	Free radical polymerisation


	
	



	

	



	
	



	

	ROMP


	
	Click reaction


	

	ATRP


	
	Photothiol–ene polymerisation


	

	Polyaddition

	

	



	
	Oxidative polymerisation

 	Fig. 6  (a) Conductivity Arrhenius plots of composite s-ZrO2-added electrolyte and of a S-ZrO2-free electrolyte, both based on the same PEO8LiBF4 combination.257 (b) Capacity versus charge–discharge cycles for the Li/P(EO)20LiClO4 + 5% S-ZrO2/LiFePO4 battery (upper curve) and the Li/P(EO)20LiClO4/LiFePO4 battery (lower curve). Temperature 90 °C; rate: C/7. The capacity values refer to the cathode.277	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Conductivity of the hybrid membrane synthesized by electrospinning and casting approaches. (b) Comparison of the microstructure of the electrospun and cast hybrid membranes.300	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) HR-TEM observations of the silicon/carbon nanotube composite (MWCNTs-ϕ-Si), (b) the corresponding scheme and (c) specific capacity vs. cycle number when cycled at a constant current of 500 mA g−1.303	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Cycling performance of the composites in 1 M of LiTFSI in TMS electrolyte with C/10 current density for the voltage range between 1.0 and 3.0 V vs. Li. for mesoporous SBA-15, carbon and MOF.312 (b) Chemical modification of carbon by spontaneous reduction of the anthraquinone diazonium cations. (c) Representative cyclic voltammogram for an AQ-modified carbon giving the double layer voltammetric charge (QDL) as well as the voltammetric charge associated with the AQ-grafted groups (QAQ).307	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Structure of the TiO2-based material for H2 photoproduction using immobilized hydrogenase as a catalyst. (b) Structure of the TiO2-based material for H2 photoproduction using a surface-immobilized cobaloxime catalyst.315,316	 

 	Fig. 11  Arborescence representation of hybrid materials on both the academic and industrial scene.10	 

 	Fig. 12  Structure of an ophthalmic lens (courtesy of Essilor International).	 

 	Fig. 13  Encapsulation of drugs/organic UV filters in protective silica micropearls for acne treatment and sunscreens (courtesy of Sol-Gel Technologies and Merck Chemicals respectively).	 

 	Fig. 14  Some commercial products based on hybrid O–I aerogels. Aerogel products: various hybrid aerogel products commercially available (top: Aspen Aerogel® flexible composite blankets/down: Nanogel™ translucent granules and fine particles – Cabot Corporation®).	 

 	Fig. 15  Pirelli's tyres based on cap (hybrid silica nanoparticle-based PNCs) and base (nanoclay-based PNCs) technology (courtesy of Pirelli®).	 

 	Fig. 16  Number of papers (Isi Web of KnowledgeSM) and patents (WIPO) that use the concept of sol–gel derived hybrids, hybrid materials, O–I nanocomposites, bionanocomposites, ormocers, ormosils, coordination polymers and metal–organic frameworks.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
