Heterostructure consists of monolayer MoS 2 and arsenene with novel electronic and optical conductivity   - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6RA04277E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6RA04277E
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 59633-59638Heterostructure consists of monolayer MoS2 and arsenene with novel electronic and optical conductivity†
Jie Su*, 
Liping Feng and 
Zhengtang Liu
State Key Lab of Solidification Processing, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710072, China. E-mail: sujie0105@126.com
Received 
17th February 2016
, Accepted 15th June 2016First published on 21st June 2016AbstractTwo-dimensional (2D) materials receive a lot of attention due to their novel properties and wide applications. Here, we study the electronic structure and optical conductivity of new heterostructures made of two monolayers of molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and arsenene (As). Our first-principles density functional calculations show that only the valence band of As–MoS2 heterostructures is significantly affected by the interlayer distance. Upon shortening the interlayer distance, the valence-band maximum transfer from the Γ point to Λ and Σ point, and the holes effective masses decline monotonically and lower than the electrons effective masses. Tuning the interlayer distance may change the conduction character of As–MoS2 heterostructures. In addition, the valence-band maximum and conduction-band minimum of As–MoS2 heterostructures are localized on opposite monolayers, suppressing the hole–electron recombination. Unlike transition metal dichalcogenides–transition metal dichalcogenides heterostructures, the optical conductivity of As–MoS2 heterostructure is different to its monolayers, and a new optical conductivity peak is observed in visible light region. Moreover, its intensity and position are enhanced and shifted-red with the shortening interlayer distance, respectively, due to the enlarging Fermi level with the decreasing interlayer distance. Our findings suggest that engineering As–MoS2 heterostructure is beneficial for improve the application of monolayer MoS2 in the photoelectric device.
1. Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) materials have been widely developed in recent decades due to their novel properties and wide applications. Monolayer molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), one prototypical member of 2D materials, exhibits exotic electronic, optical, mechanical, chemical, and thermal properties,1–6 offering a significant opportunity to design and fabricate high-efficiency nanodevices. For examples, monolayer MoS2 transistor exhibits a high on/off current ratio of about 108 and the high room-temperature carrier mobility.7 Moreover, the power consumption of field-effect-transistors (FETs) has been significantly reduced once silicon in FETs was substituted by monolayer MoS2.8 New phototransistor based on monolayer MoS2 shows a photoresponsivity as high as 2200 A W−6, better than that of graphene-based nanodevices.9 Although monolayer MoS2 has been exhibited many novel advantages in new nanodevices, it is important to further improve the electronic and optical properties of monolayer MoS2 to realize higher efficient optoelectronic devices. Amazingly, it has been reported that the monolayer MoS2-based solar cell achieves a power conversion efficiency of 5.23% upon forming a type-II heterostructure with p-Si.10 Moreover, atomically thin graphene–MoS2 heterostructures have been fabricated to exhibit a photogain higher than 108.11 In addition, the BN–MoS2 heterostructure has been used to eliminate the Schottky barrier heights at the MoS2/metal interfaces.12,13 Thus, engineering heterostructures may be an effective way to tune the electronic and optical properties of monolayer MoS2.
In recent years, the graphene–MoS2, BN–MoS2, TMD–MoS2, etc., heterostructures have been fabricated and studied.14–16 In which, graphene and monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) are single and triple atomic layer thickness 2D semiconductors, respectively. While the heterostructures consist of the monolayer MoS2 and the new double atomic layer thickness semiconductors, such as monolayer silicene, and phosphorene, and especially arsenene, have not been well studied yet.17,18 Herein, we design and investigate the As–MoS2 heterostructures through the first-principles calculations. Arsenene is a monolayer gray arsenic, and possibly obtained by exfoliating gray arsenic, as in the cases of graphene and phosphorene. Since gray arsenic, phosphorus, and graphite are layered materials with weak interlayer interaction.18,19 It not only displays a large band gap and smooth surface like monolayer MoS2, but also has a buckled honeycomb lattice and high carrier mobility.19 Like other heterostructures, the As–MoS2 heterostructure may be useful for tuning the electronic properties of monolayer MoS2. Thus, in this paper, we performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations to systemically investigate the electronic structure, carrier effective masses and optical properties of As–MoS2 heterostructures.
2. Computational methods
Our DFT calculations were carried out with the CASTEP code using the generalized gradient approximation of Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (GGA-PBE) method.20 Since the van der Waals forces (vdWs) dominate the interlayer interaction of As–MoS2 heterostructures,21 vdWs corrections proposed by Grimme22 was added into the exchange–correlation functional. The Brillouin-zone integrations were performed with Monkhorst–Pack k-points with 6 × 6 × 1 Brillouin-zone sampling, along with mesh cutoff of 500 eV. All structures were fully relaxed using the conjugated gradient method until the Hellmann–Feynman force on each atom was less than 0.01 eV Å−1.
To comprehensive investigate the electronic structures and optical conductivity of monolayer MoS2 depend on the local configuration on arsenene, we consider three representative arrangements of As–MoS2 heterostructures: (i) some bottom As atoms on top of the S atoms [top configuration, as shown in Fig. 1(a)], (ii) some up As atoms on top of the S atoms [bottom configuration, as shown in Fig. 1(b)], and (iii) a S atom on center of the hexagonal of arsenene [center configuration, as shown in Fig. 1(c)]. These As–MoS2 heterostructures of commensurate structures with the 1.03% lattice mismatch are modeled by a √3 × √3 arsenene and 2 × 2 monolayer MoS2.
 Fig. 1  Geometry structures of As–MoS2 heterostructures with (a) top configuration, (b) bottom configuration, and (c) center configuration, respectively. (d) The interlayer distance d marked in the side view of As–MoS2 heterostructure. (e) The hexagonal Brillouin zone. 
3. Results and discussions
Fig. 2(a) presents the electronic band structures of arsenene on monolayer MoS2 with different arrangements. It is difficult to distinguish the band curves of the As–MoS2 heterostructure with top configuration from other configurations, indicating the electronic structures of As–MoS2 heterostructures irrespective of the adsorption arrangements. Thus, just the band structures of As–MoS2 heterostructure with top configuration depend on the interlayer distance d are displayed in Fig. 2(b). The valence-band maximum (VBM) of the As–MoS2 heterostructure with the interlayer distance d of 3.5 Å is chosen as the zero energy reference, and the band structures are aligned using the Mo 4s electrons as reference states. Since we are interested in a comparison with the heterostructure and in transport properties within layers, we focus on the in-plane part of the Brillouin zone.
 Fig. 2  (a) Band structures of As–MoS2 heterostructures with top, bottom and center configuration with the interlayer distance d of 3.5 Å. (b) Band structures of As–MoS2 heterostructure with top configuration dependent on the interlayer distance, plotted along high-symmetry lines in the in-plane Brillouin zone. The labels underneath the segments of the Brillouin zone indicate the names of the high-symmetry lines [see Fig. 1(d)]. 
As previous study report, monolayer MoS2 has a direct band gap, located at the K point.23 When monolayer MoS2 bonds to arsenene, a transition from the direct band gap to the indirect band gap occurs, as shown in Fig. 2(a). As to the conduction-band minimum (CBM) of As–MoS2 heterostructure, it is dominated by the orbitals of monolayer MoS2 region and located at K point, consistent with that of pristine monolayer MoS2. Moreover, the energy and position of the CBM of As–MoS2 heterostructure are not sensitive to the interlayer distance. This phenomenon is similar to that of TMD–TMD heterostructures and TMD multilayers.24,25 Nevertheless, in the case of VBM of As–MoS2 heterostructure, it mainly consists of the orbitals of arsenene and no longer locates at K point, as displayed in Fig. 2(b). Moreover, in contrast to the CBM, the VBM is sensitive to the interlayer distance due to the relative low elastic constant of arsenene. When the interlayer distance is larger than 3.5 Å, the VBM locates at Γ point, which is consistent with that of pristine arsenene. However, once shortens the interlayer distance to less than 3.5 Å, the valence-band at the Γ point is degenerate with the top of the valence-band at the Λ and Σ points probably due to the significant corrugation with the decreasing interlayer distance. In other words, the location of VBM shifts from the Γ point to the Λ or Σ point when the interlayer distance shortens down. Consequently, a significant population of photoexcited holes will be available at the Λ and Σ points. In addition, upon shortening the interlayer distance, the energy of VBM increases gradually and leads to the decreasing band gap. Notably, the bands along the Γ–M direction and Γ–K direction are symmetry, suggesting that the chemical character in As–MoS2 heterostructure may be isotropic.
To further study the novel properties of As–MoS2 heterostructures with top configurations, the electrons and holes effective masses along different directions are displayed in Fig. 3. The effective masses are calculated by fitting the bands to a parabola according to E = ħ2k2/(2m0m*), where m0 is the electron (or hole) static mass, ħ and k are Planck and Boltzmann constants, respectively. As we know, the carrier effective masses not only can confirm the isotropic character of As–MoS2 heterostructure, but also strongly influence the carrier mobility of As–MoS2 heterostructure. The carrier effective masses are calculated using the nearly free electron models. It can be found that the electrons effective masses (corresponding to the CBM) along K–M direction and K–Γ direction, and the holes effective masses (corresponding to the VBM) along G–M direction and G–K direction are almost coincident, respectively. This suggests that the As–MoS2 heterostructure show the isotropic chemical character, which is consistent with the aforementioned band structure analysis. In addition, Fig. 3 also exhibits the carrier effective masses depend on the interlayer distance. In the case of the electron effective mass , it keeps constant and independent on the interlayer distance. Moreover, the electron effective mass  value of about 0.37m0 is close to that of monolayer MoS2.26,27 This result indicates that the interlayer distance has negligible effect on the electrons mobility of As–MoS2 heterostructure. While the holes effective masses  decrease monotonously with the shortening interlayer distance, suggesting the significant influence of interlayer distance on the holes mobility of As–MoS2 heterostructure. Moreover, for the holes effective masses  located at Γ point, they are higher than the electron effective masses , especially for the interlayer distance wider than 3.5 Å, suggesting the lower holes mobility than electron mobility. Thus, the electron mobility dominates the carrier mobility of As–MoS2 heterostructure. As to holes effective masses  located at Λ and Σ points, they are far larger than the electron effective masses  when the interlayer distance wider than 3.5 Å, while they are lower than the electron effective masses  of about 0.37m0 when the interlayer distance shorter than 3.5 Å, indicating the higher holes mobility than electron mobility. In other words, the holes mobility dominates the carrier mobility of As–MoS2 heterostructure when the interlayer distance lowers than 3.5 Å. Therefore, exerting strong pressure vertical to the As–MoS2 heterostructure to reduce the interlayer distance may be a simple way to tuning the holes mobility of As–MoS2 heterostructure.
 Fig. 3  Carrier effective masses dependent on the interlayer distance d. The subscript v and c represent the corresponding carrier effective masses calculated by valence and conduction band, respectively. 
Fig. 4(a–c) displays the density of states of As–MoS2 heterostructure, pristine monolayer MoS2 and pristine arsenene, respectively. As to the pristine monolayer systems shown in Fig. 4(a and b), both pristine monolayer MoS2 and arsenene have an obvious gap which is in good agreement to previous calculated results.19,28 Moreover, the band gap edges of pristine monolayer MoS2 and arsenene mainly consist of Mo 4d and As 4p orbitals, respectively. Interestingly, when the monolayer MoS2 bonds to arsenene to form the As–MoS2 heterostructure, the VBM of the As–MoS2 heterostructure is dominated by arsenene 4p states and the CBM is composed of monolayer MoS2 4d states, as exhibited in Fig. 4(c). This result suggests that the generated electrons and holes are separated spatially. This phenomenon is beneficial to suppress the charge recombination at contact region, which has potential applying in the electronics and photoelectric device.29 Notably, the faster the charge carriers move, the less the combination of photo-induced electron–hole pairs.30 Thus, the photoelectric efficiency of the As–MoS2 heterostructure will be improved when shortening the interlayer distance of the As–MoS2 heterostructure because the reducing carrier effective masses of As–MoS2 heterostructure.
 Fig. 4  Density of states of monolayer MoS2 (a), arsenene (b), and As–MoS2 heterostructure (c), respectively. (d) Optical conductivity of As–MoS2 heterostructure and its constituents. 
To further acknowledge the optical properties of the As–MoS2 heterostructure, the optical conductivity was calculated and displayed in Fig. 4(d). The experimental adsorption edge of pristine monolayer MoS2 is about 1.90 eV.31 Thus, in our calculation, we have used the scissor approximation to fit the calculated absorption edge to the experimental value, as show in Fig. 4(d). Both monolayer MoS2 and arsenene show low optical conductivity in the visible light energy region. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that the optical conductivity shows a significant increment in the visible light region upon monolayer MoS2 bonding to arsenene. Moreover, a new optical conductivity peak (labeled peak A) of As–MoS2 heterostructure in the low energy region is observed comparing to the isolated monolayer MoS2 and arsenene. This is different to the TMD–TMD heterostructures whose optical conductivity hold all the same features as in the monolayers and at the same energies.25 This result suggests the As–MoS2 heterostructure is beneficial to improve the application of monolayer MoS2 on solar. In addition, the calculated absorption edge for As–MoS2 heterostructure locates on the left side of that of pristine monolayer MoS2 and arsenene due to the smaller band gap of As–MoS2 heterostructure than that of pristine monolayer MoS2 and arsenene. When compress or expand the interlayer distance of As–MoS2 heterostructure, the position of absorption edge will red shift or blue shift, as presented in Fig. 5(a) and ESI Table S1.† That is because the adsorption edge is closely linked with the minimum energy (sometimes can be regarded as band gap) that excites electron jump from valence band to conduction band. Moreover, previous studies21 shown that the band gap of As–MoS2 heterostructure decreases with the increasing interlayer distance.
 Fig. 5  (a) Optical conductivity of As–MoS2 heterostructure dependent on the interlayer distance d. (b) The Fermi level of As–MoS2 heterostructure dependent on the interlayer distance d. 
Besides, at the low frequency region in Fig. 4(d), several obvious peaks of optical conductivity curves are observed, except for pristine monolayer MoS2. As we know, the optical conductivity peak at the low frequency can be understood in terms of optical adsorption from the DOS, a process in which the carriers are optically excited from significantly localized states in the band tail to less localized states within the band32 as schematically illustrated in Fig. 4(c). In the case of pristine arsenene, the first peak at the low frequency region consists of the transition between As 4p bonding states and As 4p anti-bonding states. While for the As–MoS2 heterostructure, the lower optical conductivity peak (peak A) is dominated by the transition between As 4p bonding states and the Mo 4d anti-bonding states. Moreover, the position of lower optical conductivity peak A move to the left as the interlayer distance shortens, as shown in Fig. 5(a). That is because the Fermi level of the As–MoS2 heterostructure enlarges upon decreasing the interlayer distance as displayed in Fig. 5(b). Moreover, the positions of the lower optical conductivity peaks have significant connection with the Fermi level.32 In addition, it is also found from Fig. 5(a) that the intensity of the lower optical conductivity peak A shifts up upon declining the interlayer distance due to the enhanced charge density at contact region. In other words, shortening the interlayer distance is beneficial to improve the application of the As–MoS2 heterostructure in visible light region. In addition, it is interestingly observed from Fig. 5(a) that the location of peak B appears blue shift at first and then red shift while the interlayer distance enhances. It may be that the peak B is dominated by the transition between As 4p bonding states and Mo 4d anti-bonding states, and the transition between Mo 4d bonding states and Mo 4d anti-bonding states. When the interlayer distance increases from 2.0 to 3.5 Å, the former transition dominates the peak B, and the As 4p bonding states move to lower energy region as the red shift of Fermi level. While the interlayer distance is larger than 3.5 Å, the latter transition dominates the peak B, and the charge distribution weakens with the increment of interlayer distance. As a result, the optical conductivity peak B shift red, and more and more close to the optical conductivity of monolayer MoS2.
4. Conclusions
In this paper, we have systematically studied the electronic structure, effective masses and optical conductivity of the As–MoS2 heterostructure via first-principles calculations. We find that the CBM of the As–MoS2 heterostructure coincides with that of pristine monolayer MoS2. Moreover, the interlayer distance just has significant effect on the VBM of the As–MoS2 heterostructure. The carriers effective masses, except for electrons effective masses, decrease with the shortening interlayer distance, and the holes effective masses is lower than the electrons effective masses when the interlayer distance shorter than 3.5 Å. Tuning the interlayer distance may be an effective way to tune the electronic conductivity of monolayer MoS2. In addition, the valence-band maximum and conduction-band minimum of the As–MoS2 heterostructure are localized on opposite monolayers, suppressing the hole–electron recombination. Different to TMD–TMD heterostructure, we find that the optical conductivity of As–MoS2 heterostructure independent of its monolayers. Moreover, the new optical conductivity peak in the visible light region is strengthened and shifted red as the interlayer distance decreases due to the enlarging Fermi level with the decreasing interlayer distance. In this sense, our findings suggest that engineering As–MoS2 heterostructure is beneficial for improve the application of monolayer MoS2 in the photoelectric devices.
AcknowledgementsWe acknowledge the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant No. 61376091, the Aeronautical Science Foundation of China under grant No. 2014ZF53070, and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under grant No. 3102014JCQ01033.
ReferencesB. Radisavijevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147 CrossRef PubMed .Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Poot, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. Van der Zant, N. Agrait and G. Rubio-Bollinger, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. S. Yun and J. D. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2822 CAS .M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263 CrossRef PubMed .J. Su, Z. Liu, L. Feng and N. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 622, 777 CrossRef CAS .D. Jena and A. Konar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .W. Bao, X. Cai, D. Kim, K. Sridhara and M. S. Fuhrer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 102, 042012 Search PubMed .W. Zhang, J. Huang, C. Chen, Y. Chang, Y. Cheng and L. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Tsai, S. Su, J. Chang, D. Tsai, C. Chen, C. Wu, L. Li, L. Chen and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Zhang, C. Chu, J. Huang, C. Chen, M. Tsai, Y. Chang, C. Liang, Y. Chen, Y. Chueh and J. He, et al., Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3826 Search PubMed .F. Mojtaba and G. Brocks, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 161304 CrossRef .J. Su, L. Feng, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016 10.1039/c6cp02132h .A. Ebnonnasir, B. Narayanan, S. Kodambaka and C. V. Ciobanu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 031603 CrossRef .R. Gillen, J. Robertson and J. Maultzsch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 075437 CrossRef .H. Terones, F. Lopez-Urias and M. Terrones, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1549 Search PubMed .L. Li and M. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19129 CAS .Y. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. Xu and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Li, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1 CrossRef .J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Su, L. Feng, H. Pan, H. Lu and Z. Liu, Mater. Des., 2016, 96, 257 CrossRef CAS .S. Grimme, J. Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Su, Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, L. Feng and Z. Liu, RSC. Adv., 2015, 5, 68085 RSC .H. P. Komsa and A. V. Krasheninnikov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 241201 CrossRef .H. P. Komsa and A. V. Krasheninnikov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 085318 CrossRef .Q. Yue, J. Kang, Z. Shao, X. Zhang, S. Chang, G. Wang, S. Qin and J. Li, Phys. Lett. A, 2012, 376, 1166 CrossRef CAS .T. Cheiwchanchamnangij and W. R. L. Lambrecht, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 205302 CrossRef .J. Su, Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, L. Feng and Z. Liu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 68085 RSC .Q. Sun, Y. Dai, Y. Ma, W. Wei and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Dong, J. Zhang and J. Yu, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 104404 CrossRef .K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Li, Y. Yi, V. Coropceanu and J. Bredas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 245112 CrossRef .
Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ra04277eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Geometry structures of As–MoS2 heterostructures with (a) top configuration, (b) bottom configuration, and (c) center configuration, respectively. (d) The interlayer distance d marked in the side view of As–MoS2 heterostructure. (e) The hexagonal Brillouin zone.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Band structures of As–MoS2 heterostructures with top, bottom and center configuration with the interlayer distance d of 3.5 Å. (b) Band structures of As–MoS2 heterostructure with top configuration dependent on the interlayer distance, plotted along high-symmetry lines in the in-plane Brillouin zone. The labels underneath the segments of the Brillouin zone indicate the names of the high-symmetry lines [see Fig. 1(d)].	 

 	Fig. 3  Carrier effective masses dependent on the interlayer distance d. The subscript v and c represent the corresponding carrier effective masses calculated by valence and conduction band, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Density of states of monolayer MoS2 (a), arsenene (b), and As–MoS2 heterostructure (c), respectively. (d) Optical conductivity of As–MoS2 heterostructure and its constituents.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Optical conductivity of As–MoS2 heterostructure dependent on the interlayer distance d. (b) The Fermi level of As–MoS2 heterostructure dependent on the interlayer distance d.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ra04277e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
