Probing the photoelectrochemical properties of hematite (α-Fe 2 O 3 ) electrodes using hydrogen peroxide as a hole scavenger  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00570C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00570C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 958-964Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsProbing the photoelectrochemical properties of hematite (α-Fe2O3) electrodes using hydrogen peroxide as a hole scavenger

        
          
            Hen 
            Dotan
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kevin 
            Sivula
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Grätzel
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Avner 
            Rothschild
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Scott C. 
            Warren
          
        
      *b
aFaculty of Materials Engineering, Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. E-mail: avnerrot@technion.ac.il
bLaboratory of Photonics and Interfaces, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: scott.warren@epfl.ch
Received 
      17th October 2010
    , Accepted 29th November 2010First published on 23rd December 2010AbstractWe study hematite (α-Fe2O3) photoelectrodes for water splitting by examining the fate of photogenerated holes. Using H2O2 as an efficient hole scavenger, we collect all holes that arrive at the electrode/electrolyte interface. This provides the ability to distinguish between and quantify bulk and surface recombination processes involved in the photoelectrochemical oxidation of water. Below 1.0 VRHE, electrolyte oxidation kinetics limits the performance but above 1.2 VRHE bulk recombination becomes the limiting factor.

Broader context

Hematite (α-Fe2O3) is one of the most promising photoanode materials for solar hydrogen production via photoelectrochemical water-splitting because it displays a unique combination of visible light absorption, stability in aqueous solutions, non-toxicity and abundance. With energy bandgap of 2.1 eV hematite photoanodes can reach solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency as high as 15.5%, but in practice only a quarter of the theoretical limit has been achieved despite intensive efforts to improve performance by nanostructuring and catalysis. The low quantum efficiency of hematite photoanodes has been attributed to surface and bulk recombination losses connected with low rate of water oxidation and short diffusion length of the photogenerated minority carriers (holes). The question of what is the rate limiting step in hematite photoanodes and where carrier recombination occurs – at the bulk or at the surface – has been studied for a long time without a conclusive result so far. In this work we present a new approach to attack this fundamental question in photoelectrochemistry, using H2O2 as a hole scavenger that readily accepts the holes arriving at the electrode/electrolyte interface. This provides the ability to distinguish between and quantify bulk and surface recombination losses and predict the expected photocurrent with a perfect catalyst

Introduction
Efficient conversion of solar energy to hydrogenvia photoelectrochemical means is a long-standing challenge with promising implications for solar energy conversion and storage. Important advances in understanding water photoelectrolysis by semiconductor electrodes have been achieved in the last 38 years since this process was first described,1 leading to significant improvement in performance of photoelectrochemical cells for water splitting. Numerous semiconductor electrodes were examined, but most of them were ruled out due to poor stability or low efficiency. Hematite (α-Fe2O3) is one of the best candidates because of a unique combination of visible light absorption, stability in aqueous solutions and low cost. A major drawback of hematite photoelectrodes is low incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) even at +1.23 VRHE (volts vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode), the O2/H2O reduction potential. Many electrode morphologies, deposition methods, and catalysts were examined during the last three decades to improve its efficiency. Niobium-doped single crystals achieved an IPCE of 37% at 370 nm and 1.23 VRHE.2 Polycrystalline thin films were deposited by chemical vapor deposition (CVD)3 and reactive sputtering, achieving an IPCE of 21% at 400 nm and 1.46 VRHE.4,5 Many nanostructured porous electrodes were also investigated. These include electrodes fabricated by sintering colloidal hematite nanoparticles that achieved an IPCE of 20% at 400 nm and 1.43 VRHE.6 Ultrasonic spray pyrolysis (USP) silicon-doped hematite electrodes reached an IPCE of 16% at 380 nm and 1.23 VRHE.7 The benchmark efficiency was reported for cauliflower-like silicon-doped hematite electrodes that achieved an IPCE of over 50% at 320 nm and 1.23 VRHE and maintain a value of 21.4% closer to the absorption edge (at 500 nm), which corresponds to a solar photocurrent of 3.01 mA cm−2.8
In spite of these efforts the solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency of hematite electrodes still falls short of the maximum theoretical limit that corresponds to a photocurrent of 12.6 mA cm−2 at AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination.8 The low IPCE of hematite electrodes is typically attributed to the low rate constant for water oxidation9 and the short (<10 nm) diffusion length of the photogenerated minority carriers.10 The goal of this work is to understand the factors that limit the water splitting efficiency in hematite-based photoelectrochemical cells. In particular, we aim to develop an electrochemical characterization method that distinguishes between bulk and surface recombination processes.
The question of where carrier recombination occurs has been studied for a long time without a conclusive result. It was suggested that the short minority carrier diffusion length is the main reason for low IPCE,10–12 thereby implying that bulk recombination is the primary problem. Other studies have suggested, however, that the presence of surface states at 0.9 and 1.8 eV below the conduction band edge13 and the low rate constant for water oxidation, measured as 0.1 to 3.5 cm s−1,10,14 promote surface recombination and are primarily responsible for the low IPCE. Additional insight into surface recombination was provided in a study of transient photocurrent effects in various electrolytes.12 In a 1 M NaOH electrolyte, photocurrent transients were observed on a hematite electrode and these transients were assigned to electron-hole recombination via photogenerated surface species. The use of redox couples with relatively negative reduction potentials, such as S/S2− (E = −0.45 V vs.NHE) decreased or eliminated the transients by eliminating surface recombination. This observation suggests the possibility of using suitable redox couples as a probe to quantify surface and bulk recombination processes, which we explore in this work.
Our strategy to quantify bulk and surface recombination relies upon the use of an easily oxidized hole scavenger, as in the earlier work.12 If surface recombination is completely suppressed, then any difference between the maximum theoretical photocurrent—as calculated from the optical absorption spectrum—and the observed photocurrent can be assigned to bulk recombination. Comparison of the photocurrent between an electrolyte solution with a hole scavenger that suppresses surface recombination with a water-based electrolyte without hole scavenger allows the extent of surface recombination to be quantified. The power of such an analysis is that it allows for the deconvolution of surface and bulk recombination as a function of potential for different electrode morphologies as demonstrated in the following.

        H2O2 was chosen as a hole scavenger in this work because it is transparent to visible and ultraviolet light, does not corrode hematite, has a rate constant for oxidation that is 10 to 100 times higher than that of water,10,14 and has a relatively negative reduction potential (E0 = +0.68 VRHE for the O2/H2O2 couple, compared with E0 = +1.23 VRHE for the O2/H2O couple). The electrochemical current produced with H2O2 is largely a product of the following reactions: H2O2 + 2H+ + e− → OH− + OH* + 2H+ → 2H2O + h+(1) H2O2 + 2h+ → 2H+ + O2(2)Reaction (1) gives rise to a cathodic dark current, and can give current doubling for electron injection with some p-type semiconductor electrodes.15Reaction (2) gives rise to anodic dark- and photocurrents. Although current doubling occurs with some semiconductor electrodes in H2O2 containing electrolytes,15–19 current doubling was not detected in previous studies of hematite electrodes with H2O27,14 and was not observed in the present work.
Experimental

Hematite films were grown by atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD) and ultrasonic spray pyrolysis (USP) on TEC-15 (Hartford TEC Glass Co.) substrates.
The USP samples were prepared in the following procedure:7 the substrates (3 cm × 9 cm) were sonicated in deionized water for several hours to clean the glass. The substrate was dried under a stream of compressed air and placed on a 3 cm × 9 cm heater. The substrate and heater were inserted into a glass tube (diameter = 5 cm). The glass tube was open at both ends and was inserted into a 30 cm long flow-through type furnace. The furnace remained off during the deposition and was used only for thermal insulation. A 20 mM Fe(acac)3 (99.9%, Sigma Aldrich) solution in methanol was prepared; 0.15 mM tetramethylorthosilicate (TMOS) was added to make the solution. The sample was heated to 540 °C and allowed to equilibrate for 1 hour prior to deposition. The Fe(acac)3 solution was fed into an ultrasonic sprayer at a rate of 0.23 g min−1. Air was fed into the sprayer at a flow rate of 20 L min−1. Droplets were sprayed vertically downwards into a 250 ml jar and a small proportion was collected at a right angle through a 1 cm circular opening in the side of the jar. The droplets were then carried into the heated furnace. Film growth occurred over a period of 8 hours at a rate of approximately 0.6 nm min−1, at which point the furnace and sprayer were turned off so 288 nm of 1% Si doped hematite film was expected. The resulting film was translucent red in appearance with a gradient in iron oxide deposition across the 9 cm length of the substrate. The 3 cm × 9 cm sample was cut into six 3 cm × 1.2 cm pieces. Each piece had nearly identical performance in spite of the gradient in hematite thickness.
The APCVD samples were prepared in the following procedure: TEC-15 substrates were heated to 420 °C and then exposed to iron pentacarbonyl and tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) in a cold wall APCVD chamber. Film growth occurs over a period of 4 minutes at a rate of approximately 100 nm min−1 so 400 nm of 1% Si doped hematite film was expected. The APCVD preparation method was described elsewhere.20
The electrochemical measurements were performed with an Ivium potentiostat and used a three electrode configuration with Ag/AgCl reference electrode and meshed platinum counter electrode. The measurements were done in the dark and under illumination with a xenon lamp tuned to give simulated sunlight (AM1.5) with a KG3 optical filter (3 mm, Schott) to cut off infrared light and avoid sample heating. The light intensity is adjusted so that the integral absorbed light flux is the same as that for AM1.5 at 100 mW cm−2 although the spectral distribution is different. All measurements were performed with illumination to the hematite/electrolyte interface through a 0.28 cm2 mask that defines the electrode area exposed to the electrolyte and the light. The electrolyte was 1 M NaOH or 1 M NaOH with 0.5 M H2O2 in deionized water. The NaOH–H2O2 solutions were used within a few hours of their preparation. The samples were examined by three electrochemical characterization methods: current density vs. applied potential at dark and under simulated solar light, current vs. time (chronoamperometry) at different applied potentials with light chopping, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). In the chronoamperometry experiments the current was recorded at 0.01 second intervals. The EIS measurements were fitted to an equivalent electrical circuit using Zview software.
Results and discussion

        SEM images of the hematite electrodes are presented in Fig. 1. The APCVD electrode (Fig. 1A) had a cauliflower-like dendritic nanostructure. This deposition method gives rise to a graded nanostructure with particle sizes ranging from 50 nm close to the substrate and down to 5 nm at the top of the film. XRD and TEM analyses (not shown) reveal that the cauliflowers are polycrystalline with no preferred crystallographic orientation. The USP electrode (Fig. 1B) had a platelet structure with typical platelet dimensions of approximately 300 nm by 150 nm by 50 nm. The two large faces of each platelet are parallel to the (001) basal plane of hematite, as determined by XRD and TEM (not shown).
 Fig. 1  
          SEM images of hematite electrodes. (A) APCVD sample, viewed from a 45 degree angle. (B) USP sample viewed from top. 
Current density vs. applied potential (J–V) plots for USP and APCVD electrodes at the dark (dashed lines) and under illumination (solid lines) are presented in Fig. 2. The potential was scanned anodically at 30 mV s−1 for USP (Fig. 2A) and APCVD electrodes (Fig. 2B) in 1 M NaOH and 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2. Without H2O2 the onset potential is about 1 VRHE but with H2O2 in the electrolyte the photocurrent is present in the entire potential range, indicating that the injection barrier for minority carriers (holes) has been removed.
 Fig. 2  Current density vs. applied potential (J–V) plots in dark (dotted curves) and under simulated solar illumination (solid curves) for USP (A) and APCVD (B) hematite electrodes. 
Chopped light chronoamperometry measurements in 1 M NaOH and 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2 electrolytes were used to examine the transient current response of the USP and APCVD hematite electrodes using simulated sunlight. The potential was scanned from 0.65 to 1.65 VRHE with 0.1 V steps and with three 20 seconds light on/light off cycles on each step. Fig. 3 shows the transient current response during the first second of the first cycle on each one of the potential steps. These segments represent the entire chronoamperometry scans because the current transients typically stabilized in less than one second and the three cycles at each potential step were identical. In the measurements carried out without H2O2 in the electrolyte (Fig. 3A and C), only transient photocurrents with no steady Faradaic currents were observed upon exposing the electrodes to light at low potentials (<1.15 or 1.05 VRHE for the USP or APCVD electrodes, respectively). The positive current transients upon turning the light on represent the accumulation of holes at the electrode/electrolyte interface without injection to the electrolyte. Likewise, negative current transients were observed upon turning the light off, representing the back reaction of electrons from the conduction band with the accumulated holes.12 Therefore, we conclude that at low potentials charge accumulation at the electrode/electrolyte interface21 took place upon illumination of the hematite electrodes in 1 M NaOH electrolyte without H2O2. This behavior characterizes semiconductor/electrolyte systems with high injection barriers.21 At high potentials (≥1.15 or 1.05 VRHE for the USP or APCVD electrodes, respectively) a steady photocurrent was observed following the transient current response. This steady photocurrent represents a Faradaic current, which means that the photogenerated holes were injected to the electrolyte, driving the water oxidation reaction. As expected, the photocurrent transients decrease with increasing potentials until they nearly disappear at 1.65 VRHE for the USP and 1.45 VRHE for the APCVD electrodes.
 Fig. 3  Chopped light chronoamperometry measurements of USP (A and B) and APCVD (C and D) hematite electrodes in either 1 M NaOH (A and C) or 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2 (B and D). Each light on/light off period was 10 s but only the first 1 s of each cycle is shown (thus the breaks in the data). Each light on/light off pair was acquired with 0.1 V steps with the first step at 0.65 VRHE (at time = 0 s) and the final step at 1.65 VRHE (at time = 25 s). 
The fate of the current transients at high potentials indicates that the injection barrier no longer impedes the transfer of holes from the electrode to the electrolyte and therefore nearly all of the holes that reach the surface participate in the water oxidation reaction. In other words, surface recombination is suppressed and the photocurrent becomes limited by the transfer of holes from the bulk of the electrode to the electrode/electrolyte interface. We therefore refer to the high potential range where this condition prevails as the high injection regime and the photocurrent in this range is referred to as the plateau photocurrent.8 Once H2O2 was added to the electrolyte (Fig. 3) the current transients disappeared and purely Faradaic photocurrents were observed in the entire potential range. The absence of the positive current transients upon illuminating the electrodes indicates that all holes that reach the electrode/electrolyte interface contribute to the water oxidation reaction; the absence of the negative current transients upon turning the light off indicates that no recombination takes place between electrons and photo-oxidized surface species.12 These observations therefore confirm that the injection barrier that was clearly observed in the 1 M NaOH electrolyte was removed by adding 0.5 M H2O2 to the electrolyte and as a result the surface recombination was suppressed.
The steady state photocurrent of the USP and APCVD hematite electrodes, with and without H2O2, was obtained from the chopped light chronoamperometry measurements presented in Fig. 3 by subtracting the steady state dark current from the steady state current under illumination. This method is more precise than obtaining the photocurrents from the dynamic J–V curves (cf.Fig. 2) because it is not sensitive to temporal deviations from steady state conditions caused by the current transients. Therefore, it provides accurate and reproducible results that are independent of the scan rate and measurement history. The results are shown in Fig. 4A and B for the USP and APCVD electrodes, respectively. The steady state photocurrent curves in 1 M NaOH and 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2 electrolytes are shown with squares and circles, respectively. In 1 M NaOH electrolyte there is no steady state photocurrent below 1.15 VRHE for the USP or 1.05 VRHE for the APCVD electrodes. The photocurrent starts to rise at these potentials, so-called onset potentials, and rises steeply up to 1.65 VRHE for the USP or 1.45 VRHE for the APCVD electrodes, respectively. At higher potentials the high injection regime is obtained and the photocurrents reach the plateau range. The onset potential in 1 M NaOH electrolyte with 0.5 M H2O2 is 0.55 VRHE, much lower than without H2O2 in the electrolyte. It is also notable that the photocurrents measured in both electrolyte solutions (with or without H2O2) converge at high potentials for both types of hematite electrodes, indicating that no current doubling occurred in our measurements, consistent with previous studies.7,14 We note that the apparent drop in photocurrent at high potentials in Fig. 4A is most likely an artifact connected with the potential drop at high currents.
 Fig. 4  Steady state photocurrent for the USP (A) and the APCVD (B) samples in either 1 M NaOH (squares) or 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2 (circles). The steady state photocurrent values were obtained from the chopped light chronoamperometry measurements in Fig. 3, as explained in the text. 
Further evidence for the disappearance of the injection barrier when H2O2 is added to the electrolyte was obtained by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements of the USP sample at 1.23 VRHE. These measurements reveal distinctly different low frequency impedances with and without H2O2, as shown in Fig. 5. The low frequency (<2 Hz) impedance, which is typically associated with interfacial charge transfer phenomena, is much higher in the 1 M NaOH electrolyte (squares) than in the 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2 electrolyte (circles). This is in line with the negative shift of the onset potential (cf.Fig. 2 and 4) and the disappearance of current transients (Fig. 3) when H2O2 is added to the electrolyte, and therefore we attribute the high impedance in the 1 M NaOH electrolyte to the injection barrier at the electrode/electrolyte interface. This barrier is suppressed in the presence of H2O2 in the electrolyte and consequently the electrochemical charge transfer resistance, which scales inversely with the rate of hole injection to the electrolyte, is small.
 Fig. 5  Impedance (A) and phase shift (B) as a function of frequency for a USP hematite electrode measured at 1.23 VRHE in either 1 M NaOH (squares) or 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2 (circles). Measured values are represented by symbols and the solid lines are the fitted curves. 
The EIS results in the frequency range 0.5 Hz to 10 kHz were fitted to the equivalent circuit in Fig. 6A with a series resistance (Rs) connected to a resistor (Rsc) and capacitor (Csc) in parallel to each other. Rs stands for all the series resistances in the electrochemical cell while Rsc and Csc represent the resistance and capacitance of the space charge depletion region at the surface of the electrode.22 The low frequency impedance (below 0.5 Hz) was excluded from the equivalent circuit fitting because of an insufficient number of data points. Therefore, the contribution of recombination processes connected with slow surface processes at the electrode/electrolyte interface, whose signature is clearly observed in the impedance spectrum in 1 M NaOH electrolyte but disappears when H2O2 is added to the electrolyte (cf.Fig. 5), could not be fitted well. Nevertheless, good fitting was obtained in the frequency range 0.5 Hz to 10 kHz and the fitted curves, shown as solid lines in Fig. 5, fit the experimental results (represented by symbols) very well. The Csc values obtained at different potentials are shown in Fig. 6B, from which the Mott-Schottky plots in Fig. 6C were calculated. The space charge capacitance decreases with increasing anodic potentials due to widening of the depletion region, a typical behavior for semiconductor/liquid junctions.21 The Mott-Schottky analysis reveals that the flat band potential is 0.55 VRHE, remaining the same with and without H2O2. Notably, this potential is the same as the onset potential for the photocurrent measured with H2O2 in the electrolyte (see Fig. 4A).
 Fig. 6  Analysis of the EIS results shown in Fig. 5. (A) Equivalent circuit model. (B) Space charge capacitance vs. applied potential plots. (C) Mott-Schottky plots. Squares and circles represent measurements in 1 M NaOH or 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2 electrolytes, respectively. 
The absence of current transients in the 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2 electrolyte (Fig. 3) means that no charge is accumulated at the electrode/electrolyte interface. This indicates that all the charges that reach the interface are injected to the electrolyte or consumed by a very fast surface recombination (faster than the time resolution of the experiment). The onset of photocurrent at the flat band potential rules out the latter possibility. The EIS results also suggest that the injection barrier is removed once H2O2 is added to the electrolyte. These three independent and complementary observations corroborate the conclusion that surface recombination is suppressed and that all the holes that reach the surface are injected into the electrolyte when H2O2 is added to it. Because the photocurrents with and without H2O2 converge at high potentials—where surface recombination is negligible—and because the flat band potential is the same with and without H2O2, it is likely that the band bending at the electrode/electrolyte interface is the same in both electrolyte solutions. We therefore conclude that the addition of H2O2 to the electrolyte removes the injection barrier but does not affect charge separation within the space charge layer of the hematite electrodes. With the surface recombination eliminated and the band bending remaining the same in both electrolyte solutions, we can safely proceed with our strategy to quantify the relative contributions of the surface and bulk recombination processes.
The water splitting photocurrent (JH2Ophotocurrent) is a product of the rate of photon absorption expressed as a current density (Jabsorbed), the charge separation yield of the photogenerated carriers (Pcharge separation), and charge injection yield to the electrolyte (Pcharge injection): JH2Ophotocurrent = Jabsorbed × Pcharge separation × Pcharge injection(3)Pcharge separation is the yield of the photogenerated holes that reach the electrode/electrolyte interface or, in other words, the fraction of photogenerated holes that does not recombine with electrons in the bulk. Pcharge injection is the yield of those holes that have reached the electrode/electrolyte interface and that are injected into the electrolyte to oxidize the water, or in other words, do not recombine with electrons at surface traps. On the other hand, the photocurrent measured with H2O2 in the electrolyte (JH2O2photocurrent) is a product of Jabsorbed and Pcharge separation only: JH2O2photocurrent = Jabsorbed × Pcharge separation(4)because the charge injection yield becomes 100% (Pcharge injection = 1) in the presence of the hole scavenger (H2O2) in the electrolyte. Because the light penetration depth in a semiconductor is wavelength-dependent, Pcharge separation is sensitive to the spectral distribution of the incident light. It is therefore important to emphasize that the light source used in this work is not AM1.5G and that this should be noted when making comparisons between experimentally derived values of Pcharge separation.
The charge injection yield into water is achieved by dividing JH2Ophotocurrent by JH2O2photocurrent. By measuring the light absorption of both the USP and APCVD samples and integrating it with respect to the AM1.5G solar spectrum, Jabsorbed was calculated to be 11.4 mA cm−2 for the USP sample and 10.9 mA cm−2 for the APCVD sample. With the injection yield and Jabsorbed both known, the charge separation was calculated by dividing JH2O2photocurrent by Jabsorbed (according to eqn (4)). Fig. 7 presents the carrier separation and hole injection yield for the USP and APCVD hematite electrodes. For both electrodes the separation yield (Fig. 7A) begins to rise at potentials anodic of the flat band potential, reaching 12.6% and 18.6% for the USP and APCVD electrodes, respectively, at a potential of 1.23 VRHE. The gradual enhancement in separation yield with increasing anodic potentials results, most probably, from the widening of the space charge depletion region adjacent to the electrode/electrolyte interface, as discussed above in the analysis of the impedance spectra (cf.Fig. 6B). It is particularly notable that the separation yield increases in proportion to the space charge layer width (approximated as the square root of the potential across the space charge layer). This suggests that the proportion of photocurrent from hole diffusion to the space charge layer is small, which is consistent with the small hole diffusion length in hematite.10 The injection yield is close to zero up to the photocurrent onset potential (1.15 and 1.05 VRHE for the USP and APCVD electrodes, respectively) and then it rises steeply up to more than 90% at high potentials. The rapid enhancement in injection yield at high anodic potentials results, most likely, from deactivation of surface traps at the electrode/electrolyte interface. The finer microstructure of the APCVD samples22 results in less bulk recombination and therefore more holes reach the electrode/electrolyte interface compared to the USP electrode. Although there is a gradient in particle size in the APCVD samples, the smallest particles are 5 nm in diameter, while the USP samples have a smallest dimension of 30 to 60 nm (Fig. 1). The small difference in the injection yield may result from different grain orientations and faceting in the respective samples.7,9,23
 Fig. 7  (A) Yield of charge separation in USP and APCVD hematite electrodes. (B) Yield of charge injection from the electrode to the 1 M NaOH electrolyte. 
Prior to the development of this analytical tool, the relative importance of surface and bulk recombination in the photoelectrolysis of water was unclear. It is now apparent that the principle difference among these two types of state-of-the-art hematite photoelectrodes can be ascribed primarily to differences in bulk recombination. The use of this analytical tool to discern differences in bulk and surface recombination between samples with complex morphologies is extremely powerful because it allows, for the first time, an unambiguous assessment of the role of electrode mesostructure and surface characteristics on charge separation. The present study also highlights the challenges associated with hematite electrodes and should enable studies into the influence of structural features such as hematite crystallite size and orientation on bulk and surface recombination losses.
Conclusions

Hydrogen peroxide was shown to be an excellent hole scavenger for hematite photoanodes and no evidence of current doubling was found. In addition, hydrogen peroxide can be used as a probe to diagnose the factors limiting the photoelectrochemical splitting of water by hematite electrodes. For the two types of nanostructured hematite electrodes examined in this work, one produced by USP and the other by APCVD, we found that at low anodic potentials the rate constant for water oxidation is very low and limits the photocurrent, but at high potentials it increases substantially and the injection yield reached more than 90%. Under these conditions the photocurrent becomes limited by bulk recombination. Being an excellent hole scavenger, hydrogen peroxide can also be used to examine the maximum photocurrent that a photo-anode can achieve without an injection barrier. Therefore, it can be used to predict the expected photocurrent with a perfect catalyst.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the Swiss Federal Office of Energy (PEChouse, project number 102326) and by the European Commission's Framework Project 7 (NanoPEC, Project 227179). A.R. acknowledges the support of the Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute (RBNI) and the Wolfson Family Charitable Trust.
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CAS .
C. Sanchez, K. D. Sieber and G. A. Somorjai, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1988, 252, 269–290 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Hardee and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 1024–1026 CAS .
L. C. Schumacher, N. S. McIntyre, S. Mamiche-Afara and M. J. Dignam, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1990, 277, 121–138 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Glasscock, P. R. F. Barnes, I. C. Plumb and N. Savvides, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16477–16488 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, R. Zboril, F. Le Formal, R. Robert, A. Weidenkaff, J. Tucek, J. Frydrych and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7436–7444 CrossRef CAS .
A. Duret and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17184–17191 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405–6408 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Dare-Edwards, J. B. Goodenough, A. Hamnett and P. R. Trevellick, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1983, 79, 2027–2041 RSC .
J. H. Kennedy, J. Karl and W. Frese, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 709–714 CAS .
R. K. Quinn, R. D. Nasby and R. J. Baughman, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 1011–1017 CrossRef CAS .
P. Iwanski, J. S. Curran, W. Gissler and R. Memming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 2128–2133 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Fredlein and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 1892–1898 CrossRef .
K. Itoh and J. O. M. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 1266–1271 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Minks, D. Vanmaekelbergh and J. J. Kelly, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1989, 273, 133–145 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerischer, N. Müller and O. Haas, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1981, 119, 41–48 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, T. Kato, E. Maekawa and K. Honda, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1981, 54, 4 .
R. Memming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1969, 116, 785–790 CAS .
A. Theuwis, I. E. Vermeir and W. P. Gomes, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1996, 410, 31–42 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. L. Formal and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Memming, Semiconductor Electrochemistry, Wiley VCH, Weinheim,  2001 Search PubMed .

          I. Cesar, PhD thesis, École Polytechnique Féderalé de Lausanne,  2007 .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context

Hematite (α-Fe2O3) is one of the most promising photoanode materials for solar hydrogen production via photoelectrochemical water-splitting because it displays a unique combination of visible light absorption, stability in aqueous solutions, non-toxicity and abundance. With energy bandgap of 2.1 eV hematite photoanodes can reach solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency as high as 15.5%, but in practice only a quarter of the theoretical limit has been achieved despite intensive efforts to improve performance by nanostructuring and catalysis. The low quantum efficiency of hematite photoanodes has been attributed to surface and bulk recombination losses connected with low rate of water oxidation and short diffusion length of the photogenerated minority carriers (holes). The question of what is the rate limiting step in hematite photoanodes and where carrier recombination occurs – at the bulk or at the surface – has been studied for a long time without a conclusive result so far. In this work we present a new approach to attack this fundamental question in photoelectrochemistry, using H2O2 as a hole scavenger that readily accepts the holes arriving at the electrode/electrolyte interface. This provides the ability to distinguish between and quantify bulk and surface recombination losses and predict the expected photocurrent with a perfect catalyst

H2O2 + 2H+ + e− → OH− + OH* + 2H+ → 2H2O + h+	(1)
H2O2 + 2h+ → 2H+ + O2	(2)

 	Fig. 1  
          SEM images of hematite electrodes. (A) APCVD sample, viewed from a 45 degree angle. (B) USP sample viewed from top.	 

 	Fig. 2  Current density vs. applied potential (J–V) plots in dark (dotted curves) and under simulated solar illumination (solid curves) for USP (A) and APCVD (B) hematite electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 3  Chopped light chronoamperometry measurements of USP (A and B) and APCVD (C and D) hematite electrodes in either 1 M NaOH (A and C) or 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2 (B and D). Each light on/light off period was 10 s but only the first 1 s of each cycle is shown (thus the breaks in the data). Each light on/light off pair was acquired with 0.1 V steps with the first step at 0.65 VRHE (at time = 0 s) and the final step at 1.65 VRHE (at time = 25 s).	 

 	Fig. 4  Steady state photocurrent for the USP (A) and the APCVD (B) samples in either 1 M NaOH (squares) or 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2 (circles). The steady state photocurrent values were obtained from the chopped light chronoamperometry measurements in Fig. 3, as explained in the text.	 

 	Fig. 5  Impedance (A) and phase shift (B) as a function of frequency for a USP hematite electrode measured at 1.23 VRHE in either 1 M NaOH (squares) or 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2 (circles). Measured values are represented by symbols and the solid lines are the fitted curves.	 

 	Fig. 6  Analysis of the EIS results shown in Fig. 5. (A) Equivalent circuit model. (B) Space charge capacitance vs. applied potential plots. (C) Mott-Schottky plots. Squares and circles represent measurements in 1 M NaOH or 1 M NaOH–0.5 M H2O2 electrolytes, respectively.	 
JH2Ophotocurrent = Jabsorbed × Pcharge separation × Pcharge injection	(3)
JH2O2photocurrent = Jabsorbed × Pcharge separation	(4)

 	Fig. 7  (A) Yield of charge separation in USP and APCVD hematite electrodes. (B) Yield of charge injection from the electrode to the 1 M NaOH electrolyte.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
