On the mechanism for nanoplasmonic enhancement of photon to electron conversion in nanoparticle sensitized hematite films  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP44483J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP44483J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4947-4954Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsOn the mechanism for nanoplasmonic enhancement of photon to electron conversion in nanoparticle sensitized hematite films

        
          
            Beniamino 
            Iandolo
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Tomasz J. 
            Antosiewicz
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Anders 
            Hellman
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Igor 
            Zorić
          
        
      
Department of Applied Physics, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-421 96 Göteborg, Sweden. E-mail: iandolo@chalmers.se
Received 
      12th December 2012
    , Accepted 8th February 2013First published on 12th February 2013AbstractHematite (Fe2O3) is a promising candidate for hydrogen production via water splitting despite the difference in the characteristic lengths for photon absorption and charge carrier transport. Metallic nanoparticles supporting localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs), i.e. collective, non-propagating oscillations of electrons excited by an external electric field, are well-suited to improve the optoelectronic properties of hematite, in particular for ultra-thin films. Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the observed LSPR mediated performance enhancement. In this work, the improvement of incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of ultra-thin hematite photoanodes functionalized with Au nanodisks was investigated. The improvement in IPCE at wavelengths close to the bandgap in hematite was found to correlate well with the increase in optical extinction owing to the excitation of LSPR in the nanodisks. Finite-difference time-domain calculations of the near-field distribution around the nanodisks enabled us to elucidate the mechanism behind the IPCE enhancement and its variations with the position of the plasmonic resonance with respect to the bandgap of hematite. Both were attributed to an increased charge generation close to the hematite–electrolyte interface caused by the electric field enhancement in hematite. The results presented here are directly applicable to other semiconductors with similar properties to hematite and are expected to be helpful in future design of optimized photoanodes, where, for instance, functionalization with metallic nanoparticles is combined with material doping and nanostructuring.
Introduction
Sunlight-driven water splitting in photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells is an attractive method for sustainable production of hydrogen. In a PEC cell, light is captured and converted into chemical energy stored in H2 and O2 molecules. Electrode materials and configurations used so far have failed to achieve a sufficiently high solar-to-chemical energy conversion efficiency, long-term stability and low fabrication cost, which are needed to make PEC water splitting interesting for large-scale hydrogen production.1 Hematite (α-Fe2O3) is considered one of the most promising light-absorbing materials for PEC cells thanks to its unique combination of natural abundance, stability in aqueous environment, and photoactivity under visible light irradiation. Hematite shows excellent stability against corrosion (both in the dark and under illumination) for pH > 3 (ref. 2) and with a bandgap of ∼2.0 eV it is an ideal candidate for water splitting, with a theoretical solar-to-chemical energy conversion efficiency of 16%.3 So far, much lower efficiency values have been reported,4 due to a number of factors including: low absorption cross section for wavelengths close to the bandgap,5 fast charge recombination dynamics,6 short diffusion length for holes, low flat band potential, and sluggish oxygen evolution kinetics.7 A severe drawback consists in a mismatch between the minority carrier diffusion length and the photon absorption length. Hematite is an n-type semiconductor characterized by an extremely short hole diffusion length of 2–4 nm.8 Therefore, only holes generated in close vicinity to the semiconductor–electrolyte interface will contribute to water splitting. The use of ultra-thin (<50 nm) hematite films has thus gained considerable interest.9,10 For such films, however, the absorption of light is severely limited due to an indirect bandgap, resulting in a relatively long absorption length, e.g. 118 nm for a photon energy of 2.26 eV.5
An interesting scheme to address these challenges is to use metallic nanoparticles supporting localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs), i.e. collective, non-propagating oscillations of electrons in the nanoparticle, which can be excited by an external electric field. Plasmonic nanoparticles have shown promise in manipulating light in solar11–13 and PEC cells.14–18 A number of possible beneficial effects on the performance of functionalized photoelectrodes upon excitation of LSPRs in the incorporated nanoparticles has been identified:19 (i) increased charge generation and/or separation in the semiconductor caused by the enhanced electric near-field around the nanoparticles, (ii) prolonged optical pathway in the semiconductor, driven by light scattering from the nanoparticles, which enhances light absorption, (iii) enhanced photoconductivity caused by direct injection of hot electrons (emerging from one possible decay channel of the LSPR excitation) into the conduction band of the semiconductor, and (iv) increase of carrier conductivity driven by excess local heating in the hematite produced upon the decay of the LSPR. Mechanisms (i) and (ii) require a spectral positioning of the LSPR at or above the energy of the bandgap if the photons are to be absorbed in the semiconductor. Mechanism (iii) can be active even when such overlap is not present, provided that there is a favorable alignment between the energy bands of the semiconductor and of the nanoparticle. This mechanism has in fact been observed in PEC cells based on TiO220–22 and ZnO,23 where the LSPR in Au or Ag nanoparticles appeared at energies well below the bandgap of these semiconductors.
All the above-mentioned mechanisms can be active simultaneously in hematite, owing to its comparably smaller bandgap. Thimsen et al. investigated the influence of Au nanoparticles on the performance of compact hematite and Si-doped nanoplatelet films made by spray pyrolysis.14 The authors found that the nanoparticles had a detrimental effect on the absolute IPCE values and that only after normalizing the IPCE to the respective maximum value for each photoanode, an increase was found for the modified photoanodes compared to the bare hematite control samples. Later studies have shown a beneficial effect of Au nanoparticles on the IPCE in undoped, compact hematite films in the same spectral region where the LSPR was excited in Au.15,24 While the observed improvement was generically ascribed to the excitation of LSPRs in Au, no specific mechanism from those mentioned above was identified. A more detailed understanding of the phenomena resulting in such an increase in efficiency is crucial if the beneficial effect of metallic nanostructures in the design of photoanodes is to be fully exploited.
The aim of this work is to identify which of the four previously mentioned mechanisms is responsible for LSPR-enhanced efficiency in ultra-thin hematite films. To this end, we fabricated model photoanodes consisting of undoped hematite films of various thicknesses and functionalized them with short-range ordered arrays of Au nanodisks. We performed spectrally resolved photocurrent and optical measurements and compared them with finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations to understand the optoelectronic response occurring in the samples upon illumination. Based on spectrally resolved IPCE measurements, carried out for samples with different position of the LSPR with respect to the hematite bandgap, we identify the local electric field enhancement caused by the excited LSPR around the nanodisks as the dominant mechanism causing an increased charge generation in hematite, which in turn leads to an enhancement of the photocurrent in the spectral region of the LSPR. Moreover, we show that the Ti adhesion layer present between the Au nanodisks and the hematite influences the PEC properties of the photoanodes considerably, both in the spectral region of the LSPR as well as at shorter wavelengths. Our IPCE measurements reveal an increased efficiency correlated with the spectral position of the hybrid Au–Ti LSPR with respect to the bandgap. The latter is in good agreement with calculated maps of electric field enhancement, where the highest enhancement is observed for the thinnest hematite films. We show both experimentally and theoretically that an increase in hematite film thickness shifts the Au/Ti LSPR into the red, giving rise to smaller IPCE enhancement driven by a weaker near field enhancement around the nanodisks. Finally, a significant increase of IPCE is demonstrated at shorter wavelengths than those at which the LSPRs are excited, where the introduction of the nanodisks does not influence the optical properties of the photoanodes.
Methods
Nanofabrication and characterization
Hematite films were fabricated on glass substrates coated with indium tin oxide (ITO, thickness of 120 nm, sheet resistance ≤15 Ω per square, PGO GmbH), according to a procedure described elsewhere.25 In brief, iron films were deposited by electron-beam evaporation and subsequently oxidized in a tube furnace at 350 °C in a mixed N2/O2 atmosphere. The thickness of the iron films was monitored during each evaporation process with a quartz crystal microbalance monitor. The furnace was heated to the desired temperature at a 15 °C min−1 rate, kept at 350 °C for 6 hours and then allowed to cool down to room temperature. The thickness of the hematite films was measured in a surface profiler (Dektak D150, Veeco). Au nanodisks of 50 nm diameter, 25 nm height and ca. 5% surface coverage were deposited on top of the hematite films by hole-mask colloidal lithography.26 5 nm Ti was evaporated through the resist mask before the evaporation of Au disks in order to improve the adhesion of the latter to the hematite (the use of an alternative Cr underlayer was ruled out as it would have dissolved in the strongly basic environment used for the photocurrent measurements). For some samples, the Ti layer was replaced by a SiOx layer of the same nominal thickness.
The functionalized samples were examined by scanning electron microscopy (Zeiss Supra 60 VP). For the determination of the bandgap of the hematite films, optical absorption measurements were performed in a Cary 5000 spectrophotometer (Varian) equipped with the External Diffuse Reflectance Accessory (DRA) 2500. The absorption coefficient α for each film thickness was calculated by dividing the absorption by the respective thickness. The optical extinction of all samples was measured in the same spectrophotometer without the DRA, by measuring transmission in the forward direction, with the samples immersed in water. Extinction was then obtained for each sample by subtraction of transmission from unity. Photoelectrochemical measurements were carried out in a standard three-electrode configuration, with the fabricated photoanodes as working electrode, a Pt wire as counter electrode, and a Ag/AgCl electrode (3 M KCl, Metrohm) as reference electrode. A 1 M KOH solution (pH = 13.5) was used as electrolyte. The measured potential against the Ag/AgCl electrode was converted into potential against the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) through the following equation:ERHE = EAg/AgCl + 0.059 × pH + E0Ag/AgCl,where EAg/AgCl is the experimentally measured potential and E0Ag/AgCl = 0.210 V at 25 °C for a Ag/AgCl electrode in 3 M KCl.
The sample was illuminated from the front side in all the experiments. A solar simulator (SKU SS150, Sciencetech. Inc.) was used as a light source for photocurrent–potential measurements. The light power density impinging on the cell was measured with a Si photodiode connected to a current reader (Keithley 2400) and adjusted to 1 Sun. The potential was scanned from cathodic to anodic values at a rate of 5 mV s−1. All the spectrally resolved photocurrent measurements were done at 1.5 V against RHE. The light from an Apex Illuminator (Newport) equipped with a 100 W quartz tungsten halogen lamp was guided into a Cornerstone 130 1/8 m monochromator (Oriel). Wavelengths shorter than 400 nm were cut off by placing a color glass filter (FSR-GG400, Newport) in a dedicated holder in the illuminator. The light power density was measured with the same Si photodiode mentioned above. The IPCE at a certain wavelength λ was calculated through the following formula:  where h is Planck's constant, c is the speed of light, jph(λ) is the measured photocurrent, e is the elementary electronic charge and P(λ) is the power density impinging on the sample.
Calculations
Interaction of light with the investigated structure was simulated using a finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) code (Lumerical). The substrate and water layer were treated as dispersionless dielectrics with refractive indices of 1.45 and 1.33, respectively. The refractive indices of hematite and ITO were determined from ellipsometry measurements (J.A. Woollam M2000) and taken from the literature,27 respectively. The bulk dielectric functions of Ti and Au were also taken from the literature.28,29
The geometry used for calculations was the following: on top of the glass substrate, ITO (same thickness as in the real samples) and hematite (thickness ranging from 5 to 65 nm) were placed. Au/Ti disks with diameter of 50 nm and thickness of 25/5 nm were positioned on top of the hematite and covered with water. Periodic boundary conditions (with a periodicity equal to three times the disk diameter) were used to simulate an infinite structure, rather than mimicking a hole-mask colloidal lithography based short-ordered distribution of disks. Under these conditions diffraction effects on the array as a whole were not observed.
Results
The as-fabricated hematite films, with a measured thickness t = 25, 40 and 55 nm, are compact and have roughness of the order of a few nm, comparable to that of the underlying ITO charge collection layer. X-ray diffraction spectra show that the only observable iron oxide phase present in the samples is hematite with [104] and [110] as the preferred surface orientations.24
The optical bandgap of hematite is reported to depend on the sample preparation technique, ranging between approximately 1.9 and 2.2 eV30 (corresponding to 650 and 560 nm, respectively). It is crucial to determine the position of the bandgap in our samples since the relative spectral position between the bandgap in the semiconductor and the LSPR in the nanoparticles is a key element in distinguishing between different mechanisms of LSPR-enhanced water splitting. The size of the bandgap for our samples was obtained from optical measurements of the absorption coefficient as a function of photon energy by using an integrating sphere set-up attached to a spectrophotometer that enables simultaneous measurements of the scattering and extinction efficiencies. By relying on the optical theorem one can extract the absorption coefficient α. The bandgap was obtained from the relation (valid for excitation via an indirect transition) (αhν)1/2 = A(hν − EG), where hν is the photon energy, A is a proportionality constant, and EG is the bandgap energy.31 Thus, by plotting (αhν)1/2versus the photon energy and extrapolating the linear region of the plot to the abscissa, one can determine EG. Fig. 1 shows the results of this procedure where the experimentally obtained values for α of our films were used as input. The bandgap is found to be of 1.97 eV for the 25 nm thick films, and of 1.87 eV for the 40 and 55 nm films. The small differences are possibly caused by different crystallinity of the fabricated films.
 Fig. 1  Determination of optical bandgap for hematite thin films from spectroscopic absorption measurements. (αhν)1/2 is plotted against the photon energy for films of different thicknesses (orange, light green and light blue for t = 25, 40 and 55 nm respectively). The indirect bandgap is determined by extrapolating the linear fit to the experimental data (magenta, green and blue lines) to zero absorption. The size of the bandgap is 1.97 eV for the 25 nm thick hematite films and 1.87 for the 40 nm and 55 nm thick films. 
In the next step the functionalization of hematite films with Au nanodisks was carried out. Photocurrent versus potential measurements allow for comparing the photoactivity of the as-fabricated and functionalized hematite films. Photocurrent–potential curves, recorded for functionalized hematite films of different thicknesses as well as for bare hematite films (references), both in the dark and under solar simulator illumination (AM 1.5 filter, power density adjusted at 1 Sun), are shown in Fig. 2. Little activity is observed in the reference films before the potential for water electrolysis on hematite in the dark is reached. The higher photocurrent in the 40 nm reference sample is the result of a compromise between light absorption and charge transport efficiency, compared to other thicknesses. Such behavior has been previously observed in flat, undoped hematite photoanodes.32
 Fig. 2  Photocurrent–potential curves under solar simulator illumination (light power density adjusted to 1 Sun) for bare hematite samples with thicknesses t = 25, 40 and 55 nm and for hematite films functionalized with Au nanodisks of 50 nm diameter and 25 nm height (magenta circles, green squares and blue diamonds for t = 25, 40 and 55 nm respectively). A 5 nm thick Ti adhesion layer is present between the Au disks and the hematite films. All the functionalized samples show considerably higher photocurrent than the respective reference. Dark scans for 25 nm thick bare and functionalized hematite are also shown. 
All the functionalized samples show remarkably higher photoactivity as compared to the corresponding reference samples. The highest activity over the whole investigated potential window is measured for the 25 nm thick sample, reaching a photocurrent of 0.28 mA cm−2 at 1.5 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE).
Wavelength resolved optical extinction (in an electrolytic environment) and photocurrent measurements were performed to scrutinize the spectral response of the functionalized films. Fig. 3a shows the measured optical extinction difference between functionalized samples and the respective reference sample as a function of wavelength of the incoming light. The excitation of a LSPR in the metallic nanodisks gives rise to a considerable increase in extinction. Interestingly, the LSPR main peak extends into the region of light absorption in hematite (to the left of the dashed line) for all samples. A red-shift of the peak can be observed for increasing hematite thickness, which is expected due to the increase of the effective refractive index in the surroundings of the nanodisks33 (hematite has a larger refractive index than ITO in the whole spectral region of interest). Moreover, a shoulder centered around 550 nm is clearly identified for the 25 and 55 nm thick samples. Its origin will be discussed later.
 Fig. 3  (a) Measured spectra of optical extinction difference between functionalized and bare hematite. A LSPR is clearly excited in the nanodisks of all samples. (b) Extinction difference spectra simulated with FDTD calculations. The presence of a shoulder is distinguishable for the 25 and 55 nm thick samples, as in the measured spectra. (c) Experimental IPCE difference between functionalized and reference samples. An improvement for all samples can be identified in the region where LSPRs are active in the nanodisks. The wavelength corresponding to the bandgap in hematite is marked by a dashed line. When the IPCE difference is normalized to the IPCE of the reference samples, an increase by a factor of 2 (for 55 nm thick film) and 4 (for 25 nm thick film) is found. An even higher IPCE difference can be found at shorter wavelengths. 
FDTD-calculated extinction difference spectra are shown in Fig. 3b. The global features of the plasmonic resonance and the accompanying red shift for thicker films are well reproduced together with the high-energy shoulder seen around 550 nm. The qualitative trend in the calculated spectral position of the main LSPR peak is consistent with the measured spectra, although the main LSPR peaks in the calculations are a few tens of nm red-shifted as compared to the experimental values and the calculated peaks are broader than their experimental counterparts. The shift and broadening of the calculated peaks likely originate from the defined geometry, representing the experimental Au/Ti structure used in our calculations. In particular, the Ti adhesion layer was modeled as a homogeneous, pure Ti metallic disk. In reality, the presence of some titanium oxide is expected, especially around the rim of the Ti disks, which is most exposed to the electrolyte. The properties of such an oxide (i.e., stoichiometry, crystallinity, refractive index) are difficult to determine experimentally in the prepared samples. As a consequence, the titanium/titanium oxide bi-layer is difficult to model (even to define with any degree of precision) as compared to all the other layers. Excluding any potential resonances, the presence of a metal/oxide structure is optically less lossy than a pure Ti layer used in calculations and leads to a narrower peak. Thus, the broadening of the numerically calculated peak with respect to the experimental one is the result of using a full 5 nm Ti layer instead of guessing as to the amount and structure of the hypothesized dielectric. However, we note that for a qualitative determination of the mechanism the FDTD methodology presented here is more than adequate.
The spectrally resolved difference in IPCE between functionalized and reference films is plotted in Fig. 3c. Each sample shows a local maximum in IPCE difference close to the wavelength corresponding to the bandgap in hematite films, in good agreement with the position of the main LSPR peaks in the extinction difference spectra. The spectral position of the maximum in IPCE difference also red-shifts with increasing hematite thickness. The peaks are asymmetric in shape, which is explained by the fact that the photocurrent vanishes in our photoanodes when the wavelength approaches the bandgap. The 25 nm sample clearly shows the highest IPCE difference near the bandgap. It is worth mentioning that when the IPCE difference is normalized to the IPCE of the reference samples, a relative improvement by a factor 2 (for 55 nm thick film) and 4 (for 25 nm thick film) is obtained. Furthermore, we notice that all samples show a considerably higher IPCE difference at shorter wavelength. Comparison with the IPCE of a control sample where only Ti disks of the same diameter and height are present indicates that the latter are at least partly responsible for such a pronounced effect (see Discussion section for more details).
The investigation of the interaction of light with the photoanodes and of the electric field spatial distribution, performed using the FDTD method, is the starting point of our analysis. Fig. 4 shows cross sections of the electric field contours for incident electric field at different wavelengths and for hematite thicknesses t = 25, 40, and 55 nm. The total field E is normalized to the incident one E0 (note that absorption is proportional to E2) and the curved lines denote contours with an enhancement factor of 1. Straight horizontal lines mark the boundaries of the hematite films.
 Fig. 4  Calculated cross sections of the electric field for hematite film thickness of 25, 40 and 55 nm for incident electric field of different wavelengths. The field enhancement factor E/E0 is plotted, with the curved lines marking an enhancement factor of 1. The straight horizontal lines mark the boundaries of the hematite film. A LSPR is visible at the Au/Ti nanodisks at around 550 nm. Here, the field enhancement is concentrated around the top corners of the Au disk. With increasing wavelength the field distribution becomes more symmetric around the nanodisk (see the plots for λ = 610 nm). Finally, the field enhancement is stronger in the hematite for wavelength equal to or longer than 640 nm. The volume of hematite where the field enhancement is larger than one decreases with an increase in the film thickness. 
It is clear that at short wavelengths (550 nm) a LSPR is excited at the top of the Au/Ti disk, while the field amplitude in hematite is considerably lower. As the wavelength increases, the near-field profile around the disk first becomes symmetric (see the plots for λ = 610 nm) and then the maximum amplitude shifts into the hematite. The hematite volume where the enhancement factor is larger than 1 decreases for increasing hematite thickness. A similar trend is found for the maximum field enhancement factor, which will be discussed in the following section.
Discussion
To gain insight into the mechanism responsible for the observed increase in photoactivity in the LSPR spectral region upon functionalization with the Au/Ti nanodisks, we start by comparing the light extinction spectra with the IPCE measurements. While it is complicated to understand from the experimental extinction spectra where in the photoanode the increase in photon absorption is localized, calculations allow for a precise determination of the electric field distribution in each component of the model system. They also provide a picture of the excitation of LSPR in the nanodisks that explains the shape of the observed LSPR peaks.
An idealized Au/Ti nanodisk supports an asymmetric LSPR (i.e., with an asymmetric top-bottom near-field distribution) even in the absence of a dielectric substrate. Placing the nanodisks on the hematite surface breaks the symmetry even further and the LSPR evolves into a complex hybrid resonance in whose spectrum we can identify two peaks. The plasmonic properties of similar hybrid systems are being investigated for both fundamental reasons as well as for application like LSPR-driven photochemistry and sensing.34,35 The combination of metals with considerably different loss functions (for instance Pd or Ti with Au or Ag) is of interest as it allows for a spatial separation of processes like light scattering and dissipation owing to the difference in optoelectronic properties. In our case, it was found that placing Ti and Au disks in contact with each other generates one broader LSPR (with a shoulder – second resonance confined to the Au side of the heterometallic disk) where localization of the plasmon at each metal is clearly distinguishable.
The top part of the Au disk is responsible for the weak extinction difference peak at shorter wavelengths (e.g., λ = 550 nm), as indicated by the plots of the electric field cross section in Fig. 4. One can notice the strong field enhancement at the top of the structure and the weak penetration of the enhanced fields into the hematite for λ < 600 nm. This is confirmed by the maximum field enhancement plot in the bottom panel of Fig. 5, which shows that the effect is strongest for wavelength around 560 nm.
 Fig. 5  (a) Field enhancement in hematite near the Ti edge as a function of wavelength and film thickness. The enhancement increases with increasing wavelength because of the shift of the LSPR from the top to the bottom of the nanodisks. The enhancement decreases for increasing hematite thickness, resulting in a lower LSPR-related IPCE increase. (b) Field enhancement at the top of the Au disk. The plasmon resonance at the top of the Au/Ti structure is marked by a maximum field enhancement at 550 nm and is visible in the extinction measurements as the short wavelength shoulder accompanying the main LSPR peak. 
As the wavelength increases, the main LSPR becomes dominant and the field enhancement is increasingly more localized in the bottom part of the disk where the Ti is present. This resonance, in contrast to the one described above, is not confined to a part of the Au/Ti structure but encompasses the whole disk. Indeed, without the Au part a LSPR would not be observed at all. The contribution of the whole structure to the resonance is made evident by a relatively large field enhancement along the whole length of both sides of the disk. Naturally, as a consequence of the substrate having a larger refractive index as compared to water, the field is drawn into the former and the electric field is enhanced there most strongly. We notice that in a geometry where the plasmonic nanostructure is on top of the semiconductor the field enhancement is concentrated close to the semiconductor–electrolyte interface. This is particularly advantageous in exploiting near-field effects in semiconductors characterized by poor charge transport properties because once the additional charges are generated and separated, the minority carriers (in this case, holes) have a higher probability to reach the interface before undergoing recombination.
As shown in Fig. 5a, the maximum enhancement in hematite near the edge of the Ti nanodisks is found for a thickness of around 20 nm and then decreases for increasing thickness. Moreover, the volume within which a large field enhancement is present also decreases. This correlates with the observation of the same trend in the plasmon-enhanced IPCE difference close to the bandgap. As can be seen in Fig. 3c, the highest photocurrent enhancement occurs for 25 nm of hematite and decreases monotonously with an increase of the thickness to 40 and 55 nm. Thus, the measured IPCE versus t dependence results from two distinct contributions: (i) the volume of hematite in which the field is enhanced decreases with increasing hematite thickness (cfr. Fig. 4) and (ii) once the charges are generated and separated, the collection efficiency of electrons into the ITO layer is decreasing for the thicker films as electron transport is poor in pure hematite. Moreover, the wavelength for maximum plasmonic IPCE increase is also red-shifted for increasing hematite thickness, just as the maximum field enhancement connected to a red-shifting plasmon resonance. An additional argument that strengthens the above picture is obtained by calculating the integrated intensities (as obtained from the electromagnetic field distributions) in the functionalized and reference samples. The latter is done since the charge separation mechanism is sensitive to the field intensity in the material. By doing the integration over a 5 nm thick hematite film (such a thickness was chosen since the holes created in this region of the sample can reach the semiconductor–electrolyte interface and contribute to water splitting), one finds an increase in the integrated intensity for all the functionalized samples as compared to the respective reference. Furthermore, the integrated intensities have maxima at the position of the main plasmon resonances and their value is reduced for increasing film thickness. The same trend is seen experimentally in Fig 3c.
To rule out the prolonged absorption distance mechanism owing to transverse far-field scattering into the hematite layer, we have performed simulations for a single Au/Ti disk surrounded by a total-field/scattered-field (TFSF) source36 100 by 100 nm wide. In this way, only the scattered field is present outside the TF/SF interface and is easy to quantify. According to calculations, the plasmonic resonance is visible in the integrated field intensity E2 in the far-field (approximately beyond 50 nm from the centre of the disk); however, it is more than one order of magnitude smaller than that of the integrated near-field (over the small area close to the disk). We note that these integrations were carried out in a similar manner as described above, i.e. in the top 5 nm of hematite. In light of this result, we conclude that the prolonged optical absorption distance plays only a very small role in the IPCE enhancement mechanism. Thus, we believe that there is strong evidence that the enhanced electric field generated close to the hematite surface upon excitation of LSPR in the Au/Ti nanodisks is responsible for the observed increase in efficiency at wavelengths close to the bandgap of hematite.
To further support this hypothesis, we recall that the photocurrent (and thus the IPCE) rapidly vanishes after the bandgap is crossed, even though there is considerable optical extinction in the functionalized samples for wavelengths below the bandgap.
Moreover, we investigated the performance of samples in which the Ti adhesion layer was replaced by a SiOx layer of the same nominal thickness of 5 nm. Both the measured photocurrent under solar simulator illumination and IPCE difference (not shown here) did not change appreciably as compared to those of the samples with Ti, irrespective of the hematite thickness. Since we consider a 5 nm SiOx layer as an effective barrier to charge transfer from the Au nanodisks to the hematite, we believe that hot electron transfer from Au to hematite can be ruled out as a performance improving mechanism. Finally, photoactivity increase owing to plasmon-induced heating can be ruled out here, as recent calculations show that the generation of heat within the hematite is negligible for the photon flux corresponding to solar illumination.37
As mentioned earlier, the highest IPCE difference is found for all samples in the wavelength region (λ < 500 nm, partly out of scale in Fig. 3c), where the presence of the Au/Ti nanodisks has practically no impact on the optical properties of the photoanodes. Fig. 6 compares the IPCE of two 25 nm thick hematite films, one functionalized with Au/Ti nanodisks and one with Ti nanodisks of 5 nm thickness, having the same diameter and surface coverage. In this case, the Ti disks are more prone to oxidation during fabrication and PEC characterization, since they are not covered by the Au nanodisks. We notice that the plasmon-induced IPCE increase is not present in the sample with Ti only, where the IPCE is close to zero for wavelengths longer than 600 nm. For decreasing wavelengths, the IPCE of the two samples increases and is basically the same until around 480 nm. For even shorter wavelength, the IPCE of the Au/Ti functionalized hematite continues to increase, while the sample with Ti only remains approximately constant.
 Fig. 6  IPCE spectra of 25 nm thick hematite films functionalized with Au/Ti nanodisks (magenta circles) and 5 nm thick Ti/TiOx nanodisks (green squares). The LSPR-related efficiency increase is observed only in the Au/Ti sample. The inset shows the IPCE difference between the two samples for wavelengths between 560 and 760 nm. 
Experiments carried out with hematite films functionalized with SiOx nanodisks, having a 5 nm height, show very similar behavior for the IPCE as a function of λ as in case with the 5 nm Ti/TiOx disks shown in Fig. 6. We suggest that the observed photocurrent enhancement at λ < 580 nm is related to the presence of electron traps at the TiOx or SiOx/Fe2O3 interface. It has been shown recently that nanostructured CoOx or GaOx deposited on hematite thin films give rise to photocurrent enhancement.38 The origin of this effect is a consequence of an enhanced electron depletion in the photoelectrode at the interface of the two oxides in the presence of an applied bias. This in turn results in a reduction of electron–hole recombination losses, i.e. effectively increasing the lifetime of the photogenerated holes. The latter are responsible for the enhanced photocurrent in the λ < 580 nanometers region. Further investigation is being carried out in order to identify the mechanism responsible for such improvement of performance outside the range of excitation of LSPR in our system.
Conclusions
In summary, we have investigated how functionalization of ultra-thin hematite films with Au nanodisks affects the PEC properties of the semiconductor. We have measured considerable improvement of photoactivity in the functionalized photoanodes, under solar simulator illumination, as compared to reference samples consisting of bare hematite. Spectroscopic extinction spectra confirm the presence of a LSPR in the nanodisks whose diameter was chosen so that the LSPR excitation spectrum overlaps appreciably with the region of least efficient light absorption in hematite, i.e. at energy just above the bandgap. A clear improvement in IPCE is observed in the same spectral region and is attributed to the plasmonic activity of the nanodisks. Using FDTD simulations, which give optical spectra in good agreement with measured ones, we elucidate the mechanism of improved IPCE in this wavelength. The maps of electric field enhancement show that for increasing wavelength the LSPR is at first concentrated around the top of the Au disks and then shifts towards the Ti disks and the underlying hematite. This suggests from the analysis of the maximum enhancement field in the hematite that additional charge generation close to the semiconductor–electrolyte interface is responsible for the observed LSPR-related IPCE improvement. Any contribution of other plasmon-related channels is disproved by experimental observation and with reference to recent calculations that show that LSPR-generated heat transfer from nanoparticles to hematite is negligible. A considerable IPCE increase (in fact, higher than the LSPR-related increase) is observed at shorter wavelengths, where the nanodisks do not change the optical properties of the photoanodes. Further investigation is currently being carried out in order to gain understanding of the mechanism(s) active in this spectral region.
Metallic nanoparticles supporting LSPR offer interesting possibilities to improve the performance of light absorbers for PEC cells, in particular, of those based on semiconductors – like hematite – where the photon absorption length is much longer than the minority charge diffusion length. We believe that the detailed understanding of the mechanism(s) behind beneficial effect of LSPRs can lead to design of photoanodes where such effects can be optimized. Furthermore, we envision the possibility to combine this approach with other strategies (for instance, doping and nanostructuring, to increase electron conductivity and surface area respectively) that have already been investigated,4 in order to achieve yet higher performance.
Acknowledgements
The Swedish Energy Agency (project no 32078-1) and the Formas project 229-2009-772 are acknowledged for financial support. B.I. thanks M. Zäch for fruitful discussions and M. Eng for help with the PEC setup. T.J.A. acknowledges support from the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research via the metamaterial project SSF RMA08.
References
Basic Research Needs for Solar Energy Utilization (updated report), US Department of Energy, 2010.
L. S. R. Yeh and N. Hackerman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 833 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Murphy, P. R. F. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne and J. A. Glasscock, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1999–2017 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS .
I. Balberg and H. L. Pinch, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 1978, 7, 12 CrossRef .
A. G. Joly, J. R. Williams, S. A. Chambers, G. Xiong, W. P. Hess and D. M. Laman, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 053521 CrossRef .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, T. Hamann and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4294–4302 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy and K. W. Frese Jr., J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 709 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862 CrossRef CAS .
K. Itoh and J. O. Bockris, J. Appl. Phys., 1984, 56, 874 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nature Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hägglund, M. Zäch, G. Petersson and B. Kasemo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053110 CrossRef .
V. Gusak, B. Kasemo and C. Hägglund, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6218–6225 CrossRef CAS .
E. Thimsen, F. Le Formal, M. Grätzel and S. C. Warren, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
I. Thomann, B. A. Pinaud, Z. Chen, B. F. Clemens, T. F. Jaramillo and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3440–3446 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202–5205 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Liu, W. B. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS .
R. Solarska, A. Krolikowska and J. Augustynski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7980–7983 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 51 Search PubMed .
T. Tatsuma and Y. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852–14853 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kowalska, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, Chem. Commun., 2009, 241–243 RSC .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, C. J. Chen, L. C. Cheng, P. C. Wu, B. H. Cheng, Y. Z. Ho, M. L. Tseng, Y. Y. Hsu and T. S. Chan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7362–7372 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, C. Liu, H. E. Jeong and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
B. Iandolo and M. Zäch, Aust. J. Chem., 2012, 65, 633–637 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fredriksson, Y. Alaverdyan, A. Dmitriev, C. Langhammer, D. S. Sutherland, M. Zäch and B. Kasemo, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4297–4302 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Synowicki, Thin Solid Films, 1998, 313, 394–397 CrossRef .

          E. D. Palik, Handbook of Optical Constants, Academic Press,  1998 Search PubMed .
P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 6, 4370–4379 CrossRef CAS .

          R. M. Cornell and U. Schwertmann, The Iron Oxides, Wiley,  2003 Search PubMed .
J. Tauc, Mater. Res. Bull., 1968, 3, 37–46 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hiralal, S. Saremi-Yarahmadi, B. C. Bayer, H. Wang, S. Hofmann, K. G. Upul Wijayantha and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Sol. Energy Mater., 2011, 95, 1819 CrossRef CAS .

          S. A. Maier, Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley,  2006 Search PubMed .
C. Wadell, T. J. Antosiewicz and C. Langhammer, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4784–4790 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Antosiewicz, S. P. Apell, C. Wadell and C. Langhammer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20522–20529 CAS .

          A. Taflove and S. C. Hagness, Computational Electrodynamics: The Finite-Difference Time-Domain Method, Artech House, Norwood, MA, 3rd edn,  2005 Search PubMed .
V. P. Zhdanov, I. Zorić and B. Kasemo, Physica E, 2012, 46, 113–118 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barroso, C. A. Mesa, S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan, T. Hisatomi, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15640–15645 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
Table Content:
ERHE = EAg/AgCl + 0.059 × pH + E0Ag/AgCl,

 		 

 	Fig. 1  Determination of optical bandgap for hematite thin films from spectroscopic absorption measurements. (αhν)1/2 is plotted against the photon energy for films of different thicknesses (orange, light green and light blue for t = 25, 40 and 55 nm respectively). The indirect bandgap is determined by extrapolating the linear fit to the experimental data (magenta, green and blue lines) to zero absorption. The size of the bandgap is 1.97 eV for the 25 nm thick hematite films and 1.87 for the 40 nm and 55 nm thick films.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photocurrent–potential curves under solar simulator illumination (light power density adjusted to 1 Sun) for bare hematite samples with thicknesses t = 25, 40 and 55 nm and for hematite films functionalized with Au nanodisks of 50 nm diameter and 25 nm height (magenta circles, green squares and blue diamonds for t = 25, 40 and 55 nm respectively). A 5 nm thick Ti adhesion layer is present between the Au disks and the hematite films. All the functionalized samples show considerably higher photocurrent than the respective reference. Dark scans for 25 nm thick bare and functionalized hematite are also shown.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Measured spectra of optical extinction difference between functionalized and bare hematite. A LSPR is clearly excited in the nanodisks of all samples. (b) Extinction difference spectra simulated with FDTD calculations. The presence of a shoulder is distinguishable for the 25 and 55 nm thick samples, as in the measured spectra. (c) Experimental IPCE difference between functionalized and reference samples. An improvement for all samples can be identified in the region where LSPRs are active in the nanodisks. The wavelength corresponding to the bandgap in hematite is marked by a dashed line. When the IPCE difference is normalized to the IPCE of the reference samples, an increase by a factor of 2 (for 55 nm thick film) and 4 (for 25 nm thick film) is found. An even higher IPCE difference can be found at shorter wavelengths.	 

 	Fig. 4  Calculated cross sections of the electric field for hematite film thickness of 25, 40 and 55 nm for incident electric field of different wavelengths. The field enhancement factor E/E0 is plotted, with the curved lines marking an enhancement factor of 1. The straight horizontal lines mark the boundaries of the hematite film. A LSPR is visible at the Au/Ti nanodisks at around 550 nm. Here, the field enhancement is concentrated around the top corners of the Au disk. With increasing wavelength the field distribution becomes more symmetric around the nanodisk (see the plots for λ = 610 nm). Finally, the field enhancement is stronger in the hematite for wavelength equal to or longer than 640 nm. The volume of hematite where the field enhancement is larger than one decreases with an increase in the film thickness.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Field enhancement in hematite near the Ti edge as a function of wavelength and film thickness. The enhancement increases with increasing wavelength because of the shift of the LSPR from the top to the bottom of the nanodisks. The enhancement decreases for increasing hematite thickness, resulting in a lower LSPR-related IPCE increase. (b) Field enhancement at the top of the Au disk. The plasmon resonance at the top of the Au/Ti structure is marked by a maximum field enhancement at 550 nm and is visible in the extinction measurements as the short wavelength shoulder accompanying the main LSPR peak.	 

 	Fig. 6  IPCE spectra of 25 nm thick hematite films functionalized with Au/Ti nanodisks (magenta circles) and 5 nm thick Ti/TiOx nanodisks (green squares). The LSPR-related efficiency increase is observed only in the Au/Ti sample. The inset shows the IPCE difference between the two samples for wavelengths between 560 and 760 nm.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
