A facile and rapid synthesis of lead sulfide colloidal quantum dots using in situ generated H 2 S as the sulfur source  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CE26976K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CE26976K
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 2532-2536Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsA facile and rapid synthesis of lead sulfide colloidal quantum dots using in situ generated H2S as the sulfur source

        
          
            Daoli 
            Zhang
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Jiaqi 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianbing 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Song 
            Zhang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Xiangshui 
            Miao
          
        
      ab
aSchool of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1037 Luoyu Road, Hongshan District, Wuhan City, Hubei Province 430074, P. R. China. E-mail: zhang_daoli@mail.hust.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 27 8754 2693;   Tel: +86 27 8754 2894
bWuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, 1037 Luoyu Road, Hongshan District, Wuhan City, Hubei Province 430074, P. R. China
Received 
      21st June 2012
    , Accepted 21st January 2013First published on 21st January 2013AbstractWe report on the synthesis of semiconductor PbS colloidal quantum dots with good size distribution through a facile and rapid approach using in situ generated H2S as the sulfur source. This novel approach is easily reproducible and less energy consuming. It also has the advantages of low-input and high-output. The growth of PbS colloidal quantum dots should be controlled in 50–60 minutes to allow the rod-like CQDs with lengths of about 25–30 nm and widths of 3–5 nm to be obtained. The dodecylamine (DDA) is speculated to play a crucial role on the morphology of the products. Ligand exchange is performed to replace the oleic acid from the surface of PbS quantum dots by butylamine, aiming to strengthen the coupling between quantum dots and solve the transmission problem of the photo-generated carriers. At last, its electrical transport performance is evaluated as the conducting layer in an infrared photodetector.
Introduction
In the last two decades, the study and development of nanomaterials has made impressive progress, particularly in the chemical synthesis of quantum dots (inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals) via the colloidal process. Colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) have attracted broad attention from researchers in various disciplines.1 These CQDs exhibit size-dependent characteristics, resulting in novel electronic, magnetic, optical, chemical, and mechanical properties that cannot be obtained in their bulk counterparts.2 Among the various CQDs, lead sulfide colloidal quantum dots have attracted considerable attention due to their narrow band gap of 0.41 eV and a large exciton Bohr radius of 18 nm.1 The narrow band gap is sensitive to infrared light and able to extend the spectral range of cells to near-infrared wavelengths, which contain as much as half of the energy of the solar spectrum. For the unique optical and electronic properties, lead sulfide colloidal quantum dots have been widely used in many different technological areas including biological labeling and diagnostics, light-emitting diodes, electroluminescent devices, photovoltaic devices, lasers, IR detectors, ion-selective sensors and single-electron transistors.2–5
The synthesis of colloidal quantum dots is not a simple task, because it requires control over the chemical composition and the purity, size, size distribution, and shape of the crystallographic phase, as well as the chemical functionality of the surfaces of quantum dots.6 There are various methods for the synthesis of PbS CQDs including gas-phase synthesis,7 solution-phase synthesis,8–11 and template synthesis.12 To date, PbS CQDs with a variety of shapes have been synthesized by the methods above such as nanorods,13 nanocubes,14 nanobelts,15 nanowires,16 nanofibers,17 nanotubes,18 and dendrites.19 The factors affect the shape of PbS CQDs include injection temperature and time, growth temperature and time, capping agents, reaction solvent and so on.
Here we report on the synthesis of PbS CQDs with good size distribution through a facile and rapid approach using in situ generated H2S as the sulfur source, which is easily reproducible and less energy consuming. H2S gas is produced by the reaction of FeS and hydrochloric acid. In addition, the as-prepared colloidal quantum dots were more stable with repeatability, and its characteristics were more sensible in response to the experimental parameters, which made it convenient to analyze the underlying mechanism of the growth process.
Experimental section
Chemicals
Lead(II) acetate trihydrate (Pb(Ac)2·3H2O), oleic acid (OA), 1-octadecene (ODE) (tech. 90%), dodecylamine (DDA), iron(II) sulfide (FeS), HCl, P2O5, n-hexane, butylamine and ethanol were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. All the chemicals were used as received.
Synthesis of PbS colloidal quantum dots
A 0.23 g portion of Pb(Ac)2·3H2O, 8 mL of ODE, 1.3 mL of DDA and 2 mL of OA was mixed in a round-bottom, three-necked flask and the mixture was heated to ~80 °C under argon and agitated for 30 min, yielding clear, yellow lead oleate stock solution. In another three-necked glass container, 0.05 g FeS and an excess of HCl reacted to produce H2S gas. In 10 minutes, under the impetus of Ar gas, H2S was passed through a test tube which was full of P2O5 for drying, reaching a three-necked flask to take part in the reaction with lead oleate. The solution changed to a brownish color immediately, suggestive of a nucleation burst. The temperature was maintained at ~80 °C for 15–60 min, which depended on the ultimate structure and dimension of PbS colloidal quantum dots. Then the solution was slowly cooled down to room temperature.
PbS CQDs were precipitated by centrifugation by injecting n-hexane and ethanol. The ratio of PbS CQDs stock solution, n-hexane and ethanol is 2:1:2. The centrifugation process is repeated for three times to clean and purify the PbS colloidal quantum dots. Then the upper clear liquid was removed and the sediments were collected, and dispersed in n-hexane for future use. The experimental setup is schematically shown in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Experimental setup for the synthesis of PbS NCs. 
Ligand exchange
The following steps were all performed in a glove box under argon. The right amount of ethanol was injected into the solution of OA-capped PbS colloidal quantum dots to precipitate the nanocrystal particles. The precipitate was redissolved in butylamine as 100 mg mL−1, enclosed in an opaque bottle for 3 days. The butylamine-exchanged QDs were precipitated with anhydrous isopropanol, dried, and redispersed in normal hexane for storage.
Fabrication of substrate with electrode
The glass substrate was first immersed in nitric acid for 3 days, then covered by silver paste on the surface. The substrate with silver was sintered at 300 °C for 10 h, allowing silver paste to deposit as one metal layer. By using laser etching, the silver deposit was partially eliminated to form an interdigitated array of electrodes on substrate. The active area of the interdigitated silver electrode consisted of a set of 20 interlocking silver fingers separated by 10–20 nm gaps and running a length of 5 mm.
Preparation of colloidal quantum dots film
A colloidal quantum dots film was simply made by spin-casting 100 mg mL−1 solution of as-synthesized colloidal quantum dots in hexane onto the silver electrodes. The spin-casting contained two consecutive stages with different spin-speed as 700 r min−1 and 2500 r min−1 respectively for the 1st and 2nd stage. The dropping of colloidal quantum dots was performed within the first stage of 10 seconds. After the second stage of 20 seconds, the film was permitted to dry for 3–5 minutes, allowing the organic solvents to evaporate. This procedure was repeated for 20 times to accomplish the film preparation.
Characterization of PbS colloidal quantum dots
Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected on a PANalytical X'Pert PRO. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were obtained on a FEI Tecnai G2 20 transmission electron microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV.

FTIR characterization. 
FTIR analysis was performed by drop-casting nanocrystals onto double-sided-polished KBr substrates. The sample adhered as a firm between two pieces of substrates at room temperature. A Bruker VERTEX 70 was used for all measurements.



I–V characterization. 
Both dark current and photocurrent were measured at room temperature by using an Autolab (model AUT84315) with automatic data acquisition. An infrared hand lamp with a power density of 1.25 mW cm−2 (λ = 1100/800 nm, switchable) and the IPCE (incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency) testing light equipped with a monochromator were used as light sources.

Results and discussion
In this approach, the Pb source was also prepared as dissolved in organic chemicals under heating, the same as the solution process. However, the prefabrication of the S source was obtained as H2S gas, by blending hydrochloric acid and iron(II) sulfide to generate it, no longer as a mixed solution. Instantly as H2S was introduced into Pb source, the PbS formed a nuclear core, and then grew bigger to become a quantum dot. The speed of the gas injection was easy to control, as was the reaction time and temperature.

Fig. 1 presents X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of PbS colloidal quantum dots, which shows sharp peaks corresponding to cubic PbS with an fcc rocksalt structure (JCPDS No. 5-592), and almost all other diffraction peaks coincide perfectly with the standard PbS peaks (the vertical straight lines). No observable impurity phases could be detected in the XRD spectra. That was a good evidence to identify the chemical composition of as-synthesized PbS nanocrystals and its high purity. The grain size of PbS nanocrystals can be obtained by the Debye–Scherrer formula,  (1) where D is the grain size along a certain crystal orientation, λ is the X-ray wavelength of 0.15408 nm, B is the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the diffraction peak, and θ is Bragg diffraction angle. In this work, the size of PbS nanocrystals was about 6 nm, consistent with the result of the following TEM analysis.
 Fig. 1  XRD pattern of PbS colloidal quantum dots. 
The TEM photos in Fig. 2 show the size, size distribution and morphology of the PbS CQDs. The particle size was generally in the range of 2–8 nm and was much smaller than the exciton Bohr radius of 18 nm. Fig. 2(a)–(c) show ensembles of as-synthesized PbS nanocrystals capped with oleic acid, displaying the excellent monodispersity and close packing without condensed aggregation. The oleic acid played the role of keeping dots separated away from each other, and rendering them soluble in organic solvents. And in specific growth conditions, some line-shaped bars emerged within the spherical particles, as shown in Fig. 2(d). These line-shaped bars were formed as spherical particles attached each other in a particular direction, due to the anisotropism of the PbS nanocrystal structure. In our investigation, the amount of the line-shaped quantum dots reached a maximum when growing for 30 min at 100 °C. In Fig. 2(e), it can be found that there were rod-like CQDs which arranged regularly among the CQDs. The rod-like CQDs had lengths of about 25–30 nm and widths of 3–5 nm. Through a series of experiments, we have concluded that when the growth time was 60 minutes, we could observe the most rod-like CQDs. After that the rod-like CQDs reduced as the growth time increased.
 Fig. 2  TEM images of the PbS nanoparticles sample (a), (b), (c) and (d) without DDA, (e) with 1.11 g DDA. 
In our reaction system, we propose a reaction mechanism as follows: ODE, as the surfactant, could mediate the reactivity of Pb(OA)2 to prevent re-coalescence of PbS particles generated. As for DDA, it played a soft template role in the reaction. DDA caused PbS particles to have a regular structure. The synthesis progress began when the H2S gas was injected. The spherical PbS CQDs started to grow after that. In about half an hour the rod-like CQDs started to synthesise under the effect of DDA. The capping ligands attracted each other to form the rod-like shapes. Over time, the ligands started to link up into a single stretch. The rod-like CQDs disappeared after 1 h since the PbS CQDs synthesized. We conjecture that the rod-like CQDs ruptured in the action of stirrer because of CQDs grew bigger and bigger. To verify the above conclusion, we prepared another PbS CQDs under the same conditions without adding DDA. Then we found that there were just spherical PbS CQDs. Also, we added half of the original dose of DDA, and still no rod-like CQDs appeared. When the molar ratio of ODE and DDA reached 1:1, the rod-like CQDs began to appear. We have reason to believe that the rod-like CQDs increase as the DDA increases.
And in the synthesis process, oleic acid acted not only as surfactant, but also as a catalyst, contributing to nanocrystals' stability and size distribution, while the other ligands couldn't do as well as it. This is why butylamine shouldn't be directly used in the synthesis step, but be applied to replace oleic acid by ligand exchange.
The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of PbS CQDs capped with oleic acid and butylamine are shown in Fig. 3, which illustrate the nature of the chemical components, particularly organic ligands, on the surface of PbS colloidal quantum dots. In Fig. 3(a), the absorption peaks in the range of 1300–1500 cm−1 and 2800–3000 cm−1 coincide with the spectrum signals for COO− and C–H, respectively, which indicates that the original PbS colloidal quantum dots were indeed capped with oleic acid. In comparison, the obviously reduced signals for COO− and C–H in Fig. 3(b) revealed the fact that some of oleic acid units had been removed from the surface of butylamine-exchanged colloidal quantum dots. In addition, the butylamine-exchanged colloidal quantum dots also feature a significant peak in the range of 3250–3500 cm−1, confirming the presence of amino groups. Of course, the oleic acid was partially replaced by butylamine which is a shorter ligand, but it is enough to make dramatic progress on charge transport.
 Fig. 3  FTIR spectra of PbS CQDs capped with oleic acid and butylamine. 

Fig. 4(a) displays the room-temperature I–V curves of oleic acid-capped PbS nanocrystal film in the dark or under illumination. Under dark conditions, the current rises along with the voltage, showing approximately linear performance. And under illumination by the infrared ray of 1100 nm wavelength, the current is clearly intensified in contrast to dark conditions, due to the increased current carriers generated by photons. However, the I–V curve is not linear enough to satisfy the demand of high-performance photodetectors. As for butylamine-exchanged PbS film in Fig. 4(b), the I–V curve is almost perfectly linear in the dark. And the curve under the same illumination is also more straight and smooth. These improvements prove the successful ligand exchange again, and this treatment indeed optimized electrical transport of PbS CQDs.
 Fig. 4  Room temperature I–V curves for oleic acid-capped (a) and butylamine-capped (b) samples in the dark (dashed) and under illumination (solid). 
But there is no obvious difference in conductivity between the two samples, because the butylamine-exchanged PbS film was thinner than the oleic acid-capped film, which counteracted the increasing of conductivity. In this test, the luminous power was 2020 nW, so we calculated the responsivity of a photodetector made of butylamine-exchanged PbS nanocrystals, and depicted it in Fig. 5. It shows a nearly linear dependence on bias, and reaches 3.5 A W−1 at 2 V bias.
 Fig. 5  Responsivity as a function of applied bias for a butylamine-exchanged PbS photodetector. 
Conclusions
In summary, we synthesized spherical PbS CQDs with excellent stability, monodispersity and purity through controlling the velocity of H2S gas. This new method offers a potential alternative for nanocrystal synthesis technology. At the same time rod-like CQDs are produced, but we still have yet to find the optimum ratio of DDA, thus we can get more rod-like CQDs. Attempting to find the optimum ratio of DDA or to change other conditions to improve the controllability of rod-like CQDs is important in our future work.
The short organic ligand (butylamine) is able to replace the long ligand (oleic acid) on the surface of PbS nanocrystals, to strengthen coupling and even prolong the lifetime of current carriers. After ligand exchange, PbS CQDs capped with butylamine could obtain improved optoelectronic characteristics than that capped with oleic acid, such as electrical transmission, which is shown in the I–V curves. These properties render a commercial value for PbS CQDs applied in future infrared photodetectors.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the funding support from the International Cooperation Fund of Wuhan City (No. 201070934333) and the Graduate Innovation Fund of Huazhong University of Science and Technology (No. HF-09-03-2011-185). We also thank the Analytical and Testing Center of Huazhong University of Science and Technology for sample characterization.
References
J. L. Machol, F. M. Wise, R. C. Patel and D. B. Tanner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 2819 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Malyarevich, V. G. Savitsky, I. A. Denisov, P. V. Prokoshin, K. V. Yumashev, E. Raaben, A. A. Zhilin and A. A. Lipovskii, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2001, 224, 253 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Infrared Phys. Technol., 2011, 54, 278–282 CAS .
G. V. Shcherbatyuk, R. H. Inman, C. Wang, R. Winston and S. Ghosh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 191901 CrossRef .
L. Raniero, C. L. Ferreira, L. R. Cruz, A. L. Pinto and R. M. P. Alves, Phys. B, 2010, 405, 1283–1286 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, C. B. Murray and S. O'Brien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3620–3637 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kaito, Y. Saito and K. Fujita, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1987, 26, L1973 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Y. Liu, M. J. Li, J. Y. Ouyang, M. B. Zaman, R. B. Wang, X. H. Wu, C.-S. Yeh, Q. Lin, B. Yang and K. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2301–2308 CAS .
M. T. Nenadovice, M. I. Comor, V. Vasic and O. I. Micic, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 6390 CrossRef .
T. Trindade, P. O. Brien, X. Zhang and M. Motevalli, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1011 RSC .
W. Z. Zhou, J. M. Thomas, D. S. Shephard, B. F. G. Johnson, D. Ozkaya, T. Maschmeyer, R. G. Bell and Q. F. Ge, Science, 1998, 280, 705 CrossRef CAS .
V. F. Puntes, K. M. Krishnan and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2001, 291, 2115 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gou and C. J. Murphy, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 231 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Liang, S. Li, S. Peng and Y. Qian, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 634 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, Y. Xie, Z. Li, X. Li and S. Gao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 654 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Sawall, R. M. Villahermosa, R. A. Lipeles and A. R. Hopkins, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1606 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Ebbesen and P. M. Ajayan, Nature, 1992, 358, 220 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, Y. Xie, R. Tang, M. Chen and X. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1887 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Experimental setup for the synthesis of PbS NCs.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  XRD pattern of PbS colloidal quantum dots.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of the PbS nanoparticles sample (a), (b), (c) and (d) without DDA, (e) with 1.11 g DDA.	 

 	Fig. 3  FTIR spectra of PbS CQDs capped with oleic acid and butylamine.	 

 	Fig. 4  Room temperature I–V curves for oleic acid-capped (a) and butylamine-capped (b) samples in the dark (dashed) and under illumination (solid).	 

 	Fig. 5  Responsivity as a function of applied bias for a butylamine-exchanged PbS photodetector.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
