Recent advances in TiO 2 -based photocatalysis  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA00941J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA00941J
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12642-12661Recent advances in TiO2-based photocatalysis

        
          
            Hua 
            Xu
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Shuxin 
            Ouyang
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Lequan 
            Liu
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Pakpoom 
            Reunchan
          
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Naoto 
            Umezawa
          
          
        
      ace and 

        
          
            Jinhua 
            Ye
          
          
        
      *abc
aTU-NIMS Joint Research Center, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Composite and Functional Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, 92 Weijin Road, Nankai District, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
bCollaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, P.R. China
cEnvironmental Remediation Materials Unit, and International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (WPI-MANA), National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: Jinhua.YE@nims.go.jp
dDepartment of Physics, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, Bangkok 10900, Thailand
ePRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), 4-1-8 Honcho Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan
Received 
      24th February 2014
    , Accepted 1st May 2014First published on 16th June 2014AbstractSemiconductor photocatalysis is a promising approach to combat both environmental pollution and the global energy shortage. Advanced TiO2-based photocatalysts with novel photoelectronic properties are benchmark materials that have been pursued for their high solar-energy conversion efficiency. In general, the photocatalytic efficiency is affected by the degree of light absorption, charge separation, and surface reactivity. Consequently, in this review we first discuss a series of interesting studies that aim to extend the light absorption of TiO2 from UV wavelengths into the visible or even the near-infrared region. We next focus on attempts to overcome the drawback that dopants usually act as charge recombination centres. We discuss the use of either selective local doping or the introduction of disorder together with doping, which aims to facilitate charge separation while preserving the visible-light response. We also show that crystal facet engineering can endow TiO2 with superior physicochemical properties, thus yielding high surface reactivity in photocatalytic reactions. Finally, we examine the recent theoretical advances of TiO2-based photocatalysis.Hua XuHua Xu was awarded a PhD in Chemistry from Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan in 2013, under the guidance of Prof. Jinhua Ye. After graduation, she worked as a lecturer in the TU-NIMS Joint Research Center, School of Material Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China. Her research interests are synthesis and characterization of novel TiO2-based photocatalysts for application in solar-to-energy conversion.Shuxin OuyangShuxin Ouyang received his BSc degree from the Nanjing University in 2004 and his PhD degree in Materials Science from Nanjing University in 2009 under the supervision of Prof. Zhigang Zou and Prof. Jinhua Ye. Since 2009, he worked in Prof. Ye's group as a postdoctoral fellow at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan. From 2014, he joined the TU-NIMS Joint Research Center of Tianjin University, China, and was appointed as an Associate Professor. He is interested in developing and fabricating new photocatalysts, electronic structures of semiconductor photocatalysts, and surface/interface engineering of photocatalysts.Lequan LiuLequan Liu received his PhD degree in 2011 from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences under the supervision of Prof. Youquan Deng. In the same year, he moved to NIMS (Japan) as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Jinhua Ye's group. His research interests involve noble metal catalysis and developing metal@semiconductor composite materials for artificial photosynthesis.Pakpoom ReunchanPakpoom Reunchan has received his PhD from Suranaree University of Technology (SUT), Thailand under the supervision of Prof. Sukit Limpijumnong in 2009. After working at the Asia Pacific center for Theoretical Physics (APCTP) in Korea and NIMS in Japan as a postdoctoral fellow during 2009–2012, he has joined the Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, Thailand. His background is electronic structure calculations of real materials, focusing on defects in semiconductors. His current research interests are computational design of highly active photocatalysts based on doping schemes and hydrogen storage materials.Naoto UmezawaNaoto Umezawa completed the doctoral course in the Department of Physics, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Science, and was employed as a Postdoctoral Scientist at the University of Southern California in 2003. He joined NIMS as a Special Researcher in 2004 and was appointed to his present position as a Senior Researcher at NIMS in 2008. In 2007, he was a Visiting Scientist at the University of California at Santa Barbara. He also received the 29th Japan Society of Applied Physics Best Original Paper Award in 2007. His research field is materials design using first-principles calculation.Jinhua YeJinhua Ye received her PhD from the University of Tokyo in 1990, and joined the National Research Institute for Metals (former organization of NIMS) in 1991. She is now the director of the Environmental Remediation Materials Unit, and a Principle Investigator at the International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), NIMS. She is also an appointed director of the TU-NIMS Joint Research Center, and a Professor of Materials Science at Tianjin University, China, since 2011. Her current research interests focus on the research and development of photo-functional materials and their applications in the fields of environment remediation and new energy production.
1. Introduction
Photocatalysis is a promising, environmentally friendly technology for the conversion of solar energy into chemical energy.1–4 Potential applications include photodegradation of hazardous substances,5,6 photocatalytic water splitting,7–10 artificial photosynthesis,11–13 photo-induced super-hydrophilicity,14 and photoelectrochemical conversion.15 To date, a wide variety of semiconductors have been investigated as photocatalysts in addition to traditional materials such as TiO2,16–21 WO3,22–24 CdS,24–26 and SrTiO3.27,28 Novel photocatalysts are still being discovered; recent reports include Ag3PO4,29,30 C3N4,31–33 and metal–organic framework (MOF) based materials.34–36 However, TiO2 remains the most popular material and can be considered as a benchmark in the field of photocatalysis.37–39 The many advantages of TiO2 include high photoreactivity, good stability with time, low cost, and environmentally friendly nature. In Japan, TiO2 has been used in air purifiers and self-cleaning windows since the late 1990s.40–43 More commonly, TiO2 has been used as a white pigment from ancient times, and thus its safety for both humans and the environment is guaranteed by history.44
The evolution of TiO2-based photocatalysis can be traced back to the early 1930s. In 1938, Doodeve et al. reported that active oxygen species produced on the TiO2 surface can bleach dyes under UV light irradiation; TiO2 was referred to as a “photosensitizer” in that publication.45 The first researchers to use the terminology “photocatalyst” with respect to TiO2 might be Kato and Mashio in 1956, whose report is entitled “Autooxidation by TiO2 as a photocatalyst”.44 In their experiments, the autooxidation of organic solvents and the simultaneous formation of H2O2 were observed under the irradiation of a Hg lamp. In 1972, Fujishima and Honda reported the landmark discovery of water photolysis on a TiO2 electrode,37 which aroused much attention towards TiO2-based photocatalysis. As shown in Fig. 1, the number of publications related to this topic steadily increased in the 1970s and 1980s, then grew exponentially since 1990s till now, indicating that TiO2 is really a hot subject in the field of photocatalysis. It is also interesting to point out that studies based on TiO2 have become more intensive over the last ten years.
 Fig. 1  Annual number of publications (Science Citation Index Expanded) in Web of Science when a search for the topic “titanium dioxide or titania or TiO2” and “photo*” is performed. 
The main topic of investigation has become concentrated on how to improve the solar energy conversion efficiency to meet engineering requirements. In general, a photocatalytic reaction consists of three steps as shown in Fig. 2. First, photoexcitation generates electrons (e−) and holes (h+). Next, the electrons and holes migrate to the TiO2 surface. Finally, the electrons and holes react with adsorbed electron acceptors and donors, respectively, to complete the photocatalytic reaction.4 Accordingly, much effort is currently focused on how to improve the light absorption, charge separation, and surface reactivity of TiO2 in order to achieve outstanding photocatalytic performance.46–50
 Fig. 2  Schematic picture of the TiO2 photocatalytic reaction process. 
Both spatial structuring of TiO2 to increase the effective path length of incident light51 and band structure engineering to enhance the optical response in the UV to visible light range17,52 can induce TiO2 to absorb more photons. Attempts have been made to apply both physical concepts and spatial structuring to TiO2, such as utilizing the slow-light effect in periodic TiO2 photonic crystals,53 the multi-reflection effect in semi-hollow TiO2 spheres,54 and Mie's scattering effect in TiO2 spheres of particular size;55 all of these interesting studies revealed that well-designed nanostructures can trap photons and force them to propagate more effectively through TiO2, thus resulting in more efficient light absorption. A limitation of TiO2 is its 3.2 eV bandgap, which allows only UV light to be absorbed (λ < 387 nm, accounting for 5% of the solar spectrum). To harvest visible light (43% of the solar spectrum) for better solar energy conversion, it has been reported that either the inter-particle electronic coupling of TiO2 nanocrystals56 or localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) photosensitization57 can be utilized. Chemical doping is also an effective method to enable visible light photocatalytic performance, by narrowing the bandgap of TiO2. The prerequisite is that the integrity of the TiO2 crystal structure should be maintained when pursuing the favourable modulations in the electronic structure.58,59 Generally, the metal dopants (Cr,60 Mn,61 Fe,62 Ni,63 Cu,64etc.) substitute the Ti atoms and their states can mix with the conduction band or valence band, and in some cases can insert a new band into the original bandgap of TiO2; while the non-metal dopants (C,65 N,17,66 F,67,68 S,69 Cl,70etc.) are introduced onto the O sites to mostly modulate the valence band of TiO2.
After excitation by light, the photo-generated electrons and holes migrate to the surface. For TiO2 electrodes, the existing electric field in the depletion region facilitates charge separation, hence this depletion region contributes most of the electrons and holes that are available for the photocatalytic reaction. However, doping can directly increase the carrier density and result in a narrower depletion region, which greatly hinders the electron–hole separation process.71–74 In addition, surface dopants generally act as charge recombination centres.75 These drawbacks greatly limit the practical use of doped TiO2. Conversely, the selective doping of an inner region of a TiO2 sample while keeping the outer region pure is a strategy that not only enables visible-light harvesting but also preserves a wide depletion region for efficient charge transfer, offering a promising and general way to enhance the photocatalytic efficiency.76,77 Furthermore, disorder can be introduced on the surface layer of nanophase TiO2 powder to obtain “black TiO2”, an approach that is different from conventional doping. The stable lower-energy mid-gap states that result from the surface disorder can localize both photo-excited electrons and holes and thus avoid fast recombination.20 Therefore, appropriate modification is necessary to further fine-tune the local electronic structure of doped TiO2 and achieve better charge separation.
Surface chemistry plays an important role in photocatalytic reactions because a variety of physical and chemical processes (e.g., adsorption of reactant molecules, surface transfer of photoexcited electrons to reactant molecules, and desorption of product molecules) take place on the surface.19,78,79 The type of atomic arrangement and coordination on a surface influences the surface energy and reactivity. In general, the presence of more under-coordinated atoms on the surface will yield a higher surface energy; however, a higher surface energy does not directly imply superior surface reactivity.80 The surface reactivity is determined by both the surface atomic structure and electronic structure. Much effort has been applied to the growth of TiO2 single crystals with highly active surfaces exposed (e.g. the {100},81,82 {001},83,84 and {111} facets85); these studies have shown that the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 differs with the type of facet exposed.78 The surface adsorption/desorption ability and the redox potential of the charge carriers are influenced by the percentage of each facet exposed,82 the surface area,84 the coordination of surface atoms,85 the concentration of surface oxygen vacancies,30 and the facet-dependent electronic band structure.80,86 All of these factors should be analysed together in facet engineering studies.78,87
In this article, we aim to bring the reader up to date regarding recent progress in TiO2-based photocatalysis. Firstly, we introduce methods that have been adopted to enhance the light absorption of TiO2, such as applying a physical concept (Mie's scattering) to TiO2 spheres to reinforce the intrinsic optical absorption, utilizing electronic coupling in assemblies of TiO2 nanocrystals to achieve a visible-light-response, and the use of LSPR-based Au-photosensitization for visible/near-infrared light harvesting. Then, approaches for obtaining better charge separation and overcoming the shortcomings of doping will be reviewed, such as selectively doping the inner layers of TiO2 films, constructing p–n junctions in bulk TiO2, and introducing surface disorder for better localization of photoexcited charge carriers. Thirdly, a systematic investigation of facet engineering in TiO2 will be discussed. Finally, we focus on related theoretical studies that aim to provide a comprehensive understanding of TiO2-based photocatalysis. This article provides a survey of recent advances in TiO2 photocatalysis, and discusses effective solutions to the challenges in this field.
2. Light harvesting: from UV to visible to near-infrared light
The first step in photocatalysis is photoexcitation, thus highly efficient light harvesting is an important goal. To date, remarkable progress has been made to improve the absorption of light in TiO2 materials, not only in the intrinsic absorption region of TiO2, but also to extend the spectral range into the visible/near infrared region. Light absorption can be improved by applying physical concepts to spatially nanostructured TiO2 to increase the effective optical path length through the material. Doping TiO2 with other elements, which introduce impurity levels between the conduction band and valence band, is a general method to extend the optical sensitivity to the visible light region. Alternatively, making use of electronic coupling between two TiO2 nanocrystals in close proximity, in order to engineer the electronic band structure and obtain a self-narrowed bandgap without changing the chemical composition, is also a promising route towards enhanced solar energy utilization. Another versatile method of extending the optical response of TiO2 to the visible or even the near-infrared region is to utilize photosensitization.
2.1 Physical concepts applied to spatially structured TiO2
When a TiO2 photocatalyst is illuminated, light can be absorbed, reflected, or scattered. We assume that only the absorbed photons can generate electrons and holes. Nevertheless, it is obvious that the path length of the incident light varies with different TiO2 nano-architectures. If physical concepts such as the slow-light effect22,88,89 or Mie's scattering effect90–92 are applied to TiO2 with optimized spatial structuring, the light can be forced or guided to reflect/scatter many times as it passes through the material; in this case, the effective optical path length is greatly increased, which offers more opportunities for photons to be absorbed by TiO2 and ensures more efficient light harvesting in the photocatalytic reaction.
The slow-light effect in TiO2 photonic crystals is a well-studied phenomenon that can lead to higher light absorption for photocatalysis.51 In photonic crystals, the unique periodic dielectric structure can give rise to multiple diffraction and reflection and trap light inside the material;53,89,93,94 this is similar to the way in which electron motion is affected by the periodic potential of semiconductor crystals. In the same way as a semiconductor crystal possesses an electronic bandgap, a photonic bandgap can be defined in a photonic crystal.95 Bragg diffraction can prevent light with energy close to the photonic bandgap from propagating in a particular crystallographic direction. Therefore, light propagates through the material with a strongly reduced group velocity, leading to the delay and storage of light inside the photonic crystal, the so-called slow-light effect.96 When the wavelength of the slow photons overlaps with the absorption regime of TiO2 (λ < 387 nm), light absorption will be strongly promoted.97 Bragg's equation implies that the slow-light wavelength can be tuned by controlling the pore size of the photonic crystal.10,63,93 Experimentally, Ozin et al. fabricated TiO2 inverse opal photonic crystals with various pore sizes to obtain photonic bandgaps centred at 280, 300, 325, 345, 370, 430, and 500 nm. When testing the photocatalytic properties via the photooxidation of adsorbed MB, it was demonstrated that more efficient photodegradation was achieved when the energy of the slow photons was close to the electronic bandgap of TiO2.53
Nevertheless, it is worth noting that although the slow-light effect results from the periodicity of the photonic crystal structure, any disorder might break the integrity of the structure and lead to deterioration of the optical response.98 To date, photonic crystals have mainly been fabricated in the form of films rather than powders, because crushing or grinding the material will destroy the periodicity of the structure. Thus, most applications of photonic crystals are limited to the photodegradation of hazardous substances53,93,98 or to photoelectrochemical conversion.22 To solve this problem, we have recently applied another physical concept, “Mie's scattering”, to TiO2 spheres in order to enhance the light utilization efficiency in photocatalytic water splitting.55
Mie's scattering is an optical phenomenon that occurs when the size of the spheres is comparable to the wavelength of the incident light. The light is strongly scattered in the forward direction, producing a pattern like an antenna lobe, with a sharper and more intense forward lobe (Fig. 3a).90 Therefore, the path length of the incident light between neighbouring spheres is increased, leading to greater light utilization efficiency.99 Theoretically, for an incident light wavelength λ, the scattering of a system that consists of dispersed spherical particles can be fully described by the radius of the spheres r and the complex refractive index m. The complex Mie coefficients an and bn can be obtained from the complex Bessel–Riccatti functions ψ and ζ as follows:91,92 (1) (2) (3)here the size parameter x is given by x = 2πr/λ, and QSca is the Mie coefficient. Therefore, the light scattering efficiency is largely dependent on the size of the scattering spheres and the wavelength of the incident light.91,92
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of Mie's scattering. (b) Scattering resonance spectra of TiO2 suspensions with various particle sizes. (c) Photocatalytic evolution of H2 using TiO2 sphere samples. TiO2 spheres with diameters of 330, 380, 450, 600, and 750 nm are denoted as T330, T380, T450, T600, and T750, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55 (copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
In our study, TiO2 spheres with various diameters in the range 330–750 nm were fabricated in a controlled fashion to investigate the relationship between size and scattering properties. As shown in Fig. 3b, the positions of the scattering resonant peaks, which indicate highly efficient scattering in different wavelength regimes, were largely dependent on the size of the TiO2 spheres. Resonant peaks were observed at 366, 400, and 440 nm for the T380, T450, and T600 samples, respectively. The bandgap of TiO2 is 3.2 eV, and thus the excitation of carriers can only be achieved by light with wavelengths smaller than 387 nm. Light is first scattered, then transferred to and absorbed by neighbouring TiO2 spheres. The path length of the incident light is thus increased, resulting in higher light utilization efficiency for the 380 nm spheres. However, the effect of scattering for the 450 and 600 nm spheres is beyond the light absorption region of TiO2, and thus is limited to the promotion of light harvesting.55 Accordingly, the T380 sample exhibited significant photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution that was approximately 5 and 3 times higher than that of the T450 and T600 samples, respectively (Fig. 3c).55 Our study thus demonstrated that Mie's scattering can be adopted for the light absorption region of TiO2via morphological modulation to improve light harvesting, which results in excellent photocatalytic performance for H2 evolution. Mie's scattering is a common natural phenomenon; for example, it is the reason why clouds look white because in the atmosphere, dust particles with various sizes can scatter all wavelengths of visible light. This study provides a promising and general way to effectively enhance light absorption in other semiconductor photocatalysts, simply by optimizing the diameters of the spheres and inducing Mie's scattering in their intrinsic light absorption regions.
2.2 Electronic coupling
The large bandgap of TiO2 limits its absorption to UV light only, although visible light (400–700 nm) accounts for a much larger proportion (43%) of the solar spectrum. Electronic coupling, which is a general phenomenon in assemblies of TiO2 nanocrystals, allows the bandgap to be narrowed and enables visible light absorption. In assemblies of nanoparticles, inter-particle coupling of the surface electrons (excitons), plasmons or magnetic moments may endow the particles with novel properties.100,101 Exciton energy transfer and electronic coupling are the main types of interactions that have been considered in such assemblies, but they occur under different conditions in practical applications. Previous studies have revealed that when CdTe nanoparticles are separated by distances between 2 and 10 nm, long-range dipole–dipole interactions play an important role in inducing resonance energy transfer.102 However, if the inter-particle separation is less than 2 nm, the wave functions of adjacent nanoparticles overlap; such electronic coupling results in a substantial alteration of the electronic structure and the observation of a red-shifted light absorption band and a photoluminescence emission band.103 As shown in Fig. 4a, when a pair of nanoparticles is electronically coupled, bonding and anti-bonding levels are formed, resulting in a modified electronic structure.56,104
 Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of the electronic bond formed between two atoms and two nanocrystals. (b) High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of individual TiO2 nanocrystals (NCs). (c) UV-visible absorption spectra, photographs, and the converted spectra as a function of photon energy based on the Butler equation (inset) of colloidal TiO2 nanoparticles, assembled TiO2 NCs, and crushed NC powder. (d) Comparison of XPS spectra between assembled TiO2 NCs and crushed NC powder. (e) Photocatalytic decomposition of IPA under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 4 (copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh) and ref. 56. 
We performed a study on the effect of Ti–Ti electronic bonding in an assembly of anatase TiO2 nanoparticles with an average size of 5 nm (Fig. 4b). The as-prepared sample of assembled nanoparticles had a bright yellow colour (inset of Fig. 4c) and a much narrower bandgap than bulk TiO2, allowing the absorption of visible light up to 500 nm (Fig. 4c). However, when the sample was mechanically crushed to form powder, the colour returned to white because the interactions between neighbouring nanoparticles were eliminated. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) offered powerful evidence for the presence of such interactions; as shown in Fig. 4d, compared to the crushed sample, the Ti 2p peaks in the TiO2 assembly sample were shifted to higher binding energy, indicating that interfacial Ti–Ti electronic bonding between the assembled TiO2 nanocrystals was indeed present.56 Most significantly, as shown in Fig. 4e, the assembled TiO2 nanocrystals exhibited considerable activity in the visible light (λ > 420 nm, 300 W Xe lamp with a 440 nm cut-off filter) region for the decomposition of isopropyl alcohol (IPA), whereas the crushed powder sample was inactive; this implies that the bandgap narrowing induced by the TiO2 assembly can indeed enhance solar energy utilization. This finding opens up a new way to narrow the bandgaps of semiconductor photocatalysts via electronic coupling in nanoparticle assemblies.
2.3 Localized surface plasmon resonance photosensitization
The utilization of LSPR based photosensitization enables TiO2 to absorb visible or even near-infrared light.105,106 For plasmonic metals (such as Au,107–112 Ag,113–118 Pt,119–122 Cu,123–125 and Pd126–129), resonant collective oscillation of the valence electrons occurs when the frequency of the incident photons matches with the natural frequency of surface electrons that oscillate against the restoring force of the positive nuclei, thus exhibiting their characteristic plasmon absorption bands.130 In general, the frequency of the surface plasmon absorption band strongly depends on their component, size, shape, and surrounding medium.107,131 Au,107 Ag,113 Pt,120 and Cu125 particles exhibit the LSPR excitation in the visible light region,132 when combined with TiO2, they can act as photosensitizers for the excitation of TiO2 under visible light irradiation via transferring electrons from photoexcited metals to TiO2,108,133 and/or supplying additional energy caused by the LSPR-induced electromagnetic fields for the photoexcitation of TiO2.121,122 However, the reactivity and fast oxidation of Cu under ambient conditions usually limited the study of Cu plasmons,134 and thus most of the LSPR based TiO2 were focused on the noble metal because of the relative chemical inertness.107,113,130 Silva et al. reported that Au nanoparticles supported on P25 (Au/TiO2), which exhibited a surface plasmon band with λmax ≈ 550 nm, can produce 0.1 mL h−1 H2 under 532 nm laser irradiation.135 In that work, it was assumed that the photoexcited Au injects its electrons into the conduction band of TiO2 to reduce H2O to H2, while the holes that remain on Au quench the sacrificial electron donor to complete the entire water splitting process.135 Zhai et al. revealed that Pt/TiO2 films exhibited high selectivity and relatively long-term stability for selective oxidation of aromatic alcohols to aldehydes under visible light irradiation because of the LSPR effect of Pt.122 In Zheng et al.'s study, plasmonic composites M@TiO2 (M = Au, Ag, Pt) with LSPR excitation of the visible-light-response were systematically investigated. Au@TiO2 and Ag@TiO2 exhibited the LSPR peaks around 540 and 451 nm, respectively, while no obvious LSPR peak but a wide absorption band can be probed for Pt@TiO2.105,136 When evaluating their photocatalytic properties for oxidation of benzene to phenol under visible light (λ > 400 nm), Au@TiO2 exhibited the highest yield in selective organic transformation.136 However, those above-mentioned studies have mainly been limited to reactions under visible light. The question of how to achieve photocatalytic activity in the near-infrared region, which accounts for a larger proportion of solar energy, is still a big challenge.137,138
To achieve more visible or near-infrared light, we should tune the LSPR modes of those plamonic metals to the longer wavelength region via size or shape control.105 With the increase of the particle size for a certain metal, the LSPR peak will be red-shifted due to the electromagnetic retardation in larger particles.105 For instance, the LSPR extinction peak of Pt spheres gradually shifted from 248 to 494 nm when the diameter of Pt increased from 29 nm to 107 nm.120 Shape control is another effective method to tune the LSPR band position. The LSPR mode of Pd nanoparticles (<10 nm in size) was reported in the UV region, however, both Pd nanoplates126 and nanocubes127 can exhibit the LSPR peak in the visible region; more interestingly, the LSPR locations were tuned from 410 to 520 nm when the nanocubes were cavitated into nanoboxes,127 and the discrete dipole approximation (DDA) calculations even indicate that this location can be further red-shifted to 870 nm for the Pd nanocage with an edge length of 48 nm and a wall thickness of 3 nm.127 In addition, in contrast to spherical Au particles, which only exhibit a transversal plasma at ∼520 nm, the plasmon resonance absorption of Au nanorods splits into two modes, which correspond to the oscillation of free electrons parallel (referred to as the longitudinal plasma) and perpendicular (referred to as the transversal plasma) to the long axis of the rods.139 When the length-to-width ratio of the rod increases, the LSPR mode parallel to the long axis can be red-shifted to the near-infrared light region in addition to the increased oscillator strength.105,129
Accordingly, we carried out a study to demonstrate that the use of Au nanorods instead of spherical Au particles enables the absorption of photosensitized TiO2 to be shifted to the longer visible/near-infrared region.57 As shown in Fig. 5a, well dispersed Au nanorods (bright contrast) can be discerned in high angle annular dark field (HAADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) images of the composite material; HRTEM images revealed that the Au nanorods and TiO2 nanoparticles are in close contact with each other (Fig. 5b), which facilitates electron/energy transfer between them. Most importantly, besides the transversal plasma located at ∼520 nm, the longitudinal mode strongly depends on the aspect ratio (defined as length divided by width) of the nanorods due to the difference in charge accumulation parallel and perpendicular to the rod axis. The restoring force is proportional to this charge accumulation, and thus smaller forces and consequently smaller resonance frequencies are required to excite the longitudinal plasmon resonance. Tuning the aspect ratio of the Au nanorods allowed samples with longitudinal plasma resonances centred at 630, 660, 710, 760, and 810 nm to be prepared (Fig. 5c). The photocatalytic oxidation of IPA served as a model reaction to evaluate the wavelength dependence on the photocatalytic activity of Au-sensitized TiO2 for two different types of broadband light irradiation: (I) visible light covering the transversal plasmon resonance of the Au nanorods only (400 < λ < 650 nm), and (II) visible light covering both the transversal and longitudinal plasmon resonances of the Au nanorods (400 < λ < 820 or 910 nm). As shown in Fig. 5d, both the production of acetone and CO2 were much higher under broadband II irradiation than under broadband I irradiation, indicating that IPA photo-oxidation can be driven by the longitudinal plasma of Au nanorods. This greatly extends the light harvesting region from ∼520 nm for spherical Au particles to ∼810 nm for Au nanorods.57
 Fig. 5  (a) HAADF-STEM images and (b) HRTEM image of a Au nanorod/TiO2 photocatalyst. (c) UV/visible absorption spectra of Au nanorod/TiO2 photocatalysts. (d) Time dependence of acetone (solid symbols) and CO2 (open symbols) evolution in the photocatalytic oxidation of IPA using the Au nanorod/TiO2 photocatalyst with a longitudinal band centred at 660 nm under irradiation with broadband light I (circles) and II (squares). Reproduced with permission from ref. 57 (copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh). 
3. Better charge separation
After photoexcitation, the generated electrons and holes migrate to the TiO2 surface; a better charge separation efficiency is hence favourable for photocatalytic reactions. Doping can narrow the bandgap of TiO2 to allow visible light harvesting. However, the undesirable charge recombination that occurs frequently at the dopant sites severely degrades the photocatalytic performance. For TiO2 photoelectrodes, doping can increase the electronic conductivity and one may thus expect it to enhance the photoelectrochemical properties. Conversely, a large number of studies have revealed that the monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) decreases in the intrinsic light absorption region of TiO2 after doping, because significant charge recombination occurs in the depletion region of doped TiO2.75–77 However, the latest reports in this area have demonstrated that selective doping of inner layers of the TiO2 electrode can greatly enhance the photocurrent by effectively suppressing the charge recombination. In addition, particular dopants (Cr–TiO2) can convert n-type TiO2 into p-type. Here, the inner layer of the electrode is locally doped (p-Cr–TiO2) while maintaining pure n-TiO2 in the outer layer; this allows a p–n junction to be precisely formed for better charge transfer in the TiO2 electrode, enabling better charge separation for photoelectrochemical solar water splitting. In powder samples, introducing disorder on the surface layers of nanophase TiO2 through hydrogenation might create stable mid-gap electronic states, thus localizing both the photoexcited electrons and holes and preventing fast recombination.
3.1 Local doping in TiO2 photoelectrodes
When a TiO2 electrode is immersed in aqueous solution, the energy bands close to the surface are bent (this is known as the depletion region) whereas the energy bands of the inner part remain flat (this is known as the neutral region). Accordingly, the TiO2 electrode is divided into an “inner layer” (the neutral region) and an “outer layer” (the depletion region and the surface), as shown in Fig. 6a.140,141 Under solar light illumination, the depletion region can absorb more light and generate more electron–hole pairs than the inner neutral region, and the electric field that exists in the depletion region can enhance the charge separation efficiency. Therefore, it is generally assumed that the depletion region (several tens of nm in thickness) contributes most of the available electrons and holes for photocatalytic reactions.142 To date, most studies have been performed on uniformly doped TiO2 electrodes, in which the dopants were homogeneously distributed over both the neutral and depletion region of TiO2. Doping can increase the carrier density directly and thus result in a narrower depletion region,143,144 which greatly degrades the electron–hole separation ability and causes electron–hole recombination at the dopant sites, accompanied by decreased IPCE.71,145
 Fig. 6  (a) Band structure of a TiO2 photoelectrode interacting with the electrolyte. (b) STEM image (dark field) and atomic ratio of N/Ti at different locations (inset) of the inner layer of a N-doped TiO2 thin film. (c) I–V curves and (d) IPCEs of pure TiO2, uniformly N-doped TiO2, outer-layer N-doped TiO2, and inner-layer N-doped TiO2 electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 76. 
To solve these problems, considering that doping in the outer layer has a negative effect on the electron–hole separation, we selectively doped nitrogen (N) on the inner layer of a TiO2 film using pulsed laser deposition (PLD) in a N2 atmosphere.76 As presented in Fig. 6b, the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) spectra of the TiO2 electrode (total thickness ∼200 nm) revealed that N was selectively doped in the inner layer of the TiO2 film (thickness ∼120 nm), and that N was absent in the outer region of the film (∼80 nm). For such inner-doped TiO2 electrodes, N-doping can improve both the carrier density and electronic conductivity in the neutral region, whereas a wide depletion region is maintained in the outer non-doped layer. In this case, the inner N-doped TiO2 electrode exhibited an excellent photocurrent density (400 μA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) under 100 mW cm−2 solar simulator illumination), much higher than those of pure TiO2, outer N-doped TiO2, and uniformly N-doped TiO2 electrodes (Fig. 6c). An IPCE measurement further confirmed that the inner N-doped TiO2 electrode exhibited a much higher IPCE than that of pure TiO2, outer and uniformly N-doped TiO2 electrodes in the light region with λ < 400 nm. Under monochromatic light irradiation (centred at 320 nm), an IPCE of as much as 95% was achieved for the inner N-doped TiO2 electrode (Fig. 6d). This study suggests that the effects of doping in different regions of TiO2 electrodes should be analysed more carefully in practical photoelectrochemical tests.76
In contrast to pure and N-doped TiO2, which are n-type semiconductors and hence only suitable as the anodes for oxidization reactions, Cr-doped TiO2 is a p-type semiconductor and was fabricated as a cathode for photo-reduction in our group.77 We fabricated Cr-doped TiO2 thin films at a relatively low substrate temperature of 550 °C by PLD.77 Two peaks observed in the XPS spectra at 586.1 eV and 576.3 eV were assigned to the 2p1/2 and 2p3/2 binding energies of Cr ions, respectively (Fig. 7a); the O 1s peak was observed at 529.3 eV (inset of Fig. 7a). These spectra confirmed that the TiO2 films were doped with Cr4+. The photocathodic I–V curves indicated that Cr-doped TiO2 is a p-type semiconductor (Fig. 7b). More significantly, by selectively doping Cr in the inner layer of the TiO2 film, the photocurrent density was increased to a relatively high value of −69.4 μA cm−2, much larger than in uniformly Cr-doped TiO2 (−13.2 μA cm−2) at −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl. In contrast to the single depletion region that exists in uniformly Cr-doped TiO2 electrodes (Fig. 7c), two depletion regions (depletion region I at the p-type Cr-doped TiO2–n-type TiO2 interface and depletion region II at the n-type TiO2–electrolyte interface) were observed for the inner Cr-doped TiO2 photoelectrode. Depletion region I can drive the transfer of electrons to the electrode surface, which has a positive effect on the p-cathode; however, the presence of depletion region II might hinder this electron transfer. To overcome this negative effect, we deposited Pt nanoparticles on the surface of the TiO2 electrode in order to construct a TiO2/Pt interface instead of the TiO2/electrolyte interface (Fig. 7c). Electrons can move to the Pt nanoparticles more easily because they do not have to overcome the high barrier associated with the TiO2/electrolyte interface. After Pt loading, both the photocurrent density and the onset potential were significantly enhanced (Fig. 7b).77
 Fig. 7  (a) XPS spectrum showing Cr 2p and O 1s (inset) peaks for uniformly Cr-doped TiO2. (b) I–V curves of the as-prepared Cr-doped TiO2 thin films. (c) Band structures of films of uniformly Cr-doped TiO2 (left), inner Cr-doped TiO2 (center), and inner Cr-doped TiO2 with Pt loading. Reproduced from ref. 77. 
3.2 Surface disorder in TiO2 powders
An alternative approach to conventional impurity doping, which generates discrete donor or acceptor states near the conduction band or valence band edge of a semiconductor, is the introduction of a large degree of lattice disorder, which might yield stable mid-gap states. Such mid-gap states (also known as band-tail states) can form a continuum extending to and overlapping with the conduction/valence band edge (Fig. 8a). This can not only narrow the bandgap of TiO2 but also localize the photoexcited charge carriers and prevent fast charge recombination.20,146–149
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure and electronic density of states (DOS) of a semiconductor nanocrystal with surface disorder. (b) HRTEM image of the TiO2 nanocrystal. (c) HRTEM image of the TiO2 nanocrystal after hydrogenation (the interface between the crystalline core and the disordered outer layer is outlined by the dashed curve). (d) Absorption spectra and photographs (inset) of the TiO2 nanocrystals before and after hydrogenation. (e) Valence-band XPS spectra of the white and black TiO2 nanocrystals. (f) Decomposition of the total DOS of surface-disordered black TiO2 nanocrystals into partial DOS of the Ti, O, and H orbitals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20 (copyright 2011 American Association for the Advancement of Science). 
Recently, Chen et al. reported that introducing disorder on the surface layer of nanophase TiO2 through hydrogenation (resulting in a sample referred to as “black TiO2”) can create stable mid-gap states close to the valence band of TiO2.20 Experimentally, TiO2 nanocrystals were hydrogenated in a 20.0 bar H2 atmosphere at 200 °C for 5 days to obtain the surface-disordered TiO2 sample. HRTEM images showed that the pure TiO2 nanocrystals were highly crystalline (Fig. 8b), whereas after hydrogenation, a crystalline core and a highly disordered surface layer (∼1 nm in thickness) could be distinguished when the hydrogen dopant was introduced (Fig. 8c). The onset of optical absorption was drastically shifted from the UV region to the near-infrared (∼1200 nm) after hydrogenation (Fig. 8d), accompanied by a colour change from white to black (inset of Fig. 8d). The abrupt change in the absorbance spectra that occurred at ∼800 nm suggests that the bandgap of black TiO2 was substantially narrowed by intraband transitions.20 Valence band XPS spectra (Fig. 8e) showed that in comparison with the white TiO2 sample, for which the valence band edge was at 1.26 eV, black TiO2 exhibited a valence band edge that was shifted towards the vacuum level at −0.92 eV, which accounts for the onset of optical absorption at ∼1200 nm. Calculations based on first-principles density functional theory (DFT) confirmed that the disorder-induced mid-gap states formed by hybridization of the O 2p orbitals and Ti 3d orbitals can indeed up-shift the valence band edge of TiO2 (Fig. 8f); the hydrogen dopant stabilizes the lattice disorder by passivating dangling bonds on the surface. Most importantly, because the mid-gap states are derived from the hybridization of O 2p and Ti 3d orbitals, an optical transition between these mid-gap states and the conduction band tail would produce charge transfer from O 2p states to Ti 3d states, similar to the transition from the valence band to the conduction band in bulk TiO2. This localization of both photoexcited electrons and holes can prevent the occurrence of fast recombination, which overcomes the drawback that dopants usually act as charge recombination centres in photocatalytic reactions. In photocatalytic H2 evolution, black TiO2 produced ∼0.1 mmol h−1 g−1 H2 under visible/infrared light irradiation, indicating that the mid-gap states resulting from surface disorder indeed narrow the bandgap of TiO2.20 This disorder engineering not only enables visible/infrared light harvesting, but also improves the charge separation in photocatalytic reactions, and thus can be considered as a feasible strategy for both environmental and energy applications.
4. Optimized surface reactivity
Because photocatalytic redox reactions take place on the surface, the surface reactivity of TiO2 has a strong influence on the photocatalytic activity.78 To determine the surface reactivity, not only the surface atomic structure (the density of under-coordinated Ti atoms), but also the surface electronic structure (the redox potential of the photoexcited charge carriers) should be considered. Furthermore, special attention should be paid on the distribution of charge carriers (e−–h+) on the specified facet, which will affect the charge separation efficiency.
4.1 Surface chemistry of TiO2 single crystals
It is of great importance to study the surface chemistry of TiO2. In general, surfaces with high surface energy disappear rapidly during the crystal growth process in order to minimize the total surface energy. According to the Wulff construction and the calculated surface energy, under equilibrium conditions anatase TiO2 adopts a slightly truncated tetragonal bipyramidal shape with 94% of the surface area accounted for by {101} surfaces and the remainder by {001} surfaces (Fig. 9a-I); no {100} surfaces will appear despite its calculated surface energy (0.53 J m−2) lying between those of the {101} (0.44 J m−2) and {001} surfaces (0.90 J m−2).78
Nevertheless, the introduction of appropriate surface adsorbates can substantially lower the energy of the anatase {001} surface and selectively control the growth rates of related crystal planes.78 Yang et al. calculated the energies of each surface when terminated with 12 different non-metallic atoms;17 it was revealed that fluorine (F) termination can most effectively lower the energies of both the {001} and {101} surfaces, leading to crystals with dominant {001} surfaces. Experimental results subsequently verified this theoretical predication; anatase TiO2 single crystals with 47% active {001} facets were grown using HF as a crystallographic controlling reagent.19 This significant finding indicates that the selective adsorption of ions on high-energy surfaces can induce TiO2 crystals to grow preferentially along a desired crystallographic direction.150–152 To date, TiO2 nanosheets comprising nearly 100% exposed {001} facets have been experimentally realized by dissolving diethylenetriamine in isopropyl alcohol as a capping reagent.84 In addition to the {001} surface,153,154 {100} facets have also been confirmed to exist as the “belt” in the centre of TiO2 particles (Fig. 9a-II); the preferential adsorption of hydroxyl ions on the {100} surface can stabilize it, leading to TiO2 with a higher percentage of exposed {100} facets.155,156 Experimentally, TiO2 nanorods exposed with a large percentage of {100} facets were reported to be synthesized by hydrothermal transformation of either alkali titanate nanotubes in basic solution157 or H0.68Ti1.83O4 particles in aqueous solution.158 TiO2 nanocuboids with dominant {100} facets were also solvothermally prepared via carboxymethyl cellulose,159 or acid-delaminated vermiculite and tetramethylammonium hydroxide,160 or the ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate81 as the capping agents.
4.2 Surface reactivity in photocatalytic reactions
For anatase TiO2, the most extensively investigated surfaces are {101}, {001} and {100}. In contrast to the {101} surface, for which only 50% of the Ti atoms are five-coordinated (Ti5c), both the {001} and {100} surfaces consist of 100% Ti5c atoms (Fig. 9b).78 The Ti5c atoms can act as active sites in the photocatalytic process.85 Therefore, from the viewpoint of the surface atomic structure, the {100} and {001} facets should be more active than the {101} facet. Han et al. systematically controlled the shape of TiO2 single crystals from a tetragonal bipyramidal shape enclosed by {101} facets to a truncated tetragonal bipyramidal bounded with a combination of {001} facets and {101} facets, to sixteen-faceted polyhedral exposed to {103} and {101} facets, and then to pudgy tetragonal bipyramidal enclosed by {102} facets. The photooxidation of methylene blue (MB) was further carried out to evaluate the surface-dependent photocatalytic properties of those TiO2 nanocrystals which are in the order of truncated tetragonal bipyramidal > pudgy tetragonal bipyraidal > sixteen-faceted polyhedral > tetragonal bipyramidal, and the higher activity is related to the percentage of active facets exposed. It is reported that the {001} facet has a high surface energy, and both the high density of surface undercoordinated Ti atoms and the presence of enlarged Ti–O–Ti bond angles at the surface make the Ti and O atoms very reactive, thus facilitating the photodegradation of MB.161–164 Since the truncated tetragonal bipyramidal composed of a 45% {001} facet, it exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity; while the tetragonal bipyramidal dominantly surrounded with the most stable {101} facets, which showed the lowest activity. Both {102} and {103} surfaces have a similar structure which were consisted of units of {001} subfacets, thus should exhibit similar activity but higher than the {101} surface; however, besides the {103} facet, the sixteen-faceted polyhedral also exposed with eight {101} facets, leading to a lower activity than that of pudgy tetragonal bipyramidal with major {102} facets exposed. Accordingly, the order of photooxidation efficiencies for various surfaces was deduced to be {001} > {102} ≈ {103} > {101}.165
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic pictures of anatase TiO2 crystals with various surfaces exposed. (b) Structures of relaxed stoichiometric {101}, {001}, {100}, and {111} surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85 (copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
Nevertheless, when operating the photocatalytic tests in H2 evolution from H2O, a contradictory reaction order ({100} > {101} > {001}) was revealed for the anatase TiO2 samples with dominant {101}, {001}, and {100} facets.80 It is pointed out the different atomic coordination and arrangement on each surface (Fig. 9b) will give rise to different surface electronic configurations, and thus the electronic band structure of TiO2 will depend on which facets are exposed.85,158 In Pan et al.'s study, the conduction band minimum of TiO2 is in the order of {100} > {101} > {001}, and thus more reductive electrons can be produced on TiO2 exposed with more {100} and {101} facets to reduce H2O into H2, followed with a higher photocatalytic activity. Despite that the {001} facet has a higher surface energy and 100% of Ti5c on its surface, the poor electronic band structure really hinders the H2 production efficiency.80 Therefore, even the Ti5c atoms can act as active sites to facilitate the reactant adsorption on both {100} and {001} surfaces, and the superior surface electronic structure of the {100} facet makes it more reactive in the photoredution test because of the more reductive electrons generated.
Compared to the above results for the {100} facet, we have recently found that the {111} facet (Fig. 9a-III) exhibits superior properties with respect to both the surface atomic structure and electronic structure.85 DFT calculations predict that the surface energy of the {111} facet is 1.61 J m−2, which is partially attributed to the large percentage of under-coordinated Ti atoms (Ti5c:Ti3c = 3:1) and the presence of O atoms (100% O2c) on the surface (Fig. 9b). To overcome this high surface energy experimentally, both fluorine and ammonia were used as capping reagents to stabilize the {111} facet. Electron diffraction (SAED) showed that the resulting square TiO2 nanoplates were single crystals (Fig. 10a); the zone axis was indexed to [111]. HRTEM images revealed that the interfacial angle between the (101) and (011) atomic planes of anatase TiO2 is 82° (Fig. 10b), further confirming that the exposed crystal plane is the {111} facet. The numerous under-coordinated O atoms (100% O2c) on the {111} facet facilitate the formation of oxygen vacancies, which can act as active sites in photocatalytic reactions. The electron spin resonance (EPR) signal at g = 2.002 (Fig. 10c) indicated the presence of Ti3+ on the surface; in comparison to TiO2 samples in which the other three facets were dominant, the intensity of the signal in the T111 sample was much stronger, implying the presence of more oxygen vacancies on the T111 surface.166,167 Furthermore, the UV-visible absorption spectra (Fig. 10d) and valence band XPS spectra showed that TiO2 with exposed {111} facets possesses a superior electronic band structure to that of the previously discussed T100 sample (Fig. 10e). Tests of the photocatalytic activity in water splitting showed that TiO2 with {111} facets exposed yielded H2 evolution in quantities ∼5 times greater than for TiO2 with {100} facets exposed (Fig. 10f). This excellent photocatalytic efficiency can be ascribed to the optimized surface atomic structure and electronic band structure.
 Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of TiO2 with {111} facets exposed, and the corresponding SAED pattern (inset). (b) HRTEM image of this TiO2 sample. (c) EPR spectra of TiO2 with various facets exposed. (d) UV-visible absorption spectra of the TiO2 samples. (e) Schematic band structures of TiO2 with various facets exposed. (f) Photocatalytic water splitting tests on Pt-loaded (0.5%) TiO2 samples with various facets exposed under UV-visible light irradiation (λ > 300 nm). TiO2 with dominant {111}, {100}, {101}, and {001} facets are denoted as T111, T100, T101, and T001, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85 (copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
4.3 Charge separation between {001} and {101} facets of TiO2
As aforementioned, the surface reactivity is in the order of {001} > {101} in photooxidation of MB because of its higher surface energy and 100% of Ti5c, while {101} is superior to {001} in H2 production related to its higher conduction band minimum. The former is emphasized to offer active sites on the TiO2 surface, and the latter is focused on the more reductive electrons produced. Moreover, the charge migration process from bulk to surface is also need to be considered in the facet-engineered TiO2 single crystal. Via detecting the deposition sites of noble metals (Au, Ag, and Pt) or metal oxides (PbO2 and MnOx), we can primarily justify whether the crystal facet is for reductive sites or oxidation sites; therefore, TiO2 single crystals exposed with various facets can effectively reinforce the photogenerated e− and h+ to be distributed in different facets, thus realizing the charge separation.168,169 Ohno et al. found that more PbO2 particles which were oxidized from Pb2+via h+ were deposited on rutile {011} and anatase {001} facets than that on rutile {110} and anatase {101} facets, indicating that the photogenerated h+ are mainly accumulated on rutile {011} and anatase {001} facets acted as oxidation sites while e− are mostly distributed on rutile {110} and anatase {101} facets acted as reduction sites.169 This behavior was attributed to the different energy levels of the conduction and valence bands resulting in various facets with different atomic arrangement characteristics; the difference in the energy levels drives the e− and h+ to various crystal facets, aiming to reach the most stable energy configuration and leading to a charge separation.170–172
In D'Arienzo's study, to evaluate the role of the exposed crystal facet in phenol mineralization by using O2 as the oxidizing agent, EPR was adopted to quantitatively monitor the formation and the interfacial reactivity of the charge-trapping sites over shape-controlled anatase TiO2 nanocrystals via detection of the charge-trapping centers, Ti3+, O−, and O2−, etc. Under vacuum conditions, the concentration of trapped h+ (O− center) increased with a higher {001} surface area, followed by a higher photoactivity; whereas the amount of Ti3+ centers (caused by the reduction of Ti4+via e−) increased with more {101} facet exposed, but with a weaker photooxidative activity. Those results suggested that the {001} surface is for oxidation sites with a key role in photooxidation while {101} surfaces provide reductive sites which do not directly assist the oxidative process. Furthermore, photoexcitation experiments in an O2 atmosphere led to the formation of Ti4+–O2− oxidant species mainly located on {101} facets, confirming the indirect contribution of {101} surfaces to the photooxidative process.173
Therefore, we can conclude that the specific exposed facets also influence the charge trapping and interfacial transfer process of the photogenerated e−–h+, in which the {001} facet prefers oxidation while {101} favours the reduction.
5. Theoretical studies
Theoretical studies, particularly electronic structure calculations and molecular dynamics simulations, have been extensively performed to gain insight into the photocatalysis phenomenon. In general, a photocatalytic reaction consists of three steps: photoexcitation to generate electrons and holes, charge transfer from the bulk to the surface, and redox reaction on the surface. Accordingly, theoretical studies address each of these three steps.4
Doping is the most popular way to tailor the absorption edge of TiO2. However, doping is usually accompanied by defects in the TiO2 matrix, which can act as carrier recombination centres with a negative effect on the charge transfer process. Therefore, to obtain better light absorption while avoiding undesirable recombination, more systematic theoretical studies are necessary to better understand the effects of doping. In calculations, doped materials are usually described by introducing a foreign element into a sufficiently large extended unit cell (supercell) with geometric relaxation performed using DFT. Asahi et al. have studied the effects of anion doping in anatase TiO2 by means of DFT calculations within the local-density approximation, and suggested that nitrogen is the most promising dopant for an upward shift of the valence band maximum, thus enhancing visible-light absorption.17 Although this computational result was consistent with experimental findings by the same authors that nitrogen doping induces a red-shift of the absorption edge, their interpretation based on a small supercell containing 6 atomic % of nitrogen has been questioned by subsequent work.174–176 Actual TiO2 samples can accommodate no more than 1% nitrogen,17,177,178 and the electronic structure of samples with this much lower concentration of nitrogen is significantly different from that described in ref. 17; a substitutional N atom at an O site (NO) creates an occupied state far above the valence band maximum (a deep impurity state) rather than a hybrid band consisting of N 2p states and the host valence band.174–176 Such deep impurity states can act as carrier recombination sites179 and possibly degrade the carrier transfer process. Therefore, substitutional nitrogen alone cannot explain the oxidation reaction that was experimentally observed on N-doped TiO2.
Recently, Umezawa et al. reported a comprehensive theoretical analysis of N-doped TiO2, which not only revealed the origin of the visible-light absorption but also gave a reasonable explanation of the photocatalytic oxidation reactions facilitated by N-doped TiO2.180 Using DFT incorporating onsite Coulomb interactions (DFT + U), it was suggested that a NO prefers to bond with Ti atoms at interstitial sites (Tii) to form complex defects, NO–Tii. This promotes the hybridization of N p states with the Ti d states of Tii, giving rise to broader energy states at the valence band edge and eliminating the hole trapping centres associated with the deep NO states. Fig. 11a and b show band structures for the up-spin states of a negatively charged NO−1 and a neutral [NO–Tii]0, respectively. The deep impurity states associated with a NO−1 are replaced by multiple states above the valence band of the host TiO2 for the complex [NO–Tii]0 defects (Fig. 11b) due to the formation of bonding and anti-bonding states.180 The DOS plot in Fig. 11d shows that the defect–impurity hybrid states associated with [NO–Tii]0 are connected under an appropriate smearing parameter (0.1 eV) representing thermal fluctuation. By contrast, the deep impurity state associated with NO−1 remains disconnected from the valence band maximum of the host material (Fig. 11c), which is consistent with previous reports.174–176 The calculated bandgap (2.4 eV) for [NO–Tii]0 is in good agreement with experimental data.177,178 This scenario is further supported by the migration properties of Tii shown in Fig. 11e. The second barrier in the migration path of Tii+1 disappears when it migrates towards NO−1, and the total energy monotonically decreases along the migration path until the complex [NO–Tii]0 is formed. The estimated migration barrier is ∼0.7 eV, which is readily overcome at a typical annealing temperature of 550 °C. This study offers a reasonable explanation for the good, visible-light-driven photo-oxidation ability of N-doped TiO2.180
 Fig. 11  Band structures of the up-spin states for (a) NO−1 and (b) [NO–Tii]0 between highly symmetric points in the Brillouin zone associated with a 96-atom supercell. Total and local DOS for the up- and down-spin states are shown for (c) NO−1 and (d) [NO–Tii]0. Here, the local DOS for Tii was integrated over the two nearest-neighbour Ti atoms. The horizontal dashed line indicates the highest occupied state. (e) Images of the intermediate configurations formed when Tii+1 migrates towards NO−1 and the calculated total energy along this migration path in comparison to the total energy in the absence of NO−1. Reproduced from ref. 180. 
The separation of electron–hole pairs is an important factor to control in order to enhance photocatalytic activity. Platinum particles on the surface of TiO2 as a co-catalyst are beneficial for two reasons: facilitating carrier separation and lowering reaction barriers. However, the detailed mechanism of the effects of Pt as a co-catalyst has until recently been insufficiently understood. To tackle this issue from a theoretical point of view, the photo-excited carriers that are transported to a Pt/TiO2 interface must be taken into account. Recently, Boonchun et al. have suggested a useful model involving substitutional fluorine at an oxygen site in order to better describe photo-excited electrons.181Fig. 12a shows the DOS for pristine anatase TiO2 and F-doped TiO2, which indicates that the substitutional fluorine acts as a donor and shifts the highest occupied state upto the bottom of the conduction band. In this study, the extra electron introduced by substitutional fluorine was utilized to mimic a photo-excited electron. From the partial charge densities associated with the interfacial states at Pt/TiO2 and Pt/F-doped TiO2 (Fig. 12b), it was found that the extra electron is mainly located at oxygen sites near the interface. This implies that the gap states induced by loading Pt on TiO2 make energy states available for electrons to occupy; this is the likely driving force behind the electron transfer from the bulk TiO2 to the Pt/TiO2 interface. The accumulation of electrons at the Pt/TiO2 interface leads to an upward shift of the Fermi level of the system, which allows protons (H+) to be more readily attracted and the adsorption of H2 on the Pt surface to be weakened.181 Therefore, this simple model successfully explains the photocatalytic evolution of H2 from water splitting on the surface of Pt-loaded TiO2.
 Fig. 12  (a) Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) calculated total DOS for bulk TiO2 and F-doped TiO2 at the X point in the Brillouin zone. The vertical dashed lines indicate the highest occupied state. The red shaded area indicates the F p states. (b) Partial charge density of electrons associated with metal-induced gap states at the Pt/TiO2 interface for undoped and F-doped TiO2. The isosurface of the density is displayed at a value of ∼0.08 electrons per Å3. Reproduced from ref. 181. 
Theoretical studies have mainly focused on explanations of observed phenomena or have suggested model mechanisms. In recent years, however, there has been great demand for theory-guided prediction of better materials in order to alleviate the burden of experimental trial and error approaches. Reunchan et al. have succeeded in developing a theoretical design for visible-light driven photocatalysts using a co-doping scheme applied to strontium titanate.182 The same approach is also valid for TiO2 and it is expected that the photocatalytic performance of transition metal-doped TiO2 can be controlled by co-doping with either donors or acceptors, or by any other method that adjusts the Fermi level of the system. A greater challenge for theoretical studies is to predict entirely novel materials with high photocatalytic activity instead of simply improving known photocatalysts. Such computational materials design can be realized only by close collaborations with experimentalists and through iterative prediction and validation procedures, and will become a key technology for accelerating the development of advanced photocatalysts.
6. Conclusion and perspectives
In this article, we have selectively discussed recent advances in TiO2-based photocatalysis from three of the most important aspects dominating a photocatalytic reaction: light absorption, charge separation, and surface reactivity. Starting from the strategies in enhancing light absorption, novel approaches were introduced, which were proved to be effective for increasing light absorption of TiO2 not only from the range of wavelength, but also from the amount of light. Adopting Mie's scattering over size-optimized TiO2 spheres is shown to be promising to improve the intrinsic light absorption of TiO2; to extend the light harvesting from UV to visible light region, electronic coupling emerged in the assembly of TiO2 nanocrystals can effectively narrow the bandgap of TiO2 and enlarge its light response to 500 nm; most significantly, the LSPR based Au nanorod photosensitization over TiO2 can even harvest the near-infrared light. Noticeably, doping with a different element in the matrix of TiO2 can vary the chemical composition of TiO2 to narrow its bandgap for more visible light harvesting. However, the unexpected charge recombination occurred in the dopant center largely impede the charge transfer from bulk to surface. Then, for better charge migration, selective doping in the inner layer or modulation of the dopant for the p–n junction in TiO2 electrodes were confirmed to be valid routes for the higher charge separation efficiency; in parallel, introducing surface disorder in hydrogenated TiO2 powders can build stable mid-gaps in TiO2 to localize the photogenerated charge carriers from fast recombination. Furthermore, to promote the surface reactivity, superior surface atomic and electronic structures of TiO2 single crystals can be optimized via facet engineering. Finally, the latest theoretical studies were also discussed for better understanding about TiO2-based photocatalysis, including a bold approach in understanding detailed behavior of photo-excited electrons in TiO2 loaded with a Pt co-catalyst. With significant fundamental understanding achieved from the past research, we can believe that TiO2-based photocatalysis represents a promising way in both environmental remediation and energy conversion. However, from the aspects of practical application, many challenges remain in the materials engineering.
It is essential to further enhance both the light absorption and charge separation via fabrication of TiO2-based composite materials. Doping and solid-solution strategies can modulate the bandgap,6,106,183,184 even though the visible-light-response can be achieved, the charge recombination occurring in the dopant center remains hard to conquer. For the practical application on a large scale, via combining the semiconductor with a narrower bandgap, the light absorption edge can be red-shifted to a longer wavelength region for more light-harvesting; in addition, the charge transfer and accumulation process between the band-structure-matched phases will facilitate the multiple-electron reactions (e.g. CO2 photoreduction), which offers a promising route for higher solar-energy conversion efficiency.185–188
With regard to the co-catalyst, there are indeed few details understood until now. Nevertheless, the significant influence of co-catalysts on photocatalytic activity has been known for decades,49 and recently, the efforts in not only understanding the mechanism of the co-catalysts, but also in exploring new co-catalysts, including bimetallic alloy co-catalysts have been performed widely.189,190Via optimizing the element in alloys, the Schottky barrier between the alloy and TiO2 can be tuned to further inhibit charge recombination.191,192 Then more electrons can be accumulated on alloy co-catalysts for an effective CO2 photoreduction, especially in which the resultant products largely depend on the specific reaction pathway and the number of electrons transferred, thus the product selectivity can be achieved via tuning the component of an alloy co-catalyst.12 On the other hand, since different metals possess different overpotentials and adsorption abilities, we can selectively control the electron accumulation and reactant adsorption/dissociation occurring in various components of alloys to inhibit the resultant material to be further decomposed for higher productivity.193,194 Therefore, more attention should be paid to the engineering of bimetallic alloy co-catalysts on the TiO2 surface in the perspective research. Besides the metal co-catalyst, particular attention should also be paid on the carbonaceous nanomaterials (such as graphene,195–197 carbon nanotubes,198 C60,199etc.), which can act as electron acceptors for efficient charge separation in the photocatalytic reaction and play the role of a co-catalyst but with much cheaper cost.200
In addition to all the strategies described in this article, we definitely need to pay more attention on how to activate the targeting reactants (IPA, H2O, CO2, etc.) from both experimental and theoretical approaches, including development of sophisticated surface-interface engineering for realizing a higher activity. Generally, via forming the chemical bonding with TiO2 not only the physically adsorption on the TiO2 surface, but also the reactant molecules can be effectively activated with higher reactivity, and then the photocatalytic reaction can be completed with much lower chemical potential. It is known that the linear CO2 molecule is highly stable, thus it is a big challenge to activate it in CO2 photoreduction. Nevertheless, when chemisorbed on the basic oxides (such as MgO), CO2 will become destabilized carbonate which is more easy to reduce into CH4, and results in a higher CH4 evolution for the Pt–TiO2 with MgO modified on its surface.201
It is worth noting that TiO2 is a good model system in which the fundamental mechanisms of photocatalysis can be investigated. The wide bandgap of TiO2 fundamentally limits its solar-energy conversion efficiency. Even though TiO2 has been commercially used in air purifiers and self-cleaning windows, practical application in H2 evolution and solar fuel conversion remains a big challenge. Therefore, further research and development in TiO2-based materials are indispensable for exploring sufficient functionality required from the industry. More importantly, the comprehensive investigation of TiO2-based photocatalysis can provide scientists with valuable information for the study of other semiconductor photocatalysts, especially in the area of visible-light driven photocatalysis.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr H. Tong, Dr J. Y. Cao and Dr A. Boonchun for their generous help and valuable discussion during the preparation of this article. This work was partially supported by the 973 Program (no. 2014CB239301), China, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), China, and the World Premier International Research Center Initiative on Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), MEXT, Japan.
References
A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49–68 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Y. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4428–4453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tong, S. X. Ouyang, Y. P. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. H. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Chen, C. E. Nanayakkara and V. H. Grassian, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5919–5948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Ouyang and J. H. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7757–7763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Chen, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ouyang, H. Tong, N. Umezawa, J. Cao, P. Li, Y. Bi, Y. Zhang and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1974–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753–759 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. C. Leung, X. Fu, C. Wang, M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, X. Wang and X. Fu, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 681–694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, S. Yan, S. Bao, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1743–1749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, K. Hashimoto, A. Fujishima, M. Chikuni, E. Kojima, A. Kitamura, M. Shimohigoshi and T. Watanebe, Nature, 1997, 388, 431–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler, Science, 2002, 297, 2243–2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Setvin, U. Aschauer, P. Scheiber, Y. F. Li, W. Y. Hou, M. Schmid, A. Selloni and U. Diebold, Science, 2013, 341, 988–991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Chen, J. H. Ye, S. X. Ouyang, T. Kako, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4310–4318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Xi, J. H. Ye, Q. Ma, N. Su, H. Bai and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6508–6511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen and J. H. Ye, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1922–1928 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Sun, Y. Yu, H. Y. Pan, X. F. Gao, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Jing and L. J. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11139–11145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Wang, J. H. Ye, T. Kako and T. Kimura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15824–15830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Ouyang, H. Tong, N. Umezawa, J. Y. Cao, P. Li, Y. P. Bi, Y. J. Zhang and J. H. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1974–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Yi, J. H. Ye, N. Kikugawa, T. Kako, S. X. Ouyang, H. Stuart-Williams, H. Yang, J. Y. Cao, W. J. Luo, Z. S. Li, Y. Liu and R. L. Withers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 559–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bi, S. Ouyang, N. Umezawa, J. Cao and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6490–6492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. C. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Li, X. C. Wang and M. Antonietti, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2170–2174 RSC .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. M. Laurier, F. Vermoortele, R. Ameloot, D. E. De Vos, J. Hofkens and M. B. J. Roeffaers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14488–14491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Hu, C. Y. Sun, C. Qin, X. L. Wang, H. N. Wang, E. L. Zhou, W. E. Li and Z. M. Su, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3564–3566 RSC .
T. R. Cook, Y. R. Zheng and P. J. Stang, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 734–777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, X. T. Zhang and D. A. Tryk, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Watanabe, K. Hashimoto and A. Fujishima, 1st Int. Conf. TiO2 Photocatalyst, ed. H. A1-Ekabi,  1992 Search PubMed .
H. Honda, A. Ishizaki, R. Soma, K. Hashimoto and A. Fujishima, J. Illum. Eng. Soc., 1998, 27, 42–49 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Fujishima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, TiO2 Photocatalysis, Fundamentals and Applications, BKC, Tokyo,  1999 Search PubMed .
K. Sunada, T. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37, 4785–4789 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hashimoto, H. Irie and A. Fujishima, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 8269–8285 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Doodeve and J. A. Kitchener, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1938, 34, 902–908 RSC .
X. Pan, M.-Q. Yang, X. Fu, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3601–3614 RSC .
Y. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Zhan, F. Wang, M. Safdar and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8326–8339 RSC .
M. A. Lazar and W. A. Daoud, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 4130–4140 RSC .
J. R. Ran, J. Zhang, J. G. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014 10.1039/c3cs60425j .
L. Liu, Z. Liu, A. Liu, X. Gu, C. Ge, F. Gao and L. Dong, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 618–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Aprile, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 769–783 RSC .
R. Asahi, Y. Taga, W. Mannstadt and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2000, 61, 7459–7465 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. L. Chen, G. von Freymann, S. Y. Choi, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1915–1919 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. Bian, J. Zhu, D. Zhang, G. Li, Y. Huo, H. Li and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8406–8407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, X. Q. Chen, S. X. Ouyang, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3833–3839 CAS .
H. Tong, N. Umezawa and J. H. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4219–4221 RSC .
L. Q. Liu, S. X. Ouyang and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6689–6693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5018–5019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Umebayashi, T. Yamaki, H. Itoh and K. Asai, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2002, 63, 1909–1920 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Zhu, Z. G. Deng, F. Chen, J. L. Zhang, H. J. Chen, M. Anpo, J. Z. Huang and L. Z. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 62, 329–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gracia, J. P. Holgado, A. Caballero and A. R. Gonzalez-Elipe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17466–17476 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Zhou, J. G. Yu and B. Cheng, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 137, 1838–1847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Jing, Y. J. Zhang and L. J. Guo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 415, 74–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Colon, M. Maicu, M. C. Hidalgo and J. A. Navio, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 67, 41–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ren, Z. Ai, F. Jia, L. Zhang, X. Fan and Z. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 69, 138–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sato, R. Nakamura and S. Abe, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 284, 131–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Yu, J. G. Yu, W. K. Ho, Z. T. Jiang and L. Z. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3808–3816 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Fang, X. L. Wang, H. M. Zhang, Y. Jia, Z. Y. Huo, Z. Li, H. J. Zhao, H. G. Yang and X. D. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3513–3520 CAS .
T. Ohno, M. Akiyoshi, T. Umebayashi, K. Asai, T. Mitsui and M. Matsumura, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 265, 115–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, Z. Zheng, L. Zhang, H. Zhang and F. Deng, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 2516–2522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Torres, T. Lindgren, J. Lu, C. G. Granqvist and S. E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5995–6003 CrossRef CAS .
B. Neumann, P. Bogdanoff, H. Tributsch, S. Sakthivel and H. Kisch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16579–16586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Koslowski, K. Ellmer, P. Bogdanoff, T. Dittrich, T. Guminskaya and H. Tributsch, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2006, 24, 2199–2205 CAS .
L. K. Randeniya, A. B. Murphy and I. C. Plumb, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 1389–1399 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Zhang, S. H. Chen, L. Mo, Y. Huang, H. J. Tian, L. H. Hu, Z. P. Huo, S. Y. Dai, F. T. Kong and X. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 16418–16424 CAS .
J. Y. Cao, Y. J. Zhang, H. Tong, P. Li, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8649–8651 RSC .
J. Y. Cao, Y. J. Zhang, L. Q. Liu and J. H. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3440–3442 RSC .
G. Liu, J. C. Yu, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6763–6783 RSC .
S. Liu, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4085–4093 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, G. Liu, G. M. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2133–2137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, W. Jin, J. Cai, J. Ye, Z. Li, Y. Ma, J. Xie and L. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3554–3563 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, S. Ouyang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1348–1354 CAS .
S. Liu, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11914–11916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen, Y. L. Tan, C. M. Li, Y. L. Cheah, D. Luan, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6124–6130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, P. Reunchan, S. X. Ouyang, H. Tong, N. Umezawa, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 405–411 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, C. Sun, H. G. Yang, S. C. Smith, L. Wang, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 755–757 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S.-P. Chai, S.-T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 690–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. A. Vlasov, M. O'Boyle, H. F. Hamann and S. J. McNab, Nature, 2005, 438, 65–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Baba, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 465–473 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mie, Ann. Phys., 1908, 330, 377–445 CrossRef .

          H. C. Hulst, Light Scattering by Small Particles, Dover, New York,  1981 Search PubMed .
S. M. Scholz, R. Vacassy, J. Dutta and H. Hofmann, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 7860–7866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ren, R. Ravikrishna and K. T. Valsaraj, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 7029–7033 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Zheng, S. G. Meng, J. Chen, J. X. Wang, J. J. Xian, Y. Shao, X. Z. Fu and D. Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21263–21273 CAS .
J. D. Joannopoulos, P. R. Villeneuve and S. H. Han, Nature, 1997, 386, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Imhof, W. L. Vos, R. Sprik and A. Lagendijk, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 2942–2945 CrossRef CAS .
M. Honda, T. Seki and Y. Takeoka, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1801–1804 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. L. Chen, G. von Freymann, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1196–1202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Koo, J. Park, B. Yoo, K. Yoo, K. Kim and N. G. Park, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 677–683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zeng, J. Li, J. P. Liu, Z. L. Wang and S. H. Sun, Nature, 2002, 420, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Fan, C. H. Wu, K. Bao, J. M. Bao, R. Bardhan, N. J. Halas, V. N. Manoharan, P. Nordlander, G. Shvets and F. Capasso, Science, 2010, 328, 1135–1138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Crooker, J. A. Hollingsworth, S. Tretiak and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 186802 CrossRef CAS .
R. Koole, P. Liljeroth, C. D. Donega, D. Vanmaekelbergh and A. Meijerink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10436–10441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tong, N. Umezawa, J. H. Ye and T. Ohno, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1684–1689 CAS .
P. Wang, B. Huang, Y. Dai and M.-H. Whangbo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9813–9825 RSC .
Z. Wang, Y. Liu, B. Huang, Y. Dai, Z. Lou, G. Wang, X. Zhang and X. Qin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2758–2774 RSC .
M. Hu, J. Chen, Z.-Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. Li, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1084–1094 RSC .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852–14853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nishijima, K. Ueno, Y. Yokota, K. Murakoshi and H. Misawa, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2031–2036 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Kochuveedu, D. P. Kim and D. H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2500–2506 CAS .
Y. Lin, C. X. Xu, J. T. Li, G. Y. Zhu, X. Y. Xu, J. Dai and B. P. Wang, Adv. Optical Mater., 2013, 1, 940–945 CrossRef .
R. A. Naphade, M. Tathavadekar, J. P. Jog, S. Agarkar and S. Ogale, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 975–984 CAS .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Arabatzis, T. Stergiopoulos, M. C. Bernard, D. Labou, S. G. Neophytides and P. Falaras, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 42, 187–201 CrossRef CAS .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Christopher, D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9173–9177 CAS .
H. Y. Li, W. B. Lu, J. Q. Tian, Y. L. Luo, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. P. Sun, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8508–8514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Eom, J. Y. Jung, Y. Shin, S. Kim, J. H. Choi, E. Lee, J. H. Jeong and I. Park, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 226–234 RSC .
A. Henglein, B. G. Ershov and M. Malow, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 14129–14136 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Bigall, T. Haertling, M. Klose, P. Simon, L. M. Eng and A. Eychmueller, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4588–4592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, W. Chen, H. Kobayashi and C. Ma, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 212–215 RSC .
W. Zhai, S. Xue, A. Zhu, Y. Luo and Y. Tian, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 127–130 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marimuthu, J. Zhang and S. Linic, Science, 2013, 339, 1590–1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Tan, D. W. Y. Yong, Z. H. Zhang, H. Y. Low, L. W. Chen and W. S. Chin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10780–10787 CAS .
K. P. Rice, E. J. Walker, Jr, M. P. Stoykovich and A. E. Saunders, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1793–1799 CAS .
Y. J. Xiong, J. M. McLellan, J. Y. Chen, Y. D. Yin, Z. Y. Li and Y. N. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17118–17127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Xiong, B. Wiley, J. Y. Chen, Z. Y. Li, Y. D. Yin and Y. N. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7913–7917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Xiong, J. Y. Chen, B. Wiley, Y. N. Xia, Y. D. Yin and Z. Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1237–1242 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung, K. L. Shuford and S. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19049–19053 CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hutter and J. H. Fendler, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1685–1706 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Zhang, Y. L. Chen, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Rep. Progr. Phys., 2013, 76, 046401 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Silva, R. Juarez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595–602 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zheng, B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai and M.-H. Whangbo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9079–9087 RSC .
Y. Q. Qu, R. Cheng, Q. Su and X. F. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16730–16733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Mubeen, X. Ji, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5014–5019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Link, M. B. Mohamed and M. A. EI-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3073–3077 CrossRef CAS .
P. Salvador, J. Appl. Phys., 1984, 55, 2977–2985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Wilson and H. Idriss, J. Catal., 2003, 214, 46–52 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Formal and M. Gratzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kavan and M. Gratzel, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 643–652 CrossRef CAS .
M. Radecka and K. Zakrzewska, J. Power Sources, 2008, 181, 46–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Maruka and A. Ghosh, Sol. Energy Mater., 1978, 1, 237 CrossRef .

          J. Tauc, A. Abraham, L. Pajasova, R. Grigorovici and A. Vancu, Non-Crystalline Solids, North-Holland, Amsterdam,  1965 Search PubMed .

          P. Y. Yu and M. Cardona, Fundamentals of Semiconductors: Physics and Materials Properties, Springer, Heidelberg, edn 4,  2010 Search PubMed .
U. Diebold, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates Jr, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yang, G. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, C. H. Sun, Y. G. Jin, S. C. Smith, J. Zou, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4078–4083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, Q. Kuang, M. Jin, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3152–3153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Liu, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4085–4093 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, L. Piao, W. Lu, S. Ju, L. Zhao, C. Zhou, H. Li and W. Wang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1115–1117 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai, S.-T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1946–2008 RSC .
A. S. Barnard and L. A. Curtiss, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1261–1266 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Wu, C. Y. Guo, N. F. Zheng, Z. X. Xie and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17563–17567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li and D. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2301–2303 RSC .
J. Pan, X. Wu, L. Wang, G. Liu, G. Q. Lub and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8361–8363 RSC .
N. Cuong Ky, H. G. Cha and Y. S. Kang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 3947–3953 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, L. Zang, J. Zhao and C. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11736–11738 RSC .
A. Vittadini, A. Selloni, F. P. Rotzinger and M. Gratzel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 2954–2957 CrossRef CAS .
A. Selloni, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 613–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Liu, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11914–11916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Ma, Z. G. Chen, S. B. Hartono, H. B. Jiang, J. Zou, S. Z. Qiao and H. G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6608–6610 RSC .
X. G. Han, B. J. Zheng, J. J. Ouyang, X. Wang, Q. Kuang, Y. Q. Jiang, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, Chem. Asian J., 2012, 7, 2538–2542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Q. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anpo, M. Che, B. Fubini, E. Garrone, E. Giamello and M. C. Paganini, Top. Catal., 1999, 8, 189–198 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, F. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Yang, M. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Han and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1432 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ohno, K. Sarukawa and M. Matsumura, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 1167–1170 RSC .
E. Bae and T. Ohno, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 91, 634–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bae, N. Murakami and T. Ohno, J. Mol. Catal. Chem., 2009, 300, 72–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Murakami, Y. Kurihara, T. Tsubota and T. Ohno, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3062–3069 CAS .
M. D'Arienzo, J. Carbajo, A. Bahamonde, M. Crippa, S. Polizzi, R. Scotti, L. Wahba and F. Morazzoni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17652–17661 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni and A. Selloni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2004, 70, 085116 CrossRef .
Z. S. Lin, A. Orlov, R. M. Lambert and M. C. Payne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20948–20952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Varley, A. Janotti and C. G. Van de Walle, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2343–2347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Irie, Y. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 5483–5486 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fu, L. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhu and J. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 3061–3065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Miyagi, M. Kamei, I. Sakaguchi, T. Mitsuhashi and A. Yamazaki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 43, 775 CrossRef CAS .
N. Umezawa and J. H. Ye, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 5924–5934 RSC .
A. Boonchun, N. Umezawa, T. Ohno, S. X. Ouyang and J. H. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6664–6669 CAS .
P. Reunchan, S. X. Ouyang, N. Umezawa, H. Xu, Y. J. Zhang and J. H. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4221–4227 CAS .
H. Yu, S. Ouyang, S. Yan, Z. Li, T. Yu and Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11347–11351 RSC .
P. Reunchan, S. Ouyang, N. Umezawa, H. Xu, Y. Zhang and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4221–4227 CAS .
G. Xi, S. Ouyang and J. Ye, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 9057–9061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, S. Ouyang, L. Liu, D. Wang, T. Kako and J. Ye, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 165402 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Q. Liu, L. L. Ruan, S. B. Adeloju and Y. C. Wu, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 1706–1715 RSC .
S. Ho-Kimura, S. J. A. Moniz, A. D. Handoko and J. W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3948–3953 CAS .
Y. Shiraishi, H. Sakamoto, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9287–9297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sugano, Y. Shiraishi, D. Tsukamoto, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5295–5299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Schottky, Z. Phys., 1939, 113, 367–414 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakato, K. Ueda, H. Yano and H. Tsubomura, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 2316–2324 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tanaka, S. Sakaguchi, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 79–85 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tsukamoto, A. Shiro, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 599–603 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Hu, H. Wang and B. Hu, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 782–796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3670–3678 RSC .
G. Lui, J.-Y. Liao, A. Duan, Z. Zhang, M. Fowler and A. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12255–12262 CAS .
W.-J. Ong, M. M. Gui, S.-P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 4505–4509 RSC .
J. G. Yu, T. T. Ma, G. Liu and B. Cheng, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 6635–6644 RSC .
J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4584–4589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Xie, Y. Wang, Q. H. Zhang, W. Q. Fan, W. P. Deng and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2451–2453 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Hua Xu	Hua Xu was awarded a PhD in Chemistry from Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan in 2013, under the guidance of Prof. Jinhua Ye. After graduation, she worked as a lecturer in the TU-NIMS Joint Research Center, School of Material Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China. Her research interests are synthesis and characterization of novel TiO2-based photocatalysts for application in solar-to-energy conversion.
Shuxin Ouyang	Shuxin Ouyang received his BSc degree from the Nanjing University in 2004 and his PhD degree in Materials Science from Nanjing University in 2009 under the supervision of Prof. Zhigang Zou and Prof. Jinhua Ye. Since 2009, he worked in Prof. Ye's group as a postdoctoral fellow at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan. From 2014, he joined the TU-NIMS Joint Research Center of Tianjin University, China, and was appointed as an Associate Professor. He is interested in developing and fabricating new photocatalysts, electronic structures of semiconductor photocatalysts, and surface/interface engineering of photocatalysts.
Lequan Liu	Lequan Liu received his PhD degree in 2011 from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences under the supervision of Prof. Youquan Deng. In the same year, he moved to NIMS (Japan) as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Jinhua Ye's group. His research interests involve noble metal catalysis and developing metal@semiconductor composite materials for artificial photosynthesis.
Pakpoom Reunchan	Pakpoom Reunchan has received his PhD from Suranaree University of Technology (SUT), Thailand under the supervision of Prof. Sukit Limpijumnong in 2009. After working at the Asia Pacific center for Theoretical Physics (APCTP) in Korea and NIMS in Japan as a postdoctoral fellow during 2009–2012, he has joined the Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, Thailand. His background is electronic structure calculations of real materials, focusing on defects in semiconductors. His current research interests are computational design of highly active photocatalysts based on doping schemes and hydrogen storage materials.
Naoto Umezawa	Naoto Umezawa completed the doctoral course in the Department of Physics, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Science, and was employed as a Postdoctoral Scientist at the University of Southern California in 2003. He joined NIMS as a Special Researcher in 2004 and was appointed to his present position as a Senior Researcher at NIMS in 2008. In 2007, he was a Visiting Scientist at the University of California at Santa Barbara. He also received the 29th Japan Society of Applied Physics Best Original Paper Award in 2007. His research field is materials design using first-principles calculation.
Jinhua Ye	Jinhua Ye received her PhD from the University of Tokyo in 1990, and joined the National Research Institute for Metals (former organization of NIMS) in 1991. She is now the director of the Environmental Remediation Materials Unit, and a Principle Investigator at the International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), NIMS. She is also an appointed director of the TU-NIMS Joint Research Center, and a Professor of Materials Science at Tianjin University, China, since 2011. Her current research interests focus on the research and development of photo-functional materials and their applications in the fields of environment remediation and new energy production.

 	Fig. 1  Annual number of publications (Science Citation Index Expanded) in Web of Science when a search for the topic “titanium dioxide or titania or TiO2” and “photo*” is performed.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic picture of the TiO2 photocatalytic reaction process.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of Mie's scattering. (b) Scattering resonance spectra of TiO2 suspensions with various particle sizes. (c) Photocatalytic evolution of H2 using TiO2 sphere samples. TiO2 spheres with diameters of 330, 380, 450, 600, and 750 nm are denoted as T330, T380, T450, T600, and T750, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55 (copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of the electronic bond formed between two atoms and two nanocrystals. (b) High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of individual TiO2 nanocrystals (NCs). (c) UV-visible absorption spectra, photographs, and the converted spectra as a function of photon energy based on the Butler equation (inset) of colloidal TiO2 nanoparticles, assembled TiO2 NCs, and crushed NC powder. (d) Comparison of XPS spectra between assembled TiO2 NCs and crushed NC powder. (e) Photocatalytic decomposition of IPA under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 4 (copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh) and ref. 56.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) HAADF-STEM images and (b) HRTEM image of a Au nanorod/TiO2 photocatalyst. (c) UV/visible absorption spectra of Au nanorod/TiO2 photocatalysts. (d) Time dependence of acetone (solid symbols) and CO2 (open symbols) evolution in the photocatalytic oxidation of IPA using the Au nanorod/TiO2 photocatalyst with a longitudinal band centred at 660 nm under irradiation with broadband light I (circles) and II (squares). Reproduced with permission from ref. 57 (copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Band structure of a TiO2 photoelectrode interacting with the electrolyte. (b) STEM image (dark field) and atomic ratio of N/Ti at different locations (inset) of the inner layer of a N-doped TiO2 thin film. (c) I–V curves and (d) IPCEs of pure TiO2, uniformly N-doped TiO2, outer-layer N-doped TiO2, and inner-layer N-doped TiO2 electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 76.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) XPS spectrum showing Cr 2p and O 1s (inset) peaks for uniformly Cr-doped TiO2. (b) I–V curves of the as-prepared Cr-doped TiO2 thin films. (c) Band structures of films of uniformly Cr-doped TiO2 (left), inner Cr-doped TiO2 (center), and inner Cr-doped TiO2 with Pt loading. Reproduced from ref. 77.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure and electronic density of states (DOS) of a semiconductor nanocrystal with surface disorder. (b) HRTEM image of the TiO2 nanocrystal. (c) HRTEM image of the TiO2 nanocrystal after hydrogenation (the interface between the crystalline core and the disordered outer layer is outlined by the dashed curve). (d) Absorption spectra and photographs (inset) of the TiO2 nanocrystals before and after hydrogenation. (e) Valence-band XPS spectra of the white and black TiO2 nanocrystals. (f) Decomposition of the total DOS of surface-disordered black TiO2 nanocrystals into partial DOS of the Ti, O, and H orbitals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20 (copyright 2011 American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic pictures of anatase TiO2 crystals with various surfaces exposed. (b) Structures of relaxed stoichiometric {101}, {001}, {100}, and {111} surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85 (copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of TiO2 with {111} facets exposed, and the corresponding SAED pattern (inset). (b) HRTEM image of this TiO2 sample. (c) EPR spectra of TiO2 with various facets exposed. (d) UV-visible absorption spectra of the TiO2 samples. (e) Schematic band structures of TiO2 with various facets exposed. (f) Photocatalytic water splitting tests on Pt-loaded (0.5%) TiO2 samples with various facets exposed under UV-visible light irradiation (λ > 300 nm). TiO2 with dominant {111}, {100}, {101}, and {001} facets are denoted as T111, T100, T101, and T001, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85 (copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  Band structures of the up-spin states for (a) NO−1 and (b) [NO–Tii]0 between highly symmetric points in the Brillouin zone associated with a 96-atom supercell. Total and local DOS for the up- and down-spin states are shown for (c) NO−1 and (d) [NO–Tii]0. Here, the local DOS for Tii was integrated over the two nearest-neighbour Ti atoms. The horizontal dashed line indicates the highest occupied state. (e) Images of the intermediate configurations formed when Tii+1 migrates towards NO−1 and the calculated total energy along this migration path in comparison to the total energy in the absence of NO−1. Reproduced from ref. 180.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) calculated total DOS for bulk TiO2 and F-doped TiO2 at the X point in the Brillouin zone. The vertical dashed lines indicate the highest occupied state. The red shaded area indicates the F p states. (b) Partial charge density of electrons associated with metal-induced gap states at the Pt/TiO2 interface for undoped and F-doped TiO2. The isosurface of the density is displayed at a value of ∼0.08 electrons per Å3. Reproduced from ref. 181.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
