Electrochemistry at nanometer-sized electrodes  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP53773K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP53773K
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 635-652Electrochemistry at nanometer-sized electrodes

        
          
            Shengli 
            Chen
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Yuwen 
            Liu
          
          
        
      
Hubei Key Laboratory of Electrochemical Power Sources, Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Biology and Medicine (Ministry of Education), Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: slchen@whu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-27-68754693;   Tel: +86-27-68754693
Received 
      5th September 2013
    , Accepted 1st November 2013First published on 4th November 2013AbstractElectrodes of nanometer sizes provide a model approach to study the nanoscale electrochemical properties and processes, which are of fundamental and applied significance in a variety of areas including energy and environmental science, scanning probe microscopies, nanofabrication as well as electrochemistry itself. This Perspective reviews recent developments in conceptual understanding, theoretical modelling and simulation, and experimental observation of nanosize-induced properties and phenomena at interfaces between nanometer-sized electrodes and electrolytes. The aim is to provide a view on how the dimension comparability of nanoelectrodes with the electric double layer and the effective electron-tunnelling distance may raise distinct features in interfacial structure and reactivity. The strong coupling between the electrostatic field, the concentration field and the dielectric field of solvent at nanoelectrode/electrolyte interfaces is highlighted. The effects of this coupling on the voltammetric responses of nanoelectrodes are evaluated. Electron transfer kinetics at the nanoelectrode/electrolyte interface is discussed by emphasizing the inappropriateness of the Butler–Volmer (BV) and classic Marcus–Hush (MH) theories at potentials largely departing from the formal potential of the redox moieties and the importance of the long-distance electron tunnelling. The conditions for using the mathematically more straightforward BV and classic MH formalisms as an alternative to the physically more realistic but mathematically unfriendly Marcus–Hush–Chidsey model are analysed.
Shengli Chen
Shengli Chen is currently a Luojia professor of chemistry at Wuhan University, China. He received his PhD degree from Wuhan University in 1996, after which he served as an assistant professor of chemistry at Wuhan University till 1998. He then spent two years in Department of Chemistry, Southern Methodist University (Dallas), working as a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Mark Schell on nonlinear dynamics in electrocatalytic oxidation of small fuel molecules. In October 2000, he moved to Imperial College London, where he worked on nanoelectrochemistry and fuel cell electrocatalysis as a research associate with Prof. Anthony Kucernak in Department of Chemistry. In April 2004, he came back to Wuhan University and was appointed as a professor in Department of Chemistry. His current research is focused on the nanoelectrochemistry, theoretical and computational electrochemistry, and electrocatalysis of fuel cell relevance.
Yuwen Liu
Yuwen Liu is an associate professor of physical chemistry at the Wuhan University, China. He received his PhD from the Wuhan University in 2002. His current research interests include nanoelectrochemistry and computational electrochemistry.
1 Introduction
Distinct structures, properties and processes associated with nanosizes and nanostructures are among the current research focuses of various scientific and technological areas. Electrochemistry is a particular area where nanoscale sizes and structures are of fundamental and applied significance. Fundamentally, electrochemistry itself has been truly a nanoscale science by dealing with surface and interface processes within/across the electric double layers (EDLs) which are (sub)nanometers in thickness.1 Scanning probe microscopies (SPM) and other nano-based characterization techniques are taking increasing part in probing the structure and processes at the electrochemical surface and interface.2 Technologically, nanosizing and nanostructuring of the electrode materials have been the major ways to promote the performance of various electrochemical energy technologies3–9 including fuel cells, supercapacitors, batteries, solar cells and water splitting, which are expected to play key roles in utilizing the renewable energy sources.
On the other hand, electrochemistry has been significantly contributing to nanoscience and nanotechnology. Electrochemical deposition and etching10–12 are among the major methods for fabricating nanomaterials, nanostructures and nanodevices. Voltammetric measurements can provide rich information on the electronic structures of nanomaterials such as various novel nanocarbons,13 quantum dots14 and semiconducting nanofilms of energy and sensing relevance.15 Understanding the electron transfer (ET) between molecules and solid electrodes, a subject which is electrochemistry to the core, is the key for developing suitable systems in molecular electronics.16
In the above mentioned coalescence of electrochemistry with nanoscience and nanotechnology, the sizes of electrodes and/or their structural units would be vitally important. They impact the electrochemical responses not only quantitatively by changing the electroactive areas, but also qualitatively by altering the EDL structures, ET kinetics and mass transport dynamics. One of the particular areas in which the nanosizes are intrinsically important for electrochemical properties and processes are the nanoparticle electrocatalysis. Due to the distinctly different atomic and electronic structures of nanoparticles from their bulk counterparts, nanoparticles usually exhibit size-dependent surface adsorption properties17,18 and charge donation/acceptance ability,19 which crucially determine the electrocatalytic pathways and kinetics. There have been very good recent reviews on these topics.17,19
Besides, the intrinsic electrochemical nanosize effects could also be raised due to the dimension comparability of electrodes and/or their structural units with the EDL, the effective electron-tunnelling distances and other characteristic physical lengths determining the kinetics of electrochemical processes at the surface and the interface. Such dimension comparability can be found in a broad range of areas which involve nanoscopic electrochemical interfaces, for example, utilization of nanostructured electrode materials (nanoparticles, nanowires and so on) or SPM probes in electrolyte solution, electrochemical formation of nanostructured materials, and so on. These electrochemical nanosize effects not only help to understand the nanoscopic ET kinetics and mass transport dynamics, but also offer additional ways to modulate the pathways and kinetics of electrochemical reactions which are important for the efficiency promotion in the electrochemical energy and sensing technologies, and the shape and size control in electrochemical nanofabrication.
The past three decades have seen tremendous growth of electrochemical studies using electrodes of nanoscale dimensions, either in individual or arrayed form.20–22 As well as novel applications in probing fast heterogeneous ET kinetics,23–29 performing voltammetric measurements of high time-resolution and space-resolution,30 investigating the electrochemistry of single biological cells,31 nanoparticles32–34 and molecules,35–37 nanoelectrodes provide model systems to study electrochemical nanosize effects due to the dimension comparability mentioned above.38–43 The voltammetric responses of nanometer-sized electrodes should contain rich information on the nanoscopic ET kinetics and mass transport dynamics.
This Perspective presents a conceptual analysis on the mechanistic origin of various possible nanosize effects in electrochemistry of nanoelectrodes, and introduces the recent progress in theoretical modelling and experimental observation of these nanosize effects by us and others. We will also discuss how and to what extent the conventional voltammetric theories may fail at nanoelectrodes due to these nanosize effects. Our discussions will be focused on the electrochemical interfaces between individual nanoelectrodes and electrolyte solution, which can be models for a variety of nanoscale electrochemical systems mentioned above.
2 Nanosize-induced EDL effects at interfaces of nanometer-sized electrodes
2.1 Overlap of EDLs with the concentration distribution layers
In the course of an electrochemical reaction at the electrode/electrolyte interface, there would form a concentration distribution layer (CDL) of redox molecules, which starts at the position of the closet approach (PCA) of molecules to the electrode surface and spans a region into the solution, with the thickness varying with the electrode size. For example, the effective thickness of CDL (δeff) for a micrometer electrode can be approximately estimated with eqn (1),1,44,45 in which r0 refers to the electrode radius, A equals to 1 and 4/π, respectively, for spherical and disk electrodes. δeff = r0/A(1)
The effective thickness of CDL determines the mass transport rate of redox species at PCA according to1,46 mi = Di/δeff(2)in which mi and Di refer to the flux at the PCA and the diffusion coefficient of species “i”. The former is usually called mass transport coefficient. According to eqn (1), the CDL should be above micrometer in thickness at electrodes of micrometer or larger scales.
As well as the CDL, the diffuse part of the EDL, which is characterized as a potential distribution, also extends into the solution at the PCA of solution species. The effective thickness of the diffuse EDL in solution containing a symmetric electrolyte can be estimated with the Debye length (eqn (3)).1,44 (3)In eqn (3), ε and ε0 are the local dielectric constant and the permittivity of vacuum, z is the charge of the electrolyte ions, c0 is the bulk concentration of the supporting electrolyte, F, R, and T have their usual meanings. Depending on the concentration of the background supporting electrolyte, the thickness of the diffuse EDL varies from a few angstroms to several hundreds of nanometers (Table 1).
Table 1 Effective thickness of the diffuse EDL in 1:1 aqueous electrolyte solution of different concentrations at T = 298 Ka





a For a 1:1 electrolyte at 25 °C in water (ref. 1).






c
0 (mol L−1)
1
0.1
0.01
0.001



κ (nm)
0.3
0.94
3.04
9.62




If we assume that all the solution species approximately have the same PCA, the diffuse EDL would be a part of the CDL at the electrode/electrolyte interface. At conventional micrometer-sized or larger electrodes, however, the diffuse EDL would share only a negligible part of the CDL. Therefore, the structure of the CDL and mass transport of the redox species are negligibly impacted by the EDL. That is why the EDL has been generally ignored in classic voltammetric treatment. Such ignorance has greatly simplified voltammetric analysis and provided a satisfactory description of various electrochemical processes. Upon reduction of the electroactive size of an electrode into nanometer scales, however, the CDL will be shrunk into nanometer scales accordingly. In this case, the diffuse EDL would share a significant part of the CDL. This may occur at electrodes of a few nanometers when the solution is strongly supported by a background electrolyte, or at electrodes of tens of nanometers in dilute solutions of redox probes without a supporting electrolyte.
An immediate result of the increased overlap of the diffuse EDL with the CDL is the possible breakdown of the electroneutrality condition which has long been used in conventional voltammetric analysis. By assuming the electroneutrality in the CDL, the mass transport of electroactive species can be treated either by using Fick's diffuse equations in the presence of an excess of supporting electrolyte or by using the diffuse-electromigration equation (e.g., the Nernst–Planck) together with the electroneutrality equation (Σcizi = 0) in the case when the solution is weakly supported.1 In both cases, the possible effects of EDLs have been ignored.
The overlap between the CDL and EDLs and its effects on the ET kinetics and mass transport dynamics at nanoelectrodes were first theoretically treated by White and co-workers in early 1990s.47,48 The Poisson–Nernst–Planck equations were used to model the distribution and transport of solution species at the interface. It was shown that significant charge separation may occur in the CDL at electrodes of up to several tens of nanometers even in strongly supported solution. The breaking down of electroneutrality at the nanoelectrode interface also has been predicted theoretically by Oldham et al.,49 Compton and coworkers43 and other researchers.50 Most of these studies, however, may have overestimated the EDL effect due to the inappropriate treatment of the compact part of the EDL. As will be shown in the following, the dielectric screening of solvent to the electrostatic interaction within the EDL is crucially important in the EDL structure and voltammetric responses of nanoelectrodes.
To describe the nanosize-induced merging of EDLs and the CDL, we recently have proposed that the nanoelectrode interface bearing a redox reaction can be treated with a dynamic EDL.40 The core concepts are that the entire interface at a nanoelectrode is more like an EDL, in which the concentration distribution of various solution species is strongly coupled with the distribution of the electrostatic potential, and that the structure and properties of the EDL vary with the reaction rate (current density) at the electrode surface. By combining the Poisson equation, the Nernst–Planck equation, the Butler–Volmer equation and the Faraday law, we have derived two equations, namely, eqn (4) and (5), to formulate the proposed dynamic EDL.40 (4) (5)In the two equations, the current density is given as a dimensionless form (i*) through normalization with the limiting diffusion current density at the same electrode, Ωj is the integral of exp(−zjFφ/RT) in the entire interface for species j, which can be the supporting electrolyte ions or the redox molecules of O and R (see ref. 40 for details). Therefore, the values of Ωj are determined by the potential distribution (EDL structure) at the interface. In eqn (5), φPCA refers to the electrostatic potential at PCA, γ = k0r0/D, in which k0 refers to the standard rate constant of the studying ET reaction. The value of γ can be a measure of the electrochemical irreversibility,51,52 that is, the facility of ET kinetics relative to the mass transport rate (see Section 2.4).
At low current density, eqn (4) could be approximated to the Poisson–Boltzmann equation which has been the theoretical basis for Gouy and Chapman to treat the equilibrium EDL.1 Therefore, it has been called the dynamic Poisson–Boltzmann equation.40 As exp(−zjRTφ/F) = 1, that is, the electrostatic potentials in the CDL are close to zero, eqn (5) will reduce to the voltammetric equation in classic voltammetric theory, namely, eqn (6), which can be derived by combining the Butler–Volmer equation and the steady-state diffusion equation(1),40 (6)One thus can find that, in the dynamic EDL model, the EDL equation describing the potential and charge density profiles (eqn (4)) and the voltammetric equation formulating the relation between current density and the electrode potential (E) (eqn (5)) are closely coupled, whereas in the conventional scheme of electrochemical theories the EDL structure and the voltammetric responses are usually treated independently. In the rare case when the EDL effect has to be considered, Frumkin's treatment is used,1,44 which would be problematic at the nanoelectrode interface since it has been based on the Gouy–Chapman's equilibrium EDL theory and assumed that the EDL and the CDL are separated.

Fig. 1 displays the profiles of the electrostatic potential and the concentration of redox molecules obtained by simultaneously solving eqn (4) and (5) for the one-electron reduction of a −1 valence reactant at spherical electrodes of 1 nm and 100 nm radii respectively. The 3-state water dielectric model introduced by Bockris53 is used in the calculations (see the next subsection for details). One can see that the potential profile (EDL) is nearly squeezed to a line at PCA at an electrode of 100 nm as compared with the concentration profile (CDL), whereas significant penetration of the potential profile into the concentration profile occurs at an electrode of 1 nm, which indicates the transition of the electrochemical interface from the CDL nature to the EDL nature as electrode size approaches nanometer scales.
 Fig. 1  Calculated interfacial potential and reactant concentration profiles during the one-electron reduction of 5 mM Oz (z = −1) in the presence of a 0.5 M 1:1 supporting electrolyte at spherical electrodes of 1 nm and 100 nm radii respectively. Other parameters: k0 = 1.0 cm s−1, D = 1 × 10−5 cm2 s−1, E = −1.0 V (with respect to the formal potential, ). Reprinted with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. 
2.2 Coupling between the electrostatic field and the solvent dielectric field in EDLs
As well as the electrostatic potential and the concentrations of redox and electrolyte species, the dielectric property of the solvent molecules also have a gradient distribution at the electrode/electrolyte interface, which, as pointed out earlier by Bockris et al.,53 could significantly impact the EDL properties. The coupling between the dielectric property of solvent and the electric field may be understood as follows. The solvent dipole would be oriented in the electric field, with the degree of orientation depending on the strength of the electric field. The orientation degree of solvent molecules determines their dielectric constant, which in turn affects the electric field because of the dielectric screening to the electrostatic interactions.
Since that the EDL in most cases can be ignored in classic voltammetric analysis, the influence of the solvent dielectric property on the voltammetric responses of large electrodes has been seldom considered. As stated above, EDLs may have significant impacts on the mass transport and ET kinetics at nanoelectrode interfaces. In order to properly address the EDL effect at nanoelectrodes, it is important to have a relatively accurate description of the EDL structures, which requires the knowledge of the dielectric property of solvent molecules at the interface.
Bockris has introduced a 3-state model for the dielectric distribution of water at the electrode/electrolyte interface53 (Fig. 2). In this simple model, the first layer of water dipoles is assumed to be completely oriented due to the strong interactions with the electrode, thus forming a saturated dielectric. The dielectric constant of such an oriented water layer was estimated to be about 6. In the region from the outer edge of the first water layer (the so-called inner Helmholtz plane, IHP) to the plane of closet approach of ions (the so-called outer Helmholtz plane, OHP), the water molecules are considered partly oriented due to the balanced electrostatic interaction and thermal and hydrogen-bonding interaction. Outside OHP, the dielectric constant of water is assumed to be close to that in bulk water, namely, 78. The dielectric constant in the second region can be approximately considered a linear change from 6 to 78 or simply an averaged value between 6 and 78 (e.g., 40).
 Fig. 2  The schematic diagram of the three-state dielectric model of water at the electrode/electrolyte interface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. 
Booth54 has derived a more delicate relation between the dielectric constant of water and electric field strength (), which is formulated by (7)in which nd and μv refer to the optical refractive index and dipole moment of water, kB is the Boltzmann constant, N0 is the number of water molecules per unit volume, and L(x) is the Langevin function. The Booth model predicts that the dielectric constant of water decreases continuously with the increasing electric field strength as  is in the range of 3 × 107–3 × 1010 V m−1. Under lower , ε gradually converges to the value of bulk water (78), while it reaches a nearly constant value of ca. 2 due to the dielectric saturation as  is larger than 3 × 1010 V m−1. The prediction of eqn (7) has been well verified in a range of  by recent results of molecular dynamics simulations carried out by Yeh and Berkowitz.55
Combining eqn (7) with eqn (4) and (5) allows the distribution of electrostatic potential, dielectric constant and concentrations of ions and the current density at certain electrode potential to be determined simultaneously through a self-consistent iteration. Fig. 3 shows the resulted distribution of ε during the one-electron reduction of a −1 valence reactant at spherical electrodes of different sizes. At large electrodes (>20 nm), the values of ε inside the OHP are similar around 20 regardless of electrode sizes, and change little with the distance to the electrode surface. This means that the electric field strength in the compact EDL at large electrodes is nearly constant. This holds true in the absence of specific adsorption of charge species. As electrode radius becomes smaller than 10 nm, one can see a continuous change in ε in the EDL and a significant electrode size dependence of the distribution. These dielectric profiles may be understood in terms of the comparability between the electrode curvature and the EDL thickness. For large spherical electrodes, the curvature of the electrode surface is very small as compared with the thickness of the EDL. Therefore, the EDL structures are more like that at planar electrodes. Electrodes of nanometer sizes, however, possess curvatures comparable to the thickness of EDLs, therefore would have curved EDL structures.
 Fig. 3  Dielectric distribution of water molecules at interfaces of spherical electrodes of different radii calculated by combining eqn (4), (5) and (7). The vertical dash line indicates the OHP. The other parameters are the same as that for Fig. 1. 

Fig. 4 shows the calculated potential profiles at spherical electrodes of different sizes when the dynamic EDL model is combined with different dielectric models. It can be seen that the potential distribution becomes more curved at smaller electrodes, regardless of the dielectric model used. The size-dependence of the potential distribution is most pronounced when the Booth model is used. This is because the dielectric constants are allowed to change flexibly with the potential distribution during the calculation, whereas in the uniform and the 3-state models the dielectric constants are fixed during the calculation.
 Fig. 4  Potential distribution at spherical electrodes of different radii calculated by using the dynamic EDL model together with the different dielectric models. The other parameters are the same as that for Fig. 1. 
At large electrodes (e.g., 100 nm in radii), the Booth dielectric model predicts very similar linear potential profiles inside the OHP to that given by using the uniform dielectric constant of 78, whereas, it predicts potential profiles close to the 3-state model at electrodes less than 5 nm in radii. This points out a general trend of increased potential drop in the compact part of the double layer at electrodes of decreased sizes due to the increased coupling between dielectric and electrostatic fields.
The dynamic EDL model has also been applied to electrodes of disk shapes.42 It is somewhat complicated to apply the 3-state dielectric model at the interface of nanoscale disk electrodes due to that the EDL structure and the dielectric distribution vary along the radial coordinate as well as in the normal direction. The Booth dielectric model becomes a useful approach. As shown in the calculated 2-D surface plots of potential and dielectric constant distributions (Fig. 5), a transition from one dimensional to two dimensional distributions occurs as electrodes go to the nanometer scale. For electrodes of 100 nm in radius, the iso-potential and iso-dielectric constant surfaces are almost parallel to the electrode surface, changing little along the radial directions. As the electrode size is below 10 nm, however, they become more and more curved with reducing electrode size, showing pronounced radial variation and electrode size dependence.
 Fig. 5  Dielectric constant (upper panels) and potential (lower panels) distributions at the interface of disk electrodes of different radii calculated by combining eqn (4), (5) and (7). The other calculation parameters are the same as that for Fig. 1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Although the disk electrode surface is not curved, the edge behavior is curved. It has been well recognized that this edge effects would enhance the mass transport rate at disk electrodes of micrometer sizes due to the comparability of the electrode size with the thickness of the CDL. As the size of disk electrodes is on nanometer scales so as to be comparable with the thickness of EDLs, the edge effects will be seen in the EDL structure. This results in significant radial heterogeneity in the potential and dielectric constant distributions. As well, it leads to significant extension of the potential and dielectric distributions outside the electrode surface.
2.3 EDL effects on voltammetric responses of nanoelectrodes: importance of the solvent dielectric field and the reactant charges

Fig. 6 compares the steady-state polarization curves obtained by combining the dynamic EDL model with different dielectric models. The most notable feature is that, when using a uniform dielectric constant of 78, the calculated polarization curves at electrodes less than 10 nm in radii are peak-shaped and no limiting current plateau occurs. Similar results were also obtained in an earlier simulation study reported by White and coworkers48 for the oxidation of cations at nanoelectrodes. So far, there has been no experimental evidence to support such a prediction. Instead, sigmoid-shaped polarization curves with limiting current plateaus have been mostly observed for the oxidation of cations (e.g., TMAFc+)23,28,38b,41 or reduction of anions (e.g., Fe(CN)6−3 and IrCl62−)24,39,41,50 at nanoelectrodes. When the Booth or 3-state dielectric models are used, the calculated polarization curves all approximately have a sigmoid shape, regardless of electrode sizes. This indicates that the dielectric distribution in EDLs plays a key role in the voltammetric responses of nanoelectrodes.
 Fig. 6  Calculated steady-state voltammetric curves for the reduction of 5 mM Oz (z = −1) at spherical electrodes of different radii. The other parameters are the same as that for Fig. 1. 
The difference between the polarization curves calculated using different dielectric models becomes less pronounced at larger electrodes, especially in the limiting current region. It can be seen that the dimensionless limiting current density, i*, is very close to 1 at electrodes larger than 20 nm. As the electrode radius approaches nanometer scales, deviation of i* from 1 occurs. However, the deviation magnitudes are only ca. 10% even at electrodes of as small as a few nanometers in radii when the Booth or the 3-state dielectric model is used. This seems to tell that the EDL effect on the mass transport at nanoelectrodes is not significant for the reduction of a −1 valence anion, which is somewhat out of the expectation when considering the overlap between EDLs and the CDL at nanoelectrodes shown in Fig. 1.
In Fig. 7, the potential profiles in the diffuse part of EDLs at spherical electrodes of different sizes are displayed. It is interestingly seen that the potential drop in the diffuse EDL actually becomes less pronounced at smaller electrodes. The major reason for this should be due to the distinctly low dielectric constants of solvent in the EDL at nanoelectrodes, which make the potential drops mainly occur in the compact part of EDL. Thus, there are two counterbalancing factors governing the EDL effect on the mass transport at nanoelectrodes. The decreasing CDL thickness tends to enhance the overlap between EDLs and the CDL, whereas the decreasing dielectric constant of solvent tends to make the EDL more compact.
 Fig. 7  The potential distribution in the diffuse part of EDLs at interfaces of spherical electrodes of different radii. 
Although the Booth and 3-state models predict similar voltammetric responses in the limiting current region, their prediction in the kinetic regions differs considerably. As shown in Fig. 5, even at electrodes of 100 nm in radius, the polarization curve obtained by using the 3-state dielectric model departs from that predicted by the Booth model in the kinetic region. A question is that which one of the 3-state and Booth models is more realistic. We think that the 3-state model should be more accurate at electrochemical interfaces. Although the Booth model is more delicate in correlating the dielectric constant and the electric field strength, it neglects the short range interaction of water dipoles with electrodes and solute ions, which would become crucially important at the electrochemical interface.
The reliability of the 3-state model is also implied by the convergence of its prediction to the conventional diffusion-based voltammetric theory at large electrodes. As shown in Fig. 8, the steady-state polarization curve given by the dynamic EDL model together with the 3-state dielectric model is nearly identical to that predicted by the conventional diffusion-based voltammetric theory (eqn (6)) at electrodes of 100 nm in radius, at which the EDL effect should be negligible as suggested in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 8  Comparison of steady-state polarization curves calculated using the dynamic EDL model under 3-state dielectric distribution with that predicted by eqn (6) for spherical electrodes of different sizes. The calculation parameters are the same as that for Fig. 1. 
It should be pointed out that the results and discussions shown above are based on the reduction of a −1 valence species. As shown in Fig. 9, the magnitude of the EDL effect on the limiting mass transport rate strongly depends on the charges of redox species as well as the electrode sizes. For −3 valence species, ca. 20% deviation of the limiting current from the diffusion limiting current occurs at electrodes of less than 10 nm radius. At the 100 nm and larger electrodes, however, nearly no deviation occurs regardless of the reactant charges. This means that the limiting current-based voltammetric analysis can be performed using the conventional theories at electrodes larger than 100 nm.
 Fig. 9  Ratio between the limiting current density predicated by the dynamic EDL model and that predicted by eqn (6) for the reduction of variously charged reactants at electrodes of different sizes. Other parameters are the same as that for Fig. 1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. 
2.4 EDL effect on the ET kinetics
One of the most important applications of nanometer-sized electrodes is to measure the fast heterogeneous ET kinetics. Since the first report on the ET kinetic study at nanoelectrodes by Penner et al.,25 there has been a long dispute on whether the ET kinetics at nanoelectrodes is significantly altered by the EDL effect or not, and whether the conventional voltammetric theories can be used to extract the kinetic parameters of heterogeneous ET reaction at nanoelectrodes.
To reliably extract the heterogeneous ET kinetic parameters using steady-state voltammetric responses of ultramicroelectrodes, it is essential that the associated electrode process is electrochemically irreversible or quasi-reversible, that is, the mass transport rates are not slower than the ET rates. The reversibility of an electrode process can be evaluated by the value of γ = k0r0/D. Usually, γ values of less than 1 would produce quasi-reversible electrode processes, while irreversible electrode processes may be achieved as γ is less than 0.1.51,52 Thus, for ET reactions with k0 larger than 1 cm s−1, electrodes smaller than 100 nm in radii should be used for kinetic analysis. As seen from Fig. 8, the steady-state voltammetric responses of electrodes less than 100 nm in radii may deviate from the prediction of the conventional voltammetric theory in the kinetic region. The magnitude of the deviation depends on the electrode sizes and the reactant charges.
The half-wave potential (E1/2), at which the current density reaches half of the limiting value on the steady-state polarization curve, can be used to estimate the value of k0 of an ET reaction. For reversible electrode processes, E1/2 is nearly identical to , while it varies with mass transport rates (electrode sizes) in quasi-reversible and irreversible cases. According to eqn (6), one can have the following relation between E1/2 and γ by assuming that the transfer coefficient α = 0.5. (8)For totally irreversible electrode processes (γ < 0.1), eqn (8) can be simplified into42,52 (9)

Table 2 summarizes the E1/2 values of polarization curves calculated by combining the dynamic EDL model with the 3-state dielectric model for the reductive ET reactions with k0 of 1 cm s−1 and reactants of different charges (z) at spherical electrodes of different radii. The values of apparent rate constants (k0a) estimated using these E1/2 values according to eqn (8) are also given.
Table 2 Values of half wave potentials and apparent rate constants predicted by the dynamic EDL model for ET reaction of 1 cm s−1k0 with reactants of different charges at electrodes of different radii





z = +3

z = −1

z = −2

z = −3

z = 0



r
0/nm

E
1/2/mV

k
0a/cm s−1

E
1/2/mV

k
0a/cm s−1

E
1/2/mV

k
0a/cm s−1

E
1/2/mV

k
0a/cm s−1

E
1/2/mV




5
−132
1.36
−160
0.79
−168
0.67
−176
0.57
−147


10
−102
1.32
−126
0.80
−134
0.69
−142
0.59
−115


20
−73
1.24
−91
0.84
−97
0.75
−103
0.66
−83


100
−23
1.06
−26
0.95
−26
0.92
27
0.90
−25




The E1/2 values obtained for z = 0 are identical to that predicted by eqn (8) with 1 cm s−1k0. For reactants with nonzero charges, the E1/2 values predicted by the dynamic EDL model deviate from the prediction of eqn (8). If one uses these E1/2 values to estimate the ET rate constants according to eqn (8), values different from the real k0 values would be obtained. The deviation becomes more pronounced for higher reactant charges and at smaller electrodes. At electrodes of 100 nm in radii, the deviation of E1/2 is only ca. 2 mV. The estimated k0a is very close to the real k0 value of 1 cm s−1k0. The most severe deviation occurs for the reduction of highly charged anions. For the reduction of a −3 valence reactant at electrodes of 10 and 5 nm radii, the obtained k0a values are about 0.6k0. Intrinsically, this should represent a significant deviation. In practical ET kinetic measurements using micro/nanometer electrodes, however, it might be within the experiment uncertainties. This seems to tell that the heterogeneous ET kinetics at nanometer-sized electrodes would be hardly distinguishable in experimental measurements from that at electrodes of micrometer and larger dimensions, which agrees with the recent results obtained by Mirkin and coworkers,27,28 who found that the rate constants for heterogeneous ET reactions obtained by fitting the steady-state voltammetric responses of nanoelectrodes with conventional voltammetric theories are compared to those previously measured at large electrodes.
3. Heterogeneous ET kinetics at nanoelectrodes: beyond the EDL effect
3.1 Applicability of the BV and classic Marcus–Hush theories
Electrochemical ET kinetics is most commonly treated with the phenomenological BV theory, which, similar to the Brønsted–Evans–Polanyi (BEP) relation in heterogeneous catalysis,56–59 assumes a linear dependence of the ET activation free energy on the electrode potential without considering the molecular details about the activation process. Taking the reductive ET reaction as an example, the standard rate constant in BV theory is formulated as (10)
The linear relation between the activation free energy and reaction free energy implies that the free energy curves of reactants and products are linear. Despite this oversimplification, the BV theory has shown general applicability in treating the kinetics of electrochemical ET reactions. This is easy to be understood when considering that any curves can be reasonably linearized in a narrow region around a point by performing the Taylor series expansion. On this basis, BV theory should apply only at potentials very close to  of the studied ET reaction. This immediately makes it problematic in treating the voltammetric responses of nanoelectrodes, at which the high mass transport rates would shift the ET kinetics-governed voltammetric behaviors to potentials far away from . Thus, one may have to use more realistic ET models to perform voltammetric analysis when using electrodes of nanometer sizes.
In addition to the assumption of linear free energy curves, the BV model has another unrealistic implication in describing the heterogamous ET kinetics between molecules and metal electrodes, that is, only a narrow range of states near the Fermi level of the electrode are involved in ET processes. Considering the continuum of electrode states, the ET rate constant should be sums of the individual rates between each electronic state of the electrode weighted by the Fermi–Dirac probability of occupancy (for reduction) or vacancy (for oxidation) of the state. Chidsey, expositing on the earlier work of Levich60 and Gerischer,61 has derived rate constant expressions for heterogeneous ET based on density of states (DOS) of electrodes by assuming that both the electronic coupling and the DOS are independent of the energy level (ε) and that the ET rate for individual states can be treated with the classic Marcus–Hush (MH) ET model. We may call this treatment the Marcus–Hush–Chidsey (MHC) model, which can be expressed in the following modified form, in which λ refers to the reorganization energy of the solvent shell. (11)It is easily seen that Chidsey's rate constants will be approximately equal to the BV ones as the applied electrode potential E is very close to . An important prediction of the Chidsey formalism is that the rate constants for an electrochemical ET will finally reach a limiting value at large , rather than increasing unlimitedly as predicted by the BV formalism.
Feldberg62 has recently shown that the applicability of the BV theory depends on γ and λ. As γ and λ are sufficiently small so that γ < 10^(1 − λ/10kbT), the voltammetric responses predicted by the BV model would significantly deviate from that given by the MHC model. In the case that γ > 10^(2 − λ/20kbT), the results predicted by the BV and Chidsey formalisms would be indistinguishable.62 As stated earlier, γ is a measure of the irreversibility of the electrode process. Small γ means that the kinetics-governed voltammetric responses would extend to potentials far away from . In addition, γ decreases linearly with decreasing r0. Therefore, the BV formalism would become increasingly inapplicable at nanometer electrodes.
We have performed systematic simulations to investigate the deviation of BV prediction from that of the MHC formalism at electrodes of various sizes for ET reactions of various k0 and λ. The general conclusion was that,63 for ET reactions with k0 near 0.1 cm s−1, the BV theory could predict voltammetric responses visibly deviated from that expected by the MHC model as the electrode radii are smaller than 50 nm, while this occurs as r0 approaches 10 nm for ET reactions with k0 around 1.0 cm s−1. According to the half-wave-potential difference in the polarization curves predicted by the BV and MHC models, the deviation magnitudes of the rate constants obtained by BV-based voltammetric analysis from the real k0 were estimated. It was shown that the BV-based voltammetric analysis would give standard rate constants of ca. 0.6k0 and 0.5k0, respectively, for a reaction of 0.1 cm s−1k0 and 100 kJ mol−1λ at electrodes of 20 nm and 10 nm radii. For the ET reaction with k0 of 1.0 cm s−1, an apparent standard rate constant of ∼0.8 k0 or 0.6k0 will be obtained by BV-based analysis at electrodes of 10 nm or 5 nm radius.
It should be pointed out that the above results and discussions do not consider the possible EDL effects. Considering that the EDL effect would result in enhanced apparent ET kinetics for cation reduction or anion oxidation (Table 2), the measured polarization curves at nanoelectrodes would be closer to that that predicted by the BV formalism without including the EDL effect. For anion reduction or cation oxidation, the EDL effect and the MHC formalism both predict inhibited ET kinetics as compared with the conventional BV model. In this case, the measured polarization would significantly deviate from the prediction of the conventional BV model. Therefore, BV-based voltammetric analysis would result in apparent rate constants significantly lower than the real k0.
It is also worth mentioning that the classic version of the MH model is still widely used in electrochemistry.64–67 In comparison with the BV model, the MH model adopts more realistic quadratic free energy curves, as well as provides more physical insights into the activation mechanism of the ET process. Similar to the BV model, however, the classic MH model also simplifies the multi-state electrochemical ET into a quasi-two-state process, by assuming that ET occurs mainly between the HOMO and LUMO of redox molecules with the energy states near the Fermi level of electrodes. This makes it problematic at considerably large , where it predicts an inversion of the ET rate.
The classic MH rate constant can be expressed in the form of eqn (12). One can find that the MH rate constants will reduce to the BV ones as  is much less than the value of 2(λRT)1/2/F. (12)
We have explored the possibility of using the classic MH formalism of the rate constants as an alternative to the unfriendly integrals in the MHC formalism to treat the voltammetric responses of nanoelectrodes.42,63 As shown in Fig. 10, for reactions with relatively large λ, eqn (11) and (12) predict almost identical rate constants prior to the occurrence of the Marcus inversion. However, the BV rate constants deviate from the prediction of the MH and MHC formalisms as  > 0.3 V. Only for reactions with very small λ, the MH predication shows deviation at relatively low  values (Fig. 11). This is easy to understand when considering that larger λ corresponds to less broadening of the electron donation/acceptance state of redox molecules, which would make the contribution of the non-Fermi states in electrodes insignificant to the overall ET rate.
 Fig. 10  Dependence of ET rate constants on  for a one electron ET process with relatively large λ predicted by different ET theories. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 11  Dependence of ET rate constants on  for a one electron ET process with relatively small λ predicted by different ET theories. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
If the steady-state voltammetric response of an electrode reaches the mass transport control at potential where the MH rate constants deviate insignificantly from those predicted by the MHC formalism, one thus can use the relatively straightforward MH model for ET kinetics to perform voltammetric analysis. Fig. 12 shows the steady-state polarization curves calculated according to different ET models for a relatively facile one-electron reduction reaction (1.0 cm s−1k0) having different λ at spherical electrodes of 5 nm radius. In order to clearly compare the prediction of different ET models, the polarization curves have been calculated without considering the possible effects of the diffuse EDL. At such small electrodes, the MH model predicts nearly identical voltammetric response to that given by the MHC model for ET reaction with 100 KJ mol−1λ. For reaction of 50 KJ mol−1λ, the two models also give very similar prediction in the kinetic region. In the limiting current region, the MH model significantly underestimates the current.
 Fig. 12  Steady-state polarization curves predicted by the BV, MH and MHC models, respectively, at electrodes of 5 nm radius for one electron reduction reactions of 1.0 cm s−1k0 and different λ. 
As shown in Fig. 13, when electrodes of 10 nm radius are considered, the MH and MHC models give nearly identical voltammetric responses in both the kinetic and limiting current region, regardless of λ. Thus, it seems that the classic MH formalism in most cases can be used to treat the voltammetric responses of nanoelectrodes, unless for the ET reactions with very small λ (e.g., <50 KJ mol−1) at electrodes smaller than 5 nm.
 Fig. 13  Steady-state polarization curves predicted by the BV, MH and MHC models, respectively, at electrodes of 10 nm radius for one electron reduction reaction of 1.0 cm s−1k0 and 50 KJ mol−1λ. 
It should be pointed out that the ET kinetics at extremely small electrodes could also be complicated by the possible variation in the DOS of electrodes and the electronic coupling of electrodes with the redox molecules. For metals, the visible size-dependent DOS may occur only as their physical sizes are below 2 nm so that only a limited number of atoms are involved and the continuum of energy states breaks. In addition, although the very tip end of a nanoelectrode may contain a very small number of atoms, it remains a part of a metal wire of micrometer scales rather than an isolated nano-object. Therefore, the size-dependence of the electrode DOS should occur at electrodes of even smaller sizes. In practice, electrodes smaller than 5 nm in radii are seldom used in current electrochemical studies due to the fabrication and characterization challenges.
3.2 Long distance ET effects at nanoelectrodes
In previous sections, it has been simply assumed in the models and discussions that the standard rate constant for a heterogeneous ET reaction at electrodes of certain materials is an intrinsic quantity independent of electrode sizes and geometries. This could become inappropriate as the electrode sizes are comparable with the effective electron tunneling distances. It is known that the heterogeneous ET occurs through electron tunneling between the electrode and the electroactive molecules in the interfacial region. It has also been realized for some time that ET between an acceptor state and a donor state can occur over a range of distances rather than only at the distance of closest approach. Accordingly, the redox molecules that can transfer electrons with electrodes should be distributed in an extended region adjacent to PCA rather than only at PCA as treated in most of the current voltammetric treatments.42,67
The electron tunneling probability depends on the coupling between the electronic states at the electrode surface and that in the electroactive molecules. The latter varies with the distance through which the electron tunneling takes place.68,69 The usually quoted k0 for an ET reaction in conventional voltammetric treatments should represent an integral of the distance-dependent electron tunneling probability over the entire extended ET region. Feldberg70 has shown that the extended ET may have experimentally measurable implications for the voltammetric responses when the diffusion effect is diminished, which would be satisfied at ultrasmall electrodes, especially those with nanometer sizes.
We have considered the effects of the extended ET on the voltammetric responses of nanoelectrodes of spherical63 and planar42,67 geometries. Fig. 14 illustrates schematically how the heterogeneous ET rate at a nanospherical electrode may be different from that at a relatively large electrode. For a redox molecule located above the electrode surfaces with a normal distance of z to the surface, the numbers of surface sites with site-surface separation of x can be expressed by eqn (13) and (14) respectively, for the large electrode (npx) and the nanospherical electrode (nsx), in which ρ refers to the site density per surface area and A = r0/(r0 + z) (see ref. 63 for derivation details). npx = ρ2πxdx(13) (14)For the large electrode, the x in principle can be any distances larger than z, whereas it has a maximum (L) for the spherical electrode which satisfies eqn (15), (15)
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the different ET probability for an electroactive molecule on a large electrode and a spherical nanoelectrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
The molecule-site tunneling probability at separation x can be expressed by eqn (16), in which p0 refers to the probability at the distance of the closest approach (μ) and β is a characteristic constant representing the decaying rate of the electronic coupling with distance. p(x) = p0e−β(x−μ)(16)Thus, the total molecule–surface tunneling probability for a molecule with normal distance of z to the electrode surface can be expressed by eqn (17) and (18) respectively, for the large and nanospherical electrodes. At nanoelectrodes, the electrode radii affect the value of Ωs(r0,z) by changing the values of L and A, both of which decrease upon decreasing the r0. As r0 ≫ z, eqn (17) will become equivalent to eqn (18). (17) (18)Integration of Ωs(r0,z) and Ωp(z) over the entire extended ET region would give the total electron tunneling probability, from which an overall ET rate constant can be obtained. At large electrodes, this will give the usually quoted k0. At nanoelectrodes, however, a radius dependent rate constant, k0(r0), would be obtained, which is given in eqn (19). (19)The k0(r0) ∼ r0 dependence predicted by eqn (19) is shown in Fig. 15. One can see that k0(r0) starts to deviate from k0 as r0 goes smaller than 10 nm. At the same electrode size, the deviation magnitude slightly varies with β. At electrodes of 5 nm radius, k0(r0) is ca. 0.87k0 if β = 1.0 Å−1. To distinguish such relatively small deviations should be experimentally difficult at the current state due to the difficulties in fabrication and characterization of electrodes smaller than 5 nm. However, this may be of some significance in dye-sensitized solar cells, in which the ET kinetics between molecular dye and semiconductor nanoparticles sized a few nanometers plays an important role in the energy conversion efficiency.71
 Fig. 15  Calculated dependence of the ET rate constant on electrode radius according to eqn (19). The numbers indicate the values of β with unit of Å−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
For nanoelectrodes with planar geometries, for example, nanodisk electrodes, the extended ET can bring about significant surface heterogeneity in the ET kinetics as well as the electrode size effect.42,67 In another word, the ET rate constants could vary with the position at an electrode surface. This is mainly due to the increased edge effect at the planar nanoelectrodes. As shown in the inset of Fig. 16, the electron tunneling probability between the electrode and the redox molecules located near the edge of the disk would be smaller than those at the disk center. Such an edge effect of the ET probability would negligibly impact the overall rate constant of an ET reaction at conventional large electrodes.
 Fig. 16  Radial profiles of ET rate constants at disk electrodes of various sizes calculated according to eqn (20) with β of 1 Å−1. The inset is an illustration of the edge effect of electron tunneling probability. 
The radial dependence of ET rate constant for a heterogeneous ET reaction which exhibits a rate constant of k0 at conventional large electrodes can be expressed as (see ref. 42 for derivation details), (20)Fig. 16 shows the calculated rate constant profiles along the surface of disk electrodes of different radii according to eqn (20). Pronounced radial dependence can be seen at electrodes less than 10 nm in radii. It is also seen in Fig. 16 that the effective electron transfer plane extends significantly outside the electrode surface in radial direction at electrodes less than 5 nm in radii.
4. Experimental studies of nanosize effects in the electrochemistry at nanoelectrodes
Experimental study of electrochemistry at nanoelectrodes can be traced back to the late 1980s, when White and coworkers72 developed nanoband electrodes as small as 5 nm in width and observed deviated mass transport behavior of redox molecules from the prediction of the conventional theories. The report by Penner et al.25 in 1990 should represent the earliest attempt to use nanoelectrodes in measuring the kinetics of fast heterogeneous ET reactions. This work has demonstrated the great potential of nanoelectrodes for fast measuring fast electrochemical kinetics and led to great interest in developing nanometer-sized electrochemical probes. In the meantime, it also exposed the perils of using nanometer-sized electrodes in voltammetric analysis without proper characterization. For example, several researchers have showed immediately after Penner et al.'s report that the recession of the electrode into the surrounding insulating sheath, which easily occurs in nanoelectrode fabrication, could resulted in large errors in ET kinetics determination.73 Since then, tremendous efforts have been made in last two decades to improve the fabrication and characterization of nanoelectrodes,20,26–29,74 so that the mass transport and ET kinetics at nanoscopic interfaces can be investigated on a relatively reliable basis.
Current methods for fabricating nanometer-sized electrodes include partial insulation of sharpened metal or carbon wires with polymers23,24,38,39 or glasses,25,41,74 laser-assisted pulling of micropipette-embedded metal wires,18,26,28,29,32,33 lithography-based techniques,75 and so on. Despite enormous progress, the controllable fabrication of structurally well-defined nanoelectrodes remains an experimental challenge. In comparison, the accurate size and microstructure characterization of nanoelectrodes is even more challenging. In earlier studies, the sizes of nanoelectrodes have been mainly estimated from the steady-state voltammetric responses with assumed geometries. The reliability of the sole voltammetric characterization of nanoelectrodes without accurate structural information has been long questioned.18,20,26–29,74–76 Recent nanoelectrode studies have mostly combined the voltammetric measurements and high-resolution electron microscopy observation to obtain more accurate size and shape information.20,26,76 Using high-resolution scanning electron microscopy, Agyekum et al.76 showed that the physical geometric radius matched the effective radius deduced from voltammetric responses very well when the effective radius is larger than 20 nm, while there was a significant difference between the effective and the geometric electrode radii when the effective electrode radius is smaller than 20 nm. To image electrodes smaller than 10 nm has been extremely difficult. In a recent report, Li et al.26 have managed to obtain TEM images of a 3 nm-radius Pt nanoelectrode sealed in quartz. For a detailed summary of the fabrication and characterization of various nanoelectrodes, the readers may refer to the recent review by Zhang and coworkers20 and references therein.
The nanoscale effects in the ET kinetics and mass transport dynamics are among the most interested issues in the electrochemistry at nanoelectrodes. Recently, Mirkin and coworkers27,28 have comprehensively reviewed various issues concerning the nanoelectrochemical measurements of fast heterogeneous ET kinetics. These authors concluded, based on a large number of their own data and others, that the proper electrode characterization and data analysis of steady-state voltammetry at nanoscopic interfaces of electrodes larger than 10 nm in radii can yield relatively reliable values of kinetic parameters for very fast ET processes. In most cases, the ET kinetics and mass transport processes at these relatively “large” electrodes are not significantly altered by the “non-classical” phenomena. In contrast, kinetic measurements at ultra-small (e.g., r0 < 5 nm) electrodes might be less reliable at this moment because of unresolved experimental issues and the lack of comprehensive theory. These conclusions agree with the implication and prediction gained in the previous sections in this Perspective. The interested readers may refer to the review by Mirkin and coworkers for the experimental progress in ET kinetics at the nanoscale electrode/electrolyte interface. In the following, we will focus on the experimental studies on the electrochemical nanosize effects in the mass transport of electroactive species at nanoelectrode interfaces.
4.1 EDL effects on the mass transport in the presence of an excess of supporting electrolyte
As discussed in Section 2.1, visible penetration of EDLs into the CDL would occur only at electrodes of a few nanometer radii when the solution is adequately supported by a background electrolyte, and the resulted deviation of the limiting current could be rather small in magnitude due to the cancelling effect of the solvent dielectric at nanometer-sized electrodes. Therefore, observation of the EDL effect in the mass transport in the presence of an excess of supporting electrolyte would be a challenging task and the related study has been rather rare.
In a recent study, we have tackled this challenge by delicately analyzing the dependencies of the limiting current obtained on nanodisk electrodes of a series of sizes for reactants of different charges.41 A so-called “inverted heat-sealing” approach was employed in the electrode fabrication process to eliminate the possible tiny interstice between the glass sheath and the electrode wire, so that well-defined limiting transport currents could be obtained at nanometer-sized electrodes. It was found that the limiting currents (iL) and the concentrations of electroactive ions (ca) satisfy linear relations at electrodes as small as 5 nm (Fig. 17a), which seemed to imply that the classic voltammetric theory is applicable at such small electrodes in the presence of an excess of inert electrolyte. However, careful inspection revealed an electrode size matter in the iL ∼ ca linearity at electrodes smaller than 10 nm in radii.
 Fig. 17  The dependence of the limiting current on the concentration of Fe(CN)63− at Pt disk electrodes of various sizes in 1.0 M KCl solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
According to the conventional diffusion-based voltammetric theory, the value of iL/r0 changes linearly with ca and the corresponding slope is determined by the diffusion coefficient of the reactant and the electron transfer number (n) of the reaction, and is independent of electrode size. As shown in Fig. 17b, the iL/r0 ∼ ca data obtained at electrodes larger than 10 nm almost fell into the same linearity as expected. However, fitting iL/r0 ∼ ca data obtained at electrodes of less than 10 nm gave linear lines obviously deviating from that obtained at larger electrodes. Smaller the electrode size, greater the deviation was. Considering that D and n for outer-sphere ET reactions would not change with electrode sizes, we believed that the altered iL ∼ ca linearity at nanoelectrodes was due to the nanosize-induced merging of EDLs and the CDL.
Starting from the Nernst–Planck equation, we can have the following equation to formulate the relation between the limiting current and the reactant concentration, iL = AnFD′r0ca(21)where A is a constant depending on the geometry of electrodes, and D′ = D[cr0/ca + (zFr0/RT)∇φ∇c/ca], in which c is the local concentration at the PCA. According to the interfacial potential and concentration distributions calculated using the dynamic EDL model under the limiting transport conditions at an electrode of 5 nm in radius for different concentrations of Fe(CN6)3− in 1.0 M KCl, the values of c/ca, ∇c/ca and ∇φ are approximately independent on ca. Eqn (21) thus predicting that there is indeed a linear relation between the limiting current and reactant concentration even in the case when the EDL effect functions at the nanoelectrode interface. The slopes of this linearity would give an apparent diffusion coefficient, D′, which changes with the electrode sizes.
According to the iL ∼ ca data given in Fig. 17, the apparent diffusion coefficient at an electrode of 5 nm radius was found to be about 80% of that obtained at an electrode of 9.7 μm in radius, which meant a ca. 20% depression of limiting current at a 5 nm electrode due to the EDL effect. This reasonably agreed with the prediction of the dynamic EDL model shown in Section 2.3 (Fig. 9). Such a deviation could be easily considered a scattering of experimental data. However, the iL/r0 ∼ ca dependence and the corresponding theoretical analysis shown above indicated that it was a result of the enhanced EDL effects at nanoscale electrochemical interfaces.
To further confirm the EDL effect on the mass transport at nanometer electrodes, the limiting currents obtained for the reduction of highly charged cation (Ru(NH6)3+) and anion (Fe(CN)63−) at disk electrodes of different sizes were compared. As shown in Fig. 18, the ratios between the limiting currents for the cationic and anionic reactants are very close to one for electrodes larger than 20 nm, in accordance with the expectation of the diffusion-based mass transport theory. Whereas, the ratio gradually departs from one as electrodes go below 10 nm. Smaller the electrode size, higher the ratio is.
 Fig. 18  Ratio between the limiting currents for the reduction of Ru(NH6)3+ and Fe(CN6)3− in 1.0 M KCl. Reprinted partly with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
4.2 EDL effects on the mass transport in non-supported media
Since that the EDL thickness can be increased to tens even hundreds of nanometers in dilute solutions of redox probes without a supporting electrolyte, the overlap between EDLs and the CDL can occur at electrodes of up to hundreds of nanometers, thus allowing the EDL effect in mass transport to be readily studied. A number of works in this regard have been reported, mainly by White and coworkers,38 Compton and coworkers43,77 and the authors of this Perspective.39,42,67,78
It is known in electrochemistry that the removal of the supporting electrolyte would bring about significant electromigration contribution to the mass transport of electroactive ions. According to the theoretical analysis by Amatore,79 the limiting current (IL) under the mixed diffusion and migration mass transport in the absence of a supporting electrolyte should satisfy the following relation with the diffusion limiting current (IdL) at the same electrode in the presence of a supporting electrolyte, (22)in which the sign (±) is positive for n < z and negative for n > z. According to this relation, the value of IL/IdL depends only on the charge of the reactant (z) and the electron transfer number in the electrode reaction (n, positive for reduction and negative for oxidation), and is independent of the dimensions of the electrode. This relation has been derived under the assumption of electroneutrality in the CDL and considered nothing about the EDL. However, its prediction has been verified experimentally on micrometer-sized electrodes with a range of redox probes, suggesting that the EDL indeed has a trivial effect on the mass transport of electroactive species at electrodes of conventional large scales.
The deviation of the IL/IdL values from the prediction of eqn (22) due to EDL effects was first demonstrated by White and coworkers38b for the oxidation of FcTMA+ (n = −1 and z = +1) using nanometer-sized Pt electrodes fabricated through electrophoretic paint deposition. Chen and Kucernak39 also showed such deviation in an earlier study for the reduction of several redox systems, including Ru(NH6)3+/2+, IrCl62−/3− and Fe(CN)63−/4−, at carbon nanoelectrodes.
Recently, we have used a new type of nanoelectrodes to demonstrate the EDL effect on the mass transport of electroactive ions in the absence of a supporting electrolyte. The electrodes were fabricated by attaching single flakes of reduced graphene oxides (r-GOs) of nanometer and submicrometer dimensions on the self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of n-dodecanethiol modified on Au ultramicroelectrodes of appropriately small sizes (Fig. 19).78 By investigating the steady-state voltammetric responses of the fabricated r-GO electrodes of different sizes for the reduction of Ru(NH3)63+, MV2+ and Fe(CN)63− in the presence and absence of 1 M KCl, the corresponding IL/IdL values as a function of r-GO sizes were obtained. The results are shown in Fig. 20, in which the apparent sizes of r-GO flakes are given in the form of the dimensionless diffusion limiting current (IdL*), obtained by normalizing the limiting currents of the r-GO electrodes in the presence of the supporting electrolyte by that of a bare Au disk electrode of 10 μm diameter in the same solution. In this way, an effective diameter can be estimated for each r-GO flake according to d = 10 × IdL* (μm) by assuming that the flake has a disk shape.
 Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of r-GO electrode fabrication. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 20  Ratios between the limiting currents for the reduction of Ru(NH3)63+, MV2+ and Fe(CN)63− in the absence and presence of 1 M KCl as a function of r-GO sizes (given as the dimensionless diffusion limiting current IdL*). The dotted lines are the ratios calculated from eqn (22). 
As seen in Fig. 20, the removal of the supporting electrolyte led to enhanced and inhibited limiting currents, respectively, for the reduction of cation (Ru(NH3)63+ and MV2+) and anion (Fe(CN)63−). At electrodes of relatively large IdL*, the enhancement or the inhibition was nearly invariant with IdL* and agreed reasonably with the prediction of eqn (22). As IdL* was below some small values, the IL/IdL started to depart from the relatively constant values seen on large r-GO electrodes, with the departure magnitude increasing with the decrease in the r-GO size.
The diffuse EDL effect seemed to be much more pronounced for the reduction of Fe(CN)63−, with the deviation of IL/IdL from the prediction of eqn (22) occurring at a considerable large IdL* (∼0.2) which corresponded to an effective radius of ca. 1.0 μm. Similar phenomena were also observed previously on Pt and carbon microelectrodes,80,81 which has been attributed to the formation of a passivation layer through ferricyanide decomposition81 and/or the diffuse EDL effect on the ET kinetics,80i.e., the so-called Frumkin effect1 due to the relatively sluggish kinetics of the Fe(CN)63−/4− system. It was found that the steady-state voltammetric responses for this probe became severely lagged at small r-GO flakes in the absence of a supporting electrolyte.78 At r-GOs of nanometer dimensions, the voltammetric currents were nearly completely inhibited upon removal of the supporting electrolyte. This seemed to tell that there was indeed an increased inhibition of the ET kinetics as well as the MT dynamics due to the diffuse EDL effect at interfaces of smaller r-GOs. For the reduction of Ru(NH3)63+ and MV2+, the diffuse EDL effects were only seen on the MT dynamics because that the ET kinetics are too facile so that the limiting transport occurs well before the appearance of the kinetic effect of the diffuse EDL.
5. Conclusions and outlook
This Perspective highlights some of the electrochemical nanosize effects at the nanoelectrode/electrolyte interface, and has shown how the conventional electrochemical treatments of interfacial structures and kinetics at the electrode/electrolyte interface may become invalid due to these nanosize effects. The main conclusions are detailed as follows.
(1) Depending on the concentrations of the supporting electrolyte, significant penetration of diffuse EDLs into the CDL may occur at interfaces of electrodes from a few to tens of nanometers, which on one hand makes the electroneutrality assumption in conventional treatments of electrochemical mass transport problematic, and on the other hand renders the ion distributions in the diffuse EDL far apart from equilibrium. Accordingly, the nanoelectrode interface bearing a redox reaction should be treated with a dynamic EDL, rather than the separated EDL and CDL as happens in conventional electrochemistry.
In the dynamic EDLs, the concentration distribution of various solution species, the electrostatic potential distribution and the dielectric distribution of solvent are strongly coupled to each other. These distributions are also altered by the electrode size and the reaction rate (current density). In results, the EDL equation describing the potential and charge density profiles at the interface and the voltammetric equation relating the current density and electrode potential are closely coupled, unlike that in the conventional scheme of electrochemical theories in which the EDL structure and the voltammetric responses are mostly treated independently.
(2) The EDL structure at an electrode/electrolyte interface vitally depends on the coupling between the electrostatic potential distribution and the dielectric distribution of solvent. In order that the EDL effects on the mass transport and ET kinetics at nanoelectrode interfaces can be reasonably evaluated, it is necessary to have a proper description of a solvent dielectric at the electrode/electrolyte interface. Although the Booth model for the water dielectric is more delicate in correlating the dielectric constant and the electric field strength, it neglects the short range interaction of water dipoles with electrodes and solute ions, which would become crucially important at the electrochemical interface. In comparison, the 3-state dielectric model proposed by Bockris should be relatively more realistic for water at the electrode/electrolyte interface.
(3) There are two counterbalancing factors that govern the EDL effect on the mass transport and ET kinetics at nanoelectrode interfaces. The decreasing CDL thickness tends to enhance the overlap between EDLs and the CDL. Whereas, the decreasing dielectric constant of solvent tends to make the EDL more compact at nanoelectrode interfaces, therefore to decrease the overlap between the EDL and CDL. In results, the EDL only has a relatively mild impact on the mass transport and ET kinetics at nanoelectrode interfaces.
The EDL-induced deviation of the mass transport rate and ET kinetics from the prediction of conventional voltammetric theories depends on the charges of redox species as well as the electrode sizes. For the reduction of −3 valence species at electrodes of 5–10 nm radii, for instance, ca. 20% deviation of the limiting current from the diffusion limiting current would occur and an apparent rate constant of ca. 0.6k0 could be produced. Such deviations could be intrinsically significant, but are on the boundary of the experimental uncertainties in voltammetric measurements using nanoelectrodes. Combination of theoretical prediction and proper data analysis, however, could be able to identify these deviations. At electrodes of 100 nm and larger radii, a negligible effect of EDLs occurs regardless of the reactant charges.
(4) The assumption of a linear relation between the activation free energy and reaction free energy and the implication of only the electronic states near the Fermi level of electrodes participating in ET processes make the commonly used phenomenological BV theory applicable only at small values of , therefore problematic in treating the voltammetric responses of nanoelectrodes, at which the high mass transport rates shift the ET kinetics-governed voltammetric behaviors to potentials far away from .
The applicability of the BV formalism depends on the electrochemical irreversibility measured by the value of γ = k0r0/D and the reorganization energy, λ, of the studying ET reaction. Smaller γ and λ would cause larger deviation of BV prediction from that of the more realistic MHC formalism. For common λ (∼100 KJ mol−1), the BV formalism could predict voltammetric responses visibly deviated from that expected by the MHC model at electrodes of smaller than 50 nm for ET reactions with k0 near 0.1 cm s−1, while this occurs as r0 approaches 10 nm for ET reactions with k0 around 1.0 cm s−1.
Although the classic Marcus–Hush ET kinetic model also assumes that the heterogeneous ET occurs mainly between the HOMO and LUMO of redox molecules with the electrode states near the Fermi energy level, the adoption of more realistic quadratic free energy curves makes it applicable in larger values of  than the BV model. Except for ET reactions involving redox moieties with λ lower than 50 KJ mol−1 at extremely small electrodes (r0 < 5 nm), the classic Marcus–Hush formalism could be a reasonable alternative to the mathematically unfriendly MHC formalism for treating the voltammetric responses of nanoelectrodes.
(5) The long-distance electron tunneling can result in an electrode size dependence of k0 as r0 goes less than 10 nm, with visible deviation from the constant value observed at large electrodes occurring at electrodes smaller than 5 nm in r0. However, the magnitude of the deviation might be too low to be distinguished experimentally due to the difficulties in fabrication and characterization of such small electrodes at the current state.
The above implications and conclusions are of fundamental significance in electrochemistry. In addition, the nanoscale electrochemical interfaces considered in this Perspective are also widely found in a variety of processes and/or areas, such as growth of nanoparticles or nanowires in solution, use of SPM probes in solution, nanoparticle-based energy conversion and storage and electrochemical sensing, and so on. To be more relevant to these problems, knowledge on the mechanism and kinetics of charge transport, transfer and storage at interfaces of electrodes smaller than 5 nm is highly desired. Experimentally, this requires developing new electrode fabrication and characterization methods since that most of the current fabrication approaches are largely incapable of making such small electrodes. Theoretically, a number of issues should be considered at interfaces of such small electrodes. First, the applicability of the continuum and mean-field based Poisson and Nernst–Planck equations used in current theoretical modelling and simulation should be verified since the sizes of molecules become important at the interface of such small electrodes. In addition, the surface atomic structures, for example, the distributions of terrace and border atoms, on the surface of such small electrodes would be different from that on the relatively larger electrodes. This will alter the surface electronic structures, therefore the charge transfer and storage mechanism and kinetics. Therefore, atomic level modeling and simulation of the structures and processes at the nanoscale electrode/electrolyte interface are highly expected.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the financial support from the National Basic Research Program of China (Grant No. 2012CB932800) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (21173162, 21073137 and 20973131).
Notes and references

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical methods: fundamentals and applications, 2nd ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .

          S. Kalinin and A. Gruverman, Scanning Probe Microscopy: Electrical and Electromechanical Phenomena at the Nanoscale, Springer-Verlag, New York,  2007 Search PubMed .
Y. M. Li and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2289–2295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Dillon, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6856–6872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Nandasiri, R. Sanghavi, S. Kuchibhatla and S. Thevuthasan, Nanosci. Nanotechnol. Lett., 2012, 4, 124–131 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Fan, C. Y. Wang and M. M. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 154–174 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Long, C. M. Thi, Y. Yong, M. Nogami and M. Ohtaki, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2013, 13, 4799–4824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Naoi, W. Naoi, S. Aoyagi, J. I. Miyamoto and T. Kamino, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1075–1083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, R. S. Liu, L. Zhang, J. J. Zhang and A. D. P. Wilkinson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5654–5671 RSC .
F. Chen, H. Q. Jiang, A. M. Kiefer, A. M. Clausen, Y. H. Ting, A. E. Wendt, B. J. Ding and M. G. Lagally, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 444 CrossRef PubMed .
G. M. Chapman, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 114, 120–124 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Trimmer, J. L. Hudson, M. Kock and R. Schuster, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 3327 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. A. C. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, Chem. Rev., 2012, 41, 6944–6976 RSC ; 
  (b) I. Heller, J. Kong, H. A. Heering, K. A. Williams, S. G. Lemay and C. Dekker, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 137–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) R. L. McCreery, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2646–2687 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J. Chlistunoff, D. Cliffel and A. J. Bard, Thin Solid Films, 1995, 257, 166–184 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. Kucur, W. Bücking and T. Nann, Microchim. Acta, 2008, 160, 299–308 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. K. Haram, A. Kshirsagar, Y. D. Gujarathi, P. P. Ingole, O. A. Nene, G. B. Markad and S. P. Nanavati, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6243–6249 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) P. P. Ingole, G. B. Markad, D. Saraf, L. Tatikondewar, O. Nene, A. Kshirsagar and S. K. Haram, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7376–7383 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 49–72 RSC ; 
  (b) L. Bertoluzzi, L. Badia-Bou, F. Fabregat-Santiago, S. Gimenez and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1334–1339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) E. Wierzbinski, R. Venkatramani, K. L. Davis, S. Bezer, J. Kong, Y. Xing, E. Borguet, C. Achim, D. N. Beratan and D. H. Waldeck, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5391–5401 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) R. L. McCreery, Chem. Rec., 2012, 12, 149–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) R. L. McCreery, H. Yana and A. J. Bergren, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1065–1081 RSC .

  (a) M. T. M. Koper, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2054–2073 RSC ; 
  (b) 
            F. Maillard, in Fuel cell Catalysis: a surface science approach, ed., M. T. M. Koper, Wiley-Interscience,  2009, pp. 507–568 Search PubMed .

  (a) Y. Sun, Y. Dai, Y. W. Liu and S. L. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 2278–2285 RSC ; 
  (b) K. Mayrhofer, B. Blizanac, M. Arenz, V. Stamenkovic, P. Ross and N. Markovic, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14433–14440 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) K. Kinoshita, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 845–848 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Arenz, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, V. Stamenkovic, B. B. Blizanac, T. Tomoyuki, P. N. Ross and N. M. Markovic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6819–6829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Kissling, D. O. Milesa and D. J. Fermin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21175–21185 RSC .

  (a) J. T. Cox and B. Zhang, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2012, 5, 253–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. M. Oja, M. Wood and B. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 85, 473–486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Yeh and H. B. Shi, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2010, 2, 176–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Murray, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2688–2720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Watkins, J. Y. Chen, H. S. White, H. D. Abruña, E. Maisonhaute and C. Amatore, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 3962–3971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Slevin, N. J. Gray, J. V. Macpherson, M. A. Webb and P. R. Unwin, Electrochem. Commun., 1999, 1, 282–288 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Penner, M. J. Heben, T. L. Longin and N. S. Lewis, Science, 1990, 250, 1118–1121 CAS .
Y. Li, D. Bergman and B. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 5496–5502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Mirkin, Isr. J. Chem., 2010, 50, 291–305 CrossRef .
P. Sun and M. V. Mirkin, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 6526–6534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Mirkin and Y. Shao, Anal. Chem., 1997, 69, 1627–1634 CrossRef .
T. Matsue, Anal. Sci., 2013, 29, 171–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Zheng and C. M. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2061–2071 RSC .

  (a) Y. Li, J. T. Cox and B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3047–3054 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) B. K. Jena, S. J. Percival and B. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 6737–6743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Lakbub, A. Pouliwe, A. Kamasah, C. Yang and P. Sun, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 2270–2274 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Guo, C.-N. Ho and P. Sun, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 481–486 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar and S. Z. Zou, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 574–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. M. Hoeben, I. Heller, S. P. J. Albracht, C. Dekker, S. G. Lemay and H. A. Heering, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5925–5931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. M. Hoeben, F. S. Meijer, C. Dekker, S. P. J. Albracht, H. A. Heering and S. G. Lemay, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2497–2504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2437–2440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. J. Watkins and H. S. White, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5474–5483 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. L. Conyers and H. S. White, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 4441–4446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. L. Chen and A. Kucernak, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 9396–9404 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. L. Chen and A. Kucernak, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 80–85 CrossRef CAS .
R. He, S. L. Chen, F. Yang and B. L. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 3262–3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Y. W. Liu, Z. X. Liang, L. Xiong, A. L. Wang and S. L. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9878–9883 CAS .
Y. W. Liu, R. He, Q. F. Zhang and S. L. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10812–10822 CAS .
E. J. F. Dickinson and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17585–17589 CAS .

Electrode Process Kinetics Introduction (in Chinese), ed. Q. X. Cha, 3rd edn, Science Press, Beijing,  2002 Search PubMed .
A. Molina, E. Laborda, J. González and R. G. Compton, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7106–7113 RSC .

          C. M. A. Brett and A. M. O. Brett, Electrochemistry: Principles, Methods, and Applications, Oxford University Press Inc., New York,  1993 Search PubMed .
J. D. Norton, H. S. White and S. W. Feldberg, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 6772–6780 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Smith and H. S. White, Anal. Chem., 1993, 65, 3343–3353 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Oldham and A. M. Bond, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 508, 28–40 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Yang and G. G. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 335201 CrossRef .
M. V. Mirkin and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 1992, 64, 2293–2302 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. B. Oldham and C. G. Zoski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1988, 256, 11–19 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            K. B. Oldham, Steady-State Voltammetry, In Microelectrode: Theory and Application, ed., M. I. Montenegro, M. A. Queiros and J. L. Daschbach, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  1991 Search PubMed .
J. O'M. Bockris, M. A. V. Devanathan and K. Müller, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1963, 274, 55–79 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Booth, Chem. Phys., 1951, 19, 391–394 CAS .
I.-C. Yeh and M. L. Berkowitz, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 7935–7942 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. van Santen, M. Neurock and S. G. Shetty, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2005–2048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Brønsted, Chem. Rev., 1928, 5, 231–338 CrossRef .
M. G. Evans and M. Polanyi, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1938, 34, 11–24 RSC .

          R. A. van Santen and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, Chemical Kinetics and Catalysis, Plenum Press, New York,  1995 Search PubMed .

          V. G. Levich, in Physical Chemistry: An Advanced Treatise Vol. 9B, ed. H. Eyring, D. Henderson and W. Jost, Academic, New York,  1970 Search PubMed .
H. Gerischer, Photochem. Photobiol., 1972, 16, 243–260 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Feldberg, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 5176–5183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Liu and S. L. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13594–13602 CAS .

          C. J. Miller, in Physical Electrochemistry, Principles, Methods and Applications, ed. I. Rubinstein, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1995 Search PubMed .

  (a) R. A. Marcus, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1964, 15, 155–196 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. A. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys., 1965, 43, 679–701 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. S. Hush, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 470, 170–195 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. S. Hush, J. Chem. Phys., 1958, 28, 962–972 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Liu, Q. F. Zhang and S. L. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 8280–8286 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. T. Li and M. J. Weaver, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 6107–6108 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Rees, A. D. Clegg, O. V. Klymenko, B. A. Coles and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 13047–13051 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. W. Feldberg and N. Sutin, Chem. Phys., 2006, 324, 216–225 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. J. Gavaghan and S. W. Feldberg, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2000, 491, 103–110 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. W. Feldberg, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1986, 198, l–18 CrossRef .
Y. R. Liu, J. R. Jennings, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and Q. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3939–3952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Morris, D. J. Franta and H. S. White, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 3559–3564 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. S. Baranski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 307, 287–292 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. B. Oldham, Anal. Chem., 1992, 64, 646–651 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) 
            M. J. Weaver, in: Electrified Interfaces in Physics, Chemistry and Biology, ed. R. Guidelli, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  1992 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang, J. Galusha, P. G. Shiozawa, G. L. Wang, A. J. Bergren, R. M. Jones, R. J. White, E. N. Ervin, C. C. Cauley and H. S. White, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 4778–4787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) D. Krapf, B. M. Quinn, M. Y. Wu, H. W. Zandbergen, C. Dekker and S. G. Lemay, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2531–2535 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. G. Lemay, D. M. van den Broek, A. J. Storm, D. Krapf, R. M. M. Smeets, H. A. Heering and C. Dekker, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 1911–1915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Agyekum, C. Nimley, C. Yang and P. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14970–14974 CAS .

  (a) J. G. Limon-Petersen, I. Streeter, N. V. Rees and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 333 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Streeter and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13716 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. G. Limon-Petersen, I. Streeter, N. V. Rees and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17175 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, L. X. Fan, H. W. Zhong, Y. W. Liu and S. L. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10073–10080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Amatore and B. Fosset, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1988, 256, 255–268 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Rooney, D. C. Coomber and A. M. Bond, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 3486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Lee and F. C. Anson, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1992, 323, 381 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Beriet and D. Pletcher, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1993, 361, 93 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:

Shengli Chen
	Shengli Chen is currently a Luojia professor of chemistry at Wuhan University, China. He received his PhD degree from Wuhan University in 1996, after which he served as an assistant professor of chemistry at Wuhan University till 1998. He then spent two years in Department of Chemistry, Southern Methodist University (Dallas), working as a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Mark Schell on nonlinear dynamics in electrocatalytic oxidation of small fuel molecules. In October 2000, he moved to Imperial College London, where he worked on nanoelectrochemistry and fuel cell electrocatalysis as a research associate with Prof. Anthony Kucernak in Department of Chemistry. In April 2004, he came back to Wuhan University and was appointed as a professor in Department of Chemistry. His current research is focused on the nanoelectrochemistry, theoretical and computational electrochemistry, and electrocatalysis of fuel cell relevance.

Yuwen Liu
	Yuwen Liu is an associate professor of physical chemistry at the Wuhan University, China. He received his PhD from the Wuhan University in 2002. His current research interests include nanoelectrochemistry and computational electrochemistry.
δeff = r0/A	(1)
mi = Di/δeff	(2)
	(3)


c
0 (mol L−1)	1	0.1	0.01	0.001

κ (nm)	0.3	0.94	3.04	9.62
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 1  Calculated interfacial potential and reactant concentration profiles during the one-electron reduction of 5 mM Oz (z = −1) in the presence of a 0.5 M 1:1 supporting electrolyte at spherical electrodes of 1 nm and 100 nm radii respectively. Other parameters: k0 = 1.0 cm s−1, D = 1 × 10−5 cm2 s−1, E = −1.0 V (with respect to the formal potential, ). Reprinted with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  The schematic diagram of the three-state dielectric model of water at the electrode/electrolyte interface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2006, American Chemical Society.	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 3  Dielectric distribution of water molecules at interfaces of spherical electrodes of different radii calculated by combining eqn (4), (5) and (7). The vertical dash line indicates the OHP. The other parameters are the same as that for Fig. 1.	 

 	Fig. 4  Potential distribution at spherical electrodes of different radii calculated by using the dynamic EDL model together with the different dielectric models. The other parameters are the same as that for Fig. 1.	 

 	Fig. 5  Dielectric constant (upper panels) and potential (lower panels) distributions at the interface of disk electrodes of different radii calculated by combining eqn (4), (5) and (7). The other calculation parameters are the same as that for Fig. 1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Calculated steady-state voltammetric curves for the reduction of 5 mM Oz (z = −1) at spherical electrodes of different radii. The other parameters are the same as that for Fig. 1.	 

 	Fig. 7  The potential distribution in the diffuse part of EDLs at interfaces of spherical electrodes of different radii.	 

 	Fig. 8  Comparison of steady-state polarization curves calculated using the dynamic EDL model under 3-state dielectric distribution with that predicted by eqn (6) for spherical electrodes of different sizes. The calculation parameters are the same as that for Fig. 1.	 

 	Fig. 9  Ratio between the limiting current density predicated by the dynamic EDL model and that predicted by eqn (6) for the reduction of variously charged reactants at electrodes of different sizes. Other parameters are the same as that for Fig. 1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2006, American Chemical Society.	 
	(8)
	(9)


5	−132	1.36	−160	0.79	−168	0.67	−176	0.57	−147
10	−102	1.32	−126	0.80	−134	0.69	−142	0.59	−115
20	−73	1.24	−91	0.84	−97	0.75	−103	0.66	−83
100	−23	1.06	−26	0.95	−26	0.92	27	0.90	−25
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 10  Dependence of ET rate constants on  for a one electron ET process with relatively large λ predicted by different ET theories. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Dependence of ET rate constants on  for a one electron ET process with relatively small λ predicted by different ET theories. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Steady-state polarization curves predicted by the BV, MH and MHC models, respectively, at electrodes of 5 nm radius for one electron reduction reactions of 1.0 cm s−1k0 and different λ.	 

 	Fig. 13  Steady-state polarization curves predicted by the BV, MH and MHC models, respectively, at electrodes of 10 nm radius for one electron reduction reaction of 1.0 cm s−1k0 and 50 KJ mol−1λ.	 
npx = ρ2πxdx	(13)
	(14)
	(15)

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the different ET probability for an electroactive molecule on a large electrode and a spherical nanoelectrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 
p(x) = p0e−β(x−μ)	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)

 	Fig. 15  Calculated dependence of the ET rate constant on electrode radius according to eqn (19). The numbers indicate the values of β with unit of Å−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Radial profiles of ET rate constants at disk electrodes of various sizes calculated according to eqn (20) with β of 1 Å−1. The inset is an illustration of the edge effect of electron tunneling probability.	 
	(20)

 	Fig. 17  The dependence of the limiting current on the concentration of Fe(CN)63− at Pt disk electrodes of various sizes in 1.0 M KCl solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 
iL = AnFD′r0ca	(21)

 	Fig. 18  Ratio between the limiting currents for the reduction of Ru(NH6)3+ and Fe(CN6)3− in 1.0 M KCl. Reprinted partly with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 
	(22)

 	Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of r-GO electrode fabrication. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Ratios between the limiting currents for the reduction of Ru(NH3)63+, MV2+ and Fe(CN)63− in the absence and presence of 1 M KCl as a function of r-GO sizes (given as the dimensionless diffusion limiting current IdL*). The dotted lines are the ratios calculated from eqn (22).	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
