Introductory lecture: nanoplasmonics  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5FD90020D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5FD90020D
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2015, 178, 9-36Introductory lecture: nanoplasmonics

        
          
            Mark L. 
            Brongersma
          
        
      *
      Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. E-mail: brongersma@stanford.edu;  Fax: +1 650 736 1984;   Tel: +1 650 736 2154
Received 
      31st March 2015
    , Accepted 31st March 2015First published on 13th May 2015AbstractNanoplasmonics or nanoscale metal-based optics is a field of science and technology with a tremendously rich and colourful history. Starting with the early works of Michael Faraday on gold nanocolloids and optically-thin gold leaf, researchers have been fascinated by the unusual optical properties displayed by metallic nanostructures. We now can enjoy selecting from over 10000 publications every year on the topic of plasmonics and the number of publications has been doubling about every three years since 1990. This impressive productivity can be attributed to the significant growth of the scientific community as plasmonics has spread into a myriad of new directions. With 2015 being the International Year of Light, it seems like a perfect moment to review some of the most notable accomplishments in plasmonics to date and to project where the field may be moving next. After discussing some of the major historical developments in the field, this article will analyse how the most successful plasmonics applications are capitalizing on five key strengths of metallic nanostructures. This Introductory Lecture will conclude with a brief look into the future.
1 A brief history of the field of nanoplasmonics
The field of nanoplasmonics, or plasmonics for short, is concerned with the study and application of a surprisingly rich set of optical phenomena that can be elicited from metallic nanostructures. At the origin of these phenomena are easily accessible surface plasmon excitations, which are collective charge oscillations in a metal. They can take various forms, ranging from freely propagating electron density waves along metal surfaces to localized charge oscillations in metal nanoparticles. Their unique properties have motivated many scientific studies and a wealth of practical applications in physics, chemistry, biology and medicine. This Introductory Lecture of the Faraday Discussion 178 analyses how the most successful applications of plasmonics have effectively capitalized on five key strengths of plasmonic structures. These strengths have become evident over time as researchers learned more about the many unusual properties of nanoscale metallic objects. To understand the successes in plasmonics, it is thus important to understand the historical development of the field, and this is the topic of this first section.
Michael Faraday's research marked the birth of the plasmonics field. Back in the 1850s he performed pioneering, systematic studies on the optical properties of gold (Au) leaf that was beaten so thin it was rendered translucent, transmitting in the green and reflecting the yellow part of incident sunlight.1 He also synthesized and investigated Au colloidal particles and examined their distinct ruby red colours. Fig. 1 shows a glass flask with Au nanoparticles produced by Faraday himself.
 Fig. 1  A glass flask containing a suspension of nanoscale Au colloidal particles in water produced by Michael Faraday. The synthesis and optical properties of such colloidal suspensions and of beaten Au leaf were discussed in the famous Bakerian Lecture written by Michael Faraday in 1857.1 Au colloids were typically prepared using aqueous solutions of Au-containing compounds, such as sodium chloroaurate (NaAuCl4). The addition of a reducing solution, e.g. phosphorus in carbon disulfide in a two-phase system, would produce the ruby red liquid seen in this photograph. Although not visible in any optical microscope at the time, it was Turkevich who used electron microscopy to show that such a synthesis results in Au nanoparticles of a few to a few tens of nanometers.2 Reproduced with permission from the Royal Institution of Great Britain (© Paul Wilkinson). 
In 1904, Maxwell Garnett provided a detailed explanation for the origin of the vibrant colours of the suspensions produced by Faraday when he described the optical properties of transparent media doped with a high density of metallic nanoparticles.3 In his mathematical treatment, he used the newly developed Drude theory of metals and the understanding of the electromagnetic properties of small spheres developed by Lord Rayleigh. In his analysis, the optical properties of the small particles were derived in terms of bulk optical constants (real and imaginary part of the refractive index). A more physically intuitive description in terms of surface plasmon excitations in the metal nanoparticles only came much later.
Another early set of optical experiments involving metals were those by Heinrich Hertz in 1887, who discovered the photoelectric effect when he studied the impact of ultraviolet light on an electrical discharge between metallic electrodes.4 The key explanation of this phenomenon was provided in 1905 by Albert Einstein.5 More detailed photoemission studies on metallic films in the 1960s revealed the possible use of plasmon resonances to enhance light absorption in the near-surface region of the metal and thereby to enhance the photoemission rate.6,7 In metallic nanostructures, light absorption can be increased even further through the excitation of localized surface plasmon resonances and this topic is currently receiving renewed attention with an eye on its use for photocatalysis and solar energy harvesting.8
The first observation of propagating surface plasmons on metal films dates back to 1902 when Robert W. Wood perceived some unexplained features in optical reflection measurements he performed on metallic gratings.9 The origins of these features, now termed Wood anomalies, were elucidated in 1941 in physically intuitive terms by Ugo Fano,10 who suggested the important role of surface wave excitation. Using detailed experiments of the dispersive behaviour of the surface waves, these excitations were unequivocally linked to surface plasmons by Rufus Ritchie in 1968.11
Meanwhile, in 1956 David Pines theoretically described the characteristic energy losses experienced by fast electrons traveling through metals and attributed these losses to collective oscillations of free electrons inside the metal.12 In analogy to earlier work on plasma oscillations in gas discharges, he named them “plasmons”. This original research kicked off an ever-increasing stream of publications on the topic of plasmon science and technology (see Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  The rapid growth of the field of plasmonics is illustrated by the number of scientific articles published annually containing the word “plasmon” or “surface plasmon” in either the title or abstract. This graph is updated from the original graph shown in the book “Surface Plasmon Nanophotonics,” ed. M. L. Brongersma and P. G. Kik, Springer Series in Optical Sciences, 2007, vol. 131,13 reprinted with kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media. 
In 1957 a theoretical study was published by Rufus Ritchie showing that electrons crossing the boundary of a metal film can experience a lowered electron energy loss compared to electrons moving through the bulk of a metal. He attributed this to the excitation of surface collective oscillations.14 Powell and Swan experimentally demonstrated such excitations15 for which the quanta were termed “surface plasmons” by Stern and Ferrell.16
A major advance in the study of surface plasmons was made in 1968 when Andreas Otto,17 Erich Kretschmann18 and Heinz Raether19 presented methods for optically exciting surface plasmons on metal films, making experiments on plasmon phenomena easily accessible to many researchers. This sparked a series of fundamental studies on surface plasmon propagation along metallic films, starting with the work of Eleftherios Economou in 1969.20 As a result, knowledge quickly built on how various experimental geometries can be optimized to excite highly confined short-range surface plasmons and more poorly confined long-range surface plasmons.21,22 As the field continued to develop and the importance of the coupling between the oscillating electrons of a surface plasmon and the electromagnetic field was more appreciated, Stephen Cunningham et al. introduced the term surface-plasmon-polariton (SPP) in 1974.23
In the 1970s a completely new approach was explored to excite SPPs, which later played a key role in the development of active plasmonic sources. It did not rely on the gratings used by Wood or on optical prisms, which were rapidly gaining popularity at the time. Instead, it was based on the use of quantum emitters. This approach found its origin in the early experiments of Hans Kuhn24 and Karl H. Drexhage,25 who studied the changes in the fluorescent decay rate of molecules when they were spaced at different heights above a silver mirror (Fig. 3). They argued that most of their data could be explained using an intuitive classical model, in which the constructive/destructive interference of light that was directly emitted to free space and the reflected light from the mirror could lead to an enhancement/reduction in the decay lifetime. They did not give a detailed explanation for the faster-than-expected decay rates close to the metal beyond noting that this must be linked to energy losses into the metal. Ronald R. Chance, Alfred Prock and Robert J. Silbey provided an electromagnetic theory that included far-field as well as near-field effects and correctly predicted the decay rate at emitter spacings much smaller than the dominant emission wavelength λe.26
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematics used by Drexhage to explain how the emission of an excited quantum emitter is influenced by the presence of a metallic mirror. He argued that the interference of the light that is directly emitted to free space and reflected light from the mirror could cause enhancements or reductions in the radiative decay rate of the emitter.25 Reprinted from ref. 25 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Normalized photoluminescence lifetimes for an Eu3+ complex placed at different distances from a silver mirror. The solid line is the best fit using the model proposed by Chance, Prock, and Silbey,27 which includes the impact of free space reflection of propagating light waves as well as the excitation of surface plasmon polaritons and electron hole pair excitation (i.e. ‘lossy waves’) in the metal.28 Figure reprinted from ref. 27 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. 
However, the physical nature of the decay process only became clear when the analogy between the radiative decay of molecules and the coupling of radio antennas to radio-wave propagation near the surface of the earth became apparent.29 It was then argued that, as an emitter approaches a metal surface to a distance that is just a small fraction of λe, the excitation rate of propagating surface plasmon waves can become very effective.30–33 Bo N. J. Persson then also argued that very close to the surface (d < 10 nm) electron–hole pair excitation can become dominant.34 The first experimental demonstration of the coupling of emitters to surface plasmon waves was performed by Yu M. Gerbshtein and co-workers in 1975.35 He showed that excited surface plasmon waves again could be decoupled to free-space photons with the help of a high-index prism. These works also stimulated later research in manipulating radiative decay and a range of other photophysical processes near finite-sized metallic nanoparticles.36
At this point the basic properties of surface plasmons were quite well-established. However the connection to the optical properties of metal nanoparticles had not yet been made. In 1970, more than sixty years after Maxwell Garnett's work on the colours of metal-doped glasses, Uwe Kreibig and Peter Zacharias initiated a rich set of studies in which they analysed the electronic and optical response of gold and silver nanoparticles.37 In this work, they, for the first time, described the optical properties of metal nanoparticles in the context of localized surface plasmon excitations. Excellent reviews capture the great diversity and depth of the research on the optical properties of metallic nanoparticles.38,39 Research in this time period discussed details of the importance of the size, shape, spatial arrangement and environment,40 and even temperature,41 quantum42–44 and non-local45 effects, in the optical response of nanometer-sized noble metal particles. With the increased control over nanostructure synthesis and arrangement as well as improved characterization tools, these topics remain of significant interest to the present day.
Another major discovery in the area of metal optics occurred in that same year, when Martin Fleischmann and co-workers observed strong Raman scattering from pyridine molecules in the vicinity of roughened silver surfaces.46 Richard van Duyne47 and J. Alan Creighton48 independently came to the conclusion that the increase in surface area over a smooth surface could not explain the significant (>factor of 10) enhancements seen in the measured Raman signals. Although it was not realized at the time, the Raman scattering process, which involves an exchange of energy between photons and molecular vibrations, was enhanced by the concentrated electromagnetic fields near the rough silver surface due to the presence of surface plasmons. The link to plasmons was made by Martin Moskovits49 and this facilitated the development of detailed electromagnetic theories that quantify the observed enhancements in Raman spectra by Moskovits,50 George Schatz, Matthew Young and Richard Van Duyne.51 The link to plasmons also inspired Mark Stockman, Vladimir Shalaev and co-workers to design more complex structures, such as fractal clusters, that could provide very significant field and Raman enhancements.52 Ultimately, it became possible to take Raman spectra of individual molecules, as shown in the work by Katrin Kneipp.53 These collective works led to the now well-established field of Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS).54,55
The 1980s saw the birth of the scanning near-field optical microscope (SNOM) through the work of Dieter Pohl and Aaron Lewis,56–58 a tool that can both capitalize on surface plasmon excitations to concentrate light below the diffraction limit and also facilitate imaging of plasmon fields with high spatial resolution. Over time, tremendous progress has been made in improving the spatial resolution, reducing data acquisition time, and adding new functionality such as nanoscale spectroscopy59,60 and the measurement of amplitude, phase and vectorial properties of light at the nanoscale.61
Around 1990, the growth in the annual number of papers on surface plasmons showed a sudden increase, and since this time the number of publications has doubled approximately every three years. This is linked to the development of the first commercial surface plasmon resonance (SPR)-based sensor in 1986 (ref. 62) based on the work by Bo Liedberg, Claes Nylander and Ingemar Lundström.63 At present, still a very substantial fraction of all publications on surface plasmons involves the use of plasmons for sensing and biodetection.
Around the turn of the century, a range of new applications for metallic nanostructures were considered that are fundamentally different in character. In 1997 Juinichi Takahara and co-workers suggested that metallic nanowires could enable the guiding of optical beams below the free-space diffraction limit (see Fig. 4a),64 in 1998 Thomas Ebbesen et al. reported on the extraordinary optical transmission through subwavelength metal apertures,65 and in 2001 Sir John Pendry suggested that a thin metallic film may serve as a “perfect lens”66 (see Fig. 4). These applications were aimed at manipulating the flow of light with metallic nanostructures below the diffraction limit to realize new optical functionalities. With the realization that surface plasmons, like electrons, and photons, could now form the basis for an entirely new device technology, Mark Brongersma and Harry Atwater coined the term “plasmonics” for the field in 1999.67
 Fig. 4  (a) Plots of the phase constant and beam radius for a metallic nanowire waveguide used by Takahara and co-workers to illustrate how such waveguides can guide light with a deep subwavelength mode diameter.64 Reprinted from ref. 64 with permission from OSA Publishing. (b) Transmission spectrum of a Ag film with a square array of holes that Ebbesen and co-workers took to prove that properly designed arrays can exhibit a light transmission which was larger than expected from knowledge of the total area of the holes.65 Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd from ref. 65, copyright 1998. (c) Schematic used by Sir John Pendry to illustrate how negative refraction can make a perfect lens.66 Figure reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2000 by the American Physical Society. 
From the turn of the century, the development of plasmonics saw a tremendous diversification into many new areas of science and technology. Some of the most promising and fast-growing areas included plasmon-assisted catalysis,8,36,68–73 nanoscale thermal engineering for nanostructure synthesis and phase transformations,74–79 heat-assisted magnetic recording80,81 and treatment of cancer,82,83 optical trapping84–86 and sensing,87–89 optical imaging90–94 and lithography,95,96 engineering emission from quantum emitters,97–107 thermal radiation engineering,108–112 ultrafast and nonlinear plasmonics,113–116 plasmonics for solar energy harvesting,8,69,70,117–128 and active chipscale plasmonic devices including most notably nanoscale sources,129–139 modulators140–145 and detectors.146–152 Interestingly, the first applications mentioned in this list capitalized on light-induced heating, which was originally considered to be a major weakness of plasmonics. Many of the advances in these areas resulted from a deeper understanding of the light concentrating properties of resonant antennas and cavities153–164 as well as the guiding properties of plasmonic waveguides165–173 and nanocircuits.137,174–178
The rapid growth of the plasmonics field in the early part of the 21st century was in part facilitated by the development and commercialization of powerful electromagnetics simulation codes, the introduction of new plasmonic materials and the introduction of powerful nanofabrication and optical/physical analysis techniques. System-level simulation tools and design rules have also become available to analyse plasmonic structures of increased complexity, such as nanoparticle clusters, metamaterials, and non-periodic plasmonic devices. I briefly analyse the different areas of progress below.
Firstly, this time period saw an increase in the general availability of excellent commercial computational design tools for nanophotonic structures. These included now popular simulation techniques such as Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD), Finite-Difference Frequency-Domain (FDFD), the Discrete Dipole Approximation (DDA) and the Boundary Element Method (BEM).179 As a result, the computation of optical properties of nanostructures was no longer just accessible to a few electromagnetics experts.
Plasmonics also saw a large influx of new, high-performance materials. Of course, there was an ongoing quest to produce high-quality single crystal noble metal structures with ultrasmooth surfaces.180–184 At the same time, Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) technology moved into the sub-100 nm size range and now facilitates the scalable and reproducible fabrication of plasmonic elements making it the truly the next chip-scale technology.138,185–188 This technology allowed for the incorporation of an increasingly large materials set that is of great practical value to the plasmonics community. Alexandra Boltasseva, Vladimir Shalaev, Harry Atwater and others have strongly promoted the use of a wide variety of new Si-compatible materials for plasmonics and characterized their performance for different applications.189–191
Most recently, a set of new, more exotic materials have also been entering into the plasmonics research space. Unique 2-dimensional materials such as graphene both support plasmon propagation192–194 and can benefit from the highly confined plasmon fields to realize new types of modulators and detectors.195–200 The 2-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides also exhibit a range of very unique optical properties that will no doubt unlock new plasmoptoelectronic device applications.201–203
New materials are also developed for active plasmonic devices. The downscaling of active elements to a subwavelength footprint constitutes a particularly formidable challenge, as one cannot benefit from the long interaction lengths that conventional active devices can rely on to achieve a desired active functionality. This is particularly true for a range of important electro-optical switching, modulation and cavity-tuning devices, which tend to rely on weak electro-absorption or electro-refraction. To address this point, new metals have been introduced that feature lower carrier densities than the noble metals, such as transparent oxides, graphene and titanium nitride. Their carrier density can be tuned by chemical doping and various electrical gating strategies. As such, these materials can serve as actively-tunable metals, offering new pathways to modify the resonant optical properties beyond passive size and shape tuning.145,204–209 New materials showing extreme changes in their optical properties in e.g. metal-to-insulator transitions, or changes in structural phases, are also receiving an increased interest for tuning of the optical properties of plasmonic elements by placing such materials in their environment.210,211
New materials that offer strong field concentration or surface wave guiding in other frequency regimes are also gaining more interest. For example, mid-infrared plasmonics has recently received more attention as researchers hope to manipulate infrared light and control near- and far-field thermal emission.108–110,212–217 In the development of infrared and THz plasmonics, the concept of spoof surface plasmons also played an important role. Whereas regular surface plasmon waves are very poorly confined at long wavelengths where the conductivity of most metals is very high, it was shown that corrugation of the metal surfaces opens up the possibility to support more confined spoof surface plasmon waves that in many ways resemble conventional surface plasmons.
Finally, recent history has seen a reignited passion for quantum plasmonic materials and systems. Optical antennas are now routinely capable of concentrating light to physical dimensions where quantum size effects naturally occur in various nanomaterials, and it thus seems logical that links to various subdisciplines of solid state physics are currently being made. With the ability to realize increasingly small cavities, the Purcell effect, the flow of light from emitters near metal nanostructures and strong coupling effects are now investigated to new levels of detail.98,100,218,219 The recent work by Isabel Romero, Javier Aizpurua, Garnett W. Bryant and F. Javier García de Abajo has also opened new lines of research into quantum plasmonic phenomena by showing that nearly touching metallic nanoparticles feature a singular optical response in the limit where they become touching. Here, the possibility to physically transfer charge between the adjacent particles has a dramatic impact on the plasmonic response/the supported plasmonic modes. This has spurred an intense debate and a flurry of experiments that aim to show the impact of quantum tunnelling and non-local effects between closely-spaced metal nanostructures on their optical response.220–224
New and powerful fabrication methods including printing tools, nanosphere lithography, soft lithography, focussed ion beam milling, two-photon lithography, self-assembly, and novel materials chemistry approaches have further accelerated progress.225–233 Using these techniques, nanostructures can now be created with extreme control and over increasingly large areas. A similar substantive impact on the field comes from the advances in near-field and far-field optical characterization tools for plasmonic structures. A variety of commercial scanning near-field microscopes are now available and this has made this quite advanced route of characterizing nanostructures accessible to a large user base. In recent research it has also become eminently clear that the successful realization of future, ultra-compact photonic devices will require the development of new techniques capable of correlating the nanostructural properties of materials and devices to their optical performance. In this regard, one cannot underestimate the recent development of electron-beam-based techniques that can simultaneously map the morphology, atomic structure and optical modes of plasmonic devices at very high spatial resolution (see Fig. 5a).234–238 Several leading groups, including those of Christian Colliex, Albert Polman, F. Javier García de Abajo, Nikolay Zheludev and Paul Midgley have shown that techniques such as cathodoluminescence and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) can provide valuable information on the spatial distribution of the local density of optical states and the plasmonic modes that can be excited in nanometallic structures, at an astounding ∼10 nm spatial resolution and most recently in 3 dimensions.239
 Fig. 5  (a) Experimental EELS map of a plasmonic mode of an Ag nanoprism. It was created by raster-scanning the electron beam from a scanning transmission electron microscope over the structure and by plotting the spatial distribution of the electrons that lost 1.75 eV through the excitation of this particular plasmonic mode.234 Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd from ref. 234, copyright 2007. (b) An energy-level diagram used to describe the concept of plasmon hybridization. Here, the optical properties of a metal nanoshell can be thought of as resulting from the interaction between sphere and cavity plasmons.245 Figure from ref. 245, reprinted with permission from AAAS. (c) The illustrations show how nanoparticles with different dielectric properties can be viewed as lumped nanocircuit elements for light. Such modularization facilitates the rapid design of complex nanophotonic architectures consisting of a plurality of nano-elements. This forms the basis of metactronics.274 Figure from ref. 274, reprinted with permission from AAAS. 
With all of these technological advances, it has become possible to realize and understand the optical properties of plasmonic structures of increasing complexity. By placing metallic nanostructures first in pairs240 and later in more intricate multi-particle arrangements, one could realize nanoscale waveguides,166 complex antenna structures capable of directing light emission99,134,241 and engineered particle clusters that exhibit Fano-like resonances242 and structural-induced transparency.243,244 Nordlander and Halas provided a key tool to intuitively understand the plasmon response of complex metal particle arrays based on the interaction or “hybridization” of elementary plasmons supported by constituent building blocks, in analogy to molecular orbital theory (see Fig. 5b).245
A natural extension of this has also been the development of metamaterials constructed from a dense array of subwavelength elements. These building blocks are typically metallic/plasmonic and can support both electrical and magnetic resonances. As a result new materials could be realized that exhibit exotic functionalities that go beyond those found in nature, including a negative index,246–248 a zero index,249 cloaking,250 imaging below the diffraction limit,90–92,94,251,252 lasing,253 as well as unique anisotropic behavior,254 chiral properties and optical activity.255,256 Transformation optics has provided a theoretical framework for the design of new exotic metamaterial-based optical components, and suggests how one can achieve ultimate control over the flow of light by manipulating the properties of optical materials at a subwavelength scale.257,258 Much of the work in this area was stimulated by the early works of Victor Veselago and Sir John Pendry that pointed to some of the wonderful opportunities for the metamaterials field.66,257,259,260 Currently, new developments are emerging in the realization of flat optical elements261–264 and essentially two-dimensional metamaterials, termed metasurfaces.265–267 There is also a natural evolution to active metadevices.252 These developments will ultimately enable completely flat and active optical components for optical beam/guided wave manipulation. Such planar elements afford facile integration with electronic, mechanical, magnetic, chemical and bio-technologies.
As the complexity of plasmonic systems increased, the development of simple design rules for components became absolutely essential. The power of good design rules lies in their ability to hide much of the complexity within an individual device. Instead, the aim is to capture the essence of the device function and focus on its interactions with other devices. Such simplifications then enable the construction of system-level theories and simulators that can predict the behaviour of larger plasmonic circuits and advanced multicomponent metamaterials. In this vein, Nader Engheta developed an elegant theoretical framework that treats nanostructured optical or “metactronic” circuits, much akin to conventional electronic circuitry, in 2005 (see Fig. 5c).268,269 Within this framework, insulators are modelled as capacitors, metals as inductors, and energy dissipation (heating) can be accounted for by introducing resistors. The desired response of an optical circuit can now be realized simply through the optimization of an electronic circuit, levering knowledge built up by electrical engineers over many decades.
There have been many sceptical voices about the usefulness of plasmonics as a device technology. However, after roughly a decade and a half of research and development of plasmonic functionalities, researchers in the field have managed to figure out how to deal with the biggest challenge: optical losses in metallic systems.270 By capitalizing on the strengths of plasmonic structures, new useful functionalities are now being designed that can either live with some degree of optical loss or capitalize on this loss to facilitate local heating. The state of the art is discussed in a number of excellent reviews.113,271–273 In all successful plasmonics applications the metal structures perform a unique set of functions that are very hard or impossible to accomplish with dielectrics and semiconductors. In the following discussion, we will analyse the real strengths of nanometallic elements and their physical properties in more detail.
2 Plasmonics applications: capitalizing on key strengths
The previous section described the colourful and impressive history of the field of nanoplasmonics and argued how recent developments in nanotechnology gave rise to a significant acceleration in the developments in this area. In order to deeply appreciate the success and growth of this field, it is also important to understand the key strengths and weaknesses of plasmonic structures and devices. Below, I will argue how the most successful applications in the field make use of at least one of five unique properties of metallic nanostructures. These strengths are illustrated with examples in Fig. 6 and can be summarized as follows: (1) extreme light concentration and light manipulation below the free space diffraction limit; (2) straightforward tunability of the optically-resonant response of metallic nanostructures by engineering their size, shape or dielectric environment; (3) simple building blocks offer a tremendous design flexibility to create an almost unimaginably large number of optical functions; (4) efficient light-to-heat conversion with high spatial and temporal control; (5) multi-functionality of nanometallic elements in a single physical space.
 Fig. 6  (a) Image showing how the excitation of a localized surface plasmon redirects the flow of light (Poynting vector) towards and into a 20 nm-diameter Al nanoparticle.275 Reproduced with permission from ref. 275. Copyright 1983, American Association of Physics Teachers. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and corresponding dark-field optical microcroscopy images of Ag nanoparticles of different shapes (the scale bar is 300 nm).226 Figure reprinted from ref. 226 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. (c) SEM image of an optical Yagi–Uda antenna driven by quantum dots. The image shows metallic reflector, feed, and director elements.99 Figure from ref. 99, reprinted with permission from AAAS. (d) SEM image of an array of staple-shaped Au nanostructures forming a metamaterial with a negative permeability.276 Figure reprinted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 2005 by the American Physical Society. (e) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of two Ag nanowires that were optically welded together through the excitation of a surface plasmon resonance at the crossing-point of the two wires.277 Figure reprinted from ref. 277 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. (f) Schematic showing two Au antenna electrodes of different widths used to simultaneously inject current into an underlying quantum well and directing the emission from this quantum well in either a dipolar or quadrupolar angular emission pattern.134 Figure reprinted from ref. 134 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. (g) Optical microscope image of a thermo-optic Mach–Zender interferometric modulator, in which Au strips simultaneously serve as long-range surface plasmon waveguides and electrical wires that can be heated to modify the index of a thermo-optic polymer surrounding the stripes and to achieve switching.140 Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2004, AIP Publishing LLC. 
Arguably the most well-recognized strength of metallic nanostructures is their ability to concentrate light to the nanoscale. Craig F. Bohren beautifully illustrated this point by showing that even a simple spherical metallic nanoparticle can concentrate light to the nanoscale (see Fig. 6a).275 It essentially can operate like a miniature version of a radio antenna that can effectively capture and concentrate radio waves. The time-varying electric field associated with a light wave can exert a force on the gas of negatively charged electrons in a metallic nanostructure and drive them into a collective oscillation. The driven motion of the oscillating electrons can be described in analogy to a simple mass–spring system, in which the relevant mass is the electron mass and the restoring force is produced by the displaced electron charge. As such, it is expected that the system can feature a strong resonance in which all of the electrons are effectively set into oscillation by converting electromagnetic energy into kinetic energy of the electrons.
The ability to concentrate light and/or to produce high local field intensities has traditionally been the domain of dielectric lenses and resonators. These objects provide a convenient way to manipulate light and enhance a range of linear and non-linear phenomena with virtually no optical material loss. However, the fundamental laws of diffraction dictate that dielectric lenses cannot focus light to spot sizes less than about half a wavelength of light (∼λ/2) and dielectric resonators exhibit electromagnetic mode volumes limited to Vm ≈ (λ/2)3, where λ is the wavelength of light inside the dielectric medium. The nature of nanometallic light concentrators and resonators is quite distinct from their dielectric counterparts, and nanometallic structures do not exhibit these limitations. Plasmonic antennas and lenses can convert optical radiation into intense, engineered, localized near-field distributions or deep sub-wavelength guided modes. Thus, wherever sub-wavelength control over light is required, nanometallic structures are likely to play an important role.
By squeezing light into subwavelength volumes, plasmonic structures can achieve a number of very valuable functions. In their role as optical antennas they can efficiently mediate interactions between propagating radiation and nanoscale objects and devices. This of course comes at the cost of some unavoidable optical losses that are intrinsically linked to the way metals manipulate light by means of plasmon excitations. However, in many applications one can live with some optical losses if given a dramatic increase in another, desired performance parameter. For example, in chip-scale devices, a reduced footprint can directly lead to an increased speed (which typically scales with a linear device dimension) and a reduced power consumption (which typically scales with the capacitance or area of a device). Smaller device structures tend to also produce steeper thermal gradients when heated and this affords more rapid cooling. In addition, the subwavelength dimensions of plasmonic structures facilitate increased light–matter interaction. Despite modest values of the optical quality factor Q (typically between 10–100), metallic cavities with sufficiently small mode volumes can often outperform higher-Q, dielectric cavities (Q ∼ 106) and benefit from having a more broadband response and easy electrical access via the highly-conductive metals forming the cavity.133,134,137,193 The strong confinement can ultimately lead to the realization of new types of useful quantum plasmonic devices and circuits for quantum information processing, including quantum computing, cryptography and metrology.176,278–282
The second key strength of plasmonic structures lies in the possibility to engineer their optically-resonant response in very straightforward ways through a modification of their size, geometry and dielectric environment.39 An example is shown in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs and associated dark field optical microscopy images of several differently-shaped Ag nanoparticles (see Fig. 6b). The observable changes in the colour of the scattered light from these structures can be understood by realizing that the different particle shapes cause incident light to drive different plasmon-currents and displaced-charge distributions. As a result, the restoring force produced by the displaced charges and the associated resonance frequency will also be different. The fact that very simple changes in the shape and size can result in dramatically different responses constitutes a tremendously powerful notion in the design of plasmonic functions. It affords a tremendous design flexibility and opens the door to the creation of a large diversity of possible devices.
The third key strength of plasmonics lies in the fact that simple nanometallic building blocks offer a tremendous design flexibility to create an almost unimaginably large number of optical functions. Here, one can take advantage of the fact that metallic nanostructures can feature useful near- and far-field optical interactions.39,245,283 For example, Fig. 6c shows an SEM image of a five element Yagi–Uda antenna capable of directing the emission from a quantum dot.99 Complex multi-nanoparticle assemblies also offer the opportunity to create sharp optical resonances to more effectively concentrate light and gain increased control over a range of physical processes, including light absorption, fluorescence and Raman emission, hot electron ejection, and more.8,242,284,285 The sensitive dependence of plasmonic scattering signals on the distance and angle between metallic nanostructures has also facilitated the development of new nanoscale measurement, sensing and tomographic imaging techniques for chemistry and biology.286–288 In further increasing complexity, the assembly of many plasmonic building blocks has led to the realization of bulk metamaterials and metasurfaces (see Fig. 6d).276 Most recently, there has also been a growing interest in realizing non-periodic plasmonic structures and devices that can that outperform their periodic counterparts. To identify and realize such devices is a nontrivial task due to the need to solve Maxwell's equations repeatedly over an enormous design space. Here, brute-force optimization is typically impractical and therefore these type of optimizations rely on a variety of techniques to reduce the computation time. The reward can however be significant, and recently, new types of aperiodic plasmonic couplers, wavelength splitters, mode transformers, as well as designer solar light trapping and sensing schemes have been explored.118,289–291
Whereas in many plasmonics applications the generation of heat is undesirable, the ability to rapidly raise and lower the temperature in nanoscale volumes of material has also found new applications. Metal nanostructures are arguably the most efficient objects at converting incident light to heat.292,293 As such, local heat generation can be viewed as the fourth key strength of metallic nanostructures. Early experiments on the propagation of surface plasmon polaritons along metal films already highlighted the efficient light-to-heat conversion inside the metal. In careful measurements, the heat produced by the radiationless decay of the propagating plasmons could be quantified in a photoacoustic study.294 Subwavelength metallic nanostructures, in particular, can be heated very effectively by capitalizing on their large optical absorption cross section.295,296 By engineering their size, shape, and dielectric environment, one can control the way in which they absorb and scatter light as well as the relative importance of these processes.297–300 Several techniques have been developed to measure the local temperature near metallic nanostructures.301–303 The ability to effectively heat and measure temperature has been exploited in many practical plasmonics applications. Recent active areas of research include the selective identification and killing of cancer cells,304 photothermal nanotherapeutics,305 modification of polymer surfaces,306 local control over phase transitions,307,308 growth of individual metallic nanoparticles,79 semiconductor nanowires and carbon nanotubes,309,310 nanofluidics and chemical separation,311 heterogeneous catalysis,312,313 drug delivery,314 reversible photothermal melting of DNA,315,316 heat assisted magnetic recording81 and steam generation.317,318Fig. 6e shows another photothermal application of plasmonics, in which two metallic nanowires were welded together with the help of local heat generation by surface plasmon excitations.277 The large change in the plasmonic resonance properties upon the realization of a solid (electrical) connection between the two wires caused a desirable reduction in the heating efficiency and a natural self-limitation of the welding process. This process was found to be very effective in the creation of large-area transparent metallic electrodes. In many of the above-mentioned applications, the need to only heat locally with plasmons rather than globally in a furnace has resulted in major increases in control, speed, and energy efficiency with an accompanying reduction in cost. Complex assemblies of metallic nanostructures may be designed to thermally engineer nanoscale environments in which local heating occurs in a desired, prescribed fashion. This opens up a wide range of opportunities for the creation of new devices in which thermally-stimulated processes can be manipulated and controlled.
One final unique feature of metallic nanostructures is that they can perform multiple functions at the same time. This is rooted in the fact that metals can display a number of desirable physical properties, including a high electrical conductivity, an excellent thermal conductivity, a good mechanical stability, a high catalytic activity, a high temperature stability, etc. Of course, different metals perform better in terms of some of these properties than others, but many metals exhibit several of these desirable traits. Examples of the use of multifunctionality can be found in chip-scale optoelectronic devices and systems. Here, the metal wiring is traditionally only used to inject/extract current or to apply electric fields. However, the metallic leads in photodetectors and sources can simultaneously be used as electrodes and as optical antennas capable of enhancing the way light is received193,319,320 or emitted.134,137,321Fig. 6f shows an example where metallic antenna-electrodes are used to inject current into a light-emitting quantum well and to control the angular and polarization properties of the emitted light. In a different approach, the metals in plasmonic waveguides can be used to transmit optical signals, but also serve as electrical heaters or as contacts to apply an electrical field to modulate the guided signal.140,142 The pioneering work by Sergey Bozhevolnyi on plasmonic modulators elegantly illustrates this concept (see Fig. 6g). Here, long-range surface plasmons are modulated in a thermo-optic Mach–Zender interferometric device constructed from 15 nm-thin and 8 μm-wide gold stripes embedded in a thermo-optic polymer. One of the metallic stripes can be heated by running an electrical current through it. The resulting temperature increase induces a change in the local refractive index in the polymer surrounding the heated stripe. This in turn causes the interference of the plasmon signals propagating along the two parallel stripes of the interferometer to be changed from constructive to destructive. In this way, the device can modulate incoming signals with great efficiency and extinction ratios as high as 30 dB were achieved. By cleverly combining metals and semiconductors, entirely new functions can also be realized. For example, it was recently shown that the metallic leads to a Si nanowire photodetector could render the device ‘invisible’ (i.e. significantly reduce the scattering cross section of the structure).319 In this example, the metal again performs multiple functions at the same time and in the same physical space. These types of multifunctional devices can only be achieved by moving beyond traditional design principles in optoelectronics that prescribe an initial optimization of the performance of the individual electronic and optical building blocks, followed by an assembly of the pieces. In the design of multifunctional devices, the boundaries between electronic, photonic and other functional elements are less clear (or completely gone) and these distinct functions need to be optimized in unison. The benefit may be an increased functionality of chip-scale devices and new unexplored opportunities for ultra-dense integration.
3 The future of nanoplasmonics
The field of nanoplasmonics has come a long way since the early studies by Michael Faraday. He would have been pleased to learn about the tremendous wealth of pure science and exciting practical applications that developed over the next century and a half. Whereas the early days of plasmonics focused primarily on fundamental science, we have seen a gradual transition from these fundamental studies to more application-driven research. In particular, the last two decades have seen a tremendous diversification of the application areas, and the reach of plasmonics has expanded into many different disciplines. Everywhere that light is used, it seems of value to think whether plasmonics can help to accomplish something new, better, faster, lower-power or smaller. Over time, researchers in the field have gained a better appreciation for the weaknesses of plasmonics and learned to capitalize on its key strengths to achieve many valuable results. It has also become more obvious as to how plasmonics can augment other technologies. As an example, Fig. 7 shows how plasmonics complements semiconductor electronics and dielectric photonics.138,185
 Fig. 7  Schematic elucidating the role of plasmonics with respect to other chip-scale device technologies. It shows how semiconductor electronics, dielectric photonics and metallic nanoplasmonics occupy well-defined domains on a graph of the operating speed and device dimensions. The dashed lines indicate physical/practical limitations of different technologies; semiconductor electronics in electronic processors tend to be limited in speed by thermal and interconnect delay time issues to about 10 GHz. Dielectric photonics is limited in its critical dimensions by the fundamental laws of diffraction. Plasmonics can serve as an effective bridge between similar-speed dielectric photonics and similar-size nano-electronics. Figure adapted from ref. 185 (M. L. Brongersma and V. M. Shalaev, Science, 2010, 328, 440–441). Reprinted with permission from AAAS. 
From the graph it is clear that each of the presented device technologies can perform unique functions that play to the strength of the key materials that these technologies are based on. The electrical properties of semiconductors enable the realization of truly nanoscale elements for computation and information storage. The high transparency of dielectrics (e.g. glass) facilitates information transport over long distances and at incredible data rates. Unfortunately, semiconductor electronics is limited in speed by thermal and interconnect resistor–capacitor–inductor (RCL) delay-time issues and photonics is limited in size by the fundamental laws of diffraction. Plasmonics offers precisely what electronics and photonics do not have: the size of electronics and the speed of photonics. Plasmonic devices might therefore naturally interface with similar-speed photonic devices and with similar-size electronic components, increasing the synergy between these technologies.
Similar analyses can be applied to the linking of plasmonics to other fields of science and technology. As the control over the size, shape and placement of plasmonic structures approaches the atomic scale, plasmonics will more effectively and naturally interface with nanomechanics, nanomagnetics, nanobiology and ultimately chemistry. At these very small length scales, quantum, non-local, non-linear and ultrafast phenomena will naturally play a very big role in the design of new plasmonic functions. With the many recent developments and great future potential, it is clear that plasmonics is here to stay. It will be exciting to watch what the next 150 years will bring.
4 Concluding remarks
This Introductory Lecture has provided a brief overview of some of the key developments of the field of nanoplasmonics. I have also tried to provide my personal assessment of the limitations, key strengths and most exciting future opportunities for the field. In this relatively short Lecture, it is obviously impossible to capture the breath of this still very rapidly expanding field. I apologize to those researchers whose great scientific accomplishments were not covered. Fortunately, the many excellent lectures that were presented as part of this Faraday Discussion nicely captured the state of the art of the field and some of the frontier topics not highlighted here. I hope that this Faraday Discussion will inspire the next generation of young plasmonics scientists to take the field into exciting new directions and that they join us in defining and shaping the future of nanoplasmonics.
Acknowledgements
The author acknowledges support from a Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative grant from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (grant no. FA9550-10-1-0264).
References
M. Faraday, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1857, 147, 145–181 CrossRef .
J. Turkevich, P. C. Stevenson and J. Hillier, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1951, 11, 55–75 RSC .
J. C. Maxwell Garnett, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 1904, 203, 385–420 CrossRef .
H. Hertz, Ann. Phys. Chem., 1887, 267, 983–1000 CrossRef .
A. Einstein, Ann. Phys., 1905, 322, 132–148 CrossRef .
J. Hofmann and W. Steinmann, Phys. Status Solidi, 1968, 30, K53–K56 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Sipe and J. Becher, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1981, 71, 1286 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Wood, Philosophical Magazine Series 6, 1902, 4, 396–402 CrossRef .
U. Fano, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1941, 31, 213–222 CrossRef .
R. H. Ritchie, E. T. Arakawa, J. J. Cowan and R. N. Hamm, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1968, 21, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pines, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1956, 28, 184–198 CrossRef CAS .

Surface Plasmon Nanophotonics, ed. M. L. Brongersma and P. G. Kik, Springer Series in Optical Sciences,  2007 Search PubMed .
R. H. Ritchie, Phys. Rev., 1957, 106, 874–881 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Powell and J. B. Swan, Phys. Rev., 1959, 115, 869–875 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Stern and R. A. Ferrell, Phys. Rev., 1960, 120, 130–136 CrossRef .
O. Schwelb, J. Lightwave Technol., 2004, 22, 1380–1394 CrossRef .
E. Kretschmann, Z. Phys., 1971, 241, 313–324 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kretschmann and H. Raether, Z. Naturforsch., 1968, 23, 2135–2136 CAS .
E. N. Economou, Phys. Rev., 1969, 182, 539–554 CrossRef .
J. J. Burke, G. I. Stegeman and T. Tamir, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 33, 5186–5201 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sarid, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1981, 47, 1927–1930 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Cunningham, A. A. M. Maradudin and R. F. Wallis, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1974, 10, 3342–3355 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kuhn and H. Kuhn, J. Chem. Phys., 1970, 53, 101–108 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Drexhage, J. Lumin., 1970, 1–2, 693–701 CrossRef .
R. R. Chance, A. Prock and R. Silbey, J. Chem. Phys., 1974, 60, 2744–2748 CrossRef CAS .

          R. R. Chance, A. Prock and R. Silbey, in Advances in Chemical Physics, ed. I. Prigogine and S. A. Rice,  1978, vol. 37 Search PubMed.
R. R. Chance, A. H. Miller, A. Prock and R. Silbey, J. Chem. Phys., 1975, 63, 1589–1595 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sommerfeld, Ann. Phys., 1909, 28, 665–736 CrossRef .
H. Morawitz and M. Philpott, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1974, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef .
M. R. Philpott, J. Chem. Phys., 1975, 62, 1812–1817 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Eagen, W. H. Weber, S. L. McCarthy and R. W. Terhune, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1980, 75, 274–277 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Ford and W. H. Weber, Phys. Rep., 1984, 113, 195–287 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. J. Persson and N. D. Lang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1982, 26, 5409–5415 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gerbshtein and I. Merkulov, JETP Lett., 1975, 22, 35–36 Search PubMed .
J. I. Gersten and A. Nitzan, Surf. Sci., 1985, 158, 165–189 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kreibig and P. Zacharias, Z. Phys. B: Condens. Matter, 1970, 231, 128–143 CAS .
U. Kreibig and L. Genzel, Surf. Sci., 1985, 156, 678–700 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1992, 107, 668–777 CrossRef .
S. Person, M. Jain, Z. Lapin, J. J. Sáenz, G. Wicks and L. Novotny, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1806–1809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Kreibig, J. Phys. F: Met. Phys., 2001, 4, 999–1014 CrossRef .
F. Ouyang, P. Batson and M. Isaacson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 15421–15425 CrossRef CAS .
O. Keller, M. Xiao and S. Bozhevolnyi, Opt. Commun., 1993, 102, 238–244 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tiggesbaumker, L. Koller and A. Liebsch, Phys. Rev. A, 1993, 48, R1749–R1752 CrossRef .
A. Ljungbert and S. Lundqvist, Surf. Sci., 1985, 156, 839–844 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fleischmann, P. J. Hendra and A. J. McQuillan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1974, 26, 163–166 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Jeanmaire and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1977, 84, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Albrecht and J. A. Creighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 5215–5217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moskovits, J. Chem. Phys., 1978, 69, 4159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moskovits, J. Chem. Phys., 1982, 77, 4408–4416 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Schatz, M. A. Young and R. P. Van Duyne, Top. Appl. Phys., 2006, 103, 19–46 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Stockman, V. M. Shalaev, M. Moskovits, R. Botet and T. F. George, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 2821–2830 CrossRef .
K. Kneipp, Y. Wang, H. Kneipp, L. T. Perelman, I. Itzkan, R. R. Dasari and M. S. Feld, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 1667–1670 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moskovits, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1985, 57, 783–826 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Le Ru and P. G. Etchegoin, MRS Bulletin, 2013, 38, 631–640 CrossRef .
D. W. Pohl, W. Denk and M. Lanz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1984, 44, 651–653 CrossRef .
A. Lewis, M. Isaacson, A. Harootunian and A. Muray, Ultramicroscopy, 1984, 13, 227–231 CrossRef .
E. Betzig, J. K. Trautman, T. D. Harris, J. S. Weiner and R. L. Kostelak, Science, 1991, 251, 1468–1470 CAS .
A. Hartschuh, E. J. Sánchez, X. S. Xie and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 095503 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ichimura, N. Hayazawa, M. Hashimoto, Y. Inouye and S. Kawata, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 220801 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Rotenberg and L. Kuipers, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 919–926 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liedberg, C. Nylander and I. Lunström, Sens. Actuators, 1983, 4, 299–304 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liedberg, C. Nylander and I. Lundström, Biosens. Bioelectron., 1995, 10, i–ix CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Takahara, S. Yamagishi, H. Taki, A. Morimoto and T. Kobayashi, Opt. Lett., 1997, 22, 475–477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ebbesen, H. Lezec, H. Ghaemi, T. Thio and P. Wolff, Nature, 1998, 391, 667–669 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Pendry, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 3966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma, J. W. Hartman and H. A. Atwater, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1999, 502, H10.5 Search PubMed .
K. Watanabe, D. Menzel, N. Nilius and H.-J. Freund, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4301–4320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Thomann, B. A. Pinaud, Z. Chen, B. M. Clemens, T. F. Jaramillo and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3340–3446 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Maillard, P. Huang and L. Brus, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1611–1615 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee, F. Libisch, N. Large, O. Neumann, L. V. Brown, J. Cheng, J. B. Lassiter, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 240–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, D. N. Barsic, A. R. Guichard and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3523–3527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Adleman, D. A. Boyd, D. G. Goodwin and D. Psaltis, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4417–4423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Wei, H. I-Kai, A. Bushmaker, R. Kumar, J. Theiss and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3278–3282 CrossRef PubMed .
A. O. Govorov and H. H. Richardson, Nano Today, 2007, 2, 30–38 CrossRef .
H. H. Richardson, A. C. Thomas, M. T. Carlson, M. E. Kordesch and A. O. Govorov, J. Electron. Mater., 2007, 36, 1587–1593 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. MacDonald, V. A. Fedotov, S. Pochon, K. J. Ross, G. C. Stevens, N. I. Zheludev, W. S. Brocklesby and V. I. Emel’Yanov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1643–1645 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chalabi, D. Schoen and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1374–1380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Challener, C. Peng, A. V. Itagi, D. Karns, W. Peng, Y. Peng, X. Yang, X. Zhu, N. J. Gokemeijer, Y.-T. Hsia, G. Ju, R. E. Rottmayer, M. A. Seigler and E. C. Gage, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 303 CrossRef .
L. R. Hirsch, R. J. Stafford, J. A. Bankson, S. R. Sershen, B. Rivera, R. E. Price, J. D. Hazle, N. J. Halas and J. L. West, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 13549–13554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Today, 2007, 2, 18–29 CrossRef .
L. Novotny, R. Bian and X. Xie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 79, 645–648 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pang and R. Gordon, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 402–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Kang, K. Kim, H.-S. Ee, Y.-H. Lee, T.-Y. Yoon, M.-K. Seo and H.-G. Park, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 582 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Homola, S. S. Yee and G. Gauglitz, Sens. Actuators, B, 1999, 54, 3–15 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Anker, W. P. Hall, O. Lyandres, N. C. Shah, J. Zhao and R. P. Van Duyne, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 442–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, M. L. Tang, M. Hentschel, H. Giessen and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 631–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Fang, H. Lee, C. Sun and X. Zhang, Science, 2005, 308, 534–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Blaikie and D. O. S. Melville, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., 2005, 7, S176–S183 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jacob, L. V. Alekseyev and E. Narimanov, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 8247–8256 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Salandrino and N. Engheta, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 1–5 CrossRef .
L. Zhaowei, H. Lee, Y. Xiong, C. Sun and X. Zhang, Science, 2012, 315, 1686 Search PubMed .
P. G. Kik, A. L. Martin, S. A. Maier and H. A. Atwater, Proc. SPIE, 2002, 4810, 7–13 CrossRef .
Z. Ye, S. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y.-S. Park, T. Zentgraf, G. Bartal, X. Yin and X. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 155148 CrossRef .
P. Anger, P. Bharadwaj and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 3–6 CrossRef .
A. Kinkhabwala, Z. Yu, S. Fan, Y. Avlasevich, K. Müllen and W. E. Moerner, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 654–657 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Curto, G. Volpe, T. H. Taminiau, M. P. Kreuzer, R. Quidant and N. F. van Hulst, Science, 2010, 329, 930–933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Y. Huang, Y. C. Jun, M. Seo and M. L. Brongersma, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 19084 CrossRef PubMed .
E. C. Garnett and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9224–9225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Koenderink, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 4208–4210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gérard, J. Wenger, N. Bonod, E. Popov, H. Rigneault, F. Mahdavi, S. Blair, J. Dintinger and T. Ebbesen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 045413 CrossRef .
B. C. Buchler, T. Kalkbrenner, C. Hettich and V. Sandoghdar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 063003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kühn, U. Håkanson, L. Rogobete and V. Sandoghdar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 017402 CrossRef .
L. Rogobete, V. Sandoghdar and S. Ku, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 017402, 1–4 Search PubMed .
T. H. Taminiau, S. Karaveli, N. F. van Hulst and R. Zia, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 979 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-J. Greffet, R. Carminati, K. Joulain, J.-P. Mulet, S. Mainguy and Y. Chen, Nature, 2002, 416, 61–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Schuller, T. Taubner and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 658–661 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chalabi, E. Hasman and M. L. Brongersma, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 014302 CrossRef .
A. P. Raman, M. A. Anoma, L. Zhu, E. Rephaeli and S. Fan, Nature, 2014, 515, 540–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Miyazaki, K. Ikeda, T. Kasaya, K. Yamamoto, Y. Inoue, K. Fujimura, T. Kanakugi, M. Okada, K. Hatade and S. Kitagawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 141114 CrossRef .
M. I. Stockman, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 22029–22106 CrossRef PubMed .
K. F. MacDonald, Z. L. Samson, M. I. Stockman and N. I. Zheludev, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 3, 55–58 CrossRef .
L. Cao and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 12–13 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kauranen and A. V. Zayats, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 6, 737–748 CrossRef .
M. Westphalen, U. Kreibig, J. Rostalski, H. Lu and D. Meissner, Sol. Energy Mater., 2000, 61, 97–105 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Pala, J. S. Q. Liu, E. S. Barnard, D. Askarov, E. C. Garnett, S. Fan and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2095 Search PubMed .
R. A. Pala, J. White, E. Barnard, J. Liu and M. L. Brongersma, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3504–3509 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Rand, P. Peumans and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 7519–7526 CrossRef CAS .
D. Derkacs, S. H. Lim, P. Matheu, W. Mar and E. T. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 20–23 CrossRef .
S. Pillai, K. R. Catchpole, T. Trupke and M. A. Green, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 0–8 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 865–865 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kahl, T. Thomay, V. Kohnle, K. Beha, J. Merlein, M. Hagner, A. Halm, J. Ziegler, T. Nann, Y. Fedutik, U. Woggon, M. Artemyev, F. Pérez-Willard, A. Leitenstorfer and R. Bratschitsch, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2897–2900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Krämer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Boriskina, H. Ghasemi and G. Chen, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 375–386 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hayashi, K. Kozaru and K. Yamamoto, Solid State Commun., 1991, 79, 763–767 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Bergman and M. I. Stockman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 027402 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Hill, Y.-S. Oei, B. Smalbrugge, Y. Zhu, T. de Vries, P. J. van Veldhoven, F. W. M. van Otten, T. J. Eijkemans, J. P. Turkiewicz, H. de Waardt, E. J. Geluk, S.-H. Kwon, Y.-H. Lee, R. Nötzel and M. K. Smit, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Koller, A. Hohenau, H. Ditlbacher, N. Galler, F. Reil, F. R. Aussenegg, A. Leitner, E. J. W. List and J. R. Krenn, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 684–687 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Oulton, V. J. Sorger, T. Zentgraf, R.-M. Ma, C. Gladden, L. Dai, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Nature, 2009, 461, 629–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Hryciw, Y. C. Jun and M. L. Brongersma, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 185–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Jun, K. C. Y. Huang and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 283 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Nezhad, A. Simic, O. Bondarenko, B. Slutsky, A. Mizrahi, L. Feng, V. Lomakin and Y. Fainman, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 395–399 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Lu, J. Kim, H.-Y. Chen, C. Wu, N. Dabidian, C. E. Sanders, C.-Y. Wang, M.-Y. Lu, B.-H. Li, X. Qiu, W.-H. Chang, L.-J. Chen, G. Shvets, C.-K. Shih and S. Gwo, Science, 2012, 337, 450–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Y. Huang, M.-K. Seo, T. Sarmiento, Y. Huo, J. S. Harris and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 244–249 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zia, J. Schuller, A. Chandran and M. Brongersma, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
P. Neutens, L. Lagae, G. Borghs and P. Van Dorpe, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1429–1432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nikolajsen, K. Leosson and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5833–5835 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nikolajsen, K. Leosson and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Opt. Commun., 2005, 244, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cai, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4403–4411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dionne, K. Diest, L. Sweatlock and H. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Melikyan, L. Alloatti, A. Muslija, D. Hillerkuss, P. C. Schindler, J. Li, R. Palmer, D. Korn, S. Muehlbrandt, D. Van Thourhout, B. Chen, R. Dinu, M. Sommer, C. Koos, M. Kohl, W. Freude and J. Leuthold, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 229–233 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Lee, G. Papadakis, S. P. Burgos, K. Chander, A. Kriesch, R. Pala, U. Peschel and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6468 Search PubMed .
T. Ishi, J. Fujikata, K. Marita, T. Baba and K. Ohashi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44(part 2), L364–L366 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. White, G. Veronis, Z. Yu, E. S. Barnard, A. Chandran, S. Fan and M. L. Brongersma, Opt. Lett., 2009, 34, 686–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tang, S. E. Kocabas, S. Latif, A. K. Okyay, D.-S. Ly-Gagnon, K. C. Saraswat and D. A. B. Miller, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 226–229 CrossRef CAS .
P. Neutens, P. Van Dorpe, I. De Vlaminck, L. Lagae and G. Borghs, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 283–286 CrossRef CAS .
I. Goykhman, B. Desiatov, J. Khurgin, J. Shappir and U. Levy, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2219–2224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Scales and P. Berini, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2010, 46, 633–643 CrossRef CAS .
D.-S. Ly-Gagnon, K. C. Balram, J. S. White, P. Wahl, M. L. Brongersma and D. A. B. Miller, Nanophotonics, 2012, 1, 9–16 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mühlschlegel, H.-J. Eisler, O. J. F. Martin, B. Hecht and D. W. Pohl, Science, 2005, 308, 1607–1609 CrossRef PubMed .
P. J. Schuck, D. P. Fromm, A. Sundaramurthy, G. S. Kino and W. E. Moerner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 017402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Bozhevolnyi and T. Søndergaard, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 10869–10877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bharadwaj, B. Deutsch and L. Novotny, Adv. Opt. Photonics, 2009, 1, 438–483 CrossRef .
Y. Kurokawa and H. Miyazaki, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 035411 CrossRef .
V. J. Sorger, R. F. Oulton, J. Yao and G. Bartal, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3489–3493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ditlbacher, A. Hohenau, D. Wagner, U. Kreibig, M. Rogers, F. Hofer, F. Aussenegg and J. Krenn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 257403 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Taminiau, F. D. Stefani and N. F. van Hulst, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 105005 CrossRef .
T. H. Taminiau, F. D. Stefani, F. B. Segerink and N. F. van Hulst, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 234–237 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Schoen, A. C. Atre, A. García-Etxarri, J. A. Dionne and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 120–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Taminiau, F. D. Stefani and N. F. Van Hulst, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1020–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 270–272 CrossRef CAS .
M. Quinten, A. Leitner, J. R. Krenn and F. R. Aussenegg, Opt. Lett., 1998, 23, 1331–1333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma, J. W. Hartman and H. A. Atwater, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, R16356–R16359 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Weeber, Y. Lacroute and A. Dereux, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 1–10 CrossRef .
R. Zia, M. D. Selker, P. B. Catrysse and M. L. Brongersma, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A. Opt. Image Sci. Vis., 2004, 21, 2442–2446 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zia, M. Selker and M. Brongersma, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 1–9 CrossRef .
R. Zia and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 426–429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. P. Pile, T. Ogawa, D. K. Gramotnev, Y. Matsuzaki, K. C. Vernon, K. Yamaguchi, T. Okamoto, M. Haraguchi and M. Fukui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 1–3 Search PubMed .
G. Veronis, Z. Yu, S. Kocabas, D. Miller, M. Brongersma and S. Fan, Chin. Opt. Lett., 2009, 7, 302–308 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 9467–9476 CrossRef PubMed .
S. I. Bozhevolnyi, V. S. Volkov, E. Devaux, J. Laluet and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature, 2006, 440, 508–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Gramotnev and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. De Leon, M. D. Lukin and H. Park, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2012, 18, 1781–1791 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cai, W. Shin, S. Fan and M. L. Brongersma, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5120–5124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shin, W. Cai, P. B. Catrysse, G. Veronis, M. L. Brongersma and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4653–4758 Search PubMed .

          G. A. E. Vandenbosch, in Plasmonics – Principles and Applications, ed. K. Y. Kim, InTech,  2012, pp. 23–48, ISBN: 978-953-51-0797-2 Search PubMed .
P. Nagpal, N. C. Lindquist, S.-H. Oh and D. J. Norris, Science, 2009, 325, 594–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yan, Y. Bao, U. Manna, R. A. Shah and N. F. Scherer, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2436–2442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Xu, Y. Ma, Z. Li and D. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4345–4349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, Y. Hu, Y. Xuan, J. Li, Y. Yang, R. V Martinez, C. Li, J. Luo, M. Qi and G. J. Cheng, Science, 2014, 346, 1352–1356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma and V. M. Shalaev, Science, 2010, 328, 440–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Papaioannou, D. Kalavrouziotis, K. Vyrsokinos, J.-C. Weeber, K. Hassan, L. Markey, A. Dereux, A. Kumar, S. I. Bozhevolnyi, M. Baus, T. Tekin, D. Apostolopoulos, H. Avramopoulos and N. Pleros, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 1–9 Search PubMed .
S. Zhu, G. Q. Lo and D. L. Kwong, Int. J. Electr. Comput. Electron. Commun. Eng., 2013, 7, 712–715 Search PubMed .
J. T. Kim, J. J. Ju, S. Park, M. Kim, S. K. Park and M.-H. Lee, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 13133–13138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boltasseva and H. A. Atwater, Science, 2011, 331, 290–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. West, S. Ishii, G. V. Naik, N. K. Emani, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Laser Photon. Rev., 2010, 4, 795–808 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, U. Guler, N. Kinsey, G. V. Naik, A. Boltasseva, J. Guan, V. M. Shalaev and A. V. Kildishev, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7959–7965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fei, A. S. Rodin, G. O. Andreev, W. Bao, A. S. McLeod, M. Wagner, L. M. Zhang, Z. Zhao, M. Thiemens, G. Dominguez, M. M. Fogler, A. H. Castro Neto, C. N. Lau, F. Keilmann and D. N. Basov, Nature, 2012, 487, 82–85 CAS .
A. L. Falk, F. H. L. Koppens, C. L. Yu, K. Kang, N. de Leon Snapp, A. V. Akimov, M.-H. Jo, M. D. Lukin and H. Park, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 475–479 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, M. Badioli, P. Alonso-González, S. Thongrattanasiri, F. Huth, J. Osmond, M. Spasenović, A. Centeno, A. Pesquera, P. Godignon, A. Z. Elorza, N. Camara, F. J. García de Abajo, R. Hillenbrand and F. H. L. Koppens, Nature, 2012, 487, 77–81 CAS .
T. J. Echtermeyer, L. Britnell, P. K. Jasnos, A. Lombardo, R. V. Gorbachev, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fang, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, P. M. Ajayan, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3808–3813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fang, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, A. Schlather, P. M. Ajayan, F. H. L. Koppens, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10222–10228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Woo, M. S. Kim, H. W. Kim and J. H. Jang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 081106 CrossRef .
V. Thareja, J. Kang, H. Yuan, K. Milaninia, H. Y. Hwang, Y. Cui, P. G. Kik and M. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1570–1576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Niu, Y. Jun Shin, Y. Lee, J.-H. Ahn and H. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 061116 CrossRef .
J. Mann, Q. Ma, P. M. Odenthal, M. Isarraraz, D. Le, E. Preciado, D. Barroso, K. Yamaguchi, G. Von Son Palacio, A. Nguyen, T. Tran, M. Wurch, A. Nguyen, V. Klee, S. Bobek, D. Sun, T. F. Heinz, T. S. Rahman, R. Kawakami and L. Bartels, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1399–1404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y.-J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. Castro Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C. Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Feigenbaum, K. Diest and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2111–2116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Vasudev, J.-H. Kang, J. Park, X. Liu and M. L. Brongersma, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 26387 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Abb, P. Albella, J. Aizpurua and O. L. Muskens, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2457–2463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Krasavin and A. V. Zayats, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 053901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. J. Sorger, N. D. Lanzillotti-Kimura, R.-M. Ma and X. Zhang, Nanophotonics, 2012, 1, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. West, S. Ishii, G. V. Naik, N. K. Emani, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Laser Photonics Rev., 2010, 4, 795–808 CrossRef CAS .
K. Appavoo, B. Wang, N. F. Brady, M. Seo, J. Nag, R. P. Prasankumar, D. J. Hilton, S. T. Pantelides and R. F. Haglund, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1127–1133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-K. U. Michel, D. N. Chigrin, T. W. W. Maß, K. Schönauer, M. Salinga, M. Wuttig and T. Taubner, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3470–3475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schuller, R. Zia, T. Taubner and M. Brongersma, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 107401 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Vassant, A. Archambault, F. Marquier, F. Pardo, U. Gennser, A. Cavanna, J. L. Pelouard and J. J. Greffet, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 237401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Law, D. C. Adams, A. M. Taylor and D. Wasserman, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 12155–12165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhong, D. Wasserman, Y. Zhong, S. D. Malagari, T. Hamilton and D. Wasserman, J. Nanophotonics, 2015, 9, 093791 CrossRef .
M. Wagner, A. S. Mcleod, S. J. Maddox, Z. Fei, M. Liu, R. D. Averitt, M. M. Fogler, S. R. Bank, F. Keilmann and D. N. Basov, Nano Lett., 2014 Search PubMed .
R. Hillenbrand, T. Taubner and F. Keilmann, Nature, 2002, 418, 159–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Schwartz, J. A. Hutchison, C. Genet and T. W. Ebbesen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 196405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sauvan, J. P. Hugonin, I. S. Maksymov and P. Lalanne, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 237401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Scholl, A. García-Etxarri, A. L. Koh and J. A. Dionne, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 564–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Savage, M. M. Hawkeye, R. Esteban, A. G. Borisov, J. Aizpurua and J. J. Baumberg, Nature, 2012, 491, 574–577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zuloaga, E. Prodan and P. Nordlander, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 887–891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Marinica, A. K. Kazansky, P. Nordlander, J. Aizpurua and A. G. Borisov, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1333–1339 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Toscano, S. Raza, W. Yan, C. Jeppesen, S. Xiao, M. Wubs, A.-P. Jauho, S. I. Bozhevolnyi and N. A. Mortensen, Nanophotonics, 2013, 2, 161–166 CrossRef .

          B. Kobrin, E. S. Barnard, M. L. Brongersma, M. K. Kwak and L. J. Guo, in Proc. SPIE 8249, Advanced Fabrication Technologies for Micro/Nano Optics and Photonics V, ed. W. V. Schoenfeld, R. C. Rumpf and G. von Freymann,  2012, vol. 8249, p. 82490 Search PubMed .
W. A. Murray and W. L. Barnes, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3771–3782 CrossRef CAS .
V. E. Ferry, M. A. Verschuuren, H. B. T. Li, R. E. I. Schropp, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 183503 CrossRef .
Y. Xia and G. Whitesides, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1998, 28, 153–184 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawata, H. B. Sun, T. Tanaka and K. Takada, Nature, 2001, 412, 697–698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fischer and M. Wegener, Laser Photonics Rev., 2013, 7, 22–44 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Kuznetsov, R. Kiyan and B. N. Chichkov, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 21198–21203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Serbin, A. Egbert, A. Ostendorf, B. N. Chichkov, R. Houbertz, G. Domann, J. Schulz, C. Cronauer, L. Fröhlich and M. Popall, Opt. Lett., 2003, 28, 301–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Henzie, M. H. Lee and T. W. Odom, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 549–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nelayah, M. Kociak, O. Stéphan, F. J. García de Abajo, M. Tencé, L. Henrard, D. Taverna, I. Pastoriza-Santos, L. M. Liz-Marzán and C. Colliex, Nat. Phys., 2007, 3, 348–353 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. R. Vesseur, R. de Waele, M. Kuttge and A. Polman, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2843–2846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. García de Abajo, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2010, 82, 209–275 CrossRef .
M. V. Bashevoy, F. Jonsson, A. V. Krasavin, N. I. Zheludev, Y. Chen and M. I. Stockman, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1113–1115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Schoen, A. C. Atre, A. García-Etxarri, J. A. Dionne and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 120–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Nicoletti, F. de la Peña, R. K. Leary, D. J. Holland, C. Ducati and P. A. Midgley, Nature, 2013, 502, 80–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Rechberger, A. Hohenau, A. Leitner, J. R. Krenn, B. Lamprecht and F. R. Aussenegg, Opt. Commun., 2003, 220, 137–141 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Hancu, A. G. Curto, M. Castro-López, M. Kuttge and N. F. Van Hulst, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 166–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Fan, C. Wu, K. Bao, J. Bao, R. Bardhan, N. J. Halas, V. N. Manoharan, P. Nordlander, G. Shvets and F. Capasso, Science, 2010, 328, 1135–1138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, H. Guo, L. Fu, S. Kaiser, H. Schweizer and H. Giessen, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 31–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Kekatpure, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai and M. L. Brongersma, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 243902 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Prodan, C. Radloff, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Science, 2003, 302, 419–422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Smith, J. B. Pendry and M. C. K. Wiltshire, Science, 2004, 305, 788–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Shalaev, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 41–48 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Soukoulis and M. Wegener, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 1–8 Search PubMed .
E. J. R. Vesseur, T. Coenen, H. Caglayan, N. Engheta and A. Polman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 013902 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. Kildishev, W. Cai, U. K. Chettiar and V. M. Shalaev, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 115029 CrossRef .
A. Salandrino and N. Engheta, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 075103 CrossRef .
N. I. Zheludev and Y. S. Kivshar, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 917–924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. I. Zheludev, S. L. Prosvirnin, N. Papasimakis and V. A. Fedotov, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 351–354 CrossRef CAS .
A. Poddubny, I. Iorsh, P. Belov and Y. Kivshar, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 948–957 CrossRef CAS .
V. Fedotov, P. Mladyonov, S. Prosvirnin and N. Zheludev, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 72, 056613 CrossRef CAS .
E. Plum, X. X. Liu, V. A. Fedotov, Y. Chen, D. P. Tsai and N. I. Zheludev, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 113902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Pendry, D. Schurig and D. R. Smith, Science, 2006, 312, 1780–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Leonhardt, Science., 2006, 312, 1777–1780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. G. Veselago, Phys.-Usp., 1968, 10, 509–514 CrossRef .
A. Boardman, Journal of Optometry, 2010, 13, 020401 Search PubMed .
P. B. Catrysse, L. Verslegers, Z. Yu, J. S. White, E. S. Barnard, M. L. Brongersma and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 235–238 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Hasman, Z. Bomzon, A. Niv, G. Biener and V. Kleiner, Opt. Commun., 2002, 209, 45–54 CrossRef CAS .
L. Martín-Moreno, F. García-Vidal, H. Lezec, A. Degiron and T. Ebbesen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 167401 CrossRef .
F. Afshinmanesh, J. S. White, W. Cai and M. L. Brongersma, Nanophotonics, 2012, 1, 125–129 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yu, P. Genevet, M. A. Kats, F. Aieta, J.-P. Tetienne, F. Capasso and Z. Gaburro, Science, 2011, 334, 333–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ni, S. Ishii, A. V. Kildishev and V. M. Shalaev, Light: Sci. Appl., 2013, 2, e72 CrossRef .
A. Kildishev, A. V. Boltasseva and V. M. Shalaev, Science, 2013, 339, 1232009 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Engheta, A. Salandrino and A. Alù, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 095504 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Engheta, Science, 2007, 317, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Khurgin, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 10, 2–6 CAS .
W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature, 2003, 424, 824–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maier, M. Brongersma and P. Kik, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1501–1505 CrossRef CAS .
N. Engheta, Science, 2007, 317, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Bohren, Am. J. Phys., 1983, 51, 323 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, W. Fan, B. K. Minhas, A. Frauenglass, K. J. Malloy and S. R. J. Brueck, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 037402 CrossRef PubMed .
E. C. Garnett, W. Cai, J. J. Cha, F. Mahmood, S. T. Connor, M. Greyson Christoforo, Y. Cui, M. D. McGehee and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 241–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chang, A. Sørensen, P. Hemmer and M. Lukin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 053002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Chang and M. D. Lukin, Proc. SPIE, 2008, 6904, 69040I CrossRef .
M. S. Tame, K. R. McEnery, S. K. Ozdemir, J. Lee, S. A. Maier and M. S. Kim, Nat. Phys., 2013, 9, 329–340 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuttge, E. J. R. Vesseur, J. Verhoeven, H. J. Lezec, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 113110 CrossRef .
J. S. Fakonas, H. Lee, Y. A. Kelaita and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 317–320 CrossRef CAS .
W. Rechberger, A. Hohenau, A. Leitner, J. R. Krenn, B. Lamprecht and F. R. Aussenegg, Opt. Commun., 2003, 220, 137–141 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Zheludev, S. A. Maier, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, H. Giessen and C. T. Chong, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 707–715 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sundaramurthy, K. Crozier, G. Kino, D. Fromm, P. Schuck and W. Moerner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 165409 CrossRef .
N. Liu, M. Hentschel, T. Weiss, A. P. Alivisatos and H. Giessen, Science, 2011, 332, 1407–1410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sönnichsen, B. M. Reinhard, J. Liphardt and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Biotechnol., 2005, 23, 741–745 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Shafiei, C. Wu, Y. Wu, A. B. Khanikaev, P. Putzke, A. Singh, X. Li and G. Shvets, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 367–372 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baron, E. Devaux, J. C. Rodier, J. P. Hugonin, E. Rousseau, C. Genet, T. W. Ebbesen and P. Lalanne, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4207–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gopinath, S. V Boriskina, B. M. Reinhard and L. Dal Negro, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 3741–3753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tanemura, K. C. Balram, D. S. Ly-Gagnon, P. Wahl, J. S. White, M. L. Brongersma and D. A. B. Miller, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2693–2698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Tribelsky, A. E. Miroshnichenko, Y. S. Kivshar, B. S. Luk'yanchuk and A. R. Khokhlov, Phys. Rev. X, 2011, 1, 1–9 Search PubMed .
G. Baffou and R. Quidant, Laser Photonics Rev., 2013, 7, 171–187 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rothenhäusler, J. Rabe, P. Korpiun and W. Knoll, Surf. Sci. Lett., 1984, 137, 373–383 CrossRef .
C. F. Bohren, Am. J. Phys., 1983, 51, 323 CrossRef CAS .
S. Toroghi and P. G. Kik, Phys. Rev. B, 2014, 90, 205414 CrossRef .
G. Baffou, R. Quidant and C. Girard, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 153109 CrossRef .
G. Baffou and R. Quidant, Laser Photonics Rev., 2013, 7, 171–187 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Richardson, M. T. Carlson, P. J. Tandler, P. Hernandez and A. O. Govorov, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1139–1146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Baffou, R. Quidant and F. J. García de Abajo, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 709–716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Baffou, M. P. Kreuzer, F. Kulzer and R. Quidant, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 3291–3298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Boyer, P. Tamarat, A. Maali, B. Lounis and M. Orrit, Science, 2002, 297, 1160–1163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Baffou, P. Bon, J. Savatier, J. Polleux, M. Zhu, M. Merlin, H. Rignault and S. Monneret, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2452–2458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Hirsch, R. J. Stafford, J. A. Bankson, S. R. Sershen, B. Rivera, R. E. Price, J. D. Hazle, N. J. Halas and J. L. West, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 13549–13554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. P. Zharov, K. E. Mercer, E. N. Galitovskaya and M. S. Smeltzer, Biophys. J., 2006, 90, 619–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Röntzsch, K.-H. Heinig, J. A. Schuller and M. L. Brongersma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 044105 CrossRef .
H. H. Richardson, A. C. Thomas, M. T. Carlson, M. E. Kordesch and A. O. Govorov, J. Electron. Mater., 2007, 36, 1587–1593 CrossRef CAS .
B. Soares, F. Jonsson and N. Zheludev, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 153905 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Boyd, L. Greengard, M. Brongersma, M. Y. El-Naggar and D. G. Goodwin, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2592–2597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, D. N. Barsic, A. R. Guichard and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3523–3527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Boyd, J. R. Adleman, D. G. Goodwin and D. Psaltis, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Adleman, D. Boyd, D. Goodwin and D. Psaltis, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4417–4423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Greengard, M. Brongersma and D. Boyd, US Pat. 7,998,538,  2004 .
S. R. Sershen, S. L. Westcott, N. J. Halas and J. L. West, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2000, 51, 293–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Stehr, C. Hrelescu, R. A. Sperling, G. Raschke, M. Wunderlich, A. Nichtl, D. Heindl, K. Kürzinger, W. J. Parak, T. A. Klar and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 619–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Reismann, J. C. Bretschneider, G. von Plessen and U. Simon, Small, 2008, 4, 607–610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Neumann, C. Feronti, A. D. Neumann, A. Dong, K. Schell, B. Lu, E. Kim, M. Quinn, S. Thompson, N. Grady, P. Nordlander, M. Oden and N. J. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 11677–11681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Fan, U. K. Chettiar, L. Cao, F. Afshinmanesh, N. Engheta and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 380–385 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fan, K. C. Y. Huang, L. Cao and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 392–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Y. Huang, M.-K. Seo, Y. Huo, T. Sarmiento, J. S. Harris and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1005 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A glass flask containing a suspension of nanoscale Au colloidal particles in water produced by Michael Faraday. The synthesis and optical properties of such colloidal suspensions and of beaten Au leaf were discussed in the famous Bakerian Lecture written by Michael Faraday in 1857.1 Au colloids were typically prepared using aqueous solutions of Au-containing compounds, such as sodium chloroaurate (NaAuCl4). The addition of a reducing solution, e.g. phosphorus in carbon disulfide in a two-phase system, would produce the ruby red liquid seen in this photograph. Although not visible in any optical microscope at the time, it was Turkevich who used electron microscopy to show that such a synthesis results in Au nanoparticles of a few to a few tens of nanometers.2 Reproduced with permission from the Royal Institution of Great Britain (© Paul Wilkinson).	 

 	Fig. 2  The rapid growth of the field of plasmonics is illustrated by the number of scientific articles published annually containing the word “plasmon” or “surface plasmon” in either the title or abstract. This graph is updated from the original graph shown in the book “Surface Plasmon Nanophotonics,” ed. M. L. Brongersma and P. G. Kik, Springer Series in Optical Sciences, 2007, vol. 131,13 reprinted with kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematics used by Drexhage to explain how the emission of an excited quantum emitter is influenced by the presence of a metallic mirror. He argued that the interference of the light that is directly emitted to free space and reflected light from the mirror could cause enhancements or reductions in the radiative decay rate of the emitter.25 Reprinted from ref. 25 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Normalized photoluminescence lifetimes for an Eu3+ complex placed at different distances from a silver mirror. The solid line is the best fit using the model proposed by Chance, Prock, and Silbey,27 which includes the impact of free space reflection of propagating light waves as well as the excitation of surface plasmon polaritons and electron hole pair excitation (i.e. ‘lossy waves’) in the metal.28 Figure reprinted from ref. 27 with permission from John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Plots of the phase constant and beam radius for a metallic nanowire waveguide used by Takahara and co-workers to illustrate how such waveguides can guide light with a deep subwavelength mode diameter.64 Reprinted from ref. 64 with permission from OSA Publishing. (b) Transmission spectrum of a Ag film with a square array of holes that Ebbesen and co-workers took to prove that properly designed arrays can exhibit a light transmission which was larger than expected from knowledge of the total area of the holes.65 Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd from ref. 65, copyright 1998. (c) Schematic used by Sir John Pendry to illustrate how negative refraction can make a perfect lens.66 Figure reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2000 by the American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Experimental EELS map of a plasmonic mode of an Ag nanoprism. It was created by raster-scanning the electron beam from a scanning transmission electron microscope over the structure and by plotting the spatial distribution of the electrons that lost 1.75 eV through the excitation of this particular plasmonic mode.234 Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd from ref. 234, copyright 2007. (b) An energy-level diagram used to describe the concept of plasmon hybridization. Here, the optical properties of a metal nanoshell can be thought of as resulting from the interaction between sphere and cavity plasmons.245 Figure from ref. 245, reprinted with permission from AAAS. (c) The illustrations show how nanoparticles with different dielectric properties can be viewed as lumped nanocircuit elements for light. Such modularization facilitates the rapid design of complex nanophotonic architectures consisting of a plurality of nano-elements. This forms the basis of metactronics.274 Figure from ref. 274, reprinted with permission from AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Image showing how the excitation of a localized surface plasmon redirects the flow of light (Poynting vector) towards and into a 20 nm-diameter Al nanoparticle.275 Reproduced with permission from ref. 275. Copyright 1983, American Association of Physics Teachers. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and corresponding dark-field optical microcroscopy images of Ag nanoparticles of different shapes (the scale bar is 300 nm).226 Figure reprinted from ref. 226 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. (c) SEM image of an optical Yagi–Uda antenna driven by quantum dots. The image shows metallic reflector, feed, and director elements.99 Figure from ref. 99, reprinted with permission from AAAS. (d) SEM image of an array of staple-shaped Au nanostructures forming a metamaterial with a negative permeability.276 Figure reprinted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 2005 by the American Physical Society. (e) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of two Ag nanowires that were optically welded together through the excitation of a surface plasmon resonance at the crossing-point of the two wires.277 Figure reprinted from ref. 277 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. (f) Schematic showing two Au antenna electrodes of different widths used to simultaneously inject current into an underlying quantum well and directing the emission from this quantum well in either a dipolar or quadrupolar angular emission pattern.134 Figure reprinted from ref. 134 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. (g) Optical microscope image of a thermo-optic Mach–Zender interferometric modulator, in which Au strips simultaneously serve as long-range surface plasmon waveguides and electrical wires that can be heated to modify the index of a thermo-optic polymer surrounding the stripes and to achieve switching.140 Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2004, AIP Publishing LLC.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic elucidating the role of plasmonics with respect to other chip-scale device technologies. It shows how semiconductor electronics, dielectric photonics and metallic nanoplasmonics occupy well-defined domains on a graph of the operating speed and device dimensions. The dashed lines indicate physical/practical limitations of different technologies; semiconductor electronics in electronic processors tend to be limited in speed by thermal and interconnect delay time issues to about 10 GHz. Dielectric photonics is limited in its critical dimensions by the fundamental laws of diffraction. Plasmonics can serve as an effective bridge between similar-speed dielectric photonics and similar-size nano-electronics. Figure adapted from ref. 185 (M. L. Brongersma and V. M. Shalaev, Science, 2010, 328, 440–441). Reprinted with permission from AAAS.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
