Regulating spatial charge transfer over intrinsically ultrathin-carbon-encapsulated photoanodes toward solar water splitting   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA10379H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA10379H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2741-2753Regulating spatial charge transfer over intrinsically ultrathin-carbon-encapsulated photoanodes toward solar water splitting†

        
          
            Xiao-Cheng 
            Dai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ming-Hui 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Bing 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bei-Bei 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yunhui 
            He
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Guangcan 
            Xiao
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Fang-Xing 
            Xiao
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Fuzhou University, New Campus, Minhou, Fujian Province 350108, China. E-mail: fxxiao@fzu.edu.cn
bInstrumental Measurement and Analysis Center, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350002, People's Republic of China
Received 
      29th October 2018
    , Accepted 7th January 2019First published on 9th January 2019AbstractPhotoinduced charge separation and transfer have been deemed the core factors affecting the efficiency of photoelectrocatalysis; precisely modulating the spatial migration of photo-induced charge carriers to the ideal reaction sites is of paramount importance for boosting the solar conversion efficiency of photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells. In this work, a combinatorial strategy has been developed to progressively construct highly efficient charge transport channels on the quintessential electrochemically anodized one-dimensional semiconductor framework (TiO2 nanotube arrays, TNTAs) by in situ annealing-induced intrinsic ultrathin carbon encapsulation. Antimony sulfide (Sb2S3) nanocrystals were subsequently attached to the interior and exterior surfaces of the carbon-encapsulated TNTA (C–TNTA) substrate forming a well-defined ternary photoanode (C–Sb2S3–TNTA) capable of triggering smooth and cascade electron transfer. Cooperativity stemming from intrinsic carbon encapsulation on the surface for fast electron transport in conjunction with Sb2S3 photosensitization for substantial visible light harvesting endows the C–Sb2S3–TNTA heterostructure with markedly enhanced solar-powered PEC water dissociation performances, conspicuously exceeding its single and binary counterparts. Furthermore, a hole transport pathway was further constructed by site-selective incorporation of an oxygen evolving catalyst (Co-Pi) in the ternary system via a photo-assisted electrodeposition or electrodeposition approach, which contributes to more enhanced separation efficiency and prolonged lifetime of photo-induced charge carriers together with improved photostability. It is expected that our work would afford a new frontier to intelligently mediate the spatial directional flow of photogenerated charge carriers and rationally construct efficient charge transport channels on the semiconductor-based photoelectrodes for high-efficiency solar energy harvesting and conversion.
1. Introduction
Renewable solar energy as one of the most abundant, green, and inexhaustible resources is extremely important to ameliorate the ever-growing energy crisis for modern industry.1,2 In particular, solar hydrogen generation has been eliciting heightened interest since it represents a promising clean and renewable energy source.3 In the past few decades, semiconductor-based photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting has experienced a tremendous upsurge in solar fuel production since the groundbreaking work initiated by Fujishima and Honda in 1972.4,5 Since then, multitudinous semiconductors have thus been explored to achieve solar water splitting, among which one-dimensional (1D) semiconducting nanostructures, such as nanorods, nanowires, and nanotubes have been the focus of considerable attention nowadays owing to their fascinating structural advantages including larger specific surface area, excellent charge separation/transport efficiency along the vertical direction of the 1D framework, and outstanding light absorption and scattering, in comparison with their corresponding nanoparticulate or bulk counterparts.6–8 Especially, wide-band-gap 1D semiconductors (e.g., TiO2, ZnO, SrTiO3etc.) directly grown on conducting substrates (e.g., Ti foil, FTO, ITO etc.) feature a high degree of vertically oriented geometry and unidirectional charge transfer channel as well as intrinsic merits (e.g., TiO2) such as good physicochemical stability and environmental friendliness, making them prime candidates for versatile heterogeneous photocatalysis or photoelectrocatalysis.9–12 However, poor light absorption in the solar spectrum especially in the visible region, fast recombination of photoexcited electron–hole charge carriers and sluggish kinetics hinder their promising applications in PEC water dissociation.13 To solve this dilemma, diverse modification strategies have thus been developed predominantly centering around metal or non-metal doping,14,15 formation of heterojunctions with semiconductors possessing matched band alignments,16,17 incorporation of an electron conducting medium (e.g., carbon nanotubes or graphene), or integration with noble metals (e.g., Au, Pd, Rh and Pt), aiming at achieving cooperative synergy to enhance the surface reaction kinetics and thus boost the efficiency of photoredox reactions.18–24
Recent years have witnessed explosive interest in constructing a large variety of carbon–semiconductor nanocomposites for photocatalytic and PEC applications.18,19 Rational integration of carbon materials with traditional semiconductors in an appropriate fashion has been well-established as an efficacious approach to boost the charge separation efficiency of a semiconductor matrix for the sake of superior acceptance and shuttling of electrons from band-gap-photoexcitation of semiconductors afforded by carbon materials. Nonetheless, it should be particularly stressed that true intimate integration of 1D semiconductors especially for those grown directly on conducting substrates (e.g., Ti foil, FTO, ITO etc.) with carbon materials (e.g., CNTs or graphene)25,26 at the nanoscale level is actually hard to achieve in terms of their spatial structure incompatibility, hence inevitably affecting the photo-induced charge carrier separation/transfer in the interfacial region during the photoredox process. Moreover, two essential questions are naturally raised after reviewing the previous studies on carbon–semiconductor photocatalysts. Is it possible to realize complete encapsulation of the whole 1D semiconductor framework with carbon materials without sacrificing surface active sites and simultaneously, to unlock their synergistic interactions in carbon–semiconductor composite systems? Is it feasible to strategically modulate the spatial charge transfer pathway with the assistance of carbon materials to achieve more prolonged lifetime of charge carriers? To this end, it is highly desirable to develop a facile, green, and judicious synthetic strategy rather than merely depending on conventional approaches to randomly integrate carbon materials with semiconductors without exquisite structural engineering. On the other hand, electrocatalysts as co-catalysts have garnered tremendous attention due to their superior capability to regulate either electron or hole vectorial flow direction.27 Inspired by this, it is reasonably expected that a high-efficiency charge transport highway could be constructed once the merits of carbon materials (electrons) and co-catalysts (holes) for tuning directional charge transfer are fully harnessed for crafting a carbon/co-catalyst/semiconductor composite PEC system, which would contribute to the efficacious separation/transfer of photo-induced charge carriers to the ideal active sites.
With these motivations, herein, we for the first time developed a facile, green, and combinatorial strategy to progressively construct highly efficient charge separation/transport channels on the 1D semiconductor matrix for solar-powered PEC water splitting. First, hierarchically ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNTAs), as a conceptual wide-band-gap 1D semiconductor, were selected as the light harvester and building block by virtue of their vectorial charge transport characteristics without particle-to-particle hop occurring in the nanoparticle system. Then, a facile, green and tunable in situ annealing approach was developed to fabricate well-defined ultrathin carbon-encapsulated TNTAs (C–TNTAs) which ensures a smooth electron transfer pathway for hydrogen production. Afterward, antimony sulfide (Sb2S3) nanocrystals were uniformly grown on the whole framework (interior and exterior surfaces) of TNTAs (C–Sb2S3–TNTAs) considering their favorable energy level alignment with a view to substantially boosting the light harvesting efficiency of the semiconductor substrate. Finally, cobalt-based oxygen evolving catalysts (cobalt phosphate, Co-Pi) were further anchored on the active sites of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs to simultaneously mediate the directional hole transport. Significantly, it was uncovered that concurrent intrinsic in situ carbon encapsulation, Sb2S3 nanocrystal sensitization, and oxygen evolving co-catalyst decoration are beneficial for precisely regulating the unidirectional migration of charge carriers, thus strategically enhancing the separation and transfer of charge carriers and ameliorating the sluggish kinetics of the solar-powered PEC water slitting process.28 Our work could provide a conceptual avenue to realize tunable control of spatial photo-induced charge carrier separation/transfer via progressive interface engineering for solar energy harvesting and conversion.
2. Experimental
2.1 Materials
Titanium sheets (50 mm × 20 mm × 0.1 mm, 99.9%), deionized water (DI H2O, Millipore, 18.2 MΩ cm resistivity), graphite sheets (50 mm × 20 mm × 0.1 mm, 99.6%), ethylene glycol (CH2OH)2, ammonium fluoride (NH4F), hydrogen fluoride (HF), nitric acid (HNO3), antimony trichloride (SbCl3), sodium thiosulfate (Na2S2O3·5H2O), dipotassium hydrogen phosphate (K2HPO4·3H2O), potassium dihydrogen phosphate (KH2PO4), cobalt nitrate hexahydrate (Co(NO3)2·6H2O), sodium sulfite (Na2SO3), ammonium formate (CH5NO2). All the chemicals were of analytical grade and used as received without further purification.
2.2 Preparation of the TNTA substrate
Ti foil was first sonicated in acetone, ethanol and DI H2O for 15 min, respectively. Afterwards, Ti sheets (50 mm × 20 mm × 0.1 mm) were dipped into a HF–HNO3–H2O mixed solution with a volume ratio of 1:4:5 for 30 s, washed using DI H2O and dried with a gentle N2 stream. Electrochemical anodization was carried out at 50 V for 2 h with a 3 cm separation distance between the working (Ti foil) and counter electrode (graphite) under ambient conditions. The electrolyte consists of 0.3 wt% of NH4F in ethylene glycol (196 mL) and DI H2O (4 mL). After the first anodization, the TiO2 layer was removed by sonication in ethanol for 5 min, washed using DI H2O and dried with a N2 stream. The second anodization was subsequently performed at 50 V for 30 min to produce the hierarchically ordered TNTAs followed by the same washing and drying treatments. Finally, the thus-obtained TNTAs were calcined at 450 °C for 3 h in air with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1.29
2.3 Preparation of ultrathin carbon-enwrapped TNTAs (C–TNTAs)
Preparation of C–TNTAs is similar to that of TNTAs except for calcining the amorphous TNTAs in a N2 atmosphere rather than in air. Specifically, samples after the second anodization were rinsed several times using DI H2O, dried in air and then annealed in a N2 atmosphere at 450 °C for 3 h with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1. Eventually, the samples were further annealed at 300 °C for 3 h with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 in air to obtain C–TNTAs.
2.4 Preparation of Sb2S3-sensitized TNTAs (Sb2S3–TNTAs) and C–TNTAs (C–Sb2S3–TNTAs)
Preparation of Sb2S3–TNTAs was carried out according to a previous study.30 To be specific, 0.01 M SbCl3 was first added to 50 mL of DI H2O and kept stirring for 15 min to produce a white precipitate. Subsequently, 0.03 M Na2S2O3·5H2O was added and kept stirring for 0.5 h, after which the precipitate color changed from white to orange. This mixed precursor solution was then transferred to a Teflon-lined autoclave with the TNTA or C–TNTA substrate immersed in it and maintained at 70 °C for 2 h. The as-prepared Sb2S3–TNTA and C–Sb2S3–TNTA samples were washed with DI H2O and ethanol three times and dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 2 h.
2.5 Loading the Co-Pi oxygen evolving co-catalyst on C–Sb2S3–TNTAs
Photo-assisted electrodeposition of the Co-Pi oxygen evolving co-catalyst was carried out by immersing the C–Sb2S3–TNTA electrode in an electrolyte containing 0.5 mM CoCl2 and 0.1 M potassium phosphate electrolyte (pH = 7) with an applied bias of 0.4 V (vs. Ag/AgCl electrode) and the sample was illuminated by UV light (λ = 400 nm) for 200 s.31–33 Electrodeposition of Co-Pi on the C–Sb2S3–TNTAs was carried out by using C–Sb2S3–TNTAs as the working electrode with an applied bias of 1.1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl electrode) in an electrolyte containing 0.5 mM CoCl2 and 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH = 7) for 100 s.34,35
2.6 Characterization
The crystal structure was studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Miniflex 600, Rigaku Corporation, Japan) using Cu Kα as the radiation source at 40 kV and 15 mA. Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Supra 55, Carl Zeiss, Germany) was used to probe the morphology of the samples. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and high-resolution (HR) TEM images and the energy dispersive X-ray spectrum (EDS) were collected on a Tecnai G2 F20 transmission electron microscope with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS, Cary 50, Varian, America) were obtained using BaSO4 as the reflectance background ranging from 200 to 800 nm. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra were recorded on a photoelectron spectrometer (Escalab 250, Thermo Scientific, America), where the binding energy (B.E.) of the elements was calibrated based on the BE of carbon (284.60 eV). Raman measurements were carried out by Raman spectroscopy (Dxr-2xi, Thermo Scientific, America) with an extended scan range of 0–3000 cm−1. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were collected on a Varian Cary Eclipse spectrometer.
2.7 Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting measurements
PEC water splitting measurements were performed using a conventional three-electrode configuration on an electrochemical workstation (CHI660E, CHI Shanghai, Inc.). The samples (1 cm × 1 cm) were directly employed as the working electrode and Pt foil as well as the Ag/AgCl electrode served as the counter and reference electrodes, respectively. The electrolyte was composed of 0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH = 6.69) aqueous solution. PEC water splitting performances were evaluated under simulated sunlight irradiation with a 300 W Xe lamp (FX300, Beijing Perfect Light Co. Ltd, China) equipped with an AM 1.5G filter or visible light (λ > 420 nm). The potentials of the electrodes were calibrated against the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) based on the formula below: (1)
The scan rate for linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) measurements was 5 mV s−1 and photocurrent responses (i.e., I–t) of different electrodes were collected under chopped light irradiation (light on/off cycle: 30 s) at a fixed bias of 1.23 V vs. RHE. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were measured on an IM6 electrochemical station (Interface 1000E, Gamry, America) with an amplitude of 10 mV in the frequency range of 105 to 0.1 Hz. Monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were collected using a three-electrode configuration under a bias of 1.23 V vs. RHE, for which monochromatic light was provided using a 300 W xenon arc lamp combined with different monochrome filters with a wavelength ranging from 365 to 700 nm. The hydrogen evolution amount of photoelectrodes was determined by gas chromatography (Shimadzu 8A) at ambient temperature (25 °C) under irradiation with a 300 W Xe lamp equipped with an AM 1.5G filter.
3. Results and discussion

Scheme 1 depicts the flowchart for progressively constructing the C–Sb2S3–TNTA ternary heterostructure. More specifically, the spatially hierarchically ordered TNTA substrate was first fabricated via a two-step electrochemical anodization approach, which yields a well-defined nano-architecture consisting of a top-porous layer and vertically aligned bottom nanotubular arrays. Subsequently, TNTAs were annealed in an inert (N2) atmosphere and the intrinsic residual ethylene glycol molecules adsorbed on the nanotubes after the anodization act as the carbon source for uniform and intimate in situ carbon encapsulation within the whole TNTA framework (C–TNTAs).36 The C–TNTAs (black) obtained after N2 annealing were then subjected to a second-annealing treatment in air to optimize the carbon encapsulation amount on the TNTA matrix. Then, Sb2S3 nanocrystals were evenly and closely grown on both the interior and exterior surfaces of C–TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs through a facile hydrothermal approach with a view to boosting the light absorption of TNTAs in the visible region. Finally, the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) co-catalyst (Co-Pi) was deposited on the C–Sb2S3–TNTAs by a photo-assisted electrodeposition or electrochemical deposition method to trigger the directional flow of holes for prolonging the life span of photogenerated charge carriers. Such a progressive synthetic strategy helps to construct highly efficient charge separation/transfer channels in conjunction with substantial solar harvesting and conversion efficiency.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration for construction of the C–Sb2S3–TNTA heterostructure. 
3.1 Characterization of composite photoanodes
Our work begins with the systematic characterization of composite photoelectrodes. Morphologies of the samples were probed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM). As shown in Fig. S1(a–d),† the pristine TNTA substrate shows a characteristic hierarchically ordered nanostructure consisting of a periodic nanoporous layer on the top with a mean size of ca. 90 nm and highly ordered nanotubes at the bottom with a thickness of ca. 4 μm. When carbon was in situ encapsulated on the TNTA framework, as displayed in Fig. 1(a and d), the morphology of C–TNTAs was not changed compared with pristine TNTAs owing to the generation of an ultrathin carbon layer on the TNTA framework and this can be revealed by the following transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements. Uniform encapsulation of carbon on the TNTAs can be evidenced by the elemental mapping results (Fig. S2†). Fig. 1(c and f) show the panoramic and side-view FESEM images of C–Sb2S3–TNTA wherein Sb2S3 nanocrystals (NCs) were uniformly and densely anchored on the TNTA scaffold without agglomeration. The size of Sb2S3 NCs in nanocomposites is similar to those in the pure Sb2S3 film directly grown on Ti foil (Fig. S3†). More significantly, apart from being deposited on the top-layer, it is interesting to find that Sb2S3 NCs were also uniformly distributed in the gap and inside of the nanotubes, forming a well-defined pea-like heterostructure. It is noteworthy that the morphology of C–Sb2S3–TNTA is analogous to that of Sb2S3–TNTA in Fig. 1(b and e), suggesting that in situ carbon encapsulation on the TNTA framework did not affect the uniform deposition of Sb2S3. Deposition of Sb2S3 on TNTAs in the Sb2S3–TNTA binary heterostructure and concurrent carbon encapsulation and Sb2S3 deposition in the C–Sb2S3–TNTA ternary heterostructure can be further reflected by the elemental mapping & EDS results in Fig. S4† and 2(g–l), respectively.
 Fig. 1  Top-view and cross-sectional FESEM images of (a & d) C–TNTAs, (b & e) Sb2S3–TNTAs and (c & f) C–Sb2S3–TNTAs. 
 Fig. 2  TEM and HRTEM images of (a & d) pristine TNTAs, (b & e) C–TNTAs, and (c & f) C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, (g) with corresponding mapping results for (h) Ti, (i) Sb, (j) C, (k) O, and (l) S signals. The insets in (a), (b), and (c) show the corresponding models of TNTAs, C–TNTAs, and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, respectively. 
TEM measurements were carried out to probe the microscopic structure of the samples. As displayed in Fig. 2a, blank TNTAs feature a uniform and nanotubular structure and this agrees well with FESEM results (Fig. S1†). When carbon was in situ encapsulated on the TNTA substrate (Fig. 2b), the nanotubular structure of TNTA was retained except that an ultra-thin layer was uniformly capped on the surface. This can be corroborated by the high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of C–TNTAs in Fig. 2e which reveals close encapsulation of the amorphous ultrathin carbon layer with a thickness of ca. 3.3 nm on the TNTAs. Fig. 2c exhibits the TEM image of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, from which it is clearly seen that Sb2S3 NCs were uniformly and intimately adhered to the TiO2 nanotubes, as marked by the red circle. The HRTEM image of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs in Fig. 2f demonstrates distinct lattice fringes of 0.353 and 0.365 nm, corresponding to the (101) and (101) crystal planes of TiO2 (Fig. 2d) and Sb2S3, respectively.37,38 Successful deposition of Sb2S3 in C–Sb2S3–TNTAs can also be verified by Fig. S5.† Passivation of an ultra-thin carbon layer (1.66 nm) was also observed in the HRTEM image of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs as marked in yellow in Fig. 2f. Notably, the HRTEM image of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs (Fig. 2f) shows the distinguishable and clear interfaces among the in situ encapsulated carbon layer, Sb2S3 nanocrystals and TNTA scaffold, indicating the formation of intimate interfacial contact among them, which is able to facilitate the separation and transfer of photoinduced charge carriers across the interfacial domain of the ternary heterostructure.

Fig. 3a shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of blank TNTA, C–TNTA, Sb2S3–TNTA and C–Sb2S3–TNTA heterostructures. As seen in Fig. 3a, diffraction peaks at 2θ values of 25.5°, 38.1°, 48.2°, 54.4°, and 55.3° are undisputedly indexed to (101), (004), (200), (105), and (211) crystal planes of anatase TiO2 (JCPDS no. 21-1272) and the peaks at 38.6°, 40.3°, 53.1°, 63.0°, 70.8°, and 76.3° match well with the metal Ti phase (JCPDS no. 44-1294) from Ti foil. Note that the characteristic diffraction peaks corresponding to anatase TiO2 are concurrently observed in the XRD patterns of all these samples, suggesting that the crystal structure of the TNTA framework was retained after in situ carbon encapsulation and Sb2S3 deposition. It is noteworthy that no obvious Sb2S3 peaks (JCPDS no. 42-1393) are observed in the XRD patterns of Sb2S3–TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs. This might be ascribed to the relatively low loading amount of the Sb2S3 ingredient in the nanocomposites or probably, diffraction peaks of Sb2S3 were shielded by the predominant anatase TiO2 and metal Ti peaks from Ti foil. This speculation can be confirmed by the XRD patterns of the blank Sb2S3 film directly deposited on Ti foil (Fig. S6†).
 Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns (A: anatase; T: Ti), (b) Raman spectra, (c) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) with the corresponding sample photographs in the inset (left to right: TNTAs, C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs, and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs) and (d) plots of the transformed Kubelka–Munk function vs. the energy of light for pristine TNTAs, C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs. 
As shown in Fig. 3b, Raman spectra of all these four samples exhibit four characteristic peaks at 143 (Eg), 394 (B1g), 515 (A1g + B1g) and 637 cm−1 (Eg), which can be accurately assigned to anatase TiO2 and this is in line with the XRD results (Fig. 3a).39 Notably, apart from anatase TiO2 peaks, another two new bands at ca. 1360 (D band) and 1590 cm−1 (G band) corresponding to the characteristic vibration modes of carbon materials were clearly observed in the Raman spectrum of C–TNTAs.40 More specifically, the G band is generally assigned to the E2g symmetry in-plane stretching mode of graphite and the D band results from a defect-induced double resonant scattering.41 As a result, the Raman spectrum of C–TNTAs provides a solid evidence for successful in situ encapsulation of the carbon layer on the TNTA scaffold. The Raman spectrum of Sb2S3–TNTAs shows a new peak at 289 cm−1 apart from the anatase TiO2 peaks, which correspond to the Sb–S stretching mode (Ag) of Sb2S3, once again verifying successful deposition of Sb2S3 nanocrystals on the TNTA matrix.42 Furthermore, it is worth noting that all Raman peaks corresponding to anatase TiO2, D and G bands of carbon, and the Ag mode of Sb2S3 were simultaneously observed in the Raman spectrum of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, strongly indicating simultaneous carbon encapsulation and Sb2S3 deposition on the TNTA matrix.
Optical properties of the samples were explored by UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS). Fig. 3c shows that the absorption band edge of pristine TNTAs is only located in the ultraviolet (UV) region below 390 nm and this is in line with the bandgap (ca. 3.2 eV) of TiO2.8 Compared with pristine TNTAs, absorption band edges of C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs, and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs are red-shifted to ca. 411, 617, and 627 nm respectively. Significantly, uniform encapsulation of the ultrathin carbon layer on the TNTA matrix exerts a pronounced impact on boosting the light absorption of C–TNTs. It should be pointed out that absorption above 400 nm for both TNTA and C–TNTA samples mainly stemmed from the unique periodically ordered structure of TNTAs, as analyzed in previous studies.8 Similarly, Sb2S3–TNTAs exhibit substantially improved light absorption in the visible region (400–600 nm) in comparison with pristine TNTAs and C–TNTAs, substantiating the excellent light harvesting capability of Sb2S3. This can be verified by the DRS result of the blank Sb2S3 film directly grown on Ti foil (Fig. S7†). It is worth noting that C–Sb2S3–TNTAs demonstrates the most enhanced light absorption within the visible region from 400 to 800 nm originating from the cooperative synergy of in situ ultrathin carbon encapsulation and Sb2S3 photosensitization. Fig. 3d shows the transformed plots based on the Kubelka–Munk function43vs. photon energy, from which the bandgap (Eg) energy of TNTAs, C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs, and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs can be roughly estimated to be 3.19, 3.01, 2.01 and 1.94 eV, respectively. Obviously, sensitization of TNTAs with Sb2S3 along with in situ ultrathin carbon encapsulation are beneficial in remarkably reducing the bandgaps of TiO2 for substantial light absorption.
Elemental chemical valence states of the photoelectrodes were probed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Fig. 4a reveals the presence of Ti and O signals in the survey spectra of all these samples arising from the TNTA substrate. Apart from Ti and O elements, Sb and S signals were also observed in the survey spectra of Sb2S3–TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, which confirms deposition of Sb2S3 on the TiO2 substrate in both binary and ternary nanocomposites. In situ carbon encapsulation on the whole framework of TNTAs in C–TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs can be persuasively evidenced by their high-resolution C 1s spectra after sputtering for a designated time, as unraveled in Fig. S8.† It should be particularly pointed out that the C 1s signal can still be detected even when C–TNTAs are subjected to ion sputtering for 45 s, once again indicating that carbon was encapsulated on the outer surface of the TNTA substrate. Based on the above analysis, the co-existence of C, Ti, O, S and Sb signals in the survey spectrum of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs corroborates simultaneous carbon encapsulation and Sb2S3 deposition, which is in good agreement with the Raman results (Fig. 3b). It should be emphasized that the high-resolution N 1s spectrum of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs (Fig. S9†) is rather weak and it suggests that no residual N element was retained in the nanocomposite, completely elucidating the possible nitrogen doping caused by calcination of residual ammonium fluoride adsorbed on the nanotube under an inert (N2) atmosphere.
 Fig. 4  (a) Survey spectra of pristine TNTAs, C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs, and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, and high-resolution (b & c) C 1s, (d & e) O 1s, and (f & g) Ti 2p spectra for TNTAs (b, d, f) and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs (c, e, g), respectively. High-resolution (h & i) Sb 3d and (j & k) S 2p spectra for Sb2S3–TNTAs (h, j) and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs (i, k), respectively. 
As demonstrated in Fig. 4(b and c), high-resolution C 1s spectra of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs are analogous to those of pristine TNTAs, wherein the peaks located at the binding energy (B.E.) of ca. 284.6/284.6, 286.2/286.6, and 288.1/288.8 eV are attributed to the C–C/C–H, C–OH/C–O–C, and carboxyl (–COO−) species, respectively.44,45 As exhibited in Fig. 4(d and e), two characteristic peaks at ca. 529.6 and 530.0 eV in the high-resolution O 1s spectra of pristine TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs are assigned to crystal oxygen (Ti–O) and hydroxyl oxygen (Ti–OH) on the TiO2 surface, respectively.46 Note that the B.E. of lattice oxygen for C–Sb2S3–TNTAs is considerably red-shifted compared with blank TNTAs and this validates the substantial interfacial interaction between the ingredients (carbon and Sb2S3) and substrate (TNTAs). Fig. 4g shows the high-resolution Ti 2p spectrum of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, in which the peaks at 459.0 and 464.7 eV for Ti 2p3/2 and Ti 2p1/2 correspond to the Ti element in the +4 oxidation state (Ti4+).47 Noticeably, the B.E. of the Ti element in C–Sb2S3–TNTAs shows pronounced positive shifts, i.e., 0.6 eV for Ti 2p3/2 (i.e., 459.0 eV vs. 458.4 eV) and 0.6 eV for Ti 2p1/2 (i.e., 464.7 eV vs. 464.1 eV) as compared to blank TNTAs (Fig. 4f), which may also be due to the intimate interfacial integration and synergistic interaction between Sb2S3 and TNTAs in forming heterostructures. Similar results were observed in the high-resolution Ti 2p spectra of C–TNTAs and Sb2S3–TNTAs as unveiled in Fig. S10(b and c).†Fig. 4i shows the high-resolution Sb 3d spectrum of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs with Sb 3d5/2 and Sb 3d3/2 peaks located at 530.0 and 538.8 eV which can be undoubtedly attributed to Sb3+, and the analogous result was also observed in the high-resolution Sb 3d spectrum of Sb2S3–TNTAs (Fig. 4h).48 The peaks at 161.2 and 162.4 eV in the high-resolution S 2p spectrum of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs (Fig. 4k) are analogous to those of Sb2S3–TNTAs (Fig. 4j), both of which are accurately assigned to S2−.49 Apparently, high-resolution Sb 3d and S 2p spectra of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs and Sb2S3–TNTAs concurrently evidence the formation and deposition of Sb2S3 in the nanocomposites. Similarly, a pronounced negative shift of B.E. was once again observed in the high-resolution Sb 3d spectrum of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs relative to Sb2S3–TNTAs, i.e., 0.3 eV for Sb3/2 (i.e. 538.8 eV vs. 539.1 eV), which suggests that ultrathin carbon layer encapsulation in the interfacial domain of Sb2S3 and TNTAs affords substantial interaction. For specific comparison, the chemical bond species vs. B.E. for different samples are summarized in Table S1.† Consequently, XPS results confirm successful cascade assembly of the carbon layer and Sb2S3 nanocrystals on the TNTA matrix to form well-defined ternary heterostructures with favorable interfacial interactions, which would contribute to conspicuously enhanced PEC water splitting performances.
3.2 PEC water splitting performances
PEC water splitting performances were systematically probed to evaluate the role of ultrathin carbon layer encapsulation and Sb2S3 photosensitization in affecting the separation and transfer of photoinduced charge carriers. Fig. 5a shows the LSV results of different photoelectrodes under simulated solar light irradiation, in which the photocurrent density of the electrode at 1.23 V vs. RHE is often chosen as a metric to evaluate the PEC performance of the photoanode as it corresponds to the theoretical water oxidation potential.50 It is clearly seen that the photocurrent of TNTAs prepared by a two-step anodization method was only 0.11 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE. It is noteworthy that residual ethylene glycol molecules adsorbed on the walls and nozzles of TNTAs after anodization are able to serve as a carbon source for in situ ultrathin carbon encapsulation when the as-anodized TNTAs were annealed in a N2 atmosphere in the absence of foreign carbonaceous precursors.36 The encapsulated carbon amount on the TNTA substrate can be finely tuned by annealing the one-time-calcined (N2) C–TNTAs in air for different times or under different temperatures via directly combusting the residual carbon. As reflected in Fig. S11,† one-time annealing of C–TNTAs in a N2 atmosphere demonstrates markedly lower photocurrent density in comparison with pristine TNTAs under simulated solar light irradiation, owing predominantly to excessive encapsulation of carbon on the TNTA surface after calcination, which seriously blocks the light absorption of the TNTA substrate and thus reduces the photocurrent density. In contrast, the photocurrent density of C–TNTAs after second-annealing in air was greatly improved in comparison with its one-time annealing counterpart in N2 through direct combustion of excessive carbon at high temperature. The experimental conditions for ultra-thin carbon encapsulation on the TNTA framework were specifically probed and the optimal second-annealing temperature and time were determined to be 300 °C and 3 h (Fig. S12†).
 Fig. 5  PEC water splitting performances of pristine TNTAs, C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs in Na2SO4 aqueous solution (pH = 6.69) under simulated solar light irradiation (AM1.5). (a) Linear-sweep voltammogram (LSV) collected with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in the dark and under simulated solar light illumination with corresponding (b) applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) results, (c) transient photocurrent responses at an applied potential of 1.23 V vs. RHE, (d) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results under simulated solar light illumination with corresponding Bode plots displayed in (e), and (f) Mott–Schottky plots of different photoelectrodes. The inset in (d) demonstrates the equivalent circuit. 
The photocurrent of the optimized C–TNTA sample is 0.21 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE which is about two times larger than that of blank TNTAs, suggesting that the in situ encapsulated ultra-thin carbon layer plays a crucial role in boosting the charge carrier separation and transfer over TNTA substrate. The intimately enwrapped carbon layer on the entire TNTA scaffold can serve as a high-efficiency electron trap and fast electron transfer channel to benefit effective separation of photoinduced electrons and holes. Note that Sb2S3–TNTAs exhibited a more substantially enhanced photocurrent as compared with pristine TNTAs and C–TNTAs in that Sb2S3 is able to remarkably broaden the photo-response of TNTAs especially in the visible region, which can be validated by the DRS results (Fig. 3c). More importantly, heterostructure formation between Sb2S3 and TNTAs effectively promotes photo-induced charge carrier transfer and separation owing to their favorable type II band alignment. Besides, it is worth noting that Sb2S3 nanocrystals in the nanocomposites were not only distributed on the exterior surface of TNTAs but also interposed between the nanotubes (Fig. 1e), which is beneficial for generating more intimate interfaces between Sb2S3 and TNTAs, hence further promoting the charge carrier separation/transfer. The deposition amount of Sb2S3 is finely tuned by changing the precursor concentration which exerts a profound impact on the photocurrents of Sb2S3–TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, as reflected by Fig. S13a and S13b,† respectively. It is worth noting that LSV curves of Sb2S3–TNTAs exhibit a peak at around 0.8 V vs. RHE, which was caused by the partial oxidation of Sb2S3 and this can be verified by the LSV results collected at different scan rates (Fig. S14†). Combining the dual roles of interfacial ultrathin carbon encapsulation and heterostructure formation, the photocurrent of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs was further markedly improved in comparison with its corresponding single and binary counterparts (Fig. 5a), substantiating the cooperative synergy of in situ carbon encapsulation and Sb2S3 photosensitization.
Based on the LSV results, the applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) of the photoelectrodes can be calculated using the following formula:50 (2)where η is the photoconversion efficiency, I is the photocurrent density (mA cm−2), Jlight is the incident light irradiance (mW cm−2),  is the standard reversible potential which is 1.23 V vs. RHE, and V is the applied bias potential vs. RHE. Fig. 5b shows the ABPE plots of different electrodes, among which C–Sb2S3–TNTAs exhibit an optimal ABPE of 0.44%, followed by Sb2S3–TNTAs, C–TNTAs and TNTAs with an ABPE of 0.29%, 0.09% and 0.06%, respectively.

Fig. 5c shows the amperometric transient photocurrent (I–t) results of different photoanodes under 1.23 V vs. RHE bias, wherein a transient spike induced by the charge carrier diffusion was observed in each on–off cycle and thereafter a relatively steady photocurrent was recorded due to the formation of a diffusion layer at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte.51 It is worth mentioning that the photocurrent of all these samples is almost zero in the dark and an apparent response was observed under simulated solar light irradiation, indicating that the photocurrent is truly caused by a PEC water splitting process. Consistently, C–Sb2S3–TNTAs show the most remarkably enhanced photocurrent (1.6 mA cm−2) which greatly outperforms the Sb2S3–TNTA (1.2 mA cm−2), C–TNTA (0.22 mA cm−2), and pristine TNTA (0.11 mA cm−2) counterparts under the same conditions and they follow the order of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs > Sb2S3–TNTAs > C–TNTAs > TNTAs, which is in good agreement with the LSV (Fig. 5a) and ABPE results (Fig. 5b). Analogous results were observed under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm), as displayed in Fig. S15.† The results unambiguously corroborate the pivotal roles of in situ ultrathin carbon layer encapsulation, Sb2S3 photosensitization, in conjunction with their synergistic interaction in boosting the charge separation and transfer under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation. It should be stressed that both Sb2S3–TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs show relatively poor photostability in the LSV and I–t results, which is predominantly ascribed to the drawback of Sb2S3 inclining to be oxidized at ambient conditions or by photogenerated holes during the PEC water splitting process.52 This issue will be specifically discussed and the corresponding modification strategies will be presented in the latter part.
With a view to evaluating the charge transfer efficiency of the photoanode from the electrode to electrolyte, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were conducted in the dark and under simulated solar light illumination. Semicircles in the Nyquist plots at high frequency convey information on the charge transfer process as the diameter of the semicircle is equal to the charge transfer resistance (Rct) of an electrode.53 Nyquist plots of different photoanodes collected in the dark are shown in Fig. S16† which shows that all the samples exhibit quite a large charge transfer resistance Rct, suggesting that the charge transfer efficiency in the interfacial region is relatively low in the dark without the involvement of photo-induced charge carriers. Nevertheless, it should be particularly noted that the charge transfer efficiency of these electrodes without light irradiation determined from the semi-circular arc radius follows the same order for LSV and I–t results, i.e., C–Sb2S3–TNTAs > Sb2S3–TNTAs > C–TNTAs > TNTAs. This result strongly implies that encapsulation of the ultrathin carbon layer on the TNTAs forms an intimate heterostructure between Sb2S3 and TNTAs as well as their cooperativity are indeed in favourable of reducing the interfacial charge transfer resistance albeit the photo-induced charge carriers were not responsible for the process. As shown in Fig. 5d together with the simulated EIS results in Table S2,† both C–TNTA (10.84 ohm) and Sb2S3–TNTA (7.703 ohm) photoanodes exhibited much lower charge transfer resistance (Rct) under simulated solar light illumination in comparison with pristine TNTAs (11.9 ohm) under the same conditions. More significantly, C–Sb2S3–TNTAs show the smallest semicircular arc radius compared to other counterparts, which means that the interfacial charge transport resistance is greatly reduced over C–Sb2S3–TNTAs with simultaneous in situ ultra-thin carbon encapsulation and Sb2S3 photosensitization on TNTAs, thereby causing a dramatic drop in Rct (2.36 ohm) and improved charge separation efficiency and PEC performances. Furthermore, EIS can also be utilized to determine the charge relaxation time which represents the time required for charge transfer from the photoelectrode surface to the electrolyte. The electron lifetime (τrel) can be calculated from the following formula:54 τrel = 1/2πfmax(3)where fmax is the peak frequency of the Bode plot. As unveiled in the Bode plots of different photoanodes (Fig. 5e), peak frequencies of pristine TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs, and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs were determined to be 2.02, 1.46, and 0.38 Hz, which correspond to τrel of 0.08, 0.11, and 0.42 ms, respectively. Consistently, C–Sb2S3–TNTAs demonstrate the longest electron lifetime followed in turn by Sb2S3–TNTAs and TNTAs, which agrees well with the LSV, I–t and EIS results, corroborating the crucial roles of in situ carbon encapsulation for constructing a high-efficiency electron transfer channel, Sb2S3 deposition for elevating substantial solar light harvesting especially in the visible region as well as their synergistic interaction.
The charge carrier lifetime was probed by measuring the open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) upon turning off light irradiation to better understand the interfacial charge transfer kinetics between the photoelectrode and electrolyte.55 As displayed in Fig. S17a,† the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the electrode substantially increases upon turning on the simulated solar light irradiation arising from instantaneous production of a large number of charge carriers on the photoanode and then it gradually decreases and decays to the lower Voc once turning off the light irradiation, based on which charge separation efficiency can be assessed. The average electron lifetime (τn) can be determined according to the formula below:56 τn = −kBT/e × (dVoc/dt)−1(4)where τn represents the electron lifetime, kB is the Boltzman constant, T is the temperature, e is the electron charge, and Voc is the open-circuit voltage. The transformed electron lifetime profiles for different photoelectrodes are shown in Fig. S17b.† Clearly, the electron lifetime increases with increasing the Voc and Sb2S3–TNTAs show a relatively longer electron lifetime than pristine TNTAs, verifying the formation of an intimate heterostructure between TNTAs and Sb2S3 in terms of their suitable energy level alignment which helps to augment the charge separation and transfer. Noticeably, the electron lifetime of Sb2S3–TNTAs was further increased after in situ encapsulation of carbon on the TNTAs, which indicates that the electron transfer speed from the conduction band (CB) of Sb2S3 to the CB of TNTAs (TiO2) was conspicuously accelerated on account of the formation of high-efficiency electron transfer highway assisted by carbon encapsulation.
The Mott–Schottky (M–S) results of photoelectrodes were explored to assess the charge carrier density. Fig. 5f shows the M–S plots of different photoanodes, from which it is clearly seen that slopes of the linear parts of the M–S plots are positive, indicative of a typical n-type semiconductor behavior.50 The charge carrier density (ND) of the photoanodes can be calculated according to the following formula:57 Nd = (2/eεε0)[d(1/C2)/d(Us)]−1(5)where Nd is the carrier density, e is the electron charge, ε0 is the permittivity of vacuum, ε = 48 for anatase TiO2, Us is the applied potential, and C is the capacitance.50 The calculated charge carrier densities for different photoanodes are shown in Fig. S18a† which reveals that the ND values of TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs are ca. 1.2 × 1018, 2.5 × 1018 and 9.5 × 1018 cm−3, respectively. Consistently, C–Sb2S3–TNTAs still demonstrate the largest charge carrier density which is almost 8 and 4 times larger than those of Sb2S3–TNTAs and TNTAs, signifying the highest charge transfer efficiency in comparison with other counterparts as a result of simultaneous in situ ultrathin carbon encapsulation and Sb2S3 photosensitization.
Incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured under a constant bias of 1.23 V vs. RHE to uncover the light response region responsible for the photocurrent production of photoanodes. IPCE values as a function of incident light wavelength were calculated with the following formula and the results were displayed in Fig. 6a.29 IPCE (%) = 1240I/λJlight × 100%(6)where I is the photocurrent density (mA cm−2), λ is the incident light wavelength (nm), and Jlight is the incident light intensity (mW cm−2). Notably, TNTAs and C–TNTAs exhibit substantial photon absorption at ca. 365 nm (UV region) arising from bandgap photoexcitation of TNTAs (TiO2); however, the IPCE of TNTAs is almost zero when the wavelength is above 400 nm (visible region) since the photon energy within this region is much lower than the bandgap of TiO2. It is worth mentioning that the IPCE of C–TNTAs is larger than that of pristine TNTAs in the visible region of 400–500 nm and this further confirms the crucial role of in situ encapsulated carbon in boosting the light absorption of TNTAs to some extent. Clearly, Sb2S3–TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs manifest remarkable IPCE enhancement especially in the wavelength region from 400 to 700 nm in comparison with TNTAs and C–TNTAs, substantiating that Sb2S3 deposition markedly increases light absorption of the TNTA substrate for substantial solar energy harvesting and conversion. Moreover, note that the IPCE of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs is always larger than that of Sb2S3–TNTAs within the same wavelength profile, which once again confirms the pronounced influence exerted by in situ ultrathin carbon encapsulation for photocurrent enhancement. Alternatively, notably, IPCE enhancement between C–Sb2S3–TNTAs and Sb2S3–TNTAs is much larger than that between C–TNTAs and TNTAs, which unlocks the synergistic interaction between Sb2S3 and ultrathin carbon encapsulation in the ternary heterostructure. Based on the above analysis, the active wavelength region of the solar spectrum contributing to the significantly enhanced PEC water splitting performances of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs has thus been determined and the specific impacts of in situ carbon encapsulation and Sb2S3 functionalization on the light absorption of nanocomposites were clarified. This was additionally validated by the hydrogen production amount over different photoanodes (Fig. S18b†), among which C–Sb2S3–TNTAs exhibit the largest hydrogen production amount followed successively by Sb2S3–TNTAs, C–TNTAs, and TNTAs, consistent with the aforementioned PEC water splitting performances.
 Fig. 6  (a) IPCE results, and (b) PL spectra of pristine TNTAs, C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs, and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs. 
Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy was carried out to ascertain the fate of photo-induced charge carriers over semiconductor-based photoelectrodes. PL has been well-established as a powerful tool to unveil the surface processes associated with charge carrier separation.8 The PL spectrum of anatase TiO2 mainly includes three physical modes, i.e., self-trapped excitons, oxygen vacancies, and surface states.58,59 As shown in Fig. 6b, the peak at ca. 410 nm in the PL spectra is assigned to the self-trapped excitons of anatase TiO2 from the TNTA substrate.60 It is clearly seen that the PL intensity of this peak for TNTAs, C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs, and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs decreases gradually and it follows the order of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs < Sb2S3–TNTAs < C–TNTAs < TNTAs, suggesting the most efficient separation of photogenerated charge carriers over C–Sb2S3–TNTAs when compared with other single and binary counterparts. It is noteworthy that the PL results are in line with hydrogen production amount and PEC water splitting performances.
As mentioned before, the LSV results of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs and Sb2S3–TNTAs demonstrate relatively poor photostability under simulated solar light irradiation owing predominantly to the easy oxidation of the Sb2S3 ingredient by holes during the PEC water splitting process. Generally, the sulphide-based semiconductor suffers from serious photocorrosion. That is, sulfide ions (S2−) are prone to oxidation by photogenerated holes accompanied by leaching of the free antimony ions (Sb3+), which makes Sb2S3 very unstable and this is detrimental to its cyclic operation and large-scale applications.61,62 In our current reaction system, in situ carbon encapsulation on the TNTA framework in C–Sb2S3–TNTAs significantly accelerates photoelectron transfer, which gives rise to more accumulation of holes in the valence band (VB) of the photoanode. In this regard, these accumulated holes are more inclined to seriously partially oxidize Sb2S3 to Sb2O3. To solve this dilemma, it is highly desirable to construct an efficacious hole transport channel to boost the directional flow of the holes to accelerate the water oxidation reaction rather than oxidizing Sb2S3. Inspired by the excellent merits of oxygen evolution reaction (OER) co-catalysts for efficiently trapping holes,63 Co-Pi was uniformly deposited on the active sites of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs via the photo-assisted electrodeposition (PED) or direct electrodeposition (ED) method. It is worthwhile to point out that when the Co-Pi co-catalyst was electrochemically deposited on the C–Sb2S3–TNTAs (i.e., ED method), a large amount of Co-Pi nanoparticles was deposited on the TNTAs and Ti foil substrate. However, the PED method involves the deposition of Co-Pi nanoparticles selectively on the Sb2S3 and TiO2 surface where the holes are produced, followed by oxidation of the Co-precursor with these holes to the Co-Pi co-catalyst.28 Apparently, the PED method prevents unnecessary catalyst deposition. Successful loading of the Co-Pi co-catalyst on the C–Sb2S3–TNTAs by PED and ED methods can be evidenced by the XPS and EDS results, as manifested in Fig. 7(b and c) & S19† and 7(e and f) & S20,† and TEM results (Fig. S21†), respectively. As displayed in Fig. 7(a and d), the photostability of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs was improved and, moreover, the photocurrent density of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs was boosted after Co-Pi deposition through either the PED (Fig. 7a) or direct ED (Fig. 7d) method. The results suggest that Co-Pi is beneficial for improving the photostability of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs by constructing a highly efficient hole transport channel which efficaciously promotes the spontaneous trapping of holes and thus retards/reduces the photo-corrosion of Sb2S3. On the other hand, we have demonstrated that the photostability of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs can also be effectively improved by introducing a hole scavenger in the electrolyte to expedite hole transfer kinetics at the electrode/electrolyte interface (Fig. S22†). Consequently, the photostability of C–Sb2S3–TNTA photoanode can be ameliorated by rational semiconductor/electrolyte interface engineering via OER co-catalyst loading to construct a high efficiency hole transport pathway or direct introduction of a hole scavenger in the electrolyte to accelerate hole transport kinetics.
 Fig. 7  Amperometric photocurrents of (a) C–Sb2S3–TNTAs without and with Co-Pi deposition achieved by the PED method with corresponding high-resolution (b) Co 2p & (c) P 2p spectra and by (d) the direct ED method with corresponding high-resolution (e) Co 2p & (f) P 2p spectra under continuous simulated solar light irradiation (AM 1.5G) at a bias of 1.23 V vs. RHE. 
3.3 PEC water dissociation mechanism
On the basis of the above systematic investigation, the PEC water splitting mechanism of C–Sb2S3–TNTAs was tentatively proposed. As depicted in Scheme 2, when C–Sb2S3–TNTAs was irradiated by solar light, the TNTA substrate (TiO2) and Sb2S3 were concurrently photoexcited to produce electron–hole pairs. Instantly, electrons flow spontaneously from the CB of Sb2S3 to the CB of TiO2 on account of forming a favorable type II energy level alignment between them. Simultaneously, holes in the VB of TiO2 flow to the VB of Sb2S3, which promotes the separation of photoexcited electron–hole charge carriers over Sb2S3 and TiO2. Considering the uniform and intimate in situ ultrathin carbon encapsulation on the whole framework of TNTAs in the C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, the transfer speed of electrons accumulated in the CB of TiO2 was remarkably expedited in terms of the outstanding electronic conductivity of the ultrathin carbon layer enwrapped on the surface, which is able to serve as a highly efficient electron transfer highway to promote directional electron transport toward the photocathode for hydrogen production. Besides, it should be stressed that 1D nano-architecture of TNTAs also contributes partially to rapid electron transport in terms of its unique structural merits. In the meantime, holes accumulated in the VB of Sb2S3 enable oxidation of water for oxygen generation on the photoanode, thus efficiently inhibiting the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and prolonging the lifetime of charge carriers. Once the Co-Pi OER co-catalyst was further deposited on the C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, holes no longer resided in the VB of Sb2S3 but were rather rapidly transferred to the active sites of Co-Pi where the circular catalytic reaction, i.e., Co2+/3+ → Co4+ → Co2+/3+ occurs at the Co/electrolyte interface for water oxidation,64 thereby additionally promoting the separation of photogenerated charge carriers and improving the PEC water splitting performances.
 Scheme 2  Schematic diagram illustrating the PEC water splitting mechanism of the C–Sb2S3–TNTA heterostructure. 
4. Conclusions
In summary, a well-defined hierarchically ordered C–Sb2S3–TNTA ternary photoanode has been progressively designed to achieve in situ encapsulation of an ultrathin amorphous carbon layer on the whole TNTA framework for rationally constructing a high-efficiency electron transfer channel, followed by uniform growth of Sb2S3 nanocrystals on the C–TNTA substrate for substantially boosting solar light harvesting and conversion especially in the visible region. Cooperative synergy arising from in situ ultrathin amorphous carbon encapsulation and progressive construction of an electron transport highway and Sb2S3 photosensitization for harnessing visible light endows the C–Sb2S3–TNTA ternary heterostructure with significantly enhanced PEC water splitting performances under simulated solar light irradiation outperforming its corresponding single and binary counterparts. The salient role of in situ ultrathin carbon encapsulation on the TNTA matrix has been ascertained to trigger a directional migration of photoelectrons for boosted charge separation/transfer in this well-defined ternary system. More intriguingly, the hole transport channels can also be simultaneously constructed in C–Sb2S3–TNTAs by rationally decorating the OER co-catalyst (Co-Pi) on the active sites, which further augments the directional hole transfer, resulting in more enhanced PEC water splitting performances along with improved photostability by virtue of efficacious separation and directional flow of photogenerated charge carriers. It is anticipated that our work would open up new frontiers for rationally modulating spatial photogenerated charge carrier separation and transfer toward solar energy conversion.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The support by the Award Program for Minjiang Scholar Professorship is greatly acknowledged. The Fuzhou University Testing Fund of Precious Apparatus (2018T003) is also acknowledged. This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21703038).
Notes and references
L. Shi, W. Zhou, Z. Li, S. Koul, A. Kushima and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6335–6342 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Q. Wang, T. Zhang and J. W. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645–4660 RSC .
J. Seo, H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 130, 8530–8550 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, 6 CrossRef PubMed .
F.-X. Xiao, J. W. Miao, H. B. Tao, S. F. Hung, H. Y. Wang, H. B. Yang, J. Z. Chen, R. Chen and B. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 2115–2131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Im, H. Jun, K. H. Lee, S.-H. Lee, I. K. Yang, Y. H. Jeong and J. S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4806–4813 CrossRef CAS .
F.-X. Xiao, S. F. Hung, J. Miao, H. Y. Wang, H. Yang and B. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 554–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Law, J. Goldberger and P. D. Yang, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2004, 34, 83–122 CrossRef CAS .
F.-X. Xiao, Z. Zeng and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, Y. C. Chang, C. W. Tsai, R. S. Liu, S. F. Hu, W. S. Chang and K. H. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2010, 49, 5966–5969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, Y. Yu, H. Yang, L. N. German, Z. Li, J. Chen, W. Yang, L. Huang, W. Shi, L. Wang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701432 CrossRef PubMed .
F.-X. Xiao and B. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701098 CrossRef .
J. Zhang and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23681–23693 RSC .
B. Liu, L. M. Liu, X.-F. Lang, H. Y. Wang, X. W. Lou and E. S. Aydil, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2592–2597 RSC .
Y. Q. Gai, J. B. Li, S. S. Li, J. B. Xia and S. H. Wei, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 4 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, D. W. Jing, X. L. She, H. W. Liu, D. J. Yang, Y. Lu, J. Li, Z. F. Zheng and L. J. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2071–2078 RSC .
K. Woan, G. Pyrgiotakis and W. Sigmund, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2233–2239 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, Y. B. Li, S. F. Chen, P. Chen and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11154–11162 RSC .
Y. T. Ma and Z. H. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 452, 279–285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Pu, G. Wang, K. D. Chang, Y. Ling, Y. K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C. M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y. J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yui, A. Kan, C. Saitoh, K. Koike, T. Ibusuki and O. Ishitani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2594–2600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rupprechter, G. Seeber, H. Goller and K. Hayek, J. Catal., 1999, 186, 201–213 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 371, 360–364 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chaudhary, S. Singh, V. D. Vankar and N. Khare, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 7826–7835 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ning, M. Shao, S. Xu, Y. Fu, R. Zhang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2633–2643 RSC .
W. Bi, L. Zhang, Z. Sun, X. Li, T. Jin, X. Wu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4253–4257 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. P. Steinmiller and K.-S. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20633–20636 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, F.-X. Xiao, H. Phan, S. Chen, Z. Yu, R. Wang, T.-Q. Nguyen and T. T. Y. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1700–1713 RSC .
J. Zhang, Z. Liu and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9684–9691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, G. Magesh, D. H. Youn, J. W. Jang, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2681 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Chen, Z. Liu, M. Zhou, P. Wu and J. Wei, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 742, 918–927 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Graetzel and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759–1764 RSC .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Young, D. G. Nocera and V. Bulovic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1726–1728 RSC .
L. Hu, C. C. Fong, X. Zhang, L. L. Chan, P. K. Lam, P. K. Chu, K. Y. Wong and M. Yang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 4430–4438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Quan, S. Xie, B. Weng, Y. Wang and Y.-J. Xu, Small, 2018, 14, 1704531 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sun, D. Li, W. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, Y. He and X. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18076–18081 CrossRef CAS .
P. Song, X. Zhang, M. Sun, X. Cui and Y. Lin, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1800–1804 RSC .
C. Casiraghi, A. C. Ferrari and J. Robertson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 085401 CrossRef .
E. López-Honorato, P. Meadows, R. Shatwell and P. Xiao, Carbon, 2010, 48, 881–890 CrossRef .
R. Parize, T. Cossuet, O. Chaix-Pluchery, H. Roussel, E. Appert and V. Consonni, Mater. Des., 2017, 121, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lopez and R. Gomez, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 61, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
S. Biniak, G. Szymanski, J. Siedlewski and A. Swiatkowski, Carbon, 1997, 35, 1799–1810 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Wei and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 433–442 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Quan, S. Xie, B. Weng, Y. Wang and Y.-J. Xu, Small, 2018, 14, 1870096 CrossRef .
Z. Zeng, Y.-B. Li, S. Chen, P. Chen and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11154–11162 RSC .
M. Pal, N. R. Mathews and X. Mathew, J. Mater. Res., 2017, 32, 530–538 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xiao, Q. Z. Xu, K. H. Ye, Z.-Q. Liu, L. M. Fu, N. Li, Y.-B. Chen and Y. Z. Su, ECS Solid State Lett., 2013, 2, 51–54 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6506–6512 RSC .
J. Miao, H. B. Yang, S. Y. Khoo and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11118–11124 RSC .
A. Ali, S. K. Hasanain, T. Ali and M. Sultan, Phys. E, 2017, 87, 20–26 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, D. Zheng, M. Ye, C. Zhang, B. Xu, C. Lin, L. Sun and Z. Lin, Small, 2015, 11, 1436–1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Hung, F.-X. Xiao, Y. Y. Hsu, N. T. Suen, H. B. Yang, H. M. Chen and B. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501339 CrossRef .
J. Bisquert, A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and I. Mora-Seró, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13550–13559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Meekins and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3437–3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, Q. Wang, W. Lu and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22029–22034 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tachikawa and T. Majima, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7791–7802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. L. Sajjad, S. Shamaila, B. Tian, F. Chen and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 91, 397–405 CrossRef CAS .
W. Teng, X. Li, Q. Zhao and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9060–9068 RSC .
M. Q. Yang, C. Han and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 27234–27246 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Graetzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14868–14871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ai, R. Mo, H. Li and J. Zhong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6722–6728 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta10379hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration for construction of the C–Sb2S3–TNTA heterostructure.	 

 	Fig. 1  Top-view and cross-sectional FESEM images of (a & d) C–TNTAs, (b & e) Sb2S3–TNTAs and (c & f) C–Sb2S3–TNTAs.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM and HRTEM images of (a & d) pristine TNTAs, (b & e) C–TNTAs, and (c & f) C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, (g) with corresponding mapping results for (h) Ti, (i) Sb, (j) C, (k) O, and (l) S signals. The insets in (a), (b), and (c) show the corresponding models of TNTAs, C–TNTAs, and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns (A: anatase; T: Ti), (b) Raman spectra, (c) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) with the corresponding sample photographs in the inset (left to right: TNTAs, C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs, and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs) and (d) plots of the transformed Kubelka–Munk function vs. the energy of light for pristine TNTAs, C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Survey spectra of pristine TNTAs, C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs, and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs, and high-resolution (b & c) C 1s, (d & e) O 1s, and (f & g) Ti 2p spectra for TNTAs (b, d, f) and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs (c, e, g), respectively. High-resolution (h & i) Sb 3d and (j & k) S 2p spectra for Sb2S3–TNTAs (h, j) and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs (i, k), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  PEC water splitting performances of pristine TNTAs, C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs in Na2SO4 aqueous solution (pH = 6.69) under simulated solar light irradiation (AM1.5). (a) Linear-sweep voltammogram (LSV) collected with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in the dark and under simulated solar light illumination with corresponding (b) applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) results, (c) transient photocurrent responses at an applied potential of 1.23 V vs. RHE, (d) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results under simulated solar light illumination with corresponding Bode plots displayed in (e), and (f) Mott–Schottky plots of different photoelectrodes. The inset in (d) demonstrates the equivalent circuit.	 
	(2)
τrel = 1/2πfmax	(3)
τn = −kBT/e × (dVoc/dt)−1	(4)
Nd = (2/eεε0)[d(1/C2)/d(Us)]−1	(5)
IPCE (%) = 1240I/λJlight × 100%	(6)

 	Fig. 6  (a) IPCE results, and (b) PL spectra of pristine TNTAs, C–TNTAs, Sb2S3–TNTAs, and C–Sb2S3–TNTAs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Amperometric photocurrents of (a) C–Sb2S3–TNTAs without and with Co-Pi deposition achieved by the PED method with corresponding high-resolution (b) Co 2p & (c) P 2p spectra and by (d) the direct ED method with corresponding high-resolution (e) Co 2p & (f) P 2p spectra under continuous simulated solar light irradiation (AM 1.5G) at a bias of 1.23 V vs. RHE.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic diagram illustrating the PEC water splitting mechanism of the C–Sb2S3–TNTA heterostructure.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta10379h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
