Nanocrystal engineering of noble metals and metal chalcogenides: controlling the morphology, composition and crystallinity  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CE00112A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CE00112A
(Highlight)
CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 3727-3762Nanocrystal engineering of noble metals and metal chalcogenides: controlling the morphology, composition and crystallinity

        
          
            Lakshminarayana 
            Polavarapu
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Stefanos 
            Mourdikoudis
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Isabel 
            Pastoriza-Santos
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Jorge 
            Pérez-Juste
          
          
        
      *
      Departamento de Química Física, Universidade de Vigo, 36310 Vigo, Spain. E-mail: lakshmi@uvigo.es; mourdik@uvigo.es; pastoriza@uvigo.es; juste@uvigo.es
Received 
      18th January 2015
    , Accepted 9th March 2015First published on 9th March 2015AbstractThe term “Nanocrystal Engineering” can be defined as the design and synthesis of nanocrystals with desired morphologies and compositions based on understanding and exploitation of the nucleation and growth process. It is a key process in advancing the applications of nanomaterials including biosensing, catalysis, photonics, electronics and photovoltaics. As compared to the accomplishments of organic synthesis, we are still far from the complete understanding and experimental control over the synthesis of nanocrystals with well-defined morphology. However, the last two decades of research have resulted in excellent control over the morphology and composition of noble metal and metal chalcogenide nanocrystals. In this Highlight article, we summarize various standard protocols and recent advances for the shape-controlled synthesis of such nanocrystals. From the discussion in this article, it is clear that significant progress has been made toward the design and synthesis of nanocrystals with desired shape, crystallinity and composition by controlling the nucleation and growth process using specific synthetic protocols. We hope that this Highlight article will help researchers to follow some general rules to engineer the morphology and composition of noble metal and metal chalcogenide nanocrystals to maximise their efficiency for various applications.
Lakshminarayana Polavarapu
Lakshminarayana obtained his Masters degree from the University of Hyderabad (India) in 2005 and his PhD degree from the National University of Singapore in 2011. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at CIC biomaGUNE in San Sebastián (2012–2013), and he is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Vigo (Spain). He is a co-author of over 40 publications and his current research interests include shape-controlled synthesis of metal nanocrystals for applications such as plasmonic sensors, plasmonic solar cells and water splitting.
Stefanos Mourdikoudis
Stefanos Mourdikoudis is a chemical engineer who obtained his PhD in 2009 from the Department of Physics in Aristotle University of Thessaloniki in Greece. After this he moved to the Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry at Toulouse (France) for a post-doctoral research stay until 2011. Since 2012 he has been working in a research project in collaboration with the Department of Physical Chemistry of the University of Vigo (Spain) and the Department of Chemical Engineering in Aristotle University. His main research interests involve the chemical synthesis of various types of nanoparticles, inspired from application-oriented reasons or just from pure scientific curiosity.
Isabel Pastoriza-Santos
Isabel Pastoriza-Santos obtained her PhD degree from the Universidade de Vigo in 2001. She worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Melbourne (Australia) in 2002 and 2003. Since 2009, she has been an Associate Professor at the University of Vigo. She has co-authored over 100 articles and holds 2 patents. Her current interests include the synthesis of plasmonic nanoparticles with size and shape control, as well as their assembly.
Jorge Pérez-Juste
Jorge Pérez-Juste obtained his Chemistry degree from the Universidade de Santiago de Compostela in 1995 and his PhD degree in Chemistry from the Universidade de Vigo in 1999. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at UCSC in 2000 and at University of Melbourne (Australia) in 2002 and 2003. Since 2009, he has been an Associate Professor at the University of Vigo. His current interests include the synthesis and assembly of nanoparticles and nanostructured materials with tailored optical and sensing properties.
1. Introduction
Nanomaterials have received extensive and growing research interest due to their unique properties and potential applications in various fields.1–14 They have contributed immensely to modern materials science and technology during the last two decades.15–23 Among various types of functional nanomaterials, noble metal nanoparticles and metal chalcogenides have attracted special attention because of their special optical, catalytic and electronic properties.24–27 These two classes of nanomaterials have found extensive use in a wide range of applications including biosensing, imaging, theranostics, medicine, catalysis, electronics, photonics, energy conversion and storage devices.10,11,23,27–29 Most of the above applications require nanostructures with specific morphology, crystallinity and composition, because these parameters control their physicochemical properties, thus influencing their applications.6,10,23,30–43 For example, in the case of noble metal nanoparticles such as Au or Ag, the size and shape are the main parameters determining their unique optical properties arising from the localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs).38,40,42 At the same time, LSPRs constitute the basis of plasmon-enhanced applications such as surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), enhanced fluorescence, enhanced light harvesting and photothermal therapy.29,44–47 Similarly, the size, shape, crystallinity and porosity of Pd and Pt nanocrystals significantly influence their catalytic activity.48–50 Interestingly, when metals are chemically combined with chalcogenides in the form of nanomaterials, they exhibit semiconductor like electronic properties.9,23 These metal chalcogenides have attracted significant attention in recent years due to their potential applications in solar energy conversion and storage, which are the most important challenges to be addressed to meet the world's rising demand for more and cleaner energy in future.10,30 Similar to noble metal nanoparticles, morphology and crystallinity play a key role in determining their efficiency for applications such as fluorescence imaging and energy conversion.10,30 So, nanocrystal engineering (controlling the morphology, crystallinity and composition) plays a central role in advancing the applications of modern nanoscience and nanotechnology.
The last two decades have witnessed tremendous progress in development of solution-based methods for the shape-controlled synthesis of noble metal and metal chalcogenide nanocrystals to maximise their efficiency in related applications.6,10,11,23,36,38,39,43,51–60 Despite the great success in the synthesis of various morphologies of nanocrystals, there is still a lack of experimental control and mechanistic understanding of nucleation and growth processes involved in the nanocrystal synthesis. Nowadays, there are few general approaches that one can follow for controlling the final shape of nanocrystals.9,35,54,56,61 Among them, seed-mediated growth is one of the most popular ones for the shape-controlled synthesis of nanocrystals, in which the final shape of nanocrystals could be controlled by varying several parameters as we discuss in this review. In some cases, nanocrystals with desired morphology can also be acquired by designing a reaction scheme through a retrosynthetic route, a strategy that has been commonly used in organic synthesis. Preparation of single-crystalline hollow nanocrystals is a good example of retrosynthetic route (hollow nanocrystal − choose single-crystal metal nanoparticle with lower reduction potential − prepare single-crystal seed via controlled nucleation).35,62 This Highlight article intends to provide an overview on the advances in the chemical synthesis of noble metals (in particular Au, Ag, Pd and Pt) (Table 1) and metal chalcogenides (Table 2) with size, shape, composition and crystalline structure control. First, we focus on noble metal nanocrystals, where we describe the most relevant and general synthetic methods to fabricate single metal (by one-pot or seed-mediated growth approaches), bimetallic (alloys or core–shell), and hollow (via galvanic replacement) nanocrystals. On the other hand, the shape-controlled synthesis of metal chalcogenides is relatively complex compared to noble metal nanocrystals. Nanocrystal engineering of metal chalcogenides has been one of the important research topics during the last few years. Recently, various synthetic methods have been developed for shape and composition control of metal chalcogenide nanostructures, which we discuss in the third section. After a brief introduction to the state of the art, the nanocrystals are classified according to the relative chalcogenide component (sulfides, selenides, tellurides, mixed chalcogenide element compositions, heterostructures).
Table 1 Summary of various protocols for shape-controlled synthesis of noble metal nanostructures discussed in this Highlighta




Metal
Shape
Method
Precursors, surfactants and reaction conditions
References





a CTAB: cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, CTAC: cetyltrimethylammonium chloride, AA: ascorbic acid, PVP: polyvinylpyrrolidone, DMF: N,N-dimethyl formamide, PEG: polyethylene glycol, DEG: diethylene glycol, EG: ethylene glycol, RT: room temperature.





Au
Sphere (twinned)
“Turkevich” (one-pot)
HAuCl4, sodium citrate, 100 °C

64 and 65



Au
Sphere (twinned) (size tunable)
Seeded-growth
HAuCl4, sodium citrate, 100 °C (ref. 149); HAuCl4, CTAB, AA, citrate-capped seeds, 35 °C (ref. 150)

149 and 150



Au
Sphere (organic soluble)
“Brust–Schiffrin synthesis”
HAuCl4, alkanethiols, tetraoctylammonium bromide (TOAB), toluene, NaBH4, RT

69



Au
Sphere (single-crystalline) (size tunable)
Seeded-growth
HAuCl4, CTAB, CTAC, AA, NaBH4, CTAB-capped Au seeds, 27 °C

154



Au
Single-crystal nanorod (NR)
Seeded-growth
HAuCl4, CTAB, AA, NaBH4, 1.5 nm single-crystal Au seeds

126 and 127



Au
Penta-twinned NR and bipyramids.
Seeded-growth
(i) HAuCl4, CTAB, AA, NaBH4, twinned Au seeds

147, 155 and 156









(ii) cetyltributylammonium bromide (CTAB)(ref. 156)




Au
Monodisperse NR
Seeded-growth
(i) HAuCl4, NaBH4, AA, CTAC, sodium iodide (NaI), surfactant mixture composed of alkyltrimethylammonium chloride and sodium oleate and CTAB-capped single-crystal Au seeds (ref. 137)

137, 140 and 160









(ii) binary surfactant mixture CTAB and sodium oleate (ref. 140)










(iii) aromatic additives (ref. 159)




Au
NR with SPR >1200 nm
Seeded-growth
HAuCl4, CTAB, AA, NaBH4, hydroquinone and CTAB-capped Au seeds

128



Au
Decahedra, octahedra and stars
Seeded-growth
HAuCl4, DMF, PVP, Au seed (shape could be controlled by varying seed morphology)

87



Au
Prism
Biosynthesis
HAuCl4 and lemongrass extract

78



Au
Triangle
Seeded-growth
HAuCl4, CTAC, AA, NaBH4, CTAC-capped Au seeds

135



Au
Octahedra
Polyol method or seeded-growth
(i) AuCl3,PVP, NaBH4, PEG 600 (ref. 95) (ii) HAuCl4, CTAB, Au seed (ref. 185)

95 and 187



Au
Icosidodecahedra
Seeded-growth
HAuCl4, DEG, PVP, DMF

131



Au
Cubes
Polyol method
HAuCl4, EG, PVP

93



Au
Octahedra, cube, trisoctahedra, bitetrahedra, triangle, dodecahedra,
Seeded-growth
HAuCl4, AA, NaBH4, AgNO3, CTA-X (Cl or Br), NaI (morphology of Au NPs could be either kinetically controlled or Ag underpotential deposition controlled)

60



Au
Nanowire
Single-step
HAuCl4, oleylamine

98, 99 and 100



Ag
Cube
Polyol
(i) AgNO3, PVP, EG (ref. 56)

56 and 82









(ii) silver trifluoroacetate, PVP, DEG, HCl (ref. 82)




Ag
Cube
Aqueous
[Ag(NH3)2]OH, CTAB

83



Ag
Wire
Polyol
AgNO3, PVP, EG

80



Ag
Nanoprism
Light-mediated (seeded-growth)
AgNO3, PVP, trisodium citrate, Ag seeds prepared by NaBH4 reduction

141



Ag
Nanoprism
Hydrothermal
AgNO3, PVP, trisodium citrate, H2O2

86



Ag
Nanobars and nanorice
Polyol
AgNO3, EG, PVP, NaBr

84



Ag
Octahedra
Polyol
AgNO3, PVP, CuCl2, 1,5-pentanediol

85



Ag
Decahedra
DMF
AgNO3, PVP, DMF

87



Ag
Prism
DMF
AgNO3, PVP, DMF

88



Pd
Cube and octahedra
Oxidative etching
PdCl2, NaCl, cetylpyridinium chloride, AA

111



Pd
Icosahedra, decahedra, octahedra, tetrahedra, triangular plate
Oleylamine mediated
Pd(acac)2, formaldehyde, oleylamine (morphology can be controlled by varying the amount of oleylamine)

110



Pd
Nanorod and nanowire
One-pot
PdCl2, PVP, NaI

108



Pd
Tetrapod
One-pot
PdCl2, PVP, arginine, formaldehyde, formic acid

112



Pt
Octapod
Solvothermal
Hexachloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6), methylamine solution (30%), ethylamine, n-butylamine, DMF

115



Pt
Cubes, cuboctahedra, tetrapods, spheres, octapods, multipods, and hyper-branched structures
Hot-injection
Pd(acac)2, oleylamine, oleic acid, Mn2(CO)10 (morphology can be controlled by varying the amount of metal carbonyls and reaction temperatures)

116



Pt
Cubic and truncated octahedra
Solvothermal
Pt(acac)2, K2PtCl4, K2PtCl6,

117



Pt
Dendrite


HAuCl4, H2PtCl6, and (NH4)2PdCl6, sodium N-(4-n-dodecyloxybenzoyl)-L-isoleucinate, AA

124



Pt
Ultrathin nanowire
Heat-up synthesis
H2PtCl6, KOH, EG, DMF

125





Table 2 Summary of the reaction parameters for some representative metal chalcogenide nanostructures featured in this Highlight.a (The samples are listed according to the order of the corresponding figures in the text)




Sample/Fig.
Precursors
Surfactants
Method/reference

T (°C)
Time
Morphology/size





a OAc = oleic acid, OAm = oleylamine, DDTC = diethyldithiocarbamate, DT = dodecanethiol, OctAm = octylamine, TOP = trioctylphosphine, TOPO = trioctylphosphine oxide, TDPA = tetradecylphosphonic acid, TBP = tributylphosphine, ODE = octadecene, RT = room temperature, SSP = single source precursor, DMF = dimethylformamide, ODPA = octadecylphosphonic acid.






AgInS

2
/13a
Ag(DDTC), In(DDTC)3
OAc, DT
SSP/261
200
2 h
Heliotrope seed-like NPs/8 × 16 nm



Ag

2

S/13b
Ag-oleate, DT
OAc
Heat-up/258
220
1 h
Self-assembled arrays of 6 nm spherical NPs



CuInS

2
/13c
Cu(I)acetate, In(III)acetate, DT, tert-DT
TOPO, OAm
Hot-injection/14
230
1 h
Bullet-like NPs/12 × 50 nm



CdS/13d
CdO, trioctylphosphine sulfide
TOPO, ODPA, TBP
Hot-injection/268
250
Several minutes
Cubic-like/18 nm



Rh


x


S


y

/C/13e
Rh6(CO)16, elemental sulfur
Propanol or other alcohols
Solvothermal/278
400
10 h
Nanospheres/45–90 nm



CuInS

2
/13f
CuCl, InCl3·4H2O, DT
OAc
Heat-up/243
250
40 min
Nanoplates/200–400 × 20 nm



PbS/13g
PbO, S–OAm
OAc, OctAm
Two-step (RT + solvothermal)/262
250
30 min
Hollow nanotubes/5 μm × 40 nm



PbS/13h
PbO, S–OAm
OAc, OctAm
Two-step (RT + solvothermal)/262
200
~10–20 min
Hollow cuboctahedra/~40 nm



PbS/13i
Pb–oleate, S–ODE
OAm
Hot-injection/264
180
5 min
Nanocubes/~11 nm



CdSe/14a-d
Cd–OAc, Se–TBP
Hot-injection in pressurized hexane/294
300
1 h (for 2, 5 g)
Spherical/2–5, 6 nm



Ag

2

Se/14e
AgNO3, Cu3Se2 NPs


Cation exchange/281
RT


Cubes/~11 nm



Cu

2-x

Se/14f
Cu stearate, Se–ODE
Stearic acid, OAm
Heat-up/282
220
2 h
Triangular/12 nm



SnSe/14g
SnCl2, Se–OAm
OAc, OAm
Hot-injection/310
146
30 sec
Dotlike/~7 nm



MnSe

2
/14h
Mn-acetate, SeO2
PVP, DMF
Hydrothermal/302
180
24 h
Very long nanorods with variable aspect ratio



Ag

2

Te/15a
Ag–TOP, TOP–Te
OAm
Hot-injection/318
130–160
3 min
Disk-like/~11 nm



PbTe/15b
Pb-oleate, TOP–Te


Hot-injection/317
130
2 min
Nearly spherical/8 nm



PbTe/15c
Pb-oleate, TOP–Te


Hot-injection/340
160–180
3 min
Cubic/11 nm



CuTe/15d
CuCl, TOP–Te
TOP, TOPO, OAc, OAm, Li-amide
Hot-injection/313
190
2 min
Thin nanorods



PbSeTe/16
Pb-oleate, TOP–Se, TOP–Te


Hot-injection (two steps)/330
200
6 min
Cubic/11 nm



Ni–CdS/17
NiCl2, Cd–TDPA, S–TOP
Cysteine
Two-step (hot-injection + subsequent addition of NiCl2)/339
300 for CdS formation
1, 5 h
100–120 nm × 5 nm CdS nanorods decorated by 2–8 nm Ni NPs




2. Crystal engineering of noble metal nanocrystals
2.1 One-pot synthesis of noble metal nanocrystals
Generally, suspensions of metal nanoparticles are prepared by the reduction of corresponding metal salts with suitable reducing agents in the presence of stabilizing (capping) molecules in different solvents. Typically, the stability of the particles will be given by either electrostatic repulsions or steric stabilization. In many cases, stabilizing molecules play an important role in controlling the morphology of nanoparticles. In this section, we review the advances in shape-controlled synthesis of noble metal (Au, Ag, Pd and Pt) nanocrystals through one-pot synthesis. The single-step synthesis of colloidal gold by chemical methods dates back to 1857 by Michael Faraday.63 He prepared colloidal gold (which he called “activated gold”) by the reduction of gold chloride with phosphorus. Another landmark method for the preparation of colloidal gold nanoparticles was reported by Turkevich et al.64 in 1951 and later it was modified by Frens in 1973.64,65 It is one of the simplest and straightforward methods for the preparation of citrate stabilized Au NPs with size range 5–150 nm and it can also be applied for the synthesis of Ag NPs. Over the years, significant efforts have been devoted to understand the growth mechanism of nanoparticles in solutions.66–68 For instance, Polte et al.68 studied the growth of Au NPs via small angle X-ray scattering with a millisecond resolution continuous-flow SAXS setup and they found that the growth takes place in two steps. The first step involves rapid conversion of Au ions into Au(0) nuclei in less than 200 ms of time, followed by particle growth via coalescence of small entities (Fig. 1a). Another important approach for the synthesis of gold nanoparticles was developed by Brust and Schiffrin in 1994, which is also a landmark in gold nanoparticle research.69 They have developed a two-phase synthesis method for the preparation of monolayer-protected Au NPs in organic medium using alkanethiols as stabilizers. This method has been modified over the years to obtain monodisperse Au NPs. For example, Hussain et al.70 reported the synthesis of near-monodisperse gold nanoparticles in the size range of 1–4 nm using polymeric stabilizers. In another work, Stucky and co-workers have reported one-step one-phase synthesis of monodisperse noble metal nanoparticles by reducing metal ions with a mild reducing agent, amine-borane complex, in the presence of dodecanethiol. Such particles tend to self-assemble into close-packed superlattices upon drying (Fig. 1b).71
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration for the nucleation and growth process of gold nanoparticle formation. The first step involves a rapid reduction of the gold ions into metallic gold nuclei, followed by nanoparticle growth via coalescence of nuclei. (b) TEM image of close-packed superlattice of monodisperse gold nanoparticles. (c) TEM image of gold nanotriangles prepared by biosynthesis method using lemon grass extract as reducing agent. (d) SEM image of silver nanocubes prepared by polyol reduction method using PVP. (e) TEM image of 5-fold twinned Pd nanorods obtained by hydrothermal reduction method using polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as the reductant in the presence of sodium iodide. Figures (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) reproduced with permission from ref. 68, 71, 78, 56 and 108, respectively. 
During the last 2 decades, various kinds of reducing agents have been utilized for the synthesis of metal NPs. Among all, biomolecules and various plant extracts have been widely used as reducing as well as capping agents.72–77 However, these strategies often produce mostly spherical nanoparticles with limited size control and with a few exceptions. For example, Shankar et al.78 reported the synthesis of triangular gold nanoprisms by using lemongrass extract (Fig. 1c). The reaction between aqueous chloroaurate ions and lemongrass extract at room temperature leads to the formation of thin, flat, single-crystalline gold nanotriangles. In another report, Ramanathan et al.79 demonstrated the shape-directed biosynthesis of silver nanoplates using Morganella psychrotolerans. Generally, biosynthesis methods yield polydisperse metal nanoparticles without control over their morphology.

Silver nanocrystals. 
Ag nanoparticles of various morphologies have been prepared by one-pot synthesis. Xia and co-workers reported a breakthrough in shape-controlled synthesis of monodisperse Au and Ag nanostructures via the polyol method (Fig. 1d).56 Monodisperse and single-crystalline truncated Ag nanocubes were prepared by reducing silver nitrate (AgNO3) with ethylene glycol in the presence of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP). Ethylene glycol acts as both solvent and reducing agent in the polyol process. It was found that the presence of PVP and its molar ratio to AgNO3 plays an important role in determining the shape and size of Ag NPs. For instance, while keeping the concentration of PVP unchanged, a slight decrease in the concentration of AgNO3 will lead to the formation of Ag nanowires.80 So, it is possible to tune the morphology of the final product by controlling the kinetics of the nucleation process. The morphology of final Ag nanocrystals depends on the type of seed that grows after nucleation that depends on the rate of reaction. For instance, fast nucleation leads to the formation of single-crystalline Ag seeds, while slow nucleation results in the formation of twin Ag seeds that eventually grow into single-crystalline Ag nanocubes and twinned Ag nanowires, respectively. In addition, PVP also plays a critical role in the formation of single-crystalline Ag nanocubes by selective adsorption of PVP on the {100} facets, which will eventually result in preferential deposition of silver on {111} facets.58 However, it is quite difficult to control the nucleation process in order to obtain a desired seed, which led to the formation of nanocubes with few percentage of wires. Later it was discovered that it is possible to obtain single-crystalline seeds by etching the reactive twinned sites of the particles with chloride ions or oxygen, which leads to the formation of single-crystal, truncated cubes and tetrahedra.81 Recently, the method for the synthesis of Ag nanocubes has been optimised to obtain nanocubes 18–32 nm in edge length by varying the reaction time, using diethylene glycol as reductant and reaction medium and silver trifluoroacetate as Ag precursor.82 In addition to the polyol method, monodisperse Ag nanocubes could be synthesized in water using n-hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide as surfactant and [Ag(NH3)2]OH as Ag precursor.83
Ag nanocrystals of other morphologies such as triangles, octahedra, nanobars, decahedra and nanorice have been synthesized by one-pot synthesis.84–87 For example, Peidong Yang and co-workers reported the synthesis of polyhedral (cubes, truncated cubes, cuboctahedra, truncated octahedral and octahedra) Ag nanocrystals by a modified polyol process using 1,5-pentanediol as reaction medium and PVP as capping agent.85 They have found that the silver deposits selectively onto the {100} facets rather than growing in a layer-by-layer fashion, thus the shape of nanoparticles evolves as cubes at first and then transforms into truncated cubes, cuboctahedra, truncated octahedra, and octahedra, with the increase in reaction time. It was also found that the temperature, reactant concentration, and reactant molar ratios played an important role in the preferential silver deposition through kinetically limited equilibrium. In another report, Mirkin and co-workers reported a hydrothermal one-pot route for the synthesis of Ag nanoprisms with tailorable thickness.86 In this method, silver ions were reduced using NaBH4 in the presence of trisodium citrate, PVP and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and by varying the concentration of NaBH4, they were able to tune the nanoparticles' thickness and thus their optical properties. The mechanism of particle growth was not clear, but it was found that H2O2 played an important role in the formation of Ag nanoprisms. Another important one-step approach for the shape-controlled synthesis of metal nanoparticles is based on reduction of metal salts in N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF) as solvent and reducing agent.87,88 For instance, Pastoriza-Santos and Liz-Marzán reported synthesis of Ag nanoprisms in DMF in the presence of PVP.87–89


Gold nanocrystals. 
The polyol method could also be applied for the shape-controlled synthesis of Au nanocrystals. For example, Tsuji et al.55 reported shape-controlled synthesis of Au nanostructures via oxidative etching by Cl− anions through a microwave-polyol process. Anisotropic Au nanostructures such as nanorods,90 nanotriangles,91 nanooctahedra,92 cubes,93 tetrahedra,93 icosahedra93 and decahedra94 have been synthesized by one-step synthesis. For instance Li et al.95 reported the synthesis of single-crystalline Au nano-octahedra via the polyol method and the prepared particles were rather uniform. Very recently, Zhang et al.96 reported high yield one-pot synthesis of monodisperse Au nanocrystals with various shapes such as quasi-spherical, rods, concave nanocubes, nanocubes, and trisoctahedral. In this method, the synthesis was carried out by adding NaBH4 to a growth solution composed of HAuCl4, ascorbic acid and surfactants. The morphology of prepared Au nanocrystals can be tuned by optimising the compositions of the growth solutions and the amount of NaBH4 added. Very recently, Chen et al.97 reported one-pot synthesis of size tunable Au nanoplates with high monodispersity and yield via iodide ion induced oxidative etching. In this method, iodide ions selectively bind to the Au {111} facets and also selectively remove other less stable facets via oxidative etching, thus facilitating the formation of planar nuclei, which allows the formation of nanoplates. In addition, one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures such as Au nanowires have also been synthesized by one-pot synthesis.98–100 Feng et al.100 and Pazos-Pérez et al.99 independently reported a simple and single-step synthesis of single-crystalline ultrathin gold nanowires by the reduction of gold ions with oleylamine in organic medium. Huo et al.98 reported sub-two nanometer thick Au nanowires by using oleylamine as solvent as well as reducing agent and they proposed a mechanism based on cooperative organisation between Au ions and oleylamine leading to the formation of nanowire morphology. Another anisotropic Au nanostructure that has received significant attention recently is nanostars. Au nanostars act as excellent candidates for SERS applications due to the presence of a high electromagnetic field at the tips of nanostars. A great amount of research has been carried out on the synthesis of Au nanostars and their applications for SERS and photothermal therapy.101–103 For example, Xie et al.102 reported one-pot high yield synthesis of three-dimensional branched gold nanostructures using 2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinyl]ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) buffer as both reducing and shape-directing agents. They have found that HEPES played an important role in the growth of nanostars, however the detailed mechanism is yet to be investigated. In another report by Senthil et al.104 Au nanostars were synthesized in high yield through the reduction of HAuCl4 in a concentrated solution of PVP in DMF.


Palladium nanocrystals. 
Pd nanocrystals have received great attention due to their excellent catalytic activity for various organic chemical reactions.105,106 The knowledge that we have obtained from the shape-controlled one-pot synthesis of Au & Ag nanostructures could be readily applied to the crystal engineering of Pd. It was also found that the catalytic activity of Pd nanocrystals depends on their size, shape and crystallinity.32,107–110 So, several research groups are actively engaged in developing new Pd nanocrystals with enhanced catalytic activity.36 Previously, Xia and co-workers provided an excellent overview of shape-controlled synthesis of Pd nanocrystals in different reviews.32,36 Here, we discuss recent progress in the shape-controlled synthesis of Pd nanocrystals. Recently, Zhang et al.111 reported a synthesis strategy for one-pot synthesis of single-crystalline low-index Pd nanoparticles through oxidative etching by HCl and the morphological transformation (cubes–cuboctahedra–octahedra) of Pd nanostructures was achieved by increasing the amount of HCl added (Fig. 2). In another study, Niu et al.110 reported OAm mediated shape-controlled one-pot synthesis of Pd nanocrystals in toluene. The shape of the nanoparticles was selectively controlled from icosahedra–decahedra–octahedral–tetrahedral–triangular plates by simply varying the amount of added oleylamine. In this reaction, oleylamine played an important role in the shape control of Pd nanoparticles. It was proposed that the increase in oleylamine concentration leads to the reduction of surface energy per unit area due to the increased number of capping molecules per nanocrystal. Thus, multiple twinned particles (low surface-to-volume ratio) transform into single-crystal particles (high surface-to-volume ratio) and they eventually grow into single-crystalline Pd nanocrystals. In addition, one-dimensional Pd nanostructures such as nanorods and nanowires have also been reported via one pot synthesis, by Zheng and co-workers (Fig. 1e).108 In this method, Pd nanocrystals were prepared by hydrothermal reduction of Pd ions with PVP in water and in the presence of iodide ions. They have found that both PVP and iodide ions played a critical role in the formation of 5-fold twinned nanorods. The time dependent TEM characterization of the obtained particles showed that the Pd nanowires were formed in the initial stages and they eventually transform into nanorods with a smaller aspect ratio and finally to multiply twinned particles with increasing reaction time. In addition to platonic and one-dimensional Pd nanocrystals which were discussed above, branched nanostructures have also been synthesized by one-pot synthesis. Very recently, Fu et al.112 reported a one-pot synthesis method for the synthesis of Pd tetrapods in water by the reduction of Pd salt with PVP in the presence of arginine molecules and they found that these molecules played a vital role in controlling the tetrapod-like morphology. Such tetrapod Pd nanocrystals exhibit enhanced catalytic activity for the HCOOH decomposition to promote reduction of highly toxic hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)).
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of shape evolution of the Pd nanocrystal and the corresponding TEM images (a–e) of different morphologies (scale bars, 10 nm). It shows that the added HCl induced slight truncation at the corner of cubic Pd through oxidative etching in the early stage of the reaction and then continuous atomic addition to {100} facets promotes the enlargement of {111} facets, thus resulting in the formation of octahedral Pd nanocrystals. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 111. 


Platinum nanocrystals. 
In addition to the above discussed Ag, Au and Pd nanostructures, research on shape-controlled synthesis of Pt has also received special attention in recent years due to their applications in catalysis.113 Pt has been discovered as one of the best candidates for various chemical and electrochemical reactions, but it is very expensive due to its low abundance. On the other hand, Pt nanostructures exhibit high catalytic efficiency and they can be easily recycled for multiple reaction cycles. It has been proved that the catalytic efficiency significantly depends on nanocrystals' morphology, which has attracted many researchers to carry out their research on shape-controlled synthesis of Pt nanocrystals in order to understand and exploit the catalytic activity toward various chemical transformations. Unlike Au, Ag and Pd, it has been challenging to control the morphology of Pt nanocrystals with a high degree of monodispersity. In spite of all, some success has been achieved in the shape-controlled synthesis of Pt nanocrystals for catalytic applications.49,114 In this review article, we discuss about recently developed synthetic methods for the shape control of Pt nanostructures. For example, Huang et al.115 reported the synthesis of polyhedral platinum nanocrystals with concave octapod morphology by introducing amines as the surface controller (Fig. 3a). The as-prepared concave Pt nanocrystals displayed {411} high-index facets which endowed the particles with excellent electrocatalytic activity toward the oxidation of both formic acid and ethanol. Shape control of Pt could also be achieved by using metal carbonyls as additives, as reported by Murray and co-workers (Fig. 3b & c).116 In their synthesis, Pt ions were reduced with a mixture of oleylamine and oleic acid in the presence of metal carbonyls at higher temperatures. By varying the amount of metal carbonyls and reaction temperatures they were able to synthesize various morphologies such as truncated cubes, cuboctahedra, tetrapods, spheres, octapods, multipods, and hyper-branched structures (Fig. 3b & c). In related work, Gumeci et al.117 prepared cubic and truncated octahedral Pt nanocrystals by a simple, surfactant-free solvothermal synthesis method in DMF–water mixtures. In this reaction, DMF acts as solvent as well as reducing agent and the shape of the nanocrystals was tuned from truncated octahedral to cubic by increasing the reaction time. Although various types of faceted Pt nanostructures have been synthesized, the growth mechanism is not well understood so far, which is important for the shape control as well as the design of novel materials. Very recently, Liao et al.118 reported the imaging of facet development during the Pt nanocube growth in liquid cell using transmission electron microscopy with high spatial and temporal resolution. Fig. 3d shows the sequential TEM images of particles obtained from growth trajectory of Pt nanoparticles at different times and their corresponding simulated TEM images. It was found that all low index facets grow at a similar rate until the {100} facets stop growing and then the rest of the facets continue to grow until the particle transforms into a nanocube. They also propose that the high mobility of surface ligands on {111} facets allows them to grow at a faster rate, while the low mobility of the ligands on the {100} facets prevents their growth. Another important morphology that exhibits high catalytic efficiency is Pt nanodendrites.114,119,120 Significant effort has been devoted to the synthesis of Pt nanodendrites through various synthetic approaches and it is relatively easy to prepare over faceted nanocrystals. Nanodendrites of Pt have been prepared by reducing Pt sources with reducing agents such as ascorbic acid,121 dimethylformamide,122 or oleylamine.123 The Pt dendrites could be single-crystalline or multiply twinned depending on the type of seed that forms after nucleation. For example, Jin and co-workers reported one-pot high yield synthesis of Pt nanodendrites using an amino acid based surfactant, sodium N-(4-n-dodecyloxybenzoyl)-L-isoleucinate.124 They found that the branches grow epitaxially on single-crystalline seeds to obtain highly crystalline nanoflowers. In addition, one-dimensional Pt nanostructures have also been synthesized. Very recently, Wang and co-workers reported the synthesis of ultralong and ultrathin Pt nanowires and their assemblies with high electrochemical activity. In their synthesis, Pt precursor was decomposed in a mixture of ethylene glycol (EG) and DMF at 170 °C.125 From the above discussion related to the shape-controlled synthesis of various metal nanocrystals, it is clear that the shape control could be achieved through one-pot synthesis. However, one has to keep in mind that the control of seeds after nucleation plays a vital role for the further well-defined shape, which is a little difficult in single-step synthesis. However, multi-step seed-mediated growth could provide control over the seed and growth process in order to design the final morphology of nanocrystals with a high degree of monodispersity.
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM image of concave polyhedral Pt nanocrystals having {411} high-index facets. (b & c) TEM images of octahedral and cubic Pt nanocrystals prepared using metal carbonyls as a shape-directing agent. (d) Snap shots of high-resolution TEM images of Pt nanocrystals during facet development of a Pt nanocube and the corresponding simulated TEM images. Scale bars: (b, c) 20 nm. Figures (a), (b–c), and (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 115, 116 and 118, respectively. 

2.2 Seed-mediated growth of nanocrystals
Among all solution-based methods for the synthesis of noble metal nanocrystals, seed-mediated growth has received enormous interest from nano-synthetic chemists due to the ability to control the size and shape of nanocrystals with a high degree of monodispersity.61,126–140 The seed-mediated growth refers to the process that involves preparation and isolation of seed particles followed by their addition to a growth solution for the formation of nanocrystals or the conversion of seeds into nanocrystals by using external sources such as light or heat.126,141 Many parameters, including capping agents, additives, metal salts concentrations, etc., strongly affect the final morphology of the particles. Nevertheless the crystallinity of the initial seeds (generated in situ or preformed) is considered as the key parameter for determining the final morphology. In the year 1999, seed mediated growth has been applied for the size controlled synthesis of spherical Au nanocrystals in the size range between 20 and 100 nm with good monodispersity.142 This method was mainly applied for the synthesis of spherical nanocrystals until it was employed also for the synthesis of gold nanorods (Au NRs) by Murphy and co-workers in 2001,127,129 which has revolutionized the field of anisotropic nanoparticle synthesis. Later in 2003, El-Sayed and co-workers126 reported improved synthesis of Au NRs with varying aspect ratios, which is still widely used even today. A recent review by Lohse and Murphy provided the history of seed-mediated synthesis of Au NRs, recent developments in the mechanistic understanding and current progress in the improved synthesis. Another important discovery in nanoparticle synthesis was the light-mediated conversion of Ag seeds into Ag nanoprisms with different tunable surface plasmon resonances based on the wavelength of light.141 Over the years, this seed-mediated method has been extensively used for the improved synthesis of a large variety of Au nanoparticles (NRs, nanospheres, cubes, decahedra, octahedra, stars, etc.) even with a tight size control in a wide size range.60,61,66,87,130,134–140,143–148 One important thing is that this method has been widely used for the shape control of Au nanocrystals compared to other metals due to the fact that it is relatively easy to tune the crystallinity of Au seeds using well established synthetic methods compared to other metals (Table 1). So, to overcome this limitation some authors have recently developed new strategies for the shape control of Ag, Pd and Pt nanocrystals using preformed Au nanoparticles as seeds (it will be discussed in the following section related to bimetallic nanoparticles).
In this section, we mainly discuss the recent developments and achievements related to the size and shape control of Au nanocrystals through seed-mediated growth.61,130,135,137,138,140,143,149 Previously, Liz-Marzán and co-workers reported seed-mediated growth for the preparation of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) capped Au NPs with size ranges from 12 to 180 nm.150 Recently, Puntes and colleagues149 as well as Ziegler and co-workers151 have reported kinetically controlled seed-mediated growth synthesis of citrate stabilized Au nanospheres of 15–300 nm using citrate and ascorbic acid as reducing agents, respectively. Very recently, Puntes and co-workers have extended this approach for the synthesis of Ag nanoparticles obtaining controlled sizes ranging from 10 to 200 nm.152 In this case the reduction of AgNO3 took place by the combination of sodium citrate and tannic acid. Those citrate-capped Au or Ag NPs produced by seed-mediated growth are multi-twinned due to the fact that citrate reduction of silver ions generally produces twinned seed particles. As already mentioned, the final morphology of nanocrystals critically depends on the crystallinity of seeds used in the growth process among other parameters (see Fig. 4).36,38,153 For instance, Xia and co-workers synthesized cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC)-capped single-crystal Au NPs (with controlled size in the range of 5–150 nm) through the growth of single-crystal seeds produced by the reduction of HAuCl4 with NaBH4 in the presence of CTAB (Fig. 5a).154
 Fig. 4  A general schematic illustration showing the role of the initial seed morphology and crystallinity in the final particle shape and crystallinity of nanocrystal. At first, a precursor is reduced into a form of small seed particles via nucleation. The seed particles can be a single-crystal, singly twinned, or multiply twinned structure. If stacking faults are introduced, then plate-like seeds will be formed. The green, orange, purple and red colours represent the {100}, {111}, {110} facets and twin planes, respectively. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 153. 
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of single-crystal gold nanospheres prepared by seed-mediated growth. (b) TEM images of Au nanotriangles prepared by three-step seed-mediated growth. The size of the nanotriangles can be widely tuned by varying the experimental parameters. (c) TEM images of monodisperse Au NRs prepared using bromide-free surfactant mixture. (d) TEM image of icosidodecahedral Au NCs. Figures (a), (b), (c) and (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 154, 135, 140, and 131, respectively. 
Similarly, the addition of single-crystal-Au seeds to a growth solution containing Ag+, ascorbic acid, CTAB and HAuCl4 produced single-crystal Au NRs,126,147 while the addition of twinned Au seeds produced penta-twinned Au NRs or Au bipyramids.147,155,156 The importance of the seeds in the final morphology can be clearly seen in the Feature article focused on the synthesis of metal nanoparticles using DMF published by Pastoriza-Santos and Liz-Marzan.87 In this work it showed the selective production of monodisperse Au decahedra, octahedra, spheres, stars, and so on with a tight size by tuning the crystalline structure of the seed (penta-twinned, single-crystal, multitwinned). In addition to the crystallinity of the seeds, various factors such as capping agents, additives and precursor concentrations could also have an important contribution to the final particle morphology.157,158 For instance, recently, Almora-Barrios et al.157 gave a theoretical description of the involvement of silver, surfactant and halides in the synthesis of Au NRs. They found that the structure of nanorods was driven by the preferential adsorption of the surfactant on some facets and therefore blocking their further growth. Besides, during the last few years, it was found that Au NR synthesis could be optimized by using additional metal ions and co-surfactants for improving the particle yield and monodispersity.128,130,138,140,159,160 For example, Murray and co-workers improved the synthesis of size-tunable monodisperse Au NRs through the addition of aromatic additives160 or using a binary surfactant mixture composed of CTAB and sodium oleate (NaOL) (Fig. 5c).140 In addition to surfactants, additional metal ions have also been used to tune the growth of NRs. For example, Liu et al.130 reported the tunability of Au NR overgrowth by controlling the kinetics of reaction through oxidative etching activated by copper ions. While the presence of Cu2+ led to the overgrowth of Au NRs into Au octahedral NPs, the presence of both Cu2+ and Ag+ led to the formation of Au tetrahexahedra (THH). The authors proposed that copper ions were able to remove the adsorbed oxygen from the Au NR surface via oxidative etching, thus exposing more reaction sites for Au deposition, resulting in the transformation of Au NRs into octahedra. Similarly, the pH of the growth solution could also influence the seed-mediated growth. For instance, shorter rods were produced in a basic solution environment due to a faster growth rate, while the slower growth in a highly acidic solution led to the formation of nanowires, as reported by Huang and co-workers.138 This seed-mediated method has also been widely applied to obtain other morphologies such as cubes, octahedral, triangles, and wires, through slight modifications of the original method reported for the synthesis of Au NRs. For instance, recently, Li et al.161 have shown that by varying the volume of seed solution and the amount of ascorbic acid, one can gradually tune the morphologies of Au nanocrystals from cubic to octahedral. Very recently, Liz-Marzán and co-workers reported the large scale synthesis of monodisperse size tunable Au nanotriangles by modification of the original seed-mediated method (Fig. 5b).135
Halide ions also play an important role in the final morphology of anisotropic Au nanocrystals prepared via seed-mediated growth.54,60 Mirkin and co-workers studied the influence of halide ions (chloride, bromide, and iodide) in the seed-mediated synthesis of Au nanostructures and various types of morphologies.60 In addition, they found that the kinetics of the reaction and silver ion concentration greatly influence the morphology. Based on that, they defined a set of rules to tune the morphology of Au nanostructures by varying certain parameters (Fig. 6).60 Over the last few years, polyhedral nanocrystals have attracted great interest due to their high catalytic activity and researchers have successfully applied the seed-mediated growth approach for their synthesis.131,162,163 Very recently, dodecahedral Au nanocrystals have been synthesized via the seed-mediated method, in which nanocrystals of icosahedral, icosidodecahedral, and dodecahedral shapes have been prepared by tuning the ratio between {111} and {110} facets grown on the icosahedral Au seeds, as reported by Niu et al. (Fig. 5d).131 In addition to platonic nanocrystals, branched nanostructures such as nanostars and nanoflowers have also been synthesized via seed-mediated growth. For example, Liz-Marzán and co-workers reported the high-yield synthesis of size tunable Au nanostars in concentrated solutions of PVP in DMF using Au and Pt NPs as seeds.41 Vo-Dinh and co-workers143 reported surfactant-free synthesis of size tunable Au nanostars and their two-photon photoluminescence properties. In their method, Au nanostars were prepared by the reduction of gold ions in the presence of citrate-capped gold NP seeds and AgNO3 in sodium citrate solution. Another important nanostructure type that has attracted greatly in the field of nanoplasmonics is the gold nanoshell, due to the applications in near-infrared photothermal cancer therapy.47,164 Gold nanoshells are generally prepared by two approaches. The first approach is seed-mediated growth of the gold shell on dielectric nanotemplates such as SiO2 nanoparticles. For example, Sun et al.165 reported the synthesis of silica–gold core–shell NPs to be used as an ultrafast nanothermometer. In their synthesis method, Au nanoseeds were covalently attached to SiO2 NPs using 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APS) as linker, followed by the reduction of Au ions using hydroxylamine hydrochloride (NH2OH·HCl) to obtain a complete Au shell on SiO2 templates. The second approach for the synthesis of nanoshells is via galvanic replacement reaction between silver nanoparticle templates and HAuCl4. These are usually called as hollow nanoshells and this will be discussed in the next section related to galvanic replacement reaction.
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation showing the role of halides and silver ions to direct the growth of gold seeds into different morphologies of Au nanocrystals via different growth pathways: kinetically controlled products in the absence of silver ions (where ascorbic acid or halide ions control the reaction kinetics to obtain different morphologies of Au nanocrystals) and Ag underpotential deposition-controlled products where the interactions of silver with the particle surface control product shape (with higher amounts of silver on the particle producing higher-index surfaces). Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 60. 
2.3 Synthesis of bimetallic nanocrystals
Bimetallic noble metal nanostructures have drawn significant interest in recent years due to their new chemical and physical properties resulting in the synergistic effects between the two metals.59,146,166–171 They have been widely applied for various applications such as biosensing, therapy and catalysis.59,167,168 Bimetallic nanocrystals composed of metals such as Au, Ag, Pd and Pt exhibit enhanced optical and catalytic properties over their monometallic counterparts. For instance, Ag nanostructures exhibit a high extinction cross section compared to Au, while Au is more bio-friendly than Ag. So the combination of Au and Ag led to the particles with higher extinction and better biocompatibility.172 Similarly, Pd & Pt exhibit higher catalytic activity than Ag or Au, while the case is reverse in the case of visible–NIR optical response. However, the combination of Pt and Pd with either Au or Ag led to the formation of multifunctional particles that can be used for both catalysis and optical sensing.37 Additionally, the synergistic effect between two metals contributes to the enhancement of catalytic activity in bimetallic nanostructures. Considering their wide applications, various methods have been developed to prepare bimetallic nanocrystals. In general, there are few approaches for the preparation of bimetallic nanostructures in different configurations as shown in Fig. 7. In this section, we discuss different types of bimetallic nanostructures and recent advances made toward their synthesis via well-defined methodologies as shown in Fig. 7. One of the simple methods that has been widely applied to prepare the bimetallic nanocrystals is based on the reduction of the corresponding metal salt precursors at the same time using reducing agents, which produce alloy type nanostructures composed of two metals (Fig. 7a). The composition of alloys and therefore their properties could be tuned simply by varying the ratio between both precursors.173 For example, alloys made of Au and Ag with different Au/Ag ratios have been prepared just by reducing the Au and Ag ions together using sodium citrate (Turkevich method).174 Such Au–Ag alloys have also been prepared by green synthesis methods using plant extracts as reducing agents.175 Another important bimetallic nanostructure is core–shell type morphologies and they can be prepared by the reduction of one metal ion in the presence of nanoparticles made of second metal (Fig. 7b).59,169,176 This method is quite similar to seed-mediated growth discussed in the previous section. Over the years, a wide variety of core–shell morphologies have been prepared by varying the core shape and controlling the shell growth. The size and therefore the resulting optical properties of core–shell nanocrystals could be controlled either by changing the core size or shell thickness, as reported by Samal et al.59 for the case of Au@Ag core–shell spherical nanoparticles. Au@Ag core–shell NPs were prepared in both aqueous and organic medium using Au nanoparticles as seeds.59,171,177 The core–shell nanoparticles could also be transformed into alloys via annealing. Very recently, Yadong Yin and co-workers demonstrated a promising approach for the synthesis of fully alloyed Ag/Au nanospheres by annealing the SiO2-coated Au@Ag core–shell nanospheres (Fig. 8a).178 The optical properties of the prepared alloy nanoparticles were controlled by varying the ratio of Au/Ag in core–shell nanoparticles before annealing them. They have also found that the original polycrystalline Au@Ag core–shell nanoparticles were transformed into single-crystal alloy nanospheres with uniform distribution of Au and Ag after annealing (Fig. 8a).178 Generally, the morphology of Au@Ag core–shell nanocrystals strongly depends on the crystallinity and morphology of Au seeds (or templates) as well as on the amount of AgNO3, reducing agents and surfactants.169,170,177 For example, Tsao et al. reported the synthesis of Au@Ag core–shell nanocrystals with morphologies such as cubic, truncated cubic, cuboctahedral, truncated octahedral, and octahedral structures using rhombic dodecahedral gold nanocrystals as seed particles in CTAC aqueous solution.177 A recent study by Gómez-Graña et al. shows that halide ions play an important role in the formation of Ag shell growth on Au nanocrystals through the stabilization of {100} facets.169 They have characterized the growth mechanism of Ag shells on Au seeds with various well-defined crystalline structures and morphologies through three-dimensional electron microscopy (Fig. 8b–d).169 The shell growth usually takes place based on the relative surface energies of exposed surface facets, however, the surface energies could change in the presence of halides through preferential adsorption on certain facets, which provides preferential growth of Ag{100} facets. As shown in Fig. 8b–d, single-crystal Au octahedra and NRs evolve into single-crystalline Au@Ag cubes enclosed by six {100} facets (Fig. 8b & d), while the silver shell growth takes place longitudinally on pentatwinned Au NRs and then evolves into core–shell NRs with an increased aspect ratio, since the seed NRs display five {100} lateral facets.
 Fig. 7  (a & b) Schematic illustrations showing different synthetic approaches for the preparation of bimetallic nanocrystals of different morphologies and compositions (alloys, core–shell, heterodimers, stars, core–satellites). Core–shell particles could transform into alloys upon annealing. M1 and M2 represent two distinct metal elements. 
 Fig. 8  (a) DF-STEM image of fully alloyed Au–Ag nanospheres obtained by annealing the Au@Ag core–shell nanospheres inside SiO2 matrix, and the corresponding EDX elemental mapping of Au and Ag. (b–d) HAADF-STEM images of Au@Ag nanocubes, Ag–Au–Ag NRs and Au@Ag NRs obtained using Au octahedra, penta-twinned NRs and single-crystal NRs as core particles, respectively. The insets of Fig. 8b and d show the corresponding 3D reconstruction of the particles and the inset of Fig. 8c is a HAADF-STEM image of a standing Au@Ag nanorod. (e) TEM image of bimetallic Au/Pd nanocrystals prepared by the reduction of H2PdCl4 on Au NRs using ascorbic acid as reducing agent. The inset shows illustration of particle morphology. (f) SEM image of Au/Pd octopods obtained by co-reduction of Au and Pd in the presence of Au cubes. (g) TEM image of palladium–silver hybrid dimers obtained by the controlled reduction of silver ions on Pd nanocubes. (h) TEM image of Pt-covered Au NRs obtained by the reduction of Pt ions in the presence of Au NRs using ascorbic acid as reductant. Figures (a), (b–d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) reproduced with permission from ref. 178, 169, 34, 33, 179 and 167, respectively. 
Similarly, various morphologies of Au–Pd bimetallic nanocrystals could also be prepared using different morphologies of Au seeds.146,170 Au–Pd bimetallic nanostructures have been found to be potential candidates for catalysis and SPR based hydrogen sensing. Very recently Jiang et al.34 reported the synthesis of bimetallic Au@Pd core–shell NRs with continuous and discontinuous Pd shells, and they found that continuous shells show larger plasmon shifts for ultrasensitive plasmonic hydrogen sensing (Fig. 8e). Very recently, branched nanostructures of Au–Pd bimetallic nanoparticles (Au/Pd octopods) have been prepared by co-reduction of Au and Pd in the presence of either Au seeds (cubic, rhombic dodecahedral and octahedral morphologies) or Pd seeds (octahedral morphology), as reported by Skrabalak and co-workers (Fig. 8f).33 The morphology of bimetallic nanocrystals could also be controlled by manipulating the reaction kinetics. For instance, Xia and co-workers were able to control the nucleation and growth of Ag on Pd nanocubes by controlling the reaction kinetics to obtain various Ag–Pd bimetallic nanocrystals including Ag–Pd hetero-dimers as shown in Fig. 8g.179 Over the last few years, great efforts have also been devoted to the synthesis of bimetallic Au–Pt and Ag–Pt nanostructures due to their improved catalytic efficiency, and they can be prepared in a similar fashion as Au–Pd or Ag–Pd.167 For example, Au–Pt bimetallic NRs could be simply prepared by reducing Pt ions in the presence of Au NRs and the amount of Pt can be controlled by varying the concentration of Pt ions in the reaction medium.167,168 Such Au–Pt NRs exhibit enhanced plasmon induced hydrogen generation in the visible to near-infrared region revealed by the single-particle study reported by Majima and co-workers (Fig. 8h).167 The incorporation of Pt into Au nanostructures enhances the catalytic activity for chemical transformations, while the plasmonic properties of Au could be used to monitor the reaction progress by SERS.166 In addition to the above discussed synthesis methods (Fig. 7 & 8), galvanic replacement reaction has also been widely used for the synthesis of bimetallic nanocrystals, which is discussed in the following section.35
2.4 Hollow nanocrystals via galvanic replacement reaction
During the last decade, galvanic replacement reaction has been widely applied in nanotechnology research for engineering the nanocrystals of different morphologies with complex chemical compositions.35,62,145,146,180–189 It is a simple and versatile method to transform solid nanocrystals of different morphologies into the corresponding hollow/porous nanocrystals with tunable optical and catalytic properties by controlling the extent of porosity/voids.35 Galvanic replacement reaction is a redox process that involves the oxidation of one metal by the ions of other metals having higher reduction potentials. The metals that oxidise in galvanic replacement reaction act as sacrificial templates in the formation of corresponding hollow nanocrystals. Generally, the morphology of final hollow nanocrystals closely resembles the morphology of the sacrificial template. Thus, this simple reaction can be used to prepare a broad variety of hollow nanocrystals with tunable chemical compositions (more than two metals) by the selection of two or more metals with a favourable difference in their redox potentials. For example, galvanic replacement reaction between Ag nanoparticles and gold ions has been widely applied for the preparation of Au–Ag hollow nanocrystals of various morphologies, since the reduction potential of gold (AuCl4−/Au, 0.99 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)) is higher than that of silver (Ag+/Ag, 0.8 V vs. SHE).181,190 For instance, Xia and co-workers have reported the first example of galvanic replacement reaction between silver nanocrystals and AuCl4− ions for the preparation of hollow nanocrystals.181 After this pioneering work, this reaction has been exploited in a wide range of silver nanostructures such as nanocubes, nanowires, nano-octahedra, nanodecahedra, nanorods and nanotriangles, to convert them into respective hollow or framed nanostructures using metal ions (such as Au3+, Pd2+, Pt2+) with higher reduction potentials. In this section, we review recent progress in the preparation of hollow nanocrystals of various morphologies through galvanic replacement reaction together with the recent advancements made toward the mechanistic understanding of galvanic replacement induced nanoscale shape and chemical transformations.
For example, Sun et al.190 have reported the systematic mechanistic study of galvanic replacement reaction between silver nanostructures and chloroauric acid in aqueous medium. In their study, monodisperse Ag nanocubes were titrated with different amounts of HAuCl4 solution, followed by monitoring the morphological, structural, compositional, and spectral changes with increasing amounts of HAuCl4 (Fig. 9a).190 It has been proposed that the Au atoms epitaxially deposit on the surface of Ag template in the initial stages of the reaction and then the Ag atoms diffuse into the gold shell to form hollow nanocrystals with their walls made of Au–Ag alloys. The final stages of reaction (with further increasing amounts of HAuCl4) involve the removal of Ag from the walls made of Au–Ag alloy (dealloying), leading to the formation of single-crystalline Au nanoboxes with pinholes on each facet (path (I) in Fig. 9a).191 Further increasing the amount of HAuCl4 added leads to the fragmentation of the shell into small Au particles. Alternatively, the silver atoms from the Au–Ag alloy could also be selectively removed by using external wet etchants such as Fe(NO3)3 and NH4OH and this process results in the formation of Au nanoframes (path (II) in Fig. 9a).191 The final size of the void and shell thickness depends on the sacrificial template as well as the stoichiometric ratio between Au3+ and Ag. For instance, it has been found that the reaction between Au+ and Ag nanocubes leads to the formation of nanoshells with thicker walls, in comparison with the same amount of Au3+ due to the differences in stoichiometric ratio.182 Galvanic replacement reaction between Au atoms and Ag nanoparticles proceeds through facet selectivity.183,190 If the sacrificial Ag templates possess only one type of facet, the galvanic reaction is expected to take place on each equal facet with the same probability. For example, Ag nanocubes with sharp edges are enclosed by six {100} facets, so the Au atoms react with each facet equally and lead to the formation Au–Ag nanocages with pores randomly distributed on the side walls.190 A similar reaction mechanism was also observed for octahedral Ag nanoparticles as they are only covered by {111} facets.184 However, in the case of sacrificial templates that are covered by two or more types of facets, galvanic replacement initially takes place on high surface energy facets.183,192 The presence of capping surfactants can alter the surface free energy of facets, which can influence the facet selectivity of galvanic replacement reaction.183,192 In general, the surface energies of metal nanoparticle facets decrease in the order of {110} > {100} > {111}. But, in the presence of capping molecules such as polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) the surface facet energy of {100} is less than that of {111} as PVP selectively binds to the {100} facet of the silver nanocrystal surface and decreases its surface facet energy.144,183 For instance, when truncated Ag nanocubes (PVP capped cuboctahedra) were used as sacrificial templates for the galvanic replacement reaction with HAuCl4, the reaction initiated on eight {111} facets and the epitaxial deposition of Au atoms occurred on six {100} facets.183 Therefore, one has to consider the influence of capping molecules in the design of galvanic replacement reaction to achieve the desired hollow nanocrystals.
 Fig. 9  (a) Galvanic replacement reaction between Ag nanocubes and HAuCl4: schematic representation of the formation of Au nanocages (I) and nanoframes (II) using Ag nanocube as sacrificial template. It shows the conversion of Ag nanocube into an Au/Ag nanocage (green colour) and then Au nanocages via continued galvanic replacement (I) or the conversion of Au–Ag nanocages into Au nanoframes via selective etching with a wet etchant (II). (b) Schematic illustration of steps involved in the conversion of Ag nanowires into porous Ag–Au nanotubes and then fragmented Au NPs via galvanic replacement reaction with HAuCl4. (c) TEM images of double walled Au–Ag nanocages obtained from the galvanic replacement reaction between Ag nanocubes and HAuCl4 in the presence of CTAB and ascorbic acid. The insets show the magnified image of double walled nanocage and corresponding EDX mapping. (d) TEM image of ultrathin gold nanoframes prepared via galvanic replacement reaction between Ag nanocubes and HAuCl4 followed by etching with H2O2/NH4OH. (e) TEM images of Pd–Pt bimetallic cubic nanocages prepared via the galvanic replacement reaction between Pd nanocubes and K2PtCl4 in the presence of ascorbic acid. (f) TEM images of Mn3O4/γ-Fe2O3 nanoboxes prepared via galvanic replacement reaction between Mn3O4 and iron(II) perchlorate. Figures (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) reproduced with permission from ref. 191, 185, 195, 197, 199 and 200, respectively. 
Galvanic replacement reaction has also been used for the preparation of one dimensional (1D) hollow nanocrystals such as nanotubes using metal nanowires as sacrificial templates.181,185,190,193 For example, silver nanowires have been used as templates for the preparation of hollow nanotubes via galvanic replacement reaction with precursors for other noble metals (e.g. Au, Pt, Pd), which are difficult to prepare by conventional chemical synthesis methods.181,185,190,193Fig. 9b illustrates the stepwise transformation of Ag nanowires into porous Au–Ag nanotubes via galvanic replacement with HAuCl4 and the reaction mechanism is quite similar to the reaction mechanism between Ag nanocubes and HAuCl4.185,190 In most of the reported studies, galvanic replacement reaction was probed by the TEM analysis of intermediate nanocrystals obtained after the addition of different amounts of HAuCl4 to silver nanocrystal templates. However, Sun et al.181,183,190 investigated the galvanic replacement reaction between silver nanowires and HAuCl4 by in situ transmission X-ray microscopy. They have found that the galvanic replacement reaction on the silver nanowires involves initiation of the pitting process followed by anisotropic etching and epitaxial deposition of the resulting gold atoms on the surfaces of the nanowires and then reconstruction of walls into porous Au–Ag nanotubes via an Ostwald ripening process.
Galvanic replacement reaction can be modulated or prevented by the introduction of strong reducing agents in the reaction medium. Very recently, Yang et al.194 demonstrated the galvanic replacement-free epitaxial deposition of Au atoms on Ag nanocubes by using ascorbic acid as reducing agent at high pH. They have shown that Ag nanocubes were completely covered by Au with uniform thickness and the number of Au atomic layers could be controlled.194 In general, galvanic replacement reaction between silver nanocrystals and HAuCl4 is performed at 100 °C in order to control the diffusion process. However, Puntes and co-workers have shown that it is possible to control the galvanic reaction and diffusion processes at room temperature by slightly changing the chemical environment.195 They have found that the galvanic replacement reaction between PVP capped Ag nanocubes and HAuCl4 leads to the formation of single-crystalline double walled nanoboxes in the presence of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and ascorbic acid (Fig. 9c). The chemical composition of double walled nanoboxes was found to be completely different from that of single walled nanoboxes obtained under normal conditions. In addition, they have studied the mechanism of shape transformation by high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM and EDX maps and it was found that unusual shape and chemical transformations happen due to the presence of galvanic replacement followed by the Kirkendall effect. Furthermore, this new method opens a new synthetic route for the preparation of polymetallic hollow nanocrystals made of Au, Ag and Pd with unique chemical compositions.195 Galvanic replacement reaction has also been used for the preparation of other morphologies. For example, Mirkin and co-workers reported the preparation of triangular nanoframes made of Au–Ag alloy by performing galvanic replacement reaction between Ag nanotriangles and HAuCl4.196 The presence of ascorbic acid leads to the transformation of Au–Ag nanoframes into Au–Ag alloy nanoprisms with pores. Very recently, Shahjamali et al.197 reported the preparation of surfactant-free sub-2 nm ultrathin triangular gold nanoframes by selective deposition of Au on Ag nanoprisms followed by removal of Ag by using H2O2/NH4OH (Fig. 9d). Galvanic replacement reaction has also been applied for the preparation of nanorattle structures using core–shell nanocrystals as sacrificial templates.145,186,187,198 For instance, Khalavka et al.198 reported the synthesis of rod-shaped gold nanorattles using Au@Ag core–shell NRs as sacrificial templates in the galvanic replacement reaction with HAuCl4 and they showed increased plasmon sensitivity and catalytic activity. In a recent report Jaiswal et al.187 prepared cubic nanorattles with intrinsic electromagnetic hot-spots using Au@Ag core–shell nanocubes in a galvanic replacement reaction with HAuCl4 and these materials exhibited enhanced SERS activity.
In addition to silver nanocrystals, Pd nanoparticles have also been used as sacrificial templates in galvanic replacement reaction. For example, Sang Woo Han and co-workers have reported the synthesis of Pd–Pt alloy hollow nanostructures via galvanic replacement reaction involving Pd nanocrystal templates and K2PtCl4 in the presence of ascorbic acid as reductant (Fig. 9e).199 They have shown that Pd–Pt alloy hollow nanocrystals such as nanocages with porous walls and dendritic hollow structures and Pd@Pt core–shell dendritic NCs could be selectively synthesized by varying the concentration of reductant.199 The presence of an excess amount of reductant can reduce all Pt ions and prevent galvanic replacement reaction. Therefore, the reducing agent plays an important role in controlling the degree of galvanic replacement reaction, so that it influences the final morphology of bimetallic hollow nanocrystals and their catalytic activity.199 Very recently, galvanic replacement reaction has been applied for the preparation of hollow metal oxides for the first time by Hyeon and co-workers.200 Galvanic replacement reaction between manganese oxide (Mn3O4) nanocrystals and iron(II) perchlorate leads to the formation of hollow box-shaped nanocrystals of Mn3O4/γ-Fe2O3 and these materials ultimately transformed into γ-Fe2O3 nanocages (Fig. 9f).200
Galvanic replacement reaction could also be performed in organic medium using organic soluble sacrificial templates.62,189,192,201 For instance, Hong et al.192 reported the synthesis of single-crystalline octahedral Au–Ag nanoframes via galvanic replacement reaction between truncated polyhedron Ag NPs and HAuCl4 in organic medium, and in the presence of octadecylamine (ODA). In this case, the final morphology of hollow nanocrystals is different from that of the sacrificial template due to the existence of overgrowth together with galvanic replacement reaction and such octahedral nanoframes were found to be excellent candidates for catalysis. Recently, we have found that the galvanic replacement reaction between oleylamine capped Ag nanocubes and HAuCl4 in organic medium leads to the formation of single-crystalline Au–Ag octahedral nanocages with complex chemical composition (Fig. 10).62,189 The mechanism of galvanic replacement reaction is most often studied by TEM analysis of intermediate nanocrystals obtained during the transformation of solid NPs into hollow nanocrystals. However, conventional TEM only provides 2D projection images of these 3D nanocrystals, therefore, the outcome of such an analysis is not sufficient for the complete understanding of the mechanism taking place. We have recently investigated the galvanic replacement reaction mechanism by 3D tomography together with 3D chemical mapping for the first time for the clear understanding of shape and chemical transformations during galvanic replacement (Fig. 10). Fig. 10a shows the TEM images of octahedral Au–Ag nanocages, but it is difficult to predict the shape from 2D TEM images. On the other hand, 3D tomography provides clear visualization of particles as shown in the inset of Fig. 10a. From the 3D tomography and EDX mapping, it was clear that all eight corners of the initial nanocubes have transformed into {111} facets of Au–Ag octahedral nanocages (Fig. 10b). Fig. 10c shows the EDX maps of nanocages in two different orientations and it demonstrates that the particles are composed of Au–Ag alloy surrounded by thick and thin Au layers from inside and outside, respectively. In addition, HAADF-STEM 3D reconstructions of the particles were obtained during the initial (Fig. 10d) and final stages (Fig. 10e) of reaction. The corresponding 3D EDX reconstructions confirm the epitaxial deposition of Au initially and a deposition of a thick layer of Au on the inner walls of the nanocage in the final stages of reaction, and the results were confirmed by 3D EDX mapping (Fig. 10f–g). From the above discussion with various examples, it is clear that the galvanic replacement is a simple and convenient chemical approach to the preparation of hollow nanocrystals of various morphologies.
 Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of Au–Ag octahedral nanocages. The insets show the 3D view of nanocage through [111] direction and magnified TEM image. (b) Reconstructed 3D rendering along [001] directions, and models (insets) showing the gradual transformations of Ag nanocubes into Au–Ag hollow nanocages after addition of increasing amounts of HAuCl4. The arrow indicates the presence of a pinhole in one of the side facets of the cube during the initial stages of the reaction, from which the cube is emptied. (c) 2D EDX mapping on nanocages in two different orientations. (d–e) HAADF-STEM 3D reconstructions of the particles obtained in the initial (d) and final stages (e) of reaction and their corresponding 3D EDX reconstructions. The inner layer around the pinhole (d) and outer layers of Au (e) are indicated by white arrows. (f–g) Volume rendering along [100] direction and 3D rendering of the EDX reconstructions of the particles obtained at the initial (f) and final stages (g) of reaction. Red and green colours represent Au and Ag, respectively. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 62. 
2.5. Microscopic characterization of noble metal nanoparticle nucleation and growth mechanism
Although a large number of synthesis methods have been reported for controlling the morphology, composition and crystallinity of nanostructures, the growth mechanism of many nanocrystals is still unclear. Electron microscopy techniques such as transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and liquid-cell electron microscopy have become excellent techniques to investigate the morphology, composition, crystallinity and growth mechanism of nanocrystals.202–214 For example, Mirkin and co-workers have studied the shape evolution of spherical Au seeds into 20-fold twinned Au–Ag core–shell icosahedra via STEM (Fig. 11A–J).208 STEM provides the location of the Au core at each stage of the Ag shell shape evolution, and thus enables the probing of the Ag shell growth mechanism. They have found that eight intermediate structures formed during the shape evolution of twinned Au seeds into bimetallic Au–Ag icosahedra (Fig. 11A–J). Very recently, several research groups have investigated the growth mechanism of Au NRs using high resolution STEM.207,211 For instance, Etheridge and co-workers have investigated the evolution of single-crystalline Au nanoseeds into NRs in the presence and absence of silver by looking at the crystallinity at the embryonic stages of gold nanorod growth via annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF STEM) (Fig. 11Q).211 They have observed a symmetry breaking event at which the growth transforms from isotropic to anisotropic in the presence of Ag+ ions when the seed diameter reached 4–6 nm. Such symmetry breaking is essential for the formation of anisotropic nanocrystals. In another study, atomic-level geometry and the relative stability of Au NR facets and their relationship to the overall three-dimensional nanocrystal shape and size were determined through quantitative STEM (atom-counting method).207 It was found that both high and low-index facets with similar dimensions exist in Au NRs and they are equally stable and the facet stability does not vary significantly with facet width. Such characterization using STEM provides new insights into noble metal nanoparticle growth mechanisms.
 Fig. 11  (A–J) Models and representative STEM images showing the stepwise evolution of Ag shell on single-crystalline Au seed into icosahedral Au–Ag bimetallic NPs through plasmon-mediated reaction. (A) STEM image of the pseudo-spherical single-crystalline Au seeds. (B to J) STEM images of Au–Ag core–shell NPs with (B) octahedral, (C) truncated tetrahedral, (D) tetrahedral, (E) truncated bitetrahedral, (F) bitetrahedral, (G) truncated decahedral, (H) decahedral, (I) decahedral with tetrahedral growth and (J) icosahedral morphologies, which were obtained during the stepwise evolution of Ag shell. Scale bars, 25 nm. (K) Schematic representation of liquid cell experimental setup. (L–P) HAADF-STEM images of Pd dendrites obtained at different time intervals. Scale bars, 50 nm. (Q) Aberration-corrected HRTEM images of Au NPs evolved during the synthesis of Au NRs in the presence and absence of Ag+ ions. It clearly shows a symmetry breaking step (isotropic to anisotropic) in the presence of Ag+ that leads to the formation of Au NRs. (R) Schematic representation (left) of the basic principle behind the electron tomography and 3D-tomographic reconstruction of Au–Ag core–shell NRs through 3D elemental mapping on the atomic scale. Figures (A–J), (K–P), Q, R (left) and R (right) reproduced with permission from ref. 208, 214, 211, 202 and 205, respectively. 
Another breakthrough technology in microscopy is liquid-cell electron microscopy, which is useful for in situ monitoring of nanoparticle growth in real time.203 For instance, the growth of two-dimensional palladium dendritic nanocrystals was monitored by liquid-cell electron microscopy at different time intervals and it was found that the diffusion-limited aggregation and direct atomic deposition were responsible for the growth of dendritic nanostructures (Fig. 11K–P).214 Similarly, such a technique has been used for in situ monitoring of galvanic replacement reaction between Pd2+ ions and Ag nanocrystals to understand the formation of Ag–Pd hollow nanocrystals, as reported by Sutter et al.209 In recent years there has been tremendous progress in 3D-electron microscopy (electron tomography) techniques that provide not only morphology, but also 3D-chemical and electronic information with atomic resolution.202–214 A recent review by Bals et al.202 provided an excellent overview of 3D-electron tomography characterization of noble metal nanoparticles and their assemblies. The basic principle behind electron tomography is based on 3D reconstruction of TEM images acquired by tilting the sample in the TEM over a large tilt angle range as shown in the scheme of Fig. 11. During the last few years, this technique has been applied to characterize a wide range of nanocrystals to understand their 3D morphology, composition and crystallinity. As we discussed in the above section, we have recently applied this technique to better comprehend the galvanic replacement reaction between HAuCl4 and Ag nanocubes and the 3D characterization of resultant Au–Ag porous nanocrystals.62 Electron tomography could also be applied to 3D characterize nanocrystals with atomic resolution. For instance, Goris et al. have reported the 3D elemental mapping in bimetallic Au–Ag core–shell NRs and they have clearly observed an epitaxial deposition of Ag on Au NRs at the interface.205 Based on the discussion in this section, it is very clear that there has been tremendous progress in electron microscopy techniques to characterise noble metal nanocrystals with complete information of their morphology, composition and crystallinity with atomic resolution.
3 Metal chalcogenide nanoparticles
3.1 State of the art
Nanoscale metal chalcogenides have attracted the interest of scientists involved in the task to tailor a large number of chemical and photophysical properties.12 ‘Soft chemistry’ approaches employing relatively mild conditions have been increasingly used for the successful production of such materials. A significant number of Review, Perspective, Feature and Highlight articles were devoted during the last few years to describe the new advances in nanomaterials chemistry which is considered as a key element for the reproducible synthesis of metal chalcogenides (MCs) with main applications in ECS (energy conversion and storage) devices. The nanoscale size of MCs may also provide unusual, different or improved properties, depending in principle on the metallic element which is combined with the chalcogenide one. Important progress in tuning the shape, composition and crystalline structure of MCs has been achieved, but there are still challenges to overcome so as to reach their full commercial exploitation.215 In this Highlight article we will emphasize on the most recent outstanding achievements on the controlled synthesis of MCs, and its relation to the obtained features and properties as well as the potential or existing applications. We categorize the studied nanomaterials according to the relative chalcogenide component (sulfides, selenides, tellurides, mixed chalcogenide element compositions, heterostructures) but we first give an overview of the recent review articles on this topic, as an introduction to its ‘state of the art’.
The so-called hot-injection method has been extensively utilized for the preparation of MC nanoparticles. In this method, a ‘cold’ (room temperature) solution of precursor molecules is directly injected into a hot solvent (e.g. at 280 °C). The injection leads to an immediate formation of nuclei and the subsequent formation of new nuclei is hindered by a certain drop in the temperature, following the precursor injection. Thus, the nucleation and growth stages are effectively separated, leading to the yield of monodisperse nanocrystals.216 However, the aforementioned approach provides MCs with homogeneous size, but at the expense of the difficulty to scale up to a multigram level. For this reason, the ‘heating up’ synthetic route has also been used, where all reagents are mixed at room temperature and the solution is heated to a designated temperature for a fixed time.13 The latter strategy has been proved to result also in monodisperse nanocrystals, especially at slow heating rates.217,218 Sowers et al. have reviewed several aspects of the synthetic mechanisms proposed for the acquisition of MC semiconductor nanocrystals, focusing on the precursor reactivity and the formation of metastable intermediate complexes which lead to nanoparticle formation upon precursor reduction or decomposition.219 Alloyed (e.g. not core–shell or hybrid) metal chalcogenides with homogeneous composition distribution are a common synthetic choice, because the enthalpy of formation of these nanostructures is quite lower than that of the pure components, which acts as the driving force in the alloying process.220 The role of the precursor together with its own ligand environment has been highlighted by Ortiz and Skrabalak.221 Kovalenko and co-workers analyzed the use of amides (such as silylamides, M[N(SiMe3)2]n) as precursors which are decomposed to give MC nanoparticles.222 Seisenbaeva and Kessler showed how governing the precursor chemistry facilitates to obtain MCs with tuned chemical and phase composition, crystallinity, shape, porosity and optical properties.223 Chang and Waclawik demonstrated that the defects present on MC nanocrystal surfaces often require a surface passivation for example by covering with a wider-gap material to form a ‘core@shell’-type structure aiming to improve their optical and electronic properties.224 Such ‘capping’ strategies targeted to obtain defect-free semiconductor cores were also reviewed by Samokhvalov and colleagues.225
Furthermore, Rao et al.226 shed also some light on several parameters of the synthesis of various MC nanocrystal types, while another report227 concentrated on the description of shape-controlled synthesis, with Manna and co-workers focusing on the identification of the mechanisms which result in branched growth mode in colloidal MCs.11 Anisotropic MC nanocrystals were reviewed by Min and colleagues which explained their solution-based synthesis and principal applications.15 The synthesis, characterization and application fields of ultrasmall MCs were presented by Kim et al.228 Ternary and quaternary MCs (e.g. CuInS2 and Cu2ZnSnS4) were comprehensively analyzed by Reiss and colleagues.229 In addition, Han and co-workers described the most important synthetic approaches for 2D-layered MC nanocrystals. Such nanomaterials possess a rather rare orthorhombic structure which may be viewed as a distorted NaCl lattice.30
A large variety of characterization techniques available to evaluate the properties of MC nanoparticles were overviewed by van Veggel.230 Such techniques include, among others, electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), dynamic light scattering, zeta-potential analysis, fluorescence spectrophotometry and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). In particular, the suitability of XPS to distinguish between core@shell and homogeneous alloy MC structures was demonstrated in a review by Sarma et al.231 XPS can also confirm the bonding of ligands to the particles' surface. In this context, the capability of NMR to reveal also such a kind of ligand bonding, aiming to quantify the bound and free ligands, as well as its ability to monitor the ligand exchange was illustrated by Hens and Martins.232
Another Review with exhaustive details also on the application domains of MC nanoparticles was elaborated by Yu and co-workers.10 Such fields include fuel and solar cells, electrochemical water splitting, lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors (Fig. 12). The same group reported another, more focused review, aiming to present the types of MCs which exhibit good oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activity.233 Examples of such materials are the late transition metal chalcogenides (LTMCs) consisting of metal atoms (Fe, Co, Ni) and typical chalcogens (S, Se, Te). On the other hand, solar cells as an application domain of MCs were the topic of a detailed overview by Freitas et al.234 These researchers centered their review on Cd-based and Pb-based chalcogenides. Besides, the application domains of different kinds of inorganic nanoparticles including MCs were also reviewed by Lohse and Murphy.7 Finally, Chung and Kanatzidis highlighted the perspective of MCs as a rich source of nonlinear optical materials. They showed that exploratory synthesis may be able to achieve, for instance, Cs5BiP4Se12 nanowires, which are obtained pure and in high yield without using any complex chemical or physical processes. These materials displayed an excellent nonlinear optical second-harmonic generation response.235
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of nanostructured MC/modified-MC materials and their potential applications in various ECS devices. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 10. 
3.2 Metal sulfide nanocrystals
Sulfur powder, dispersible in long chain alkylamines, such as oleylamine (OAm), is a common precursor for metal sulfides, which combines relatively low cost, moderate environmental concerns and certain stability in air and moisture. Thomson et al. have attempted, through detailed NMR studies, to unravel the complex S–amine chemistry which leads to the controlled preparation of various types of M-sulfide nanoparticles.236 Moreover, a sacrificial, low-T, template-directed method was employed to synthesize several kinds of metal sulfide yolk–shell nanoboxes with monodisperse sizes of about 220 nm. The main phenomenon behind that approach was the Kirkendall effect and it included two steps of ion-exchange.237
Another general strategy for the production of M-sulfide NPs is the use of single-source precursors (SSPs). The employment of such compounds in which a metal–chalcogen bond is present has arisen as an efficient pathway to prepare such nanomaterials. The SSPs are also known as single molecule precursors and contain the desired elements in one molecule. They are preferred over multiple precursors because of inherent advantages of better air/moisture tolerance, lower risk of side reactions or product contamination, low toxicity and better stoichiometric control as well as volatility control via the use of suitable ligands. Mixed metal thiosemicarbazones were used as SSPs for the synthesis of M1–xFexS nanocrystals by pyrolysis and solvothermal decomposition.238 In addition, palladium–phosphorus/sulfur NPs were produced by the one-pot thermolysis of a SSP complex. That was a rare report where the same SSP resulted in two different compositions (PdP2 and Pd4S) just by changing the thermolysis solvent.239
Sines and Schaak demonstrated the ability of trioctylphosphine (TOP) to be used for the phase-selective extraction of S (and Se) from their starting materials. This route comprises a low-temperature strategy to manipulate the composition of NPs and produce the most metal-rich chalcogenide that is stable in a particular binary system (e.g. convert FeS2 to FeS).240 Besides, Yonemoto et al. published a general synthetic approach to obtain ordered mesoporous first-row transition-metal sulfides through an oxide-to-sulfide nanocasting transformation procedure.241

Cu-based sulfides. 
Chang and Waclawik reported a universal phase-selective mechanism to prepare CuInS2, Cu2SnS3 and Cu2ZnSnS4 nanostructures with tuned crystalline structure. It was found that the crystallinity degree of an intermediate complex named CuIn(SR)x determined the final crystal phase of the product as either zinc-blende (with preference for triangular shapes) or wurtzite (where hexagonal morphologies were more abundant).242 The CuInS2 composition was also investigated by Liu et al., where it was found that different structures and shapes were obtained (e.g.Fig. 13f) by simply varying the concentration of dodecanethiol in a reaction mixture which contained also metal chlorides, oleic acid and octadecene.243 A relevant study by Kuzuya and co-workers suggested that the stability of an indium ligand complex was responsible for the final shape and crystalline structure of their CuInS2 NPs. Their procedure consists of the thermolysis of Cu–In thiolate which yields Cu2−xS NPs, followed by a cation exchange reaction in an indium-thiolate solution to provide the final nanomaterial.244 Furthermore, Li and colleagues emphasized on the evaluation of the optical properties of their CuInS2 nanocrystals, in relation to the reaction time and temperature selected. In particular, they varied the reaction temperature from 210 °C to 250 °C, while the time was in the range 5–60 min, using acetate salts as copper and indium sources, dodecanethiol as sulfur precursor, and oleic acid or cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) as ligands.245
 Fig. 13  Electron microscopy images of a) AgInS2 nanoparticles, b) assemblies of Ag2S NCs, c) CuInS2 NPs, scale bar is 50 nm, d) CdS NCs, e) RhxSy/C nanocomposites, f) CuInS2 nanoplates, g) PbS nanotubes, h) PbS hollow NPs, and i) PbS nanocubes. Figures (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g–h), and (i) reproduced with permission from ref. 261, 258, 14, 268, 278, 243, 262 and 264, respectively. 
Huang et al. reported the solvothermal synthesis of CuInS2 NPs and they noticed that oleylamine solvent favored the acquisition of a zinc-blende structure, while ethylenediamine resulted in a wurtzite phase. Both phases exhibited strong light absorption covering the entire visible light region to beyond 1300 nm. These nanocrystals were employed by spray-coating to fabricate working solar cells.246 The microwave heating route was used by Pein and colleagues to prepare CuInS2 NPs in the presence of oleylamine, InCl3, CuI and S. These researchers compared the aforementioned method with the conventional ‘heating up’ one (use of oil bath).247 Actually no differences between these two separate approaches were noticed, when the syntheses were performed at the same temperature. The particles produced by both techniques had the same crystal structure, shape, grain size and size distribution. Additionally, they possessed practically equal optical properties. Moreover, He and co-workers presented a one-pot route to prepare monodisperse CuInS2 NPs using copper- and indium-acetylacetonate salts together with dodecanethiol.248 They observed that the presence of an amount of Sn(acac)2Cl2 facilitated the control of shape homogeneity but also improved the chemical composition and photoelectric response of the product. The particles' energy band gap was estimated at 1.58 eV. In fact, Kolny-Olesiak and Weller have published a Review article which summarizes the synthetic protocols leading to CuInS2 NPs as well as their potential applications.28
The CuInS2 composition was further developed by many researchers, either in the direction of incorporating more elements in it, or through the formation of more complex configurations. For example, Nam et al. used a stepwise solvothermal protocol to prepare highly fluorescent CuInS2/ZnS core/shell quantum dots (QDs). These nanomaterials showed tunable emission of yellow-to-red with a maximum quantum yield (QY) of 65%.249 Manna and colleagues published the preparation of strongly fluorescent quaternary CuInZnS NPs using Cu1−xInS2 as starting materials and employing a partial cation exchange process. The Cu-deficient composition was produced deliberately as it was found to be connected with a higher QY of the final product, which rose up to 80%. The starting material stoichiometry which provided the optimum luminescence value was Cu0.38InS2.22 Regarding the surface chemistry of such quaternary nanomaterials, Gabka et al. illustrated in a very recent study the utility of XPS and NMR techniques to monitor ligand exchange processes. The investigation of these phenomena is interesting not only from the basic research point of view but also for practical reasons.250
In certain cases, the partial replacement of indium with germanium is necessary for the aforementioned MC compound, as CuIn1−xGaxS2 displays also excellent optical and optoelectronic properties, with a direct band gap readily tuned in the range 1.55–2.53 eV, depending on the Ga amount. The Cabot group noticed some slight morphological differences upon changing the Ga content from Ga-rich to Ga-void (Fig. 13c) in their nanomaterial synthesis, but the main purpose of their work was to identify the influence of Ga concentration on the photocatalytic hydrogen generation ability.14 A one-pot, facile, cheap and environmentally benign method was used by Vahidshad et al. to substitute In3+ with Ga3+ in order to synthesize CuInxGa1−xS2 NPs. Depending on the chemical composition and other synthesis conditions, the shape of the NPs obtained was trigonal, semitrigonal, hexagonal or quasi-spherical. These nanomaterials were stable for several weeks and they are considered as promising for low-cost ink-jet printing solar cells.251 A phosphine-free and scalable procedure was reported by Dilena et al. for the preparation of CuInxGa1−xS2 NPs with tailored composition. These nanocrystals had a controlled size from 13 to 19 nm by increasing the reaction temperature and they showed composition-dependent optical absorption properties, with a band gap increase from 1.5 to 2.1 eV with increasing Ga content.252
A new route for the insertion of germanium in Ge-containing MCs was presented by Chesman et al., and they used an inexpensive, air- and moisture-stable precursor, [Ge(gly)2(OAm)2], for the gram-scale, non-injection (heat up) synthesis of Cu2ZnGeS4 NPs using a binary sulfide source. The ultimate objective of those materials was their application for solar cells and optoelectronic devices.253 Talapin and co-workers elucidated the significant role of the precursors' reactivities toward the quality of Cu2ZnSnS4 films. They discussed how the kinetics of precursor decomposition influenced the texture of such films, which were generated by sintering and growth of the initial grains.254 A continuous-flow reactor was utilized for the preparation of several grams of Cu2ZnSnS4 NPs by reacting elemental sulfur with metal–amino complexes. This procedure allowed efficient control of the nanoparticle composition over a wide range, and the product was thermoelectrically characterized.255 Antimony (Sb) is another element which can be effectively combined with copper and sulfur to yield ternary CuxSbySz NPs. Xu et al. employed a modified SSP approach to synthesize the above system with diverse morphologies, compositions and band gaps. For instance Cu12Sb4S12 NPs had a trigonal-pyramidal shape while Cu3SbS3 NPs were rhombic.256


Silver-containing metal sulfides. 
Ag2S is an important semiconductor with an energy band gap at around 1.0 eV (at room temperature) and a relatively large absorption coefficient. Nanoscale Ag2S possesses excellent photoelectric properties. The sole-oleylamine route (OAm as solvent, surfactant and reducing agent) was employed for the pyrolytic preparation of Ag2S using AgNO3 and S powder as precursors. The as-synthesized NPs can be used as substrate for surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) detection.257 Superlattices of Ag2S NPs were prepared using Ag–oleate complexes, alkanethiol and sulfur. The resulting highly monodisperse particles could readily self-assemble into interesting superstructures (Fig. 13b) in a solution phase without the need to employ any additional assembly means.258 Besides, new (chalcogenoethyl)ferrocenylcarboxalate-functionalized silver chalcogenide (S, Se) nanoclusters were synthesized using a combination of silylated chalcogen reagents at low temperatures. These nanoparticles were tested by cyclic voltammetry as sensors for HSO4− species.259
Compared with the significant advances published in the synthesis of ternary Cu-based sulfides, research on corresponding Ag-based ternary colloids is not that established. AgInS2 is an intriguing material, and a candidate for applications in photovoltaic and other domains, with a bandgap energy between 1.87 and 2.03 eV. Peng et al. reported a hot-injection synthesis of orthorhombic AgInS2 NPs with variable sizes and morphologies, using octadecene together with OAm and dodecylthiol. The injection temperature was a crucial determining factor for the structural features of the particles. These researchers prepared AgInS2 films by drop-casting the as-prepared NPs and those films exhibited a reproducible photovoltaic response.260 Deng et al. used a simple SSP method to prepare heliotrope seed-like AgInS2 NPs (Fig. 13a) in the presence of oleic acid and dodecanethiol (DT). It was evidenced that DT played a dominant role in defining the resultant particles, because of its strong absorption onto the {001} crystal plane of AgInS2 NPs. These nanomaterials presented high photosensitivity and photostability to outside illumination.261 The ‘polyol’ route was employed by Ranjbar and co-workers: in their protocol, AgInS2 nanostructures were prepared via a facile process using silver nitrate, thiosemicarbazide and indium chloride. This mixture was refluxed in propylene glycol for 1 h. The roles of parameters such as precursor concentration, reaction time and type of sulfur source were investigated, with regard to their role on the final product. It was evidenced that the choice of sulfur precursor was critical in the morphology of the final product.52

Lead sulfide (PbS) has a narrow band gap (0.41 eV) and a large exciton Bohr radius (18 nm). Nanoscale PbS finds applications in various fields, including solar cells. Wang et al. presented a facile approach to produce three-dimensional PbS nanoflowers, which was based on the co-existence of two types of amines with unequal alkyl chain length and different steric hindrance. They also prepared a series of single-crystal hollow PbS NPs with tunable morphologies (Fig. 13h and g) through elevating reaction temperature and prolonging growth time.262 In another report, a layered intermediate lead thiolate compound was formed in the initial stage of the reaction of lead acetate in DT. The above compound then decomposed into PbS species upon heating, and the morphology of the final product was tuned by varying several reaction parameters.263 McPhail and Weiss have shown how the reaction of sulfur with octadecene induces a change in the shape of PbS NPs synthesized from the S/ODE precursor from cubic (Fig. 13i) to hexapodal by altering the ligand chemistry of the growing particles. They demonstrated that the binding of organosulfur ligands to the growing NPs causes a preferential growth at the {100} faces (over the {111} faces) and, thus, a hexapodal geometry for the particles.264 Moreover, PbS nanocubes were used as a model system whose ability to self-assemble on a large length scale was investigated. A relevant analysis suggested that the PbS nanocubes prepared by Quan et al. acted as building blocks of an ultra slow assembly from a fcc superstructure in their tilted positions, instead of a simple cubic symmetry predicted by theory. The identified tilted fcc superstructure was observed as the most stable macroscopic assembly.265 The aqueous pathway was also employed to prepare PbS NPs: in that case, oligonucleotides were used as capping agents. FTIR measurements illustrated that functional groups on the nucleobases such as carbonyl and amine moieties were responsible for surface passivation, while the phosphate backbone prevented irreversible particle aggregation.266

Cadmium chalcogenide NPs have drawn special interest due to their potential applications in domains such as solar cells, LEDs and photocatalysis. Li et al. have presented a non-injection route to prepare CdS (and CdSe) NPs in oleylamine. The cadmium sulfide particles were highly crystalline (wurtzite phase) and have good optical properties.267 The Manna group evaluated the electrical properties of films of CdS NPs (Fig. 13d), taking into account the interaction of the film surface with air. These films were treated with propyltrichlorosilane prior to photoconductivity measurements. The capacity of such materials for oxygen sensing was also investigated. CdS, a direct-band semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.4 eV, can be also used as a diluted magnetic semiconductor (DMS) when a fraction of component ions of semiconductors is replaced with transition metal (TM) impurities.268 Farle and co-workers have published a thermal evaporation route to prepare Mn-doped CdS belts. We include this work in the present Highlight although the synthetic approach of those researchers is not ‘chemical’. However, that is an interesting work where their product shows a tunable emission band that shifted from 570 to 850 nm and ferromagnetic responses were also detected. Those phenomena were assigned to the formation of a (MnS)n aggregate in the CdS matrix.269
The ‘net oleylamine route’ (where OAm was simultaneously used as a solvent, surfactant and reductant) was employed for the preparation of ZnS, by employing zinc stearate as Zn source. In this case, the final nanoparticle shape was modified according to the type of sulfur precursor used (elemental S, thiourea or DT).270 The preparation of ZnIn2S4 flower-like hollow microspheres was reported to take place via a solvothermal method in ethylene glycol (EG) with the assistance of L-cysteine as sulfur source. A possible mechanism for the formation of such particles was also suggested.271 Alivisatos and co-workers published the synthesis of 80 nm FeS2 nanocubes. OAm was one of the reactants in their approach, but they attributed the control over the nanocrystal shape to the employment of an unusual ligand, that is, 1-hexadecanesulfonate.272 Fredrick and Prieto claim to be the first to synthesize Fe2GeS4via a solution approach. They additionally reported its optical properties, reactivity and potential for photovoltaic application.273 Furthermore, Ramasamy et al. presented the first solution-phase (hot-injection) synthesis of monodisperse quaternary nearly cubic-shaped NPs of CoxCu1−xCr2S4 over the entire composition range, along with their detailed magnetic characterization and band structure calculations.274
Hexagonal MX2 nanoflakes (M = Ti, Zr, X = S and Se) were studied by Miro et al. from both synthetic and computational points of view. Their aim was to understand the driving force behind the preferential nanoflake growing shape as well as the role of lateral quantum-confinement effects in both electronic structure and properties of these species.275SnS NPs with uniform spherical shape were produced by a facile hot-injection synthesis using hydrazine hydrate-assisted diethylene glycol (DEG) solution at a designated moderate temperature. These particles had an orthorhombic crystal structure and an indirect bandgap of approximately 1.1 eV.276Bi2S3 NPs were produced by decomposing bismuth(III) acetate in the presence of oleic acid, with a hot-injection protocol. These size-controlled nanomaterials were investigated with regard to their band-gap tunability, the relaxation kinetics of photoexcited carries, and other phenomena such as the possible origin of midgap states.277

Rhodium sulfide/carbon composite nanospheres were prepared by a one-step alcohol-thermal method at 400 °C from Rh6(CO)16 and elemental sulfur. The sphere diameter was in the range 45–90 nm, depending on the type of solvent (alcohol) used. Such hybrid nanomaterials displayed good dispersion of RhxSy NPs (Fig. 13e), high surface area and extraordinary thermal/chemical resistance, making them candidate materials for electrocatalytic application of HCl electrolysis.278 Additionally, Rao and colleagues published a ‘Frontiers article’ on the structural and spectroscopic features of MoS2 nanosheets, as well as on their impressive properties. MoS2 typifies the family of metal dichalcogenides such as MoSe2 and WS2 and there's much to be done on nanosheets of these materials. MoS2 nanosheets have been synthesized by micromechanical cleavage using the Scotch tape technique, but also by chemical methods such as hydrothermal synthesis and chemical vapour deposition. Potential and current applications of these materials include electronics, optoelectronics, energy devices, spintronics, lithium batteries, supercapacitors and hydrogen generation.279

3.2 Metal selenide nanostructures
Metal-selenide NPs occupy an important position in both basic research and technological applications. Particularly, CuSe is a significant semiconductor, targeted as a candidate material for solar cells, gas sensors, thermoelectric converters etc. Xiao et al. presented a heat-up pathway to produce high-quality copper selenide NPs with controllable shape and structure. They showed that the different reactivities among the precursors used can directly affect the morphological and compositional characteristics of the nanomaterials.280 Li et al. demonstrated an example of the influence of foreign metal ions to control the morphology of CuxSe NPs. More specifically, they incorporated Al3+ ions in the initial precursor solution so as to produce CuxSe nanocubes. Cu3Se2 nanocubes showed a strong composition-dependent plasmonic peak in the wavelength range between 900 and 1100 nm.281 A non-injection route was used by Tian and colleagues to prepare triangular Cu2−xSe NPs (Fig. 14f) in the presence of copper stearate, oleic acid (OAc), OAm and Se–ODE. The size of the nanotriangles could be tuned at the range 2.8–12 nm by simply adjusting the reaction duration. A cubic berzelianite crystal phase was evidenced, and the nanocrystals could easily self-assemble into ordered superstructures.282 2D CuSe nanosheets were prepared by Wu et al.; their facile and phosphine-free approach included the initial synthesis of CuSe nanosheets with hexagonal phase, which were afterwards thermally treated in the presence of CuI cations to produce cubic-phase nanosheets. These materials are considered as promising building blocks for the construction of sensors and other devices.283
 Fig. 14  a) Schematic picture of a continuous flow system for the gram-scale production of CdSe QDs (photographs at (b–d)), e) TEM image of Ag2Se nanocubes, f) Cu2−xSe NCs, g) SnSe NPs, h) MnSe2 nanorods. Figures (a–d), (e), (f), (g) and (h) reproduced with permission from ref. 294, 281, 282, 310 and 302, respectively. 
As in the case of copper-based sulfides, indium and in certain cases germanium are also mixed sometimes with selenium to produce ternary and quaternary MC nanostructures, respectively. Korgel and co-workers published the synthesis of CuInSe2 NPs and they compared the photovoltaic response between the OAm- and inorganic ligand-capped NPs.284 Bekaert et al. performed a first-principles calculation study of the p- and n-type conductivity in CuIn1−xGaxSe2. They concluded that the band gap mainly opens with increasing Ga-to-In ratio due to the rise of the conduction band minimum.285

Sn-containing copper selenium nanocrystals. 
Polycrystalline samples with nominal composition of Cu3−xSnxSe3 were synthesized by direct reaction of the composing elements in powder form, in evacuated and sealed quartz ampoules. The obtained specimens in the vicinity of the composition Cu2SnSe3 possessed four types of crystal structure with distinct cation ordering. The composition-linked structural relationship was analyzed and the effect of the crystal structure on the electrical and thermal properties was presented.286 Shavel et al. have described a colloidal synthetic route to prepare nonstoichiometric, Cu2ZnxSnySe1+x+2y NPs with a narrow size distribution and tetragonal crystal structure.287 Cu2ZnSnSe4 (and Cu2ZnSnS4) NPs were synthesized using OAm as solvent and capping agent. A composition close to the stoichiometric one was acquired by selecting metal salts with appropriate reactivity.288 In another report, the dissolution of elemental Se in OAm, mediated by alkythiol reduction at room temperature, was reported to generate alkylammonium selenide; the latter compound was used as a highly reactive precursor for the hot-injection synthesis of MC nanoparticles such as Cu2ZnSnSe4.289 Taking into account that the successful formation of such quaternary materials is often complicated, Hou et al. investigated by various techniques the reactions taking place at the initial stages of nanoparticle formation, for the case of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 NPs. OAm was found to play a dual role in the generation of key intermediates in the initial stages before the start of nucleation.290 Moreover, a colloidal synthetic pathway to prepare highly monodisperse Cu2HgGeSe4 was published by the Cabot group. These researchers used HgCl2 as the mercury source and the NPs produced possessed a band gap at 1.6 eV and were used as building blocks for the formation of corresponding bulk nanostructured materials. The thermoelectric properties of the nanomaterials were studied in a broad temperature range.291
A suitable way to realize property nanoengineering in complex quaternary chalcogenide nanocrystals was presented for Cu2CdxSnSey polypods. The influence of polytypism and polarity on the branching mechanism of those particles was presented. Their chemical and crystallographic structure changes from the seed (zinc-blende-like) to the branches (wurtzite legs) and leads to dramatic changes in the physical properties.292 As a matter of fact, Cd-based selenium particles have received a lot of attention; Harrell et al. have reviewed the synthesis of ultrasmall and magic-sized CdSe nanocrystals.293 So here we will mainly focus on some more recent articles on CdSe NPs; Yang and Tuan developed a non-microfluidic flow reactor system (Fig. 14a–d) to synthesize CdSe NPs through injecting a solution containing a Cd–OAc mixture with Se-tributylphosphine into pressurized hexane. The optical properties of these particles could be tuned almost over the entire visible region by modifying the reaction paremeters.294 Boles and Talapin studied the self-assembly of zinc-blende CdSe tetrahedra which were synthesized by the reaction of Cd-oleate with Se in octadecene. Self-assembly was carried out by gentle evaporation of a colloidal solution of CdSe NPs in tetrachloroethylene over a TEM grid tilted at about 25° from the horizontal surface. CdSe NPs readily assembled into microscale superlattices (SLs).295 Furthermore, the open-air synthesis of highly luminescent CdSe NPs was reported by Yang et al., with a microreactor as the controllable reaction tool. Oleylamine was employed as a coligand in that approach, and its effect on the PL properties and on reaction kinetics was investigated.296
Di Stasio et al. illustrated how core–shell CdSe/CdS quantum dot-in-rods can be transferred into water using a ligand exchange method employing mercaptopropionic acid (MPA), without harming the light-emitting properties of the pristine materials. In this way, the water processability of such semiconductors can greatly increase their versatility and applicability.297 Actually, the optical properties of CdSe QDs are often improved (QY enhancement) by covering them with a ZnS shell. Focsan et al. studied the modification of carboxyl-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QD luminescence at 620 nm in the close vicinity of Au nanorods in aqueous solution, as a function of both the spectral overlap between the luminescence of QDs and LSPR band of NPs and the interparticle distance. CTAB surfactant was used and Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) protein layers over-coated the metal surface as spacer.298 Lappas and colleagues presented a chemical process to decorate self-assembled 2D amphiphilic peptide fibrils with CdSe@ZnS core–shell QDs capped with TOPO. The organization of quantum dots on two-dimensional nanosheets revealed an unexpected, striking transformation of their co-operative optical properties.299 In a somewhat different approach, Plaisant et al. attempted to coat ZnSe cores with CdSe shells. It was found that ZnSe was not uniformly covered by CdSe. Instead, XRD showed the formation of a ternary compound, concluding that their product consisted of inhomogeneous nanorods (NRs) with an average stoichiometry of Cd0.2Zn0.8Se. The NRs were a result of the self-assembly of prolate nanospheres by aligned attachment.300

MnSe (and MnS) NPs were synthesized by Moloto et al. Manganese selenide nanorods were produced through the reaction of manganese chloride and selenium with sodium borohydride as reducing agent in methanol. The optical and paramagnetic features of these nanomaterials were studied. The ESR spectra of the MnSe NRs showed broad single resonance peaks with g-values of 2.0068.301 MnSe2 NRs (Fig. 14h) were prepared using a solvothermal protocol with PVP as capping agent in a DMF/water mixture. It was evidenced that the amount of PVP affected the aspect ratio of the nanorods, while the DMF/H2O volume ratio influenced also the morphology and composition of the products. An increased aspect ratio was related to enhanced microwave absorption properties.302 Besides, MnSe2/Se nanocomposites were prepared via a hydrothermal process in the presence of PEG and hydrazine. The concentration of the latter reductant had a crucial influence on the shape and phase of the final materials. In that report, cubes of MnSe2/Se coated with a plethora of NRs were obtained, and SeCl4 was employed as selenium precursor for the first time.303
A SSP protocol was utilized for the synthesis of palladium selenide NPs. These materials had a Pd17Se15 composition and they were grafted onto graphene oxide resulting in a very efficient and recyclable catalyst for C–O coupling reactions of aryl halides with phenol.304 The synthesis of pyrazole-based sulfur/selenium ligands and their palladium(II) complexes was recently reported; these complexes of palladium were utilized as SSPs to prepare TOP-capped Pd4Se and PdSe NPs with size range 8–26 nm. For this purpose, thermolysis of these precursors at 200–250 °C was carried out.305 The same group (Singh and co-workers) published the synthesis of Pd complexes from suitable selenium-containing imidazolium salts through a silver carbene transfer reaction. These complexes were efficient catalysts for Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reactions and PdxSey NPs were formed in the beginning of these reactions. As a matter of fact, these NPs appeared to participate in the catalysis.306

PbSe nanotubes were achieved using a reactive template approach through solvothermal transformation of trigonal selenium (t-Se) nanotubes in ethylene glycol in the presence of lead acetate. It was found that a relatively high reaction temperature and a certain amount of ascorbic acid were critical to produce PbSe nanotubes, keeping the initial morphology of the pristine materials. The wall thickness of the PbSe nanotubes was modified in relation to the reaction time, and these materials possessed a remarkably better electrochemical activity than PbSe NPs.307 Akhtar et al. found that the oriented assembly of small PbSe nanocrystals resulted in extended ‘nanoworm’ structures. The starting PbSe particles were prepared in olive oil medium and oleic acid was used as surfactant, while PbO was the source of lead.308

Ag

2

Se NPs were prepared using a SSP method, with the help of an imidazolium bromide ligand. A TOP–OAc mixture was employed, under inert conditions and at a temperature of 200 °C. The composition of the solvent used in the thermolysis affected the purity of the product.309 Moreover, SnSe (Fig. 14g) and SnS nanostructures with various morphologies were produced by Liu et al.; inexpensive SnCl2 was used as tin source, and chalcogenide precursors with different reactivities were explored, along with a variety of ligand combinations. The optoelectronic behavior of SnSe NPs was evaluated by fabricating a thin SnSe NP film between interdigitated gold electrodes.310 Finally, Cha et al. presented 2D-layered chalcogenide structures where five atomic layers (Se–Bi–Se–Bi–Se in the case of Bi2Se3) bond covalently to form a 1 nm thick quintuple layer and neighboring quintuple layers interact through weak van der Waals forces. The combination of thickness control, compositional tuning and intercalation chemistry in such two-dimensional nanoplates paves a way to develop novel metamaterials that can be engineered on multiple scales simultaneously.311

3.4 M-based-Te nanoparticles (M = metal or metalloid)
In contrast to their sulfide and selenide counterparts, the shape-controlled synthesis and optical characterization of copper telluride NPs still remain almost poor because of the difficult control over morphology and composition obtained via one-step routes. Feldmann and colleagues have published the preparation of well-defined Cu2−xTe NPs through a cation exchange of preformed CdTe NPs without affecting their initial shape. That work offered a clearer understanding of the near infrared (NIR) optical resonances of vacancy-doped copper chalcogenide NPs.312 In addition, Li et al. illustrated the potential of LiN(SiMe3)2 to control the growth of copper telluride NPs and lead to the production of uniform nanocubes, nanoplates and nanorods (Fig. 15d). Such CuTe NPs could be employed as a platform to design sensors of a big number of molecules which cannot be conventionally detected by SERS.313 Also, a simple galvanostatic electrodeposition route was used for the shape-controlled synthesis of copper telluride micro/nanostructures in air at room temperature, within five minutes of reaction. Several morphologies were acquired (including nanorod arrays, dendritic structures and nanowires), by tuning experimental parameters such as Cu and Te sources, deposition currents and media.53 Moreover, a fast solvothermal pathway was described by Han et al. for the preparation of copper telluride nanocubes, 2D nanosheets and NPs in inert conditions. These researchers systematically investigated the effect of synthetic parameters on the shape, crystal phase and composition of their nanomaterials. These nanostructures have potential as anodes in rechargeable batteries due to their excellent cycling stability, as shown by experiments in lithium ion batteries, with the nanosheet morphology performing better than the rest.314
 Fig. 15  a) Scheme depicting the displacement of TOP molecules from the surface of Ag2Te NCs, allowing their transfer from chloroform to formamide, b) PbTe NPs, c) PbTe nanocubes, d) CuTe nanorods. Figures (a), (b), (c) and (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 318, 317, 340 and 313, respectively. 
Kim et al. reported solution-based synthetic pathways to prepare germanium telluride (GeTe) nanomaterials. The morphology of such NPs was strongly dependent on the Te precursor and the reaction medium. Longer reaction times resulted in larger particles and provided a more uniform shape. Such NPs are believed to be desirable for reducing the reset current in phase change random access memory (PCRAM) devices.315 Relatively large GeTe octahedra with rhombohedral crystal structure were prepared at moderate temperatures by Schulz et al.; these authors observed that the mechanism of the GeTe formation was strongly correlated with the solvent used, while the effect of reaction time and temperature was also investigated in detail.316
In what concerns some other metal selenide systems, Garcia-Gutierrez et al. studied the role of Pb0 atoms in the nucleation and growth of PbTe (and PbSe) NPs. Through monitoring using electron microscopy and other techniques, they showed that Pb NPs forming at an early stage of the reaction gradually disappear as the reaction progresses. This implies that the reduced Pb0 atoms contribute to the growth of the final PbTe NPs (Fig. 15b) which reach sizes between 8 and 18 nm.317 Furthermore, Cadavid et al. showed a scalable and general procedure (Fig. 15a) to displace organic ligands from the surface of Ag2Te NPs. These particles therefore become soluble in polar solvents for a short time, which however is sufficient for their purification and assembly/deposition for the production of technologically interesting macroscopic nanomaterials.318
The synthesis and properties of ZnTe and ZnTe/ZnS core/shell NPs were published by Lincheneau et al.; for the synthesis of ZnTe particles, the hot-injection method was applied, and the active Zn species were produced in situ by reaction of a zinc precursor with a fatty acid in ODE. The tellurium solution was prepared by dissolving Te powder in ODE using a trialkylphosphine as a complexing agent. The nucleation started by the injection of the Te solution in the Zn-containing mixture at a chosen high temperature and the particle growth was continued for a selected duration and temperature.319 Hsin et al. reported a facile and quick route to synthesize BiTe and Bi2Te3 micro/nanowires by combining solution chemistry reactions and catalyst-free vapor-solid growth. The as-synthesized BiTe nanostructures were transformed into Bi2Te3 by thermal annealing in the presence of Te vapor.320
Hexagonal PdTe NPs and nanorods were produced by employing a SSP protocol. The use of TOP as solvent yielded a nanorod shape upon thermolysis of the precursor at 220 °C, while a mixture of OAc–ODE provided hexagonal morphology. However, the chemical composition of the products did not depend on the SSP molecule and solvent used.321 Regarding CdTe nanocrystals, a Feature article by Li et al. has summarized the aqueous solution-based protocols as well as the optoelectronic applications and bioapplications of such materials.322 Moreover, colloidal QDs presenting optoelectronic properties in the mid-infrared were reviewed by Lhuillier et al. with an emphasis on HgTe.323
3.5 Nanoparticles with mixed chalcogenide element compositions (MSxSey, MSxTey, MSexTey)
In contrast to the size-dependent properties of the pure quaternary phases of either Cu2ZnSnS4 or Cu2ZnSnSe4, the exploration of Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1−x)4 quinary nanomaterials with tunable optical properties makes it possible to tune the bandgap of these materials even at a constant size, by changing their constituent stoichiometries as well as their internal structure. Ou et al. reported a simple, green and cheap method to synthesize such quinary NPs containing both sulfur and selenium elements. Common reagents such as ODE and OAm were used and the final S/Se ratio varied by adjusting the initial reactant ratio.324 Saldanha et al. described a facile and scalable route to synthesize Cu2−xSeyS1−y and Cu2−xTeyS1−y NPs without employing hot-injection. These particles were spherical and with tunable sizes in the range 2–10 nm. The plasmonic properties of the latter NPs were preserved even after a ligand exchange procedure with mPEG-SH stabilizer which rendered them water-soluble.325 Lesnyak et al. presented the synthesis of copper zinc selenide-sulfide and copper tin selenide-sulfide as well as copper zinc tin selenide-sulfide nanoplatelets (20 nm wide) with tunable chemical composition and band gap, by an in situ partial cation exchange pathway using Cu2−xSeyS1−y NPs as starting materials. Interestingly, the varying composition of the above complex structures did not alter their morphology neither the hexagonal crystal structure as that of the initial copper selenide-sulfide NPs.326 In another approach, chemical welding of CuSe and In2S3 NPs resulted in the formation of CuInSxSe1−x NPs. This process involved room-temperature stirring for 24 h and various conditions were tested aiming to study the importance of morphology and surface charge of precursors in the coalescence and sintering process.327

CdS

1−x

Se


x

 QDs were synthesized via single injection of a R3PS–R3PSe mixture to cadmium oleate at 250 °C. Rod-shaped NPs with similar composition were prepared by injection of a single R3PE (ES or Se) precursor or a R3PS–R3Pse mixture to cadmium phosphonate at 320 or 250 °C. Characteristics such as composition, degree of alloying and aspect ratio (in the case of rods) depended on the precursors' reactivities.328 Small spherical CdTexSy alloyed NPs were formed in an aqueous solution containing glutathione, CdCl2, Na2TeO3 and NaBH4. These QDs exhibited remarkable photophysical properties (QY up to 29%), being easily isolated as solids and redispersed in water without loss of their photoluminescence efficiency. 329
Regarding thermoelectric applications, PbSe and PbTe are considered as ideal materials due to their low thermal conductivity. The thermal conductivity could be further lowered by introducing a third component into the building blocks to form a ternary alloy (e.g. PbSeTe). Quan et al. presented a robust synthesis route to prepare high quality PbSeTe ternary alloy (Fig. 16) and core/shell nanocubes through fine control of the PbSe nucleation time. The different reactivity between the Se- and Te-precursors was taken into account to achieve the aforementioned nanomaterials. The PbSeTe nanoalloys could be promising building blocks to develop nanodevices with anisotropic structures.330 As the last example of this section we mention the work of Cabot and colleagues on the production of Bi2Se3−xTex bulk nanostructured materials by anion exchange after mixing dried Bi2S3 nanocrystals with Te powder in a ratio Bi:Te = 2:3. The fine powder was annealed at different temperatures from 400 °C to 550 °C for 1 h. The final materials were compacted using a hydraulic press and their thermoelectric properties were measured.331
 Fig. 16  Images of PbSeTe ternary alloy nanocubes: a) TEM with a SAED pattern as inset, b) HRTEM image, c) HAADF-STEM-EDS line scan profile of an individual nanocube, d)–g) elemental maps of Pb (red), Se (purple), Te (green) and Se + Te overlap, respectively; scale bars represent 20 nm. Figures (a–g) reproduced with permission from ref. 330. 
3.6 Nanoheterostructures with at least one metal chalcogenide as component
Hybrid nanostructures consist of two distinct materials which are combined together to yield advanced materials with multiple functionalities and often synergistic properties. Particularly, the selective growth of metals on the tips of semiconductor nanorods is targeted to couple the electrical and optical properties of semiconductors with the properties of the metallic component on the nanoscale. Two separate Review articles have overviewed the progress in the colloidal synthesis and derived properties of metal–metal chalcogenide nanostructures.21,332 For this reason we will mainly analyze some more recent advances in this field; Chang and Cheng published an easy method to prepare Cu2S–MC NPs, including Cu2S–ZnS, Cu2S–CuInS and other nanoheterostructures in the presence of ODE solvent. This approach avoids preparation and purification of NCs of one material to seed the growth of the other, while offering versatile control of the aspect ratio of the resulting nanorods.333 Yu et al. used Cu2ZnSnS4 as seeds to produce CZTS–Au and CZTS–Pt heterostructured nanoparticles. These heterostructures showed enhanced photocatalytic activity toward photodegradation of Rhodamine-B and H2 production by water splitting when compared to pure CZTS. The intimate contact between the two materials was crucial to acquire a semiconductor–noble metal synergistic effect with improved properties.334
Feldmann and co-workers published the synthesis of rod-shaped CdTe–Cu2−xTe nanoheterostructures with tunable dimensions by Cd2+/Cu+ cation exchange. Those heterostructures displayed an optical response with excitonic and plasmonic properties arising from the corresponding CdTe and Cu2−xTe sub-units.335 Murray and colleagues used a variety of preformed metal nanocrystals which served as seeds for the synthesis of metal-indium doped-cadmium oxide (e.g. Au–ICO) heterodimers. The oxide part of the dimers could be transformed into a series of hollow cadmium chalcogenide nanoarchitectures with unprecedented structural complexity, leaving the metal domain intact. That was achieved by exploiting the radically different chemical reactivities of metals and oxides.336 In a separate approach, Hendel et al. reported the formation of a composite metal–semiconductor porous aerogel built from thiol-stabilized CdTe and Au NPs prepared in water. A photochemical treatment was applied to achieve gelation. The variation of the initial CdTe to Au NP ratio allowed an easy control of the resulting aerogel properties.337
Wang et al. presented a route to produce nanocomposites of semiconductor and noble metal via reaction between sulfur and bimetallic nanocrystals in octadecylamine solvent. In this way they obtained various nanostructures, including core–shell and heterostructure configurations (e.g.CoxS@Au, CoxS–Pt and Pt–Ag2S NPs correspondingly).338 Simon et al. have suggested that a two-step mechanism of hole transfer employing a redox shuttle leads to a substantial improvement in the photocatalytic generation of H2 in Ni-decorated CdS nanorods (Fig. 17), avoiding the employment of noble metal co-catalysts and protecting the photocatalyst against photooxidation.339 Cabot and co-workers presented the gram-scale synthesis of PbTe@PbS core–shell nanoheterostructures which were used as building blocks to produce PbTe–PbS nanocomposites. To achieve the core–shell NPs, the first step involved the synthesis of PbTe NCs (Fig. 15c) which were afterwards coated by a PbS shell. Synergistic effects resulted in tenfold higher electrical conductivities in such nanocomposites compared to the case of pure PbTe or PbS nanomaterials.340 Finally, Ding et al. have published the facile synthesis of Pt–CuS heterogeneous nanoparticle dimers which includes the preparation of CuPt alloy NPs in oleylamine, which are converted to the above heterodimers by reacting with sulfur in octadecene at elevated temperatures. These dimers possessed a highly selective activity to catalyze the methanol oxidation reaction at room temperature because of the strong electronic coupling effect between the different domains in the heterodimers.341.Table 2 provides a comprehensive view on the details of the synthesis of several representative metal chalcogenide nanostructures which are illustrated in this Highlight article.
 Fig. 17  Schematic view of the photocatalytic generation of hydrogen under the proposed hole shuttle mechanism: nickel forms 2–8 nm nanoparticles on the cysteine-stabilized CdS nanorods where water is reduced to H2 on illumination. The photoexcited holes oxidize hydroxyl anions that –as a radical– carry away the positive charges and in turn oxidize ethanol to acetaldehyde. The blue arrows denote movement of the species; the red arrows denote a redox reaction. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 339. 
3.7 Microscopy techniques as a tool for a better understanding of MC nucleation, growth and final morphology
Several microscopy techniques are being constantly used for the characterization of the big variety of metal chalcogenide nanostructures similar to noble metal nanocrystals. Such measurements do not only help for a thorough investigation and comprehension of the unique structural and morphological features of the nanomaterials, but they may also provide some ‘secondary’ information with respect to their growth pathways. For example, and as mentioned in the previous sections, a less reactive precursor will produce a low number of nuclei during the ‘burst’ phase, resulting in a low amount of large-sized particles, while a more reactive precursor will lead to a high concentration of nuclei, which will provide final particles of a relatively smaller size as shown by TEM observations (Fig. 18a).219 In fact, the concentration of certain surfactants appears often as quite crucial; the different binding energies of oleic acid on the {100} and {111} planes influenced the reaction evolution and determined the final shapes in the case of PbSe NCs, as a function of the amount of OAc used in the synthesis (Fig. 18b).224,342 TEM monitoring may also facilitate the evaluation of occurring or proposed ‘oriented attachment’ growth routes, e.g. upon formation of FeS2 big single-crystals by thermal treatment (Fig. 18c).223 In particular, certain materials, such as Bi2S3, have an inherent tendency for anisotropic growth: visualization of its crystal unit cell and TEM and HRTEM observations corroborate such one-dimensional growth preference (Fig. 18d–f).15 HRTEM imaging was successfully employed for the study of ZnS hollow NPs acquired after anion exchange using ‘solid’ ZnO nanoparticles as starting materials (Fig. 19a).220 SAED (selected area electron diffraction) patterns were routinely used for the characterization of the composition of Ni3S4 NPs along with conventional TEM imaging (Fig. 19b).224 Furthermore, STEM (Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy) observations can shed light on the morphology of relatively small CuInS2 NPs (Fig. 19c).224 Extended arrays of very monodisperse PbSe NPs can be depicted in an excellent way by SEM imaging (Fig. 19d).222 On the other hand, core–shell configurations such as in the case of the PbSe/CdSe one can be effectively illustrated by respective HRTEM observations (Fig. 19e).230 Aberration-corrected TEM demonstrates in detail the morphology of very thin MoS2 sheets. Associated Fourier transforms and low-pass Butterworth filtering may reveal additional characteristics of the crystal symmetry of the above material (Fig. 19f).10 Another interesting case concerns the solvothermal synthesis of Fe7Se8 polyhedra with exposed high-index facets. The shape that is shown by TEM in Fig. 19g agrees quite well with the truncated dodecahedral model enclosed by two {001} facets and twelve {012} facets (Fig. 19h).233 The exposed high-index facets for such a material denote that it belongs to the hexagonal system rather than to the cubic one.
 Fig. 18  a) Generalized illustration of colloidal nucleation and growth processes for MC nanocrystals, b) schematic diagram of the simulated shape evolution of PbSe NCs. The equilibrium shape is a function of the ligand surface coverage, which depends on the concentration of oleic acid during synthesis, c) the oriented attachment mechanism (formation of FeS2 NCs with unexpected symmetry), d)–f) the case of Bi2S3: crystal unit viewed along the c axis, [001] direction – the growth direction is denoted with arrows along the c-axis, d). TEM and HRTEM images of nanorods, e) and f), respectively. Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 219, 342, 223 and 15, respectively. 
 Fig. 19  a) ZnS hollow NPs, b) TEM image of Ni3S4 NCs with a SAED pattern as inset, c) STEM image of CuInS2 nanocrystals, d) SEM image of highly monodisperse PbSe NCs, e) HRTEM images of PbSe/CdSe core/shell QDs, f) HRTEM image of MoS2 nanosheets. Inset above is the corresponding fast Fourier transform and inset below is a Butterworth-filtered image, g) TEM image of a Fe7Se8 polyhedron viewed along the [166−1−] direction. Inset: the corresponding SAED pattern, h) schematic model of an ideal truncated Fe7Se8 dodecahedron bound by {001} and {012} facets, projected along the aforementioned direction. Figures (a), (b–c), (d), (e), (f), (g–h) reproduced with permission from ref. 220, 224, 222, 230, 10 and 233, respectively. 
In addition, HRTEM characterization is a powerful tool also for the investigation of 2D-layered metal chalcogenide nanostructures. More specifically, inspection of the HRTEM image of ZrS2 disk-like particles shows that individual disks are composed of three layers of S–Zr–S units, which correspond to two unit cells of 1T-type ZrS2 (Fig. 20a).30 Besides, elemental color-mapping, which is commonly used in HRTEM microscopes nowadays, opens a way for a better identification of the ‘core’ and the ‘shell’ phases, e.g. in the case of PbTe–PbS nanocomposites (Fig. 20b).340 The combination of HRTEM-FFT images and the knowledge of ideal structural models have been used also in the case of spherical Bi2S3 NPs, aiming not only to explain the pure structural features, but also the arising physical properties (Fig. 20c).277 Structural defects, such as twin boundaries, may also be spotted via HRTEM (see Fig. 20d, copper–chromium–sulfide and cobalt–copper–chromium–sulfide NPs).274 Twin defects were also observed in the case of copper–cadmium–tin selenide NPs (Fig. 20e), where the co-existence of both wurtzite and zinc-blende crystal structures – in different zones of the material – was evidenced.292 Finally, a quite ‘modern’ technique for the study of nanostructures, including metal chalcogenide ones, is the TEM 3D-tomography. Such an approach elucidates the 3D morphology of nanoparticles by mixing many single 2D-projected images into a 3D reconstructed image, which can be directly visualized. As an example, MnSe nanostructures have been observed using TEM by tilting the sample from −68° to +62° with 2° steps. A 3D-reconstruction movie was created by using snap shots from different angles. Four screenshots of this movie are shown in Fig. 20f. Based on these images, a bullet-shaped morphology is proposed to be the most close one to the reality for the aforementioned particles.343
 Fig. 20  a) HRTEM side-view image of a ZrS2 nanodisk showing a disc thickness of ~1.6 nm and a (001) lattice of 0.58 nm, b) HRTEM micrograph and color crystallographic maps of (PbTe)0.28(PbS)0.72 nanocomposite: PbTe = green, PbS = red, c) HRTEM image of a spherical Bi2S3 nanocrystal with the superimposed ideal crystalline structure formed by ribbons aligned along the <001> direction: FFT of the HRTEM image in the top right corner, d) HRTEM image of CuCr2S4 and Co0.2Cu0.8Cr2S4 NPs with arrows indicating twin boundary defects, e) HRTEM image showing the atomic planes and twinning in a Cu2CdxSnSey bipod, f) the screenshots from a 3d-tomography TEM reconstructed movie for bullet-shaped MnSe nanocrystals. The small dots are ~5 nm Au NPs used as alignment marks so as to create a well aligned stack of images, which is then transformed into a full, 3d-reconstruction. Figures (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) reproduced with permission from ref. 30, 340, 277, 274, 292 and 343, respectively. 
4 Summary and outlook
Nanomaterials have already started to play a pivotal role in many key areas such as electronics, photovoltaics, photonics, medicine, biosensors and catalysis. Over the past decade or so, these applications have largely benefited from the advances made on the synthesis of nanocrystals with desired properties through good control over their morphology and composition. In particular, noble metal and metal chalcogenide nanocrystals have been successfully applied in various applications ranging from medicine to energy, because of the ability to prepare them in a wide range of morphologies with tunable properties using simple chemistry. We have broadly summarized in this Highlight article various strategies that have been implemented for shape-controlled synthesis of such nanocrystals. For the synthesis of metal nanocrystals, few general synthetic methods such as biosynthesis method, polyol method, seed-mediated growth approach and galvanic replacement reaction have been widely used to control the final morphology and composition. We have mainly emphasized on the recent advances made toward the development of methods to achieve highly monodisperse particles together with the discussion about the mechanisms of nucleation and growth processes involved in various synthetic approaches. Based on the current understanding of the growth mechanism, there is a clear correlation of crystallinity and symmetry of the seed with the final nanocrystal. However, controlling the nucleation process is still challenging due to the lack of understanding of the route to the formation of a particular type of seed in each synthesis method. In addition, the surfactants, other reagents and the total reaction kinetics also play a critical role in the shape control. Overall, from the discussion in this article, one would be able to predict the simplest and closest possible synthetic strategy for a given morphology of the metal nanocrystal based on reported methods. Although it is difficult to accomplish, it has long been a dream of nano-chemists to achieve strict control over nanocrystal morphology and composition like the way organic chemists achieved for the synthesis of molecules of any kind. In fact, such a kind of control becomes even more complicated in this kind of metal chalcogenide nano-synthesis. The above ‘general’ synthetic pathways are more difficult to be defined in that case, due to issues such as the large difference in the reduction potential between metal and chalcogenide precursors, but also because of the different crystal structures of such materials. Despite this, approaches such as the ‘hot-injection’ (or even non-injection – i.e. heat-up) method, the use of a single-source precursor (SSP) molecule or other molecules as complexing agents which form key intermediates that influence the nucleation and subsequent growth stages are being increasingly understood and further developed. In addition, solvothermal and hydrothermal protocols are often used for the synthesis of MCs. We hope indeed that this Highlight article will help the readers to summarize the recent advances in the discussed topic and to be able to optimize the synthetic routes of their products, thus constituting them as improved nanomaterials with enhanced properties and candidates for a large variety of applications.
Acknowledgements
This work was implemented within the framework of the Action “Supporting Postdoctoral Researchers” of the Operational Program “Education and Lifelong Learning” (Action's Beneficiary: General Secretariat for Research and Technology of Greece), and is co-financed by the European Social Fund (ESF) and the Greek State [project code PE4(1546)]. This work was also supported by the Spanish MINECO (MAT2013-45168-R) and by the Xunta de Galicia/FEDER (GPC2013-006), Inbiomed-FEDER “unhamaneira de facer Europa”.
References
L. Polavarapu, J. Perez-Juste, Q.-H. Xu and L. M. Liz-Marzan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7460–7476 RSC .
L. Polavarapu and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 5288–5300 RSC .
D. A. Giljohann, D. S. Seferos, W. L. Daniel, M. D. Massich, P. C. Patel and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3280–3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Webb and R. Bardhan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2502–2530 RSC .
H. Ko, S. Singamaneni and V. V. Tsukruk, Small, 2008, 4, 1576–1599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Bansal, V. Li, A. P. O'Mullane and S. K. Bhargava, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 4280–4286 RSC .
S. E. Lohse and C. J. Murphy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15607–15620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, S. Zhao, S. Zhu, Y. Sun and M. Fang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 2262–2267 RSC .
E. Lhuillier, S. Pedetti, S. Ithurria, B. Nadal, H. Heuclin and B. Dubertret, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 22–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-R. Gao, Y.-F. Xu, J. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2986–3017 RSC .
H. Li, A. G. Kanaras and L. Manna, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1387–1396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Manna, A. Cabot, Z. Hens, D. V. Talapin, C. R. Kagan, V. I. Klimov, A. L. Rogach, P. Reiss, D. J. Milliron, P. Guyot-Sionnnest, G. Konstantatos, W. J. Parak, T. Hyeon, B. A. Korgel, C. B. Murray and W. Heiss, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1012–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. van Embden, A. S. R. Chesman and J. J. Jasieniak, Chem. Mater., 2015 DOI:10.1021/cm5028964 .
X. Yu, X. An, A. Shavel, M. Ibanez and A. Cabot, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12317–12322 CAS .
Y. Min, G. D. Moon, C.-E. Kim, J.-H. Lee, H. Yang, A. Soon and U. Jeong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6222–6248 RSC .
R. Zhang, C. Wu, L. Tong, B. Tang and Q.-H. Xu, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10153–10158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Storhoff, A. A. Lazarides, R. C. Mucic, C. A. Mirkin, R. L. Letsinger and G. C. Schatz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 4640–4650 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Mirkin, R. L. Letsinger, R. C. Mucic and J. J. Storhoff, Nature, 1996, 382, 607–609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shi, R. W. Hughes, S. J. Denholme and D. H. Gregory, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 641–659 RSC .
I. Lokteva, N. Radychev, F. Witt, H. Borchert, J. R. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12784–12791 CAS .
U. Banin, Y. Ben-Shahar and K. Vinokurov, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 97–110 CrossRef .
L. De Trizio, M. Prato, A. Genovese, A. Casu, M. Povia, R. Simonutti, M. J. P. Alcocer, C. D'Andrea, F. Tassone and L. Manna, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2400–2406 CrossRef CAS .
T. Heine, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 65–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cheong, J. D. Watt and R. D. Tilley, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2045–2053 RSC .
P. N. Njoki, I. I. S. Lim, D. Mott, H.-Y. Park, B. Khan, S. Mishra, R. Sujakumar, J. Luo and C.-J. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14664–14669 CAS .
J. H. Rhee, C.-C. Chung and E. W.-G. Diau, NPG Asia Mater., 2013, 5, e68 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Kershaw, A. S. Susha and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3033–3087 RSC .
J. Kolny-Olesiak and H. Weller, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12221–12237 CAS .
H. F. Zarick, O. Hurd, J. A. Webb, C. Hungerford, W. R. Erwin and R. Bardhan, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 806–811 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Han, S. Lee and J. Cheon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2581–2591 RSC .
P. K. Jain, X. H. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1578–1586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, M. Jin, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and Y. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 1783–1794 CrossRef PubMed .
R. G. Weiner, C. J. DeSantis, M. B. T. Cardoso and S. E. Skrabalak, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8625–8635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jiang, F. Qin, Q. Ruan, J. Wang and C. Jin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7328–7337 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, Y. Wang, A. Ruditskiy and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6313–6333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3385–3391 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ataee-Esfahani, L. Wang, Y. Nemoto and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6310–6318 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Motl, A. F. Smith, C. J. DeSantis and S. E. Skrabalak, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3823–3834 RSC .
M. Grzelczak, J. Perez-Juste, P. Mulvaney and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1783–1791 RSC .
V. Myroshnychenko, J. Rodriguez-Fernandez, I. Pastoriza-Santos, A. M. Funston, C. Novo, P. Mulvaney, L. M. Liz-Marzan and F. J. G. de Abajo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1792–1805 RSC .
S. Barbosa, A. Agrawal, L. Rodríguez-Lorenzo, I. Pastoriza-Santos, R. N. A. Alvarez-Puebla, A. Kornowski, H. Weller and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14943–14950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Liz-Marzan, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 32–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Peng, L. Manna, W. D. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Emory, W. E. Haskins and S. Nie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 8009–8010 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Pompa, L. Martiradonna, A. D. Torre, F. D. Sala, L. Manna, M. D. Vittorio, F. Calabi, R. Cingolani and R. Rinaldi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 126–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Polavarapu, A. L. Porta, S. M. Novikov, M. Coronado-Puchau and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Small, 2014, 10, 3065–3071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Hirsch, R. J. Stafford, J. A. Bankson, S. R. Sershen, B. Rivera, R. E. Price, J. D. Hazle, N. J. Halas and J. L. West, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 13549–13554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-K. Tsung, J. N. Kuhn, W. Huang, C. Aliaga, L.-I. Hung, G. A. Somorjai and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5816–5822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tian, Z.-Y. Zhou, S.-G. Sun, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 316, 732–735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-X. Yin, X.-Q. Min, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3816–3819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12268–12271 CAS .
M. Ranjbar, M. Taher and M. Sadeghinia, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2014, 37, 767–772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ni, H. Zhang, J. Xi, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Xiao, X. Ma and J. Hong, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 7869–7875 RSC .
S. E. Lohse, N. D. Burrows, L. Scarabelli, L. M. Liz-Marzán and C. J. Murphy, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 34–43 CrossRef .
M. Tsuji, N. Miyamae, M. Hashimoto, M. Nishio, S. Hikino, N. Ishigami and I. Tanaka, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 302, 587–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Sun and Y. N. Xia, Science, 2002, 298, 2176–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Xia, Y. J. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wiley, Y. Sun, B. Mayers and Y. Xia, Chem. – Eur. J., 2005, 11, 454–463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Samal, L. Polavarapu, S. Rodal-Cedeira, L. M. Liz-Marzán, J. Pérez-Juste and I. Pastoriza-Santos, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 15076–15082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Langille, M. L. Personick, J. Zhang and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14542–14554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Niu, L. Zhang and G. Xu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3172–3181 RSC .
B. Goris, L. Polavarapu, S. Bals, G. Van Tendeloo and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3220–3226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Faraday, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1857, 147, 145–180 CrossRef .
J. Turkevich, P. C. Stevenson and J. Hillier, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1951, 11, 55–75 RSC .
G. Frens, Nature, Phys. Sci., 1973, 241, 20–22 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. K. Thanh, N. Maclean and S. Mahiddine, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7610–7630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Polte, X. Tuaev, M. Wuithschick, A. Fischer, A. F. Thuenemann, K. Rademann, R. Kraehnert and F. Emmerling, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5791–5802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Polte, R. Erler, A. F. Thünemann, S. Sokolov, T. T. Ahner, K. Rademann, F. Emmerling and R. Kraehnert, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1076–1082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Brust, M. Walker, D. Bethell, D. J. Schiffrin and R. Whyman, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 801–802 RSC .
I. Hussain, S. Graham, Z. Wang, B. Tan, D. C. Sherrington, S. P. Rannard, A. I. Cooper and M. Brust, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16398–16399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zheng, J. Fan and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6550–6551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Sharma, R. A. Yngard and Y. Lin, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 145, 83–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hebbalalu, J. Lalley, M. N. Nadagouda and R. S. Varma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 703–712 CAS .
P. Mukherjee, S. Senapati, D. Mandal, A. Ahmad, M. I. Khan, R. Kumar and M. Sastry, ChemBioChem, 2002, 3, 461–463 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Kharissova, H. V. R. Dias, B. I. Kharisov, B. O. Pérez and V. M. J. Pérez, Trends Biotechnol., 2013, 31, 240–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Mittal, Y. Chisti and U. C. Banerjee, Biotechnol. Adv., 2013, 31, 346–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Thakkar, S. S. Mhatre and R. Y. Parikh, Nanomedicine, 2010, 6, 257–262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shankar, A. Rai, B. Ankamwar, A. Singh, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 482–488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ramanathan, A. P. O'Mullane, R. Y. Parikh, P. M. Smooker, S. K. Bhargava and V. Bansal, Langmuir, 2010, 27, 714–719 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 833–837 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wiley, T. Herricks, Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1733–1739 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Zheng, C. Z. Huang and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1941–1951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu and V. W.-W. Yam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13200–13201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Wiley, Y. Chen, J. M. McLellan, Y. Xiong, Z.-Y. Li, D. Ginger and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1032–1036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tao, P. Sinsermsuksakul and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4597–4601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Métraux and C. A. Mirkin, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 412–415 CrossRef .
I. Pastoriza-Santos and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 679–688 CrossRef CAS .
I. Pastoriza-Santos and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 903–905 CrossRef CAS .
I. Pastoriza-Santos and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 948–951 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jianping, Z. Ling, N. Wenxin, Q. Wenjing, Z. Jianming, L. Zhongyuan, Z. Wei and X. Guobao, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 125601 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Miranda, E. Malheiro, E. Skiba, P. Quaresma, P. A. Carvalho, P. Eaton, B. de Castro, J. A. Shelnutt and E. Pereira, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2209–2216 RSC .
C. Cao, S. Park and S. J. Sim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 322, 152–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Kim, S. Connor, H. Song, T. Kuykendall and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 3673–3677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Seo, C. I. Yoo, I. S. Chung, S. M. Park, S. Ryu and H. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2469–2475 CAS .
C. Li, K. L. Shuford, Q. H. Park, W. Cai, Y. Li, E. J. Lee and S. O. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3264–3268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, C. Xi, C. Feng, H. Xia, D. Wang and X. Tao, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 2480–2489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, F. Ji, Y. Xu, L. He, Y. Mi, F. Bao, B. Sun, X. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7201–7206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huo, C.-. Tsung, W. Huang, X. Zhang and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2041–2044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pazos-Pérez, D. Baranov, S. Irsen, M. Hilgendorff, L. M. Liz-Marzán and M. Giersig, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9855–9860 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Feng, Y. Yang, Y. You, G. Li, J. Guo, T. Yu, Z. Shen, T. Wu and B. Xing, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1984–1986 RSC .
J. A. Webb, W. R. Erwin, H. F. Zarick, J. Aufrecht, H. W. Manning, M. J. Lang, C. L. Pint and R. Bardhan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3696–3707 CAS .
J. Xie, J. Y. Lee and D. I. C. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2823–2830 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shiohara, J. Langer, L. Polavarapu and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9817–9823 RSC .
P. Senthil Kumar, I. Pastoriza-Santos, B. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, F. J. Garcia de Abajo and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 015606 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zheng, K. Kaefer, S. Mourdikoudis, L. Polavarapu, B. Vaz, S. E. Cartmell, A. Bouleghlimat, N. J. Buurma, L. Yate, Á. R. de Lera, L. M. Liz-Marzán, I. Pastoriza-Santos and J. Pérez-Juste, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 6, 230–238 CrossRef .
P. Taladriz-Blanco, P. Hervés and J. Pérez-Juste, Top. Catal., 2013, 56, 1154–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Niu, W. Zhang, S. Firdoz and X. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4602–4603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Mazumder and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4588–4589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, Q. Peng, M. Gong, H. Rong and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6315–6319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, C. Feng, Y. Deng, L. Liu, Y. Wu, B. Shen, C. Zhong and W. Hu, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 1213–1218 CrossRef .
G.-T. Fu, X. Jiang, R. Wu, S.-H. Wei, D.-M. Sun, Y.-W. Tang, T.-H. Lu and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22790–22795 CAS .
C. Wang, H. Daimon, T. Onodera, T. Koda and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3588–3591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, B. Lim, E. P. Lee and Y. Xia, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 81–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Zhao, J. Fan, Y. Tan and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4718–4721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kang, J. B. Pyo, X. Ye, R. E. Diaz, T. R. Gordon, E. A. Stach and C. B. Murray, ACS Nano, 2012, 7, 645–653 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Gumeci, A. Marathe, R. L. Behrens, J. Chaudhuri and C. Korzeniewski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14433–14440 CAS .
H.-G. Liao, D. Zherebetskyy, H. Xin, C. Czarnik, P. Ercius, H. Elmlund, M. Pan, L.-W. Wang and H. Zheng, Science, 2014, 345, 916–919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gao, M.-R. Gao, J.-W. Liu, M.-Y. Chen, C.-H. Cui, H.-H. Li and S.-H. Yu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3202–3207 RSC .
P. Kannan, J. Dolinska, T. Maiyalagan and M. Opallo, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11169–11176 RSC .
L. Wang, M. Imura and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2865–2869 CAS .
S. Mourdikoudis, M. Chirea, T. Altantzis, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Perez-Juste, F. Silva, S. Bals and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4776–4784 RSC .
L.-M. Lacroix, C. Gatel, R. Arenal, C. Garcia, S. Lachaize, T. Blon, B. Warot-Fonrose, E. Snoeck, B. Chaudret and G. Viau, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4690–4694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mohanty, N. Garg and R. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4962–4966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Xia, H. B. Wu, Y. Yan, X. W. Lou and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9480–9485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Nikoobakht and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1957–1962 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Jana, L. Gearheart and C. J. Murphy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4065–4067 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vigderman and E. R. Zubarev, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1450–1457 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Jana, L. Gearheart and C. J. Murphy, Chem. Commun., 2001, 617–618 RSC .
W. Liu, H. Zhang, T. Wen, J. Yan, S. Hou, X. Shi, Z. Hu, Y. Ji and X. Wu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 12376–12383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Niu, W. Zhang, S. Firdoz and X. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3010–3012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xia, S.-I. Choi, J. A. Herron, N. Lu, J. Scaranto, H.-C. Peng, J. Wang, M. Mavrikakis, M. J. Kim and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15706–15709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Gilroy, R. A. Hughes and S. Neretina, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15337–15345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Personick and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18238–18247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Scarabelli, M. Coronado-Puchau, J. J. Giner-Casares, J. Langer and L. M. Liz-Marzán, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5833–5842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Lohse and C. J. Murphy, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1250–1261 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, Y. Gao, J. Chen, D. C. Reifsnyder, C. Zheng and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2163–2171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-N. Wang, W.-T. Wei, C.-W. Yang and M. H. Huang, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 10491–10497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. O'Brien, M. R. Jones, K. A. Brown and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7603–7606 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ye, C. Zheng, J. Chen, Y. Gao and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 765–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jin, Y. Cao, C. A. Mirkin, K. L. Kelly, G. C. Schatz and J. G. Zheng, Science, 2001, 294, 1901–1903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Brown, D. G. Walter and M. J. Natan, Chem. Mater., 1999, 12, 306–313 CrossRef .
H. Yuan, C. G. Khoury, H. Hwang, C. M. Wilson, G. A. Grant and T. Vo-Dinh, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 075102 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xia and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6038–6042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ye, H. Shi, X. He, K. Wang, D. Li and P. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 3667–3673 RSC .
H. Jing and H. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 9469–9477 RSC .
J. Perez-Juste, I. Pastoriza-Santos, L. M. Liz-Marzan and P. Mulvaney, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1870–1901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Wu, H.-R. Tsai, Y.-T. Hung, K.-U. Lao, C.-W. Liao, P.-J. Chung, J.-S. Huang, I. C. Chen and M. H. Huang, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 8106–8111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Bastús, J. Comenge and V. C. Puntes, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 11098–11105 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Rodríguez-Fernández, J. Pérez-Juste, F. J. García de Abajo and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 7007–7010 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ziegler and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4502–4506 CAS .
N. G. Bastús, F. Merkoçi, J. Piella and V. Puntes, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2836–2846 CrossRef .
S. E. Skrabalak and Y. Xia, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 10–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, X. Zhong, Z. Li and Y. Xia, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 266–273 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22192–22200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Kou, W. Ni, C.-K. Tsung, K. Chan, H.-Q. Lin, G. D. Stucky and J. Wang, Small, 2007, 3, 2103–2113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Almora-Barrios, G. Novell-Leruth, P. Whiting, L. M. Liz-Marzán and N. López, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 871–875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Walsh, S. J. Barrow, W. Tong, A. M. Funston and J. Etheridge, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 715–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, K. Xia, Z. Lu, G. Li, J. Chen, Y. Deng, S. Li, F. Zhou and N. He, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1794–1798 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, L. Jin, H. Caglayan, J. Chen, G. Xing, C. Zheng, V. Doan-Nguyen, Y. Kang, N. Engheta, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2804–2817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, F. Fan, B. Yin, L. Chen, T. Ganguly and Z. Tian, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, Y. Tang, C. Liow, J. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Jiang, Z. Dong, S. Li, V. P. Dravid and X. Chen, Small, 2013, 9, 705–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ming, W. Feng, Q. Tang, F. Wang, L. Sun, J. Wang and C. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16350–16351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liang, Y. Zhao, S. Xu, X. Wu, J. Chen, M. Wu and J. X. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 7, 85–93 Search PubMed .
H. Sun, X. Sun, M. Yu, A. K. Mishra, L. Huang and J. Lian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2389–2395 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Bao, D. Y. Lei, R. Jiang, X. Liu, J. Dai, J. Wang, H. L. W. Chan and Y. H. Tsang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9063–9070 RSC .
Z. Zheng, T. Tachikawa and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6870–6873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, L. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Fang and E. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 315, 363–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gómez-Graña, B. Goris, T. Altantzis, C. Fernández-López, E. Carbó-Argibay, A. Guerrero-Martínez, N. Almora-Barrios, N. López, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-Juste, S. Bals, G. Van Tendeloo and L. M. Liz-Marzán, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2209–2216 CrossRef .
Q. Li, R. Jiang, T. Ming, C. Fang and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7070–7077 RSC .
M. S. Shore, J. Wang, A. C. Johnston-Peck, A. L. Oldenburg and J. B. Tracy, Small, 2011, 7, 230–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Sotiriou, G. D. Etterlin, A. Spyrogianni, F. Krumeich, J.-C. Leroux and S. E. Pratsinis, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13559–13562 RSC .
T. T. Chng, L. Polavarapu, Q.-H. Xu, W. Ji and H. C. Zeng, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5633–5643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Analyst, 2003, 128, 686–691 RSC .
G. Zhang, M. Du, Q. Li, X. Li, J. Huang, X. Jiang and D. Sun, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 1878–1884 RSC .
G. Fu, Z. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Lin, Y. Tang and T. Lu, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1205–1214 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Tsao, S. Rej, C.-Y. Chiu and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 136, 396–404 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Gao, Y. Hu, M. Wang, M. Chi and Y. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7474–7479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zeng, C. Zhu, J. Tao, M. Jin, H. Zhang, Z.-Y. Li, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2354–2358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, L. Au, J. McLellan, Z.-Y. Li, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, B. T. Mayers and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 481–485 CrossRef CAS .
L. Au, X. Lu and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2517–2522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. M. McLellan, A. Siekkinen, Y. Xiong, Z.-Y. Li and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14776–14777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, D. Wan, S. Xie, X. Xia, C. Z. Huang and Y. Xia, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4586–4594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1626–1642 RSC .
W. Xiong, D. Sikdar, M. Walsh, K. J. Si, Y. Tang, Y. Chen, R. Mazid, M. Weyland, I. D. Rukhlenko, J. Etheridge, M. Premaratne, X. Li and W. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9630–9632 RSC .
A. Jaiswal, L. Tian, S. Tadepalli, K.-. Liu, M. Fei, M. E. Farrell, P. M. Pellegrino and S. Singamaneni, Small, 2014, 10, 4287–4292 CAS .
A. G. M. da Silva, M. L. de Souza, T. S. Rodrigues, R. S. Alves, M. L. A. Temperini and P. H. C. Camargo, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 15040–15046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Polavarapu and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4355–4361 RSC .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3892–3901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Skrabalak, J. Chen, Y. Sun, X. Lu, L. Au, C. M. Cobley and Y. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, D. Wang, S. Cai, H. Rong and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18165–18168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun and Y. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4386–4392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, J. Liu, Z.-W. Fu and D. Qin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8153–8156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. González, J. Arbiol and V. F. Puntes, Science, 2011, 334, 1377–1380 CrossRef PubMed .
G. S. Métraux, Y. C. Cao, R. Jin and C. A. Mirkin, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 519–522 CrossRef .
M. M. Shahjamali, M. Bosman, S. Cao, X. Huang, X. Cao, H. Zhang, S. S. Pramana and C. Xue, Small, 2013, 9, 2880–2886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Khalavka, J. Becker and C. Sönnichsen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1871–1875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Hong, S. W. Kang, B.-S. Choi, D. Kim, S. B. Lee and S. W. Han, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2410–2419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Oh, T. Yu, S.-H. Yu, B. Lim, K.-T. Ko, M.-G. Willinger, D.-H. Seo, B. H. Kim, M. G. Cho, J.-H. Park, K. Kang, Y.-E. Sung, N. Pinna and T. Hyeon, Science, 2013, 340, 964–968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Karvianto and G. M. Chow, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1186 CrossRef .
S. Bals, B. Goris, L. M. Liz-Marzán and G. Van Tendeloo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10600–10610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, C. Li and H. Cao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4811–4819 RSC .
J. E. Evans, K. L. Jungjohann, N. D. Browning and I. Arslan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2809–2813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Goris, A. De Backer, S. Van Aert, S. Gómez-Graña, L. M. Liz-Marzán, G. Van Tendeloo and S. Bals, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4236–4241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Jackson, J. R. McBride, S. J. Rosenthal and D. W. Wright, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5261–5263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Katz-Boon, M. Walsh, C. Dwyer, P. Mulvaney, A. M. Funston and J. Etheridge, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1635–1641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Langille, J. Zhang, M. L. Personick, S. Li and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2012, 337, 954–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Sutter, K. Jungjohann, S. Bliznakov, A. Courty, E. Maisonhaute, S. Tenney and P. Sutter, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Sutter and P. W. Sutter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16865–16870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Walsh, S. J. Barrow, W. Tong, A. M. Funston and J. Etheridge, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 715–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, V. N. Richards, S. P. Shields and W. E. Buhro, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5–21 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Woehl, J. E. Evans, I. Arslan, W. D. Ristenpart and N. D. Browning, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8599–8610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, Y. Jiang, F. Lin, H. Zhang, C. Jin, J. Yuan, D. Yang and Z. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9447–9450 RSC .
B. K. Hughes, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4573–4579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. de Mello Donegá, P. Liljeroth and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Small, 2005, 1, 1152–1162 CrossRef PubMed .
S. G. Kwon, Y. Piao, J. Park, S. Angappane, Y. Jo, N.-M. Hwang, J.-G. Park and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12571–12584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. I. Timonen, E. T. Seppälä, O. Ikkala and R. H. A. Ras, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2080–2084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Sowers, B. Swartz and T. D. Krauss, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1351–1362 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sebastian, M. Arruebo and J. Santamaria, Small, 2014, 10, 835–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ortiz and S. E. Skrabalak, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 6649–6659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yarema, R. Caputo and M. V. Kovalenko, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8398–8410 RSC .
G. A. Seisenbaeva and V. G. Kessler, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6229–6244 RSC .
J. Chang and E. R. Waclawik, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23505–23527 RSC .
P. Samokhvalov, M. Artemyev and I. Nabiev, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 1534–1546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao, H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte, R. Voggu and A. Govindaraj, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 5089–5120 RSC .
M. H. Huang and P.-H. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 14–24 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Kim, M. J. Hackett, J. Park and T. Hyeon, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 59–71 CrossRef .
D. Aldakov, A. Lefrancois and P. Reiss, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3756–3776 RSC .
F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 111–122 CrossRef .
D. D. Sarma, P. K. Santra, S. Mukherjee and A. Nag, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1222–1232 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hens and J. C. Martins, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1211–1221 CrossRef CAS .
M.-R. Gao, J. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, Small, 2012, 8, 13–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Freitas, A. S. Goncalves and A. F. Nogueira, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6371–6397 RSC .
I. Chung and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 849–869 CrossRef .
J. W. Thomson, K. Nagashima, P. M. Macdonald and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5036–5041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qin, H. Sun, Z. Jiang, X. Jiao and D. Chen, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 897–902 RSC .
S. D. Disale and S. S. Garje, J. Organomet. Chem., 2011, 696, 3328–3336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Joshi, K. N. Sharma, A. K. Sharma and A. K. Singh, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4588–4597 RSC .
I. T. Sines and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 133, 1294–1297 CrossRef PubMed .
B. T. Yonemoto, G. S. Hutchings and F. Jiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8895–8898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chang and E. R. Waclawik, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 5612–5619 RSC .
Z. Liu, L. Wang, Q. Hao, D. Wang, K. Tang, M. Zuo and Q. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 7192–7198 RSC .
T. Kuzuya, Y. Hamanaka, K. Itoh, T. Kino, K. Sumiyama, Y. Fukunaka and S. Hirai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 388, 137–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, Y. Zou and D. Yang, J. Lumin., 2012, 132, 313–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-C. Huang, C.-H. Tseng, S.-H. Chang, H.-Y. Tuan, C.-C. Chiang, L.-M. Lyu and M. H. Huang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8496–8501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pein, M. Baghbanzadeh, T. Rath, W. Haas, E. Maier, H. Amenitsch, F. Hofer, C. O. Kappe and G. Trimmel, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 50, 193–200 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-J. He, W.-H. Zhou, M. Li, Z.-L. Hou, Y.-F. Du and S.-X. Wu, Mater. Lett., 2012, 66, 96–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-E. Nam, W.-S. Song and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18220–18226 RSC .
G. Gabka, P. Bujak, K. Giedyk, K. Kotwica, A. Ostrowski, K. Malinowska, W. Lisowski, J. W. Sobczak and A. Pron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 23082–23088 RSC .
Y. Vahidshad, M. Nawaz Tahir, A. Iraji Zad, S. M. Mirkazemi, R. Ghasemzadeh, H. Huesmann and W. Tremel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24670–24679 CAS .
E. Dilena, Y. Xie, R. Brescia, M. Prato, L. Maserati, R. Krahne, A. Paolella, G. Bertoni, M. Povia, I. Moreels and L. Manna, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3180–3187 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. R. Chesman, J. van Embden, E. Della Gaspera, N. W. Duffy, N. A. S. Webster and J. J. Jasieniak, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5482–5491 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, W. Liu and D. V. Talapin, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4038–4043 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shavel, D. Cadavid, M. Ibáñez, A. Carrete and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1438–1441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xu, S. Shen, Y. Zhang, H. Gu and Q. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 12958–12962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, X. Zhang, W. Yang, Y. Liu and X. Zhai, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 2579–2583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 941–946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. MacDonald, C. Kübel and J. F. Corrigan, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 3252–3261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Peng, S. Zhang, S. G. Mhaisalkar and S. Ramakrishna, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8523–8529 RSC .
M. Deng, S. Shen, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Xu, T. Zhang and Q. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 6443–6447 RSC .
Y. Wang, Q. Dai, X. Yang, B. Zou, D. Li, B. Liu, M. Z. Hu and G. Zou, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 199–203 RSC .
Y. Wang, A. Tang, K. Li, C. Yang, M. Wang, H. Ye, Y. Hou and F. Teng, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 16436–16443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. McPhail and E. A. Weiss, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3377–3384 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Quan, W. Siu Loc, C. Lin, Z. Luo, K. Yang, Y. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Wang and J. Fang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4409–4413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-G. Cha, B. A. Baker, J. Salgado, C. J. Bates, K. H. Chen, A. C. Chang, M. C. Akatay, J.-H. Han, M. S. Strano and J. H. Choi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8136–8143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, X. Zhang, S. Chen, X. Hou, Y. Liu and X. Zhai, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2011, 176, 688–691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Maserati, I. Moreels, M. Prato, R. Krahne, L. Manna and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9517–9523 CAS .
M. Arshad Kamran, R. Liu, L.-J. Shi, Z.-A. Li, T. Marzi, C. Schoppner, M. Farle and B. Zou, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 385201 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhai, X. Zhang, S. Chen, W. Yang and Z. Gong, Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 409, 126–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Liu, J. Ying, J. Qian, L. Liu and L. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 105, 185–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lucas, C.-C. Tuan, S. D. Lounis, D. K. Britt, R. Qiao, W. Yang, A. Lanzara and A. P. Alivisatos, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1615–1620 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Fredrick and A. L. Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18256–18259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ramasamy, H. Sims, R. K. Gupta, D. Kumar, W. H. Butler and A. Gupta, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4003–4009 CrossRef CAS .
P. Miró, J. H. Han, J. Cheon and T. Heine, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12624–12628 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ren, Z. Jin, S. Cai, J. Yang and Z. Hong, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2012, 47, 461–466 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aresti, M. Saba, R. Piras, D. Marongiu, G. Mula, F. Quochi, A. Mura, C. Cannas, M. Mureddu, A. Ardu, G. Ennas, V. Calzia, A. Mattoni, A. Musinu and G. Bongiovanni, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3341–3350 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, N. Li, K. Yanagisawa, X. Ding and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1484–1492 CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, U. Maitra and U. V. Waghmare, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 609, 172–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xiao, J. Ning, Z. Liu, Y. Sui, Y. Wang, Q. Dong, W. Tian, B. Liu, G. Zou and B. Zou, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 2139–2144 RSC .
W. Li, R. Zamani, M. Ibáñez, D. Cadavid, A. Shavel, J. R. Morante, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4664–4667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tian, T. Zhao, J. Niu, H. Shen and L. S. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 39547–39551 RSC .
X.-J. Wu, X. Huang, J. Liu, H. Li, J. Yang, B. Li, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5083–5087 CAS .
C. J. Stolle, M. G. Panthani, T. B. Harvey, V. A. Akhavan and B. A. Korgel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2757–2761 CAS .
J. Bekaert, R. Saniz, B. Partoens and D. Lamoen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22299–22308 RSC .
J. Fan, W. Schnelle, I. Antonyshyn, I. Veremchuk, W. Carrillo-Cabrera, X. Shi, Y. Grin and L. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 16788–16794 RSC .
A. Shavel, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4514–4515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rath, W. Haas, A. Pein, R. Saf, E. Maier, B. Kunert, F. Hofer, R. Resel and G. Trimmel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 87–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, D. Yao, L. Shen, H. Zhang, X. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7207–7210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hou, D. Benito-Alifonso, N. Kattan, D. Cherns, M. C. Galan and D. J. Fermín, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 15847–15851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, M. Ibáñez, D. Cadavid, R. Zamani, J. Rubio-Garcia, S. Gorsse, J. Morante, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 2297 CrossRef .
R. R. Zamani, M. Ibáñez, M. Luysberg, N. García-Castelló, L. Houben, J. D. Prades, V. Grillo, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, J. R. Morante, A. Cabot and J. Arbiol, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2290–2301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Harrell, J. R. McBride and S. J. Rosenthal, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1199–1210 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Yang and H.-Y. Tuan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 51926–51934 RSC .
M. A. Boles and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5868–5871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, N. Fan, W. Luan and S.-T. Tu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 344–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Di Stasio, J. Q. Grim, V. Lesnyak, P. Rastogi, L. Manna, I. Moreels and R. Krahne, Small, 2015, 11, 1328–1334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Focsan, A. M. Gabudean, A. Vulpoi and S. Astilean, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25190–25199 CAS .
E. Kasotakis, A. Kostopoulou, M. Spuch-Calvar, M. Androulidaki, N. Pelekanos, A. Kanaras, A. Lappas and A. Mitraki, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2014, 116, 977–985 CrossRef CAS .
M. Plaisant, O. M. Ntwaeaborwa, H. C. Swart and P. H. Holloway, Phys. B, 2014, 439, 72–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Moloto, M. J. Moloto, M. Kalenga, S. Govindraju and M. Airo, Opt. Mater., 2013, 36, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Liu, C. Liang, F. Zhang and R. Che, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 548, 13–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sobhani and M. Salavati-Niasari, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 3204–3210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Joshi, K. N. Sharma, A. K. Sharma, O. Prakash and A. K. Singh, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7483–7485 RSC .
K. N. Sharma, H. Joshi, V. V. Singh, P. Singh and A. K. Singh, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 3908–3918 RSC .
K. N. Sharma, H. Joshi, A. K. Sharma, O. Prakash and A. K. Singh, Organometallics, 2013, 32, 2443–2451 CrossRef CAS .
H. Teng and Q. Limin, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 025606 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Akhtar, M. A. Malik, P. O'Brien and N. Revaprasadu, Mater. Lett., 2012, 77, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Joshi, K. N. Sharma, V. V. Singh, P. Singh and A. K. Singh, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 2366–2370 RSC .
X. Liu, Y. Li, B. Zhou, X. Wang, A. N. Cartwright and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3515–3521 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Cha, K. J. Koski, K. C. Y. Huang, K. X. Wang, W. Luo, D. Kong, Z. Yu, S. Fan, M. L. Brongersma and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5913–5918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kriegel, J. Rodríguez-Fernández, A. Wisnet, H. Zhang, C. Waurisch, A. Eychmüller, A. Dubavik, A. O. Govorov and J. Feldmann, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4367–4377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, R. Zamani, P. Rivera Gil, B. Pelaz, M. Ibáñez, D. Cadavid, A. Shavel, R. A. Alvarez-Puebla, W. J. Parak, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7098–7101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, Z. Li, W.-. Li, S.-L. Chou and S.-X. Dou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11683–11690 CAS .
M. H. Kim, G. Gupta and J. Kim, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 288–292 RSC .
S. Schulz, S. Heimann, K. Kaiser, O. Prymak, W. Assenmacher, J. T. Brüggemann, B. Mallick and A.-V. Mudring, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 14326–14333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Garcia-Gutierrez, L. De Leon-Covian, D. Garcia-Gutierrez, M. Treviño-Gonzalez, M. A. Garza-Navarro and S. Sepulveda-Guzman, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15, 1–12 CrossRef .
D. Cadavid, M. Ibanez, A. Shavel, O. J. Dura, M. A. Lopez de la Torre and A. Cabot, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4864–4870 CAS .
C. Lincheneau, M. Amelia, M. Oszajca, A. Boccia, F. D'Orazi, M. Madrigale, R. Zanoni, R. Mazzaro, L. Ortolani, V. Morandi, S. Silvi, K. Szacilowski and A. Credi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2877–2886 RSC .
C.-L. Hsin, M. Wingert, C.-W. Huang, H. Guo, T.-J. Shih, J. Suh, K. Wang, J. Wu, W.-W. Wu and R. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4669–4672 RSC .
K. N. Sharma, H. Joshi, A. K. Sharma, O. Prakash and A. K. Singh, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9344–9346 RSC .
Y. Li, L. Jing, R. Qiao and M. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9293–9311 RSC .
E. Lhuillier, S. Keuleyan, H. Liu and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1272–1282 CrossRef CAS .
K.-L. Ou, J.-C. Fan, J.-K. Chen, C.-C. Huang, L.-Y. Chen, J.-H. Ho and J.-Y. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14667–14673 RSC .
P. L. Saldanha, R. Brescia, M. Prato, H. Li, M. Povia, L. Manna and V. Lesnyak, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1442–1449 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lesnyak, C. George, A. Genovese, M. Prato, A. Casu, S. Ayyappan, A. Scarpellini and L. Manna, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8407–8418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Min Lim, S. K. Batabyal, S. S. Pramana, L. H. Wong, S. Magdassi and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5351–5353 RSC .
T. P. A. Ruberu, H. R. Albright, B. Callis, B. Ward, J. Cisneros, H.-J. Fan and J. Vela, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5348–5359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yahia-Ammar, A. M. Nonat, A. Boos, J.-L. Rehspringer, Z. Asfari and L. J. Charbonniere, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 15583–15592 RSC .
Z. Quan, Z. Luo, W. S. Loc, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, K. Yang, N. Porter, J. Lin, H. Wang and J. Fang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17590–17593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cadavid, M. Ibáñez, U. Anselmi-Tamburini, O. J. Durá, M. A. L. D. L. Torre and A. Cabot, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 11, 773–784 CAS .
T. Mokari, Nano Rev., 2011, 2, 5983 Search PubMed .
J.-Y. Chang and C.-Y. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9089–9091 RSC .
X. Yu, A. Shavel, X. An, Z. Luo, M. Ibáñez and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9236–9239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kriegel, A. Wisnet, A. R. Srimath Kandada, F. Scotognella, F. Tassone, C. Scheu, H. Zhang, A. O. Govorov, J. Rodriguez-Fernandez and J. Feldmann, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3189–3198 RSC .
X. Ye, D. Reifsnyder Hickey, J. Fei, B. T. Diroll, T. Paik, J. Chen and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5106–5115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hendel, V. Lesnyak, L. Kühn, A.-K. Herrmann, N. C. Bigall, L. Borchardt, S. Kaskel, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1903–1911 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, X. Li, H. Li, L. Li, X. Hong, Q. Peng and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1587–1590 CAS .
T. Simon, N. Bouchonville, M. J. Berr, A. Vaneski, A. Adrović, D. Volbers, R. Wyrwich, M. Döblinger, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, F. Jäckel, J. K. Stolarczyk and J. Feldmann, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1013–1018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ibáñez, R. Zamani, S. Gorsse, J. Fan, S. Ortega, D. Cadavid, J. R. Morante, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2573–2586 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ding, Y. Zou, F. Ye, J. Yang and J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11880–11886 CAS .
C. R. Bealing, W. J. Baumgardner, J. J. Choi, T. Hanrath and R. G. Hennig, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2118–2127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, F. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Wang, L. Yin, C. Liang, M. Wang, Y. Li, J. Liu, Q. Wu and R. Che, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 275–285 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Lakshminarayana Polavarapu
	Lakshminarayana obtained his Masters degree from the University of Hyderabad (India) in 2005 and his PhD degree from the National University of Singapore in 2011. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at CIC biomaGUNE in San Sebastián (2012–2013), and he is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Vigo (Spain). He is a co-author of over 40 publications and his current research interests include shape-controlled synthesis of metal nanocrystals for applications such as plasmonic sensors, plasmonic solar cells and water splitting.

Stefanos Mourdikoudis
	Stefanos Mourdikoudis is a chemical engineer who obtained his PhD in 2009 from the Department of Physics in Aristotle University of Thessaloniki in Greece. After this he moved to the Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry at Toulouse (France) for a post-doctoral research stay until 2011. Since 2012 he has been working in a research project in collaboration with the Department of Physical Chemistry of the University of Vigo (Spain) and the Department of Chemical Engineering in Aristotle University. His main research interests involve the chemical synthesis of various types of nanoparticles, inspired from application-oriented reasons or just from pure scientific curiosity.

Isabel Pastoriza-Santos
	Isabel Pastoriza-Santos obtained her PhD degree from the Universidade de Vigo in 2001. She worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Melbourne (Australia) in 2002 and 2003. Since 2009, she has been an Associate Professor at the University of Vigo. She has co-authored over 100 articles and holds 2 patents. Her current interests include the synthesis of plasmonic nanoparticles with size and shape control, as well as their assembly.

Jorge Pérez-Juste
	Jorge Pérez-Juste obtained his Chemistry degree from the Universidade de Santiago de Compostela in 1995 and his PhD degree in Chemistry from the Universidade de Vigo in 1999. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at UCSC in 2000 and at University of Melbourne (Australia) in 2002 and 2003. Since 2009, he has been an Associate Professor at the University of Vigo. His current interests include the synthesis and assembly of nanoparticles and nanostructured materials with tailored optical and sensing properties.


Au	Sphere (twinned)	“Turkevich” (one-pot)	HAuCl4, sodium citrate, 100 °C	
64 and 65

Au	Sphere (twinned) (size tunable)	Seeded-growth	HAuCl4, sodium citrate, 100 °C (ref. 149); HAuCl4, CTAB, AA, citrate-capped seeds, 35 °C (ref. 150)	
149 and 150

Au	Sphere (organic soluble)	“Brust–Schiffrin synthesis”	HAuCl4, alkanethiols, tetraoctylammonium bromide (TOAB), toluene, NaBH4, RT	
69

Au	Sphere (single-crystalline) (size tunable)	Seeded-growth	HAuCl4, CTAB, CTAC, AA, NaBH4, CTAB-capped Au seeds, 27 °C	
154

Au	Single-crystal nanorod (NR)	Seeded-growth	HAuCl4, CTAB, AA, NaBH4, 1.5 nm single-crystal Au seeds	
126 and 127

Au	Penta-twinned NR and bipyramids.	Seeded-growth	(i) HAuCl4, CTAB, AA, NaBH4, twinned Au seeds	
147, 155 and 156


	
	
	(ii) cetyltributylammonium bromide (CTAB)(ref. 156)	

Au	Monodisperse NR	Seeded-growth	(i) HAuCl4, NaBH4, AA, CTAC, sodium iodide (NaI), surfactant mixture composed of alkyltrimethylammonium chloride and sodium oleate and CTAB-capped single-crystal Au seeds (ref. 137)	
137, 140 and 160


	
	
	(ii) binary surfactant mixture CTAB and sodium oleate (ref. 140)	


	
	
	(iii) aromatic additives (ref. 159)	

Au	NR with SPR >1200 nm	Seeded-growth	HAuCl4, CTAB, AA, NaBH4, hydroquinone and CTAB-capped Au seeds	
128

Au	Decahedra, octahedra and stars	Seeded-growth	HAuCl4, DMF, PVP, Au seed (shape could be controlled by varying seed morphology)	
87

Au	Prism	Biosynthesis	HAuCl4 and lemongrass extract	
78

Au	Triangle	Seeded-growth	HAuCl4, CTAC, AA, NaBH4, CTAC-capped Au seeds	
135

Au	Octahedra	Polyol method or seeded-growth	(i) AuCl3,PVP, NaBH4, PEG 600 (ref. 95) (ii) HAuCl4, CTAB, Au seed (ref. 185)	
95 and 187

Au	Icosidodecahedra	Seeded-growth	HAuCl4, DEG, PVP, DMF	
131

Au	Cubes	Polyol method	HAuCl4, EG, PVP	
93

Au	Octahedra, cube, trisoctahedra, bitetrahedra, triangle, dodecahedra,	Seeded-growth	HAuCl4, AA, NaBH4, AgNO3, CTA-X (Cl or Br), NaI (morphology of Au NPs could be either kinetically controlled or Ag underpotential deposition controlled)	
60

Au	Nanowire	Single-step	HAuCl4, oleylamine	
98, 99 and 100

Ag	Cube	Polyol	(i) AgNO3, PVP, EG (ref. 56)	
56 and 82


	
	
	(ii) silver trifluoroacetate, PVP, DEG, HCl (ref. 82)	

Ag	Cube	Aqueous	[Ag(NH3)2]OH, CTAB	
83

Ag	Wire	Polyol	AgNO3, PVP, EG	
80

Ag	Nanoprism	Light-mediated (seeded-growth)	AgNO3, PVP, trisodium citrate, Ag seeds prepared by NaBH4 reduction	
141

Ag	Nanoprism	Hydrothermal	AgNO3, PVP, trisodium citrate, H2O2	
86

Ag	Nanobars and nanorice	Polyol	AgNO3, EG, PVP, NaBr	
84

Ag	Octahedra	Polyol	AgNO3, PVP, CuCl2, 1,5-pentanediol	
85

Ag	Decahedra	DMF	AgNO3, PVP, DMF	
87

Ag	Prism	DMF	AgNO3, PVP, DMF	
88

Pd	Cube and octahedra	Oxidative etching	PdCl2, NaCl, cetylpyridinium chloride, AA	
111

Pd	Icosahedra, decahedra, octahedra, tetrahedra, triangular plate	Oleylamine mediated	Pd(acac)2, formaldehyde, oleylamine (morphology can be controlled by varying the amount of oleylamine)	
110

Pd	Nanorod and nanowire	One-pot	PdCl2, PVP, NaI	
108

Pd	Tetrapod	One-pot	PdCl2, PVP, arginine, formaldehyde, formic acid	
112

Pt	Octapod	Solvothermal	Hexachloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6), methylamine solution (30%), ethylamine, n-butylamine, DMF	
115

Pt	Cubes, cuboctahedra, tetrapods, spheres, octapods, multipods, and hyper-branched structures	Hot-injection	Pd(acac)2, oleylamine, oleic acid, Mn2(CO)10 (morphology can be controlled by varying the amount of metal carbonyls and reaction temperatures)	
116

Pt	Cubic and truncated octahedra	Solvothermal	Pt(acac)2, K2PtCl4, K2PtCl6,	
117

Pt	Dendrite	
	HAuCl4, H2PtCl6, and (NH4)2PdCl6, sodium N-(4-n-dodecyloxybenzoyl)-L-isoleucinate, AA	
124

Pt	Ultrathin nanowire	Heat-up synthesis	H2PtCl6, KOH, EG, DMF	
125




AgInS

2
/13a	Ag(DDTC), In(DDTC)3	OAc, DT	SSP/261	200	2 h	Heliotrope seed-like NPs/8 × 16 nm

Ag

2

S/13b	Ag-oleate, DT	OAc	Heat-up/258	220	1 h	Self-assembled arrays of 6 nm spherical NPs

CuInS

2
/13c	Cu(I)acetate, In(III)acetate, DT, tert-DT	TOPO, OAm	Hot-injection/14	230	1 h	Bullet-like NPs/12 × 50 nm

CdS/13d	CdO, trioctylphosphine sulfide	TOPO, ODPA, TBP	Hot-injection/268	250	Several minutes	Cubic-like/18 nm

Rh


x


S


y

/C/13e	Rh6(CO)16, elemental sulfur	Propanol or other alcohols	Solvothermal/278	400	10 h	Nanospheres/45–90 nm

CuInS

2
/13f	CuCl, InCl3·4H2O, DT	OAc	Heat-up/243	250	40 min	Nanoplates/200–400 × 20 nm

PbS/13g	PbO, S–OAm	OAc, OctAm	Two-step (RT + solvothermal)/262	250	30 min	Hollow nanotubes/5 μm × 40 nm

PbS/13h	PbO, S–OAm	OAc, OctAm	Two-step (RT + solvothermal)/262	200	~10–20 min	Hollow cuboctahedra/~40 nm

PbS/13i	Pb–oleate, S–ODE	OAm	Hot-injection/264	180	5 min	Nanocubes/~11 nm

CdSe/14a-d	Cd–OAc, Se–TBP	Hot-injection in pressurized hexane/294	300	1 h (for 2, 5 g)	Spherical/2–5, 6 nm

Ag

2

Se/14e	AgNO3, Cu3Se2 NPs	
	Cation exchange/281	RT	
	Cubes/~11 nm

Cu

2-x

Se/14f	Cu stearate, Se–ODE	Stearic acid, OAm	Heat-up/282	220	2 h	Triangular/12 nm

SnSe/14g	SnCl2, Se–OAm	OAc, OAm	Hot-injection/310	146	30 sec	Dotlike/~7 nm

MnSe

2
/14h	Mn-acetate, SeO2	PVP, DMF	Hydrothermal/302	180	24 h	Very long nanorods with variable aspect ratio

Ag

2

Te/15a	Ag–TOP, TOP–Te	OAm	Hot-injection/318	130–160	3 min	Disk-like/~11 nm

PbTe/15b	Pb-oleate, TOP–Te	
	Hot-injection/317	130	2 min	Nearly spherical/8 nm

PbTe/15c	Pb-oleate, TOP–Te	
	Hot-injection/340	160–180	3 min	Cubic/11 nm

CuTe/15d	CuCl, TOP–Te	TOP, TOPO, OAc, OAm, Li-amide	Hot-injection/313	190	2 min	Thin nanorods

PbSeTe/16	Pb-oleate, TOP–Se, TOP–Te	
	Hot-injection (two steps)/330	200	6 min	Cubic/11 nm

Ni–CdS/17	NiCl2, Cd–TDPA, S–TOP	Cysteine	Two-step (hot-injection + subsequent addition of NiCl2)/339	300 for CdS formation	1, 5 h	100–120 nm × 5 nm CdS nanorods decorated by 2–8 nm Ni NPs

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration for the nucleation and growth process of gold nanoparticle formation. The first step involves a rapid reduction of the gold ions into metallic gold nuclei, followed by nanoparticle growth via coalescence of nuclei. (b) TEM image of close-packed superlattice of monodisperse gold nanoparticles. (c) TEM image of gold nanotriangles prepared by biosynthesis method using lemon grass extract as reducing agent. (d) SEM image of silver nanocubes prepared by polyol reduction method using PVP. (e) TEM image of 5-fold twinned Pd nanorods obtained by hydrothermal reduction method using polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as the reductant in the presence of sodium iodide. Figures (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) reproduced with permission from ref. 68, 71, 78, 56 and 108, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of shape evolution of the Pd nanocrystal and the corresponding TEM images (a–e) of different morphologies (scale bars, 10 nm). It shows that the added HCl induced slight truncation at the corner of cubic Pd through oxidative etching in the early stage of the reaction and then continuous atomic addition to {100} facets promotes the enlargement of {111} facets, thus resulting in the formation of octahedral Pd nanocrystals. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 111.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM image of concave polyhedral Pt nanocrystals having {411} high-index facets. (b & c) TEM images of octahedral and cubic Pt nanocrystals prepared using metal carbonyls as a shape-directing agent. (d) Snap shots of high-resolution TEM images of Pt nanocrystals during facet development of a Pt nanocube and the corresponding simulated TEM images. Scale bars: (b, c) 20 nm. Figures (a), (b–c), and (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 115, 116 and 118, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  A general schematic illustration showing the role of the initial seed morphology and crystallinity in the final particle shape and crystallinity of nanocrystal. At first, a precursor is reduced into a form of small seed particles via nucleation. The seed particles can be a single-crystal, singly twinned, or multiply twinned structure. If stacking faults are introduced, then plate-like seeds will be formed. The green, orange, purple and red colours represent the {100}, {111}, {110} facets and twin planes, respectively. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 153.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of single-crystal gold nanospheres prepared by seed-mediated growth. (b) TEM images of Au nanotriangles prepared by three-step seed-mediated growth. The size of the nanotriangles can be widely tuned by varying the experimental parameters. (c) TEM images of monodisperse Au NRs prepared using bromide-free surfactant mixture. (d) TEM image of icosidodecahedral Au NCs. Figures (a), (b), (c) and (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 154, 135, 140, and 131, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation showing the role of halides and silver ions to direct the growth of gold seeds into different morphologies of Au nanocrystals via different growth pathways: kinetically controlled products in the absence of silver ions (where ascorbic acid or halide ions control the reaction kinetics to obtain different morphologies of Au nanocrystals) and Ag underpotential deposition-controlled products where the interactions of silver with the particle surface control product shape (with higher amounts of silver on the particle producing higher-index surfaces). Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 60.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a & b) Schematic illustrations showing different synthetic approaches for the preparation of bimetallic nanocrystals of different morphologies and compositions (alloys, core–shell, heterodimers, stars, core–satellites). Core–shell particles could transform into alloys upon annealing. M1 and M2 represent two distinct metal elements.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) DF-STEM image of fully alloyed Au–Ag nanospheres obtained by annealing the Au@Ag core–shell nanospheres inside SiO2 matrix, and the corresponding EDX elemental mapping of Au and Ag. (b–d) HAADF-STEM images of Au@Ag nanocubes, Ag–Au–Ag NRs and Au@Ag NRs obtained using Au octahedra, penta-twinned NRs and single-crystal NRs as core particles, respectively. The insets of Fig. 8b and d show the corresponding 3D reconstruction of the particles and the inset of Fig. 8c is a HAADF-STEM image of a standing Au@Ag nanorod. (e) TEM image of bimetallic Au/Pd nanocrystals prepared by the reduction of H2PdCl4 on Au NRs using ascorbic acid as reducing agent. The inset shows illustration of particle morphology. (f) SEM image of Au/Pd octopods obtained by co-reduction of Au and Pd in the presence of Au cubes. (g) TEM image of palladium–silver hybrid dimers obtained by the controlled reduction of silver ions on Pd nanocubes. (h) TEM image of Pt-covered Au NRs obtained by the reduction of Pt ions in the presence of Au NRs using ascorbic acid as reductant. Figures (a), (b–d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) reproduced with permission from ref. 178, 169, 34, 33, 179 and 167, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Galvanic replacement reaction between Ag nanocubes and HAuCl4: schematic representation of the formation of Au nanocages (I) and nanoframes (II) using Ag nanocube as sacrificial template. It shows the conversion of Ag nanocube into an Au/Ag nanocage (green colour) and then Au nanocages via continued galvanic replacement (I) or the conversion of Au–Ag nanocages into Au nanoframes via selective etching with a wet etchant (II). (b) Schematic illustration of steps involved in the conversion of Ag nanowires into porous Ag–Au nanotubes and then fragmented Au NPs via galvanic replacement reaction with HAuCl4. (c) TEM images of double walled Au–Ag nanocages obtained from the galvanic replacement reaction between Ag nanocubes and HAuCl4 in the presence of CTAB and ascorbic acid. The insets show the magnified image of double walled nanocage and corresponding EDX mapping. (d) TEM image of ultrathin gold nanoframes prepared via galvanic replacement reaction between Ag nanocubes and HAuCl4 followed by etching with H2O2/NH4OH. (e) TEM images of Pd–Pt bimetallic cubic nanocages prepared via the galvanic replacement reaction between Pd nanocubes and K2PtCl4 in the presence of ascorbic acid. (f) TEM images of Mn3O4/γ-Fe2O3 nanoboxes prepared via galvanic replacement reaction between Mn3O4 and iron(II) perchlorate. Figures (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) reproduced with permission from ref. 191, 185, 195, 197, 199 and 200, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of Au–Ag octahedral nanocages. The insets show the 3D view of nanocage through [111] direction and magnified TEM image. (b) Reconstructed 3D rendering along [001] directions, and models (insets) showing the gradual transformations of Ag nanocubes into Au–Ag hollow nanocages after addition of increasing amounts of HAuCl4. The arrow indicates the presence of a pinhole in one of the side facets of the cube during the initial stages of the reaction, from which the cube is emptied. (c) 2D EDX mapping on nanocages in two different orientations. (d–e) HAADF-STEM 3D reconstructions of the particles obtained in the initial (d) and final stages (e) of reaction and their corresponding 3D EDX reconstructions. The inner layer around the pinhole (d) and outer layers of Au (e) are indicated by white arrows. (f–g) Volume rendering along [100] direction and 3D rendering of the EDX reconstructions of the particles obtained at the initial (f) and final stages (g) of reaction. Red and green colours represent Au and Ag, respectively. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 62.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A–J) Models and representative STEM images showing the stepwise evolution of Ag shell on single-crystalline Au seed into icosahedral Au–Ag bimetallic NPs through plasmon-mediated reaction. (A) STEM image of the pseudo-spherical single-crystalline Au seeds. (B to J) STEM images of Au–Ag core–shell NPs with (B) octahedral, (C) truncated tetrahedral, (D) tetrahedral, (E) truncated bitetrahedral, (F) bitetrahedral, (G) truncated decahedral, (H) decahedral, (I) decahedral with tetrahedral growth and (J) icosahedral morphologies, which were obtained during the stepwise evolution of Ag shell. Scale bars, 25 nm. (K) Schematic representation of liquid cell experimental setup. (L–P) HAADF-STEM images of Pd dendrites obtained at different time intervals. Scale bars, 50 nm. (Q) Aberration-corrected HRTEM images of Au NPs evolved during the synthesis of Au NRs in the presence and absence of Ag+ ions. It clearly shows a symmetry breaking step (isotropic to anisotropic) in the presence of Ag+ that leads to the formation of Au NRs. (R) Schematic representation (left) of the basic principle behind the electron tomography and 3D-tomographic reconstruction of Au–Ag core–shell NRs through 3D elemental mapping on the atomic scale. Figures (A–J), (K–P), Q, R (left) and R (right) reproduced with permission from ref. 208, 214, 211, 202 and 205, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of nanostructured MC/modified-MC materials and their potential applications in various ECS devices. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 10.	 

 	Fig. 13  Electron microscopy images of a) AgInS2 nanoparticles, b) assemblies of Ag2S NCs, c) CuInS2 NPs, scale bar is 50 nm, d) CdS NCs, e) RhxSy/C nanocomposites, f) CuInS2 nanoplates, g) PbS nanotubes, h) PbS hollow NPs, and i) PbS nanocubes. Figures (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g–h), and (i) reproduced with permission from ref. 261, 258, 14, 268, 278, 243, 262 and 264, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 14  a) Schematic picture of a continuous flow system for the gram-scale production of CdSe QDs (photographs at (b–d)), e) TEM image of Ag2Se nanocubes, f) Cu2−xSe NCs, g) SnSe NPs, h) MnSe2 nanorods. Figures (a–d), (e), (f), (g) and (h) reproduced with permission from ref. 294, 281, 282, 310 and 302, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 15  a) Scheme depicting the displacement of TOP molecules from the surface of Ag2Te NCs, allowing their transfer from chloroform to formamide, b) PbTe NPs, c) PbTe nanocubes, d) CuTe nanorods. Figures (a), (b), (c) and (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 318, 317, 340 and 313, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 16  Images of PbSeTe ternary alloy nanocubes: a) TEM with a SAED pattern as inset, b) HRTEM image, c) HAADF-STEM-EDS line scan profile of an individual nanocube, d)–g) elemental maps of Pb (red), Se (purple), Te (green) and Se + Te overlap, respectively; scale bars represent 20 nm. Figures (a–g) reproduced with permission from ref. 330.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic view of the photocatalytic generation of hydrogen under the proposed hole shuttle mechanism: nickel forms 2–8 nm nanoparticles on the cysteine-stabilized CdS nanorods where water is reduced to H2 on illumination. The photoexcited holes oxidize hydroxyl anions that –as a radical– carry away the positive charges and in turn oxidize ethanol to acetaldehyde. The blue arrows denote movement of the species; the red arrows denote a redox reaction. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 339.	 

 	Fig. 18  a) Generalized illustration of colloidal nucleation and growth processes for MC nanocrystals, b) schematic diagram of the simulated shape evolution of PbSe NCs. The equilibrium shape is a function of the ligand surface coverage, which depends on the concentration of oleic acid during synthesis, c) the oriented attachment mechanism (formation of FeS2 NCs with unexpected symmetry), d)–f) the case of Bi2S3: crystal unit viewed along the c axis, [001] direction – the growth direction is denoted with arrows along the c-axis, d). TEM and HRTEM images of nanorods, e) and f), respectively. Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 219, 342, 223 and 15, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 19  a) ZnS hollow NPs, b) TEM image of Ni3S4 NCs with a SAED pattern as inset, c) STEM image of CuInS2 nanocrystals, d) SEM image of highly monodisperse PbSe NCs, e) HRTEM images of PbSe/CdSe core/shell QDs, f) HRTEM image of MoS2 nanosheets. Inset above is the corresponding fast Fourier transform and inset below is a Butterworth-filtered image, g) TEM image of a Fe7Se8 polyhedron viewed along the [166−1−] direction. Inset: the corresponding SAED pattern, h) schematic model of an ideal truncated Fe7Se8 dodecahedron bound by {001} and {012} facets, projected along the aforementioned direction. Figures (a), (b–c), (d), (e), (f), (g–h) reproduced with permission from ref. 220, 224, 222, 230, 10 and 233, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 20  a) HRTEM side-view image of a ZrS2 nanodisk showing a disc thickness of ~1.6 nm and a (001) lattice of 0.58 nm, b) HRTEM micrograph and color crystallographic maps of (PbTe)0.28(PbS)0.72 nanocomposite: PbTe = green, PbS = red, c) HRTEM image of a spherical Bi2S3 nanocrystal with the superimposed ideal crystalline structure formed by ribbons aligned along the <001> direction: FFT of the HRTEM image in the top right corner, d) HRTEM image of CuCr2S4 and Co0.2Cu0.8Cr2S4 NPs with arrows indicating twin boundary defects, e) HRTEM image showing the atomic planes and twinning in a Cu2CdxSnSey bipod, f) the screenshots from a 3d-tomography TEM reconstructed movie for bullet-shaped MnSe nanocrystals. The small dots are ~5 nm Au NPs used as alignment marks so as to create a well aligned stack of images, which is then transformed into a full, 3d-reconstruction. Figures (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) reproduced with permission from ref. 30, 340, 277, 274, 292 and 343, respectively.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
