CO 2 electrolysis in seawater: calcification effect and a hybrid self-powered concept   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA09368G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA09368G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23301-23307CO2 electrolysis in seawater: calcification effect and a hybrid self-powered concept†

        
          
            Chong-Yong 
            Lee
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Gordon G. 
            Wallace
          
        
      *
      ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, Intelligent Polymer Research Institute, AIIM, Innovation Campus, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW 2500, Australia. E-mail: cylee@uow.edu.au; gwallace@uow.edu.au
Received 
      27th September 2018
    , Accepted 7th November 2018First published on 7th November 2018AbstractOceans are regarded as a sink for anthropogenic CO2; as such seawater provides an attractive electrolyte for electrochemical CO2 reduction to value-added carbon-based fuels and chemical feedstocks. However, the composition of seawater is inherently complex, containing multiple cations and anions that may participate in the CO2 electroreduction reaction. Herein, examination of a nanoporous Ag electrocatalyst in seawater reveals a significant influence of calcium ions on the electrochemical CO2 reduction performance. Under the applied cathodic potential and in the presence of CO2, calcium ions in the seawater result in calcium carbonate deposition onto the nanoporous Ag, reducing active sites for CO2 electroreduction. Mitigation of calcification would promote a stable CO2 electrolysis in seawater. A first proof-of-concept self-powered hybrid CO2 electrolysis is demonstrated by the coupling of a Mg anode to a nanoporous Ag cathode in 0.6 M NaCl or seawater. A spontaneous oxidation of a Mg alloy at the anode drives cathodic reduction of AgCl to nanoporous Ag, which electrocatalytically reduces CO2 to CO. Combining galvanic and electrolytic properties in a single electrochemical cell offers a general approach for designing hybrid self-powered electrolysers. Strategies to overcome calcification such as removal of calcium from the seawater and development of anti-calcifying electrocatalysts are needed to promote practicability of seawater as an electrolyte in CO2 electroreduction technology.
Introduction
As part of a CO2 mitigation effort, the scientific community has long investigated a variety of approaches to capture and convert CO2 to value-added products.1–9 Electrochemical CO2 reduction is one such attractive approach.4–9 While enormous efforts have been devoted to developing highly efficient and selective CO2 reduction electrocatalysts, examination on the influence of the electrolytes has attracted growing interest. Dissolved ions in the electrolytes were reported to affect CO2 electroreduction performance via parameters such as solution's bulk/localised pH and conductivity, specific adsorption on the catalyst, and alteration in catalyst surface morphologies.7–9
Oceans currently absorb vast quantities of CO2 released mainly by the burning of fossil fuels.10–12 CO2 dissolves into seawater where it reacts to initially form carbonic acid, before being converted in equilibrium to hydrogen carbonate (HCO3−) and carbonate (CO32−) ions. Having absorbed ∼40% anthropogenic CO2 emissions, the acidity of oceans has increased by ∼26% since the pre-industrial era, and this trend is expected to continue.10–12 As such, seawater represents an extremely attractive electrolyte for CO2 electroreduction: not only is it abundant, but it also has the ability to serve as a sink for CO2 and has an inherently high ionic conductivity. However, to date, seawater has been employed as an electrolyte for electrocatalytic water oxidation and proton reduction,13–15 rarely for electroreduction of CO2.
To the best of our knowledge, the only reported use of seawater for electroreduction of CO2 is from Nakata et al.16 They briefly used seawater as an electrolyte and achieved a faradaic conversion efficiency of 36% in formaldehyde formation using a boron doped diamond (BDD) electrode. However, no elucidation of factors affecting the poor CO2 electroreduction performance was given, illustrating the complexity of such chemistry in the presence of the dissolved ions in seawater. Instead of an expensive BDD electrode, a cheaper, widely available and tunable nanostructured metallic based electrode with corrosion resistance features would be desirable. We found that Ag/AgCl is an attractive choice. The Ag/AgCl electrode is highly stable at a wide range of chloride concentrations in an electrochemical reference system. Interestingly, it served as a cathode material for water or seawater activated batteries;17–19 this may also offer an opportunity to integrate battery-type galvanic features with the intended CO2 electroreduction process. Moreover, halide-derived nanoporous Ag from AgCl is among the best performing Ag-based electrocatalysts20–27 and exhibits outstanding performance with a high faradaic CO2 to CO conversion efficiency at a low overpotential.25–27
Electrochemical CO2 reduction is conventionally driven by the use of external electricity.4–9,20–27 If the electricity could instead be readily generated internally within an electrochemical cell for CO2 reduction, an alternative simplified design of a CO2 electrolyser with dual-functionality of electrical power and carbon-based fuel generation can be achieved. We demonstrate here such a concept by coupling of a spontaneous anodic magnesium oxidation reaction that produces H2, whilst driving electroreduction of CO2 to CO at the Ag-based cathode in saline water including seawater. Mg was selected for this proof-of-concept study as it is light-weight, environment friendly, possesses high theoretical voltages, and has been employed as a standby power source in land, and also as an undersea power source.28 In this communication, we examined and compared the CO2 electroreduction performance of nanoporous Ag in 3.5 wt% NaCl and seawater, and investigated the influence of dissolved ions present in the seawater. We also discussed the features of our proof-of-concept self-powered hybrid system, and its broader range of applications.
Results and discussion
Ag/AgCl electrodes employed in this work were prepared by anodisation of Ag foils. Interplay of chloride concentrations and applied potentials not only allows rapid formation of Ag/AgCl layers, but also provides tunable surface morphologies.25 Considering that the electrolytes for CO2 electroreduction were with a salinity of ∼3.5 wt% NaCl, 0.6 M NaCl was employed as an electrolyte for the anodic formation of the Ag/AgCl film. Fig. S1 (ESI†) shows the representative SEM top and cross-sectional views of the Ag/AgCl electrode formed in 0.6 M NaCl solution at 1.0 V for 300 s. An AgCl film of ∼10 μm thickness with negligible nanosheets on the microstructure was obtained. Upon electrochemical reduction at −1.4 V (vs. Ag/AgCl (3 M NaCl)) for 900 s (Fig. S2, ESI†) to convert AgCl to Ag, halide-derived Ag with the nanoporous structures of around ∼120 ± 50 nm (Fig. 1f(i)) was formed.
 Fig. 1  (a) Faradaic CO and H2 conversion efficiencies as a function of applied potentials for CO2 electroreduction performed on a nanoporous Ag in seawater and 3.5 wt% NaCl. (b) Current–time plot with long-term electrolysis of nanoporous Ag performed in seawater and 3.5 wt% NaCl at a fixed potential of −1.40 V vs. Ag/AgCl (3 M NaCl). (c) The effect of introducing 10 mM and 20 mM CaCl2 into the 3.5 wt% NaCl electrolyte on electrocatalytic CO2 reduction at −1.40 V vs. Ag/AgCl (3 M NaCl); CaCl2 was injected at 900 s. (d) XRD patterns of the as-formed Ag/AgCl, the nanoporous Ag (np-Ag) formed by electroreduction of AgCl, and the np-Ag after undergoing electrolysis in seawater and 3.5 wt% NaCl in the presence of 20 mM CaCl2, respectively. (e) Raman spectra of the corresponding electrodes as described in the XRD analysis. (f) SEM data of the (i) nanoporous Ag, (ii) nanoporous Ag after 24 h electrolysis in 3.5 wt% NaCl, and (iii) nanoporous Ag after 16 h electrolysis in seawater. 
We examine the performance of chloride-derived nanoporous Ag electrodes for the cathodic CO2 reduction process. Fig. 1a shows the plot of the CO2 to CO conversion faradaic efficiency versus applied potential recorded under 1 h electrolysis in 3.5 wt% NaCl and seawater, respectively. In 3.5 wt% NaCl, CO2 to CO conversion efficiencies were consistently above 90% up to −1.1 V and dropped to ∼72 ± 5% at −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl (3 M NaCl). In seawater, the conversion efficiency is strongly dependent on the applied potentials. The highest faradaic efficiency of ∼93 ± 3% was achieved at −1.2 V, but dropped to 65 ± 4% at −1.1 V. Note that the electrolysis at these two potentials was stable over 1 h, but at −1.3 V and above, electrocatalytic currents in the first 10 min were unstable (Fig. S3a, ESI†). Concurrently, the faradaic efficiencies also dropped to about 85, 70 and 50% at −1.3 V, −1.4 V and −1.5 V, respectively. The higher cathodic potentials enhanced the localised pH change, which may promote the precipitation of calcium carbonate on the electrocatalytic sites of nanoporous Ag that subsequently influences the faradaic conversion efficiencies. H2 constitutes the remaining percentage of the generated products in both NaCl and seawater electrolytes. No other gas or liquid phase product was detected.
We further examined the long-term stability of the reduced nanoporous Ag electrodes. Seawater as an electrolyte results in a much lower stability in comparison to 3.5 wt% NaCl (Fig. 1b). The electrocatalytic current drops significantly in the first few hours and further drops to a negligible current density. At −1.20 V (Fig. S3b, ESI†), although a greater initial stability was achieved, it dropped substantially after the first 3 h. In contrast, in 24 h electrolysis at −1.40 V vs. Ag/AgCl (3 M NaCl) in 3.5 wt% NaCl, the catalytic current density shows an excellent consistency. The initial faradaic current efficiency for conversion of CO2 to CO is found to be ∼95%, and dropped to ∼79% and ∼75% in 12 h and 24 h, respectively.
Typical seawater consists of major dissolved ions such as 55% Cl−, 30.6% Na+, 7.7% SO42−, 3.7% Mg2+, 1.2% Ca2+ and 1.1% K+.29 To elucidate the plausible reason for the lower stability and poorer performance of nanoporous Ag in the seawater, in addition to ∼3.5 wt% Na+ and Cl−, we introduced other seawater constituents SO42−, Mg2+, Ca2+ and K+. The addition of SO42−, Mg2+ and K+ at 20 mM did not affect the electrocatalytic current and the CO conversion faradaic efficiencies (Fig. S4, ESI†). However, introduction of Ca2+ resulted in a detrimental effect on electrocatalytic CO2 reduction (Fig. 1c). The increased concentration of CaCl2 in the electrolyte from 10 mM to 20 mM leads to a significant drop in the catalytic current.
XRD analysis in Fig. 1d indicates the formation of calcite for both reduced Ag electrodes in seawater and 3.5 wt% NaCl solution with 20 mM CaCl2 intentionally added. The diffraction intensity of calcite at (104) was the strongest, with other peaks at (013), (116), (018), (110) and (012).30 XRD data also indicate the expected reduction of AgCl to Ag upon electro-reduction.25 Raman analysis performed using a laser of 638 nm presented in Fig. 1e shows a principal Raman shift of 1086 cm−1, with weaker satellite peaks being observed with frequency shifts of 279 cm−1 and 710 cm−1, all indicating the signature peaks of calcite.30 XPS analysis further confirms the formation of calcite (Fig. S5, ESI†). SEM images in Fig. 1f show a structural change, with a larger particle size of nanoporous Ag obtained in 24 h (Fig. 1f(ii)) in comparison to the electrolysis in 3.5 wt% NaCl for 1 h (Fig. 1f(i)). In seawater, there was significant deposition of calcite with patch sizes of ∼10 to 20 μm on the electrode surface (Fig. 1f(iii), Fig. S6, ESI†).
Supported by the evidence of calcite formation, we propose that Ca2+ containing seawater results in electrochemically driven calcite precipitation onto nanoporous Ag (Fig. 2, eqn (3)). The localised increase of the pH resulting from CO2 reduction at Ag active sites induces precipitation of calcite on the Ag catalyst. This is consistent with our pH measurement indicating decreased acidity of seawater as the experiment progresses. The type of substrate and hard water composition could significantly influence such an electrochemical scaling process.31,32 In this study, nanoporous Ag in contact with seawater preferentially deposited calcite, and this process competes with CO2 and H+ reduction reactions (eqn (1) and (2)). As such, the available Ag active sites for CO2 electroreduction decreased gradually with the increase of deposition.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the interactions of dissolved ions in salt water (a) and seawater (b) under CO2 purging and an applied cathodic potential. In NaCl electrolyte, the competition to CO2 reduction (eqn (1)) is the proton reduction reaction (eqn (2)). The complexity of seawater as an electrolyte in the presence of several additional major ions is highlighted in bold (seawater also constitutes other ∼0.7% minor ions, which are not shown here). The applied cathodic potential induces a localised pH change resulting in calcite precipitation on the nanoporous Ag (eqn (3)). This reduces the available active sites of Ag to perform CO2 electroreduction (represented by red arrows). 
Taking advantage of the feasibility of CO2 electroreduction in saline water, we examine the possibility of driving the cathodic reaction by coupling with an anodic process which could generate galvanic currents. Such a hybrid concept of a galvanic reaction driven by an electrolytic process is illustrated in Fig. 3. A galvanic cell consists of two half-cells connected by a membrane or glass frit; Mg and Ag+ (e.g. AgCl in this work) serve as an anode and a cathode, respectively. A Mg anode in a salt containing electrolyte is spontaneously oxidised to Mg2+,33–35 and the electrons resulting from the galvanic reaction flow to the cathode for electroreduction of Ag+ to Ag. In the presence of CO2 as a reactant in the cathodic compartment, the reduced Ag acts as an electrocatalyst converting CO2 to CO. This half-cell electrolytic reaction of CO2 catalytic conversion is therefore powered by an internal galvanic cell.
 Fig. 3  (a) Diagram of a galvanic cell consisting of Mg as the anodic half-cell that is oxidized to Mg2+, and Ag+ is reduced to Ag at the cathodic half-cell. An overlapping box to the cathodic half reaction represents an electrolytic process of catalytic conversion of CO2 to CO by the reduced Ag. (b) Schematic diagram of the assembly of an electrochemical cell to generate H2 and CO. Anodic and cathodic compartments consist of a Mg alloy and an Ag/AgCl electrode, respectively. 

Fig. 4a illustrates the electrochemical behavior of the proposed cell-assembly via a combined plot from half-cell studies of cathodic CO2 reduction and anodic Mg oxidation processes. Evidently, as the oxidation of Mg occurs at a more negative potential than the cathodic CO2 reduction process, the spontaneously oxidative process readily generates electricity within the assembled cell to drive the cathodic CO2 reduction to CO by the nanoporous Ag. In contrast, a typical CO2 reduction in an electrochemical device exhibits a more positive anodic potential than the counterpart cathodic reaction, whereby the potential difference determines the external bias potential needed to drive the reaction.36,37
 Fig. 4  (a) The voltammograms recorded in a three-electrode configuration for anodic oxidation of a Mg alloy and cathodic CO2 reduction on a chloride-derived nanoporous Ag in 3.5 wt% NaCl and seawater. Plots of moles of H2 (b) and CO (c) obtained from the anodic and cathodic compartments, over a 5 h self-powered full-cell assembly. (d) Representative SEM images of the Ag/AgCl samples after electroreduction in the self-powered full-cell assembly in 3.5 wt% NaCl (i) and seawater (ii). 
To examine the concept of a self-powered system, the anode and cathode in a two-compartment cell were wired with crocodile clips, without any external electrical power supply (Fig. S7, Video S1, ESI†). Our examination of the open circuit potential of the cell assembly in a two-compartment configuration shows the value of ∼1.58 V ± 0.04 with the use of the Ag/AgCl electrode (Fig. S8, ESI†). Upon electrical connection, the AgCl film was gradually reduced to nanoporous Ag as evidenced by the change of brownish AgCl to silver-grey Ag. This conversion process to produce electrocatalytically active nanoporous Ag is typically completed in around 20 minutes. This step was identical to the chronopotentiometry measurement (Fig. S9, ESI†), but the electroreduction of AgCl was instead driven by the electrons generated from the spontaneous oxidation of Mg. The galvanic current then proceeded to drive the CO2 electroreduction at the reduced nanoporous Ag. As illustrated in Fig. 1b, H2 and CO were generated simultaneously in the anodic and cathodic compartments, respectively.
We collected and quantified the H2 and CO gases, with the plots of moles of generated H2 and CO shown in Fig. 4b and c. As a result of oxidation of the Mg alloy, H2 was generated spontaneously and it increased with time. The Mg alloy in 3.5 wt% NaCl produced more H2 in comparison to the seawater as anodic dissolution was faster in this medium. Consequently, CO production in seawater was lower than that in 3.5 wt% NaCl. Although the production rate becomes slower as the experiment progresses, CO was continually generated up to ∼4 h in seawater which implies a slower rate of calcite deposition on the Ag surface in this self-powered assembly. Otherwise, a poorer stability of the nanoporous Ag with a quicker decay of CO production may occur, as was the case of the half-cell study of CO2 electroreduction at −1.4 V in seawater (Fig. 2b). In addition to CO, a small amount of H2 was also generated in the cathodic compartment (see Fig. S10, ESI†), with no other product detected. Control experiments with bare Ag foil in 3.5 wt% NaCl and seawater produce a very small quantity of CO (less than 1 μmol cm−2 after 5 h electrolysis), indicating the role of nanoporous Ag in the activation of CO2 electroreduction.
A comparison of SEM images of the Ag electrodes after 5 h electrolysis is shown in Fig. 4d. A nanoporous feature was observed for the reduced Ag electrode in a NaCl electrolyte. However, in seawater, a larger feature size around 1 to 2 μm was observed indicating the deposition of calcite onto the reduced nanoporous Ag. This is confirmed by detection of peaks corresponding to calcite from XRD and Raman data (Fig. S11, ESI†). For the anodic part, XRD of Fig. S12 (ESI†) confirmed the by-product from the oxidation of Mg producing Mg(OH)2.
We show in this study the suitability of AgCl-derived nanoporous Ag for CO2 electroreduction to CO in saline electrolytes. Halide-derived electrocatalysts including AgCl have been reported to offer an advantage of significantly suppressing the hydrogen evolution reaction.25–27 The reaction mechanism is believed to involve a multi-step overall two-electron reduction process of CO2 to CO as described in previous studies.20,26 In salt water, high selectivity towards CO production (>90% conversion efficiency) was achieved, with the retention of a faradaic efficiency of up to ∼75% over one day of electrolysis. A CO conversion faradaic efficiency of ∼90% was achieved at −1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl (3 M NaCl) in seawater, but with reduced long-term stability. The presence of calcium in seawater is found not only to decrease the stability of the Ag catalyst, but also to decrease the selectivity in CO conversion. To minimise the impact of Ca2+ in seawater in the direct electrochemical CO2 conversion, existing technologies, such as ion exchange resins38,39 and precipitation agents,40 are readily available to remove Ca2+ from seawater before being employed as an electrolyte.
In our proof-of-concept demonstration of a self-powered hybrid system, we employed a magnesium alloy to serve as the anode. This serves two purposes: its direct reaction with saline water spontaneously generates H2, producing Mg(OH)2 that precipitates in the solution as the sole by-product; its high activity drives a galvanic current that ultimately reduces CO2. The rate limiting factor of the present system was the long-term stability of the halide-derived Ag catalyst in performing CO2 reduction, as an excess of electrons were generated from the anodic dissolution of Mg. Mg in this demonstration serves as a primary cell, where the spent Mg anode can be replaced, as is the case of Mg-based battery systems.28
Our proposed compartmented self-powered electrochemical cell facilitates the coupling of various anode and cathode materials, and therefore it is important to emphasise that the self-powered concept demonstrated here is not limited to the use of Mg as an anode or Ag/AgCl as a cathode. As Mg production is relatively energy-intensive, other sustainable anode materials that generate valuable anodic products would be desirable. Ag/AgCl employed as a cathode for CO2 reduction in this work generates CO through two proton-coupled electron transfers. Other CO2 reduction electrocatalyst materials that are capable of generating long chain (C4–C12) carbon products which consumed up to 12 electrons could be examined for this hybrid system.41,42
As more efficient CO2 reduction electrocatalysts to accommodate a wide range of products are expected to be developed as the field progresses, such a self-powered concept could serve to accommodate ad hoc and task-specific generation of desirable carbon-based products. For example, accessibility to electricity may be limited in remote, undersea and military areas; this technology offers dual functionalities where users could generate electricity and/or desirable carbon-based fuels. The required CO2 could be integrated and sourced from advanced materials that are capable of releasing the stored CO2.1,43 Hence, the proposed self-powered concept is intended to serve as a portable system for task-specific niche applications. This is a complementary technology to the large-scale carbon-based fuel generation approach powered by external renewable electricity, such as from solar and wind, with CO2 obtained from fossil fuel power plants. Importantly, recent advances in aqueous-based magnesium and other metallic secondary cell batteries28,44–46 offer a prospect to further advance such a self-powered concept to be rechargeable, where one could store the renewable electricity, and generate carbon-based fuels in a single aqueous-based electrochemical cell.
Conclusions
In summary, seawater is employable as an electrolyte for CO2 electroreduction. Calcium ions in the seawater could be viewed as undesirable interference species with respect to durability and efficiency of a CO2 reduction electrocatalyst; in contrast, its high affinity for CO2 means that it may serve as a useful species to electrochemically capture and store CO2. A follow-up study will focus towards two key directions: finding an effective and simple strategy to remove calcium from the seawater, and developing an anti-calcification coating on the electrocatalyst, with the aim of achieving a long-term stable and durable CO2 electroreduction in seawater. The first proof-of-concept self-powered aqueous-based CO2 electrolyser that we presented here is readily extendable to the rational coupling of other anodes and cathodes that could trigger both galvanic and targeted electrocatalytic reactions. Future work by the incorporation of an aqueous-based secondary battery feature would allow a rechargeable self-powered CO2 electrolyser concept. Renewable electricity could be stored to power the electrolyser, hence advocating a sustainable system for electricity storage and renewable fuel generation within a single electrochemical cell.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the University of Wollongong's Vice Chancellor Research Fellowship (to CYL). Funding from the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence Scheme (CE 140100012) is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would also like to thank the Australian National Fabrication Facility-Materials Node (ANFF) and UOW Electron Microscopy Centre for equipment use. We thank John Bullock (Bennington College) for his useful comments on this manuscript.
References
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Artz, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Schrag, Science, 2007, 315, 812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Montoya, L. C. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. Jaramillo and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 70 CrossRef PubMed .
C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Lin, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, Q. Luo, W. Zhang, D. Li, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Nature, 2016, 529, 68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, Md. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. G. d. Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. D. Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Verma, X. Lu, S. Ma, R. I. Masel and P. J. A. Kenis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7075 RSC .
M. R. Singh, Y. Kwon, Y. Lum, J. W. Ager and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Khatiwala, T. Tanhua, S. M. Fletcher, M. Gerber, S. C. Doney, H. D. Graven, N. Gruber, G. A. Mc Kinley, A. Murata, A. F. Rios and C. L. Sabine, Biogeosciences, 2013, 10, 2169 CrossRef CAS .
T. Devries, M. Holzer and F. Primeau, Nature, 2017, 542, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Caldeira and M. E. Wickett, Nature, 2003, 425, 365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi, Y.-M. Lee and W. Nam, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dionigi, T. Reier, Z. Pawolek, M. Gliech and P. Strasser, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang and H.-M. Meng, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 206, 4362 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakata, T. Ozaki, C. Terashima, A. Fujishima and Y. Einaga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Blake, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1952, 99, 202c CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Mullen and P. L. Howard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1946, 90, 520 Search PubMed .
K. V. Rao, Def. Sci. J., 2001, 51, 161 CrossRef .

          Y. Hori, in Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, ed. C. G. Vayenas, R. E. White and M. E. Gamboa-Aldeco, Springer New York, New York, USA,  2008, vol. 42, ch. 3 Search PubMed .
Q. Lu, J. Rosen, Y. Zhou, G. S. Hutchings, Y. C. Kimmel, J. G. Chen and F. Jiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3242 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Q. Zhou, C. Ling, M. Jones and H. Jia, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17704 RSC .
C. Kim, H. S. Jeon, T. Eom, M. S. Jee, H. Kim, C. M. Friend, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ma, B. J. Trześniewski, J. Xie and W. A. Smith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 9900 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Lee, Y. Zhao, C. Wang, D. G. Mitchell and G. G. Wallace, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1023 RSC .
Y.-C. Hsieh, S. D. Senanayake, Y. Zhang, W. Xu and D. E. Polyansky, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5349 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. Wang, N. Mehio, X. Jin and S. Dai, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Mater. Horizons, 2014, 2, 149 Search PubMed .

          M. E. Q. Pilson, An introduction to the chemistry of the sea, Prentice Hall, N. J.,  1998 Search PubMed .
C. G. Kontoyannis and N. V. Vagenas, Analyst, 2000, 125, 251 RSC .
C. Gabrielli, R. Jaouhari, S. Joiret, G. Maurin and P. Rousseau, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, C478 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jaouhari, A. Benbachir, A. Guenbour, C. Gabrielle, J. Garcia-Jareno and G. Maurin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2151 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pardo, M. C. Merino, A. E. Coy, R. Arrabal, F. Viejo and E. Matykina, Corros. Sci., 2008, 50, 823 CrossRef CAS .
N. Birbilis, M. K. Cavanaugh, A. D. Sudholz, S. M. Zhu, M. A. Easton and A. Gibson, Corros. Sci., 2011, 53, 168 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Qiao, Z. M. Shi, N. Hort, N. I. Z. Abidin and A. Atrens, Corros. Sci., 2012, 61, 185 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Vermass and W. A. Smith, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1143 CrossRef .
Y. C. Li, D. Zhou, Z. Yan, R. H. Goncalves, D. A. Salvatore, C. Berlinguette and T. E. Mallouck, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1149 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Flodman and B. I. Dvorak, Water Environ. Res., 2012, 84, 535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Clifford, T. J. Sorg and G. L. Ghurye, Ion exchange and adsorption of inorganic contaminants, in Water Quality & Treatment: a Handbook on Drinking Water, ed. J. K. Edzwald, McGraw-Hill Inc., New York, NY,  2011 Search PubMed .
R. I. Jeldres, M. P. Arancibia-Bravo, A. Reyes, C. E. Aguirre, L. Cortes and L. A. Cisternas, Miner. Eng., 2017, 109, 10 CrossRef CAS .
B. Khezri, A. C. Fisher and M. Pumera, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8230 RSC .
O. S. Bushuyev, P. D. Luna, C. T. Dinh, L. Tao, G. Saur, J. v. d. Lagemaat, S. O. Kelly and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2018, 2, 825 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Boot-Handford, J. C. Abanades, E. J. Anthony, M. J. Blunt, S. Brandani, N. Mac Dowell, J. R. Fernández, M.-C. Ferrari, R. Gross, J. P. Hallett, R. S. Haszeldine, P. Heptonstall, A. Lyngfelt, Z. Makuch, E. Mangano, R. T. J. Porter, M. Pourkashanian, G. T. Rochelle, N. Shah, J. G. Yao and P. S. Fennell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 130 RSC .
F. Wang, X. Fan, T. Gao, W. Sun, Z. Ma, C. Yang, F. Han, K. Xu and C. Wang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 1121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, X. Liu, C. Li, H. Yin, W. Xi, R. Liu, G. He, X. Zhao, J. Luo and Y. Ding, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801152 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, C. Xu, Z. Chen, S. Ni and Z. X. Shen, Green Energy Environ., 2018, 3, 20–41 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09368gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Faradaic CO and H2 conversion efficiencies as a function of applied potentials for CO2 electroreduction performed on a nanoporous Ag in seawater and 3.5 wt% NaCl. (b) Current–time plot with long-term electrolysis of nanoporous Ag performed in seawater and 3.5 wt% NaCl at a fixed potential of −1.40 V vs. Ag/AgCl (3 M NaCl). (c) The effect of introducing 10 mM and 20 mM CaCl2 into the 3.5 wt% NaCl electrolyte on electrocatalytic CO2 reduction at −1.40 V vs. Ag/AgCl (3 M NaCl); CaCl2 was injected at 900 s. (d) XRD patterns of the as-formed Ag/AgCl, the nanoporous Ag (np-Ag) formed by electroreduction of AgCl, and the np-Ag after undergoing electrolysis in seawater and 3.5 wt% NaCl in the presence of 20 mM CaCl2, respectively. (e) Raman spectra of the corresponding electrodes as described in the XRD analysis. (f) SEM data of the (i) nanoporous Ag, (ii) nanoporous Ag after 24 h electrolysis in 3.5 wt% NaCl, and (iii) nanoporous Ag after 16 h electrolysis in seawater.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the interactions of dissolved ions in salt water (a) and seawater (b) under CO2 purging and an applied cathodic potential. In NaCl electrolyte, the competition to CO2 reduction (eqn (1)) is the proton reduction reaction (eqn (2)). The complexity of seawater as an electrolyte in the presence of several additional major ions is highlighted in bold (seawater also constitutes other ∼0.7% minor ions, which are not shown here). The applied cathodic potential induces a localised pH change resulting in calcite precipitation on the nanoporous Ag (eqn (3)). This reduces the available active sites of Ag to perform CO2 electroreduction (represented by red arrows).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Diagram of a galvanic cell consisting of Mg as the anodic half-cell that is oxidized to Mg2+, and Ag+ is reduced to Ag at the cathodic half-cell. An overlapping box to the cathodic half reaction represents an electrolytic process of catalytic conversion of CO2 to CO by the reduced Ag. (b) Schematic diagram of the assembly of an electrochemical cell to generate H2 and CO. Anodic and cathodic compartments consist of a Mg alloy and an Ag/AgCl electrode, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The voltammograms recorded in a three-electrode configuration for anodic oxidation of a Mg alloy and cathodic CO2 reduction on a chloride-derived nanoporous Ag in 3.5 wt% NaCl and seawater. Plots of moles of H2 (b) and CO (c) obtained from the anodic and cathodic compartments, over a 5 h self-powered full-cell assembly. (d) Representative SEM images of the Ag/AgCl samples after electroreduction in the self-powered full-cell assembly in 3.5 wt% NaCl (i) and seawater (ii).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09368g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
