Recent advances and energy-related applications of high quality/chemically doped graphenes obtained by electrochemical exfoliation methods  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA01711A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA01711A
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7228-7242Recent advances and energy-related applications of high quality/chemically doped graphenes obtained by electrochemical exfoliation methods

        
          
            J. I. 
            Paredes
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            J. M. 
            Munuera
          
          
        
      
Instituto Nacional del Carbón, INCAR-CSIC, Apartado 73, 33080 Oviedo, Spain. E-mail: paredes@incar.csic.es
Received 
      24th February 2017
    , Accepted 28th March 2017First published on 28th March 2017AbstractThe electrochemical exfoliation of graphite, particularly through anodic approaches in aqueous electrolyte, is currently the focus of increasing research attention as a simple, versatile and environmentally friendly means to access different types of graphene, for the most part with a view to their use in energy-related applications. Over the last couple of years, the scope of anodically exfoliated graphene has been critically broadened on the basis of significant developments along two main directions: (1) the attainment of high quality, oxide-free graphene nanosheets using strategies that inhibit the oxidative degradation reactions usually associated to anodic exfoliation processes, and (2) the preparation of heteroatom (nitrogen, sulfur)-doped graphene through simultaneous anodic exfoliation/functionalization methods. Here we provide an overview of such developments, highlighting the key aspects that have made these advances possible as well as the applications that have been explored for the resulting graphenes, mainly in the field of electrochemical energy storage and conversion. Open questions and further avenues for progress in this research area are also discussed.J. I. ParedesJuan Ignacio Paredes graduated in Physics from the University of Cantabria (Spain) and obtained his PhD degree from the University of Oviedo (Spain) working in the field of carbon materials. After a postdoc stay at the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research in Stuttgart (Germany), he was incorporated as a Tenured Scientist into the Instituto Nacional del Carbón (INCAR) in Oviedo, belonging to the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC). His current research interests are focused on the preparation and applications of graphene and other two-dimensional materials, as well as on porous carbon materials.J. M. MunueraJosé María Munuera graduated in Chemistry from the University of Oviedo in 2013 and obtained a Master's Degree in Chemistry in 2014 from the same university. He is currently a PhD candidate at INCAR, working on the preparation and applications of graphene and other two-dimensional materials.
1. Introduction
As the prototypical two-dimensional material and the first to be experimentally isolated more than a decade ago, graphene has been and still is at the center of extensive and concerted research efforts worldwide.1,2 Although the initial phase of the graphene journey was mostly driven by fundamental studies related to its exceptional physical properties, recent years have witnessed a clear shift in focus towards more application-oriented research. This move has been undertaken with the hope that graphene-based products for both incremental and disruptive technologies can be commercialized in the mid- and long-term, having a potentially strong impact on such relevant areas as electronics and photonics, energy conversion/storage, catalysis or biomedicine.2 However, the high expectations placed on graphene carry a number of significant challenges that need to be overcome, one of the most pressing of which is that related to its mass production by convenient and cost-effective means, and with characteristics that can be specifically tailored to each intended use of the material.
Although great strides have been made over the last decade to develop strategies for the large-scale preparation of graphene, a one-fits-all approach to this issue is currently lacking and instead researchers have resorted to a palette of production methods, each of which having its own advantages and drawbacks and being thus well suited only to a certain set of graphene applications.2,3 For instance, the requirement of high quality, large-area graphene films for many uses in electronics is probably best met by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) methods onto metal or even semiconductor/dielectric substrates, but the high growth temperatures, long growth times and/or the need to transfer the films to different target substrates are significant obstacles to their widespread implementation.4,5 On the other hand, when small-sized (typically < 10 μm) graphene nanosheets are needed in high throughput, top-down approaches based on the exfoliation of graphite and graphite derivatives are likely the best option.6 Among the latter, the so-called graphite oxide route is known to afford large amounts of single-layered material, i.e. reduced graphene oxide (RGO), via harsh oxidation, exfoliation and reduction of graphite.7–9 Nevertheless, the carbon lattice in RGO incorporates oxygen functional groups and structural defects inherited from the oxidation step that can only be removed altogether under very high temperatures,10 which hinders its wider utility. Alternatively, pristine graphene flakes of a high structural quality can be obtained by direct exfoliation of graphite in the liquid phase with the aid of ultrasound or shear forces, but this approach generally suffers from low exfoliation yields (usually < 5 wt%) and degrees (samples dominated by few- to multi-layer flakes).11–15
In the pursuit of efficient exfoliation methods that can bypass the limitations of the two aforementioned routes, researchers have recently paid attention to electrochemical approaches.16–18 These involve the expansion and subsequent delamination of a graphite electrode triggered by ion intercalation under cathodic or anodic voltage in a proper electrolytic medium. Of particular relevance is anodic exfoliation, because it can be readily carried out in water using simple electrolytes (e.g., sulfate-based) to give well-exfoliated graphene nanosheets (mostly 1–3 layers thick) in high yield and throughput.17,18 Furthermore, the versatility associated to electrochemical methods in terms of, e.g., type and concentration of electrolyte, or inclusion of electrolyte additives, provides ample opportunities to tune some relevant characteristics of the graphene materials during the exfoliation step, an ability that is not so easily accessible through the graphite oxide or direct liquid-phase exfoliation routes. In this regard, research conducted over the last couple of years has demonstrated two critically important points, namely, that (1) graphene nanosheets of structural quality and chemical composition approaching those of pristine graphene produced by direct liquid-phase exfoliation can be attained through the anodic approach, in spite of the a priori unfavorable (highly oxidizing) conditions associated to the latter, and (2) chemically doped/functionalized nanosheets can be generated during the anodic process, thus affording a straightforward, one-pot method to access graphene materials with enhanced functionality for use in many applications (mostly energy-related). These very recent advances have strengthened the position of anodic exfoliation as a serious contender in the quest for graphene production techniques amenable to industrial scale-up.
Here, we highlight the research strategies that have been explored along the two relevant avenues outlined above, as well as the potential applications that have been investigated for the resulting high-quality and/or chemically doped graphene materials. It is worth noting that the explored applications have mostly encompassed, although they have not restricted to, the field of electrochemical energy storage and conversion (e.g., supercapacitors, batteries, fuel cells). Finally, a perspective on unresolved issues and possible avenues to further advance the field of electrochemically exfoliated graphene is provided.
2. Towards pristine graphene nanosheets via aqueous anodic exfoliation
The electrochemical exfoliation of graphite to give graphene nanosheets can be carried out essentially under two different modes of operation, namely the cathodic mode and the anodic mode. For cathodic exfoliation, a graphite electrode is subjected to a negative bias voltage in the presence of a proper electrolytic medium.16–18 Researchers have identified certain lithium-, sodium-, alkylammonium- or imidazolium-based salts in such organic solvents as propylene carbonate (PC), acetonitrile, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) or N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) to be efficient electrolyte systems towards this end. Specific examples include LiClO4 in PC,19 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium or 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIM/BMIM BF4) in acetonitrile,20,21 NaCl or LiCl in DMSO,22,23 tetrabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate or hexafluorophosphate (TBA BF4/PF6) in NMP or DMF,24,25 or tetra-n-octylammonium bromide in DMF.26 LiCl in deep eutectic solvents (e.g., choline chloride-urea) has also been used as an electrolyte,27 as well as pure molten salts at high temperature (e.g., LiOH at 600 °C) in the absence of any solvent.28 Exfoliation of the graphite cathode is believed to be facilitated by intercalation of the solvated cations present in the electrolytic medium, for example, (Li·2PC)+ and (Li·3PC)+ species in the case of LiClO4 in PC.19 The fact that the process is carried out with graphite under reducing conditions (negative electrode) implies that an extensive oxidation of the resulting graphene nanosheets can be readily avoided, giving rise to products of a considerable structural quality.16 Indeed, moderate to low oxygen contents (O/C atomic ratios between 0.03 and 0.08) have been frequently reported for cathodically exfoliated graphenes.22–26 However, the known cathodic exfoliation strategies generally require long intercalation times (several hours) followed by similarly long sonication treatment in proper solvent systems in order to complete delamination of the cathodically intercalated product.18 Furthermore, with a view to up-scaling the production process, the use of non-innocuous organic solvents is not desirable from an environmental standpoint and the high boiling point of many of such solvents can also be an issue for the subsequent processing of the graphene products.
On the other hand, anodic exfoliation of graphite can be readily accomplished in aqueous medium after short intercalation times (even minutes) using proper intercalating anions derived from widely available acids (e.g., H2SO4), their inorganic salts (Na2SO4, etc.) or ionic liquids as the electrolyte.17 Indeed, early work by Liu et al.29 and Lu et al.30 demonstrated that graphite can be anodically exfoliated in an aqueous medium using a number of ionic liquids as the electrolyte to give graphene nanosheets. Although the potential of this method as a simple, environmentally friendly and scalable approach to graphene production was immediately apparent, it was also recognized that the structural quality and thus many properties of the material could become seriously compromised due to oxidative attack by hydroxyl and other oxygen radicals generated from the oxidation of water molecules during the anodic process.30 Furthermore, it was assumed that some extent of oxidation of the graphite anode was even necessary to open up its edges, grain boundaries and other defects, hence facilitating the intercalation of anions from the electrolyte and the subsequent expansion/delamination of the material (Scheme 1).31 Indeed, most of the work on anodically exfoliated graphene reported ever since (using ionic liquids or other common electrolytes) has found that the nanosheets are significantly oxidized, with O/C atomic ratio values typically ranging between ∼0.10 and 0.20.32–37 Such values are comparable to those commonly found for many types of RGO,9 but much higher than those of pristine graphene flakes derived from direct exfoliation routes (O/C ratios ∼0.01).38 However, different to the case of the graphite oxide route, which critically relies on extensive oxidation of the parent graphite to allow its efficient delamination, there is mounting evidence that oxidation of the graphene lattice can be actually avoided in the aqueous anodic exfoliation of graphite. As outlined below, to a large extent the key to anodically exfoliated graphenes with physicochemical characteristics approaching those of pristine graphene flakes lies in a judicious choice of electrolytes and/or electrolyte additives.
 Scheme 1  Pictorial representation of the mechanism of anodic exfoliation of graphite in aqueous medium using a common electrolyte (sulfate-based salt). Initially, the anodic oxidation of water molecules generates highly oxidizing species (e.g., hydroxyl radicals) that attack and open up the edges and grain boundaries of the graphite anode. This allows the subsequent intercalation of anions and water molecules into the graphite interlayer spaces. Decomposition of these intercalated species into gaseous products (e.g., O2, SO2, etc.) leads to a violent expansion of the graphite layers, eventually affording well exfoliated products, i.e., graphene nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31 (American Chemical Society). 
Owing to its well-known ability to intercalate graphite, particularly by electrochemical means,39,40 H2SO4 is frequently used as the electrolyte in aqueous anodic exfoliation processes.33,36,37,41–43 However, the highly acidic nature of such a medium is known to further promote oxidation reactions at the graphite electrode, thus leading to exfoliated graphene nanosheets with a high density of defects and oxygen-containing functional groups. Researchers originally addressed this issue by rising the pH of the electrolytic medium through addition of a proper base (e.g., KOH) combined with cycles of cathodic reduction of the graphite electrode,44,45 and more recently by simply using sulfate-based salts [(NH4)2SO4, K2SO4, etc.] instead of the acid.31,46 For example, Parvez et al. have demonstrated that anodic exfoliation of graphite flakes and foil in 0.1 M (NH4)2SO4 aqueous solution affords mostly monolayer and bilayer, micrometer-sized (1–15 μm) graphene nanosheets in large quantities with an O/C ratio of about 0.06 (Fig. 1a–c).31 In a different work, graphene with a similar extent of oxidation could be produced from a mixture of NaOH and H2O2 as the electrolyte.47 In the latter case, it was proposed that intercalation of nucleophilic O22− anions generated from the reaction of H2O2 molecules with OH− ions was the main driving force in the expansion and delamination of the graphite electrode.
 Fig. 1  Strategies towards high quality graphene by anodic exfoliation of graphite. (a) Schematic of a typical two-electrode setup for the anodic exfoliation of graphite. (b) Digital photographs of (i) a starting graphite foil piece, (ii) the same piece after anodic exfoliation in aqueous (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte, (iii) the exfoliated product in the electrolytic solution as well as (iv) dispersed in N,N-dimethylformamide. (c) Scanning electron microscopy image of graphene nanosheets prepared by anodic exfoliation in (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte. (d) Raman spectra of bulk graphite (blue trace) as well as graphene anodically exfoliated in H2SO4 electrolyte in the absence (red) and presence (black) of melamine as an electrolyte additive. (e) Schematic of the anodic exfoliation of graphite in (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte using TEMPO as an additive to prevent graphene oxidation. TEMPO neutralizes ˙OH radicals generated from water during the anodic process by forming an oxoammonium cation and a less reactive OH− anion. (f) Schematic of proposed processes occurring during anodic exfoliation of graphite in the presence of (i) a non-oxidizable electrolyte (SO42−) and (ii) an oxidizable electrolyte (benzene sulfonate), which acts as a sacrificial agent preventing graphene oxidation by ˙OH radicals. (g) C 1s core level X-ray photoelectron spectra of graphene exfoliated in (i) Na2SO4 electrolyte and (ii) the oxidation-preventing electrolyte SNDS (black trace). Red trace in (ii): spectrum of pristine graphene prepared by direct ultrasonic exfoliation of graphite in water/surfactant solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31 and 51 (American Chemical Society), as well as ref. 49 and 52 (Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Incorporation of certain additives to the electrolytic medium has recently emerged as an effective approach to curtail the extent of oxidation in anodically exfoliated graphene. As reported by Rao et al., while anodic treatment of a graphite rod in aqueous ∼0.9 M H2SO4 solution led to an exfoliated product with characteristics comparable to those of graphene oxide, addition of an equimolar amount of glycine (the simplest of all amino acids) to the acid solution afforded nanosheets with much improved structural quality.48 However, oxygen was still present in the glycine-derived material to a relatively high degree, with O/C ratios around 0.12. Better results (O/C ratios ∼0.04) have been obtained with the use of a limited amount of melamine (∼16 mM in the presence of 0.66 M H2SO4).49 Indeed, the use of this additive yielded nanosheets with a significantly improved structural quality, as gauged by a decreased Raman D to G band ratio (ID/IG ratio), which is a common proxy for crystalline quality in graphitic materials (Fig. 1d). Although no mechanistic picture of the possible (electro)chemical reactions involving melamine was provided, it was believed that adsorption of this nitrogen-containing aromatic compound on the graphene surface yielded an encapsulating layer that protected the nanosheets against oxidative attack by oxygen radicals. Addition of H2O2 to an aqueous (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte has also been reported to result in anodically exfoliated graphene with lower oxygen content.50
Because oxygen radicals (e.g., ˙OH) generated from water electrolysis at the graphite anode are thought to be largely responsible for the oxidation of the exfoliated graphene nanosheets, the use of electrolyte additives that are efficient at neutralizing or eliminating such radicals should have a positive impact on the quality of the resulting graphene materials. Based on this idea, Yang et al. have explored a number of reducing agents, namely ascorbic acid, gallic acid, hydrazine, sodium borohydride, hydrogen iodide and (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl (TEMPO), as additives in the anodic exfoliation of graphite with (NH4)2SO4 as the electrolyte.51 Whereas gallic acid, hydrazine and hydrogen iodide were found to be unsuitable for the intended purpose (they decomposed upon application of the bias voltage or jeopardized the exfoliation efficiency), the three other antioxidants had a beneficial effect on the nanosheet quality without compromising the exfoliation yield. In particular, TEMPO was remarkably efficient at inhibiting the oxidation and structural degradation of the graphene lattice, affording micrometer-sized, single-/few-layer nanosheets with O/C ratios ∼0.04 and ID/IG ratios below 0.1. The higher structural quality of these nanosheets led to increased charge carrier mobilities in field-effect transistor measurements compared to materials exfoliated in H2SO4 or (NH4)SO4 only, as well as to sheet resistance values similar to those of some CVD-grown graphene samples. To rationalize the role of TEMPO in the anodic exfoliation process, the authors proposed that it reacted with ˙OH radicals to yield a metastable intermediate and then an oxoammonium cation (Fig. 1e). As a result, the highly reactive ˙OH species were eliminated through their conversion to the hydroxide anion (OH−), thereby preventing the exfoliated graphene nanosheets from being oxidized by the former. Finally, the TEMPO radicals would be regenerated at the cathode through electrochemical reduction of the oxoammonium cation.
A step further in the strategy outlined by Yang et al. towards pristine anodically exfoliated graphene has been recently taken by Munuera et al., who demonstrated that an oxidation-preventing ability can be incorporated in the exfoliating electrolyte itself, hence avoiding the inclusion of additives in the medium.52 Central to this approach was the selection of certain sulfonated aromatic hydrocarbons as the electrolyte. While the sulfonate groups (up to 4 per molecule) provided the necessary anionic character for intercalation and delamination of the graphite anode, the well-known propensity of aromatic hydrocarbon moieties to be oxidized by hydroxyl and other oxygen radicals furnished the electrolyte with a capability to eliminate such radicals and thus curtail oxidation of the exfoliated nanosheets (Fig. 1f). Although a pool of sulfonated hydrocarbons was tested towards this purpose, the best results were obtained with disodium naphthalene-1,5-disulfonate (SNDS), which afforded single-/few-layer (<5), submicrometric graphene nanosheets with an O/C ratio as low as ∼0.02 and ID/IG ratio of ∼0.2. Indeed, different to the case of common electrolytes (e.g., Na2SO4), the C 1s X-ray photoelectron spectrum of SNDS-derived graphene was almost identical to that of pristine graphene produced by ultrasonication of graphite in water/surfactant solution (Fig. 1g). The oxidation of SNDS during the exfoliation process was confirmed by ultrahigh performance liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis. Trisodium naphthalene-1,3(6,7)-trisulfonate and tetrasodium pyrene-1,3,6,8-tetrasulfonate also exhibited a good performance (O/C ratios of the resulting graphenes ∼0.05–0.06).
The very limited extent of oxidation achieved with SNDS proved that anodically exfoliated graphene with physicochemical characteristics very closely approaching those of pristine graphene can indeed be realized. For instance, the electrical conductivity of paper-like films prepared from SNDS-exfoliated graphene was ∼46000 S m−1, which compared favorably with the values obtained for films made up of graphene flakes obtained by direct liquid-phase exfoliation.52 Moreover, these sulfonate-based electrolytes exhibited a multifunctional nature: in addition to acting as intercalating/exfoliating ionic species and sacrificial agents against graphene oxidation, they functioned as colloidal stabilizers for the exfoliated nanosheets in water and as anchoring sites for the nucleation and growth of metal nanoparticles on the low-defect nanosheets. Also, graphite could be anodically exfoliated by Kurys et al. using Na2SO4 as the intercalating electrolyte and the aromatic compound sodium benzoate as an additive, with cycles of cathodic reduction.53 However, although a product with an O/C ratio as low as ∼0.04 could be obtained, it was mostly made up of multilayer graphene (10–20 layers).
Besides the use of carefully selected electrolytes or electrolyte additives, or the application of cathodic reduction steps, researchers have identified other factors that have a bearing on the oxidation degree of anodically exfoliated graphenes. Particularly relevant is the type of graphite employed for exfoliation. For instance, relatively low density (∼1 g cm−3) graphite foil has been shown to afford graphenes with lower oxygen content than that of their counterparts derived from high density (∼2.25 g cm−3) graphites, such as highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG).46 The presence of a large number of tiny voids and openings in the former graphite was thought to facilitate anionic intercalation compared to the case of HOPG, thus making its delamination process to be less reliant on oxidative attack by radicals. This idea was further supported by the observation that graphenes with reduced oxygen and defect levels can be obtained by anodic exfoliation of graphite foil with H2SO4 if the electrode is first subjected to a pre-expansion step (via anodic treatment with NaOH).54 It has also been reported that independent control of the intercalation and exfoliation steps (through the magnitude and duration of anodic voltage pulses) allows some modulation of the defect density in the exfoliated nanosheets.55
The attainment of graphene flakes with low oxygen content, high structural quality and good exfoliation degree by the approaches described above can be exploited towards applications that require materials with high electrical conductivity and surface area, as they could outperform other mass-produced graphene materials with higher oxygen content and thus lower conductivity (graphite oxide route), or with larger flake thickness and thus lower surface area/aspect ratio (wet direct exfoliation). Indeed, the potential of high quality, anodically exfoliated graphene has been explored towards different practical uses, many of which are energy-related. For instance, graphenes obtained by anodic exfoliation in (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte (with or without TEMPO as an additive) have been employed as electrodes for all-solid-state, thin-film supercapacitors with areal capacitances outperforming those of similar devices made with RGO (e.g., 11.5 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1vs. 7.6 mF cm−2 for RGO).31,51 In addition, both the areal and volumetric capacitance of a related type of device, referred to as micro-supercapacitor (MSC), can be dramatically increased by incorporating V2O5 nanobelts in the electrode (Fig. 2a).56 These nanobelts act as spacers for the graphene nanosheets, thus facilitating access of ionic species to the electrode. As a result, MSCs with ultrahigh volumetric energy densities (∼20 mW h cm−3) could be attained. Furthermore, incorporation of methyl viologen to the electrolyte in these MSCs afforded a stimulus-responsive device that provided direct visual information of its charge/discharge state (Fig. 2b).
 Fig. 2  Energy-related applications of high quality anodically exfoliated graphene. (a) Areal and volumetric capacitance as a function of scan rate for micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) made up of a hybrid film of V2O5 nanobelts and graphene nanosheets prepared by anodic exfoliation in (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte. (b) Digital photograph of the MSC in its discharged (left) and charged (right) state. The electrochromic effect was attained by incorporation of methyl viologen to the MSC electrolyte. (c) Energy density as a function of current density for graphene aerogel supercapacitors prepared by freeze drying graphene suspensions at different temperatures (graphene derived from anodic exfoliation in H2SO4/KOH electrolyte). (d) Discharge rate capability and coulombic efficiency at different charge/discharge rates for Li-ion batteries with cathodes made up of carbon-coated LiFePO4 powder without (blue triangles) and with a small amount (1.2 wt%, black squares) of graphene prepared by anodic exfoliation in H2SO4/KOH electrolyte. (e) High resolution transmission electron microscopy image of the ternary hybrid material comprised of Co0.85Se/NiFe layered double hydroxide/graphene nanosheets (prepared by anodic exfoliation in (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte). (f) Overall water splitting performance of an electrolyzer made up of the ternary hybrid as both the anode and cathode (blue trace), compared with devices incorporating different combinations of Ir- and Pt-based materials as anode/cathode (black, red and green traces). Reproduced with permission from ref. 56 (Wiley-VCH), ref. 59 (MacMillan Publishers Limited), as well as ref. 57 and 61 (Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The large aspect ratio and high quality of graphene anodically exfoliated in H2SO4/KOH mixed electrolyte has been exploited for the production of graphene aerogels with a high electrical conductivity and well-developed meso-/macro-porosity57 When used as electrodes in supercapacitors, these aerogels delivered gravimetric capacitance and energy density values (up to 325 F g−1 and 45 W h kg−1, respectively) higher than those of many other carbon-based supercapacitors (Fig. 2c). More recently, a 3D Ni/Ni(OH)2/graphene foam has been reported and used as a supercapacitor electrode.58 Although the (pseudo)capacitive behavior of the material was dominated by the Ni(OH)2 component, the graphene nanosheets [obtained by anodic exfoliation with (NH4)2SO4] furnished the foam with improved electrical conductivity and cycling stability. Similar beneficial effects in terms of capacity enhancement and retention have been observed upon incorporation of a small amount of high quality anodic graphene to carbon-coated LiFePO4 used as the cathode in Li-ion batteries (Fig. 2d).59 Also, graphene flakes produced by anodic exfoliation in (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte have served as an electrically conductive support for (1) poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) layers to be used as a counter electrode in dye-sensitized solar cells with an electrocatalytic behavior comparable to that of Pt,60 and (2) Co0.85Se and NiFe layered double hydroxide nanosheets (Fig. 2e), with the resulting ternary hybrid material exhibiting excellent electrocatalytic performance towards overall water splitting (Fig. 2f).61 Other applications of high quality anodic graphene include the development of (1) ultrathin transparent films with a high strain sensing capability (gauge factors up to 1037 at 2% strain) for use as artificial electronic skin or in health monitoring,62 (2) electrically conductive polymer (polyvinyl butyral) composites,49 (3) transparent and conductive continuous graphene circuits (generated by high-temperature coalescence of individual micrometer-sized nanosheets),63 and (4) graphene-supported, noble metal (Au, Pt) nanoparticle catalysts with a high activity towards a number of reduction reactions of organic compounds, such as nitroarenes52 and ethyl benzoate.48
3. Functional graphenes via anodic exfoliation with simultaneous chemical doping
The functionalization of graphene by covalent and non-covalent means has been an active area of research for several years now, allowing the physical and chemical properties of this two-dimensional material to be fine-tuned towards many relevant technological applications.64,65 For graphenes obtained by electrochemical exfoliation, the ability to carry out the functionalization process in parallel to the exfoliation step would be a particularly attractive feature, as it would afford a simple one-pot, one-step access to functional graphenes. Several attempts in this regard have involved the covalent grafting of substituted aryl groups during the cathodic exfoliation of graphite on the basis of the aryl diazonium chemistry, which exploits the fact that electroreduction of aryl diazonium cations at the graphite electrode (cathode) generates the corresponding aryl radicals that can then readily attack the graphene lattice.66,67 Although a priori counterintuitive, functionalization with aryl diazonium species is also possible under anodic conditions, as very recent work by Ossonon and Bélanger has demonstrated (using anthraquinone diazonium and H2SO4 as the electrolyte).68 In this case, it can be argued that functionalization occurs via spontaneous reduction of the diazonium cation by the exfoliated graphene flakes once the latter become physically detached from the graphite anode.
However, in anodic exfoliation processes the non-covalent functionalization with amphiphilic species (e.g., metal phthalocyanine derivatives,69 anthracene carboxylic acid,70 tetracyanoquinodimethane,71 phytic acid72 and sulfonated hydrocarbons52) has traditionally been much more common (Fig. 3a). Indeed, such ionic species were shown to serve multiple functions, including those of exfoliating electrolyte, colloidal stabilizer and others. Owing to their amphiphilic nature, these electrolytes are known to readily adsorb on the graphene surface (frequently through π–π interactions), furnishing the nanosheets with enhanced processability in solvents (Fig. 3b) as well as other attractive characteristics, such as an enhanced electroactivity that is useful in energy storage applications,70,71 an ability to anchor and stabilize catalytic metal nanoparticles,52 or an improved performance as flame retardant in polymer composites.72 By resorting to certain electrolytes or electrolyte additives, graphene functionalization with non-molecular species has also been achieved during anodic exfoliation. For example, the use of sulfourea in combination with H2SO4/KOH electrolyte has afforded graphene nanosheets compounded with electrodeposited sulfur particles that exhibit an excellent performance as electrodes for Li–S batteries.73 Fe3O4 nanoparticle/graphene hybrids have also been prepared via anodic exfoliation in aqueous Fe2(SO4)3 electrolyte (with the assistance of a thermal annealing step), and have demonstrated an excellent performance as electromagnetic interference shielding materials and as electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).74
 Fig. 3  (a) Chemical structure of the amphiphilic electrolytes copper phthalocyanine-3,4′,4′′,4′′′-tetrasulfonic acid tetrasodium salt (top) and naphthalene-1,5-disulfonic acid disodium salt (bottom). (b) Schematic diagram of the anodic exfoliation of graphite in the presence of 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) as the electrolyte to give TCNQ-functionalized graphene nanosheets that are readily dispersible in water. (c) Schematic of the preparation of nitrogen-doped graphene through anodic exfoliation of graphite in ethylammonium nitrate (EAN)/water mixtures. (d) Typical N 1s core level X-ray photoelectron spectrum of nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets obtained by anodic exfoliation of graphite in aqueous (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte in the presence of NH3 as nitrogen source. (e) Percentage of the different nitrogen configurations present in the nitrogen-doped graphene as a function of NH3 concentration in the aqueous electrolyte. (f) Schematic structure of the two nitrogen configurations present in nitrogen-doped graphene obtained by anodic exfoliation of graphite in mixed glycine/NH3 aqueous solutions. (g) S 2p core level X-ray photoelectron spectrum of sulfur-doped graphene prepared with H2SO4 as the exfoliating electrolyte and Na2S2O3 as the sulfur source. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52, 69, 71, 78, 80 and 83 (Royal Society of Chemistry), as well as ref. 81 (Elsevier Ltd). 
Probably more relevant from both fundamental and applied perspectives are functional graphenes obtained by chemical (covalent) doping of the carbon lattice with such non-metal heteroatoms as nitrogen, sulfur, boron or phosphorus. Heteroatom incorporation usually brings about changes to the local electronic structure of graphene (e.g., an increase or a decrease in the density of states at the carbon atoms bonded to the heteroatom), which in turn can have a large positive effect on its performance in energy storage, sensing or electrocatalytic applications.75,76 Unfortunately, a majority of the known doping strategies involve the use of high temperatures, harsh reagents and/or complex processing steps.75 In this regard, electrochemical methods for the simultaneous exfoliation and doping of graphene constitute an attractive alternative, as they can be carried out at room temperature under mild conditions (e.g., the required highly reactive agents can be generated in situ using proper electrolytes or electrolyte additives). Moreover, because the presence of oxygen functional groups is known to greatly facilitate the incorporation of heteroatoms in graphitic materials,77 the frequently unwanted oxidation of the graphene nanosheets that is generally associated to anodic exfoliation processes can be turned to good advantage for the purpose of doping. Building on this idea, several research groups have reported the preparation of nitrogen- and sulfur-containing graphene via anodic exfoliation/doping methods. Indeed, early work by the group of Zhao demonstrated the use of electrolytes incorporating nitrate anions and ammonium-based cations (i.e., ethylammonium nitrate and NH4NO3) for the production of nitrogen-doped anodic graphene (Fig. 3c), with the heteroatom mostly present in pyridinic and pyrrolic form.78,79 However, only modest doping levels were attained in these cases (N/C ratios ∼0.01–0.03). Although the doping mechanisms were not investigated, the authors suggested that nitrogen in the graphene lattice originated mainly from the ammonium-based cation and not from the nitrate anion.78
Significant advances in the doping of anodic graphene with nitrogen have been made very recently using NH3 as an electrolyte additive. Specifically, by combining this nitrogen source with (NH4)2SO4 as the exfoliating electrolyte, Lou et al. were able to attain graphene nanosheets having N/C ratios as high as ∼0.06 (∼0.10 when the anodic process was carried out at 60 °C).80 Again in this case, pyridinic and pyrrolic species were the dominant nitrogen configurations, although a significant fraction of graphitic nitrogen could also be generated at low NH3 concentrations in the electrolytic solution (Fig. 3d and e). No significant nitrogen doping was observed when using (NH4)2SO4 alone, suggesting that the NH4+ ion was not an efficient nitrogen source in the anodic process. Importantly, on the basis of a detailed analysis of the gases released during the anodic treatment as well as of the partially exfoliated graphite electrodes and the obtained nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets, the authors gained some mechanistic insight into the doping process. It was concluded that NH3 molecules adsorb on the graphite electrode and are electrooxidized to give highly reactive NHx species (x = 0, 1, 2). The latter can then react with the oxygen functional groups grafted on the carbon lattice as a result of its anodic oxidation, finally yielding gaseous NOx molecules as well as nitrogen species covalently bonded to the lattice. Moreover, CO and CO2 were also among the gaseous species released during anodic exfoliation, implying the creation of carbon vacant sites in the graphene nanosheets where nitrogen atoms can subsequently incorporate in the form of substitutional (i.e., pyridinic and graphitic) species.
As an alternative to the use of (NH4)2SO4, glycine has been employed as an exfoliating electrolyte in combination with NH3 to afford graphene with a high doping level (N/C ratio ∼0.08; Fig. 3f).81 In this case, it is conceivable that glycine itself also acts as a nitrogen source, because NH3 is known to be one of the products of its anodic oxidation. The use of nitrogen-containing solvents instead of water constitutes another strategy to access nitrogen-doped graphenes via anodic exfoliation that obviates the need for electrolyte additives, as work with formamide (solvent and nitrogen source) and LiClO4 (electrolyte) has brought to light.82 Similar to the case of NH3, the oxidative decomposition of formamide at the anode was believed to generate reactive intermediates that then went on to combine with oxygen functional groups or structural defects and introduce the heteroatom in the graphene lattice (N/C ratio ∼0.03–0.04). Also noteworthy from this study was the use of multiwalled carbon nanotubes instead of graphite as the graphene source, which led to the production of nanoribbons (rather than irregularly shaped nanosheets) upon their sequential unzipping during the anodic treatment.
Concerning the anodic preparation of sulfur-doped graphene, recent efforts have identified sodium thiosulfate (Na2S2O3) to be an efficient additive (sulfur source) when used in combination with H2SO4 (exfoliating electrolyte).83,84 Because the S2O32− anion can be readily electrooxidized under anodic conditions to give a variety of sulfur-containing intermediate species,85 reaction of the latter with the oxygen functional groups present in the exfoliated graphene nanosheets can be regarded as a plausible mechanism for the introduction of this heteroatom in the carbon lattice. S/C ratios around 0.04 were attained by this strategy, with most the sulfur being present in the form of thiol groups (Fig. 3g). Although H2SO4 could have also acted as a sulfur doping source, it is quite unlikely that this was actually the case: anodic oxidation of the SO42− anion to give reactive intermediates is not to be expected because sulfur is already in its highest possible oxidation state (6+). As a matter of fact, no sulfur doping of graphene was observed when the exfoliation process was carried out in the absence of Na2S2O3.
Co-doping of anodic graphene with sulfur and nitrogen has also been recently reported by Parvez et al. using (NH4)2SO4 as both exfoliating electrolyte and heteroatom source, attaining N/C and S/C ratios of ∼0.05 and 0.06, respectively.86 This result seems to be at odds with the previous findings that neither NH4+ nor SO42− are efficient sources of the corresponding heteroatom in anodic exfoliation processes.80,83 It is worth noting, though, that the use of graphite rod as the anode (as opposed to, e.g., graphite foil) was critical for a successful doping with the (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte. With a graphite rod, the exfoliation was seen to proceed at a slower rate and gave rise to nanosheets with a much higher extent of oxidation (indeed, they were regarded as graphene oxide; O/C ratio ∼0.43).86 Under such circumstances, a possible scenario for the doping with nitrogen could be the following: (1) the NH4+ cations reach the cathode of the electrolytic cell (typically a platinum wire or foil), where they would be electroreduced to give NH3 and H2; (2) the build-up of NH3 molecules would raise the pH of the electrolyte, originally just around the cathode but then progressively closer to the graphite anode; (3) a basic medium would favor a significant population of NH3 species in detriment of the population of NH4+ species; (4) nitrogen incorporation to the graphene lattice would proceed via anodic oxidation of NH3 as discussed above.80 The sluggishness of the exfoliation process would give the NH3 molecules enough time to accumulate at the graphite anode, whereas the high density of oxygen functional groups in the nanosheets would be especially conducive to facilitating the incorporation of nitrogen in the lattice. Concerning the introduction of sulfur species, inspection of the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy data provided by the authors86 revealed that they were fully consistent with the presence of just sulfates. It is therefore quite likely that sulfur was incorporated to the graphene nanosheets just in the form of adsorbed SO42−. On a separate note, the simultaneous anodic exfoliation and doping of graphene with halogens has been very recently reported by Munaiah et al.,87 using potassium halides as both the exfoliating electrolyte and halogen source. Depending on the specific halogen, doping levels between 0.26 and 2.32 at% were achieved (it was the highest in the case of fluorine and lowest for iodine).
Heteroatom-doped graphenes usually exhibit promising performance as metal-free electrocatalysts for a number of energy-relevant reactions, most notably the ORR,75 so it is not surprising that many of the explored applications for doped graphenes obtained by the electrochemical strategies described above have focused on such a use. For instance, nitrogen-doped anodic graphenes prepared with different electrolytes and/or electrolyte additives have shown a good behavior as ORR electrocatalysts, displaying onset potentials between −0.08 and −0.20 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), as well as peak potentials around −0.3 V (Fig. 4a).78–80 Electron transfer numbers for this reaction were determined to be in the 3.4–3.9 range (compared to values around 2.5 for non-doped anodic graphene), which revealed the electrocatalytic process to be dominated by the sought-after 4-electron reduction of O2 to H2O. Furthermore, even though they were outperformed by benchmark Pt/carbon electrocatalysts in terms of onset potential and peak current values, the nitrogen-doped anodic graphenes boasted a higher stability and much better tolerance to the presence of methanol, which is a common fuel in fuel cells (Fig. 4a).80 The predominance of pyridinic configurations in the nitrogen-doped anodic graphenes was concluded to be the main reason behind their good ORR performance, as this type of configuration is thought to provide the most active sites in nitrogen-doped carbons towards such a reaction.88 More specifically, it has been shown that carbon atoms adjacent to pyridinic nitrogen in graphitic carbon materials possess a localized density of electronic states near the Fermi level that makes them behave as Lewis basic sites. In turn, this character of Lewis base favors the adsorption of O2 (the first step of the ORR) onto such carbon atoms, which consequently act as the active sites allowing the reduction reaction to proceed. Building upon its ORR electrocatalytic activity, nitrogen-doped anodic graphene was successfully employed as the cathode catalyst in Al–air batteries, delivering gravimetric capacities and energy densities as high as 619 mA h gAl−1 and 817 W h kgAl−1, respectively (Fig. 4b).80 These values were higher than those of other Al–air batteries that make use of metal oxides (e.g., MnOx and LiMn2O4) as the catalyst. Sulfur-doped anodic graphene was also demonstrated to be electroactive towards the ORR. Nevertheless, its performance was lower than that of their nitrogen-doped counterparts (e.g., onset potential of −0.22 V vs. Ag/AgCl and electron transfer number of 2.67 for the material prepared with H2SO4 and Na2S2O3),84 although it could be greatly improved by combining the nanosheets with Fe nanoparticles.86 Remarkably, this shortcoming of sulfur-doped graphene relative to nitrogen-doped graphene and Pt/carbon ORR electrocatalysts did not prevent the former from outperforming a commercial Pt/carbon material when used as the cathode catalyst in microbial fuel cells (Fig. 4c and d).84 Such a result was put down to limitations in the diffusion of oxygen and/or protons to the Pt-based catalyst in the actual cells, being much less severe in the case of the sulfur-doped nanosheets.
 Fig. 4  Energy-related applications of chemically doped anodic graphene. (a) Cyclic voltammograms of nitrogen-doped graphene (obtained via anodic exfoliation in (NH4)2SO4/NH3 electrolyte) recorded at 100 mV s−1 in oxygen-saturated, aqueous 0.1 M KOH solution in the absence (blue trace) and presence (red) of 3 M methanol. (b) Galvanostatic discharge curves of Al–air battery containing either nitrogen-doped anodic graphene (N-graphene, red trace) or non-doped anodic graphene (C-graphene, blue) as the cathode catalyst at a current density of 1 mA cm−2. The indicated specific capacity was normalized to the mass of consumed Al anode. (c) Schematic of a microbial fuel cell incorporating sulfur-doped anodic graphene as the cathode catalyst and an electrochemically active biofilm, EAB (S. oneidensis), as the anode. (d) Areal power density generated by the microbial fuel cell in the absence of catalyst at the cathode (green symbols) as well as in the presence of either Pt/carbon (black) or sulfur-doped anodic graphene (red) as the cathode catalyst. (e) Gravimetric capacitance of nitrogen-doped anodic graphene (exfoliated in glycine/NH3 electrolyte) as a function of the discharge current density when used as a supercapacitor electrode in aqueous KOH electrolyte. (f) Ragone plot of a supercapacitor that uses sulfur-doped anodic graphene (exfoliated in H2SO4/Na2S2O3 electrolyte) as the electrode in KOH electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80, 83 and 84 (Royal Society of Chemistry) as well as ref. 81 (Elsevier Ltd). 
Finally, a couple of studies have explored the potential application of heteroatom-doped anodic graphenes as electrodes for supercapacitors. More to the point, nitrogen-doped graphene obtained by exfoliation in aqueous glycine/NH3 electrolyte was shown to yield capacitance values in aqueous KOH electrolyte as high as 152.8 and 132.7 F g−1 at current densities of 5 and 50 A g−1, respectively (Fig. 4e), as well as a remarkable cycling behavior (∼96% of capacitance retention after 10000 cycles at 5 A g−1).81 Even better results were attained with sulfur-doped graphene generated in H2SO4/Na2S2O3 electrolyte, with a capacitance value of 285 F g−1 at a current density of 5 A g−1 (also in KOH electrolyte) and a capacitance retention value of 92% after 1500 charge/discharge cycles (86% of retention at 10 A g−1).83 This translated into gravimetric energy densities as high as 160 W h kg−1 at a power density of 5161 W kg−1 (Fig. 4f), suggesting such a type of anodic graphene to be a good candidate for practical applications.
4. Summary and outlook
The electrochemical exfoliation of graphite, and in particular the variant carried out under anodic conditions with aqueous electrolytes, has recently emerged as a very promising method for the production of different types of graphene, boasting such attractive features as simplicity, versatility, environmental friendliness or up-scalability towards industrial implementation. In the preceding sections, we have discussed the most relevant advances that have taken place in this area within the last couple of years, which have encompassed two main research directions: (1) the development of strategies to access anodically exfoliated graphene of increasing structural quality, which is now closely approaching that typical of graphenes produced by ultrasound- or shear-based wet exfoliation methods, and (2) the production of heteroatom-doped graphenes via simultaneous anodic functionalization/exfoliation processes. A common defining trait of most of the work reported along these lines has been the exploitation of redox reactions involving carefully selected electrolytes and/or electrolyte additives, which have served the purpose of, e.g., stemming the tide of oxidative attack that graphene usually suffers during anodic exfoliation, or enabling the covalent incorporation of heteroatoms (nitrogen, sulfur) to the exfoliated graphene lattice. We believe that the diversity in chemical handles afforded by a broad choice of electrolytes and/or electrolyte additives is one of the greatest strengths of the anodic exfoliation approach. For example, the fact that one can get highly oxidized nanosheets (e.g., using H2SO4 as the electrolyte) or, alternatively, graphene nanosheets almost devoid of oxidation [e.g., using (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte with TEMPO as an additive], as well as the full spectrum of oxidation levels in-between, furnishes the anodic strategy with a versatility towards different uses that is uncommon for other graphene production methods, such as those based on the graphite oxide route or on the direct liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite with ultrasound or shear forces. Table 1 presents a summary list of the main electrolytes and electrolyte additives that have been used so far to curtail oxidation or introduce heteroatoms in anodic exfoliation processes, along with some general information about the exfoliation conditions, the extent of oxidation and/or heteroatom doping level of the resulting graphenes, as well as the applications explored for these materials. As can be noticed, these anodic graphenes have lent themselves particularly well to energy-related uses (supercapacitor electrodes, electrocatalysts for ORR, cathode catalysts for Al–air batteries and microbial fuel cells, etc.). As an illustrative example, Table 2 summarizes the capacitive performance for a number of these anodic graphenes that have been used as electrodes for supercapacitors, in comparison with other graphene-based materials obtained either from the graphite oxide route or through direct ultrasound-induced exfoliation of pristine graphene.89–92
Table 1 Summary of anodic exfoliation strategies that have made use of purposefully selected electrolytes and/or electrolyte additives for the production of graphenes either of high structural quality and low oxygen content, or chemically doped with heteroatoms (nitrogen, sulfur). Relevant applications of these anodic graphenes are also indicated. Acronym definitions: dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl (TEMPO), disodium naphthalene-1,5-disulfonate (SNDS), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG)




Electrolyte
Additive
Exfoliation conditions
O/C ratio
(N or S)/C ratio
Applications
Ref.




0.1 M sulfate salts
None
Graphite flakes; +10 V, 5 min
0.06
—
Supercapacitors, DSSCs, water splitting

31, 36, 56, 58, 60 and 61



3 M NaOH + 0.13 M H2O2
None
Graphite rod; +1 V, 10 min, then +3 V, 10 min
0.06
—
—

47



0.66 M H2SO4
16 mM melamine
Graphite powder; +20 V, 20 min, then −20 V, 20 min
0.04
—
Filler of polymer composites

49



0.1 M (NH4)2SO4
0.6–1.2 M H2O2
Graphite rod; +10 V, 2 h; 25–95 °C
0.07
—
—

50



0.1 M (NH4)2SO4
6.4 mM TEMPO
Graphite foil; +10 V
0.04
—
Flexible supercapacitor

51



0.2 M SNDS
None
Graphite foil; +10 V, 1 h
0.02
—
Noble metal catalyst support

52



0.1 M Na2SO4
0.1 M SB
Graphite rod; cycles of +4.5 V, 30 s, −4.5 V, 30 s for 2 h
0.04
—
Electrocatalyst for oxidation of biomarkers

53



Ethylammonium nitrate (EAN)
None
Graphite rod; EAN/water (9:1 v/v); +2.2 V, 2 h
0.25
0.03 (N)
ORR catalyst

78



5 M NH4NO3
None
Graphite rod; +3.2 V (Ag/AgCl), 20 min
0.22
0.013 (N)
ORR catalyst

79



1 M (NH4)2SO4
5 M NH3
Graphite foil; +7.5 V
0.14
0.06 (N)
ORR catalyst; Al–air battery cathode

80



3 M glycine
3 M NH3
HOPG or graphite rod; +10 V, 12 h
0.31
0.08 (N)
Supercapacitor electrode

81



0.1 M LiClO4
Formamide (solvent)
Multiwalled carbon nanotubes, +1.5 V for several hours
—
0.03–0.04 (N)
—

82



H2SO4
Na2S2O3
Graphite rod; +5 V, 3 h under sonication
0.17
0.04 (S)
Supercapacitor electrode; microbial fuel cell

83 and 84



1 M (NH4)2SO4
None
Graphite rod; +(6–7) V, 2 h
0.43
0.05 (N), 0.06 (S)
ORR catalyst

86





Table 2 Summary of capacitive performance of a number of anodically exfoliated graphenes that have been used as electrodes for supercapacitors, in comparison with other graphene-based materials produced either by the graphite oxide route or by direct ultrasound-induced exfoliation of graphite. Acronym definitions: polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)




Electrode
Electrolyte
Current or scan rate
Gravimetric capacitance (F g−1)
Ref.




Graphene exfoliated with (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte
PVA/H2SO4 (solid)
1 mV s−1
18.8–56.6

31



Graphene exfoliated with Na2SO4 electrolyte
6 M KOH
0.1 A g−1
106

36



Graphene exfoliated with (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte and TEMPO additive
PVA/H2SO4 (solid)
2 mV s−1
22.1

51



Graphene aerogel derived from exfoliation in H2SO4/KOH electrolyte
0.5 M H2SO4
1 A g−1
325

57



N-Doped graphene exfoliated in glycine electrolyte and NH3 additive
6 M KOH
1 A g−1
184.5

81



S-Doped graphene exfoliated in H2SO4 with Na2S2O3 additive
3 M KOH
3 A g−1
320

83



Urea-reduced graphene oxide
6 M KOH
0.5 A g−1
255

89



Microwave-exfoliated and reduced graphite oxide
5 M KOH
0.15 A g−1
191

90



Hydrazine-reduced graphene oxide
1 M H2SO4
1 A g−1
116

91



Pristine graphene obtained by direct, ultrasound-based exfoliation
6 M KOH
50 mV s−1
120

92





However, there are a number of relevant, currently unresolved issues that need to be addressed if further progress in this research area is to be made. For example, we note that the most effective electrolytes or electrolyte additives identified to this day for the production of low oxygen content anodic graphene (e.g., SNDS or TEMPO) are relatively complex and expensive compounds. To facilitate the practical implementation of this production strategy, the use of simpler, more widely available and inexpensive oxidation-preventing reagents would be highly desirable. A detailed understanding of the mechanisms that allow these compounds to curtail oxidation of anodically exfoliated graphene is generally lacking (both thermodynamic and kinetic factors can be expected to play a role), which in turn limits our ability to pinpoint alternative species with a similar or higher performance in preventing oxidative attack to graphene. Strategies for the cathodic exfoliation of graphite in aqueous medium, where oxidation processes must be inherently unfavorable, constitute a priori an attractive alternative to anodic methods, so they should be actively pursued (i.e., identification of efficient aqueous electrolytes for such a purpose). However, such strategies have seldom been reported,93 whereas most of the work on cathodic exfoliation has been carried out in (environmentally unfriendly) organic solvents with lithium- or alkylammonium-based electrolytes, and has generally given rise to graphene products with lower exfoliation degree (thicker nanosheets) compared to anodically exfoliated graphene.18
Concerning heteroatom-doped anodic graphene, researchers have focused so far only on nitrogen and sulfur as the dopant species, but work with other common dopants of carbon materials, such as boron or phosphorus, or even metal species such as iron (to give, e.g., Fe–N-anodic graphene for efficient ORR catalysis) would be most welcomed. Again, the key to such developments will probably lie in the use of appropriate electrolytes and/or electrolyte additives as precursors of highly reactive agents that can readily drive the incorporation of the heteroatom into the graphene lattice. For instance, recent work has demonstrated 1,4-phenylenebis(boronic acid) to be an adequate precursor for the synthesis of boron-doped graphene oxide quantum dots by means of electrochemical treatment of graphene oxide films,94 suggesting that such a compound could be an effective additive in the anodic exfoliation of graphite to give boron-doped graphene nanosheets. For nitrogen-doped graphene, two main issues can be brought to attention. First, although significant doping levels have already been achieved through anodic approaches, it is true that other methods can afford higher doping levels, especially those using graphene oxide as a precursor. We believe the main reason behind this outcome to be the following: as noted in the previous section, the introduction of heteroatoms into the graphene lattice must be heavily reliant on the presence of oxygen functional groups. Even though a significant oxidation of the graphene lattice can take place during the anodic exfoliation process, the extent of oxidation usually lags behind that of graphene oxide. Thus, a relatively low number of oxygen groups in the lattice of anodic graphene implies that there will be relatively few sites available for the introduction of heteroatoms, which will finally lead to a relatively low doping level. Therefore, carrying out anodic exfoliation under more oxidative conditions could be a useful strategy to increase the nitrogen doping levels. Second, control over the type of nitrogen configuration (e.g., pyridinic, pyrrolic or graphitic), and therefore over the performance of the material in practical uses, is currently very limited. For example, the most common configurations in nitrogen-doped graphene obtained by the electrochemical exfoliation/doping methods are pyridinic and pyrrolic nitrogen, whereas graphitic nitrogen is a minor component. If the latter configuration was to be preferred, then a high temperature annealing process would probably have to be implemented, although this would likely come at the expense of a significant reduction in the overall doping level. Beyond heteroatom doping, the covalent functionalization of anodic graphene with molecular groups (in a one-pot, one-step electrochemical process) would be highly desirable for a wide range of applications, but has remained essentially uncharted territory. Owing to the very nature of the anodic process, resorting to nucleophilic species will probably be required for successful modification.
On a more general note, data on graphene exfoliation yields and throughputs, as well as on the different process parameters that have a bearing on them,95 using the anodic methods described here are all too seldom available, as is usually the case with most electrochemical exfoliation approaches. However, this is a crucial aspect when considering the industrial implementation of any graphene production technology. Also, systematic knowledge about proper bias voltages and electrolyte concentrations for anodic exfoliation is generally lacking. Broadly speaking, for exfoliation to take place successfully, appropriate combinations of electrolyte concentration and bias voltage have to be used. For example, for anodic exfoliation processes researchers frequently use a bias voltage of +10 V with electrolyte concentrations in the 0.1–0.5 M range.31,44 Lower voltages (down to ∼2–3 V) can also be applied, but this generally requires higher electrolyte concentrations, up to 10 M.33,48 Below a bias voltage of about 2 V, anodic exfoliation is not generally thought to be possible because the limited oxidation of water molecules at the anode does not generate a sufficient amount of hydroxyl radicals to open up the graphite edges and grain boundaries for electrolyte intercalation. Beyond these general ideas, little is known about the appropriate bias voltages and electrolyte concentrations required for a successful exfoliation and/or doping of graphene by electrolytic methods, let alone specific information on an electrolyte-by-electrolyte basis. Likewise, there is still ample scope to explore the potential of these anodic graphenes in applications that have hardly or even not yet been tested, not only in energy- and environment-related fields [e.g., Li-ion batteries, adsorbents for different types of pollutants (dyes, oils, drugs, etc.) or gases (H2, CO2, etc.)] but also in other areas, such as molecular sensing or biomedicine. Overall, we believe that the production and practical implementation of graphenes by the electrochemical methods outlined here will be strengthened by future advances along the abovementioned research directions and others, which may prove instrumental to meet many of the expectations that have been placed on this two-dimensional material.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from both the Spanish Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (MINECO) and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) through project MAT2015-69844-R is gratefully acknowledged. Funding by both Plan de Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación 2013-2017 del Principado de Asturias and the ERDF (project GRUPIN14-056) is also acknowledged. J. M. M. is grateful to the Spanish Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deporte (MECD) for his pre-doctoral contract.
References
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Ferrari, F. Bonaccorso, V. I. Fal'ko, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roche, P. Bøggild, S. Borini, F. Koppens, V. Palermo, N. Pugno, J. A. Garrido, R. Sordan, A. Bianco, L. Ballerini, M. Prato, E. Lidorikis, J. Kivioja, C. Marinelli, T. Ryhänen, A. Morpurgo, J. N. Coleman, V. Nicolosi, L. Colombo, A. Fert, M. Garcia-Hernandez, A. Bachtold, G. F. Schneider, F. Guinea, C. Dekker, M. Barbone, C. Galiotis, A. Grigorenko, G. Konstantatos, A. Kis, M. Katsnelson, C. W. J. Beenakker, L. Vandersypen, A. Loiseau, V. Morandi, D. Neumaier, E. Treossi, V. Pellegrini, M. Polini, A. Tredicucci, G. M. Williams, B. H. Hong, J. H. Ahn, J. M. Kim, H. Zirath, B. J. van Wees, H. van der Zant, L. Occhipinti, A. Di Matteo, I. A. Kinloch, T. Seyller, E. Quesnel, X. Feng, K. Teo, N. Rupesinghe, P. Hakonen, S. R. T. Neil, Q. Tannock, T. Löfwander and J. Kinaret, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4598–4810 RSC .
F. Bonaccorso, A. Lombardo, T. Hasan, Z. Sun, L. Colombo and A. C. Ferrari, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 564–589 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang and C. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2329–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4956–4975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Zhong, Z. Tian, G. P. Simon and D. Li, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 73–78 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, M. J. Fernández-Merino, L. Guardia, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 298–306 RSC .
S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2012, 50, 3210–3228 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rozada, J. I. Paredes, M. J. López, S. Villar-Rodil, I. Cabria, J. A. Alonso, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2374–2390 RSC .
J. N. Coleman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 14–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Du, X. Jiang and L. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10592–10606 CAS .
A. Ciesielski and P. Samorì, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 381–398 RSC .
D. Parviz, F. Irin, S. A. Shah, S. Das, C. B. Sweeney and M. J. Green, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8798–8818 CrossRef PubMed .
J. I. Paredes and S. Villar-Rodil, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15389–15413 RSC .
H. J. Salavagione, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7138–7146 CAS .
A. M. Abdelkader, A. J. Cooper, R. A. W. Dryfe and I. A. Kinloch, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6944–6956 RSC .
S. Yang, M. R. Lohe, K. Müllen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6213–6221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, K. M. Manga, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8888–8891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Najafabadi and E. Gyenge, Carbon, 2014, 71, 58–69 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Chakrabarti, N. S. A. Manan, N. P. Brandon, R. C. Maher, F. S. Mjalli, I. M. AlNashef, S. A. Hajimolana, M. A. Hashim, M. A. Hussain and D. Nir, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 274, 213–223 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, J. Tang, Q. Cheng, G. Xu, P. Cui and L.-C. Qin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 572, 61–65 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Abdelkader, I. A. Kinloch and R. A. W. Dryfe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1632–1639 CAS .
A. J. Cooper, N. R. Wilson, I. A. Kinloch and R. A. W. Dryfe, Carbon, 2014, 66, 340–350 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, X.-Y. Guo, O. Ambacher, C. E. Nebel and R. Hoffmann, Carbon, 2015, 83, 128–135 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Leroux, J.-F. Bergamini, S. Ababou, J.-C. Le Breton and P. Hapiot, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2015, 753, 42–46 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Abdelkader, H. V. Patten, Z. Li, Y. Chen and I. A. Kinloch, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11386–11392 RSC .
H. Huang, Y. Xia, X. Tao, J. Du, J. Fang, Y. Gan and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10452–10456 RSC .
N. Liu, F. Luo, H. Wu, Y. Liu, C. Zhang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1518–1525 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, J. Yang, J. Wang, A. Lim, S. Wang and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2367–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, Z.-S. Wu, R. Li, X. Liu, R. Graf, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6083–6091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Notarianni, G. Will, V. T. Tiong, H. Wang and N. Motta, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 13307–13314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, W. Li, P. Li, S. Liao, S. Qiu, M. Chen, Y. Guo, Q. Li, C. Zu and L. Liu, Small, 2014, 10, 1421–1429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Abdelkader, I. A. Kinloch and R. A. W. Dryfe, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8402–8405 RSC .
W. Wei, G. Wang, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5576–5581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Chem.–Eur. J, 2016, 22, 153–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Z.-S. Wu, S. Yang, R. Dong, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2217–2222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ayán-Varela, J. I. Paredes, L. Guardia, S. Villar-Rodil, J. M. Munuera, M. Díaz-González, C. Fernández-Sánchez, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10293–10307 Search PubMed .
L. B. Ebert, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1976, 6, 181–211 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shioyama and R. Fujii, Carbon, 1987, 25, 771–774 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Xia, S. Pezzini, E. Treossi, G. Giambastiani, F. Corticelli, V. Morandi, A. Zanelli, V. Bellani and V. Palermo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4684–4693 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. K. Poh, D. Zhan, L. Lai, S. H. Lim, L. Wang, X. Liu, N. G. Sahoo, C. Li, Z. Shen and J. Lin, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 377–386 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, K. Parvez, R. Li, R. Dong, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 669–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Su, A.-Y. Lu, Y. Xu, F.-R. Chen, A. N. Khlobystov and L.-J. Li, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2332–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chuang, C.-Y. Su, K.-T. Hsu, C.-H. Chen, C.-H. Huang, C.-W. Chu and W.-R. Liu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 54762–54768 RSC .
J. M. Munuera, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, M. Ayán-Varela, A. Pagán, S. D. Aznar-Cervantes, J. L. Cenis, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Carbon, 2015, 94, 729–739 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Rao, J. Senthilnathan, Y.-F. Liu and M. Yoshimura, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4237 Search PubMed .
K. S. Rao, J. Sentilnathan, H.-W. Cho, J.-J. Wu and M. Yoshimura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 298–305 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chen, S.-W. Yang, M.-C. Chuang, W.-Y. Woon and C.-Y. Su, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15362–15373 RSC .
S. T. Hossain and R. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 216, 253–260 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, S. Brüller, Z.-S. Wu, Z. Liu, K. Parvez, R. Dong, F. Richard, P. Samorì, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13927–13932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Munuera, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, M. Ayán-Varela, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2982–2998 RSC .
Y. I. Kurys, O. O. Ustavytska, V. G. Koshechko and V. D. Pokhodenko, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 36050–36057 RSC .
X. Huang, S. Li, Z. Qi, W. Zhang, W. Ye and Y. Fang, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 105602 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hofmann, W.-Y. Chiang, T. D. Nguyn and Y.-P. Hsieh, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 335607 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhang, F. Zhu, F. Wang, J. Wang, R. Dong, X. Zhuang, O. G. Schmidt and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604491 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Jung, D. L. Mafra, C.-T. Lin, H. Y. Jung and J. Kong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4386–4393 RSC .
L. Ma, M. Zheng, S. Liu, Q. Li, Y. You, F. Wang, L. Ma and W. Shen, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13373–13376 RSC .
L.-H. Hu, F.-Y. Wu, C.-T. Lin, A. N. Khlobystov and L.-J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1687 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Belekoukia, M. S. Ramasany, S. Yang, X. Feng, G. Paterakis, V. Dracopoulos, C. Galiotis and P. Lianos, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 194, 110–115 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, M. R. Lohe, J. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 478–483 CAS .
X. Li, T. Yang, Y. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Li, F. E. Alam, X. Li, K. Wang, H. Cheng, C.-T. Lin, Y. Fang and H. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1322–1329 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, X. Li, M. Du, Y. Guo, Y. Li, H. Li, Y. Yang, F. E. Alam, C.-T. Lin and Y. Fang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3360–3366 CrossRef CAS .
V. Georgakilas, M. Otyepka, A. B. Bourlinos, V. Chandra, N. Kim, K. C. Kemp, P. Hobza, R. Zboril and K. S. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6156–6214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Lonkar, Y. S. Deshmukh and A. A. Abdala, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1039–1074 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhong and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17896–17899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ejigu, I. A. Kinloch and R. A. W. Dryfe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 710–721 CAS .
B. D. Ossonon and D. Bélanger, Carbon, 2017, 111, 83–93 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Mensing, T. Kerdcharoen, C. Sriprachuabwong, A. Wisitsoraat, D. Phokharatkul, T. Lomas and A. Tuantranont, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17094–17099 RSC .
P. Khanra, T. Kuila, S. H. Bae, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24403–24410 RSC .
P. Khanra, C.-N. Lee, T. Kuila, N. H. Kim, M. J. Park and J. H. Lee, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4864–4873 RSC .
X. Feng, X. Wang, W. Cai, S. Qiu, Y. Hu and K. M. Liew, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25552–25562 CAS .
L. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Yin, Y. Xia, J. Luo, C. Liang, Y. Gan, X. Tao and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16513–16519 CAS .
R. Yan, K. Wang, C. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Song, Q. Guo and J. Wang, Carbon, 2016, 107, 379–387 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, K. Gopalakrishnan and A. Govindaraj, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 324–343 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Sun, P. Routh, D.-H. Kim, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7067–7098 RSC .
X. Li, H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, H. Sanchez, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15939–15944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu and C. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20005–20009 RSC .
R. Gondosiswanto, X. Lu and C. Zhao, Aust. J. Chem., 2015, 68, 830–835 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lou, M. E. M. Buan, N. Muthuswamy, J. C. Walmsley, M. Rønning and D. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1233–1243 CAS .
Y. Yang, W. Shi, R. Zhang, C. Luan, Q. Zeng, C. Wang, S. Li, Z. Huang, H. Liao and X. Ji, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 204, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Jaison, T. N. Narayanan, T. P. Kumar and V. K. Pillai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18222–18228 CAS .
N. Parveen, M. O. Ansari, S. A. Ansari and M. H. Cho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 233–240 CAS .
T. H. Han, N. Parveen, S. A. Ansari, J. H. Shim, A. T. N. Nguyen and M. H. Cho, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 103446–103454 RSC .
W. Bi, Y. He, M. F. Cabral, H. Varela, J. Yang, R. Jiang and Q. Gao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 133, 308–3015 CrossRef CAS .
K. Parvez, R. A. Rincón, N.-E. Weber, K. C. Cha and S. S. Venkataraman, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5714–5717 RSC .
Y. Munaiah, P. Ragupathy and V. K. Pillai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A2899–A2910 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lei, L. Lu and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6391–6399 CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, A. Velamakanni, R. D. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2118–2122 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-F. Li, H. Zhang, Q. Liu, L. Suun, L. Stanciu and J. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2685–2691 CAS .
X. An, T. Simmons, R. Shah, C. Wolfe, K. M. Lewis, M. Washington, S. K. Nayak, S. Talapatra and S. Kar, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4295–4301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Morales, P. Schifani, G. Ellis, C. Ballesteros, G. Martínez, C. Barbero and H. J. Salavagione, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2809–2816 CrossRef CAS .
M. Favaro, L. Ferrighi, G. Fazio, L. Colazzo, C. D. Valentin, C. Durante, F. Sedona, A. Gennaro, S. Agnoli and G. Granozzi, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 129–144 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Munuera, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Carbon, 2017, 115, 625–628 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
J. I. Paredes	Juan Ignacio Paredes graduated in Physics from the University of Cantabria (Spain) and obtained his PhD degree from the University of Oviedo (Spain) working in the field of carbon materials. After a postdoc stay at the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research in Stuttgart (Germany), he was incorporated as a Tenured Scientist into the Instituto Nacional del Carbón (INCAR) in Oviedo, belonging to the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC). His current research interests are focused on the preparation and applications of graphene and other two-dimensional materials, as well as on porous carbon materials.
J. M. Munuera	José María Munuera graduated in Chemistry from the University of Oviedo in 2013 and obtained a Master's Degree in Chemistry in 2014 from the same university. He is currently a PhD candidate at INCAR, working on the preparation and applications of graphene and other two-dimensional materials.

 	Scheme 1  Pictorial representation of the mechanism of anodic exfoliation of graphite in aqueous medium using a common electrolyte (sulfate-based salt). Initially, the anodic oxidation of water molecules generates highly oxidizing species (e.g., hydroxyl radicals) that attack and open up the edges and grain boundaries of the graphite anode. This allows the subsequent intercalation of anions and water molecules into the graphite interlayer spaces. Decomposition of these intercalated species into gaseous products (e.g., O2, SO2, etc.) leads to a violent expansion of the graphite layers, eventually affording well exfoliated products, i.e., graphene nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31 (American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 1  Strategies towards high quality graphene by anodic exfoliation of graphite. (a) Schematic of a typical two-electrode setup for the anodic exfoliation of graphite. (b) Digital photographs of (i) a starting graphite foil piece, (ii) the same piece after anodic exfoliation in aqueous (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte, (iii) the exfoliated product in the electrolytic solution as well as (iv) dispersed in N,N-dimethylformamide. (c) Scanning electron microscopy image of graphene nanosheets prepared by anodic exfoliation in (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte. (d) Raman spectra of bulk graphite (blue trace) as well as graphene anodically exfoliated in H2SO4 electrolyte in the absence (red) and presence (black) of melamine as an electrolyte additive. (e) Schematic of the anodic exfoliation of graphite in (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte using TEMPO as an additive to prevent graphene oxidation. TEMPO neutralizes ˙OH radicals generated from water during the anodic process by forming an oxoammonium cation and a less reactive OH− anion. (f) Schematic of proposed processes occurring during anodic exfoliation of graphite in the presence of (i) a non-oxidizable electrolyte (SO42−) and (ii) an oxidizable electrolyte (benzene sulfonate), which acts as a sacrificial agent preventing graphene oxidation by ˙OH radicals. (g) C 1s core level X-ray photoelectron spectra of graphene exfoliated in (i) Na2SO4 electrolyte and (ii) the oxidation-preventing electrolyte SNDS (black trace). Red trace in (ii): spectrum of pristine graphene prepared by direct ultrasonic exfoliation of graphite in water/surfactant solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31 and 51 (American Chemical Society), as well as ref. 49 and 52 (Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 2  Energy-related applications of high quality anodically exfoliated graphene. (a) Areal and volumetric capacitance as a function of scan rate for micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) made up of a hybrid film of V2O5 nanobelts and graphene nanosheets prepared by anodic exfoliation in (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte. (b) Digital photograph of the MSC in its discharged (left) and charged (right) state. The electrochromic effect was attained by incorporation of methyl viologen to the MSC electrolyte. (c) Energy density as a function of current density for graphene aerogel supercapacitors prepared by freeze drying graphene suspensions at different temperatures (graphene derived from anodic exfoliation in H2SO4/KOH electrolyte). (d) Discharge rate capability and coulombic efficiency at different charge/discharge rates for Li-ion batteries with cathodes made up of carbon-coated LiFePO4 powder without (blue triangles) and with a small amount (1.2 wt%, black squares) of graphene prepared by anodic exfoliation in H2SO4/KOH electrolyte. (e) High resolution transmission electron microscopy image of the ternary hybrid material comprised of Co0.85Se/NiFe layered double hydroxide/graphene nanosheets (prepared by anodic exfoliation in (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte). (f) Overall water splitting performance of an electrolyzer made up of the ternary hybrid as both the anode and cathode (blue trace), compared with devices incorporating different combinations of Ir- and Pt-based materials as anode/cathode (black, red and green traces). Reproduced with permission from ref. 56 (Wiley-VCH), ref. 59 (MacMillan Publishers Limited), as well as ref. 57 and 61 (Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Chemical structure of the amphiphilic electrolytes copper phthalocyanine-3,4′,4′′,4′′′-tetrasulfonic acid tetrasodium salt (top) and naphthalene-1,5-disulfonic acid disodium salt (bottom). (b) Schematic diagram of the anodic exfoliation of graphite in the presence of 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) as the electrolyte to give TCNQ-functionalized graphene nanosheets that are readily dispersible in water. (c) Schematic of the preparation of nitrogen-doped graphene through anodic exfoliation of graphite in ethylammonium nitrate (EAN)/water mixtures. (d) Typical N 1s core level X-ray photoelectron spectrum of nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets obtained by anodic exfoliation of graphite in aqueous (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte in the presence of NH3 as nitrogen source. (e) Percentage of the different nitrogen configurations present in the nitrogen-doped graphene as a function of NH3 concentration in the aqueous electrolyte. (f) Schematic structure of the two nitrogen configurations present in nitrogen-doped graphene obtained by anodic exfoliation of graphite in mixed glycine/NH3 aqueous solutions. (g) S 2p core level X-ray photoelectron spectrum of sulfur-doped graphene prepared with H2SO4 as the exfoliating electrolyte and Na2S2O3 as the sulfur source. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52, 69, 71, 78, 80 and 83 (Royal Society of Chemistry), as well as ref. 81 (Elsevier Ltd).	 

 	Fig. 4  Energy-related applications of chemically doped anodic graphene. (a) Cyclic voltammograms of nitrogen-doped graphene (obtained via anodic exfoliation in (NH4)2SO4/NH3 electrolyte) recorded at 100 mV s−1 in oxygen-saturated, aqueous 0.1 M KOH solution in the absence (blue trace) and presence (red) of 3 M methanol. (b) Galvanostatic discharge curves of Al–air battery containing either nitrogen-doped anodic graphene (N-graphene, red trace) or non-doped anodic graphene (C-graphene, blue) as the cathode catalyst at a current density of 1 mA cm−2. The indicated specific capacity was normalized to the mass of consumed Al anode. (c) Schematic of a microbial fuel cell incorporating sulfur-doped anodic graphene as the cathode catalyst and an electrochemically active biofilm, EAB (S. oneidensis), as the anode. (d) Areal power density generated by the microbial fuel cell in the absence of catalyst at the cathode (green symbols) as well as in the presence of either Pt/carbon (black) or sulfur-doped anodic graphene (red) as the cathode catalyst. (e) Gravimetric capacitance of nitrogen-doped anodic graphene (exfoliated in glycine/NH3 electrolyte) as a function of the discharge current density when used as a supercapacitor electrode in aqueous KOH electrolyte. (f) Ragone plot of a supercapacitor that uses sulfur-doped anodic graphene (exfoliated in H2SO4/Na2S2O3 electrolyte) as the electrode in KOH electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80, 83 and 84 (Royal Society of Chemistry) as well as ref. 81 (Elsevier Ltd).	 

0.1 M sulfate salts	None	Graphite flakes; +10 V, 5 min	0.06	—	Supercapacitors, DSSCs, water splitting	
31, 36, 56, 58, 60 and 61

3 M NaOH + 0.13 M H2O2	None	Graphite rod; +1 V, 10 min, then +3 V, 10 min	0.06	—	—	
47

0.66 M H2SO4	16 mM melamine	Graphite powder; +20 V, 20 min, then −20 V, 20 min	0.04	—	Filler of polymer composites	
49

0.1 M (NH4)2SO4	0.6–1.2 M H2O2	Graphite rod; +10 V, 2 h; 25–95 °C	0.07	—	—	
50

0.1 M (NH4)2SO4	6.4 mM TEMPO	Graphite foil; +10 V	0.04	—	Flexible supercapacitor	
51

0.2 M SNDS	None	Graphite foil; +10 V, 1 h	0.02	—	Noble metal catalyst support	
52

0.1 M Na2SO4	0.1 M SB	Graphite rod; cycles of +4.5 V, 30 s, −4.5 V, 30 s for 2 h	0.04	—	Electrocatalyst for oxidation of biomarkers	
53

Ethylammonium nitrate (EAN)	None	Graphite rod; EAN/water (9:1 v/v); +2.2 V, 2 h	0.25	0.03 (N)	ORR catalyst	
78

5 M NH4NO3	None	Graphite rod; +3.2 V (Ag/AgCl), 20 min	0.22	0.013 (N)	ORR catalyst	
79

1 M (NH4)2SO4	5 M NH3	Graphite foil; +7.5 V	0.14	0.06 (N)	ORR catalyst; Al–air battery cathode	
80

3 M glycine	3 M NH3	HOPG or graphite rod; +10 V, 12 h	0.31	0.08 (N)	Supercapacitor electrode	
81

0.1 M LiClO4	Formamide (solvent)	Multiwalled carbon nanotubes, +1.5 V for several hours	—	0.03–0.04 (N)	—	
82

H2SO4	Na2S2O3	Graphite rod; +5 V, 3 h under sonication	0.17	0.04 (S)	Supercapacitor electrode; microbial fuel cell	
83 and 84

1 M (NH4)2SO4	None	Graphite rod; +(6–7) V, 2 h	0.43	0.05 (N), 0.06 (S)	ORR catalyst	
86


Graphene exfoliated with (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte	PVA/H2SO4 (solid)	1 mV s−1	18.8–56.6	
31

Graphene exfoliated with Na2SO4 electrolyte	6 M KOH	0.1 A g−1	106	
36

Graphene exfoliated with (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte and TEMPO additive	PVA/H2SO4 (solid)	2 mV s−1	22.1	
51

Graphene aerogel derived from exfoliation in H2SO4/KOH electrolyte	0.5 M H2SO4	1 A g−1	325	
57

N-Doped graphene exfoliated in glycine electrolyte and NH3 additive	6 M KOH	1 A g−1	184.5	
81

S-Doped graphene exfoliated in H2SO4 with Na2S2O3 additive	3 M KOH	3 A g−1	320	
83

Urea-reduced graphene oxide	6 M KOH	0.5 A g−1	255	
89

Microwave-exfoliated and reduced graphite oxide	5 M KOH	0.15 A g−1	191	
90

Hydrazine-reduced graphene oxide	1 M H2SO4	1 A g−1	116	
91

Pristine graphene obtained by direct, ultrasound-based exfoliation	6 M KOH	50 mV s−1	120	
92


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
