Sustainable management of lead in perovskite solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA03081K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA03081K
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 15861-15864Sustainable management of lead in perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Xia 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Binghai 
            Dong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mingjie 
            Feng
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Ding-Jiang 
            Xue
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Shi-Min 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aHubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Advanced Organic Chemical Materials, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for the Green Preparation and Application of Functional Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Hubei University, Wuhan 430062, PR China. E-mail: shiminwang@126.com
bBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Nanostructure and Nanotechnology, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: djxue@asscs.ac.cn
cNational Engineering Research Center for Advanced Polymer Processing Technology, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450002, China
Received 
      17th April 2022
    , Accepted 8th July 2022First published on 11th July 2022AbstractLead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have come closer to their commercialization because of their high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs), substantially enhanced stability, and low-cost and scalable manufacturing. However, toxic lead (Pb) as an indispensable component in high-performance PSCs remains an outstanding issue challenging the commercialization of perovskite photovoltaic technology; toxic and water-soluble lead can leak out of perovskite layers under severe weather conditions, resulting in great potential pollution to soil and underground water. It is therefore essential to develop a closed-loop management of lead from preventing Pb leakage from perovskite solar modules during the device service life to recycling Pb from end-of-life modules. Here we highlight the recent advances in the sustainable management of Pb in PSCs from the above two aspects, and provide a brief outlook for the further development of lead management in PSCs.
Lead halide perovskites have demonstrated great potential for next-generation low-cost and high-efficiency solar cells. The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have reached over 25% for single-junction perovskite solar cells (PSCs) and 29% for perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells on a laboratory scale.1 Large-area perovskite modules have achieved a high efficiency of 18.6% (area of 30 to 60 cm2),2 comparable to that of commercialized silicon modules. Substantial improvements have also been made to the stability of PSCs, passing most industry standard tests.3 All these developments suggest that the performance has not been a major limiting factor for the commercialization of this emerging photovoltaic technology.
Nevertheless, the use of toxic lead (Pb), inevitable in high-performance PSCs, remains a major concern as to whether and how this technology can be commercialized, since toxic and water-soluble lead can leak out of perovskite layers particularly under severe weather conditions, posing a great threat to ecosystems and human health. It is therefore essential to develop a closed-loop management of lead in perovskite solar modules not only during the device service life, but also at the end of life, avoiding environmental pollution and significantly accelerating the commercialization of perovskite photovoltaic technology. Here we highlight the latest advances in the study of preventing lead leakage and recycling lead from perovskite solar modules (Fig. 1), and then provide a perspective on further development of lead management for sustainable perovskite solar cells.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the sustainable management of lead in perovskite solar cells. 
We begin by discussing the prevention of lead leakage from modules during operation in the field, including device encapsulation and applying lead-adsorbing materials in perovskite solar modules (Fig. 2). Although conventional encapsulation methods aiming at improving the stability of PSCs can also lessen the leakage of lead in operational modules, once the encapsulation layers are damaged or broken in extreme weather conditions such as hail and storm, toxic lead can leak out of water-soluble perovskite layers during rainfall. To solve this problem, a self-healing polymer-based encapsulation method was reported recently,4 wherein the used encapsulant of epoxy resin-based polymer possesses the ability to self-repair when heated to temperatures higher than its glass transition temperature of around 42 °C. This temperature is so low that the sun on a sunny day can provide enough heat to trigger the self-healing process. The damaged region of the devices was thus recovered by this encapsulant after heating treatment, preventing water from penetrating into the damaged perovskite solar modules. This strategy was able to reduce the lead leakage rate by 375 times when compared with that using ultraviolet-cured resins for encapsulation.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the strategies to prevent lead leakage from perovskite solar cells during operation. 
We then focus on the discussion of lead-absorbing materials that prevent lead leakage through in situ capture of leaked lead from damaged perovskite solar modules by forming water-insoluble complexes, thus retaining structural integrity and making it easy to subsequently collect lead when subjected to water soaking. This lead-absorbing method can serve as a useful supplement for encapsulation, since encapsulation alone cannot completely prevent lead leakage, because lead can still escape the modules in rainwater under extreme weather conditions. Recently, several lead-adsorbing materials have been reported to dramatically reduce the lead leakage of damaged modules. We divide these in situ lead-capture approaches into two categories according to the applied position of lead adsorbents: (i) lead adsorbent coating method that applies lead-adsorbing layers on the front and back sides of perovskite solar modules, and (ii) lead adsorbent embedding method that incorporates lead adsorbents into different functional layers of modules.
Several Pb-adsorbing materials coated on both sides of perovskite solar devices have been reported recently including p,p′-di(2-ethylhexyl)methanediphosponic acid (DMDP) and N,N,N′,N′-ethylenediaminetetrakis(methylenephosphonic acid) (EDTMP).5 These lead adsorbents possess phosphonic acid groups acting as adsorption sites for Pb2+ with high binding energies above 250 kJ mol−1. The formed insoluble Pb-chelating complexes thus greatly mitigate the lead leakage when water seeps into the damaged devices. Such lead adsorbent coating approach substantially reduced the lead leakage by 96%. To provide a convenient and industry-ready process for this lead adsorbent coating method, Pb-adsorption tape that combines Pb2+ adsorbents such as DMDP with standard solar ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) film was subsequently developed,6 which can be readily attached to both sides of as-fabricated PSCs as in the standard encapsulation process used in silicon photovoltaics. This Pb-adsorbing tape can capture over 99.9% of leaked lead from severely damaged PSCs with good outdoor durability.
Another in situ lead-capture approach is to integrate lead adsorbents inside different functional layers of modules. This strategy possesses the advantage of preventing direct long-term exposure of Pb-adsorbing films to rainwater and extreme weather conditions when comparing with coating lead-adsorbing layers on module surfaces. Several lead adsorbents, including alkoxy-PTEG composed of benzo[1,2-b:4,5:b′]dithiophene and tetraethylene glycol-substituted 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole,7 hydroxyapatite (HAP),8 and cation-exchange resins,9,10 have been reported to embed into hole transport layers, electron transport layers, electrode layers, and perovskite layers.11,12 This embedding strategy can efficiently block potential exit channels of Pb and reduce lead leakage from damaged perovskite solar modules even to below the safe level (15 ppb) of drinking water according to the US Federal 40 CFR 141 regulation.
The above device encapsulation and lead-adsorbing strategies have also been integrated into one double-function protection layer, where the introduced ionogel not only acts as a self-healable encapsulation layer similar to the aforementioned epoxy resin, but also provides a capacity to adsorb lead that might leak.13 Specially, the self-healable and lead-adsorbing ionogel sealants were coated on the surface of the front glass and between the electrode and encapsulation glass, thus physically blocking water permeation into perovskite modules even if the encapsulation glasses were damaged and chemically capturing lead from possible leakage simultaneously. This ionogel-based encapsulation thereby reduced lead leakage to undetectable lead below 1 ppb after the hail-damaged module was soaked in water for 24 hours. The high mechanical integrity of the ionogel layer also provided robust mechanical protection for solar modules, where even under extreme conditions such as being run over by a car followed by water soaking for 45 days, the ionogel encapsulation reduced lead leakage by three orders of magnitude compared with devices encapsulated by conventional glass cover and polyolefin sealant.
We finally discuss the recycling of Pb from end-of-life perovskite solar modules, specifically from the Pb-containing organic solvents, since decommissioned perovskite modules are usually first dissolved by organic solvents such as dimethylformamide (DMF). The above-mentioned in situ lead adsorbents applied in perovskite modules are also applicable to removing Pb from Pb-containing organic solvents. The separated insoluble adsorbed lead ions are then redissolved in HNO3 aqueous solution by forming soluble Pb(NO3)2, which is followed by precipitation as PbI2, a main lead source for most high-performance PSCs. The recycled PbI2 acting as the best form of recycled lead is finally reused to refabricate perovskite solar modules, thus achieving a closed-loop lead management for perovskite photovoltaics (Fig. 3).14–16
 Fig. 3  Schematic of recycling lead from end-of-life perovskite solar cells achieving a closed-loop lead management. 
An Fe-incorporated HAP showing high Pb2+ adsorption arising from its strongly negatively charged surface was recently reported to be used to adsorb Pb2+ from organic solvents.14 This adsorbent also possessed magnetism due to the incorporation of Fe, thus enabling the easy collection of Pb-adsorbed HAP from solvents through an electromagnetic separating system. The resulting concentration of lead in purified Pb-containing polar solvent was below 15 ppb, meeting the standards of the US Environmental Protection Agency, while achieving a high Pb recycling yield of 99.97% by forming PbI2.
To further realize a cost-effective lead management, a carboxylic acid cation-exchange resin was introduced as a lead adsorbent due to its reversible ion-exchange process achieving the reuse of lead adsorbents, besides its high lead adsorption capability.15 The lead-adsorption and lead-release processes on this resin can be described by the following reaction: 2R–COOH + Pb2+ ↔ (R–COO)2Pb + 2H+, where high-concentration HNO3 acid solution can induce the regeneration of this resin. The regenerated resin was then reused to adsorb Pb2+ from Pb-containing organic solvents, greatly reducing the recycling cost. This technique achieved a high recycling efficiency of 99.2% while possessing outstanding low-cost advantages.
We herein highlight the recent progress in sustainable management of Pb in PSCs during the device service lifetime and at the end of life. The operation lifetime lead management focuses on preventing lead leakage from modules during operation through device encapsulation and applying lead-adsorbing materials in solar modules; the end-of-life lead management is to recycle lead from decommissioned modules to protect the environment while creating economic benefits from recycled lead. The developed closed-loop lead management has greatly accelerated the commercialization of perovskite photovoltaic technology.
Despite the above significant achievements in lead management, much room remains to further advance this emerging but dominant field. The following research directions could be of great importance for the further development of lead management in PSCs. (i) The lead management should cover all periods of perovskite solar devices from fabrication through operation to recycling, whereas current lead management only focuses on the operation and recycling periods. More research on lead management during film preparation and device fabrication should also be done; (ii) multiple-function lead-adsorbing materials that provide not only conventional adsorption, but also encapsulation as well as an industry-ready process for perovskite modules may be the main point of future development of lead management; (iii) the recent recycling technology for end-of-life perovskite solar modules mainly focuses on the perovskite absorber layers. Recycling other valuable functional layers especially metal or transparent conducting oxide electrodes should also be explored, thus building a complete circular economy. (iv) With the rapid development of perovskite-based monolithic tandem solar cells including perovskite/silicon and all-perovskite devices, the current lead management for single-junction perovskite cells should be further extended to tandem solar cells. Overall, with all the progress made in the last several years, we are optimistic that a meticulous management and recycling programme from production through operation to disposal of lead halide perovskites would be founded in the near future ensuring the commercialization of perovskite photovoltaic technology, similar to the commercialized CdTe solar cells despite the hazardous element Cd.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21922512 and 21875264), the Youth Innovation Promotion Association of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. Y2021014), the Higher Education Discipline Innovation Project (No. D18025), Key Program for Intergovernmental S&T Innovation Cooperation Projects of National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2019YFE0107100) and Austria/China Scientific & Technological Cooperation (No. WTZ-OeAD CN03/2020).
References

          NREL,  2022, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.
Y. Deng, S. Xu, S. Chen, X. Xiao, J. Zhao and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 633–641 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tan, T. Huang, I. Yavuz, R. Wang, T. W. Yoon, M. Xu, Q. Xing, K. Park, D.-K. Lee, C.-H. Chen, R. Zheng, T. Yoon, Y. Zhao, H.-C. Wang, D. Meng, J. Xue, Y. J. Song, X. Pan, N.-G. Park, J.-W. Lee and Y. Yang, Nature, 2022, 605, 268–273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, L. Qiu, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono, Z. Hu, Z. Liu, Z. Wu, L. Meng, Q. Wang and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 585–593 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, F. Zhang, H. He, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu and T. Xu, Nature, 2020, 578, 555–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, F. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Tong, T. Xu and K. Zhu, Nat. Sustain., 2021, 4, 1038–1041 CrossRef .
J. Lee, G. W. Kim, M. Kim, S. A. Park and T. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902662 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Mokhtar, J. He, M. Li, Q. Chen, J. C. R. Ke, D. J. Lewis, A. G. Thomas, B. F. Spencer, S. A. Haque and B. R. Saunders, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 994–997 RSC .
S. Chen, Y. Deng, H. Gu, S. Xu, S. Wang, Z. Yu, V. Blum and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 1003–1011 CrossRef .
S. Chen, Y. Deng, X. Xiao, S. Xu, P. N. Rudd and J. Huang, Nat. Sustain., 2021, 4, 636–643 CrossRef .
Y. Miao, X. Wang, H. Zhang, T. Zhang, N. Wei, X. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Chen and Y. Zhao, eScience, 2021, 1, 91 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, P. Song, H. Tian, C. Tian, W. Tian, Z. Nan, Y. Cai, P. Yang, C. Sun, J. Chen, L. Xie, Q. Zhang and Z. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2110139 CrossRef .
X. Xiao, M. Wang, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. Gu, Y. Deng, G. Yang, C. Fei, B. Chen, Y. Lin, M. D. Dickey and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabi8249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Park, J. S. Park, B. J. Kim, H. Lee, A. Walsh, K. Zhu, D. H. Kim and H. S. Jung, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 1044–1051 CrossRef .
B. Chen, C. Fei, S. Chen, H. Gu, X. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, T. Ye, X. Huang, Y. Hou, J. Yoon, D. Yang, X. Hu, X. Jiang, C. Wu, G. Zhou and S. Priya, Matter, 2021, 4, 2522–2541 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the sustainable management of lead in perovskite solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the strategies to prevent lead leakage from perovskite solar cells during operation.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of recycling lead from end-of-life perovskite solar cells achieving a closed-loop lead management.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
