Molybdenum disulfide quantum dots: synthesis and applications  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6RA09060E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6RA09060E
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 65670-65682Molybdenum disulfide quantum dots: synthesis and applications
N. Sabari Arul

*a and 
V. D. Nithya

*b
aDepartment of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Dongguk University, Seoul, 04620, South Korea. E-mail: artsabari@gmail.com;   Tel: +82-10-5159-1984
b3, Madheswaran Koil Street, Gobichettipalayam, 638476, Erode, India. E-mail: nithyaphybu@gmail.com
Received 
8th April 2016
, Accepted 25th June 2016First published on 28th June 2016AbstractRecently, two-dimensional (2D) layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have received a notable amount of interest due to their fascinating properties and versatile potential applications. One such material is molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), which has unique, superior functional properties including high current-carrying capacity and large carrier mobility which have drawn interest in many emerging fields. In particular, MoS2 quantum dots (QDs) are being investigated for various applications such as electrocatalytic activity in hydrogen evolution reactions, sensing and bioimaging. In this review, we will take 2D TMD MoS2 QDs as a typical example and discuss the latest research advancement with emphasis on synthesis and applications.N. Sabari ArulDr Narayanasamy Sabari Arul is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at Dongguk University. He received his PhD in the Department of Nanoscience and Technology, Bharathiar University under the supervision of Professor D. Mangalaraj. His former research positions include visiting research-fellow at LHU-Taiwan and Brain-Korea (BK21), and Postdoctoral Fellow at Hanyang University. His present research interests include synthesis of metal-oxides, nanomaterials, quantum dots and nanostructured thin-films for photocatalysts, OLEDs, OPV cells, supercapacitors and electrochemical sensors. He has published more than 30 SCI journal articles along with about 20 papers in the proceedings of international conferences and holds one Korean Patent.V. D. NithyaDr V. D. Nithya received her B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in Physics from Bharathiar University, India. She received her PhD degree in the Department of Physics, under the supervision of Dr R. Kalai Selvan, Bharathiar University. During her PhD degree, she was awarded INSPIRE Fellowship (2010–2014) by the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India. Her research interest mainly focus on metal-oxide nanostructures and their applications for energy storage devices with special emphasis on supercapacitors and Li-ion batteries. She has published more than 15 SCI research articles.
1. Introduction
During last two decades, graphene, the first and thinnest two-dimensional (2D) atomic crystal, has caused a remarkable sensation in broad interdisciplinary fields due to its exceptional electronic, optical and mechanical properties.1–6 The inherent crisis of the zero-band gap in graphene has offered motivation for the scrutiny for next-generation electronic materials including transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs).7 Among TMD materials, molybdenum disulphide (MoS2) has received colossal interest due to its direct band gap property when exfoliated to a single-layer.8–10 Bulk MoS2 is an n-type semiconductor with an indirect band gap of 1.2 eV, whereas monolayer MoS2 has a direct band gap of 1.8 eV.11–19 MoS2 is composed of S–Mo–S triple layers which are weakly bonded by van der Waals interactions to form its layered structure, as shown in Fig. 1.20–23 Fig. 1(a) displays the three-dimensional view of the MoS2 structure. This structure offers 2D permeable channels for electron transport while the interlayer potential barrier in the vertical direction of MoS2 layers hinders the jumping of electrons.24–26 Thus the conductivity parallel to the plane is two orders of magnitude higher than that of the adjacent layers.27 Considering these factors, decreasing the number of layers to a single monolayer would highly improve the conductivity and facilitate fast electron transport. Each layer of MoS2 possesses S–Mo–S stacks in which each molybdenum atom is surrounded by six sulphur atoms. There are three polytypes of MoS2, namely 1T, 2H and 3R which are classified based on the co-ordination of S atoms with central M atom and stacking order of each layer (Fig. 1(b)). Here, 1, 2 and 3 represent the number of layers and T, H, and R denote the different crystal structures namely trigonal (T), hexagonal (H) and rhombohedral (R) respectively. Among them, 2H and 3R are stable and present in nature. Both 2H and 3R-MoS2 have trigonal prismatic co-ordination of Mo atoms but they differ in their stacking order. Furthermore, 2H-MoS2 is a diamagnetic, n-type semiconductor with an indirect band gap of 1.29 eV and a charge carrier mobility of 100 cm2 V−1. It is the most stable structure. Besides, 3R-MoS2 possesses similar properties to 2H-MoS2 except for a small change in the band structure.
 Fig. 1  (a) Three-dimensional view of MoS2 structure.14 Reproduced from ref. 14, with permission of Nature (b) schematic representations of the structural polytypes namely 2H, 3R and IT.23 Reproduced from ref. 23, with permission of Nature. 
In turn, 1T-MoS2 is paramagnetic and metallic in nature.28 This has a meta-stable phase with octahedral coordination of Mo atoms and is likely to be transformed into the 2H polytype upon annealing, applying strain and electric doping.28–31
2. Properties of MoS2 quantum dots (QDs)
When 2D TMDs are reduced to 0D (zero dimensions), an entirely special electronic and photo-physical property arises due to its quantum confinement and edge effects.32–34 In particular, MoS2 (QDs) have been recognized as a prospective candidate due to its high stability, low toxicity, abundance and suitable optical properties.35 MoS2 QDs have both large edge-to-volume ratios and high in-plane electron transport abilities when compared to other MoS2 nanostructures.36 MoS2 QDs have been scrutinized for their remarkable size dependent optical and electronic properties that have caused a great sensation in numerous applications including hydrogen evolution reactions (HER),37 bio-imaging,38,39 sensors,40 photodetectors,41 and photocatalysts.42
Because of the quantum confinement effect, there is an increase in the band gap of the MoS2 QDs. As an example, MoS2 QDs with a lateral size of ∼2.1 nm exhibited a larger direct band gap (3.96 eV) when compared to monolayer 2D sheets (1.89 eV).43 In addition, the investigation of how the quantum mechanical effect changes the geometry (i.e. formation energy) and electronic characteristics (charge density, spin density, etc.) when 2D MoS2 sheets transform to quantum dot was reported by Loh et al.44 It was inferred that the bonding between the Mo atoms in monolayer QDs was stronger than that in the monolayer sheet. Also, in order to study the effect of passivation on the above mentioned properties, the edge S atom of the QD was passivated by hydrogen to attenuate the quantum mechanical effects. Moreover, using quantum theory, the effect of dangling bond states on the chemical topology of QDs was investigated. Fig. 2(a) shows the structure of a triangular MoS2 QD which consists of 5 under-coordinated Mo and 8 under-coordinated S atoms. Since the electron distribution is dependent on the bonding characteristics, reducing 2D MoS2 to QDs certainly modified the charge density distribution. The existence of interactions between Mo atoms of bare MoS2 is shown in Fig. 2(b). Here, the charge density between the Mo pair in partially and fully passivated QDs was greater than the Mo pair in the bare QD. It was found from the quantum theory of atoms, that the covalency changes at different regions of the QD where the Mo–S bond is largely covalent at the head and tail. Conversely, it is primarily ionic in the mid-section. On the other hand upon passivation of the edge S atom, the bonds became more ionic. As a whole, the results suggested the greater covalency of the Mo–S bond in the bare QD. From the calculated projected atomic density of states (DOS), the band gap of the monolayer sheet was found to be 1.6 eV. When this was reduced to QDs, these began to have metal-like behavior with the presence of states related to Mo and S atoms at the Fermi level. Furthermore, there was a decrease in the magnitude of DOS at the Fermi-level due to passivation of the S atoms which caused the saturation of the dangling bonds at the edge atoms.
 Fig. 2  (a) Triangular monolayer MoS2 QD where coordinatively unsaturated S atoms are shown by the red circles. The blue circle marks the central Mo atom above which the STM tip is positioned. Atoms in purple are Mo, and those in yellow are S. (b) The charge density plots of bare, partially (S) passivated QD, and fully (S) passivated monolayer MoS2 QD. The left panel is the side view taken through the central plane passing through an Mo atom at the head of the QD. The right panel is the top view taken through the plane consisting of Mo atoms. The black dashed circles show the position of the Mo atoms. (c) STM-like images in the constant current mode of the bare monolayer QD, (d) bare bilayer QD, and (e) QD/substrate. The orange-red regions in (c–e) correspond to the atomic positions in the QDs, with reference to the schematics of the QD atoms in (c) and (e). The color bar denotes the surface height.44 Reproduced from ref. 44, with permission of the American Chemical Society. 
The layer dependent geometrical, DOS and spin density of MoS2 QDs were further examined.45 It was found that in MoS2 bilayer QDs, the average distance between Mo atoms lay in-between the values for the monolayer QD and monolayer sheets. Also, the structural stability of bilayer QD was greater due to the van der Waals interaction between the layers that induced a reduction in the number of occupied states near the Fermi level. Contrarily, the spin density was concentrated at the tail of both the top and bottom layers in monolayer QDs. In addition, the behavior of the monolayer QD and the variation in the properties when it is deposited on electrically insulating materials (i.e. hexagonal boron nitride) was studied using density functional theory on triangular MoS2 QD. The study suggested a weak interaction between the substrate and the QD. Also, due the presence of the h-BN substrate, there was a small change in the DOS of the QD near the Fermi-level. In the case of the bare QD/substrate, the occupied valence states remained constant near the Fermi-level and the changes were observed in the conduction states (between 2 and 6 eV). In passivated QD/substrate, valence states were constant and there was a difference in the conduction states between 2 and 4 eV. The electronic transport properties indicated ohmic-like characteristics of bare QDs. The STM-like images of bare monolayer QDs, bare bilayer QDs and QD/substrate in the constant current mode are given in Fig. 2(c–e). The triangular shape of the bare monolayer QDs and QD/substrate can be clearly observed and this was not clear in the bare bilayer QDs. Finally, the retention of the metallic behavior of bare MoS2 QDs accompanying insulating substrates and additional layers would have a substantial influence in catalysis applications.
Furthermore, the electronic structure of triangular and hexagonal MoS2 QDs was calculated using a tight binding approach.45 The studies suggested that there is a possibility of forming QDs with the same shapes that possess different electronic properties due to orbital asymmetry. It was also proposed that (i) the edge states are noticeable in the band gap, (ii) there are more electronic states in the conduction band when compared to the valence band and (iii) with respect to increase in dot size, there is a decrease in the relative number of edge states.
Additionally, the properties of MoS2 QDs are mainly based on the edge structure and shapes. Pei et al.46 has systematically explored the structural stability, electronic and magnetic properties of different MoS2 QDs based on first principles with the different chemical potentials of sulphur. To determine the stability, two types of triangle QDs and two types of hexagonal QDs were chosen. They were (i) a triangle structure with Mo edges with S coverage, (ii) a triangle structure with S edges, (iii) a hexagonal structure with S edges and Mo edges and (iv) a hexagonal structure with S edges and Mo edges with S-coverage. The edge formation energy of hexagonal QDs with S-edges and Mo-edges was found to be lower in Mo-rich conditions. Whereas in S-rich conditions, the triangular QDs with Mo edges with S coverage were the most stable structures with the lowest energy. The electronic property determined from the total density of states indicated that, all the QDs showed metallic properties. Furthermore, the hexagonal structure with Mo edges and S edges might be an excellent catalyst due to the outer Mo atom. In the other three structures, the outer S atoms do not possess enough active sites and acquires little electrical contact. Also, all the structures displayed magnetic properties except the triangle and hexagonal QDs with Mo edges with S coverage. In addition, it was found that the transport properties of MoS2 QDs could be altered by controlling the shape of the quantum dot.
Why are MoS2 quantum dots (QDs) highly essential? One main functional characteristic of QDs are the colors of light they absorb and emit which can be tuned simply by varying their size, since QDs with different sizes having different band gaps, they can absorb and emit different frequencies.39 Thus, the size tunable absorption and luminescence spectra of QDs stem from the quantum confinement effect. What is quantum confinement? The electron–hole pair is surrounded by a characteristic length in a bulk semiconductor which is called the exciton Bohr radius. When the size of a semiconductor nanocrystal becomes comparable to the diameter of the bulk exciton, this leads to discrete states with the effective bandgap energy blue shifted from that of the bulk counterparts. Thus the regime of discrete energy levels is called quantum confinement.47,48 Furthermore, the quantum confinement of both the electron and hole in all the three dimensions leads to an increase in the effective bandgap of the material by decreasing the particle size.
It has been reported that the optical absorption of MoS2 QDs exhibits a strong blue shift when the lateral dimensions of the MoS2 nanostructures are reduced to <50 nm, due to the quantum size effect.35 Furthermore, the optical absorption of MoS2 QDs (2–5 nm) showed a large blue-shift compared to 2D nanostructures. The MoS2 QDs possess a unique photoluminescence (PL) property that arises from the quantum confinement and edge effect. The excitation dependent PL phenomenon for MoS2 QDs was reported by Lin et al.38 It exhibited intense fluorescence at 575 nm with a quantum yield of 4.4%. Also, the synthesized MoS2 QDs showed a size dependent tunable luminescence in the wide visible range from blue fluorescence (430 nm) to red fluorescence (600 nm) upon increasing the QD size. Consecutively, Ha et al.33 reported that, the larger sized MoS2 (300–800 nm) did not reveal any PL emission, whereas MoS2 QDs (10–20 nm) exhibited a blue luminescent emission at 415 nm. The excitation dependent luminescence behavior of MoS2 QDs was also studied by Gopalakrishnan et al.49 It was also illustrated that this excitation dependent luminescence behavior could be improved by surface passivation.
A pH dependent PL property of MoS2 QDs was studied by Li et al.50 It was noted that under alkaline conditions MoS2 QDs emit strong PL emission whereas in acidic conditions the PL emission is completely quenched. Besides, the PL intensity changes reversibly when pH is varied between 12 and 2. It was demonstrated that there is a significant number of H+ intercalated into 2H-MoS2, leading to the transformation of semiconducting 2H phase into metallic 1T phase resulting in the loss of PL properties. Interestingly, an up-conversion PL from MoS2 QDs was achieved by Huang et al.43 through two successive energy transfers from the near infrared absorption generated by an N-acetyl-L-cysteine capping reagent to the hexagonal MoS2 QDs. Also, MoS2 QDs were found to be highly selective fluorescent agents in the detection of tetracycline hydrochloride under UV and NIR irradiation.
The PL intensities of MoS2 QDs solutions with various additives such as sodium chloride (NaCl), sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were investigated.51 Moreover, it was found that the PL intensity of the solution with additives was higher than that of the solution without additives. Among all the additives, the QD solution with NaOH results in the highest PL intensity at the excitation of 440 nm. One of the main challenges is still focused on how to enhance the PL quantum yield and to date the highest PL quantum yield achieved is only 2.6%.40 The PL quantum yield is one of the important characteristics of fluorophores, and is determined by the ratio of number of emitted photons to the number of absorbed photons. These are significant for the characterization of a fluorescent probe and as a substance with a high PL quantum yield displays the brightest emissions. A high PL quantum yield is desirable in many imaging techniques. In addition, the efficiency of charge and the electron transfer process occurring in solar energy conversion are determined by the quantum yield.52 The PL quantum yield can be increased from 0.99% to 4.84% at the excitation of 440 nm due to a NaOH additive. The enhanced PL intensity is due to the intercalated Na+ ions that improve the exfoliation efficiency of 2D sheets and the involvement of surface states. A variable light emitting property of MoS2 QDs was evident from the blue, green and red emission under 405 nm, 488 nm and 552 nm excitations.51 These distinct PL properties make MoS2 QDs a promising candidate for fabricating multicolour display devices, lasers and sensors.
The couplings between the electronic structure and phonons of layered materials are identified using Raman spectroscopy. In general, the Raman spectrum of bulk MoS2 exhibits two phonon modes i.e. A1g vibrations at ∼408 cm−1 and E12g vibrations at ∼382 cm−1.53 Normally, E12g vibrations are connected with the opposite vibrations of two sulphur atoms in connection with the molybdenum atom and A1g vibrations are ascribed to the out of plane vibration of sulphur atoms in the opposite direction. The Raman frequencies depend on the number of layers of MoS2 and from the Raman spectrum, it is possible to identify the number of layers in the synthesized MoS2 QDs.32 When compared with bulk MoS2, there is a blue shift in E12g (∼384 cm−1) and a red shift in A1g (∼406 cm−1) vibrations observed for MoS2 QDs. There was a decrease in the peak spacing between A1g and E12g with a reduction in intensity of both A1g and E12g. A closer gap between the frequencies of two phonons indicates that the monolayer structure is more prominent.38 Likewise, a monolayer structure of MoS2 QDs was confirmed from the peak spacing between E12g and A1g. The peak spacing for MoS2 QDs (22.5 cm−1) was less than that of the bulk MoS2 (25.7 cm−1) revealing the monolayer structure of MoS2 QDs.37 It was also observed that the intensity of the A1g mode decreases with increase in the times of exfoliation due to the decrease in the layer–layer interactions.54
3. Synthesis methods of MoS2 QDs
To date, two main approaches have been proposed to synthesize MoS2 QDs, namely, top-down (e.g. exfoliation and electrochemical Li-intercalation, liquid phase exfoliation with the direct sonication process) and bottom-up (e.g. hydrothermal reaction and chemical vapour deposition (CVD) method) approaches. On the basis of the published literature, the latest developments in various synthesis methods and applications of MoS2 QDs are summarized as follows.
3.1. Liquid exfoliation via ultrasonication process
The main physical phenomenon of ultrasonication is acoustic cavitation i.e. formation, growth, and implosive collapse of bubbles which can attain temperatures above 5000 K, and pressure exceeding 1000 atmospheres with heating and cooling rates in excess of 1010 K sec−1.55–57 Thus utilizing these concepts, Stengl et al.58 have obtained MoS2 QDs by intense sonication of MoS2 nanosheets followed by a one-pot reflux method. During the reaction the structural sheets are broken and reduced to nanoparticles exhibiting quantum size effects. The mean particle size distribution curves showed that the obtained particle size varied from 4 to 70 nm with maximum size of around 20 nm.
Also, the preparation of MoS2 QDs (2–9 nm) using a simple liquid exfoliation technique was reported by Gan et al.59 The commercial MoS2 microcrystals were dispersed in an ethanol/water mixture and the dispersion was subjected to probing with a sonic tip at 250 W followed by bath sonication (100 W) for three hours. The MoS2 QDs were obtained by centrifugation at 10000 rpm for 15 min and the solvent was evaporated by placing under vacuum at 45 °C. It was observed from transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images, that the average particle size of MoS2 QDs was found to be 5.2 nm.
Gopalakrishnan et al.60 have reported the synthesis of MoS2 QDs interspersed within a few-layered sheets of MoS2 using a liquid exfoliation technique involving bath sonication followed by ultrasound probe sonication of the MoS2 flakes. The bath temperature was kept below 277 K by maintaining the sample in an ice bath. There was a uniform distribution of MoS2 QDs on the exfoliated sheets of MoS2 whose lateral size is 1 μm. The distribution of particles was in the size range from ∼0.5 to 4.5 nm with maximum size around 2.5 nm.
Furthermore, the controllable sized MoS2 QDs were synthesized by utilizing tetrabutylammonium (TBA) assisted ultrasonication of multilayered MoS2 powder.61 The resulting MoS2 QDs were dispersed in the required amount of ultrapure water and stored at 4 °C. The average hydrodynamic diameter of MoS2 QDs was found to be 14.7 nm. In addition, atomic force microscopic (AFM) images confirmed the height of MoS2 QDs to be 1–2 nm demonstrating that the QDs possessed 1–2 layers. Also, the fast Fourier transformation pattern revealed the formation of the hexagonal MoS2 structure. The atomic ratio of Mo and S in MoS2 QD was 1:2 as revealed by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) indicated the dominance of Mo4+ states in MoS2 QDs. There were two characteristic peaks for Mo at 231.5 and 234.1 eV corresponding to Mo4+ 3d5/2 and Mo4+ 3d3/2. The binding energies of sulphur at 164.1 and 165.6 eV were assigned to S 2p3/2 and S 2p1/2, and confirmed the −2 oxidation states of sulphur. Apart from this, there was a positive shift (1.2 eV) in the Mo and S core-level binding energies when compared with bulk MoS2. This blue shift was an indication of the shorter and stronger Mo–S chemical bonds of MoS2 QDs.
In addition, Wu et al.51 have reported the fabrication of MoS2 QDs using sonication combined with an ion intercalation method in an alkaline environment. MoS2 QDs with an average size of 3.5 nm were obtained. It was reported that the combination of sonication with ion intercalation was highly efficient in the reduction of the lateral size of MoS2 and transformation from a monocrystalline (2D) to polycrystalline (0D) structure.
Recently, Ali et al.32 have reported the synthesis strategy of MoS2 QDs obtained from the wet grinding of pristine MoS2 in NMP (N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone) solution followed by mechanical shaking, bath sonication and probe sonication in NMP and 1,2-dichlorobenzne (o-DCB). The supernatant solution was centrifuged and dried in order to obtain MoS2 QDs. The concentration (yield) of the synthesized MoS2 QDs was 7 mg mL−1 and all the QDs were 2–5 nm in size. The high resolution TEM images confirmed the formation of a highly crystalline hexagonal lattice structure of the MoS2 QDs.
Later, Li et al.62 reported MoS2 QDs decorated on reduced graphene oxide (RGO) synthesized by a facile sonication process. Fig. 3 displays the experimental procedure of the MoS2 QD decorated RGO. MoS2 is dispersed in NMP solution and successively sonicated for 2 h at a power of 300 W in an ice-bath. The particle size of the MoS2 QDs was estimated to be ∼2.7 ± 0.3 nm. From AFM images, the height of the MoS2 QDs was found to be 1.3 ± 0.7 nm, indicating the formation of 2 ± 1 layers.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the MoS2 QDs/RGO catalyst.62 Reproduced from ref. 62, with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Compared to the single/few-layer MoS2 nanosheets, the researchers have shown that the synthesized 0D MoS2 QDs can provide a better defect-rich structure with abundant active sites, which can additionally improve the HER activity by a synergistic effect with electro-conductive RGO. MoS2 QDs were prepared by sodium intercalation followed by ultrasonic exfoliation reaction without using any organic additives by Zhou et al.63 Here, bulk MoS2 was mixed with sodium sand in a Pyrex tube and the intercalation reaction was carried out at 160 °C under vacuum for 12 hours. Then, it was exposed to air for one hour. Later, it was subjected to ultrasonic exfoliation in water for about 30 min. The resultant yellow solution containing the MoS2 QDs was filtrated to remove un-exfoliated MoS2 and the suspension was concentrated by reduced pressure distillation. Finally, the larger size MoS2 nanosheets were removed by centrifugation and sodium ions by dialysis. This is a green synthesis technique because it avoids the use of organic additives. This technique offered MoS2 QDs with a lateral size of around 3.5 nm with height between 0.5 and 1.2 nm. Also, the prepared MoS2 QDs were highly fluorescent, highly photostable and low in cytotoxicity. Furthermore, this technique allows the formation of sufficiently high defect sites to allow long term retention within a cell in bio-imaging applications.
3.2. Multi-exfoliation based on lithium (Li) intercalation
Intercalation is a chemical process of reversibly inserting foreign species at the crystal gap.64 Layered materials classically display strong in-plane covalent bonding and weak out-of-plane van der Waals interactions through the interlayer gap.23,65 Intercalation can be achieved in such layered 2D structures due to the larger interlayer gap which might be useful for the scientific applications.66,67 These can be effectively accomplished by various methods such as electrochemical methods, chemical vapor transport, ion exchange, and oxide-reduction methods.68,69 Recently, monolayer MoS2 QDs have been produced by employing multi-exfoliation based on lithium (Li) intercalation of bulk MoS2.54 The schematic diagram of the synthesis procedure of MoS2 QDs is depicted in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the synthesis procedure of MoS2 QDs employing multi-exfoliation based on lithium (Li) intercalation.54 Reproduced from ref. 54, with permission of Elsevier. 
The synthesis process mainly includes the subsequent steps: (i) formation of Li-intercalated MoS2 by intercalating Li atoms between the MoS2 sheets (100–800 nm) (ii) the exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets were dried in a vacuum oven to form the restacked MoS2 nanosheets which were then subjected to the second Li-intercalated exfoliation. After the second exfoliation, the size of the MoS2 nanosheets was reduced to 10–100 nm. (iii) The third Li-intercalation of the dried MoS2 nanosheets resulted in the size reduction of MoS2 nanosheets by about 10 times.54 Following the third exfoliation, a large amount of MoS2 QDs (<10 nm) and a small quantity of MoS2 nanosheets (10–20 nm) were present in the suspension. The final products of MoS2 QDs were obtained after centrifugation of the obtained suspension at 12000 rpm. The obtained MoS2 QDs were highly crystallized and the lateral sizes were approximately 3 nm. The thickness of a MoS2 QD was 1 nm, which confirmed the formation of monolayer MoS2.
3.3. Single-step electrochemical exfoliation
A tedious multi-step process has been initially adopted for obtaining MoS2 layers and the size-controlled fabrication of MoS2 QDs still remains a challenge.50 Very recently, Gopalakrishnan and co-workers49 have reported a single-step electrochemical synthesis of luminescent MoS2 QDs (≤2 layers) with size ranging from 2.5 to 6 nm. In this technique, efficient control over the size of the particles could be achieved by varying the DC voltage and electrolyte composition. The single-step electrochemical synthesis involved the formation of MoS2 QD from bulk material in ionic liquids 1-butyl-3-methyl-imidazolium chloride and lithium bis-trifluoromethyl-sulphonylimide. The thickness of the MoS2 QDs was estimated to be ∼0.8–1.5 nm. The generation of oxygen and hydroxyl free radicals during the electrochemical process offers an efficient and rapid synthesis of MoS2 QDs which can be used in emerging applications such as nanoelectronics, quantum information systems and energy conversion devices.
3.4. Electro-Fenton reaction
Fenton et al. established the Fenton reaction process in 1894.70 Recently, electro-Fenton has been accepted as the most economic and promising electrochemical advanced oxidation process for conducting on a wide diversity of organic pollutants.71–73 The electro-Fenton process is based on the electrochemical generation of H2O2 which occurs at the cathode as given by eqn (1), and the addition of Fe2+ forms a Fenton reagent resulting in the formation of hydroxyl radicals according to eqn (2). Besides the utility of maintaining a constant H2O2 concentration, oxygen is fed into the electrochemical system. Due to the direct cathodic reaction, there is regeneration of Fe2+ that can occur upon electro-generation of H2O2 (eqn (3)) resulting in the production of a large number of hydroxyl radicals.50,74 
O2 + 2H + 2e− → H2O2
(1) 
Fe2+ + H2O2 + H+ → Fe3+ + ˙OH + H2O
(2) 
Fe3+ + e− → Fe2+
(3)
Thus the generation of hydroxyl radicals can be enhanced and controlled by an electro-Fenton reaction. During the last decade, electro-Fenton reactions were used as a vital advanced oxidation technology for the degradation of pollutants in the environment through the generation of hydroxyl radicals. Recently, Li et al.50 reported the electrochemically induced Fenton reaction of few-layered MoS2 nanosheets to form MoS2 QDs.
Fig. 5 shows schematic diagrams for the synthesis of MoS2 QDs by the etching of MoS2 nanosheets using the electro-Fenton process.50 Etching MoS2 sheets as induced by hydroxyl radicals results in the disintegration of MoS2 sheets into MoS2 QDs. One of the main significant factors of the Fenton reaction is the degree of etching and the concomitant porosity of the product which could be easily tuned by the reaction time. The MoS2 sheets were completely converted into MoS2 QDs in 60 min of electro-Fenton reaction time. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrum of the products confirmed the presence of a 2H-MoS2 type structure in the synthesized MoS2 QDs. The distribution of MoS2 QDs was highly uniform without agglomerations as elucidated from the TEM images. Also, the length and width of individual MoS2 QDs were found to be 11.5 and 5.3 nm. The semi-conducting phase of the MoS2 QDs (2H-MoS2) was further confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) analysis. In addition, the authors have found that the conventional Fenton reagent does not induce any apparent changes in the MoS2 nanosheets. As an outcome, the electrochemical process and pre-Fenton reagents (O2 and Fe2+) were recognized as crucial for obtaining MoS2 nanosheets and MoS2 QDs.
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagrams for the synthesis of MoS2 QDs using an electro-Fenton process.50 Reproduced from ref. 50, with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.5. Hydrothermal method
Among all the established chemical methods, the hydrothermal method has attracted massive interest due to its exceptional advantages, namely, precise control, ease in handling, high yield, minor air pollution and uniform products.75–77 The hydrothermal method is carried out in a sealed Teflon-lined autoclave with a reaction temperature typically beyond 100 °C. During the reaction, a high pressure will self-develop and increase further with the reaction temperature. The controllable conditions of the hydrothermal method are concentration, time, pressure, pH value, organic additives or templates. Wang et al.40 have achieved photoluminescent MoS2 QDs under a hydrothermal method by utilizing sodium molybdate and cysteine as starting precursors and fabricated a PL quenching sensor for 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP) detection. The distribution of MoS2 QDs was highly uniform with 2.15 ± 0.34 nm in diameter. Also, the thickness was found to be 1.79 ± 0.71 nm from AFM (atomic force microscopy) characterizations. The XRD and XPS analysis confirmed the formation of MoS2 QDs. The FTIR (Fourier transform infra-red) spectra revealed a weak peak at around 465 cm−1 which was attributed to Mo–S vibrations. Also, it confirmed the presence of amino groups on the surface of MoS2 QDs. Besides, Ren and co-workers,35 have reported the hydrothermal synthesis of uniform MoS2 QDs using sodium molybdate and dibenzyl disulphides precursors.
The average diameter of prepared MoS2 QDs was 3.6 nm with a thickness of 0.7 nm that confirmed the formation of monolayer QDs. The XPS analysis of MoS2 QDs confirmed the formation of a 2H phase. Due to the availability of huge exposed catalytic edge sites and the excellent intrinsic conductivity, the synthesized MoS2 QDs exhibited excellent catalytic activity with a low overpotential of ∼160 mV and a small Tafel slope of 59 mV dec−1. The UV-vis absorption and PL of the synthesized MoS2 QDs exhibited a noticeable blue-shift due to the strong quantum confinement effect in the material.
4. Applications of MoS2 QDs
4.1. Electrocatalytic activity in HER
Hydrogen is a promising energy resource for clean and sustainable energy technology. The large scale production of hydrogen through conventional methods is highly energy consuming and releases a large amount of CO2. Alternatively, the electrochemical approach for hydrogen production has been attractive due to its facile synthesis procedure and cost effectiveness.39 To date, platinum (Pt) group noble metals exhibit excellent activity towards HER.78 However, these rare metals are expensive which limits their commercial application. Thus there is a need for highly abundant HER active materials.
An ideal electrocatalysts should possess a large exchange current density, low over potential, low Tafel slope and good catalytic stabilities. If the over potential is small, then the energy efficiency will be high. The materials used as HER electrocatalysts should be capable of catalyzing the reaction with low over potential. Here, the exchange current density is the rate of reaction at the equilibrium potential.79 Initially, the investigation on the catalytic activity of bulk MoS2 revealed that they are non-reactive to HER. Later, the possibility of using MoS2 for HER was found by Hinnemann in 2005.80 The computational free energy of atomic hydrogen bonding to the MoS2 edge was found to be close to that of platinum (Pt). In addition, the electrocatalytic performance of MoS2 was found to depend on the edge state length. The effective ways to enhance the electrocatalytic performance of MoS2 include increasing the number of exposed active sites, improving the reactivity of active sites etc.81 When bulk MoS2 is reduced to MoS2 QDs, there is an increase in the number of exposed active sites and high in-plane electron transport that favors improvement in the HER activity.
The MoS2 nanostructures and their composites are found to be an alternate material for platinum group metals in hydrogen evolution reactions (HER).82,83 However, the major drawbacks of these bulk MoS2 nanostructures are namely, limited active edges, electrical conductivity and less specific surface area. Hence, improving the number of active edges and electrical conductivity could enhance its performance in HER. Generally, when MoS2 sheets are reduced to MoS2 QDs, the intra-plane S–Mo–S bonds are broken and more edge atoms are produced. This offers high surface area with more edge atoms which result in a lack of co-ordination of the surface atoms and enhances the unsaturated bonds. These properties, in turn, offer a higher surface activity which is beneficial for the catalytic activity towards HER.
The pioneering effort for MoS2 QDs for a HER application was initially reported in 2014.60 These researchers have synthesized hetero-dimensional MoS2 QDs interspersed in a few layered sheets of MoS2 using a liquid exfoliation approach and investigated their HER activity. It exhibited an onset potential of ∼190 mV and Tafel slope of ∼74 mV dec−1 with exchange current density of 3.2 × 10−5 A cm−2. Later, the electrocatalytic performance of monolayer MoS2 QDs with an average thickness of about 3.6 nm prepared via one-step hydrothermal method was tested by Ren et al.35 They exhibited an enhanced electrocatalytic performance with a low over potential of ∼160 mV and a small Tafel slope of 59 mV dec−1. The monolayer MoS2 QDs with a lot of exposed active edges and excellent intrinsic conductivity lead to an enhanced electrocatalytic activity.
Also, Qiao et al.37 have reported the monolayer MoS2 QDs with enhanced HER catalytic activity have a lower onset over potential of about 120 mV and a small Tafel slope of 69 mV dec−1. The obtained HER performance of MoS2 QDs was compared with bulk MoS2. In contrast, the bulk MoS2 exhibited a weak HER activity with a high onset overpotential of ∼390 mV, weak cathodic current density and high Tafel slope of 190 mV dec−1. The negligible loss of cathodic current observed in the polarization curves of monolayer MoS2 QDs before and after 2000 cycles indicates its long-term stability. The abundant edge sites of MoS2 QDs led to the enhanced electrocatalytic performance of MoS2 QDs when compared with that of bulk MoS2. Later, MoS2 QDs decorated on electroconductive reduced graphene oxide (RGO) was utilized as an effective electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution reactions by Li et al.50
Various catalysts such as MoS2 nanosheets (NSs), MoS2 nanoflowers (NFs), and MoS2 QDs with their composites MoS2 NSs/RGO, MoS2 NFs/RGO and MoS2 QD/RGO were synthesized by the facile sonication method. The polarization curves of these catalysts are shown in Fig. 6(a) in which MoS2 QD/RGO showed the highest HER activity. This was due to the high specific surface area of the MoS2 QDs and the conductivity enhancement contributed by RGO. Also, the HER activity of different mass ratios of MoS2 QD/RGO composites was studied as shown in Fig. 6(b). Among various mass ratios, MoS2 QD/RGO with a 10:1 ratio exhibited an outstanding HER performance with an onset potential of −8 mV, a small Tafel slope value of 63 mV dec−1 and exchange current density of 0.669 mA cm−2. The better catalytic properties of MoS2 QD/RGO (10:1) were also evident from the over potential plot at the current density of 10 mA cm−2 and the onset potential plot of all the catalysts provided in Fig. 6(c and d).
 Fig. 6  (a) Polarization curves for several catalysts, (b) polarization curves of MoS2 QDs/RGO with different ratios of MoS2 QDs and RGO, (c) summarized over potential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and (d) onset potential of each catalyst.50 Reproduced from ref. 50, with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Later, the effect of dopants on the catalytic activity of MoS2 QDs was investigated by Tadi et al.84 In this regard, three elements, namely Fe, Mg and Li, were taken and modified with MoS2 QDs through a solvothermal method. Here, Fe and Mg formed doped structures with MoS2 QDs while Li formed an intercalated structure with the MoS2 QDs. The average size of the Fe, Mg and Li modified MoS2 QDs was 3 nm. The electrocatalytic performance of the metal doped/intercalated MoS2 QDs towards HER was enhanced when compared with that of the bulk MoS2. The Tafel slopes were 265 mV dec−1, 121 mV dec−1, 91 mV dec−1 and 109 mV dec−1 for bulk MoS2, FexMO1−xS2, MgxMO1−xS2 and LixMoS2·xH2O, respectively. Besides, FexMO1−xS2 demonstrated a high Oxygen Reduction Reaction (ORR) with a low onset potential of 0.27 V with high current density.
4.2. Bioimaging
The microscopic imaging of live cells through fluorescent probes is a main approach in long-term live cell tracing.63 For this, the luminescent materials with high metabolic degradation resistive behavior and high photo-bleaching thresholds are required. Normally, living cells will expel foreign objects (organic dyes and nanomaterials) after a period of time. So retention of these luminescent materials within living cell over a long period is an essential factor to be considered. Transition metal QDs are found to be suitable candidates for live cell tracers. Among which, MoS2 QDs are highly advantageous since they are negatively charged and could be able to disperse well in bio-fluids. They are able to form covalent bonding with thiol-containing species such as amino acids, small peptides and proteins due to surface defects that result in long-term intracellular residence. Hence, these MoS2 QDs probes could be able to track the migration, fusion, division and transplantation of living cells. In addition, a high surface to mass ratio of MoS2 QDs allows more efficient loading of medicinal molecules in biomedical applications.
Fluorescent probes with two-photon excitation have been extensively used in two-photon fluorescence (TPF) imaging and they can concurrently absorb two less-energetic photons to attain the excited state of fluorophores.85 Currently, an enormous achievement has been obtained in the synthesis of TPF probes, including organic dyes and semiconductor QDs as probes. Due to the high toxicity of heavy metals and semiconductor QDs, severe health and environmental issues have been prompted. Hence the search for alternative non-toxic materials has come into the spotlight.
Very recently, Gu et al.86 reported a top-down, eco-friendly, facile synthesis of MoS2 QDs using an ethanol-thermal route. Due to their low toxicity and TPF ability, the synthesized MoS2 QDs were successfully applied in two-photon fluorescence (TPF) bio-imaging. From the MTT assay, the cell viability of MDA-MB-468 cells with various concentrations of MoS2 QDs showed these have a slight toxicity and the cells retained about 80% viability at concentrations as high as 150 μg mL−1. From the results, it is confirmed that MoS2 QDs are appropriate for staining cellular nuclei and are promising probes for biological and deep-tissue imaging applications. Likewise, the MoS2 QDs prepared via a solvothermal approach were applied in two photon fluorescence bio-imaging which has been reported by Gu et al.86
Similarly, Lin et al.38 have reported the synthesis of TPF MoS2 QDs through a one-step solvothermal approach. The synthesized MoS2 QDs exhibited a quantum yield of 4.4% at λmax = 575 nm. In this work, 293T cells were used as a model to evaluate the cytotoxicity, cell viability and programmed cell death of MoS2 QDs. The viability of 293T cells containing MoS2 QDs remained above 80% after 24 h incubation at a concentration of 80 μg mL−1. Dong et al.61 reported a facile and tunable synthesis of MoS2 QDs using a tetrabutylammonium-assisted sonication route. UV-vis absorption revealed the high stability of MoS2 QDs as shown in Fig. 7(a). HeLa cells were taken as a target model and the MTT assay is displayed in Fig. 7(b). Fascinatingly, MoS2 QDs reveal no cytotoxicity when treated with HeLa cells. The down-conversion cellular imaging of MoS2 QDs is displayed in Fig. 7(c and d). The bright green area inside the HeLa under near-IR excitation (Fig. 7(d–f)) displays evidence for the translocation of MoS2 QDs cells through the cell membrane.61 Likewise, very recently Liu et al.87 have reported the synthesis of bright luminescent MoS2 QDs which exhibited low toxicity and excellent biocompatibility towards HeLa cells.
 Fig. 7  (a) UV-vis absorption and photograph (inset) of MoS2 QDs dissolved in water, PBS with 1 M NaCl and cell medium. (b) Cytotoxicity of HeLa cells induced by MoS2 QDs. (c) Down conversion cellular imaging of MoS2 QDs under 460 nm excitation and (d) corresponding merged images with bright field. (e) Up-conversion cellular imaging of MoS2 QDs under 800 nm excitation and (f) corresponding merged images with bright field.61 Reproduced from ref. 61, with permission of the American Chemical Society. 
Wu et al.51 have explored the multicolour PL property of MoS2 QDs in biological cell imaging and component analysis via confocal fluorescence microscopy. The confocal microscopic images of MoS2 QDs with human lung cells are shown in Fig. 8(a) and their corresponding magnified images are shown in Fig. 8(e and f). The bright areas inside the cells (Fig. 8(b and d)) depict that MoS2 QDs permeated into the cells without piercing the nuclei. Also, the whole cell morphology can be clearly identified with the help of MoS2 QDs. Thus, an overview of the results showed that the MoS2 QDs are highly stable and biocompatible and could be a promising material for bioimaging applications.
 Fig. 8  (a) Bright field image of MoS2 QDs with human lung cells. (b–d) Fluorescence images of cells imaged under excitation light with a wavelength of 405 nm, 488 nm and 552 nm respectively. (e and f) The magnified fluorescence images and merged images of fluorescence and bright field for a single cell under the above three excitations, respectively.51 Reproduced from ref. 51, with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Later, biocompatible MoS2 QDs were prepared by a sodium intercalation method and used as a fluorescent probe for the long-term tracing of living cells.63 The MoS2 QDs were utilized readily without any surface modifications. HeLa cells were utilized to assess the cytocompatibility of MoS2 QDs for their use as bio-imaging markers. They were nearly non-toxic even at higher concentrations. Also, they had the ability to interact with thiol-containing species and the MoS2 QD stained HeLa cells continued to be highly luminescent even after culture for 2 hours. This is evidence for the long-term fluorescence stability of the synthesized MoS2 QDs.
Hyaluronidase (HAase) is a tumour marker (brain cancer, bladder cancer, and prostate cancer) and nowadays its assessment has drawn wide consideration among researchers. The MoS2 QDs were used to develop label-free fluorescent probes to evaluate the bioactivity of HAase using hyaluronic acid-functionalised gold nanoparticles (HA-AuNPs) as fluorescence quenchers.88 The fluorescence of the MoS2 QDs was quenched by HA-AuNPS through a photo-induced electron transfer mechanism. The fluorescence lifetime was estimated to be 6.9 ns for MoS2 QDs. The addition of HAase caused the cleavage of HA and the aggregation of AuNPs. Hence, the electron transfer from MoS2 QDs to AuNPs was blocked and the fluorescence was recovered. The fluorescence intensity increased with the increase in HAase concentration and the detection limit was 0.7 U mL−1. Apart from this, HAase in human urine was measured and the recoveries were in the range of 96.8–104.6%.
4.3. Sensing of luminescent MoS2 QDs
TNP (2,4,6-trinitrophenol) is a kind of significant aromatic explosive that causes more a violent explosion than 2,4,6-trinitrotolune. It causes severe effects to humans and wildlife since it is used in many areas such as mine detection, forensic research etc. and hence, it is of prime importance to detect TNP. The selective and sensitive detection of TNP using PL quenching of MoS2 QDs was carried out by Wang et al.40 The PL quenching behavior was studied using Stern–Volmer equations at different emission wavelengths. The fabricated TNP sensor was highly sensitive towards TNP when compared to other structurally similar compounds and environmentally relevant metal ions (Fig. 9). As can be seen, the PL quenching ratios (Fo/F) of all substances were close to 1 (except for TNP) and TNP exhibited a high quenching ratio of 1.42. The TNP sensor showed a wide linear range from 0.099 to 36.5 μm with a detection limit of 95 nM. The high sensitivity was due to the favourable PL resonance energy transfer (RET), electronic energy transfer (EET) reactions and electrostatic interactions between TNP and the MoS2 QDs.
 Fig. 9  Selectivity of the MoS2 QDs based PL sensor for TNP.40 Reproduced from ref. 40, with permission of the American Chemical Society. 
In addition, MoS2 QDs were utilized as selective sensors for tetracycline.88 Tetracycline is an antibiotic used to treat human and animal infections. However, its usage in higher concentrations would cause harmful effects. The blue emission of MoS2 QDs aids in the determination of tetracycline through the quenching of its luminescence. The limit of detection of MoS2 QD for tetracycline was found to be 7.86 × 10−6 M. Also, the lifetime of MoS2 QDs means that they were stable during the titration period. The results proved MoS2 QDs to be promising sensors for the detection of tetracycline.
4.4. Electrochemical lithium storage of MoS2 QDs
Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are one of the efficient energy storage devices with high energy density, long cycle life and high rate capability. The commercially available Li-ion batteries possess graphite as an anode material due to its merits such as low working potential, low cost and high cycle life. However, the major drawback is its low theoretical specific capacity (372 mA h g−1) for fully lithiated graphite. Hence, there is a search of alternative anode materials that possess high theoretical capacity along with good cycling stability. Two dimensional layered MoS2 is found to be one of the alternative materials due to its high theoretical capacity of 670 mA h g−1.89 The high theoretical capacity arises due to the insertion of four moles of lithium into one mole MoS2. The interlayer spacing of MoS2 (0.615 nm) is much higher than that of the commercial graphite (0.335 nm), hence the lithium ions could easily intercalate/de-intercalate into the MoS2 structure without any structural damage. Also, there exists a weak interaction between the layers of MoS2 which favors the intercalation of these lithium ions. Therefore, the stability of MoS2 remains constant during the continuous charge/discharge phenomena.90 There are numerous reports for MoS2 and its composites being utilized as anode materials for Li-ion batteries.91–93
Consequently, MoS2 QDs were selected as a surface sensitizer to boost the electrochemical properties of Li4Ti5O12.94 Spinel Li4Ti5O12 is another anode material in LIB, and is a zero-strain material with a stable charge–discharge platform at 1.5 V. Recently, it was also explored as an anode material for sodium ion batteries (NIB). The major drawback of Li4Ti5O12 is the fast capacity fading and poor rate performance. In order to overcome this limitation, MoS2 QDs were selected as a surface sensitizer to enhance the electrochemical properties of Li4Ti5O12. Li4Ti5O12 nanosheets anchored with MoS2 QDs exhibited an excellent lithium and sodium storage property with high specific capacity, high rate capability and excellent cycling stability. There was a strong hetero-interfacial effect observed between the 2D Li4Ti5O12 nanosheets and 0D MoS2 QDs that produces a space charge layer near the Li4Ti5O12/MoS2 QDs interface. This in turn causes a change in the structural environment in the near surface region of Li4Ti5O12 resulting in the distribution of redox potentials associated with the enhancement of surface controlled lithium/sodium storage properties. Upon lithiation, a high reversible specific capacity of 170 mA h g−1 with 94.1% retention after 1000 cycles was observed. In addition a specific capacity of 91 mA h g−1 was achieved upon sodiation at a rate of 5C. An extraordinary capacity retention with 101 mA h g−1 at a rate of 2C after 200 cycles was obtained.
4.5. Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution
Solar light driven hydrogen production from water splitting using a photocatalyst is a promising approach to solve the problems of energy shortage. It is an eco-friendly method since it doesn’t involve any unwanted emission. Nowadays, MoS2 is widely used as a co-catalyst and exhibits excellent photocatalytic activity in the hydrogen production from water.95,96 Recently, MoS2 QDs were utilized as co-catalysts for hydrogen evolution by water splitting. Because of their quantum confinement effect, unsaturated bonds are presented at the surface and the edges of the MoS2 QDs. Since they are capable of collecting the photo-induced electrons around the edges, charge recombination is prevented. Hence, the MoS2 QDs can be used as a photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution.
MoS2 QD decorated graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) was employed as a photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution by water splitting under visible light irradiation by Jin et al.97 Various compositions of MoS2 QDs/g-C3N4 were taken, among which 1 wt% MoS2 incorporated g-C3N4 delivered the highest hydrogen evolution rate of 19.66 μmol h−1. This is due to the perfect balance between the suitable band gap structure, high charge transfer mobility and low recombination rate. This evolution rate of 1 wt% MoS2 QDs/g-C3N4 was 6.6 times higher than pure g-C3N4. This enhanced photocatalytic property was attributed to enhanced light absorption and the higher charge transfer rate that arises from the synergistic effect of MoS2 QDs and g-C3N4. The band structure MoS2 QDs/g-C3N4 is similar to type II heterostructures that prevent the recombination of photo-induced carriers and significant edge activity of MoS2 QDs.
4.6. Gas sensing applications
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and ammonia (NH3) gases are the most harmful air pollutants from industries and agriculture that affect human health. Hence, the detection of these gases through highly sensitive, highly selective and cost effective gas sensors is very important. An enhanced surface area of the material used could enhance the sensitivity, give a faster response and lower the limit of detection.98 When sensors are exposed to the gases, these are adsorbed onto the surface of the sensor leading to change in the resistance of the sensor. Consecutively when exposed to an inert/air atmosphere, the gas molecules are desorbed and the sensor resistance returns back to its original state.99 Recently, 2D layered materials have been received great attention for gas sensors due to their larger surface area and high electrical conductivity.100
In recent times, graphene/MoS2 QDs hybrid structures were used as gas sensors in the detection of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and ammonia (NH3) gases.101 Graphene/MoS2 QDs were synthesized by combining high speed shear, sonication and solvothermal treatment of bulk MoS2 and graphene oxide in dimethylformamide solvent. The graphene/MoS2 QDs exhibited an excellent sensing response towards NO2 and NH3 even at low concentrations (10 ppm). Moreover, the sensitivity of the graphene/MoS2 QDs composite was higher than that of pure graphene QDs and MoS2 QDs. The limit of detection was calculated to be 41.4 ppb and 35.5 ppb for NO2 and NH3 respectively. In order to determine the photosensitivity of MoS2, light was irradiated during gas sensing measurements. Because of the irradiation, the sensitivity was increased by 6.5% and 7.1% for NO2 and NH3. This was due to the local heating that occurred at the junction between the graphene/MoS2 QD composite and the gases owing to light absorption. This heating was translated into a potential difference, which caused the current flow through the device.
4.7. Photocatalysts in degradation of organic dyes
Photocatalytic technology has become a considerable technique to control environmental pollution. Among several techniques, semiconductor photocatalysis offers a green and energy saving technology for the photodegradation of toxic pollutants in environmental and wastewater remediation.102,103 In particular, Rhodamine B dye is a very harmful effluent from dye industries, and photocatalysis is a widely applied technique to degrade harmful dyes such as this. The photocatalytic activity of MoS2 QDs/graphene/TiO2 composites towards photo-degradation of Rhodamine B was studied by Gao et al.104 As is well known, titanium dioxide (TiO2) is an efficient photocatalyst however it still possesses some drawbacks due to its larger band gap (3.2 eV) and low charge separation rate.102 In order to overcome the drawbacks, MoS2 QDs and graphene have been taken as co-catalysts. Since MoS2 QDs have enhanced specific surface area, reaction sites, visible light absorbance and charge separation, these would aid in enhancing the photocatalytic activity. They also support the control of the charge recombination and provide more photochemical reaction sites.
In TiO2, only a fraction of the electrons and holes are involved in the photocatalytic activity due to the faster recombination of photogenerated electrons. When both graphene and MoS2 QDs were used as co-catalysts with TiO2, both the ultraviolet (UV) and visible ranges of incident light took part simultaneously in the photo-degradation reactions. Initially, TiO2 absorbs UV light and the generated electrons were transferred to the MoS2 QDs. Simultaneously, MoS2 was excited by visible light and the excited electrons were transferred onto graphene resulting in the photodegradation process. Also the charge transfer controlled the electron and hole recombination that favours the participation of a large number of holes in the photodegradation process. The degradation rate of MoS2 QDs/graphene/TiO2 composites was found to be 4 times higher than that of commercial degussa-P25. Hence, MoS2 QDs have enhanced the photocatalytic activity due to their increased specific surface area, photochemical reaction sites and by controlling the charge recombination process.
5. Summary and outlook
The amazing properties and performance of layered graphene in numerous applications have inspired researchers to develop other two dimensional (2D) layered materials. In particular, 2D layered MoS2 is a semi-conducting analogue of graphene that possess excellent electronic, opto-electronic, electrochemical and catalytic performances. When this 2D MoS2 is reduced to 0D MoS2 i.e. MoS2 quantum dots, entirely special electronic and photo-physical properties arise due to the quantum confinement and edge effects. This review presents the current development of MoS2 QDs with a special focus on their synthesis techniques and their applicability in various applications.
MoS2 QDs attain a large edge-to-volume ratio and high in-plane electron transport, which is beneficial for the improved HER activity. Besides, the superior luminescent properties exhibited from MoS2 QDs means they may be used as probes for real-time optical cellular imaging. Due to the presence unsaturated bonds at the surface and the edges, they are capable of collecting the photo-induced electrons and prevent charge recombination. This property allows the usage of MoS2 QDs as a photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution through water splitting. The enhanced specific surface area, improved reaction sites, visible light absorbance and charge separation of MoS2 QDs are favourable in enhancing the photocatalytic activity. Moreover, the enhanced surface area is favourable in enhancing the sensitivity and response time, and for lowering the limit of detection. Also due to the high surface area, MoS2 QDs could be selected as a surface sensitizer to boost the electrochemical properties in energy storage applications. Due to these extraordinary properties, MoS2 QDs are widely applied in variety of applications such as electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reactions, bio-imaging, luminescent sensing, lithium storage, gas sensing, photocatalytic hydrogen production and as a photocatalyst in the degradation of organic dyes.
Although greater improvement has been achieved in MoS2 QDs, the development of other 2D TMD QDs such as WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 are still in their earlier stage. So, our present review will provide a wide range of knowledge for the improvement of other 2D TMD QDs and still greater achievements could be attained in all fields. A future trend lies in the formation of appropriate doping or composite materials with 2D TMD MoS2 QDs which might offer room for new functional and phenomenal properties ensuing in the understanding of the high performance in multifunctional applications.
Notes and referencesK. S. Novoselov, V. I. Falko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2011, 490, 192–200 CrossRef PubMed.X. Li, M. Rui, J. Song, Z. Shen and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4929–4947 CrossRef CAS.A. C. Ferrari, F. Bonaccorso, V. Falko, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roche and P. Boggild, et al., Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4598–4810 RSC.S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov, M. I. Katsnelson, F. Schedin, D. C. Fias, J. A. Jaszczak and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 016602–016604 CrossRef CAS PubMed.C. Lee, X. D. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Jone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed.K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed.X. Song, J. Hu and H. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 2952–2969 RSC.J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O’Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King and U. Khan, et al., Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed.P. Joensen, R. F. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 457–461 CrossRef CAS.S. J. Sandoval, D. Yang, R. F. Frindt and J. C. Irwin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 3955–3962 CrossRef.K. K. Kam and B. A. Parkinson, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 463–467 CrossRef CAS.J. Pak, J. Jang, K. Cho, T. Y. Kim, J. K. Kim, Y. Song, W. K. Hong, M. Min, H. Lee and T. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18780–18788 RSC.B. L. Abrams and J. P. Wilcoxon, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2005, 30, 153–182 CrossRef CAS.B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed.O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed.E. Gourmelon, H. Lignier, H. Hodouda, G. Couturier, J. C. Bernede, J. Tedd, J. Pouzet and J. Salardenne, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 46, 115–121 CrossRef CAS.W. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Li, F. Zhang, L. Lin, S. Niu, D. Chenet, X. Zhang, Y. Hao, T. F. Heinz, J. Hone and Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2014, 514, 470–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed.T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed.Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed.H. Wang, L. Yu, Y.-H. Lee, Y. Shi, A. Hsu, M. L. Chin, L.-J. Li, M. Dubey, J. Kong and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4674–4680 CrossRef CAS PubMed.R. Ganatra and Q. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4074–4099 CrossRef CAS PubMed.M. M. Benameur, B. Radisavljevic, J. S. Heron, S. Sahoo, H. Berger and A. Kis, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 125706 CrossRef CAS PubMed.Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. A. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed.Y. Yu, S. Huang, Y. Li, S. N. Steinmann, W. Yang and L. Cao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 553–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed.J. Feng, X. Sun, C. Wu, L. Peng, C. Lin, S. Hu, J. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17832–17838 CrossRef CAS PubMed.X. Zhang and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8187–8199 RSC.H. Tang and S. R. Morrison, Thin Solid Films, 1993, 227, 90–94 CrossRef CAS.I. Song, C. Park and H. C. Choi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 7495–7514 RSC.G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed.K. A. N. Duerloo, Y. Li and E. J. Reed, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4214 CAS.B. Radisavljevic and A. Kis, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 815–820 CrossRef CAS PubMed.J. Ali, G. U. Siddiqui, K. H. Choi, Y. Jang and K. Lee, J. Lumin., 2016, 169, 342–347 CrossRef.H. D. Ha, D. J. Han, J. S. Choi, M. Park and T. S. Seo, Small, 2014, 10, 3858–3862 CrossRef CAS PubMed.J. Li and J. J. Zhu, Analyst, 2013, 138, 2506–2515 RSC.X. Ren, L. Pang, Y. Zhang, X. Ren, H. Fan and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10693–10697 CAS.J. Kibsgaard, Z. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed.W. Qiao, S. Yan, X. Song, X. Zhang, Y. Sun, X. Chen, W. Zhong and Y. Du, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 97696–97701 RSC.H. Lin, C. Wang, J. Wu, Z. Xu, Y. Huang and C. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 8492–8497 RSC.S. Xu, D. Li and P. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1127–1136 CrossRef CAS.Y. Wang and Y. Ni, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 7463–7470 CrossRef CAS PubMed.D. Kufer, I. Nikitskiy, T. Lasanta, G. Navickaite, F. H. L. Koppens and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 176–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed.W. Gao, M. Wang, C. Ran and L. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1709–1712 RSC.H. Huang, C. Du, H. Shi, X. Feng, J. Li, Y. Tan and W. Song, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 72–79 CrossRef CAS.G. C. Loh, R. Pandey, Y. K. Yap and S. P. Karna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1565–1574 CAS.S. Pavlovic and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 155410–155417 CrossRef.L. Pei, S. Tao, S. Haibo and X. Song, Solid State Commun., 2015, 218, 25–30 CrossRef CAS.M. Thambidurai, N. Muthukumarasamy, S. Agilan, N. Murugan, N. S. Arul, S. Vasantha and R. Balasundaraprabhu, Solid State Sci., 2010, 12, 1554–1559 CrossRef CAS.N. S. Arul, D. Mangalaraj, P. C. Chen, N. Ponpandian and C. Viswanathan, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 2635–2638 CrossRef CAS.D. Gopalakrishnan, D. Damien, B. Li, H. Gullappalli, V. K. Pillai, P. M. Ajauan and M. M. Shaijumon, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6293–6296 RSC.B. L. Li, L. X. Chen, H. L. Zou, J. L. Lei, H. Q. Luo and N. B. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9831–9838 RSC.J. Y. Wu, X. Y. Zhang, X. D. Ma, Y. P. Qiu and T. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 95178–95182 RSC.J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of fluorescence spectroscopy, Springer, Berlin, 3rd edn,  2006 Search PubMed.S. J. Xu, D. Li and P. Y. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1127 CrossRef CAS.W. Qiao, S. Yan, X. Song, X. Zhang, X. He, W. Zhong and Y. Du, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 359, 130–136 CrossRef CAS.H. Xu, B. W. Zeiger and K. S. Suslick, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2555–2567 RSC.T. G. Leighton, The Acoustic Bubble, Academic Press, London,  1994 Search PubMed.C. R. Brenner, Cavitation and Bubble Dynamics, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  1995 Search PubMed.V. Stengl and J. Henych, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3387–3394 RSC.Z. X. Gan, L. Z. Liu, H. Y. Wu, Y. L. Hao, Y. Shan, X. L. Wu and P. K. Chu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 233113–233115 CrossRef.D. Gopalakrishnan, D. Damien and M. M. Shaijumon, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5297–5303 CrossRef CAS PubMed.H. Dong, S. Tang, Y. Hao, H. Yu, W. Dai, G. Zhao, Y. Cao, H. Lu, X. Zhang and H. Ju, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3107–3114 CAS.F. Li, J. Li, Z. Cao, X. Lin, X. Li, Y. Fang, X. An, Y. Fu, J. Jin and R. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21772–21778 CAS.K. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Z. Xia and W. Wei, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 275101–275108 CrossRef PubMed.Y. Jung, Y. Zhou and J. J. Cha, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 452–463 RSC.M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed.M. Chhowalla, Z. F. Liu and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2584–2586 RSC.H. T. Yuan, H. T. Wang and Y. Cui, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 81–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed.X. Huang, Z. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC.J. Zheng, H. Zhang, S. H. Dong, Y. P. Liu, C. T. Nai, H. S. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, B. Liu and K. P. Loh, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 2995–2997 Search PubMed.H. J. H. Fenton, J. Chem. Soc., 1894, 65, 899–910 RSC.J. Akhavan, Chemistry of Explosive, Royal Society of Chemistry, London, 2nd edn,  2004 Search PubMed.M. Cheng, W. Ma, J. Li, Y. Huang and J. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 1569–1575 CrossRef CAS PubMed.O. Iglesias, J. Gomez, M. Pazos and M. A. Sanroman, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 416–424 CrossRef CAS.R. J. Smith, P. J. King, M. Lotya, C. Wirtz, U. Khan, S. De, A. O’Neill, G. S. Duesberg, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, J. Chen, J. Wang, A. I. Minett, V. Nicolsi and J. N. Coleman, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3944–3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed.R. L. Penn and J. F. Banfield, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1999, 63, 1549–1557 CrossRef CAS.W. Shi, S. Song and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5714–5743 RSC.S. H. Feng and R. R. Xu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 239–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed.H. B. Gray, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 7 CrossRef CAS PubMed.M. Zeng and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14942–14962 CAS.B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jorgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. Norskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed.X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC.S. J. R. Neale, D. A. C. Brownson, G. C. Smith, D. A. G. Sawtell, P. J. Kelly and C. E. Banks, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18152–18168 RSC.Y. Li, J. Wang, X. Tian, L. Ma, C. Dai, C. Yang and Z. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1676–1683 RSC.K. K. Tadi, A. M. Palve, S. Pal, P. M. Sudeep and T. N. Narayanan, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 275402–275408 CrossRef PubMed.L. Cao, X. Wang, M. J. Meziani, F. Lu, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, Y. Lin, B. A. Harruff, L. M. Veca, D. Murray, S.-Y. Xie and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11318–11319 CrossRef CAS PubMed.W. Gu, Y. Yan, C. Zhang, C. Ding and Y. Xian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11272–11279 Search PubMed.Q. Liu, C. Hu and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 25605–25610 RSC.Z. Wang, J. Lin, J. Gao and Q. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 178, 82–87 CrossRef CAS.L. Zhang, H. B. Wu, Y. Yan, X. Wang and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3302–3306 CAS.H. Li, K. Yu, H. Fu, B. Guo, X. Lei and Z. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7959–7968 CAS.L. Zhang, W. Fan, W. W. Tjiu and T. Liu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 34777–34787 RSC.S. Zhang, B. V. R. Chowdari, Z. Wen, J. Jin and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12464–12472 CrossRef CAS PubMed.H. Liu, X. Chen, L. Deng, X. Su, K. Guo and Z. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 206, 184–191 CrossRef CAS.G. Xu, L. Yang, X. Wei, J. Ding, J. Zhong and P. K. Chu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3349–3358 CrossRef CAS.H. Zhao, Y. Dong, P. Jiang, H. Miao, G. Wang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7375–7381 CAS.D. Zheng, G. Zhang, Y. Hou and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 521, 2–8 CrossRef CAS.X. Jin, X. Fan, J. Tian, R. Cheng, M. Li and L. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 52611–52619 RSC.J. Wu, K. Tao, J. M. Miao and L. Norford, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27502–27510 CAS.W. Yang, L. Gan, H. Li and T. Zhai, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 433–451 RSC.P. K. Kannan, D. J. Late, H. Morgan and C. S. Rout, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13293–13312 RSC.N. Yue, J. Weicheng, W. Rongguo, D. Guomin and H. Yifan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8198–8203 CAS.K. Nakata and A. Fujishima, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13, 169–189 CrossRef CAS.N. S. Arul, D. Mangalaraj and J. I. Han, Mater. Lett., 2015, 145, 189–192 CrossRef.W. Gao, M. Wang, C. Ran and L. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1709–1712 RSC.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
N. Sabari Arul	Dr Narayanasamy Sabari Arul is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at Dongguk University. He received his PhD in the Department of Nanoscience and Technology, Bharathiar University under the supervision of Professor D. Mangalaraj. His former research positions include visiting research-fellow at LHU-Taiwan and Brain-Korea (BK21), and Postdoctoral Fellow at Hanyang University. His present research interests include synthesis of metal-oxides, nanomaterials, quantum dots and nanostructured thin-films for photocatalysts, OLEDs, OPV cells, supercapacitors and electrochemical sensors. He has published more than 30 SCI journal articles along with about 20 papers in the proceedings of international conferences and holds one Korean Patent.
V. D. Nithya	Dr V. D. Nithya received her B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in Physics from Bharathiar University, India. She received her PhD degree in the Department of Physics, under the supervision of Dr R. Kalai Selvan, Bharathiar University. During her PhD degree, she was awarded INSPIRE Fellowship (2010–2014) by the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India. Her research interest mainly focus on metal-oxide nanostructures and their applications for energy storage devices with special emphasis on supercapacitors and Li-ion batteries. She has published more than 15 SCI research articles.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Three-dimensional view of MoS2 structure.14 Reproduced from ref. 14, with permission of Nature (b) schematic representations of the structural polytypes namely 2H, 3R and IT.23 Reproduced from ref. 23, with permission of Nature.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Triangular monolayer MoS2 QD where coordinatively unsaturated S atoms are shown by the red circles. The blue circle marks the central Mo atom above which the STM tip is positioned. Atoms in purple are Mo, and those in yellow are S. (b) The charge density plots of bare, partially (S) passivated QD, and fully (S) passivated monolayer MoS2 QD. The left panel is the side view taken through the central plane passing through an Mo atom at the head of the QD. The right panel is the top view taken through the plane consisting of Mo atoms. The black dashed circles show the position of the Mo atoms. (c) STM-like images in the constant current mode of the bare monolayer QD, (d) bare bilayer QD, and (e) QD/substrate. The orange-red regions in (c–e) correspond to the atomic positions in the QDs, with reference to the schematics of the QD atoms in (c) and (e). The color bar denotes the surface height.44 Reproduced from ref. 44, with permission of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the MoS2 QDs/RGO catalyst.62 Reproduced from ref. 62, with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the synthesis procedure of MoS2 QDs employing multi-exfoliation based on lithium (Li) intercalation.54 Reproduced from ref. 54, with permission of Elsevier.	 

O2 + 2H + 2e− → H2O2
	(1)

Fe2+ + H2O2 + H+ → Fe3+ + ˙OH + H2O
	(2)

Fe3+ + e− → Fe2+
	(3)

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagrams for the synthesis of MoS2 QDs using an electro-Fenton process.50 Reproduced from ref. 50, with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Polarization curves for several catalysts, (b) polarization curves of MoS2 QDs/RGO with different ratios of MoS2 QDs and RGO, (c) summarized over potential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and (d) onset potential of each catalyst.50 Reproduced from ref. 50, with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) UV-vis absorption and photograph (inset) of MoS2 QDs dissolved in water, PBS with 1 M NaCl and cell medium. (b) Cytotoxicity of HeLa cells induced by MoS2 QDs. (c) Down conversion cellular imaging of MoS2 QDs under 460 nm excitation and (d) corresponding merged images with bright field. (e) Up-conversion cellular imaging of MoS2 QDs under 800 nm excitation and (f) corresponding merged images with bright field.61 Reproduced from ref. 61, with permission of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Bright field image of MoS2 QDs with human lung cells. (b–d) Fluorescence images of cells imaged under excitation light with a wavelength of 405 nm, 488 nm and 552 nm respectively. (e and f) The magnified fluorescence images and merged images of fluorescence and bright field for a single cell under the above three excitations, respectively.51 Reproduced from ref. 51, with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Selectivity of the MoS2 QDs based PL sensor for TNP.40 Reproduced from ref. 40, with permission of the American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
