Peptide-based novel small molecules and polymers: unexplored optoelectronic materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC03375A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC03375A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 12462-12488Peptide-based novel small molecules and polymers: unexplored optoelectronic materials

        
          
            Rajamouli 
            Boddula
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Surya Prakash 
            Singh
          
        
      *ab
aPolymers and Functional Materials Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Uppal road, Tarnaka, Hyderabad-500007, India. E-mail: spsingh@iict.res.in
bAcademy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad-201002, India
Received 
      20th July 2021
    , Accepted 24th August 2021First published on 25th August 2021AbstractIn recent times, optoelectronic materials have become emerging technology and several designs have been established to overcome the past failures and desire for new efficient devices. Numerous analyses employing imidazole, carbazole, triphenylamine, phosphine oxide, squaraine, BODIPY, dithienosilole, dithienogermole, and fullerene/non-fullerene derivatives have been developed in different donor–acceptor combinations with the inclusion of pi/spacer conjugations. Most of these designs are constructed by organic, organometallic, and solid-state (or hybrids) to improve the external quantum yield, lifetime, and color saturation. Recently, few bio-molecular materials (peptide-conjugated) have attracted attention due to the screening of their electronic and luminous properties. Peptide-based conjugate molecules are a promising class of soft materials, which are currently gaining importance among the material community due to a wide range of applications (protein therapeutics, drug delivery, optoelectronics, and catalysis). However, peptide-based materials are currently a focused area of study since inadequate results are available and it is required to increase interest in the field with peptides as the main focus in optoelectronics. The current review explains optoelectronic materials based on peptides moieties, which have unexplored applications due to fewer reports on them. In optoelectronics, photovoltaics (solar cells), organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), thin-film transistors, and electrochromism have been discussed. Photoactive materials design based on the donor and acceptor concept has been presented and discussed. This evaluation contributes to the materialistic properties of the peptides for electro-optic applications and their design strategy along with the current status. The discussion on the future perspectives of optoelectronics via peptide-based materials will certainly give an insight into the new upcoming trends.
1. Introduction
Luminescence is a bright endless source in Nature and has been utilized for several human needs. Among the reported systems, lighting applications have become a high priority and field.1,2 Among luminescent tools, a few categories of materials are attractive, which are smart stimuli-responsive materials, mechano-responsive luminescence, templates for casting metal nanowires, biosensors-targeted molecular imaging, delivery agents, energy storage materials, light harvesting-display devices, and nanopiezoelectrics.3,4 Several molecular materials such as pyrene, carbazole, triphenylamine, fluorescein, phosphine oxide, squaraine, BODIPY, dithienosilole, dithienogermole, fullerene/non-fullerene, and rhodamine-based designs have been proven to have potential applications in the field of lighting applications, especially in the field of optoelectronics.5,6 To develop the photophysical properties of optoelectronics such as high photochemical/thermal stability, long lifetime, high quantum efficiencies, several approaches are developed and they are heavy metal ion usage, hydrogen bond, matrix-assisted isolation, crystallization, and aggregation-induced emission.
Most of the optoelectronic designs are developed with organic, organometallic, solid-state compositions, and, less frequently, bio-based materials. In bio-based materials, peptide-related architecture is favorable in light harvesting and electron transfer processes among other bio-functionalities. Peptide-based/related materials are an attractive research trend and currently, few research groups are focusing on the same.7–9 However, there is a lack of designs for optoelectronics based on peptides and it is time to understand the importance of peptide materials to fulfill the requirement of future generations. Since day-to-day energy consumption rate is increasing, there is a great need to search for fulfilling sources that also save the natural sources (fossil fuels). Among renewable energies, optoelectronics is a steadily growing field, which plays a major role in the sustainability of the human society.
Still, the scarcity of peptide-based materials for optoelectronics has motivated this review. In common, both photon as well as electron responses are essential in optoelectronics and choosing fluorophores required minimum standards such as brightness, excitation, emission wavelength, photostability, photobleaching, chemical reactions, and photophysical reactions.10–12 In the case of peptides, these materials are used for antimicrobial peptides, glycopeptides, cyclopeptides, tissue engineering,13 cell culturing, drug delivery, bio-sensing,14 and self-healing processes.
The self-assembly property of peptides, proteins, and their biodegradable/biocompatible properties makes them suitable to explore their applications further.15,16 From the last few decades, the interest in peptide-based systems has increased due to easy molecular engineering to fine tune the redox properties of peptide molecules. However, peptide-based materials employed in optoelectronic applications is a new idea because peptide derivatives are active light-sensitive, electroactive, and thermally active. Peptide and protein-based materials are also adaptive to living systems. The functional materials of these adaptive systems can yield molecular complexes (peptide groups in to materials) in the near future and investigation is underway on the understanding of peptide materials. In this context, M. Venanzi and S. Kimura expressed their view in 2013 on peptides and how these are going to be active in upcoming research.17 Based on the light response, several bio-based concepts are reported.18 Proteins and enzymes in biological systems have been reported with a chiral configuration between the two enantiomers and they grow through supramolecular interactions, which can be realized in supramolecular constructions by structural mismatch, self-sorting, and pH variation.7,19 The introduction of proteins into materials science in the near future may lead toward new bioinspired resources for optoelectronics and nanoelectronics. More recently, bio-compatible nanomaterials have useful electron, hole, and proton transport properties in biomaterials, even they are engaged in solar cells, field-effect transistors, and display devices.20,21
In addition, nanoscale roughness gives direction to superhydrophobicity and it depends on the surface free energy. Few molecules such as pentafluoroaniline in peptide nanowires have been used to decrease the surface free energy and hydrophobic coatings helpful for solar cells as well as smart windows.22 The Gatto and Venanzi group reported multi-component peptide-functionalized with photoactive and electro-response groups.23 Thermal responsive materials are added constructively to sensing applications; these responses lead to the excitation of the molecule for light generation while heating. The presence of electron transfer or electron-rich species in the peptide group leads to intramolecular attraction, which reveals the sensing property. In addition, color change with heating is an advantage to the thermal response. Similarly, mechanoluminescence also has several reports, where color changing with grinding results in two colors and less common multicolor.24
Electroactive peptide-based materials are valuable in the arena of optoelectronics. Especially, in optoelectronics, most of these materials are used as photovoltaics (solar cells), organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), thin-film transistors, and electrochromism. The main goal of light-emitting materials is utilizing the absorbed energy to yield an efficient outcome. However, theoretical prediction gives 100% result but experimental or real application do not give satisfactory results. Suppose in the case of a silicon wafer, a thick silicon wafer absorbs 60% of the available power and it is well known that all absorbed light is not converted into electrical power.25 Focusing on the same, in this review, we discussed four areas of optoelectronics, which are (i) photovoltaics, (ii) OLEDs, (iii) thin-film transistors, and (iv) electrochromism. In addition, peptide-based mechanoluminescence is discussed.
Light-responsive materials in the above fields are discussed based on the peptide or related materials. Fluorescence tuning with the reversible behavior of solid-state materials is an attractive research area and has potential application in fluorescent probes, photoelectronic devices, displays, and sensors.26 The construction of donor and acceptor moieties is an effective strategy for the optoelectronics study. Several reports are available for understanding the donor–acceptor concept; however, this review considered all the donor and acceptors with the pi-conjugation/spacer in one place. In addition, fewer reports on peptide-based electronics are emphasized. This review constructs the knowledge gap between the lighting application and the peptide functional groups (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Optoelectronic-based applications and their current interest. 
1.1 Current scenario of peptide molecules
Peptide-grafted materials have received great attention in the current times since they have a wide number of applications in diverse fields. Peptide-based drugs, such as antimicrobial peptides, cyclopeptides, and glycopeptides, play an important role in the treatment of drug-resistant infections due to their unique lower resistance antibacterial mechanism, high abundance, and low toxicity. It already has proven potential candidates for the biological arena and also in optoelectronic applications such as OLEDs, organic thin-film transistors (OTFT), electrochromic devices (ECD), and organic photovoltaics (OPV). The properties of peptide-based materials for lighting applications/optoelectronics is still challenging to understand for their new designs. This review describes peptide-based materials for a better understanding and for future direction to researchers.
Dye and fluorescent-labeled peptides are commonly used for protein binding or localization studies. These labels can be incorporated at many positions in the fluorescent or labeled peptide. Usually, they have been incorporated at the N-terminus or Cys/Lys side chains. The examples of frequently-used fluorescent dyes and fluorescence labels and common attachment options for fluorescent-labeled peptides are shown below (Table 1).27–30
Table 1 Fluorophores and their excitation/emission wavelength peaks




Fluorophore short name (full name)
Structure
Excitation/emission wavelength




Abz (anthranilyl, 2-aminobenzoyl)



320 nm/420 nm



N-Me-Abz (N-methyl-anthranilyl, N-methyl-2-aminobenzoyl)



340–360 nm/440–450 nm


FITC (fluoresceinisothiocyanate (5 or 6 isomers or mixture of isomers))



490 nm/520 nm


5-FAM (5-carboxyfluorescein)



492 nm/517 nm


6-FAM (6-carboxyfluorescein)



492 nm/517 nm


MCA (7-methoxycoumarinyl-4-acetyl)



325 nm/392 nm


AMCA/Amc (aminomethylcoumarin acetate)



350 nm/450 nm


Dansyl (5-(dimethylamino) naphthalene-1-sulfonyl)



342 nm/562 nm


EDANS (5-[(2-aminoethyl)amino] naphthalene-1-sulfonic acid)



340 nm/490 nm


TAMRA (carboxytetramethyl rhodamine (5 or 6 isomers or mixture of isomers))



543 nm/572 nm


Cy3 (1-(5-carboxypentyl)-3,3-dimethyl-2-((1E,3E)-3-(1,3,3-trimethylindolin-2-ylidene)prop-1-en-1-yl)-3H-indol-1-ium chloride)
550 nm/570 nm


Cy5 (1-(5-carboxypentyl)-3,3-dimethyl-2-((1E,3E,5E)-5-(1,3,3-trimethylindolin-2-ylidene)penta-1,3-dienyl)-3H-indolium chloride)



650 nm/670 nm


Alexa fluor (e.g., Alexa Fluor 647, Alexa488, Alexa532, Alexa546, Alexa594, Alexa633, and Alexa647)



650 nm/668 nm (Alexa647)


Atto (e.g., Atto465, Atto488, Atto495, Atto550, and Atto647)
453 nm/508 nm (Atto465)


Bodipy (e.g., Bodipy® FL)
505 nm/511 nm


Dylight (e.g., DyLight 488 and DyLight 550)
493 nm/518 nm (DyLight488)


Trp (tryptophan)
280 nm/360 nm


Lucifer yellow (ethylene diamine) (6-amino-2-(2-amino-ethyl)-1,3-dioxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzo[de]isoquinoline-5,8-disulfonic acid)



430 nm/520 nm




1.2 Sensitization strategies
Electrons in the molecules excite higher energy states by absorbing light energy in the form of a photon. Each molecule has its respective absorption wavelength and all the molecules cannot be excited directly because of the absence of electrons, from a bonding/non-bonding orbital into the empty anti-bonding orbital (may be due to the absence of conjugated system of pi-electrons). Therefore, a sensitizer is very much essential, which can populate the excited state.31,32 Photosensitization can be explained with two major processes, which are shown in Fig. 2. In optoelectronics, especially in dye-sensitized solar cells, light is absorbed by the dye molecule and electron injection initiated. Here, majorly energy-desired parts depend upon the absorption capability of the molecules and the driving force of an electron excitation. A solar cell discussion cannot be made without the conduction (CB) and valence bands (VB). The energy difference between the CB and VB reveals the efficiency of the device.
 Fig. 2  Light absorption process by dye sensitization (left) and organic molecule with metal incorporation (right). 
Another process is that in which light is absorbed by organic materials and transfers to higher energy levels and/or for light generation (absorption → emission). Here, fluorescence (FL, singlet to singlet) and phosphorescence (PL, triplet to singlet) are initial processes. The energy process in Fig. 2 (right) is shown with a metal supplement. Pure organic molecules are limited to singlet radiative emission as per spin selection and Laporte selection rules.33 Based on the triplet and metal excited state energy levels, there is a possibility of back transfer (BT). The incorporation of the metal into organic molecules increases the emission capability by overcoming the singlet to triplet energy forbidden transfer, resulting in luminescence (LM) from metal ions. However, this procedure is not ideal as it is difficult to find a sufficiently stable phosphorescent emitter structure. Therefore, it is necessary to look at the differences in the energy levels, in which absorbed light can be transferred in the form of emitted light.
1.3 Design concept of donor–acceptor and strategies
The design of charge transfer (CT) donor–acceptor (D–A) molecules plays a crucial role in their photophysical properties and device efficiency. A suitable combination of the D and A moieties in the compound leads to high-performance devices. It is also reported that the A–D–A combinations have increasingly high device performance.34–36Fig. 3 shows the generalized D–A combinations and Fig. 4 expresses D–A combinations with π-conjugation/spacer, which are (a) D–A, (b) D–A–D, (c) D–A–D–A, (d) A–D3, (e) A–D4, (f) cyclic A3D3 and (a) D–π–A, (b) D–π–A–π–D, (c) D–π–Aπ–D–π–A, (d) A–π3–D3, (e) A–π4–D4, (f) cyclic A3–π6–D3, respectively. The donor–acceptor pair is considered to have π–π stacking interactions in supramolecular constructions, especially in polymer networks.
 Fig. 3  Direct connectivity of the donor–acceptor generalized design structures. 
 Fig. 4  Pi-conjugated/spacer moiety connectivity of the donor–acceptor design strategy. 
These generalized structures can be altered as (a) A–D–A, (b) D–A3, (c) D–A4 and (a) A–π–D–π–A, (b) D–π3–A3, (c) D–π4–A4. Further research on peptide-based materials with the donor/acceptor moiety is an ever-interesting research area. Peptide chains can be attached to the end of the D/A groups or between these moieties.37–39 Few combinations with D/A copolymers have been reported,40,41 and the design includes small molecules with D–A–D,42–44 A–D–A,45 D–A–D2–A–D,46 A′(D′AD)2,47 and D–A–D–π–D–A–D combinations.48
Some of the major electron donor and electron acceptor moieties are represented in the pictorial form in Fig. 5 and 6, respectively. Rhodanine, dicyanovinyl moieties, indanedione (2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-1,3-dione (ID)),49 alkyl cyanoacetate, 1,10-phenanthroline, triphenylphospineoxide, pyridine-benzoimidazole, thiazol-benzoimidazole, oxadiazole, INCN,50,51 thiobarbituric acid (TBA), 2-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)rhodanine (RCN),52etc., are found to be efficient electron acceptor moieties.53–55 Triphenylamine, carbazole, fluorene, thiophene, benzodithiophene, dithienosilole, silafluorene, 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT), indacenodithiophene (IDT), IDTT, heptacyclicbenzodi(cyclopentadithiophene) (FBDT), etc., have been reported as electron donor moieties.52,56,57
 Fig. 5  Different types of donor moieties. 
 Fig. 6  Different types of acceptor moieties. 

1.3.1 Donor molecules. 


1.3.2 Acceptor molecules. 
At this time, the investigations of S. Antonello et al. on donor–peptide–acceptor systems in 2003 need to be recalled.58 They reported that the phthalimido moiety is a donor, the peroxide functional group is an acceptor, and α-aminoisobutyric acid (Aib) homo-oligomers are the peptide bridges. With the help of this bridge peptide, the electron transfer process from the phthalimido radical anion to the peroxide was studied. This study can help to design novel peptide-based donor–acceptor architectures for upcoming researchers and certainly give new directions in the field of optoelectronics.59

2. Peptide-based optoelectronics
Peptide and protein-based materials show optoelectronic applications and they have interesting photoluminescent properties in π–π aromatic conjugated interactions, as well as hydrogen bonding properties, which lead to photoluminescent assets. Peptides such as diphenylalanine-based peptides show temperature-dependent emission at 225 nm excitation and strong photoluminescent behavior during blue excitation.60 Based on emission spectral analysis, Tao et al. reported aromatic cyclo-dipeptides, which are (i) cyclo-phenylalanine-tryptophan (cyclo-FW) and (ii) cyclo-WW (W = tryptophan). Cyclo-FW emitted fluorescence emission at 460 nm at an excitation of 370 nm and cyclo-WW showed emission at 425 and 520 nm with the same excitation source. The absorption peak at 515 nm is attributed to the peptide (ligand) metal charge transfer. Pansieri et al.61 used the blue luminescence of Alzheimer's amyloid fibers and it has a phenylalanine peptide source. Here, first, we discuss about peptides for monochromic luminescence and continue to the same peptides for optoelectronics. This part discusses photovoltaics, OLEDs, thin-film transistors, and finally, electrochromism.
2.1 Peptide fluorophores
The combination of amine and acid groups into a molecule to form a peptide bond with the inclusion of an aromatic moiety leads to luminous emission properties. In general, fluorophore emission causes the absorbed excitation light to interact with an electron of the fluorescent molecule. Fluorescent molecules have already shown a wide range of applications and further eminent applications are still being investigated. In this scenario, peptide-based molecular materials are an attractive research area. Further, in the area of peptide fluorophores, recently, S. Loic62 defined peptide fine-tuning by amino acid modification. These fluorescent peptides lead to new achievements in the field of optoelectronic device materials.
In the case of mechanochromic luminescence, the luminous (color changes) property is induced by mechanical forces. Mechanochromic luminescence refers to mechanical-stimuli-response and reversible color change of the compounds. Nowadays, peptide materials for mechanochromic luminescence is an eye-catching area and this concept has become exciting by the incorporation of the aggregation-induced emission process.63,64 The design of these peptide-based materials contains small and/or dendron-type molecules.
2.2 Peptide-based dendrons
Teng and co-workers designed a strategy of combining the polypeptide structure and aromatic groups in the same molecule (Dendron-1, Fig. 7).65 Dendritic molecules based on polypeptides from amino acids have shown reversible mechanochromic luminescence property. Along with a shoulder peak at 403 nm, a violet emission band at 390 nm was observed. The red-shift of the luminescent band (420 nm) due to drop-cast precipitates leads to the disappearance of the shoulder peak and a reduction in the quantum yield is observed. Further, a bright green luminescence band at 470 nm was observed with the grinding of the sample and the quantum yield was enhanced (Φ = 0.18 to 0.31). The pyrenyl moiety exhibited an emission at 390 nm, which is assigned to monomeric emission. Sandwich packing shows that the excimer at 470 nm is an enrichment of the π–π interaction and long lifetime displays. It is due to the different molecular packing patterns of the excimer at 420 nm and 470 nm (sandwich packing mode in the layered nanostructure).
 Fig. 7  Pyrenyl moiety combined polypeptide structure Dendron-1. 
Tricolored mechanochromic liquid crystal structure was reported by Kato et al. and it consists of reversible color switching (different molecular packing).66,67 It shows multiluminescent colors switching from blue to green and a reddish color by applying a mechanical stimulus. Dipeptide (Dendron-2, Fig. 8a), bearing a pyrene moiety, displayed reversible mechanochromic behaviors between blue (λem = 410 nm) and green (λem = 480 nm) colors due to the formation of different pyrene excimers in the crystalline and amorphous states. Dendron-3 (Fig. 8b) has shown low emission intensity. Multicolored transitions comprise may occur mainly in two ways, such as wavelength shift from blue to green and unusual switching of the emission intensity.
 Fig. 8  Structure of (a) Dendron-2, (b) Dendron-3, and (c) Rho-B. 
A combination of optical measurements was conducted to confirm that the generation of reddish luminescence originated from the ring-opening reaction rather than the change in the Rh-B stacking (Fig. 8c).
2.3 Self-assembled dendrons
Natural amino acid-based dendrons or dendrimers (NAADs) are synthesized using a dendron composed of two natural amino acids, glycine, and aspartic acid, and then self-assembly, which leads not only to organogels but also to lyotropic liquid crystals. Non-covalent forces, mainly hydrogen-bonding and aromatic-stacking interactions, were proposed to be the driving force for the self-assembly of Dendron-4 (Fig. 9).68
 Fig. 9  Glycine and aspartic acid based peptide Dendron-4. 
2.4 Biologically inspired peptides
Peptide-based materials consisting of amino acids or their derivative moieties are incorporated and several molecules have been thus designed. However, the current decades are inspired by biologically constructed, bio-based devices. J. Yu et al. discussed two beta-peptides that they act as electron transfer dynamics. Beta-peptides are advantageous because of their secondary stable helical structure. In this structure, the electron acceptor is t-butyl hydroperoxide and the donor is p-cyanobenzamide.
The donor–acceptor design includes the peptide bridge and can be represented as D–B (bridge)–A. Electron transfer from D to A via the peptide in Peptide-1 (Fig. 10a) is remarkably small. It demonstrates that the peptide operates an electron transfer pathway. In the case of Peptide-2 (Fig. 10b), the electron transfer rate is D to A and that of A to D is less. This analysis evidences that the structural changes lead to a change in the electron transfer process.69,70 Further, similar peptide-based molecules are introduced, and their electrochemical technique and computational simulations are presented.
 Fig. 10  Structure of cyano-based (a) Peptide-1 and (b) Peptide-2. 
Peptide-based electronically active molecules (Peptide-3, Fig. 11) have been introduced by D. Ivnitski et al.39 It was observed that considerable intermolecular π-stacking interactions lead to the formation of fibrils. Naphthalene diimide (NDI) molecule interacted with peptide derivatives to form Peptide-3. The NDI counterpart did not influence the self-assembly process in Peptide-3, and the π–π stacking interaction between NDI as well adjacent molecules arises. In the absorption spectra, a 453 nm (visible region) peak was observed, which confirms the radical anions. Further, the new emission band at 600 nm in the fluorescence emission spectrum indicates that it can be a useful electron transfer moiety in devices.
 Fig. 11  Structure of naphthalene diimide-based Peptide-3. 
The electron withdrawing group and/or an electron-donating groups can be a reason for the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) process and this ICT was enhanced by photoexcitation. Few reports have reported to understand the twisting at the excited state such as quasi-rigid D–A compounds, which exhibit approximately 90° ICT. It leads to charge separation via high charge, which is called twisted ICT (TICT). The process of intramolecular rotation and their planarity arrangements are represented in Fig. 12. W. Chi et al. reported a TICT-based material (rhodamine derivative) and processed with it the peptide type chain compound (Peptide-4, Fig. 13). To analyze the TICT effect of the rhodamine derivative, the amine group was replace by glutathione, resulting in red emission at 611 nm.71 Charge transfer and charge separation is important for the chemical process and TICT certainly improves charge shuttling, which is helpful for fluorescent probes.
 Fig. 12  Twisted intramolecular charge shuttle by photoexcitation (reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from John Wiley & Sons). 
 Fig. 13  Structure of rhodamine-based Peptide-4 and its derivative. 
J. L. Andarias and group72 introduced an n/p co-assembled material based on π-extended tetrathiafulvalene (exTTF (Peptide-5, Fig. 14a)) and perylenebisimide (PBI, Fig. 14b and c). Here, exTTE acts as an electron donor and PBI acts as an electron acceptor moiety as well as segregated, alternately stacked D/A nanodomains that are depicted in Fig. 14. n/p co-assembled materials have shown good photoconductivity with 0.8 cm2 V−1 s−1 value. This indicates that these π-extended electron donor and electron acceptor leads to the best photoconductivity performance for future applications.
 Fig. 14  p- and n-Type nanofibers: (a) exTTF (Peptide-5) and (b and c) perylenebisimide and their respective co-assembly (reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from American Chemical Society). 
Benzothienobenzothiophene (BTBT)-conjugated supramolecular solution processable semiconductor material was introduced by M. A. Khalily et al.73 They prepared two peptides with an alkyl chain variation, which are Peptide-6 (BTBT-C3-COHN-Ahx-VVAGKK-Am, Fig. 15a) and Peptide-7 (C8-BTBT-C3-COHN-Ahx-VVAGKK-Am, Fig. 15b). These conjugated peptides formed a β-sheet (uniform nanofibers) in water with 11–13 nm diameter. BTBT molecules have shown π–π interaction and the calculated conductivity was found to be 6.0 × 10−6 S cm−1. This conductivity value has been the highest to date for the non-doped state and indicates that these are potential self-assembled peptides for optoelectronic applications.
 Fig. 15  Structure of (a) Peptide-6 and (b) Peptide-7. 
3. Photovoltaics
The conversion of light into energy using semiconducting materials that show the photovoltaic effect, a phenomenon investigated in physics, photochemistry, and electrochemistry, is known as photovoltaics (PV).74,75 Photovoltaic cells are made up of two or more layers of semiconductors lined up next to each other, one with a positive charge and the other with a negative charge. Sunlight, which is constituted of small energy packets known as photons, strikes the cell and is either reflected, transmitted, or absorbed. When the photons are absorbed by the negative layer of the photovoltaic cell, the energy of the photon gets moved to an electron in an atom of the cell. The electron departs the atom's outer shell as its energy increases. The released electron naturally migrates to the positive layer, resulting in a potential difference between the two layers. The electron flows through the circuit when the two layers are coupled to an external circuit, creating a current. In barely over a decade, the photovoltaics of organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite materials have surpassed the peak efficiency of semiconductor compounds such as CdTe and CIGS (copper indium gallium selenide) used in solar cells.76,77
Solar cells are used to generate direct current and can be used as a power equipment. To convert the DC current produced by PVs to AC, an inverter with an efficiency of about 95% is required. The solar cells must be protected from harm; thus, they are usually packed tightly under a sheet of glass. The solar panel is then employed as a component in a larger photovoltaic system.
Integrated PV modules are being utilized to replace traditional building materials in some areas of a structure, such as the roof and windows. They are available in several forms, such as flat roofs, pitched roofs, facades, and glazings. Peptide-based materials are preferred in the device in less quantity (for active layer formation) since the peptide-based layer decreases the energy transfer efficiency with the thickness. In addition, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) have been growing vigorously and few materials have already proven to be potential candidates. However, to further improve the efficiency, the findings are in progress. Earlier reports on DSSC showed the covalent linkage with organic dyes on the metal oxide surface, which resists the aggregation of molecules.78–81 Further, photocurrent generation analysis is made by peptide-based materials, which are thermally stable and conformationally arranged. These are feasible to self-assemble on a gold surface and lead to light-induced electron–hole separation. This initiative work motivated work toward peptide molecules as a solar cell material.
3.1 Advantages of photovoltaic cell
Photovoltaic cells produce clean and green energy because no hazardous gases such as COx, NOx, and other pollutants are emitted. They also do not pollute the environment, making them perfect for use in residential areas.82 PVs are economically viable—the cost of operating and maintenance is very low. The cost of a solar panel is merely the only cost, which includes purchase and installation. Solar panels are easy to install and can be made available in remote areas or sparsely populated areas at a lower cost than traditional transmission lines.
3.2 Peptide-based materials
Few major key points need to be understood to receive efficient PVs such as (i) the formation of optical absorption and excitation, (ii) donor–acceptor interface, (iii) dissociation of charge carriers (holes in the donor and electrons in the acceptor), (iv) collection of charge at the electrode, and (iv) mobility of the charge carrier. Peptide-based materials found in solar cell applications are quite hard since there are very less reports available.
Handan Acar et al. reported dye-sensitized solar cells based on amyloid-like peptides. These peptides are capable of self-assembling into one-dimensional structures via individual peptide supramolecular interactions. PV-1 and PV-2 (Fig. 16a and b) are different chain arrangements and PV-1, amine groups from the lysine residues and PV-2, carboxylate groups from the glutamate moiety caused the nucleation. Further, it helped in the growth of TiO2 centers. PV-1-incorporated TiO2 nanotube electrodes showed better performance in short circuit current than PV-2. In addition, the efficiency of PV-1 (0.83%) was shown to be higher than that of PV-2 (0.44%).83
 Fig. 16  Structure of (a) PV-1 and (b) PV-2. 
E. Gatto et al.84 introduced am Au–S linkage peptide-based material to bind the gold surface, which includes the 310-helical hexapeptide, residue of α-aminoisobutyric acid (strongly folding inducer), pyrene, and N-terminus at the (S,R) lipoyl anchoring group. The observed IPCE (incident photon to current efficiency) for PV-3 (Fig. 17a) (SSU6Py)/gold/TiO2/FTO (fluorine tin oxide) electrode at 350 nm is 52.4%. Once the gold/TiO2/FTO electrode is removed, the IPCE values were found to be 12%, clearly indicating that the reduction in the IPCE is due to the pyrene moiety. A high anodic current was generated in the UV-region and in the presence of the non-corrosive electron donor, i.e., triethanolamine. Along with TiO2, the pyrene chromophores absorb light and lead to the detection of a very high photocurrent signal. Similarly, PV-4, 5, 6, and 7 (Fig. 17b–e) are demonstrated for DSSC applications (Table 2).85–87 PV-6 showed good insulating property by applying a potential between −0.3 and +0.3 V, even in case of suffering with high positive or negative potentials. The general representation of the device with TiO2 and gold particles is shown in Fig. 18.
 Fig. 17  Structures of (a) PV-3, (b) PV-4, (c) PV-5, (d) PV-6, and (e) PV-7. 
Table 2 Device parameter of the peptides PV-1 to PV-6




S. no.
Name of the peptide
Performance
Ref.




1.
PV-1
DSSC, 0.83% efficiency

83



2.
PV-2
DSSC, 0.44% efficiency

83



3.
PV-3
(SSU6Py)/gold/TiO2/FTO, IPCE 52.4%. DSSC, 0.15 ± 0.05% (SSU6Py-working electrode)

84



4.
PV-4
PV-7/PV-4 SAM, λmax = 340 nm, IPCE 0.002%

85



5.
PV-5
PV-7/PV-5 SAM, λmax = 340 nm, IPCE 0.02%

85



6.
PV-6
—

87



7.
PV-7
—

85





 Fig. 18  Schematic representation of peptides (PV-1 to 7) on gold-covered TiO2 surface (reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from John Wiley & Sons). 
4. Organic light-emitting diodes
OLEDs are developed with a giant number of molecules to improve the efficiency of the device. Presently, we are focused on only peptide-based materials for organic light-emitting diodes as the already designed lighting materials are mainly organic or metal-based complexes and rarely corban/graphene associated constructions. OLEDs are a sandwich type of model that consist of glass substrate/anode//hole transporting layer/emissive layer/electron transporting layer/cathode. The device, when it is a forward bias, electrons and holes move to the emissive layer and recombine to generate the emissive light, which is called electroluminescence (Fig. 19). The pioneer work from Tang and Van Slyke in 1987 on organic light = emitting diodes is a milestone in the optoelectronics field and from this point onwards, there have been numerous reports.88
 Fig. 19  Ligand excited energy level diagrams and the general construction of the OLED device. 
Generally, fluorescence and phosphorescence are emissive processes in photoluminescence; the excitation source is the photon, and in the case of electroluminescence, electron is the source of light generation. In the electroluminescence process, singlet energy is limited to one-fourth and the triplet energy is limited to three-fourth of the total energy as it is known that singlet to triplet transition is a forbidden transition and is limited to only 25%. To utilize the remaining unutilized 75% of the energy, few methods are available, which are tremendously moving toward the complete utilization of the excitation energy toward emission. Such methods are heavy metal ions (transition and rare earth metals preferable), thermally-activated delayed fluorescence (TADF), hybridized local and charge transfer (HLCT), and triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA).89 Heavy metal ions are utilized for phosphorescence emission and reaming is mostly fluorescent emission.
TTA is a process that has long-lived excitons and arises due to the bimolecular process of two triplet state excitons. The combination of two triplet states’ energy gives rice a high singlet population and it is equal to almost two-folds of the original triplet state energy. The process is carried out as a triplet and triplet to the excited triplet (Tn). From here, energy is transferred to the first singlet state and finally reached the ground state via light emission. In the case of TADF, triplet energy (T1) is transferred to singlet (S1) energy level via reverse intersystem crossing (RISC). The design strategy includes the high priority of the energy gap between the singlet and triplet levels. Metal–organic complexes as well as pure organic compounds are more preferable for TADF emitters since they have flexible construction of molecular arrangement. Along with TTA and TADF, another method that has also been familiar in the recent years for utilizing the triplet state energy is the HLCT method. In this process, S1 and T1 are located lower than the host triplet excitons (Fig. 20). In the HLCT transfer of energy from these, hot S1 and T1 states can appear via RISC/due to the twisting angle. It leads to the arrangement of triplet and singlet states to be quite difficult to design to achieve the HLCT process. At present, tremendous progress has been going on to receive the high singlet population either via the direct (fluorescence) or the indirect (TTA, TADF, HLCT) process and to improve the high efficiency devices (high EQY, lifetime).
 Fig. 20  Phosphorescence, TADF, TTA, and HLCT process in one set of arrangement (FL = fluorescence, PS = phosphorescence, NR = non-radiative, S = singlet, T = triplet). 
4.1 Phosphorescent OLEDs
Phosphorescent OLEDs are attractive in two ways to exploit the triplet state such as the metal-free organic compound and the metal-based complex. In the above-discussed TADF method, few of the molecules exhibit phosphorescence instead of fluorescence. In addition, a metal-free organic molecule for phosphorescence is cost-effective, easier to synthesize, and fabrication feasibility. The predicted possible values are for blue fluorescence to harvest the 25% singlet excitons and phosphorescent red and green emitters to harvest the 75% triplet excitons. It means theoretically allowing 100% exciton use.90 However, efficient triplet harvesting with standard blue emitter systems has been not satisfactory. Fluorescent blue emitters have been proposed for white OLED to harvest the electrically generated singlets and to transfer the triplets to the phosphorescent green and red emitters. Usually, RGB colors are required to obtain white emission; based on this concept, the highly efficient white OLEDs are designed by combining the primary color emitting phosphorescent materials.
4.2 Fluorescent OLEDs
The maximum efficiency of the device as the external quantum efficiency (EQE) is limited to approximately 5% due to the negligible spin–orbit coupling (forbidden) of the triplet in pure organic molecules. Several fluorescent devices are established to overcome 5% of EQE by utilizing the triplet excitons. Not only pure organic molecules but metal-based coordination complexes are introduced based on iridium (Ir) and platinum (Pt) as the active layer.91 However, organic emitters have several benefits compared to metal-based fluorophores such as lower cost (since no metal) and synthetic flexibility with organic compounds. In pure organic compounds, the triplet energy is harvested; the TADF mechanism was introduced by Uoyama et al. in 2012.92 Based on this process, diverse electron donor and acceptor combinations (chemical bond/intermolecular interaction) have been reported.93,94
Later on, hot-excitation mechanism was introduced to improve the efficiency and the mechanism includes the conversion of triplet excitons (upper-lying/hot) to singlet excitons via reverse inter-system crossing. From the introduction of hot-excitation by Li et al. and Yao et al., various researchers are working to improve the singlet population manifold by excitation using sensitizers (pure/hybrid form).95,96 Recently, in 2015, Peng et al. introduced a neutral radical with the donor–acceptor composition as the emitting layer.97
4.3 Peptide-based luminescent materials
Pioneer work is going on to develop the efficiency of OLEDs and numerous metal/metal-free organic materials have been introduced. However, there is still a rising demand toward their development due to the deficiency of overcoming the drawbacks such as efficiency roll-off parameters and singlet–triplet utilization. The inclusion of the chiral/peptide with organic molecules into OLEDs is a current attractive trend. Recently, Y. Hu et al.98 introduced a pure organic molecule with a chiral moiety and proposed aggregation-induced delayed fluorescence (AIDF). The design included electron-donating poly(carbazole-ran-acridine) as the advantage, and electron-withdrawing dibenzothiophen-2-yl(phenyl)methanone and chiral alanine moieties (luminous, L1 and L2; Fig. 21). The inclusion of the 9-octyl-9H-carbazole moiety improved the solubility property, which is essential for film production. The circular dichroism of the two polymers L1 and L2 aggregates and the film state between 350 and 450 nm indicates the chirality of the polymer backbone, which reveals the transfer of the chirality from the alanine group to poly(carbazole-acridine). Strong green emission from the neat film showed 6.7%, 10.3% and lifetime (delayed fluorescence) of 1.358 μs, 1.366 μs for L1, L2, respectively. The kRISC values for L1 and L2 are 2.07 × 106 and 106 s−1, respectively; their photoluminescence quantum yield is 2.8 and 3.9% in tetrahydrofuron, and 6.7 and 10.3% in the solid form, respectively. Fabricated solution-processed OLEDs device configuration is ITO/PEDOT:PSS (50 nm)/5 wt% L2:CBP (50 nm)/TmPyPB (45 nm)/LiF (1 nm)/Al, which have shown green emitting electroluminescence performance with a current efficiency (CE) of 2.52 cd A−2, power efficiency (PE) of 0.94 lm W−1, and EQE of 0.87% (Fig. 22). The detailed device fabrication layers with their concentration and photophysical characterization are depicted in Table 3.
 Fig. 21  Structure of the chirality of the polymer backbone L1 and L2. 
 Fig. 22  Device performance: (A) device-2 based on L1, (C) device-5 based on L2 at different voltages, (C) luminance–voltage–current density characteristics of devices 1–4, (D) 1–8 (reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from American Chemical Society). 
Table 3 Device performance from 1–8 and their detailed characterization results




Device
Emitting layer

V
on (V)

L
Max (cd m−2)
CEMax (cd A−1)
PEMax (lm W−1)
EQEMax (%)

λ
Max (nm)
CIE (x, y)





V
on = turn on voltage at 1 cd m−2, LMax = maximum luminescence, CEMax = maximum current efficiency, PEMax = maximum power efficiency, EQEMax = maximum external quantum efficiency, λMax = electroluminescence maximum, CIE = Commission International de I’Eclairage coordinates.




1
5 wt% L1:CBP
7.0
724
1.05
0.35
0.37
529
(0.36, 0.50)


2
10 wt% L1:CBP
8.2
962
1.20
0.35
0.42
532
(0.38, 0.52)


3
30 wt% L1:CBP
7.6
489
0.88
0.28
0.31
536
(0.39, 0.52)


4
Neat L1 film
7.8
223
0.23
0.08
0.09
564
(0.43, 0.51)


5
5 wt% L2:CBP
6.8
1214
2.52
0.94
0.87
528
(0.35, 0.52)


6
10 wt% L2:CBP
6.6
1477
2.04
0.67
0.70
531
(0.36, 0.52)


7
30 wt% L2:CBP
6.6
1311
1.16
0.37
0.40
534
(0.38, 0.53)


8
Neat L2 film
6.0
214
0.23
0.09
0.09
571
(0.45, 0.51)




4.4 Peptide/related oligofluorenes
R. Abbel et al.99 reported self-assembled fluorene oligomers (L3–L7, Fig. 23) for white-light emitting organogels from dilute solutions to the solid state. 3,4,5-Tridodecylbenzamide chosen as the wedges and fluorene, naphthalene, quinoxaline, and benzothiadiazole/thienopyrazine as the core along with chiral dialkylfluorene conjugation. The molar absorption is found to be the highest (123000 ε M−1 cm−1) for L3 and shows emission in the blue region (405, 426 nm). However, the resulting quantum yield is observed to be the highest for L6 from the rest of the molecules. The emission wavelength of the molecules from L3 to L7 is increasing toward a redshift. In addition, it covers the greatest of the visible spectrum, which leads to the idea of white light generation by the mixing of primary color exhibitors.
 Fig. 23  Different peptide moiety structures from L3 to L7. 
Organogels have a minor response to the apolar solvent and larger aggregation in polar solvents was observed. At high polar concentration, blue and red luminescence from the gel was found and taken to initiate the mixing of these primary colors with the green-emitting gel to achieve white emission (L3 and L5–L7 mixture). It indicates that the mixing of different fluorene-based oligomers can show the self-assembled state emission via the tuning of the partial energy transfer process. Fig. 24 indicates the PL emission of the combination of the L3 and L5–L7 oligomer, illumination under UV, and the self-assembly mechanism of L3.
 Fig. 24  (a) PL emission spectra of gel compound L3 and L5–7, (b) PL life time of the gel compound-L3 and L5–7, (c) UV illumination on the same compound, (d) proposed mechanism of self-assembly in methylcyclohexane for L3 (reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from John Wiley & Sons). 
5. Thin-film transistors (TFT)
TFTs are essentially MOSFET transistors, and the first TFT was produced in 1962, about two years after the first MOSFET. The first TFT-LCD was established in 1973, establishing the main direction of the TFT technology's research and development. TFTs and MOSFETs do not have the same fabrication issues. This distinction explains why TFT-L took over two decades to develop.100,101
TFT is a component of an LCD, which is used to increase the display's quality and control. It is basically a tiny transistor connected to each and every pixel on the screen. TFT technology has the highest resolution of all flat-panel systems in today's market.102 TFT glass contains the same number of TFTs as the number of pixels displayed; however, a color filter glass features a color filter that provides the color. The liquid crystals move depending on the voltage difference between the color filter glass and the TFT glass. Back light is the amount of light determined by the amount of liquid crystal movement required to generate the color.103
TFTs are most commonly used in LCD screens. TFTs, on the other hand, are commonly utilized as sensors in X-ray detectors. It is also used in a variety of sensing applications. TFT technology has been used for physical, chemical, and biological sensing as well as LCDs. TFT displays are also known as active-matrix LCDs. The liquid crystal of TFT LCD (Thin Film Transistor Liquid Crystal Display) screens is sandwiched between two glass plates. TFTs in active-matrix LCDs operate as basic ON/OFF switches that move at different speeds depending on the refresh rate of the LCD, for example, 60 Hz. A simple structure of TFT consists of three terminals: the gate, the source, and the drain. A gate insulating film separates the gate from the semiconductor film, while the drain and source are in direct contact with the semiconductor layer.104,105
5.1 A simple hin-film-transistor (TFT) structure
To turn on a simple TFT, such as an N-channel TFT, a positive voltage is applied to the gate; the insulation layer acts as the dielectric layer in a capacitor, causing negative charges to be induced on the semiconductor channel, which is the region between the source and the drain; these negative charges cause electrons to flow from the source to the drain. When a negative voltage is applied to the gate, electrons in the channel are depleted, and there is almost no current. The ON current is affected by a number of factors, including the channel width, channel length, gate voltage, and TFT threshold voltage. When the TFT is turned on, a data voltage is applied to the source, and the drain with the LC load capacitance charges up to the same voltage, delivering the data voltage from the data line to the pixel electrode. There is no current in the channel when it is turned off, and the data voltage cannot be transferred. A TFT substrate is made up of a matrix of pixels and an ITO (transparent electrically conductive film) region, each of which contains a TFT device. The image on the screen is made up of thousands or millions of these pixels.106,107
TFTs have the advantage of being quick enough for video, having a vast and smooth color palette, and being pixel addressable via an electrical two-dimensional control matrix. Most low-cost displays use plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition to produce an amorphous silicon crystal layer onto the glass. Modern displays are the result of a variety of TFT technologies. Poor viewing angles, contrast, and backlighting were among the first issues to be solved. Many displays have become more vivid as a result of improved light sources, diffusers, and polarizers, with some even claiming to be daylight readable. In-plane switching, a modern technique that makes the crystals move parallelly to the display plane rather than vertically, improving the viewing angles. Modern displays have improved speeds and contrasts, resulting in high performance at a reasonable cost.108,109
5.2 Function of TFT
The passage of light is controlled by a liquid crystal in a TFT. A TFT-LCD panel's basic structure can be conceived of as two pieces of glass sandwiched together by a layer of liquid crystal. A color filter is installed on the front glass, while transistors are installed on the back glass. When a transistor is powered up, the liquid crystal bends, enabling light to flow through and produce a pixel. The backlight is made up of a light source, which is often an LED that is situated at the back of the screen. A color filter is installed on the front glass, giving each pixel its own color. The image on the panel is created by combining these pixels in various hues.110
5.3 Peptide-based thin-film transistors
P. C. Dastoor et al.111 worked on glutathione (GSH) and NPY peptide-based materials. GSH (TFT-1, Fig. 25) is a tripeptide and a key primer of the intercellular metabolic process. The sensing of the peptides by organic molecules required either inter or intramolecular interaction between them. In the conjugate reaction between GSH and 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB), glutathione S-transferases (GST) act as the promotor and lead to release of the hydrochloric acid.  
 Fig. 25  Glutathione-based peptide structure TFT-1. 
A. Rani and co-workers112 introduced peptide-based bio-organic thin film materials (TFT-2, 3, and 4; Fig. 26a–c). Mono (TFT-2, N-terminal acetylated peptide) and cross-linked conjugates (TFT-3, mono linked peptide; TFT-4, cross-linked peptide dimer) based on thiophene-diketopyrrolopyrrole (TDPP) were synthesized using 9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl (Fmoc) via solid-phase peptide synthesis. TFT-2 consists of the structural formula Ac-His-Glu-Phe-Ile-Ser-Thr-Ala-His-NH2 (acetyl-histidine-glutamine-phenylalanine-isoleucine-serine-threonine-alanine-histidine). TDPP is a highly absorbing fluorescent molecule and consists of good thermal and photostability properties.112 Fibrous morphology showed by mono and cross-linked peptides at neutral pH exhibited hydrogel behavior at 4 wt% in water. However, it was not observed at pH 2 and 9; it is predicted that the charge of the peptide plays a role in the assembly process. TFT-3 formed mechanically stronger gels than TFT-4, which is about 37 times larger than TFT-4. Negative stain-transmission electron microscopy was used to analyze the self-assembled nanostructures (TFT-2,3,4). Vibronically structured low-energy bands from the UV-Vis absorption study indicates the presence of monomeric species of TFT-3 and 4 in dimethyl sulfoxide. The observed intermolecular coupling directs the π–π interactions, which are a highly promising indication of the charge transport property. Their photoluminescence quantum yield was found to be ΦF 87.6% for TFT-2 and 88.3% for TFT-4.
 Fig. 26  Structure of (a) TFT-2, (b) TFT-3, and (c) TFT-4. 
A. Dezieck et al.113 constructed an organic thin-film transistor based on pentacene. They used a semiconductor dielectric interface with quartz binding polypeptide (genetically engineered). The mobility of the device was found to be 0.1–0.2 cm2 V−1. It was suggested that the mimicking of threshold voltages of the device can be done in acidic or basic environments.
Biodegradable materials are more preferable in device-based applications since they have less toxic effect than non-degradable materials and may be cost-effective. In this context, R. Singh et al.114 extracted a biodegradable dielectric material from chicken feathers. The extraction of keratin protein from chicken feathers was made by reduction, which further caused denaturation via the crosslinking of –SH groups of Cysteine. The β-sheet structure present in keratin leads to a structural confirmation and the enhancement of π–π interaction facilitates the reduction of the trapping sites in the device (at the dielectric interface). Keratin along with poly(3-hexylthiophene) based solution-processed organic thin film transistor showed charge mobility of 2.293 × 10−3 cm−2 V−1 s−1.
Y. T. Tai et al.115 reported a floating gate thin film transistor to determine alkaline phosphatase detection based on supramolecular hydrogel material, i.e., 2-naphthylacetic acid-L-phenylalanine-L-phenylalanine-L-O-phosphor (TFT-5, Fig. 27). The sol–gel transition reaction is observed by a potential drop between the two phases, i.e., liquid phase and gel phase. A minor threshold voltage difference was observed with the increase in hydrogelation.
 Fig. 27  Structure of TFT-5. 
6. Electrochromics
Platt, in 1961, reported that electrochemical redox reactions causes color change between the neutral state and the colored form in electroactive materials, which is called as the electrochromic method.116,117 Nowadays, electrofluorochromism (EFC) is another advanced field in electrochromism, which was introduced by Lehn in 1993.118 Many reports are available on electrochromism materials because of their important uses in daily life such as smart windows, e-paper, and energy storage devices. In addition, luminogens with aggregation-induced emission property (AIEgens) demonstrate improved emission contrast ratio by nullifying the concentration quenching, which leads to high-performance EFC-based fabrications.
Based on several advantages, triphenylamine and other arylamine units are introduced. However, peptide-based materials are very rare. The advantage of the photoactive and electroactive properties of triphenylamine are used for EFC devices.
6.1 Peptide-based electrochromic (EC) devices
The supramolecular structure with π-conjugation units is effective for charge carrier mobility and based on this phenomenon, M. Konda et al.119 reported the self-assembled quinquethiophene π-gel (EC-1, Fig. 28). In peptide molecules, electrochromism is responsible for a redox active π-conjugated quinquethiophene core and molecular assembly by the peptide-motif. The color exhibited by the film is stable and has controlled fast switching capability. Further J-aggregation property was observed from the concentration dependent UV-Vis analysis. These prominent observations indicate that the synthesized peptides have the capability of serving as electrochromic device materials for further optoelectronic applications.
 Fig. 28  Quinquethiophene-based electrochromic material structure EC-1. 
6.2 Peptide/related electrofluorochromic devices
Owing to their thermal and mechanical resistance, aromatic polyamides are prominent materials for electrochromic studies and are also known as microelectronic materials. Y. Oishi et al.120 reported aromatic polyamide-based molecules to improve the solubility and temperature properties. It included 4,4′-diaminotriphenylamine with various aromatic dicarboxylic acids in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone. These polymers have shown a better temperature range of decomposition, i.e., 10% weight loss temperatures are above 430 °C in air. Several aromatic groups in electrochromic polymer molecules are depicted in Fig. 29(Table 4).
 Fig. 29  Aromatic groups in electrochromic polymer molecules. 
S. H. Hsiao et al.121 introduced 4,4′-diamino-4′′-tertbutyltriphenylamine-based polymers, which show blue emission wavelength (Polymer-2 series). The thermal decomposition of these polymers is found to be more stable up to 450–500 °C. As compared to the above-mentioned strategy, these are extended with the t-butyl group on triphenylamine, which leads to improved stability. These polymers revealed the excellent stability of the electrochromic properties and spectroelectrochemical analysis behaviors, changing its original pale-yellow color to a blue/green color. In addition, these materials also find application in electroluminescence. The polymer core moiety and conjugation with peptide molecules are shown in Fig. 30.
 Fig. 30  Polymer core moiety and its series of molecules. 
Extending the carbazole moiety in the polymer core group (Polymer–series), G. S. Liou et al.122 reported N-carbazolylphenyl units by the direct phosphorylation polycondensation process. The thermal study indicates that the weight loss of the compounds improved as compared to the reported moiety122 and showed 10% decomposition at 540 °C. The fluorescence emission maxima are shown in the range of 448–499 nm for Polymer-3j,k,l. The calculated fluorescence quantum yield is found to have maxima of 0.34% for Polymer-3f to 4.44% for Polymer-3j. Electrochemical and spectroelectrochemical analyses show the best interaction of voltage and color change from yellow to green, which indicates that these polymers have good electrochromic properties (Fig. 31).
 Fig. 31  Performance of the electrochromic behavior of Polymer-3n thin-film at (a) 0.00, (b) 0.70, (c) 0.75, (d) 0.80, (e) 0.85, (f) 0.90, (g) 0.95, (h) 1.00, and (i) 1.05 V (reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from John Wiley & Sons). 
C. W. Chang et al.123 published highly stable anodic green electrochromic materials (Polymer-4 series), i.e., 4-methoxy substituted aryl units having viscosities of 0.27–1.39 dL g−1. 10% weight loss was observed at 470 °C and the char yields were higher than 60%. Cyclic voltammogram revealed reversible oxidation at 0.73–0.79 V and exhibit excellent electrochromic properties, which are from colorless to green at applied potentials ranging from 0.00 to 1.05 V. In addition, several (1000) cyclic switches of the polymer showed stable performance (Fig. 32).
 Fig. 32  Electrochromic study from 0.00–0.95 V and its cyclic switches (reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
S. H. Hsiao et al.124 explained electroactive adamantyl phenoxy-substituted triphenylamine units as electrochromic applications (Polymer-5 series). These polymers showed glass-transition temperatures between 254 and 310 °C and are stable up to 450 °C. Indium-tin-oxide (ITO) coated films showed a better reversible redox couple, which includes the color change in the sample. The colorization appears at 0.0 V and 1.1–1.4 V, and observed color change from the pale yellowish neutral state to the green or blue state.
Y. C. Kung et al.125 synthesized and characterized a series of bulky 4-(1-adamantoxy)triphenylamine-based polymers (Polymer-6 series). Reversible redox waves are exhibited in the range of 0.78–0.81 V. Polymer-6 series shows inherent viscosities in the range of 0.45–0.82 dL g−1 and the maxima was observed for Polymer-6e (0.82 dL g−1). The electrochromic study of the polymer has shown color change from the colorless/pale yellow neutral state to dark blue/bluish-green. Higher and lower thermal decomposition of the polymers is explained by S. H. Hsiao's group by the incorporation of redox-active 2,4-dimethoxytriphenylamine moieties as the core group (Polymer-7 series).126 Polymer-7a and 7h showed relatively lower glass transition temperature values due to its flexibility and low rotation barrier. Polymer-7e expressed the highest temperature, which is due to the presence of the rigid biphenylene group as the core in the polymer. Electrochromic study reveals changing color from the colorless/pale yellow neutral state to the green/blue-purple state. It has shown high redox stability even after 1000 cycles.
Two sets of the organo-polymer electrochemical behavior of the triphenylamine-based electrochromism materials were introduced by H. J. Yen et al. in 2010 (Polymer-8 and 9 series). As compared to Polymer 8 and 9, 9 consists of three methyl groups on a ring, which made it difficult to resonance stabilize the cation radical.127 It is expected to have higher oxidation potential and lower electrochemical stability. In 2010, H. J. Yen et al.128 reported near-infrared electrochromism with the inclusion of phenothiazine redox centers (Polymer-10). 10% weight loss was observed in nitrogen and air atmosphere, which was observed in the range of 500–585 and 485–570 °C, respectively. As far as absorption was concerned, near-infrared absorption was enhanced due to phenothiazine units having extended conjugation length as compared to triphenylamine units. The incorporation of the phenothiazine moiety strengthened the polymer, which leads to good electrochromic response. The oxidation pathway is shown in Fig. 33.
 Fig. 33  Oxidation pathway for electrochromic response. 
Polymer-11 has a color change property with applied potentials scanning from 0.0 to 1.3 V, which is from the neutral form to yellowish green and blue. The glass transition temperature is quite high for 11f from the others. Carbazole units with electron-donating methoxy groups certainly improve the electrochemical performance of the molecules as compared to other polymer components.129 The electrochromic behavior Polymer-12 shows color change from colorless/pale yellow to green, blue, and purple in the scan range from 0.0–1.2 V.130
A very low onset potential of 0.362 V at reversible oxidation showed Polymer-13. Polymer-13b and 13d have similar low onset potentials. A triphenylamine unit effectively reduces the oxidation potentials and also leads to multicolor chromism property.131 Polymer-14 exhibited very low onset potential in the range of 0.27–0.35 V at reversible oxidation and strong color change appeared from colorless to green and deep blue for oxidation.132 Trifluoromethyl-substituted groups (Polymer-15, 16) have electrochromic properties such as green or dark golden color upon oxidation. As compared to Polymer 15 and 16, CH3TPA (16)-containing polyamides revealed good redox stability, suggesting that it can have the feasibility for real applications.133
Polymer-17 and 18 are polymers with slight structural changes and similar functionalization moieties. Polymer-17 series are easily oxidized and show stable cationic radical behavior as compared to the Polymer-18 series (Fig. 34a).134 However, all the polymers exhibit electrochromic property and the color change is from colorless to green color when oxidized.
 Fig. 34  Phenylamine-based polymer structures (a) Polymer-18 and (b) Polymer-19. 
N. Sun et al.135 introduced fluorene-based Polymer-19 (Fig. 34b) with different aromatic moieties (19b, e, h, g, l). Fluorescence emission was observed at 441 nm with better quantum yields up to 47.1%. It also showed high colorization efficiency, which is almost 283 cm2 C−1 at 860 nm. Methylsulfonyltriphenylamine-based polymers (Polymer-20 series, Fig. 35) showed a high contrast ratio (Ioff/Ion) of 234. Polymer-20 showed the best performance in the electrochemical study since it showed aggregation-enhanced emission (AEE) features and high solid-state quantum yield up to 32.1%.136 The polymer has a strong fluorescence emission band and its responds to spectroelectrochemical analysis with effectively color change.
 Fig. 35  Structure of methylsulfonyltriphenylamine-based Polymer-20. 
Polymer-21 (Fig. 36) series consists of 2-diphenylamino-(9,9-dimethylamine) units and shows electrochromic performance from colorless to grey-green on oxidation. The electrochromic/electrofluorescent nature certainly gives a new direction to dual-switching display.137
 Fig. 36  Structure of Polymer-21. 
To date, triphenylamine based derivatives have been discussed; here, the incorporation of the designed polymer with two arylamino group's us discussed (Polymer-22 and 23 series, Fig. 37a and b). 22a has low onset oxidation potential as compared to the rest of the polymers (22b, 23a, b). Low-temperature polymer condensation solution method was used to prepare the near-infrared and multi-colored electrochromic materials based on aniline derivatives (Polymer-22 and 23). Among Polymer-22 and 23 polymers, 23 exhibits a higher bandgap (∼2.78 eV) and 22 shows a lower gap, which is ∼1.89 eV. The insertion of 4-methoxy-substituted group improves the solubility and thermal stability of the polymer. The obtained results suggest that the non-conjugated triphenylamine-based polymers expressed better electrochromic performance and stable electrochemical oxidation.138
 Fig. 37  Diphenylamine-based polymer structures (a) Polymer-22 and (b) Polymer-23. 
Similar low-temperature polycondensation was used to prepare the polymers based on anthraquinone derivatives (Fig. 38). These polymers are associated with a high glass transition temperature, which is 285–360 °C. Polymer-25 shows better solubility than Polymer-24, which is attributed to the soft fragments of the ether linkage along the anthraquinone-substituted triphenylamine groups.139,140 The performance of Polymer-25b is more stable than the remaining polymers, which is due to its lower oxidation potential and isolated ether band.
 Fig. 38  Structure of anthraquinone derivatives (a) Polymer-24 and (b) Polymer-25. 
Polymer-26141 (Fig. 39a) revealed a higher glass transition temperature compared to other molecules. The onset oxidation potentials are found to be less in the –OMe group polymers (Polymer-27 series, Fig. 39b). During the oxidation process, it dimerizes to a benzidine structure, which leads to additional oxidation states along with color change with strong absorption in the near IR region.
 Fig. 39  Structure of (a) Polymer-26 and (b) Polymer-27. 
Two triphenylamine units connected in the same polymer were synthesized and the electron-donating methoxy units were also incorporated (Polymer-28 series, Fig. 40). The synthesized Polymer-28 did not show intervalence charge transfer. Polymer-28e showed better thermal stability and glass transition temperature, which is 477 and 302 °C, respectively.142
 Fig. 40  Methoxy-connected triphenylamine-based structure, Polymer-28. 
The introduction of the electron-donating methoxy group on triphenylamine at different positions is investigated (Polymer-29, Fig. 41).143 The energy band gap and oxidation onset potential of the synthesized polymers followed the order Polymer-29c < 29a < 29b. Among these three polymers, the meta-position describes the formation of no resonance-stabilized cationic radical.
 Fig. 41  Multi-substituted triphenylamine-based structure, Polymer-29. 
The synthesized bis(diphenylamino)-fluorene-based Polymer-30144 (Fig. 42) includes the aliphatic moiety and the methoxy group. Reduced charge transfer effect was observed due to the presence of aliphatic structure inclusions. In addition, methoxy groups support the reduction in the oxidation potentials, which leads to electrochemical stability enhancement.
 Fig. 42  Fluorene-connected diphenylamine-based structure, Polymer-30. 
Table 4 Summary of the Polymers-1 to 30 and their respective references




S. no.
Name of the polymer
Thermal studya (°C)
Electrochromic property (scan range in V)
QY (%)
Ref.



T
g (DSC)
TGA (10%)


Air
Inert





T
g is glass transition state, DSC is differential scanning calorimetry and TGA is thermogravimetric analysis.a The polymer including substitution molecules range from minimum to maximum showed.




1.
Polymer-1
281–313
435–515
450–550
—
—

120



2.
Polymer-2
272–308
451–567
458–581
Pale yellow color to blue/green (0 to 1.10)

—


121



3.
Polymer-3
268–331
420–595
419–593
Yellow to green (0.00 to 1.05)
0.34–4.44

122



4.
Polymer-4
165–263
375–520
375–515
Colorless to green (0.00–1.05)
0.13–3.63

123



5.
Polymer-5
254–293
497–579
493–567
Pale yellowish neutral state to the green or blue (0.0 V, 0.80–1.10)

—


124



6.
Polymer-6
263–311
486–560
481–529
Colorless/pale yellow neutral state to dark blue/bluish-green (0.0 and 1.1–1.2)

—


125



7.
Polymer-7
243–289
482–530
471–500
Colorless/pale yellow neutral state to green/blue-purple (0.0–1.3)
0.33–0.77

126



8.
Polymer-8
293–313
465–540
450–530
Colorless to green (0.0–1.05)

—


127



9.
Polymer-9
314–329
460–535
450–500
Colorless to bluish-green (0.0–1.05)

—


127



10.
Polymer-10
255–277
485–570
500–585
Colorless to green/purple (0.0–1.0 and 1.3 V)

—


128



11.
Polymer-11
277–308
480–507
492–512
Neutral form to yellowish green and blue (0.0 to 1.3 V)

—


129



12.
Polymer-12
218–253
537–555
556–568
Colorless/pale yellow to green, blue and purple scan range from 0.0–1.2 V

—


130



13.
Polymer-13
284–295
511–578
500–584
Multicolor chromism property, (0.0–0.362)

—


131



14.
Polymer-14
274–297
433–512
437–535
Colorless to green and deep blue (0.0–0.75 and 1.20)

—


132



15.
Polymer-15
275–302
450–513
467–530
Green or dark golden color (0.0–1.2)

—


133



16.
Polymer-16
275–317
485–532
493–542
Pale green (0.0–1.2)

—


133



17.
Polymer-17
251–270
484–529
494–545
Pale yellow to green color (0.0–1.25)
0.4–3.6

134



18.
Polymer-18
245–287
503–549
488–533

—

1.5–12

134



19.
Polymer-19
248–316
420–500
427–531
Colorless to green (0.0–1.0)
0.37–47.1

135



20.
Polymer-20
306–334
—
443–470
Bifunctional EC and EFC (0.0–1.2)
2.2–32.1

136



21.
Polymer-21
281–339
491–503
493–510
Colorless to grey-green (0 to 1.3)
1.9–34.1

137



22.
Polymer-22
270–275
430–440
435–495
Color of pale-green, lawn-green/green-deep blue (0.0–1.5)

—


138



23.
Polymer-23
252–255
560–575
575–585
Colorless to yellow/blue, -deep blue (0.0–1.45)

—


138



24.
Polymer-24
335–360
440–485
490–495
Pale-red to brown (0.0–1.13)

—


139



25.
Polymer-25
283–300
455–490
470–475
Pale-yellow to green (0.0–0.95)

—


139



26.
Polymer-26
288–306
489–534
475–501
Colorless to blue (0 to 1.1)

—


141



27.
Polymer-27
264–284
499–503
490–496
Colorless to blue (0 to 1.0)

—


141



28.
Polymer-28
248–302
460–505
492–517
Colorless-green-deep blue (0.0–1.08)

—


142



29.
Polymer-29
231–238

—

385–397
(0.0–0.8)

—


143



30.
Polymer-30
251–277
439–472
440–479
Colorless to orange-red (semioxidation stage), to brilliant blue (0.0–0.7 to 1.0)
1.9–50.2

144





7. Future opportunities and conclusion
The intrinsic conductivities of the peptides enable their electrical applications. Peptides are not only related to biological compounds but can also act as bioelectronics. As discussed in this review, several bioelectronic and peptide materials have been applied in optoelectronics. The current review discusses the fundamental concept of the peptides, the status of peptide-based materials, and their design strategy. The suitable design of D–A combination leads to high-efficiency devices in optoelectronics. Most of the D–A pairs are designed with spacer or pi-conjugation but replacing these with a peptide is a new approach. The rare availability of reports indicates the less use of peptides in optoelectronics. In addition, the assumption of “peptide is a biological/living species” is now changing to “peptide is an electronic bridge” concept.
The current review covered the essentials of peptides and their design strategy, involving the development of cost-effective and eco-friendly synthetic strategies to achieve peptide-based conjugates. Optoelectronic applications such as photovoltaics, organic light-emitting diodes, thin-film transistors, and electrochromism are discussed based on peptides. Further discussion has been made on peptide-based color change mechanoluminescence and their optical performance. Peptide-based materials will certainly give future directions for optical applications, which may overcome the existing issues such as less lifetime, moderate quantum yields, and unsatisfactory device efficiency.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
SPS acknowledges financial support from DST-SERB (EMR/2017/001506). Authors also acknowledge all the researchers who contributed for the work cited in this article. CSIR-IICT Communication Number: IICT/Pubs./2021/179.
References
X. Huang, S. Han, W. Huang and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 173–201 RSC .
J. Yang, D. Yan and T. S. Jones, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 5570–5603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pope, H. P. Kallamann and P. Magnante, J. Chem. Phys., 1963, 38, 2042–2043 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cooke, I. R. Evans and P. J. Skabara, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 6492 RSC .
C. L. Ho and W. Y. Wong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1614–1649 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rajamouli, S. Kasturi, S. Giri and V. Sivakumar, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 10127–10130 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sarkar, S. Dhiman, A. Chalishazar and S. J. George, Angew. Chem., 2017, 56, 13767–13771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ying, Q. Meng, C. Yi and W. Wei, Sci. China: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2014, 57, 849–858 CrossRef .
B. D. Wall, S. R. Diegelmann, S. Zhang, T. J. Dawidczyk, W. L. Wilson, H. E. Katz, H. Q. Mao and J. D. Tovar, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5009–5014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Jasper, V. Velde, J. Oelerich, J. Huang, J. H. Smit, A. A. Jazi, S. Galiani, K. Kolmakov, G. Gouridis, C. Eggeling, A. Herrmann, G. Roelfes and T. Cordes, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10144 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Jairam, B. Rajamouli, S. S. Swayamprabha, D. K. Dubey, J. H. Jou, S. Patel and V. Sivakumar, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 16834–16844 RSC .
C. Y. Chan, M. Tanaka, Y. T. Lee, Y. W. Wong, H. Nakanotani, T. Hatakeyama and C. Adachi, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 203–207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Wong, R. Langer and D. E. Ingber, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1994, 91, 3201–3204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Traina, R. C. Bakus and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12600–12607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, E. W. Meijer and A. Schenning, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1491–1546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Palmer and S. I. Stupp, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1674–1684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Venanzi and S. Kimura, Polym. J., 2013, 45, 467 CrossRef CAS .

          N. M. Bedford, C. J. Munro and M. R. Knecht, in Methods in Enzymology, ed. V. L. Pecoraro, Elsevier Inc.,  2016, pp. 581–598 Search PubMed .
M. M. Safont-Sempere, P. Osswald, M. Stolte, M. Grune, M. Renz, M. Kaupp, K. Radacki, H. Braunschweig and F. Würthner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9580–9591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, D. Chen, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6764–6815 RSC .
J. D. Tovar, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1527–1537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Abramovicha and E. Gazit, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6881–6893 RSC .
E. Gatto, A. Porchetta, L. Stella, I. Guryanov, F. Formaggio, C. Toniolo, B. Kaptein, Q. B. Broxterman and M. Venanzi, Chem. Biodiversity, 2008, 5, 1263–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sagara and T. Kato, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 9294–9298 CrossRef .
T. Kitamura, S. Nakaso, N. Mizoshita, Y. Tochigi, T. Shimomura, M. Moriyama, K. Ito and T. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14769–14775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Panda, H. E. Katz and J. D. Tovar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3640–3658 RSC .
S. Lee, J. Xie and X. Chen, Biochemistry, 2010, 23, 1364–1376 CrossRef PubMed .
J. He, W. B. Kauffman, T. Fuselier, S. K. Naveen, T. G. Voss, K. Hristova and W. C. Wimley, J. Biol. Chem., 2013, 288, 29974–29986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. M. Velde, J. Oelerich, J. Huang, J. H. Smit, M. Hiermaier, E. Ploetz, A. Herrmann, G. Roelfes and T. Cordes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3792–3798 CrossRef PubMed .
A. D. Warren, S. T. Gaylord, K. C. Ngan, M. D. Milutinovic, G. A. Kwong, S. N. Bhatia and D. R. Walt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13709–13714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Rajamouli and V. Sivakumar, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 1017–1027 RSC .
H. Xu, H. Xu, R. Chen, Q. Sun, W. Lai, Q. Su, W. Huang and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3259–3302 RSC .
P. A. Tanner and C. K. Duan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 3026–3029 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, B. Kan, F. Liu, G. Long, X. Wan, X. Chen, Y. Zuo, W. Ni, H. Zhang, M. Li, Z. Hu, F. Huang, Y. Cao, Z. Liang, M. Zhang, T. P. Russell and Y. Chen, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 9, 35–41 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, Y. Zuo, X. Wan, G. Long, Q. Zhang, W. Ni, Y. Liu, Z. Li, G. He, C. Li, B. Kan, M. Li and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8484–8487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. He, Z. Li, X. Wan, J. Zhou, G. Long, S. Zhang, M. Zhang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1801–1809 RSC .
M. E. Peek, A. Bhatnagar, N. A. McCarty and S. M. Zughaier, Interdiscip. Perspect. Infect. Dis., 2012, 2012, 843509 Search PubMed .
M. Petrik, E. Umlaufova, V. Raclavsky, A. Palyzova, V. Havlicek, H. Haas, Z. Novy, D. Dolezal, M. Hajduch and C. Decristoforo, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 15698 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ivnitski, M. Amit, B. Rubinov, R. C. Luria, N. Ashkenasy and G. Ashkenasy, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6733–6736 RSC .
J. W. Jung, J. W. Jo, E. H. Jung and W. H. Jo, Org. Electron., 2016, 31, 149–170 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4178 RSC .
D. Deng, Y. Yang, J. Zhang, C. He, M. Zhang, Z. G. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 614–622 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yassin, P. Leriche, M. Allain and J. Roncali, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 502–507 RSC .
J. Zhang, C. He, Z. Zhang and D. Deng, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2014, 372, 20130009 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ni, X. Wan, M. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Chen and W. Ni, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4936–4950 RSC .
C. V. Kumar, L. Cabau, E. N. Koukaras, G. D. Sharma and E. Palomares, Org. Electron., 2015, 26, 36–47 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shaker, J. Lee, C. K. Trinh, W. Kim, K. Lee and J. Lee, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 66005–66012 RSC .
Y. Patil, R. Misra, A. Sharma and G. D. Sharma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 16950–16957 RSC .
K. N. Winzenberg, P. Kemppinen, F. H. Scholes, G. E. Collis, Y. Shu, Th. B. Singh, A. Bilic, C. M. Forsyth and S. E. Watkins, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6307–6309 RSC .
J. Song, C. Li, L. Ye, C. Koh, Y. Cai, D. Wei, H. Y. Woo and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18847–18852 RSC .
Q. Fan, W. Su, Y. Wang, B. Guo, Y. Jiang, X. Guo, F. Liu, T. P. Russell, M. Zhang and Y. Li, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 531–537 CrossRef CAS .
S. Suman, A. Bagui, A. Garg, B. Tyagi, V. Guptae and S. P. Singh, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4001–4004 RSC .
Y. Zhou, M. Xiao, D. Liu, Z. Du, W. Chen, D. Ouyang, L. Han, X. Wan and R. Yang, Org. Electron., 2015, 17, 355–363 CrossRef CAS .
G. He, Z. Li, X. Wan, J. Zhou, G. Long, S. Zhang, M. Zhang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1801–1809 RSC .
M. H. Chua, Q. Zhu, T. Tang, K. W. Shah and J. Xu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 197, 32–75 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ni, X. Wan, M. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Chen and W. Ni, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4936–4950 RSC .
S. M. Tuladhar, M. Azzouzi, F. Delval, J. Yao, A. A. Y. Guilbert, T. Kirchartz, N. F. Montcada, R. Dominguez, F. Langa, E. Palomares and J. Nelson, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 302–308 CrossRef CAS .
S. Antonello, F. Formaggio, A. Moretto, C. Toniolo and F. Maran, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125(10), 2874–2875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Antonello and F. Maran, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120(23), 5713–5722 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nikitin, S. Kopyl, V. Y. Shur, Y. V. Kopelevich and A. L. Kholkin, Phys. Lett. A, 2016, 380, 1658–1662 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pansieri, V. Josserand, S. J. Lee, A. Rongier, D. Imbert, M. M. Sallanon, E. Kövari, T. G. Dane, C. Vendrely, O. C. Pluchery, M. Guidetti, J. Vollaire, A. Fertin, Y. Usson, P. Rannou, J. L. Coll, C. Marquette and V. Forge, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 473–479 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Loic, in Amino acid-new insights and roles in plant and animal, ed. T. Asao and Md. Asaduzzaman, Intech Open,  2017, pp. 31–73 Search PubMed .
Y. R. Girish, K. Prashantha and K. Byrappa, Emergent Mater., 2021, 4, 673–724 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Dong, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3429–3436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Teng, X. Jia, X. Chen, Z. Ma and Y. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6078–6080 RSC .
Y. Sagara and T. Kato, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 9294–9298 CrossRef .
Y. Sagara and T. Kato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9128–9132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ji, Y. F. Luo, X. R. Jia, E. Q. Chen, Y. Huang, C. Ye, B. B. Wang, Q. F. Zhou and Y. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6025–6029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, J. R. Horsley and A. D. Abell, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 2237–2246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, D. M. Huang, J. G. Shapter and A. D. Abell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26608–26617 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chi, Q. Qiao, R. Lee, W. Liu, Y. S. Teo, D. Gu, M. J. Lang, Y. T. Chang, Z. Xu and X. Liu, Angew. Chem., 2019, 58, 7073–7077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Andarias, M. J. Rodriguez, C. Atienza, J. L. Lopez, T. Mikie, S. Casado, S. Seki, J. L. Carrascosa and N. Martín, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 893–897 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Khalily, H. Usta, M. Ozdemir, G. Bakan, F. B. Dikecoglu, C. E. Gayle, J. A. Hutchinson, I. W. Hamley, A. Dana and M. O. Guler, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9987–9995 RSC .
A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6873–6890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Rev., 2018, 119, 3418–3451 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. N. Chandiran, Md. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W. G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Szacilowski, W. Macyk, A. Drzewiecka-Matuszek, M. Brindell and G. Stochel, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 2647–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Y. Reddy, L. Giribabu, C. Lyness, H. J. Snaith, C. Vijaykumar, M. Chandrasekharam, M. Lakshmikantam, J. H. Yum, K. Kalyanasundaram, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 377–380 CrossRef .
M. Gratzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. N. Rom, Environmental policy and public health: air pollution, global climate change, and wilderness, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2011 Search PubMed .
H. Acar, R. Garifullin, L. E. Aygun, A. K. Okyay and M. O. Guler, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10979–10984 RSC .
E. Gatto, A. Quatela, M. Caruso, R. Tagliaferro, M. D. Zotti, F. Formaggio, C. Toniolo, A. D. Carlo and M. Venanzi, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 64–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Gatto, A. Porchetta, M. Scarselli, M. De Crescenzi, F. Formaggio, C. Toniolo and M. Venanzi, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 2817–2826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Strange, C. Rostgaard, H. Hakkinen and K. S. Thygesen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 115108 CrossRef .
E. Gatto and M. Venanzi, Isr. J. Chem., 2015, 55, 671–681 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang and S. A. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913–915 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Z. Mao, Z. Xie, Y. Zhang, S. Liu, J. Zhao, J. Xu, Z. Chi and M. P. Aldred, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 915–1016 RSC .

          Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, in Molecular organometallic materials for optics, ed. B. Hubert and G. Véronique, Springer,  2010, pp. 113–142 Search PubMed .
B. Das, S. T. Borah, S. Ganguli and P. Gupta, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 14987–14995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Uoyama, K. Goushi, K. Shizu, H. Nomura and C. Adachi, Highly efficient organic light-emitting diodes from delayed fluorescence, Nature, 2012, 492, 234–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tao, K. Yuan, T. Chen, P. Xu, H. Li, R. Chen, C. Zheng, L. Zhang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7931–7958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Brédas, D. Beljonne, V. Coropceanu and J. Cornil, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4971–5004 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, Y. Pan, R. Xiao, Q. Peng, S. Zhang, D. Ma, F. Li, F. Shen, Y. Wang, B. Yang and Y. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1609–1614 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yao, S. Zhang, R. Wang, W. Li, F. Shen, B. Yang and Y. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2119–2123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Peng, A. Obolda, M. Zhang and F. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7091–7095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, F. Song, Z. Xu, Y. Tu, H. Zhang, Q. Cheng, J. W. Y. Lam, D. Ma and B. Z. Tang, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2019, 1, 221–229 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abbel, R. V. Weegen, W. Pisula, M. Surin, P. Leclère, R. Lazzaroni, E. W. Meijer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 9737–9746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, R. Gulotty, A. V. Sumant and A. Roelofs, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2861–2866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. D. Brotherton, Introduction to Thin Film Transistors: Physics and Technology of TFTs, Springer International Publishing,  2013 Search PubMed .

          J. Souk, S. Morozumi, F. C. Luo and I. Bita, Flat panel display manufacturing, John Wiley & Sons,  2018 Search PubMed .
Y. K. Lai, Y. F. Lai and P. Y. Chen, J. Disp. Technol., 2011, 7, 550–555 Search PubMed .
P. Kirsch and M. Bremer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 4216–4235 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Den Boer, Active matrix liquid crystal displays: fundamentals and applications, Elsevier,  2011 Search PubMed .
C. R. Newman, C. D. Frisbie, D. A. da Silva Filho, J.-L. Bredas, P. C. Ewbank and K. R. Mann, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4436–4451 CrossRef CAS .

          S. D. Brotherton, Introduction to Thin Film Transistors: Physics and Technology of TFTs, Springer Science & Business Media,  2013 Search PubMed .
A. F. Paterson and T. D. Anthopoulos, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–4 CrossRef PubMed .
C. A. Bower, M. A. Meitl, B. Raymond, E. Radauscher, R. Cok, S. Bonafede, D. Gomez, T. Moore, C. Prevatte and B. Fisher, Photonics Res., 2017, 5, A23–A29 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stewart, R. S. Howell, L. Pires and M. K. Hatalis, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2001, 48, 845–851 CrossRef CAS .

          University of Newcastle research services grants office, Integration of peptides into OTFT-based printable sensors, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia,  2017 Search PubMed .
A. Rani, I. Kavianinia, P. Hume, L. M. Leon-Rodriguez, S. Kihara, D. E. Williams, D. J. McGillivray, N. O. V. Plank, J. Gerrard, J. M. Hodgkissce and M. A. Brimble, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 6563–6571 RSC .
A. Dezieck, O. Acton, K. Leong, E. E. Oren, H. Ma, C. Tamerler, M. Sarikaya and A. K. Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 013307 CrossRef .
R. Singh, Y. T. Lin, W. L. Chuang and F. H. Ko, Org. Electron., 2017, 44, 198–209 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Tai, W.-N. Chang, D. Wan, Y. C. Chang and F.-H. Ko, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 334, 129591 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Platt, J. Chem. Phys., 1961, 34, 862–863 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Lin, C. L. Huang and G. S. Liou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 11684–11690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Goulle, A. Harriman and J. M. Lehn, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 1034–1036 RSC .
M. Konda, S. Maiti, R. G. Jadhav and A. K. Das, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 204–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Oishi, H. Takado, M. Yoneyama, M. A. Kakimoto and Y. Imai, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1990, 28, 1763–1769 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hsiao, Y. M. Chang, H. W. Chen and G. S. Liou, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 4579–4592 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Liou, H. W. Chen and H. J. Yen, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 4108–4121 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Chang, G. S. Liou and S. H. Hsiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1007–1015 RSC .
S. H. Hsiao, G. S. Liou, Y. C. Kung, H. Y. Pan and C. H. Kuo, Eur. Polym. J., 2009, 45, 2234–2248 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Kung, G. S. Liou and S. H. Hsiao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 1740–1755 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hsiao, G. S. Liou, Y. C. Kung and T. J. Hsiung, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 3392–3401 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Yen, S. M. Guo and G. S. Liou, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 5271–5281 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Yen and G. S. Liou, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9886–9894 RSC .
H. M. Wang and S. H. Hsiao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2014, 52, 272–286 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hsiao and S. L. Cheng, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015, 53, 496–510 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hsiao, Y. H. Hsiao and Y. R. Kung, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2016, 54, 1289–1298 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hsiao, Y. H. Hsiao, Y. R. Kung, C. M. Leu and T. M. Lee, React. Funct. Polym., 2016, 108, 54–62 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hsiao and K. H. Lin, J. Fluorine Chem., 2016, 188, 33–42 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hsiao and C. N. Wu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 776, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sun, F. Feng, D. Wang, Z. Zhou, Y. Guan, G. Dang, H. Zhou, C. Chen and X. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 88181–88190 RSC .
N. Sun, Z. Zhou, S. Meng, D. Chao, X. Chu, X. Zhao, D. Wang, H. Zhou and C. Chen, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 141, 356–362 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sun, Z. Zhou, D. Chao, X. Chu, Y. Du, X. Zhao, D. Wang and C. Chen, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2017, 55, 213–222 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Huang, H. J. Yen, J. H. Wu and G. S. Liou, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 840–849 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Yen, K. Y. Lin and G. S. Liou, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 61–69 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Yen and G. S. Liou, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9797–9799 RSC .
S. H. Hsiao and Y. T. Chou, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2014, 215, 958–970 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hsiao and J. S. Han, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2017, 55, 1409–1421 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lee, Y. J. Kwak, W. C. Seok and S. W. Lee, Polym. Bull., 2016, 73, 2427–2438 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sun, S. Meng, D. Chao, Z. Zhou, Y. Du, D. Wang, X. Zhao, H. Zhou and C. Chen, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 6055–6063 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Optoelectronic-based applications and their current interest.	 

Abz (anthranilyl, 2-aminobenzoyl)	

	320 nm/420 nm

N-Me-Abz (N-methyl-anthranilyl, N-methyl-2-aminobenzoyl)	

	340–360 nm/440–450 nm
FITC (fluoresceinisothiocyanate (5 or 6 isomers or mixture of isomers))	

	490 nm/520 nm
5-FAM (5-carboxyfluorescein)	

	492 nm/517 nm
6-FAM (6-carboxyfluorescein)	

	492 nm/517 nm
MCA (7-methoxycoumarinyl-4-acetyl)	

	325 nm/392 nm
AMCA/Amc (aminomethylcoumarin acetate)	

	350 nm/450 nm
Dansyl (5-(dimethylamino) naphthalene-1-sulfonyl)	

	342 nm/562 nm
EDANS (5-[(2-aminoethyl)amino] naphthalene-1-sulfonic acid)	

	340 nm/490 nm
TAMRA (carboxytetramethyl rhodamine (5 or 6 isomers or mixture of isomers))	

	543 nm/572 nm
Cy3 (1-(5-carboxypentyl)-3,3-dimethyl-2-((1E,3E)-3-(1,3,3-trimethylindolin-2-ylidene)prop-1-en-1-yl)-3H-indol-1-ium chloride)	550 nm/570 nm
Cy5 (1-(5-carboxypentyl)-3,3-dimethyl-2-((1E,3E,5E)-5-(1,3,3-trimethylindolin-2-ylidene)penta-1,3-dienyl)-3H-indolium chloride)	

	650 nm/670 nm
Alexa fluor (e.g., Alexa Fluor 647, Alexa488, Alexa532, Alexa546, Alexa594, Alexa633, and Alexa647)	

	650 nm/668 nm (Alexa647)
Atto (e.g., Atto465, Atto488, Atto495, Atto550, and Atto647)	453 nm/508 nm (Atto465)
Bodipy (e.g., Bodipy® FL)	505 nm/511 nm
Dylight (e.g., DyLight 488 and DyLight 550)	493 nm/518 nm (DyLight488)
Trp (tryptophan)	280 nm/360 nm
Lucifer yellow (ethylene diamine) (6-amino-2-(2-amino-ethyl)-1,3-dioxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzo[de]isoquinoline-5,8-disulfonic acid)	

	430 nm/520 nm

 	Fig. 2  Light absorption process by dye sensitization (left) and organic molecule with metal incorporation (right).	 

 	Fig. 3  Direct connectivity of the donor–acceptor generalized design structures.	 

 	Fig. 4  Pi-conjugated/spacer moiety connectivity of the donor–acceptor design strategy.	 

 	Fig. 5  Different types of donor moieties.	 

 	Fig. 6  Different types of acceptor moieties.	 

 	Fig. 7  Pyrenyl moiety combined polypeptide structure Dendron-1.	 

 	Fig. 8  Structure of (a) Dendron-2, (b) Dendron-3, and (c) Rho-B.	 

 	Fig. 9  Glycine and aspartic acid based peptide Dendron-4.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structure of cyano-based (a) Peptide-1 and (b) Peptide-2.	 

 	Fig. 11  Structure of naphthalene diimide-based Peptide-3.	 

 	Fig. 12  Twisted intramolecular charge shuttle by photoexcitation (reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from John Wiley & Sons).	 

 	Fig. 13  Structure of rhodamine-based Peptide-4 and its derivative.	 

 	Fig. 14  p- and n-Type nanofibers: (a) exTTF (Peptide-5) and (b and c) perylenebisimide and their respective co-assembly (reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 15  Structure of (a) Peptide-6 and (b) Peptide-7.	 

 	Fig. 16  Structure of (a) PV-1 and (b) PV-2.	 

 	Fig. 17  Structures of (a) PV-3, (b) PV-4, (c) PV-5, (d) PV-6, and (e) PV-7.	 

1.	PV-1	DSSC, 0.83% efficiency	
83

2.	PV-2	DSSC, 0.44% efficiency	
83

3.	PV-3	(SSU6Py)/gold/TiO2/FTO, IPCE 52.4%. DSSC, 0.15 ± 0.05% (SSU6Py-working electrode)	
84

4.	PV-4	PV-7/PV-4 SAM, λmax = 340 nm, IPCE 0.002%	
85

5.	PV-5	PV-7/PV-5 SAM, λmax = 340 nm, IPCE 0.02%	
85

6.	PV-6	—	
87

7.	PV-7	—	
85


 	Fig. 18  Schematic representation of peptides (PV-1 to 7) on gold-covered TiO2 surface (reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from John Wiley & Sons).	 

 	Fig. 19  Ligand excited energy level diagrams and the general construction of the OLED device.	 

 	Fig. 20  Phosphorescence, TADF, TTA, and HLCT process in one set of arrangement (FL = fluorescence, PS = phosphorescence, NR = non-radiative, S = singlet, T = triplet).	 

 	Fig. 21  Structure of the chirality of the polymer backbone L1 and L2.	 

 	Fig. 22  Device performance: (A) device-2 based on L1, (C) device-5 based on L2 at different voltages, (C) luminance–voltage–current density characteristics of devices 1–4, (D) 1–8 (reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from American Chemical Society).	 


1	5 wt% L1:CBP	7.0	724	1.05	0.35	0.37	529	(0.36, 0.50)
2	10 wt% L1:CBP	8.2	962	1.20	0.35	0.42	532	(0.38, 0.52)
3	30 wt% L1:CBP	7.6	489	0.88	0.28	0.31	536	(0.39, 0.52)
4	Neat L1 film	7.8	223	0.23	0.08	0.09	564	(0.43, 0.51)
5	5 wt% L2:CBP	6.8	1214	2.52	0.94	0.87	528	(0.35, 0.52)
6	10 wt% L2:CBP	6.6	1477	2.04	0.67	0.70	531	(0.36, 0.52)
7	30 wt% L2:CBP	6.6	1311	1.16	0.37	0.40	534	(0.38, 0.53)
8	Neat L2 film	6.0	214	0.23	0.09	0.09	571	(0.45, 0.51)

 	Fig. 23  Different peptide moiety structures from L3 to L7.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) PL emission spectra of gel compound L3 and L5–7, (b) PL life time of the gel compound-L3 and L5–7, (c) UV illumination on the same compound, (d) proposed mechanism of self-assembly in methylcyclohexane for L3 (reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from John Wiley & Sons).	 

 		 

 	Fig. 25  Glutathione-based peptide structure TFT-1.	 

 	Fig. 26  Structure of (a) TFT-2, (b) TFT-3, and (c) TFT-4.	 

 	Fig. 27  Structure of TFT-5.	 

 	Fig. 28  Quinquethiophene-based electrochromic material structure EC-1.	 

 	Fig. 29  Aromatic groups in electrochromic polymer molecules.	 

 	Fig. 30  Polymer core moiety and its series of molecules.	 

 	Fig. 31  Performance of the electrochromic behavior of Polymer-3n thin-film at (a) 0.00, (b) 0.70, (c) 0.75, (d) 0.80, (e) 0.85, (f) 0.90, (g) 0.95, (h) 1.00, and (i) 1.05 V (reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from John Wiley & Sons).	 

 	Fig. 32  Electrochromic study from 0.00–0.95 V and its cyclic switches (reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 33  Oxidation pathway for electrochromic response.	 

 	Fig. 34  Phenylamine-based polymer structures (a) Polymer-18 and (b) Polymer-19.	 

 	Fig. 35  Structure of methylsulfonyltriphenylamine-based Polymer-20.	 

 	Fig. 36  Structure of Polymer-21.	 

 	Fig. 37  Diphenylamine-based polymer structures (a) Polymer-22 and (b) Polymer-23.	 

 	Fig. 38  Structure of anthraquinone derivatives (a) Polymer-24 and (b) Polymer-25.	 

 	Fig. 39  Structure of (a) Polymer-26 and (b) Polymer-27.	 

 	Fig. 40  Methoxy-connected triphenylamine-based structure, Polymer-28.	 

 	Fig. 41  Multi-substituted triphenylamine-based structure, Polymer-29.	 

 	Fig. 42  Fluorene-connected diphenylamine-based structure, Polymer-30.	 




1.	Polymer-1	281–313	435–515	450–550	—	—	
120

2.	Polymer-2	272–308	451–567	458–581	Pale yellow color to blue/green (0 to 1.10)	
—
	
121

3.	Polymer-3	268–331	420–595	419–593	Yellow to green (0.00 to 1.05)	0.34–4.44	
122

4.	Polymer-4	165–263	375–520	375–515	Colorless to green (0.00–1.05)	0.13–3.63	
123

5.	Polymer-5	254–293	497–579	493–567	Pale yellowish neutral state to the green or blue (0.0 V, 0.80–1.10)	
—
	
124

6.	Polymer-6	263–311	486–560	481–529	Colorless/pale yellow neutral state to dark blue/bluish-green (0.0 and 1.1–1.2)	
—
	
125

7.	Polymer-7	243–289	482–530	471–500	Colorless/pale yellow neutral state to green/blue-purple (0.0–1.3)	0.33–0.77	
126

8.	Polymer-8	293–313	465–540	450–530	Colorless to green (0.0–1.05)	
—
	
127

9.	Polymer-9	314–329	460–535	450–500	Colorless to bluish-green (0.0–1.05)	
—
	
127

10.	Polymer-10	255–277	485–570	500–585	Colorless to green/purple (0.0–1.0 and 1.3 V)	
—
	
128

11.	Polymer-11	277–308	480–507	492–512	Neutral form to yellowish green and blue (0.0 to 1.3 V)	
—
	
129

12.	Polymer-12	218–253	537–555	556–568	Colorless/pale yellow to green, blue and purple scan range from 0.0–1.2 V	
—
	
130

13.	Polymer-13	284–295	511–578	500–584	Multicolor chromism property, (0.0–0.362)	
—
	
131

14.	Polymer-14	274–297	433–512	437–535	Colorless to green and deep blue (0.0–0.75 and 1.20)	
—
	
132

15.	Polymer-15	275–302	450–513	467–530	Green or dark golden color (0.0–1.2)	
—
	
133

16.	Polymer-16	275–317	485–532	493–542	Pale green (0.0–1.2)	
—
	
133

17.	Polymer-17	251–270	484–529	494–545	Pale yellow to green color (0.0–1.25)	0.4–3.6	
134

18.	Polymer-18	245–287	503–549	488–533	
—
	1.5–12	
134

19.	Polymer-19	248–316	420–500	427–531	Colorless to green (0.0–1.0)	0.37–47.1	
135

20.	Polymer-20	306–334	—	443–470	Bifunctional EC and EFC (0.0–1.2)	2.2–32.1	
136

21.	Polymer-21	281–339	491–503	493–510	Colorless to grey-green (0 to 1.3)	1.9–34.1	
137

22.	Polymer-22	270–275	430–440	435–495	Color of pale-green, lawn-green/green-deep blue (0.0–1.5)	
—
	
138

23.	Polymer-23	252–255	560–575	575–585	Colorless to yellow/blue, -deep blue (0.0–1.45)	
—
	
138

24.	Polymer-24	335–360	440–485	490–495	Pale-red to brown (0.0–1.13)	
—
	
139

25.	Polymer-25	283–300	455–490	470–475	Pale-yellow to green (0.0–0.95)	
—
	
139

26.	Polymer-26	288–306	489–534	475–501	Colorless to blue (0 to 1.1)	
—
	
141

27.	Polymer-27	264–284	499–503	490–496	Colorless to blue (0 to 1.0)	
—
	
141

28.	Polymer-28	248–302	460–505	492–517	Colorless-green-deep blue (0.0–1.08)	
—
	
142

29.	Polymer-29	231–238	
—
	385–397	(0.0–0.8)	
—
	
143

30.	Polymer-30	251–277	439–472	440–479	Colorless to orange-red (semioxidation stage), to brilliant blue (0.0–0.7 to 1.0)	1.9–50.2	
144


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
