Self-assembled monolayer assisted fabrication of zinc oxide nanorods  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CE27005J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CE27005J
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 4189-4195Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSelf-assembled monolayer assisted fabrication of zinc oxide nanorods

        
          
            Desalegn Manayeh 
            Zena
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jian-Ming 
            Chiu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yian 
            Tai
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, 43 Keelung Road, Taipei-106, Taiwan. E-mail: ytai@mail.ntust.edu.tw;  Fax: +886-2-2737-6644;   Tel: +886-2-2737-6620
Received 
      11th December 2012
    , Accepted 16th March 2013First published on 15th April 2013AbstractIn this study, self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) with different tail groups were employed to control the surface property of zinc oxide (ZnO) coated indium tin oxide substrates for the fabrication of ZnO nanorods. By modulating the tail group of the SAM molecule and the growth time of SAM, the thickness, diameter, morphology, and optical properties of ZnO nanorods can be controlled effectively. X-ray diffraction patterns confirmed that high quality crystals with preferential orientation along the (002) plane of the ZnO nanorods can be fabricated by utilizing proper SAM with the growth temperature of 60 °C and the growth time of 7 h. Such ZnO nanorods were reported as potential candidates for hybrid polymer solar cells.
Introduction
Synthesis of semiconductor nanostructures with precise control of size, shape and dimension, has evoked extensive research interests due to their unique chemical, optical and electronic properties.1 Zinc oxide (ZnO), is one of the most important multifunctional n-type II–VI semiconductors with a direct wide band gap (3.37 eV), high exciton binding energy (60 meV) at room temperature and superior thermal stability.2,3 In addition, ZnO has a stable symmetric wurtzite crystal structure, spontaneous surface polarization characteristics,4 and the ability to grow in a large variety of self-organized nanostructures, for which in the entire family of wide band gap semiconductor nanostructures ZnO has a significant place for its huge range of morphologies.
In response to the alarming increase in global energy demand, organic photovoltaics have been found to play significant roles as inexpensive and eco-friendly energy sources. However, conversion efficiency of these organic photovoltaics is not comparable to their conventional solar cell counterparts. Along with other challenges, exciton dissociation, charge carrier recombination, and free charge carrier mobility are the major aspects to be considered. Hybrid polymer solar cells, in which metal oxides act as electron acceptors, showed a promising role to overcome the limitations due to low charge carrier mobility in the organic counterparts. Apart from the above-mentioned features, ZnO has been considered as a potential candidate for transparent electronics, solar cells and other optoelectronic devices.5–8 Moreover, different semiconductor nanostructures such as nanowires, nanotubes, nanorods and others have attracted considerable interest of many research groups to solve the exciton diffusion length limitation. Among all, ZnO nanorod has been regarded as an excellent semiconductor material for solar cell application due to its high electron mobility as well as the high chemical and thermal stability.9–11
Various polymer/ZnO nanorod hybrid solar cells have been reported. However, the power conversion efficiencies of these devices are still low and therefore more attention is now given for further enhancement of performances of these hybrid devices.9,10,12 Among the reasons behind the low performance of these hybrid devices, length of nanorods is very important. Longer ZnO nanorods lead to a long route for the holes near the cathode travelling to the anode. Consequently, the recombination probability for the free charge carriers is increased, resulted in low charge carrier extraction efficiency.
The current study is focused on understanding the influence of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on ZnO crystal growth. SAMs of small organic molecules have been reported to modify the surface properties when they are covalently linked to substrates.13 ZnO nanorods were fabricated with and without SAM modification on ZnO seeded indium oxide (ITO) substrates by hydrothermal process. By changing the tail-groups and SAM growth time, the substrate surface energy can be controlled and thereby the growth features of nanorods can also be modified.
The resulting ZnO nanorod structures were characterized using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and X-ray diffractometry (XRD) for surface morphology and crystallinity, respectively. The optical transmittance and defect emission properties of the sample were analyzed using ultraviolet visible (UV-Vis) spectrophotometer and micro-photoluminescence (μ-PL), respectively.
Experimental
ITO substrates were cleaned with detergent, de-ionized (DI) water, acetone and isopropanol alcohol sequentially for 15 minutes under ultrasonic treatment. All chemicals were of analytical grade reagents and were used without further purification. In a typical synthesis, 0.05 M of zinc acetate (99.99%) solution in methanol was prepared using an ultrasonic water bath for 15 minutes at room temperature. Subsequently, the solution (20 mL) was poured into a spraying chamber fitted with N2 carrier gas. Next, ZnO films were deposited onto pre-cleaned ITO substrates at 300 °C substrate temperature for 10 minutes.
Different SAM chemicals, namely 3,3,3-triflouropropyltrimethoxysilane (CF3-SAM; 10 μL); p-carboxylbenzoic acid (COOH-SAM, 3 mg) and 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane (SH-SAM; 10 μL) were dissolved in ethanol (7 mL) using an ultrasonic water bath for 30 seconds at room temperature. Then, ZnO seeded ITO substrates were immersed into SAM solutions and degassed with continuous N2 flow for 2 minutes and the reaction vessels were sealed and left undisturbed for 6–36 h duration at room temperature. Finally, the samples were taken out, rinsed with ethanol, and blown dry using a N2 stream.
In fabricating ZnO nanorods, zinc acetate dihydrate and hexamethylenetetramine (HMT) were dissolved in ultrapure DI water to form 0.02 M of zinc acetate dihydrate and 0.04 M HMT (precursor solution) by stirring the solution at 500 rpm for 30 minutes at room temperature. The precursor solution (25 mL) was poured into Teflon-lined 60 mL capacity autoclave, in which the SAM modified ZnO coated ITO substrate was placed at the bottom. The hydrothermal fabrications of nanorods were conducted in an oven at different growth temperature for different growth time interval. After the completion of reaction, the autoclaves were cooled down to room temperature and the samples were cleaned ultrasonically with DI water and blown dry using a N2 stream.
PANalytical X'Pert PRO diffractometer with Cu Kα1 radiation source (λ = 0.1540598 nm) with operating conditions 45 kV and 40 mA and glancing angle 4–90°, was employed for structural analysis. The nanorods showed a preferred c-axis orientation perpendicular to the substrate regardless of the SAM type. The surface morphology of the nanorods was studied by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JSM-6500F, JEOL Ltd., tungsten field emission gun, accelerating voltage 0.5 to 30 kV). The surface of the ZnO film showed vertically aligned ZnO nanorods with hexagonal cross section. With different tail groups and SAM growth time, the diameter of the nanorods was found to be present within the range of 35–73 nm and the thickness was within a large range from 260 nm to 568 nm. The transmission properties of the samples were investigated by UV-Vis spectrophotometry (JASCO, V-670, single monochromator, double-beam, dual grating, light source: Deuterium (190–350) and Halogen Optical Lamps (OSRAM) [330–2700 nm (3200 nm, option)]). A pronounced transmission spectrum of ZnO nanorods in the visible region with their thickness was observed. The μ-PL spectra were analyzed by fluorescence spectrophotometer (DongWoo Optron, model MAPLE II, Pulsed Diode Laser excitation source, and excitation wavelength 377 nm).
Results and discussion
The morphology, size and nanostructure of the samples were intensely investigated by FESEM experiments. The main results of FESEM nanographs, displayed in Fig. 1(a)–(c), depicted the different natures of ZnO nanorods fabricated on different surfaces for 7 h. It was clearly indicated that the different surface conditions resulted in a remarkable difference in the rod thickness, diameter and crystalline properties. The diameter of ZnO nanorods increased gradually from 35 nm for the rods fabricated on CF3-SAM to 49 nm for the rods fabricated without SAM application. At the same time, the average thickness of the rods was found to be varied within the range of 260–342 nm (Fig. 1(a)–(c)). The rods fabricated on CF3-SAM revealed the lowest thickness while the rods grown on pristine ZnO seed layer showed the highest. The variations were observed both in the nanorod thickness and diameter, with the difference in substrate surfaces featuring different SAMs, which might be due to the different sticking coefficient of the zinc precursor to the seed layers. The ZnO seed layer deposited on ITO revealed the purpose to assist the initiation of the nucleation step for the growth of nanorods. Therefore, the surface properties such as the dipole moment of the seed layer is of importance, since it determines the degree of chemical interaction between the precursor and seed layer surface. In other words, it controls the sticking coefficient of the zinc onto the seed layer, and thus, varies the growth rate of ZnO nanorods. By passivation of SAMs with different functional groups on the seed layer, the surface dipoles were varied.14
 Fig. 1  FESEM image of ZnO nanorods grown for 7 h at 60 °C on the seed layer with No SAM (a); CF3-SAM (b); and COOH-SAM (c) each for 6 h, and their XRD profiles (d). The HRTEM images (e) and (f) and SAED pattern (g) of the nanorods on CF3-SAM modified seed layer are also presented. 
XRD patterns of nanorods fabricated with different surface conditions indicated the evolution of oriented and aligned ZnO nanorods with strong reflection from the (002) plane with minor peaks from other planes such as (001), (102), and (103) as shown in Fig. 1(d). The ZnO nanorods grow preferentially in the (002) plane perpendicular to the substrate surface. It is noteworthy that the (002) peak intensity increases significantly for the nanorods grown on hydrophobic surfaces. The full width at half maxima (FWHM) values were 0.1378, 0.3120 and 0.3542 for nanorods grown on CF3-SAM, No SAM, and COOH-SAM modified surfaces, respectively. The (002) peak intensity together with the FWHM shows that CF3-SAM yields the best crystalline ZnO nanorods. High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern demonstrated in Fig. 1(e)–(g) further confirmed the XRD results. The lattice image and SAED of nanorods fabricated on CF3-SAM modified seed layer clearly showed lattice structure and bright spots of (002) with minor patterns diffracted from other planes. The modulation of the crystallinity of ZnO nanorods upon different SAMs might be explained by the variation of the surface energy of seed layers. The water contact angles (CA) of COOH-SAM, No SAM, and CF3-SAM ZnO seed layers were measured as 27°, 41°, and 93°, respectively. The elevation in the CA suggested a decrease in surface energy of the seed layers.15 It is well understood that a substrate with lower surface energy is more favorable for metal oxide to form a high crystalline structure on top of it, due to the reason that the precursor atoms more easily mobilized on that substrate surface.16 Since the CF3-SAM modified seed layer exhibited the lowest surface energy, it is rational that the crystallinity of the nanorods grown on top was highest.
From a solar cell perspective, controlling the dimension and crystallinity of nanorods plays a key role in improving device performances.12,17,18
With the increase of SAM growth time to 12 h, thicker and vertically aligned nanorods were found to be grown on CF3- and COOH-SAMs (Fig. 2). However, the situation was very different in the case of COOH-SAM with even longer growth time, 36 h (Fig. 2(f)). As indicated in Fig. 2(f), we observed completely porous structures when the ZnO seed layer was immersed in COOH-SAM solution for about 36 h. It was found that the surface modified by COOH-SAM became extremely hydrophilic after 36 h, which was verified by corresponding water CA values ranging from 5–8°. The generation of porous structure might be due to higher acidic surface caused by the dissociation of more –COOH groups. Different research groups have reported that an alkaline solution is essential for the growth of ZnO nanostructures since divalent metal ions do not hydrolyze in acidic environments.19–22 Therefore, a highly acidic ZnO seed layer hardly favored the growth of alkaline ZnO nanorods on it. Our results demonstrated that the same SAM with different growth time (Fig. 2(d)–(f)) could result in different growth feature of the nanostructures.
 Fig. 2  FESEM image of ZnO nanorods fabricated for 7 h at 60 °C on ZnO seed layers featuring different SAM growth time; CF3-SAM 6 h (a), 12 h (b), and 36 h (c), and COOH-SAM 6 h (d), 12 h (e), and 36 h (f). 
For solar cell application, the transmission property of the nanorod is a very important parameter. Fig. 3 shows transmission spectra of ZnO nanorods employed in the present study. CF3-SAM treated surfaces yielded the shortest nanostructures with the highest optical transmission value in the visible region.
 Fig. 3  UV-Vis transmission spectra of the as-prepared nanorods fabricated for 7 h with and without SAM treatment to the seed layers (inset shows PL spectra). 
To determine whether the transmission was thickness dependent or not, nanorods were fabricated for different growth times (Fig. 4). Those nanorods grown for 3 h were found to be the shortest size with highest transmission value, while the samples grown for 8 h showed the opposite effect (Fig. 4). The transmission analysis in combination with FESEM imaging suggests that the optical property observed for nanorods is thickness dependent. However, the thickness difference may not fully explain the transmittance profile difference observed in the visible region (Fig. 3 and 4(a)). The defect concentration together with vertical alignment of nanorods has been reported to control the optical properties of ZnO nanostructures.23 The transmission profile observed in the near-UV region may be explained by Rayleigh scattering behavior, which is wavelength dependent (=λ−4).23,24 It can be noted that, the transmission and PL data show a clear relationship between transmission profile and defect concentration (Fig. 3 and 4(a)). Thus, the observed transmission difference may be attributed to Rayleigh scattering behavior. Furthermore, the band gap values, calculated from transmission spectroscopy were 3.27, 3.24, and 3.18 eV for CF3-SAM, COOH-SAM, and No SAM samples, respectively. These values are consistent with the observed transmission phenomena in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 4  UV-Vis transmission spectra of the as-prepared nanorods fabricated for different growth time (3–8 h) with 6 h CF3-SAM treatment to the seed layers (inset shows PL spectra) (a), and FESEM image of nanorods fabricated for 3 h (b), 5 h (c), and 8 h (d). 
Knowing the strong affinity of sulfur to zinc metal, SH-SAM was considered for 6, 12, and 36 h in further investigating the SAM growth time effect. The FESEM images (Fig. 5) clearly demonstrate how the SAM growth time strongly influences both the thickness as well as diameter of the nanorods. When the growth time increased from 6 h to 36 h in case of SH-SAM, the nanorod thickness was shifted from 320 nm to 568 nm. At the same time the average diameter calculated for case a, b, and c is 40, 64, and 73 nm, respectively. From a biochemical view point, sulfur has a higher affinity for zinc and results in more favored interaction between S–Zn precursors.25 With more SAM growth time more sulfur atoms can be adsorbed on the substrate surface, which in turn favors the attachment of more zinc precursors to the substrate surface producing longer and thicker nanostructures.
 Fig. 5  FESEM images of ZnO nanorods fabricated for 7 h after SH-SAM treatment to the seed layers featuring different SAM growth time; 6 h (a), 12 h (b), and 36 h (c). 
Finally, we demonstrated that the surface dipole, the surface energy, and the pH value of the seed layer play key roles in controlling the growth dynamics of nanorods. This can be achieved using SAMs of different tail groups and by varying the SAM growth time. A histogram is revealed in Fig. 6 to summarize the correlation between the different SAMs with various SAM growth time and the thickness of the nanorods.
 Fig. 6  Histogram of the thickness of ZnO nanorods fabricated on the seed layers featuring different SAMs and various SAM growth times. 
Summary
ZnO nanorods were fabricated on SAM modified ZnO seed layers over ITO substrates using hydrothermal process. From FESEM characterization, the nanorods revealed uniform distribution over the substrate. By changing the tail group and SAM growth time, the nanorod thickness, diameter as well as optical properties can be controlled effectively. For monolayer characterization, contact angle measurements were performed. The most hydrophobic surface with CF3-SAM yielded the shortest nanostructures with the highest optical transmission value in the visible region. Extremely hydrophilic surfaces, with acidic SAMs resulted in porous structures attributed to the acid–base interaction. From XRD characterization, the nanorods showed c-axis orientation perpendicular to the substrate. Overall, from this work we demonstrated that with proper SAM consideration and surface engineering, optimization of the growth features of ZnO nanostructures can be achieved.
Acknowledgements
The authors are indebted to Dr. Sudeshna Kar and Mr. Abebe Tedela for their useful discussions. This project was financially supported by the top university project of NTUST.
References
J.-M. Jang, C.-R. Kim, H. Ryu, M. Razeghi and W.-G. Jung, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 463, 503 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-D. Ko, P. Moon, C. E. Kim, M.-H. Ham, J.-M. Myoung and I. Yun, Expert Syst. Appl., 2009, 36, 4061 CrossRef .
P. Ravirajan, A. M. Peiró, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel, D. D. C. Bradley, J. R. Durrant and J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7635 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, F. Qu, X. Zhang, W. Cai and G. Shen, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 486, L13 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shakti and P. S. Gupta, Appl. Phys. Res., 2010, 2, 19 CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Park, S.-H. Kim and S.-W. Han, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 055608 CrossRef .
K. Keis, E. Magnusson, H. Lindström, S.-E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 73, 51 CrossRef .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Lao, M.-C. Park, Q. Kuang, Y. Deng, A. K. Sood, D. L. Polla and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12096 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, J. Goldberger, F. Kim, J. C. Johnson, Y. Zhang, R. J. Saykally and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3031 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Li, Y. Y. Lin, W. F. Sue and C. W. Chen, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1635 CrossRef CAS .
G. Heimel, L. Romaner, E. Zojer and J.-L. Bredas, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 721 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Campbell, S. Rubin, T. A. Zawodzinski, J. D. Kress, R. L. Martin and D. L. Smith, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, R14321 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Venables, G. D. T. Spiller and M. Hanbucken, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1984, 47, 399 CrossRef .
M. Aklilu and Y. Tai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 270, 648 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Lin, Y.-Y. Lee, L. Chang, J.-J. Wu and C.-W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 063308 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Lin, C.-W. Chen, T.-H. Chu, W.-F. Su, C.-C. Lin, C.-H. Ku, J.-J. Wu and C.-H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4571 RSC .
L. Fan, H. Song, T. Li, L. Yu, Z. Liu, G. Pan, Y. Lei, X. Bai, T. Wang, Z. Zheng and X. Kong, J. Lumin., 2007, 122–123, 819 CrossRef CAS .
L. Demianets, D. Kostomarov, I. Kuz'mina and S. Pushko, Crystallogr. Rep., 2002, 47, S86 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Li, E.-W. Shi, W.-Z. Zhong and Z.-W. Yin, J. Cryst. Growth, 1999, 203, 186 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Laudise and A. A. Ballman, J. Phys. Chem., 1960, 64, 688 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Y. Choi, D. Choi, M.-J. Jin, I. Kim, S.-H. Kim, J.-Y. Choi, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2185 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, P. Wang, J. Wei, J. Zhan, X. Jing, H. Liu, Z. Xu, H. Cheng, X. Wang and Z. Zheng, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 130 CrossRef CAS .
W. Maret, Biochemistry, 2004, 43, 3301 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  FESEM image of ZnO nanorods grown for 7 h at 60 °C on the seed layer with No SAM (a); CF3-SAM (b); and COOH-SAM (c) each for 6 h, and their XRD profiles (d). The HRTEM images (e) and (f) and SAED pattern (g) of the nanorods on CF3-SAM modified seed layer are also presented.	 

 	Fig. 2  FESEM image of ZnO nanorods fabricated for 7 h at 60 °C on ZnO seed layers featuring different SAM growth time; CF3-SAM 6 h (a), 12 h (b), and 36 h (c), and COOH-SAM 6 h (d), 12 h (e), and 36 h (f).	 

 	Fig. 3  UV-Vis transmission spectra of the as-prepared nanorods fabricated for 7 h with and without SAM treatment to the seed layers (inset shows PL spectra).	 

 	Fig. 4  UV-Vis transmission spectra of the as-prepared nanorods fabricated for different growth time (3–8 h) with 6 h CF3-SAM treatment to the seed layers (inset shows PL spectra) (a), and FESEM image of nanorods fabricated for 3 h (b), 5 h (c), and 8 h (d).	 

 	Fig. 5  FESEM images of ZnO nanorods fabricated for 7 h after SH-SAM treatment to the seed layers featuring different SAM growth time; 6 h (a), 12 h (b), and 36 h (c).	 

 	Fig. 6  Histogram of the thickness of ZnO nanorods fabricated on the seed layers featuring different SAMs and various SAM growth times.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
