Essential scientific mapping of the value chain of thermochemically converted second-generation bio-fuels  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6GC02335E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6GC02335E
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5086-5117Essential scientific mapping of the value chain of thermochemically converted second-generation bio-fuels

        
          
            Xiaolei 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      
School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Queen's University, Belfast, UK. E-mail: xiaolei.zhang@qub.ac.uk;   Tel: +44 (0) 28 9097 4490
Received 
      21st August 2016
    , Accepted 23rd August 2016First published on 24th August 2016AbstractAs the largest contributor to renewable energy, biomass (especially lignocellulosic biomass) has significant potential to address atmospheric emission and energy shortage issues. The bio-fuels derived from lignocellulosic biomass are popularly referred to as second-generation bio-fuels. To date, several thermochemical conversion pathways for the production of second-generation bio-fuels have shown commercial promise; however, most of these remain at various pre-commercial stages. In view of their imminent commercialization, it is important to conduct a profound and comprehensive comparison of these production techniques. Accordingly, the scope of this review is to fill this essential knowledge gap by mapping the entire value chain of second-generation bio-fuels from technical, economic, and environmental perspectives. This value chain covers (i) the thermochemical technologies used to convert solid biomass feedstock into easier-to-handle intermediates, such as bio-oil, syngas, methanol, and Fischer-Tropsch fuel; and (ii) the upgrading technologies used to convert intermediates into end products, including diesel, gasoline, renewable jet fuels, hydrogen, char, olefins, and oxygenated compounds. This review also provides an economic and commercial assessment of these technologies, with the aim of identifying the most adaptable technology for the production of bio-fuels, fuel additives, and bio-chemicals. A detailed mapping of the carbon footprints of the various thermochemical routes to second-generation bio-fuels is also carried out. The review concludes by identifying key challenges and future trends for second-generation petroleum substitute bio-fuels.Xiaolei ZhangDr Xiaolei Zhang is a lecturer at Queen's University Belfast (QUB), UK. She earned her bachelor's degree in 2007 from North China Electric Power University, China. In 2013, she was awarded a Ph.D. degree from the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Sweden. Afterwards, she worked for one year as a post-doctoral fellow at the University of Alberta, Canada. Her research interests are biomass utilization, thermochemical conversion technologies (pyrolysis, gasification and combustion), and production of second-generation fuels, power, heat, and chemicals from renewable energy sources.
1. Introduction
Worldwide concerns regarding global warming have led both industry and academic researchers to attempt to develop technologies to address the unprecedented challenge of reducing carbon emissions. Global CO2 emissions in 1973 were 15633 Mt, increasing to 31734 Mt by 2012; thus, a 200% increase has been seen in merely 40 years.1 Fossil fuels (oil, gas, and coal) remain the predominant sources of both energy supply and CO2 emissions globally—in 2012, approximately 81.7% of the total primary energy supply, 67.9% of electricity generation, and 99.5% of CO2 emissions resulted from the consumption of fossil fuels.1 In addition to these considerable CO2 emissions, the depletion of fossil fuel resources is yet another major concern, as reserves of petroleum, natural gas, and coal are expected to be exhausted within the next 45, 60, and 120 years, respectively.2 At the same time, global energy demand is increasing dramatically, from 13214 Mtoe (million tonnes of oil equivalent) in 2010 to an estimated 15888 Mtoe by 2020, and to a further 20680 Mtoe by 2040.3
The use of alternative energy resources is necessary to address this inevitable and foreseeable demand-supply gap in the energy sector. In 2014, it was reported that by 2040, oil, gas, coal, and low-carbon sources would supply roughly equal proportions of energy, around 25% each; this means that approximately 75% of total energy will still be derived from fossil fuels.4 This consumption level is expected to lead to a global temperature increase of 3.6 °C, much higher than the allowable safe limit (2 °C) determined by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to avoid severe and widespread climate change implications.4 For this reason, efforts are being made to obtain a higher proportion (>25%) of energy from low-carbon sources.
Biomass is considered to be an attractive low-carbon resource. According to the climate agreement made at COP21 (21st annual Conference of the Parties) in Paris in 2015, it was agreed that biomass and bioenergy play a crucial role in meeting the 2 °C target for climate change. In 2012, biomass contributed to around 10% of world energy consumption and 80% of global renewable energy production, and it will continue to play a dominant role among renewable resources throughout the first half of this century.5 Legislation to mandatorily increase the share of bioenergy has been enacted in several nations. For example, there are targets to obtain 20% of transportation fuel from biomass by 2030 in the US, and targets for biomass to provide 20% of the renewable energy share and 10% of transportation renewable energy in the EU by 2020.6 By 2050, 30% of the world's energy demand is expected to be met by bioenergy.7 However, these ambitious targets raise a question: is the existing biomass sufficient? The answer is in the affirmative. The quantity of biomass is enormous, and the total energy stored in biomass plant materials is three to four times greater than the global energy demand.7 Efficient utilization of bioenergy would therefore provide an ideal alternative energy resource.
Theoretically, biomass is a resource that can be used to produce all types of energy: heat, electricity, and fuels. Currently, heat is the major product of biomass utilization, with roughly 60% of worldwide bioenergy comprising traditional applications for cooking and heating in developing countries.5 With regard to electricity production from biomass, dedicated biomass power plants or biomass co-firing plants are feasible means of reducing CO2 emissions and producing green energy. In fact, as of 2011, there were 230 biomass co-firing plants in operation worldwide, generating electricity and heat.8 However, combustion of biomass does not represent its optimal use; it can be more efficiently utilized if converted into bio-fuel or related products, since biomass is the only renewable energy resource that contains all elements needed for the generation of fuels and related products. The various types of fuels derived from biomass, whether gaseous (syngas, biogas), liquid (biomass-derived diesel, ethanol, gasoline), or solid (pellets, briquettes, charcoal), have the potential to replace conventional gaseous, liquid, and solid fuels, respectively. It is thus increasingly important to develop technologies for the efficient production of high-quality fuels, rather than exploiting the direct conversion of biomass into heat and electricity.
Over the past decades, considerable efforts have been made to convert lignocellulosic biomass into bio-fuels, fuel additives, and bio-chemicals, especially after the oil crisis of the mid-1970s. Various conversion pathways, including thermochemical and biochemical routes, have been explored. Thermochemical routes convert biomass into fuels by heating and oxidation, while biochemical routes are normally based on enzyme catalysis. The commercial potential of both pathways has been proven.9 The main advantages for the scale-up of thermochemical conversion technologies are related to the high temperatures and short residence times involved. High temperatures enable the actuation of all the components of plant material, especially lignin, which is the most difficult to break down, whereas the feedstocks for biochemical conversion are limited to sugars. The short residence times of most thermochemical conversion technologies, comprising minutes or even seconds, compared to hours or days for biochemical conversion processes, allows the construction of reactors on smaller scales, enabling more economically viable pathways.10
Extensive scientific research has been carried out regarding the production of second-generation bio-fuels via thermochemical conversion pathways. However, in practice, all proposed conversion technologies remain at the laboratory, pilot, or pre-commercialization stages. Additionally, there is a related need to synthesize research and practice-based knowledge to guide future development. This review provides this synthesis through a rigorous comparison of the technical, economic, and environmental aspects of different thermochemical technologies, with a view to facilitating the emerging industry of second-generation bio-fuels. Combustion is not considered here, since this is a mature technology aimed only at generating heat and electricity rather than bio-fuels and bio-chemicals. This review first explains the thermochemical processing of biomass from mass, energy, economic and environmental perspectives, which are then then described in detail in subsequent sections. The review concludes with a discussion of challenges and future trends in the conversion of biomass into fuel and related products.
2. Essentials of biomass thermochemical conversion
Biomass thermochemical conversion comprises a set of chemical reactions that simultaneously generate or absorb heat to convert raw biomass feedstock into energy (electricity and heat), energy carriers (bio-fuels, fuel additives), or chemical products (bio-chemicals). Essentially, the thermochemical conversion of biomass to produce bio-fuels and related products is a process that separates useful from non-useful biomass components. The solid, liquid, and gas fuels generated represent energy carriers that can be further utilized; however, the process also generates undesirable products, mainly in the form of CO2, H2O, and environmentally unfriendly emissions. For example, one of the main drawbacks of using biomass feedstock is its high water content compared with fossil fuels. Water is useless as an energy carrier and must be removed, requiring the consumption of external energy. Similarly, the high oxygen content of biomass is not useful for second-generation bio-fuels, and the oxygen is typically removed using either H or C to produce H2O, CO2, or CO.
Considering all conversion pathways and products, Fig. 1 provides an overall evaluation of the thermochemical conversion of lignocellulosic biomass from mass, energy and economic perspectives. Among the three main forms of second-generation bio-fuels, solid products such as firewood, woodchips, wood pellets, and charcoal are more widely available as source materials and have higher conversion efficiencies, with effective conversion technologies and lower production costs. However, solid products are bulky and difficult to handle, and can only be used in solid fuel burners. Second-generation liquid bio-fuels are energy dense, easier to transport, and have the potential to substitute for conventional transport fuels. It is important to note that liquid fuel is still expected to dominate the transportation fuel sector, at least until 2050, due to the existing liquid fuel supply system, which restricts automobile utilization of natural gas, hydrogen, and electric power sources.7 However, the energy efficiency of converting biomass into liquid fuel is low and production costs are high. Moreover, the technologies for converting lignocellulosic biomass into liquid bio-fuel that can be directly used have not yet been fully commercialized. With regard to gaseous products, there are a number of widely used techniques available; the main challenges involved in these techniques are upgrading intermediate gases and disposing of unwanted by-products.7
 Fig. 1  Mass-energy-economic comparison of second-generation bio-fuels generated via thermochemical conversion processes. 
The production of solid fuels from raw biomass is considered to be low-level decomposition, while the decomposition level for liquid products is higher than that of solid fuel; the production of gaseous fuel represents the greatest decomposition of raw biomass. As such, the mass yields of solid, liquid, and gaseous products derived from biomass are around 75 to 90%, 40 to 80%, and 20 to 50%, respectively. It is evident that higher-level decomposition leads to a lower mass yield. From energy and economic perspectives, a higher level of biomass decomposition will provide purer products with higher heating values, because the low quality and low energy density portions have been removed. However, high-level decomposition involves higher production costs, as shown in Fig. 1. Thus, the appropriate and maximal utility of bio-fuels must be evaluated, considering all three aspects of technical feasibility, energy efficiency, and economic cost.
3. Technical forefront
3.1 All pathways

Fig. 2 provides a general classification of all biomass thermochemical conversion technologies. Overall, the process of bio-fuel formation can be described as feedstock (lignocellulosic biomass) being converted into solid, liquid, or gaseous intermediates via thermochemical processing technologies, followed by these intermediates being further upgraded into final products (bio-fuels, bio-chemicals, fuel additives) via further conversions. The main thermochemical processing technologies include pyrolysis, gasification, liquefaction, and torrefaction, while the upgrading technologies include bio-oil upgrading and syngas upgrading techniques. The selection of technologies requires a general understanding of the biomass feedstock, the desired product, and the relevant economic and environmental impacts.
 Fig. 2  Thermochemical and further upgrading pathways for converting lignocellulosic biomass into second-generation bio-fuels, fuel additives, and bio-chemicals. F-T: Fischer-Tropsch; WGS: water–gas shift; i-C4: isobutene and isobutane; DME: dimethyl ether. Pink lines represent solid streams, green lines represent liquid streams, and blue lines represent gaseous streams. Grey lines represent pathways for heat and electricity generation, which are outside the scope of this research, while the dashed blue lines show alternative gasification classifications. 

3.1.1 Thermochemical conversion. 
Operating conditions. 
Three key operating parameters governing these technologies and their end products are temperature, heating rate, and residence time. Fig. 3 summarizes these operating conditions for various thermal conversion technologies.
 Fig. 3  Various operating conditions of the main thermochemical processing technologies for lignocellulosic biomass. Slow: slow pyrolysis; fast: fast pyrolysis; intermediate: intermediate pyrolysis; flash: flash pyrolysis. 
Torrefaction is a deep pre-treatment technology with operating conditions of a temperature range of 200 to 300 °C, isolating oxidation, and atmospheric pressure. The operating temperature is lower than for other thermal conversion technologies; thus, lower energy inputs are required.11
Pyrolysis is a thermal conversion technology that can either be considered an initial step for other thermal conversion processes, such as gasification, or as a conversion method to produce bio-fuels in its own right. Pyrolysis decomposes biomass in the absence of oxygen, within a temperature range of 300 to 900 °C (ref. 7) and a heating rate that varies greatly, from less than 0.005 °C s−1 to more than 10000 °C s−1.12 Depending on the operating conditions, pyrolysis can be classified as slow, intermediate, fast, or flash pyrolysis. As shown in Fig. 3, preferential conditions for slow pyrolysis are a relatively low heating rate (around 0.005 °C s−1), low temperatures (300 to 600 °C), and long residence times (minutes to days). Fast pyrolysis is a process with heating rates ranging between 5 and 100 °C s−1,13,14 a temperature range of 375 to 650 °C, and a short residence time of 1 to 5 s.15,16 Intermediate pyrolysis is a technology with a moderate operating temperature and heating rate. Flash pyrolysis has the highest heating rate (up to 104 °C s−1 (ref. 17)) and the shortest residence time (<1 s); thus, special reactors, such as appropriately designed entrained flow reactors or fluidized bed reactors, and fine particles (105 to 250 μm)18 are normally required. Depending on operating conditions or energy sources, flash pyrolysis can be subdivided into flash hydro-pyrolysis, rapid thermal process, solar flash pyrolysis, and vacuum pyrolysis, as described in detail by Goyal et al.18
Liquefaction normally operates at high pressures (5 to 40 MPa) and mild temperatures (200 to 400 °C) in the presence of a solvent.19 Water is the most common solvent used for liquefaction due to its lower cost compared to other options, including creosote oil, ethylene glycol, simple alcohols, and phenol.20 The use of high pressure offers the potential to use a mixture of feedstock varieties, including lignocellulosic biomass, after consideration of the difficulties that this poses for processing.19 An additional benefit of this hydrothermal process is that neither catalysts nor active organisms are required for pre- or post-treatment because of the high pressures and temperatures involved.19
Gasification is a partial biomass oxidation process typically conducted at temperatures higher than 800 °C. It is aimed at the production of syngas rich in CO and H2.21 Under different operating conditions, gasification can be classified into atmospheric gasification, hydrothermal homogeneous gasification, and hydrothermal catalytic gasification. The normal operating conditions for hydrothermal gasification are high pressures (5 to 40 MPa) in a liquid environment and within a temperature range of 400 to 700 °C.19
Product distribution. 
Different thermochemical technologies provide different distributions of the three product forms: solid, liquid, or gaseous. This distribution is shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Solid, gaseous, and liquid product distribution diagram for different thermochemical processing pathways for lignocellulosic biomass.11,15,17,22–28 
An energy-dense solid product, termed torrefied biomass, is the main product of torrefaction. The solid yield is normally in the range of 65 to 95 wt% (see Fig. 4). The remaining products comprise torrefaction gases that are non-condensable, including CO and CO2, and condensable, including water, acetic acid, furfural, formic acid, methanol, lactic acid, and phenol.24,29 The gaseous yields increase with elevated temperature and extended residence time. Solid char is also the major product of slow pyrolysis and carbonization, with the latter focusing more on the production of charcoal and less on gas and liquid products, therefore requiring a longer residence time (days) than slow pyrolysis.22 An asymptotic relationship for char yield with decreasing heating rate has been noted, and a heating rate of less than 15 °C h−1 prevents the wood particles from shrinking and cracking, leading to maximal formation of solid char.30 The distribution of liquid, gaseous, and solid products from pyrolysis varies with temperature and heating rate and with the complexity of the biomass feedstock. It has been found that the pyrolysis conversion rate increases significantly, from 50% to 80%, with a temperature increase from 673 K to 973 K.18,26,31 Higher heating rates also lead to higher liquid yields; for example, the oil yield from raw biomass at a heating rate of 0.5 °C s−1 (slow pyrolysis) is 51.7%,14 which increases to 68% at a heating rate of 5 °C s−1 (ref. 14) and increases further to 73% at heating rates higher than 100 °C s−1.13,14,32 During fast pyrolysis, lignocellulosic feedstock is first cracked into short chain vapors, which can be rapidly cooled into liquid bio-oil. Secondary reactions, involving the depolymerization of the vapor, are prevented by rapid heating and cooling,33 leading to higher liquid yields (up to 70 to 80%).5 However, it is worth noting that the reason for higher liquid yields from fast pyrolysis, as compared with flash pyrolysis, is the significant secondary cracking of long chain liquid products into gases during flash pyrolysis.
Gasification produces the highest yield of gaseous products, normally around 85%, with 5% liquid and 10% solid products. Four sub-processes are involved in biomass gasification: dehydration, pyrolysis, oxidation, and reduction. Moisture evaporation occurs during dehydration at temperature ranges of around 100 to 200 °C. As the temperature increases, volatile vapors (light hydrocarbons, CO, CO2) and tar (liquid long-chain hydrocarbons) are released, while char is produced as a solid residue. The distribution of gases, tar, and solids varies depending on the feedstock type, operating conditions, and gasifying agents.34 During the oxidation stage, non-decomposed materials (biomass, char, volatile vapors, and partial tar) are oxidized by the injected gasifying agent, forming CO, CO2, H2O, and various other species. Finally, CO2 is reduced by char to CO in the reduction zone of the entire gasification process.


3.1.2 Bio-oil upgrading. 
Direct utilization of crude bio-oil as a transportation fuel is challenging, due to its low quality and immiscibility with conventional liquid fuels. Reported technologies for upgrading bio-oils include chemical methods (hydro-deoxygenation, catalytic treatment, visbreaking, and steam reforming) and physical methods (emulsification and filtration).35,36Fig. 5 provides a detailed description of the various upgrading technologies.
 Fig. 5  Mapping of operating conditions and key issues facing bio-oil upgrading technologies. 
Bio-oil hydro-deoxygenation (HDO) is an extensively studied technology for upgrading low-grade bio-oil into high-quality liquid fuels that can be further refined in existing oil refineries. The process can be summarized as the reaction of crude bio-oil with H2, during which C–O bonds are broken, new C–C bonds are formed, and water is produced simultaneously. HDO originates from the hydro-desulfurization (HDS) process in conventional industrial petroleum refineries.6 Thus, HDS and HDO have similar reaction pathways and mechanisms, with the difference being that HDO mainly produces H2O, while HDS mainly produces H2S. The processing temperature is normally 300 to 900 °C in the presence of hydrogen at pressures of 3.5 to 20 MPa (ref. 25) over a heterogeneous catalyst.20
Catalytic cracking is another common bio-oil upgrading method;37,38 it takes place at atmospheric pressure. Both HDO and catalytic cracking are used to reduce the high oxygen content of bio-oil; the former requires high-pressure hydrogen in the presence of a catalyst and eliminates oxygen in the form of H2O, while the latter operates under conditions similar to those in the petroleum refining process, eliminating oxygen in the form of CO2 and CO. The catalytic cracking process can be easily controlled because its operating temperatures (300 to 600 °C) are similar to those required for bio-oil production processes.
Catalytic fast pyrolysis (CFP) provides another means of converting lignocellulosic biomass into gasoline-compatible aromatics, using a technology that was first proposed at the beginning of the 1980s.39 CFP is normally carried out at a high heating rate (around 500 °C s−1) with a short residence time (2 to 10 s) and at temperatures between 400 and 600 °C (see Fig. 3.) in an inert atmosphere with zeolite catalysts. This catalytic deoxygenation method is carried out during fast pyrolysis and, therefore, takes place in a single reactor. Compared with two-reactor systems of pyrolysis followed by catalytic cracking, CFP produces more aromatic products and less coke. A detailed description of CFP has been well presented by Carlson et al.40
Catalysts play a significant role in the upgrading of bio-oil. The HDO process employs sulfided CoMo and NiMo-based catalysts, which have high resistance to sulfur poisoning compared to noble metal catalysts. However, a certain amount of sulfur must be fed into the system to avoid catalyst deactivation.6 Other types of catalysts, such as Pt/SiO2–Al2O3, vanadium nitride, and ruthenium/C, do not require co-feeding of sulfur and have much higher hydrogenating capabilities than conventional HDO catalysts. However, these catalysts are generally not preferred due to their higher cost and the occurrence of side decarboxylation reactions.6 Various catalysts have been developed for catalytic cracking or for the CFP process, including HZSM-5, H–Y zeolite, mordenite, silicalite, and silica-alumina. Silica-alumina catalysts minimize char formation, and H–Y, silicalite, and silica-alumina catalysts minimize tar formation, resulting in higher production of aliphatic hydrocarbons.41,42 Al-MCM-41, Cu/Al-MCM-41, and Al-MCM-41 can eliminate the formation of levoglucosan and large molecular phenols, increasing the yields of acetic acid, furfural, and furans and reducing the yield of large molecular phenols.43–45 The widely used zeolite catalysts46–48 are inexpensive and produce the highest yield of organic liquid products (34 wt%), with minimal coke formation. Transition metal catalysts (Fe/Cr) lead to the selective production of phenol and light phenolics; however, their activity is lower than that of zeolites. A robust catalyst is needed for the CFP process, and catalyst regeneration is therefore a key consideration in reactor design.25,49 It has been reported that the use of fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) catalysts with ZSM-5 additives can improve the quality of bio-oil; however, this also increases the yields of water, non-condensable gases, and char.50 More selective bi-functional catalysts, such as that formed by the addition of Ga to ZSM-5, have also been suggested. Narrowing the pore sizes in zeolites can significantly increase p-xylene selectivity during biomass CFP, from 32% to 96%.9
Thermal cracking, or visbreaking, is an oil refinery technique for upgrading crude oil, reducing oil viscosity and producing light hydrocarbons, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), or gasoline. Visbreaking has also been used to upgrade bio-oil, mainly to reduce its viscosity. In some EU countries, visbreaking is preferred over catalytic cracking, especially for oil feedstocks with poisonous catalyst compounds (e.g. metals and aromatic compounds, such as asphaltene and resins).51,52 Visbreaking normally takes place at mild temperatures of 470 to 500 °C, with a short residence time of 1 to 3 min, in order to maximize liquid yields and minimize coke formation. The latter can also be avoided through low residence times and through blending with H-donor additives such as tetralin.53,54 A combination of hydro-treatment and visbreaking provides a higher liquid yield than the sole application of visbreaking.55
Steam reforming provides a feasible means of converting liquid energy carriers into gaseous products, especially hydrogen. The feedstock can be fossil fuel, bio-oil, or black liquor from chemical pulp and paper production.56 The technology for steam reforming of fossil fuels is well developed. This technique is usually carried out at temperatures of 600 to 800 °C, with high space velocities, and usually with Ni catalysts.20 Steam reforming of bio-oil is more complicated than that of petroleum oil, due to the presence of some active bio-oil compounds. Therefore, during steam reforming, bio-oil is first separated into high-value and low-value products, with the latter being subjected to steam reforming treatment57 using aqueous bio-oil compounds to produce hydrogen. The non-aqueous organic fraction is used to produce chemicals such as phenol-formaldehyde resins or gasoline additives such as aromatic hydrocarbons and ethers.58
The physical emulsification of bio-oil with gasoline/diesel is considered to be a simple method for transforming bio-oil into useful liquid fuel by reducing its viscosity. However, since bio-oil is not miscible with conventional fuel, a surfactant is required. A higher fraction of bio-oil in an emulsification leads to higher viscosity.59 Emulsification can also reduce the corrosiveness of bio-oil; for example, 10 to 20 wt% emulsions can reduce the corrosiveness of bio-oil by half.60 CANMET in Canada60,61 have developed micro-emulsions with 5 to 30% bio-oil in diesel, while researchers at the University of Florence62 have developed emulsifications of 10 to 90%.
Filtration is used to remove the solid contents in bio-oil, reducing the ash content to less than 0.01% and the alkali content to less than 10 ppm; these proportions are much lower than those produced by systems that only use cyclones.25 The char in crude bio-oil can also be reduced by filtration, which can increase liquid yield by up to 20%, since the presence of char will catalytically crack vapors.25 Active char will also reduce the average molecular weight of the produced liquid, in turn leading to an increase in the burning rate and delayed ignition.25 Due to the liquid nature of bio-oil, filtration of small-sized solid particles (<5 μm) is difficult, owing to the greater demands on the pressure drop and the self-cleaning ability of filters.25


3.1.3 Syngas cleaning and upgrading. 
The syngas produced directly from biomass gasification is not sufficiently clean to be used in gas engines or to be further upgraded into high-value products. Its main contaminants include tar,63 solid particulates, alkali compounds, sulfur, and a number of catalyst-retarding gases. The currently available syngas cleaning technologies are listed in Table 1, which also summarizes the associated advantages and disadvantages for each cleaning technology for downstream applications and for targeted end-products.
Table 1 Summary of key syngas cleaning technologies




Technology
Contaminants removed
Operating conditions
Contamination problems, advantages, and disadvantages
Ref.




Filter
Solid particulate
Cold, warm, hot
Filter particulates, which damage equipment; filter is inexpensive and highly efficient, but the short operating period decreases the chance of wide plant availability.

64



Scrubbing
Tar
Cold
Tar causes equipment fouling and clogging, reducing gasification efficiency; scrubbing is efficient but economically impractical when working at elevated temperatures.

21, 66



Thermal cracking
Tar
Hot
Thermal cracking reduces tar and increases gas yield by breaking down long chain tar hydrocarbons into smaller molecules such as CO and H2. It improves thermal integration and biomass utilization efficiency, but suffers from problems of coke formation. Dolomite and olivine catalysts can be used to enhance tar cracking; these are cheap but still cannot remove tar completely. Nickel-based catalysts can remove tar efficiently; however, their easy deactivation by coke must be considered.

66–69



Steam reforming
Tar
Warm, hot
Steam reforming reduces tar and increases gas yield, as hydrocarbons in tar react with steam to produce CO and H2; the temperature normally ranges from 650 °C to 700 °C. A further water–gas-shift reaction can be added to adjust the targeted H2/CO ratio. Coke formation remains a problem, but can be reduced by providing sufficient steam or by using appropriate catalysts to reduce tar and char formation concurrently.

21, 70–72



Sorbents
Sulfur
Cold
Sulfur creates catalyst poisoning, especially during subsequent F-T synthesis. Sorption capacity is a key factor for evaluating the efficiency of sulfur removal, and sorption capacity is highly dependent on material porosity. High porosity facilitates sorption; however, this also decreases the tensile strength of the material. As a result, optimization of porosity is needed.

21, 73



Sorbents
Alkali
Cold
Alkalis cause irreversible damage to equipment. Similar to sulfur sorption, the sorption capacity is a key factor and is highly dependent on material porosity.

21



Water scrubber
NH3
Cold
NH3 poisons the zeolite catalyst. Water scrubbers can help to remove NH3, and a water scrubber can be easily operated.

74





Gas cleaning and purification technologies can be classified as hot, warm, or cold, corresponding to temperature ranges of more than 300 °C, from 25 to 300 °C, or lower than 25 °C, respectively.64 Cold syngas cleaning can be further subdivided into wet cold cleaning and dry cold cleaning, depending on whether wet scrubbing is involved. Wet cold cleaning has been commercially used in the petrochemical process; however, significant wastewater generation remains a problem and limits its application. Warm cleaning can be used for hydrogen generation. Hot cleaning systems have the advantage of higher efficiency, due to lower energy loss when a high temperature downstream process, such as combustion in a turbine, is applied, because the raw syngas produced from gasifiers is normally a gaseous mixture at high temperatures. However, for other downstream processes with low operating temperatures, such as F-T synthesis, hot cleaning is not preferred from an energy conversion perspective.21 The process of syngas cleaning includes various endothermic and exothermic reactions, which can be controlled through different types of heating or cooling mechanisms, depending on the process design.
Cleaned syngas can either be used for direct combustion aimed at power generation65 or can be further synthesized into liquid fuel or bio-chemicals. As shown in Fig. 6, various upgrading technologies exist, including the F-T process, methanol synthesis, isosynthesis, and oxosynthesis.
 Fig. 6  Syngas upgrading technologies. 
F-T synthesis is a leading technology for the conversion of gas into liquid fuel. During the syngas F-T process, cleaned syngas can be polymerized into long-chain liquid hydrocarbons (CnH2n−2). The operating requirements for this process are temperatures of 150 to 300 °C and elevated pressures of tens of atmospheres, to avoid the formation of short chain hydrocarbons (CH4).21 The need for high pressure is a disadvantage because it increases costs. F-T synthesis uses transition metal-based catalysts, including Fe, Co, Ni, and Ru. In the case of Co-based catalysts, it is better for syngas to have a H2/CO ratio close to 2, while Fe-based catalysts have lower hydrogen requirements because they promote the formation of H2 through water–gas shift reactions. The F-T process involves CO adsorption onto the metal surface to form metal carbonyls, with further hydrogenation and hydrogenolysis, and the formation of many intermediates with bonded C, H, and O, before a final C–C bond-formation step.75 To ensure efficient functioning of the catalyst, and given that sulfur can poison the F-T catalyst, a proper desulfurization stage for raw syngas is required.21 The liquid products and their quality are highly dependent on the catalyst and on the operating conditions, especially the synthesis temperature.21,76 The hydrocarbon products from F-T synthesis have carbon numbers from 1 to more than 12; hydrocarbons with chains that are too long and that are solid at room temperature are not needed, and are referred to as F-T wax. F-T wax, which has a boiling point of more than 370 °C, can be further converted into the desired liquid hydrocarbons through hydrocracking, thus enhancing F-T product quality.21,74 Catalysts and hydrogen injection are also needed for F-T wax hydrocracking, and the proper selection of catalysts helps to control the degree of hydrocracking to ensure that the wax decomposes into hydrocarbons of a preferred chain length.21 Potential sources of hydrogen are gasification, tar thermal cracking, and tar steam reforming.
Methanol synthesis has been widely used as another means for converting syngas into liquid. The process can be summarized as follows: gases are initially chemisorbed onto a transition metal surface to form a highly reactive intermediate metal carbonyl, which can be further formed into methanol. The key step is the chemisorption of gaseous CO onto the metal surface.74 The process is exothermic, which poses challenges for reactor design, as heat removal is required.20 Methanol synthesis normally occurs at low temperatures of 220 to 300 °C and high pressures of 50 to 100 bar over Cu/ZnO-based catalysts.20 The copper catalyst has a lifetime of 2 to 5 years, but it can be poisoned by sulfur; therefore, sulfur should be reduced to less than 0.1%.20 Cu catalysts will also sinter in the presence of Cl.20 Methanol synthesis produces a number of side products, including methane, dimethyl ether, methyl formate, higher alcohols, and acetone, which together decrease methanol yield.20
Isosynthesis reactions can be described as the conversion of syngas into i-C4 hydrocarbons (isobutane and isobutene), using a thorium or zirconium catalyst. The selective formation of i-C4 is affected by the CO2 content in the reactant mixture,77 and a potential means of improving carbon efficiency is to recycle CO2 back into the synthesis process. This also simultaneously reduces CO2 emissions. Extreme optimum reaction conditions (450 °C and 150 to 1000 atm)78 are needed to obtain optimum i-C4 production from the isosynthesis reaction. Undesired alcohols will form at low temperatures, while methane and aromatics form at high temperatures. The choice of optimum reaction conditions varies with the use of different catalysts. For example, for thorium-based catalysts, 150 atm and 450 °C are the preferred conditions for the isosynthesis reaction; with 46% CO conversion, the product is 10% isobutene, with isobutane comprising much of the remaining products. For zirconium-based catalysts, the overall CO conversion is comparatively lower. For example, under the same operating conditions (150 atm and 450 °C), only 32% of CO can be converted. Another difference between the two catalysts is that the latter has higher selectivity for isobutene than thorium-based catalysts, and has also received more attention in the literature.77,79 Pure isosynthesis catalysts (either thorium- or zirconium-based) can be improved by using promoters such as Al2O3, Zn, or Cr.
Another pathway that directly converts syngas is oxosynthesis, also referred to as hydroformylation, to produce aldehydes through hydroformylate olefin intermediates. The operating conditions for oxosynthesis are temperatures of up to 200 °C, with a 1:1 ratio of H2/CO. Oxosynthesis is an exothermic reaction,74 and during the initial stage of the process, a metal–carbonyl complex is formed by the combination of an olefin and a metal. This is followed by the formation of an alkyl–metal carbonyl complex through combination of the olefin and a metal–hydrogen bond. Finally, an aldehyde can be formed through the insertion of CO, followed by H2, into the carbon–metal bond in the alkyl–metal carbonyl complex.74 The catalysts used in the oxosynthesis processes are Co, Pt, Rh, and Rh; among these, Co and Rh are predominantly used in commercial plants.78

3.2 Feedstock classification and characterization
Based on various biomass feedstock types, bio-fuels can be classified into four generations (see Table 2).9 First-, second-, and third-generation bio-fuels are produced from edible feedstocks, non-food competitive feedstocks, and aqueous biomass, respectively, while fourth-generation bio-fuels apply similar technologies but also consider carbon capture and storage (CCS), which is outside the scope of this review.
Table 2 Various biomass feedstocks and their corresponding generations of bio-fuels




Biomass feedstock
Bio-fuel




Edible feedstock
Starch (wheat, barley, corn, potato)
Bioethanol, biodiesel
First-generation bio-fuel


Sugars (sugarcane, sugar beet)


Oil crops (rapeseed, soybeans, sunflower, palm, coconut, used cooking oil, animal fats)


Non-food-based
Forest and forest residue
Hydrocarbon fuels, hydrogen, methanol, alcohols, F-T fuel, aviation fuel, olefins
Second-generation bio-fuel


Agricultural biomass (straw, grass)


Energy crops (jatropha, cassava, miscanthus)


Municipal solid waste


Aquatic biomass
Microalgae
Naphtha, diesel, hydrogen, methanol, ethanol
Third-generation bio-fuel


Seaweed


Microbes


Based on the same technologies as first-, second-, or third-generation bio-fuels, but including carbon capture and storage (CCS) for each conversion technology
Fourth-generation bio-fuel




First-generation biomass feedstocks are not considered sustainable, due to the inherent fuel versus food competition as well as significant social and environmental problems related to water and land.21 It is expected that in the near future, second- and third-generation biomass sources will dominate.80 Second-generation bio-fuels provide a compelling alternative fuel option, and they are currently being explored through a growing number of demonstration and pilot-scale plants. In addition to the advantage of not competing with food, second-generation biomass is also more widely available than first-generation feedstock. It is believed that second-generation feedstocks will be able to meet fuel provision requirements once commercialized.81 Moreover, they are more environmentally friendly than conventional energy crops, due to their tolerance of a wide range of soil and environmental stressors, fast growth rates, lower land use requirements, and reduced CO2 emissions.81 The latter is a key environmental advantage over first-generation feedstocks and fossil fuels.9 Microalgae constitute the main feedstock of third-generation bio-fuels, due to their rapid growth rate, high feedstock production efficiency, environmental benefits, and high liquid fuel production capacity. It should be noted that the mass production of oil from microalgae is 30 times that from oil seed crops when using the same area of land.82 However, the technologies involved are expensive and cannot compete in the short term with other energy sources.9,83 Therefore, the near-term strategy is to increase bio-fuel production through a transition from first-generation to second-generation bio-fuels, reaping the associated social and environmental benefits. The transition process will be slow and must be steady.84
Typical feedstocks for second-generation bio-fuels include: (i) woody biomass and related waste; (ii) agricultural biomass and related waste; (iii) energy crops; (iv) municipal solid waste (MSW); and (v) animal manure. The first three of these are generally referred to as lignocellulosic biomass. This is the most abundant biomass type, comprising more than 95% of all global biomass sources.6 Its utilization has a long history, primarily for cooking and heating, predating the use of fossil fuels in the 19th century.7,20 Of the different lignocellulosic biomass types, woody biomass is generally preferred, owing to lower concentrations of fertilizers and pesticides and to the fact that less land is required for the same level of production.11 Considerable focus has been placed on energy crops, due to their fast growth rates, the environmental benefits for increasing carbon storage in soil, and the improvement of surface water quality.85–88 Energy crops can also grow on land that is unsuitable for growing food crops, reducing land erosion, and restoring soil.9 However, the environmental benefits of energy crops vary with land use. For example, normal utilization of temperate energy crops releases fewer greenhouse gases (GHG) than using diesel or gasoline; however, emissions are up to 20% higher than those of diesel or gasoline if the crops are grown on arable land converted from pasture.89 Additionally, the GHG emissions of tropical energy crops are higher than those of fossil fuels if grown on tropical rainforest soils, but are lower when grown on degraded land.89
Feedstock characterization can be performed on the basis of biochemical, proximate, and ultimate analysis.80 Biochemical analysis determines the main biomass components, including cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin, with minor amounts of other oils, fats, proteins, terpenes, alkaloids, terpenoids, and waxes.6 Proximate analysis determines the thermal properties of the feedstocks, including moisture content, fixed carbon, volatile matter, and ash, the latter mainly comprising the inorganic remains following combustion. Ultimate analysis determines the individual element contents, including C, H, O, N, and S. Fig. 7 provides a general description of some of the most important properties of key biomass feedstocks.
 Fig. 7  Key properties of typical biomass feedstocks and coal. MSW: municipal solid waste; HHV: high heating value.8,80,90–94 
Moisture content significantly influences the heating value, especially the low heating value (LHV), since moisture evaporation requires large quantities of energy,95 and the presence of moisture reduces the efficiency of most thermochemical conversion processes. Table 3 shows moisture content requirements for the main thermochemical conversion technologies. Moisture content varies significantly with different feedstocks and with other factors, such as climate. Normally, green unseasoned wood has a moisture content of 40 to 100% on a dry basis, even if the content of intrinsic water that is chemically bonded to the biomass is low.80 In contrast, seasoned, air-dried wood has a much lower moisture content of 10 to 25% on a dry basis, and this can be reduced to 5 to 10% after pelletization.
Table 3 Moisture content requirements for key thermochemical conversion technologies




 
Normally
MC (maximum value)
Ref.




Combustion
5%
35%

95



Gasification
15%
10 to 20%

96



Liquefaction
No drying needed
No drying needed




Fast pyrolysis
<10%
Up to 15%

22





Biomass normally has a higher content of volatiles (64 to 98%) compared to coal (<40%)94 and has a lower fixed carbon content than fossil fuels. The levels of volatiles and fixed carbon significantly influence the distribution of gaseous, liquid, and solid products. Greater quantities of gaseous products can be obtained from the cracking of volatiles contained in the feedstock, while a high liquid yield normally requires external hydrogen. Some degree of hydro-processing, hydrogen addition, or steam reforming is therefore needed to increase liquid quality.80 A larger content of fixed carbon will lead to more solid char formation.97 Compared with fossil fuels, biomass has a lower carbon content,11,12 leading to low energy density. Biomass generally contains less sulfur (0.05 to 0.1%) than fossil fuels, and SOx emissions from subsequent biomass combustion are not significant. However, the presence of sulfur in syngas poses problems for further syngas upgrading.98 The nitrogen content of biomass is similar to or greater than that of fossil fuels, and must be dealt with during the upgrading process.99
It is worth noting that inorganic elements in biomass, mainly in the form of inert and thermally stable ashes, do not contribute to the heating value of feedstock. However, inorganic elements have considerable influence on the yield and quality of produced bio-fuels,100,101 not only accelerating the primary decomposition of biomass into cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin, but also promoting further volatile cracking to form light compounds and char.93,102 However, the presence of inorganic elements also creates problems such as slagging and fouling, due to the high alkali content of biomass ash, especially in agricultural biomass.7,80 When compared with woody biomass, herbaceous biomass has a higher ash content and is especially high in silica and potassium, leading to greater gasifier slagging.7 For example, the ash content of switchgrass is 4.5 to 6.4%,103 which is undesirably high for conversion into bio-fuel, and must therefore be addressed.102
3.3 Second-generation bio-fuels and allied products

Fig. 8 shows the network of second-generation bio-fuels and related fuel additives and bio-chemicals. Key intermediates include torrefied biomass, bio-oil, syngas, methanol, and F-T fuel. The end products mainly include charcoal, gasoline/diesel-range hydrocarbons, jet fuels, aldehydes, and hydrogen.
 Fig. 8  Network of second-generation bio-fuels and allied fuel additives and bio-chemicals. Brown backgrounds represent solid feedstocks or products, green backgrounds represent liquid products, and blue backgrounds represent gaseous products. F-T: Fischer-Tropsch; i-C4: isobutene and isobutane; DME: dimethyl ether; OME: oxymethylene ethers; MTBE: methyl tert-butyl ether; HRJs: hydro-processed renewable jet fuels. 

3.3.1 Torrefied biomass. 
Compared with untreated biomass, torrefied biomass is a more attractive fuel, with enhanced physical properties that provide both energetic and economic advantages for downstream conversions, including gasification and combustion.11,104 Torrefaction can significantly reduce the high moisture content of raw biomass, directly improving its energy efficiency and enhancing its ignition behavior. Another important advantage of torrefied biomass over raw biomass is its higher calorific value, due to its lower moisture and oxygen contents. Energy densification, defined as the dimensionless energy density ratio of torrefied to raw biomass, can range from 1.0 to 1.45, depending on feedstocks and operating conditions.11,24 The improvement in energy density provides additional cost-saving advantages during handling and transportation. Moreover, the grindability of torrefied biomass is improved by breaking down feedstock fibers;105 as a result, the energy consumption of a biomass mill can be significantly reduced.24,106 Biomass fuel uniformity can also be increased through torrefaction, enabling the production of torrefied biomass with similar physical and chemical properties from a variety of raw materials.104


3.3.2 Syngas. 
Syngas is the general name for gaseous products derived from gasification. The composition of syngas varies with different gasification technologies, operating conditions, and gasifying agents.19,107 Chemically, syngas consists of 30 to 60% CO, 25 to 30% H2, 5 to 15% CO2, 0 to 5% CH4, and small proportions of tar, particulates, water vapor, H2S, COS, NH3, and other compounds.7 High-value products derived from syngas upgrading include methanol, F-T fuel, i-C4, and aldehydes, as shown in Fig. 6 and as described in Section 3.1.3. Other products that can be obtained directly or indirectly from syngas are higher alcohols, dimethyl ether (DME), and hydrogen. Higher alcohols include ethanol, propanols, and butanols.74,108 Based on standard enthalpy and Gibbs free energy of formation, the order of alcohol formation, with increasing difficulty, can be summarized as follows: isobutanol < butanol < propanol < ethanol.74 It has been shown that ethanol yields from syngas are similar to those from corn fermentation.20,109–111


3.3.3 Methanol. 
For the syngas-to-methanol process, it has been shown that lower temperatures lead to higher methanol yields112 and that a certain quantity of water promotes the methanol process via a water–gas shift reaction. However, excess water blocks the active sites and reduces methanol yield.78 H2, CO, and CO2 are all present during the methanol synthesis process, and the preferred ratio of (H2–CO2)/(CO + CO2) is around 2.1.113 However, the rate of methanol production from a H2–CO–CO2 mixture is thought to be significantly higher (7 times) than that from a H2–CO2 or a H2–CO mixture.20 CO2 in the product gas may originate either from gasification reactions or from the water–gas shift reaction.112 The presence of CO2 promotes the formation of methanol, as this helps to maintain the oxidation state of the active metal sites.78 However, excessive concentrations of CO2 reduce methanol formation due to lower catalyst activity, and are also undesirable from the perspective of environmental impact. It has been shown that CO2 concentrations of 4 to 8% provide maximum methanol yields.78 One possible method for disposing of excessive CO2 is to convert it into methanol over a copper catalyst, with a H2 to CO2 ratio of 3:1, giving 25% CO2 conversion and a 20% methanol yield.114
Direct utilization of methanol as a transportation fuel in internal combustion engines following blending with gasoline is limited, due to undesirable properties such as toxicity, water solubility, low vapor pressure, and phase separation.20,115 However, methanol can be used directly in methanol fuel cells116–118 and is also an important platform chemical that can be further converted into other fuels and chemicals. It has been reported that 25% of industrial methanol is used to produce methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE), 9% for acetic acid, and 35% for the production of formaldehyde.78 Other products derived from methanol include olefins (ethylene and propene), hydrogen,119–123 gasoline-range hydrocarbons, and the fuel additives DME and oxymethylene ether (OME). As the simplest alcohol, methanol can be further converted into higher alcohols, such as ethanol, 2-propanol, and butanol. The catalysts needed for the conversion process are mainly Cu, Zn, Mo, or Cr, and are promoted with alkali metals.


3.3.4 Bio-oil. 
The liquid energy-dense form of biomass, bio-oil, is mainly collected from the quenching of vapors and aerosols. It is much easier to handle and deliver than raw solid biomass. Bio-oil is a heterogeneous mixture of viscous black liquids with high oxygen contents and alkalinity.33,80 More than 400 different compounds can be found in bio-oil; the main components are shown in Table 4.20,23 On the basis of water solubility, these can be divided into: (i) aqueous compounds, including dissolved oxygenated organics such as acetic acid, methanol, and acetone, which account for 15 to 30 wt%; and (ii) non-aqueous compounds, including some oxygenated compounds (aliphatic alcohols, carbonyls, acids, phenols, sugars, hydroxyaldehydes, and hydroxyketones) and aromatic hydrocarbons (benzene, toluene, indene, and naphthalene).124
Table 4 Key bio-oil components18




Organic species
Phenols
Phenol, methyl-substituted phenols


Acids
Formic, acetic, propanoic, hexanoic, benzoic, etc.


Esters
Methyl formate, methyl propionate, butyrolactone, methyl n-butyrate, valerolactone, etc.


Alcohols
Methanol, ethanol, 2-propene-1-ol, isobutanol, etc.


Ketones
Acetone, 2-butanone, 2-butanone, 2-pentanone, 2-cyclopentanone, 2,3 pentenedione, 2-hexanone, cyclo-hexanone, etc.


Aldehydes
Formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, 2-butenal, pentanal, ethanedial, etc.


Alkenes
2-Methyl propene, dimethylcyclopentene, alpha-pinene, etc.


Aromatics
Benzene, toluene, xylenes, nphthalenes, phenanthrene, fluoranthrene, chrysene, etc.


Nitrogen compounds
Ammonia, methylamine, pyridine, methylpyridine, etc.


Furans
Furan, 2-methyl furan, 2-furanone, furfural, furfural alcohol, etc.


Guaiacols
2-Methoxy phenol, 4-methyl guaiacol, ethyl guaiacol, eugenol, etc.


Syringols
Methyl syringol, 4-ethyl syringol, propyl syringol, etc.


Sugars
Levoglucosan, glucose, fructose, D-xylose, D-arabinose, etc.


Miscellaneous oxygenates
Hydroxyacetaldehyde, hydroxyacetone, dimethyl acetal, acetal, methyl cyclopentenolone, etc.


Inorganic species
Ca, Si, K, Fe, Al, Na, S, P Mg, Ni, Cr, Zn, Li, Ti, Mn, Ln, Ba, V, Cl, etc.




The composition and properties of bio-oil vary with its different feedstocks15,22 and conversion pathways.59,125 Feedstocks with low nitrogen and ash are preferred for bio-oil production.7 Moreover, higher lignin content in feedstock leads to a lower bio-oil yield, because the decomposition of lignin is difficult,22 even though feedstocks with high lignin content tend to result in products with high octane numbers.126 Comparing pyrolysis bio-oil with hydrothermal liquefaction bio-oil, the latter has lower moisture due to the high pressure applied during liquefaction, which can evaporate moisture. Liquefaction bio-oil also has a lower oxygen content than pyrolysis bio-oil, due to the decarboxylation reaction that takes place during the process, the low content of polar compounds, and the high heating value.20 Pyrolysis bio-oil is water soluble, while liquefaction bio-oil is water insoluble.20
Potential applications of bio-oil include: (i) combustion in stationary power boilers for electricity or heat production; (ii) upgrading and blending with diesel oil, followed by further utilization in diesel engines; (iii) gasification into syngas,127 which can be further upgraded into desired liquid fuels; (iv) producing chemicals, for example, resins and anhydro-sugars such as levoglucosan; (v) as a binder for pelletizing and briquetting combustible organic waste materials; (vi) as a preservative, such as the wood preservative liquid smoke; and (vii) for producing adhesives.18
However, crude bio-oil cannot be directly used for combustion in boilers/turbines, except in some industrial-scale combustion systems that have a unique burner set up specifically for bio-oil combustion. Additionally, crude bio-oil cannot be introduced into commercialized FCC units due to its high oxygen and water contents, high viscosity, low volatility, high corrosiveness,128 high acidity, low energy density, and low stability.25 The physical properties of crude bio-oil and its related problems have been explained by Bridgwater25 and Mohan et al.;22 the main issues are shown in Table 5. The upgrading of crude bio-oil aims to reduce moisture, acid, and oxygen, and each deoxygenation technology aims to achieve one or more of these targets.
Table 5 Main physical properties of crude bio-oil, with sources, advantages, and disadvantages




 
Normally
Petroleum fuel
Source
Advantages and disadvantages
Ref.




LHV-lower heating value; HHV-higher heating value.




Moisture content
15 to 35%
0.1%
Biomass feedstock
Moisture content in bio-oil reduces its viscosity and produces enhanced fluidity, which is good for its combustion in engines; however, its energy density and flame temperature are reduced.

23, 134



Oxygen content
35 to 50%
0.5 to 2%
Biomass composition
High oxygen content leads to poor chemical stability, low energy density, high reactivity, and immiscibility with hydrocarbon fuels. Additionally, the lower energy released when burning leads to higher CO2 emissions per unit energy.

126, 128, 134–136



The highest oxygen content that the FCC unit can tolerate is 10 wt%.


However, the oxygen content cannot be reduced too much as the oxygen content of gasoline is so low (near zero) that anti-knock agents (gasoline additives) are needed to ensure auto-ignition.


pH
2 to 3
3.5 to 4
Organic acids from biopolymer degradation
Acidity leads to corrosion of vessels and pipework. Given that the industry standard is <1.5 mg KOH per g before FCC, the acid number of bio-oil needs to be reduced by using 317 stainless steel cladding, which can tolerate the acid number of bio-oil; however, this has not yet been applied in standard refinery units. The acidity of bio-oil is mainly caused by carboxylic acid in the liquid; this leads to the composition of bio-oil changing over time due to the reactions of aldehydes under acid conditions, leading to further storage difficulties.

25, 33, 134, 137



Ash
0 to 0.2 wt%
0.01 to 0.180 wt%
The ash content of pyrolysis oil has been shown to be directly related to the char content of oil.
Existence of ash reduces the oil quality. The ash content can be reduced to <0.01% by hot-gas filtration, meeting the requirement for even the best quality diesel fuel.

6, 25, 134



Alkalis leads to problems such as catalyst poisoning, deposition of solids in combustion, erosion, and corrosion, slag formation, and damage to turbines. A guard bed with an ion exchanger can be used to remove the metals contained in bio-oil. Alkali content can be lowered to about 2 ppm, very close to the level recommended for gas-turbine fuels.


Char
NA
NA
Incomplete char separation during the process
Char causes problems such as oil aging, sedimentation, filter blockage, catalyst blockage, engine injector blockage, and alkali metal poisoning.

25



Distillability
Poor
NA
Reactive mixture of degradation products
Bio-oil cannot be distilled – typical maximum is 50%. Liquid begins to react at <100 °C and substantially decomposes at >100 °C.

25



LHV
15 to 20 MJ kg−1
35 to 40 MJ kg−1
High moisture content, high oxygen content
Low energy density creates utilization difficulties

25



Viscosity
25 to 1000 centistokes
3 to 400 centistokes
Chemical composition of bio-oil
High viscosity leads to high pressure drop, increasing equipment costs, high pumping cost, poor atomization, fairly high and variable with time, greater temperature influence than hydrocarbons.

22, 25



H:C ratio
Low
NA
Low H:C ratio in biomass feedstock
Upgrading to hydrocarbons is more difficult.

25



Miscibility with hydrocarbons
Very low
NA
Highly oxygenated nature of bio-oil
Will not mix with any hydrocarbons; thus, integration into a refinery is more difficult.

25



Nitrogen
0 to 0.2 wt%
0 to 0.02 wt%
Contaminants in biomass feed
Existence of nitrogen leads to unpleasant smells, catalyst poisoning during upgrading, and release of NOx in combustion.

25, 134, 138



High nitrogen feed such as proteins in wastes


Phase separation or inhomogeneity
NA
NA
High feed water
Inhomogeneity leads to phase separation, partial phase separation, layering, poor mixing, and inconsistency in handling, storage, and processing.

25



High ash in feed


Poor char separation




HDO treatment can significantly reduce oxygen content, from 40 to 50 wt% to 1 to 28 wt%.129–133 The conversion rate from crude bio-oil to upgraded HDO bio-oil is up to 85%.28 When co-processing HDO in standard refinery units, it was found that up to 70 wt% of the carbon in pyrolysis oil was recovered during the HDO process. Even so, the oxygen content of the upgraded bio-oil is still high compared to conventional oil. However, 20 wt% of the product is miscible with FCC feed with long residues. Additionally, HDO also minimizes the yields of light gases, char, and coke.129 The liquid viscosity will be increased during the HDO process; thus, a lower limiting value of 5 wt% for the oxygen content is needed to ensure low viscosity.20 Considering the different bio-oil compounds involved in HDO, mainly aromatics and aliphatic compounds, the energy required to break down C–O bonds is higher for the former than the latter,20 and the reaction of aromatics with hydrogen should be avoided because it decreases the octane number and consumes more hydrogen.
Catalytic cracking leads to the removal of oxygen, with the main products being CO and CO2. The yield of gasoline-compatible aromatics from this process is 20% of the raw biomass material on a mass basis and 45% on an energy basis.25,134
When comparing upgraded bio-oil from different upgrading technologies, hydro-treating typically produces high quality oil, with high energy content and low corrosivity. However, the technology requires high-pressure H2, and the product water reduces the caloric value of the produced bio-oil to some extent.28 Catalytic cracking does not require H2; however, the formation of coke influences catalyst reactivity. The naphtha equivalents for both HDO and catalytic cracking are 25% of the mass of the biomass and 55% of the energy, without considering hydrogen provision.134 Compared to catalytic cracking, thermal bio-oil from visbreaking has lower hydrocarbon content and a higher proportion of heavy oxygenated compounds.9 Physical emulsion with diesel fuel requires expensive emulsifying agents and produces highly corrosive oil. Steam reforming is a technically feasible route; however, the rate of conversion to fuel is low.20
With the exception of the aforementioned chemical and physical bio-oil upgrading technologies, the blending of additives, such as methanol, can significantly reduce the viscosity of bio-oil. Diebold and Czernik139 reported that adding 10 wt% methanol to bio-oil can reduce its viscosity to 20 times less than that of crude bio-oil. Moreover, the stability of bio-oil can be significantly increased using ZnO catalysts; the increase in viscosity can be reduced to 55% after heating at 80 °C for 24 hours, compared to a 129% increase in viscosity in the absence of ZnO catalyst.140


3.3.5 F-T fuel. 
F-T hydrocarbon fuels produced from syngas are clean, of high value,141 non-toxic, and do not produce NOx emissions. They have a high cetane number, low particulate emissions, and low sulfur and aromatic contents.76 F-T fuel does not need a specialized distribution infrastructure, due to the high fuel quality.141 Additionally, F-T fuel is characterized by wider feedstock flexibility, as it is produced from syngas. However, due to the lack of sulfur, F-T fuel is low in lubricity;76 one solution for this is to blend it with conventional fuel.76 Due to its low efficiency (of 25 to 50%) and high price, F-T fuel is generally unpopular from the power and fuel economy viewpoints.141 One potential problem in its application is fuel leakage in the engine while blending, due to its lack of aromatic compounds; however, the use of additives can minimize this problem.76 The F-T hydrocarbons produced can be further converted into a wide range of products, including gasoline, diesel, and chemicals. Linear oils and waxes are also tagged as high price products.142 The production of chain alkanes from the F-T process range from C1 to C50, while methane is also a major byproduct of F-T synthesis. The product selectivity of F-T fuels can be adjusted by controlling the catalytic properties.


3.3.6 Char. 
Char produced during pyrolysis can be directly utilized as a solid fuel for boilers. Global wood charcoal production was around 51 million tons in 2012, with annual production estimated to remain on the order of 50 million tons in the near future.7 Char also acts as an intermediate in the production of activated carbon and carbon nano-tubes, or for soil amendment.143 It can also be gasified or steam reformed into syngas through similar mechanisms to those of torrefied biomass. Wood charcoal is normally made into briquettes, requiring additives as binders; these are normally anthracite coal, mineral charcoal, starch, sodium nitrate, limestone, borax, and sawdust.7
The main component of char is carbon, along with hydrogen and various inorganic species. Char yield is normally 35 wt% from wood on a dry basis. However, as biomass has a higher volatile content than coal, its char yield is lower. Thus, an efficient way of utilizing biomass is combining the production char and gases. The combustion of biomass normally gives a temperature of 850 °C, while charcoal combustion can produce temperatures as high as 2000 °C.30
It has been noted that the char yield from hemicellulose is higher than that from cellulose, mainly due to the higher mineral content of the former, which catalytically promotes char formation. Conversely, the higher crystallinity of cellulose obstructs char formation.12 The high char yield from lignin is mainly due to the benzene rings present in lignin. Thus, biomass with a high lignin content is recommended for coal substitution in industrial applications, while biomass with a low lignin content is recommended for bio-oil production via fast pyrolysis. During the latter process, lignin is the main reason for the production of high molecular weight compounds that contribute to bio-oil viscosity, mainly due to the high stability of the benzene rings.144 Depolymerization of lignin mainly produces phenolic compounds.12


3.3.7 Renewable gasoline/diesel-range hydrocarbons. 
Renewable gasoline/diesel-range hydrocarbons produced from biomass are one type of drop-in bio-fuel, in that their properties meet the requirements of existing fuel utilization systems. These hydrocarbons can be widely upgraded from F-T fuel, syngas, methanol, and bio-oil.
The conversion rate of gasoline/diesel-range hydrocarbons from F-T fuel is 40%, using a high capacity FFB reactor at around 340 °C with Fe catalysts. Production of gasoline requires specific properties, such as high linearity and low aromatic content; the F-T products (propane and butane) are highly branched, with high octane values. Compared with diesel, gasoline is not a favored F-T fuel product due to its production complexity.142 The process of converting F-T fuel into diesel requires high-capacity slurry bed reactors with cobalt catalysts, operated to maximize wax production.142 The selectivity of “straight run” diesel can be 20%, with a cetane number of 75 after hydrotreatment; the final cetane number of diesel is around 70 after hydrocracking, higher than the market requirement. It can therefore be used for blending with diesel and to increase the fuel quality.142 Coupling the Co or Fe catalyst with ZSM-5 zeolite catalysts can crack the long chains in gasoline-range fuels and directly produce high-octane gasoline from the F-T process.145 The heavy waxes produced can be hydrocracked to increase the yield of gasoline and diesel.
Gasoline-range hydrocarbons can also be produced from syngas using bi-functional catalysts, which are a combination of transition metal species and zeolites. During the process, syngas initially converts into mixed alcohols by CO chemisorption on the catalyst as a first step. The alcohols are further converted into low olefins. Hydrocarbons are formed from these olefins by oligomerization, followed by hydrogenation.74 Bi-functional catalysts have higher energy efficiencies than metal catalysts. The main reason for this is that, when using the same metal catalyst, correctly chosen zeolite supports (mainly from the point of view of size and acidity level) determine the selection of desired hydrocarbons. For example, H–Y zeolite leads to high-octane fuels, while the HZSM-5 catalyst leads to aromatics for more expensive jet fuels. One probable reason for this difference is the different pore sizes of the different zeolite catalysts.146 The metal/support ratio also affects the hydrocarbon type, mainly by affecting protonic acid sites. It is considered that a balance exists in the ratio of metal/support for optimal catalyst design.74 Olefins can be formed from methanol over a Ca-modified HZSM-5 zeolite catalyst. Further, it has been shown that optimal Ca loading for a given HZSM-5 catalyst provides the best performance in the methanol-to-olefin process.147 During the alcohol-to-hydrocarbon process, carbenium ions are important intermediates in the formation of long molecules on zeolite catalysts. Carbenium ions can be formed from the dehydrogenation of an olefin on the acid site of the catalyst;74 they increase in size through the transfer of hydrogen ions. Finally, products can be formed from the larger carbenium ions by hydrogenation.74
The methanol to gasoline (MTG) process involves the production of gasoline-range hydrocarbons from methanol over a composite catalyst containing H-ZSM-5 and a mixed oxide (Cu–Co–Cr) alcohol synthesis catalyst.148 Methanol converts into ethanol, with the formation of the first C–C bond; this is considered the rate limiting step during the MTG process.149 Following this, progressively higher value alcohols produce higher gasoline yields than methanol. This remains a challenge for catalyst development for higher alcohol synthesis. Gujar et al.148 investigated the effects of temperature, total pressure, and H2 partial pressure on MTG in a batch reactor; they found that high pressures and H2 promoted gasoline yield and decreased the yield of poly-aromatic compounds. Aromatics comprise 40% of gasoline produced from MTG. The MTG process can be described as DME formation, with water being produced from the dehydration of methanol at a temperature of 300 °C and a pressure of 27 atm, followed by the production of hydrocarbons and water from DME at 350 °C and 20 atm over ZSM-5 catalysts.20
Gasoline-range hydrocarbons can also be produced from the upgrading of bio-oil. HDO oil is separated into two parts: the light volatile fractions and the heavy non-volatile fractions (37 wt%). The light parts are correspondingly blended with petroleum, while the heavy parts are blended with vacuum gas oil (VGO) for further upgrading. Blending the heavy portion of HDO oil with VGO increases gasoline and diesel production but simultaneously increases the coke yield. Coke blocks the active catalyst site, and the structure of the catalyst must be adjusted accordingly.150 Blending of HDO oil with VGO in an FCC unit or in hydro-treating, up to 20 wt%, has shown that it is possible to operate without plugging the reactor, with coke formation at 5%. This is the same level as for the VGO upgrading, and the gasoline fraction yield is the same as with the VGO-only unit.150,151 A mixture of 15 wt% HDO bio-oil with light cycle oil can be used in the FCC unit, producing a bio-gasoline with similar quality to the products upgraded from VGO, but with a lower yield of around 20 wt%.152


3.3.8 Fuel additives. 
Oxygenated compounds produced from methanol can be blended with conventional fuel diesel or gasoline to reduce pollutants such as NOx and particulates. Such compounds include DME, and oxymethylene ethers (OME). DME can be used as a diesel additive and is produced from the dehydration of methanol. It can also be directly produced from syngas over bi-functional catalysts.20 The operating temperature for DME formation is lower than that of the bi-functional catalytic syngas-to-olefin process. A hybrid catalyst, referred to as HMCM-22 zeolite, with different SiO2/Al2O3 ratios, has been studied for a syngas-to-DME one step process. Results showed that a higher SiO2/Al2O3 ratio leads to a higher DME yield and lower yield of side-products. Further results have shown that a high-silica HMCM-22 zeolite catalyst is preferred for the syngas-to-DME process.153 An admixed catalyst of methanol synthesis catalyst (CuO–ZnO–Al2O3) combined with HZSM-5 zeolite was also tested for the syngas-to-DME process. It was shown that a DME selectivity of 69% can be attained under the optimal operating conditions, at a temperature of 260 °C and a pressure of 4 MPa.154 OME is another promising diesel additive that has advantages over DME because its physical properties are more similar to conventional diesel, requiring less engine modification.155–157
Butanol (29 MJ l−1), which has higher energy than ethanol (21 MJ l−1), is preferred as a gasoline additive (34 MJ l−1) over ethanol. Furthermore, another high octane number gasoline additive, methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE), is produced from methanol reacting with isobutene over a solid acid catalyst, H-ZSM-5.20,74 The use of MTBE raises environmental concerns related to groundwater contamination from leaking tanks in gas stations, which limits its use as a gasoline additive in the US.20


3.3.9 Renewable jet fuels. 
Bio-oil HDO generates aviation fuels, or so-called hydro-processed renewable jet fuels (HRJs), mainly comprising paraffinic hydrocarbons with the formula CnH2n+2.76 The process involves HDO followed by isomerization and cracking to remove the oxygen in bio-oil through the addition of hydrogen. HRJs can be solely and directly used in conventional aircraft engines due to their high energy content and high quality. The paraffinic hydrocarbons contained in HRJs have a high cetane number; they are thermally stable fuels that are free of aromatics, oxygen, and sulfur. The high purity of these fuels results in ash-free combustion with low emissions of CO, HC, NOx, and particulate matter.76 Some conventional jet fuel or fuel additives should be blended with HRJs to improve their low lubricity, due to their absolute lack of oxygen and sulfur.158
Bio-alcohols (methanol, ethanol, and butanol) cannot be used as aviation fuels due to their low flash points, low energy densities, and pure low temperature properties. However, they can be used as feedstock to produce jet fuels. Other options for jet fuel include liquid hydrogen and liquid methane; however, their applications are limited by their high production costs and lower suitability for conventional aircraft engines.76 For example, liquid hydrogen produces more energy per weight compared with conventional aviation fuel; however, high storage volumes and other modifications are required for its use in aircraft engines. There are also associated security and storage challenges. Furthermore, during hydrogen combustion, large amounts of water are produced, posing a problem for potential hydrogen aircraft.76


3.3.10 Hydrogen. 
Hydrogen can be produced from biomass steam gasification. When H2 needs to be separated from CO and CO2, this can be accomplished either by using the membrane method or through chemical methods. The hydrogen yield can be further improved through the water–gas shift (WGS) reaction by adjusting the CO/H2 ratio.20 Industrial WGS decreases CO concentration to 0.2% through a two-step reaction, first decreasing the CO concentration to 2 to 3% at high temperatures of 350 to 500 °C with Fe-oxide-based catalysts, followed by H2 purification methods, including pressure swing adsorption at low temperatures (200 °C) with Cu-based catalysts,20 preferential air oxidation (PROX), and Pd membranes.20
Hydrogen can also be produced from gasification or catalytic steam reforming of bio-oil. The carbohydrate-derived fraction of bio-oil is converted to hydrogen and CO2 with nickel-based catalysts. The overall yield of hydrogen from biomass via bio-oil is lower than direct gasification of biomass feedstock (6 wt% compared with 11 to 12 wt%); however, the economics of the biomass → bio-oil → hydrogen route can be improved by selling lignin-derived products as a replacement for phenol in phenol-formaldehyde resins.134 Carbohydrate-derived bio-oil theoretically generates around 80% hydrogen, equivalent to an approximately 6 wt% hydrogen yield from wood.57
Three major pathways for the production of hydrogen from methanol are auto-thermal reforming (eqn (1)), partial oxidation (eqn (2)), and aqueous-phase reforming (APR). These are used to supply hydrogen to proton-exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells. Auto-thermal reforming is an endothermic process, while partial oxidation is an exothermic process; however, both occur within a temperature range of 150 to 350 °C and require a catalyst, such as Pd/ZnO, Pt/ZnO, or Cu/ZnO.20 CH3OH + H2O = CO2 + 3H2(1) (2)
Considering lignocellulosic biomass feedstocks, different fractions of hemicellulose, cellulose, and lignin lead to differences in hydrogen production. In general, H2 from hemicellulose starts to form at a temperature of 480 °C, while H2 from cellulose and lignin is formed at 500 °C. The lower starting temperature of hemicellulose can be explained by its mineral composition, which acts as a catalyst for hemicellulose decomposition.12


3.3.11 Bio-chemicals. 
Another important application of lignocellulosic biomass is the production of bio-chemicals (see Fig. 9). For example, carboxylic acids (formic acid, acetic acid, and propionic acid) can be used to produce calcium salts as road de-icers. It is technically possible to scale up the production of biomass-derived de-icers; however, this is not presently economically feasible. Other applications include the use of carbonyl groups for the production of nitrogen fertilizers, the use of terpenoids and phenolic compounds as wood preservatives, and the use of aldehydes (especially glycolaldehyde) as meat browning agents. Phenolic compounds can be used to give smoky flavors. Levoglucosan/levoglucosenone has various applications, including in the manufacture of pharmaceuticals, surfactants, biodegradable polymers, antibiotics, and flavor compounds.134 Furfural from the pyrolysis of cellulose or hemicellulose can be used as a chemical solvent or as a platform molecule for other chemicals or fuels.159
 Fig. 9  Main bio-chemical production routes. 
The water-insoluble fraction of bio-oil, referred to as pyrolytic lignin, can be converted into resin.134 Chemical extraction provides a possible means of separating these compounds, with the main limitation being the ability to develop low-cost separation and refining techniques.59
Some chemicals can also be produced from the conversion of syngas. For example, ethylene, propylene, i-C4, and aldehydes can be produced via the platform molecules of methanol and F-T fuels. The methanol to olefin (MTO) process was discovered in the 1970s,20 and olefin selectivity from methanol is as high as 80 to 90%.160–164 These chemicals can be further used to produce plant hormones, detergents, and bio-plastics. For example, ethylene and propylene can be used for the production of polyethylene, polyvinylchloride, polypropylene, and acrylonitrile. Long chain olefins can be used to produce linear alcohols by hydroformylation; these can be used to further produce biodegradable detergents with prices six times higher than that of fuel.142

4. Energy perspective
4.1 Energy quality
Fuel quality can be expressed in terms of its C, H, and O contents,6 using the atomic ratios O/C and H/C,135,165 often summarized in the well-known Van Krevelen diagram165 to compare different solid feedstocks. Two other hydrogen-to-carbon atomic effective ratios have been further defined to better indicate fuel quality, as shown in eqn (3)166 and (4).167 H/Ceff considers the effects of H and O, while H/Ceff-ad considers the influences of a wider spectrum of elements (H, O, N, and S). (3) (4)

Fig. 10 illustrates and compares the HHV and H/Ceff values of 22 types of fuel obtained through biomass thermochemical conversion, including most biomass feedstock and bio-products. Three categories of fuel are indicated: solids, liquids, and gases. The figure shows that the heating value of solid char is lower than that of fuel gas, fuel oil, or bio-chemicals. Converting biomass into gaseous and liquid fuels is therefore of greater value than converting it into solid products. Biomass-derived liquid fuels in the form of “drop-in” fuels, such as butanol and diesel/gasoline-range hydrocarbons, may be directly used in existing engines without significant modifications. While some fuels with high oxygen content are not suitable for direct use in engines, they could instead be used as fuel additives. For instance, gasoline has a near-zero oxygen content; therefore, improving its oxygen content with additives will facilitate auto-ignition.
 Fig. 10  HHV-H/Ceff map for solid, liquid, and gaseous fuels; hydrogen is not included because its H/Ceff value is infinite. HHV for hydrogen is 142 MJ kg−1. HHV: high heating value; DME: dimethyl ether; HDO: hydro-deoxygenation; MSW: municipal solid waste.8,11,15,17,22–28,80,90–94 
Compared with fossil fuels, biomass has a low energy density; its HHV normally lies within the range of 15 to 25 MJ kg−1,90,91 as shown in Fig. 10. Low density (80 to 100 kg m−3 for grasses, 150 to 200 kg m−3 for woody biomass6) is another problem that can result in biomass having a lower quality than oleaginous feedstock. This low density can be addressed by biomass densification, such as through torrefaction, pelletization, briquetting, steam explosion, and carbonization.6 Torrefaction provides the potential of improving biomass quality through a significant decrease in the O/C ratio168 and an increase in HHV to 20 to 25 MJ kg−1.168 Air-dried wood normally has an energy content of 15 MJ kg−1, which can be increased to 28 to 33 MJ kg−1 for char after carbonization. Additionally, higher carbon content in a feedstock gives higher energy content. Lignin normally contains greater amounts of carbon; its energy content is around 26 MJ kg−1, close to that of coal.20,80
The energy content of syngas ranges from 5 to 20 MJ Nm−1 (ref. 3 and 5) roughly 10 to 45% of that of natural gas. Typically, for gasification of wood to syngas, the carbon conversion rate is 92%, the hydrogen conversion rate is 71%, and the energy conversion rate is 62%, with a syngas yield of around 1.2 Nm3 kg−1 wood.7 The production of fuels from biomass via syngas normally has a low overall process thermal efficiency of 16 to 50% because some proportion of biomass energy is lost during the biomass-to-syngas step. Biomass air gasification has been widely employed, as air is a low-cost agent and is easy to obtain; however, using air as a gasifying agent is disadvantageous, as it produces low-ranked syngas with heating values of around 3 to 6 MJ Nm−3.65,169,170 The heating value of syngas can be increased by using pure O2 as a gasifying agent, although this requires an additional O2 separation unit, which significantly increases operating costs. Alternatively, steam gasification can improve H2 yield and thus produce syngas with a high heating value (10 to 15 MJ Nm−3).171,172 CO2 is also considered to be a preferred gasifying agent because both carbon and oxygen components are included in the product gases. In particular, the use of Ni/Al catalysts in the CO2 gasification process provides a feasible means of increasing syngas yield, and the production of CO and H2 increases with increasing amount of catalyst. However, the gas yields do not increase beyond a threshold.173
The heating value of crude bio-oil is lower than that of other liquid fuels (see Fig. 10): around 36 to 47% of that of fuel oil (16 to 19 MJ kg−1 for bio-oil and 40 to 44 MJ kg−1 for conventional fuel oil).15,33,134 It has been shown that a higher lignin content in feedstock will lead to a bio-oil product with a higher heating value. The upgrading processes for the two types of bio-oil (fast pyrolysis and liquefaction) are similar, although the upgrading of hydrothermal liquefaction bio-oil is more straightforward.19 The production of either pyrolysis bio-oil or liquefaction bio-oil requires only a single reactor, significantly minimizing energy loss due to complicated multi-step reactors and thereby offering relatively large energy recovery during solid biomass feedstock conversion into liquid products (around 50 to 90%).20 Nevertheless, further upgrading of bio-oil reduces energy efficiency and increases costs. For example, 70% of the energy and 83% of the mass of wood feedstock are retained in pyrolysis oil, 63% of the energy is retained after hydro-treating, and 53% of the energy is retained after zeolite upgrading. The corresponding values at the final stage of refining hydrocarbons are 25 to 27 wt% and 55% energy. The thermal efficiency of pyrolysis and further upgrading is higher than that of gasification followed by F-T synthesis.20
4.2 Reaction heat
Reaction heat is an important parameter required to understand the energy balance and efficiency of specific thermochemical technologies. Fig. 11 summarizes the standard enthalpy changes for the detailed reactions involved in individual processes.
 Fig. 11  Enthalpy changes during main thermochemical conversion and further upgrading technologies.7,20,74,78,149,160–163,175–179 
Torrefaction normally has a thermal efficiency, represented by the ratio between the energy in the product and the energy in the feedstock, of up to 96% (on a dry, ash free basis),24,168 with a proportion of the process energy being derived from the combustion of torrefaction gas. The net process efficiency, represented by the ratio of the energy in the product and the sum of the energy in the feedstock and process energy input, such as internal electricity consumption, is 92%.24 The net process efficiency can be reduced to 80% or even less on a wet basis.174
Pyrolysis is an endothermic process; external heat sources are provided for the reaction. Elevated temperatures can prompt the release of volatiles and char; however, when the released volatiles approach solid fuel particles, they can be condensed onto the fuel surface and form tar.22
For biomass gasification, the reaction heat varies with different gasifying agents. As shown in Fig. 11, air or O2 gasification is exothermic, as a portion of the energy required is provided by partial combustion. This is not the case with steam or CO2 gasification, which are endothermic reactions and thus require a supply of external energy for continuous operation. From an energy-saving perspective, the use of external energy sources should be avoided, especially high-quality energy sources. Alternatively, a combination of air and steam or air and CO2 gasifying agents can be used, providing benefits both in terms of high heating value syngas and by providing essential system energy.180,181
5. Economic assessment and feasibility of commercialization
5.1 Economic assessment

Fig. 12 presents the production costs of the main fuels and allied products produced from both lignocellulosic biomass and fossil fuels. The production costs of bio-fuel are around 2 to 3 times higher than those of conventional fuels. For each specific bio-fuel, there is a large range of production costs which are dependent on feedstock cost, conversion efficiency, plant capacity, product value, and the producing region.209
 Fig. 12  The range of production costs for the main second-generation bio-fuels and bio-chemicals, compared with the price of fuel from fossil sources.5,84,182–208 All costs are in US$, with average exchange rates of €1 = $1.09 and £1 = $1.5 based on current currency in 2015. All production prices were converted into 2015 costs using an inflation rate of 2%. Within each bar, the length of the dash-filled part represents the mineral production cost, and the total length of each bar represents the maximal production. 
Feedstock cost is the most significant factor influencing the economy of bio-fuel production. High biomass feedstock cost can be explained by intrinsic features, such as diversity and low quality. Biomass is a complicated feedstock; a number of pre-treatment factors need to be considered, such as cultivation, harvesting, transportation, processing, and storage. Moreover, the cost of deliverable biomass depends greatly on the plant type and production region.20 The predicted order of delivery costs for different feedstocks is as follows: waste > straw > woody biomass > corn stover > high-yield grasses (Miscanthus) > normal-yield grasses (switchgrass, prairie grasses) = hay > corn grain.193 One potential solution to address the diversity and low quality of biomass feedstocks is the development and integration of feasible technologies to simultaneously process various biomass feedstocks, improving energy efficiency, reducing cost, and minimizing the waste stream.6 Bio-refineries210–213 provide another promising way to mitigate the low value of biomass feedstocks; by coupling with the facilities of petroleum refineries, they focus on converting low-value high-volume (LVHV) biomass feedstock into multiple high-value low-volume (HVLV) bio-fuels or bio-chemicals at low cost.
For the liquid bio-products, fast pyrolysis with bio-oil processing (such as catalytic cracking or hydro-processing) provides a relatively low-investment cost option28 compared with either fermentation or gasification followed by F-T synthesis. The low capital cost of fast pyrolysis is due to the small scale of the process. In contrast, fermentation needs a longer reaction time, leading to higher capital costs.195 The process of gasification, combined with the F-T process for liquid production, has high investment costs.9 Moreover, the thermal efficiency of bio-oil production from pyrolysis or liquefaction is higher than that for liquid fuel derived from biomass gasification followed by F-T synthesis (16 to 43%).20
The cost of bio-oil production is 10 to 100% higher than that of fossil fuel.134 When comparing fast pyrolysis and liquefaction pathways for bio-oil production, the production cost of the latter (either crude bio-oil or refined bio-oil) is higher, mainly due to high capital costs and variable operating costs driven by long reaction times.19,20 Chemical production from bio-oils faces technical and economic obstacles due to the complexity of the bio-oils and various product separation issues.134
The upgrading of bio-oil to specific usable liquid fuels is still in development, due to technical challenges and a lack of economic feasibility. Visbreaking has low cost, as no hydrogen is required; it is carried out on a laboratory scale.9 Catalytic vapor cracking can produce aromatics from bio-oil;48 however, its technical feasibility has not yet been fully demonstrated.134 The main issues are catalyst deactivation and high processing costs, which render the product uncompetitive with fossil fuels. A combined mode, with the production of bio-oil in several small pyrolysis plants followed by transportation to a central bio-refinery for further conversion, could provide an economically preferable option because the transport cost of dense bio-oil would be lower than that of solid biomass feedstock. Bio-oil/diesel emulsification can generate fuel that is easily ignited; however, the cost of emulsification is high because of the high cost of the surfactant and because emulsification also requires more energy, with further complications caused by corrosion of engines and subassemblies.59,134
The largest fraction of production costs for syngas-derived bio-fuel is the syngas production cost, which accounts for 50 to 75% of the total;78 this is mainly due to the costly and energy-consumptive step of syngas purification.7 The order of cost for syngas-derived fuel is H2 < methanol ≈ ethanol < F-T liquids. F-T diesel is 40 to 50% more expensive than methanol or hydrogen,20 and biomass-derived methanol is more expensive than its market price. Gasification followed by F-T synthesis can produce high-quality fuels that are compatible with conventional fossil fuels; however, their high investment costs make them economically unfeasible.
The production cost of jet fuels (HRJs) is $0.80 to $2.00 per L, three times higher than the cost of petroleum jet fuel.76 This cost must be reduced for HRJs to compete with petroleum jet fuel. The development of renewable aviation fuels would reduce dependence on fossil fuel sources, thus reducing environmental impacts. To achieve this, the production costs must be reduced, for example, by reducing feedstock cost.76 Finally, the production cost of hydrogen is within the cost range of the hydrogen market price.20,78 Its commercial price depends on the cost of fossil fuels, with higher fossil fuel costs leading to higher hydrogen costs.
5.2 Feasibility of full commercialization
Currently, biomass utilization is dominated by combustion and co-firing with coal/natural gas for heat and power production. Most bio-fuels, especially biodiesel and bioethanol, still rely on first-generation biomass in phase I bio-refineries, with no flexibility for resource input,214 using conventional esterification technologies. It has been reported that biomass co-firing and first-generation biodiesel and bioethanol make up two-thirds of renewable energy consumption in Europe.9 To meet future renewable energy requirements, phase II bio-refineries, with fixed input and processing capabilities, that utilize lignocellulosic materials, and phase III bio-refineries, which can flexibly accommodate both feedstocks, are needed. However, the related costs are high due to the required facilities for these innovative technologies. Alternatively, biomass-derived intermediates can be integrated within existing oil refineries, offering a viable option for bio-fuel and bio-chemical production at a reasonable cost.9Table 6 lists the second-generation bio-fuel plants at various stages of development (operational, under construction, planned, or shut down).
Table 6 Economic evaluation of different products produced through different pathways




Product
Scale
Company
Description
Capacity
Location
Status




Bio-oil
Commercial
Dynamotive Energy Systems Corporation
Fast pyrolysis; a bubbling fluid bed reactor to generate electricity
130 t per d feedstock
West Lorne, Ontario
Shut down


Commercial
Dynamotive Energy Systems Corporation
Fast pyrolysis to generate electricity
200 t per d feedstock
Guelph, Ontario
Shut down


Pilot
Union Fenosa
Fast pyrolysis in a bubbling fluid bed reactor
4.8 t per d feedstock
Spain
Dismantled


Pilot
Agri-Therm
Flash pyrolysis in a fluidized bed reactor
4.8 t per d feedstock
Canada
Developing


Pilot
Agri-Therm
Mobile pyrolysis in a fluidized bed reactor with heat recovery
5 t per d feedstock
Canada
Developing


Pilot
Biomass Technology Group
Fast pyrolysis in a rotating cone reactor to generate electricity
4.8 t per d feedstock
UK
Operational


Pilot
Wellman Process Engineering Ltd. (WPEL)
Fast pyrolysis in a bubbling fluid bed reactor to generate electricity
6 t per d feedstock
Oldbury, UK
Finished


Demo
Licella
Fast pyrolysis to convert radiate pine, banana grass, algae into ‘drop-in’ fuels, including aviation fuel
1000 odt feedstock
Somersby, Australia
Operational








350 t per y bio-oil






Demonstration
Licella
Fast pyrolysis
200000 odt feedstock
—
Planning


Pilot
Biomass Engineering Ltd
Fast pyrolysis in a fluidized bed reactor to process sawdust
6 t per d feedstock
Newton-le-Willows, UK
Operational


Commercial
BTG-BTL
Rotating cone reactor
120 t per d feedstock
Hengelo, Netherlands
Operational


Commercial
BTG-BTL
Rotating cone BTG unit
48 t per d feedstock
Malaysia
Shut down


Commercial
Ensyn
Transported bed and CFB; a dedicated RFO™ bio-fuels facility
3 million gallons per year bio-oil
Renfrew, Ontario
Operational


Commercial
Ensyn Red Arrow RTP Facilities
Transported bed and CFB for production of food flavorings
40.8 t per d feedstock
Rhinelander, Wisconsin
Operational


Industrial
Pyrovac
Vacuum pyrolysis
93 t per d feedstock
Québec, Canada
Operational


Industrial
ENEL
The Ensyn unit transported bed and CFB
650 t per d feedstock
Italy
Not operated


Industrial
PyTec
Ablative pyrolysis
2 × 250 t per d feedstock
Germany
Operational


Pilot
UPM, Metso and Fortum, Technical Research Centre of Finland (VTT)
A pyrolysis transported bed and CFB reactor is integrated into a power boiler to convert wood
9.6 t per d feedstock
Finland
Finished


Industrial
Lurgi LR
Augur or screw reactor
1 × 500 t per d feedstock
Germany
Operational


Industrial
Renewable Oil Intl
Augur or screw reactor
4 × 200 t per d feedstock
USA
Operational


Industrial
Anhui Yineng Bioenergy Ltd.
Moving bed and fixed bed reactor
3 × 600 t per d feedstock
China
Operational


F-T liquids
Pilot
GTI Gas Technology Institute
Forest residues
21 t per d feedstock
Des Plaines, United States
Operational


Pilot
TUBITAK
Combination of hazelnut shell, olive cake, wood chips, and lignite blends
6 t per d feedstock
Gebze, Turkey
Under construction


Pilot
Vienna University of Technology; BIOENERGY 2020+; repotec; biomassekraftwerk Güssing
Gasification followed by FT
7 Nm3 h−1 syngas
Güssing, Austria
Operational










0.2 t per y F-T liquids






F-T liquids; gasoline-type fuel
Pilot
GTI Gas Technology Institute
Wood, corn stover, bagasse, algae
0.05 t per d feedstock
Des Plaines, United States
Operational


F-T liquids; mixed alcohols
Pilot
Research Triangle Institute
Gasification with further upgrading
0.5 t per d feedstock
Research Triangle ParK, United States
Under construction


Pilot
Southern Research Institute
Feedstock is cellulosics, municipal wastes
2–4 t per d feedstock
Durham, United States
Operational


Renewable F-T diesel and F-T jet fuel
Pilot
Clearfuels-Rentech
FT process converting green waste, municipal and solid wastes, wood waste, and bagasse to synthetic jet fuels
20 t per d feedstock
Commerce City, CO, USA
Under construction


Ethanol
Pilot
Chemrec & Weyerhaeuser
Processing wood using thermochemical technologies
330 t BLS per day
New Bern, NC
Finished


Demonstration
Coskata
Gasification and fermentation; natural gas, wood chips, and simulated waste materials
NA
Madison, PA
Operational


Commercial
Indian River BioEnergy Center, Vero Beach, FL. Owned by the Swiss firm Ineos Bio INEOS
Gasification and anaerobic fermentation; lignocellulosic biomass
60 million tonnes of petrochemicals
USA
Operational


Pilot
Gulf Coast Energy
Thermochemical conversion; urban waste, including sorted MSW and C&D debris


Livingston, AL
Operational


Pilot
Pearson Technologies Inc.
Thermochemical conversion; agricultural residues, wood
30 t per d feedstock
Aberdeen, MS
Operational


Diesel-type hydrocarbons
Demonstration
Cello Energy
Catalytic depolymerization; agricultural residues, wood
20 MGY
Bay Minette, AL
Not operational


Demonstration
ThermoChem Recovery International (TRI)
Thermochemical conversion; agricultural residues, wood, energy crops, and urban waste, including sorted MSW and C&D debris
0.02 MGY
Durham, NC
Operational


Demonstration
Virent
Steam reforming gasification; pine residues, sugarcane bagasse, and corn stover
30 t per y diesel
Madison, Wisconsin, United States
Operational


Pilot
CHOREN Tech. GmbHSold to Linde Engineering Dresden
Gasification followed by FT
100 l per day diesel
Freiberg, Germany
Developing


Demonstration
CHOREN Tech. GmbH
Gasification, BTL
2739 t per d feedstock
Schwedt, Germany
Developing


Pilot
Neste and Stora Enso
Gasification and the FT process; wood
—
Varkaus, Finland
Cancelled


Jet fuel
Commercial
Solena Fuels
Unique combination of high temperature plasma gasification, and FT tech
1575 t per d feedstock
Thurrock, Essex
Under construction






British Airways










Syngas
Commercial
Premier Green Energy
Lignocellulosic biomass
72 t per d feedstock
Thurles, Ireland
Planning


Syngas
Commercial
Rentech-SilvaGas
Gasification
—
Burlington, VT
Finished


Syngas/SNG
Pilot
ECN


5 t per d feedstock
Petten, Netherlands
Operational


SNG
Demonstration
ECN – Consortium Groen Gas 2.0
Convert waste wood, prunings, or mown grass into electricity and heat
6500 t per y SNG
Alkmaar, Netherlands
Planning








11.6 MWthermal output gasifier






Demonstration
Goteborg Energi AB
Forest residues, wood pellets, branches, and tree tops
11200 t per y SNG
Göteborg, Sweden
Operational






District heating








Demonstration
Biomassekraftwerk Güssing
Two inter-connected fluidized bed systems of a fluidized bed steam gasifier (reactor)
576 t per y, 100 Nm3 y−1 SNG
Güssing, Austria
Operational






Vienna University of Technology, Paul Scherrer Institute, Repotec










Syngas, methanol, acetates, and second-generation ethanol
Pilot
Enerkem
Thermochemical from wood urban waste, including sorted MSW and C&D debris
4.8 t per d feedstock
Sherbrooke, Canada
Operational


Ethanol; methanol; various chemicals
Commercial Demonstration
Enerkem
Treated wood (i.e. decommissioned electricity poles and railway ties), wood waste, and MSW
48 t per d feedstock
Westbury, Canada
Operational


Commercial
Enerkem – Varennes Cellulosic Ethanol L.P.
Sorted industrial, commercial, and institutional waste
350 t per d feedstock
Varennes, Canada
Planning


Commercial
Enerkem Alberta Bio-fuels LP
Sorted municipal solid waste (SMSW)
350 t per d feedstock
Edmonton, Canada
Operational


Commercial
Enerkem Mississippi Bio-fuels LLC
Sorted municipal solid waste (SMSW) and wood residues
350 t per d feedstock
Pontotoc, United States
Developing


Chemical products – resins, lignosulfonates, and ethanol
Demonstration
Tembec Chemical Group
Spent sulfite liquor
13000 t per y chemicals
Témiscaming, Canada
Operational


DME
Pilot
Chemrec AB
Gasification; black liquor
20 t per d feedstock
Pitea, Sweden
Operational


DME; gasoline-type fuel
Pilot
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) Bioliq
Lignocellulosic biomass
12 t per d feedstock
Karlsruhe, Germany
Operational


Various chemicals
Pilot
NREL (National Renewable Energy Laboratory)
Dry biomass
0.5–1 t per d feedstock
Golden, Colorado, United States
Operational in 1985; expansion ongoing


Bio-oil, steam, electricity and organic acids
Demonstration
EMPYRO
Using fast pyrolysis technology to convert woody biomass
25 MWthermal polygeneration
Hengelo, The Netherlands
Operational






BTG Biomass Technology Group B.V.










Bio-oil, electricity, heat, resins
Commercial
Ensyn Technologies Inc.
Converting sawmill into energy by fast pyrolysis
400 t per d feedstock
Alberta, Canada
Under construction






Tolko Industries Ltd.










Low-carbon renewable fuel
Commercial
Sierra Bio-fuels Plant
Gasification; urban waste, including sorted MSW and C&D debris, to produce electricity
246 t per d feedstock
McCarran, Nevada
Expected to start operation in 2017





5.2.1 Liquid fuel commercialization. 
Technologies for the commercial production of transportation liquid fuels from first-generation biomass feedstocks are available in some countries. For example, bioethanol produced from corn grain in the US meets 10% of the gasoline demand in the country.215 Similar cases are found in the use of bioethanol from sugarcane in Brazil, as well as the use of biodiesel from rapeseed and bioethanol from wheat and barley in Europe.9 Unfortunately, technologies for second-generation bio-fuels for transportation are still under commercialization. The most promising technology chains include: (i) fast pyrolysis followed by bio-oil upgrading, (ii) gasification with F-T synthesis, and (iii) gasification, methanol synthesis, and additional alcohol upgrading.
CFP, as a technology for producing transportation fuel from biomass via a one-step reactor, has been investigated extensively by Professor George Huber's laboratory at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst and has been further developed by Anellotech, during which the process of producing cost-competitive aromatics from lignocellulosic biomass was patented. However, no commercial plant has yet been established.
The production of ethanol from lignocellulosic biomass has still not been completely commercialized because of its high production cost and complicated feedstock supply system. Reported cellulosic ethanol production from global pilot plants was 20000 gal in 2012, with production increasing to 218000 gal in 2013.216 The MTG process is used commercially, with gasoline selectivity of over 85%; the remainder comprises light petroleum gas.112 A commercial plant producing gasoline from methanol (MTG) was operated in New Zealand by Mobil from 1981 to 1984, producing 14500 bbl per day.20 Commercial processes for the production of mixed higher alcohols have been developed by Snamprogetti-Topsoe, Lurgi, Dow, and IFP-Idemitsu.20 Considering the isosynthesis process, research has recently focused more on catalytic performance, which is the key process element. Oxosynthesis is one commercial technology for the application of syngas,78 and the aldehydes (butanol, propanol, isobutanol, and ethylhexanol20) generated in this process can be further used to produce detergents or polyvinyl chloride.74
The conversion of biomass to jet fuel is a promising process which is of interest to several companies. Airlines are providing support by signing contracts for the use of jet fuel produced from biomass, including British Airways, Airbus, Hainan Airlines, General Electric Aviation, and the Air Force Certification Office, a fuel certifying agency that has legalized the use of F-T fuel blends in aviation fuel.76 The ASTM international standard, D7566, has approved specifications for aviation fuels, with F-T fuels approved in 2009 and HRJs in 2011.76


5.2.2 Gaseous fuel commercialization. 
Gasification feedstocks can be any carbon-rich materials, including coal, petroleum, natural gas, or biomass. Gasification is a mature technology based on the resources of coal, petroleum, and natural gas, with these comprising around 51%, 25%, and 22%, respectively, of the total capacity of 144 commercial gasification plants in 2010. However, biomass-based gasification accounted for only 0.5% of this capacity in 2010.7 Of the total produced syngas, 45% was used to produce chemicals, 38% was used for transportation fuels, 11% for electricity, and 6% for gaseous fuel.7 From Table 6, it can be noted that second-generation liquid bio-fuels produced from biomass gasification followed by F-T synthesis are still at various stages of development.


5.2.3 Solid fuel commercialization. 
Carbonization for the production of char is currently practiced in traditional stoves in developing countries, in barbecues in Western countries, and in the Brazilian steel industry.5 Torrefaction has not yet been commercially applied, with research and development focusing on addressing challenges related to handling, logistics, safety, and optimization of process design for high energetic and economic efficiency. Furthermore, combinations of biomass densification processes, such as pelletization with torrefaction, also provide a possible direction for technological development, with the added benefits of reduced dust formation.24


5.2.4 Commercialization of chemicals. 
The conversion of bio-oil into chemicals is a promising commercial possibility for products such as fertilizers, liquid smoke, and resins,134 which have higher values than bio-fuels. Some biochemical production processes have already been commercialized (such as for liquid smoke) or are highly likely to be commercialized through fast pyrolysis technology.134 Commercial production of chemicals from bio-oil must consider low-cost chemical separation processes and market requirements.134
Honeywell UOP currently uses a commercial process to produce olefins from methanol (originally from natural gas/coal/petroleum residues) using silicoaluminophosphate (SAPO) catalysts. New opportunities for producing olefins from methanol may be provided by using other catalysts, such as eight-membered ring zeolites, chabazite, ITQ-3151 ITQ-29152, and ITQ-32.20

6. Environmental analysis
The renewability and sustainability of biofuel has been deemed questionable as a result of its ecological impacts, such as cleanliness, measured by CO2 and other pollutant emissions, impacts on water resources, land use, and biodiversity, and its socioeconomic impacts on food security, income, and employment.217,218 Rather than simply considering biofuel as a renewable and carbon-neutral resource, owing to the inherent photosynthesis that will absorb CO2, the renewability of biofuel is also dependent on the non-renewable energy used during the production of the biofuel itself.219 Based on the Fossil Energy Ratio (FER) or Net Energy Ratio (NER), which define the amount of energy that can be produced from the consumption of one unit of energy, individual fuels can be classified as entirely renewable, partially renewable, or non-renewable. The extra fossil energy needed to generate the biofuel will release CO2, although the regrowth of the plant will absorb CO2. However, in some cases, this absorption cannot be taken into consideration, depending on the origin of the raw material; for example, the absorbed CO2 can be taken into consideration if the feedstock is grown on wastelands or deserts, but it cannot be considered when it is grown on deforested land.220
“Corn to ethanol” is one commonly debated pathway for first-generation biofuels, where the claimed renewability is offset by the fossil fuel requirements and the GHG emissions of the process.221 Second-generation biofuels will potentially generate fewer GHG emissions and have better environmental performance.222 These biofuels tend to compete less with food and fibre production; they also have higher energy yields per unit of land area. In addition, second-generation biofuels have greater land adaptability, although adequate water and nutrient supplies are needed.223
Land conservation under biofuel production falls into two categories: direct land use change (dLUC), due to the direct transformation of previously untouched areas into biofuel crops, and indirect land use change (iLUC), which refers to the additional change in land use in other places to maintain the same production of food and feed crops as demanded in the market. Traditional life cycle assessment (LCA) cannot normally consider the GHG emissions of iLUC, due to their variability and complexity, in addition to the fact that it usually occurs across country borders.218 Thus, in order to consider the influence of iLUC, the European Commission (EC) has proposed the addition of a specific iLUC factor for different biofuel sources. However, subsequent investigations have indicated that it is oversimplified to consider the effect of iLUC using a single factor, due to the difficulty in calculating the impacts from theoretical models based on hypotheses, assumption, and market predictions, which is necessary due to the significant uncertainty in iLUC.218
The iLUC issue is that using agricultural areas and dedicating land for biofuel production is closely related to rates of deforestation, irrigation water use, and crop price. As a result, second-generation biofuels typically perform much better, except when the crops are directly competing for agricultural land, in which case their performance is worse than that of first-generation biofuels.224
The effects of biofuel production on water use, soil quality, and biodiversity are not typically considered in the traditional LCA approach. The impacts on water use mainly focus on water consumption, and the effects of water pollution mainly focus on ecosystems and human health.225 Impacts on soil quality are related to land use and land transformation225 and depend on the different biofuel systems. An obvious example is that biofuel production may significantly alter forest ecosystems, but will have limited impact on microalgal cultural systems, except for the salinization of soil and groundwater.225 For biodiversity, biofuel production is becoming a key environmental concern, as biodiversity is strongly linked to the impacts of land use and land use change, as well as water use.225
The conventional measurement of greenhouse gas emissions is the amount of carbon dioxide equivalent emitted per unit of energy provided by a particular pathway (i.e. gCO2e per MJ).226 The GHG emissions of some typical biofuels from different pathways are shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  GHG emissions of several typical bio-fuels from different pathways in gCO2e per MJ. The dash-filled part represents mineral annualized GHG emissions, and the maximum value of the solid part represents the maximal annualized GHG emissions. 
Considering the GHG emissions of biofuels, there is not yet any fixed conclusion as to the cleanness of biofuels, although one study calculated that compared with fossil fuels, first-generation biofuels will reduce approximately 78% of GHG emissions, while second-generation biofuels will reduce 94% of GHG emissions.218 Comparing forest-based renewable diesel and microalgae-based diesel, it has been shown that the GHG emissions of microalgae are higher than those of forest residue-based diesel, due to the relative immaturity and uncertainty of microalgae-processing technology; however, in contrast, microalgae systems have lower impacts on land use and biodiversity.225
The renewability of biofuel depends on the feedstock. For example, the biofuel produced from corn grain, corn stover, and switchgrass can be defined as an advanced biofuel; however, that produced from corn starch cannot be considered an advanced biofuel.226 In the generation of second-generation liquid biofuels from sugarcane bagasse, it was concluded that the thermal conversion process with gasification followed by Fischer-Tropsch synthesis has higher environmental benefit than the two biochemical conversion pathways. The main reason for this is the relatively high energy efficiency (51.7 ± 0.8% vs. 43 ± 1.1%) due to heat integration during the thermochemical process, in addition to the fact that the large amounts of processing chemicals utilized in the biochemical processes also have a negative impact on the environment.227 It has also been reported that FT-diesel from forest residues can reach the 60% emission reduction target set by the EU.225
Another measurement of GHG emissions was proposed by Kauffman et al.226 based on the unit of land rather than the energy provided by the pathway. One benefit of utilizing a land-based measurement is that it can consider various different feedstocks; this is practical, as multiple types of feedstock are normally utilized together during biofuel production, due to land scarcity. For example, the ethanol produced from corn is not considered to be an advanced fuel in energy-based LCA evaluation; however, under land-based LCA evaluation, by combining the bio-fuel produced from corn with the associated conversion of corn stover to drop-in fuel via fast pyrolysis, and the use of the by-product bio-char as soil fertilizer, the GHG emissions can realize a 52.1% reduction when compared with 2005 gasoline-based emissions; therefore, ethanol produced from corn can be considered to be an advanced fuel.226
7. Challenges and future trends
Complete commercialization of the production of directly usable second-generation bio-fuels and related products can be envisaged in the near future. Fig. 14 summarizes the relationships between key challenges and future directions, which are further discussed in this section.
 Fig. 14  Main challenges and future trends. 
7.1 Main challenges

7.1.1 Diversity and low quality of feedstock. 
The imminent utilization of lignocellulosic feedstocks faces numerous challenges, including diverse distribution and complex multi-scale structures. Some primary conversion steps are needed to purify the feedstock and give high product yields by mitigating the intrinsic difficulties of the lignocellulosic biomass, such as those related to harvesting, handling, and transportation.
Harvesting and collecting pose problems for biomass utilization because the feedstock is concentrated, as with fossil fuels. The low harvesting density also creates transportation problems, and the storage of biomass is likewise problematic. A large biomass harvesting area, especially of agricultural land, must be available to guarantee local supply, except in the case of extensive imports. Moreover, unlike fossil fuels, biomass also suffers from discontinuous production, influenced by harvesting season, climate, and region.6 The diversity of biomass feedstocks also makes a continuous supply difficult.6
Low energy density is another barrier, mainly as a result of the high moisture and oxygen contents of biomass. Even if pre-treatment improves biomass properties through energy densification, a number of existing technical and economic challenges remain unresolved. For example, depolymerization of lignin into aromatic alcohols and further end products remains problematic.6 In addition, bio-fuel is not compatible with conventional fuels, mainly due to its sulfur and aromatic content, auto ignition temperature, thermal stability, and, in the case of bio-jet fuel, its storage stability.
The complex structure and diversity in size of biomass, with a length scale from 0.1 to 10 m, also limits the production of bio-fuels and bio-chemicals from biomass.9 The precise characteristics of the biomass structure help to determine its conversion process;228 however, the detailed conversion mechanisms are still unclear due to the complexity of feedstock structures. A description of the fundamental mechanisms of biomass-to-biofuel/biochemical processes would be a powerful tool in optimizing these processes and providing theoretical understanding.229–233 Although approximate descriptions of several key steps of the main thermochemical processes (such as pyrolysis and gasification) exist, there are still insufficient satisfactorily-detailed explanations of their conversion pathways and kinetics.6 Accurate structural descriptions of biomass feedstocks and of interactions between constituents, either based on molecular/atomic modeling or on experiments, are needed and would eventually contribute to developing high-efficiency and low-cost conversions of biomass into useful bioenergy. Other problems include the tenacious and fibrous structure of biomass and its heterogeneous composition, which further complicate the conversion process.


7.1.2 Complexity and instability of bio-oil. 
Bio-oil has considerable potential to replace current petroleum fuels, due to its low cost of production. However, bio-oil is typically low quality and complex, and there are still no standards for its usage and distribution. The main challenges lie in finding effective ways to scale up production, reduce production costs, and improve the quality of bio-oil. In general, the challenge for fast pyrolysis of biomass into bio-oil is still the commercial upgrading of crude bio-oil into marketable products, especially through the development of hydrogen-lean or hydrogen-free technologies.234 At the same time, since bio-oil compositions vary with feedstock type, inorganic content, and operating conditions, optimal process design could make it possible to obtain high-quality bio-oil. Theoretically accurate characterization of the process, using fundamental models, would be needed for this approach.234
Bio-oil produced using hydrothermal liquefaction is still under development. High pressures pose challenges for scaling up, and feedstock impurities are of critical concern, especially when utilizing low quality feedstock, which often leads to fouling and plugging problems, coke formation, and catalyst deactivation. Another operating barrier is the feeding of feedstock into a high pressure reactor: in addition to the technical difficulties of scaling up, hydrothermal high pressures involve high capital costs because of the specific reactor and separator requirements. Additionally, more than 15 to 20 wt% solid loading is required to render commercial production profitable. Otherwise, with low concentrations of solid loading, high capital costs will create economic barriers.19
None of the existing bio-oil upgrading technologies are yet sufficiently mature for commercialization. HDO, catalytic cracking, and steam reforming are complex processes that require high-performance reactors, and each process possesses its own difficulties. Bio-oil HDO is limited by the high cost of high-pressure hydrogen, as hydrogen for treating biomass is even more expensive than for hydro-treating conventional petroleum because of the higher oxygen content in biomass feedstock.6 The availability of active surface hydrogen is crucial for the HDO process, especially for the deoxygenation and decarboxylation steps. HDO can be promoted if hydrogen is largely produced from renewable sources, such as solar, wind, or biomass.235 For example, there have been promising attempts to combine APR and HDO. APR produces hydrogen for the HDO process from biomass-derived oxygenated compounds (e.g. glycerol) in aqueous solution, at low temperatures, and in the presence of platinum as a catalyst.6 In addition to the costs of pressured hydrogen, the complex HDO equipment also incurs extra costs; also, catalyst deactivation and reactor clogging remain significant challenges.59 The use of high pressures (around 170 atm) and longer contact times can help to avoid such problems; however, this further increases the cost.137 The HDO process suffers from other limitations, including the large amount of water produced during the HDO process, which is an undesirable component of bio-oil.59
Upgrading via catalytic cracking avoids the high cost of using pressurized H2 in HDO, providing both economic and safety advantages. The challenge of catalytic cracking of bio-oil is catalyst deactivation, which is mainly due to the large amount of coke formed (8 to 25%) during the process,13,59 although the catalyst deactivation could also be partially due to volatile components blocking the active catalyst sites.236 Coke formation poisons the catalyst because of its small pore size. When large oxygenated compounds are produced, these cannot enter the catalyst pores; therefore, coke will be formed on the catalyst surface, leading to catalyst deactivation and a decrease in hydrocarbon yield. It has been reported that acetic acid is the main compound leading to coking. Sugars are not the main cause, because they are thermally decomposed before reaching the catalyst surface.237 The problem of catalyst deactivation due to coking is even more severe during bio-oil steam reforming than for petroleum oil, due to the high reactivity of bio-oil.


7.1.3 Syngas impurity. 
The main challenge for biomass gasification into bio-fuels and bio-chemicals is the cleaning and processing of raw syngas, for both technical and economic reasons. Process design, including sorbent, filters, and heat exchangers, will play a crucial role in the future commercialization of bio-fuels and bio-chemicals via gasification.10 For example, a lab-scale experiment in Karlsruhe in Germany238 combined a sorption stage at the head of the filter and a tar reforming stage at the end of the filter. However, these concepts have not yet been commercially applied.
Biomass gasification followed by the F-T process is still limited by high capital costs9 and by the large amount of contaminants of crude syngas. Catalyst poisoning is also a major challenge limiting commercialization. These difficulties could potentially be overcome economically through the development of reliable technologies or the discovery of new catalysts.84
The utilization of side products from biomass gasification, which would improve process efficiency, remains another challenge,74 as it currently requires low-cost separation technologies.
For an integrated biomass gasification cycle, biomass production and processing (crushing, drying) comprise a large share of the total energy consumption (around 50% and 43%, respectively).9 Biomass transportation consumes 4 to 16% of the total energy. To reduce this cost, one option is to transport the produced bio-oil instead of the low bulk density biomass feedstock. To do this, bio-oil should be produced near the crops and subsequently transported to a central plant. The drawback of this option is that it is only cost effective for a large generation plant (more than 20 PJ per year), with a maximum 30% reduction.9


7.1.4 Challenges facing environmental evaluation. 
Challenges facing the environmental evaluation of biofuel systems involve addressing the issue of iLUC, mainly through data collection and indicator definition. Currently, although iLUC is considered in some analysis systems, the lack of a uniform and widely-used model, as well as insufficient transparency between different analysis approaches, limits its utility.225 Moreover, the lack of a commonly accepted methodology capable of comprehensively estimating the chosen environmental impacts becomes another problem when considering the environmental impact of the biofuel production process.225
Furthermore, when evaluating the environmental impact of biofuel systems, most cases are site-dependent, which creates more difficulties for data collection and uniform modelling of data sets for holistic evaluation.225
From the perspective of policy, the impacts of iLUC should be considered in national reporting on GHG emissions, such as in the Renewable Energy Directive (RED) of the European Commission.225
The uncertainty of GHG emission calculations using the existing methodology is a further challenge. This creates problems because the evaluation results cannot be used directly for political and economic decision-making. Uncertainty assessment can help to address this issue to some extent; however, it may also compound the problem by widening the range of uncertainties.225

7.2 Future trends

7.2.1 Process integration. 
The integration and optimization of multi-state processes is a feasible way of improving economic viability and overall process efficiency. Examples include further conversion of waxy materials into useful fuels via the F-T process,9 tar separation from produced fuel, combined hydrogen production and biomass gasification, steam reforming, the water–gas shift reaction, and H2 separation and CO2 capture. The use of various sources of waste materials is helpful for sustainable production and distribution of feedstock. Moreover, the energy efficiency and economic benefits can be improved by combining targeted products with marketable by-products. These byproducts can be heat, electricity, fuels, and chemicals, depending on the process optimization, with the aim of maximizing value.84
Bio-refineries remain at the early stages of development, due to high capital costs. Co-processing of renewable lignocellulosic biomass using the infrastructure of existing petroleum refineries provides a potential solution for capital investment savings,235 with the additional benefits of wider product choices, such as LPG, kerosene, or fuel oil, rather than just gasoline and diesel.6 The upgrading of bio-oil for direct utilization in conventional equipment will also help to improve the process. However, the high water6 and oxygen contents of crude bio-oil limit its application. Pre-processing of bio-oil using HDO or hydrogenation is therefore normally required to maintain a longer catalyst lifetime and to ensure high quality of the final products.6
The concept of using small-scale bio-refineries to overcome the high transportation cost of biomass feedstocks has been proposed. However, this does not feasibly address the problem of smaller capacities, as an increasing number of bio-refineries will be needed for equable production. Satellite storage locations have also been proposed, representing temporary storage facilities for renewable biomass feedstock before transportation to bio-refineries. A combination of both small refineries and satellite storage locations has also been proposed to minimize the transportation costs of lignocellulosic biomass.6
However, process integration is not easy and requires further research and development. Macroscopic integrated simulations of the bio-fuel production process may provide a way to describe biomass utilization, which could serve as a bridge between theoretical modeling and the industrial world.


7.2.2 Catalyst regeneration. 
Proper catalyst design can significantly assist in improving the desired products. This mainly depends on the catalyst properties, such as their chemisorption rates and levels of acidity. The use of catalyst promoters is a good option: for example, K2CO3 (potassium carbonate) can be used as a catalyst promoter to significantly improve the alcohol yield from syngas when molybdenum disulfide is used as the catalyst.239 Similarly, the performance of Mo/HzSM-5 can be improved by using catalyst promoters such as Ag, Al, Cu, Co, Fe, Ga, Pt, Ru, W, Zn, and Zr.74
Novel heterogeneous catalysts for the production of second-generation bio-fuels, which differ from the conventional catalysts used in the petroleum industry, must still be developed.6 Novel catalyst design should also consider the interaction between different biomass constituents and the influence of the mineral contents of biomass.12 Some studies have proposed novel catalysts, including a mixture of mesoporous, macroporous (Gamma-Al2O3, CaO, and MCM-41), and microporous (LOSA-1) catalysts,9 to avoid catalyst deactivation. Using these catalysts, large oxygenated compounds can be cracked into small compounds, such as olefins and aromatics. Acetic acid can be steam reformed using noble metal catalysts, such as Pt, Rh, and Pd supported on Al2O3 and CeO2–ZrO2.20
Several potential solutions can be explored to address the issue of catalyst deactivation resulting from coke formation. One option is to use a specific thermal pre-step to crack coke.240 Similarly, a two-reactor system was specially developed by Srinivas241 to minimize coke formation and extend the lifetime of the catalyst. In this system, a thermal reactor was used first, followed by a catalytic reactor. During the thermal reaction, the bio-oil is separated into light and heavy organics. The heavy bio-oil feed is thermally cracked to avoid catalyst deactivation in the second catalytic upgrading reactor. Co-feeding of methanol (around 70 wt%) allows the catalyst activity to be maintained.242 Co-feeding of other model bio-oil compounds (acetic acid, hydroxyacetone, and phenol) can also reduce coke formation and increase bio-oil conversion, giving higher production yields. However, feeding of these bio-oil compounds influences the reactivity of the catalyst.6 Therefore, coke formation can also be avoided using aqueous-phase reactants. However, these require high operating temperatures. Instead of using water-containing reactants, ionic liquids have also been proposed as reaction media. The use of ionic liquid is a better option than water, as it leads to a higher conversion of feedstock, especially of lignin-derived phenols. In the case of lignin-derived bio-oil production, Mo2C/CNF is a better catalyst choice than CoMo/Al2O3 for the production of oxygen-free products, such as benzene and toluene.
To solve the problem of catalyst deactivation during the steam reforming process, it has been demonstrated that fluidized bed reactors are preferable to fixed bed reactors, due to the catalyst stability associated with better steam-catalyst contact.20 Fixed bed reactors are not suitable for generating hydrogen through bio-oil steam reforming, especially for lignin-derived compounds, due to coke formation and subsequent catalyst deactivation.59 Catalyst regeneration during the steam reforming process in a fixed bed requires 3 to 4 hours.20 However, in a fluidized bed reactor, catalyst attrition is an additional problem that must be considered. A high ratio of steam to carbon may be a good way to avoid catalyst deactivation from coking; this ratio should normally be greater than 7.
One possible means of decreasing catalyst deactivation is to recycle a portion of the hydrogen generated from the steam reforming process to hydrogenate the bio-oil and improve its stability.20 The catalyst can then be regenerated by steam or CO2 gasification. Commercial nickel catalysts can be readily regenerated within 20 min to 2 hours by steam or CO2 gasification after deactivation during reforming.59 Coke can also be oxidized through continuous catalyst regeneration after the catalytic cracking process. Despite this, some technical issues still persist, such as poor control of the system and high processing costs.25
Moreover, it has been shown that a combination of HDO and catalytic cracking to treat crude bio-oil, generating a stream, would not poison the catalyst downstream. Additionally, further upgrading can be carried out in the FCC, leading to better performance and higher quality of the final hydrocarbon fuels.


7.2.3 Policy support. 
Bio-fuel production can also be encouraged through governmental policy support in the short term (2020 to 2030). To meet the 10% mandatory bio-fuel target by 2020 without interfering with other goals, it was determined that 3% should be obtained from second-generation bio-fuels. To achieve this target, the CO2 cost needs to be set at €60 per t CO2.9 However, the carbon price remained stable at €10 per t CO2 in 2012.
In addition, modern carriers for transporting lignocellulosic biomass from high production areas (Scandinavian countries) to high fuel demand areas (Holland, Belgium, and North Germany) will be very helpful for the use of second-generation bio-fuels.9 Market orientation of bio-fuels may also be another direction in which to promote the development of second-generation bio-fuels.


7.2.4 Future trends of environmental evaluation. 
The identification of common sustainability criteria is one way to address the lack of common models, allowing the assessment of different scenarios and the reduction of uncertainties.243
Process design and plant capacity design will be helpful for the overall optimization of both the economic cost and environmental benefits of biofuels. For example, various negative environmental impacts of biofuel production can be reduced by adjusting the design of system components, such as through the use of recycled materials.219,222

8. Concluding remarks
Producing second-generation bio-fuels using lignocellulosic biomass can represent a solution for biomass utilization in the short term.
Technical efforts toward this end should be invested in each conversion pathway to enable their universal application. Promising pathways for industrialization include fast pyrolysis for bio-oil and gasification for syngas, with downstream upgrading of the raw products. Technical barriers to the conversion of lignocellulosic biomass into fuels via pyrolysis include bio-oil upgrading, while barriers to gasification include syngas purification.
In the case of bio-fuels and bio-chemicals produced from bio-oil, a short-term goal may be to minimize the consumption of hydrogen, which is reliant on the development of active and efficient catalysts that enable deoxygenation with minor or no hydrogen requirements. With the same aim, hydrogen generation processes can be combined with bio-oil generation to upgrade bio-oil, providing a single promising pathway with both environmental and economic benefits.
The essentials of thermochemical conversion of lignocellulosic biomass involve trade-offs between technical, economical, and environmental aspects. One trade-off exists between high biofuel quality and low economic cost; another exists between low production cost and increased environmental benefits, although the environmental benefits of bio-fuels are still under debate.
The main focus of the short-term development of the technologies of second-generation bio-fuels is still the lowering of the production cost. To decrease the cost gap between biomass-derived and fossil-fuel derived products, future development should be focused in two main directions: namely, improving feedstock processing technologies to assure sustainable and continuous provision of biomass feedstock, and co-processing biomass-derived fuels within conventional petroleum facilities. Furthermore, process integration, proper catalyst design, and policy support would significantly facilitate full commercialization of second-generation bio-fuels and allied products in the near future.
Notes and references

          IEA, Key world energy statistics,  2014 Search PubMed .

          IEA, Resources to reserves 2013, oil, gas and coal technologies for the energy markets of the future,  2013 Search PubMed .

          EIA, International Energy Outlook,  2013 Search PubMed .

          IEA, World Energy Outlook,  2014 Search PubMed .

          IPCC, Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation,  2012 Search PubMed .
J. A. Melero, J. Iglesias and A. Garcia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7393–7420 CAS .
M. Guo, W. Song and J. Buhain, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 42, 712–725 CrossRef CAS .
E. Agbor, X. Zhang and A. Kumar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 40, 930–943 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sanna, BioEnergy Res., 2014, 7, 36–47 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Crocker, Thermochemical Conversion of Biomass to Liquid Fuels and Chemicals, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2010, pp. P001–P532 Search PubMed .
M. J. C. Van Der Stelt, H. Gerhauser, J. H. A. Kiel and K. J. Ptasinski, Biomass Bioenergy, 2011, 35, 3748–3762 CAS .
F. Collard and J. Blin, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 38, 594–608 CrossRef CAS .
N. Taufiqurrahmi and S. Bhatia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1087–1112 CAS .
O. Onay and O. Mete Koçkar, Biomass Bioenergy, 2004, 26, 289–299 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Bridgwater and G. V. C. Peacocke, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2000, 4, 1–73 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Bridgwater, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1999, 51, 3–22 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Horne and P. T. Williams, Fuel, 1996, 75, 1051–1059 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Goyal, D. Seal and R. C. Saxena, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 504–517 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Peterson, F. Vogel, R. P. Lachance, M. Froling, J. Antal Michael and J. W. Tester, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 32–65 CAS .
G. W. Huber, S. Iborra and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4044–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Damartzis and A. Zabaniotou, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 366–378 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mohan, U. Pittman Charles and P. H. Steele, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 848–889 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vamvuka, Int. J. Energy Res., 2011, 35, 835–862 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Bergman, A. Boersma, R. Zwart and J. Kiel, Torrefaction for biomass co-firing in existing coal-fired power stations “biocoal”, July,  2005 Search PubMed .
A. V. Bridgwater, Biomass Bioenergy, 2012, 38, 68–94 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Pütün, A. Özcan, H. F. Gerçel and E. Pütün, Fuel, 2001, 80, 1371–1378 CrossRef .
D. A. Laird, R. C. Brown, J. E. Amonette and J. Lehmann, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2009, 3, 547–562 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Lappas, S. Bezergianni and I. A. Vasalos, Catal. Today, 2009, 145, 55–62 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Prins, K. J. Ptasinski and F. J. J. G. Janssen, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2006, 77, 35–40 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Antal and M. Grønli, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 1619–1640 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Scott, J. Piskorz and D. Radlein, Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Dev., 1985, 24, 581–588 CAS .
O. Onay and O. M. Kockar, Renewable Energy, 2003, 28, 2417–2433 CrossRef CAS .
E. Taarning, C. M. Osmundsen, X. Yang, B. Voss, S. I. Andersen and C. H. Christensen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 793–804 CAS .
P. McKendry, Bioresour. Technol., 2002, 83, 55–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, R. Liu, R. Yin and Y. Mei, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 24, 66–72 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Ruddy, J. A. Schaidle, J. R. Ferrell Iii, J. Wang, L. Moens and J. E. Hensley, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 454–490 RSC .
A. V. Bridgwater, Appl. Catal., A, 1994, 116, 5–47 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Mortensen, J. Grunwaldt, P. A. Jensen, K. G. Knudsen and A. D. Jensen, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 407, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Weisz, W. O. Haag and P. G. Rodewald, Science, 1979, 206, 57–58 CAS .
T. R. Carlson, Y. Cheng, J. Jae and G. W. Huber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 145–161 CAS .
J. D. Adjaye and N. N. Bakhshi, Fuel Process. Technol., 1995, 45, 161–183 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Adjaye and N. N. Bakhshi, Fuel Process. Technol., 1995, 45, 185–202 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Horne, N. Nugranad and P. T. Williams, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1995, 34, 87–108 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Horne and P. T. Williams, Fuel, 1996, 75, 1043–1050 CrossRef CAS .
J. Adam, M. Blazsó, E. Mészáros, M. Stöcker, M. H. Nilsen, A. Bouzga, J. E. Hustad, M. Grønli and G. Øye, Fuel, 2005, 84, 1494–1502 CAS .
A. Aho, N. Kumar, K. Eränen, T. Salmi, M. Hupa and D. Y. Murzin, Fuel, 2008, 87, 2493–2501 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Haniff and L. H. Dao, Appl. Catal., 1988, 39, 33–47 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Park, J. Dong, J. Jeon, K. Yoo, J. Yim, J. M. Sohn and Y. Park, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2007, 13, 182–189 CAS .
M. C. Samolada, A. Papafotica and I. A. Vasalos, Energy Fuels, 2000, 14, 1161–1167 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Lappas, M. C. Samolada, D. K. Iatridis, S. S. Voutetakis and I. A. Vasalos, Fuel, 2002, 81, 2087–2095 CrossRef CAS .
J. Singh, M. M. Kumar, A. K. Saxena and S. Kumar, Chem. Eng. J., 2005, 108, 239–248 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bozzano, M. Dente and F. Carlucci, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2005, 29, 1439–1446 CrossRef CAS .
A. Del Bianco, G. Garuti, C. Pirovano and R. Russo, Fuel, 1995, 74, 756–760 CrossRef CAS .
K. U. Ogbuneke, C. E. Snape, J. M. Andrésen, S. Crozier, C. Russell and R. Sharpe, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 2157–2163 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Speight, Catal. Today, 2004, 98, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Sánchez, A. Gonzalo, G. Gea, R. Bilbao and J. Arauzo, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19, 2140–2147 CrossRef .
S. Czernik, R. French, C. Feik and E. Chornet, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2002, 41, 4209–4215 CrossRef CAS .
L. Garcia, R. French, S. Czernik and E. Chornet, Appl. Catal., A, 2000, 201, 225–239 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Chang, T. Wang and Y. Xu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2007, 48, 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ikura, M. Stanciulescu and E. Hogan, Biomass Bioenergy, 2003, 24, 221–232 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dabros, A. Yeung, J. Masliyah and J. Czarnecki, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1999, 210, 222–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chiaramonti, M. Bonini, E. Fratini, G. Tondi, K. Gartner, A. V. Bridgwater, H. P. Grimm, I. Soldaini, A. Webster and P. Baglioni, Biomass Bioenergy, 2003, 25, 85–99 CrossRef CAS .

          T. A. Milne, N. Abatzoglou and R. J. Evans, Biomass Gasifier “tars”: Their Nature, Formation, and Conversion,  1998 Search PubMed .
S. D. Sharma, M. Dolan, D. Park, L. Morpeth, A. Ilyushechkin, K. McLennan, D. J. Harris and K. V. Thambimuthu, Powder Technol., 2008, 180, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, C. L. Weller, D. D. Jones and M. A. Hanna, Biomass Bioenergy, 2008, 32, 573–581 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Kuhn, Z. Zhao, L. G. Felix, R. B. Slimane, C. W. Choi and U. S. Ozkan, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 81, 14–26 CrossRef CAS .
R. Coll, J. Salvadó, X. Farriol and D. Montané, Fuel Process. Technol., 2001, 74, 19–31 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, R. C. Brown, A. Suby and K. Cummer, Energy Convers. Manage., 2004, 45, 995–1014 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yoon, Y. Choi and J. Lee, Energy Convers. Manage., 2010, 51, 42–47 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheah, K. R. Gaston, Y. O. Parent, M. W. Jarvis, T. B. Vinzant, K. M. Smith, N. E. Thornburg, M. R. Nimlos and K. A. Magrini-Bair, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 134–135, 34–45 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Nahil, X. Wang, C. Wu, H. Yang, H. Chen and P. T. Williams, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5583–5590 RSC .
A. Lamacz, A. Krzton, A. Musi and P. D. Costa, Catal. Lett., 2009, 128, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Sharma, M. Dolan, A. Y. Ilyushechkin, K. G. McLennan, T. Nguyen and D. Chase, Fuel, 2010, 89, 817–826 CrossRef CAS .
J. Street and F. Yu, Biofuels, 2011, 2, 677–691 CrossRef CAS .

          I. M. Ciobica, The Molecular Basis of the Fischer Tropsch Reaction,  2002 Search PubMed .
T. Kandaramath Hari, Z. Yaakob and N. N. Binitha, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 42, 1234–1244 CrossRef .
Y. Li, D. He, S. Ge, R. Zhang and Q. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 80, 72–80 CrossRef CAS .

          P. L. Spath and D. C. Dayton, Preliminary Screening—Technical and Economic Assessment of Synthesis Gas to Fuels and Chemicals with Emphasis on the Potential for Biomass-Derived Syngas,  2003 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, D. He, Q. Zhu, X. Zhang and B. Xu, J. Catal., 2004, 221, 584–593 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tanger, J. L. Field, C. E. Jahn, M. W. DeFoort and J. E. Leach, Front. Plant Sci., 2013, 4, 218 Search PubMed .
R. A. A. Suurs and M. P. Hekkert, Energy, 2009, 34, 669–679 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Sheehan, T. Dunahay, J. Benemann and P. Roessler, A Look Back at the U.S. Department of Energy's Aquatic Species Program: Biodiesel from Algae,  1998 Search PubMed .
L. A. Ribeiro and P. P. D. Silva, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 25, 89–96 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. H. Sims, W. Mabee, J. N. Saddler and M. Taylor, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 1570–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Bransby, S. B. McLaughlin and D. J. Parrish, Biomass Bioenergy, 1998, 14, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Hohenstein and L. L. Wright, Biomass Bioenergy, 1994, 6, 161–173 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, C. W. Wood and D. I. Bransby, Biomass Bioenergy, 2000, 18, 93–104 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Keshwani and J. J. Cheng, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 1515–1523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sterner and U. Fritsche, Biomass Bioenergy, 2011, 35, 4797–4814 CrossRef CAS .
D. Neves, H. Thunman, A. Matos, L. Tarelho and A. Gómez-Barea, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2011, 37, 611–630 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Channiwala and P. P. Parikh, Fuel, 2002, 81, 1051–1063 CrossRef CAS .

          ECN, https://www.ecn.nl/phyllis2/Browse/Standard/ECN-Phyllis,  2015.
N. Tröger, D. Richter and R. Stahl, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2013, 100, 158–165 CrossRef .
S. V. Vassilev, D. Baxter, L. K. Andersen and C. G. Vassileva, Fuel, 2010, 89, 913–933 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Bridgwater, A. J. Toft and J. G. Brammer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2002, 6, 181–246 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Cummer and R. C. Brown, Biomass Bioenergy, 2002, 23, 113–128 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brar, K. Singh, J. Wang and S. Kumar, Int. For. Res., 2012, 2012, 10 Search PubMed .

          A. V. Bridgwater, Upgrading Fast Pyrolysis Liquids, in Thermochemical Processing of Biomass, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2011, pp. 157–199 Search PubMed .
D. M. Wilson, D. L. Dalluge, M. Rover, E. A. Heaton and R. C. Brown, BioEnergy Res., 2013, 6, 103–113 CrossRef CAS .
C. Couhert, J. Commandre and S. Salvador, Fuel, 2009, 88, 408–417 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lv, M. Xu, X. Liu, Z. Zhan, Z. Li and H. Yao, Fuel Process. Technol., 2010, 91, 903–909 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fahmi, A. V. Bridgwater, L. I. Darvell, J. M. Jones, N. Yates, S. Thain and I. S. Donnison, Fuel, 2007, 86, 1560–1569 CrossRef CAS .
K. David and A. J. Ragauskas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1182–1190 CAS .
J. Li, A. Brzdekiewicz, W. Yang and W. Blasiak, Appl. Energy, 2012, 99, 344–354 CrossRef CAS .
B. Arias, C. Pevida, J. Fermoso, M. G. Plaza, F. Rubiera and J. J. Pis, Fuel Process. Technol., 2008, 89, 169–175 CrossRef CAS .
M. Phanphanich and S. Mani, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 1246–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, Y. Matsumura, J. Stenberg and M. J. Antal, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1996, 35, 2522–2530 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, K. Murata, M. Inaba, I. Takahara and K. Okabe, Fuel, 2013, 104, 62–69 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Datar, R. M. Shenkman, B. G. Cateni, R. L. Huhnke and R. S. Lewis, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2004, 86, 587–594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Klasson, M. D. Ackerson, E. C. Clausen and J. L. Gaddy, Fuel, 1993, 72, 1673–1678 CrossRef CAS .
H. Younesi, G. Najafpour and A. R. Mohamed, Biochem. Eng. J., 2005, 27, 110–119 CrossRef CAS .
I. Wender, Fuel Process. Technol., 1996, 48, 189–297 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Johansson, Process integration study of biomass-tomethanol (via gasification) and methanol-toolefins (MTO) processes in an existing steam cracker plant, Chalmers University of Technology,  2013 Search PubMed .
H. Arakawa, J. Dubois and K. Sayama, Energy Convers. Manage., 1992, 33, 521–528 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Reed and R. M. Lerner, Science, 1973, 182, 1299–1304 CAS .
R. Dillon, S. Srinivasan, A. S. Aricò and V. Antonucci, J. Power Sources, 2004, 127, 112–126 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Shin, S. Y. Lee, N. R. Kang, K. H. Lee, M. D. Guiver and Y. M. Lee, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 3452–3460 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li and A. Faghri, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 223–240 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Barrios, M. V. Bosco, M. A. Baltanás and A. L. Bonivardi, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 262–275 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, G. Guan, C. Shi, A. Zhu, X. Hao, Z. Wang, K. Kusakabe and A. Abudula, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 258–266 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shokrani, M. Haghighi, N. Jodeiri, H. Ajamein and M. Abdollahifar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 13141–13155 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monney, E. Barsch, P. Sponholz, H. Junge, R. Ludwig and M. Beller, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 707–709 RSC .
N. Vinothkumar and M. De, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 11494–11500 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Boucher, A. Chaala and C. Roy, Biomass Bioenergy, 2000, 19, 337–350 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yaman, Energy Convers. Manage., 2004, 45, 651–671 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saidi, F. Samimi, D. Karimipourfard, T. Nimmanwudipong, B. C. Gates and M. R. Rahimpour, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 103–129 CAS .
S. Panigrahi, A. K. Dalai, S. T. Chaudhari and N. N. Bakhshi, Energy Fuels, 2003, 17, 637–642 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Adjaye, R. K. Sharma and N. N. Bakhshi, Fuel Process. Technol., 1992, 31, 241–256 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Miguel Mercader, M. J. Groeneveld, S. R. A. Kersten, N. W. J. Way, C. J. Schaverien and J. A. Hogendoorn, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 96, 57–66 CrossRef CAS .
E. Furimsky, Appl. Catal., A, 2000, 199, 147–190 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Elliott and T. R. Hart, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 631–637 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Elliott, T. R. Hart, G. G. Neuenschwander, L. J. Rotness, M. V. Olarte, A. H. Zacher and Y. Solantausta, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 3891–3896 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Yan, T. Li and Z. Ren, Bioresour. Technol., 2005, 96, 545–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Czernik and A. V. Bridgwater, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18, 590–598 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rinaldi and F. Schuth, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 610–626 CAS .
I. Graça, F. R. Ribeiro, H. S. Cerqueira, Y. L. Lam and M. B. B. de Almeida, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 90, 556–563 CrossRef .

          T. Marker, J. Petri, T. Kalnes, M. McCall, D. Mackowiak, B. Jerosky, B. Reagan, L. Nemeth and M. Krawczyk, Opportunities for biorenewables in oil refineries,  2005 Search PubMed .
A. I. Pavlova, D. S. Dobrev and P. G. Ivanova, Fuel, 2009, 88, 27–30 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Diebold and S. Czernik, Energy Fuels, 1997, 11, 1081–1091 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Nokkosmäki, E. T. Kuoppala, E. A. Leppämäki and A. O. I. Krause, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2000, 55, 119–131 CrossRef .

          EPA, Clean alternative fuels: Fischer-Tropsch,  2002 Search PubMed .
M. E. Dry, Catal. Today, 2002, 71, 227–241 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Field, C. M. H. Keske, G. L. Birch, M. W. Defoort and M. Francesca Cotrufo, GCB Bioenergy, 2013, 5, 177–191 CrossRef .
Q. Bu, H. Lei, A. H. Zacher, L. Wang, S. Ren, J. Liang, Y. Wei, Y. Liu, J. Tang, Q. Zhang and R. Ruan, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 124, 470–477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Martínez and C. López, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 294, 251–259 CrossRef .
S. Liu, A. C. Gujar, P. Thomas, H. Toghiani and M. G. White, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 357, 18–25 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, B. Zhang, Z. Gao and Y. Han, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 2103–2106 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Gujar, V. K. Guda, M. Nolan, Q. Yan, H. Toghiani and M. G. White, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 363, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lo, C. A. Giurumescu, R. Radhakrishnan and B. L. Trout, Mol. Phys., 2004, 102, 281–288 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fogassy, N. Thegarid, G. Toussaint, A. C. van Veen, Y. Schuurman and C. Mirodatos, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 96, 476–485 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. de, M. J. Groeneveld, S. R. A. Kersten, C. Geantet, G. Toussaint, N. W. J. Way, C. J. Schaverien and K. J. A. Hogendoorn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 985–997 Search PubMed .
M. C. Samolada, W. Baldauf and I. A. Vasalos, Fuel, 1998, 77, 1667–1675 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mao, J. Xia, Q. Chen and G. Lu, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 620–624 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mao, J. Xia, B. Zhang and G. Lu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2010, 51, 1134–1139 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, O. Oyedun, A. Kumar, D. Oestreich, U. Arnold and J. Sauer, Biomass Bioenergy, 2016, 90, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burger, M. Siegert, E. Ströfer and H. Hasse, Fuel, 2010, 89, 3315–3319 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burger, E. Ströfer and H. Hasse, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 12751–12761 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lapuerta, M. Villajos, J. R. Agudelo and A. L. Boehman, Fuel Process. Technol., 2011, 92, 2406–2411 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Zhu and Q. Lu, Production of Chemicals from Selective Fast Pyrolysis of Biomass, in Biomass, ed. M. N. B. Momba,  2010 Search PubMed .
C. Mei, P. Wen, Z. Liu, H. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Yang, Z. Xie, W. Hua and Z. Gao, J. Catal., 2008, 258, 243–249 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, P. Tian, Z. Liu, G. Liu, F. Chang and J. Li, Chin. J. Catal., 2007, 28, 817–822 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inui and M. Kang, Appl. Catal., A, 1997, 164, 211–223 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dutta, S. C. Roy, L. N. Nandi, P. Samuel, S. M. Pillai, B. D. Bhat and M. Ravindranathan, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 223, 231–235 CrossRef CAS .
T. Masuda, T. Asanuma, M. Shouji, S. R. Mukai, M. Kawase and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2003, 58, 649–656 CrossRef CAS .

          D. W. van Krevelen and D. W. van Krevelen, Coal—typology, physics, chemistry, constitution, Elsevier, Amsterdam, New York,  1993 Search PubMed .
T. P. Vispute, H. Zhang, A. Sanna, R. Xiao and G. W. Huber, Science, 2010, 330, 1222–1227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Y. Chen, T. F. Degnan Jr. and L. R. Koenig, CHEMTECH, 1986, 16, 506–511 CAS .
T. G. Bridgeman, J. M. Jones, I. Shield and P. T. Williams, Fuel, 2008, 87, 844–856 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gabra, E. Pettersson, R. Backman and B. Kjellström, Biomass Bioenergy, 2001, 21, 351–369 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Zainal, A. Rifau, G. A. Quadir and K. N. Seetharamu, Biomass
Bioenergy, 2002, 23, 283–289 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rapagnà, N. Jand, A. Kiennemann and P. U. Foscolo, Biomass Bioenergy, 2000, 19, 187–197 CrossRef .
J. Gil, J. Corella, M. P. Aznar and M. A. Caballero, Biomass Bioenergy, 1999, 17, 389–403 CrossRef CAS .
L. Garcia, M. L. Salvador, J. Arauzo and R. Bilbao, Fuel Process. Technol., 2001, 69, 157–174 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ciolkosz and R. Wallace, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2011, 5, 317–329 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, C. Guo, Q. Qian and G. Yuan, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 853–858 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Rostrup-Nielsen, Catal. Today, 2000, 63, 159–164 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Gumz, Gas Producers and Blast Furnaces: Theory Ad Metods of Calculation, John Wiley & Sons,  1950 Search PubMed .
T. Seitarides, C. Athanasiou and A. Zabaniotou, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 1251–1276 CrossRef CAS .

          A. V. Bridgwater, Thermochemical processing of biomass, Butterworths,  1984 Search PubMed .
P. M. Lv, Z. H. Xiong, J. Chang, C. Z. Wu, Y. Chen and J. X. Zhu, Bioresour. Technol., 2004, 95, 95–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lucas, D. Szewczyk, W. Blasiak and S. Mochida, Biomass Bioenergy, 2004, 27, 563–575 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar and A. Kumar, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 7350–7361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarkar and A. Kumar, Energy, 2010, 35, 582–591 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Mozaffarian, R. W. R. Zwart, H. Boerrigter and E. P. Deurwaarder, Biomass and waste related SNG production technologies, Technical, economic and ecological feasibility,  2004 Search PubMed .
O. P. R. Van Vliet, A. P. C. Faaij and W. C. Turkenburg, Energy Convers. Manage., 2009, 50, 855–876 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Wright, D. E. Daugaard, J. A. Satrio and R. C. Brown, Fuel, 2010, 89(Suppl. 1), S2–S10 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Swanson, A. Platon, J. A. Satrio and R. C. Brown, Fuel, 2010, 89(Suppl. 1), S11–S19 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Brown, R. Thilakaratne, R. C. Brown and G. Hu, Fuel, 2013, 106, 463–469 CrossRef CAS .
R. Thilakaratne, T. Brown, Y. Li, G. Hu and R. Brown, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 627–636 RSC .
S. D. Phillips, J. K. Tarud, M. J. Biddy and A. Dutta, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 11734–11745 CrossRef CAS .
P. Haro, F. Trippe, R. Stahl and E. Henrich, Appl. Energy, 2013, 108, 54–65 CrossRef CAS .
F. Trippe, M. Fröhling, F. Schultmann, R. Stahl, E. Henrich and A. Dalai, Fuel Process. Technol., 2013, 106, 577–586 CrossRef CAS .

          NRC, Liquid Transportation Fuels from Coal and Biomass: Technological Status, Costs, and Environmental Impacts,  2009 Search PubMed .
E. D. Larson, G. Fiorese, G. Liu, R. H. Williams, T. G. Kreutz and S. Consonni, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 28–42 CAS .
R. P. Anex, A. Aden, F. K. Kazi, J. Fortman, R. M. Swanson, M. M. Wright, J. A. Satrio, R. C. Brown, D. E. Daugaard, A. Platon, G. Kothandaraman, D. D. Hsu and A. Dutta, Fuel, 2010, 89(Suppl. 1), S29–S35 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shabangu, D. Woolf, E. M. Fisher, L. T. Angenent and J. Lehmann, Fuel, 2014, 117(Part A), 742–748 CrossRef CAS .
B. Amigun, J. Gorgens and H. Knoetze, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 312–322 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, A. Kumar and A. Sultana, Energy, 2011, 36, 6251–6262 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Hamelinck and A. P. C. Faaij, J. Power Sources, 2002, 111, 1–22 CrossRef CAS .
CARE, 250 kg h−1 biomass fast pyrolysis plant for power generation, 2002.
J. G. Rogers and J. G. Brammer, Biomass Bioenergy, 2012, 36, 208–217 CrossRef CAS .

          A. V. Bridgwater, Determination of norms and standards for biomass fast pyrolysis liquids as an alternative renewable fuel for electricity and heat production,  2005 Search PubMed .

          A. Bauen, G. Berndes, M. Junginger, M. Londo and F. Vuill, Bioenergy-a sustainable and reliable energy source: a review of status and prospects,  2009 Search PubMed .
F. Trippe, M. Fröhling, F. Schultmann, R. Stahl and E. Henrich, Waste Biomass Valorization, 2010, 1, 415–430 CrossRef .
C. Reyes Valle, A. L. Villanueva Perales, F. Vidal-Barrero and A. Gómez-Barea, Appl. Energy, 2013, 109, 254–266 CrossRef CAS .
J. Holmgren, R. Marinangeli, P. Nair, D. Elliott and R. Bain, Hydrocarbon Process., 2008, 87, 95–103 CAS .

          R. L. Bain, World biofuels assessment, worldwide biomass potential: technology characterizations,  2007 Search PubMed .
C. N. Hamelinck and A. P. C. Faaij, Energy Policy, 2006, 34, 3268–3283 CrossRef .
M. Patel, X. Zhang and A. Kumar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 53, 1486–1499 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cherubini, Energy Convers. Manage., 2010, 51, 1412–1421 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fatih Demirbas, Appl. Energy, 2009, 86(Suppl. 1), S151–S161 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demirbas, Energy Convers. Manage., 2009, 50, 2782–2801 CrossRef CAS .
S. Octave and D. Thomas, Biochimie, 2009, 91, 659–664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fernando, S. Adhikari, C. Chandrapal and N. Murali, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 1727–1737 CrossRef CAS .

          USDA, US bioenergy statistics,  2013 Search PubMed .
IER EPA Ignores Reality with 2014 Ethanol Mandate, 2015.

          T. Searchinger and R. Heimlich, Avoiding Bioenergy Competition for Food Crops and Land,  2015 Search PubMed .
D. Garraín, C. de la Rúa and Y. Lechón, Biomass Bioenergy, 2016, 85, 187–197 CrossRef .
X. Ji and X. Long, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 61, 41–52 CrossRef .
F. H. Sobrino, C. R. Monroy and J. L. H. Pérez, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 2621–2628 CrossRef .
R. Melamu and H. von Blottnitz, J. Cleaner Prod., 2011, 19, 138–144 CrossRef .
S. C. de Vries, G. W. J. van de Ven and M. K. van Ittersum, Eur. J. Agron., 2014, 52(Part B), 166–179 CrossRef .
R. E. H. Sims, W. Mabee, J. N. Saddler and M. Taylor, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 1570–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Havlík, U. A. Schneider, E. Schmid, H. Böttcher, S. Fritz, R. Skalský, K. Aoki, S. D. Cara, G. Kindermann, F. Kraxner, S. Leduc, I. McCallum, A. Mosnier, T. Sauer and M. Obersteiner, Energy Policy, 2011, 39, 5690–5702 CrossRef .
A. Holma, K. Koponen, R. Antikainen, L. Lardon, P. Leskinen and P. Roux, J. Cleaner Prod., 2013, 54, 215–228 CrossRef .
N. Kauffman, D. Hayes and R. Brown, Fuel, 2011, 90(25), 3306–3314 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Petersen, R. Melamu, J. H. Knoetze and J. F. Görgens, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 91, 292–301 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Yang and W. Blasiak, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 4786–4795 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Yang and C. Dong, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2013, 104, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Yang and W. Blasiak, Fuel, 2013, 109, 476–483 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Li, W. Yang and W. Blasiak, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 3739–3746 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Yang and W. Blasiak, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2012, 96, 110–119 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Yang and W. Blasiak, Fuel, 2012, 96, 383–391 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Mettler, D. G. Vlachos and P. J. Dauenhauer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7797–7809 CAS .
G. W. Huber and A. Corma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7184–7201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. V. Pindoria, A. Megaritis, A. A. Herod and R. Kandiyoti, Fuel, 1998, 77, 1715–1726 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marquevich, S. Czernik, E. Chornet and D. Montané, Energy Fuels, 1999, 13, 1160–1166 CrossRef CAS .
H. Leibold, A. Hornung and H. Seifert, Powder Technol., 2008, 180, 265–270 CrossRef CAS .
X. Youchang, B. N. Naasz and G. A. Somorjai, Appl. Catal., 1986, 27, 233–241 CrossRef .
A. G. Gayubo, B. Valle, A. T. Aguayo, M. Olazar and J. Bilbao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Srinivas, A. K. Dalai and N. N. Bakhshi, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2000, 78, 343–354 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Gayubo, B. Valle, A. T. Aguayo, M. Olazar and J. Bilbao, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 4129–4136 CrossRef CAS .
S. Heyne and S. Harvey, Appl. Energy, 2013, 101, 203–212 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Xiaolei Zhang	Dr Xiaolei Zhang is a lecturer at Queen's University Belfast (QUB), UK. She earned her bachelor's degree in 2007 from North China Electric Power University, China. In 2013, she was awarded a Ph.D. degree from the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Sweden. Afterwards, she worked for one year as a post-doctoral fellow at the University of Alberta, Canada. Her research interests are biomass utilization, thermochemical conversion technologies (pyrolysis, gasification and combustion), and production of second-generation fuels, power, heat, and chemicals from renewable energy sources.

 	Fig. 1  Mass-energy-economic comparison of second-generation bio-fuels generated via thermochemical conversion processes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Thermochemical and further upgrading pathways for converting lignocellulosic biomass into second-generation bio-fuels, fuel additives, and bio-chemicals. F-T: Fischer-Tropsch; WGS: water–gas shift; i-C4: isobutene and isobutane; DME: dimethyl ether. Pink lines represent solid streams, green lines represent liquid streams, and blue lines represent gaseous streams. Grey lines represent pathways for heat and electricity generation, which are outside the scope of this research, while the dashed blue lines show alternative gasification classifications.	 

 	Fig. 3  Various operating conditions of the main thermochemical processing technologies for lignocellulosic biomass. Slow: slow pyrolysis; fast: fast pyrolysis; intermediate: intermediate pyrolysis; flash: flash pyrolysis.	 

 	Fig. 4  Solid, gaseous, and liquid product distribution diagram for different thermochemical processing pathways for lignocellulosic biomass.11,15,17,22–28	 

 	Fig. 5  Mapping of operating conditions and key issues facing bio-oil upgrading technologies.	 

Filter	Solid particulate	Cold, warm, hot	Filter particulates, which damage equipment; filter is inexpensive and highly efficient, but the short operating period decreases the chance of wide plant availability.	
64

Scrubbing	Tar	Cold	Tar causes equipment fouling and clogging, reducing gasification efficiency; scrubbing is efficient but economically impractical when working at elevated temperatures.	
21, 66

Thermal cracking	Tar	Hot	Thermal cracking reduces tar and increases gas yield by breaking down long chain tar hydrocarbons into smaller molecules such as CO and H2. It improves thermal integration and biomass utilization efficiency, but suffers from problems of coke formation. Dolomite and olivine catalysts can be used to enhance tar cracking; these are cheap but still cannot remove tar completely. Nickel-based catalysts can remove tar efficiently; however, their easy deactivation by coke must be considered.	
66–69

Steam reforming	Tar	Warm, hot	Steam reforming reduces tar and increases gas yield, as hydrocarbons in tar react with steam to produce CO and H2; the temperature normally ranges from 650 °C to 700 °C. A further water–gas-shift reaction can be added to adjust the targeted H2/CO ratio. Coke formation remains a problem, but can be reduced by providing sufficient steam or by using appropriate catalysts to reduce tar and char formation concurrently.	
21, 70–72

Sorbents	Sulfur	Cold	Sulfur creates catalyst poisoning, especially during subsequent F-T synthesis. Sorption capacity is a key factor for evaluating the efficiency of sulfur removal, and sorption capacity is highly dependent on material porosity. High porosity facilitates sorption; however, this also decreases the tensile strength of the material. As a result, optimization of porosity is needed.	
21, 73

Sorbents	Alkali	Cold	Alkalis cause irreversible damage to equipment. Similar to sulfur sorption, the sorption capacity is a key factor and is highly dependent on material porosity.	
21

Water scrubber	NH3	Cold	NH3 poisons the zeolite catalyst. Water scrubbers can help to remove NH3, and a water scrubber can be easily operated.	
74


 	Fig. 6  Syngas upgrading technologies.	 

Edible feedstock	Starch (wheat, barley, corn, potato)	Bioethanol, biodiesel	First-generation bio-fuel
Sugars (sugarcane, sugar beet)
Oil crops (rapeseed, soybeans, sunflower, palm, coconut, used cooking oil, animal fats)
Non-food-based	Forest and forest residue	Hydrocarbon fuels, hydrogen, methanol, alcohols, F-T fuel, aviation fuel, olefins	Second-generation bio-fuel
Agricultural biomass (straw, grass)
Energy crops (jatropha, cassava, miscanthus)
Municipal solid waste
Aquatic biomass	Microalgae	Naphtha, diesel, hydrogen, methanol, ethanol	Third-generation bio-fuel
Seaweed
Microbes
Based on the same technologies as first-, second-, or third-generation bio-fuels, but including carbon capture and storage (CCS) for each conversion technology	Fourth-generation bio-fuel

 	Fig. 7  Key properties of typical biomass feedstocks and coal. MSW: municipal solid waste; HHV: high heating value.8,80,90–94	 

Combustion	5%	35%	
95

Gasification	15%	10 to 20%	
96

Liquefaction	No drying needed	No drying needed	

Fast pyrolysis	<10%	Up to 15%	
22


 	Fig. 8  Network of second-generation bio-fuels and allied fuel additives and bio-chemicals. Brown backgrounds represent solid feedstocks or products, green backgrounds represent liquid products, and blue backgrounds represent gaseous products. F-T: Fischer-Tropsch; i-C4: isobutene and isobutane; DME: dimethyl ether; OME: oxymethylene ethers; MTBE: methyl tert-butyl ether; HRJs: hydro-processed renewable jet fuels.	 
Organic species	Phenols	Phenol, methyl-substituted phenols
Acids	Formic, acetic, propanoic, hexanoic, benzoic, etc.
Esters	Methyl formate, methyl propionate, butyrolactone, methyl n-butyrate, valerolactone, etc.
Alcohols	Methanol, ethanol, 2-propene-1-ol, isobutanol, etc.
Ketones	Acetone, 2-butanone, 2-butanone, 2-pentanone, 2-cyclopentanone, 2,3 pentenedione, 2-hexanone, cyclo-hexanone, etc.
Aldehydes	Formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, 2-butenal, pentanal, ethanedial, etc.
Alkenes	2-Methyl propene, dimethylcyclopentene, alpha-pinene, etc.
Aromatics	Benzene, toluene, xylenes, nphthalenes, phenanthrene, fluoranthrene, chrysene, etc.
Nitrogen compounds	Ammonia, methylamine, pyridine, methylpyridine, etc.
Furans	Furan, 2-methyl furan, 2-furanone, furfural, furfural alcohol, etc.
Guaiacols	2-Methoxy phenol, 4-methyl guaiacol, ethyl guaiacol, eugenol, etc.
Syringols	Methyl syringol, 4-ethyl syringol, propyl syringol, etc.
Sugars	Levoglucosan, glucose, fructose, D-xylose, D-arabinose, etc.
Miscellaneous oxygenates	Hydroxyacetaldehyde, hydroxyacetone, dimethyl acetal, acetal, methyl cyclopentenolone, etc.
Inorganic species	Ca, Si, K, Fe, Al, Na, S, P Mg, Ni, Cr, Zn, Li, Ti, Mn, Ln, Ba, V, Cl, etc.


Moisture content	15 to 35%	0.1%	Biomass feedstock	Moisture content in bio-oil reduces its viscosity and produces enhanced fluidity, which is good for its combustion in engines; however, its energy density and flame temperature are reduced.	
23, 134

Oxygen content	35 to 50%	0.5 to 2%	Biomass composition	High oxygen content leads to poor chemical stability, low energy density, high reactivity, and immiscibility with hydrocarbon fuels. Additionally, the lower energy released when burning leads to higher CO2 emissions per unit energy.	
126, 128, 134–136

The highest oxygen content that the FCC unit can tolerate is 10 wt%.
However, the oxygen content cannot be reduced too much as the oxygen content of gasoline is so low (near zero) that anti-knock agents (gasoline additives) are needed to ensure auto-ignition.
pH	2 to 3	3.5 to 4	Organic acids from biopolymer degradation	Acidity leads to corrosion of vessels and pipework. Given that the industry standard is <1.5 mg KOH per g before FCC, the acid number of bio-oil needs to be reduced by using 317 stainless steel cladding, which can tolerate the acid number of bio-oil; however, this has not yet been applied in standard refinery units. The acidity of bio-oil is mainly caused by carboxylic acid in the liquid; this leads to the composition of bio-oil changing over time due to the reactions of aldehydes under acid conditions, leading to further storage difficulties.	
25, 33, 134, 137

Ash	0 to 0.2 wt%	0.01 to 0.180 wt%	The ash content of pyrolysis oil has been shown to be directly related to the char content of oil.	Existence of ash reduces the oil quality. The ash content can be reduced to <0.01% by hot-gas filtration, meeting the requirement for even the best quality diesel fuel.	
6, 25, 134

Alkalis leads to problems such as catalyst poisoning, deposition of solids in combustion, erosion, and corrosion, slag formation, and damage to turbines. A guard bed with an ion exchanger can be used to remove the metals contained in bio-oil. Alkali content can be lowered to about 2 ppm, very close to the level recommended for gas-turbine fuels.
Char	NA	NA	Incomplete char separation during the process	Char causes problems such as oil aging, sedimentation, filter blockage, catalyst blockage, engine injector blockage, and alkali metal poisoning.	
25

Distillability	Poor	NA	Reactive mixture of degradation products	Bio-oil cannot be distilled – typical maximum is 50%. Liquid begins to react at <100 °C and substantially decomposes at >100 °C.	
25

LHV	15 to 20 MJ kg−1	35 to 40 MJ kg−1	High moisture content, high oxygen content	Low energy density creates utilization difficulties	
25

Viscosity	25 to 1000 centistokes	3 to 400 centistokes	Chemical composition of bio-oil	High viscosity leads to high pressure drop, increasing equipment costs, high pumping cost, poor atomization, fairly high and variable with time, greater temperature influence than hydrocarbons.	
22, 25

H:C ratio	Low	NA	Low H:C ratio in biomass feedstock	Upgrading to hydrocarbons is more difficult.	
25

Miscibility with hydrocarbons	Very low	NA	Highly oxygenated nature of bio-oil	Will not mix with any hydrocarbons; thus, integration into a refinery is more difficult.	
25

Nitrogen	0 to 0.2 wt%	0 to 0.02 wt%	Contaminants in biomass feed	Existence of nitrogen leads to unpleasant smells, catalyst poisoning during upgrading, and release of NOx in combustion.	
25, 134, 138

High nitrogen feed such as proteins in wastes
Phase separation or inhomogeneity	NA	NA	High feed water	Inhomogeneity leads to phase separation, partial phase separation, layering, poor mixing, and inconsistency in handling, storage, and processing.	
25

High ash in feed
Poor char separation
CH3OH + H2O = CO2 + 3H2	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 9  Main bio-chemical production routes.	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 10  HHV-H/Ceff map for solid, liquid, and gaseous fuels; hydrogen is not included because its H/Ceff value is infinite. HHV for hydrogen is 142 MJ kg−1. HHV: high heating value; DME: dimethyl ether; HDO: hydro-deoxygenation; MSW: municipal solid waste.8,11,15,17,22–28,80,90–94	 

 	Fig. 11  Enthalpy changes during main thermochemical conversion and further upgrading technologies.7,20,74,78,149,160–163,175–179	 

 	Fig. 12  The range of production costs for the main second-generation bio-fuels and bio-chemicals, compared with the price of fuel from fossil sources.5,84,182–208 All costs are in US$, with average exchange rates of €1 = $1.09 and £1 = $1.5 based on current currency in 2015. All production prices were converted into 2015 costs using an inflation rate of 2%. Within each bar, the length of the dash-filled part represents the mineral production cost, and the total length of each bar represents the maximal production.	 

Bio-oil	Commercial	Dynamotive Energy Systems Corporation	Fast pyrolysis; a bubbling fluid bed reactor to generate electricity	130 t per d feedstock	West Lorne, Ontario	Shut down
Commercial	Dynamotive Energy Systems Corporation	Fast pyrolysis to generate electricity	200 t per d feedstock	Guelph, Ontario	Shut down
Pilot	Union Fenosa	Fast pyrolysis in a bubbling fluid bed reactor	4.8 t per d feedstock	Spain	Dismantled
Pilot	Agri-Therm	Flash pyrolysis in a fluidized bed reactor	4.8 t per d feedstock	Canada	Developing
Pilot	Agri-Therm	Mobile pyrolysis in a fluidized bed reactor with heat recovery	5 t per d feedstock	Canada	Developing
Pilot	Biomass Technology Group	Fast pyrolysis in a rotating cone reactor to generate electricity	4.8 t per d feedstock	UK	Operational
Pilot	Wellman Process Engineering Ltd. (WPEL)	Fast pyrolysis in a bubbling fluid bed reactor to generate electricity	6 t per d feedstock	Oldbury, UK	Finished
Demo	Licella	Fast pyrolysis to convert radiate pine, banana grass, algae into ‘drop-in’ fuels, including aviation fuel	1000 odt feedstock	Somersby, Australia	Operational

	
	
	350 t per y bio-oil	
	

Demonstration	Licella	Fast pyrolysis	200000 odt feedstock	—	Planning
Pilot	Biomass Engineering Ltd	Fast pyrolysis in a fluidized bed reactor to process sawdust	6 t per d feedstock	Newton-le-Willows, UK	Operational
Commercial	BTG-BTL	Rotating cone reactor	120 t per d feedstock	Hengelo, Netherlands	Operational
Commercial	BTG-BTL	Rotating cone BTG unit	48 t per d feedstock	Malaysia	Shut down
Commercial	Ensyn	Transported bed and CFB; a dedicated RFO™ bio-fuels facility	3 million gallons per year bio-oil	Renfrew, Ontario	Operational
Commercial	Ensyn Red Arrow RTP Facilities	Transported bed and CFB for production of food flavorings	40.8 t per d feedstock	Rhinelander, Wisconsin	Operational
Industrial	Pyrovac	Vacuum pyrolysis	93 t per d feedstock	Québec, Canada	Operational
Industrial	ENEL	The Ensyn unit transported bed and CFB	650 t per d feedstock	Italy	Not operated
Industrial	PyTec	Ablative pyrolysis	2 × 250 t per d feedstock	Germany	Operational
Pilot	UPM, Metso and Fortum, Technical Research Centre of Finland (VTT)	A pyrolysis transported bed and CFB reactor is integrated into a power boiler to convert wood	9.6 t per d feedstock	Finland	Finished
Industrial	Lurgi LR	Augur or screw reactor	1 × 500 t per d feedstock	Germany	Operational
Industrial	Renewable Oil Intl	Augur or screw reactor	4 × 200 t per d feedstock	USA	Operational
Industrial	Anhui Yineng Bioenergy Ltd.	Moving bed and fixed bed reactor	3 × 600 t per d feedstock	China	Operational
F-T liquids	Pilot	GTI Gas Technology Institute	Forest residues	21 t per d feedstock	Des Plaines, United States	Operational
Pilot	TUBITAK	Combination of hazelnut shell, olive cake, wood chips, and lignite blends	6 t per d feedstock	Gebze, Turkey	Under construction
Pilot	Vienna University of Technology; BIOENERGY 2020+; repotec; biomassekraftwerk Güssing	Gasification followed by FT	7 Nm3 h−1 syngas	Güssing, Austria	Operational

	
	
	
	0.2 t per y F-T liquids	
	

F-T liquids; gasoline-type fuel	Pilot	GTI Gas Technology Institute	Wood, corn stover, bagasse, algae	0.05 t per d feedstock	Des Plaines, United States	Operational
F-T liquids; mixed alcohols	Pilot	Research Triangle Institute	Gasification with further upgrading	0.5 t per d feedstock	Research Triangle ParK, United States	Under construction
Pilot	Southern Research Institute	Feedstock is cellulosics, municipal wastes	2–4 t per d feedstock	Durham, United States	Operational
Renewable F-T diesel and F-T jet fuel	Pilot	Clearfuels-Rentech	FT process converting green waste, municipal and solid wastes, wood waste, and bagasse to synthetic jet fuels	20 t per d feedstock	Commerce City, CO, USA	Under construction
Ethanol	Pilot	Chemrec & Weyerhaeuser	Processing wood using thermochemical technologies	330 t BLS per day	New Bern, NC	Finished
Demonstration	Coskata	Gasification and fermentation; natural gas, wood chips, and simulated waste materials	NA	Madison, PA	Operational
Commercial	Indian River BioEnergy Center, Vero Beach, FL. Owned by the Swiss firm Ineos Bio INEOS	Gasification and anaerobic fermentation; lignocellulosic biomass	60 million tonnes of petrochemicals	USA	Operational
Pilot	Gulf Coast Energy	Thermochemical conversion; urban waste, including sorted MSW and C&D debris	
	Livingston, AL	Operational
Pilot	Pearson Technologies Inc.	Thermochemical conversion; agricultural residues, wood	30 t per d feedstock	Aberdeen, MS	Operational
Diesel-type hydrocarbons	Demonstration	Cello Energy	Catalytic depolymerization; agricultural residues, wood	20 MGY	Bay Minette, AL	Not operational
Demonstration	ThermoChem Recovery International (TRI)	Thermochemical conversion; agricultural residues, wood, energy crops, and urban waste, including sorted MSW and C&D debris	0.02 MGY	Durham, NC	Operational
Demonstration	Virent	Steam reforming gasification; pine residues, sugarcane bagasse, and corn stover	30 t per y diesel	Madison, Wisconsin, United States	Operational
Pilot	CHOREN Tech. GmbHSold to Linde Engineering Dresden	Gasification followed by FT	100 l per day diesel	Freiberg, Germany	Developing
Demonstration	CHOREN Tech. GmbH	Gasification, BTL	2739 t per d feedstock	Schwedt, Germany	Developing
Pilot	Neste and Stora Enso	Gasification and the FT process; wood	—	Varkaus, Finland	Cancelled
Jet fuel	Commercial	Solena Fuels	Unique combination of high temperature plasma gasification, and FT tech	1575 t per d feedstock	Thurrock, Essex	Under construction

	
	British Airways	
	
	
	

Syngas	Commercial	Premier Green Energy	Lignocellulosic biomass	72 t per d feedstock	Thurles, Ireland	Planning
Syngas	Commercial	Rentech-SilvaGas	Gasification	—	Burlington, VT	Finished
Syngas/SNG	Pilot	ECN	
	5 t per d feedstock	Petten, Netherlands	Operational
SNG	Demonstration	ECN – Consortium Groen Gas 2.0	Convert waste wood, prunings, or mown grass into electricity and heat	6500 t per y SNG	Alkmaar, Netherlands	Planning

	
	
	11.6 MWthermal output gasifier	
	

Demonstration	Goteborg Energi AB	Forest residues, wood pellets, branches, and tree tops	11200 t per y SNG	Göteborg, Sweden	Operational

	
	District heating	
	
	

Demonstration	Biomassekraftwerk Güssing	Two inter-connected fluidized bed systems of a fluidized bed steam gasifier (reactor)	576 t per y, 100 Nm3 y−1 SNG	Güssing, Austria	Operational

	
	Vienna University of Technology, Paul Scherrer Institute, Repotec	
	
	
	

Syngas, methanol, acetates, and second-generation ethanol	Pilot	Enerkem	Thermochemical from wood urban waste, including sorted MSW and C&D debris	4.8 t per d feedstock	Sherbrooke, Canada	Operational
Ethanol; methanol; various chemicals	Commercial Demonstration	Enerkem	Treated wood (i.e. decommissioned electricity poles and railway ties), wood waste, and MSW	48 t per d feedstock	Westbury, Canada	Operational
Commercial	Enerkem – Varennes Cellulosic Ethanol L.P.	Sorted industrial, commercial, and institutional waste	350 t per d feedstock	Varennes, Canada	Planning
Commercial	Enerkem Alberta Bio-fuels LP	Sorted municipal solid waste (SMSW)	350 t per d feedstock	Edmonton, Canada	Operational
Commercial	Enerkem Mississippi Bio-fuels LLC	Sorted municipal solid waste (SMSW) and wood residues	350 t per d feedstock	Pontotoc, United States	Developing
Chemical products – resins, lignosulfonates, and ethanol	Demonstration	Tembec Chemical Group	Spent sulfite liquor	13000 t per y chemicals	Témiscaming, Canada	Operational
DME	Pilot	Chemrec AB	Gasification; black liquor	20 t per d feedstock	Pitea, Sweden	Operational
DME; gasoline-type fuel	Pilot	Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) Bioliq	Lignocellulosic biomass	12 t per d feedstock	Karlsruhe, Germany	Operational
Various chemicals	Pilot	NREL (National Renewable Energy Laboratory)	Dry biomass	0.5–1 t per d feedstock	Golden, Colorado, United States	Operational in 1985; expansion ongoing
Bio-oil, steam, electricity and organic acids	Demonstration	EMPYRO	Using fast pyrolysis technology to convert woody biomass	25 MWthermal polygeneration	Hengelo, The Netherlands	Operational

	
	BTG Biomass Technology Group B.V.	
	
	
	

Bio-oil, electricity, heat, resins	Commercial	Ensyn Technologies Inc.	Converting sawmill into energy by fast pyrolysis	400 t per d feedstock	Alberta, Canada	Under construction

	
	Tolko Industries Ltd.	
	
	
	

Low-carbon renewable fuel	Commercial	Sierra Bio-fuels Plant	Gasification; urban waste, including sorted MSW and C&D debris, to produce electricity	246 t per d feedstock	McCarran, Nevada	Expected to start operation in 2017

 	Fig. 13  GHG emissions of several typical bio-fuels from different pathways in gCO2e per MJ. The dash-filled part represents mineral annualized GHG emissions, and the maximum value of the solid part represents the maximal annualized GHG emissions.	 

 	Fig. 14  Main challenges and future trends.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
