Hydrogen production by traditional and novel alkaline water electrolysis on nickel or iron based electrocatalysts  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CC00996C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CC00996C
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2023, 59, 8205-8221Hydrogen production by traditional and novel alkaline water electrolysis on nickel or iron based electrocatalysts

        
          
            Rufei 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Ao 
            Xie†
b, 
      
        
          
            Linting 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiqun 
            Bai
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Pingyu 
            Wan
          
          
        
      *b
aInstitute of Applied Electrochemistry, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, No. 15 of North Third Ring East Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100029, China
bNational Fundamental Research Laboratory of New Hazardous Chemicals Assessment & Accident Analysis, Institute of Electrochemical Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, No. 15 of North Third Ring East Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100029, China
Received 
      28th February 2023
    , Accepted 26th May 2023First published on 26th May 2023AbstractHydrogen production through alkaline water electrolysis holds great promise as a scalable solution for renewable energy storage and conversion. The development of non-precious metal-based electrocatalysts with low-overpotential for alkaline water electrolysis is essential to decrease the cost of electrolysis devices. Although the Ni-based and Fe-based electrocatalysts have been commercially employed in the cathodic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER), it is imperative to persistently pursue the advancement of highly efficient electrocatalysts with enhanced current density and fast kinetics. This feature article overviews the progress of NiMo HER cathodes and NiFe OER anodes in the traditional alkaline water electrolysis process for hydrogen production, including the detailed mechanisms, preparation strategies, and structure–function relationship. Moreover, recent advances of Ni-based and Fe-based electrodes in the process of novel alkaline water electrolysis, involving small energetic molecule electro-oxidation and redox mediator decoupled water electrolysis, are also discussed for hydrogen production with low cell voltage. Finally, the perspective of these Ni-based and Fe-based electrodes in the mentioned electrolysis processes is proposed.
Rufei Zhang
Rufei Zhang is currently pursuing her PhD under the supervision of Prof. Wan and Prof. Tang's group. She attained her Bachelor's degree in Science from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2018. Her area of research is the development of carbon-encapsulated transition metal based hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts and the compatibility with renewable electric electrolysis.
Ao Xie
Ao Xie is currently pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Wan and Prof. Tang's group. He attained his Bachelor's degree in Science from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2017. His area of research is the development of functional and hierarchical carbon-based materials to be used as advanced electrocatalysts in hydrogen production systems.
Linting Cheng
Linting Cheng is currently studying for a Master's Degree in Chemistry at the School of Chemistry, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, under the tutelage of Prof. Pingyu Wan. His research interests focus on the controllable construction of cathode catalysts for hydrogen production by alkaline water electrolysis at high current density.
Zhiqun Bai
Zhiqun Bai is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Pingyu Wan in the School of Chemistry at Beijing University of Chemical and Technology (BUCT). He received his master's degree from BUCT in 2017. His research direction is the preparation and industrial application of non-noble electrocatalysts for green hydrogen production in alkaline electrolysis.
Yang Tang
Yang Tang received his PhD degree from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT) in 2013 under the supervision of Prof. Pingyu Wan. Currently, he works as an associate professor in BUCT. His research interests focus on the design and fabrication of nanomaterials for electrochemical and catalytic applications such as water electrocatalysts, fuel cells, and inorganic-salt electrolysis coupled with CO2 conversion process. He also devoted himself to the pilot research and industrial application of new electrode materials.
Pingyu Wan
Pingyu Wan received his BE from Dalian University of Technology in 1982, followed by an ME in Applied Chemistry from Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 1986. Subsequently, he was appointed as an Assistant and Associate Professor at Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT) in 1986 and 1994, respectively. He was promoted to the rank of Full Professor in 1998 and later set up the Institute of Applied Electrochemistry and Institute of Electrochemical Engineering at BUCT in 2006. His research interests are focused on the advanced electrochemical materials and their engineering applications, such as green hydrogen production, meta-air batteries, and electrocatalysis.
1 Introduction
As global fossil-energy consumption increases, it is imperative to develop renewable energy sources to alleviate the current energy crisis.1–3 As a prime example, solar and wind power, although effective, are subject to the unpredictability of weather conditions, leading to an unstable and intermittent supply of energy.4 To capitalize on renewable energy sources on a large scale, it is essential to develop energy storage technology. Rechargeable batteries, such as lead-acid batteries, lithium-ion batteries, liquid flow batteries, and metal-air batteries, are investigated for renewable energy storage.5,6 Among them, the vanadium redox flow battery can be assembled modularly for large scale application, but it is still hampered by issues like high cost, unsatisfactory life cycle, and intricate maintenance of equipment.7,8 Water electrolysis is a suitable, reliable and scalable solution for renewable energy storage as it is able to convert renewable electricity into the chemical energy of hydrogen.9 Furthermore, hydrogen fuel cells can be employed to produce electricity when necessary. In this regard, hydrogen production by water electrolysis is a promising solution and crucial bridge for renewable energy conversion in the future.10
To facilitate the development of water electrolysis technology, especially the alkaline water electrolysis for hydrogen production, the exploration of new and efficient electrode materials for electrochemical overall water-splitting (OWS) is necessary. At present, the electrochemical method of generating hydrogen via alkaline water electrolysis (AWE) has attained a relatively high level of technological maturity that makes it a practical choice for large-scale commercial applications. This is due to its favourable operating temperature range (70–90 °C), extended system lifespan (10–20 years), high energy conversion efficiency (60–78%), and relatively low equipment cost (500–1000 USD kW−1).11 Furthermore, the utilization of 3d transition metal electrocatalysts that are readily soluble in acids has been demonstrated to operate consistently in alkaline electrolytes, further enhancing the feasibility of the process. Consequently, this article will primarily concentrate on the technology of producing hydrogen through electrochemical OWS under alkaline conditions. In principle, this overall reaction of alkaline water electrolysis can be divided into two half reactions, namely, the anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and the cathodic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), with the HER process being the main source of hydrogen production. To ensure that OWS can operate under the ideal condition of high current density and low cell voltage, excellent OER and HER electrocatalysts must be used to accelerate the reaction process and reduce the reaction overpotential.
In general, noble metals such as iridium- and ruthenium-based electrocatalysts are typically highly active OER electrode materials,12,13 while platinum-based electrocatalysts are benchmark electrocatalysts in the HER.14 However, due to their scarcity and high cost, they are not suitable for large-scale applications in OWS.15,16 Therefore, non-noble metal OER and HER electrocatalysts have been developed.17–19 Among numerous HER catalysts, NiMo materials have attracted wide attention due to their excellent HER properties, which show an overpotential of less than 50 mV at 10 mA cm−2.20,21 Meanwhile, among multitudinous OER catalysts, NiFe-based catalysts show good electrocatalytic performance.22,23 Currently, the nickel iron layered double hydroxide (NiFe-LDH) and nickel iron phosphate (NiFePx) serve as typical representatives and exhibit an overpotential of less than 250 mV at 10 mA cm−2.23,24 In addition, with respect to the above composition regulation, self-assembly and integrated structure design for OWS electrocatalysts are preferred, such as arranging a secondary structure on various metal substrates like nickel foam (NF),25,26 iron foam (IF)27 and stainless steel felt (SS).28 The popularity of NiFe- and NiMo-based materials being used in OER and HER electrocatalysts proves their high efficiency, which has been further evidenced by their extensive use in the reported electrolyzer-level studies, particularly in the field of hydrogen production from AWE.29,30
By optimizing the OER and HER electrocatalysts, the cell voltage consumed during the process of OWS can be significantly decreased. However, a considerable cell voltage of around 1.8–2.0 V is still required for a normal AWE at an industrial current density of 0.3–0.5 A cm−2.31,32 Besides, the expense of membranes or diaphragms, along with the danger of hydrogen and oxygen mixing, presents a significant financial burden and raises safety concerns in a large-scale hydrogen production process.33,34 To solve the above issues, two approaches can be considered. Firstly, an electrochemical reaction with lower redox potential can be implemented to replace the anodic OER process, which has a higher thermodynamic equilibrium potential (1.23 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode, RHE) and slower kinetics, thus decreasing the cell voltage.35,36 Secondly, to reduce the cost of the electrolyzer and improve hydrogen purity and security, constructing decoupled hydrogen production configurations is a practical solution.37,38
Although many valuable reviews have been published on the design of electrocatalysts and novel technologies for electrolytic hydrogen production,11,39–42 few of them have focused on Ni- and Fe-based electrocatalysts for traditional and novel hydrogen production in recent years. With the above considerations and the research experience of authors, this review begins by providing a brief overview of the HER and OER principles applied in NiMo- and NiFe-based materials in alkaline water electrolysis (Section 2.1), and subsequently, focuses on the preparation of electrode materials, the regulation of the electronic structure and the improvement of electrode stability of both HER and OER electrocatalysts in alkaline water-splitting. In detail, a comprehensive analysis of the material composition and regulations of NiMo-based materials used in the HER process is presented (Section 2.2). Moreover, the material synthesis, performance regulation and stability adjustment of NiFe materials involved in the OER process are also examined, taking into account the demands of hydrogen production, as a part of industrial perspective for the electrolysis of water (Section 2.3). Furthermore, the small energetic molecule (NaBH4 and CO(NH2)2) assisted water electrolysis (Section 3.1) and the innovative electrolyzer system (Section 3.2) assisted hydrogen production are discussed in light of current literature progress and the experience inherited from our group. Finally, the key issues, potential solutions, and further outlooks in the development of hydrogen production technology in alkaline electrolysis are discussed (Section 4). Fig. 1 outlines the categorization and fundamental elements of this feature article concerning the production of hydrogen by alkaline water electrolysis.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of hydrogen production based on traditional and novel water electrolysis under alkaline conditions. 
2. Hydrogen production based on traditional alkaline water electrolysis
Hydrogen production based on traditional alkaline water electrolysis by renewable electricity is a promising strategy for energy substitution and conversion. In order to improve the electrolysis efficiency and reduce the cost, it is very vital to develop transition metal based electrocatalyst materials with low overpotential and fast kinetics. Thereinto, NiMo- and NiFe-based electrocatalysts have been widely studied and applied to the HER and OER, respectively. Because of their good catalytic performance, they are the one pair of the most promising alternatives to precious metal catalysts which are used in industrial water electrolysis. Researchers often use various synthesis methods and optimization strategies to further improve the performance of electrode materials, such as the introduction of vacancy defects, doping engineering, surface coating, in situ activation, etc.43,44
2.1 HER and OER mechanism

2.1.1 HER mechanism. 
In the process of electrochemical water splitting, the HER is a half reaction directly generating H2, which can transform electric energy into chemical energy in the form of hydrogen molecules. Under alkaline conditions, the HER abides by the following mechanism.45Electrode reaction: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−Volmer step: H2O + * + e− → H* + OH−Heyrovsky step: H* + H2O + e− → H2 + OH−Tafel step: H* + H* → H2The first step is the Volmer step; due to the lack of H3O+, the HER in the alkaline electrolyte requires the first decomposition of H2O molecules to supply protons, wherein hydrogen intermediates (H*) are formed on the electrode surface by proton reduction, in which * represents the active site at the electro-catalyst surface. After the formation of H*, H2 is generated by either the Heyrovsky step or the Tafel step, or both steps. In the Heyrovsky step, H* intermediates are adsorbed on the active site, and react with H2O to form H2. As the coverage of H* on the catalyst surface increases, the collision probability increases. In the Tafel step, as the surface coverage of H* increases, the adjacent H* intermediates combine to generate H2. When the reaction reaches a steady state, the formation rates of H* and H2 are in dynamic equilibrium.46–48
It is widely believed that the high activity of materials based on NiMo in the HER is influenced by the interaction of electrons mediated through multiple sites.49,50 The intrinsic activity of NiMo-based electrocatalysts can be determined by examining the roles of Ni and Mo. Typically, Ni serves as the electron-rich center for water dissociation, leading to the formation of the M–H intermediate.51 The optimized adsorption and desorption energy can be adjusted by the reaction energy at the interface of NixMoy. In contrast, Mo is prone to forming oxides, making it suitable for optimizing the adsorption and desorption behaviour of HO*.52 Moreover, the dissolution of Mo to form MoO4− results in an increase in specific surface area. Research has shown that the dimer Mo2O72− of MoO4− can re-adsorb on the electrode surface, improving the properties of the electrode interface and thus enhancing the HER activity.53 Additionally, Mo acts as a “relief valve” to prevent Ni–H deactivation, similar to the “hydrogen spillover effect”.54 The generated *H is then combined on Ni or alloy sites to produce hydrogen through the Volmer–Tafel process in alkaline media. In conclusion, there is a synergistic effect between the Ni or NiMo alloy and MoOx, which not only facilitates the water absorption and dissociation, but also optimizes the following electrochemical steps.55 Therefore, optimizing the density and properties of Ni/NixMoy–H sites, as well as MOx–OH/O sites, can effectively improve the HER ability. The HER pathway details and effects in NiMo-based materials are illustrated in Fig. 2a.
 Fig. 2  The pathways and mechanisms of (a) HER and NiMo-based materials and (b) OER and NiFe-based materials under alkaline conditions, respectively. 


2.1.2 OER mechanism. 
Compared with the HER, which only involves two electron transfer, the OER involves four electron transfer and several intermediates, making its kinetic process more intricate and sluggish. Therefore, the overpotential of the OER is often much higher than that of the HER, which is also the main reason for the high voltage in the water electrolysis process. Under alkaline conditions, the OER abides by a variety of mechanisms, with the adsorption evolution mechanism (AEM) and lattice oxygen mechanism (LOM) being the most prevalent and extensively validated.44 The AEM can be conducted as follows:Electrode reaction: 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−* + OH− → OH* + e−OH* + OH− → O* + H2O + e−O* + OH− → OOH* + e−OOH* + OH− → * + O2+ H2O + e−In the first step, OH− adsorbs on the active site of the catalyst surface to form OH* and transfer an electron. * denotes the active site of the catalyst surface. The formed OH* species in the first step is then transformed into O* through the removal of the proton or the reaction with OH−. In the next step, O* combines with the OH− to form OOH* species. Finally, the OOH* species generates O2 and the initial active site. The above mechanism clearly shows that the OER mechanism begins with the adsorption of OH−, which then undergoes continuous steps, culminating in the release of O2.49,56
Differently, the LOM involves five elementary steps, including four electrochemical reactions and one chemical reaction step. The LOM can be described asElectrode reaction: 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−* + OH− → OH* + e−OH* + OH− → O* + H2O + e−O* + OL → O2 + VOVO + OH− → OH* + e−OH* + OH− →* + OL + H2O + e−The formation of O* is a multi-faceted process that involves a continuous two-step electron transfer behaviour. Subsequently, O* couples with lattice oxygen (OL), leading to the liberation of O2 and the generation of oxygen vacancies (VO). To address the created VO, OH− binds to the active site, resulting in the formation of OH*. Following the deprotonation of OH−, the OL is regenerated, and the active site is freed, culminating in the lattice oxygen mechanism.57
In general, the distinction between the AEM and LOM can be discerned based on several factors. Firstly, in the AEM, evolved oxygen is derived from the solvent H2O or OH−, while in the LOM, a portion of the oxygen originates from the OL in the catalyst. Secondly, the active site in the AEM is thought to arise from the transition metal site, whereas in the LOM, the active site contains the OL itself. Thirdly, the LOM is believed to confer superior OER activity compared to the AEM due to the former's ability to bypass the limitations of scaling relation and exhibit enhanced activity.58 Lastly, catalysts that follow the LOM are often susceptible to severe metal dissolution, which can result in the formation of oxygen vacancies and render the catalysts unstable. Conversely, catalysts that follow the AEM are not subjected to significant surface dissolution.59 It is worth noting that the AEM and LOM are not strictly delineated and may in fact compete with one another. Additionally, the efficiency and durability of an OER catalyst can be optimized by thoughtfully engineering the configuration of its active site to achieve a balanced interplay between the AEM and LOM.60
In terms of NiFe-based materials with high activity, the widely accepted theory for their exceptional performance in the OER is that the presence of both Ni and Fe promotes electron transport and optimizes interaction energy with oxygen intermediates by influencing the electronic structure surrounding Ni or Fe sites.61 However, the “real” active site of NiFe-based materials remains a topic of debate.62 Some studies suggest that NiFe-based materials form NiOOH or FeOOH, serving as the active site through pre-oxidation or phase transformation during the OER process.63,64 In recent years, more precise Mössbauer spectroscopy has revealed that NiFe-based materials tend to produce Ni4+ or Fe4+ sites during electrolysis, which facilitates interaction with oxygen intermediates and enhances OER activity.65,66 Additionally, recent research has found that Fe sites in NiFe-based materials have a better adsorption effect on OH* and O*, leading to first and second elementary reactions in the OER. Differently, the Ni site has an optimized adsorption energy for the OOH* intermediate, which significantly impacts the third elementary reaction of the OER in the AEM.67 Therefore, it is believed that Ni and Fe play their respective roles in different stages of the OER, synergistically promoting the enhancement of OER activity. Fig. 2b displays the detailed reaction mechanism of the alkaline OER process and role of NiFe-based materials.

2.2 NiMo-based HER electrodes
In terms of HER catalysts, with abundant reserves and relatively low price, transition metals are expected to replace Pt-based precious metals as promising HER catalysts in large-scale applications. Researchers have conducted extensive research on transition metal alloy catalysts, such as Ni,68 Co,69,70 Cr,71,72 Fe,73,74etc. Among them, the NiMo-based catalysts receive the most extensive attention due to their high activity. As early as 1993, I. ARULRAJ prepared a series of binary Ni-based alloy coatings on low carbon steel by the conventional electrodeposition technology, and obtained the sequence of hydrogen evolution activity as Ni–Mo > Ni–Zn > Ni–Co > Ni–W > Ni–Fe > Ni–Cr.75 In recent years, various strategies have been employed to further improve the activity and stability of NiMo-based catalysts, such as regulating the electronic structure of catalysts and coating the catalyst surface.

2.2.1 Electronic regulation of NiMo-based catalysts. 
NiMo catalysts have good HER activity due to the intermetallic synergism between Ni and Mo.76,77 However, the simple NiMo alloy still has the problems of strong hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔGH*) and insufficient stability. Researchers usually regulate the electronic structure of NiMo-based catalysts to further improve their activity and stability through various methods, such as phase separation, surface oxidation, non-metallic element doping, and so on.
For instance, Yanshuo Jin and co-authors studied phase-separated Mo–Ni alloy (PS-MoNi). Because Mo metal phase was relatively stable and had a high breakdown potential, the PS-MoNi had better structural and electrochemical performance than the intermetallic compound MoNi alloy. As shown in Fig. 3a and b, the electrons of PS-MoNi transferred from Mo to Ni, resulting in H* having suitable adsorption free energy on the Mo surface. This indicates that electron density modulation of Mo metal by embedding Ni metal nanoparticles could also yield splendid HER activity.78 Besides, the surface oxidation of Mo in NiMo alloys was also the key to improve the HER activity. Luigi Cavallo et al. showed that Mo3+ was the dominant species during HER catalysis by Raman spectroscopy and electron paramagnetic resonance (Fig. 3c and d). The DFT simulations further confirmed the thermodynamic stability and HER activity of Mo3+ containing centers on Ni(111) at HER potentials. Noticeably, Ni was proved to disperse and activate the oxidized catalytic Mo species effectively, further improving HER performance.76
 Fig. 3  (a) The electron density of PS-MoNi and Mo metal. (b) ΔGH* on the Mo metal, Ni metal, and PS-MoNi.78 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Operando SERS of NixMoy deposited on a gold electrode under potentials close to the RHE potential. (d) EPR spectra of NixMoy electrodes held at the respective potentials in an organic electrolyte.76 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (e) HRTEM image of the NiMoN/NiN.89 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (f–h) HRTEM images of the NiMoN MP. (i) Overall water splitting at 100 mA cm−2 with a 12 h power-off state for Ni@NCNT/NiMoN-8 (+)//Ni@NCNT/NiMoN-8 (−). The stop state of 24–36 h simulates the conditions of renewable energy power outages. Inset: The photograph exhibiting H2 and O2 bubbles on the surface of the electrodes.90 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (j) Overall water splitting in the ON/OFF state at 100 mA cm−2 and 27 °C in 1.0 M KOH for NiMoS@NiFe (+)//NiMoN@NC-6 (−) and comparison system.91 Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. 
Furthermore, non-metallic elements such as S,79–81 P82–84 and N85–87 are often doped into the NiMo catalysts to further adjust the electronic structure. On the one hand, non-metallic doping can cause plentiful amorphous structure or crystal distortion of the active site; on the other hand, it can change the ΔGH* or energy level matching degree.45 Thereinto, N doping can significantly improve the activity and stability of NiMo catalysts, which are attributed to the most significant class of catalysts. The formation of metal-nitrogen bonds usually leads to the change of the state density of the metal d band, thus changing the electron density around NiMo and optimizing its surface adsorption capacity.88,89 Fuxiang Zhang et al. constructed a heterostructure catalyst composed of 1D Ni0.2Mo0.8N nanorods and 0D Ni3N nanoparticles (Fig. 3e), which showed remarkable hydrogen evolution reaction performance in alkaline medium with an overpotential of 49 mV at 10 mA cm−2. It is known that the metal properties of transition metal nitrides are conducive to improving the charge transfer efficiency. The obvious functional advantages of Ni0.2Mo0.8N and Ni3N are expressed in superiority of adsorption/activation of water and adsorption/desorption of H*/OH*.89


2.2.2 Surface coating of NiMo-based catalysts. 
Although great progress has been made in the research of NiMo-based catalysts, the long-term stability under industrial electrolytic conditions is still a key problem to be solved; especially, when it comes to electrolysis of water with renewable electricity, electrolytic cells are inevitably subjected to fluctuations in working conditions, and the surface of NiMo catalysts is more likely to be oxidized or dissolved.91 Encapsulation of NiMo active materials in a N doped carbon layer is an effective strategy to improve catalyst stability and oxidation resistance. Tatsuhiko Ohto et al. demonstrated that the activity and corrosion resistance of catalysts depended on the number of layers covered with graphene and the degree of chemical doping. Consequently, the adjustment of carbon layer thickness, defect degree and electronic structure was critical to affect the activity and stability of the coated NiMo-based catalysts for the HER.92
The hydrothermal method, impregnation method, chemical vapor deposition method, etc. have been investigated for coating a carbon layer on electrocatalysts. Hydrothermal synthesis of carbon coated catalysts involves hydrothermal reaction of carbon source solution and metal salt solution. For example, Shibin Yin and co-authors prepared a N-doped carbon-coated Ni–MoO2 nanowire catalyst by hydrothermal reaction of C19H42BrN, nickel and molybdenum metal salts, followed by heat treatment under a reductive atmosphere. The prepared (Ni–MoO2)@C/NF had good hydrogen evolution activity and excellent stability, which could be maintained for 340 h in the multi-current step test with negligible performance degradation.93
The preparation of a carbon coated catalyst by the impregnation method involves soaking the metal precursor in carbon source solution. Min Ho Seo et al. reported a Ni–Mo2C/NC Mott–Schottky array on NF (Ni–Mo2C/NC@NF) that was fabricated by sequential self-assembly of NiMoO4 nanorods and polyimide nanosheets followed by low-temperature carbothermic reaction. Ni–Mo2C/NC@NF was applied as the bifunctional electrode for symmetric water electrolysis, affording low overpotentials of only 40 mV for the HER and 337 mV for the OER at 10 mA cm−2.94
Vapor deposition is a widely used method for growing carbon clad materials because of its simplicity. Our research group synthesized a bifunctional catalyst by vapor deposition, which was composed of carbon nanotubes coated with Ni particle modified NiMoN microcolumn arrays grown on NF (Ni@NCNT/NiMoN/NF). The HRTEM images shown in Fig. 3f–h can further demonstrate the morphology and structure of the Ni@NCNT/NiMoN/NF. Benefiting from the well-designed multistage structure and the protection of the nitrogen-doped carbon layer, the prepared catalyst showed excellent activity and durability under both acidic and alkaline conditions. The electrode requires very low overpotentials of 15 mV and 31 mV to attain 10 mA cm−2 in acidic and alkaline electrolytes, respectively. Furthermore, the Ni@NCNT/NiMoN/NF possessed strong anti-oxidation ability in the simulated power ON/OFF state (Fig. 3i), demonstrating promising application in energy conversion and storage of wind power and solar power.90
In addition, our research group constructed an ultra-thin nitrogen doped carbon-coated NiMoN microrod array catalyst for the HER. The catalyst had excellent HER activity, showing an ultra-low overpotential of less than 10 mV in both 1 M KOH and 0.5 M H2SO4. Importantly, it exhibited not only high stability during the 100 h repeated power ON/OFF test (Fig. 3j), but also high oxidation resistance and corrosion resistance in an acidic electrolyte. All the results demonstrated the high activity and excellent stability of the ultra-thin nitrogen-doped carbon-encapsulated NiMoN as the HER electrode, which also had a strong ability to cope with fluctuating and harsh working conditions, demonstrating its great prospect in repeated ON/OFF electrolysis associated with changeful and renewable electric power.91

2.3 NiFe-based OER electrodes
It has been established that nickel, iron, and their oxides exhibit good electrocatalytic OER effect; especially, for NiFe-based materials, doping Fe in nickel hydroxide would significantly enhance the OER performance.95–97 Additionally, metallic substrates with open frameworks, such as nickel foams, iron foams and stainless steel nets, have been used as OER electrodes due to their active elements and conductive substrate.98 Nevertheless, bare stainless steel and metallic foam can only provide a limited number of active sites, which is not sufficient to achieve high efficiency of industrial hydrogen production by water electrolysis. Therefore, it is necessary to consider further modifying the surface of original stainless steel or employing metallic foam (i.e., nickel foam and iron foam) to provide more OER active sites. Herein, we divided the activation strategies for highly efficient OER electrocatalysts involving stainless steel or other metallic foam into two categories: loaded activation and in situ activation. The former involves the methods of electrodeposition, hydrothermal treatment, spraying and impregnation, allowing the additional OER active phase to be loaded onto the substrate. The latter can be further subdivided into electrochemical activation and corrosion activation, wherein the OER active phase is generated by the stainless steel or other metallic foam itself, enabling it to participate in a chemical reaction on their surfaces.

2.3.1 Loaded activation of NiFe-based catalysts. 
Electrodeposition is an electrochemical reduction technique that can be used to deposit precursors onto a substrate. By adjusting the potential, current, time, and precursor ratio/contents, the morphology, structure, and performance of the resulting electrodes can be optimized. This method can be conducted at normal temperature and pressure to make a popular choice for synthesizing NiFe-based catalysts. For example, our group has electrodeposited a lamellar NiFe(OH)x assembly active phase on a porous stainless steel fiber (SSF) felt by adjusting the electrodeposition time (SSF@NiFe-120). The preparation process is shown in Fig. 4a.99 As a result, this binder-free OER electrode displayed an overpotential of 210 mV (10 mA cm−2) and a Tafel slope of 42 mV dec−1. In our previous work, we also created a composite electrode (NiFe/NiMoO4/NF) consisting of ultra-fine NiFe(OH)x nanosheets electroplated on the top of the NiMoO4 micro column (Fig. 4b and c).83 This electrode displayed an OER overpotential of 300 mV at 100 mA cm−2 and an enhanced Tafel slope of 39 mV dec−1 in 1 M KOH (Fig. 4d).
 Fig. 4  (a) The schematic diagram of the electrodeposition process of SSF@NiFe-120.99 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) and (c) The morphology of NiFe/NiMoO4/NF with different magnifications. (d) The LSV polarization curves of NiFe/NiMoO4/NF in a 1 M KOH electrolyte.83 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (e) The two-step hydrothermal preparation of Ni-ANS@NiFe2O4/IF-3.100 Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (f) The cross-sectional TEM images of the OESSC sample: low magnification (left), corresponding high magnification (middle), and schematic illustration of Fe3C@G (right).101 Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (g) The operando electrochemistry/Raman measurements in 0.01 M KOH and potential range from 1.32 V to 1.92 V vs. RHE with potential steps of 0.1 V compared to OCP.102 Copyright 2023, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (h) The stability test of NiFe LDH/Ni fiber electrode based AEMWE at 0.5 A cm−2.103 Copyright 2022, MDPI. 
In general, by modulating temperature and pressure, the nucleation and growth processes of chemical reactions are accelerated, allowing us to obtain materials that would be hard to obtain under usual conditions. Therefore, the process of hydrothermal treatment is widely accepted for the supported OER electrocatalyst materials. For example, Zhang et al. reported NiFe2O4 spinel nanoparticles deposited onto iron foam via hydrothermal reaction, and subsequently, a repeated solvothermal reaction was employed to load nickel-based nano-sheets on the nanoparticles (Fig. 4e).100 This composite of the internal nanoparticles and the external nano-sheets not only had a synergistic effect, but also featured increased electrochemical active area, resulting in improved OER performance in 1 M KOH. Specifically, the OER overpotential was 209 mV (@ 10 mA cm−2) and the Tafel slope was close to 32 mV dec−1.
In addition to the above two approaches, other treatments such as plasma, coating, spraying and impregnation have been reported to be utilized as preparation methods for OER electrocatalysts via loaded activation. Lyu et al. proposed a plasma strategy for development of stainless steel-based OER electrocatalysts with strong tolerance and high activity.101 In the preparation process, the graphite-coated crystal Fe3C nanoparticles were covered with a methane-derived amorphous carbon layer (Fig. 4f). This designed OER electrode enabled the redistribution and directional movement of electrons, thus improving the OER activity and extending the lifespan of the electrocatalyst.
Stienen et al. utilized the direct metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) method to deposit a coating layer of α-Fe2O3 to nickel foam (Fe2O3@NiF-450) with great uniformity by oxidizing and decomposing Fe(CO)5 at a high temperature of 450 °C.104 This material was advantageous due to its three-dimensional framework, which allowed greater contact between the α-Fe2O3 and the electrolyte. As a result, when tested in 1 M KOH, it was found to have an OER overpotential of 370 mV (@ 10 mA cm−2) and a Tafel slope of 55 mV dec−1.
Moreover, Cechanaviciute et al. developed a spraying technique which could apply a precursor solution containing five transition metals onto a three-dimensional nickel foam (Nf) substrate.102 Among them, the CoNiFeMoCr/Nf material demonstrated a uniform component distribution on the substrate surface and visible disruptions of the lattice on its microstructure. Through operando electrochemistry/Raman measurements of CoNiFeMoCr/Nf, the in situ formation of γ-NiOOH active phase during the OER was confirmed (Fig. 4g). However, although it exhibited remarkable OER activity in an MEA configuration electrolyzer (η = 270 mV@3.0 A cm−2), its stability was compromised due to the gradual formation of agglomerates on the surface of nickel foam. Besides, the simple impregnation process is also an effective way to fabricate an active OER electrode. Guo et al. developed a nanoflower cluster-like NiFe-LDH structure (NiFe-LDHs/Ni fiber) on the nickel fiber felt through a single-step impregnation process in FeCl2 and NiCl2 mixture solution.103 This structure, due to its huge electrochemical specific surface area and excellent mass transfer effect, demonstrated a low overpotential of 208 mV (@ 10 mA cm−2) and a Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1 in 1 M KOH when used as the OER electrode. Additionally, when employed as an anode material for anion exchange membrane water electrolysis (AEMWE), the NiFe-LDH/Ni fiber could be used for 200 hours at 0.5 A cm−2 (1 M KOH, 70 °C, as shown in Fig. 4h).


2.3.2 
            In situ activation of NiFe-based catalysts. 
Electrochemical activation is a rapid, simple and adjustable method of generating an OER active phase in situ via the electrochemical oxidation and reduction of the metal matrix in a specific electrolyte when external electric energy is applied. Generally, the activation degree and phase constitution are dependent on the potential range, cycling operation number and activation time. For instance, our group modified the stainless-steel fiber felt (SSF) electrode with an ultrathin layer NiFeCr-hydroxide/oxide structure by adjusting the CV start-stop potential range (Fig. 5a).105 Based on the synergy effect between Fe, Cr and Ni, this surface modified SSF electrode displayed a low overpotential of 230 mV (@10 mA cm−2), small Tafel slope of 44 mV dec−1 and long-term stability of 550 hours in 1 M KOH.
 Fig. 5  (a) The schematic diagram of the SSF-F sample synthesized by CV in the potential range of −0.3 V to 1.7 V.105 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (b) The LSV polarization curves of Ni2Fe1-ac/SSM in 1 M KOH at 5 mV s−1 for the OER.106 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) The scheme of catalyst preparation by chloride corrosion. (d) The long-term potentiostatic assessment of NFF-AS3 in 1 M KOH at a current density of 1 A cm−2.107 Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (e) The formation of MS phase on the SS surface at ambient temperature.108 Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V. 
Additionally, the direct electrochemical activation of stainless steel or other metallic foam substrates has been proved to generate active sites, while pre-deposited components or pre-catalysts can also be activated through electrochemical means. As reported by Zhang et al., a Ni2Fe1-ac/SSM electrode was synthesized by electrochemically activating a NixFey thin film pre-deposited on stainless steel mesh.106 The surface was found to be principally composed of Ni(OH)2 and FeOOH. In 1 M KOH, electrochemical tests showed that the nickel-rich Ni2Fe1-ac/SSM featured a low overpotential of 216 mV and a long-term stability of 1000 hours at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 5b). Meanwhile, a low Tafel slope of 42.9 mV dec−1 and activation energy of 13.8 kJ mol−1 indicated a high reaction rate.
It is believed that the outstanding OER performance is due to the combined effect of the components, the uniform nanostructures and the plentiful active sites.
Compared with the above electrochemical activation, corrosion activation is a more energy-saving treatment as it greatly reduces or eliminates the need of additional electrical energy to stimulate the reaction on the metal surface. At present, the chloride ion is widely used in the corrosion activation process to de-passivate, adsorb and corrode metal materials to generate active metal hydroxide. In 2022, Wu et al. studied the effect of high concentration NaCl on the etching of ferronickel foam at room temperature assisted by the CV scanning (Fig. 5c).107 It was discovered that the CV scanning could boost the corrosion of the metal substrate, while the concentration of chloride ions and different types of anions could significantly regulate the corrosion behaviour of the metallic matrix, thus altering the morphology or composition of the produced NiFe-LDH phase. In 1 M KOH, the as-obtained NFF-AS3 electrode revealed an ultralow OER overpotential of 216 mV at 10 mA cm−2, and an 800 hour long-term stability at a high current density of 1 A cm−2 (Fig. 5d). It is remarkable that its long-term stability was attributed to the ultra-small size of NiFe-LDH, which was in close contact with the metal substrate by in situ corrosion reaction.
In addition to the chloride ions, the ferric ions (Fe3+) are typically examined in the synthesis of active OER electrodes. Zhou et al. employed an in situ corrosion–vulcanization treatment strategy, which involved the use of Fe3+ to etch nickel–molybdenum foam, followed by electrochemical oxidation activation.108 The as-synthesized S-doped NiFe LDH (S-NiFe-LDH-A) had a large number of grain boundaries (Fig. 5e), thus increasing its electrochemical activity. In 1 M KOH electrolyte, the S-NiFe-LDH-A exhibited an overpotential of 270 mV (@ 50 mA cm−2) and a stability of 32 hours. Despite the NiFe-LDH exhibiting promising OER activity after ferric iron corrosion and vulcanization, the potential dissolution of S, unclear role of Mo element and the crystal phase transformation due to S doping might lower the OER performance.

3. Hydrogen production based on novel alkaline water electrolysis
The development of more efficient electrocatalysts for the HER and OER is essential in order to reduce the overpotential and accelerate the kinetics of electrochemical reactions involved in water splitting. To this end, the traditional water splitting process can be improved by introducing thermodynamically more favourable electrochemical reactions to replace the OER at the anode, thus reducing the voltage during the overall reaction and achieving efficient hydrogen production. Additionally, advanced electrolyzer configurations can be employed to decouple the OER and HER in terms of time and space, thus reducing the cost of electrolyzers and improving the safety of hydrogen production.
3.1 Hydrogen production assisted by small energetic molecule oxidation
Compared with the HER, the OER is a relatively complex four-electron transfer process with essentially slow reaction kinetics and a high theoretical potential (1.23 V vs. RHE), greatly reducing the efficiency of energy conversion for hydrogen electrolysis.111,112 At the same time, the O2 produced in the OER process has the potential danger tendency to form an explosive mixture of H2 and oxygen through the possible leakage.113 An effective strategy to solve this problem is to replace the OER with a thermodynamically more favourable small-molecule oxidation reaction. The mechanism and the related catalysts for common small molecule oxidation reactions are shown as below sections.

3.1.1 Borohydride oxidation reaction (BOR) mechanism. 
The hydrogen content in sodium borohydride (SB) is up to 10.6 wt%. So SB is widely used as a chemical hydrogen storage material for hydrogen production from either sodium borohydride decomposition or direct (derivation from) sodium borohydride fuel cells. The oxidation of sodium borohydride is a complex surface catalytic process that usually involves transfer of less than 8 electrons. As shown in Fig. 6a, depending on the number of transferred electrons, the reaction process and oxidation products of sodium borohydride are different. The electrochemical oxidation pathway of sodium borohydride in an alkaline environment can be summarized asNaBH4 + zOH− → NaBO2 + (z − 2) H2O + (4 − z/2) H2 + ze−Upon completion of 8 electron transfer, NaBO2 is formed without evolution of hydrogen gas. Conversely, if the number of transferred electrons is less than 8, namely, both Faraday process and non-Faraday process occur on the catalyst surface at the same time, borate and hydrogen will be formed simultaneously, leading to a decrease in the current efficiency of electrochemical oxidation of sodium borohydride.109,114
 Fig. 6  (a) The different mechanisms of borohydride oxidation reaction with different transfer electron numbers.109 Copyright 2008, The Electrochemical Society. (b) The mechanism of the dynamic electrochemical processes involved during UOR on the catalyst surface.110 Copyright 2022, Elsevier Inc. 


3.1.2 Urea oxidation (UOR) mechanism. 
The theoretical oxidation potential of urea is relatively low (0.37 V vs. RHE), so the total voltage of urea electrolysis is much lower than the total voltage of water electrolysis (1.23 V). Electrolytic hydrogen production assisted by urea can effectively reduce the energy consumption, while efficiently degrading urea-rich wastewater. Currently, UOR is commonly studied in alkaline solutions, and the oxidation reaction is as follows:CO(NH2)2 + 6OH− → N2 + CO2 + 5H2O + 6e−At present, three typical transition metal oxides, including the rock salt-structured NiO, spinel-type Co3O4, and hematite α-Fe2O3, are used as model catalysts for UOR. The dynamic electrochemical processes involved during catalysis are shown in Fig. 6b, including urea adsorption, dissociation, and further electrochemical oxidation.110


3.1.3 Ni-based catalyst for BOR. 
The theoretical potential of sodium borohydride oxidation reaction is more negative (−0.41 V vs. RHE), which can be used in an anode reaction for electrolytic hydrogen production of sodium borohydride and in direct sodium borohydride fuel cells (DBFCs). The number of active sites and the adsorption capacity for BH4− of the catalyst surface determine the electrocatalytic oxidation activity of sodium borohydride. Meanwhile, multi-component non-noble metal composites, such as Ni-based catalysts, can capture the reaction intermediates due to the synergistic action of different metals, increase the residence time of the intermediates on the catalyst surface and promote the further oxidation of BH4−. Our research group fabricated the carbon layer-encapsulated NiMo nitride micropillars through a simple two-step method (NiMoN@NC, as shown in Fig. 7a).115 The as-prepared electrode exhibited remarkable activity toward BOR oxidation with high current at low potential (123 mA cm−2@0 V vs. RHE), offering small activation energy (16.2 kJ mol−1), and long durability. The DBFC employing NiMoN@NC as the anodic electrocatalyst showed a great power density of 67 mW cm−2 at room temperature with good stability. In addition, we proposed a new electrochemically regulatory ON/OFF switching technique for controllable BOR.116 Specifically, switching to high potential could electrochemically oxidize the catalyst and inhibit the adsorption of borohydride to stop the hydrolysis of NaBH4, while switching to low potential could electrochemically reduce the catalyst to form an unoccupied d orbital and promote the adsorption of borohydride for starting the hydrolysis (Fig. 7b). The only operation was changing the potential of the catalyst. Thereby, an on-demand production could be realized by simply adjusting the potential of NiMoN@NC to start/stop the hydrogen generation by BH4− hydrolysis.
 Fig. 7  (a) The schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the hierarchical sea urchin-like NiMoN@NC catalyst.115 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (b) The chronoamperometry test of NiMoN@NC at different potentials with an interval of 0.04 V for 300 s in 1 M NaOH with 0.05 M NaBH4 and the inset shows the schematic of the start/stop reaction mechanism.116 Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the Ni–WOx catalyst. (d) Polarization curves of Ni–WOx in 1 M KOH with and without 0.33 M urea at a scan rate of 10 mVs−1; the inset shows an energy diagram representing the kinetics of the OER and UOR.117 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH. 


3.1.4 Ni-based catalyst for UOR. 
UOR can utilize urea in wastewater and has a low theoretical voltage (0.37 V vs. RHE). Therefore, the combination of UOR and HER can simultaneously achieve wastewater treatment and efficient H2 generation, which is an attractive approach. However, UOR is a six-electron transfer process and suffers from inherently slow kinetics. Therefore, the development of highly active UOR catalysts is still a difficult task. Nickel-based (Ni) catalysts have been widely studied and reported for their excellent UOR properties, and their catalytic activity can be further adjusted by high metal doping strategies. For example, Huisheng Peng et al. developed a tungsten-nickel doped catalyst (Ni–WOx) with excellent activity to UOR.117 The schematic illustration of the catalyst and performance test are shown in Fig. 7c and d. The Ni–WOx catalyst exhibited record fast reaction kinetics and a high turnover frequency of 0.11 s−1, 4.8 times that of the non-W doped metal. Various types of characterization show that W dopants can regulate the local charge distribution of Ni atoms, which leads to the formation of Ni3+ sites with higher activity, thus accelerating the interfacial catalytic reaction. In addition, electron transfer from Ni to W atoms leads to the formation of locally electron-deficient and electron-rich regions, which favour the adsorption of –NH2 and CO groups, respectively.

3.2 Hydrogen production assisted by redox mediator decoupled water electrolysis
The decoupled redox mediator-assisted hydrogen production process is a form of separating the HER and OER in different spaces or time. This process is accomplished by introducing one or more electrochemical redox reaction pairs into the OWS system, resulting in higher purity of hydrogen products, lower cell voltage and improved energy efficiency.41 Currently, research in this field is focused on the development of redox mediators (RMs) with high reversibility and fast kinetic properties. To be successful in decoupling the traditional water splitting process, the RMs must have a thermodynamic equilibrium potential between the thermodynamic equilibrium potentials of the HER and OER, a rapid dynamic process, and an enough ability to provide large redox capacitance when coupled with the HER or OER. Furthermore, they should maintain good durability during oxidation and reduction reactions.

3.2.1 Solid-state Ni-based and Fe-based RM mechanism. 
Usually, the NiOOH/Ni(OH)2 electrode pair is the most popular choice for RMs due to its proper thermodynamic potential and kinetic characteristics. This pair can remain stable in alkaline environments and undergo redox reactions, making it a viable option. The reversible reaction process in electrolytes is as follows.121
Electrochemical oxidation reaction:Ni(OH)2 + OH− → NiOOH + H2O + e−
Electrochemical reduction reaction:NiOOH + H2O+ e− → Ni(OH)2 + OH−Notably, NiOOH is highly sensitive to temperature and can be thermally decomposed into Ni(OH)2 near 100 °C, thus providing an alternative route for the production of Ni(OH)2:1192NiOOH + H2O → 2Ni(OH)2 + 1/2O2For Fe-based RMs, iron oxide (FeOx, x = 0–3) materials can be used due to their ability to stably conduct oxidation–reduction reactions at a certain current density in alkaline electrolytes. The electrochemical oxidation reaction is as follows:120Fe(0) → Fe(II) → Fe(III)Electrochemical reduction reaction:Fe(III) → Fe(II) → Fe(0)Meanwhile, based on the nickel-iron battery principle, the Fe(OH)2/Fe pair is also a feasible RM when combined with the NiOOH/Ni(OH)2 pair under alkaline conditions. The detailed reaction process is described as below:122
Electrochemical oxidation reaction:Fe + 2OH− → Fe(OH)2 + 2e−Electrochemical reduction reaction:Fe(OH)2 + 2e− → Fe + 2OH−


3.2.2 Ni-based catalyst as a redox mediator for hydrogen production. 
Rothschild and Grader's group creatively proposed the concept of decoupling water decomposition in a photoelectrochemical (PEC) system for generating hydrogen.118 This technology utilized Ni(OH)2/NiOOH, a material commonly found in secondary batteries, as a RM for the conduction of OH− ions. In the oxygen cell, the OH− released by the charged NiOOH (NiOOH + 4H2O + 4e− → 4Ni(OH)2 + 4OH−) combined with the photogenerated holes (4hν → 4e− + 4h+), resulting in the production of oxygen (4OH− + 4h+ →2H2O + O2). In the hydrogen cell, the discharged Ni(OH)2 adsorbed the OH− from the solution (4Ni(OH)2 + 4OH− → 4NiOOH + 4H2O + 4e−), providing electrons to the cathode and releasing hydrogen (4H2O + 4e− → 2H2 + 4OH−). The use of Ni(OH)2/NiOOH as a solid RM in a PEC powered hydrogen production system enabled the efficient spatial separation of oxygen evolution and hydrogen production (as depicted in Fig. 8a). This technology offered various advantages, such as allowing for large-scale application of PEC powered hydrogen production, eliminating the potential danger of hydrogen and oxygen mixing, and simplifying the piping manifold configurations to store the oxygen and hydrogen generated. Additionally, owing to the absence of diaphragm, the cost of electrolyzers was reduced. However, its practical application was limited by the low efficiency of solar energy to hydrogen (STH) conversion and the low capacitance of the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH RM.123 Once the capacity of the RM was full, manual exchange of the oxidized and reduced electrodes would be required. Even though the authors have considered the design of additional electrode reserve to make full use of the system maintenance during periods of darkness (Fig. 8b), further progress and utilization were still hindered.
 Fig. 8  (a) Separate-cell configuration for decoupled PEC water splitting with an oxygen-producing tandem PEC-PV cell and a hydrogen producing electrolytic cell connected to each other electrically and (b) digital photographs of the electrochemical hydrogen generation cell.118 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. (c) The schematic of the E-TAC water-splitting process. (d) and (e) The schematic of the multi-cell E-TAC process.119 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (f) The diagram of the anodic-cathodic reactions based on hybrid electrodes and three-electrode configuration. (g)–(i) The digital photographs of the dual electrolyte battery.120 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In comparison with intermittent solar light-driven hydrogen production, direct current to decouple water electrolysis equipment is more efficient. Rothschild and Grader's group also proposed a two-step electrochemistry-thermal activation chemical cycle (E-TAC) strategy as an alternative to drive the hydrogen production.119 In the first step, this strategy involved the use of direct current to electrolyze water in order to produce hydrogen at the cathode (4H2O + 4e− → 2H2 + 4OH−), and to conduct the oxidation of a stable Ni(OH)2 electrode (Ni(OH)2 + OH− → NiOOH + H2O + e−) at the auxiliary electrode. Subsequently, through high temperature chemical decomposition, oxygen could be generated at the anode by elevating the electrolyte to 95 °C for 100 s (4NiOOH + 2H2O → 4Ni(OH)2 + O2), simultaneously producing Ni(OH)2 for the next cycle (Fig. 8c). This study demonstrated the E-TAC strategy that could achieve a current density of 200 mA cm−2 and a voltage efficiency of 98.7% at a voltage of 1.60 V. The key Ni(OH)2/NiOOH RM had been rigorously tested and proven to be capable of having good redox properties with a high Faraday efficiency and avoiding OER side reactions. Additionally, Co doping in Ni(OH)2 could further decrease the overpotential of the Ni(OH)2 oxidation reaction. The feasibility of the multi-cell structure and operation in buffer electrolyte systems (K2CO3 and KHCO3) have been identified and analysed (Fig. 8d and e). This E-TAC technology provided a simplified capacitance recovery method for the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH RM, thus enabling more efficient and large-scale hydrogen production processes. It is theoretically feasible to produce hydrogen without interruption by only two cells. However, there are some practical issues to be considered. For instance, the as-prepared Ni(OH)2 electrodes possess a low active capacity (5 C cm−2), limiting the rate of hydrogen production. To accelerate the above process, a metal foam- or carbon cloth-supported nanosheet Ni(OH)2 electrode, which has a larger electrochemical active surface area, is recommended.124,125 Additionally, although the Co-doped Ni(OH)2 electrode has demonstrated a good parallelism for 10 cycles, frequent start-up/shutdown of the electrolyzer may lead to a decreased stability of both the cathode and anode due to the impacts of on-off current in a multi-cell structure.126


3.2.3 Fe-based catalyst as a redox mediator for hydrogen production. 
Iron-based materials, comparable to nickel-based ones, show multiple valence changes and compounds such as FeOx (Fe = II or III) and a considerable capacitance of around 1005 mA h g−1, making them a suitable material for RMs. Jin et al. proposed a decoupling water splitting apparatus with a three-electrode structure (Fig. 8f),120 wherein the cathode and anode were involved in the electrochemical discharge process to produce hydrogen:Cathode: H+ + 2e− → H2Anode: Fe(0) → Fe(II) → Fe(III) (on RM FeOx)To finish the complete water electrolysis, the OER process took place in the electrochemical charging process, which involved an anode and an auxiliary electrode:Auxiliary electrode: 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−Anode: Fe(III) → Fe(II) → Fe(0) (on RM FeOx)The above structure enabled the separation of hydrogen production in space and time, thereby improving the safety of hydrogen production (Fig. 8g–i). It is essential to note that the FeOx/NF electrode used as the RM operated in an alkaline electrolyte (pH = 14), while the hydrogen-producing electrode was used in an acidic electrolyte (pH = 0). This arrangement remarkably reduced the theoretical voltage of overall water-splitting from the traditional 1.23 V to 0.40 V and increased the overall energy efficiency of hydrogen production from ∼68% to 88.4% at 25 °C. Furthermore, the electrochemical system (Pt/C//FeOx) composed of FeOx/NF RM as the anode and Pt/C as the hydrogen evolution cathode could provide a current density of 500 mA g−1 (@∼1.6 V) and exhibited outstanding tolerance effect. Additionally, the introduction of activated carbon as a capacitive anode enabled the successful implementation of photoelectrochemical (PEC) driven coupled water electrolysis, which demonstrated good stability, high Faraday efficiency and good capacity retention. Although this decoupled water-splitting reaction driven by a redox mediator with hybrid electrodes and three-electrode configuration had been demonstrated to be effective, the pH changes in the catholyte and anolyte would be a concern. With the progress of hydrogen production, the proton in the catholyte was consumed, and the pH gradually increased. Besides, the hydroxide ions in the anolyte were consumed, leading to the gradual decrease of pH. In addition, the Fe ions from FeOx that were dissolved in the electrolyte during the redox cycle might continue to contaminate the membrane and reduce the electrolytic efficiency.127 Besides, the gradual accumulation of K2SO4 in the anolyte might also affect the permeability of the membrane.

4 Conclusions
The development of water electrolysis powered by renewable energy sources is proposed as a viable solution for green hydrogen production. Recently, research into the electrode materials for traditional alkaline water electrolysis has progressed from the effect of surface and interface composition to examining microstructural and electronic properties, which has significantly increased the activity of HER and OER electrodes. Additionally, for the successful implementation of large-scale hydrogen production by alkaline water electrolysis, it is essential to not only enhance the activity of the electrocatalysts, but also ensure the stability and safety. By innovating electrode reactions and utilizing electrochemical principles, it is possible to elevate the efficiency of traditional alkaline water electrolysis to fulfil the purpose of hydrogen production and the needs of various application scenarios.
This review investigates the NiMo- and NiFe-based electrocatalysts for hydrogen production by traditional alkaline water electrolysis. The preparation method, electrolyte system and electrochemical performance of the catalysts involved are shown in Table 1. For the HER, by regulating the electronic structure and coating a carbon layer doped with nitrogen on the transition metal matrix of NiMo-based electrodes, they can achieve optimal activity and stability, respectively. For the OER, two strategies of loading activation and in situ activation for synthesis of NiFe-based electrodes are explored, taking into consideration the requirements of metallic/alloy substrates for industrial water electrolysis to generate hydrogen. Besides, this review also summarizes the principle of hydrogen production assisted by small energetic molecule oxidation, the structure characteristics, the regulation methods and the hydrogen production performance of Ni-based electrocatalysts. Furthermore, the concept, creativity and restrictions of the solid-state Ni- and Fe-based redox mediators as auxiliary electrodes in the process of hydrogen production, which is assisted by decoupled water electrolysis, are discussed.
Table 1 Typical catalysts listed in this paper




Reaction types
Catalysts
Electrolyte & substrates
Compound methods
Overpotential (mV) @10 mA cm−2
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Ref.




HER
PS-NiMo
1 M KOH, nickel foam
Hydrothermal + heat treatment
30
37

79



NiMoN/NiN
1 M KOH, nickel foam
Solvothermal + pyrolysis process
49
70

89



(Ni−MoO2)@C/NF
1 M KOH, nickel foam
Hydrothermal + annealing process
50
50

93



Ni–Mo2C/NC@NF
1 M KOH, nickel foam
Hydrothermal + pyrolysis process
40
54

94



Ni@NCNT/NiMoN
1 M KOH, nickel foam
Hydrothermal + pyrolysis process
15
68

90



NiMoN@NC
1 M KOH, nickel foam
Hydrothermal + pyrolysis process
8
39.1

91



OER
SSF@NiFe-120
1 M KOH, SSF
Electrodeposition
210
42

99



NiFe/NiMoO4/NF
1 M KOH, nickel foam
Hydrothermal process + electrodeposition
210
39

83



Ni-ANS@NiFe2O4/IF-3
1 M KOH, iron foam
Hydrothermal process
209
32

100



Fe3C@G
1 M KOH, SS
Plasma strategy
290
38

101



Fe2O3@NiF-450
1 M KOH, nickel foam
Metalorganic vapor deposition
370
55

104



NiFe-LDHs/Ni fiber
1 M KOH, nickel fiber
Single-step impregnation process
208
50

103



NiFeCr-SSF
1 M KOH, SSF
Electrochemical activation
230
44

105



Ni2Fe1-ac/SSM
1 M KOH, SS mesh
Electrochemical activation
216
42.9

106



NFF-AS3
1 M KOH, NiFe foam
Corrosion activation
216
43.2

107



S-NiFe-LDHA
1 M KOH, MoNi foam
Corrosion activation
270 mV @ 50 mA cm−2
40

108



BOR
NiMoN@NC
1 M NaOH + 0.05 M NaBH4, nickel foam
Hydrothermal + pyrolysis process
55
—

115



UOR
Ni–WOx
1 M KOH + 0.33 M urea, no substrate
Coprecipitation + annealing process
1.4 V @ 100 mA cm−2
39

117





Despite the considerable efforts and developments to enhance the activity and durability of HER and OER electrocatalysts based on the Ni- and Fe-based catalysts for hydrogen production by traditional and novel alkaline water electrolysis, there are still some issues that must be solved. The outlooks are as follows:
(1) At present, most non-noble metal electrode materials still have the problem of lack of stability under actual working conditions. Firstly, the mechanical stability of the supported catalyst is poor, and it is easy to fall off. Secondly, the gas and impurities in the process of electrolysis will deactivate the active site of the catalyst. In order to address the crucial issue of stability and gain a comprehensive understanding of the deactivation process of electrode materials, it is necessary to utilize various on-line analysis and characterization techniques, such as in situ spectroscopy/electrochemical characterization techniques. In addition, researchers should be encouraged to develop or improve various photoelectric chemical instruments to improve research efficiency.
(2) Moreover, to couple renewable energy sources with a cost-effective hydrogen production process, it is imperative to thoroughly assess the activity and stability of Ni- and Fe-based HER and OER electrode materials under intermittent or even frequent start-up/shutdown (or called ON/OFF) conditions.
(3) The hydrogen production assisted by both the small energetic molecule oxidation and the redox mediator decoupled water electrolysis is still in the initial stage, which is desired to be intensively investigated.
(4) To improve the Faraday efficiency for the oxidation of small energetic molecules, and to suppress the occurrence of non-faradaic processes, a suitable Ni- or Fe-based electrode with optimal intermediate adsorption ability and adjustable redox potential control should be developed.
(5) Additionally, to further increase the rate and output of hydrogen production, research on the active surface and dielectric properties of Ni- or Fe-based redox mediators is essential, as these can assist in improving their charge storage capabilities.
In summary, the development of Ni- and Fe-based electrode materials for both traditional and novel alkaline water electrolysis can be mutually beneficial. The texture and electronic structure studies of electrocatalysts in the traditional mode can be used as a reference for the novel mode. On the contrary, progress made in the novel mode can inspire the development of HER and OER materials.
We believed this overview, utilizing the Ni-based and Fe-based electrode materials to bridge the advancements between the traditional and novel alkaline water electrolysis for hydrogen production, is expected to inspire readers to improve the performance of Ni- and Fe-based electrode materials in the hydrogen production process by alkaline water electrolysis.
Author contributions
Rufei Zhang: writing-original draft, writing-review & editing and visualization. Ao Xie: writing-original draft, writing-review & editing and visualization. Linting Cheng: writing-review & editing. Zhiqun Bai: investigation. Yang Tang: conceptualization, writing-review & editing, funding acquisition, supervision. Pingyu Wan: supervision, project administration, funding acquisition.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Project no. 2021YFB3301101); the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. JD2314, JD2212); the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 22075012, 21506010) and the Zhongguancun Frontier Technology and Industrial Service Alliance. The authors especially thank Prof. Xiaoguang Liu for important discussions and suggestions of this work.
References
W. Strielkowski, L. Civin, E. Tarkhanova, M. Tvaronaviciene and Y. Petrenko, Energies, 2021, 14, 8240 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Panchenko, Y. V. Daus, A. A. Kovalev, I. V. Yudaev and Y. V. Litti, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2023, 48, 4551–4571 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ursúa, I. San Martín, E. L. Barrios and P. Sanchis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14952–14967 CrossRef .
A. Townsend and R. Gouws, Energies, 2022, 15, 4930 CrossRef CAS .
G. Thenmozhi, S. J. Alexis, S. Mohankumar, K. Natarajan, M. Sasidharan, R. Dinesh and V. Vidhya, AIP Conf. Proc., 2022, 2446, 100003 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jing, X. Li, H. Yu, X. An, Z. Liu, A. Zhang, X. Qin, C. Li and D. Fang, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 455, 140789 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, A. Mu, L. Wu, B. Yang, Y. Qian and J. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 7786–7810 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brauns and T. Turek, Processes, 2020, 8, 248 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ursúa, E. L. Barrios, J. Pascual, I. San Martín and P. Sanchis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 12852–12861 CrossRef .
M. Chatenet, B. G. Pollet, D. R. Dekel, F. Dionigi, J. Deseure, P. Millet, R. D. Braatz, M. Z. Bazant, M. Eikerling, I. Staffell, P. Balcombe, Y. Shao-Horn and H. Schäfer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 4583–4762 RSC .
H. Wu, Y. Wang, Z. Shi, X. Wang, J. Yang, M. Xiao, J. Ge, W. Xing and C. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 13170–13189 RSC .
J. Yu, Q. He, G. Yang, W. Zhou, Z. Shao and M. Ni, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9973–10011 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, C. Fang, X. Jiang, D. Zhang and Z. Cui, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 4377–4386 RSC .
S. Deng, C. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Ji, B. Mei, Z. Yao and S. Lin, Catalysts, 2023, 13, 174 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, J. Z. Soo, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish, K. Catchpole and S. K. Karuturi, Adv. Energy Sustainability Res., 2021, 2, 2000071 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sivanantham, P. Ganesan and S. Shanmugam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4661–4672 CrossRef CAS .
X. Long, G. Li, Z. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Zhang, S. Xiao, W. Guo and S. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11900–11903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lalwani, M. AlNahyan, A. Al Zaabi, F. AlMarzooqi and A. Qurashi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 14571–14592 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pan, Z. Tang, D. Sun and Y. Zhan, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 436, 141393 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jia, J. Li, X. Yu, L. Feng, L. Yang, Y. Yang, W. Ye and B. Liu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2023, 6, 1050–1058 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, X. Zheng, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Bajdich, M. García-Melchor, L. Han, J. Xu, M. Liu, L. Zheng, F. P. García de Arquer, C. T. Dinh, F. Fan, M. Yuan, E. Yassitepe, N. Chen, T. Regier, P. Liu, Y. Li, P. De Luna, A. Janmohamed, H. L. Xin, H. Yang, A. Vojvodic and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2016, 352, 333–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Görlin, J. Ferreira de Araújo, H. Schmies, D. Bernsmeier, S. Dresp, M. Gliech, Z. Jusys, P. Chernev, R. Kraehnert, H. Dau and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2070–2082 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, M. R. Lohe, J. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 478–483 RSC .
X. Long, S. Xiao, Z. Wang, X. Zheng and S. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1120–1123 RSC .
B. Zhang, C. Xiao, S. Xie, J. Liang, X. Chen and Y. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6934–6941 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Zhang and X. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 325, 122311 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, C. Cao, W. Wei, S. Zhou, X.-T. Wu and Q.-L. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 5817–5823 RSC .
Z. Wei, M. Guo and Q. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 322, 122101 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhiani, M. M. Taghiabadi and M. H. Bagherabadi, Electrocatalysis, 2023, 14, 473–483 CrossRef CAS .
H. Koshikawa, H. Murase, T. Hayashi, K. Nakajima, H. Mashiko, S. Shiraishi and Y. Tsuji, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1886–1893 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, F. Yu, Q. Zhu, J. Sun, F. Qin, L. Yu, J. Bao, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2858–2864 RSC .
F. Yang, T. Wang, X. Deng, J. Dang, Z. Huang, S. Hu, Y. Li and M. Ouyang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 31467–31488 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Esposito, Joule, 2017, 1, 651–658 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhang, H. Liu and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 435, 141406 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, X. Cao and L. Jiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202213328 CAS .
L. G. Bloor, R. Solarska, K. Bienkowski, P. J. Kulesza, J. Augustynski, M. D. Symes and L. Cronin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6707–6710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, Y. Bian, S. Jin, D. Sun and Z. J. Ren, ACS Environ. Au, 2022, 2, 20–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang and Q. Wang, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 641–651 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. McHugh, A. D. Stergiou and M. D. Symes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002453 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang and Y. Wang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100138 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jung, S. Choung and J. W. Han, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 6797–6826 RSC .
X. Yan, Y. Jia and X. Yao, Small Struct., 2020, 2, 2000067 CrossRef .
H. Xu, Y. Han, Q. Wu, Y. Jia, Q. Li, X. Yan and X. Yao, Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 1248–1267 RSC .
F. Liu, C. Shi, X. Guo, Z. He, L. Pan, Z. F. Huang, X. Zhang and J. J. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2200307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Yusuf, W. Yaseen, M. Xie, R. S. Zayyan, A. I. Muhammad, R. Nankya, J. Xie and Y. Xu, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2023, 311, 102811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, F. Xu, H. Jin, Y. Chen and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605838 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Theerthagiri, S. J. Lee, A. P. Murthy, J. Madhavan and M. Y. Choi, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2020, 24, 100805 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, L. Zhang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2620–2645 RSC .
M. Luo, J. Yang, X. Li, M. Eguchi, Y. Yamauchi and Z.-L. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2023, 14, 3400–3414 RSC .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Liu, Z. Liao, S. Liu, X. Zhuang, M. Chen, E. Zschech and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Bau, S. M. Kozlov, L. M. Azofra, S. Ould-Chikh, A.-H. Emwas, H. Idriss, L. Cavallo and K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 12858–12866 CrossRef CAS .
W. Du, Y. Shi, W. Zhou, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7051–7055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bao, E. Kemppainen, I. Dorbandt, R. Bors, F. Xi, R. Schlatmann, R. van de Krol and S. Calnan, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 8, 195–208 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, W. Xiao, W. H. Guo, Y. X. Yang, J. L. Lei, H. Q. Luo and N. B. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102117 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Kwon, H. Park, S. E. Jun, S. Choi and H. W. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 7874–7889 RSC .
L. An, C. Wei, M. Lu, H. Liu, Y. Chen, G. N. G. Scherer, A. C. Fisher, P. Xi, Z. J. Xu and C.-H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Rong, J. Parolin and A. M. Kolpak, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1153–1158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, S. Hu, W. Chen, Z.-Q. Huang, W. Wei, T. Yao, R. Liu, K. Zang, X. Wang, G. Wu, W. Yuan, T. Yuan, B. Zhu, W. Liu, Z. Li, D. He, Z. Xue, Y. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Dong, C.-R. Chang, Y. Chen, X. Hong, J. Luo, S. Wei, W.-X. Li, P. Strasser, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 304–313 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Yoo, X. Rong, Y. Liu and A. M. Kolpak, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4628–4636 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, W. Chen, X. Zheng, D. He, Y. Luo, X. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Wu, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, X. Hong and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 167–174 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lei, D. Huang, C. Zhou, S. Chen, X. Yan, Z. Li and W. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 408, 213177 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dionigi and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600621 CrossRef .
D. Friebel, M. W. Louie, M. Bajdich, K. E. Sanwald, Y. Cai, A. M. Wise, M.-J. Cheng, D. Sokaras, T.-C. Weng, R. Alonso-Mori, R. C. Davis, J. R. Bargar, J. K. Nørskov, A. Nilsson and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1305–1313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. C. Chen, L. Dang, H. Liang, W. Bi, J. B. Gerken, S. Jin, E. E. Alp and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15090–15093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, D. K. Bediako, R. G. Hadt, D. Hayes, T. J. Kempa, F. von Cube, D. C. Bell, L. X. Chen and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 1486–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, X. Zhang, Z. Xia, M. Shu, H. Li, X. Xu, R. Si, A. I. Rykov, J. Wang, S. Yu, S. Wang and G. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14001–14010 RSC .
J. Wang, S. Xin, Y. Xiao, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, W. Zhang, C. Li, R. Bao, J. Peng, J. Yi and S. Chou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, 202202518 Search PubMed .
S. Shen, Z. Wang, Z. Lin, K. Song, Q. Zhang, F. Meng, L. Gu and W. Zhong, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2110631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, Q. Liu, Y. Diao, L. Wei, J. Chen and F. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2103732 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian, X. Wang, H. Jiang, S. Li, C. Li, S. Li, R. Ma and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 18607–18615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bao, Z. Yang, Y. Yuan, P. Yu, G. Zeng, Y. Cheng, Y. Lu, J. Zhang and H. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2108991 CrossRef .
L. Xiong, B. Wang, H. Cai, H. Hao, J. Li, T. Yang and S. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 295, 120283 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, G. Cheng, S. Peng, M. Sun, S. Wang, S. Han, Y. Liu, T. Zhai and L. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132699 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Raj, J. Mater. Sci., 1993, 28, 4375–4382 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Bau, S. M. Kozlov, L. M. Azofra, S. Ould-Chikh, A.-H. Emwas, H. Idriss, L. Cavallo and K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 12858–12866 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McKone, B. F. Sadtler, C. A. Werlang, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 166–169 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, Y. Q. Jin, L. Zhang, P. Dong, J. Li, F. Xie, H. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Jin, H. Meng and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003511 CrossRef CAS .
X. Mei, C. Li, F. L.-Y. Lam and X. Hu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 6172–6179 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kuang, T. Tong, K. Fan and J. Yu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6179–6187 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kuang, M. He, H. Zou, J. Yu and K. Fan, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 15–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. Zhang, G. Yang, W. Song, W. Zhong, X. Wang, M. Wang, T. Sun and Y. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101532 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhuang, S. Tong, H. Wang, H. Xiong, Y. Gong, Y. Tang, J. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Wan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 24546–24558 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, W. Tian, X. Lv, F. Wang, Z. Hu, K. Ma, C. Wang, T. Yang and J. Ji, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 587, 855–863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Yu, G. Xiong, H. Niu, Y. Li, D. Sun, X. Zhang, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2105869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Yu, J. Jia, F. Liu, Y. Zhang, G. Xiong, R. Zhang, R. Yang, D. Sun, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 118956 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, L. Yu, W. Zhang, Q. Xiao, J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, P. An, J. Zhang and Y. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 276, 119137 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shang, Y. Zhao, X.-Y. Kong, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Wen and T. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105375 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, L. Guo, J. Zhang, Y. Qiao, M. He, Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Shi and F. Zhang, Small, 2022, 18, 2201927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, L. Wang, H. Xiong, M. Shao, L. Xu, A. Xie, S. Zhuang, Y. Tang, X. Yang, Y. Chen and P. Wan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13671–13678 RSC .
R. Zhang, L. Xu, Z. Wu, L. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Tang, L. Xu, A. Xie, Y. Chen, H. Zhang and P. Wan, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 436, 134931 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hu, T. Ohto, Y. Nagata, M. Wakisaka, Y. Aoki, J. I. Fujita and Y. Ito, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qian, J. Chen, L. Luo, T. Yu, Y. Wang, W. Jiang, Q. Xu, S. Feng and S. Yin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 12063–12071 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, S. Jin, M. H. Seo and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 292, 120168 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 23–39 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Seiger and R. Shair, Oxygen evolution from heavily doped nickel oxide electrodes, Electrochemical Soc Inc 65 South Main Street, Pennington, NJ 08534,  1961 Search PubMed .
R. L. Tichenor, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1952, 44, 973–977 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. K. Lodhi, K. M. Deen and W. Haider, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 24698–24704 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, G. Duan, C. Chang, Y. Chen, Y. Sun, Y. Tang, P. Wan and J. Pan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 9885–9895 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Ye, M. Zhang, L. Ma and Y. Gong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 589, 152957 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lyu, R. Wang, L. Tao, Y. Zou, H. Zhou, T. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Huo, S. P. Jiang, J. Zheng and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 277–285 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Cechanaviciute, R. P. Antony, O. A. Krysiak, T. Quast, S. Dieckhöfer, S. Saddeler, P. Telaar, Y.-T. Chen, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202218493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Guo, J. Chi, H. Yu, G. Jiang and Z. Shao, Energies, 2022, 15, 4645 CrossRef CAS .
C. Stienen and G. Bendt, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 5954–5961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, C. Chang, Y. Sun, G. Duan, Y. Chen, J. Pan, Y. Tang and P. Wan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 1810–1821 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Bai, C. Zhang, H. Gao, J. Niu, Y. Shi, Y. Zhang, M. Song and Z. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14601–14610 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, Y. Zhu, G. Yang, H. Zhou, R. Li, S. Chen, H. Li, L. Li, O. Fontaine and J. Deng, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 446, 136833 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-N. Zhou, W.-L. Yu, Y.-N. Cao, J. Zhao, B. Dong, Y. Ma, F.-L. Wang, R.-Y. Fan, Y.-L. Zhou and Y.-M. Chai, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 292, 120150 CrossRef CAS .
V. W. S. Lam and E. L. Gyenge, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, 1155–1160 CrossRef .
J. Ge, Z. Liu, M. Guan, J. Kuang, Y. Xiao, Y. Yang, C. H. Tsang, X. Lu and C. Yang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 620, 442–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Cao, Z. Chen, H. Wu, P. Yu, Y. Wang, F. Xiao, S. Chen, S. Du, Y. Xie, Y. Wu and Z. Ren, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4154–4160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, C. Wei, Z. F. Huang, C. Liu, L. Zeng, X. Wang and Z. J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2196–2214 RSC .
M. Liu, R. Zhang, L. Zhang, D. Liu, S. Hao, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, R. Kong and X. Sun, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 420–423 RSC .
G. Feng, Y. Kuang, P. Li, N. Han, M. Sun, G. Zhang and X. Sun, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600179 CrossRef PubMed .
B. He, S. Zhuang, X. Tai, J. Zhang, A. Xie, L. Cheng, P. Song, Y. Tang, Y. Chen and P. Wan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 17631–17641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. He, S. Zhuang, X. Tai, A. Xie, W. Lou, Y. Tang, Y. Chen and P. Wan, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 1800–1803 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Zhu, Y. Wen, S. Li, C. Cui, F. Ni, Y. Liu, H. Lin, Y. Li, H. Peng and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 10577–10582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Landman, R. Halabi, P. Dias, H. Dotan, A. Mehlmann, G. E. Shter, M. Halabi, O. Naseraldeen, A. L. Mendes, G. S. Grader and A. Rothschild, Joule, 2020, 4, 448–471 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dotan, A. Landman, S. W. Sheehan, K. D. Malviya, G. E. Shter, D. A. Grave, Z. Arzi, N. Yehudai, M. Halabi, N. Gal, N. Hadari, C. Cohen, A. Rothschild and G. S. Grader, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 786–795 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, P. Li and D. Xiao, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 483–488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, X. Dong, R. Wang, D. Bin, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 11, 260–266 CrossRef .
C. Yang, A. K. Manohar and S. R. Narayanan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A418 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske and M. Sunkara, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hayek, A. Landman, Y. Halpern, I. Slobodkin, E. S. Davydova and A. Rothschild, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 726–739 RSC .
A. Landman, S. Hadash, G. E. Shter, A. Ben-Azaria, H. Dotan, A. Rothschild and G. S. Grader, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008118 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, S. S. Araya and S. K. Kær, J. Power Sources, 2019, 434, 226755 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abdel Haleem, J. Huyan, K. Nagasawa, Y. Kuroda, Y. Nishiki, A. Kato, T. Nakai, T. Araki and S. Mitsushima, J. Power Sources, 2022, 535, 231454 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† R. Zhang and A. Xie contributed equally to this work and should be considered as co-first authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Rufei Zhang
	Rufei Zhang is currently pursuing her PhD under the supervision of Prof. Wan and Prof. Tang's group. She attained her Bachelor's degree in Science from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2018. Her area of research is the development of carbon-encapsulated transition metal based hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts and the compatibility with renewable electric electrolysis.

Ao Xie
	Ao Xie is currently pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Wan and Prof. Tang's group. He attained his Bachelor's degree in Science from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2017. His area of research is the development of functional and hierarchical carbon-based materials to be used as advanced electrocatalysts in hydrogen production systems.

Linting Cheng
	Linting Cheng is currently studying for a Master's Degree in Chemistry at the School of Chemistry, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, under the tutelage of Prof. Pingyu Wan. His research interests focus on the controllable construction of cathode catalysts for hydrogen production by alkaline water electrolysis at high current density.

Zhiqun Bai
	Zhiqun Bai is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Pingyu Wan in the School of Chemistry at Beijing University of Chemical and Technology (BUCT). He received his master's degree from BUCT in 2017. His research direction is the preparation and industrial application of non-noble electrocatalysts for green hydrogen production in alkaline electrolysis.

Yang Tang
	Yang Tang received his PhD degree from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT) in 2013 under the supervision of Prof. Pingyu Wan. Currently, he works as an associate professor in BUCT. His research interests focus on the design and fabrication of nanomaterials for electrochemical and catalytic applications such as water electrocatalysts, fuel cells, and inorganic-salt electrolysis coupled with CO2 conversion process. He also devoted himself to the pilot research and industrial application of new electrode materials.

Pingyu Wan
	Pingyu Wan received his BE from Dalian University of Technology in 1982, followed by an ME in Applied Chemistry from Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 1986. Subsequently, he was appointed as an Assistant and Associate Professor at Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT) in 1986 and 1994, respectively. He was promoted to the rank of Full Professor in 1998 and later set up the Institute of Applied Electrochemistry and Institute of Electrochemical Engineering at BUCT in 2006. His research interests are focused on the advanced electrochemical materials and their engineering applications, such as green hydrogen production, meta-air batteries, and electrocatalysis.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of hydrogen production based on traditional and novel water electrolysis under alkaline conditions.	 
Electrode reaction: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−
Volmer step: H2O + * + e− → H* + OH−
Heyrovsky step: H* + H2O + e− → H2 + OH−
Tafel step: H* + H* → H2

 	Fig. 2  The pathways and mechanisms of (a) HER and NiMo-based materials and (b) OER and NiFe-based materials under alkaline conditions, respectively.	 
Electrode reaction: 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−
* + OH− → OH* + e−
OH* + OH− → O* + H2O + e−
O* + OH− → OOH* + e−
OOH* + OH− → * + O2+ H2O + e−
Electrode reaction: 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−
* + OH− → OH* + e−
OH* + OH− → O* + H2O + e−
O* + OL → O2 + VO
VO + OH− → OH* + e−
OH* + OH− →* + OL + H2O + e−

 	Fig. 3  (a) The electron density of PS-MoNi and Mo metal. (b) ΔGH* on the Mo metal, Ni metal, and PS-MoNi.78 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Operando SERS of NixMoy deposited on a gold electrode under potentials close to the RHE potential. (d) EPR spectra of NixMoy electrodes held at the respective potentials in an organic electrolyte.76 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (e) HRTEM image of the NiMoN/NiN.89 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (f–h) HRTEM images of the NiMoN MP. (i) Overall water splitting at 100 mA cm−2 with a 12 h power-off state for Ni@NCNT/NiMoN-8 (+)//Ni@NCNT/NiMoN-8 (−). The stop state of 24–36 h simulates the conditions of renewable energy power outages. Inset: The photograph exhibiting H2 and O2 bubbles on the surface of the electrodes.90 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (j) Overall water splitting in the ON/OFF state at 100 mA cm−2 and 27 °C in 1.0 M KOH for NiMoS@NiFe (+)//NiMoN@NC-6 (−) and comparison system.91 Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The schematic diagram of the electrodeposition process of SSF@NiFe-120.99 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) and (c) The morphology of NiFe/NiMoO4/NF with different magnifications. (d) The LSV polarization curves of NiFe/NiMoO4/NF in a 1 M KOH electrolyte.83 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (e) The two-step hydrothermal preparation of Ni-ANS@NiFe2O4/IF-3.100 Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (f) The cross-sectional TEM images of the OESSC sample: low magnification (left), corresponding high magnification (middle), and schematic illustration of Fe3C@G (right).101 Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (g) The operando electrochemistry/Raman measurements in 0.01 M KOH and potential range from 1.32 V to 1.92 V vs. RHE with potential steps of 0.1 V compared to OCP.102 Copyright 2023, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (h) The stability test of NiFe LDH/Ni fiber electrode based AEMWE at 0.5 A cm−2.103 Copyright 2022, MDPI.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The schematic diagram of the SSF-F sample synthesized by CV in the potential range of −0.3 V to 1.7 V.105 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (b) The LSV polarization curves of Ni2Fe1-ac/SSM in 1 M KOH at 5 mV s−1 for the OER.106 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) The scheme of catalyst preparation by chloride corrosion. (d) The long-term potentiostatic assessment of NFF-AS3 in 1 M KOH at a current density of 1 A cm−2.107 Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (e) The formation of MS phase on the SS surface at ambient temperature.108 Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V.	 
NaBH4 + zOH− → NaBO2 + (z − 2) H2O + (4 − z/2) H2 + ze−

 	Fig. 6  (a) The different mechanisms of borohydride oxidation reaction with different transfer electron numbers.109 Copyright 2008, The Electrochemical Society. (b) The mechanism of the dynamic electrochemical processes involved during UOR on the catalyst surface.110 Copyright 2022, Elsevier Inc.	 
CO(NH2)2 + 6OH− → N2 + CO2 + 5H2O + 6e−

 	Fig. 7  (a) The schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the hierarchical sea urchin-like NiMoN@NC catalyst.115 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (b) The chronoamperometry test of NiMoN@NC at different potentials with an interval of 0.04 V for 300 s in 1 M NaOH with 0.05 M NaBH4 and the inset shows the schematic of the start/stop reaction mechanism.116 Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the Ni–WOx catalyst. (d) Polarization curves of Ni–WOx in 1 M KOH with and without 0.33 M urea at a scan rate of 10 mVs−1; the inset shows an energy diagram representing the kinetics of the OER and UOR.117 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 
Ni(OH)2 + OH− → NiOOH + H2O + e−
NiOOH + H2O+ e− → Ni(OH)2 + OH−
2NiOOH + H2O → 2Ni(OH)2 + 1/2O2
Fe(0) → Fe(II) → Fe(III)
Fe(III) → Fe(II) → Fe(0)
Fe + 2OH− → Fe(OH)2 + 2e−
Fe(OH)2 + 2e− → Fe + 2OH−

 	Fig. 8  (a) Separate-cell configuration for decoupled PEC water splitting with an oxygen-producing tandem PEC-PV cell and a hydrogen producing electrolytic cell connected to each other electrically and (b) digital photographs of the electrochemical hydrogen generation cell.118 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. (c) The schematic of the E-TAC water-splitting process. (d) and (e) The schematic of the multi-cell E-TAC process.119 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (f) The diagram of the anodic-cathodic reactions based on hybrid electrodes and three-electrode configuration. (g)–(i) The digital photographs of the dual electrolyte battery.120 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
Cathode: H+ + 2e− → H2
Anode: Fe(0) → Fe(II) → Fe(III) (on RM FeOx)
Auxiliary electrode: 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−
Anode: Fe(III) → Fe(II) → Fe(0) (on RM FeOx)

HER	PS-NiMo	1 M KOH, nickel foam	Hydrothermal + heat treatment	30	37	
79

NiMoN/NiN	1 M KOH, nickel foam	Solvothermal + pyrolysis process	49	70	
89

(Ni−MoO2)@C/NF	1 M KOH, nickel foam	Hydrothermal + annealing process	50	50	
93

Ni–Mo2C/NC@NF	1 M KOH, nickel foam	Hydrothermal + pyrolysis process	40	54	
94

Ni@NCNT/NiMoN	1 M KOH, nickel foam	Hydrothermal + pyrolysis process	15	68	
90

NiMoN@NC	1 M KOH, nickel foam	Hydrothermal + pyrolysis process	8	39.1	
91

OER	SSF@NiFe-120	1 M KOH, SSF	Electrodeposition	210	42	
99

NiFe/NiMoO4/NF	1 M KOH, nickel foam	Hydrothermal process + electrodeposition	210	39	
83

Ni-ANS@NiFe2O4/IF-3	1 M KOH, iron foam	Hydrothermal process	209	32	
100

Fe3C@G	1 M KOH, SS	Plasma strategy	290	38	
101

Fe2O3@NiF-450	1 M KOH, nickel foam	Metalorganic vapor deposition	370	55	
104

NiFe-LDHs/Ni fiber	1 M KOH, nickel fiber	Single-step impregnation process	208	50	
103

NiFeCr-SSF	1 M KOH, SSF	Electrochemical activation	230	44	
105

Ni2Fe1-ac/SSM	1 M KOH, SS mesh	Electrochemical activation	216	42.9	
106

NFF-AS3	1 M KOH, NiFe foam	Corrosion activation	216	43.2	
107

S-NiFe-LDHA	1 M KOH, MoNi foam	Corrosion activation	270 mV @ 50 mA cm−2	40	
108

BOR	NiMoN@NC	1 M NaOH + 0.05 M NaBH4, nickel foam	Hydrothermal + pyrolysis process	55	—	
115

UOR	Ni–WOx	1 M KOH + 0.33 M urea, no substrate	Coprecipitation + annealing process	1.4 V @ 100 mA cm−2	39	
117

Footnote
† R. Zhang and A. Xie contributed equally to this work and should be considered as co-first authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
