Mechanisms of charge accumulation in the dark operation of perovskite solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP01427E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP01427E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 14970-14975Mechanisms of charge accumulation in the dark operation of perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Teresa S. 
            Ripolles
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ajay K. 
            Baranwal
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Koji 
            Nishinaka
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuhei 
            Ogomi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Germà 
            Garcia-Belmonte
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Shuzi 
            Hayase
          
        
      *a
aGraduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, 2-4 Hibikino, Wakamatsu-ku, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka 808-0196, Japan. E-mail: teresa@life.kyutech.ac.jp; hayase@life.kyutech.ac.jp
bInstitute of Advance Materials (INAM), Universitat Jaume I, ES-12006 Castelló, Spain. E-mail: garciag@uji.es
Received 
      1st March 2016
    , Accepted 28th April 2016First published on 28th April 2016AbstractIn this work, a new current peak at forward bias in the dark current–voltage curves has been identified for standard mesoscopic perovskite solar cells. This characteristic peak appears only under some specific conditions, mainly in the reverse scan (RS) direction and when the solar cells were kept for several seconds under short-circuit conditions before starting the RS measurement. This peak disappears when the above experimental conditions are not applied. It is considered that this uncommon diode shape is obtained because shallow and/or deep trap states located at the interface between either perovskite/p-type or perovskite/n-type transport materials are dynamically filled during the RS voltage scan. To corroborate this hypothesis, the response of hole transport materials (HTMs), small molecule spiro-OMeTAD and polymer P3HT, as well as both HTMs with additives, was compared. Also perovskite absorbers such as CH3NH3PbI3 and all-inorganic perovskite based on cesium (CsPbI3) were also analyzed, achieving in all cases similar trends.
Introduction
The rapid development of organometal halide perovskite solar cells starting six years ago has yielded an attractive technology able to be an alternative to conventional photovoltaic solar cells.1 Solid state solar cells with high efficiencies over 21%, numerous new materials and interfaces, easy fabrication, and alternative device configurations have been the reasons for their major progress so far.2,3 However, there are still some issues that should be addressed to well understand the working mechanisms of these devices. The electrical processes such as carrier transport into the perovskite film and charge extraction at the interfaces that occur on the timescale of seconds are still under debate.4 Fundamental device physics issues are of great interest because they determine the photoconversion efficiency. In particular, several reports were focused on the trapping of electronic carriers most likely at the interface between perovskite and n-type extraction materials.5 This factor is highly dependent on the device architecture. As regards mesoporous CH3NH3PbI3-based perovskite solar cells, the surface trap density can be reduced when the surface of the TiO2 nanoparticles was passivated with lithium.6 Another option to suppress the intrinsic trap sites is to introduce core/shell-structured CdS/TiO2, reducing the decomposition of the perovskite absorber that occurs under illumination.7 On the other hand, to facilitate the charge transfer at the interface from perovskite to TiO2, and suppress the accumulation charge at the perovskite, a planar architecture can be an alternative when PCBM was added between compact-TiO2 (c-TiO2) and the perovskite film. Concerning trap states in the c-TiO2,8 the PCBM plays a passivation role at iodide-rich trap sites on the surface of the perovskite grains.9 Recent analysis suggests the accumulation of carriers at interfaces at forward bias under illumination.10 Similarly, high positive voltage might induce large carrier injection and consequently charge accumulation even for dark conditions. The above cases were focused on the electron extraction interface. However, this study addresses the chemical interactions and physical mechanisms occurring at the interlayer between perovskite and hole transport materials which have been less investigated to date.
In this work, a series of electrical experiments using solar cells with a configuration of glass/FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite/HTM/Au, where FTO is fluorine doped tin oxide, c-TiO2 is the compact layer of TiO2, mp-TiO2 is the mesoporous layer of TiO2, and HTM is the hole transport material, were carried out in order to understand distinctive current–voltage features and underlying mechanisms. The absorber layers analyzed in this study were standard methyl ammonium lead iodine, CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3), with an intrinsic dipole from MA+ and all-inorganic cesium lead iodine (CsPbI3). Additionally, several interlayer hole-extracting materials were checked: either the standard small molecule 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N′-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) or the polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), allowing for a variation of the interface work function. Every photovoltaic device was characterized by current–voltage (I–V) curves under dark at reverse voltage sweep for several voltage–time preconditioning. Our findings suggest the trapping or accumulation of charge carriers at the interlayers as a general mechanism observed for different perovskite absorbers and interlayer materials.
Experimental
Device fabrication
The etching of FTO glass (8 Ω sq−1, AGC) was facilitated with Zn powder (Wako) and 4 N-HCl solutions followed by immaculate with detergent, DI water, acetone, isopropanol and DI water for 15 min each in sequence under sonication. The compact TiO2 layer of 2 min plasma treated (Femto PCCE) cleaned FTO glass was prepared using a spray coating system (Y-D Mechatro Solutions Inc. (STS-200)) loaded with (1:39, v/v) titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (Sigma-Aldrich) in super dehydrated ethanol (Wako) while maintaining a substrate temperature of 480 °C. The scaffold mesoporous TiO2 layer was prepared by spin coating ethanol diluted (1:4, w/w) PST-30NRD (6000 rpm for 30 s) and sintering it at 500 °C for 30 min. 1 M PbI2 (TCI) dissolved in DMF (Wako) was prepared by stirring at 70 °C for 5 h. The homogenous PbI2 solution was spun on a mesoporous film in the meantime by preserving the same temperature and repeatedly the substrate was baked at 70 °C for 30 min on a hot plate. The growing of the perovskite film was followed by PbI2 coated substrate dipping in 10 mg mL−1 (MAI (Wako)/super dehydrated 2-propanol (Wako)) solution for 1 min and subsequently dried on a spin coater followed by annealing at 70 °C for 30 min under ambient conditions.
The hole transporting materials (HTMs) employed in various architectures with their processing conditions are as follows,
(H1) 72.3 mg of spiro-OMeTAD (SHT-263) (Merck) was dissolved in 1 mL of chlorobenzene (Wako) under ambient conditions with the direct inclusion of 17.5 μL of Li-TFSI (520 mg in 1 mL of acetonitrile) and 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP). The as-prepared spiro-OMeTAD solution was coated on the room temperature substrate at 4000 rpm for 30 s. The fabricated cell was kept overnight for spiro-OMeTAD oxidation.
(H2) Co-additives of 11.28 μL of 3 mM tris[(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)cobalt(III) tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide)] (FK209) solution (in super dehydrated acetonitrile) were added to the aforesaid spiro-MeOTAD solution (H1) and the resulting solution was spin coated on the substrate under ambient conditions.
(H3) P3HT (17 mg mL−1) in o-dichlorobenzene (Wako) was prepared at 70 °C and maintained at room temperature prior to coating on the ambient perovskite film at 1000 rpm for 10 s.
(H4) In the formed P3HT solution (H3) 6.8 μL of Li-TFSI/acetonitrile (28 mg mL−1) and 3.4 μL of TBP were added as additives and the same experimental conditions were followed as used previously. P3HT and P3HT with the additive coated substrate were left overnight for solvent engineering advantages. In all the above cases, 60 nm gold as a cathode electrode was thermally deposited.
Device characterization
The photovoltaic performances were measured using a solar simulator (CEP-2000 Bunko Keiki Co. Ltd, Japan) fitted with a xenon lamp (Bunko Keiki BSO-X150LC) for the light illumination. The spectrum of the solar simulator and its power were adjusted to be 100 mW cm−2 at AM 1.5 using a spectroradiometer (LS-100, Eiko Seiki, Japan). A standard amorphous silicon photodetector (Bunkokeiki BS-520 S/N 353) was used to confirm and correct the power of the irradiated light of the solar simulator. The device characterization was performed with a step of 0.01 V and 100 ms sweep delay in forward bias and reverse bias.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows the I–V characteristics under 100 mW cm−2 air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5 G) for the standard perovskite solar cell with glass/FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au architecture. This measurement was performed in a forward sweep (FS) from negative applied bias (−Vapp) to positive applied bias (+Vapp) and reverse sweep (RS) from +Vapp to −Vapp. All photovoltaic results are summarized in Table 1. An overestimation of the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) from 14.18% in FS to 14.87% in RS was achieved due to the inherent hysteresis effect.
 Fig. 1  Current density–voltage curves (a) at simulated 1 sun illumination from short-circuit to forward conditions (forward sweep, FS) and forward to short-circuit conditions (reverse sweep, RS); (b) under dark conditions at FS and RS, the solar cell remains at +3.5 V or under short-circuit conditions for 0 s or 20 s between the FS and RS measurements; and (c) under dark at RS and at different delay times between FS and RS measurements. The scan rate was 0.1 V s−1 for all measurements. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters under simulated 1 sun illumination at forward and reverse directions for the standard device glass/FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au




Sweep

j
sc, mA cm−2

V
oc, V
FF
PCE, %




Forward
21.91
1.06
0.61
14.18


Reverse
20.79
1.05
0.68
14.87




However, the current–voltage curves scanned at FS and RS under dark conditions are still less studied. In particular, from short-circuit conditions to large forward voltages (+3.5 V) and back, keeping the system between these two measurements under short-circuit conditions or waiting for several seconds at forward bias. Fig. 1b shows the current–voltage performance in the dark at forward and backward sweep directions measured under different experimental conditions, such as applying a delay time between FS and RS measurements for 0 s and 20 s at +3.5 V and 20 s at 0 V. The j–V curve shows the expected diode shape when the reverse scan was performed immediately after finishing the forward scan (delay time 0 s). Conversely, a new shape appears when the solar cell was short-circuited for 20 s prior to starting the measurement from forward bias at +3.5 V to short-circuit (Fig. 1b). A distinctive current peak is found at voltages slightly below +3.5 V which produces a reduction in the measured current with respect to that measured in the FS. This effect is enhanced by increasing the waiting time between FS-RS measurements (Fig. 1c). As explained in the following this behavior indicates the presence of traps able to store charge carriers either at the perovskite absorber film,11 at the boundary of the TiO2 nanoparticles with the absorber6,7 or at the interface between the perovskite and the HTL. Based on these results, it is proposed that shallow traps located at the charge extraction interface of either TiO2 nanoparticles or hole transport layers, are being filled at the forward scan. Consequently, when the reverse scan was measured immediately after finishing the forward scan, or even keeping the solar cell for several seconds at forward bias (Fig. 1b for 20 s and Fig. S1 for several seconds, ESI†), the usual diode shape of the j–V curve is obtained because all traps are filled since the beginning of the RS measurement. However, as the waiting time was increased from 5 s to 60 s under short-circuit conditions (Fig. 1c), the intensity of the current peak is enlarged because more traps have to be filled once again to recover the current level at forward bias. In order to verify this behavior, other perovskite solar cells with the same experimental conditions were carefully analyzed, achieving similar trends (Fig. S2, ESI†).
The previous results are highly affected by the kinetics of the photovoltaic performance because the scan rate determines different states of the solar cell.12Fig. 2 represents the j–V curves under dark at reverse for two different voltage scan rates at 0.1 V s−1 and at 0.01 V s−1. The preconditions of the reverse measurement were maintained in holding the device for several seconds (20 s or 60 s) under short-circuit conditions or at forward bias (denoted as 0 s). Higher intensity of the current peaks is observed because the device takes a longer time to reach the quasi-steady-state. Therefore, more charge carriers are accumulated at a slow scan rate when the delay time between forward and reverse measurements was several seconds, compared with the fast scan rate measurements. This implies that current level recovering is favored by slow scans.
 Fig. 2  Current density–voltage curves under dark at different scan rates such as 0.1 V s−1 (solid line) and 0.01 V s−1 (dashed line). Every scan starts from forward bias to short-circuit and prior to scanning, the device was stabilized for some seconds (0, 20 or 60 s) under short-circuit conditions. The zoom of (a) is shown in (b). 
In order to further check the mechanism behind the observed j–V curve distortion for this kind of solar cell, other mp-TiO2 device structures will be analyzed. In particular, different materials at the anode interface were studied, such as the polymer P3HT instead of the small molecule spiro-OMeTAD, with both HTMs being altered with some chemicals as additives (more details are given in the Experimental section). Additionally, another factor that will be considered is the perovskite absorber material, with MAPbI3 being contrasted with the all-inorganic cesium perovskite CsPbI3.
The j–V curves under dark conditions in the backward direction by keeping the solar cells under short-circuit conditions for 1 min before starting the reverse measurement for the standard MAPbI3 perovskite compound show different behaviors depending on the hole conductors (Fig. 3a). The solar cells with spiro-OMeTAD exhibit high current intensity peaks compared with their counterpart P3HT. The uncommon diode shape is independent of the high applied voltage limit as is represented in Fig. 3b.
 Fig. 3  (a) The j–V curves for perovskite solar cells with different absorber materials and HTMs under dark at the reverse direction, the scan rate was 0.1 V s−1 and the delay time was 1 min under short-circuit conditions prior to RS measurements. (b) The j–V curves under dark at RS with different starting bias and the delay time was 10 s for the device based on MAPbI3/P3HT solar cells. 
The current offset at +3.5 V achieved at the reverse direction with respect to the forward direction (see Fig. 2b) is related to the reduction in charge accumulation at the interfaces. We propose that the relative percentage of charge accumulation (I(FS at +3.5 V) − I(RS at +3.5 V))/(I(FS at +3.5 V) × 100) between the forward and reverse measurements was calculated for the spiro-OMeTAD and MAPbI3 solar cells (Table S1, ESI†). A reduction of the charge accumulation (14.8%) for the spiro-OMeTAD with respect to the spiro-OMeTAD with additives (18.0%) entails that charge carriers are easily removed from the interface between MAPbI3 and HTMs without additives. However, the effect of the co-addition Li-TFSI(TBP) and an organic dye based on Co(III) (FK209) as a p-dopant into the spiro-OMeTAD solution has reported an improvement in the charge transport properties compared to pristine spiro-OMeTAD.13 Additionally, the appointed device was also analyzed at different scan rates and delay times under short-circuit conditions prior to starting the RS measurement. These data are summarized in the ESI† (see Fig. S3). Slow (0.01 V s−1) and fast (0.1 V s−1) scan rates show two distinct behaviors, mainly low current intensities, as well as the slope of the measurements scanned at a low voltage scan rate. However, the opposite behavior is observed for the cells based on spiro-OMeTAD doped solely with Li-TFSI(TBP) (Fig. 2). Therefore, different mechanisms are observed at the interface between perovskite MAPbI3 and HTMs, with the chemicals used being crucial in order to extract and transport charge efficiently.
In addition, similar studies were carried out for MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells with P3HT as a HTM. Fig. S4 and S5 (ESI†) represent the j–V curves under dark at the reverse direction for devices with HTMs such as pure P3HT and P3HT with Li-TFSI as an additive, respectively. Unlike the cases described above, similar current intensities are observed, which means that the addition of lithium does not alter significantly the interlayer between perovskite and the HTM.
Taking into account the MAPbI3-based solar cells, the stored charge depends highly on the HTM. In particular, the capacitance under dark conditions was measured as the difference in currents at FS and RS at forward bias divided by the scan rate, in this case was 0.1 V s−1, (I(FS at +3.5 V) − I(RS at +3.5 V))/scan rate. This is a general procedure that assumes that the current difference is originated by an additional capacitive current which distorts the steady-state current–voltage response.14,15 The capacitance estimation is summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). The spiro-OMeTAD devices (∼450–520 mF cm−2) show higher capacitance than the P3HT devices (∼45 mF cm−2). These large capacitance values agree with those extracted from direct measurements of the capacitance spectra,16 with smaller hysteretic behavior exhibited for inverted architectures.17
Once the interlayer between MAPbI3 and HTM was analyzed, the perovskite absorber film is another important factor to take into account. Fig. 3a shows the significant current intensity difference between MAPbI3- and CsPbI3-based solar cells. The fabrication of all-inorganic cesium solar cells was described in our previous publications.18 In order to analyze the effect of the MA+ and Cs+ cations, the reduction in charge accumulation percentage was measured as explained above, being 10.9% and 18.6% for the MAPbI3/P3HT and CsPbI3/P3HT solar cells, respectively. Additionally, this effect was increased (37.6%) when a new layer of molybdenum trioxide MoO3 was deposited between P3HT and Au in the CsPbI3 devices.
Summarizing all previous data, the measurements of the current–voltage curves were strongly influenced by several parameters, mainly (i) the initial state of the solar cell before starting a scan, such as in the dark, and under short-circuit or under forward bias conditions for several seconds, (ii) the voltage sweep rate that was analyzed in this study was 0.1 V s−1 and 0.01 V s−1, but commonly was in the range from >0.1 V s−1 to 0.001 V s−1,12 and (iii) the scan direction from short-circuit conditions to forward bias (denoted as forward scan) or the opposite way (denoted as reverse or backward scan).
The phenomenon previously introduced is rationalized in Fig. 4, where some sketches are drawn in order to clarify the fundamental mechanisms for the devices that have been studied here. Initially, the current–voltage curves were measured at the forward scan direction, followed by either keeping the solar cell at forward bias for several seconds and then measuring the I–V curve at the reverse scan direction, or measuring the I–V curve at RS directly (Fig. 4a). In both cases, the initial experimental conditions for the solar cell are the same, namely forward bias. The I–V curves (Fig. 4b) showed under the experimental conditions explained above the characteristic diode shape at forward and reverse bias directions. We consider that at the forward sweep direction (Fig. 4c), the shallow or deep traps located at the interface between the perovskite absorber and the hole transport layers as well as at the boundary of the TiO2 nanoparticles are filled with voltage-driven charges. Consequently, taking into account the preconditions before starting the RS scan, the I–V curve at the reverse direction started without empty traps (Fig. 4d). In contrast, a new shape of the I–V curve was observed at RS (Fig. 4f) when the solar cell was kept under short-circuit conditions for several seconds between forward and reverse I–V curve measurements under dark (Fig. 4e). Under short-circuit conditions, shallow or deep traps have time to gradually empty out depending on the delay time as represented in Fig. 4g. Once the reverse scan starts, the traps should be filled once again (Fig. 4h), showing the non-characteristic diode shape. It should be stressed here that our experiments are not conclusive with respect to which outer contact (either perovskite/TiO2 or perovskite/HTM) is responsible for the charge carrier trapping. Changing the HTM or the perovskite material induces large variations in the dark current level in the forward sweep, and the position, and the height of the reverse sweep peak is then modified. In addition, other explanations different from the charge trapping discussed here are also plausible as the recently proposed occurrence of carrier accumulation zones at the interfaces.10
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the conditions of the I–V measurements (a) and (e), I–V curves (b) and (f), and energy level diagrams (c), (d), (g), and (h). The above and below images represent the experiment without and with a delay time between forward and reverse bias directions in the I–V curves, respectively. These mechanisms represent only the electron trapping at the interface of the perovskite/HTM. 
Conclusions
In summary, we report that the experimental preconditions of the current–voltage curves under dark conditions play a crucial role in understanding the physical mechanisms that occur in the MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD-based perovskite solar cells. The scan rate, the bias sweep direction, as well as preconditioning of the solar cell were the main parameters analyzed in this manuscript. In particular, a new peak at forward bias in the I–V curve was observed at the reverse sweep bias direction after the system was equilibrated under short-circuit conditions for several seconds. The current intensity peak was controlled depending on the delay time under short-circuit conditions and the scan rate. This uncommon diode shape was attributed to the shallow and/or deep traps located at the interface of perovskite/p- and/or n-type contact materials. In order to corroborate those results, other materials with different work functions were analyzed, achieving similar trends.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by CREST.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jung and N. G. Park, Small, 2015, 11, 10–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Shi, X. Xu, H. Y. Zhang, Y. H. Luo, D. M. Li and Q. B. Meng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 5 Search PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T. W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, M. S. You, M. H. Chang, W. Yin, T. K. Ahn, S. J. Lee, S. J. Sung, D. H. Kim and S. H. Im, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 530–539 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hwang, M. Baek and K. Yong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27863–27870 CAS .
A. K. Jena, H. W. Chen, A. Kogo, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9817–9823 CAS .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Zarazua, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 525–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wu, K. W. Fu, N. Yantara, G. C. Xing, S. Y. Sun, T. C. Sum and N. Mathews, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 8 Search PubMed .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 CAS .
J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Choi, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and S. I. Seok, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11842–11847 CAS .
O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1645–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Carrillo, A. Guerrero, S. Rahimnejad, O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201502246 .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, R. S. Sanchez, L. Badia, G. Garcia-Belmonte, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2390–2394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, I.-H. Jang, N. Ahn, M. Choi, A. Guerrero, J. Bisquert and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4633–4639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Ripolles, K. Nishinaka, Y. Ogomi, Y. Miyata and S. Hayase, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 144, 532–536 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of experiments and additional supplementary figures. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp01427eThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Current density–voltage curves (a) at simulated 1 sun illumination from short-circuit to forward conditions (forward sweep, FS) and forward to short-circuit conditions (reverse sweep, RS); (b) under dark conditions at FS and RS, the solar cell remains at +3.5 V or under short-circuit conditions for 0 s or 20 s between the FS and RS measurements; and (c) under dark at RS and at different delay times between FS and RS measurements. The scan rate was 0.1 V s−1 for all measurements.	 

Forward	21.91	1.06	0.61	14.18
Reverse	20.79	1.05	0.68	14.87

 	Fig. 2  Current density–voltage curves under dark at different scan rates such as 0.1 V s−1 (solid line) and 0.01 V s−1 (dashed line). Every scan starts from forward bias to short-circuit and prior to scanning, the device was stabilized for some seconds (0, 20 or 60 s) under short-circuit conditions. The zoom of (a) is shown in (b).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The j–V curves for perovskite solar cells with different absorber materials and HTMs under dark at the reverse direction, the scan rate was 0.1 V s−1 and the delay time was 1 min under short-circuit conditions prior to RS measurements. (b) The j–V curves under dark at RS with different starting bias and the delay time was 10 s for the device based on MAPbI3/P3HT solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the conditions of the I–V measurements (a) and (e), I–V curves (b) and (f), and energy level diagrams (c), (d), (g), and (h). The above and below images represent the experiment without and with a delay time between forward and reverse bias directions in the I–V curves, respectively. These mechanisms represent only the electron trapping at the interface of the perovskite/HTM.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of experiments and additional supplementary figures. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp01427e

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
