Harnessing single-active plasmonic nanostructures for enhanced photocatalysis under visible light  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA06484D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA06484D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5244-5258Harnessing single-active plasmonic nanostructures for enhanced photocatalysis under visible light

        
          
            Hefeng 
            Cheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kojirou 
            Fuku
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yasutaka 
            Kuwahara
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kohsuke 
            Mori
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Hiromi 
            Yamashita
          
        
      *ab
aDivision of Materials and Manufacturing Science, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. E-mail: yamashita@mat.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp
bUnit of Elements Strategy Initiative for Catalysts & Batteries, Kyoto University, Katsura, Kyoto 615-8520, Japan
Received 
      27th November 2014
    , Accepted 22nd December 2014First published on 23rd December 2014AbstractThe past several decades have witnessed the fast-growing field of plasmonics, which localize and concentrate incident light at the nanoscale and provide a source of light, heat and energetic carriers. Plasmonic nanostructures, which are able to harvest and convert the abundant sunlight to drive chemical reactions, have shown great prospects in heterogeneous photocatalysis. To maximize solar energy utilization, the rational design and precise manipulation of plasmonic nanostructures are, therefore, essential to obtain their strong light–matter interaction. In this review, we focus on the very recent advances in harnessing single-active plasmonic nanocatalysts (i.e., plasmonic materials as the only photo- and catalytic-active species), involving noble metals and doped-semiconductors, for enhanced photocatalytic reactions with visible light.
1. Introduction
Heterogeneous catalysis, which employs catalysts to drive or facilitate chemical reactions, is of paramount importance to the chemical and energy industries. To activate a reaction, in most cases it requires a higher temperature to conquer the potential barrier, which leads to huge energy consumption. As an alternative to traditional fossil fuels, solar energy is by far the largest detectable resource to fulfil the increasing worldwide energy demands due to its great abundance, environmentally benign nature and in particular the renewable availability.1 The introduction of light irradiation alters the thermodynamic equilibrium of a reaction and this may enable chemical reactions to be implemented at ambient conditions instead of thermal treatments.2 Sunlight-driven catalytic reactions could be actualized via either semiconductor photocatalysis,3–7 in which photo-generated electrons/holes upon light excitation would participate in the subsequent reduction/oxidation processes, or by plasmon-mediated photocatalysis.8
Since the discovery of the Honda-Fujishima effect on the TiO2 photoelectrode,3 semiconductor photocatalysis has played a great role in energy exploitation and environmental decontamination, which allows water reduction into H2 or toxic pollutant molecule oxidation.4–7 Nevertheless, the intrinsic wide band gaps (WBG, >3.1 eV) render the conventionally used semiconductors (e.g., TiO2, ZnO) solely responsive to ultraviolet (UV) light. Furthermore, under UV irradiation, the involvement of active oxygen radical intermediates, such as the superoxide anion radical (O2˙−) and hydroxyl radical (˙OH), is usually non-selective, thereby resulting in the complete decomposition of organic molecules into small inorganic species (CO2 and H2O).7 In terms of energy proportion, sunlight contains less than 5% of UV light, whereas visible light (400–800 nm) accounts for the majority (ca. 43%). Therefore, it is more appealing to develop visible light driven photocatalysis with narrow band gap (NBG) semiconductors, which entail broader visible light absorption and higher selectivity towards organic synthesis.
Nanostructured plasmonic metals, such as Au, Ag and Cu, represent another class of important materials that strongly absorb visible light in a wide range of the solar spectrum owing to their localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR).8–11 LSPR can be described as the collective resonant oscillation of free conduction electrons confined in metallic nanoparticles (NPs), which is stimulated by incident light. As a consequence, light is amplified in the near-field region of plasmonic NPs, and it leads to an array of applications as diverse as surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS),12–14 single-molecule spectroscopy,15,16 solar cells17 and biological molecular detection/sensing.18 Recently, plasmonic metal NPs have been used to sensitize semiconductors and boost their photocatalytic performances by the construction of noble metal/semiconductor hybrids under visible light.19–26 Arising from the LSPR effect, plasmonic NPs are able to transfer solar energy to neighboring semiconductors19–26 or molecular complexes27 to drive chemical reactions. Intriguingly, in addition to acting as a visible light absorber, plasmonic metal NPs themselves can also directly induce catalysis.28 In this case, plasmonic NPs are not only photo-active components, but are also the catalytically active species. The integration of plasmonic and catalytic properties into metallic NPs paves a new route for visible light-driven photocatalysis, and has shown great potential in selective organic transformations in a mild manner.8,29–31
As a new and burgeoning field, plasmon-mediated photocatalysis has been paid immense interest by researchers.32–40 In the present review, we mainly focus on the very recent advances and emerging strategies in harnessing single-active plasmonic nanostructures to enhance their catalytic properties with visible light excitation. Herein, the term “single-active” indicates that plasmonic metallic nanostructures are the only photo- and catalytic-active material under visible light. In this context, plasmonic systems of those without photocatalytic applications, metal/semiconductor hybrids that employ plasmonic metal NPs to sensitize and/or improve the photocatalysis of the semiconductors,32–38 and bi-metals plasmonic structures41,42 will not be covered. This review starts with a brief introduction to the LSPR phenomenon, and then focuses on plasmonic nanostructures, including metals and doped-semiconductors, together with the parameters that influence their plasmonic frequencies. Subsequently, the surface plasmon decay process will be discussed. We predominantly concentrate on plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis by single-active nanostructures, which are divided into six categories concerning their existing forms, and we try to highlight the underlying structure–function relationship. Then, it ends with a summary and future outlook on the development of highly efficient plasmon-mediated photocatalysis with visible light.
2. Plasmonic nanostructures
LSPR is a unique characteristic of metallic nanostructures, which is established when their particles sizes are comparable to or smaller than the wavelength of the incident light. Upon light illumination, the polarization of the free electron cloud gives rise to the accumulated negatively charged centers against the positive nuclei, creating an electric dipole (Fig. 1). The curved surface of metal NPs exerts an effective restoring force on the driven electrons, such that a resonance occurs, leading to the field enhancement both inside and in the near-field zone outside the NPs.43,44 The enhancement attenuates quickly with the distance from the surface, and the optical extinction cross section (sum of both the absorption and scattering processes) of metal NPs reaches a maximum at the plasmon resonant frequency.
 Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of LSPR excitation on metallic NPs. 
In principle, due to the presence of free electrons in large quantities, most metal NPs could support LSPR in a wide range from the UV to visible light region, such as Na,45 K,45 Al,46 Co,47 Pt48 and Pd.48,49 However, these metals suffer from short plasmonic wavelengths in the deep UV region or instability to air/moisture. In terms of a strong visible light response, the noble metals Au, Ag and Cu are suitable candidates.10,11,50–56 For example, spherical Ag (38 nm in mean diameter), Au (25 nm) and Cu (133 nm) NPs exhibit LSPR absorption peaks at approximately 420, 520 and 610 nm, respectively, which are all located in the visible range (Fig. 2a).8 In particular, Au and Ag NPs with higher chemical stability to oxidation and relatively higher free electron concentration (around 5.9 × 1022 cm−3),57 which provide very intense and narrow absorptions at the lower wavelengths of the visible range, are more attractive for solar utilization.
 Fig. 2  The plasmonic wavelength dependence of metal nanostructures on their (a) metal species (b) shapes and (c) sizes. Adapted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (d) The effect of the surrounding media on the plasmonic wavelength of Ag nanocubes. Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The LSPR wavelength and intensity of metallic nanostructures are not only dependent on the nature of metals, but also on their shapes, sizes, as well as the surrounding media.8,51,58 The geometrical symmetry of metallic nanostructures determines their polarization modes, thereby leading to the change in the number of observed LSPR peaks. The evolution of shapes from spheres into wires or cubes changes the LSPR wavelengths of Ag nanostructures, and also increases the number of LSPR peaks from one to two and three, respectively (Fig. 2b).8 An increase in size will cause the LSPR wavelength of metal NPs to shift to a longer wavelength (red shift, Fig. 2c). In addition, the LSPR wavelength also changes with the surrounding media due to variation in their dielectric constant. When the surrounding environment changed from air to different solvents, the LSPR wavelengths of Ag nanocubes were found to red shift as the surrounding refractive index of the solvent increased (Fig. 2d).58
Recently, it was revealed that LSPR can also occur in some highly-doped semiconductors, involving indium tin oxides (ITO),59 copper chalcogenides (Cu2−xS),60–63 transition-metal oxides (TiO2, WO3−x, MoO3−x)64–68 and many others.69–71 As illustrated in Fig. 3, a sufficient free electron concentration (1022–1023 cm−3) enables metals to display LSPR absorption over a wide range from UV to visible light, and even to the near infrared (NIR) region. However, in semiconductors, in order to sustain the LSPR, high density of free carriers are introduced by doping.69,70 As a consequence, the concentration of the free carriers in doped-semiconductors is usually lower than 1022 cm−3, resulting in their LSPR absorption at longer wavelengths beyond the visible region. Such NIR absorption is extremely useful for applications in photothermal therapy and bio-imaging, in which the interaction of tissue with light at these wavelengths is relatively weak.70 Due to the generation of pathways for free charge carriers, plasmonic semiconductors can be generally divided into two categories: those with extrinsically doped heterovalent atoms (e.g., ITO) and those with self-doped non-stoichiometric semiconductors through the formation of oxygen or cation vacancies (e.g., WO3−x, Cu2−xS).
 Fig. 3  A schematic diagram, which exhibits the plasmonic frequency dependence on the free carrier density and doping constraints in metals and doped semiconductors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
In addition to the effects of shape, size and surrounding medium, which are analogous to noble metals, one additional feature of doped-semiconductors is that their plasmonic frequencies could be tailored by changing dopant concentrations, stoichiometric compositions or phase transitions.69,70 For example, the introduction of Sn(IV) atoms into the In2O3 lattice will lead to free charge carriers that are responsible for the conductivity, and a considerable high concentration of free carriers could be expected to support LSPR in ITO NPs. By controlling the Sn concentration from 3 to 10 mol%, the LSPR in ITO NPs was blue shifted from >2200 nm to 1618 nm (Fig. 4a).59 Furthermore, in contrast with stoichiometric semiconductors, the presence of cations or oxygen vacancies in their non-stoichiometric counterparts could offer appreciable free carriers (electrons or holes) to support their LSPR. In the case of Cu2−xS, as the copper vacancies gradually decreased from Cu1.1S (x = 0.9) to Cu2S (x = 0), the plasmonic absorption of Cu2−xS NPs was red shifted to a longer wavelength, and finally vanished for the stoichiometric Cu2S (Fig. 4b).63
 Fig. 4  (a) The blue shift in the extinction spectra of ITO NPs with increasing Sn doping. Adapted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) The red shift in the optical extinction spectra of Cu2−xS NPs with increasing Cu+ concentration. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
LSPR which arises from strong light–matter interaction enables metallic nanostructures to efficiently harvest the light. The plasmonic resonance frequencies are determined by the concentration of free carriers (electrons or holes), which is further dependent on an array of factors involving particle sizes, geometrical shapes and surrounding dielectric materials. Through the rational manipulation of metallic nanostructures, it is reasonable for one to tailor the corresponding plasmonic resonance in a wide range to absorb as much sunlight as possible.
3. Plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis
Upon resonant excitation, the electromagnetic field in the vicinity of plasmonic metal NPs is enhanced. Through finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations, it was observed that the electric field intensity of local plasmonic hot spots could reach 1000 times as high as that of the far-field incident light.35,72 The decay of surface plasmons takes place on the femtosecond timescale either through the radiative re-emission of photons, or non-radiative transfer of energy to hot electrons (Fig. 5).57 In the non-radiative process, energetic electrons will generally be injected to nearby semiconductors to overcome the interfacial Schottky barrier,32–38,73 or into the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the adsorbates,8,36 thereby activating and stimulating catalytic redox reactions. In addition to the charge transfer, plasmonic heating can also occur as a result of electron–electron interactions and the subsequent thermalization.57 In plasmonic metal NPs, the electron injection (within 50 fs) was found to be prior or simultaneous to the electron–electron scattering relaxation (<100 fs).74 Both the hot electron transfer and thermal heating processes brought by the surface plasmons of metallic NPs are favorable for the chemical reactions of the adsorbates, leading to plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis.
 Fig. 5  A schematic illustration of the surface plasmon decay process via (i) radiative and (ii) non-radiative routes. Adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. (a) The transfer of the hot electrons to the nearby semiconductor (n-type). Adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The direct injection of the hot electrons to the LUMO of the adsorbates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In singly-active plasmonic catalysts, metallic NPs act as both the photo-sensitive and catalytic-active sites. Considering the existing forms, which are used in photocatalysis, herein single-active plasmonic photocatalysts fall primarily into the following categories: (i) free-standing metals, (ii) metal/insulator hybrids, (iii) metal/WBG semiconductors hybrids, (iv) metal/carbon-based hybrids, (v) supported metal films and (vi) highly-doped semiconductor materials.
3.1 Free-standing metal catalysts
In plasmon-mediated single-active catalysis, plasmonic NPs are the sole photo- and catalytic-active sites rather than the support materials. Therefore, free-standing plasmonic metal NPs without supports could be a compelling system to understand their intrinsic catalytic property and rule out the support-effect.75 In contrast to Ag and Cu, Au NPs are more chemically resistant and stable to oxygen atmosphere, thus making free-standing Au NPs suitable for direct plasmonic photocatalysis.
The first example of free-standing Au NPs as plasmonic photocatalysts was reported by Scaiano et al.76 Colloidal Au NPs with sizes of ∼15 nm was obtained by a solution-based photochemical method, and could oxidize alcohols into the corresponding carbonyl compounds with H2O2 upon irradiation with either a laser (532 nm) or LED (530 nm) light (eqn (1)). The Au NPs exhibited strong light absorption in the visible region with a LSPR peak of around 522 nm (Fig. 6a). Under LED illumination, the plasmonic excitation of Au NPs was necessary to obtain a substantial conversion of benzylic alcohols to the oxidized products, which was considerably higher than the cases without Au NPs (Fig. 6b). (1)
 Fig. 6  (a) UV-vis spectrum of a colloidal Au NPs suspension in sec-phenethyl alcohol and H2O2. (b) Acetophenone and benzaldehyde yield as a function of LED excitation time with or without Au NPs. Adapted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, in the presence of air or oxygen, Au NPs could promote the oxidation of 9-anthraldehyde to the predominant product anthraquinone in acetonitrile under 530 nm LED irradiation (eqn (2)).77 The reaction did not occur in the dark or without the Au NPs, suggesting that the catalysis was triggered by the Au NPs under plasmonic stimulation. With the aid of the single particle detection technique, it was revealed that the dynamics of the surface plasmon mediated reactions involved Au NPs. Apart from oxidation reactions, Au NPs were also found to exhibit a high efficiency in the reduction of resazurin into resorufin with hydroxylamine and green LED light (eqn (3)).78 (2) (3)
3.2 Metal/inert insulator hybrids
Despite the fact that free-standing plasmonic metal NPs show considerable photocatalytic activity in organic transformations under visible light irradiation, they are not desirable candidates for large-scale implementation. In typical photocatalytic conditions, free-standing metal NPs are vulnerable to aggregation, and suffer from low stability.76 Therefore, from the point of view of practical applications, plasmonic metal catalysts are usually supported on solid oxide materials, which have large surfaces to disperse the plasmonic NPs evenly and enable them to be recycled. One important class of the solid supports is insulating oxides with band gaps over 5 eV,79 for instance, ZrO2 (∼5.8 eV), SiO2 (∼9.0 eV) and Al2O3 (∼8.7 eV), which are unable to be excited by visible light (less than 3 eV). In addition, it is also difficult for inert insulators to capture the hot electrons induced by plasmonic metal NPs because of their large potential barrier.74,80 Under this circumstance, the corresponding photocatalytic reactions exclude the participation of inert insulators.
Triggered by their extraordinary catalytic properties, supported Au NPs on inert insulators as plasmonic photocatalysts have been paid considerable interest in the past several years.28,29,81–84 In 2008, Zhu et al. first observed the oxidation of the volatile organic compound (VOC) HCHO to CO2 by Au NPs supported on inert ZrO2 and SiO2.28Fig. 7a displays the HCHO decomposition over a range of supported Au photocatalysts under blue (400–500 nm) or red (600–700 nm) light illumination. Although visible-light-sensitive semiconductor (Fe2O3) supported Au NPs showed a higher efficiency, the photocatalysis with Au NPs on optically inert SiO2 was found to be active under red light irradiation, giving clear evidence for plasmon-driven chemical reactions with visible light. Furthermore, organic dye molecules, such as sulforhodamine-B (SRB) and methyl orange (MO), could be degraded over supported Au catalysts on a range of insulating oxides (ZrO2, SiO2, zeolites and halloysite) under visible light irradiation.81–83 The photocatalytic activity of Au NPs on supported insulators was attributed to be electronic effect in nature, as depicted in Fig. 7b. For Au NPs, the transition of 5d electrons to the 6sp band (interband transition) causes considerable UV absorption.81 In addition, the plasmonic resonance of Au NPs originates from the intraband transition of their 6sp electrons, leading to visible light absorption. Under visible light illumination, the electrons of Au NPs gain energy through plasmonic resonance and migrate to higher potential intraband levels, in which they are then captured by oxygen molecules, leaving the Au NPs with positive charges. To maintain the electric charge neutrality, Au NPs will seize the electrons from the adsorbed organic molecules, thereby oxidizing these organic compounds.
 Fig. 7  (a) Photocatalytic decomposition of HCHO to CO2 under blue light (blue bars) and red light (red bars) for Au NPs on different oxide supports. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH. (b) The schematic diagram of band structures for the supported Au NPs and the possible photocatalytic mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In contrast with the complete decomposition of organic macromolecules into small inorganic species, for example CO2 and H2O, selective organic transformation into desirable products holds considerably greater prospects for both scientific research and industrial applications. For instance, Zhu et al. reported the visible light driven reduction of nitrobenzene to azobenzene on Au/ZrO2 catalysts with high efficiency (eqn (4)).29 With sizes of about 6 nm and LSPR peak around 520 nm, Au NPs was supported on ZrO2 by the reduction–deposition method with NaBH4 in the presence of lysine. It was noted that the plasmon-driven catalytic reactions could show high selectivity at low temperatures and pressures, outperforming conventional thermal catalysis, which has higher reaction temperatures and lower product selectivity. In addition, the photocatalytic reduction of styrene oxide into styrene has also been executed over insulating oxide (ZrO2, Al2O3 and zeolite-Y) supported Au NPs, showing good selectivity under visible light irradiation.84 (4)
The selective oxidation of alcohols by Au NPs has been widely studied in organic synthesis, in which the resulting carbonyl products are important industrial intermediates.85 As a rule, benzyl alcohol is used as a reference for selective oxidation reactions. Au NPs supported on insulating zeolites can serve as plasmonic photocatalysts for the aerobic oxidation of benzyl alcohol in toluene under the illumination of visible light from a 500 W halogen lamp (eqn (5)).86 It was found that Au/zeolite photocatalysts could oxidize aromatic alcohols into the corresponding aldehydes with high conversion under visible light irradiation, while in dark conditions the reactions proceeded with a considerably lower conversion rate. The conversion efficiency was observed to be dependent on the supports, with the Au/zeolite-Y catalyst performing the best. Other inert materials, such as Al2O3 and hydrotalcite, have also been used as solid supports for Au NPs. Upon irradiation with a 530 nm LED light source, the Au/Al2O3 and Au/hydrotalcite catalysts displayed considerable efficiency towards the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol in the presence of H2O2.87 (5)
As the versatile starting substrates, aromatic amines and ester derivatives play vital roles in the synthesis of complicated pharmaceutical molecules. Recently, it was shown that the chemical production of such derivatives could take place by plasmonic Au catalysts under visible light.88,89 Through a tandem oxidation/amidation process between benzaldehyde and morpholine with H2O2 in basic KOH conditions, 4-benzoylmorpholine was obtained over an Au/SiO2 catalyst under 532 nm laser illumination (eqn (6)).88 Because the selective oxidation of alcohols into aldehydes is easy to carry out under the same conditions, amide formation could also occur on using benzyl alcohol as the starting material. In addition, visible light could drive the esterification from aldehydes and alcohols on supported Au NPs (Au/γ-Al2O3) photocatalysts (eqn (7)).89 The photocatalytic activity was found to be related to the light intensity and wavelength, thus elucidating plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis by Au NPs. (6) (7) (8)
Analogous to Au, Ag and Cu NPs are also important visible-light-responsive plasmonic metal catalysts. As a commercially pivotal reaction, the selective epoxidation of ethane to ethylene oxide has been executed on supported Ag nanostructures (Ag/α-Al2O3) using low intensity visible light and thermal energy (eqn (8)).30,90 Ag nanocubes with the edge length of about 60 nm were supported on the α-Al2O3 surface, which showed the plasmonic peak wavelength of ca. 400 nm. The observed reaction rate of ethane epoxidation conducted at 433 K with low intensity visible light (250 mW cm−2) irradiation was comparable to that at 473 K in the dark, which demonstrates a unique route towards enhanced selective chemical reactions by plasmonic Ag nanocatalysts. As shown in Fig. 8, the measured photocatalytic rate matched well with the plasmon intensity, whereas there was a linear relationship between the photocatalytic activity and the intensity of the incident light. The presence of such linear dependence indicates that the energetic electrons, mediated by the excitation of surface plasmons in Ag nanocubes, were responsible for the photoactivity. Furthermore, kinetic studies using labelled 18O2 exhibited a larger kinetic isotope effect (KIE) value for the photothermal process (1.19 ± 0.01) with respect to that of the thermal process (1.06 ± 0.02). Thus, the surface plasmon-induced energetic electrons on irradiated Ag NPs were transferred to the adsorbed molecular O2, accelerating its dissociation process. Moreover, supported Ag NPs on inert oxides (Ag/zeolite-Y, Ag/ZrO2, Ag/SiO2) also showed good photocatalytic activity in the degradation of organic dyes, such as SRB and methylene blue (MB).91,92 Through plasmonic excitation of 5sp electrons, the supported Ag NPs even surpassed N-doped TiO2 in the oxidation of organic molecules under visible light irradiation.91 (9)
 Fig. 8  (a) Wavelength- and (b) intensity-dependent photocatalytic activity of Ag/Al2O3 catalysts in the photocatalytic ethylene epoxidation under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
The quest for high-quality hydrogen storage and release systems is indispensable to modern on-board applications, such as proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFC). Ammonia borane (NH3BH3), which contains as high as 19.6 wt% hydrogen and exceeds that of gasoline, is an attractive and potential target.93 Recently, plasmon-enhanced catalysis from NH3BH3 dehydrogenation has been demonstrated on mesoporous silica (SBA-15) supported Ag NPs under visible light irradiation (eqn (9)).94 The Ag/SBA-15 hybrid was prepared by the microwave-assisted alcohol reduction method, in which Ag NPs having different sizes were obtained by controlling the microwave irradiation time (3 or 5 min) and the use of a surface ligand (sodium laurate). As shown in Fig. 9, the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of Ag/SBA-15 samples with different sizes of Ag NPs exhibited different colours: (a) small NPs with a yellow colour, (b) short nanorods with a red colour, and (c) long nanorods with a blue colour, which were also reflected by their different LSPR absorptions in the UV-vis spectra. The supported Ag NPs showed an enhanced H2 generation rate for NH3BH3 dehydrogenation under visible light (>420 nm) irradiation compared to that conducted in the dark. The enhancement of the initial H2 yield was dependent on the sizes of the Ag NPs, with the larger Ag NPs showing greater activity improvement. The rates of the enhanced catalytic performances by different wavelengths were almost consistent with the LSPR absorption of Ag NPs, supporting the hypothesis that the enhanced catalytic property was derived from the plasmonic effect of Ag NPs. (10)
 Fig. 9  (A) TEM images and photographs of the Ag/SBA-15 hybrids with different sizes of Ag NPs. (B) The action spectra of the enhanced catalytic performance for the Ag/SBA-15 hybrids. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. 
Copper metal is prone to surface oxidation upon exposure to ambient atmosphere, hence, the employment of Cu NPs as plasmonic catalysts has not been paid considerable attention relative to Au and Ag. Nevertheless, one of the pioneering studies using Cu NPs for plasmonic catalysis has recently been reported by Linic et al.31 Cu NPs with an average size of 41 nm supported on inert SiO2 was prepared by a solution reduction method with hydrazine, which was used to catalyze the propylene epoxidation under visible light (eqn (10)). Interestingly, the selectivity of the propylene oxide product changed from 20% (in the dark) to nearly 50% (under visible light irradiation), showing a light irradiation-induced selectivity increase (Fig. 10a). The sharp increase in selectivity was found to be accompanied by the light-induced reduction of the surface Cu atoms (Fig. 10b). Prior to light irradiation, the Cu catalysts were oxidized to Cu@Cu2O structures with a Cu2O shell covering the metallic Cu core. The subsequent illumination of the catalysts with visible light led to the reduction of the Cu2O shell, manifested by the appearance of the plasmonic absorption of metallic Cu NPs around 565 nm. It was believed that Cu NPs with the oxidized Cu2O shell absorb visible light to induce plasmon excitation, and then the plasmonic hot electrons weaken and break the Cu–O bonds, thus facilitating the reduction of Cu2O to Cu.31 This finding sheds some light on the potential use of unstable plasmonic metallic nanostructures, thus allowing their efficient catalysis with the assistance of light.
 Fig. 10  (a) The selectivity to propylene oxide for thermal (light off) and photothermal (light on) processes as a function of the reaction rate. (b) In situ diffuse reflectance UV-vis extinction spectra of the Cu/SiO2 catalyst treated under different conditions. Adapted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2013 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
3.3 Metal/WBG semiconductors hybrids
In addition to the insulating oxide supports, WBG semiconductors, such as CeO2 (3.19 eV),95 TiO2 (3.20 eV)96 and ZnO (3.20 eV),96 can also work as important supports for single-active plasmonic photocatalysts. Visible light irradiation (>400 nm) is inefficient to induce the band gap excitation of these WBG semiconductors. Nonetheless, there usually exists Schottky barriers between noble metals (e.g., Au) NPs and WBG semiconductors (e.g., TiO2). Upon light illumination, the hot electrons from the excited noble metal NPs with energies above the Schottky barrier (∼1.0 eV) will be injected into these WBG semiconductors, leading to direct charge separation on the plasmonic NPs.74,97–100 In such a manner, interfacial charge transfer can be realized between plasmonic metals and WBG semiconductor supports, further influencing their catalytic performance. However, in the case of the insulating oxides (e.g., ZrO2), the interfacial hot electron transfer from plasmonic NPs is impeded due to their large potential barriers.74 (11)
As one of the most studied semiconductors, TiO2 has been found to exhibit efficient visible light photocatalytic performances with the addition of plasmonic Au NPs.19,20,22,24,26,98,99,101–104 Furthermore, TiO2 has also been employed to support Au NPs to promote the aerobic oxidation of alcohols under visible light.105,106 For example, Au NPs loaded on P25 TiO2 could enhance benzyl alcohol oxidation at room temperature with visible light (eqn (11)).105 Au/TiO2 catalysts were prepared by the deposition–precipitation (DP) method. From the high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image, Au NPs with sizes less than 5 nm were found to locate at the anatase/rutile interface of P25 TiO2 (Fig. 11a). The Au/TiO2 hybrids, exhibiting a LSPR absorption band at ca. 550 nm, showed high yield of the aldehyde or ketone products in toluene under visible light illumination (>450 nm). As evidenced by the electron spin resonance (ESR) spectra, electrons were transferred from the plasmon-activated Au NPs to the adjacent TiO2, and ultimately captured by the electron acceptors (O2). Moreover, the positively charged Au NPs were quenched by the alcohols, thus promoting their oxidation to complete the plasmonic resonance circle (Fig. 11b). The Au/TiO2 catalysts were also active in the chemo-selective oxidation of alcohols in water with O2 under visible light.106 Based on the good resemblance of the action spectrum with optical absorption of the Au/TiO2 catalysts, it was concluded that the plasmonic excitation of the Au NPs was the driving force for alcohol oxidation. In contrast, Au/ZrO2 exhibited no activity under visible light because the conduction band (CB) position of ZrO2 is too high for hot electrons on Au NPs to be transferred.106
 Fig. 11  (a) HRTEM image of Au/P25 TiO2 hybrid and (b) proposed mechanism for visible light driven aerobic oxidation by Au NPs supported on WBG semiconductors. Adapted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Au/CeO2 catalysts have also been discovered to show high efficiency in the photocatalytic selective oxidation of alcohols.107,108 Au/CeO2 catalysts were prepared by the photodeposition of HAuCl4 on CeO2 in the presence of citric acid. Under green laser irradiation with O2, alcohols were oxidized into the corresponding aldehydes in water on the Au/CeO2 catalysts. The apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) was in agreement with the photoabsorption, and the highest value occurred at the LSPR wavelength (550 nm) of Au NPs. Subsequently, it was found that increasing the Au NPs sizes resulted in enhanced catalytic activity of the Au/CeO2 hybrids towards alcohol oxidation.107 Multi-step photodeposition increased the sizes of Au NPs (∼92 nm) relative to those (∼59 nm) prepared by the single-step method. Despite the presence of amine functional groups, Au/CeO2 exhibited chemo-selective oxidation of 4-aminobenzyl alcohol to 4-aminobenzaldehyde under green laser light illumination (eqn (12)).108 Larger Au NPs with stronger plasmonic absorption showed superior photocatalytic activity compared to smaller ones. In a recent study using paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPR) measurements, it was revealed that the Au–H intermediates were important to alcohol oxidation by Au NPs under both UV and visible light irradiation.109 This finding gives insight into the reaction processes of alcohol oxidation with Au catalysts, and may open up new possibilities to use alcohols as hydrogen donors for hydrogenation reactions. (12)
Plasmon-assisted selective oxidation reactions by supported Au NPs are not limited to the aerobic oxidation of alcohols, but are also shown in other reactions, such as the oxidation of thiol,110 benzene111–113 and amines.114 The selective oxidation of thiol to disulfide has been found to be achievable on TiO2 supported Au NPs under visible light (eqn (13)).110 Au/TiO2 was prepared by the DP method, and showed a broad LSPR absorption around 550 nm. Under visible light irradiation (>420 nm), Au/TiO2 could catalyze the oxidation of thiol to disulfide in the presence of O2. Interestingly, the reaction was reversed with UV light irradiation (>300 nm) from disulfide to thiol. The different electron transfer processes under visible light and UV light induced different reaction directions on the Au/TiO2 catalyst. As a rather stable compound, benzene was transformed into phenol with the supported Au photocatalysts in the presence of an oxidative atmosphere (O2 or CO2) under visible light (eqn (14)).111–113 For example, an in situ method was used to prepare metal NPs (Au, Ag and Pt) anchored on TiO2 microspheres, in which the metal precursors were reduced by the produced surface Ti3+ ions of the TiO2 particles.113 The obtained Au/TiO2 and Ag/TiO2 displayed clear plasmonic absorption peaks at approximately 540 and 450 nm, respectively (Fig. 12a). Under visible light irradiation, oxidation of benzene into phenol in the presence of O2 was observed on the TiO2 supported metal NPs, with the highest activity obtained on Au/TiO2 (Fig. 12b). The Au/TiO2 catalyst also showed visible light activity for the oxidation of amines to the corresponding imines (eqn (15)).114 Au/TiO2, with Au NPs of about 7 nm on rutile TiO2 particles, was prepared by the DP method. A range of oxide materials (TiO2, SrTiO3, ZnO, WO3, In2O3 and Nb2O5) were employed as supports, whereas Au/rutile TiO2 showed the best photocatalytic performance towards the oxidation of amines under visible light. In these reactions, the LSPR-induced electrons transferred from the Au NPs to TiO2 lowers the Fermi level of the Au NPs, thereby causing their oxidation ability. Owing to the wild oxidation ability of Au NPs, the selective oxidation of thiol to disulfide, benzene to phenol and amines to imines could proceed without further overoxidation. (13) (14) (15)
 Fig. 12  (a) UV-vis spectra of M@TiO2 (M = Au, Ag, Pt), and (b) the yield and selectivity of the phenol product over different photocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The visible light-driven reduction reaction was also boosted on WBG semiconductor supported Au NPs. Au/CeO2 catalysts were found to be efficient in the selective reduction of organic compounds, including the deoxygenation of epoxides to alkenes, reduction of ketones to alcohols and hydrogenation of azobenzene to hydrazobenzene, with visible light in ambient conditions (eqn (16)).115 It was observed that the reduction ability of Au/CeO2 catalysts could be tailored by choosing the irradiation light wavelength. The shorter light wavelength endows Au/CeO2 with the greater reduction power of conduction electrons, thereby driving considerably harsher catalytic reactions. This offers a design protocol to selectively manipulate chemical syntheses through the plasmonic excitation of metal NPs with tunable light irradiation wavelengths. In a recent study, TiO2 supported Au NPs showed significant enhancement in the photocatalytic reduction of nitrobenzenes to azobenzenes upon visible light irradiation (eqn (17)).116 Au/TiO2 catalysts, having Au NPs with a bimodal distribution of both small (2.1 nm) and large (9.0 nm) sizes, were prepared by a two-step method and showed broad absorption in the visible light range with an LSPR wavelength of around 550 nm. Under visible light irradiation, the bimodal Au/TiO2 exhibited a highly enhanced catalytic performance towards nitrobenzene reduction than that in the dark. In contrast, however, the unimodal Au/TiO2, which contains only small or large sizes of Au NPs, was inactive under visible light. The high efficiency of the bimodal Au/TiO2 was ascribed to the plasmon-induced electron transfer from small Au NPs to larger ones through the CB of TiO2 (Fig. 13). As a result, the small Au NPs functioned as the oxidation sites for 2-propanol, while the reduction of nitrobenzene took place on the large Au NPs. Through the plasmonic excitation of Au NPs, the neat one-directional charge separation led to the enhanced catalytic activity. (16) (17)
 Fig. 13  The reaction mechanism for the visible light-induced electron transfer from small to large Au NPs in Au/TiO2 catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
Aromatic amines are important versatile intermediates for fine chemicals and organic synthesis in the pharmaceutical industry. Recently, the direct production of imines from the hydroamination of alkynes with amines was achieved on supported Au NPs photocatalysts (Au/TiO2–N) under visible light (eqn (18)).117 Without Au NPs or visible light irradiation, almost no reaction was observed, indicating the role of plasmonic Au NPs as the catalytic sites. The TiO2–N support, which was endowed with rich Ti3+ sites by N doping, provided more coordination sites for the addition of H, and thus outperformed other supporting materials. As N doping introduces new gap states, the enhanced optical transitions involving mid-gap defect states could also contribute to the enhanced photocatalytic performance.118 Plasmonic excitation of ZnO supported Au NPs can also induce the selective formation of propargylamines from a mixture of an aldehyde, amine and phenylacetylene under 530 nm LED illumination (eqn (19)).119 It was found that in contrast to Al2O3 and TiO2 supports, ZnO could interact with alkyne and this led to Au NPs-driven photocatalysis with the product yield as high as 95%. (18) (19)
Apart from the organic transformation reactions mentioned above, visible light irradiation could also expedite CO oxidation over supported Au NPs. Au/TiO2, which was prepared by the DP method, exhibited an LSPR absorption peak around 540 nm.120 The introduction of visible light (490–780 nm) irradiation could boost the CO conversion compared to dark conditions. It was proposed that the LSPR effect favored the adsorption and activation of CO on the surface of Au NPs, thereby enhancing its oxidation. Further studies showed that CO oxidation was dependent on the electron transfer behavior between the Au NPs and the support materials.121 Visible light could accelerate the adsorption and activation of CO over Au/TiO2, while it suppressed its selectivity over Au/Al2O3. Upon plasmonic excitation, electrons were transferred from the Au NPs to TiO2 over Au/TiO2, yet in the case of Au/Al2O3 such process was prohibited. This finding demonstrates that CO oxidation is dominated by the metal–support interaction, in which proper electron transfer could improve the preferential oxidation of CO over the supported Au catalysts.
3.4 Metal/carbon-based hybrids
As one of the most abundant elements in the biosphere, carbon materials have shown great potential in sustainable energy and environmental science. In recent years, arising carbon materials such as zero-dimensional (0D) fullerene (C60), one-dimensional (1D) carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and two-dimensional (2D) graphene, exhibit excellent electrical, optical and mechanical properties.122 Carbon materials usually possess a large surface area, good adsorption capacity, as well as high electronic conductivity, which provide indispensable and protective supports to plasmonic nanocatalysts.123–125
Supported metal NPs on carbon materials have shown efficient activity in the degradation of organic dyes under visible light. For example, amorphous carbon can be used as the basis material to support and protect Ag NPs.126 As displayed in Fig. 14, the Ag@C core@shell hybrid, which was composed of Ag cores of 70–100 nm and carbon shell with a thickness of around 25 nm, showed a broad LSPR absorption centred at 630 nm. The Ag@C hybrid displayed higher photocatalytic activity than that of N–TiO2 in RhB degradation and gaseous CH3CHO decomposition under visible light, which was predominantly attributed to the plasmonic effect of the Ag NPs.
 Fig. 14  (a) TEM image and (b) UV-vis spectrum of the Ag@C hybrid dispersed in ethanol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. 
Graphene, which is a 2D network composed of monolayer sp2-hybridized carbon atoms, has been paid ever-growing interest due to its supreme and unique structural and electronic properties.127 The presence of delocalized electrons, dangling bonds and carbon vacancies enable graphene to facilitate the interfacial charge transfer with plasmonic metal NPs and stabilize them. Hybrids of graphene and plasmonic metal NPs, such as Au/graphene128 and Ag/graphene,129 have shown excellent visible-light photocatalytic performance in degrading dyes solutions. With respect to conventional semiconductors, plasmonic metal/graphene hybrids possess higher adsorption, stronger p–p interactions with dye chromophores, more efficient photosensitized electron injection and slower electron recombination, guaranteeing their superior photocatalytic activities.128 In addition, graphene supported plasmonic NPs have recently exhibited efficient selective reduction of nitrobenzene under visible light.130 A Cu/graphene hybrid was prepared by the reduction of Cu2O/graphene composites in H2 atmosphere at an elevated temperature. As displayed in Fig. 15, the obtained Cu/graphene hybrid, with Cu NPs of about 15 nm dispersed on 2D graphene nanosheets, showed an LSPR absorption peak at around 560 nm. Under visible light irradiation, the Cu/graphene hybrid exhibited a highly enhanced performance and selectivity towards nitrobenzene reduction compared to that in the dark. The wavelength-dependence of the catalytic activity (Fig. 15b) suggested that the reaction was induced by the plasmonic effect of Cu NPs. This work illustrates that the hybridization with carbon materials could enable unstable metal NPs to be more resistant to oxidation.
 Fig. 15  (a) TEM image and (b) the action spectrum of photocatalytic activity for the Cu/graphene hybrid. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
3.5 Supported metal films
In heterogeneous photocatalysis, supported metal films demonstrate an immobilized system that allows easy recycling, as well as long term use. Furthermore, the integration of plasmonic metals in films facilitates chemical reactions for single-molecule detection and synthesis through remote SERS.12–14 Thus, the construction of supported films expands the applications of plasmonic metals.
Supported metal films have been found to play a pivotal role in plasmon-assisted surface-catalyzed reactions during SERS measurement, with the formation of 4,4′-dimercaptoazobenzene (DMAB) either by the oxidation of 4-aminothiophenol (PATP) or reduction of 4-nitrobenzenethiolate (4NBT).131,132 For instance, Sun et al. reported the use of plasmonic metal (Au, Ag, Cu) films for the reduction of 4NBT to DMAB under red and green laser irradiation (eqn (20)).132 The Au, Ag, and Cu films with the average thickness of 50 nm were prepared by vacuum electron beam evaporation. It was found that the reduction reaction was strongly dependent on the substrate, the laser wavelength and the reaction timescales, which could be rationally chosen to accelerate or restrain the reaction. A variety of supported plasmonic metal films, such as Au rings,133 Ag NPs arrays,134 Ag microspheres,135 roughened Ag substrates,136 as well as Au and Ag NPs,137,138 have been employed to understand the underlying mechanism of SERS. The introduction of the LSPR effect not only drives the transfer of hot electrons to activate the chemical reaction, but also enhances the Raman signal of the surface species.137 (20)
In addition to driving the surface-catalyzed reactions during SERS, enhanced performances in conventional catalysis have also been observed on the supported metal films with visible light irradiation.139,140 For example, anisotropic Au nanorod arrays showed plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis in the reduction of 2-nitrobenzenamine (eqn (21)).139 The unidirectional Au nanorod arrays with optical anisotropy was fabricated by the oblique angle deposition technique on a p-type silicon wafer. Under green laser light irradiation, these arrays displayed an obvious improvement in the catalytic reduction of 2-nitrobenzenamine to 1,2-benzenediamine with NaBH4, which was assigned to the plasmonic effect of the Au nanorods. (21)
3.6 Non-metal semiconductor plasmonic catalysts
Different from noble metals that possess abundant free electrons, in semiconductors high doping is required to satisfy the prerequisite for LSPR. Consequently, doped-semiconductors have lower carrier concentrations than metals, and hence lower plasmonic frequencies in the NIR range. The longer LSPR wavelength absorption of the doped-semiconductors has rendered them appropriate candidates for bio-medical and optoelectronic applications.69,70 For photocatalytic reactions, extrinsically-doped semiconductors are not suitable as heterovalent atom sites facilitates the recombination of photo-excited charge carriers. Nonetheless, it may become favourable for self-doped non-stoichiometric semiconductors (WO3−x, MoO3−x and CuxInyS2) because their stoichiometric forms have turned out to be efficient catalysts for solar energy conversion.141–143 Recently, it has been revealed that plasmonic semiconductors, albeit at their incipient research stage, displayed superior activity in photocatalysis or photovoltaics as compared to their non-plasmonic counterparts.67,144 The presence of cation or oxygen vacancies brings appreciable free carriers in non-stoichiometric semiconductors, ensuring that they harvest the sunlight in a broad range.
The first example for plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic reactions using non-metal semiconductors under visible light was illustrated on MoO3−x nanosheets.67 MoO3−x nanosheets, with sizes ranging from 200 nm to 1 μm (Fig. 16a), were prepared by oxidizing metal Mo powder with H2O2 in ethanol solution and subsequent solvothermal treatment. In contrast with commercial MoO3 that merely responds to UV light, strong visible light absorption was observed in the prepared MoO3−x nanosheets with an LSPR peak at around 680 nm (Fig. 16b). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement confirmed the presence of oxygen vacancies, with large amounts of Mo5+ in the MoO3−x. It was found that plasmonic MoO3−x could be used as a highly efficient catalyst to dehydrogenate NH3BH3. The plasmonic MoO3−x outperformed the non-plasmonic commercial MoO3 both in the dark and under visible light illumination. It was noted that compared to the dark conditions, visible light could dramatically enhance the catalytic activity by a factor of 4 on the plasmonic MoO3−x (Fig. 16c). Through contrast experiments, the plasmonic effect accounted for the predominant contribution (ca. 77%) to the catalytic enhancement (Fig. 16d).
 Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of MoO3−x nanosheets, (b) UV/Vis-NIR optical absorption of MoO3−x and commercial MoO3, (c) comparison of initial H2 yield rate over MoO3−x and commercial MoO3 samples with and without light irradiation, and (d) thermal effect on the catalytic performance of MoO3−x in dark conditions and under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
High doping by defect chemistry is precondition to induce metallic behavior in semiconductors. The presence of defects enables plasmonic semiconductors, especially self-doped semiconductors, to have more active sites for reactions, and could be promising for heterogeneous catalysis. The as-prepared plasmonic MoO3−x nanosheets showed highly efficient activity in the dehydrogenation of NH3BH3 with visible light, even exceeding the plasmonic noble metals of Ag/SBA-15.67 This work demonstrates a facile access to semiconductor nanostructures with strong LSPR absorption in the visible light range, which is comparable to noble metals. In addition, the plasmonic semiconductors can also be employed for efficient visible light-driven photocatalysis, and it offers the potential utilization of the earth-abundant elements instead of the precious noble metals to a certain extent.
4. Summary and outlook
Plasmonic metallic nanostructures, including noble metals and highly-doped semiconductors, represent a class of promising materials that integrate light-responsive and catalytic-active properties. Through the excitation of LSPR, the hot electrons generated on the surface of metallic NPs are able to migrate to the contiguous semiconductors, or directly activate the adsorbed molecules and drive their catalytic reactions. Plasmon-mediated photocatalysis, with the assistance of near-field enhancement and electron density at the Fermi level,8 usually surpasses conventional semiconductor photocatalysis. The introduction of LSPR into photocatalysis has opened up new avenues for the efficient conversion of the abundant sunlight into chemical energy.
The photocatalytic reactions involve the participation of oxidizing and reducing agents in the following redox procedures; hence, interfacial charge transfer is the key to understand the underlying mechanism. Despite the fact that direct chemical reactions occur on the adsorbed molecules, vectorial electron transfer between metal NPs and the supports is required to obtain higher efficiency. On one hand, prior to recombination, plasmon-induced energetic electrons are able to cross the Schottky barrier between noble metals and wide band semiconductors, leading to interfacial charge separation. On the other hand, the presence of strong metal–support interactions (SMSI) enables the inherent electronic and chemical stability of surface noble metals,145,146 and thus reducible oxide semiconductors (e.g., CeO2, TiO2) usually outperform the non-reducible ones (e.g., Al2O3, ZrO2) to support the plasmonic photocatalysis of metal NPs. Therefore, for specific reactions with favorable electron-withdrawing or donating effects, it is of crucial importance to choose appropriate oxide support materials.
As the most investigated plasmonic photocatalysts, Au and Ag nanostructures have been paid considerable attention. Nevertheless, the high cost and earth-rarity restrict their large-scale practical applications. It seems more appealing to use earth-abundant plasmonic elements/oxides such as Cu, Al and MoO3−x with comparable plasmonic absorption to Au and Ag in the visible light region. To this end, the control of their surface oxidation states and guarantee of their chemical stability should be well addressed. The presence of light irradiation31 or hybridization with electron-rich graphene130 has turned out to be possible routes to protect and maintain the stabilities of the instable plasmonic metal nanostructures. Other strategies, for example, photoelectrocatalysis with the aid of voltage bias, could be further developed to enhance plasmonic-mediated photocatalysis, as well as the chemical stability of metallic nanostructures.
In single-active plasmonic photocatalysis, metallic NPs function as both the photo- and catalytic-active sites, and they have shown high potential in selective organic transformations with mild oxidation ability. In addition to enhancing the catalysis of metallic NPs themselves, the surface plasmons have the ability to boost the catalytic activities of adjacent semiconductors, molecular complexes, as well as metal NPs. Among these, metal/semiconductor hybrids account for the majority and have been dominantly applied to improve the photocatalytic performance of semiconductors in water splitting and toxic pollutant removal. Recently, it was found that the electron transfer from plasmonic metals to the other catalytic ones could also improve the photocatalytic activity of the latter in chemical synthesis, such as Pd-catalyzed Suzuki-coupling reactions147–149 and Ru-catalyzed ammonia synthesis.150
Albeit with the arresting progress, plasmon-directed photocatalysis is still in its infancy. A great many issues, such as the interfacial structure, band alignment and contacting architectures between plasmonic metals and support materials, should be clarified for preferential charge transfer. The plasmonic property of metallic nanostructures is strongly dependent on their metal species, sizes, shapes and supporting materials, which in turn offer the guidelines and protocols to allow one to harvest the broad absorption across the whole solar spectrum by harnessing rationally devised nanostructures. With the on-going in-depth investigations, it is envisaged that this burgeoning field will bring greater success in the exploitation of highly efficient and robust plasmonic photocatalysts working under visible light.
Acknowledgements
Part of this work was performed under the management of ‘Elements Strategy Initiative for Catalysts & Batteries (ESICB)’ supported by Ministry of Education Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology (MEXT) program, Japan. H.C. would like to thank Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) for the fellowship.
Notes and references
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lang, X. Chen and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 473–486 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9, 157–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Watanabe, D. Menzel, N. Nilius and H. J. Freund, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4301–4320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, L. Shao, Q. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2679–2724 RSC .
S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science, 1997, 275, 1102–1106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. van Schrojenstein Lantman, T. Deckert-Gaudig, A. J. G. Mank, V. Deckert and B. M. Weckhuysen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 583–586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lal, N. K. Grady, J. Kundu, C. S. Levin, J. B. Lassiter and N. J. Halas, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 898–911 RSC .
M. E. Stewart, C. R. Anderton, L. B. Thompson, J. Maria, S. K. Gray, J. A. Rogers and R. G. Nuzzo, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 494–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Lim, K. S. Jeon, H. M. Kim, J. M. Nam and Y. D. Suh, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 60–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. E. Ferry, L. A. Sweatlock, D. Pacifici and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4391–4397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Plasmonics, 2007, 2, 107–118 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tada, T. Mitsui, T. Kiyonaga, T. Akita and K. Tanaka, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 782–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai, J. Wei and M. H. Whangbo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7931–7933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, B. Huang, P. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. Lou, J. Wang, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7054–7056 RSC .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Krämer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tanaka, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 586–589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bian, T. Tachikawa, P. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 458–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mori, M. Kawashima, M. Che and H. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8598–8601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Y. Zhu, J. C. Zhao, Z. F. Zheng and X. P. Gao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5353–5356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, X. Ke, X. Yang, S. Sarina and H. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9657–9661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Christopher, H. Xin and S. Linic, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 467–472 CAS .
A. Marimuthu, J. Zhang and S. Linic, Science, 2013, 339, 1590–1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 CAS .
X. Zhou, G. Liu, J. Yu and W. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21337–21354 RSC .
P. Wang, B. Huang, Y. Dai and M. H. Whangbo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9813–9825 RSC .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, R. Jiang, F. Wang, C. Fang, J. Wang and J. C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5790–5805 CAS .
R. Jiang, B. Li, C. Fang and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5274–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lou, Z. Wang, B. Huang and Y. Dai, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 2456–2476 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiao, E. Jaatinen and H. Zhu, Chem.–Asian J., 2014, 11, 3046–3064 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Kale, T. Avanesian and P. Christopher, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 116–128 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. DeSantis, R. G. Weiner, A. Radmilovic, M. M. Bower and S. E. Skrabalak, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3072–3082 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Motl, A. F. Smith, C. J. DeSantis and S. E. Skrabalak, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3823–3834 RSC .

          S. A. Maier, Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer,  2007 Search PubMed .
M. A. Garcia, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 283001 CrossRef .
J. A. Creighton and D. G. Eadont, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1991, 87, 3881–3891 RSC .
C. Langhammer, M. Schwind, B. Kasemo and I. Zorić, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1461–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. M. Sanghamitra and S. Mazumdar, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 3439–3445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Langhammer, Z. Yuan, I. Zorić and B. Kasemo, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 833–838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, S. Tang, X. Mu, Y. Dai, G. Chen, Z. Zhou, F. Ruan, Z. Yang and N. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 28–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 788–800 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, M. Rycenga, S. E. Skrabalak, B. Wiley and Y. Xia, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2009, 60, 167–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, F. Tam, N. K. Grady and N. J. Halas, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18218–18222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fuku, S. Takakura, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Chem. Lett., 2012, 41, 614–616 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, J. Chen, Z. Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. Li, M. Marqueze and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1084–1094 RSC .
P. Lignier, R. Bellabarba and R. P. Tooze, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1708–1720 RSC .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Mahmoud, M. Chamanzar, A. Adibi and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6434–6442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kanehara, H. Koike, T. Yoshinaga and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17736–17737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhao, H. C. Pan, Y. B. Lou, X. F. Qiu, J. J. Zhu and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4253–4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Hsu, K. On and A. R. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19072–19075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, A. Riedinger, M. Prato, A. Casu, A. Genovese, P. Guardia, S. Sottini, C. Sangregorio, K. Miszta, S. Ghosh, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17630–17637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Manthiram and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3995–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Gordon, M. Cargnello, T. Paik, F. Mangolini, R. T. Weber, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6751–6761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, S. Hu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 15283–15287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2910–2914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, K. Latham, M. R. Field, D. D. Yao, N. V. Medehkar, G. A. Beane, R. B. Kaner, S. P. Russo, J. Z. Ou and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3931–3937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3908–3920 RSC .
A. Comin and L. Manna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3957–3975 RSC .
X. Ma, Y. Dai, L. Yu and B. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3986 Search PubMed .
F. Le, D. W. Brandl, Y. A. Urzhumov, H. Wang, J. Kundu, N. J. Halas, J. Aizpurua and P. Nordlander, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 707–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, B. Huang and Y. Dai, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2009–2026 RSC .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852–14853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fujita, P. Guan, K. McKenna, X. Lang, A. Hirata, L. Zhang, T. Tokunaga, S. Arai, Y. Yamamoto, N. Tanaka, Y. Ishikawa, N. Asao, Y. Yamamoto, J. Erlebacher and M. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 775–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Hallett-Tapley, M. J. Silvero, M. González-Béjar, M. Grenier, J. C. Netto-Ferreira and J. C. Scaiano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10784–10790 CAS .
T. L. Wee, L. C. Schmidt and J. C. Scaiano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24373–24379 CAS .
C. J. B. Alejo, C. Fasciani, M. Grenier, J. C. Netto-Ferreira and J. C. Scaiano, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 1506–1511 CAS .
J. Robertson, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.--Process., Meas., Phenom., 2000, 18, 1785–1791 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Knight, H. Sobhani, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Science, 2011, 332, 702–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, X. Chen, Z. Zheng, X. Ke, E. Jaatinen, J. Zhao, C. Guo, T. Xie and D. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7524–7526 RSC .
L. Gómez, J. L. Hueso, M. C. Ortega-Liébana, J. Santamaría and S. B. Cronin, Catal. Commun., 2014, 56, 115–118 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Gomez, V. Sebastian, M. Arruebo, J. Santamaria and S. B. Cronin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15111–15116 RSC .
X. Ke, X. Zhang, J. Zhao, S. Sarina, J. Barry and H. Zhu, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 236–244 RSC .
C. D. Pina, E. Falletta and M. Rossi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 350–369 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Ke and H. Zhu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8048–8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Hallett-Tapley, M. J. Silvero, C. J. Bueno-Alejo, M. González-Béjar, C. D. McTiernan, M. Grenier, J. C. Netto-Ferreira and J. C. Scaiano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12279–12288 CAS .
A. Pineda, L. Gomez, A. M. Balu, V. Sebastian, M. Ojeda, M. Arruebo, A. A. Romero, J. Santamaria and R. Luque, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2043–2049 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Q. Xiao, Y. Bao, Y. Zhang, S. Bottle, S. Sarina, B. Zhaorigetu and H. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19062–19069 CAS .
P. Christopher, H. Xin, A. Marimuthu and S. Linic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 1044–1050 CAS .
X. Chen, Z. Zheng, X. Ke, E. Jaatinen, T. Xie, D. Wang, C. Guo, J. Zhao and H. Zhu, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 414–419 RSC .
K. H. Chen, Y. C. Pu, K. D. Chang, Y. F. Liang, C. M. Liu, J. W. Yeh, H. C. Shih and Y. J. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19039–19045 CAS .
M. Yadav and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9698–9725 CAS .
K. Fuku, R. Hayashi, S. Takakura, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7446–7450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ho, J. C. Yu, T. Kwong, A. C. Mak and S. Lai, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4514–4522 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu and M. A. A. Schoonen, Am. Mineral., 2000, 85, 543–556 CAS .
S. Mukherjee, L. Zhou, A. M. Goodman, N. Large, C. Ayala-Orozco, Y. Zhang, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 64–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sá, G. Tagliabue, P. Friedli, J. Szlachetko, M. H. Rittmann-Frank, F. G. Santomauro, C. J. Milne and H. Sigg, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3584–3588 Search PubMed .
X. Ma, Y. Dai, L. Yu and B. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12388–12394 CAS .
X. Ma, Y. Dai, M. Guo, Y. Zhu and B. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 8722–8731 RSC .
E. Kowalska, O. O. P. Mahaney, R. Abea and B. Ohtani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 2344–2355 RSC .
A. Tanaka, A. Ogino, M. Iwaki, K. Hashimoto, A. Ohnuma, F. Amano, B. Ohtani and H. Kominami, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 13105–13111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tanaka, Y. Nishino, S. Sakaguchi, T. Yoshikawa, K. Imamura, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2551–2553 RSC .
A. Tanaka, K. Hashimoto, B. Ohtani and H. Kominami, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3419–3421 RSC .
D. Tsukamoto, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6309–6315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Naya, A. Inoue and H. Tada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6292–6293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tanaka, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10446–10448 RSC .
A. Tanaka, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14526–14533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Maldotti, A. Molinari, R. Juárez and H. Garcia, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1831–1834 RSC .
S. Naya, M. Teranishi, T. Isobeb and H. Tada, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 815–817 RSC .
Y. Ide, M. Matsuoka and M. Ogawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16762–16764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ide, N. Nakamura, H. Hattori, R. Ogino, M. Ogawa, M. Sadakane and T. Sano, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11531–11533 RSC .
Z. Zheng, B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai and M. H. Whangbo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9079–9087 RSC .
S. Naya, K. Kimura and H. Tada, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 10–13 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ke, S. Sarina, J. Zhao, X. Zhang, J. Chang and H. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3509–3511 RSC .
S. Naya, T. Niwa, T. Kume and H. Tada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7305–7309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Z. Zheng, S. Bottle, A. Chou, S. Sarina and H. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2676–2678 RSC .
X. Ma, Y. Dai, L. Yu, Z. Lou, B. Huang and M. H. Whangbo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12133–12140 CAS .
M. González-Béjar, K. Peters, G. L. Hallett-Tapley, M. Grenier and J. C. Scaiano, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1732–1734 RSC .
J. Liu, R. Si, H. Zheng, Q. Geng, W. Dai, X. Chen and X. Fu, Catal. Commun., 2012, 26, 136–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, J. Liu, R. Si, X. Chen, W. Dai and X. Fu, J. Catal., 2014, 317, 229–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Titirici, R. J. White, N. Brun, V. L. Budarin, D. S. Su, F. del Monte, J. H. Clark and M. J. MacLachlan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 250–290 RSC .
J. Li, C. Y. Liu and Z. Xie, Mater. Res. Bull., 2011, 46, 743–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, S. Liu, Y. Luo, W. Lu, L. Wang and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2142–2144 RSC .
V. G. Kravets, R. Jalil, Y. J. Kim, D. Ansell, D. E. Aznakayeva, B. Thackray, L. Britnell, B. D. Belle, F. Withers, I. P. Radko, Z. Han, S. I. Bozhevolnyi, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim and A. N. Grigorenko, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5517 CAS .
S. Sun, W. Wang, L. Zhang, M. Shang and L. Wang, Catal. Commun., 2009, 11, 290–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiong, L. L. Zhang, J. Ma and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6099–6101 RSC .
Y. Haldorai, B. K. Kim, Y. L. Jo and J. J. Shim, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 143, 1452–1461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, C. Hao, G. Jin, H. Y. Zhu and X. Y. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1973–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sun and H. Xu, Small, 2012, 8, 2777–2786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dong, Y. Fang, X. Chen, H. Xu and M. Sun, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10677–10682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, J. A. Hutchison, H. Uji-i, J. Hofkens, L. Lagae, G. Maes, G. Borghs and P. V. Dorpe, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1606–1611 RSC .
Z. G. Dai, X. H. Xiao, Y. P. Zhang, F. Ren, W. Wu, S. F. Zhang, J. Zhou, F. Mei and C. Z. Jiang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 335701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kang, P. Xu, B. Zhang, H. Tsai, X. Han and H. L. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3389–3391 RSC .
X. Zhang, P. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Fang and M. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5407 Search PubMed .
Y. F. Huang, M. Zhang, L. B. Zhao, J. M. Feng, D. Y. Wu, B. Ren and Z. Q. Tian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2353–2357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zong, Q. Guo, M. Xu, Y. Yuan, R. Gu and J. Yao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 31810–31816 RSC .
L. Kubus, H. Erdogan, S. S. Cetin, E. Biskin and G. Demirel, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 2973–2977 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, K. M. Twaddle, J. Hu and H. Byun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11514–11522 CAS .
J. Papp, S. Soled, K. Dwight and A. Wold, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 496–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vasilopoulou, A. M. Douvas, D. G. Georgiadou, L. C. Palilis, S. Kennou, L. Sygellou, A. Soultati, I. Kostis, G. Papadimitropoulos, D. Davazoglou and P. Argitis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16178–16187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Lewerenz, H. Goslowsky, K. D. Husemann and S. Fiechter, Nature, 1986, 321, 687–688 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Niezgoda, E. Yap, J. D. Keene, J. R. McBride and S. J. Rosenthal, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3262–3269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tauster, S. C. Fung and R. L. Garten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 170–175 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, F. Yang and X. Bao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1692–1701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, C. Li, H. Chen, R. Jiang, L. D. Sun, Q. Li, J. Wang, J. C. Yu and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5588–5601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarina, H. Zhu, E. Jaatinen, Q. Xiao, H. Liu, J. Jia, C. Chen and J. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5793–5801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Chen, H. Zhou, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6063–6067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Oshikiri, K. Ueno and H. Misawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9802–9805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of LSPR excitation on metallic NPs.	 

 	Fig. 2  The plasmonic wavelength dependence of metal nanostructures on their (a) metal species (b) shapes and (c) sizes. Adapted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (d) The effect of the surrounding media on the plasmonic wavelength of Ag nanocubes. Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  A schematic diagram, which exhibits the plasmonic frequency dependence on the free carrier density and doping constraints in metals and doped semiconductors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The blue shift in the extinction spectra of ITO NPs with increasing Sn doping. Adapted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) The red shift in the optical extinction spectra of Cu2−xS NPs with increasing Cu+ concentration. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  A schematic illustration of the surface plasmon decay process via (i) radiative and (ii) non-radiative routes. Adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. (a) The transfer of the hot electrons to the nearby semiconductor (n-type). Adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The direct injection of the hot electrons to the LUMO of the adsorbates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  (a) UV-vis spectrum of a colloidal Au NPs suspension in sec-phenethyl alcohol and H2O2. (b) Acetophenone and benzaldehyde yield as a function of LED excitation time with or without Au NPs. Adapted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photocatalytic decomposition of HCHO to CO2 under blue light (blue bars) and red light (red bars) for Au NPs on different oxide supports. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH. (b) The schematic diagram of band structures for the supported Au NPs and the possible photocatalytic mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Wavelength- and (b) intensity-dependent photocatalytic activity of Ag/Al2O3 catalysts in the photocatalytic ethylene epoxidation under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 
	(10)

 	Fig. 9  (A) TEM images and photographs of the Ag/SBA-15 hybrids with different sizes of Ag NPs. (B) The action spectra of the enhanced catalytic performance for the Ag/SBA-15 hybrids. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The selectivity to propylene oxide for thermal (light off) and photothermal (light on) processes as a function of the reaction rate. (b) In situ diffuse reflectance UV-vis extinction spectra of the Cu/SiO2 catalyst treated under different conditions. Adapted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2013 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
	(11)

 	Fig. 11  (a) HRTEM image of Au/P25 TiO2 hybrid and (b) proposed mechanism for visible light driven aerobic oxidation by Au NPs supported on WBG semiconductors. Adapted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)

 	Fig. 12  (a) UV-vis spectra of M@TiO2 (M = Au, Ag, Pt), and (b) the yield and selectivity of the phenol product over different photocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(16)
	(17)

 	Fig. 13  The reaction mechanism for the visible light-induced electron transfer from small to large Au NPs in Au/TiO2 catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 
	(18)
	(19)

 	Fig. 14  (a) TEM image and (b) UV-vis spectrum of the Ag@C hybrid dispersed in ethanol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) TEM image and (b) the action spectrum of photocatalytic activity for the Cu/graphene hybrid. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 
	(20)
	(21)

 	Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of MoO3−x nanosheets, (b) UV/Vis-NIR optical absorption of MoO3−x and commercial MoO3, (c) comparison of initial H2 yield rate over MoO3−x and commercial MoO3 samples with and without light irradiation, and (d) thermal effect on the catalytic performance of MoO3−x in dark conditions and under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
