Biopolymeric photonic structures: design, fabrication, and emerging applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS01007B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS01007B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 983-1031Biopolymeric photonic structures: design, fabrication, and emerging applications

        
          
            Rui 
            Xiong
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jingyi 
            Luan
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Saewon 
            Kang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunhong 
            Ye
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Srikanth 
            Singamaneni
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Vladimir V. 
            Tsukruk
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0245, USA. E-mail: vladimir@mse.gatech.edu
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Institute of Materials Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, St Louis, MO 63130, USA
cSchool of Physical Science and Technology, Shanghai Tech University, Shanghai 201210, China
Received 
      1st June 2019
    First published on 21st January 2020AbstractBiological photonic structures can precisely control light propagation, scattering, and emission via hierarchical structures and diverse chemistry, enabling biophotonic applications for transparency, camouflaging, protection, mimicking and signaling. Corresponding natural polymers are promising building blocks for constructing synthetic multifunctional photonic structures owing to their renewability, biocompatibility, mechanical robustness, ambient processing conditions, and diverse surface chemistry. In this review, we provide a summary of the light phenomena in biophotonic structures found in nature, the selection of corresponding biopolymers for synthetic photonic structures, the fabrication strategies for flexible photonics, and corresponding emerging photonic-related applications. We introduce various photonic structures, including multi-layered, opal, and chiral structures, as well as photonic networks in contrast to traditionally considered light absorption and structural photonics. Next, we summarize the bottom-up and top-down fabrication approaches and physical properties of organized biopolymers and highlight the advantages of biopolymers as building blocks for realizing unique bioenabled photonic structures. Furthermore, we consider the integration of synthetic optically active nanocomponents into organized hierarchical biopolymer frameworks for added optical functionalities, such as enhanced iridescence and chiral photoluminescence. Finally, we present an outlook on current trends in biophotonic materials design and fabrication, including current issues, critical needs, as well as promising emerging photonic applications.
Rui Xiong
Dr Rui Xiong is currently a Humboldt Research Fellow at the University of Konstanz, Germany. He received his BS degree (2011) and PhD degree (2016) from the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at Sichuan University. He carried out his post-doctoral research (2017–2019) at Georgia Institute of Technology. His research focuses on bioinspired interfacial assembly of natural biopolymers for high-performance structural and functional materials.
Jingyi Luan
Jingyi Luan received her bachelor's degree from Xi'an Jiaotong University. Currently, she is a PhD candidate in the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science at Washington University in St. Louis. Her research interests include novel materials and transduction platforms for ultra-sensitive biodetection and biosensors for point-of-care and resource-limited settings.
Saewon Kang
Dr Saewon Kang received his BS degree and MS degree from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Pusan National University (2011) and PhD degree (2018) from the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology. He is currently working as a postdoctoral fellow at Georgia Institute of Technology. His research interests include the development of biopolymer-based flexible photonic sensors and laser devices.
Chunhong Ye
Dr Chunhong Ye is currently an Assistant Professor at the School of Physical Science and Technology, Shanghai Tech University. She received her PhD from Nangjing Forestry University (2013). She carried out her post-doctoral research at Georgia Institute of Technology (2012–2015) and Leibniz Institute of Polymer Dresden as a Humboldt Research Fellow (2015–2018). Her research interests include interfacial assembly of bio/synthetic polymers, nanoparticles and 2D materials for biomimetic 3D stimulated micro-actuators, bioinspired chiral optical nanocomposites.
Srikanth Singamaneni
Dr Srikanth Singamaneni is a Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science at Washington University in St. Louis. He obtained his PhD in Polymer Materials Science and Engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology in 2009. His research group interests include the design, synthesis and self-assembly of plasmonic nanostructures for various biomedical and energy applications.
Vladimir V. Tsukruk
Vladimir Tsukruk is a Regents Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology. He received his MS degree in physics from the National University of Ukraine, PhD and DSc degrees in polymer science from the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine and carried out his post-doctoral research at the U. Marburg, Darmstadt TU and U. Akron. He serves on the Editorial Advisory Boards of five journals and as an Executive Editor at ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces. He has co-authored about 500 refereed articles and five books and has organized ten professional symposia. His research in the field of nanomaterials morphology, surfaces and interfaces, assembly of synthetic/natural polymers, and bioinspired materials has been recognized by the Fulbright Award, Humboldt Research Award, and NSF Special Creativity Award, among others. He is an elected Fellow of the American Physical Society, Materials Research Society, and American Chemical Society.
1. Introduction
Photonic structures which are capable of manipulating light at multi-length scales via hierarchical micro/nanostructural organization enable various optical applications related to vision enhancement, camouflaging, energy harvesting, light actuation and colorimetric biosensing.1–4 However, a longstanding challenge is developing environmentally sustainable photonic structures while maintaining excellent structural and optical performance. For instance, wearable optical biodevices in human–machine interfaces and implantable medical devices require materials that possess good mechanical flexibility and stretchability combined with biocompatibility and biodegradability to match skin and tissue properties.5–7 Naturally derived polymers that are produced by living organisms demonstrate extraordinary mechanical flexibility and diverse rich surface chemistry, combined with excellent physical properties such as high decomposition temperature, low thermal expansion, good transparency and biocompatibility.8–10 Such features make them promising building blocks for flexible bioenabled hierarchical photonic structures.11–18 Although inorganic materials have been used as the mainstream optical material platform for decades, their inherent mechanical rigidity, fragility, high absorbance, and potential toxicity make it difficult to meet the requirements of emerging applications in various advanced biomaterial-related fields.19
Research in the field of bio-enabled photonic structures has rapidly grown in the last two decades with much accelerated growth observed in the past decade (Fig. 1). Current original literature provides a large number of examples of biophotonic structures and integration of spatially organized structures with a variety of biopolymers. These significant efforts can lead to the development of new functional biophotonic materials, extending the range of prospective optical applications, and require careful analysis to establish most interesting common trends and potential for future impact.
 Fig. 1  Publications in naturally derived polymers for photonics, 2000–2019. (Web of Science, 2019.) 
Several recent reviews have summarized bio-related photonic and optical materials, with most of them focusing on the light–matter interactions of biological optical materials and their applications.1,2,4,20 However, very few reviews have discussed the combination of the critical topics in naturally-derived biopolymers, synthetic materials, and resulting unique photonic and optical behavior in one collection. Although some reviews also considered photonics of biopolymers,21 these topics mostly involved light absorption, fluorescence emission, and chemical reactions of biopolymers.
Due to these advantages of naturally-derived polymers for photonic/optics (e.g. mechanical robustness, transparency, renewability, rich chemistry and biocompatibility), it is extremely important to specifically discus the chemistry, nanostructure and properties of biopolymers, and summarize/analyze the fabrication strategies and mechanisms for constructing biopolymer-based photonics in a very general sense. Thus, in this review, we discuss the naturally derived polymers serving as components for organized photonic materials, including photonic structures, materials selections, assembly strategies, and emerging applications (Fig. 2).14–17
 Fig. 2  Overview of naturally derived photonic materials, including biopolymer selection, photonic structures, construction strategies, and emerging applications. (a) Silk optical elements.14 Reprinted from ref. 14 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2008. (b) Cellulose photonic sensors.15 Reprinted from ref. 15 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (c) Responsive cellulose nanocrystal photonics18 Reprinted from ref. 18 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (d) Transparent wood for light harvesting.17 Reprinted from ref. 17 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. 
Below, we firstly briefly introduce the fundamentals of most frequently considered photonic structures, including multi-layered structures, opals, chiral structures, and photonic networks. Next, we summarize the corresponding fabrication approaches and relevant physical and chemical properties of biopolymers and the advantages of biopolymers as building blocks for photonic structures. Finally, we discuss current and emerging biophotonics applications with a few existing examples, as well as related grand challenges.
2. Photonic and biophotonic structures
Well-organized hierarchical micro/nanostructures are critical for realizing highly resilient photonic materials, structures, and systems.22 Photonic structures enable controllable light–matter interactions because of the hierarchically organized periodic structures at multi-length scales.2,23–27 This section provides a brief overview of relevant structures and discusses their optical properties.
2.1 Multi-layered photonic structures
Structural colors are frequently produced by layered structures known as Bragg stacks and are caused by multilayer light interference with incident angle dependency.1,27,28 The condition of incident wavelength, λ, for producing constructive light interference is described with the well-known relationship (Fig. 3a): 2nbdcosθb = mλ(1)where θb is the refraction angle, nb is the refractive index, d is the film thickness, and m is an integer. Multilayer interference can be analyzed with periodic stacks of pairs of thin layers (Fig. 3b).27 In a special case of two layers, the A and B layers possess thickness da and db, and refractive index na and nb, respectively. Considering nb > na, the phase of reflected light at each A–B interface changes by 180°, while remaining unchanged at the B–A interface. This phase shift of half wavelength is caused by reflection at the surface with a higher refractive index, while no phase shift occurs upon reflection at the surface with a lower refractive index.
 Fig. 3  Configuration of common thin-film interference (a) and multilayer interference (b).27 Reprinted from ref. 27 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2005. (c) Photos of Japanese jewel beetle, Chrysochroa fulgidissima. Microscopy (d) and TEM (e) images of the cuticular surface of the beetles at different locations.29 Reprinted from ref. 29 with permission from IOP Publishing, copyright 2013. 
The general conditions for multilayer constructive interference are presented as:27 2(nadacosθa + nbdbcosθb) = mλ(2)with maximum reflection achieved at: 2nadacosθa = (m − 1/2)λ(3)where the angles of refraction in layers A and B are designated as θa and θb, respectively (Fig. 3).
If light waves interfere constructively, it results in strong structural colors, whereas destructive interference leads to faded colors.30 Notably, the reflectivity highly depends on the difference in the refractive index between the two layers.27 With close refractive index, which is common in biopolymer multilayers, the number of layers should be significantly increased for achieving sharp light reflection. In contrast, multilayered structures composed of materials with large differences in the refractive index (Δn > 0.2), maximum reflectivity intensity can be reached with stacks composed of only several layers. The multilayer interference for thicker films demonstrates advantages in selectivity, which is more favorable for obtaining highly intense and uniform structural colors.
This multilayer interference is exploited by numerous natural creatures, such as Morpho butterfly, jewel beetles, birds-of-paradise, mollusks, and fish for survival in natural competition (Fig. 3).31–35 For instance, the metallic structural color of Japanese jewel beetles, Chrysochroa fulgidissima, is a well-known example of multilayer interferences.29,36 As demonstrated in Fig. 3c,29 the elytra favorably reflect the green wavelength that is interrupted with longitudinal, dark-purple stripes, while the ventral area reflects an orange color. These intense structural colors are caused by the multilayer-controlled light interference, which in turn stems from the alternating morphology that consists of bilayers (a chitin layer and a melanin layer) with different periodicities from ∼100 nm to 200 nm (Fig. 3d and e). These structural colors are highly view angle dependent, as expected for common multilayer interference.34 Theoretical calculations indicated that the ideal thickness is around 150 nm for maximum reflection, for alternatingly stacking five layers with refractive index varying from 1.5 and 1.6 for each layer.
2.2 Photonic crystal properties
Photonic crystals are organized optical structures with periodic modulation of the refractive index at the sub-micron scale, which enables controlled light propagation.37 These highly organized structures demonstrate intense structural colors if the photonic gap is within the visible wavelength range. Photonic crystals can be classified into three categories, one-dimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) structures as discussed in this section (Fig. 4a).38,39
 Fig. 4  (a) General organization of 1D, 2D and 3D photonic crystals.38 Reprinted from ref. 38 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2014. (b) 1D photonic crystal structure of iridescent scales of butterfly (M. rhetenor).42 Reprinted from ref. 42 with permission from CC-BY license. (c) 2D photonic crystal structure of the wings of a black cicada (Cryptotympana atrata Fabricius).43 Reprinted from ref. 43 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2016. 
In 1D photonic crystals, layers of different refractive materials are deposited in an alternating way to generate the periodic modulation of refractive index in one direction. For example, the brick-and-mortar structure of mollusk shells is built from inorganic plates and a protein layer, which provides excellent mechanical performance.40 In addition, the highly ordered multilayered structures with different refractive index enable intense iridescent colors of these shells. For some shells of mollusks, such as Haliotis Glabra, both interference and diffraction are responsible for the vivid structural colors, owing to the fine-scale grating structure and stacks of thin crystalline nacreous platelets under the surface.41
In addition, some 1D photonic crystals can be considered as parallel alternating layers and layers filled with air, which is common in synthetic and natural materials such as some species of butterfly wings. These materials display iridescent colors that are attributed to the diffraction effect caused by evenly grooved surface microstructures. As shown in Fig. 4b, Morpho wing-scales’ structures reveal the discretized ridges (∼200 nm in width, ∼2 μm in height) comprising periodic lamellae of alternating cuticle layers with a thickness of tens of nanometers. Every single ridge exhibits a characteristic tapered shape with an asymmetry of lamella.42 These two elements can interact with light independently to obtain structural colors resulting from quasi-multilayer interference and thin-film interference, respectively. The synergistic effect produces light reflection at the same wavelength that allows Morpho wings to show a brilliant blue color.27
2D photonic crystals possess structural periodicity in two directions (Fig. 4a).38 Common examples of 2D photonic crystals are periodic arrays of nanorods and periodically arranged pores.38 Notably, the 2D periodic ordering of nanorods at the surface can minimize the reflection from the surface and significantly enhance the optical transparency. In nature, the most well-known examples are the transparent cicada wing and the moth eye.43,44 As shown in Fig. 4c, the surface of the transparent cicada wing, which mainly consists of chitin, presents a highly ordered hexagonal array of nano-nipples with center-to-center top spacing of 160 nm.43 The average size of nano-nipples, with a height of 200 nm, continuously decreases from 140 nm of basal diameter to 60 nm at the top. The enhanced antireflection performance of such structures is attributed to a refractive index gradient between those of air and chitin, which enables largely decreasing light reflectance over a broad wavelength range.
Similar to the structure of a cicada wing, the outer surface of the facet lenses in the moth eye consists of an array of excessive cuticle corneal nipples with a distance of 180–240 nm and height varying from 0 nm to 230 nm.44 Similarly, the nipples create a gradient refractive index because their size and distance are distinctly smaller than the wavelength of visible light. The gradient refractive index highly depends on the shapes, spacing, and height, based on experimental and theoretical studies.44 Nipples with a paraboloid shape demonstrated ideal, complete antireflection properties across the visible spectrum, which can minimize the eye glare to make them less visible for predators.
The optical properties of 3D photonic crystals are determined by the periodicity and contrast of refractive index variation in all three directions (Fig. 4a).45 The critical factor that affects the optical properties is the photonic band gap that refers to the energy/wavelength range of prohibited light propagation in photonic crystals. Light in this band gap will be completely reflected.45 To describe the geometry of photonic crystals, the term “lattice” is frequently used.37 Local defects are sometimes intended to embed into photonic crystals to introduce localized photonic gaps. Such designs can induce incoherent scattering and hopping-like photon transport for an efficient waveguide.38,45–47
The most famous 3D photonic crystals are natural opals, which demonstrate rich colorful appearances because of periodic systems with densely packed spheres (Fig. 5a).48,49 These spheres are nearly monodisperse with diameters within 150–400 nm, forming a face-centered cubic (FCC) lattice (Fig. 5b and c).48 Additionally, they are usually amorphous and can be doped with other elements (e.g. Fe, Al, and Ti) to control their refractive index.50,51 Their voids can be filled with hydrated silica for enhancing mechanical stability and lowering the refractive index contrast.48,52 As a result, light scattering can be significantly minimized, making these structural colors much clearer.
 Fig. 5  (a–c) Photonic structure of natural opals: (a) and (b) SEM image and (c) scheme of the opal structure.48 Reprinted from ref. 48 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2009. (d–g) 3D photonic crystal structure in beetle scales: (d) photograph of L. augustus. (e) Optical micrograph and SEM image of individual scales, (f) 3D reconstruction image; (g) SEM image of the photonic structure.54 Reprinted from ref. 54 with permission from the American Physical Society, copyright 2008. 
Natural 3D photonic structures are also found in many living creatures.53 Take exoskeleton scales of the weevil Lamprocyphus augustus as an example (Fig. 5d).54 Their brilliant green iridescence is associated with an interior diamond lattice-like cuticular structure as shown in Fig. 5d–g.54 In sharp contrast to the angle dependent iridescence in multilayered structures and opals, this scale shows nearly angle-independent structural colors because of the combination of differently oriented, single-crystalline micrometer-sized domains of the same 3D crystal lattice in each scale. Notably, this 3D photonic crystal cannot possess a complete photonic bandgap because of the low refractive index of biopolymeric materials. However, photonic crystals with a complete photonic bandgap can be constructed by using the natural photonic crystals as biotemplates for porous opal structures with a high refractive index contrast.55
Calculating the complex photonic bandgaps is important to gain a fundamental understanding of the observed appearance of both natural and synthetic photonic structures and to effectively guide the design and fabrication of synthetic photonic structures made from natural and synthetic materials. It plays an important role in guiding the design of three-dimensional photonic bandgap materials, the fabrication of which remains resource-intensive. Photonic band gaps can be analyzed by plotting the appropriate photonic band diagrams.
To numerically calculate such diagrams, software packages, such as MIT Photonic Bands (MPB)56 and BandSOLVE,57 can be employed. MPB is a software package to compute definite-frequency eigenstates of Maxwell's equations in periodic dielectric structures. It can compute optical dispersion relations and eigenstates for structures such as strip waveguides and optical fibers. In MPB, calculations are typically performed using 32 × 32 × 32 grid points to discretize the unit cell. MPB computes fully-vectorial eigenmodes of Maxwell's equations with periodic boundary conditions by preconditioned conjugate-gradient minimization of the block Rayleigh quotient in a plane-wave basis. The BandSOLVE software employs the Plane Wave Expansion (PWE) algorithm to perform band computations, and it also provides a graphical display of the electromagnetic fields and other quantities of interest for further analysis. It also includes several advanced simulation features for more efficient, fast band computations, such as inversion symmetry, mode seeding, and parity for 3D calculations. These computational tools are widely available to researchers interested in designing novel photonic structures.
2.3 Chiral nanostructures
Chiral nematic structures, also called twisted plywood and helicoidal Bouligand structures, are well known arrangements which are identical to those for cholesteric liquid crystals (LC) as shown in Fig. 6a.58,59 This hierarchical architecture consists of superimposing planar layers of parallel-aligned rod-like molecules/nanostructures with a certain twisting angle. A 360° rotation of the planar layer defines the helicoidal pitch (P) (Fig. 6a). This chiral morphology reflects circularly polarized light of the same handedness as the helicoid structure and transmits circularly polarized light with the opposite handedness.60 The selective reflection of circularly polarized light follows the rule of Bragg's law, λmax = navPsinθ, where nav is the average refractive index of the helicoidal structure and θ is the angle of incidence. The reflectivity for a given color is produced with the half-pitch distance corresponding to the wavelength of the color.60
 Fig. 6  (a) Chiral nanostructure.58 (b and c) Chiral nematic nanostructure of the beetle C. gloriosa that is responsible for the circularly polarized iridescence.58 Reprinted from ref. 58 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2009. 
Examples of chiral nanostructures are reported in fruits, beetles, and exoskeletons of crustaceans.58,61,62 These chiral nanostructures can produce vivid structural colors as a result of matching the pitch distance with visible light wavelength. Additionally, these structures exhibit both high toughness and strength because of various toughening mechanisms at multiscale levels, which are mutually exclusive in most artificial materials.63 Most of these natural chiral architectures only selectively reflect left circularly polarized light because of their left-handed chiral organization. Fig. 6b–d shows the metallic green beetle Chrysina gloriosa, which selectively reflects left circularly polarized light when illuminated with unpolarized light.58 However, this brilliant metallic color disappears when viewed under a right circular polarizer. The exoskeleton of this beetle consists of hexagonal domains (∼10 μm) that appear to be green with a bright yellow core. These domains are composed of chiral nematic nanostructures that are organized in a near-hexagonal domain, which can produce left-handed reflectance. Interestingly, these beetles not only demonstrate chirality and selective optical reflections in the visible range, but they also show chirality and chiroptical activity in the THz range, for unknown purposes.64
Notably, few remarkable biological structures that are found in beetles and fruits can reflect both left and right circularly polarized light. For example, the scarabaeid beetle Plusiotis resplendens shows intense green and gold coloration under left and right circular polarizers, respectively.62 The optically active reflecting layer in the outer exocuticle is composed of a sandwiched structure, which consists of thick upper and lower layers for a total sandwiched layer of 1.81 μm.65 The upper and lower layers exhibit left twisted chiral nematic structures, while the middle layer exhibits a vertically oriented architecture. The left-handed upper layer reflects the left-handed circularly polarized light, while allowing the right-handed polarized light to go through. The middle unidirectional layer then acts as a half-wave retardation plate to convert the right-handed circularly polarized light that was transmitted by the upper layer into left-handed light. Then, the bottom layer reflects the converted left-handed light back, and the light changes into right-handed light again through the middle layer. Finally, the right-handed light can propagate through the upper layer to exhibit right-handed polarized light reflection. Another example is the Pollia condensata fruit in the plant kingdom.61 The metallic blue iridescence originates from the thick-walled cell, which bears uniform helicoidal structures. Furthermore, this fruit can reflect both left-handed and right-handed circularly polarized light. This unique optical property is associated with the chirality of the organized microfibrils with both left- and right-handedness.
2.4 Semi-organized photonic networks
In contrast to highly ordered periodic structures, which are capable of producing intense structural color iridescence through light interference, disordered photonic networks can generate bright white color through broadband light scattering.66–69 Multiple random scattering of incident light allows materials to exhibit bright whiteness at a small thickness. With the lower refractive index of the scattering elements, the thicker system must achieve a pronounced brightness.70
Among natural materials, the spongy random networks of keratin found in the barb of bird feathers are known for producing diffuse scattering.27 The underlying layer of scales of a butterfly with an irregular network structure can produce diffused light through light scattering, which can be selectively reinforced through the interference of the attached periodic structures.71 Another striking example is a white beetle, e.g., Cyphochilus, which displays brilliant whiteness (Fig. 7).72 The body of the beetle is covered with 7 μm-thick white scales with an anisotropic nanostructured network. This network is composed of interconnected chitin fibrils with length less than 1 μm and a diameter of 250 nm. These anisotropic nanostructures can increase the light scattering in the out-of-plane directions, leading to enhanced brightness, while minimizing the in-plane scattering that does not contribute to the brightness. This unique character makes this network one of the strongest scattering low-refractive-index materials in nature. These kinds of morphologies have been reproduced a number of times with abiotic materials such as plasmonic nanoparticle structures as perfect absorbers and reflectors.73–75
 Fig. 7  The photo of a brilliant white beetle Cyphochilus (a) and the beetle scales (b). (c) SEM of the sample pillar on a pin holder obtained from a beetle scale by focused ion-beam milling. (d–f) 3D reconstruction image of the photonic random networks by the X-ray tomography technique.72 Reprinted from ref. 72 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. 
Overall, these well-ordered hierarchical photonic structures provide extraordinary examples of unique and often exceptional photonic properties, including vivid structural colors, brilliant whiteness anti-reflection, and polarized light. Various efficient manipulations of light are responsible for these attractive optical phenomena through light absorption, multilayer interference, scattering, diffraction, as well as combinations of these effects. Even for the same photonic properties, the light propagation mechanism can be very different. Learning and applying these design and assembly principles are considered for constructing high-performance biophotonic materials. Additionally, these observations clearly point out that naturally derived materials can be a great choice for sophisticated engineering of these optical effects in synthetic materials and structures.
3. Natural polymers for photonic structures
Naturally derived polymers are ubiquitous and produced by plants, animals, and micro-organisms as the main components of their bodies. In nature, they are constructed into various forms of well-organized photonic structures as summarized in Table 1. These structures demonstrate good mechanical properties, light-weight, renewability, and prospective low-cost combined with prospective biocompatibility and biodegradability. Additionally, other additive properties of biopolymers, such as strong adhesion, good responsive properties, self-healing, and tailored wetting, may provide additional functionalities. It is worth noting that polynucleotides such as DNAs are too pricey to be used as meaningful structural photonics materials, and most relevant photonic examples in the literature are template assembly of plasmonic nanoparticles using DNAs.76–79 Thus, we will not discuss polynucleotides in this review and refer a reader to several reviews suggested above.
Table 1 Biopolymers in natural photonic structures




Biopolymers
Photonic structure
Natural source
Optical mechanisms




Cellulose
Chiral nematic structures, gratings
Fruits, flowers
Chiral photonic crystals, diffraction gratings


Chitin
Chiral nematic structures, multilayered structure, disordered networks
Insect cuticles/wings, mollusk shells
Chiral photonic crystals, multilayer interference, light scattering, diffraction gratings


Keratin
Multilayered structure, photonic crystals
Avian feathers
Multilayer interference


Collagen
Photonic crystals
Avian skin
Multilayer interference


Melanin
Multilayered structure
Avian feathers/skin
Pigments, multilayer interference




In this section, we discuss the chemistry, morphology, properties, and preparation of naturally derived polymers that are frequently used for constructing biophotonic materials from classes of polysaccharides and proteins (Table 1).
3.1 Cellulose and nanocellulose materials
Cellulose is the most abundant class of biopolymer materials available in nature.80 Their linear backbones are composed of several hundreds – thousands of β 1,4-linked D-glucose units (Fig. 8a). Cellulose is mainly produced by plants and bacteria in the form of cellulose fibers, microfibers, and finally, nanofibers (CNFs), which constitute the cell walls (Fig. 8).81,82 These CNFs possess a one-dimensional (1D) anisotropic nanostructure with alternatingly packed crystalline regions and small portions of amorphous regions. The predominant crystalline regions, usually called cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs), are composed of parallel linear cellulose chains bound by hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces.81
 Fig. 8  Nanocellulose materials prepared from wood pulp through different methods and the hierarchical structure of wood cell wall (a); (b, f and j) CNFs prepared by high-intensity ultrasonication; (c, g and k) CNCs prepared by HCl hydrolysis; (d, h and l) CNFs prepared by TEMPO pretreatment and ultrasonication; (e, i and m) CNCs prepared by H2SO4 hydrolysis.82 Reprinted from ref. 82 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2014. 
Such features endow CNFs and CNCs with extraordinary mechanical strength, stiffness, and flexibility, in addition to excellent thermal, optical, and biological properties. These properties are attractive for practical uses in a variety of engineering and biomedical fields. Nanocelluloses demonstrate amphiphilic character because of the different surface chemistries at different crystal planes. The OH groups decorate hydrophilic planes, while CH groups constitute hydrophobic planes.83 This unique amphiphilic nature facilitates the heterogeneous interaction with other amphiphilic nanocomponents used in assembling hierarchical nanostructures.84 In many cases, nanocelluloses that are produced by bacteria are classified as the third category (bacterial cellulose), although they possess similar morphology to CNFs.81 CNCs and CNFs are distinguished by their length and aspect ratio, as well as their crystal structures (Table 2). The dimensions of nanocellulose highly depend on the original cellulosic source and the processing conditions. The primary goal of nanocellulose processing is to have highly efficient exfoliation of these naturally occurring cellulose nanostructures without destroying their inherent structure. To date, numerous techniques have been developed to isolate CNFs, including high pressure homogenization,85 grinding,86 high-intensity ultrasonication,87 and ball milling.88 The shearing force produced in these intense mechanical treatments is capable of disintegrating cellulose fibers into nanofibers.
Table 2 The classification of cellulose materials




Types of cellulose
Sub-types
Cellulosic source
Synthesis
Crystal types




Nanocellulose
Cellulose nanofibers (CNFs)
Wood, bamboo, hemp, flax
Mechanical treatments with/without chemical or enzymatic pretreatments
Cellulose I


Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs)
Wood, cotton, hemp, flax, wheat straw, tunicate, bacterial cellulose, microcrystalline cellulose
Acid hydrolysis
Cellulose I


Bacterial cellulose (BC)
Sugars and alcohols
Bacterial biosynthesis
Cellulose I






Regenerated cellulose
—
Cotton, wood, bamboo, microcrystalline cellulose
Dissolution-regeneration
Cellulose II




The resulting CNFs exhibit high aspect ratios (50–100) because they largely preserve the original dimensions of the cellulose nanostructures. However, the strong interfacial strength between neighboring CNFs in cellulose fibers, especially dried cellulose that forms strong hydrogen bonding, makes these techniques low-efficient and energy-intensive. Additionally, the as-prepared CNFs exhibit large variation in diameter and length of individual nanofibers, and entangled network structures are poorly dispersed in water, which largely restricts their aqueous-based processability. Even if using the same cellulosic source, different preparation and modification methods can lead to nanocellulose structures with different dimensions and surface chemistries (Fig. 8).82
To minimize the energy consumption, various chemical treatments or enzymatic hydrolysis was introduced to decrease the interfacial strength of CNCs. The most known example is the TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl radical)-mediated oxidation method.89–91 In this chemical process, carboxylate groups are grafted on the cellulose molecules. The strong repulsion generated from the negatively charged carboxylate groups allows fast-preparation of CNF dispersions with gentle mechanical disintegration treatment.89 The as-prepared individual CNFs from wood pulp exhibit diameters of 3–4 nm and lengths of up to a few microns, which are believed to be the elementary nanofiber dimensions in wood cells. Bacterial cellulose is another high aspect ratio nanocellulose structure that presents in a web-like entangled microstructure.92 Individual bacterial cellulose possesses a ribbon-like morphology with 30–100 nm width and around 100 μm length, which consists of elementary nanofibers of 2–4 nm diameter (Fig. 8).93
Another class of nanocellulose materials, CNCs, can be synthesized by acid hydrolysis of a wide variety of cellulosic sources, including plants, microcrystalline cellulose, bacterial cellulose and algae.94,95 Disordered amorphous regions are more vulnerable to hydrolysis than crystalline regions of CNFs. Thus, crystalline segments are liberated when the amorphous regions are etched. As a result, the obtained CNCs are short and possess very high crystallinity of 80–90%.96 The length of individual CNCs usually ranges from 100 to 300 nm depending on the source, with the CNCs from tunicate reaching microns.
Use of sulfuric acid for hydrolysis allows the grafting of highly negatively charged sulfate esters, high negative surface potentials (around −50 mV) and the attainment of stable CNC aqueous dispersions.97 Hydrochloric acid used for producing CNCs cannot react with the surface hydroxyl groups of cellulose, resulting in poor CNC dispersion.98 However, this issue can be addressed by using CNFs that are prepared via the TEMPO oxidation method as the original cellulosic source because CNCs can inherit the anion carboxylate groups.99
In addition to native nanocelluloses, regenerated cellulose is prepared directly from cellulose materials via the dissolution and regeneration process.100,101 However, the long length of the cellulose molecular chains, their close packing and strong bonding frequently make cellulose materials insoluble in conventional solvents.102 In the traditional dissolution process, cellulose is converted to cellulose xanthogenate with the help of CS2, which can dissolve in aqueous NaOH to form a viscous solution, subsequently treated with an acidic solution to produce regenerated cellulose. However, the use of toxic, flammable, and explosive CS2 is undesirable.100 Several approaches with “green” solvents, including N-methylmorpholine-N-oxide (NMMO),103 ionic liquids,104 LiCl/N,N-dimethylacetamide,105 and alkali/urea,106 have also been suggested for the preparation of regenerated celluloses and formation of hydrogels.
As known, crystalline celluloses usually with degree of crystallinity within 70–80% exhibit four different crystalline types, cellulose I, II, III, and IV, with different symmetries of crystal packings.107 The crystal structures in native nanocellulose are defined as the cellulose I structure. It has two polymorphs: a triclinic structure (Iα) and a monoclinic structure (Iβ). The two polymorphs usually co-exist in nanocelluloses, but with various ratios that highly depend on the cellulosic sources.108 For example, Iβ is dominant in plants and tunicate, while Iα presents more frequently in algae and bacteria.109–111 Cellulose I is the crystal structure with the highest axial elastic modulus (it reaches 220 GPa).112 Cellulose Iα has a triclinic one-chain unit cell where parallel cellulose chains stack, via van der Waals interactions. Cellulose Iβ has a monoclinic two-chain unit cell, where cellulose chains stack parallelly. Cellulose II is the most stable structure, which can be found in regenerated cellulose from the treatment of cellulose I by an alkali solution, mercerization, or recrystallization from a solution.113 It consists of a monoclinic two-chain unit cell as cellulose Iα but the cellulose chains with opposite polarity are stacked.114 And, the crystallinity of regenerated cellulose is much lower than that of native nanocellulose, resulting in poor mechanical performance.
Both cellulose forms III and IV could not be found in natural cellulose materials. Cellulose III can be obtained by treating cellulose I and II with liquid ammonia or selected anhydrous alkylamines.115 Compared to cellulose Iα and Iβ, the intramolecular hydrogen bonding between O6 and O2 are broken in cellulose III, resulting in the glucose ring being transferred from a tg conformation of the original cellulose glucose ring to a gt conformation.116 And cellulose III can be reversibly transformed back into cellulose III by hydrothermal treatment. On the other hand, cellulose IV generally cannot be prepared directly from cellulose I ascribing to the high crystalline order, but only from the lower crystallized cellulose II and III by heat treatment in solvents such as glycerol at 260 °C.117
3.2 Chitin materials
Chitin is the second most abundant natural polymer, which mainly exists in the exoskeleton shells of arthropods, such as crabs, shrimps, and beetles. Chitin is a structural biopolymer that has high molecular weight and a linear chain of (1,4)-β-N-acetylglucosamine.118 Naturally occurring chitin is in the form of ordered crystalline nanofibrils that are often embedded in the protein matrix in crustaceans (Fig. 9a).119,120
 Fig. 9  (a) The schematic illustration of natural chitin nanofibers in lobsters.119 Reprinted from ref. 119 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2005. (b) Chitin nanofibers prepared from squid pen by mechanical treatment under acidic conditions.126 Reprinted from ref. 126 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2008. (c) Chitin nanocrystals prepared by TEMPO-mediated oxidation of α-chitin.127 Reprinted from ref. 127 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2008. 
Chitins exist in three different crystalline forms (α, β, and γ-chitin) that differ in the packing and polarities of adjacent chains in adjacent sheets.9 The γ form was occasionally observed and was suggested as a variant of α form.121 Molecular chains in the α form are arranged in an antiparallel manner with a strong inter- and intra-molecular hydrogen bonding network, whereas the β form has a parallel chain packing resulting in ordered crystals with an elastic modulus of 120 GPa.122,123 This feature endows α-chitin with strong inter-sheet hydrogen bonds that are absent in β-chitin, resulting in ready swelling of β-chitin. Compared with β-chitin, α-chitin is more stable and the β-to-α transition can be realized through recrystallization.124 α-Chitin is the most common crystal form found in nature and is produced commercially from crab and shrimp shells.125
Chitin nanofibers in natural organisms have diameters ranging from 2 to 25 nm depending upon species.128 Natural chitin sources usually contain large amounts of other components, such as minerals, proteins, and pigments, thus chemical pretreatment has to be carried out to purify the chitin source. This pretreatment usually involves NaOH, HCl, ethanol, and NaClO to remove proteins, minerals, pigments, and bleach chitin, respectively.125,129
It is worth noting that chitin and cellulose biomaterials have similar chemical structures, both with linear polymer chains consisting of β 1,4-linked D-glucose units.130,131 The only difference is the functional group on C2: instead of the hydroxyl group of cellulose, an acetamido side group is present in chitin backbones. Similar chemical structures enable comparable balance of inter/intramolecular interactions. For example, –C(6)H2OH on both chitin and cellulose forms hydrogen bond with the neighboring chain and the next unit along the same chain, which enable the gt and tg conformations, correspondingly. However, the acetamido group on C2 introduces additional interchain H-bonding between C(2)NH⋯OC(7′) and C(6)H2OH⋯OC(7′).132 The abundant H-bonding contributes to the higher ordered crystalline structure of chitin backbones. The crystal morphs further arranged with protein to form nanofibers with a similar hierarchical structure as cellulose nanocrystals. The subsequent mechanical treatment can exfoliate the purified chitin material into chitin nanofibers. Therefore, methods employed in the preparation of nanocellulose materials are widely adopted to isolate the chitin nanofibers because of their similar surface chemistry and nanoscale structure.
In the whole process, chitin should be kept in the wet state similarly to nanocellulose preparation processing. Otherwise, it is difficult to disintegrate chitin nanofibers because of the strong interfibrillar bonding caused by the drying process. TEMPO-mediated oxidation was also frequently introduced to selectively oxidize the primary hydroxyl groups of chitin into carboxylate groups.127 Combining the following mechanical disintegration treatments (e.g. homogenization, blending, ultrasonication, ball milling), individual chitin nanocrystals with a diameter of 8 nm and length of 340 nm can be obtained (Fig. 9c). Direct exfoliation of β-chitin of squid pen in an acidic aqueous solution is capable of producing uniform chitin nanofibers with 3–4 nm width and length up to several microns (Fig. 9b).126
Additionally, chitin nanocrystals or whiskers can be prepared using acid hydrolysis.133 Disordered regions of chitin are preferentially hydrolyzed in acid solutions, whereas highly crystalline regions have a higher resistance to acid attack, resulting in chitin nanocrystals with high crystallinity.10 The most important derivative of chitin is chitosan, which is obtained by partial deacetylation of chitin under alkaline conditions.134,135 The positive charge makes them soluble in dilute acids such as acetic acid or formic acid.136
3.3 Silk proteins
Silk is natural fibrous protein, and acts as the main structural component in insect cocoons and spider webs.137 In natural silks, multidomain silk chains are assembled in nanofibrils composed of inter-connected domains of β-sheets with a diameter of 3–5 nm.10 These elementary silk nanofibrils can closely pack together to form silk microfibers with a diameter of 20–200 nm, which will further assemble into macroscopic fibers glued by other adhesive proteins.138 For example, the Bombyx mori (B. mori) silkworm silk possesses core–shell fibrillary structures with a diameter of 10–25 μm, where two silk filaments are coated with glue-like sericins, which comprise 25–30% of silk cocoon mass (Fig. 10a).139 Similar to the hierarchical nanostructures in polysaccharide nanofibers, natural silk nanofibers also have stiff β-sheet nanocrystals embedded in a semi-amorphous matrix consisting of helices, β-turns, and random backbones.140
 Fig. 10  (a) The silkworm cocoon structure.139 Reprinted from ref. 139 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. (b) The extraction of silk fibroin from silkworm cocoon.141 Reprinted from ref. 141 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2011. 
The antiparallel β-sheets are stabilized by strong inter and intramolecular hydrogen bonds and van der Waals interactions. The multi-domain morphology is responsible for the superior stretchability and mechanical strength of silk fibers because partial crystallization by β-sheets allows dynamic bonding and reorientation of molecular chains.
The amino acid sequence of silk is complicated and depends on the creature species. For instance, B. mori silk consists of 350 kDa heavy chain and 25 kDa terminal light chains, which are linked by a disulfide bond to form a heavy–light chain complex.142 The glycoprotein of ∼25 kDa, P25, bonds with the heavy–light chain complex usually by hydrophobic interactions to maintain the chain complex stability. The heavy chains mainly contain 46% glycine (G), 30% alanine (A), 12% serine (S), 5% tyrosine (Y), 1.8% valine (V), and 4.7% of the other 15 amino acids.138,141 The heavy chain forms the crystalline regions with aliphatic amino acids glycine and alanine assembled into two series of hexapeptides, GAGAGS or GAGXGY.8,143
Considering the cost and availability, the most common silk source is the B. mori silkworm cocoon.138 A robust silk fibroin extraction protocol has been widely used to obtain silk materials from cocoons with high purity (Fig. 10b).141 Three steps for extracting silk includes degumming, dissolution, and dialysis. Silkworm cocoons first undergo a degumming process to remove the sericin proteins that often cause immune response in biomedical applications.
Sericin is a proteinaceous glue, which mainly consists of the following amino acids: serine (33.43 mol%), aspartic (16.76 mol%), glycine (13.49 mol%), threonin (9.74 mol%) and glutamic acid (4.42 mol%). However, the silk fibroin has different major amino acid compositions, e.g. only 1.3 mole% aspartic acid and 1.0% glutamic acid.144 The difference of amino acid components provides base for selection during degumming. And sericin present on the surface of the silk fiber, used to bind the silk fibroin together, is easily accessible to the degumming chemicals. During the degumming process, sericin undergoes hydrolytic cleavage followed by dissolving in the solution.145–147 Up to now, mainly three kinds of degumming approaches have been explored in terms of sericin removal efficiency and physico-mechanical properties of silk fibers.
Firstly, alkali, where Na2CO3 is frequently utilized, hydrolyses proteins by attacking peptide bonds.144 However, this chemical reaction is nonspecific. Depolymerization and reduced mechanical properties of silk fibroin can happen. Secondly, acidic solutions, e.g. organic acids (acetic, formic, lactic) and strong inorganic acids (sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid), are also utilized, with the latter ones having a better sericin eliminating effect.148 Diluted acids specifically break the bonds linking aspartic and glutamic acids, which are mainly present in secirin. Therefore, good tensile strength and elongation of silk are usually obtained in purified materials. Thirdly, enzymes (such as trypsin, papain and bacterial enzymes) can be used for treatment. This approach is usually carried out under mild conditions and has the advantage of high reaction specificity.144,146 After degumming, other approaches can be utilized for dissolving silk fibroin to obtain a homogeneous silk solution. Inorganic salts, fluorinated organic solvents, ionic liquids and concentrated acids can be used for these purposes.149
The general mechanism of dissolution is based on the cleavage of the intermolecular hydrogen bonding in silk crystalline regions and avoiding peptide bonding hydrolysis.146,150–152 Among many solvents utilized for silk fibroin dissolution, lithium thiocyanate aqueous solution,153 calcium nitrate/methanol,154N-methylmorpholine N-oxide,146 CaCl2/H2O/EtOH mixed solution,155 LiBr aqueous solution156 and ionic liquids150 are the most frequently used with negligible silk decomposition. Finally, pure silk aqueous solutions can be obtained after intensive dialysis, with resulting materials to be processed into various forms such as fibers, films, gels, and foams.
To enhance the mechanical properties and water stability, methanol and water vapor annealing can be exploited to control the formation and content of β-sheets.157,158 However, these regenerated silk materials are far weaker than natural silk counterparts.158,159 To maintain the original structure of native silk nanofibers, liquid exfoliation of silk fibers has been recently developed to prepare silk nanofibers.160,161 Partial dissolution of silk fibers can significantly weaken the interfacial strength of nanofiber aggregates, and the subsequent intensive sonication will separate the nanofibers. Overall, in such a common approach, chemical treatment to decrease interfacial strength is combined with a strong shear force for further exfoliation.
4. Fabrication and assembly of photonic structures
The next challenge for the development of high-performance photonic structures is fabrication of organized materials with periodicities at different spatial scales. Although living creatures can create fascinating photonic architectures via natural growth, this process is very slow, and can last for years. To recreate these natural structures, different top-down engineering and bottom-up directed assembly are used as discussed in this section.
4.1. Top-down engineering of natural polymers
Engineering of nanostructured biomaterials to mimic natural architectures requires advanced manufacturing techniques. In particular, well-established micro/nanofabrication techniques for bioderived polymers have been explored to construct photonic structures at multi-length scales with high-resolution including photolithography, soft lithography, and nanoimprinting.162

4.1.1 Photolithography techniques. 
Photolithography is a universal fabrication technique that can be adapted to a wide selection of biopolymer materials.162–165 Photolithography is exploited for micro/nanoscale patterning with a spatial resolution reaching a nanometer scale.162 To adapt the photolithographical approach, the biopolymers can be modified by grafting photoactive functional groups to act as the photoresist layer. For example, the patterning of silk fibroin has been proposed by using so-called protein photolithography.162,166,167 In this method, silk fibroin can be used as a “bio-photoresist” after grafting the photo-reactive group (2-isocyanatoethyl methacrylate, IEM) onto native silk fibroin, which renders them photo-sensitive.162 The modified silk can be crosslinked in the presence of UV light to enable patterning over macroscale areas.166 These photo-crosslinking approaches can also be extended to the patterning of cellulose materials.163 With the help of photo acid generators and UV light, soluble trimethylsilyl cellulose can be converted into pristine insoluble cellulose. Thus, the photo-reaction under a photomask allows the fabrication of well-defined cellulose patterns.163
Another ubiquitous natural protein, keratin, has also been synthesized with a very similar fabrication strategy. Keratin is one of the tough, durable biological materials possessing both high toughness and modulus, and with a high content of cysteine and half cysteine.168 The high sulfur content introduces abundant inter/intra-molecular disulfide bonding, enabling a complex hierarchical structure of keratinous materials with polypeptide chains and filament-matrix forming lamellar/sandwich structures.169
According to X-ray diffraction, keratin crystalline structures can be classified as α- and β-type. α-Keratin is mainly found in mammals, such as in wool, hair, and nails, with basic right-handedα-helix conformation, which further organizes to intermediate filaments by disulfide links.170 β-Keratin is the primary component of hard avian and reptilian tissues, such as feathers, claws and scales, with laterally packed β-strands, which can be assembled into pleated sheets and further distorted to left-handed helical filaments through hydrogen bonding.171 Abundant disulfide bonds hinder the solubility of keratin in most solvents. And only strong oxidants are able to extract keratin to form aqueous soluble derivatives and enable further chemical modifications.172 A photoactive keratin resist can be prepared by grafting with the photoreactive reagent 2-isocyanatoethyl methacrylate. The photoactive keratin resist can be further photo-crosslinked using a photomask and UV-light. The uncrosslinked water-soluble area can be removed, leaving periodic microstructures for generating brilliant structural colors.173
To further improve the resolution of the periodic patterns, electron-beam lithography has been introduced to fabricate patterned silk materials with feature dimensions of a few tens of nanometers.174 In this approach, 2D- and 3D-photonic structures can be constructed by using crystallized and amorphous silk either as a positive or negative resist (Fig. 11a). In the case of a positive resist, e-beam irradiation degrades crystallized silk into short polypeptides that are water-soluble and therefore can be washed away during the process. On the other hand, the e-beam treatment of the amorphous silk in the negative resist version can crystallize silk to make them water insoluble. As a result, photonic crystals with different periodicities with vivid structural colors can be constructed in both positive and negative resist processes (Fig. 11b and c). Through multiple e-beam exposure, pyramid-like structures with nanoscale dimensions can be generated (Fig. 11d).174 The resulting spatial resolution is around 30 nm, but the resolution could be further improved to 5–10 nm by optimizing the fabrication parameters (such as resist layer thickness and electron-beam current). This technique shows great potential to overcome the main issues that face the current high-resolution nanopattern fabrications, including low electron sensitivity, line edge roughness and scalability constraints.
 Fig. 11  (a) The e-beam lithography on silk fibroin film. Dark-field and SEM images of patterned silk films produced on positive (b) and negative (c) resists. (d) Schematic illustration, SEM and AFM images of 3D silk nanostructures.174 Reprinted from ref. 174 with permission from Nature Springer, copyright 2014. 
Similarly, an ion beam and argon fluoride excimer laser can be adapted to pattern silk materials.175,176 Combining ion beam and e-beam exposure enables the realization of complex 3D nanopatterns with desired shapes.176 In recent studies, the fabrication approaches have been extended by the introduction of multiphoton lithography, which facilitates direct 3D patterning without a photomask with high resolution and is applicable to various biopolymers.177–179


4.1.2 Soft lithography. 
Soft lithography enables photonic arrays with a feature size down to the nanoscale with examples including gratings, holograms, prisms, photonic lattices, and microlens arrays.187 In a typical fabrication process, predesigned photonic structures are fabricated as a hard mold (e.g. silicon wafer) or soft mold (e.g. PDMS). By casting the aqueous biopolymers solution/dispersion on the patterned surfaces, the complex topographies of a master can be replicated in the freely standing biopolymer films.
To date, various biopolymers, such as silk, chitin, chitosan, and nanocellulose, have been exploited for the fabrication of photonic structures with this approach.180–184 For example, silk fibroins are ideally suited for the soft lithography approach because of their good flexibility and strong adhesion with various substrates.185 The patterned silk fibroin films can be subsequently crystallized by the formation of β-sheets when exposed to methanol vapor to improve stability. In this way, the free-standing silk fibroin films that replicate the original photonic structures can be obtained. By using simple casting of silk fibroin solutions, multi-phase micropatterning can be achieved that enables complex projected images.185
In addition to the replication of photonic structures in planar configuration, silk fibroin has also been used to replicate 3D photonic crystals resulting in silk inverse opals (Fig. 12a).186 Due to the strict requirements of monodispersity of individual elements, artificial opals are usually constructed from very uniform silica or polymer spheres, such as polystyrene and poly(methyl methacrylate).187–190 However, the resulting opals lack an efficient and complete photonic bandgap because of the low refractive index contrast and incompatible filler ratio between spheres and space filling materials. To address this issue, replicas of these opals’ structures can be fabricated in the form of so called inverse opals.191 Subsequent removal of the opal templates produces a high refractive contrast, and, thus, facilitates a complete photonic bandgap.192,193 The silk solution can infiltrate into the pre-assembled opals and, after drying and crystallization, form the inverse opal replicas after removing the original synthetic template by dissolving in an organic solvent. As a result, freestanding, mechanically strong, and flexible silk inverse opal structures are fabricated (Fig. 12a). By choosing the initial templates, silk inverse opals with various photonic bandgaps are obtained to produce different structural color materials. To realize multiple optical functionalities, a combination of 2D diffraction gratings and 3D photonic crystals has been suggested.194 In this strategy, polystyrene (PS) opals are assembled on a silicon mold that possesses a diffraction grating surface, where PS opals can replicate the diffraction grating pattern. This photonic structure is used as a template for “hierarchical inverse opals.” The resulting diffractive structure composed of 3D photonic lattice allows simultaneous control over reflection (through the 3D photonic bandgap) and transmission (through 2D diffractive structuring).194
 Fig. 12  (a) Fabrication of freely standing silk inverse opals.186 Scale bars, 500 nm. Reprinted from ref. 186 with permission from Nature Springer, copyright 2012. (b) Patterned silk inverse opal fabrication by exposing to water vapor (top image) and UV light (bottom image) for different times.195 Reprinted from ref. 195 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. 
In addition to the physical patterns of diffraction gratings, a chemical approach is also adopted to pattern the silk inverse opals. Silk as a protein is very sensitive to water vapor and UV light. The former can induce the formation of β sheets, and the latter is able to induce modest photodegradation of silk, further leading to the molecular rearrangement of silk fibroin. Controlling the silk secondary structure allows the regulation of the photonic lattices, which can be utilized to fabricate silk inverse opals with different structural colors by selectively exposing those to water vapor and UV light (Fig. 12b).195
Compared with a single photonic structure, the pre-engineered hierarchical structures with photonic–photonic coupling usually exhibit a brighter structural color, combined with additional optical functionalities. Indeed, this concept can be found in numerous examples in the living creatures.
For example, the combination of surface optical gratings and bulk chiral organization enables polarization sensitive iridescent colors for attraction of insects, communication and aid in their camouflage against predators as, for instance, observed in flower petals and beetles. On the other hand, inspired by unique hierarchical organization, photonic nanocellulose-based films that contained cholesteric/chiral organization and microscopic surface gratings have been constructed through combination of top-down lithography and bottom-up self-assembly.196–198 In this process of self-assembling CNC LC inks on a pre-designed patterned surface, 1D nanocrystals can maintain the chiral organization if the grating trench width is significantly larger than the CNC length (>200 nm).197,198 Otherwise, the CNCs at the surface grating layer will be highly oriented along the imprinted trenches due to the packing constraints arising both from close-packing conditions under external confinements.196 The resulting structures can be peeled-out to form free-standing films with polarized structural colors and enhanced asymmetric broadband circular dichroism. Additionally, other 2D photonic crystals and 3D micro-lens photonic elements can be integrated onto chiral CNC films for controlling the selective polarized light reflection and propagation that are non-achievable for regular chiral CNC films.196


4.1.3 Nano-imprinting. 
Nanoimprinting lithography (NIL) is a rapid fabrication technique, enabling large-area patterning of micro/nano-scale features.199–201 Typically, NIL is facilitated by physical deformation of thermoplastic materials, which is induced by a hard mold under controlled pressure and temperature above the glass transition of a polymer. In particular, the hot embossing imprinting technique has been well developed for patterning biopolymers with a high resolution.49 Nanocellulose materials have been patterned with high-resolution micropillar arrays with different structural colors.202
Various 2D photonic crystals from silk fibroin have also been fabricated with NILs.203 Photonic silk structures with high resolution can be obtained in both hot and room temperature NILs (Fig. 13a).203 After a crystallization process where the silk films are annealed by exposure to methanol to form primarily β-sheets, water-saturated silk films with a periodic pattern have been fabricated with a grating period of 277 nm.203
 Fig. 13  (a) Nanoimprinting with hot embossing and room-temperature embossing (left), and AFM image of a diffraction grating patterned by room-temperature imprinting (right).203 Reprinted from ref. 203 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2010. (b) Photograph of photonic crystals on a hydroxypropyl cellulose film produced by a combination of roll-to-roll and nanoimprinting.204 Reprinted from ref. 204 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. 
In a recent study, the common nanoimprinting technique was shown to be compatible with roll-to-roll processing to produce cellulose photonic crystals.202,204 This combination allows the fabrication of large-scale 2D photonic cellulose structures with submicron periodic lattices (Fig. 13b).204 The patterned photonic films exhibit tunable structural colors and offer different optical functionality by integrating with optically active components.

4.2 Bottom-up directed assembly of biopolymers
Bottom-up assembly is capable of controlling biopolymer organization at the molecular scale, which enables construction of hierarchical photonic structures at multi-length scales by exploiting different environments (e.g. pH, temperature, humidity, shearing).

4.2.1 Solvent evaporation driven assembly of chiral nematic nanostructures. 
To obtain chiral photonic properties, the natural chiral structure with defined pitch into the submicron range for visible wavelength reflection should be assembled. Aligning 1D nanoscale building blocks into hierarchical 3D organization at the nanoscale length scale is challenging.40 Efforts have been made to fabricate artificial chiral materials by using 3D printing,205 brush-induced self-assembly,206 and magnetic-field-assisted slip-casting techniques,207 but characteristic structural features of such composites are usually orders of magnitude larger than their natural counterparts. The common approach to fabricate chiral nanostructures is the self-assembly of 1D biopolymer nanocrystals in concentrated and drying dispersions undergoing a LC–solid transition. Various biopolymers have been reported to assemble into the chiral nematic LC phase in dispersions when the concentration reaches a critical value, such as fb virus,208,209 cellulose nanocrystals,210 chitin nanocrystals,211 and amyloid nanofibrils.212 During the assembly, these biopolymers undergo isotropic-chiral nematic transitions when the concentration increases (Fig. 14a).212
 Fig. 14  (a) Self-assembly of rod-like biopolymers into chiral nematic nanostructures in concentrated dispersions.212 Reprinted from ref. 212 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. Polarized optical microscopy images of the chiral nematic liquid crystal phase of fb virus208 (b). Reprinted from ref. 208 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2000. Cellulose nanocrystals210 (c). Reprinted from ref. 210 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. Chitin nanocrystals211 (d). Reprinted from ref. 211 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. Amyloid fibrils (e).212 Reprinted from ref. 212 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. Insets: The morphology of the films from corresponding rod-like biopolymers. 
Above the critical concentration, these LC dispersions present a typical ‘‘fingerprint’’ texture observed by optical microscopy between crossed polarizers (Fig. 14b–e).208,210–212 The uniformity of pitch morphology and their orientations critically affect the appearance and the width of reflection maximum. To date, however, only the CNC films demonstrate intense structural colors after complete drying. The loss of colors observed in other biopolymer films is usually related to the distortion of chiral morphology during drying or the pitch distance does not match the wavelength of visible light. Chiral CNC phases acquire an appearance often called iridescence because the reflectance changes as the angle of view changes thus producing vivid colors with a broad spectral range.213
The assembly of the CNC dispersions into the chiral nematic phase is governed by balancing the attractive (hydrogen bonds and van der Waals forces) and repulsive (steric and Coulombie) interactions as CNC dispersions undergo a phase transition from an isotropic to a cholesteric LC phase upon increasing the concentration. This phase transition strongly depends on the aspect ratio, length and surface potential of CNCs and ion strength in aqueous dispersions. The onset phase transition concentration is expected to be lower if the CNCs have a higher aspect ratio.214
For example, the onset concentration of CNCs (aspect ratio of 44–73) that are derived from bacterial cellulose is around 0.42 wt%,215 while the onset concentration of wood CNCs with a smaller aspect ratio of 34 increases to above 2 wt%.216 The role of aspect ratio and onset transition concentration can be explained using the classic LC phase transition theory by Onsager: Ci = 3.3ρ/AR,217 where Ci is the onset (isotropic to biphasic) transition concentration (wt%), ρ is the density and AR is the aspect ratio. The experimental results of the CNC LC transition have been demonstrated to be well consistent with this theory.218 However, too long CNCs are less rigid, which frequently results in the formation of disordered/web-like or nematic organization without chirality.
Before the CNCs completely organize into the chiral nematic phase, there is an isotropic–anisotropic biphasic region with a wide concentration range of 2–15 wt%.216 In this biphasic region, the pitch length decreases because of removed solute. Generally, chiral nematic phases in concentrated solutions have long-range LC order with the pitch of the helical structures ranging from 1 to 50 μm. For instance, it has been reported that the average pitch length drops from 15 to 2 μm when the dispersion concentration is increased from 2.5 to 6.5 vol%.216 Accordingly, an increase in twisting angle between neighboring CNCs from about 1° up to 4° has been observed.216 In polydisperse CNC dispersions, the CNCs with a higher aspect ratio firstly self-organize into the chiral nematic phase, while the shorter CNCs are still maintained in the isotropic phase thus forming a bi-phasic region.
Adding electrolytes can significantly increase the onset concentration for LC phase formation because the H+ counterions on CNCs will be replaced by larger ions, which will increase the effective CNC diameter and repulsive forces.219 With the increase in counterion size, the critical concentration generally increases in the order H+ < Na+ < K+ < Cs+.220 However, the electrolytes should not involve multivalent ions such as Al3+ and Mg2+, which will produce an ionic crosslink with CNCs to form hydrogels with a random network morphology and no chiral properties.221
An interesting property of the CNC LC phase is the ability to preserve the chiral nematic structure in the solid film after complete drying.222 Total removal of water causes the chiral pitch to decrease to the submicron range, resulting in Bragg's reflection in the visible spectrum and the appearance of bright structural colors. The appearance of light reflection with exclusively positive ellipticity in the circular dichroism spectra of CNC films suggests left-handed chirality. This left-handed helicoidal arrangement of nanocrystals in solid films show the helicoidal axis mostly perpendicular to the film surfaces.223 However, CNC films still show iridescence under left-handed and right-handed polarizers in many cases, although the reflection in the right-handed channel is usually much higher than that of the left-handed channel.15,224,225 This difference may be partially related to the mis-aligned multi-domain CNC LC structures.
Photonic properties of CNC solid films are closely related to the intrinsic microstructure as controlled by phase state transformations during the drying process. Apart from these intrinsic structures, other variable drying conditions (different humidity, temperature, hydrophobicity of substrates, and magnetic field presence) might affect the pitch length and overall uniformity of chiral structures.226 For example, the hydrophobicity of substrates was shown to affect the orientation of LC tactoids as well as the emergence of macroscopic ordered phases in non-spherical LC droplets (Fig. 15).227 In the case of hydrophobic substrates (Fig. 15a and b), the CNC tactoids firstly merge into a partially ordered phase beneath the upper liquid–air interface and then vertically spread along the side face to the bottom. In sharp contrast, the long-range ordered phase initially appears at the bottom center of the droplet and then horizontally spreads from the center to the edge in the presence of hydrophilic substrates (Fig. 15c and d). The behavior was associated with the Marangoni flow, pinning effects and the dynamic interactions between modified substrates and CNCs. However, details of the chiral organization formation in the solid state are still poorly understood, which largely restricts the control of the alignment and the resulting pitch value of the LC phase.
 Fig. 15  The evolution of discrete LC tactoids and continuous chiral nematic phases in the droplets of aqueous CNC dispersions on hydrophobic (a and b) and (c and d) hydrophilic substrates. (a and c) and (b and d) are the polarized optical images of CNC droplets with standing time of 1, 3, 6, and 24 h. Scale bars are 500 μm.227 Reprinted from ref. 227 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
Assembling in confined geometry has been demonstrated to be a promising method to control the chiral properties. For instance, uniformly aligned chiral LC CNC structures can be obtained by confined drying within thin capillaries.228 This confinement enables tight control of fast and uniform birefringent CNC film formation under directional flow with a uniform chiral structure that possesses a narrow optical reflection band. On the other hand, microfluidic flow can be used to generate monodisperse CNC microdroplets in oil.229 This confined geometry allows the formation of an ordered chiral nematic shell, growing inward from the water–oil interface. After complete drying, however, these LC microspheres shrink into non-uniform microparticles with wrinkles. Slowing down the water evaporation rate has been recently proved to be efficient for the fabrication of CNC films with a uniform structure.15 The conventional ambient environmental conditions usually lead to the outward capillary flow, resulting in the well-known “coffee stains”. Introducing an immiscible layer of hexadecane oil on the CNC LC dispersion micro-layers enables the slow water evaporation for avoiding the capillary flow.230 It is worth mentioning that many strategies are only demonstrated to produce uniform chiral structural colors at the micro-level, and it still remains unknown whether it is possible to extend these concepts to large-area materials with uniform colors.
In addition, a cellulose derivative, hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC), is a promising chiral photonic material with the advantages of low-cost, industrial scale production, and being non-toxic.231 At high concentrations (usually more than 50%), HPC aqueous dispersions can form a chiral nematic phase due to the chain stiffness of the polymer.232 This chiral organization can be preserved in the solid film after total removal of water similar to the CNCs. The resulting films show vivid iridescent structural colors.233 Manipulation of the reflection light is accessible by controlling the initial HPC concentration with a higher concentration leading to a smaller photonic bandgap and the structural color shifting from red to blue.234


4.2.2 Self-assembly of polymer–CNC chiral composites. 
As known, completely dried thin CNC films are brittle, which largely limits their practical optical applications. The addition of external components has been demonstrated to manipulate the mechanical stability and the pitch length of the chiral structures.235 A common example is the combination of CNCs with water-soluble polymers. Blending CNCs with polymers can not only control the pitch length, but also significantly enhance the mechanical performance of the CNC composite films. The selection of polymers for matrices is extremely important for realizing uniform chiral morphology and balancing the attractive and repulsive interactions that governs the CNC–polymer assembly.
To date, zwitterionic surfactants and various synthetic polymers, such as polyacrylate, poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG), and poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), have been introduced to co-assemble with CNCs to produce flexible iridescent films.235–238 For example, CNCs can be assembled with PEG into large-area flexible chiral nematic solid films with uniform structural colors upon slow drying (Fig. 16).238 The combination of flexible polymers and stiff CNCs also result in enhanced mechanical performance. The structural color can be regulated in a wide spectrum range from blue to red by controlling the composition. The increase in polymer content increases the photonic bandgap to reflect the light at higher wavelengths with multi-color domains visible at the microscopic level (Fig. 16d and e). No phase separation occurs in these systems due to the affinity of PEG with CNCs through hydrogen bonding.238
 Fig. 16  (a) The co-assembly of CNC/PEG chiral films. (b) UV-vis spectra of CNC/PEG photonic films with different PEG loadings. (c–e) Morphology of CNC/PEG photonic films with different PEG loadings: photograph (c), SEM images of film cross-sections (d), and POM images (e). Scale bars in (d and e) are 2 μm and 200 μm, respectively.239 Reprinted from ref. 238 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. 
Natural polymers are also explored for combining with chiral CNCs for controllable photonic band gaps and enhanced mechanical properties. For instance, hemicellulose is an abundant natural polymer derived from plants, which wraps around nanocelluloses in the natural wood cell wall.238 The strong interactions with nanocelluloses make them a good candidate for the fabrication of robust CNC/polymer nanocomposites.
In a recent study,240 three types of hemicelluloses (xylan, dextran, and pullulan) have been blended with CNC and it has been demonstrated that the CNC chirality is maintained in all CNC composite films without phase separation. The resulting hemicellulose/CNC films show improved mechanical strength and vivid structural colors ranging from blue to red by controlling the compositional content.


4.2.3 Mechanical force induced alignment and birefringence. 
The anisotropic alignment of biopolymer nanocrystals directly affects the refractive index difference along and perpendicular to the alignment direction.241,242 This optical anisotropy, birefringence (Δn), is defined as the double refraction of light in a transparent molecularly-ordered material due to the existence of orientation-dependent differences in refractive index.243 Light polarization can be changed when light passing through anisotropic materials with a phase difference (δ) between parallel and perpendicular directions to the alignment according to δ = 2πdΔn/λ, where d is the thickness of the sample and λ is the wavelength of light.244,245 The capability of altering light polarization makes birefringent materials common in natural materials such as the eyes of mantis shrimps and the shell of a beetle.65,246 Unlike the iridescent colors that can be directly observed for the chiral CNC films, the birefringence-caused colors are only visible under crossed polarizers.
To obtain uniform orientation at all spatial scales, the most frequently used strategy is the shearing-induced alignment. For instance, Tseng et al.247 reported that assembling silk fibroin in a confined geometry combined with mechanical tension could generate hierarchical organization with controlled morphology at multi-length scales (Fig. 17a). Strong shearing force can induce the isotropic–anisotropic transition and the orientation of biopolymer chains for significantly enhancing the mechanical properties, accompanied by induced birefringence.248 Mechanical tension is applied on biopolymer hydrogel materials because they have good stretchability, which allows large deformation for realizing high degrees of orientation.249 As shown in Fig. 17b, chemically and physically crosslinked cellulose hydrogels exhibited deformation-induced anisotropy under shearing force.249 This orientation is then permanently fixed after drying, with the orientation degree higher than that in regular hydrogels because the shrinkage of volume will further increase the molecular chain orientation.
 Fig. 17  Birefringent structural colors of biopolymer alignment. (a) Birefringence of silk nanofibrillar alignment generated within periodic topography (triangular, hexagonal and tri-hexagonal), scale bars: 100 μm.247 Reprinted from ref. 247 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (b) Iridescent birefringence patterns of deformed cellulose hydrogels under polarized light. Scar bar: 1 cm.249 Reprinted from ref. 249 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) Homogeneous birefringence of CNCs fixed in in situ polymerized hydrogels.244 Reprinted from ref. 244 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. (d) Birefringent patterns with CNC alignments produced by 3D printing.251 Reprinted from ref. 251 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
In addition, in situ polymerization or crosslinking of CNCs are widely adopted to fix the orientation of nanofibrils.244,250 As a result, the alignment, can be permanently maintained even after removing the external stresses. For example, centimeter-scale mono-domain nematic hydrogels have been demonstrated by in situ polymerization of highly aligned CNCs.244 CNCs that mix with a monomer (acrylamide) and photoinitiator can self-align along the shearing direction by shearing with a cover slide. After UV-polymerization, the mono-domain nematic organization is capable of producing homogeneous birefringence under crossed polarizers, even after multiple reversible swelling cycles. By controlling the swelling volume, this hydrogel demonstrates different structural colors because of the change of the CNC packing (Fig. 17c).244
Strong shearing flow produced by the printing and spinning of dispersions was shown to be an efficient way to control the alignment of LC phases.251 For example, 3D printing has been adopted for local control of the orientation to reach site-specific mechanical and optical properties. The alignment dynamics under shear stresses applied to concentrated CNC inks during inkjet printing has been recently studied.251 The alignment dynamics of CNCs under shear flow results in dynamic birefringence, which is used to evaluate the alignment behavior. A higher shear rate and CNC concentration can induce the CNC alignment much faster because of steric constraints and hydrodynamic interactions.
Complex CNC birefringent patterns have been be printed by controlling the shear flow in 3D printing nozzles of different geometries (Fig. 17d).251 In addition, this anisotropic alignment leads to anisotropic stiffness and swelling behavior in the longitudinal direction compared to the transversal direction, yielding complex 3D morphologies in water.252 Mittal et al.253 used an extensional flow field produced by a double flow-focusing channel to achieve structural nanocellulose materials with high arrangement. Individual nanocellulose fibrils can rotate to pack together under fast shear flow. The resulting alignment provides mechanically strong microfibers with a mechanical strength of 1.5 GPa and elastic modulus of 80 GPa.


4.2.4 Assembly of nanofibrillar biopolymer networks. 
Random fibril networks can achieve controllable optical transparency from a clear state to bright whiteness.70 Manipulating the surface roughness, diameter of biopolymer fibrils, and the porosity of the films allows regulation of light scattering in the fibril networks. For instance, regular cellulose papers, such as filter paper, show high whiteness due to the rough surface, large fiber size and high porosity.254 A significant decrease in fiber size can largely minimize the light scattering for obtaining highly transparent cellulose papers, so-called cellulose nanopapers. These cellulose nanopapers with smooth surfaces can be produced by filtration of nanocellulose and subsequent hot-compression (Fig. 18a).254 The 40 μm-thick papers that are produced from CNFs show a high optical transmittance of 92–93%, while papers with 25 μm fibers with the same thickness exhibit a transmittance of only 40% with the haze value decreased from 77% to 20%. Surface polishing of cellulose nanopapers can enhance the optical transparency by minimizing the light scattering (Fig. 18b).257
 Fig. 18  (a) The size effect of cellulose fibers on the optical transparency of cellulose films.254 Reprinted from ref. 254 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (b) Light transmittance of the cellulose nanopaper before and after polishing.255 Reprinted from ref. 257 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2009. (c) Photographs of the compact CNF films (left) and, porous membranes of CNFs dried from octane (right) when using (c) the finest, (d) the medium, and (e) the coarsest fibrils.256 Reprinted from ref. 258 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. 
The porosity of the cellulose films with appropriate dimensions also significantly affects the light scattering. The internal random pores in cellulose films can cause strong light scattering due to the large difference in refractive index between air and cellulose.257 Recently, porous photonic CNC materials with monodisperse polystyrene spheres (diameter ∼1.27 μm) as sacrificial templates have been reported.258 The porous geometry combined with a high filling fraction facilitates the greatly increased light scattering.
Freeze-drying can be used to construct opaque materials because of its capability of forming highly porous structures. Inspired by the photonic network structures in white beetle wing scales that can achieve brilliant whiteness, CNF films with comparable scattering efficiency have been fabricated.258 To obtain large fibrils, a sequential centrifugation technique is used to separate CNFs from polydisperse CNF dispersions. Solvent exchange combined with freeze-drying resulted in a highly porous structure because drying water based hydrogels under ambient conditions will result in a dense structure. The resulting CNF membranes look brilliantly white and exhibit a high broadband reflectivity (60–80%), reaching up to 90% for the shorter wavelengths (Fig. 18c–e).


4.2.5 Infiltration of porous structures for transparent biomaterials. 
To obtain transparent nanocellulose films, the presence of large pores in the fibrillar network should be minimized. An alternative strategy to conventional compressing/capillary methods for preparing transparent structures is filling up pores with other materials that possess a similar refractive index. For example, filling the pores of cellulose microfiber papers with ultrafine CNFs resulted in transparent composite paper with a transmittance of up to 90% (Fig. 19a).259
 Fig. 19  (a) Clear cellulose films by filling cellulose paper with cellulose nanofibers.259 Reprinted from ref. 259 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (b) Transparent cellulose paper by partially dissolving/regeneration.260 Reprinted from ref. 260 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. (c) Transparent cellulose–polymer paper by filling conventional paper with refractive-index matching polymers.261 Reprinted from ref. 261 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (d) Transparent wood by filling delignified wood with refractive-index-matching polymers.264 Reprinted from ref. 264 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. 
Regular cellulose papers can be directly transformed into transparent paper through self-dissolving and regeneration (Fig. 19b).260 Decreasing the fiber diameter through partial dissolution and filling the pores with cellulose solution dramatically reduces the light scattering. Other polymers such as epoxy resins have also been added into cellulose papers to reduce optical losses (Fig. 19c).261 The similarity of refractive index and smooth surface led to a minimized surface and bulk scattering with high optical transparency.
This design principle can also be extended to constructing transparent plastic-wood materials, so called transparent wood.262–264 Wood shows highly anisotropic structures, where vertical micro-channels and wood cells uniformly align along the axial direction with the wood cell walls composed of lignin, cellulose fibers, and hemicellulose. After the removal of lignin by chemical treatment, the wood shows a white appearance due to light scattering in empty micro-channels. Infiltrating a refractive index-matching polymer into these channels leads to a highly transparent wood composite with anisotropic optical properties (Fig. 19d).264


4.2.6 Evaporation assisted assembly of biopolymer opals. 
The widely used building blocks for artificial opals are silica and polystyrene (PS) spheres because of their availability, controllable size, surface chemistry, and relative monodispersity.48,265,266 However, preparing monodisperse submicron spheres from biopolymers is extremely challenging. Biopolymers directly derived from natural sources can form nanoparticles only using an additional post-fabrication approach. The common fabrication method is the microfluidic technique, which is appropriate for uniform microhydrogels, but these hydrogel spheres will shrink and be distorted after drying.229 Thus, biopolymers are commonly used as a matrix to replicate the artificial opal to fabricate the inverse opal.
Among recent examples, a natural pigment biopolymer (melanins) is capable of forming nanoparticles organized into periodic photonic structures to generate vivid structure colors similar to those in plants and animals (e.g., structurally colored feathers).267,268 Additionally, polydopamine (PDA) is widely used for constructing photonic structures.269,270 For instance, PDA nanoparticles with a diameter of 146 ± 15 nm and a high refractive index of 1.74 have been used for constructing the opal structures.271–273 Vertical evaporation-based self-assembly facilitates the formation of well-organized thin films with different structural colors (Fig. 20a).274
 Fig. 20  (a) Iridescent opal-like films self-assembled from monodispersed PDA spheres with different concentrations.274 Scale bars: 500 nm. Reprinted from ref. 274 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (b) Iridescent microbeads from binary PDA-silica core–shell spheres with different core–shell ratios.275 Reprinted from ref. 275 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2017. 
In contrast to conventional PS particles that display a negligible absorption of light in the visible range, the broad absorption spectrum of PDA microbeads can reduce incoherent scattering and enhance color saturation and non-iridescent photonic structures.275 In addition, PDA/silica core–shell structures, featuring high-reflective-index cores and low-reflective-index shells, are assembled, which show much higher reflectance than pure PDA spheres.275 The large reflective-index contrast between the core (1.74) and shell (1.45) and the broad absorption range largely increase the brightness and saturation of the resulting color (Fig. 20b).


4.2.7 Layer-by-layer assembly of biopolymer structures. 
Layer-by-Layer (LbL) assembly is a facile, highly versatile and universal approach to build layered nanocomposites with uniform and precisely controlled thickness on both planar and non-planar structures.276–279 A variety of complementary intermolecular interactions such as ionic pairing,280 hydrogen bonding,281 covalent bonding282 and specific recognition283 can be used as the driving force for the organized assembly. It affords a wide diversity in the selection of building blocks (e.g., polyelectrolytes, quantum dots, plasmonic nanoparticles, nanocrystals, nanofibers, nanosheets) and various deposition techniques (spin-coating, dip-coating, or spray-coating).284–288
Alternating deposition of two components that possess different refractive index can result in 1D photonic structures, which exhibit bright structural colors through multilayer interference.27 Additionally, it has been demonstrated that alternating multilayered thin films deposited from high-refractive-index plasmonic nanoparticles with low-refractive-index polyelectrolytes can generate extensive red-shifts and broadening of plasmon bands.289–291 Super-efficient Förster resonant energy transfer (FRET) was also obtained by the LbL assembly of different CdTe/CdSe quantum dots and charged polyelectrolytes, which present promising applications in photonic devices such as nanocrystal-based lasers.292–294 These concepts were also well-demonstrated in the LbL assembly of biopolymeric photonic structures.
It has been shown that the LbL assembly of low-refractive-index biopolymers with other high-refractive-index components can generate bright interference colors. For example, a multilayered structure has been fabricated from titanate nanosheets/silk and silk components.295 The refractive index of the 80 nm thick silk and the 40 nm thick titanate/silk layers were 1.56 and 1.82, respectively. Owing to the high refractive index contrast and uniform multilayer morphology, the resulting organized materials exhibit a blue color with an absorption peak centered at ∼385 nm.
In another example, iridescent Bragg stacks have been fabricated from CNCs by the LbL technique to mimic the structural color of beetles (Fig. 21).296 The high refractive index layer is composed of 13 bilayers of cationic polyethylenimine and anionic vermiculite clay, which possesses a refractive index of 1.65 with a thickness of 90 nm. The complementary layer of 40 bilayers of cationic colloidal SiO2 and anionic CNCs has a refractive index of 1.42 and thickness of 288 nm. The resulting multilayered structure shows a strong green color with reflection above 80%,296 which is comparable to the natural beetle appearance. In addition, freestanding LbL films from anionic CNFs and cationic poly(vinyl amine) show angle-dependent structural colors because of the thin film interference.297 Alternatively, LbL assembled ultrathin CNC films demonstrate strong antireflection properties due to a highly porous morphology.298
 Fig. 21  Photographs of the (a) C. rajah beetle and (b) LbL-assembled CNC Bragg stacks with different stacks. (c) Layered structure of beetle and CNC stacks. Color plots showing reflection as a function of wavelength and incidence angle for the (d) stack film and (e) C. rajah beetle.296 Reprinted from ref. 296 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 
In addition to the above mentioned 1D photonic structures, 3D photonic structures can also be fabricated by combining the LbL assembly with other fabrication approaches including nanotransfer printing (nTP) and Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) deposition. For instance, large scale multilayered photonic opal crystals from colloidal micro-particles were fabricated by transferring monolayers of colloidal crystals formed at the air–water interface.299 Moreover, chirality can be generated through manipulating the deposition angle of each layer during the LbL assembly. For example, biomimetic chiral photonic crystals with facile and precise tunable chirality were also fabricated utilizing the LbL-LB assembly of colloidal inorganic nanowires with an accurately controlled rotating angle between layers. Not only were a helical structure and homo-circularly polarized color reflection observed, but a chiroptical asymmetry factor by an interlayer arrangement was also obtained.300 Furthermore, large-area and crack-free 3D optical nanostructures fabricated by stacking multilayered gold gratings were reported with linear polarization rotation at infrared wavelength.301
However, most of the 3D optical structures are “rigid” solid systems, lacking capability for dynamic tunability and reversibility due to complexity of these transformations. Recently, reconfigurable chiroptical structures have been fabricated with the LbL assembly of plasmonic nanoparticles onto a pre-twisted elastic PDMS substrate.302 It demonstrates reversibly reconfigurable and cyclical chiral optical activity by simple stretching, ascribing to the transformation of macroscale deformation of flexible substrates into plasmonic nanoparticle nanoscale geometry. Although most of these LbL 3D photonic structures are based on synthetic polymers and nanoparticles, these findings indicate a potential for fabricating more sophisticated biopolymer-based 3D photonic materials due to the universality of this strategy.

4.3 Integrating synthetic optical components for hybrid photonics
Integrating optically active synthetic nanoparticles into periodic photonic biopolymers can be used to induce surface plasmon resonances (SPR) and fluorescence emission.204,303 Hybrid photonic crystals with optically active components can possess interesting optical functionalities depending on the types of optical dopants (e.g., quantum dots, metal nanoparticles (NPs), organic dyes) to enable plasmonic, photoluminescent, and surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) phenomena for sensing and lasing. In this section, we discuss recent advances of the integration of synthetic plasmonic/fluorescent nanoparticles within biophotonic structures discussed above.

4.3.1 Plasmonic components with biopolymers. 
Recent advances in assembly of metal NPs within biopolymers open a new route to fabricate advanced nanostructures with optical functionality.304–306 For example, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) were integrated into a silk fibroin matrix via spin assisted LbL assembly.307 Dense monolayers of AgNPs reinforced membranes and induced high reflective properties. Moreover, metal NPs that are arranged in photonic structures can confine the light beyond the diffraction limit to render different optical functionalities in a hierarchical arrangement.308–310 Incorporating metal NPs can realize the plasmon-induced coloration, due to the coupling between diffracted light and plasmonic resonances.311,312 Moreover, plasmon-induced photonic colors can be tuned by the change of the concentration, shape, and size of NPs.313 When metal NPs are added into the photonic structure, the plasmonic absorption of metal NPs can selectively enhance the hue and the reflected color with specific wavelengths that are matched to the plasmon resonance peak.314
Plasmonic properties can be directly integrated into functional silk photonic crystals by a transfer printing technique.315,316 Various plasmonic nanostructures were incorporated in both periodic and aperiodic arrays on silk films doped with fluorescent dye (Fig. 22a–d).315 In these hybrid bioplasmonic materials, the fluorescence of the doped silk film can be strongly enhanced by designing periodic arrays with appropriate periodicities due to resonant coupling between the reflected light and the light emission. Functionalized silk inverse opals doped with AuNPs have been prepared by using a template of PMMA opal structure.186 The surface plasmon absorption of AuNPs can be significantly enhanced when their absorption is matched to a pseudo-photonic band gap. The cellulose-based photonic crystals have been modified through thermal evaporation of the Ag layer onto a photonic grating of HPC films.204 The overall refractive index contrast of this hybrid system can be enhanced due to the negative dielectric permittivity of the metal coating, which generates vivid colors due to the strong electromagnetic field at the metal surface.
 Fig. 22  SEM images of plasmonic nanoparticles (a), bow tie (b), nanoholes (c), spiral arrays (d) deposited onto doped silk fibroin films by transfer printing method.315 Reprinted from ref. 315 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2008. (e) The schematic illustration of cholesteric CNC doped with Au NRs and the CD spectra (f).303 Reprinted from ref. 303 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 
Another remarkable example is chiral plasmonic materials with plasmonic metal NPs integrated into a CNC chiral structure.317 Metal NPs are co-assembled into a chiral structure coupled with the plasmonic nanoparticles to generate a so-called “chiral plasmonic response”. In such a hybrid metal–biopolymer material, the plasmonic nanoparticles assembled in a chiral manner are responsible for enhanced optical circular dichroism over a broad spectral range. For instance, chiral plasmonic nanostructures were fabricated by incorporating anisotropic Au nanorods (AuNRs) into the chiral CNC phase (Fig. 22e).303 The resulting chiral plasmonic films give rise to distinct chiral extinctions with CD peaks corresponding to the transverse and longitudinal SPR of AuNRs, due to the strong interaction between the plasmonic and photonic properties (Fig. 22f).318 In a later study, the fabricated plasmonic core–shell Au/Ag nanocubes within the CNC chiral structures show similar two-peak CD spectra.317 However, this phenomenon can be related to the reduction of the CD signal because of excessive absorption by the metal nanostructures.
In addition, adding nanoparticles (e.g. silica or silver) in the silk gratings that match the lasing wavelength enables enhanced light scattering and the laser emission linewidth reduction, resulting in the enhancement of distributed lasing emission.319 Besides, the co-assembly of silica precursors with cholesteric CNCs allows replicating the CNC organization after selectively removing the CNCs via calcination, which creates a new optical functionality in mesoporous photonic structures.320 In this approach, AgNPs can be further embedded into these mesoporous silica films. The CD spectra of AgNP-doped mesoporous silica films are highly sensitive to the pitch length and silica wall thickness with greatly enhanced CD behavior.320


4.3.2 Synthetic photoluminescent components with biopolymers. 
Highly emissive QDs assembled into photonic crystals provide a powerful platform to construct functional architectures.321–324 This combination not only enables them to modulate their emission spectrum due to the photonic bandgap, but also enhances the photoluminescence owing to the coupling between photonic structures and the emission. Significant enhancement of fluorescence has been observed by placing the QDs onto photonic crystals.52,315,325 For example, photonic crystals from patterned silk fibroin doped with QDs and fluorescent proteins have been fabricated by using e-beam lithography.174 The QDs combined with the silk photonic structures showed a five-fold enhanced fluorescence under the illumination of a light source with 480 nm (Fig. 23a).
 Fig. 23  (a) Microscopy image of nanostructured silk films doped with QDs (upper) and fluorescent proteins.174 Reprinted from ref. 174 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (b) Photograph of a transparent, iridescent, and fluorescent CNC composite film. (c) Photograph of an A-shaped CNC composite film through left-handed (upper) and right handed (bottom) polarizing filters.326 Reprinted from ref. 326 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (d) Photographs of freestanding flexible chiral luminescent CQD/CNC films under natural light and UV light. (e) The helicoidal arrangement of CQDs in the chiral CNC matrix. (f) Chiral fluorescent patterns enabled by ink-jet printing localized pH-initiation.332 Reprinted from ref. 329 with permission from ACS, copyright 2019. 
The incorporation of luminescent components within photonic chiral structures can generate circularly polarized light (CPL) emission.326 Transparent and fluorescent cellulose CPL films have been obtained through the assembly of fluorescent molecules into the chiral nematic phase of CNC dispersion.326 This cellulose CPL film can transform spontaneous emission into right-handed circularly polarized (R-CPL) emission due to the left-handed chiral photonic structure (Fig. 23b and c). It is challenging for traditional strategies to generate high CPL emission because of the low dissymmetry factor (g), quenched luminescence, and unpredictable handedness.327,328 In this structure, however, R-CPL emission with an enhanced g value has been obtained when the emission band is matched to the photonic bandgap of CNC structures, which prevents the propagation of the left-handed CPL light.
In addition, free-standing iridescent and luminescent photonic films with chiral ordering have been fabricated by the co-assembly of CNCs and carbon quantum dots (CQD).329–331 Due to the heterogeneous amphiphilic interactions between natural CNC and synthetic CQD components, they co-assemble into highly emissive needle-like “nanocob” nanostructures, which can further form chiral nematic LC phases in concentrated dispersions. After drying, the LC phase organizes into a solid-state chiral luminescent film while retaining the original long-range chiral ordering with positive ellipticity (Fig. 23e).329 The resulting film demonstrates an intense iridescent appearance superimposed with significantly enhanced luminescence (Fig. 23d).329
Because of the integration with left-handed helical organization, spontaneous emission of carbon dots can change to right-handed circularly polarized luminescence. The organization of helical CNC/CQD superstructures showed right-handed CPL luminescence with a high asymmetry value of −0.2. Additionally, large-area chiral luminescent patterns through soft lithographical processing and ink-jet printing can be fabricated with enhanced structural color, polarization-dependent light diffraction and pH-responsive patterned luminescent appearance (Fig. 23f).329
The chiral organization of CNCs has also been used as a template to prepare other chiral materials, such as those containing silica and organo-silica nanoparticles and polymers.333–336 The high porosity of chiral host–guest systems could be further explored for the integration with fluorescent NPs. For example, semiconductor CdS QDs were combined with chiral mesoporous silica that is templated by CNCs to retain high luminescent photonic structures (Fig. 23d and e).337 The resulting iridescent chiral nanocomposites show positive CD ellipticity as well as bright luminescence, indicating that QD emission is preserved during photonic structure formation. Although many attempts to realize QDs with chiro-optical activity have been made, it has been still challenging to pre-program the circularly polarized luminescence in biophotonic structures.


4.3.3 Hybrid chiral nematic droplets. 
Scalable and stable self-organization of optically active components into liquid dispersions has been rarely reported. For example, monitoring the assembly process of CNCs confined by spherical microdroplets allows investigation of dynamic formation of the chiral nematic phase of CNC suspensions (Fig. 24a).229
 Fig. 24  (a) Microfluidic systems to generate droplets containing the chiral nematic CNC phase.229 Reprinted from ref. 229 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (b) POM images of the cholesteric CNC droplets with different radii. (c) Bright field (left panel) and POM (right panel) images of cholesteric droplets doped with 10 nm (upper) and 50 nm (bottom) AuNPs. (d) Extinction spectra of aqueous gold NP dispersion (dashed lines) and Ch-CNC droplets (solid lines) loaded with 10 nm (red lines) and 50 nm (blue lines) gold NPs. (e) Fluorescence image of the cholesteric droplet doped with carbon dots and (f) photoluminescence spectra of core (red) and shell (black) of droplets doped with carbon dots and (black) pristine carbon dot solution.338 Reprinted from ref. 338 with permission from licensed under CC BY 4.0., copyright 2016. (g) The illustration of phase transition from random orientation to the nematic phase for AuNRs in a dilute CNC dispersion. (h) The polarization dependent extinction spectra of nematic CNC-AuNR composites.318 Reprinted from ref. 318 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2014. 
This study gives insight into controlling the assembly processes in cholesteric LCs for integration with optically active components to fabricate biophotonic materials. The organization of optically functional NPs in confined LC droplets can produce unique structures where photonic properties of LCs and NPs are coupled.338 In this system, confined microdroplets with different sizes can be controlled by emulsification with different NPs (Fig. 24b–f). Spherical micro-droplets can act as a template to control functional NPs partitioning in the isotropic core and the chiral nematic shell. The co-assembly of biopolymers and anisotropic NPs can align them as demonstrated by organization of gold nanorods in cholesteric dispersions of CNCs.318 In this approach, aqueous CNC dispersions show the transition from an isotropic to a nematic phase when the concentration reaches a critical value of ∼3 wt%. Gold nanorods in LC CNC dispersions are aligned due to the entropic and excluded-volume effect while they are randomly oriented in the isotropic phase (Fig. 24g and h).

5. Applications of biopolymer photonic structures
Structural colorations are frequently used in nature for camouflaging, protection, mimicking, and attraction. Efficient manipulation of light by natural organisms, which utilizes various optical phenomena such as absorption, reflection (broadband and selective), emission, scattering, interference, transmission, wave guiding and lensing, facilitates the use of natural materials for a broad range of advanced optics/photonic applications as discussed in this section.
5.1 Light manipulation
Novel photonic materials that enable more efficient light manipulation are important to advance optical applications in various fields including biomedical photonics, optoacoustics, and optomechanics. For instance, in biomedical optics, waveguides and optical transducers from natural materials are designed to directly interact with tissues offering distinct advantages. Recent advances of related biomedical applications, such as photothermal and laser therapy, implantable optical and optoelectronic sensors, and bioimaging, require highly efficient methods to analyze light interactions with cells, tissues, or organs.339–343

5.1.1 Photonic light waveguides. 
Current light guiding materials include glass,344 polymers,342,345 and inorganic nanoparticles.346 While most of these materials have been optimized for efficient light guiding with low losses, they are not ideal for in vivo applications owing to their poor biocompatibility and large mechanical mismatch with the biological tissues that can lead to damage of soft tissues. These considerations highlight the unmet need for efficient photonic waveguiding that exhibits long-term biocompatibility and biodegradability in human tissues. Naturally derived photonic materials can serve as next generation light guiding media. Apart from being biocompatible and biodegradable, these materials exhibit mechanical properties that are compatible with biological media.
Silk films are optically transparent with transmittance >95% in the range of 350–800 nm.347 Due to its higher refractive index (1.54) as compared to human tissue (1.44), silk has been employed as in vivo photonic light guides which can be fabricated using direct ink printing.348B. mori silk fibroin was employed as the stabilized concentrated bioink, which was ejected through a glass nozzle into a methanol environment to induce fast crystallization via β-sheet formation. Direct-writing allows the fabrication of straight and wavy fibers within the silk pattern up to several centimeters, which showed high uniformity in dimensions and smoothness.
Recently, it has been demonstrated that low-loss light guiding fibers can be fabricated based on spider silk.349 Compared to that made from B. mori silkworm, the spider silk optical waveguides exhibited a smoother surface and higher refractive index (Fig. 25a). When light propagates inside the silkworm optical waveguide, it scatters strongly and leaks from the fibers. However, light can be seen only at the terminal of the spider silk fiber, with minimal leaking from the waveguide walls. Correspondingly, these fibers showed low optical loss with an attenuation coefficient of 0.8 ± 0.1 dB cm−1 in air, which is significantly lower than that made by regenerated silkworm silk (1.7 ± 0.1 dB cm−1 and 3.1 ± 0.4 dB cm−1, respectively). The higher β-sheet content and refractive index of the recombinant spider silk might be responsible for this difference.
 Fig. 25  (a) Images of optical waveguides made by recombinant spider silk (bottom) and regenerative silkworm silk (top) taken with camera, optical microscopy, and SEM and their laser propagation properties.349 Reprinted from ref. 349 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (b) SEM image of self-assembled elongated tri-phenylalanine (FFF) tapes. FFF tapes in such a distribution have random orientation and inhomogeneous thickness, length, and width, and are thus inappropriate for integrated photonic devices. (c) SEM image of FFF planar wafers of dimensions 15 μm × 34 μm × 1.4 μm. (d) Passive optical waveguiding in 2D FFF wafers. (e) Active optical waveguiding in 2D FFF wafers.355 Reprinted from ref. 350 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (f) Optical microscopy images of formed E. coli bio-waveguides with various lengths and formed bio-waveguides with 644 nm red-light transmitted. White slanted arrows indicate the output spots of the red light.356 Reprinted from ref. 351 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (g) Nonlinear self-trapping of light through cyanobacteria in seawater.357 Reprinted from ref. 352 with permission from the American Physical Society, copyright 2013. 
Next, 1D micro/nanostructures (rods, wires, and belts) composed of peptides (such as diphenylalanine and tri-phenylalanine) have been explored as passive and active light waveguides.350–353 For example, peptide-based nanowires have been obtained through the self-assembly of diphenylalanine in the aqueous phase.354 More recently, large-area light guiding structures have been fabricated using tri-phenylalanine peptides which tend to assemble across large area wafers with uniform dimensions (Fig. 25b and c).350
This biomaterial exhibited several intrinsic advantages such as optical transparency over a wide wavelength range, nonlinear optical properties, as well as the ability to actively and passively guide light. The refractive index within 400–800 nm was measured to be 1.58–1.66, highlighting the potential application of these materials in in vivo bio-optical chips.354 Passive waveguiding was demonstrated by its ability to guide normally incident light through reflection, refraction, and diffraction (Fig. 25d).
Apart from the passive capability, one of its unique advantages is the ability to switch to an active mode, which involves the optical absorption of the incident light followed by light emission. This transformation can be achieved by a heat trigger, which induces formation of β-sheets, leading to a red-shift of the absorption wavelength (Fig. 25e). Even individual biological species such as Escherichia coli (E. coli) can be directly utilized as light guiding media.351 This photonic waveguide was fabricated by aligning E. coli into different lengths using a tapered optical fiber (ATF) by launching a 980 nm light with various power (Fig. 25f). The E. coli bacteria were gradually trapped along the laser beam due to the optical gradient force.358,359 The photonic waveguide shows good light propagation performance. More recently, the nonlinear transmission of light through Synechococcus cyanobacteria was demonstrated.352 When the illuminating laser power is low, light is linearly scattered by biological suspensions. However, at a high laser power, light is able to propagate over a long distance. They showed that this phenomenon is due to the alignment of bacteria at high power, which acted as an efficient light guiding media (Fig. 25g).
Overall, in vivo biomedical applications critically depend on the ability to deliver light locally at the desired site. Considering the limited penetration of light into biological tissues and poor efficiency of the implantable light sources, biocompatible and implantable waveguides are attractive for the above-mentioned applications. While it is difficult to overcome the intrinsic optical loss of these biomaterials, the loss emanating from parasitic scattering can be reduced, which should certainly be one of the goals of the future efforts. Ability to control the biodegradation of the waveguides at the end of their desired function through either an external trigger or prior programming is also important for biomedical applications.


5.1.2 Bio-enabled diffraction. 
Complex 3D structures can act as diffractive optical elements such as (micro-)lens to focus light into a confined region. To date, several examples of these elements composed of natural polymers have been demonstrated as well.14,360–362 Harnessing the facile processability of silk and soft lithography, the fabrication of optical components, such as diffraction gratings or microlens arrays, has been demonstrated.14 Silk films with a thickness of a few tens of microns exhibited nearly 100% optical transparency over the entire visible spectrum making them excellent candidates for diffractive elements. Silk elements have been used for the incorporation of biomolecules such as hemoglobin and peroxidases, enabling bio-active optical elements as well as media for stabilizing bioactive compounds.363–365
Microspheres and microcylinders can focus incident light beyond the diffraction limit, a phenomenon known as a “photonic nanojet” that enables a form of super-resolution optical microscopy.366 A photonic nanojet is a narrow, high-intensity electromagnetic beam that propagates into the medium illuminated with a lossless light source.367 Recently, a microspindle with epoxy-knot-decorated spider silk has been reported, to exhibit a photonic nanojet effect.368 In this work, a single spider silk fiber was obtained from pholcus phalangioides with a diameter of 2 μm (Fig. 26a). The laser beam was focused on the left side of the spindle knot convex, and a photonic nanojet was observed (Fig. 26d). The authors demonstrated that it is possible to realize different photonic nanojets with distinct shapes through changing the knot dimensions.
 Fig. 26  (a) Microphotograph of a bare spider silk fiber. (b) Schematic showing the process of decorating the spider silk fiber using adhesive UV cure. (c) Microphotograph of spindle knot decorated spider silk. (d) Simulation of normalized power flow patterns for the spindle knots at diameters of (a) d = 3 μm, (b) d = 6 μm, and (c) d = 10 μm. Experimental images showing the focused light from the spindle knots at (d) d = 3 μm, (e) d = 6 μm, and (f) d = 10 μm.369 Reprinted from ref. 369 with permission from the Optical Society, copyright 2019. (e) Schematic showing reflection mode silk biosuperlens imaging. The spider silk was placed directly on top of the sample surface by using a soft tape. The gaps between silk and the sample were filled with IPA which improves the imaging contrast. The silk lens collects the underlying near-field object information and projects a magnified virtual image into a conventional objective lens (100×, NA:0.9). (f and g) The integrated surface pattern is magnified by the spider silk. The 100 nm channels (f; SEM image) are resolved by the spider silk superlens (g; optical nanoscopy image).369 Reprinted from ref. 366 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
Furthermore, spider silk has been shown to serve as materials for a super-resolution lens (superlens) that can focus the light beyond the diffraction limit (Fig. 26e).366 Conformal contact between the nanostructures and the silk fiber is found to be critical for achieving near-field nanoscale resolution. This proximity enables the conversion of the surface-bound evanescent waves into propagating waves, which can be detected in the far-field regime.370,371 Silk superlens demonstrated distinctive advantages such as simplicity, biocompatibility, and ready availability for use in biomedical research. These silk superlenses can resolve features of about 100 nm (Fig. 26f and g).
In another example, freely standing silk microprisms have been demonstrated, which can potentially serve as an optical platform for reflecting forward-scattered photons through tissue for improved imaging of malignancies.372 The micropatterned silk film was shown to significantly increase the reflected light that helps to enhance intrinsic sensitivity. Overall, diffractive optical elements based on natural materials provide new avenues for high-resolution bioimaging, which can potentially be employed for light harvesting, spectral signal enhancing, and optical sensing.


5.1.3 Photonic structural colors. 
In contrast to pigment-based coloration, the astonishing structural colors observed in organized natural and biological materials are the consequence of interference, diffraction or the selective reflection of light from modulated distribution of the refractive index. Camouflaging and optical tunability in various biological organisms such as cephalopods, chameleons, paradise whiptail, hercules beetles, blue damselfish serve as a great source of inspiration for the design of hybrid materials that exhibit responsive tunable colors. Among underlying phenomena are intense iridescence,373 angle-independent coloration,374 ultra-blackness,375 and ultra-whiteness.69
For example, bright colors of bird feathers are produced by nanoscale structures of biological materials (keratin and melanin) and organized structures that periodically modulate the refractive index.376–378 Male peacock feathers exhibit brilliant iridescence, diversified coloration, and intricate patterns due to the presence of nanoscale periodic structures of melanin rods arranged in the melanin layers. Changes in the periodicity of the photonic crystal structure shift the partial photonic bandgaps and secondary overtones, which eventually leads to the formation of diversified colors with additive and mixed coloration. These observations provide inspiration to the design of novel optical synthetic materials and devices by either enhancing the refractive index contrast or increasing the relative amount of low refractive index materials.379
Extensive efforts have been dedicated for mimicking these vivid natural structural colors by design of complex periodic nanostructures.225,296,380 For example, structurally colored films composed of polyelectrolyte/clay and colloidal silica/cellulose nanocrystal layers were prepared using LbL assembly.296 These films mimic the structure of elytra of a C. rajah beetle and they are composed of alternating low and high refractive index layers with controlled thicknesses. With increasing incidence angle, the film exhibited brilliant iridescence due to the blue shift in the reflected wavelength. In another example, mimicking the bi-structural color reflection of creatures, such as Papilio butterflies, was conducted with silk-fibroin photonic crystals.380 These structures exhibit two partial photonic bandgaps, thus, causing bi-structural colors appearing from the UV/visible to visible/IR region. In addition, multicolored chiral nematic cellulose films were produced by the slow evaporation of cellulose nanocrystal suspensions on polystyrene substrates, which shows left-handed helicoidal structures. The bioinspired film exhibited distinct colored domains with sizes ranging from a few micrometers to several tens of micrometers.223

5.2 Photonic-enabled physical/chemical sensing
Next, photonic structures are extensively investigated for prospective physical, chemical and biological sensing. Design and realization of novel materials that sense various changes in the environment a.k.a. external stimuli such as temperature, light, chemical ambient, electrical field, magnetic field and dynamically change their organization are not only an exciting fundamental challenge but also highly attractive for a wide range of applications including mechanical and optical sensors, energy-saving smart windows, transparent flexible displays, telecommunication, and tunable lasing.381,382 Natural materials can be harnessed and exploited to engineer responsive optical materials, which exhibit distinct changes in optical properties with external stimuli with several recent examples summarized below.

5.2.1 Pressure sensors. 
Mapping of mechanical pressure distribution was demonstrated with HPC materials, which exhibit a structure similar to natural cellulose with hydroxyl groups of the glucose being hydroxypropylated.231 This naturally derived material can form a cholesteric LC phase, and undergoes structural changes in response to external stimuli such as stress, temperature, and light, resulting in tunable reflective colors. Based on these phenomena, biocompatible strain responsive photonic sensors were fabricated with an aqueous LC phase.233 The HPC strain sensor showed a color change (from yellow to blue) upon applying compression, due to the change in the pitch length (Fig. 27a and b). Recently, a large-area HPC photonic material was fabricated using a roll-to-roll method, continuous coating and encapsulation.18 The HPC was fabricated into photonic films under the low-pressure roll-to-roll process, resulting in large-area uniform chiral films. As pressure increased, the hue value increased a blue shift in the reflectance wavelength that enabled real-time mapping of the pressure distribution with spatial resolution of less than 1 cm.
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic illustration of the chiral HPC touch sensor based on the change in the pitch length. (b) A handprint recorded on the HPC sensor.233 Reprinted from ref. 233 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. (c) Schematic illustration of the stretchable CNC sensor mechanism. (d) Photographs of the CNC stretching sensor as viewed under crossed polarizers.16 Reprinted from ref. 16 with permission from license under CC BY 4.0, copyright 2019. 
In another study, a CNC stretchable sensor was fabricated with the reversible unwinding of chiral CNCs embedded in an elastomer under a large deformation of 900% (Fig. 27c).16 Stretching the CNC/elastomer composites unwinds the chiral organization of the CNCs in uniform alignment along the stretching direction. As a result, the deformed materials show vivid birefringence, which reversibly changes when the elastomer returns to its original shape (Fig. 27d). In their follow up study, the authors demonstrated pressure-responsive chiral photonic aerogels through freeze drying the CNC LC hydrogels.383 The applied pressure can transform the 3D porous structure of the aerogel into a compressed material with the structural color changes.
Overall, these studies demonstrated the utilization of natural biopolymers in configuring micro and macroscale structures that respond to physical cues such as mechanical stresses. These concepts can be extended to biopolymer-based photonic materials, which could broaden the dynamic range of mechanical sensors.


5.2.2 Temperature, humidity, and chemical sensors. 
One of the major hallmarks of biophotonic systems is their ability to dynamically respond and reversibly reconfigure in response to external stimuli.384–386 One of the strategies used by biological organisms is the combination of multiple photonic elements to achieve multi-parametric response, greater dynamic range, and a finer degree of control of photonic properties.238,387,388 These considerations have inspired the use of natural polymers in the design of chemically-responsive photonic structures.
Recently, a biomimetic photonic structure based on CNCs that can reflect both left circularly polarized light (LCP) and right circularly polarized light (RCP) has been demonstrated.389 The biological example, Plusiotis resplendens, has a ∼1.8 μm thick unidirectional layer, which is embedded between two layers of anticlockwise helicoidal architectures (left-handed cholesteric layers), which acted as a half-wave retardation plate (Fig. 28f).390 Inspired by the insect, researchers have fabricated various photonic materials to mimic the naturally built architectures. Iridescent CNC films that can simultaneously reflect LCP and RCP have been fabricated.389 This photonic structure was fabricated by impregnating iridescent CNC films with a 4-cyano-4′-pentylbiphenyl (5CB) nematic LC phase, which filled into the microgaps between the two left cholesteric domains of CNC materials (with different pitch, Ch′1 and Ch′2) (Fig. 28a). The resulting nanocomposite film exhibited the ability to reflect LCP (green light with λ = 518 nm) and RCP (orange-red light with λ = 610 nm) (Fig. 28b–d). This ability can be explained by the close match of the phase difference between the ordinary and extraordinary rays to 180°. In this design, the LC layer acted as a λ/2 retardation plate and changed the transmitted right-handed circularly polarized light into left-handed one. The converted LCP light was then selectively reflected (λ ∼ 600 nm) by the bottom chiral layer with a different pitch as compared to the top layer (Fig. 28e).
 Fig. 28  (a) The gap filled with the anisotropic layer sandwiched between the two CNC left cholesteric domains (Ch′1 and Ch′2). (b) POM images of the sandwiched film with a left-handed polarizer, right-handed polarizer, and crossed polarizer, scale bar: 50 μm. Spectra from LCP and RCP channels (c) and simulated reflectance spectra using Berreman's method (d). (e) Schematic illustration of the sandwiched structure.389 Reprinted from ref. 389 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (f and g) Photograph of the jewel beetle Chrysina resplendens and the hyper-reflective CNC-based nanocomposite film with a sandwich structure (scale bars, 20 mm). (h) Vapor-based actuation in the sandwich structures. (i) The deformation processes of the sandwich structured film.392 Reprinted from ref. 392 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
On its way back, this reflected left-handed polarized light is in turn converted to right-handed light while passing the retardation layer and is finally transmitted through the top chiral layer. The wavelength of the reflected RCP and LCP can be tuned by changing the birefringence Δn through temperature changes or stimulation of an electric field. This ability makes the material a good candidate for thermo(electro)-chromic effects. The interfacial LC layer changed from the nematic to the isotropic state at an elevated temperature, resulting in the right circularly polarized light to become colorless while the image of the left circularly polarized light persisted with an intense reddish color with a quick response time (milliseconds). Similar chromic changes can be induced by the external electric field. Indeed, Ribeiro et al. reported thermal and electrical responsive photonic composite films through penetrating nematic-induced molecules, 4-(hexyloxy)-4-biphenylcarbonitrile (HOBC) into the chiral nematic phase of CNC dispersions.391 This unique combination of two chiral components can significantly enhance the structural integrity of the resulting chiral organization with reversible thermal and conductive responses of the LC phase as caused by crystal–nematic transitions and nematic–isotropic transitions.
In addition, CNC-based photonic nanocomposites have been fabricated as humidity responsive chromic actuators.392 In these materials, a uniaxially oriented polyamide-6 layer was sandwiched between two left-handed chiral structures, which consisted of CNC/polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEGDA) (Fig. 28g). In this case, the polyamide-6 layer acted as a λ/2 retardation plate, which led to the hyper-reflection of the film. This film showed a dual response as well as colorimetric change with increased humidity (Fig. 28h and i). Under increased surrounding moisture, the nanocomposite film showed deformation due to the asymmetric swelling of the stimulated side; the helical pitch on the stimulated side increased, resulting in a wavelength red shift (Fig. 28h and i). In the final stage, the film became flat again due to the diffusion of the water to the non-stimulated side. For example, the CNC films show a fast color change from blue to red in response to the humidity because the intercalation of water molecules results in the increased chiral pitch length.238
Responsive photonic structures can act as a chemically responsive material when exposed to variable environmental stimuli. Generally, this type of responsive behavior originates from the photonic lattice changes caused by the changing chemical interactions and their effects on spatial dimensions and state of the elements. For instance, inverse opals change their structural color with a change of the solvent quality.393,394 Recently, photonic CNC hydrogels have been prepared with the addition of a wide range of monomers and crosslinkers.335 The as-formed CNC hydrogels’ reflected color can be tuned by changing the CNC concentration or the ionic strength of the mixture through adding sodium chloride, which leads to a decrease in the pitch length of the chiral nematic phase. These LC hydrogels are responsive to the surrounding pH and solvent quality. An immediate red-shift in the light reflectance was observed when the CNC hydrogel was immersed in water. In contrast, the hydrated CNC hydrogel underwent a blue shift due to contraction when it was subsequently immersed in ethanol. The reflected color of the hydrogel can be reversibly controlled by immersion into various media over multiple cycles with no obvious degradation. The response rate was shown to be controlled by the hydrogel crosslinking degree. This property can be further harnessed to produce patterned materials, with masked regions swelling at higher rates and, thus, producing a patterned image.
Apart from cellulose-based structures, other natural polymers have been employed to form photonic responsive materials for physical and chemical sensing.395 The growth of living cardiomyocyte tissues into a methacrylated gelatin (GelMA) inverse opal template leads to structural color hydrogels that can respond to electric stimulation.396 A biomimetic infrared camouflage coating has been demonstrated based on self-assembly of a water-soluble Loligo (Doryteuthis) pealeii reflectin isoform into a thin film.397 The reflection wavelength of the reflectin film showed a gradual red shift, to the near-infrared range, with the increase in the film thickness. When exposed to acidic vapor, the reflectance spectrum of the RFA1 film exhibited a new peak at around 1200 nm, correlating to the film thickness of ∼394 nm. The significant increase in the thickness of the film under acidic conditions was explained by the swelling of the closely packed reflectin nanoparticles. This work demonstrated a chemo-responsive material with the largest reflectance window that extends to ∼1200 nm, matching infrared imaging needs.

5.3 Photonic biosensors
Detection of biological fluids is of fundamental importance to biomedical research and clinical diagnostics to monitor complex, non-linear, biochemical systems. Photonic structures have been shown to be a promising optical platform for biosensing applications. Various bioassays have been integrated with photonic structures to attain higher sensitivity, real-time monitoring, label-free detection,398 and biocompatibility with an inexpensive setup.306 Moreover, when interfaced with other photonic platforms they can exhibit stronger local electromagnetic field enhancement, which can benefit a variety of biosensing applications.399

5.3.1 Fluorescence biosensors. 
In a recent study, autofluorescence of silk fibroin has been harnessed to realize a vitamin B12 sensing platform.400 When excited by 290 nm light, aqueous solutions of Bombyx mori silk fibroin exhibited fluorescence emission at around 350 nm. The intrinsic photoluminescence of silk fibroin originates from the indole chromophore of tryptophan.401 The authors found that the emission intensity of silk decreased with the addition of vitamin B12 (Fig. 29a). The emission intensity progressively decreased with an increase in the vitamin B12 concentration, which indicates quenching of silk photoluminescence in the presence of vitamin B12. This quenching effect was related to the efficient energy transfer process between the energy donor (silk fibroin) and the acceptor (vitamin B12) due to the overlap between the emission of silk fibroin and the absorption of vitamin B12 and coulombic interactions between vitamin B12 and silk fibroin (Fig. 29b). The authors showed that the simple silk fibroin platform can detect vitamin B12 down to 3 ng μL−1 in a label-free manner. The presence of other biological components such as serum proteins and amino acids caused minimal quenching, indicating the good selectivity of the vitamin B12 sensing platform.
 Fig. 29  (a) Photoluminescence of B. mori silk fibroin aqueous solution in the presence of vitamin B12 (λexc is 290 nm). (b) Overlap between the fluorescence emission of silk fibroin and the absorbance of vitamin B12 indicating efficient FRET between the donor and the acceptor.400 Reprinted from ref. 400 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (c) Photonic nitrocellulose enhanced fluorescence of enzyme linked immunosorbent assay. (d) Photonic nitrocellulose showing tunable colors and reflectance spectra.402 Reprinted from ref. 402 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (e) Schematic showing the digital nucleic acid assay. (f) Fluorescence micrographs of the substrate after completion of the digital nucleic acid assays in the microdroplet arrays with (top row) and without (bottom row) photonic nitrocellulose.403 Reprinted from ref. 403 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
As mentioned above, photonic structures have also been utilized for enhancing the emission from fluorophores employed as signal reporters.402,403 Fluorescence-based technologies are widely utilized for the detection of various soluble and cell-bound biomolecules. However, feeble fluorescence signals and the associated low signal-to-noise ratio remain persistent challenges in meeting the ever-increasing demand to image, detect, and quantify biological entities of low abundance. It has been demonstrated that periodic cellulose structures, termed a “photonic pseudopaper”, can be utilized as a highly sensitive platform for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay due to the enhanced emission of natural fluorophores (Fig. 29c).402
The photonic pseudopaper was fabricated by drop casting nitrocellulose solution into a template composed of close-packed SiO2 nanoparticles. After the removal of the SiO2 nanoparticles, the photonic cellulose structures contained ordered interconnected pores allowing for the transport of biomolecules into the matrix. The photonic pseudopaper exhibited tunable colors with reflectance peaks ranging from 400–600 nm, as achieved by changing the size of the silica nanoparticles of the template (Fig. 29d). These periodic structures increase the fluorophore–light interaction due to the slow-photon effect,404 leading to enhanced emission. The photonic pseudopaper further served as a platform for sandwich immunoassay, where the presence, abundance, and binding of the target analyte reflected in the fluorophores generated.
Furthermore, a digital nucleic acid assay based on the formation of a micro-droplet array on the photonic pseudopaper has been demonstrated by the same group (Fig. 29e).403 In a digital nucleic acid assay (e.g. with loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP)), samples are first diluted and evenly divided into large partitions, where each partition contains either one or two analytes, or no analyte at all. After the reaction, the amount of partitions containing positive signals can be detected, which represents the total concentration of the target analytes. These micropatterned photonic arrays served as holders for micro-size reactions after hydrophilic modification to realize photonic microwells. After casting the aqueous sample on the photonic array, discrete microdroplets were formed by preferential wetting on non-patterned photonic nitrocellulose areas. Additionally, this micropatterned photonic pseudopaper enhances the fluorescence signal generated within the micro-chambers due to the appropriate location between the photonic stopband and the fluorophore emission, leading to high sensitivity and a shortened detection time (Fig. 29f).


5.3.2 Biosensors based on reflective structures. 
Photonic colloidal crystals based on PDA/SiO2 nanoparticles can serve as a signal barcode for potential applications in suspension arrays.397 In a typical microbead suspension array, the intrinsic characteristic signal from the microbead competes with the fluorescence signal from the biomolecular reporter bound on the microbeads. The intrinsic signal of the microbeads serves as the barcode, representing different target analytes, therefore enabling high-throughput multiplexed detection from a small sample volume. The fluorescence signal from the microbeads is employed as one of the most common barcodes.
The photonic structure is an attractive alternative as a “photonic barcode” due to the stable reflection characteristics and low fluorescent interference with the target signal.405–409 PDA coated SiO2 nanoparticles were assembled into micro-spherical colloids after droplet-based microfluidic synthesis.410 Due to the broad PDA absorption, the PDA/SiO2 photonic structures exhibited high color saturation and narrower half-peak width of the reflection as compared to photonic structures from bare SiO2 microbeads. Moreover, these photonic structures showed much higher mechanical strength under ultrasound treatment. Multiple fluoroimmunoassays were then performed on the PDA/SiO2 photonic microbeads, which exhibited good sensitivity and specificity. Further optimization of the photonic properties of the beads can result in fluorescence enhancement, which might improve the bioassay sensitivity.


5.3.3 Surface enhanced Raman scattering for SERS biosensors. 
Photonic structures can serve as a versatile platform for the integration with plasmonic nanostructures to generate SERS from analytes in close proximity to plasmonic nanostructures.411–413 SERS has been shown to enable the rapid and efficient detection of trace amounts of biological analytes such as proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, pigments, and metabolites.414–418 The highly ordered photonic structures provide multiple advantages when combined with plasmonic nanostructures: (1) they serve as ordered 3D templates for the fabrication of hybrid plasmonic–photonic structures with complementary optical properties, allowing for the generation of high-density hotspots to increase the detection sensitivity; (2) photonic structures from natural materials provide rich chemical functionality to interface with plasmonic nanostructures or to grow the nanostructures in situ and render chemical selectivity; (3) the close packed large-area photonic structures allow for the generation of active hotspots with high uniformity.
Recently, gyroid-structured SERS substrates using wing scales of the butterfly Callophrys rubi as soft templates have been demonstrated.419Callophrys rubi exhibited a bright green color, which is due to the photonic structure of the gyroid photonic crystals (unit cell size of 360 nm). These 3D photonic structures are usually difficult to achieve using conventional photolithography methods. Plasmonic nanogaps were formed by growing a thin layer of gold on the gyroid photonic crystals to achieve various volume ratios via proper control in the metal deposition time. The density of the plasmonic nanogaps in the matrix was optimized to achieve ultrasensitive SERS detection of a variety of chemical analytes such as crystal violet and bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate with a low limit of detection reaching 1 fM.
Gold coated butterfly wings have been shown to be effective as the SERS substrate for the detection of cancer biomarker, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA, ∼180 kDa protein) (Fig. 30a).420 A thin layer of gold (∼40–70 nm) was uniformly grown on the wings of E. mulciber to replicate the hierarchical micro-structures of E. mulciber wing scale, leading to a higher density of the electromagnetic hotspots as compared to a planar SERS substrate. The authors showed that the Au coated photonic substrate exhibited good signal uniformity and reproducibility, which is critical for reliable detection of cancer biomarkers. CEA was then specifically captured by the antibody immobilized on the Au photonic substrate and subsequently probed by a Rhodamine G-tagged aptamer acting as a Raman reporter. The authors showed a CEA detection limit of ∼10 ng mL−1, which is an order of magnitude lower than that obtained from a commercial SERS substrate.
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of CEA detection on Au butterfly wings based on the photonic SERS structure.420 Reprinted from ref. 420 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (b) Ag-nanoparticle modified photonic flexible cellulose films for SERS detection.421 Reprinted from ref. 421 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
Cellulose based photonic/plasmonic composite films can serve as a flexible and sensitive SERS substrate (Fig. 30b).421 A photonic crystal template consists of PS nanospheres, which are assembled into a hexagonal close packed array based on the gas–liquid interface method.422 The template was subsequently immersed in a mixture of silver nanoparticles and cellulose solution followed by etching of the template by methylbenzene, leaving a well-ordered inverse opal photonic/plasmonic structure. Methylcellulose and carboxymethyl celluloses were employed in this study due to their high stability in organic solvents. Using HPC as a supporting material, photonic/plasmonic structures have been fabricated using a soft nanoimprinting lithography.204 To introduce strong electromagnetic field enhancement, a thin layer of silver (50 nm) was deposited on the top of the HPC membranes and employed as a SERS substrate. To test the SERS performance, the sample was exposed to thiophenol, a Raman reporter. Notably, the SERS signal was significantly higher between the metallic pillars when illuminated with a 532 nm laser. On the other hand, the SERS signal mainly originated at the pillar area when excited with a 633 nm laser.
This SERS-based sensing is mainly attributed to the difference in the spatial distribution of the electric field under different excitation wavelengths. The rich chemical functionality enables facile surface modification of the micro and nanostructures based on natural materials, which is important for immobilization of the highly selective bio-recognition elements and passivation of the surface to minimize overwhelming non-specific binding and fast clogging of the sensing elements.
In the context of implantable devices, the biodegradability of these materials obviates the need to surgically explant the devices at the end of their functional life. Optimizing the micro and nanostructures allows tuning the optical behavior in IR windows and the fabrication of biosensors that can continuously monitor important bioanalytes and their deployment in vivo.

5.4 Energy harvesting with biophotonic structures
In natural photosynthesis, sunlight is captured by various biological systems such as plants and cyanobacteria followed by the efficient conversion of CO2 into organic molecules of sugars and carbohydrates.423 Among the series of photo-electrochemical processes involved in photosynthesis, light harvesting is the most efficient process that drives and induces the subsequent photochemical reactions. In terms of efficiency, light harvesting occurs at greater than 90% light conversion with a nearly perfect quantum yield.424 Light harvesting machinery of general photosynthetic systems, different types of light-absorbing chromophores and pigment–protein complexes, energy transfer processes/mechanisms, and adaptations/mechanisms used to mitigate the effects of high intensity light exposure have been extensively investigated.425–427 In this section, we will highlight a few recent examples for light harvesting.
The redox activity of quinones, organic compounds that contain two adjacent carbonyl groups in an unsaturated six-membered ring structure, is widely utilized in nature for energy transduction and storage.425 PDA can be synthesized in situ through oxidative self-polymerization of dopamine, which is one of the simplest ways to harness quinone.428,429 Consequently, PDA has been extensively investigated in artificial photosynthesis, photocatalysis, and energy harvesting and storage devices.430,431 Ultrathin PDA films were fabricated as the light-harvesting interface for heterogeneous palladium catalyzed coupling reactions under visible light.432 Palladium nanocrystals were grown in the PDA film to realize a photocatalytic Suzuki coupling reaction involving a broad range of aryl bromides/iodides and arylboronic acid substrates.
One of the distinct advantages of PDA as a light harvesting interface is that it can be deposited on organic and inorganic materials through oxidative polymerization of dopamine with excellent control over the thickness. Such a universal deposition approach combined with the rich chemical functionality (catechol, amine, imine) of PDA makes it an attractive material for interfacing with other catalytic materials such as platinum and iridium to control couplings, oxidations, and reductions.
The multifunctional properties of PDA have been harnessed to realize bio-derived plasmonic hybrids for enhanced light harvesting and catalytic activity. In situ polymerized PDA on plasmonic nanostructures have been utilized to realize core–shell assemblies that exhibited enhanced light absorption and superior charge carrier generation in the photosensitizing molecules trapped within the PDA layer.433 The PDA layer served as an adhesive and reducing agent for the synthesis of the metal nanostructures and as a scaffold for hosting the photosensitizers. The hybrid structures were realized through a simple three-step process: (i) formation of thin PDA films on a flexible substrate through oxidative self-polymerization of dopamine; (ii) in situ growth of Au nanostructures using the reducing ability of the catecholic moieties of PDA; and (iii) deposition of the PDA layer encapsulating the photosensitizer around the plasmonic nanostructures. The photocatalytic activity is generated in the presence of Au nanostructures, which serve as nanoantennas. Specifically, the photoregeneration of NAD+ to NADH (nicotinamide cofactor) was found to increase from 2.1% to 14.7% with the addition of Au nanostructures within the PDA film. In a more recent study, the same group has demonstrated light harvesting materials composed of Al nanoparticles and PDA coating (Fig. 31a).434
 Fig. 31  Light harvesting enabled by natural materials. (a) PDA encapsulated Al nanoarrays for plasmonic-enhanced light harvesting.434 Reprinted from ref. 434 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (b) Biodegradable interfacial evaporator based on PDA and BNC. Photograph of a large area bilayer PDA/BNC hydrogel. SEM images of surface and cross-section of a PDA/BNC foam. Optical image of steam generation.440 Reprinted from ref. 440 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
Highly efficient solar steam generation using interfacial evaporators is being widely explored as promising for water treatment and desalination.435,436 The interfacial evaporators efficiently harvest the sunlight and result in evaporation of water that is subsequently collected as fresh water. Bacterial nanocellulose (BNC) and modified wood materials were explored as a bio-based material platform for realizing interfacial evaporators with a variety of photothermal absorbers including reduced graphene oxide (RGO), PDA nanoparticles, MoS2 flakes, and metal plasmonic nanoparticles.437–439 Recently, PDA nanoparticle-loaded BNC bilayered foam has been demonstrated for solar steam generation, which is composed of a pristine BNC bottom layer and PDA particle-loaded BNC as a top layer (Fig. 31b).440 The size of the PDA particles were tuned to achieve maximum overlap between the absorption of PDA particles and the solar spectrum. Optimized light absorption was achieved for PDA particles with a diameter of ∼1 μm. The PDA/BNC bilayered foam exhibited a solar steam generation efficiency of ∼78%. The excellent efficiency of this interfacial evaporator completely based on natural materials is ascribed to high light absorption, outstanding photothermal conversion, excellent heat localization, and rapid water transport.
6. Conclusion and outlook
In this review, we have provided a summary of the recent research in harnessing natural materials for the fabrication of bio-enabled photonic structures. Living organisms have developed and refined materials, structures, and processes to selectively absorb, reflect, scatter, transmit, guide, and harvest light. Remarkably, nature achieved a broad range of photonic structures with relatively simple materials and under mild processing conditions, which makes them particularly attractive. These materials at the macro, micro, and nanoscales have served as a great source of inspiration for designing synthetic analogues.
Natural polymers offer numerous advantages compared to their synthetic counterparts as building blocks for photonic structures. The most significant advantages of biopolymers include not only the unique combination of optical and mechanical properties, but also important auxiliary properties, which are critical for real-world applications, such as renewability, diverse interfacial chemistries, biocompatibility, and controlled thermal properties (Fig. 32).441–443 Although it is possible to choose synthetic materials with a specific set of optical properties for a given photonic structure, such materials often exhibit modest mechanical or thermal properties imposing severe limitations in their real-world application. For example, glass fibers are excellent candidates as waveguides with extremely low optical loss. However, their application in biomedical research is limited by their mechanical mismatch with soft biological tissues and no biodegradability.
 Fig. 32  The general benefits of biopolymers for organized photonic structures. 
As has been discussed in detail in this review, naturally derived materials, which are inherently biocompatible and biodegradable offer numerous handles (e.g., physical and chemical crosslinking, tunable chemistry) to finely control the properties (chemical, mechanical, optical, thermal) and meet the requirements set by the specific applications. The rich chemical functionality of naturally derived polymers is yet another feature that makes them more attractive as compared to synthetic polymers. The chemical functionality can be harnessed to create hybrid materials (organic/inorganic, biotic/abiotic) with tailored interfaces through either integration of pre-synthesized materials or in situ growth processes.
To achieve the full potential of bio-enabled photonic structures, the capability of high-efficiency light transport with low loss is the most basic requirement. Most of the biopolymers are highly transparent in the visible wavelength range, although they have strong light absorption at shorter wavelengths below 350 nm. In addition, the refractive index of the material components should be higher than that of the surrounding media to generate photonic phenomena. To this end, the refractive index of cellulose, chitin and silk are very similar and all are around 1.50 within 10% deviation, which have strong refractive index contrast with air. Another important benefit of biopolymers is their excellent mechanical robustness, elasticity, and flexibility, which are critical for the durability of photonic optical systems/devices for practical applications. For example, owing to their highly crystalline structure, cellulose and chitin nanofibers are much stronger than most synthetic polymers.9 Finally, the coefficient of thermal expansion of biopolymers (<5 ppm k−1) is much lower than that of regular polymer materials (20–100 ppm k−1),444 which renders photonic structures with good thermal stability that is important in the application in energy harvesting.
Natural materials have evolved to efficiently capture energy from the sun and convert it into chemical energy with an overall efficiency that cannot be matched by any manmade materials. Natural materials are evolving to be an integral part of energy harvesting systems both as passive (structural integrity) and active (light harvesting) components. Overall, photonic structures made from these naturally abundant materials can be broadly deployed in various ecosystems with minimal environmental risk, thus enabling environmentally benign and sustainable energy collection and conversion.
Despite the exciting progress made in the past two decades, processing of naturally derived materials into large-scale photonic structures still remains a fundamental challenge. The key requirement of photonic structures is the precise organization of the building blocks across multi-length scales. Unfortunately, the current fabrication approaches are not satisfactory in terms of reproducibility and high spatial resolution. The assembly of CNCs for chiral nematic structures, for instance, is not readily reproducible even from the same batch of CNC dispersion and within large volumes in many cases. There are numerous parameters that determine the final chiral structures, and even a small variation might result in a different structural color. Naturally, such high sensitivity of the final structures to the experimental parameters leads to poor reproducibility of the experimental results within/across laboratories.
Additionally, the purity of the structural colors that is related to the uniformity of periodic structures is barely satisfactory. Although the structural color in many cases looks homogeneous with the naked eye, multi-color domains can be observed under a polarized microscope and broad reflection peaks occur because of the poor homogeneity of structures. Another concern with the current fabrication techniques, such as photolithography, is the uncertain prospects of scalability. Even though some of these techniques produce uniform photonic structures from biopolymer building blocks under rigorously controlled fabrication conditions, the scalability of such approaches remains unclear. Hence, comprehensive studies on how to efficiently control the micro and nanoscale structures of photonic materials on a large scale are still desperately needed, especially for industrial production, where cost and performance are valued equally.
The rapid emergence of additive manufacturing techniques provides new tools to construct photonic architectures over multiple length-scales and dimensions. In particular, the capability of fabricating various hierarchical 3D photonic crystal structures makes them attractive. Considering that the biopolymers are typically processed in an aqueous-rich environment, the manufacturing techniques that are suitable for processing include stereo-lithography that use light to cure designed areas in biopolymer suspensions and inkjet printing. Additive-manufacturing technologies have been used to build functional architectures from biopolymers for electronic devices, electrical conductors, tissue-engineering scaffolds, sensors and actuators.177,445–447 However, one can find only a few examples in the literature that explore these approaches for fabricating photonic structures because most current techniques are limited to microscale features.
However, as is well known and discussed above, most of the photonic structures require submicron feature sizes on the order of the wavelength of light and, in some cases, even finer control of the structure at the nanoscale. With the unremitting efforts to improve the feature resolution, some progress has been made, although very limited to date. Recently, an aqueous multiphoton lithography has been developed to fabricate various features with a resolution of 350 nm from silk solution.177 In another study, 3D structures with high resolution (down to 50 nm) were achieved by using ion and electron beams to crystalize silk materials though with very limited productivity rate.176 With continuing improvements in the reducing feature size and broadening materials palette, there is no doubt that additive manufacturing methods are an attractive path towards fabricating photonic materials. Simultaneously, integration of multiple micro and nanostructural materials (both biotic and abiotic) for realizing multi-photonic functionalities (e.g. including non-linear phenomena) will be the future focus in the development of bio-enabled photonic materials. Efforts on the rational integration of biotic and abiotic photonic materials, although underway, are at their inception.
The translation of the natural motifs into artificial photonic materials will require a deep understanding of the optical properties of the materials and photonic properties of the corresponding structures. It requires multiscale modelling approaches to establish structure–photonic property relationships in hierarchically organized photonic materials and to guide the design of a new class of biophotonic materials. In addition to the multi-scale approaches, it will be highly advantageous for these modelling methods to involve a multi-physics approach that enables further optimization of the materials for auxiliary properties such as enhanced mechanical properties (e.g., high flexibility, resilience, strength) and thermal properties (e.g., low thermal expansion and thermal conductivity). The complexity of the underlying processes related to the physical and chemical properties of the constituents (such as biopolymer molecular weight, nanocrystal aspect ratio, complex cross-section, local twisting power, heterogeneous surface chemistry, and blending components) hinders the understanding of the complex photonic phenomena of organized biomaterials and corresponding composites.
Additionally, integration of natural polymers with other natural and synthetic components is challenging but very attractive for emerging applications such as soft photonic sensors, robots and actuating devices. The combination of photonic materials with photovoltaic materials might advance sustainable energy-harvesting and generation approaches. We suggest that the biophotonic materials and structures will undergo tremendous development in the next decade to meet the demand for next-generation sustainable, biocompatible, biodegradable, lightweight, non-toxic, flexible, wearable, implantable, and ingestible photonic devices.
Overall, compared to colors generated from traditional chemical or biological pigments or metallic nanostructures, photonic-based structural colors generally exhibit little dissipative loss and biophotonic structures are able to create a gamut of bright and deep non-fading colors. Moreover, a special iridescent color effect can be generated by periodic structural systems and is particularly conspicuous to the human eye for finding applications in visual arts. Besides, the structural color generated by biophotonic structures can be complex compared to pigments and this makes them useful for security, where marks of authentication are required. Finally, deeper and lustrous “chameleon” iridescent colors have been introduced by Mercedes–Benz and deep structural “blue paint” as “LC Structural Blue Edition” has been developed by Toyota for special editions of their Lexus brand for demanding customers (Fig. 33).448 Its appearance, to a great extent, mimics the deep color of butterfly wings (compare with Fig. 4b).
 Fig. 33  Lexus® car with a dazzling “structural blue” color (with permission from Toyota Motor North America). 
However, to date, there have been very few other examples of large-scale practical applications of bioinspired materials with designed structural colors realized as commercially available bio-derived or synthetic products. To promote broad applications and to make such biophotonic-inspired products truly mass-producible, the overall cost of the coating process and corresponding materials needs to be significantly reduced. Novel renewable materials and methods, especially those compatible with industrial scale production, to efficiently control the photonic structure over a large scale are required for further progress. Yet another aspect that requires consideration in real-world larger-scale applications of structural colors is the possibility of self-healing in such complex coatings. Considering that their unique optical properties are highly sensitive to the micro and nanoscale structural defects, it is important to effectively preserve objects with structural colors during routine use (involving scratches, and minor collisions) and possibly restore the fine and multi-length scale structural features after unwanted damage and a wide variation of temperature through smart self-healing. Clearly, these aspects will become more important as structural colors transition from being a “novelty” to the “norm”, even if an expensive one.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Air Force Research Lab FA8650-D-16-5404, AWD-000300, Air Force Office for Scientific Research FA9550-17-1-0297, and NSF CBET-1803495, CBET-1512043 and CBET-1900277 Awards.
References
S. Tadepalli, J. M. Slocik, M. K. Gupta, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12705–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Z. Xie, H. Gu, C. Zhu and Z. Gu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3297–3317 RSC .
A. P. C. Almeida, J. P. Canejo, S. N. Fernandes, C. Echeverria, P. L. Almeida and M. H. Godinho, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703655 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shang, W. Zhang, K. Xu and Y. Zhao, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 945–958 RSC .
Y. Liu, K. He, G. Chen, W. R. Leow and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12893–12941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Applegate, J. Coburn, B. P. Partlow, J. E. Moreau, J. P. Mondia, B. Marelli, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 12052–12057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Ray, J. Choi, A. J. Bandodkar, S. Krishnan, P. Gutruf, L. Tian, R. Ghaffari and J. A. Rogers, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 5461–5533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xiong, A. M. Grant, R. Ma, S. Zhang and V. V. Tsukruk, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2018, 125, 1–41 CrossRef .
S. Ling, W. Chen, Y. Fan, K. Zheng, K. Jin, H. Yu, M. J. Buehler and D. L. Kaplan, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 85, 1–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ling, D. L. Kaplan and M. J. Buehler, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18016 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kontturi, P. Laaksonen, M. B. Linder, Nonappa, A. H. Gröschel, O. J. Rojas and O. Ikkala, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703779 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tao, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2824–2837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Guo, L. Zhou, C. Ye, F. G. Omenetto, D. L. Kaplan and S. Ling, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805305 CrossRef .
B. D. Lawrence, M. Cronin-Golomb, I. Georgakoudi, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 1214–1220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Zhao, R. M. Parker, C. A. Williams, K. T. P. Lim, B. Frka-Petesic and S. Vignolini, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1804531 Search PubMed .
O. Kose, A. Tran, L. Lewis, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 510 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, M. Zhu, Z. Yang, J. Song, J. Dai, Y. Yao, W. Luo, G. Pastel, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601122 CrossRef .
H.-L. Liang, M. M. Bay, R. Vadrucci, C. H. Barty-King, J. Peng, J. J. Baumberg, M. F. De Volder and S. Vignolini, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4632 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Shan, E. Gerhard, C. Zhang, J. W. Tierney, D. Xie, Z. Liu and J. Yang, Bioact. Mater., 2018, 3, 434–445 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wu, J. He, W. Shang, T. Deng, J. Gu, H. Su, Q. Liu, W. Zhang and D. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 195–224 CrossRef CAS .

          N. L. Vekshin, Photonics of Biopolymers, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2002, ISBN 978-3-642-07855-2,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-662-04947-1 .
Z. Liu, M. A. Meyers, Z. Zhang and R. O. Ritchie, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 88, 467–498 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kolle, P. M. Salgard-Cunha, M. R. J. Scherer, F. Huang, P. Vukusic, S. Mahajan, J. J. Baumberg and U. Steiner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 511–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Uchida, Y. Takanishi and J. Yamamoto, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3234–3237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Benson, Nature, 2011, 480, 193–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Dufresne, H. Noh, V. Saranathan, S. G. J. Mochrie, H. Cao and R. O. Prum, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1792–1795 RSC .
S. Kinoshita and S. Yoshioka, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1442–1459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Shevtsova, C. Hansson, D. H. Janzen and J. Kjærandsen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 668–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schenk, B. D. Wilts and D. G. Stavenga, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2013, 8, 045002 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Matin, M. K. Leong, B. Y. Majlis and I. C. Gebeshuber, AIP Conf. Proc., 2010, 1284, 5–14 CrossRef .
P. Vukusic, J. R. Sambles and C. R. Lawrence, Nature, 2000, 404, 457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Campos-Fernández, D. E. Azofeifa, M. Hernández-Jiménez, A. Ruiz-Ruiz and W. E. Vargas, Opt. Mater. Express, 2011, 1, 85–100 CrossRef .
D. Gur, B. Leshem, D. Oron, S. Weiner and L. Addadi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17236–17242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Wilts, K. Michielsen, H. D. Raedt and D. G. Stavenga, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 4363–4368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Jordan, J. C. Partridge and N. W. Roberts, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 759–763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Stavenga, B. D. Wilts, H. L. Leertouwer and T. Hariyama, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2011, 366, 709–723 CrossRef PubMed .

          K. Sakoda, Optical Properties of Photonic Crystals, Springer Science & Business Media,  2004 Search PubMed .
C. Fenzl, T. Hirsch and O. S. Wolfbeis, Angew. Chem., 2014, 53, 3318–3335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. D. Joannopoulos, S. G. Johnson, J. N. Winn and R. D. Meade, Photonic Crystals: Molding the Flow of Light, Princeton University Press, 2nd edn,  2011 Search PubMed .
U. G. Wegst, H. Bai, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia and R. O. Ritchie, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Tan, D. Wong and P. Lee, Opt. Express, 2004, 12, 4847–4854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Starkey and P. Vukusic, Nanophotonics, 2013, 2, 289–307 Search PubMed .
I. Zada, W. Zhang, Y. Li, P. Sun, N. Cai, J. Gu, Q. Liu, H. Su and D. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 153701 CrossRef .
D. G. Stavenga, S. Foletti, G. Palasantzas and K. Arikawa, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2006, 273, 661–667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          I. A. Sukhoivanov and I. V. Guryev, Photonic Crystals: Physics and Practical Modeling, Springer,  2009 Search PubMed .

          S. G. Johnson and J. D. Joannopoulos, Photonic Crystals: The Road from Theory to Practice, Springer Science & Business Media,  2001 Search PubMed .

          K. Inoue and K. Ohtaka, Photonic Crystals: Physics, Fabrication and Applications, Springer Science & Business Media,  2004 Search PubMed .
F. Marlow, Muldarisnur, P. Sharifi, R. Brinkmann and C. Mendive, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6212–6233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Armstrong and C. O’Dwyer, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 6109–6143 RSC .
E. Gaillou, A. Delaunay, B. Rondeau, M. Bouhnik-le-Coz, E. Fritsch, G. Cornen and C. Monnier, Ore Geol. Rev., 2008, 34, 113–126 CrossRef .
M. A. S. Kalceff, M. R. Phillips, A. R. Moon and A. Smallwood, Phys. Chem. Miner., 1997, 24, 131–138 CrossRef .
E. Gaillou, E. Fritsch, B. Aguilar-Reyes, B. Rondeau, J. Post, A. Barreau and M. Ostroumov, Am. Mineral., 2008, 93, 1865–1873 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Kinoshita, Structural Colors in the Realm of Nature, World Scientific,  2008 Search PubMed .
J. W. Galusha, L. R. Richey, J. S. Gardner, J. N. Cha and M. H. Bartl, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2008, 77, 050904 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Galusha, M. R. Jorgensen and M. H. Bartl, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 107–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Johnson and J. D. Joannopoulos, Opt. Express, 2001, 8, 173–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.synopsys.com/optical-solutions/rsoft/passive-device-bandsolve.html
        .
V. Sharma, M. Crne, J. O. Park and M. Srinivasarao, Science, 2009, 325, 449–451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Bunning, L. V. Natarajan, V. P. Tondiglia and R. L. Sutherland, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 83–115 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lenau and M. Barfoed, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2008, 10, 299–314 CrossRef .
S. Vignolini, P. J. Rudall, A. V. Rowland, A. Reed, E. Moyroud, R. B. Faden, J. J. Baumberg, B. J. Glover and U. Steiner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15712–15715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kinoshita, S. Yoshioka and J. Miyazaki, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2008, 71, 076401 CrossRef .
J. C. Weaver, G. W. Milliron, A. Miserez, K. Evans-Lutterodt, S. Herrera, I. Gallana, W. J. Mershon, B. Swanson, P. Zavattieri and E. DiMasi, 
            et al.
          , Science, 2012, 336, 1275–1280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Choi, G. Cheng, Z. Huang, S. Zhang, T. B. Norris and N. A. Kotov, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 820–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Caveney, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 1971, 178, 205–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Toivonen, O. D. Onelli, G. Jacucci, V. Lovikka, O. J. Rojas, O. Ikkala and S. Vignolini, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704050 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Burresi, L. Cortese, L. Pattelli, M. Kolle, P. Vukusic, D. S. Wiersma, U. Steiner and S. Vignolini, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Luke, B. T. Hallam and P. Vukusic, Appl. Opt., 2010, 49, 4246–4254 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Vukusic, B. Hallam and J. Noyes, Science, 2007, 315, 348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cortese, L. Pattelli, F. Utel, S. Vignolini, M. Burresi and D. S. Wiersma, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1337–1341 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. D. Tilley, J. N. Eliot and H. Yoshimoto, Lepid. Sci., 2002, 53, 153–180 Search PubMed .
B. D. Wilts, X. Sheng, M. Holler, A. Diaz, M. Guizar-Sicairos, J. Raabe, R. Hoppe, S.-H. Liu, R. Langford, O. D. Onelli, D. Chen, S. Torquato, U. Steiner, C. G. Schroer, S. Vignolini and A. Sepe, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1702057 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, U. Guler, Y. Li, A. B. Rea, E. K. Tanyi, Y. Kim, M. A. Noginov, Y. Song, A. Boltasseva, V. M. Shalaev and N. A. Kotov, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1578–1583 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, D. Ji, B. Zhu, P. Zhang, J. Xu, Q. Gan, Z. Yu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501227 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhai, Y. Ma, S. N. David, D. Zhao, R. Lou, G. Tan, R. Yang and X. Yin, Science, 2017, 355, 1062–1066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu and T. Liedl, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3032–3053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tan, M. J. Campolongo, D. Luo and W. Cheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 268–276 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuzyk, R. Schreiber, Z. Fan, G. Pardatscher, E.-M. Roller, A. Högele, F. C. Simmel, A. O. Govorov and T. Liedl, Nature, 2012, 483, 311–314 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Jones, K. D. Osberg, R. J. Macfarlane, M. R. Langille and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3736–3827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Thomas, M. C. Raj, K. B. Athira, M. H. Rubiyah, J. Joy, A. Moores, G. L. Drisko and C. Sanchez, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 11575–11625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Klemm, F. Kramer, S. Moritz, T. Lindström, M. Ankerfors, D. Gray and A. Dorris, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5438–5466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Wang, X. Yi, J. Zeng, H. Yu, Y. Liu and J. Li, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 154–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xiong, H. S. Kim, L. Zhang, V. F. Korolovych, S. Zhang, Y. G. Yingling and V. V. Tsukruk, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 8644–8649 CrossRef .
R. Xiong, H. S. Kim, S. Zhang, S. Kim, V. F. Korolovych, R. Ma, Y. G. Yingling, C. Lu and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12008–12019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Wei, Q. Wang, J. Chen, G. Chang, L. Kong, J. Su and Y. Liu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2012, 90, 1609–1613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Abe, S. Iwamoto and H. Yano, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 3276–3278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, H. Yu, Y. Liu, P. Chen, M. Zhang and Y. Hai, Carbohydr. Polym., 2011, 83, 1804–1811 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Tsuzuki and X. Wang, Cellulose, 2015, 22, 1729–1741 CrossRef CAS .
T. Saito, S. Kimura, Y. Nishiyama and A. Isogai, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 2485–2491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Isogai, T. Saito and H. Fukuzumi, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 71–85 RSC .
H. Fukuzumi, T. Saito, T. Iwata, Y. Kumamoto and A. Isogai, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 162–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Iguchi, S. Yamanaka and A. Budhiono, J. Mater. Sci., 2000, 35, 261–270 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, C. Zhu, J. Yang, Y. Nie, C. Chen and D. Sun, Cellulose, 2014, 21, 1–30 CrossRef CAS .
O. van den Berg, J. R. Capadona and C. Weder, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 1353–1357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iwamoto, W. Kai, A. Isogai and T. Iwata, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 2571–2576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Hamad and T. Q. Hu, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2010, 88, 392–402 CAS .
V. F. Korolovych, V. Cherpak, D. Nepal, A. Ng, N. R. Shaikh, A. Grant, R. Xiong, T. J. Bunning and V. V. Tsukruk, Polymer, 2018, 145, 334–347 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, Z. Qin, B. Liang, N. Liu, Z. Zhou and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3938–3944 RSC .
G. Nyström, M. Arcari, J. Adamcik, I. Usov and R. Mezzenga, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5141–5148 CrossRef .
S. Wang, A. Lu and L. Zhang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 53, 169–206 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Fink, P. Weigel, H. J. Purz and J. Ganster, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2001, 26, 1473–1524 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, G. Gurau and R. D. Rogers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1519–1537 RSC .
T. Rosenau, A. Potthast, I. Adorjan, A. Hofinger, H. Sixta, H. Firgo and P. Kosma, Cellulose, 2002, 9, 283–291 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Wu, J. Zhang and J. He, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 8272–8277 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Dawsey and C. L. McCormick, J. Macromol. Sci., Part C, 1990, 30, 405–440 CrossRef .
Q. Yang, H. Fukuzumi, T. Saito, A. Isogai and L. Zhang, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 2766–2771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. O’Sullivan, Cellulose, 1997, 4, 173–207 CrossRef .
M. A. S. Azizi Samir, F. Alloin and A. Dufresne, Biomacromolecules, 2005, 6, 612–626 CrossRef .
P. S. Belton, S. F. Tanner, N. Cartier and H. Chanzy, Macromolecules, 1989, 22, 1615–1617 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamamoto and F. Horii, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 1313–1317 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamamoto and F. Horn, Cellulose, 1994, 1, 57–66 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Moon, A. Martini, J. Nairn, J. Simonsen and J. Youngblood, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3941–3994 RSC .
N.-H. Kim, T. Imai, M. Wada and J. Sugiyama, Biomcaromolecules, 2006, 7, 274–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Stipanovic and A. Sarko, Macromolecules, 1976, 9, 851–857 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wada, Y. Nishiyama and P. Langan, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 2947–2952 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wada, L. Heux, A. Isogai, Y. Nishiyama, H. Chanzy and J. Sugiyama, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 1237–1243 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wadam, L. Heux and J. Sugiyama, Biomacromolecules, 2004, 5, 1385–1391 CrossRef PubMed .
C. K. S. Pillai, W. Paul and C. P. Sharma, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 641–678 CrossRef CAS .
D. Raabe, C. Sachs and P. Romano, Acta Mater., 2005, 53, 4281–4292 CrossRef CAS .
P.-Y. Chen, A. Y.-M. Lin, J. McKittrick and M. A. Meyers, Acta Biomater., 2008, 4, 587–596 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Atkins, J. Biosci., 1985, 8, 375–387 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ogawa, C. M. Lee, Y. Nishiyama and S. H. Kim, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 7025–7031 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nikolov, M. Petrov, L. Lymperakis, M. Friák, C. Sachs, H.-O. Fabritius, D. Raabe and J. Neugebauer, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 519–526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-B. Zeng, Y.-S. He, S.-L. Li and Y.-Z. Wang, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ifuku, M. Nogi, K. Abe, M. Yoshioka, M. Morimoto, H. Saimoto and H. Yano, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 1584–1588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, T. Saito and A. Isogai, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 1919–1923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, T. Saito and A. Isogai, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 192–198 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Samyn and A. Osorio-Madrazo, in Handbook of Nanofibers, ed. A. Barhoum, M. Bechelany and A. Makhlouf, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2018, pp. 1–36 Search PubMed .
S. Ifuku, Molecules, 2014, 19, 18367–18380 CrossRef .
H. E. L. Knidri., J. Dahmani, A. Addaou, A. Laajeb and A. Lahsini, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 139, 1092–1102 CrossRef PubMed .
A. C. O’Sullivan, Cellulose, 1997, 4, 173–207 CrossRef .
J. Kumirska, M. Czerwicka, Z. Kazynski, A. Bychowska, K. Brzozowski, J. Thöming and P. Stepnowski, Mar. Drugs, 2010, 8, 1567–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Goodrich and W. T. Winter, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 252–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. S. Pillai, W. Paul and C. P. Sharma, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 641–678 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dash, F. Chiellini, R. M. Ottenbrite and E. Chiellini, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 981–1014 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yi, L. Wu, W. E. Bentley, R. Ghodssi, G. W. Rubloff, J. N. Culver and G. F. Payne, Biomacromolecules, 2005, 6, 2881–2894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Jin and D. L. Kaplan, Nature, 2003, 424, 1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, S. Ling, C. Li, F. G. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6486–6504 RSC .
V. Volkov, A. V. Ferreira and A. Cavaco-Paulo, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2015, 300, 1199–1216 CrossRef CAS .
S. Keten, Z. Xu, B. Ihle and M. J. Buehler, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Rockwood, R. C. Preda, T. Yücel, X. Wang, M. L. Lovett and D. L. Kaplan, Nat. Protoc., 2011, 6, 1612–1631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Takei, Y. Kikuchi, A. Kikuchi, S. Mizuno and K. Shimura, J. Cell Biol., 1987, 105, 175–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Vollrath and D. Porter, Polymer, 2009, 50, 5623–5632 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Gulrajani, Rev. Prog. Color., 1992, 22, 79–89 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Hill, Adv. Protein Chem., 1965, 20, 37–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Freddi, G. Pessina and M. Tsukada, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 1999, 24, 251–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nultsch, L. K. Bast, M. Näf, S. E. I. Yakhlifi, N. Bruns and O. Germershaus, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2018, 303, 1800408 CrossRef .
P. P. Viktorov and Z. S. Block, Textil. Prom., 1933, 11, 43–46 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, Q. Chen, Y. Yang and Z. Shao, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 285–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Philips, L. F. Drummy, D. G. Conrady, D. M. Fox, R. R. Naik, M. O. Stones, P. C. Trulove, H. C. De Long and R. A. Mantz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14350–14351 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, Q. Lu, J. Ming, H. Dou, Z. Liu, B. Zuo, M. Qin, M. Qin, F. Li, D. Kaplan and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 3879–3885 RSC .
H. J. Cho, C. S. Ki, H. Oh, K. H. Lee and I. C. Um, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2012, 51, 336–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Goto, M. Tsukada, N. Minoura and J. Sericult, Sci. Jpn., 1990, 59, 402–409 CAS .
A. B. Mathur, A. Tonelli, T. Tathke and S. Hudson, Biopolymers, 1997, 42, 61–74 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ajisawa, J. Seric. Sci. Jpn., 1998, 67, 91–94 CAS .
Y. Shimizu and J. Sericult, Sci. Jpn., 1978, 47, 417–420 CAS .
X. Hu, K. Shmelev, L. Sun, E.-S. Gil, S.-H. Park, P. Cebe and D. L. Kaplan, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 1686–1696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiang, X. Wang, R. Gunawidjaja, Y.-H. Lin, M. K. Gupta, D. L. Kaplan, R. R. Naik and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2229–2237 CrossRef CAS .
M. Heim, D. Keerl and T. Scheibel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3584–3596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ling, C. Li, K. Jin, D. L. Kaplan and M. J. Buehler, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7783–7790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tan, W. Zhao and T. Mu, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 3625–3633 RSC .
N. E. Kurland, T. Dey, S. C. Kundu and V. K. Yadavalli, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6207–6212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wolfberger, A. Petritz, A. Fian, J. Herka, V. Schmidt, B. Stadlober, R. Kargl, S. Spirk and T. Griesser, Cellulose, 2015, 22, 717–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Verma, Gaganjot, J. Tripathi, M. Katiyar and V. Verma, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 13, 83–90 CrossRef .
C. Ye, S. V. Nikolov, R. Calabrese, A. Dindar, A. Alexeev, B. Kippelen, D. L. Kaplan and V. V. Tsukruk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8490–8493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, Z. Zhou, S. Zhang, Z. Shi, J. Tabarini, W. Lee, Y. Zhang, S. N. G. Corder, X. Li, F. Dong, L. Cheng, M. Liu, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, G. Zhang, Y. Mao and T. H. Tao, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700191 CrossRef PubMed .
N. E. Kurland, T. Dey, C. Wang, S. C. Kundu and V. K. Yadavalli, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4431–4437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. D. B. Fraser, T. P. MacRae and G. E. Rogers, Keratins: their composition, structure and biosynthesis, Springfield III, Charles C Thomas,  1972 Search PubMed .
B. Wang, W. Yang, J. Mckittrick and M. A. Meyers, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2016, 76, 229–318 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pauling, R. B. Corey and H. R. Branson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1951, 37, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. B. Fraser and D. A. D. Parry, J. Struct. Biol., 2011, 173, 391–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Sinkiewicz, H. Staroszczyk and A. Sliwinska, J. Food Biochem., 2018, 42, e12494 CrossRef .
S. Zhu, W. Zeng, Z. Meng, W. Luo, L. Ma, Y. Li, C. Lin, Q. Huang, Y. Lin and X. Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1900870 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, B. Marelli, M. A. Brenckle, A. N. Mitropoulos, E.-S. Gil, K. Tsioris, H. Tao, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 306–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, S.-G. Lee, B. Marelli, M. Lee, T. Kim, H.-K. Oh, H. Jeon, F. G. Omenetto and S. Kim, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 39330–39334 RSC .
J. Jiang, S. Zhang, Z. Qian, N. Qin, W. Song, L. Sun, Z. Zhou, Z. Shi, L. Chen, X. Li, Y. Mao, D. L. Kaplan, S. N. G. Corder, X. Chen, M. Liu, F. G. Omenetto, X. Xia and T. H. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705919 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-L. Sun, Q. Li, S.-M. Sun, J.-C. Huang, B.-Y. Zheng, Q.-D. Chen, Z.-Z. Shao and H.-B. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Haske, V. W. Chen, J. M. Hales, W. Dong, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and J. W. Perry, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 3426–3436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Kelly, I. Bhattacharya, H. Heidari, M. Shusteff, C. M. Spadaccini and H. K. Taylor, Science, 2019, 363, 1075–1079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Huang, Y. Yin, Z. Pan, M. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang and J. Gao, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 4396–4402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhong, A. Kapetanovic, Y. Deng and M. Rolandi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4776–4781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jin, P. Hassanzadeh, G. Perotto, W. Sun, M. A. Brenckle, D. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto and M. Rolandi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4482–4487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bottan, F. Robotti, P. Jayathissa, A. Hegglin, N. Bahamonde, J. A. Heredia-Guerrero, I. S. Bayer, A. Scarpellini, H. Merker, N. Lindenblatt, D. Poulikakos and A. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 206–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rofouie, M. Alizadehgiashi, H. Mundoor, I. I. Smalyukh and E. Kumacheva, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803852 CrossRef .
H. Perry, A. Gopinath, D. L. Kaplan, L. D. Negro and F. G. Omenetto, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3070–3072 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, A. N. Mitropoulos, J. D. Spitzberg, H. Tao, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 818 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hou, W. Ali, J. Lv, J. Guo, L. Shi, B. Han, X. Wang and Z. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16446–16449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Nemtsev, I. A. Tambasov, A. A. Ivanenko and V. Y. Zyryanov, Photonics Nanostruct. - Fundam. Appl., 2018, 28, 37–44 CrossRef .
N. Sui, Y.-H. Wang, Y.-F. Song, F.-Y. Wang, Y.-G. Ma and H.-Z. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 025202 CrossRef .
L. Pan, H. Xu, R. Lv, J. Qiu, J. Zhao and Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 4523 CrossRef PubMed .
C. I. Aguirre, E. Reguera and A. Stein, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2565–2578 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hyun, H. K. Lee, S. S. Oh, O. Hess, C.-G. Choi, S. H. Im and O. O. Park, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1846–1850 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, T. Y. Jeon, S. Y. Lee, S. Y. Lee and S.-H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706664 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, W. Li, M. Li, S. Zhao, F. D. Ferrari, M. Liscidini and F. G. Omenetto, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805312 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, D. Aurelio, W. Li, P. Tseng, Z. Zheng, M. Li, D. L. Kaplan, M. Liscidini and F. G. Omenetto, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702769 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Xiong, S. Yu, S. Kang, K. M. Adstedt, D. Nepal, T. J. Bunning and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905600 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chu, A. Camposeo, R. Vilensky, G. Vasilyev, Pa. Martin, Da. Pisignano and E. Zussman, Matter, 2019, 1, 1–13 CrossRef .
G. Chu, D. Qu, A. Camposeo, D. Pisignano and E. Zussman, Mater. Horiz., 2020 10.1039/c9mh01485c .
M. C. Traub, W. Longsine and V. N. Truskett, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2016, 7, 583–604 CrossRef PubMed .

          D. Crawley, K. Nikolic and M. Forshaw, 3D Nanoelectronic Computer Architecture and Implementation, CRC Press,  2019 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, W. Li, D. Yu, Y. Wang, M. Yin, H. Wang, Y. Song, X. Zhu, P. Chang, X. Chen and D. Li, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1601116 CrossRef .
T. Mäkelä, M. Kainlauri, P. Willberg-Keyriläinen, T. Tammelin and U. Forsström, Microelectron. Eng., 2016, 163, 1–6 CrossRef .
J. J. Amsden, P. Domachuk, A. Gopinath, R. D. White, L. D. Negro, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1746–1749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Espinha, C. Dore, C. Matricardi, M. I. Alonso, A. R. Goñi and A. Mihi, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Z. Chen, X. Song, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, K. K. Shung, Q. Zhou and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605750 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-M. Chen, H.-L. Gao, Y.-B. Zhu, H.-B. Yao, L.-B. Mao, Q.-Y. Song, J. Xia, Z. Pan, Z. He, H.-A. Wu and S.-H. Yu, Nat. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 703–714 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Erb, R. Libanori, N. Rothfuchs and A. R. Studart, Science, 2012, 335, 199–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dogic and S. Fraden, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 7820–7824 CrossRef CAS .
E. Grelet and S. Fraden, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 198302 CrossRef .
X. Mu and D. G. Gray, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 9256–9260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Matsumura, S. Kajiyama, T. Nishimura and T. Kato, Small, 2015, 11, 5127–5133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nyström, M. Arcari and R. Mezzenga, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 330 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Parker, G. Guidetti, C. A. Williams, T. Zhao, A. Narkevicius, S. Vignolini and B. Frka-Petesic, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704477 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Orts, L. Godbout, R. H. Marchessault and J.-F. Revol, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 5717–5725 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hirai, O. Inui, F. Horii and M. Tsuji, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 497–502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schütz, M. Agthe, A. B. Fall, K. Gordeyeva, V. Guccini, M. Salajková, T. S. Plivelic, J. P. F. Lagerwall, G. Salazar-Alvarez and L. Bergström, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 6507–6513 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Tjipto-Margo and G. T. Evans, J. Chem. Phys., 1990, 93, 4254 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khandelwal and A. H. Windle, Polymer, 2013, 54, 5199–5206 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Dong, T. Kimura, J.-F. Revol and D. G. Gray, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 2076–2082 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Dong and D. G. Gray, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 2404–2409 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chau, S. E. Sriskandha, D. Pichugin, H. Thérien-Aubin, D. Nykypanchuk, G. Chauve, M. Méthot, J. Bouchard, O. Gang and E. Kumacheva, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 2455–2462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Lagerwall, C. Schütz, M. Salajkova, J. Noh, J. H. Park, G. Scalia and L. Bergström, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e80 CrossRef CAS .
J. Majoinen, E. Kontturi, O. Ikkala and D. G. Gray, Cellulose, 2012, 19, 1599–1605 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Wilts, A. G. Dumanli, R. Middleton, P. Vukusic and S. Vignolini, APL Photonics, 2017, 2, 040801 CrossRef .
A. G. Dumanli, H. M. van der Kooij, G. Kamita, E. Reisner, J. J. Baumberg, U. Steiner and S. Vignolini, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12302–12306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Frka-Petesic, G. Guidetti, G. Kamita and S. Vignolini, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701469 CrossRef PubMed .
O. O’Keeffe, P.-X. Wang, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 278–282 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Cherpak, V. F. Korolovych, R. Geryak, T. Turiv, D. Nepal, J. Kelly, T. J. Bunning, O. D. Lavrentovich, W. T. Heller and V. V. Tsukruk, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6770–6777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Parker, B. Frka-Petesic, G. Guidetti, G. Kamita, G. Consani, C. Abell and S. Vignolini, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8443–8449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Mu and D. G. Gray, Cellulose, 2015, 22, 1103–1107 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Werbowyj and D. G. Gray, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 1976, 34, 97–103 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Godinho, D. G. Gray and P. Pieranski, Liq. Cryst., 2017, 44, 2108–2120 CAS .
G. Kamita, B. Frka-Petesic, A. Allard, M. Dargaud, K. King, A. G. Dumanli and S. Vignolini, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1950–1954 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Liang, M. M. Bay, R. Vadrucci, C. H. Barty-King, J. Peng, J. J. Baumberg, M. F. L. D. Volder and S. Vignolini, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4632 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Guidetti, S. Atifi, S. Vignolini and W. Y. Hamad, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10042–10047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang and A. Walther, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10637–10646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bardet, N. Belgacem and J. Bras, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4010–4018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pérez, J. Muñoz-Dorado, T. de la Rubia and J. Martínez, Int. Microbiol., 2002, 5, 53–63 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yao, Q. Meng, V. Bulone and Q. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701323 CrossRef PubMed .

          K. M. Adstedt and V. V. Tsukruk, in preparation.

          E. Riande and E. Sáiz, Dipole moments and birefringence of polymers, Prentice Hall,  1992 Search PubMed .

          H. Janeschitz-Kriegl, Polymer Melt Rheology and Flow Birefringence, Springer Science & Business Media,  2012 Search PubMed .

          D. Meschede, Optics, Light, and Lasers: The Practical Approach to Modern Aspects of Photonics and Laser Physics, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2017 Search PubMed .
T. Hiratani, O. Kose, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 1076–1081 RSC .

          J. Bergström, in Mechanics of Solid Polymers, ed. J. Bergström, William Andrew Publishing,  2015, pp. 19–114 Search PubMed .
I. M. Daly, M. J. How, J. C. Partridge, S. E. Temple, N. J. Marshall, T. W. Cronin and N. W. Roberts, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tseng, B. Napier, S. Zhao, A. N. Mitropoulos, M. B. Applegate, B. Marelli, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 474–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ye, P. Yang, X. Lei, D. Zhang, L. Li, C. Chang, P. Sun and L. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5175–5183 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ye, Q. Cheng, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Chang, L. Li, H. Peng and L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 43154–43162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu and I. I. Smalyukh, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700981 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Hausmann, P. A. Rühs, G. Siqueira, J. Läuger, R. Libanori, T. Zimmermann and A. R. Studart, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6926–6937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Gladman, E. A. Matsumoto, R. G. Nuzzo, L. Mahadevan and J. A. Lewis, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 413 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Mittal, F. Ansari, K. Gowda V, C. Brouzet, P. Chen, P. T. Larsson, S. V. Roth, F. Lundell, L. Wågberg, N. A. Kotov and L. D. Söderberg, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6378–6388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, S. Parvinian, C. Preston, O. Vaaland, Z. Ruan and L. Hu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3787–3792 RSC .
M. Nogi, S. Iwamoto, A. N. Nakagaito and H. Yano, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1595–1598 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Toivonen, O. D. Onelli, G. Jacucci, V. Lovikka, O. J. Rojas, O. Ikkala and S. Vignolini, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704050 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Caixeiro, M. Peruzzo, O. D. Onelli, S. Vignolini and R. Sapienza, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7885–7890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Caixeiro, M. Peruzzo, O. D. Onelli, S. Vignolini and R. Sapienza, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7885–7890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fang, H. Zhu, C. Preston, X. Han, Y. Li, S. Lee, X. Chai, G. Chen and L. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6191–6197 RSC .
H. Yousefi, T. Nishino, M. Faezipour, G. Ebrahimi and A. Shakeri, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 4080–4085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, J. Tao, J. Zou, B. Zhang, T. Li, J. Dai, M. Zhu, S. Wang, K. Kelvin Fu, D. Henderson, E. Hitz, J. Peng and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2278–2285 RSC .
S. Fink, Holzforsch. - Int. J. Biol. Chem. Phys. Technol. Wood, 2009, 46, 403–408 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, Q. Fu, S. Yu, M. Yan and L. Berglund, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, J. Song, T. Li, A. Gong, Y. Wang, J. Dai, Y. Yao, W. Luo, D. Henderson and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5181–5187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, S. Utech, G. T. England, T. Shirman, K. R. Phillips, N. Koay, I. B. Burgess, M. Kolle, D. A. Weitz and J. Aizenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 10845–10850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Takeoka, S. Yoshioka, A. Takano, S. Arai, K. Nueangnoraj, H. Nishihara, M. Teshima, Y. Ohtsuka and T. Seki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7261–7265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Shawkey and G. E. Hill, J. Exp. Biol., 2006, 209, 1245–1250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Lu, H. Yin, X. Yu, X. Liu and J. Zi, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 72, 010902 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Jiang, H. G. Derami, D. Ghim, S. Cao, Y.-S. Jun and S. Singamaneni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18397–18402 RSC .
H. Gholami Derami, Q. Jiang, D. Ghim, S. Cao, Y. J. Chandar, J. J. Morrissey, Y.-S. Jun and S. Singamaneni, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 1092–1101 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, Y. Li, J. Zhao, Z. Wang, M. Gao, N. C. Gianneschi, A. Dhinojwala and M. D. Shawkey, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5516–5521 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kohri, Y. Nannichi, T. Taniguchi and K. Kishikawa, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 720–724 RSC .
T.-F. Wu and J.-D. Hong, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 660–666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, Y. Li, M. C. Allen, D. D. Deheyn, X. Yue, J. Zhao, N. C. Gianneschi, M. D. Shawkey and A. Dhinojwala, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5454–5460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, Z. Hu, Z. Wang, Y. Li, A. D. Tormo, N. L. Thomas, B. Wang, N. C. Gianneschi, M. D. Shawkey and A. Dhinojwala, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701151 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Caruso, R. A. Caruso and H. Möhwald, Science, 1998, 282, 1111–1114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xiong, K. Hu, A. M. Grant, R. Ma, W. Xu, C. Lu, X. Zhang and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1501–1509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Richardson, M. Björnmalm and F. Caruso, Science, 2015, 348, 411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ariga, Y. Yamauchi, G. Rydzek, Q. Ji, Y. Yonamine, K. C.-W. Wu and J. P. Hill, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 36–68 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, S. Markutsya and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 157–161 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kozlovskaya, S. A. Sousa, M. Libera and S. A. Sukhishvili, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 8590–8592 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Ochs, G. K. Such, B. Städler and F. Caruso, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 3389–3396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. P. Wang, Z. Q. Feng and C. Y. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4194–4199 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhai, A. J. Nolte, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 6113–6123 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Puzzo, L. D. Bonifacio, J. Oreopoulos, C. M. Yip, I. Manners and G. A. Ozin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3500–3506 RSC .
Z. Wu, D. Lee, M. F. Rubner and R. E. Cohen, Small, 2007, 3, 1445–1451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kurt, D. Banerjee, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8920–8927 RSC .
G. M. Nogueira, D. Banerjee, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7860–7867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vial, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-Juste and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 4606–4611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiang, S. Markutsy and V. V. Tsukruk, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 882–890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cho and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4547–4553 CrossRef CAS .
T. Franzl, T. A. Klar, S. Schietinger, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1599–1603 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Klar, T. Franzl, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 769–773 CrossRef CAS .
T. Franzl, D. S. Koktysh, T. A. Klar, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 84, 2904–2906 CrossRef .
E. Colusso, G. Perotto, Y. Wang, M. Sturaro, F. Omenetto and A. Martucci, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 3924–3931 RSC .
P. Tzeng, D. J. Hewson, P. Vukusic, S. J. Eichhorn and J. C. Grunlan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4260–4264 RSC .
R. Merindol, S. Diabang, O. Felix, T. Roland, C. Gauthier and G. Decher, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1127–1136 CrossRef CAS .
P. Podsiadlo, L. Sui, Y. Elkasabi, P. Burgardt, J. Lee, A. Miryala, W. Kusumaatmaja, M. R. Carman, M. Shtein, J. Kieffer, J. Lahann and N. A. Kotov, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7901–7906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Nakamura, K. Manabe, M. Tenjimbayashi, Y. Tokura, K.-H. Kyung and S. Shiratori, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22731–22738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, D. Ding, X. Yang, K. Hou, X. Miao, D. Wang, B. Kou, L. Huang and Z. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7783–7787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zheng, Y. Shen, M. Liu, W. Liu, S. Wu and C. Jin, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5583–5590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, B. Yeom, O. Arteaga, S. J. Yoo, S.-G. Lee, J.-G. Kim and N. A. Kotov, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 461–469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Querejeta-Fernández, G. Chauve, M. Methot, J. Bouchard and E. Kumacheva, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4788–4793 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Kelly, M. Giese, K. E. Shopsowitz, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1088–1096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, M. Retsch, C.-A. Fustin, A. del Campo and U. Jonas, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 6265–6311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Inan, M. Poyraz, F. Inci, M. A. Lifson, M. Baday, B. T. Cunningham and U. Demirci, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 366–388 RSC .
E. Kharlampieva, V. Kozlovskaya, R. Gunawidjaja, V. V. Shevchenko, R. Vaia, R. R. Naik, D. L. Kaplan and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 840–846 CrossRef CAS .
J. Olson, A. Manjavacas, L. Liu, W.-S. Chang, B. Foerster, N. S. King, M. W. Knight, P. Nordlander, N. J. Halas and S. Link, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 14348–14353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gu, L. Zhang, J. K. W. Yang, S. Ping Yeo and C.-W. Qiu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6409–6419 RSC .
Y.-K. R. Wu, A. E. Hollowell, C. Zhang and L. J. Guo, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1194 CrossRef PubMed .
P. K. Jain and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 487, 153–164 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Guay, A. Calà Lesina, G. Côté, M. Charron, D. Poitras, L. Ramunno, P. Berini and A. Weck, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Adv. Res., 2010, 1, 13–28 CrossRef .
N. Koay, I. B. Burgess, T. M. Kay, B. A. Nerger, M. Miles-Rossouw, T. Shirman, T. L. Vu, G. England, K. R. Phillips, S. Utech, N. Vogel, M. Kolle and J. Aizenberg, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 27750–27768 CrossRef PubMed .
F. G. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 641–643 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lin, H. Tao, J. Trevino, J. P. Mondia, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto and L. D. Negro, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6088–6093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Querejeta-Fernández, B. Kopera, K. S. Prado, A. Klinkova, M. Methot, G. Chauve, J. Bouchard, A. S. Helmy and E. Kumacheva, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10377–10385 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liu, M. G. Campbell, J. S. Evans and I. I. Smalyukh, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7178–7184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Silva, C. T. Dominguez, M. V. Santos, R. Barbosa-Silva, M. Cavicchioli, L. M. Christovan, L. S. A. Melo, A. S. L. Gomes, C. B. Araújo and S. J. L. Ribeiro, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 7181–7190 RSC .
H. Qi, K. E. Shopsowitz, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3728–3731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Somers, M. G. Bawendi and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 579–591 RSC .
X. Liu, X. Zhang, R. Wu, H. Shen, C. Zhou, X. Zhang, L.-J. Guo and L. S. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 324, 19–25 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, Y. Song, X. Zhao, J. Shao, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 355–381 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bera, L. Qian, T.-K. Tseng and P. H. Holloway, Materials, 2010, 3, 2260–2345 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lodahl, A. Floris van Driel, I. S. Nikolaev, A. Irman, K. Overgaag, D. Vanmaekelbergh and W. L. Vos, Nature, 2004, 430, 654–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, W. Li, W. Li, X. Wang, Z. Tang, S. X.-A. Zhang and Y. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705948 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Geng, A. Trajkovska, S. W. Culligan, J. J. Ou, H. M. P. Chen, D. Katsis and S. H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14032–14038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, R. C. da Costa, D.-M. Smilgies, A. J. Campbell and M. J. Fuchter, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2624–2628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726–6744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lizundia, T.-D. Nguyen, J. L. Vilas, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 979–987 RSC .
H. Zheng, B. Ju, X. Wang, W. Wang, M. Li, Z. Tang, S. X.-A. Zhang and Y. Xu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1801246 CrossRef .
R. Xiong, S. Yu, M. J. Smith, J. Zhou, M. Krecker, L. Zhang, D. Nepal, T. J. Bunning and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9074–9081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Shopsowitz, H. Qi, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Nature, 2010, 468, 422–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Shopsowitz, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10991–10995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Kelly, A. M. Shukaliak, C. C. Cheung, K. E. Shopsowitz, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8912–8916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Shopsowitz, A. Stahl, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6886–6890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-D. Nguyen, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 777–783 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Jun-Yan Suen, E. Prince, E. M. Larin, A. Klinkova, H. Thérien-Aubin, S. Zhu, B. Yang, A. S. Helmy, O. D. Lavrentovich and E. Kumacheva, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Yun and S. J. J. Kwok, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 1, 0008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Humar, S. J. J. Kwok, M. Choi, A. K. Yetisen, S. Cho and S.-H. Yun, Nanophotonics, 2016, 6, 414–434 Search PubMed .
T. Sakimoto, M. I. Rosenblatt and D. T. Azar, Lancet, 2006, 367, 1432–1447 CrossRef .
A. Bansal, F. Yang, T. Xi, Y. Zhang and J. S. Ho, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 1469–1474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bruegmann, T. van Bremen, C. C. Vogt, T. Send, B. K. Fleischmann and P. Sasse, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Kravitz, B. S. Freeze, P. R. Parker, K. Kay, M. T. Thwin, K. Deisseroth and A. C. Kreitzer, Nature, 2010, 466, 622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Rungta, B.-F. Osmanski, D. Boido, M. Tanter and S. Charpak, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, A. Z. Weitemier, X. Zeng, L. He, X. Wang, Y. Tao, A. J. Huang, Y. Hashimotodani, M. Kano and H. Iwasaki, Science, 2018, 359, 679–684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Teng, Y. Huang, J. Cappello and X. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 1608–1615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Parker, P. Domachuk, J. Amsden, J. Bressner, J. A. Lewis, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2411–2415 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qiao, Z. Qian, J. Li, H. Sun, Y. Han, X. Xia, J. Zhou, C. Wang, Y. Wang and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14665–14676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, Y. Jia, L. Dai, Y. Yang and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2689–2695 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, T. H. Han, Y.-I. Kim, J. S. Park, J. Choi, D. G. Churchill, S. O. Kim and H. Ihee, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 583–587 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gan, X. Wu, X. Zhu and J. Shen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2055–2059 CrossRef CAS .
L. Adler-Abramovich, D. Aronov, P. Beker, M. Yevnin, S. Stempler, L. Buzhansky, G. Rosenman and E. Gazit, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Jacques, Phys. Med. Biol., 2013, 58, R37 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Handelman, N. Lapshina, B. Apter and G. Rosenman, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705776 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xin, Y. Li, X. Liu and B. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3408–3413 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bezryadina, T. Hansson, R. Gautam, B. Wetzel, G. Siggins, A. Kalmbach, J. Lamstein, D. Gallardo, E. J. Carpenter and A. Ichimura, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 058101 CrossRef PubMed .
R. El-Ganainy, D. N. Christodoulides, Z. H. Musslimani, C. Rotschild and M. Segev, Opt. Lett., 2007, 32, 3185–3187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. T. Gongora and A. Fratalocchi, Opt. Lasers Eng., 2016, 76, 40–44 CrossRef .
N. Schuergers, T. Lenn, R. Kampmann, M. V. Meissner, T. Esteves, M. Temerinac-Ott, J. G. Korvink, A. R. Lowe, C. W. Mullineaux and A. Wilde, eLife, 2016, 5, e12620 CrossRef PubMed .
E. De Tommasi, A. C. De Luca, L. Lavanga, P. Dardano, M. De Stefano, L. De Stefano, C. Langella, I. Rendina, K. Dholakia and M. Mazilu, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 27214–27227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Miccio, P. Memmolo, F. Merola, P. A. Netti and P. Ferraro, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, J. Luan, S. Tadepalli, K.-K. Liu, J. J. Morrissey, E. D. Kharasch, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26493–26500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, E. Pritchard, X. Hu, T. Valentin, B. Panilaitis, F. G. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 11981–11986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lu, X. Wang, X. Hu, P. Cebe, F. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, Macromol. Biosci., 2010, 10, 359–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, A. Taflove and V. Backman, Opt. Express, 2004, 12, 1214–1220 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Heifetz, S.-C. Kong, A. V. Sahakian, A. Taflove and V. Backman, J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci., 2009, 6, 1979–1992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Lin, Z.-H. Huang and C.-Y. Liu, Opt. Lett., 2019, 44, 667–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Monks, B. Yan, N. Hawkins, F. Vollrath and Z. Wang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5842–5845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, W. Guo, L. Li, B. Luk’yanchuk, A. Khan, Z. Liu, Z. Chen and M. Hong, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 218 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, Nanoscience, 2016, 3, 193–210 CAS .
H. Tao, J. M. Kainerstorfer, S. M. Siebert, E. M. Pritchard, A. Sassaroli, B. J. Panilaitis, M. A. Brenckle, J. J. Amsden, J. Levitt and S. Fantini, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 19584–19589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Whitney, M. Kolle, P. Andrew, L. Chittka, U. Steiner and B. J. Glover, Science, 2009, 323, 130–133 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Wilts, K. Michielsen, H. De Raedt and D. G. Stavenga, Interface Focus, 2011, 2, 681–687 CrossRef .
P. Vukusic, J. R. Sambles and C. R. Lawrence, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2004, 271, S237–S239 Search PubMed .
J. Zi, X. Yu, Y. Li, X. Hu, C. Xu, X. Wang, X. Liu and R. Fu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 12576–12578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lee, J. Miyazaki, S. Yoshioka, H. Lee and S. Sugita, Ornithol. Sci., 2012, 11, 59–64 CrossRef .
S. Yoshioka, B. Matsuhana, S. Tanaka, Y. Inouye, N. Oshima and S. Kinoshita, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2010, 8, 56–66 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Torquato, T. M. Truskett and P. G. Debenedetti, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 2064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Diao, X. Y. Liu, G. W. Toh, L. Shi and J. Zi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5373–5380 CrossRef CAS .
B. Richter, D. Goldston, G. Crabtree, L. Glicksman, D. Goldstein, D. Greene, D. Kammen, M. Levine, M. Lubell and M. Savitz, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2008, 80, S1 CrossRef .
H. Coles and S. Morris, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 676 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, L. Lewis, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1808186,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201808186 .
Z. Sun, F. Lv, L. Cao, L. Liu, Y. Zhang and Z. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7944–7948 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Liu, D. Jiao and Z. F. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2015, 65, 13–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Pattanashetti, G. B. Heggannavar and M. Y. Kariduraganavar, Procedia Manuf., 2017, 12, 263–279 CrossRef .
T.-D. Nguyen, B. U. Peres, R. M. Carvalho and M. J. MacLachlan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2875–2881 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-D. He, Z.-L. Zhang, J. Xue, X.-H. Wang, F. Song, X.-L. Wang, L.-L. Zhu and Y.-Z. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5805–5811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Fernandes, P. L. Almeida, N. Monge, L. E. Aguirre, D. Reis, C. L. P. de Oliveira, A. M. F. Neto, P. Pieranski and M. H. Godinho, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603560 CrossRef .
S. Caveney, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 1971, 178, 205–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Santos, A. Tercjak, J. Gutierrez, H. S. Baruda, M. Napoli, M. Nalina and S. J. L. Ribeiro, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 168, 346–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, J. Li, J. Li, S. Ye, J. Wei and J. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9687–9696 RSC .
J. Y. Wang, Y. Cao, Y. Feng, F. Yin and J. P. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3865–3871 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xing, J. Li, J. Guo and J. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4424–4430 RSC .
L. Phan, W. G. Walkup, D. D. Ordinario, E. Karshalev, J.-M. Jocson, A. M. Burke and A. A. Gorodetsky, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5621–5625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu, L. Shang, Z. Chen, Y. Yu and Y. Zhao, Sci. Robot., 2018, 3, eaar8580 CrossRef .
P. Liu, T. Sheng, Z. Xie, J. Chen and Z. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29378–29384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shafiee, E. A. Lidstone, M. Jahangir, F. Inci, E. Hanhauser, T. J. Henrich, D. R. Kuritzkes, B. T. Cunningham and U. Demirci, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4116 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-N. Liu, Q. Huang, K.-K. Liu, S. Singamaneni and B. T. Cunningham, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7569–7577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chakravarty, B. Gogoi, B. B. Mandal, N. Bhardwaj and N. S. Sarma, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 112, 18–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Z. Shao, X. Chen and P. Zhou, Biomacromolecules, 2004, 5, 773–779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chi, B. Gao, M. Sun, F. Zhang, E. Su, H. Liu and Z. Gu, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 7727–7733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chi, C. Shao, X. Du, H. Liu and Z. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39144–39150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. L. Chen, G. von Freymann, S. Yeun Choi, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 369–373 RSC .
Y. Xu, X. Zhang, C. Luan, H. Wang, B. Chen and Y. Zhao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 87, 264–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu, L. Shang, F. Zheng, Z. Chen, H. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13840–13848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, X. Zhao and Z. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2970–2988 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, Y. Cai, L. Shang, H. Wang, Y. Cheng, F. Rong, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3841–3847 RSC .
L. Shang, F. Fu, Y. Cheng, H. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao and Z. Gu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15533–15539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, T. Sheng, Z. Xie, J. Chen and Z. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29378–29384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ko, S. Singamaneni and V. V. Tsukruk, Small, 2008, 4, 1576–1599 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lee, L. Tian and S. Singamaneni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3429–3435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lee, M. E. Hankus, L. Tian, P. M. Pellegrino and S. Singamaneni, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 8953–8958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kneipp, H. Kneipp, V. B. Kartha, R. Manoharan, G. Deinum, I. Itzkan, R. R. Dasari and M. S. Feld, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 1998, 57, R6281–R6284 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Johnson, N. Zhukovsky, A. E. G. Cass and J. M. Nagy, Proteomics, 2008, 8, 715–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. P. Kumar, R. Selvi, A. H. Kishore, T. K. Kundu and C. Narayana, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 6703–6707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bailo and V. Deckert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1658–1661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. de Oliveira, I. D. de, A. O. Santos, S. B. Cartaxo, R. A. Bitar, M. M. Simões e Silva Enokihara, H. da Silva Martinho, A. A. Martin and L. M. Ferreira, Acta Cir. Bras., 2010, 25, 434–439 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wu, W. Wang, W. Zhang, H. Su, Q. Liu, J. Gu, T. Deng and D. Zhang, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, e462 CrossRef CAS .
G. Song, H. Zhou, J. Gu, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, H. Su, Y. Su, Q. Yao and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 1594–1600 RSC .
D. Yan, L. Qiu, M. Xue, Z. Meng and Y. Wang, Mater. Des., 2019, 165, 107601 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, M. Xue, Q. He, W. Lu, Z. Meng, D. Yan, L. Qiu, L. Zhou and Y. Yu, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2016, 408, 8317–8323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC .
S. Caffarri, K. Broess, R. Croce and H. van Amerongen, Biophys. J., 2011, 100, 2094–2103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jin Son, J. Hong Kim, K. Kim and C. Beum Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11179–11202 RSC .
R. E. Blankenship, Plant Physiol., 2010, 154, 434–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. Ai and L. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5057–5115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, S. M. Dellatore, W. M. Miller and P. B. Messersmith, Science, 2007, 318, 426–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, M. Lee and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 6482–6486 CrossRef .
J. Yang, G.-Q. Qi, L.-S. Tang, R.-Y. Bao, L. Bai, Z.-Y. Liu, W. Yang, B.-H. Xie and M.-B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9625–9634 RSC .
A. Xie, K. Zhang, F. Wu, N. Wang, Y. Wang and M. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 1764–1771 RSC .
M. Lee, J. U. Kim, J. S. Lee, B. I. Lee, J. Shin and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4463–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, J. U. Kim, K. J. Lee, S. Ahn, Y.-B. Shin, J. Shin and C. B. Park, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6206–6213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shang and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16133 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, L. Tian, K.-K. Liu, S. Tadepalli, R. Raliya, P. Biswas, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9400–9407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, J. Luan, K.-K. Liu, Q. Jiang, S. Tadepalli, M. K. Gupta, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 609–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, F. Chen, X. Zhu, J. Dai, Y. Li, Z. Yang, X. Yan, J. Song, Y. Wang, E. Hitz, W. Luo, M. Lu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701028 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, H. G. Derami, D. Ghim, S. Cao, Y. Jun and S. Singamaneni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18397–18402 RSC .
N. Mittal, R. Jansson, M. Widhe, T. Benselfelt, K. M. O. Håkansson, F. Lundell, M. Hedhammar and L. D. Söderberg, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5148–5159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jin, D. Lee, H.-G. Im, Y. C. Han, E. G. Jeong, M. Rolandi, K. C. Choi and B.-S. Bae, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5169–5175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, J. Viventi, J. J. Amsden, J. Xiao, L. Vigeland, Y.-S. Kim, J. A. Blanco, B. Panilaitis, E. S. Frechette, D. Contreras, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, K.-C. Hwang, M. R. Zakin, B. Litt and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 511–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Z. Xiao, D. Liu, Y. Li, N. J. Weadock, Z. Fang, J. Huang and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2105–2111 RSC .
Q. Wang, J. Sun, Q. Yao, C. Ji, J. Liu and Q. Zhu, Cellulose, 2018, 25, 4275–4301 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kuzmenko, E. Karabulut, E. Pernevik, P. Enoksson and P. Gatenholm, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 189, 22–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, T. Cheng, C. Duan, W. Zhao, W. Zhang, X. Zou, J. Aspler and Y. Ni, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 203, 71–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.lexus.eu/discover-lexus/lexus-news/lc-structural-blue
        .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Rui Xiong
	Dr Rui Xiong is currently a Humboldt Research Fellow at the University of Konstanz, Germany. He received his BS degree (2011) and PhD degree (2016) from the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at Sichuan University. He carried out his post-doctoral research (2017–2019) at Georgia Institute of Technology. His research focuses on bioinspired interfacial assembly of natural biopolymers for high-performance structural and functional materials.

Jingyi Luan
	Jingyi Luan received her bachelor's degree from Xi'an Jiaotong University. Currently, she is a PhD candidate in the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science at Washington University in St. Louis. Her research interests include novel materials and transduction platforms for ultra-sensitive biodetection and biosensors for point-of-care and resource-limited settings.

Saewon Kang
	Dr Saewon Kang received his BS degree and MS degree from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Pusan National University (2011) and PhD degree (2018) from the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology. He is currently working as a postdoctoral fellow at Georgia Institute of Technology. His research interests include the development of biopolymer-based flexible photonic sensors and laser devices.

Chunhong Ye
	Dr Chunhong Ye is currently an Assistant Professor at the School of Physical Science and Technology, Shanghai Tech University. She received her PhD from Nangjing Forestry University (2013). She carried out her post-doctoral research at Georgia Institute of Technology (2012–2015) and Leibniz Institute of Polymer Dresden as a Humboldt Research Fellow (2015–2018). Her research interests include interfacial assembly of bio/synthetic polymers, nanoparticles and 2D materials for biomimetic 3D stimulated micro-actuators, bioinspired chiral optical nanocomposites.

Srikanth Singamaneni
	Dr Srikanth Singamaneni is a Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science at Washington University in St. Louis. He obtained his PhD in Polymer Materials Science and Engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology in 2009. His research group interests include the design, synthesis and self-assembly of plasmonic nanostructures for various biomedical and energy applications.

Vladimir V. Tsukruk
	Vladimir Tsukruk is a Regents Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology. He received his MS degree in physics from the National University of Ukraine, PhD and DSc degrees in polymer science from the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine and carried out his post-doctoral research at the U. Marburg, Darmstadt TU and U. Akron. He serves on the Editorial Advisory Boards of five journals and as an Executive Editor at ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces. He has co-authored about 500 refereed articles and five books and has organized ten professional symposia. His research in the field of nanomaterials morphology, surfaces and interfaces, assembly of synthetic/natural polymers, and bioinspired materials has been recognized by the Fulbright Award, Humboldt Research Award, and NSF Special Creativity Award, among others. He is an elected Fellow of the American Physical Society, Materials Research Society, and American Chemical Society.

 	Fig. 1  Publications in naturally derived polymers for photonics, 2000–2019. (Web of Science, 2019.)	 

 	Fig. 2  Overview of naturally derived photonic materials, including biopolymer selection, photonic structures, construction strategies, and emerging applications. (a) Silk optical elements.14 Reprinted from ref. 14 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2008. (b) Cellulose photonic sensors.15 Reprinted from ref. 15 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (c) Responsive cellulose nanocrystal photonics18 Reprinted from ref. 18 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (d) Transparent wood for light harvesting.17 Reprinted from ref. 17 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016.	 
2nbdcosθb = mλ	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Configuration of common thin-film interference (a) and multilayer interference (b).27 Reprinted from ref. 27 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2005. (c) Photos of Japanese jewel beetle, Chrysochroa fulgidissima. Microscopy (d) and TEM (e) images of the cuticular surface of the beetles at different locations.29 Reprinted from ref. 29 with permission from IOP Publishing, copyright 2013.	 
2(nadacosθa + nbdbcosθb) = mλ	(2)
2nadacosθa = (m − 1/2)λ	(3)

 	Fig. 4  (a) General organization of 1D, 2D and 3D photonic crystals.38 Reprinted from ref. 38 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2014. (b) 1D photonic crystal structure of iridescent scales of butterfly (M. rhetenor).42 Reprinted from ref. 42 with permission from CC-BY license. (c) 2D photonic crystal structure of the wings of a black cicada (Cryptotympana atrata Fabricius).43 Reprinted from ref. 43 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–c) Photonic structure of natural opals: (a) and (b) SEM image and (c) scheme of the opal structure.48 Reprinted from ref. 48 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2009. (d–g) 3D photonic crystal structure in beetle scales: (d) photograph of L. augustus. (e) Optical micrograph and SEM image of individual scales, (f) 3D reconstruction image; (g) SEM image of the photonic structure.54 Reprinted from ref. 54 with permission from the American Physical Society, copyright 2008.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Chiral nanostructure.58 (b and c) Chiral nematic nanostructure of the beetle C. gloriosa that is responsible for the circularly polarized iridescence.58 Reprinted from ref. 58 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2009.	 

 	Fig. 7  The photo of a brilliant white beetle Cyphochilus (a) and the beetle scales (b). (c) SEM of the sample pillar on a pin holder obtained from a beetle scale by focused ion-beam milling. (d–f) 3D reconstruction image of the photonic random networks by the X-ray tomography technique.72 Reprinted from ref. 72 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018.	 

Cellulose	Chiral nematic structures, gratings	Fruits, flowers	Chiral photonic crystals, diffraction gratings
Chitin	Chiral nematic structures, multilayered structure, disordered networks	Insect cuticles/wings, mollusk shells	Chiral photonic crystals, multilayer interference, light scattering, diffraction gratings
Keratin	Multilayered structure, photonic crystals	Avian feathers	Multilayer interference
Collagen	Photonic crystals	Avian skin	Multilayer interference
Melanin	Multilayered structure	Avian feathers/skin	Pigments, multilayer interference

 	Fig. 8  Nanocellulose materials prepared from wood pulp through different methods and the hierarchical structure of wood cell wall (a); (b, f and j) CNFs prepared by high-intensity ultrasonication; (c, g and k) CNCs prepared by HCl hydrolysis; (d, h and l) CNFs prepared by TEMPO pretreatment and ultrasonication; (e, i and m) CNCs prepared by H2SO4 hydrolysis.82 Reprinted from ref. 82 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2014.	 

Nanocellulose	Cellulose nanofibers (CNFs)	Wood, bamboo, hemp, flax	Mechanical treatments with/without chemical or enzymatic pretreatments	Cellulose I
Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs)	Wood, cotton, hemp, flax, wheat straw, tunicate, bacterial cellulose, microcrystalline cellulose	Acid hydrolysis	Cellulose I
Bacterial cellulose (BC)	Sugars and alcohols	Bacterial biosynthesis	Cellulose I


Regenerated cellulose	—	Cotton, wood, bamboo, microcrystalline cellulose	Dissolution-regeneration	Cellulose II

 	Fig. 9  (a) The schematic illustration of natural chitin nanofibers in lobsters.119 Reprinted from ref. 119 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2005. (b) Chitin nanofibers prepared from squid pen by mechanical treatment under acidic conditions.126 Reprinted from ref. 126 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2008. (c) Chitin nanocrystals prepared by TEMPO-mediated oxidation of α-chitin.127 Reprinted from ref. 127 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2008.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The silkworm cocoon structure.139 Reprinted from ref. 139 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. (b) The extraction of silk fibroin from silkworm cocoon.141 Reprinted from ref. 141 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The e-beam lithography on silk fibroin film. Dark-field and SEM images of patterned silk films produced on positive (b) and negative (c) resists. (d) Schematic illustration, SEM and AFM images of 3D silk nanostructures.174 Reprinted from ref. 174 with permission from Nature Springer, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Fabrication of freely standing silk inverse opals.186 Scale bars, 500 nm. Reprinted from ref. 186 with permission from Nature Springer, copyright 2012. (b) Patterned silk inverse opal fabrication by exposing to water vapor (top image) and UV light (bottom image) for different times.195 Reprinted from ref. 195 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Nanoimprinting with hot embossing and room-temperature embossing (left), and AFM image of a diffraction grating patterned by room-temperature imprinting (right).203 Reprinted from ref. 203 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2010. (b) Photograph of photonic crystals on a hydroxypropyl cellulose film produced by a combination of roll-to-roll and nanoimprinting.204 Reprinted from ref. 204 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Self-assembly of rod-like biopolymers into chiral nematic nanostructures in concentrated dispersions.212 Reprinted from ref. 212 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. Polarized optical microscopy images of the chiral nematic liquid crystal phase of fb virus208 (b). Reprinted from ref. 208 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2000. Cellulose nanocrystals210 (c). Reprinted from ref. 210 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. Chitin nanocrystals211 (d). Reprinted from ref. 211 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. Amyloid fibrils (e).212 Reprinted from ref. 212 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. Insets: The morphology of the films from corresponding rod-like biopolymers.	 

 	Fig. 15  The evolution of discrete LC tactoids and continuous chiral nematic phases in the droplets of aqueous CNC dispersions on hydrophobic (a and b) and (c and d) hydrophilic substrates. (a and c) and (b and d) are the polarized optical images of CNC droplets with standing time of 1, 3, 6, and 24 h. Scale bars are 500 μm.227 Reprinted from ref. 227 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) The co-assembly of CNC/PEG chiral films. (b) UV-vis spectra of CNC/PEG photonic films with different PEG loadings. (c–e) Morphology of CNC/PEG photonic films with different PEG loadings: photograph (c), SEM images of film cross-sections (d), and POM images (e). Scale bars in (d and e) are 2 μm and 200 μm, respectively.239 Reprinted from ref. 238 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 17  Birefringent structural colors of biopolymer alignment. (a) Birefringence of silk nanofibrillar alignment generated within periodic topography (triangular, hexagonal and tri-hexagonal), scale bars: 100 μm.247 Reprinted from ref. 247 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (b) Iridescent birefringence patterns of deformed cellulose hydrogels under polarized light. Scar bar: 1 cm.249 Reprinted from ref. 249 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) Homogeneous birefringence of CNCs fixed in in situ polymerized hydrogels.244 Reprinted from ref. 244 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. (d) Birefringent patterns with CNC alignments produced by 3D printing.251 Reprinted from ref. 251 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) The size effect of cellulose fibers on the optical transparency of cellulose films.254 Reprinted from ref. 254 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (b) Light transmittance of the cellulose nanopaper before and after polishing.255 Reprinted from ref. 257 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2009. (c) Photographs of the compact CNF films (left) and, porous membranes of CNFs dried from octane (right) when using (c) the finest, (d) the medium, and (e) the coarsest fibrils.256 Reprinted from ref. 258 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Clear cellulose films by filling cellulose paper with cellulose nanofibers.259 Reprinted from ref. 259 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (b) Transparent cellulose paper by partially dissolving/regeneration.260 Reprinted from ref. 260 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. (c) Transparent cellulose–polymer paper by filling conventional paper with refractive-index matching polymers.261 Reprinted from ref. 261 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (d) Transparent wood by filling delignified wood with refractive-index-matching polymers.264 Reprinted from ref. 264 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Iridescent opal-like films self-assembled from monodispersed PDA spheres with different concentrations.274 Scale bars: 500 nm. Reprinted from ref. 274 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (b) Iridescent microbeads from binary PDA-silica core–shell spheres with different core–shell ratios.275 Reprinted from ref. 275 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 21  Photographs of the (a) C. rajah beetle and (b) LbL-assembled CNC Bragg stacks with different stacks. (c) Layered structure of beetle and CNC stacks. Color plots showing reflection as a function of wavelength and incidence angle for the (d) stack film and (e) C. rajah beetle.296 Reprinted from ref. 296 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 22  SEM images of plasmonic nanoparticles (a), bow tie (b), nanoholes (c), spiral arrays (d) deposited onto doped silk fibroin films by transfer printing method.315 Reprinted from ref. 315 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2008. (e) The schematic illustration of cholesteric CNC doped with Au NRs and the CD spectra (f).303 Reprinted from ref. 303 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Microscopy image of nanostructured silk films doped with QDs (upper) and fluorescent proteins.174 Reprinted from ref. 174 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (b) Photograph of a transparent, iridescent, and fluorescent CNC composite film. (c) Photograph of an A-shaped CNC composite film through left-handed (upper) and right handed (bottom) polarizing filters.326 Reprinted from ref. 326 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (d) Photographs of freestanding flexible chiral luminescent CQD/CNC films under natural light and UV light. (e) The helicoidal arrangement of CQDs in the chiral CNC matrix. (f) Chiral fluorescent patterns enabled by ink-jet printing localized pH-initiation.332 Reprinted from ref. 329 with permission from ACS, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Microfluidic systems to generate droplets containing the chiral nematic CNC phase.229 Reprinted from ref. 229 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (b) POM images of the cholesteric CNC droplets with different radii. (c) Bright field (left panel) and POM (right panel) images of cholesteric droplets doped with 10 nm (upper) and 50 nm (bottom) AuNPs. (d) Extinction spectra of aqueous gold NP dispersion (dashed lines) and Ch-CNC droplets (solid lines) loaded with 10 nm (red lines) and 50 nm (blue lines) gold NPs. (e) Fluorescence image of the cholesteric droplet doped with carbon dots and (f) photoluminescence spectra of core (red) and shell (black) of droplets doped with carbon dots and (black) pristine carbon dot solution.338 Reprinted from ref. 338 with permission from licensed under CC BY 4.0., copyright 2016. (g) The illustration of phase transition from random orientation to the nematic phase for AuNRs in a dilute CNC dispersion. (h) The polarization dependent extinction spectra of nematic CNC-AuNR composites.318 Reprinted from ref. 318 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Images of optical waveguides made by recombinant spider silk (bottom) and regenerative silkworm silk (top) taken with camera, optical microscopy, and SEM and their laser propagation properties.349 Reprinted from ref. 349 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (b) SEM image of self-assembled elongated tri-phenylalanine (FFF) tapes. FFF tapes in such a distribution have random orientation and inhomogeneous thickness, length, and width, and are thus inappropriate for integrated photonic devices. (c) SEM image of FFF planar wafers of dimensions 15 μm × 34 μm × 1.4 μm. (d) Passive optical waveguiding in 2D FFF wafers. (e) Active optical waveguiding in 2D FFF wafers.355 Reprinted from ref. 350 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (f) Optical microscopy images of formed E. coli bio-waveguides with various lengths and formed bio-waveguides with 644 nm red-light transmitted. White slanted arrows indicate the output spots of the red light.356 Reprinted from ref. 351 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (g) Nonlinear self-trapping of light through cyanobacteria in seawater.357 Reprinted from ref. 352 with permission from the American Physical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Microphotograph of a bare spider silk fiber. (b) Schematic showing the process of decorating the spider silk fiber using adhesive UV cure. (c) Microphotograph of spindle knot decorated spider silk. (d) Simulation of normalized power flow patterns for the spindle knots at diameters of (a) d = 3 μm, (b) d = 6 μm, and (c) d = 10 μm. Experimental images showing the focused light from the spindle knots at (d) d = 3 μm, (e) d = 6 μm, and (f) d = 10 μm.369 Reprinted from ref. 369 with permission from the Optical Society, copyright 2019. (e) Schematic showing reflection mode silk biosuperlens imaging. The spider silk was placed directly on top of the sample surface by using a soft tape. The gaps between silk and the sample were filled with IPA which improves the imaging contrast. The silk lens collects the underlying near-field object information and projects a magnified virtual image into a conventional objective lens (100×, NA:0.9). (f and g) The integrated surface pattern is magnified by the spider silk. The 100 nm channels (f; SEM image) are resolved by the spider silk superlens (g; optical nanoscopy image).369 Reprinted from ref. 366 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic illustration of the chiral HPC touch sensor based on the change in the pitch length. (b) A handprint recorded on the HPC sensor.233 Reprinted from ref. 233 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. (c) Schematic illustration of the stretchable CNC sensor mechanism. (d) Photographs of the CNC stretching sensor as viewed under crossed polarizers.16 Reprinted from ref. 16 with permission from license under CC BY 4.0, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) The gap filled with the anisotropic layer sandwiched between the two CNC left cholesteric domains (Ch′1 and Ch′2). (b) POM images of the sandwiched film with a left-handed polarizer, right-handed polarizer, and crossed polarizer, scale bar: 50 μm. Spectra from LCP and RCP channels (c) and simulated reflectance spectra using Berreman's method (d). (e) Schematic illustration of the sandwiched structure.389 Reprinted from ref. 389 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (f and g) Photograph of the jewel beetle Chrysina resplendens and the hyper-reflective CNC-based nanocomposite film with a sandwich structure (scale bars, 20 mm). (h) Vapor-based actuation in the sandwich structures. (i) The deformation processes of the sandwich structured film.392 Reprinted from ref. 392 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Photoluminescence of B. mori silk fibroin aqueous solution in the presence of vitamin B12 (λexc is 290 nm). (b) Overlap between the fluorescence emission of silk fibroin and the absorbance of vitamin B12 indicating efficient FRET between the donor and the acceptor.400 Reprinted from ref. 400 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (c) Photonic nitrocellulose enhanced fluorescence of enzyme linked immunosorbent assay. (d) Photonic nitrocellulose showing tunable colors and reflectance spectra.402 Reprinted from ref. 402 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (e) Schematic showing the digital nucleic acid assay. (f) Fluorescence micrographs of the substrate after completion of the digital nucleic acid assays in the microdroplet arrays with (top row) and without (bottom row) photonic nitrocellulose.403 Reprinted from ref. 403 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of CEA detection on Au butterfly wings based on the photonic SERS structure.420 Reprinted from ref. 420 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (b) Ag-nanoparticle modified photonic flexible cellulose films for SERS detection.421 Reprinted from ref. 421 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 31  Light harvesting enabled by natural materials. (a) PDA encapsulated Al nanoarrays for plasmonic-enhanced light harvesting.434 Reprinted from ref. 434 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (b) Biodegradable interfacial evaporator based on PDA and BNC. Photograph of a large area bilayer PDA/BNC hydrogel. SEM images of surface and cross-section of a PDA/BNC foam. Optical image of steam generation.440 Reprinted from ref. 440 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 32  The general benefits of biopolymers for organized photonic structures.	 

 	Fig. 33  Lexus® car with a dazzling “structural blue” color (with permission from Toyota Motor North America).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
