Syntheses and electronic structure engineering of transition metal nitrides for supercapacitor applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA02584A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA02584A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 14655-14673Syntheses and electronic structure engineering of transition metal nitrides for supercapacitor applications

        
          
            Shivraj 
            Mahadik†
a, 
      
        
          
            Subramani 
            Surendran†
b, 
      
        
          
            Joon Young 
            Kim†
bc, 
      
        
          
            Gnanaprakasam 
            Janani
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Dong-Kyu 
            Lee
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Tae-Hoon 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jung Kyu 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Uk 
            Sim
          
          
        
      *bc
aDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, Republic of Korea. E-mail: thk@jnu.ac.kr
bHydrogen Energy Technology Laboratory, Korea Institute of Energy Technology (KENTECH), Naju, Jeonnam 58330, Republic of Korea. E-mail: usim@kentech.ac.kr
cResearch Institute, NEEL Sciences, INC., Naju, Republic of Korea
dSchool of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea. E-mail: legkim@skku.edu
Received 
      31st March 2022
    , Accepted 1st June 2022First published on 6th June 2022AbstractSupercapacitors are among the most promising energy storage devices; they exhibit a larger power density than batteries but a poor energy density. To meet the ever-increasing demands for energy, it is crucial to develop novel materials that improve the energy storage efficiency. Recent studies have focused on the use of different electrode materials in supercapacitors. Transition metal nitrides offer enormous potential in terms of energy storage because of their layered structure and high electrical conductivity, which promote promising properties in terms of stability, energy and power density, and lifetime. This review elaborates on the recent advances in transition metal nitrides. The different synthesis methods and different transition metal nitrides have been discussed and the electronic structure engineering strategies such as heteroatom-doped metal nitride, heterostructure metal nitride, and multi-metal nitride, have been focused on, which help improve the electrochemical performance of supercapacitors. Finally, the challenges, future direction, and perspectives of transition metal nitride for future direction have been discussed.Shivraj MahadikMr Shivraj Mahadik is a doctoral student at Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea. He received a bachelor's degree in physics from Shivaji University, Kolhapur. Subsequently, he earned his master's degree from Sanjay Ghodawat University, Kolhapur in 2019. His research focuses on advanced materials for energy storage and conversion.Subramani SurendranDr Subramani Surendran is a postdoctoral researcher at the Hydrogen Energy Technology Laboratory, Korea Institute of Energy Technology (KENTECH), Republic of Korea. He received his PhD degree in flexible hybrid supercapacitors and water electrolyzers from Bharathiar University, India. He completed a research internship at DGIST, Republic of Korea. Since then, he has been a postdoctoral scholar at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Chonnam National University upto February 2022. His research focuses on the experimental and theoretical interplay of electrochemistry for developing new electrode materials that are multifunctional toward various energy storage and conversion devices.Joon Young KimDr Joon Young Kim received his PhD in applied chemistry with Nam Ho Heo at the Kyungpook National University (KNU) in 2019. He is currently a postdoctoral associate at the Hydrogen Energy Technology Laboratory, Korea Institute of Energy Technology (KENTECH), Republic of Korea. He is attempting to find and develop new zeolitic quantum dots for energy production, conversion, and storage.Tae-Hoon KimProf. Tae-Hoon Kim is an assistant professor at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea. He received his bachelor's, M.S., and PhD degrees from Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU) in 2010, 2012, and 2016, respectively. In 2012–2015, he was granted the Global PhD Fellowship by NRF Korea. He worked at Ames Laboratory in USA as a postdoctoral research associate for 4 years (2017–2021). He joined Chonnam National University in 2021. His research interests include multiscale materials characterization with electron microscopy, as well as microstructure and related physical properties in various materials such as semiconductor, metals, magnets, and nanomaterials.Jung Kyu KimProf. Jung Kyu Kim is a tenure-track assistant professor at School of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Republic of Korea. He received his bachelor's, M.S., and PhD degrees from SKKU in 2010, 2012, and 2015, respectively. In 2012–2015, he was granted the Global PhD Fellowship by NRF Korea. In 2015–2018, he was a postdoctoral visiting research scholar at Stanford University, USA. Since 2018, his research group has focused on diverse energy conversions with tailored nanostructures including solar-to-electric, solar-to-electrochemical, and electric-to-chemical energy conversions.Uk SimProf. Uk Sim is an associate professor at the Hydrogen Energy Technology Laboratory, Korea Institute of Energy Technology (KENTECH), Republic of Korea. He received his B.S., (2007), M.S., (2009), and PhD degree (2016) from Seoul National University. Since then, he has been a postdoctoral scholar at Stanford University until 2017. He was an associate professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Chonnam National University. He serves as the founder and CEO of Neel Sciences INC., a research institute. His research focuses mainly on developing nanomaterials for energy production, conversion, storage, and renewable energy produced by photo- or electrochemical reactions to create a future sustainable energy system.
Introduction
With rapid development, the world requires portable and wearable electronic devices, such as mobile phones, healthcare, and implantable medical devices.1,2 The increased consumption of power demands an energy storage device with high performance, such as supercapacitors, fuel cells, and batteries, are electrochemical energy storage systems that are promising candidates for future energy storage devices.3,4 The supercapacitor has also been named an ultracapacitor or electrochemical capacitor with a unique charge storage mechanism that has fast charge–discharge capabilities and long-term stability. In the energy storage system, the supercapacitors has a higher power density than a battery or fuel cell, high charge–discharge rate, and long cycling life than other energy storage systems.5 There are two charge storage mechanisms in the supercapacitor, one of which is that the electric double layer supercapacitor (EDLC) that stores charge at the surface of the electrode or electrolyte electrostatically.6–8 The Helmholtz model can be used to explain the actual process in a double layer supercapacitor using the following equation C = εA/d(1)where C represents the double layer capacitance, ε is the permittivity, A is the specific surface area, and d is the distance between the electrode and the electrolyte ions. The second is the pseudocapacitive charge store mechanism, wherein pseudocapacitive charge is stored by a fast and reversible electrochemical reaction at the surface of the electrode. Pseudocapacitive materials store charge in two ways: (i) store the charge by the surface redox reaction and (ii) store the charge by the intercalation of the electrolyte ion into the electrode.9,10
In supercapacitors, various materials have been explored, such as carbonaceous materials, metal oxide, and polymers as electrode materials.11,12 In recent years, carbon-based materials have garnered more attention because their electrical conductivity and high surface area help in obtaining large power density. However, still, they are limited to practical applications due to their low energy density.13 On the other hand, transition metal oxides and conducting polymers have improved the energy density but could not provide long-term cycling stability.14–16 It is necessary to explore another way to enhance the energy density without losing the power density. According to the equation E = 0.5CV2 (E, C, and V are the energy density, capacitance, and voltage window, respectively), it suggests two ways to improve the energy density: first, by improving the capacitance, and second, by improving the operational voltage window. In this equation, a two times increase in the voltage window results in a four times increase in the energy density. Nowadays, research is more active in transition metal nitrides in supercapacitors due to their chemical and physical properties that have attracted considerable interest (Fig. 1).17 In transition metal nitrides, nitrogen atoms are incorporated into the interstitial sites of the metals. Due to the small atomic radius of nitrogen, the metal atoms always remain closely-packed or near close-packed in the lattices, resulting in enhanced electronic conductivity.18
 Fig. 1  Development of different materials for supercapacitors. 
The attractive properties of TMNs with excellent electrical conductivity, catalytic activity, and chemical properties play a unique role in the energy storage field. The properties of TMNs are dominated by covalent, ionic, and metallic bonds; mainly, bonds between transition metals and nitrogen atoms expand the lattice of the parent metal and shrink the metallic d-band.17 A low d-band and a high density-of-states (DOS) near the Fermi level furnish noble metals similar to the behavior of TMNs, which makes TMNs promising candidate materials for energy storage.19,20 In addition, their chemical inertness make TMNs suitable for electrolytes in a wide pH range. Besides, due to the presence of nitrogen atoms, TMNs have high corrosion resistance. The attractive properties of TMNs with excellent electrical conductivity, catalytic activity, and chemical properties play a unique role in the energy storage field. Thus, nanostructured TMNs with considerable dispersion are immensely important to expand the specific surface area and enrich the active sites for electrochemical performance; the advantages and disadvantages of TMNs are shown in Fig. 2. Transition metal nitrides have been used in various applications, including catalysis-based applications.21 Recently, different transition metal nitrides are made up of IVB–IB metals, e.g., vanadium nitride (VN), titanium nitride (TiN), niobium nitride (NbN), chromium nitride (CrN), molybdenum nitride (MoN), cobalt nitride (CoN), and nickel nitride (NiN),22–28 which have been successfully developed. Transition metal nitrides are of great interest due to their electronic structure, electrical conductivity, chemical stability, and layered structure.29 On that basis, many transition metal nitrides, including monometallic nitride and bimetallic nitride, have been reported, which are developed by different synthetic techniques, such as topochemical synthesis and etching techniques. Very few review articles are available on transition metal nitride-based electrodes in supercapacitor applications. This review summarizes the recent development in transition metal nitride-based supercapacitors. The following section introduces a well-developed synthesis strategy of transition metal nitride. We discussed the electrochemical parameters of different transition metal nitrides (VN, TiN, MoN, CrN, NiN, CoN, and other nitrides) and discussed electronic structure engineering, such as heteroatom-doped TMNs, heterostructure-based TMNs, and multimetal-based TMNs. Toward the end of this review, we discuss the current challenges and future outlook of TMN.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the advantages and disadvantages of TMNs. 
Synthesis strategies of transition metal nitrides
There are generally two ways to synthesize transition metal nitrides. Etching is one of them, and the other one is ammonolysis at high temperature, which reduces the precursor to metal nitride. Here, we have mainly summarized and discussed the synthesis techniques, such as the top-down and the bottom-up approaches, in detail below.

Top-down approach. 
The top-down approach involves the production of nanoparticles of different materials using bulk counterparts. The approach involves techniques such as ball milling, laser ablation, exfoliation, and etching.30–33 Ball milling is an efficient method in the top-down synthesis technique to synthesize nanocomposites from bulk materials. They are widely used as an efficient strategy to synthesize ceramics and alloys-based materials, which are directly applied for applications including dye removal, synthetic alloys with high wear resistance, and applications involving highly durable materials. Moreover, any fine morphology or facile synthesis method cannot be observed from the top-down procedure. Exfoliation involves the electrochemical methods to separate the closely packed layers of the bulk material. Graphene-based materials, 2D-Sb and Bi-based materials, In2Se3, transition metal dichalcogenides, and many other materials with exfoliation methods have provided high surface areas for wide applications. They are extensively used as photocatalytic/electrocatalytic materials, which show higher light absorption efficiency and energy storage applications. Besides, chemical etching processes are used to synthesize 2D materials such as Mxenes, using different etchants such as HF, HCl + LiF, and HCl + (Na, K, or, NH4F)34–36 For top-down synthesis methods, common etchants include aqueous fluoride-containing acids or salts, which can be divided into two types—aqueous hydrofluoric acid (HF) and an in situ HF-forming etchants, such as metal fluoride (e.g., LiF) mixed with an acid (e.g., HCl).37 In general, etching methods require prolonged time intervals for the complete etching of the bulk material to form nanomaterials. However, the chemical etching method is mostly reported for the synthesis of TMNs due to the strong bonds between the M and A layers; unlike graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), mechanical exfoliation cannot be performed on TMNs (Mn+1AXn).38 TMNs are often produced by the selective etching of certain atomic layers from the multilayer MAX phase. Its composition varies from an ‘n’ of 2 to 4 and an M layer of 2 to 4, as indicated by the formula Mn+1AXn. The chemical etching process using molten fluoride salt (HF and HCl) is the in situ intercalation of Li ions in the TMNs, resulting in increased interlayer spacing. The increasing interlayer spacing provides faster ion intercalation kinetics and more redox sites, which is beneficial for wide use as electrodes for supercapacitors, Li-ion batteries, and electrocatalysts.39 The etching processes determine the properties of TMNs, such as their crystallinity, flake quality, atomic defects, and functionalization of their surface. Considering the hazardous nature of hydrofluoric acid, a mild etchant mixed solution made of lithium fluoride and hydrochloric acid was used to replace HF. For instance, Gogotsi et al.40 reported the first time synthesis of metal nitrides without an HF-based etchant; in this report, the synthesis of Ti4N3 by fluoride salt used for etching Al in Ti4AlN3 at high temperature (Fig. 3a and b). To synthesize Ti4N3, MAX phase Ti4AlN3 was mixed with 59% potassium fluoride (KF), 29% lithium fluoride (LiF), and 12% sodium fluoride (NaF). The 2D layered Ti4N3 was obtained by delamination with tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH). Similarly, nanolayered Ti2NTx is synthesized by oxygen-assisted molten salt (Fig. 3c).41 In this process, due to the presence of oxygen, aluminum oxide is formed, which reacts with fluoride to form oxyfluoride; the produced aluminum oxyfluoride is removed using hydrochloric acid to produce nanolayered Ti2N. Furthermore, George et al.42 synthesized Ti2N by etching Al on the Ti2AlN MAX phase, and intercalation is done by adding a mixture of potassium fluoride and hydrochloric acid. This mixture sonicated in DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide) resulted in multi-layered Ti2N. The developed Ti2N is used as a surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) substrate to detect trace levels of explosives. Recently, Grace et al.43 reported a novel synthesis method of V2NTx by the salt-acid etching technique. In this report, the MAX phase (V2AlN) was developed by the ball milling of vanadium and AlN, and further pellets were formed using cold pressing. To avoid microvoids and cracks, heat treatment was applied to the pellets. The removal of the Al layer from V2AlN using LiF–HCl resulted in V2NTx being delaminated using dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solvent.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication process of Ti4N3Tx by molten salt treatment. (b) SEM image of Ti4N3Tx synthesized by molten salt treatment. (c) Synthesis of Ti2NTx by oxygen-assisted molten salt of Ti2AlN. (a and b) Were reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (c) Is reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 


Bottom-up approach. 
The bottom-up method gave the material from the atomic scale, atom by atom, molecule by molecule, or cluster by cluster, which shows a controllable way of producing transition metal nitrides. In the bottom-up methods, TMNs were synthesized by different techniques such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD), template method, and solvothermal method.44–46 The CVD method involves gas-phase precursors or solid phase precursors, which are subjected to high-temperature annealing to form the desired nanoparticles, oxides, sulfides, nitrides, borides, dichalcogenides, and carbon-based structures can be synthesized by the CVD technique. The technique mostly involves the use of carrier gas to remove unwanted reaction products and provide an inert atmosphere. The gas-phase CVD technique particularly involves gaseous precursors such as ammonia, which reacts with the substrate to form the expected product. The CVD technique is mainly used for the fabrication of semiconductor materials and to form layers of materials in a substrate; also, it is widely used in thin film coating in various application such as corrosion resistance. This method prepared high quality TMNs of large lateral size on a substrate, especially as it gives high crystallinity. Still, the procedure is laborious and yields poor results. More importantly, hydrothermal and solvothermal methods are facile synthesis procedures to form nanoparticles of desired morphology, which are basically wet-chemical synthesis procedures. Various morphologies including wires, rods, sheets, spheres, and ribbons can be synthesized by hydrothermal and solvothermal techniques. The technique can be widely used for the synthesis of electrode materials for batteries and supercapacitors, electrocatalysts, dye degradation, sensors, and many other potential applications. Thus, the bottom-up strategy is a potential approach that finds a wide range of applications to synthesize nanomaterials of specific size and morphology under limited reaction time and relatively lower reaction temperatures. Recently, template-assisted methods were shown to be promising as a strategy to synthesize 2D materials without layers of precursors. Metal precursors are topochemically converted into nitride, carbide, or 2D materials using the template surface; compared to the other synthetic strategies, it has great potential for various applications such as supercapacitors, metal ion batteries, and metal–air batteries.47 However, it has many advantages, such as a large specific surface area, fast electron transport, and greater structural stability; also, synthesis could produce high-quality transition metal nitrides at a much lower cost.
Due to their higher yields, template-assisted TMN techniques represent a promising approach to develop 2D TMN; since nitrides are formed by the topochemical transformation of metal precursors on template surfaces, the properties of synthesized TMNs depend on the metal precursor. Inspired by this technique, Zhou et al.48 developed 2D non-layered metal nitride using non-layered 2D metal oxide. In that process, h-MoO3@NaCl was formed by annealing Mo precursor@NaCl in Ar atmosphere. The resulting product ammoniated slowly in the presence of ammonia to form MoN@NaCl, as shown in Fig. 4a. To avoid morphology change during transformation, the salt was used as a stabilizer; Fig. 4b shows a side and top view with 6 layers of atom and 0.7 nm thickness. Zhou et al.49 also used the same template method to synthesize 2D nitrogen rich-hexagonal W2N3 (h-W2N3); the tungstate precursor was uniformly coated on KCl, and finally ammoniated at 750 °C in the NH3 atmosphere. Comparing bulk 2D h-W2N3, the lateral size of the 2D-W2N3 was 5 μm with a thickness of ∼1.5 nm due to the N vacancies in 2D h compared to bulk 2D h-W2N3.
Topochemical synthesis is one of the methods to develop non-layered 2D metal nitrides. Recently, the synthesis of metal nitrides by other two-dimensional materials such as sulfides, carbides, and chalcogenides has been reported.50 In the topochemical transformation synthesis of carbides into transition metal nitrides, carbon from carbide was topochemically substituted by N to develop the nitride, which resulted in the same structure. Gogotsi et al.51 developed Mo2N and V2N using the ammonolysis of Mo2CTx and V2CTx Mxene at 600 °C. Similarly, the synthesis of transition metal nitrides from metal dichalcogenides has been reported. Chou et al.52 synthesized molybdenum nitrides (Mo5N6, MoN, and Mo2N) by the nitration of 2H–MoS2. Molybdenum nitride has different phases; the formation of Mo5N6, MoN, and Mo2N depends on the reaction temperature of nitration, at 820 °C, Mo5N6 is formed, while at 1020 °C and 1120 °C, MoN and Mo2N are respectively formed. Besides, TMN is synthesized by the nitration of transition metal oxide or hydroxide, which is readily fabricated by the hydrothermal method. Lan et al.53 developed hierarchical P-doped NiMo4N5 one-dimensional nanorods by the ammonolysis of the oxide precursor shown in (Fig. 4c); the as-synthesized hierarchical P-doped NiMo4N5 nanorods had a diameter of 100 nm. Using the CVD method, Teo and his group54 developed atomically thin WN crystals by salt-assisted chemical vapor deposition; the salt-assisted CVD growth of TMNs is more controllable than 2D chalcogenides because ammonia in the gaseous state is used as a precursor instead of solid S, Se precursor in 2D chalcogenides. The thickness of WN could be increased by changing the concentration of NH3. Chakrapani et al.45 reported a new synthesis method for the synthesis of 2D TMNs, which involves hot filament chemical vapor deposition (HFCVD) and a nitridation process. MoN is developed by the nitration of 2D MoO3, which is synthesized by the HFCVD process. Moreover, magnetron sputtering can be used to create TMN thin film electrodes with good adhesion, controllable composition, thickness, and ideal microstructural properties. Using oblique angle magnetron sputtering (OAMS), Wang et al.55 fabricated a porous CrN thin film. The CrN thin film shows a roughness (Ra) of 32.95 nm; in addition, the CrN developed by OAMS shows more pores than normal magnetron sputtering (NMS). Besides, porous CrN thin film is synthesized by etching Cu from the CrCuN thin film. The CrCuN thin film was prepared by magnetron co-sputtering, and concentrated nitric acid was used as the etchant to remove Cu from CrCuN. Moreover, the Ra of CrCuN was 27.23 nm; after removing Cu, the CrN shows an excellent value of Ra 80.69 nm.56 Importantly, the crystal size, shape, and thickness of the crystals could be adjusted by changing the experimental deposition conditions, with nucleation density and lateral size both increasing as the temperature and time increased. Despite various discovered synthesis techniques for developing different types of TMNs, they still have some notable drawbacks, such as increased pollution levels, high costs, low yields, use of hazardous materials, and impurities.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for MoN. (b) Side and top view image of MoN. (c) Synthesis procedure of P-doped NiMo4N5. (a and b) Were reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) Is reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Elsevier, copyright 2019. 

Transition metal nitrides (TMN)
Transition metal nitrides have recently attracted attention as energy storage materials because of their high conductivity and layered structure. This section will give an overview of transition metal nitrides such as VN, TiN, MoN, NiN, CoN, FeN, and CrN as electrode materials in supercapacitor applications.
Vanadium nitride
Among transition metal nitrides, vanadium nitrides are studied extensively due to their excellent conductivity (1.17 × 10−6 s m−1), low cost, and wide potential voltage window; compared to other metal nitrides, vanadium nitride exhibits a high specific capacitance of 1350 F g−1 in alkaline electrolyte, which makes it a promising candidate for energy storage. The reaction mechanism of VN in the alkaline condition is given by eqn (2). VNxOy + OH ⟷ VNxOy//OH− + VNxOy–OH(2)
Subsequently, Huo et al.57 synthesized VNNDs (vanadium nitride nanodots-intercalated carbon nanosheets) for solid-state symmetric supercapacitor. Through the nitridation of organic–inorganic hybrid PANI/V2O5 nanosheets, a 0D-in-2D pillared VCND/CNS hybrid was designed and generated by a spatially confined strategy by intercalating VN nanodots with carbon nanosheets. The as-developed device shows a volumetric energy density of 30.9 W h L−1 and a power density of 64500 W L−1. Besides, Chen et al.58 prepared a carbon-coated porous VN nanosheet on a vertically aligned carbon wall as an anode and birnessite Na0.5MnO2 as a cathode. Initially, the porous CC/CW/p-VN@C and Na0.5MnO2 on carbon cloth by hydrothermal, nitration, and electrodeposition processes is shown in Fig. 5a. The schematic for the developed CC/CW/p-VN@C/Na0.5MnO2 asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) device is shown in Fig. 5b. The developed ASCs have a stable potential window in the range from −1.3 to 0 V and 0 to 1.3 V, and a theoretical 2.6 V was achieved in ASCs. The CV and GCD curve of the ASCs shows that they work at 2.6 V stably and effectively, as shown in (Fig. 5c–e). Furthermore, the developed asymmetric supercapacitor shows a specific capacitance of 103 F g−1 and shows excellent energy density at a power density of 96.7 W h kg−1 and 1294 W kg−1, as shown in Fig. 5f, with extraordinary cycling stability 10000 cycles and 92.5% capacitance retention.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of CC/CW/p-VN@C and Na0.5MnO2 on carbon cloth. (b) Schematic representation of ASC using CC/CW/p-VN@C as the positive electrode and Na0.5MnO2 as a negative electrode. (c) Cyclic voltammograms of ASC device. (d and e) CV and GCD of the ASCs at different scan rates and current densities. (f) Ragone plot of ASCs. (a–f) Is reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from the Wiley Publishing Group, copyright 2019. 
For instance, Sun and his group59 developed ASC by porous VN on a silicon wafer; chemical solution deposition (CSD) was used to prepare hierarchical porous VN thin film. The porous structure VN shows many interconnected mesopores with 20 nm pore size, which provides an excellent electronic and ionic transport path. The porous structure of the VN/Si wafer shows an areal capacitance of 60 mF cm−2 in the KOH electrolyte. The symmetric device delivered an energy density and power density of 21.2 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 2.0 W cm−3 and 91.2% capacitance retention after 15000 cycles.
Recently, many strategies have been developed on VN to achieve high electrochemical performance. A core–shell is one of the strategies; different shell materials were coated to improve the performance, but a conductive outermost shell is required to improve the fast ion path. A conducting polymer is the best choice for the outermost shell. On that basis, Xia et al.60 developed flexible core–shell arrays composed of VN core and PEDOT shell. The VN/PEDOT were prepared by first preparing VS2 nanosheets hydrothermally and during the nitration process, nitrogen replaces the sulfur atom. The PEDOT shell is deposited on the VN nanoshell by electrodeposition. In this work, solid-state flexible devices are assembled by VN/PEDOT used as the anode and nickel–cobalt–aluminum (NCA) used as the cathode. The solid-state device shows an energy density of 48.36 W h kg−1 and power density of 4 kW kg−1, and 91.6% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles. Yao et al.61 developed asymmetric coaxial FSS (fiber-shaped supercapacitor) using aligned CNT composite sheets wrapped around the VN@C NWAs CNT fiber. They fabricated an asymmetric coaxial fiber-shaped supercapacitor (ASCFSS) using VN@C NWAs CNT fiber as the cathode, MnO2/PEDOT:PSS/CNT as the anode, and Na2SO4 was used as the electrolyte. The fiber-shaped supercapacitor (ASCFSS) exhibited specific capacitance of 213.5 mF cm−2 and energy density of 96.03 μW h cm−2. The capacitance retention was 96.8% after bending 5000 times, which shows excellent flexibility. Fei and his group62 developed a core–shell VN@N-doped carbon macro sheet for solid-state ASC. N doping prevents the aggregation of carbon microsheets and maintains the VN microstructure. For VN@N-doped carbon preparation, melamine is a nitrogen source, and PVP is used as a carbon source. The ASCs fabricated using VN@N-doped carbon microsheets were used as the anode, NiCo2O4 as the cathode, and PVA/KOH used as the gel electrolyte. An assembled ASC device shows an energy density of 65.3 W h kg−1 and cycling performance with 92% capacitance retention over 4000 cycles. Due to high electrical conductivity and layered structure, 2D materials have recently been studied extensively in supercapacitors.63 Grace et al.64 fabricated an asymmetric supercapacitor using vanadium nitride/porous carbon as an anode and the pseudocapacitive Ti3C2Tx as the cathode. The VN was synthesized by the decomposition of melamine as the nitriding agent, and Ti3C2Tx was synthesized by the etching of Ti3AlC2. Thus, the asymmetric supercapacitor delivered a capacitance of 105 F g−1. It also delivered an energy density of 12.81 W h kg−1 and a power density of 985.8 W kg−1.
Titanium nitride
Titanium nitride has higher metallic conductivity (4000 Ω < 55500 S cm−1) than other transition metal nitrides, but TiN has a low-capacity value. In titanium nitride, ultrahigh rate capability is enhanced by the high conductivity. Researchers also try to composite the metal nitride to the metal oxide to increase the electrochemical performance; to solve this low-capacity problem, the other conducting material is used to improve the electrochemical performance. On this basis, Chu et al.65 developed core–shell MnO2/TiN/CC as the positive and Fe2O3/TiN/CC as the negative electrode for high energy density hybrid supercapacitor (HSC). The high theoretical capacity of MnO2 at 1370 F g−1 enhances the performance of the device, and core–shell Fe2O3/TiN solves the problem that plagues Fe2O3 in a redox reaction. The assembled HSCs with MnO2/TiN/CC and Fe2O3/TiN/CC delivers an energy density of 71.19 W h kg−1 and displayed remarkable cycling stability over 10000 charge–discharge cycles with 81.16% capacitance retention. Chu et al.66 reported the nitridation of TiO2 nanopillars, which were obtained through the anodization of Ti foil to fabricate hierarchical TiN nanoparticles (H-TiN). H-TiN NPs on Ti foil provide good flexibility, and the surface area of H-TiN 23.1 m2 g−1 is more than that of TiN NTs (13.8 m2 g−1), which is accessible for more active sites and facile electrolyte penetration channels. Here, the flexible solid-state device is assembled by two H-TiN NPs. The developed symmetric supercapacitor shows a volumetric capacitance of 5.9 F cm−3 and an energy density of 0.53 mW h cm−3. Furthermore, SC shows excellent cycling stability of 99% capacitance retention after 3000 cycles.
In the development of high-performance anti-freezing energy storage systems, it will be necessary to develop electrodes that work on electroactive components and photothermal layers. For example, Hu and his group developed67 a photothermal-assisted screen-printed supercapacitor working at low temperatures; bifunctional TiN nanocrystals make up the device, which has both photothermal and electrochemical properties. Fig. 6a and b describe the assembly and synthesis procedure for the photothermal supercapacitor. Here, the composite TiN/MWCNT is used to fabricate a device and LiCl–PVA is used as the gel electrolyte. At 1 solar illumination, the temperature of the device increases from −36.6 °C to −10.8 °C within 30 min. The CV curve at a temperature of −40 °C with serious deformation and contracted shape shows a decreased capacitance (Fig. 6c). In the GCD curve, the operating temperature is −40 °C, and the curve is asymmetric. As the current density increases, the device capacitance is negligible, suggesting that at a lower temperature of −40 °C, devices are unable to produce much energy as power sources (Fig. 6d). The as-fabricated device shows an energy density of 0.37 mW h cm−2 at a power density of 140 mW cm−2 at −40 °C without solar illumination. The energy density increases to 0.67 mW h cm−2 at −40 °C with solar illumination; the as-fabricated device also shows excellent cycling stability over good 1000 cycles with 100% capacitance retention at room temperature, and 1 solar illumination was applied for 97.9% capacitance retention after 100 cycles (Fig. 6e–g).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration for fabricating a TiN supercapacitor. (b) Schematic illustration of a TiN-based supercapacitor operating at −40 °C under solar illumination. (c and d) CV and GCD curves of the devices. (e) Areal capacitance at different temperatures. (f) Ragone plots of devices. (g) Capacitance retention at −40 °C with and without solar illumination. A representation of CV curves for devices under different conditions is shown in the inset. (a–g) Is reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
Chu and his group68 prepared TiN/C (carbon layer encapsulating TiN nanotubes) grown on Ti foil-nitrided TiO2 nanotubes with organic electrolyte used as the carbon source. In that work, ethylene glycol was used as the organic electrolyte. During nitridation, ethylene glycol was decomposed to form a nanometer-thick carbon layer on the TiN NTs. Due to a carbon coating encapsulated on the TiN NTs, good contact between carbon and TiN was achieved, and the prepared electrode shows enhanced energy storage capacity and excellent cycling stability. Furthermore, the symmetric solid-state device was fabricated with two TiN and PVA gel electrolytes. It shows the volumetric capacity of 8.3 mF cm−3, energy and power density of 1.66 mW h cm−3 and 0.036 W cm−3, and shows good cycling stability of 83.5% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles. Besides, Su et al.69 developed pristine chrysanthemum-TiN (CL-TiN) nanostructure composed of 2D leaf-like nanorod by the hydrothermal method for a flexible symmetric supercapacitor. The CL-TiN nanostructure facilitates fast ion diffusion by providing efficient ion transport pathways. The developed device shows a volumetric capacitance of 7.6 F cm−3 with an energy density of 0.34 mW h cm−3 with cycling stability over 20000 cycles. Recently developed microsupercapacitors are promising and compact electrochemical energy storage devices for smart electronics and wearable electronics.70 Recently, Liu et al.71 developed an on-chip micro supercapacitor using TiN; the solid-state MSCs was fabricated using the PVA/KOH gel electrolyte. The as-developed MSCs show an energy density of 36.8 mW h cm−3 and a power density of 20.6 W cm−3, and exhibits outstanding cycling stability over 10000 cycles.
Molybdenum nitride
Molybdenum nitride is another promising transition metal nitride that exhibits high electrical conductivity (2800 S cm−1) and high chemical stability. Molybdenum nitride had various phases, for example, δ1-MoN, δ2-MoN, δ3-MoN, α-Mo2N, and γ-MoxN. The energy storage behavior of molybdenum nitride is different for electrolytes and shows an electrochemical performance similar to ruthenium oxide,72 but due to a small potential window of 0.6 V, the low capacitance was observed. An asymmetric supercapacitor is a strategy to increase the performance of molybdenum nitride. Based on this strategy, Dubal et al.73 reported MoN@P-CF (MoN nanoparticles coated on phosphorous-doped cotton fabric) and RuO2@CF (RuO2 nanoparticles coated on flexible carbon fabric) to improve the performance of the asymmetric supercapacitor. Phosphomolybdic acid is used as both an initial source of P and Mo in the decoration of MoN on P-doped carbon fabric after nitration at a desirable temperature MoN is obtained. RuO2 is prepared via the layer-by-layer deposition technique. MoN@P-CF enhances the surface redox kinetics, resulting in an increase of about two times in the capacitance than that of pristine molybdenum nitride. The as-fabricated asymmetric device with MoN@P-CF as the negative and RuO2@CF as the positive electrode shows a high capacitance of 7.74 F cm−3, an energy density of 2.4 mW h cm−3, and a power density of 174 mW cm−3 with good cycling stability over 15000 cycles and a slight change in the capacitance value when it is bending at different angles. Similarly, Chandra et al.74 developed an asymmetric supercapacitor using a high-quality thin film of metal nitride in reactive DC sputtering. In this work, γ-Mo2N was used as the positive and VN as the negative electrode; the device shows a potential window of 1.4 V in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte. The as-developed VN//Mo2N ASC shows an energy density of 23.28 W h kg−1 with 2800 W kg−1 at a specific power of 0.5 mA cm−2. To meet the ongoing demand for wearable biosensors, a flexible supercapacitor is a promising candidate in wearable technology.75 Keeping this in mind, Zhu et al.76 developed flexible MoN on nitrogen-doped carbon cloth (CC@CN@MoN) by a simple nitration process for asymmetric supercapacitor (Fig. 7a). The ASC device was fabricated by CC@CN@MoN as the negative and NiCo2O4 as the positive electrode, and lithium polyacrylate hydrogel (PALi) was used as a gel electrolyte (Fig. 7b). There is no aggregation during charging–discharging because of the helical MoN and nanowire NiCo2O4-like morphology, and the PALi electrolyte had excellent conductivity and durability. These features affect ASCs, which show remarkable conductivity and stability. The ASCs work at a voltage limit of 1.6 V and negligible shape change at different scan rates (Fig. 7c and d). The developed CC@CN@MoN//CC@NiCo2O4 ASC device delivers a high areal capacitance of 90.8 mF cm−2, an energy density of 0.032 mW h cm−2, and a power density of 19.4 mW cm−2 with 90.8% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles. Moreover, the flexible ASC will be used in the self-powered system to detect human movement with strain sensors (Fig. 7f). Future wearable sensing devices will have the ability to use ASCs for self-powered sensors, paving the way for practical applications. Transition metal nitride combined with carbon could increase the electrochemical performance of the supercapacitor. Based on that strategy, Ran et al.77 prepared C/MoN nanofibers via electrospinning and nitration; polyacrylonitrile (PAN) was used as the carbon source. For comparative studies, authors developed different types of devices such as symmetric and asymmetric supercapacitors. In both devices, C/MoN is used as a negative electrode. The prepared asymmetric supercapacitor PANI‖C/MoN delivers an energy density of 14.1 W h kg−1 and a power density of 312 W kg−1, which is higher than the AC‖C/MoN device (12 W h kg−1 and 325 W kg−1). The symmetric device C/MoN‖C/MoN produced a specific energy of 4.51 W h kg−1 at a specific power of 250 W kg−1, which shows cycling stability over 15000 charge–discharge cycles with specific capacitance retention of 78.6%.
 Fig. 7  (a) Experimetal scheme of CC@MoN and CC@NiCo2O4. (b) Schematic diagram of flexible ASCs with PALi electrolyte, (c and d) CV curves at different voltage windows at 100 mV s−1 and different scan rates. (e) Cycling stability test over 10000 cycles. (f) Flexible self-powered smart sensor and system. (a–f) Is reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. 
Nickel nitride and cobalt nitride
Nickel nitride and cobalt nitride are well suited in faradaic materials for their reversible oxidation reaction and theoretical capacitance. Due to their characteristics, they are also studied as electrode materials. For instance, Lei et al.78 prepared Ni3N with 3D sphere-like morphology via the hydrothermal method and urea-assisted nitration process for a high-performance asymmetric supercapacitor. The developed asymmetric supercapacitor was fabricated with a sphere-like Ni3N as the positive and 3D interconnected porous carbon as the negative electrode. Porous carbon was developed by the pyrolysis of poplar roots (PRs) using KOH activation. The developed porous carbon shows a surface area of 710.7 m2 g−1 along with a pore size of 2–10 nm, resulting in excellent electrochemical performance. The Ni3N//PRPC ASC exhibits an energy density of 30.9 W h kg−1 and a power density of 412 W kg−1. The energy density of 15.4 W h kg−1 was maintained at a power density of 4173.7 W kg−1 with the cycling performance of 81% capacitance retained over 5000 cycles.
Ding et al.79 reported Ni3N/graphene composite fabricated by anchoring Ni3N nanoparticles on reduced graphene oxide nanosheets by the solvothermal method. Using highly electro-conductive RGO and nanocrystallization, the electroconductivity and volume change of Ni3N were greatly enhanced. The ASC device was assembled with Ni3N/RGO as the positive and diethylene glycol-grafted RGO (DEG/RGO) as the negative electrode. The device operates in the voltage window of 1.6 V and has an ultrahigh energy density of 50.5 W h kg−1, paired with an ultrahigh power density of 800 W kg−1. The fabricated device shows an 80% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles. Kong and co-workers80 prepared Co3N by the nitration process; Co3N was prepared by the nitration of the Co3O4 precursor in NH3 atmosphere. The ASC was assembled using Co3N as the cathode and activated carbon as the anode. The ASC device exhibits an energy density of 12.1 W h kg−1 and a power density of 204.6 W kg−1, and it can retain 5.4 W h kg−1 energy density at a high-power density of 4101.2 W kg−1. The ASC shows 92.3% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles. Besides, Chandra et al.81 prepared catalyst-free CoN and Zn3N2 by magnetron sputtering. The electrodes were developed by the sputtering technique to take advantage of the mechanical strength, electrochemical stability, good conductivity, adhesion to a flexible current collector, high capacitance, and excellent cycle life. Also, they developed ASCs using CoN as the cathode and Zn3N2 as the anode. The flexible CoN/Zn3N2 ASC shows an energy density of 42 W h kg−1 and a specific capacitance of 75.4 F g−1 with a 2 V voltage window, and shows excellent cycling stability over 5000 cycles with 93.2% capacitance retention.
Other transition metal nitride
Some other transition metal nitrides including NbN, FeN, MnN, and WN have been prepared for the supercapacitor. The voltage window of tungsten nitride is in the range from 0 to 1 V. The asymmetric supercapacitor is assembled by the positive electrode as an intrinsic pseudocapacitive material and carbon-based material as the negative electrode.82 Based on that concept, Dubal et al.83 developed an asymmetric supercapacitor using PPy@CF (PPy on carbon fabric) as a cathode and W2N@P-CF (W2N on phosphorous modified carbon foam) as an anode. PPy and W2N were deposited on carbon fabric without a binder additive, as shown in Fig. 8a. In both electrodes, prompt charge kinetics of the pseudocapacitive type electrodes demonstrate the swift redox reaction, resulting in a high performance of the asymmetric supercapacitor (Fig. 8b). The ASC cell exhibits a volumetric capacity of 7.1 F cm−3 with an energy density of 2.5 mW h cm−3 and a power density of 232 mW kg−3 with excellent cycling stability over 20000 cycles, as shown in Fig. 8c–f. Similarly, Kaur and his group84 fabricated a W2N electrode by a reactive sputtering technique. The symmetric supercapacitor device shows an energy density of 12.92 W h kg−1 and power density 674 kW kg−1 at an energy density of 9.36 W h kg−1 with a long cycling life of 90.46% capacitance retention over 10000 cycles.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of W2N@P-CF formation. (b and c) CV and charge–discharge curve at different scan rates and current density. (d) Ragone plot of the ASC device. (e) Cycling stability over 20000 cycles. (f) Device demonstration of W2N@P-CF and PPy@CF shows an LED powered during discharge. (a–f) Is reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the Wiley Publishing Group, copyright 2018. 
Layered double hydroxides are formed by layering positively charged brucite-like host layers with negatively charged interlayer anions, which have been extensively studied in the energy storage field because of their chemical composition and cost-effectiveness. For example, Huang et al.85 designed Cu3N@Co–Fe-LDH core–shell nanowires; Cu3N is grown on copper foam and embedded in CoFe-LDH. In Co–Fe-LDH, the conjunction of Co and Fe improves the redox reaction because of its combination during the electrochemical process. This 3D core–shell structure Cu3N as the core and Co–Fe as the shell act as the developed core–shell structure, which enhances the surface area and electron transfer from the core to the shell. A flexible asymmetric supercapacitor was assembled by Cu3N@Co–Fe-LDH as the positive and AC as the negative electrode. The device exhibits an areal capacitance of 3078 mF cm−2, energy density of 2.474 mW h cm−3, and a power density of 15 mW cm−3 with cycling stability with 92.6% capacitance retention 10000 cycles. Different TMN has been reported with different compositions; significant improvement in supercapacitor performance was noted. Table 1 summarizes the recent research on TMN in a supercapacitor.
Table 1 Comparison of different metal nitrides for supercapacitor




Electrodes
Electrolyte
Specific capacitance (F g−1)
Specific energy (W h kg−1)
Specific power (W kg−1)
Ref.




VN/CNF
6 M KOH
800
53.1
2700

105



VN/C
6 M KOH
122
43.0
800

106



VN@NC
1 M KOH
113.4 mA h g−1
68.83
2048

107



Ni–MoN/NF
6 M KOH
2446 mC cm−2
40.9
773

108



MoO2/Mo2N
1 M H2SO4
348
3.75
3000

109



TiN
1 M N2SO4
7.48 F cm−3
0.34 mW h cm−3
586.5 mW cm−3

110



TiN
0.5 M N2SO4
164.5
3.26 mW h cm−3
78.3 mW cm−3

111



TiN
1 M LiClO4
53.66 F cm−2
68.70 mW h cm−2
1.90 × 104 mW h cm−2

112



TiN/VG
1 M Li2SO4
9.0 F cm−2
6.1 μW h cm−2
2718.4 μW h cm−2

113



Nb4N5
1 M H2SO4
225.8 mF cm−2
4.66 mW h cm−3
24.56 W cm−3

114



CNS@VN
6 M KOH
300.4 
18.80
800

115



VN QD/CNF
6 M KOH
406.5
31.2
774.6

116



h-BN/C
2 M KOH
250
17
245

117



CrN
0.5 M H2SO4
31.3 mF cm−2
14.4 mW h cm−3
0.3 W cm−3

54



TiN@GNS//Fe2N@GNS
1 M LiCl
58
15.4
6400

118





Strategies for engineering electronic structure
The chemical and physical properties of the material are strongly influenced by the electronic structure. Modifying the electronic structure of TMNs is crucial to achieving optimized properties and desirable functionalities. The electronic structure of transition metal nitride improves by heteroatom doping, heterostructure, and multi-metal transition metal nitrides. It has been summarized in this section how to improve the electrochemical performance of transition metal nitrides.
Heteroatom doping-based TMN
Recently, research has been focused on the improvement in capacitance and energy performance of the electrodes. Researchers have developed different strategies to prepare high-performance electrodes. Heteroatom doping is one of them, which increases the electric conductivity and capacitance performance.86 There are two types of doping—metal and nonmetal atom doping. Wang et al.87 reported an enhanced supercapacitor performance of Co–CoN by Ni doping. The incorporation of Ni atoms into cobalt can enhance the electrochemical performance since more active sites are formed.88,89 The schematic representation of the fabrication of Ni-doped CoN is shown in Fig. 9a. Ni-doped Co–CoN delivered a specific capacity of 361.93 C g−1 at 2 mA cm−2. This capacity is 68.8% higher than oxide counterparts and 37.7% higher than other nitrides annealed at different temperatures. The HSC is fabricated by Ni-doped CoN as the cathode and porous carbon as the anode, which exhibits an energy density of 20.4 W h kg−1 and 9.85 kW kg−1 power density (Fig. 9b and c). Further, the HSC exhibits capacitance retention of 82.4% after 5000 cycles.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of Ni, Co–N@CC formation. (b) CV curves of the cathode and anode at 50 mV s−1. (c) Ragone plot of Ni, Co–N@CC, (d) scheme of the fabrication of B–Co4N on Ni foam. (e) Schematic of the B–Co4N/AC solid-state hybrid supercapacitor (HSC). (f and g) CV curves of HSCs at 10 mV s−1 and GCD curve at different current densities. (h) Cycling stability of the HSC device over 5000 cycles at 10 A g−1. (a–c) Is reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (d–h) Is reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from the RSC, copyright 2020. 
In another example, Parasuraman et al.90 reported that the doping of Cr into VN delivers excellent supercapacitive properties in alkaline electrolyte. 5.7 at% Cr-doped VN shows excellent areal capacitance of 190 mF cm−2, which is very high compared to pristine VN, together with capacitance retention of 92.4% over 5000 charge–discharge cycles in 1 M KOH and areal capacitance of Cr doped VN decrease compared to pristine VN with increasing cycle number. Nonmetal atom doping has been developed for supercapacitor application. Brousse et al.91 developed N-doped TiN; the N doping at the electrode increases after annealing at 400 and 550 °C. The developed N-doped TiN was enhanced by 8.2 mF cm−2 in an aqueous K2SO4 electrolyte with excellent cycling stability of more than 10000 charge/discharge cycles. In another example, Xu et al.92 designed hierarchical B–Co4N; the B doping facilitates ion and electron transport, and adds electrochemically active sites. The schematic of the development of B–CO4N is shown in Fig. 9d. The specific surface area of B–Co4N is 88.24 m2 g−1, which is higher than the that of Co4N (44.02 m2 g−1). B–Co4N has a large surface area due to B doping. It has mesopores with a pore size distribution of 0 nm to 10 nm in B–Co4N; the release of H during nitration and hydrogen evolution during B-doping resulted in mesopores.93 This porous nanostructure provides active sites and structural stability to the material. B–Co4N delivers a capacity of 817.9 C g−1 at 1 A g−1; besides, the AC/NF was used as a negative electrode with B–Co4N/NF positive electrode to fabricate HSCs (Fig. 9e–g); further, the device delivered an energy density of 25.85 W h kg−1; after 5000 cycles, the device retained 98.59% capacitance (Fig. 9h).
Heterostructure-based transition metal nitrides
The heterostructure is another way to enhance the performance of electrodes in supercapacitor applications. As a result of interaction between transition metal nitrides and other materials such as metals, oxides, carbides, sulfides, and phosphides, its physical and chemical properties are enhanced. The heterostructure is classified into two types, lateral heterostructure and vertical heterostructure.94
In a lateral heterostructure, for example, Wang et al.95 reported the MOF-assisted method to anchor nickel–cobalt nitride nanoparticles in porous carbon, as shown in Fig. 10a. An N-doped carbon that is highly conductive and has good mechanical stability creates a highly conductive network, as shown in Fig. 10b. Also, the developed CoN and Ni3N NPs made active surfaces more readily available to the electrolyte; as a result, materials have high capacitance. Ni–CoN/NC delivers a capacitance of 933 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and the developed asymmetric supercapacitor device by Ni–CoN@NC as the positive and activated carbon as the negative electrode. The CV curves showed a semi-rectangular shape and a clear pseudocapacitive behavior (Fig. 10c and d). The ASC device showed an energy and power density of 20.4 W h kg−1 and 7333 W kg−1, respectively, with cycling stability of 5000 cycles over 96.4% capacitance retention (Fig. 10e). Recently, Seo et al.96 developed a wearable supercapacitor using the TiN/Ni heterostructure by the RF sputtering technique. Wearable symmetric supercapacitors are designed by TiN/Ni electrodes. A wearable symmetric supercapacitor delivers a capacitance of 10.21 mF g−1 together with an energy and power density of 5.61 mW h kg−1 and 1.084 mW kg−1, respectively, with cycling stability over 10000 cycles and 98.22% capacitance retention. The surface passivation layer of Ni metal protects TiN from rapid oxidation, resulting in the enhancement of the cycling performance. In vertical core–shell heterostructures based on a different type of structure, for example, Yao et al.97 synthesized a core–shell heterostructure of TiN@V2O5 on CNT fibers, as schematically shown in Fig. 10f. Through the hydrothermal method, TiN NWAs were grown directly on CNTFs; then, through a solvothermal process and subsequent annealing, NSs of V2O5 were deposited directly on CNTFs. The SEM image exhibits that the TiN@V2O5 core–shell heterostructure is aligned in one dimensional (Fig. 10g); in the TiN@V2O5 core–shell heterostructure, TiN nanowires act as the core and V2O5 as the shell. The fiber-shaped asymmetric supercapacitor (FASC) fabricated by TiN@V2O5 electrode and LiCl–PVA as the gel electrolyte at different scan rates exhibits a quasi-rectangular shape (Fig. 10h). The as-fabricated device shows an excellent specific capacitance of 74.25 F cm−3 and an energy density of 26.42 mW cm−3. In the flexibility test, 92.7% capacitance was retained after 4000 times bending. Considering the importance of flexibility for the evaluation of portable and wearable electronics, measurements of mechanical flexibility were taken (Fig. 10i).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration for the preparation of Ni–CoN@NC. (b) Electrical pathway of Ni–CoN@NC. (c and d) Schematic illustration of the Ni–CoN@NC//AC ASCs device. CV curves of Ni–CoN@NC and activated carbon at 20 mV s−1. (e) Ragone plot of the Ni–CoN@NC//AC ASCs device. (f) Scheme for the preparation of TiN NWAs@V2O5, (g) SEM image of TiN NWAs and TiN NWAs@V2O5 core–shell heterostructure. (h) CV curves of the fiber-shaped asymmetric supercapacitor (FASCs). (i) CV curves of the FASC at 100 mV s−1 at different bending angles. (a–e) Is reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (f–i) Is reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
Similarly, Yao et al.98 fabricated FASC by the hierarchical core–shell heterostructure of TiN@VN nanowires grown on carbon nanotube fiber. A FASC was fabricated by CoNiO2 NWAs@Ni(OH)2 as the negative and TiN NWAs@VN as the positive electrode; these two electrodes were coated by the KOH–PVA gel electrolyte. The CoNiO2 NWAs@Ni(OH)2 was obtained by two-step synthesis; the first CoNiO2 was synthesized by the hydrothermal method and Ni(OH)2 was deposited on CoNiO2 NWAs by the simple CBD method. Also, TiN NWAs@VN are developed by two-step synthesis containing a hydrothermal technique and nitration. The as-fabricated device shows a specific capacitance of 109.4 F cm−3 with an excellent energy density of 36.0 mW cm−3 with excellent capacitance retention of 91.5%.
Besides, Jun et al.99 reported a Cu3N@Ni3N nanorod array integrated on copper foam with Cu3N@Ni3N serving as the numerous active sites and showing the synergistic effect in the supercapacitor. A freestanding 3D Cu3N@Ni3N core–shell structure developed by the nitration of Cu(OH)2@Ni(OH)2 supported on CF. The 3D architecture enables the electrochemical performance to be increased. In the end, an HSC was developed with Cu3N@Ni3N as the positive electrode and AC (activated carbon) as the negative electrode. It showed excellent energy storage performance such as a specific capacity of 390.5 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1. The developed device shows the highest energy density of 71.8 W h kg−1 at a power density of 700 W kg−1 with 94.9% capacitance retention over 10000 cycles.
Multi-metal based TMN
In multi-metal transition metal nitride, two or more metals are comprised in a single compound. Due to the different characteristics of metals, the electrochemical performance could be enhanced in multi-metal nitride. For example, Wang et al.100 reported TiNbN as the electrode for supercapacitor; the XRD data confirmed the formation of TiNbN, as shown in Fig. 11a. The synergistic effect between Ti and Nb improves the capacitance to a high specific capacitance of 59.3 mF cm−2 at 1.0 mA cm−2 together with excellent cycling stability 20000 cycles. In addition, TiNbN/VN was reported as the cathode and anode for an asymmetric supercapacitor; the developed ASC device exhibits a potential window of 1.6 V (Fig. 11b and c) with a remarkable energy density and power density of 74.9 mW h cm−3 and 8.8 W cm−3, respectively (Fig. 11d). Besides, Lee et al.101 fabricated core–shell N-doped graphenes-encapsulated NiCo2N and NiFeN electrodes for a flexible solid-state ASC supercapacitor. The scheme for the preparation of NiCo2N@NG and NiFeN@NG is shown in Fig. 11e. The average size of NiCo2N is ∼10–12 nm and is encapsulated in NG sheets, with thin NG shell size of ∼1.5 nm integrating the NiCo2N core. Flexible asymmetric supercapacitor fabricated by NiCo2N@NG was used as the cathode and NiFeN@NG used as the anode. In the CV curves, a nearly rectangular shape is seen in the flexible ASC; an insufficient redox reaction occurs with excellent charge storage reversibility, which corresponds to the charge–discharge curve (Fig. 11f and g). The flexible ASC delivers an energy and power density of 94.93 W h kg−1 and 0.79 kW kg−1, respectively. As assembled ASC shows outstanding cycling stability of ∼5.07% capacity decline after 25000 cycles (Fig. 11h and i). Moreover, Ishaq et al.102 reported the ASC device assembled using fluorinated graphene-supported NiCoFe (NiFeN@FG) as the anode and activated carbon as the cathode. The fabricated electrodes enhance the electron and charge transfer due to electrical contact between NiCoFeN and FG (fluorinated graphene) and improve the conductivity and stability due to the synergistic effect and semi-ionic C–F bond on the carbon skeleton; fluorinated graphene (FG) contains fluorine atoms covalently bound to carbon frameworks.103 The fabricated asymmetric device (NiCoFeN@FG//AC) showed a high energy and power density of 56.3 W h kg−1 and 374.6 W kg−1, respectively. Similarly, Sharma and his group104 developed nickel–molybdenum nitride (Ni3Mo3N) by a one-pot hydrothermal method and ammonolysis. The as-developed material is used in ASC as the negative and AC is used as the positive electrode; the as-fabricated ASC shows a high energy density of 34.89 W h kg−1 and a power density of 16000 W kg−1 with 95.7% capacitance over 3000 cycles. It is through the electronic structure that we can establish a direct correlation between the microscopic structure and the macroscopic properties. To improve the electrochemical properties of TMNs, it is important to regulate their electronic structures. The TMN's electronic structure can be controlled by tuning various parameters, such as the doping content of heteroatoms, composition of the heterostructure, and multi-metal composition. Fig. 12 shows the Ragone plot of different recently reported TMN with high energy and power density as an electrode; VN and TiN have high energy density and power density. In MoN, the device shows a low energy density and power density than VN and TiN, while NiN shows a high-power density and CoN shows an average energy density with power density.
 Fig. 11  (a) XRD of TiNbN. (b) CV curves of TiNbN//VN at 500 mV s−1. (c) GCD curve at different current densities. (d) Ragone plot of the TiNbN//VN ASC device. (e) Schematic illustration of NiCo2N@NG and NiFeN@NG. (f and g) CV and GCD curves of the flexible NiCo2N@NG//NiFeN@NG ASC device. (h) Cycling stability test of the ASC device at 25000 cycles. (i) Ragone plot of the ASC device. (a–d) Is reproduced from ref. 100 with permission Elsevier, copyright 2021. (e–i) is reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Wiley Publishing Group, copyright 2018. 
 Fig. 12  Ragone plot of transition metal nitrides. 
Conclusion and prospects
Recently, research into supercapacitors is principally focused on improving the energy density without compromising the power density and cycling stability. In this context, different electrode materials and their composites have been explored. Yet, there is a need to understand the charge storage mechanisms and the respective terminologies better. There is no doubt that despite the impressive advancements, new approaches should be developed to enlarge the voltage window in order to increase the energy density. Although TMNs present many advantages in energy storage application, many challenges and directions still need to be addressed. TMNs are chemically inert, making them stable during electrochemical reactions; the original TMNs may lack active sites for electrochemical reactions. The computational study showed that (i) doping can modify TMNs, shift the d-band center, tune the orbital, and induce more active sites, thus enhancing the electrochemical performance. (ii) in the heterostructure, TMNs coupled with other compounds through the strong interaction and electrons accumulate at the interface, resulting in a customized electronic structure and high adsorption efficiency of the reactants, which delivers high electrode activity for electrochemical devices. Computational techniques can predict the TMN compositions by considering the terminal groups and multi-element compounds but many TMNs have yet to be developed experimentally. This study highlights the synthesis strategy, electronic structure engineering, and research progress for transition metal nitride electrodes for the supercapacitor. Using the synthesis strategy, 2D transition metal nitrides can be developed by etching the nitride by MAX precursor and the transformation from transition metal oxides and hydroxides to TMNs is summarized. In addition, electronic structure engineering strategies such as heteroatom-doped TMN, heterostructure-based TMN, and multimetal TMN are addressed. This study highlights the recent developments in transition metal nitride electrodes for supercapacitors. The performance of transition metal nitrides in the supercapacitors is exhibited in Table 1. Despite many excellent electrochemical results, the fabrication of a new solid-state supercapacitor is at an early stage, and it needs to be changed to improve the electrochemical performance at a practical level. Based on the content of this review article, the following research and development paths should be pursued for TMNs SCs in future research.
(1) Material properties: the electrochemical performance of transition metal nitrides is influenced by its surface area, pore size distribution, and structure. However, TMNs have insufficient activity. Structural and morphological modifications are essential for improving the activity of TMNs. The different nanostructures, including core–shell, alloying and heteroatom doping, were explored to enhance the electrochemical performance further.
(2) Electrolyte: the energy density of the supercapacitor is dependent on the voltage window; the range of the voltage window is from 1.5 to 2.0 V, which is not beneficial at a practical level. The most research is conducted on electrode materials. However, the resultant electrochemical performance is equally dependent on the electrolyte. To increase the voltage window and energy density of HSCs, it is necessary to test newly developed electrolytes with high ionic conductivity and, most importantly, high overpotential for OER and HER, such as ionic liquids, deep eutectic salt, and water-in-salt.
(3) Composite of TMNs: although TMNs have a higher specific capacitance in acidic or basic electrolytes, they typically have poor cycling stability in these electrolytes. Hybrid composites play an important role in the development of stable electrodes. Thus, TMNs must be modified or composited with other materials, such as carbon and conducting polymer, to increase the cyclability and capacitance. Carbon materials and TMNs were reported to have good conductivity and stability. Composites made from carbon material and TMNs can offer excellent stability, attractive rate capability, and high capacity.
(4) Synthesis route: as TMNs are prepared via the topochemical reaction by nitriding metal oxide precursors. However, this process takes place in the presence of oxygen in the bulk of the TMNs, which results in a different composition in the final product. In spite of this, it is unclear how oxygen concentrations and metal oxynitride microstructures affect the capacitance of the TMNs. The method for synthesizing TMN is still the high-temperature reduction of NH3, which is hazardous, expensive, and not environment friendly. TMN electrodes require standardized methods for reporting the physicochemical parameters.
(5) Device fabrication: despite the challenges in synthesizing TMNs, researchers have reported TMN supercapacitors with excellent electrochemical performance. In most of the reports, symmetric and asymmetric supercapacitors are described. Flexible electronic devices have attracted great attention, and it is highly demanded to have flexible devices with high energy density. Increasing the capacitance and energy density using HSCs is one way to solve this issue. Thus, developing HSCs based on TMNs electrodes is highly desirable, and there is potential for further research in this area.
In summary, the present review has summarized the development of TMNs as electrode materials. In recent years, TMNs have attracted a great deal of attention for their widespread use in energy storage. The recent progress in supercapacitors suggests that TMNs will play a vital role in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea grant funded by the Ministry of Science and the Korean Government (MSIT), Republic of Korea (NRF-2022R1A2C1012419, 2021M3H4A6A01045764, and 2022R1A2C1011559). This work was also supported by the KENTECH Research Grant funded by the Korea Institute of Energy Technology, Republic of Korea (KRG2022-01-016).
References
F. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6816–6854 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, D.-H. Kim and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2065–2129 RSC .
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2280–2301 RSC .
E. Pomerantseva, F. Bonaccorso, X. Feng, Y. Cui and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2019, 366, eaan8285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, H. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Ling, M. Yu, T. Zhai, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2676–2682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Libich, J. Máca, J. Vondrák, O. Čech and M. Sedlaříková, J. Energy Storage, 2018, 17, 224–227 CrossRef .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 867–884 RSC .
P. Sharma and T. S. Bhatti, Energy Convers. Manage., 2010, 51, 2901–2912 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang and J. Liu, Energy Environ. Mater., 2019, 2, 30–37 CrossRef .
J. Sun, C. Wu, X. Sun, H. Hu, C. Zhi, L. Hou and C. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9443–9464 RSC .
Y. Zhang, S. Yang, S. Wang, H. K. Liu, L. Li, S. X. Dou and X. Liu, Small, 2018, 14, 1800480 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yu, S. Yun, J. S. Yeon, P. Bhattacharya, L. Wang, S. W. Lee, X. Hu and H. S. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702930 CrossRef .
A. Borenstein, O. Hanna, R. Attias, S. Luski, T. Brousse and D. Aurbach, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12653–12672 RSC .
J. Shi, B. Jiang, C. Li, F. Yan, D. Wang, C. Yang and J. Wan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 245, 122533 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, L. Guo, X. Sun, J. Zhang, L. Hou, L. Li, S. Yang and C. Yuan, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 820–841 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, X. Chen, X. Zhang and G. Cui, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1946–1956 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagai, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 322, 178–190 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Ningthoujam and N. S. Gajbhiye, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 70, 50–154 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Papaconstantopoulos, W. E. Pickett, B. M. Klein and L. L. Boyer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1985, 31, 752–761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, S. Piao, Y. Choi, L. Lyu, H. Hong, D. Kim, J. Lee, W. Zhang and Y. Piao, EnergyChem, 2022, 4, 100072 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, H. Chen, D. Shu, C. He and J. Nan, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2009, 70, 495–500 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, Y. Wang and H. Du, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2013, 178, 1443–1451 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, B. Wei, D. Zhang, Z. Qi and Z. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2018, 229, 17–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arif, A. Sanger and A. Singh, Mater. Lett., 2018, 220, 213–217 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Ting, K. Lian and N. Kherani, ECS Trans., 2011, 35, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Song, J. Cai, X. Zheng, D. Han, Y. Wu, Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Liu, J. Zhu, X. Liu and G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5076–5080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Tareen, G. S. Priyanga, K. Khan, E. Pervaiz, T. Thomas and M. Yang, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 3941–3954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, B. He, H.-Q. Peng, Y. Zhao, J. Cheng, J. Xia, J. Shen, T.-W. Ng, X. Meng, C.-S. Lee and W. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800406 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Xing, J. Sunarso, W. Yang, Y. Yin, A. M. Glushenkov, L. H. Li, P. C. Howlett and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7970–7976 RSC .
P. S. Kollipara, J. Li and Y. Zheng, Research, 2020, 2020, 6581250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Le, Y. Oh, H. Kim and H. Yoon, Chem.–Eur. J., 2020, 26, 6360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. He, Z. Wang, F. Zhong, H. Fang, P. Wang and W. Hu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900064 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu and F. Geng, Carbon Energy, 2021, 3, 142–152 CrossRef CAS .
T. Qiu, G. Li, Y. Shao, K. Jiang, F. Zhao and F. Geng, Carbon Energy, 2020, 2, 624–634 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dai, K. Huang, Y. Xia and Z. Xu, Green Energy Environ., 2021, 6, 193–211 CrossRef .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib and Y. Gogotsi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 128–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Ma, X. Zhang, S. Abdolhosseinzadeh, H. Sheng, W. Lan, A. Pakdel, J. Heier and F. Nüesch, Energy Environ. Mater., 2020, 3, 29–55 CrossRef CAS .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, T. Makaryan, D. Er, S. Kota, P. L. Walsh, M. Zhao, V. B. Shenoy, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385–11391 RSC .
A. Djire, A. Bos, J. Liu, H. Zhang, E. M. Miller and N. R. Neale, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2785–2795 CrossRef CAS .
B. Soundiraraju and B. K. George, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8892–8900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Venkateshalu, J. Cherusseri, M. Karnan, K. S. Kumar, P. Kollu, M. Sathish, J. Thomas, S. K. Jeong and A. N. Grace, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 17983–17992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, F. Wang, V. B. Shenoy, M. Tang and J. Lou, Mater. Today, 2020, 40, 132–139 CrossRef CAS .
S. Joshi, Q. Wang, A. Puntambekar and V. Chakrapani, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1257–1262 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lai, W. Niu, R. Luque and G. Xu, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 240–267 CrossRef CAS .
H.-h. Liu, H.-l. Zhang, H.-b. Xu, T.-p. Lou, Z.-t. Sui and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5246–5253 RSC .
X. Xiao, H. Yu, H. Jin, M. Wu, Y. Fang, J. Sun, Z. Hu, T. Li, J. Wu, L. Huang, Y. Gogotsi and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, X. Yang, X. Xiao, M. Chen, Q. Zhang, L. Huang, J. Wu, T. Li, S. Chen, L. Song, L. Gu, B. Y. Xia, G. Feng, J. Li and J. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805655 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xiao, H. Wang, P. Urbankowski and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8744–8765 RSC .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, K. Hantanasirisakul, L. Yang, L. Zhang, B. Haines, S. J. May, S. J. L. Billinge and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17722–17730 RSC .
G.-D. Sun, G.-H. Zhang and K.-C. Chou, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2018, 101, 2796–2808 CrossRef CAS .
F.-C. Shen, S.-N. Sun, Z.-F. Xin, S.-L. Li, L.-Z. Dong, Q. Huang, Y.-R. Wang, J. Liu and Y.-Q. Lan, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 470–480 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, E. J. Sandoz-Rosado, S. H. Tsang, J. Lin, M. Zhu, G. Mallick, Z. Liu and E. H. T. Teo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902663 CrossRef .
Z. Qi, B. Wei, J. Wang, Y. Yang and Z. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 806, 953–959 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wei, G. Mei, H. Liang, Z. Qi, D. Zhang, H. Shen and Z. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 385, 39–44 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Y. Chen, J. Zhang, W. Tian, L. Wang, Z. Ren, X. Ren, X. Li, B. Gao, X. Peng, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 128–136 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Peng, Y. Xiao, Y. Xu, L. Chen, Y. Xiong, L. Tan, K. Yuan and Y. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900550 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Q. Wu, B. B. Yang, H. Li, H. Y. Tong, X. Wang, H. Li, C. D. Li, L. L. Zhu, R. H. Wei, L. Hu, C. H. Liang, X. B. Zhu and Y. P. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2021, 507, 230269 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, H. Fan, Y. Zhang, X. Liang, Q. Chen and X. Xia, Small, 2020, 16, 2003434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, X. Wang, Z. Pan, J. Sun, J. Zhao, J. Zhang, C. Zhang, L. Tang, J. Luo, B. Song, Z. Zhang, W. Lu, Q. Li, Y. Zhang and Y. Yao, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2719–2726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jia, Y. Cai, S. Li, X. Zheng, L. Miao, Z. Wang, J. Qi, J. Cao, J. Feng and W. Fei, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 560, 122–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gao, S. Yang, S. Wang and L. Li, Scr. Mater., 2022, 213, 114605 CrossRef CAS .
S. Venkateshalu and A. N. Grace, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 341, 136035 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, K. Zhu, Z. Meng, R. Hu, J. Wang, C. Wang and P. K. Chu, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 35726–35736 RSC .
P. Qin, X. Li, B. Gao, J. Fu, L. Xia, X. Zhang, K. Huo, W. Shen and P. K. Chu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8728–8734 RSC .
S. Chen, L. Wang and X. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 423, 130162 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qin, C. Huang, B. Gao, C. Pi, J. Fu, X. Zhang, K. Huo and P. K. Chu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 503, 144293 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hou, Q. Li, L. Zhang, T. Yang, J. Chen and L. Su, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 319–326 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, F. Li, F. Zhu and O. G. Schmidt, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800367 Search PubMed .
N. Sun, D. Zhou, W. Liu, A. Li, Y. Su, P. Jiang, Y. Zou, S. Shi and F. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2021, 489, 229406 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Liu, W. G. Pell, B. E. Conway and S. L. Roberson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1882–1888 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dubal, S. Abdel-Azeim, N. R. Chodankar and Y.-K. Han, iScience, 2019, 16, 50–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Adalati, A. Kumar, Y. Kumar and R. Chandra, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 2000466 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, G. Long, C. Fu, M. Pang, Y. Xi, J. Li, W. Han, G. Wei and Y. Ji, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 345, 186–195 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lv, H. Ma, L. Shen, Y. Jiang, T. Sun, J. Ma, X. Geng, A. Kiran and N. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 29780–29787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tan, L. Meng, Y. Wang, W. Dong, L. Kong, L. Kang and F. Ran, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 277, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, X. Dai, K. Sun, X. Xie, F. Wang, G. Ma and Z. Lei, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 12623–12629 RSC .
Y. Yu, W. Gao, Z. Shen, Q. Zheng, H. Wu, X. Wang, W. Song and K. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16633–16641 RSC .
J.-F. Gao, W.-B. Zhang, Z.-Y. Zhao and L.-B. Kong, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1178–1188 RSC .
R. Adalati, A. Kumar, M. Sharma, P. Tiwari and R. Chandra, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 117, 123904 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Chodankar, H. D. Pham, A. K. Nanjundan, J. F. S. Fernando, K. Jayaramulu, D. Golberg, Y.-K. Han and D. P. Dubal, Small, 2020, 16, 2002806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar and S. Qiao, Small, 2019, 15, 1804104 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Prakash, A. Kumar, A. Pandey and D. Kaur, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 10823–10832 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, X. Li, D. Chen, D. Zhao and X. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24603–24613 RSC .
Y. Li, M. Chen, B. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Liang and X. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000927 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, W. Zang, C. Guan, L. Zhang, Y. Qian, A. M. Elshahawy, D. Zhao, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2462–2469 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hu, C. Tang, C. Li, H. Li, Y. Wang and H. Gong, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A695 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, B. Zhang, W. Pan, H. Ma and J. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4170–4177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Durai, P. Kuppusami, T. Maiyalagan, J. Theerthagiri, P. Vinoth Kumar and H.-S. Kim, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 12643–12653 CrossRef CAS .
A. Achour, M. Chaker, H. Achour, A. Arman, M. Islam, M. Mardani, M. Boujtita, L. Le Brizoual, M. A. Djouadi and T. Brousse, J. Power Sources, 2017, 359, 349–354 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, G. Qu, C. Wang, X. Zhang, G. Xiang, P. Hou and X. Xu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 18400–18408 RSC .
J. Deng, X. Yu, X. Qin, D. Zhou, L. Zhang, H. Duan, F. Kang, B. Li and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803612 CrossRef .
M. Aras, Ç. Kılıç and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 1547–1555 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Luo, Y. Chen, Z. Li, J. Shi, G. Wang and R. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 382–392 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Akbar Sial, L. Thai Duy, R. Singh, S. Iqbal, R. Yeasmin, Y.-J. Lee, S. S. Kalanur and H. Seo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 555, 149718 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Q. Zhang, Q. Li, J. Sun, C. Li, B. He, Z. Zhou, L. Xie, M. Li and Y. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29705–29711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, Q. Zhang, J. Sun, C. Liu, J. Guo, B. He, Z. Zhou, P. Man, C. Li, L. Xie and Y. Yao, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801379 CrossRef PubMed .
P. A. Shinde, S. Park, N. R. Chodankar, S. Park, Y.-K. Han, A. G. Olabi and S. C. Jun, Appl. Mater. Today, 2021, 22, 100951 CrossRef .
B. Wei, F. Ming, H. Liang, Z. Qi, W. Hu and Z. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2021, 481, 228842 CrossRef CAS .
J. Balamurugan, T. T. Nguyen, V. Aravindan, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804663 CrossRef .
M. Ishaq, M. Jabeen, W. Song, L. Xu, W. Li and Q. Deng, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 282, 913–922 CrossRef CAS .
W. Feng, P. Long, Y. Feng and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500413 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kumar, T. Bhuvana and A. Sharma, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 14067–14074 RSC .
G.-H. An, D.-Y. Lee and H.-J. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19714–19720 RSC .
Y. Wu, Y. Yang, X. Zhao, Y. Tan, Y. Liu, Z. Wang and F. Ran, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 63 CrossRef PubMed .
P. A. Shinde, N. R. Chodankar, S. Lee, E. Jung, S. Aftab, Y.-K. Han and S. C. Jun, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 127029 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ruan, L. Lv, Z. Li, C. Wang and J. Jiang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18032–18041 RSC .
Y. Tan, W. Dong, Y. Li, R. Muchakayala, L. Kong, L. Kang and F. Ran, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 17895–17901 RSC .
X. Hou, Q. Li, L. Zhang, T. Yang, J. Chen and L. Su, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 319–326 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yao, M. Li, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Song, W. Xiao, A. Cruz, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 12, 3 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Ansari, N. A. Khan, Z. Hasan, A. A. Shaikh, F. K. Ferdousi, H. R. Barai, N. S. Lopa and M. M. Rahman, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2480–2490 RSC .
H. Qi, S. Yick, O. Francis, A. Murdock, T. van der Laan, K. Ostrikov, Z. Bo, Z. Han and A. Bendavid, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 138–146 CrossRef .
H. Cui, G. Zhu, X. Liu, F. Liu, Y. Xie, C. Yang, T. Lin, H. Gu and F. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500126 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Tan, L. Niu, L. Kong, L. Kang and F. Ran, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 262, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu and F. Ran, J. Power Sources, 2017, 344, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, X. Jiao, T. You, F. Dai, P. Zhang, F. Yu, L. Hu, L. Ding, L. Zhang, Z. Wen and Y. Wu, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 4283–4289 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, P. Yang, D. Chao, X. Wang, X. Zhang, S. Chen, B. K. Tay, H. Huang, H. Zhang, W. Mai and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4566–4571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Shivraj Mahadik	Mr Shivraj Mahadik is a doctoral student at Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea. He received a bachelor's degree in physics from Shivaji University, Kolhapur. Subsequently, he earned his master's degree from Sanjay Ghodawat University, Kolhapur in 2019. His research focuses on advanced materials for energy storage and conversion.
Subramani Surendran	Dr Subramani Surendran is a postdoctoral researcher at the Hydrogen Energy Technology Laboratory, Korea Institute of Energy Technology (KENTECH), Republic of Korea. He received his PhD degree in flexible hybrid supercapacitors and water electrolyzers from Bharathiar University, India. He completed a research internship at DGIST, Republic of Korea. Since then, he has been a postdoctoral scholar at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Chonnam National University upto February 2022. His research focuses on the experimental and theoretical interplay of electrochemistry for developing new electrode materials that are multifunctional toward various energy storage and conversion devices.
Joon Young Kim	Dr Joon Young Kim received his PhD in applied chemistry with Nam Ho Heo at the Kyungpook National University (KNU) in 2019. He is currently a postdoctoral associate at the Hydrogen Energy Technology Laboratory, Korea Institute of Energy Technology (KENTECH), Republic of Korea. He is attempting to find and develop new zeolitic quantum dots for energy production, conversion, and storage.
Tae-Hoon Kim	Prof. Tae-Hoon Kim is an assistant professor at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea. He received his bachelor's, M.S., and PhD degrees from Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU) in 2010, 2012, and 2016, respectively. In 2012–2015, he was granted the Global PhD Fellowship by NRF Korea. He worked at Ames Laboratory in USA as a postdoctoral research associate for 4 years (2017–2021). He joined Chonnam National University in 2021. His research interests include multiscale materials characterization with electron microscopy, as well as microstructure and related physical properties in various materials such as semiconductor, metals, magnets, and nanomaterials.
Jung Kyu Kim	Prof. Jung Kyu Kim is a tenure-track assistant professor at School of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Republic of Korea. He received his bachelor's, M.S., and PhD degrees from SKKU in 2010, 2012, and 2015, respectively. In 2012–2015, he was granted the Global PhD Fellowship by NRF Korea. In 2015–2018, he was a postdoctoral visiting research scholar at Stanford University, USA. Since 2018, his research group has focused on diverse energy conversions with tailored nanostructures including solar-to-electric, solar-to-electrochemical, and electric-to-chemical energy conversions.
Uk Sim	Prof. Uk Sim is an associate professor at the Hydrogen Energy Technology Laboratory, Korea Institute of Energy Technology (KENTECH), Republic of Korea. He received his B.S., (2007), M.S., (2009), and PhD degree (2016) from Seoul National University. Since then, he has been a postdoctoral scholar at Stanford University until 2017. He was an associate professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Chonnam National University. He serves as the founder and CEO of Neel Sciences INC., a research institute. His research focuses mainly on developing nanomaterials for energy production, conversion, storage, and renewable energy produced by photo- or electrochemical reactions to create a future sustainable energy system.
C = εA/d	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Development of different materials for supercapacitors.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the advantages and disadvantages of TMNs.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication process of Ti4N3Tx by molten salt treatment. (b) SEM image of Ti4N3Tx synthesized by molten salt treatment. (c) Synthesis of Ti2NTx by oxygen-assisted molten salt of Ti2AlN. (a and b) Were reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (c) Is reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for MoN. (b) Side and top view image of MoN. (c) Synthesis procedure of P-doped NiMo4N5. (a and b) Were reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) Is reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 
VNxOy + OH ⟷ VNxOy//OH− + VNxOy–OH	(2)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of CC/CW/p-VN@C and Na0.5MnO2 on carbon cloth. (b) Schematic representation of ASC using CC/CW/p-VN@C as the positive electrode and Na0.5MnO2 as a negative electrode. (c) Cyclic voltammograms of ASC device. (d and e) CV and GCD of the ASCs at different scan rates and current densities. (f) Ragone plot of ASCs. (a–f) Is reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from the Wiley Publishing Group, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration for fabricating a TiN supercapacitor. (b) Schematic illustration of a TiN-based supercapacitor operating at −40 °C under solar illumination. (c and d) CV and GCD curves of the devices. (e) Areal capacitance at different temperatures. (f) Ragone plots of devices. (g) Capacitance retention at −40 °C with and without solar illumination. A representation of CV curves for devices under different conditions is shown in the inset. (a–g) Is reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Experimetal scheme of CC@MoN and CC@NiCo2O4. (b) Schematic diagram of flexible ASCs with PALi electrolyte, (c and d) CV curves at different voltage windows at 100 mV s−1 and different scan rates. (e) Cycling stability test over 10000 cycles. (f) Flexible self-powered smart sensor and system. (a–f) Is reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of W2N@P-CF formation. (b and c) CV and charge–discharge curve at different scan rates and current density. (d) Ragone plot of the ASC device. (e) Cycling stability over 20000 cycles. (f) Device demonstration of W2N@P-CF and PPy@CF shows an LED powered during discharge. (a–f) Is reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the Wiley Publishing Group, copyright 2018.	 

VN/CNF	6 M KOH	800	53.1	2700	
105

VN/C	6 M KOH	122	43.0	800	
106

VN@NC	1 M KOH	113.4 mA h g−1	68.83	2048	
107

Ni–MoN/NF	6 M KOH	2446 mC cm−2	40.9	773	
108

MoO2/Mo2N	1 M H2SO4	348	3.75	3000	
109

TiN	1 M N2SO4	7.48 F cm−3	0.34 mW h cm−3	586.5 mW cm−3	
110

TiN	0.5 M N2SO4	164.5	3.26 mW h cm−3	78.3 mW cm−3	
111

TiN	1 M LiClO4	53.66 F cm−2	68.70 mW h cm−2	1.90 × 104 mW h cm−2	
112

TiN/VG	1 M Li2SO4	9.0 F cm−2	6.1 μW h cm−2	2718.4 μW h cm−2	
113

Nb4N5	1 M H2SO4	225.8 mF cm−2	4.66 mW h cm−3	24.56 W cm−3	
114

CNS@VN	6 M KOH	300.4 	18.80	800	
115

VN QD/CNF	6 M KOH	406.5	31.2	774.6	
116

h-BN/C	2 M KOH	250	17	245	
117

CrN	0.5 M H2SO4	31.3 mF cm−2	14.4 mW h cm−3	0.3 W cm−3	
54

TiN@GNS//Fe2N@GNS	1 M LiCl	58	15.4	6400	
118


 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of Ni, Co–N@CC formation. (b) CV curves of the cathode and anode at 50 mV s−1. (c) Ragone plot of Ni, Co–N@CC, (d) scheme of the fabrication of B–Co4N on Ni foam. (e) Schematic of the B–Co4N/AC solid-state hybrid supercapacitor (HSC). (f and g) CV curves of HSCs at 10 mV s−1 and GCD curve at different current densities. (h) Cycling stability of the HSC device over 5000 cycles at 10 A g−1. (a–c) Is reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (d–h) Is reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from the RSC, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration for the preparation of Ni–CoN@NC. (b) Electrical pathway of Ni–CoN@NC. (c and d) Schematic illustration of the Ni–CoN@NC//AC ASCs device. CV curves of Ni–CoN@NC and activated carbon at 20 mV s−1. (e) Ragone plot of the Ni–CoN@NC//AC ASCs device. (f) Scheme for the preparation of TiN NWAs@V2O5, (g) SEM image of TiN NWAs and TiN NWAs@V2O5 core–shell heterostructure. (h) CV curves of the fiber-shaped asymmetric supercapacitor (FASCs). (i) CV curves of the FASC at 100 mV s−1 at different bending angles. (a–e) Is reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (f–i) Is reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) XRD of TiNbN. (b) CV curves of TiNbN//VN at 500 mV s−1. (c) GCD curve at different current densities. (d) Ragone plot of the TiNbN//VN ASC device. (e) Schematic illustration of NiCo2N@NG and NiFeN@NG. (f and g) CV and GCD curves of the flexible NiCo2N@NG//NiFeN@NG ASC device. (h) Cycling stability test of the ASC device at 25000 cycles. (i) Ragone plot of the ASC device. (a–d) Is reproduced from ref. 100 with permission Elsevier, copyright 2021. (e–i) is reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Wiley Publishing Group, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 12  Ragone plot of transition metal nitrides.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
