Intercalation materials for secondary batteries based on alkali metal exchange: developments and perspectives  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA03115A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA03115A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16854-16883Intercalation materials for secondary batteries based on alkali metal exchange: developments and perspectives

        
          
            Christian 
            Heubner
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Tobias 
            Lein
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Schneider
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Alexander 
            Michaelis
          
          
        
      ab
aFraunhofer IKTS, Fraunhofer Institute for Ceramic Technologies and Systems, 01277 Dresden, Germany. E-mail: christian.heubner@ikts.fraunhofer.de;  Fax: +49 351 2554 176;   Tel: +49 351 2553 7324
bInstitute of Materials Science, TU Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
Received 
      18th March 2020
    , Accepted 14th July 2020First published on 14th July 2020AbstractChemical and electrochemical alkali metal exchange (AME) techniques are powerful tools to synthesize and investigate active materials for secondary Li-, Na- and K- or mixed-ion batteries. AME can provide fundamental insights regarding the differences of Li-, Na- and K-ion analogue intercalation materials with respect to important battery performance metrics as well as kinetics, thermodynamics, phase transition behavior, etc. For this purpose, the alkali-ions stored inside an intercalation material are (electro)chemically extracted and replaced by another ionic species. This procedure can allow preservation of a desired (metastable) host structure or preparation of mixed ionic species that cannot be obtained by common solid-state or hydrothermal synthesis routes. Herein, recent insights and research trends related to the AME in intercalation hosts for secondary batteries are reviewed. The fundamentals of AME techniques are presented and discussed regarding individual advantages and disadvantages. Recent results obtained from AME are reported for different classes of intercalation materials, particularly polyanionic compounds, layered oxides and spinel oxides. The main differences found for the different crystal structures and promising perspectives related to AME processes are highlighted.Christian HeubnerChristian Heubner graduated from TU Dresden as a chemical engineer in 2012 and received his Ph.D. in Materials Science in 2016 under the supervision of Professor Alexander Michaelis. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Institute of Materials Science (TU Dresden) and joined the Department of Mobile Energy Storage Systems and Electrochemistry of the Fraunhofer IKTS in 2019. His research interests mainly focus on electrochemistry and modelling of materials for energy storage, including Li-ion and next generation batteries.Tobias LeinTobias Lein received his Master of Science degree (Chemistry and Energy) in 2018 from the University of Applied Science Zittau/Görlitz under the supervision of Professor Klaus Seibt and Professor Jens Weber. He is now a PhD candidate under the guidance of Professor Alexander Michaelis at TU Dresden in collaboration with the Fraunhofer IKTS. His current research interest focuses on the electrochemical Li/Na substitution of intercalation materials for secondary batteries.Michael SchneiderMichael Schneider was born in 1962. He studied metal science at Bergakademie Freiberg and received his diploma degree in 1989. From 1990 to 1992 he worked at the Max-Planck-Institut für Eisenforschung Düsseldorf under the supervision of Dr. Martin Stratmann. In 1993, he received his Dr.-Ing. degree from TU Dresden. From 2001–2006 he managed the working group Corrosion at Fraunhofer IFAM Bremen. Currently, he is group manager of Electrochemistry at the Fraunhofer IKTS in Dresden. His reasearch interest is related to electrochemical energy storage, functional layers for corrosion protection, and electrochemical machining.Alexander MichaelisAlexander Michaelis received his degree in physics and PhD in electrochemistry from the University of Düsseldorf (Germany). Since 2004, he has been president of the Fraunhofer Institute for Ceramic Technologies and Systems IKTS and has held the chair of Inorganic Nonmetallic Materials at Technische Universität Dresden. In 2015 he was appointed for the LEE HSUN Award on Materials Science. He is Fellow of the American and the European Ceramic Society. In 2019 he was elected President of the German Ceramic Society. He holds more than 40 patent families in materials science, microelectronics and electronics, and has published more than 360 publications.
1. Introduction
As a result of the growing energy demands, resource constraints and environmental impact of fossil fuels and the climate change debate, sustainable energy storage has become a global concern.1,2 Electrochemical energy storage (EES) systems, such as rechargeable batteries and electrochemical capacitors, play a crucial role in supporting consumer electronics and automotive and stationary storage markets.3,4 Generally, EES systems provide a wide range of energy and power densities for different applications, excellent energy conversion efficiency and long cycle and calendar life with relatively low maintenance. Rechargeable batteries with high energy density are particularly suited to integrate renewable resources, providing intermittent electricity to the grid.5 For instance, battery systems can store the excess energy of local wind and solar plants, which can later be used to charge electric vehicles or for residential electricity supply.6,7
Rechargeable Li-ion batteries (LIBs) are currently applied on a large scale as a power source in portable electronic devices and are considered the most promising candidates to power electric vehicles.8–10 However, LIBs are reaching their limits in many respects. Conventional LIBs with liquid electrolytes are approaching their theoretical limits in view of energy and power density,11 while still suffering from safety concerns.12–14 Regarding the expectations on the global demand for rechargeable batteries, including mobile as well as stationary energy storage solutions, concerns over the cost, safety and availability of lithium reserves become obvious, although they are not shared by all experts in the field.15
Accordingly, there is a need to explore battery chemistries with low cost, high safety and superior energy density based on elements with high availability, such as Na or K (cf.Table 1).16–18 Thereby, it appears obvious to transfer the tremendous scientific knowledge in Li-ion technology to accelerate the development of alkali-metal analogous batteries, especially concerning synthesis routes and intercalation chemistries (cf.Fig. 1). Intercalation type materials can be classified into three groups related to the nature of ion transport channels in the crystal lattice. Olivine, layered and spinel type materials exhibit 1D, 2D and 3D diffusion channels, respectively (cf.Fig. 1). Recent attempts to synthesize Li-analogous intercalation materials for Na- and K-ion batteries (SIBs and PIBs) partly fell short of expectations and gave some surprising results.19,20
Table 1 Key differences between the alkali metals lithium, sodium and potassium18




Elements
Li
Na
K




Atomic radius [pm]
167
190
243


Ionic radius [pm]
76
102
138


Atomic weight [g mol−1]
6.94
22.989
39.098



E
0
versus SHE [V]
−3.04
−2.71
−2.94


Common coordination environments
Octahedral, tetrahedral
Octahedral, prismatic
Octahedral, prismatic


Abundance in the earth's crust
Negligible
2.8
2.6


Distribution
70% in South America
Everywhere
Everywhere


Price/metric ton, carbonate (99% purity) [$]
2000–2200
200–250
500–1500


Metal electrode theoretical capacity [mA h g−1]
3829
1165
685




 Fig. 1  (a) Comparison of energy density expectations for LIBs, SIBs, and PIBs. (b) Abundance (wt%) of lithium, sodium, and potassium metal in the Earth's crust. (c) Stokes radii of Li-, Na-, and K-ions in PC. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.41 (d) Olivine, layered and spinel type cathode materials with 1D, 2D and 3D diffusion channels. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, MDPI.42 
The prime example is the olivine AMFePO4 cathode material. LiFePO4 has been studied extensively and is commercially applied as a cathode material for LIBs due to its high capacity, relatively low cost and favorable safety features. Accordingly, researchers considered NaFePO4 and KFePO4 to be promising cathode materials for SIBs and PIBs, respectively. However, a transfer of common synthesis pathways that work well for Li chemistry to the analogous Na and K systems proved to be impractical. For example, in the case of NaFePO4, high temperature synthesis leads to the formation of the thermodynamically favored maricite polymorph.21 In contrast to the triphylite polymorph, which forms in the Li-system and shows excellent cycling capabilities, the maricite polymorph is electrochemically inactive owing to one-dimensional, edge-sharing FeO6 octahedra blocking ion diffusion channels. In order to synthesize the electrochemically active triphylite polymorph of NaFePO4, researchers used alkali metal exchange (AME) techniques. The fundamental principle of AME is shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the typical AME procedure. 
An alkali-ion containing intercalation compound with the target host structure is used as the starting material. The alkali-ions stored inside the starting material are removed by chemical or electrochemical oxidation and substituted by the target alkali metal. In the case of NaFePO4, the desired host structure is obtained when using LiFePO4 as the starting material. AME techniques can be used to create novel metastable phases that cannot be prepared by common synthesis routes. Moreover, AME is perfectly suited for comparative studies on Li, Na and K analogous intercalation compounds and the preparation of mixed alkali metal containing species.
Generally, ion exchange reactions are soft chemistry (chimie douce) routes that can be applied in a broad context. This includes but is not limited to (i) anion exchange, e.g. to tune the chemical composition and the optical properties of hybrid perovskites;22 (ii) alkaline earth metals, such as Mg, e.g. for novel materials synthesis;23 (iii) other metals, such as Mn24 or Fe,25 for fundamental solid-state research. Tailoring of material properties by cation exchange has been demonstrated mainly for ionic semiconductors26–33 and recently also for ionic magnetic oxide materials.25 Cation exchange in the context of the synthesis of nanocrystals is thoroughly reviewed in ref. 34.
Herein, we review recent insights and research trends related to the exchange of alkali metal ions (Li, Na, and K) applied to intercalation hosts for secondary batteries with a focus on materials for positive electrodes (cathodes). It is worth mentioning that ion-exchange techniques can also be applied to prepare materials for negative electrodes (anodes) for secondary batteries.35–38
First, the basic principles and methods of AME are presented and discussed regarding individual advantages and disadvantages. Afterwards, the main results obtained from studies employing AME are reported for different classes of intercalation materials. The differences found for the different crystal structures and AME techniques are summarized. Applications of AME for comparative studies on Li, Na and K analogous intercalation materials and for the development of hybrid-ion batteries are briefly presented. Finally, promising perspectives related to AME processes in energy storage and materials science in general are discussed.
2. Basic principles and methods
The basic principle of AME techniques is to use a starting material (typically in the form of a powder) that exhibits a desired host structure and to exchange the stored alkali-ions with the target species (cf.Fig. 2). The existing AME methods can be categorized into three major groups, chemical, electrochemical and combined AME. The procedure for chemical AME depends on whether the exchange reaction is spontaneous or not. If the exchange reaction is spontaneous, which means that the displacement of the stored alkali-ions by the ions to be incorporated is thermodynamically favored, the starting material is dispersed in an aqueous or organic solution or molten salts containing a compound with the ions to be incorporated, typically alkali metal halides.39 Commonly this step requires increased temperatures and is performed under reflux conditions to increase the rate of the AME and can last up to several days. After finishing this step, the sample is washed and filtered multiple times to remove any residues of the exchange solution or salts to obtain the ion-exchanged material. If the exchange reaction is not spontaneous, the initial step of the chemical AME requires a partial oxidation of the starting material, which is carried out by dispersing the starting materials in an aqueous or organic solution including an oxidizing agent such as NO2BF421 or bromine.40 The partial oxidation of the starting material leads to the release of the stored alkali-ions into the solution. In some cases, increased temperatures and multiple oxidation steps (refreshing of the oxidizing agent) are required to complete or accelerate the extraction process. The deintercalated materials are then filtered and washed to remove any residues of the solution containing the initial alkali-ions. Afterwards, chemical reduction of the host lattice is performed in the presence of the alkali-ions to be incorporated, typically using alkali metal halides. Reduction of the host lattice leads to the insertion of alkali-ions for charge compensation. Again, increased temperatures and multiple reduction steps might be required. After repeated filtering and washing steps, the final alkali metal exchanged material is obtained and can be processed into electrodes.
The electrochemically driven AME requires preparing an electrode from the starting material. For this purpose, the starting material, conductive additive (e.g. carbon black) and binder (e.g. PVDF) are mixed with a solvent (e.g. N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone) to form a slurry that is coated on metallic current collector foil. After drying, an electrochemical cell is prepared, including the electrode with the starting material, a liquid electrolyte and a counter electrode (e.g. alkali metal foil). Depending on the cell chemistry and the corresponding electrochemical window, the electrolyte can be made from H2O,43 an organic solvent44 or an ionic liquid.45 In the electrochemical AME, the starting material is oxidized electrochemically by application of a positive current or a voltage higher than the equilibrium voltage of the cell, similarly to the processes occurring in an alkali-ion battery. The oxidation of the host lattice leads to extraction of the alkali-ions stored inside the starting material. After the extraction step, the electrolyte and counter electrode are replaced with appropriate components containing the target species. Electrochemical intercalation of the target alkali-ions is then carried out by application of a negative current or a potential lower than the equilibrium potential of the cell. After finishing the insertion process, an electrode containing the final alkali metal exchanged material is obtained and can be used directly for further electrochemical investigations. Some researchers also applied chemical/electrochemical combined AME methods to prepare novel active materials for secondary batteries.21 In this case, the starting material is chemically oxidized to remove the original alkali-ions as described above. The ‘empty’ intercalation host is then processed into an electrode and assembled in an electrochemical cell followed by intercalation of the target alkali-ions. This procedure requires that the deintercalated species is stable under the conditions during electrode preparation. The thermodynamic driving force during chemical AME is either a lower Gibbs energy of the ion-exchanged compound or an entropic effect caused by an excess of the ions to be incorporated. In the case of electrochemical AME, the driving force is ‘artificially controlled’ by application of an electrical potential, leading to oxidation/reduction of the intercalation host and corresponding ion extraction/insertion. The rate of both chemical and electrochemical AME can be limited, e.g. by a slow desolvation step or sluggish solid-state diffusion, resulting in slow ion exchange in the case of chemical AME and large overvoltage in the case of electrochemical AME. In extreme cases the kinetics of the AME might be completely inhibited, e.g. due to steric mismatches between vacancies and the ions to be incorporated. Comparing purely chemical and electrochemical AME, both techniques have distinct advantages and disadvantages. While the scalability of the electrochemical AME appears rather poor, the chemical AME exhibits a certain potential for the large scale production of active materials for secondary batteries and further possible applications. On the other hand, electrochemical processes generally have distinct advantages regarding direct kinetic control via the applied current or voltage, while controlling chemical processes by temperature and concentration is more elaborate. Further advantages and disadvantages of the different AME methods are discussed below in the context of specific experimental results. Table 2 lists the typical materials, AME methods applied and main findings.
Table 2 Summary of typical materials and methods and general findings of AME studies




Starting materials
AME methods
AME products
General findings
Ref.




LiFePO4
Chemical, electrochemical and combined, Na+ for Li+
NaFePO4
150 mA h g−1, host structure preserved

21



Na1.5VPO4.8F0.7
Chemical Li+ for Na+
Li1.1Na0.4VPO4.8F0.7
156 mA h g−1, host structure preserved

49



KVPO4F
Electrochemical, Li+ for K+
Li0.7K0.15VPO4F
Host structure preserved

50



Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)
Chemical, electrochemical and combined, Li+ for Na+
Li3NaFe3(PO4)2P2O7 or Li1.2Na2.4Fe3(PO4)2P2O7
130 mA h g−1, host structure preserved

51–53



Li2FeSiO4
Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+
Li0.2FeSiO4
Cycling in Na cells yields 330 mA h g−1

54



Na3APO4CO3 (A = Fe/Mn)
Chemical, Li+ for Na+
Li3FeCO3PO4 and Li2.67Na0.63Mn0.96CO3PO4
110 mA h g−1 and 135 mA h g−1

55, 56



Na2Fe2P3O9N
Chemical, Li+ for Na+
Li0.3Fe2P3O9N
125 mA h g−1, preservation of the cubic lattice

57



Na3V2(PO4)2F3
Electrochemical, K+ for Na+
NaK2V2(PO4)2F3
104 mA h g−1, cycling dominated by K+ insertion and extraction

58, 59



P2-Na0.7CoO2
Chemical, Li+ for Na+
LiCoO2
Novel polytype O2-LiCoO2

60–62



LiCoO2
Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+
Li0.5Na0.4CoO2
Na- and Li-rich domains

63



NaMnO2
Chemical, Li+ for Na+
LiMnO2
Host structure can be preserved but transforms into spinel during cycling

64–69



P2-type Na2/3[Li1/6Mn5/6]O2
Chemical, Li+ for Na+
O2-type Li2/3[Li1/6Mn5/6]O2
150 mA h g−1, stable cycling performance, no spinel transition

70



NaMn1−yCoyO2
Chemical, Li+ for Na+
LixMn1−yCoyO2
200 mA h g−1

71–73



NaNi0.5Mn0.5O2
Chemical, Li+ for Na+
LixNayNi0.5Mn0.5O2
Residual sodium stabilizes the layered structure

74



LiNi0.82Co0.12Mn0.06O2
Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+
Na0.75Ni0.82Co0.12Mn0.06O2
171 mA h g−1, host lattice preserved

75



Li1.2(Ni0.15Mn0.55Co0.1)O2
Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+
Na0.95Li0.15(Ni0.15Mn0.55Co0.1)O2
Initial capacity 238 mA h g−1

76



0.5Li2MnO3·0.5LiMn0.42Ni0.42Co0.16O2
Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+
Na:Li:(Mn + Ni + Co) = 0.832:0.16:0.8
1.08 Li+ extracted, 0.76 Na+ intercalated, 239 mA h g−1

77



Li1.167Ni0.25Mn0.583O2
Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+
Na0.78Li0.18Ni0.25Mn0.583O2−z
240 mA h g−1

78



Na3Fe3(PO4)4
Chemical, K+ for Na+
K3Fe3(PO4)4·yH2O
Lattice distortion due to Na–K size difference

79



O3-NaCrO2
Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+
P3-K0.69CrO2
100 mA h g−1, Na+ continuously replaced by K+ in the host structure

80



LiMn2O4
Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+
O′3-type NaxMnO2
Spinel to layered transition, reversible capacity 190–200 mA h g−1

81, 82



Li2MnO3
Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+
Li0.3NaMnO3
200 mA h g−1, spinel structure is preserved

83



LiNi0.5Mn1.504
Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+
Na0.87Mn1.56Ni0.44O4
Host structure preserved

84, 85





3. Polyanionic compounds
Polyanionic intercalation compounds consist of MeOx polyhedral (Me = transition metal) and tetrahedral anions (XO4)n− or their derivatives (XmO3m+1)n− (X = S, P, Si, As, Mo or W). The presence of (XO4)n− typically leads to rapid conduction of alkali-ions in the framework structure and ensures structural stability during the redox process. Due to their beneficial properties, polyanionic intercalation compounds attained great attention as cathode materials for LIBs46 and are expected to be promising cathode materials for SIBs47 and PIBs.20
3.1 LiFePO4 based compounds
Polyanionic compounds can be classified into phosphates, pyrophosphates, sulfates, mixed polyanionic compounds, silicates, molybdates and other polyanionic compounds. Among these, phosphates, pyrophosphates and sulphates are currently the three most investigated systems. Particular extensive research has been carried out on the olivine LiFePO4 cathode material for LIBs, owing to its remarkable electrochemical storage properties.48 In contrast to this, the Na-analogue NaFePO4 obtained at high temperature or under hydrothermal conditions attracted little attention as it exhibits poor electrochemical performance. This thermodynamically favored maricite NaFePO4 phase exhibits one-dimensional, edge-sharing FeO6 octahedra, preventing the transport of charge carriers within the host structure due to the absence of migration channels. Because the direct synthesis of the olivine NaFePO4 phase seemed unfavorable, researchers tried AME synthesis using LiFePO4 with the desired host structure as the starting material. Moreau et al. employed AME to investigate the structure and stability of olivine NaFePO4. First, FePO4 was obtained from olivine LiFePO4 by chemical oxidation in acetonitrile using NO2BF4 as the oxidizing agent.21 Electrodes are then prepared by a slurry-based coating process. Electrochemical cells are mounted with sodium as the negative electrode and EC:PC (1:1 wt%) with 1 M NaClO4 as the electrolyte. The cells are cycled between 2.0 and 4.0 V vs. Na/Na+. The authors found the Na-ion insertion and extraction of olivine FePO4 to be reversible. However, while Li-ion insertion and extraction of olivine FePO4 occurs via a reversible two-phase reaction between Li-rich and Li-poor phases, NaxFePO4 forms an additional intermediate phase Na0.7FePO4 and exhibits different voltage characteristics during charging and discharging (cf.Fig. 3a). The atomic structure of the fully intercalated compound was elucidated by XRD measurements and the sodium site occupancy was refined as Na1FePO4 (cf.Fig. 3b). The NaFePO4 cell parameters are found to be slightly larger than those for LiFePO4, being partially consistent with the differences of the ionic radii of Li and Na (cf.Table 1). Comparative DTA and XRD investigations on the stability of the olivine NaFePO4 obtained by AME and the well-known maricite NaFePO4 prove an irreversible transformation of the olivine phase into the maricite phase accompanied by a significant volume shrinkage during heating (cf.Fig. 3c and d). However, the results also demonstrate that the olivine NaFePO4 obtained by AME is stable enough not be transformed into the maricite phase during electrochemical cycling, which was later confirmed by several studies.43,44,86,87 Further XRD analysis of the intermediate phase indicates a Pnma orthorhombic unit-cell. Rietveld refinement gives a consistent average structure with an occupancy for the sodium site (Na0.71FePO4) in good agreement with the electrochemical experiments. However, the XRD pattern also suggests the existence of disorder or a superstructure. The authors emphasize that the occurrence of an intermediate phase illustrates the increased interactions of Na-ions with the host structure when compared to Li-ions. These first insights concerning the differences of Li-ion and Na-ion insertion into FePO4 led to a number of subsequent studies that tried to elucidate the reasons for the different insertion mechanisms. Casas-Cabanas et al. applied a purely chemical AME to investigate the crystal chemistry of Na-ion insertion and extraction of olivine NaxFePO4.88 Delithiation of carbon-coated LiFePO4 and subsequent Na-ion insertion are carried out using NO2BF4 and NaI in acetonitrile as oxidizing and reducing agents, respectively. XRD analyses of the samples prepared this way confirm the results obtained from samples made by chemical–electrochemical combined AME.21 Several reflexes remain unindexed, suggesting the need for a supercell to describe Na-ion ordering in the intermediate Na0.7FePO4 phase. Electron diffraction analyses indicate a complex variety of ordering schemes that are most likely related to slight differences in the Na-ion content. Electrochemical cycling reveals large kinetic barriers to Na-ion insertion that continuously decrease upon cycling, probably due to structural or microstructural reorganization.
 Fig. 3  (a) Typical voltage profile obtained for Na-ion insertion into olivine FePO4. (A), (B) and (C) mark the fully sodiated state (NaFePO4), the emergence of an intermediate phase during charging and the fully desodiated state (FePO4), respectively. (b) XRD data and Rietveld refinement of the NaFePO4 olivine structure. (c) Development of the XRD pattern during heating from 25–650 °C, showing the irreversible transformation of the olivine NaFePO4 into the maricite phase (the inset represents the corresponding DTA results). (d) Crystal structures of (i) maricite NaFePO4, (ii) olivine LiFePO4 and (iii) olivine NaFePO4. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.21 
In agreement with the results of Moreau et al.,21 the voltage profiles show a single plateau during discharge and two plateaus separated by a 0.2 V voltage drop upon charging. The authors explain the occurrence of the intermediate phase as a need to buffer the large cell mismatch between NaFePO4 and FePO4. As the cell mismatch between NaFePO4 and Na0.7FePO4 is much lower than that between Na0.7FePO4 and FePO4, the phase transformation behavior is asymmetrical. The appearance of FePO4 during charging is not favorable until the NaFePO4–Na0.7FePO4 transformation is finished. Consequently, the two transformations take place one after the other. During discharging, the energy penalty due to the addition of a second interface would have less impact as the FePO4–Na0.7FePO4 mismatch is already rather large and the two transformations take place simultaneously. No intermediate phase occurs in the Li–FePO4 system at room temperature. Due to the smaller ionic radius of Li compared to Na (cf.Table 1), the unit cell volume of LiFePO4 is smaller than that of NaFePO4, which leads to a reduced cell mismatch between LiFePO4 and FePO4 and therefore requires no intermediate buffer phase. Interestingly, the intermediate phase Li2/3FePO4 is formed in the Li–FePO4 system under extreme non-equilibrium conditions or at high temperature for reasons similar to those for NaFePO4 at room temperature.89,90 Several subsequent studies employed AME to prepare olivine NaFePO4 in order to further elucidate the Na-ion insertion mechanism91–93 and complex crystal structure94,95 in great detail.

3.1.1 Battery performance. 
In the above summarized studies concerning olivine NaFePO4, AME enabled preparation of materials that cannot be obtained from high temperature or hydrothermal methods. Within this framework, a number of highly relevant insights concerning the Na-ion insertion and extraction behavior are derived. Furthermore, AME is applied to prepare NaFePO4 for practical SIBs, including cycling and rate performance tests. Zaghib et al. prepared olivine NaFePO4 by AME of LiFePO4. In this case, delithiation is carried out by mixing LiFePO4 powder with bromine dissolved in water and stirred at room temperature for 24 h.40 The powders are then washed, filtered, dried at 200 °C and processed into electrodes. The olivine NaFePO4 prepared this way exhibits an initial discharge capacity of 147 mA h g−1. However, the capacity decreases rapidly with the cycle number. The authors also tried chemical delithiation with K2S2O8. In this case, the delithiation of LiFePO4 is obviously incomplete and the remaining Li-ions prevent sodium-ion intercalation, leading to even poorer electrochemical performance. Therefore, complete delithiation of polyanionic compounds appears crucial for the successful AME. For this purpose, Oh et al. adopted a refined purely electrochemical AME process to prepare olivine NaFePO4.87 LiFePO4-based electrodes are assembled in coin cells with a Li metal anode and 1 M LiPF6 in a 3:7 volumetric EC:EMC mixture as the electrolyte. A long term polarization procedure at 4.3 V, until the current reached a C/100 rate, is shown to be of critical importance to guarantee the complete delithiation of the FePO4 host structure. The delithiated electrode is then once again assembled in a coin cell but equipped with a Na metal anode and 1 M NaClO4 in a 98:2 volumetric PC:FEC mixture as the electrolyte. The electrochemical formation of the NaFePO4 is carried out at constant current (0.05C) until reaching the lower cut-off potential of 2.2 V vs. Na/Na+. In contrast to the results obtained by chemical AME, the electrodes prepared by the purely electrochemical AME exhibit excellent cycling stability and reasonable rate performance.
Heubner et al. performed in situ electrochemical AME to prepare a submicron sized NaFePO4 cathode material for SIBs.44 In contrast to the approach of Oh et al., the authors used cyclic voltammetry and high purity 1 M NaClO4 dissolved in TEGDME for the purely electrochemical preparation of olivine NaFePO4. During the first anodic sweep, Li-ions are extracted from LiFePO4 and dissolved into the electrolyte (cf.Fig. 4a). Na-ions are intercalated into FePO4 during the subsequent cathodic sweep. Two redox peaks appear at lower potentials compared to the delithiation cycle in the second anodic sweep. The CV stabilizes after the second cycle, demonstrating the completion of the LiFePO4–NaFePO4 transformation and highly reversible Na-ion insertion and extraction, again in contrast to the results obtained for the chemical AME, where the capacity rapidly decreases after the first cycle. The authors further investigated the impact of the asymmetric phase transformation behavior on the kinetics and thermodynamics.44 Entropy profiles measured after sodium-ion extraction and insertion steps significantly differ for the same formal composition (cf.Fig. 4b). Moreover, the exchange current density and the sodium diffusion coefficient exhibit a distinct path dependence related to the asymmetric phase transition behavior (cf.Fig. 4c and d), which might complicate battery diagnosis and management of SIBs employing olivine NaFePO4. Scrosati's team reported a SIB based on an electrochemically converted NaFePO4 cathode and nanostructured Sn–C anode.96 Full cells are prepared by combining a LiFePO4 cathode and Sn–C anode in a T-type Swagelok cell with 1 M NaClO4 in PC as the electrolyte. In situ formation of olivine NaFePO4 by AME is performed via galvanostatic cycling of the full cell between 1 and 4 V. Ex situ XRD analysis proves the transformation of olivine LiFePO4 into NaFePO4, although the amount of residual lithium in the system is relatively high (Na:Li ≈ 3:1). The proposed SIB delivers a maximum capacity of 150 mA h g−1 at an average voltage of 3.0 V, leading to a theoretical energy density comparable with those of current commercial LIBs, while benefiting from lower costs, owing to the replacement of lithium with sodium. This study particularly substantiates the practical applicability of AME processes. Fang et al. proposed a high-performance olivine NaFePO4 microsphere cathode synthesized by an aqueous AME schematically illustrated in Fig. 5.97 The aqueous cell exhibits a three-electrode design, with activated carbon as the counter electrode and Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode. Olivine FePO4/C is obtained by delithiation of a LiFePO4/C microsphere electrode in a 1 M Li2SO4 aqueous solution followed by washing with deionized water. The FePO4/C electrode is then transferred into a 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution followed by electrochemical Na-ion insertion. The authors performed the electrochemical conversion of LiFePO4/C into NaFePO4/C by cyclic voltammetry (CV) as well as constant current charge–discharge experiments, leading to similar results. The CV features (Fig. 5c) of the NaFePO4 are similar to those observed in organic solutions,44 indicating that the insertion mechanisms of NaFePO4 in aqueous and organic systems are generally identical.
 Fig. 4  (a) Development of cyclic voltammograms in the course of electrochemical AME of Li-ions by Na-ions in LiFePO4 (scan rate: 0.05 mV s−1, electrolyte: 1 M NaClO4 dissolved in TEGDME). Path dependence of (b) the entropy of Na-ion intercalation, (c) the exchange current density and (d) the Na-diffusion coefficient determined for the material prepared by electrochemical AME. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd.44 
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the aqueous electrochemical AME from olivine LiFePO4 to isostructural NaFePO4. (b) SEM image of an ion-exchanged NaFePO4/C microsphere, corresponding elemental maps and EDS spectrum (inset, element distribution of the mapping area). The results of electrochemical performance of the ion-exchanged NaFePO4/C material against Na-metal counter electrodes in 1.0 mol L−1 NaPF6 in an EC:DEC (1:1 by volume) electrolyte: (c) cyclic voltammogram (scan rate 50 μV s−1, potential range: 2.1–3.6 V vs. Na/Na+), (d) charge/discharge profiles obtained at 0.1C and different cycles, (e) cycling stability test at 0.1C and (f) rate performance test between 0.05 and 2C. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.97 
Materials characterization reveals that the NaFePO4/C composites retained the micro-spherical structure of the initial LiFePO4/C material and homogeneous element distribution (Fig. 5b). The NaFePO4/C cathode exhibits a specific capacity of 111 mA h g−1 and a capacity retention of 90% over 240 cycles together with a high rate capability (e.g. 46 mA h g−1 at 2C) (cf.Fig. 5d–f). The authors emphasize that the excellent electrochemical performance is a clear indicator for the suitability of the aqueous AME method as an inexpensive, effective and promising approach to prepare NaFePO4/C materials for Na-based energy storage applications. Tang et al. further improved the electrochemically driven aqueous AME to transform olivine LiFePO4 into highly pure olivine NaFePO4.43 The authors also carefully studied the kinetics of the electrochemical AME theoretically including the consideration of desolvation and adsorption energies in different electrolyte systems. Aqueous AME is carried out in a three-electrode arrangement using the SCE as the reference electrode and platinum as the counter electrode. The initial LiFePO4 electrode is delithiated at a constant current in aqueous Li2SO4 solution and then sodiated in an aqueous Na2SO4 electrolyte to form NaFePO4. The authors emphasize that the choice of anions is decisive for the temporary compensation of excess charges during the AME process. They selected SO42− as the electrolyte anions providing the fastest insertion/extraction kinetics.98 The experimental and theoretical investigations into the differences of aqueous and organic electrochemical AME processes indicate that an additional desolvation process increases the energy barrier for Na-ion intercalation in the case of organic electrolytes as schematically summarized in Fig. 6. The olivine NaFePO4 prepared by the aqueous electrochemical AME exhibits a significantly higher purity when compared to organic electrolytes. As a result, improved electrochemical performance is obtained (142 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, up to 6000 cycles at 10C). The authors attribute this behavior to the complete substitution of Li-ions by Na-ions in the FePO4 framework ensuring unrestricted pathways for fast Na-ion insertion. The main advantages of the aqueous open-air AME are its simple operation and sustainability, since there is no need for an inert atmosphere, organic solvents, and Li- and Na-metal. Furthermore, the Li-ions that accumulate in the electrolyte during delithiation can be recycled fairly easily.43
 Fig. 6  Comparison of reaction profiles for the Li/Na AME in LiFePO4 in (a) aqueous and (b) organic electrolytes. The blue (Na-based) and orange (Li-based) bars represent the energies required for desolvation and adsorption processes in the course of AME. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.43 


3.1.2 Aqueous batteries. 
The successful development of aqueous AME processes suggests the direct application of NaFePO4 in aqueous SIBs. Vujković et al. prepared olivine NaFePO4 from delithiated LiFePO4 in an aerated aqueous NaNO3 solution and attained excellent cyclic reversibility, high specific capacity and superb rate capability (e.g. 118 mA h g−1 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1).99 Similarly, the authors prepared NaFe0.95V0.05PO4/C composites by aqueous AME using LiFe0.95V0.05PO4/C as the starting material.100 NaFe0.95V0.05PO4/C is found to exhibit even faster kinetics than its undoped analogue, NaFePO4, prepared by an identical AME process (e.g. 100 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1). Moreover, an AME based aqueous rechargeable Na1.2V3O8/sat. NaNO3/NaFe0.95V0.05PO4/C battery is proposed that exhibits a specific capacity of 100 mA h g−1 at 1C and excellent cycle performance (100% and 90% capacity retention after 300 and 1000 cycles, respectively). Similarly promising results are reported for a NaFePO4/NaTi2(PO4)3 full cell derived from a purely chemical AME process.101 However, in this case, the rate performance is slightly reduced, which might be related to the remaining Li-ions in the FePO4 host lattice, blocking Na-pathways, as described above. Again, electrochemically driven AME processes appear superior over chemical AME regarding rate performance and cycling stability of the resulting insertion materials. Recently, Jeong et al. demonstrated electrochemically driven aqueous AME using AlF3-coated LiFePO4 as the starting material.102 TEM and EDX analyses reveal that the AlF3-coating layer remains intact during the AME process, providing superior surface stability and facile ion transport for long-term cycling stability and high rate capability of aqueous NaFePO4 based batteries.


3.1.3 Ionic liquid batteries. 
While aqueous SIBs provide excellent rate capability and high safety, they are limited regarding their specific energy density because the cell voltage is restricted by the electrochemical stability window of the aqueous electrolyte. Ionic liquids are considered promising alternatives for both aqueous and organic electrolytes, providing high voltage and high temperature stability as well as excellent ionic conductivity. Wongittharom et al. proposed a Na/NaFePO4 SIB based on chemical–electrochemical combined AME.45 First, FePO4 is prepared by stirring an argon purged mixture of LiFePO4 powder (1 g), NO2BF4 (1.7 g) and acetonitrile (100 mL) at 25 °C for 24 h. The obtained powder is then washed with distilled water, centrifuged, dried at 80 °C under vacuum and processed into electrodes via a slurry based coating process. Afterwards, a coin cell is assembled with a Na-metal anode and NaTFSI in butylmethylpyrrolidinium–bis-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (BMP–TFSI) as the ionic liquid electrolyte. Electrochemical Na-ion insertion from the NaTFSI in BMP–TFSI ionic liquid into the olivine FePO4 host appears similarly to the organic electrolyte. The olivine structure is preserved and substoichiometric NaxFePO4 is formed. A specific capacity of 125 mA h g−1 (at 0.05C and 50 °C) and fairly good rate performance and cycling stability are achieved. Recently, Hilder et al. employed a purely chemical AME to prepare olivine NaFePO4 followed by application in a SIB with highly concentrated sodium bis(fluorosulfonyl)-imide in different ionic liquids as the electrolyte.103 While poor performance is achieved at room temperature, operation at elevated temperature yields fairly good specific capacity and rate capability.

3.2 Other polyanionic compounds
The great success and deep insights gained from the preparation of olivine NaFePO4via AME led to a number of further studies employing other polyanionic compounds and alternative redox active transition metal cations. For example, Na-pillared LiMnPO4 (Li0.78Na0.22MnPO4) with an alluaudite structure was successfully prepared by chemical ion-exchange from Na0.67MnPO4 and a subsequent lithiation step.104 The starting material was mixed with a 5 times excess amount of the eutectic composition of LiNO3/LiCl and heated at 280 °C for 15 minutes in air. Long reaction times promote the ion-exchange but lead to partial conversion into olivine LiMnPO4. Accordingly, complete Na for Li exchange was not possible, because some residual Na ions must be present in the alluaudite structure for stabilization. When tested as a cathode material in LIBs, 0.8 lithium ions are reversibly intercalated at reasonably fast rates, indicating that the ion exchanged alluaudite LiMnPO4 is a promising cathode material.104

3.2.1 Fluorophosphates. 
Park et al.49 carefully analyzed the experimental conditions for preparing an isostructural lithium derivative of Na1.5VPO4.8F0.7 using chemical ion-exchange. Their main findings are: (i) too harsh conditions (e.g., using a LiCl/LiNO3 molten salt at 280 °C) cause phase decomposition. (ii) Too mild conditions (e.g., using ethanol at 70 °C or acetonitrile at 85 °C) are limited to an exchange ratio of 0.5 Li-ions for Na-ions. (iii) Using 1-hexanol at 160 °C and a reaction time of 6–17 h yields sufficient Li for Na exchange (Li1.1Na0.4VPO4.8F0.7), while maintaining the crystal structure. Considering that the ion-exchanged phase is stable up to 550 °C, the phase decomposition in molten salts (280 °C) suggests that a minimum amount of Na-ions in the metastable phase is required to maintain structural integrity. Above 550 °C, phase separation into a Na- and Li-rich phase occurs, complicating conventional high temperature synthesis. Electrodes prepared from the metastable ion-exchanged material show a specific capacity of 156 mA h g−1 with an average voltage of 4 V and excellent cycle stability and rate capability. In a subsequent study, Park et al. developed an in situ reactor for monitoring the Li+/Na+ ion-exchange reaction (cf.Fig. 7).105 It is applied to investigate the Li+/Na+ exchange in the LixNa1.5−xVOPO4F0.5 system (0 ≤ x ≤ 1.5) during chemical AME in a LiBr solution using a combination of time- and temperature-resolved in situ synchrotron XRD measurements. A two-phase transition from a Na-rich tetragonal phase to a Li-rich orthorhombic phase is observed at approximately x = 0.5 which can be described using a core–shell model. This suggests that the solid–solid interfacial Li+/Na+ exchange in addition to solid state interdiffusion might govern the exchange kinetics. The effects of LiBr concentration, temperature, and Li/Na ratio were analyzed, providing guidance to control the Li content and optimize structural and electrochemical properties. For example, excellent cycling stability and rate performance are achieved for LixNa1.5−xVOPO4F0.5 by maximizing the Li content.
 Fig. 7  (a) Experimental in situ setup for tracking the ion exchange by synchrotron XRD. (b) Temporal development of XRD patterns during ion exchange (5 M LiBr solution, 160 °C) and detailed view of the patterns indicating the transition from a 2-phase (blue) and solid solution (red) by the evolution of the (111) and (002) peaks. (c) Third XRD pattern indicating the coexistence of Na- and Li-rich phases. (d) Evolution of the position of the (002) peak (directly related to the Li content) for different LiBr concentrations and the corresponding phase transformations at different exchange stages. (e) Energy diagram of the LixNa1.5−xVOPO4F0.5 system determined from DFT computations. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.105 
Fedotov et al. reported a novel vanadium-based cathode material AVPO4F (A = Li, K) prepared by electrochemical AME.50 The starting material KVPO4F was charged up to 4.8 V vs. Li/Li+ to remove K-ions, then washed twice with dimethyl carbonate (DMC) and transferred into a fresh Li cell. The obtained K0.15VPO4F absorbs 0.7 Li per formula unit when cycling between 2.0 and 4.7 V vs. Li/Li+ and shows a sloping voltage profile (4.0 V average), which is favorable for high-power applications. In general, the authors emphasize that the direct synthesis of some Li-containing polymorphs is difficult for thermodynamic reasons and that in such cases AME and sodium-containing counterparts with a desirable framework can be used, resulting in the target materials. In this sense, due to a larger ionic radius (cf.Table 1) and a slightly different crystal chemistry, K offers even greater opportunities than Na to seek and stabilize new structures. Recently, Bianchini et al. proposed Ag3V2(PO4)2F3 obtained by chemical Ag+/Na+ ion exchange of the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 framework.106 Complete ion exchange is achieved after 30 hours for sub mm sized particles under preservation of the parent structure, whereas 60 hours are not sufficient for larger particles due to kinetic limitations. Further analyses indicate that the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 framework exhibits high ionic conductivity for different monovalent ions. Accordingly, the authors suggest the ion-exchanged Ag3V2(PO4)2F3 as the cathode material in rechargeable silver-ion batteries.


3.2.2 Pyrophosphates. 
Kim et al. synthesized novel iron-based mixed-polyanion compounds, LixNa4−xFe3(PO4)2(P2O7), by chemical AME.51 The starting material, Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7), was treated in LiBr solution. This way, a maximum of three Na-ions were replaced by Li-ions, resulting in the composition Li3NaFe3(PO4)2(P2O7) and preservation of the parent crystal structure. During electrochemical cycling, the Li3NaFe3(PO4)2(P2O7) did not show changes in the Na content, which might indicate that the residual Na acts as a stabilizing pillar in the structure. Over 90% of the theoretical capacity is obtained at low rates with an average voltage of 3.4 V, which agrees with predictions from first principles computations. These results were confirmed by Kosova et al. using both chemical and electrochemical AME.52 In both cases the AME is not complete and leads to the formation of mixed Na/Li compounds with slight differences depending on the preparation procedure. In subsequent work, the same group simulated Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) using molecular dynamics methods to understand the mechanism of (electro)chemical AME.53 The results show that lithium is stable in the structure but exchange with Na from the (Na2) position is energetically unfavorable. Moreover, the results indicate sequential Li for Na exchange because lithium becomes more stable in the (Na4) position after lithium occupies the (Na1) position. The relatively low degree of electrochemical ion exchange during competitive intercalation of Li and Na is explained by sluggish transport of Li+ across the solid/electrolyte interface or a slow (de)solvation step, resulting in large polarization.


3.2.3 Orthosilicates. 
Zhang et al. reported promising performance of orthosilicate cathode materials for SIBs obtained through electrochemical Li–Na exchange.54 Carbon-coated Li2FeSiO4 nanoparticles were synthesized by a sol–gel method and mixed with graphene oxide nanosheets. After reduction at high temperature, a composite of Li2FeSiO4 nanoparticles and graphene nanosheets was obtained and processed into electrodes. The Li2FeSiO4 is then cycled between 1.5 and 4.8 V in Li-cells and finally charged to the upper cut-off potential to obtain its delithiated form. The specific capacity for this delithiation process was 300 mA h g−1, indicating a formal stoichiometry of Li0.2FeSiO4. Na-cells were prepared using the delithiated electrodes and NaClO4 dissolved in PC:FEC as the electrolyte. Cycling in a voltage window of 1.2–4.5 V yields high initial capacities up to 330 mA h g−1, suggesting that the sodium iron orthosilicate prepared by AME could be a promising cathode material for SIBs.


3.2.4 Carbonophosphates. 
High-throughput computational studies by Ceder's group indicated that the sidorenkite crystal structure favors sodium on the alkali sites, and lithium-based compounds were found to be thermodynamically unstable.55 They concluded that the stability of many sodium-based phases suggests that metastable lithium-containing equivalent compounds with advantageous battery properties could be synthesized by AME. Based on the computational screening of materials for LIBs, the carbonophosphates Li3FePO4CO3 and Li3MnPO4CO3 were identified and synthesized for the first time by chemical AME based on their stable Na analogues using 2 M LiBr in 1-hexanol solution (Fe compound: 3 d at 110 °C; Mn compound: 4 d at 130 °C).56 The authors observed that the chemical AME does not influence the particle size, and only the edges are slightly etched. Despite some changes of the XRD pattern, the characteristic major peak of the sidorenkite structure is preserved after AME. Peak broadening might be caused by a smaller domain size or stacking faults as indicated by TEM analyses. The AME is almost complete for Li3FePO4CO3, whereas the atomic proportion in the Li3MnPO4CO3 is Li:Na:Mn:P = 2.67:0.63:0.96:1 even after 4 days at 130 °C. The authors assume that a fairly stable phase exists close to this composition, preventing further AME. For Li3FeCO3PO4, the first discharge capacity is 110 mA h g−1, which is close to the theoretical capacity (115 mA h g−1). After ball milling, Li2.67Na0.63Mn0.96CO3PO4 shows 135 mA h g−1 indicating that the Mn3+/Mn4+ redox couple is partially active. The authors also attempted to prepare the lithium carbonophosphates by hydrothermal synthesis, which was not successful and confirms the lack of thermodynamic stability predicted by the computations.107 While further optimization of the materials is still needed, the studies by Ceder's group show the synergy of computational screening of intercalation materials and their straightforward synthesis by AME. Inspired by these findings, Asl and Choudhury successfully synthesized mixed polyanionic transition metal phosphatonitrate compounds by chemical/electrochemical combined AME following a computational predictive study.108


3.2.5 Nitridophosphates. 
Divalent iron nitridophosphates are considered promising active materials for LIBs but are difficult to synthesize due to the preferential formation of olivine LiFePO4. In contrast, Na2Fe2P3O9N is easily obtained by solid state synthesis. Liu et al. heated well ground LiBr and Na2Fe2P3O9N powders at 280 °C for 20 h under flowing N2 gas.57 This leads to the composition Li0.3Fe2P3O9N and preservation of the cubic lattice. While the parent material, Na2Fe2P3O9N, is poorly electrochemically active in Na-cells, the partly ion-exchanged material shows a specific capacity of 125 mA h g−1 (85% of the theoretical capacity) in Li-half cells. Following the success of this attempt, the same authors applied solid–solid AME methods to synthesize Li2Mg2P3O9N (ref. 109) and Li3VP3O9N (ref. 110) using respective sodium analogous starting materials and clarified the Li for Na exchange mechanisms in great detail. Nitridophosphates were recently also used in hybrid-ion cells based on the in situ formation of a Li/Na mixed electrolyte and cathode material by AME.111,112

3.3 Polyanionic K-ion insertion hosts
PIBs currently attract tremendous attention due to their low cost, fast electrolytic conductivity and relatively high operating voltage.113 Understandably, scientists are trying to transfer the knowledge from lithium-ion technology to PIBs. In this context, AME techniques seem to be very suitable.
After the classical synthesis of K3V2(PO4)2F3 turned out to be ineffective, Lin et al. applied electrochemical AME using Na3V2(PO4)2F3 as the starting material.58 Na3V2(PO4)2F3 electrodes are first charged in KPF6 in an EC/PC electrolyte. The occurrence of two oxidation peaks indicates the removal of two Na ions, whereas the ‘3rd Na’ is considered not accessible due to both kinetic and thermodynamic reasons.59 Upon reduction, approximately 1.6 K ions are inserted into the host structure. The following cycling is dominated by K-ion insertion and extraction, showing a specific capacity of 104 mA h g−1 with an average potential of 3.7 V vs. K/K+ and stable performance. Interestingly, EDX, XPS and ICP-OES measurements indicate negligible amounts of Na after cycling. This suggests K for Na substitution also for the ‘3rd Na’, which is known to be inactive in the pure Na-system. Park et al. successfully prepared K4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) by electrochemical AME.114 After extraction of 3 Na-ions from Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) in a Na cell, the electrode was reassembled against K metal using 0.5 M KPF6 in EC:PC:FEC = 20:20:1 and cycled in the voltage range of 2.1–4.1 V. During cycling, the voltage profiles gradually change, indicating substitution of the residual Na by K, which is supported by the TEM–EDS analysis and ICP spectroscopy results (K:Fe ratio in K4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) ∼ 3.99:3). XRD analyses indicate that the orthorhombic structure with the Pn21a space group is preserved during AME, although the lattice parameters are different due to the differences in the ionic radii of K+ and Na+ (cf.Table 1). K4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) shows a capacity of 118 mA h g−1 and excellent cycling performance (82% after 500 cycles at 5C).
4. Layered TMOs
Layered oxides represent an important class of cathode materials for alkali-ion batteries, because of their high energy density and relatively stable performance.115 AMeO2 (A = alkali ion, Me = transition metal) compounds exhibit a planar-layered structure formed by alternating sheets of positively charged alkali-ions and negatively charged transition metal oxide polyhedra. The notation used to describe the structure of the layered oxides was originally introduced by Delmas.116 The compounds are classified into two major groups, P(n) type and O(n) type. P and O denote the local structure around the alkali metal ion as being either a prismatic or octahedral oxygen cage. The number, (n), refers to the repeat period of the transition metal stacking perpendicular to the alkali-ion layers. The layered host compounds can be grouped into transition metal oxides (TMOs), mixed TMOs and alkali-metal-rich TMOs.
4.1 Co-oxide based compounds
Layered LiCoO2 was first suggested as an intercalation compound for rechargeable LIBs by Nobel Prize winner John B. Goodenough and Mizushima117 and commercialized in 1991 by Sony. At low temperature, a cubic spinel structure is formed that is converted to a layered structure at around 750 °C. This layered LiCoO2 corresponds to the O3-phase according to Delmas' notation.
Even in the early 1980s Delmas and co-workers applied AME techniques to prepare novel metastable structures of layered LiCoO2. Starting from P2-Na0.7CoO2, obtained by a solid state reaction of cobalt and alkali oxides, AME is carried out by heating with reflux for three days in a methanol solution with LiCl at 64 °C followed by washing with pure methanol and drying under vacuum.60 The resulting compound is identified as the O2-phase and later refined to O2-LiCoO2.61 Electrochemical delithiation of the O2-phase is accompanied by the formation of a solid solution and the final occurrence of an O6-phase.62 These metastable phases were never observed before but can be prepared quite easily using AME techniques. However, the original AME method proposed by Delmas and co-workers exhibits some disadvantages regarding yield, expenditure of time and the use of harsh chemicals. Alternatively, Paulsen et al. prepared O2-LiCoO2 by ion exchanging P2-Na2/3CoO2 using 5 M LiBr dissolved in hexanol under reflux at 180 °C for 2 h.118 The O2-LiCoO2 prepared this way shows competitive electrochemical performance with that of conventional O3-LiCoO2 in terms of specific capacity, rate capability, capacity retention and thermal stability. Tournadre et al.119,120 investigated the nucleation and growth of the O2-LiCoO2-phase during ion exchanging of P2-Na2/3CoO2 in great detail using an aqueous AME method reported by Paulsen et al.39 In this case, a 5 M LiCl/LiOH aqueous solution is applied under reflux conditions with a 1:10 ratio of Na and Li for 24 h with intermediate washing, drying and grinding. In situ XRD measurements show that the growth of O2 domains is faster than the formation of nucleation centers and is kinetically activated by a P2-Na0.7CoO2 to Na0.5CoO2 transition, leading to an O2-LiCoO2-phase with almost ideal packing via the aqueous AME.119,120 Tarascon's team investigated the preparation of LiCoO2 and LiNiO2via ion-exchange of protons for Li-ions in the respective oxyhydroxides in great detail, including with IR-spectroscopy, TEM, XRD and DSC.121,122 Their ion-exchange process can be conducted in an autoclave, thus enabling large scale production, but is rather sensitive to the experimental conditions, such as temperature, pressure and concentration.
Inspired by the finding that a desired host structure can be preserved during AME, researchers further focused on the preparation of novel polytypes and comparative studies of different intercalation chemistries. Berthelot et al.123 and Komaba et al.124 prepared an O4-LiCoO2 polytype making use of AME techniques. An OP4-LixNayCoO2 precursor with the desired host structure is used as the starting material. Berthelot et al.123 applied two different chemical AME approaches: (i) perfusion of the powder using a 5 M LiCl/LiOH solution under reflux conditions as proposed by Paulsen et al.39 and (ii) grinding of the powder together with a mixture of 2LiNO3/3KNO3 for 15 h at 150 °C (5× excess of LiNO3). After washing with distilled water and drying, similar results are obtained for both routes. The materials prepared this way by Berthelot et al.123 and Komaba et al.124 are identified as the layered O4-LiCoO2 polytype, which alternatingly combines the O2 and O3 polytypes of LiCoO2. As for the O2-phase prepared by chemical AME, the metastable O4-phase transforms into the thermodynamically stable O3-phase at approximately 400 °C. Komaba's group further applied chemical AME for a comparative study of LiCoO2 polymorphs including structural and electrochemical characterization of the O2-, O3- and O4-type phases.125 Such investigations are highly important to understand the impact of the materials structure and stacking faults and other defects on the electrochemical properties, paving the way to advanced alkali-ion batteries. Based on these seminal works, other researchers applied similar AME techniques to prepare novel layered HxCoO2,126 KxCoO2,127 CaxCoO2,128,129 and AgxCoO2 (ref. 126) intercalation compounds. Heubner et al. recently showed that the purely electrochemically conducted displacement of Li-ions by Na-ions within the host lattice of layered LiCoO2 (2.0–4.0 V vs. Na/Na+) leads to formation of a Li–Na-mixed intercalation compound with the formal stoichiometry Li0.5Na0.4CoO2.63 Due to the different ionic radii (cf.Table 1) and the corresponding CoO2-layer mismatch, both Na- and Li-rich domains evolve during Na-ion insertion (Fig. 8a). Operando XRD measurements show that charging and discharging of the Li–Na-mixed intercalation compound is dominated by Na-ion insertion and extraction, while Li-ions remain in the lattice as schematically illustrated in Fig. 8b. Besides secondary batteries, such mixed alkali-metal intercalation compounds could be of interest for a number of other applications, such as superconductors,130 thermoelectrics131 and catalysis.132 For this purpose, electrochemical AME techniques appear to be highly suitable regarding the expedient preparation and investigation of such materials.
 Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional EBSD and EDS results of a Li–Na-mixed intercalation compound obtained from partial electrochemical AME of Li-ions in LiCoO2 with Na-ions, including the analysis of band contrast, Na-distribution (EDS) and phase distribution of LiCoO2 and P-type NaCoO2 correlated with their crystallographic orientation (EBSD). The dashed rectangles indicate the location of the corresponding crystal structures and orientation relationship of neighboring regions. (b) Schematic illustrations of the partial Li–Na displacement in LiCoO2 (top and bottom rows represent macroscopic and microscopic models). (i) Delithiation generates sub-stoichiometric Li0.5CoO2. (ii) Phase separation and formation of Na-rich and Li-rich domains. (iii) Growth of Na-rich and densification of Li-rich domains. (iv) Final Li–Na-mixed intercalation compound. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier Ltd.63 
4.2 Mn-oxide based compounds
Layered manganese oxide based compounds are also considered promising cathode materials for secondary alkali-ion batteries. Based on the success and deep insights gained from AME studies on LiCoO2, layered manganese oxides were investigated in this regard as they offer lower cost and toxicity than cobalt based compounds and have been demonstrated to be safer in overcharge situations. Manganese oxides can be prepared in a variety of structures. Spinel compounds are considered thermodynamically stable and have been reported with a range of different cation distributions. In contrast, layered LiMnO2, analogously to LiCoO2, is metastable. Ammundsen and Paulsen thoroughly reviewed approaches to prepare and stabilize layered LiMnO2 compounds, including soft chemistry routes such as AME.64 Fuchs and Kemmler-Sack were among the first who attempted the preparation of layered LiMnO2 based on ion-exchange of NaMnO2.65 Exchange reactions are performed in molten salts of LiCl, LiBr, LiI, and their mixtures at different temperatures. The reaction between NaMnO2 and the Li halides results in a complete AME. However, the layered structure of the starting material was not maintained and collapsed toward a three dimensional structure, most likely due to the high temperatures applied. Alternatively, Delmas' team used a low temperature (90 °C) AME method by refluxing NaMnO2 in LiCl dissolved in methanol.66 While this AME approach preserves the structure of the starting material and results in almost complete ion-exchanged LiMnO2, it continues for approximately one month due to the slow kinetics of the ion-exchange process. Bruce's team reported a more rapid AME by refluxing NaMnO2 in LiBr dissolved in n-hexanol at 150 °C.67 This approach results in complete ion-exchanged layered LiMnO2, whose cycling performance, however, is insufficient for practical applications in LIBs. Subsequent AME studies, including comprehensive materials characterization, reveal that the layered LiMnO2 is not stable during cycling and gradually transforms into a highly disordered spinel structure with poor electrochemical performance.68,69
Paulsen et al. applied a similar AME approach but using P2-type Na2/3[Li1/6Mn5/6]O2 as the starting material.70 XRD and ICP analyses prove that the result of the AME is layered O2-type Li2/3[Li1/6Mn5/6]O2. In contrast to the behavior of layered O3-type and orthorhombic LiMnO2, the O2-phase obtained by AME is not converted into a spinel structure during cycling, since this would require breaking of Mn–O bonds. The ion exchanged Li2/3[Li1/6Mn5/6]O2 shows a specific capacity of 150 mA h g−1 and stable cycling performance.
Bruce's team also reported a series of studies employing AME to synthesize Li-rich layered LixMn1−yLiyO2 intercalation materials from NaxMn1−yLiyO2 type precursors.134–137 While the layered structures are always maintained during the AME, the materials still tend to be transformed into the spinel phase during cycling. However, when compared to the earlier investigations on layered LiMnO2 obtained from AME of NaMnO2, the electrochemical performance is significantly improved in view of the specific capacity and cycling stability.
More recently, Yabuuchi and co-workers prepared O2/P2-type Li-excess layered manganese oxides by AME using Na5/6[Li1/4Mn3/4]O2 as the starting material.133 In this case, the ion-exchange is carried out in a molten salt of LiNO3:LiCl (88:12 mol%) at 280 °C for 2 h and the resulting composition is found to be Li/Mn = 0.94:0.76 with traces of sodium. The reduction of the alkali metal ion content suggests partial oxidation of manganese during the AME in molten salts. The authors argue that Li+ cannot occupy trigonal prismatic sites because of the smaller ionic radius when compared to Na+, which partly contradicts the results of other studies.138 The partial in-plane -type cation ordering of the P2-type Na5/6[Li1/4Mn3/4]O2 still exists in the ion exchanged material even though the AME results in gliding of the MeO2 layers to form an O2-phase as illustrated in Fig. 9. The O2-type phase delivers a high reversible capacity of more than 200 mA h g−1 in Li-cells. Unfavorable phase transitions, such as the layered-spinel conversion during cycling, are suppressed due to both the unusual oxygen packing and the Li substitution for manganese in the O2-phase.
 Fig. 9  Crystal structures for P2-, O2- and O3-type layered oxides. Displacement of Na-ions in P2-type layered Na5/6[Li1/4Mn3/4]O2 by Li-ions gives O2-type layered Lix[Li1/4Mn3/4]O2. Half of the MeO2 layers in the P2-phase glides toward the direction of (2/3, 1/3, z), forming the O2-phase. Na-ions are located at trigonal prismatic sites (P-site) for the P2-phase. Li-ions are located at octahedral sites (O-site) for the O2-phase. Li-ions (LiO6 octahedra) share a face (denoted as “F”) with metal ions (MeO6 octahedra) for one side after the AME. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.133 
4.3 Mixed TMO based compounds
The layered ACoO2, AMnO2 and ANiO2 based compounds each show individual advantages regarding the intercalation characteristics, stability, thermal behavior and electrochemical properties in secondary batteries. In order to combine the individual advantages, minimize the corresponding disadvantages or even achieve synergy effects, scientists are attempting to develop mixtures of the various layered compounds.139 In this context it became apparent that some mixed TMO compounds could not be prepared by conventional solid state reactions. To tackle this issue, the research groups of Dahn39,140–143 and Bruce71–73,144,145 applied chemical AME methods to synthesize metastable phases of mixed TMOs as intercalation compounds for secondary batteries. When compared the layered LiMnO2 material obtained by AME of NaMnO2, partial substitution of Co (ref. 140 and 144) or Ni (ref. 140 and 145) for Mn in the NaMnO2 precursor results in significantly improved specific capacity, rate capability and cycling stability using the same AME method for the preparation (reflux in hexanol at 150–180 °C with a 10-fold excess of LiBr for 2–8 h). Increasing the degree of doping suppresses the Jahn–Teller distortion, which slows down the layered-spinel conversion and Mn-dissolution during cycling, resulting in more favorable electrochemical properties. Robertson et al.71–73 reported a series of studies addressing the impact of AME conditions on the defect chemistry, structure and electrochemical performance of mixed TMO based intercalation compounds. It is found that exchanging Na-ions with Li-ions in NaMn1−yCoyO2 using LiBr in ethanol at 80 °C preserves vacancies present at the transition metal sites, whereas AME with LiBr in hexanol at 160 °C eliminates the vacancies. The vacancy rich materials show improved electrochemical properties in LIBs. For example, 2.5% Co doped LixMn1−yCoyO2 prepared by AME in ethanol exhibits a specific capacity of 200 mA h g−1 with only 0.08% loss per cycle. Simultaneously, Paulsen et al.39,142,143 conducted a series of studies on AME of a large variety of layered TMO based cathode materials. They found that chemically driven AME of Li for Na is more facile for P3 or P2-type materials than for O3-structures, because the Na layers are filled to only 2/3 in P3 or P2-phases, leaving open pathways for Na and Li diffusion. Moreover, non-stoichiometric precursors tend to produce stacking faults during the AME, while stoichiometric phases lead to a high degree of crystallinity. While the majority of AME processes on layered materials are performed in organic solvents at high temperature, Paulsen et al. showed that complete Li for Na AME is also possible at room temperature using aqueous solutions.39 Indeed, in some cases only the room-temperature exchange was successful because the layered structure rapidly collapsed at elevated temperatures. In general, the authors found that the exchange medium (e.g. hexanol, water, or molten salt) has a minor influence on the completeness of the AME and the crystallinity of the resulting material. In contrast, the Li:Na ratio during the chemical AME process has a significant impact on the composition of the resulting material, which can be utilized to prepare intermediate phases, e.g. Li1/3Na1/3[Ni1/3Mn2/3]O2, where Li and Na filled layers alternately. Gwon et al. investigated the mechanism of chemical Li for Na AME of NaNi0.5Mn0.5O2 by ex situ structural analyses after different times of ion exchange.74 At the beginning of the AME, an intermediate phase containing randomly distributed sodium and lithium ions forms almost immediately, followed by a significantly slower two-phase conversion that involves structural rearrangements. Further analyses indicate the importance of residual sodium in the layered structure, which could prevent collapsing of the layer space at a high SOC. Chiba et al. used systematic AME (LiBr in MeOH at 110 °C for 6 h) followed by an annealing step to prepare NaxLi0.7−xNi1−yMnyO2 (0.03 < x < 0.25, 0.5 < y < 0.8) based on P3-Na0.7Ni0.33Mn0.67O2.146,147 In particular NaxLi0.7−xNi1−yMnyO2 (x = 0.093, y = 0.67) exhibits a high capacity of 261 mA h g−1. The authors attribute the excellent electrochemical performance to the retention of the layered rock-salt structure over the spinel phase, which can be controlled by the variation of the residual Na and Mn content in the compositions via the chemical AME procedure (Li-excess, temperature, time).
Xiao et al. adopted electrochemical AME for the visualization of heterogeneous Li-ion diffusion in LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 down to the atomic level using TEM/STEM techniques.148 By probing the Na distribution to trace the Li extraction, the authors found that dislocation-mediated ion diffusion is kinetically favorable at a low SOC and planar diffusion along the (003) layers is dominant at a high SOC.
According to the high theoretical capacity and open layered framework for fast ion extraction/insertion reactions, layered Ni-rich oxides are considered promising cathode materials for high-performance LIBs. Likewise, analogous oxides are expected to be promising intercalation hosts for Na+ ions but are difficult to produce by conventional solid state reactions, since their structure is extremely sensitive to the synthesis conditions. Alternatively, Yang et al.75 recently prepared O3-type Na0.75Ni0.82Co0.12Mn0.06O2 from LiNi0.82Co0.12Mn0.06O2 by electrochemical AME. XRD XPS, and EELS measurements indicate that Na+ extraction/insertion induces reversible phase transformations from O3 to P3 and P′′3 in which Ni compensates for the charge balance. The O3-type Na0.75Ni0.82Co0.12Mn0.06O2 shows high reversible capacity (171 mA h g−1) and high rate capability (89 mA h g−1 at 9C) with decent cycle life and a stable discharge voltage of 2.8 V during long-term cycling. The authors assume structural stability to correlate with the Li–O3 phase, which was retained during AME.
Zhao et al.149 proposed an improved chemical AME method to prepare Li-rich layered cathode materials for LIBs based on Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 as the starting material. In addition to the chemical AME processes reported previously, this approach also includes a reduction agent with the purpose of partially reducing Mn4+ to Mn3+ leading to extra Li-ion insertion capabilities of the Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 precursor. This reduction-ion-exchange is conducted using a molten salt composed of LiNO3 and LiI at 280 °C for 6 h in air. Compared to the AME without the reducing agent, considerably more lithium is incorporated during the ion-exchange resulting from simultaneous reduction of manganese. XRD analyses indicate a similar cationic environment as found for Li-excess manganese oxide based cathode materials, which is supported by the typical Li2MnO3 potential profiles found during cycling. For metal ion substituted LixNi2/9M1/9Mn2/3O2 (M = Al, Co, Fe, Mg) materials prepared in a similar manner the impact of the structure is found to be negligible. The ion exchanged material obtained from the Mg-doped precursor shows high discharge capacity (240 mA h g−1) as well as improved capacity retention and rate performance. The chemical AME approach including simultaneous reduction of the precursor appears well suited to prepare Li-excess manganese based cathode materials. Alternatively, Li-rich TMOs can be prepared by chemical AME without the need for an additional reduction agent by using the corresponding Na-rich precursors.150
4.4 Li-rich TMO based compounds
In the recent years, Li1+xM1−xO2 or xLi2MnO3 (1 − x)LiMO2 (M = Ni, Co, Mn), known as Li-rich layered transition metal oxides, have attracted intense attention from researchers as these materials exhibit high theoretical capacities >300 mA h g−1. Although several issues need to be addressed before commercialization of these materials, including high initial capacity loss, poor rate capability, rapid capacity and voltage decline, a number of fundamental breakthroughs in the understanding of the synthesis methods, structure and electrochemical performance were recently achieved.151–153 In this context, the preparation of Na-excess layered metal oxide (Na2MnO3–NaMO2) materials for SIBs seems to be expedient. However, in contrast to its Li-counterpart, Na2MnO3 is not stable. Thus it is difficult to synthesize the Na-excess layered metal oxide materials directly, e.g. by hydrothermal or sintering methods. Alternatively, researchers started to transfer the AME approaches developed for layered TMOs to AM-rich TMOs.
Kataoka et al. prepared Na0.95Li0.15(Ni0.15Mn0.55Co0.1)O2 by an electrochemical Na+/Li+ ion-exchange process using Li1.2(Ni0.15Mn0.55Co0.1)O2 as the starting material.76 Li-ion extraction was carried out in a 1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC electrolyte by constant current charging to 4.6 V vs. Li/Li+ and a subsequent potentiostatic phase until the current declined to 0.01C. The ‘empty’ intercalation host is removed from the cell, washed with DC, dried under glove box conditions and assembled again into a Na-analogous half-cell. Na-ion intercalation is carried out by application of a negative current until the cell voltage decreases to 1 V versus Na/Na+. The resulting material was identified as Na0.95Li0.15(Ni0.15Mn0.55Co0.1)O2, maintaining the O3-type layered structure of the starting material. Cycling and rate capability tests reveal relatively large volume changes of approximately 20% and discharge capacities of 238, 200 and 170 mA h g−1 for the initial, second and 40th cycle, respectively.
Jian et al.77 followed a similar approach and successfully designed high-capacity cathode materials for SIBs using electrochemical AME based on the Li-rich layered oxide (0.5Li2MnO3·0.5LiMn0.42Ni0.42Co0.16O2), but employing PC as the washing agent and 1 M NaClO4 in PC for cycling against Na-metal. Li-ion extraction yields a specific capacity of 341 mA h g−1. Subsequent Na-ion insertion shows a high discharge specific capacity of 239 mA h g−1 in the potential range of 1.7 to 4.5 V vs. Na/Na+ similar to the results reported by Kataoka et al. Based on the charge and discharge capacities, 1.08 Li+ is extracted from the material and 0.76 Na+ is intercalated into the empty host, which is proven by ICP analyses. Moderate cycling stability and rate capability are found in sodium-cells, which might be related to the relatively low Na+ diffusion coefficient of approximately 10−14 cm2 s−1.
Liu and co-workers prepared O3-type Na0.78Li0.18Ni0.25Mn0.583O2−z from Li1.167Ni0.25Mn0.583O2 by electrochemical AME.78 Li1.167Ni0.25Mn0.583O2 electrodes were charged in Li-cells using 1 M LiPF6 in 1:1 EC:DMC as the electrolyte with a cut off voltage of 4.8 V. After disassembling, washing and reassembling in an analogous Na-cell, discharging to 1.5 V vs. Na/Na+ yields O3-type Na0.8Li0.14Ni0.3Mn0.567O2−z. The material prepared this way shows high discharge capacities of 240 and 190 mA h g−1 in the voltage ranges of 1.5–4.5 and 1.5–4.2 V, respectively, high coulombic efficiency and promising cycling performance. The O3-phase is maintained after AME and also during cycling. The XAS results indicate that Ni2+/Ni4+ is the main redox couple during cycling while Mn remains in the tetravalent state. Full cells utilizing the AME based Na0.78Li0.18Ni0.25Mn0.583O2−z as the cathode and SnS2/rGO as the anode deliver a desirable energy density of 430 W h kg−1.
Recently, Aurbach's team reported SIB cathode materials prepared by electrochemical AME from alumina coated Li1+xMn0.54Co0.13Ni0.1+yO2.154 Coating of the cathode materials (Li1.13Mn0.54Co0.13Ni0.2O2 and Li1.2Mn0.54Co0.13Ni0.13O2) was carried out via ALD. Electrodes prepared from alumina coated and pristine active materials are directly assembled in Na-cells with 1 M NaPF6 in PC:FEC (98:2 wt%) as the electrolyte. The authors argued that their Na-cells contained sufficiently large amounts of free Na-ions to dominate the electrode reaction when compared to the Li-ions incorporated during initial delithiation. In fact, cycling the cell directly converts the starting material into Na1+xLi0.05Mn0.54Co0.13Ni0.2O2−z (0 < x < 0.1, z < 0.1). XRD analyses indicate an O3-phase with an expanded c-axis parameter, proving that there is no change in the main host structure during ion-exchange but a volume increase due to the larger ionic radius of the Na-ions when compared to Li (cf.Table 1). The authors also attempted to prepare similar materials by conventional chemical syntheses. While ICP measurements indicate similar stoichiometry, XRD and electrochemical analyses confirmed a hexagonal structure and poor electrochemical performance. The thermodynamically stable state, obtained from chemical preparation, appears to be a structure that is neither rhombohedral nor monoclinic and devoid of electrochemical activity. In contrast, electrochemical AME allows preservation of the structure of the starting material and thus generation of the Na-analogue metastable O3-phase. The ALD coating of the starting materials before the AME leads to sodium-ion intercalation cathode materials with significantly improved performance. During the AME, the alumina is partially converted to Li5AlO4 and Na5AlO4 (cf.Fig. 10). The surface layer comprising alumina and Na5AlO4 facilitates Na-ion transport and avoids disadvantageous side reactions between the cathode material and electrolyte, resulting in improved stability and low impedance when compared to the non-coated samples.154 Xue et al. applied chemical AME to replace a small quantity of Li+ with Na+ in Li-rich TMOs.155 This doping with Na leads to an increase of the interlayer spacing and stabilization of the structure, while improving the electrochemical properties in terms of lowered impedance and enhanced rate capability.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the electrochemical AME of alumina-coated Li1+xMn0.54Co0.13Ni0.1+yO2 to prepare alumina-coated Na1+xLi0.05Mn0.54Co0.13NiyO2−z for SIBs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.154 
4.5 Layered K-ion insertion hosts
AME techniques are also applied to prepare and investigate layered insertion hosts for PIBs.79,80,156,157 Trad et al. synthesized K3Fe3(PO4)4·yH2O (0 ≤ y ≤ 1) layered phases by chemical AME using Na3Fe3(PO4)4 as the starting material.79 Na3Fe3(PO4)4 powder emerges in a concentrated aqueous solution of 5 M KCl and is heated at 110 °C under stirring. After 72 h, the sample is filtered and rinsed with distilled water and acetone, followed by drying at 80 °C. The AME leads to a distortion of the lattice, due to the replacement of Na-ions by the larger K-ions and H2O molecules. As a result, K3Fe3(PO4)4·yH2O crystallizes in the P2 monoclinic space group. Investigations on the thermal stability of the ion exchanged material reveal that a number of stable K3Fe3(PO4)4·yH2O (0 ≤ y ≤ 1) phases can be obtained between room temperature and 600 °C and a dehydrated orthorhombic K3Fe3(PO4)4 at 750 °C. Hwang et al. applied electrochemical AME to prepare the P3-KxCrO2 cathode material for PIBs using O3-phase NaCrO2 as the starting material.80 Their study was motivated by difficulties in synthesizing pure P3-KxCrO2 using typical solid-state methods, which always yield non-layered structures. The electrochemical AME is performed by directly implementing the NaCrO2 based electrode in a K-cell containing 0.5 M KPF6 in EC:DEC = 1:1 and K-metal as the anode. This cell is cycled 300 times in a voltage range of 1.5–3.8 V, where the upper limit prevents exaggerated extraction of Na-ions and the accompanying collapse of the crystal structure. Initial K-ion intercalation into Na0.5CrO2 shows several voltage steps, indicating a complicated phase transition behavior of the Na-/K-ion dual-intercalation reaction. Interestingly, the pronounced characteristics of the voltage profile gradually disappear during progressive cycling, indicating that the Na-ions were continuously replaced by the K-ions in the host structure, which is proven by XRD, TEM and EDS measurements (cf.Fig. 11). Possible reasons for the very slow AME process are the differences in size and solvation energy of Na- and K-ions. Comprehensive materials characterization and first-principles calculations on the AME, diffusion kinetics and electrochemical properties indicate highly reversible phase transformations and excellent cycling stability of the ion exchanged material. Zhang et al. followed a similar approach but employed Na0.9Cr0.9Ru0.1O2 as the starting material for the electrochemical AME.157 The main insights regarding the initialization and progress of the AME during continuous cycling support the results of Hwang et al.80 The ion-exchanged material delivers a high capacity of 100.6 mA h g−1 and maintains a capacity retention of 80.1% after 300 cycles at 0.5C and 81.2% after 500 cycles at 5C. In the discharged state, coexistence between an O3-K+-free- and a P3-K+-rich-phase is found. Interestingly, relatively high K+-diffusion coefficients of up to 10−12 cm2 s−1 are determined, surpassing the diffusivity of the smaller Na-ions in the same material. This also explains the excellent rate capability observed for the material obtained from electrochemical AME.157 Similar to the behavior of the Li/NaCoO2 system,63 Naveen et al. observed the development of Na- and K-rich domains after partial electrochemically driven ion-exchange using P′3–Na0.52CrO2 as the starting material and reversible cycling without any participation of the remaining Na.158 The authors suggest that this behavior reduces the K+ diffusion and overall volume changes, which might support a high rate performance and cycling stability, respectively. Very recently, Ceder's group rigorously investigated the electrochemical Na+/K+ AME mechanism of Na3Ni2SbO6.159 The authors observed K- and Na-rich phases, which originate from pushing the remaining Na-ions into higher concentration domains. According to this behavior three phases are present for the desodiation and potassiation of NaxKyNi2SbO6, consistent with the Gibbs phase rule for the ternary Na–K-host system. Theoretical considerations show that the phase separation is caused by the lattice mismatch between the K-rich and Na-rich phases, which is consistent with observations in the Li–Na-host systems.63
 Fig. 11  (a) Specific discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency obtained during continuous AME of Na-ions with K-ions starting from NaCrO2 and (b) the corresponding voltage profiles in the 1st, 50th, and 300th cycle and for the refreshed cell. (c) Comparison of the XRD patterns obtained from the O3-NaCrO2 precursor and the ion-exchanged P3-KxCrO2 material. (d) Results of Rietveld refinement for the P3-KxCrO2 material. TEM images and the corresponding EDX mapping results of (e) P3-KxCrO2 and (f) the pristine O3-NaCrO2. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.80 
5. Spinel oxides
Transition metal oxides with a spinel structure, particularly manganese-based oxides, are considered highly promising cathode materials for secondary batteries. In particular spinel LiMn2O4 and its derivatives were studied intensively as cathode materials for LIBs. The main advantages of this class of materials are their easy preparation, high abundance, low cost and non-toxicity. The pure LiMn2O4 exhibits a face-centered spinel structure with the Fd3m space group. The Mn-, Li- and O-ions occupy the 16d octahedral, 8a tetrahedral and 32e sites, respectively. The structure of spinel LiMn2O4 is isotropic and provides a three-dimensional network for fast Li-ion diffusion.
When compared to the work carried out regarding AME of polyanionic compounds and layered oxides, experience with materials with a spinel structure is rather limited (cf.Table 2). Komaba's group investigated the electrochemical behavior of spinel-type Li[LixMn2−x]O4 samples in a sodium-ion containing organic electrolyte solution.81 The first electrochemical oxidation process of the stoichiometric LiMn2O4 results in the formation of Li0.1Mn2O4. Subsequent sodium-ion insertion is accompanied by several oxidation peaks that do not exist in the lithium spinel system but are typical for layered NaMnO2 (cf.Fig. 12). The electrochemical results and XRD analyses suggest the nucleation of a layered phase in the spinel phase during the initial sodium-ion insertion cycle and gradual spinel to layered transition in the subsequent cycles by manganese migration from the 16d sites to the 16c sites in the cubic close-packed (CCP) oxygen. This suggests that, while the spinel phase is stable in the Li–Mn–O system, O3-type NaMnO2 is thermodynamically favored in the Na–Mn–O system. The compound prepared this way delivers a reversible capacity of approximately 190–200 mA h g−1 and relatively good capacity retention as the cathode material in SIBs. Based on this, Nie et al. recently reported an interesting approach of reusing LiMn2O4 from spent LIBs in SIBs.82 The recycled material shows a reversible capacity up to 176.3 mA h g−1 in sodium-cells. Kitta et al. performed atomic-level characterization of the respective phases, interphase boundaries and their changes associated with the AME to further understand the mechanism of the initial phase conversion from spinel LiMn2O4 to layered NaxMnO2.160 STEM-EDX and EELS analyses reveal clear phase separation without atomic-scale mixture due to the difference in the ionic radii of Na and Li (cf.Table 1). HRTEM and ABF-STEM imaging clearly show an epitaxial LiMn2O4/NaxMnO2 interface without any lattice dislocations but a low inclination angle due to the lattice mismatch and local distortions in the NaxMnO2 phase.
 Fig. 12  Differential capacity plots derived from charge/discharge profiles of layered NaMnO2 in Na-cells (black line) and spinel LiMn2O4 in Li-cells (blue line) and Na-cells (red line) including the AME of Li-ions with Na-ions and gradual conversion of the spinel into a layered structure. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2012, The Electrochemical Society.81 
Kataoka et al. electrochemically extracted Li from a monoclinic layered Li2MnO3, which yields a Li-extracted domain with a cubic spinel structure.83 Sodium-ion insertion into this compound initially exceeded 200 mA h g−1 and 160 mA h g−1 was retained after 50 cycles. Interestingly, the capacity decreases significantly faster when cycling the Li2MnO3 compound in a Li-ion cell. The spinel structure remains intact during sodium-ion insertion but significantly loses its periodicity as shown by ex situ synchrotron XRD and TEM, which partly contradicts the results of Kitta et al.160 and Komaba's group.81
Kim and Amatucci applied electrochemical AME to prepare the Na-analogues of the high voltage cathode material LiNi0.5Mn1.504 and its derivatives.84 Electrochemical delithiation is carried out versus Na-metal in a 0.1 M NaBF4 electrolyte (30:70 EC/DMC wt%) at a rate of 0.1C at 24 °C up to 5.0 V. Subsequently, the electrodes are removed from the cells and rebuilt with fresh separators and Na-metal as the counter electrode prior to the first discharge against Na/Na+ employing 1 M NaClO4 (98:2 PC/FEC wt%). GITT and PITT combined with XRD analyses show that Na-ion intercalation into the delithiated hosts occurs at 8a tetrahedral sites via a two-phase reaction at approximately 3.65 V. The majority of the insertion processes are attributed to the Ni4+/2+ redox couple leading to a nominal composition of Na0.87Mn1.56Ni0.44O4, followed by a small single-phase region until full sodium occupancy is reached. Thereby, the Fd3m spinel symmetry is retained. When compared to the analogous Li-ion insertion reactions, the characteristic voltage plateaus are reduced by approximately 1 V, which clearly deviates from the expected 0.3 V difference in standard redox potentials between Li/Li+ and Na/Na+. The authors conclude that additional energetic penalties/barriers exist when incorporating Na into the 8a sites, as the specific lattice site energies and steric considerations are considerably different between Li+ and Na+. Subsequent cycling reveals a complicated phase transformation behavior depending on the degree of sodiation, which significantly affects the kinetics and reversibility of the Na-ion insertion.85 The authors identified NaxMn1.56Ni0.44O4 spinel as a suitable cathode material for SIBs because appreciable discharge capacity can be maintained after the AME and the spinel framework is able to accommodate the large strains associated with reversible Na-ion insertion.
Chiba et al. obtained LiCoMnO4 with a spinel structure by heating ion-exchanged LixCo0.5Mn0.5O2 with an O6-type layered rocksalt structure at 600 °C.161 Despite the phase transformation, the particle size of the parent P2-NaxCo0.5Mn0.5O2 was retained during AME. Interestingly, cation-mixing of Li/Co atoms not only occurs at the tetrahedral 8a site but also the octahedral 16d site and traces of Li2MnO3 are observed after AME. The ion-exchanged LiCoMnO4 showed a capacity of 105 mA h g−1 between 3.0 and 5.2 V vs. Li/Li+.
Sun et al. examined NaV1.25Ti0.75O4 as a cathode material for Mg-ion batteries.162 The Na-ions, which block the Mg-ion migration pathways, were removed by chemical and electrochemical AME. Deep desodiation was found to cause amorphization of the material. Chemical AME at moderate temperature (80 °C) gives Na0.19Mg0.41V1.25Ti0.75O4, whereas higher temperatures lead to a phase transformation. The systematic AME studies point to the instability of the lattice when it is empty or occupied by small Mg2+ ions. Thus, the metastable lattice leads to a low migration barrier, as predicted by computations, which, however, complicates the synthesis due to the instability of the post-spinel structure, even when using ion-exchange techniques.
6. Comparative studies
Comparative studies of Na/Li/K-analogous materials are particularly suited to explore the specific impact of the respective alkali metal ion on the intercalation properties, pointing out the most appropriate optimization approaches. However, the commonly used multi-particle electrodes are highly complex electrochemical systems, making the comparability of independent research studies extremely challenging. In particular, both the kinetics and thermodynamics of insertion reactions are highly sensitive to the particle size,163–165 the type of surface coating,166,167 design parameters168–170 and the coating procedure.171 Thus, to achieve a reasonable degree of comparability, the Li/Na/K-analogous materials should share the same electrode thickness, porosity, particle size, surface coating, etc. For this purpose, AME methods appear particularly promising since these decisive parameters are preserved and any differences in the kinetics, thermodynamics and battery performance metrics are exclusively determined by the type of alkali-ion.
Zhu et al. compared the electrochemical performances of olivine NaFePO4 in SIBs and olivine LiFePO4 in LIBs.172 Olivine NaFePO4 is prepared by chemical–electrochemical combined AME from LiFePO4 as proposed by Moreau et al.,21 guaranteeing excellent comparability. Li/Na-analogous battery cells are assembled with metal anodes and organic electrolytes. The electrochemical tests reveal comparable cyclability of NaFePO4 and LiFePO4 but much lower rate capability for NaFePO4. Kinetic analyses by GITT and EIS show significantly increased reaction resistance for the Na-ion insertion when compared to Li-ion insertion and an average diffusion coefficient of Na-ions in NaxFePO4 that is 1–2 orders of magnitude lower than that for Li-ions in LixFePO4. Furthermore, the contact and charge transfer resistances in the NaFePO4 cell are ten times larger than in the LiFePO4 cell. Heubner et al. applied a purely electrochemical AME followed by comparative impedance studies on the Li-ion and Na-ion insertion kinetics into FePO4.173 The rate constant of sodiation is found to be significantly lower compared to lithiation and the solid-state diffusion of sodium in FePO4 is slower compared to lithium, confirming the results of Zhu et al.172 Moreover, the activation energies of sodiation are significantly larger compared to lithiation of FePO4. These circumstances lead to enhanced heat generation rates during operation of NaFePO4 based Na-ion cells when compared to their Li-analogues.174
Interestingly, Vujković et al. observed faster insertion kinetics for sodiation of FePO4 when compared to lithiation in aqueous electrolytes.99 Generally, the insertion kinetics are much faster for aqueous than for organic electrolytes, which might be attributed to the absence of a solid electrolyte interphase and differences in the solvation energies. Accordingly, these features have significant impact and may distinctly differ depending on the solvent and alkali-ion used. Vujković et al. performed similar comparative investigations using LiFe0.95V0.05PO4/C and NaFe0.95V0.05PO4/C composites in aqueous LiNO3 and NaNO3 solutions.100 In this case, again faster kinetics are found for sodiation of NaFe0.95V0.05PO4 in comparison to lithiation of LiFe0.95V0.05PO4. This contradicts expectations related to the ratio of ionic radii that smaller ions are more mobile than larger ones (cf.Table 1). However, the analyses of battery kinetics usually neglect (pseudo)capacitive contributions, which however may play a significant role in fast potentiodynamic scans and can vary with the type of alkali-ion in the electrolyte.
Kim et al. comparatively investigated the electrochemical properties of Na2MnPO4F and Li2MnPO4F prepared from chemical AME after attempts of direct high temperature synthesis of Li2MnPO4F failed.175 The discharge capacities of Na2MnPO4F and Li2MnPO4F were approximately 120 and 140 mA h g−1, which indicates that one ion transfer took place reversibly in each case, although the compounds actually contain two Na and Li ions, respectively. A sloping potential curve was found for Na2MnPO4F, whereas a clear redox potential plateau at around 3.9 V was observed in the case of Li2MnPO4F. First principles calculations show that the voltages required for the first and the second ion transfers are about 3.85 and 4.85 V vs. Li/Li+ in the case of Li2MnPO4F and ∼3.66 and ∼4.67 V vs. Na/Na+ in the case of Na2MnPO4F. In each case, the second ion transfer is unlikely to occur within the voltage windows investigated, which are restricted by the stability of the electrolyte. By comparison, the average voltage of Li2MnPO4F is higher than that of Na2MnPO4F although both compounds exhibit the same structure and Mn redox reactions. This supports the recent results of Ong et al.176 who argued that larger energy gain from inserting Li into a host structure when compared to Na insertion is the dominant factor for the lower voltages of Na compounds.
7. Hybrid-ion cells
The application of AME methods also appears to be highly promising for the in situ preparation of so-called hybrid-ion cells (HICs). In an HIC, multiple cations take part in the electrode reactions.177,178 Barker et al. described the first details of a hybrid-ion battery concept where sodium containing cathode materials are applied in conjunction with Li-metal, graphite, Li4Ti5O12, etc. and Li-based or blended Li/Na electrolytes.179–182 Based on this seminal work, Kosova et al. used Na-based cathode materials (triclinic Na1.56Fe1.22P2O7 and tetragonal Na3V2(PO4)2F3) to study electrochemical and chemical Na+/Li+ ion-exchange and the performance in HICs.183 Na1.56Fe1.22P2O7 and Na3V2(PO4)2F3 prepared by mechano-chemically assisted solid-state synthesis are cycled in cells with the Li-metal anode and 1 M LiPF6 in a mixture of EC and DMC as the electrolyte. After several cycles, EDX and XRD analyses indicate that the original Na1.56Fe1.22P2O7 and Na3V2(PO4)2F3 compounds transformed into Na1.2Li0.36Fe1.22P2O7 and Na2.47Li0.53V2(PO4)2F3, respectively, while preserving their initial structure. Considering these values together with the practical capacity (109 mA h g−1 and 116 mA h g−1), about 1/3 of the Na-ions for Na1.56Fe1.22P2O7 and 1/4 of the Na-ions for Na3V2(PO4)2F3 are substituted by Li-ions. The authors demonstrate similarly mixed Na/Li compositions prepared by chemical Na+/Li+ ion-exchange with LiBr, which however exhibit clearly inferior electrochemical performance in HICs when compared to the electrochemical AME. Kosova et al. also investigated the Na+/Li+ electrochemical AME of Na3FePO4CO3 carbonophosphate in an HIC using a Li metal anode and Li-based electrolyte.184 Contrary to the fully completed chemical AME,56 only partial Li for Na substitution was achieved in the HIC. The Li/Na intercalation kinetics of the partially ion-exchanged compound in the HIC are superior the sodium intercalation kinetics in sodium cells. Similar improvements were found for other sodium-based cathode materials cycled in HICs. In many cases, better cycling stability and enhanced rate capability are achieved when compared with Na cells, which is caused by the in situ formation of a Li/Na mixed electrolyte and cathode material by AME. The authors emphasize that the Na+/Li+ ion-exchange is an effective way to prepare novel metastable mixed Na/Li phases for secondary batteries without causing significant structural changes to the pristine materials. The developed design concept of simultaneous energy storage of alkali-ions has the potential to overcome respective disadvantages of single alkali-ion batteries and might even have synergistic effects.178
8. Conclusions and perspectives
AME is a soft chemistry route (chimie douce) capable of preparing novel metastable intercalation materials that cannot directly be obtained from common solid-state or hydrothermal methods. In particular, AME methods appear well-suited for the transference of scientific knowledge in Li-ion technology to accelerate the development of alkali-metal analogous batteries, especially concerning synthesis routes and intercalation chemistries. When comparing chemical, electrochemical and combined AME methods and different solvents, the purely electrochemical AME in aqueous solutions appears to yield the best results concerning battery performance metrics. The facile reaction kinetics in aqueous solution combined with the direct control of the insertion and extraction kinetics via the applied current/voltage allow the straightforward application of ion-exchange reactions. Moreover, the electric charge transferred during the AME enables in situ monitoring of any changes in stoichiometry. On the other hand, chemical AME can be carried out in large autoclaves, pointing to a certain potential for large scale application, whereas electrochemical AME methods seem to be restricted to the laboratory scale.
The majority of AME studies target the exchange of Li-ions for Na-ions to prepare cathode materials for SIBs. The first AME studies aimed at K-intercalation compounds show promising results. It is worth noting that the reversibility of the ion-exchange has not been investigated so far, although this might give deeper insights regarding exchange mechanisms and phase stability. Similarly, although it would be well suited for comparative investigations, the role of alkali-metal/transition metal site mixing has hardly been addressed by AME studies so far. Computational studies are widely applied in battery research to accelerate the development of materials for secondary batteries, aiming to predict stable phases and average voltage. The recent insights from AME studies however show that even meta-stable phases can be of practical interest and should be considered for computational studies on finding suitable active materials. The majority of AME studies were conducted using polyanionic and layered compounds, whereas the AME of oxides with spinel structures has been quite poorly investigated to date. Distinct differences are found for different crystal structures of the starting material. The relatively stable olivine structures are typically preserved during the AME. Layered structures allow a certain gliding of the individual sheets and the corresponding rearrangement of the oxygen packaging and possible displacement of transition metals by alkali-ions. Accordingly, structural transformations, such as layered to spinel conversion, can occur quite easily if the ion-exchanged material is thermodynamically more stable in another structure than the precursor. Similarly, depending on the degree of stability, oxides with spinel structures are transformed into thermodynamically more favored phases during AME, which, nevertheless, can lead to excellent electrochemical properties in rechargeable batteries. In cases where the host structure is maintained during the AME, the starting material and the ion-exchanged compound are perfectly suited for comparative studies of the impact of different alkali-ions (Li+, Na+, and K+) on the electrochemical kinetics, thermodynamics and battery properties. Prospectively, advanced AME techniques will allow preparation of novel materials, metastable phases and compositions of interest for various applications. In particular, electrochemical AME techniques appear to be highly promising for precise doping and the preparation of mixed alkali-ion containing intercalation materials exhibiting superstructures. The possible range of application goes beyond the field of battery materials, much like layered NaxCoO2, following the discovery of supraconductivity or thermoelectric properties in its derivatives. To this end, AME techniques should be further developed and understood at the fundamental level but also keeping in mind the scalability of the processes. The existing studies summarized herein form an excellent basis for this purpose.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was performed in the framework of the project NaKaSub funded by the European Union and the Free State of Saxony through the European Development Fund (EFRE) (Sächsische Aufbaubank SAB grant no. 100345904).
References
M. Child, O. Koskinen, L. Linnanen and C. Breyer, Sustainability guardrails for energy scenarios of the global energy transition, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 91, 321–334 CrossRef .
D. Gielen, F. Boshell, D. Saygin, M. D. Bazilian, N. Wagner and R. Gorini, The role of renewable energy in the global energy transformation, Energy Strategy Reviews, 2019, 24, 38–50 CrossRef .
H. D. Yoo, E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Sharon and D. Aurbach, On the challenge of developing advanced technologies for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 110–121 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. S. Badwal, S. S. Giddey, C. Munnings, A. I. Bhatt and A. F. Hollenkamp, Emerging electrochemical energy conversion and storage technologies, Front. Chem., 2014, 2, 79 Search PubMed .
H. Hesse, M. Schimpe, D. Kucevic and A. Jossen, Lithium-Ion Battery Storage for the Grid—A Review of Stationary Battery Storage System Design Tailored for Applications in Modern Power Grids, Energies, 2017, 10, 2107 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Electrochemical energy storage for green grid, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Evans, V. Strezov and T. J. Evans, Assessment of utility energy storage options for increased renewable energy penetration, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 4141–4147 CrossRef .
B. Scrosati and J. Garche, Lithium Batteries: Status, Prospects and Future, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2419–2430 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jaguemont, L. Boulon and Y. Dubé, A comprehensive review of lithium-ion batteries used in hybrid and electric vehicles at cold temperatures, Appl. Energy, 2016, 164, 99–114 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, M. Li, D. Abd El-Hady, W. Alshitari, A. S. Al-Bogami, J. Lu and K. Amine, Commercialization of Lithium Battery Technologies for Electric Vehicles, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900161 CrossRef .
C. Heubner, M. Schneider and A. Michaelis, Diffusion-Limited C-Rate: A Fundamental Principle Quantifying the Intrinsic Limits of Li-Ion Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 195, 1902523 Search PubMed .
S. Abada, G. Marlair, A. Lecocq, M. Petit, V. Sauvant-Moynot and F. Huet, Safety focused modeling of lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 178–192 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, M. Ouyang, X. Liu, L. Lu, Y. Xia and X. He, Thermal runaway mechanism of lithium ion battery for electric vehicles: a review, Energy Storage Materials, 2018, 10, 246–267 CrossRef .
B. Liu, Y. Jia, C. Yuan, L. Wang, X. Gao, S. Yin and J. Xu, Safety issues and mechanisms of lithium-ion battery cell upon mechanical abusive loading: a review, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 24, 85–112 CrossRef .
R. Schmuch, R. Wagner, G. Hörpel, T. Placke and M. Winter, Performance and cost of materials for lithium-based rechargeable automotive batteries, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 267 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kubota, M. Dahbi, T. Hosaka, S. Kumakura and S. Komaba, Towards K-Ion and Na-Ion Batteries as “Beyond Li-Ion”, Chem. Rec., 2018, 18, 459–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Vaalma, D. Buchholz, M. Weil and S. Passerini, A cost and resource analysis of sodium-ion batteries, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 1–11 CrossRef .
R. Rajagopalan, Y. Tang, X. Ji, C. Jia and H. Wang, Advancements and Challenges in Potassium Ion Batteries: A Comprehensive Review, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 18, 1909486 CrossRef .
P. K. Nayak, L. Yang, W. Brehm and P. Adelhelm, From Lithium-Ion to Sodium-Ion Batteries: Advantages, Challenges, and Surprises, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 102–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Hosaka, T. Shimamura, K. Kubota and S. Komaba, Polyanionic Compounds for Potassium-Ion Batteries, Chemical record, New York, N.Y.,  2018,  DOI:10.1002/tcr.201800143 .
P. Moreau, D. Guyomard, J. Gaubicher and F. Boucher, Structure and Stability of Sodium Intercalated Phases in Olivine FePO4, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4126–4128 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D'Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, Tuning the Optical Properties of Cesium Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals by Anion Exchange Reactions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276–10281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miura, T. Takei and N. Kumada, Synthesis and crystal structure of Mg0.5NbO2: an ion-exchange reaction with Mg2+ between trigonal [NbO2] – layers, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 197, 471–474 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Nalbandyan, E. A. Zvereva, A. Y. Nikulin, I. L. Shukaev, M.-H. Whangbo, H.-J. Koo, M. Abdel-Hafiez, X.-J. Chen, C. Koo, A. N. Vasiliev and R. Klingeler, New Phase of MnSb2O6 Prepared by Ion Exchange: Structural, Magnetic, and Thermodynamic Properties, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 1705–1711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sytnyk, R. Kirchschlager, M. I. Bodnarchuk, D. Primetzhofer, D. Kriegner, H. Enser, J. Stangl, P. Bauer, M. Voith, A. W. Hassel, F. Krumeich, F. Ludwig, A. Meingast, G. Kothleitner, M. V. Kovalenko and W. Heiss, Tuning the Magnetic Properties of Metal Oxide Nanocrystal Heterostructures by Cation Exchange, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 586–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Son, S. M. Hughes, Y. Yin and A. Paul Alivisatos, Cation Exchange Reactions in Ionic Nanocrystals, Science, 2004, 306, 1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Robinson, B. Sadtler, D. O. Demchenko, C. K. Erdonmez, L.-W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Spontaneous Superlattice Formation in Nanorods Through Partial Cation Exchange, Science, 2007, 317, 355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, H. Zheng, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Synthesis of PbS Nanorods and Other Ionic Nanocrystals of Complex Morphology by Sequential Cation Exchange Reactions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16851–16857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sadtler, D. O. Demchenko, H. Zheng, S. M. Hughes, M. G. Merkle, U. Dahmen, L.-W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Selective Facet Reactivity during Cation Exchange in Cadmium Sulfide Nanorods, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5285–5293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain, L. Amirav, S. Aloni and A. P. Alivisatos, Nanoheterostructure Cation Exchange: Anionic Framework Conservation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9997–9999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Miszta, D. Dorfs, A. Genovese, M. R. Kim and L. Manna, Cation Exchange Reactions in Colloidal Branched Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7176–7183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lambert, B. D. Geyter, I. Moreels and Z. Hens, PbTe|CdTe Core|Shell Particles by Cation Exchange, a HR-TEM study, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 778–780 CrossRef CAS .
M. Casavola, M. A. van Huis, S. Bals, K. Lambert, Z. Hens and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Anisotropic Cation Exchange in PbSe/CdSe Core/Shell Nanocrystals of Different Geometry, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 294–302 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Rivest and P. K. Jain, Cation exchange on the nanoscale: an emerging technique for new material synthesis, device fabrication, and chemical sensing, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 89–96 RSC .
Y. Fang, X.-Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Formation of Hierarchical Cu-Doped CoSe2 Microboxes via Sequential Ion Exchange for High-Performance Sodium-Ion Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706668 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kannan, K. Karunakaran and S. Vasanthkumar, Facile synthesis and catalytic studies of CdS–manganese oxide nanocomposite, Appl. Nanosci., 2011, 1, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mu, L. Ben, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, Novel 1.5 V anode materials, ATiOPO4 (A = NH4, K, Na), for room-temperature sodium-ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7141–7147 RSC .
Z. Hong, M. Wei, Q. Deng, X. Ding, L. Jiang and K. Wei, A new anode material made of Zn2Ti3O8 nanowires: synthesis and electrochemical properties, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 740–742 RSC .
J. M. Paulsen, D. Larcher and J. R. Dahn, O2 Structure Li2/3 [Ni1/3Mn2/3]O2: A New Layered Cathode Material for Rechargeable Lithium Batteries III. Ion Exchange, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zaghib, J. Trottier, P. Hovington, F. Brochu, A. Guerfi, A. Mauger and C. M. Julien, Characterization of Na-based phosphate as electrode materials for electrochemical cells, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9612–9617 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. Guo, Approaching high-performance potassium-ion batteries via advanced design strategies and engineering, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, 1–13 CrossRef .
C. M. Julien, A. Mauger, K. Zaghib and H. Groult, Comparative Issues of Cathode Materials for Li-Ion Batteries, Inorganics, 2014, 2, 132–154 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tang, X. Song, Y. Du, C. Peng, M. Lin, S. Xi, B. Tian, J. Zheng, Y. Wu, F. Pan and K. P. Loh, High-performance NaFePO4 formed by aqueous ion-exchange and its mechanism for advanced sodium ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4882–4892 RSC .
C. Heubner, S. Heiden, M. Schneider and A. Michaelis, In-situ preparation and electrochemical characterization of submicron sized NaFePO4 cathode material for sodium-ion batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 233, 78–84 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wongittharom, T.-C. Lee, C.-H. Wang, Y.-C. Wang and J.-K. Chang, Electrochemical performance of Na/NaFePO4 sodium-ion batteries with ionic liquid electrolytes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5655–5661 RSC .
Z. Gong and Y. Yang, Recent advances in the research of polyanion-type cathode materials for Li-ion batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3223 RSC .
K. Chayambuka, G. Mulder, D. L. Danilov and P. H. L. Notten, Sodium-Ion Battery Materials and Electrochemical Properties Reviewed, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800079 CrossRef .
W.-J. Zhang, Structure and performance of LiFePO4 cathode materials: a review, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2962–2970 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-U. Park, D.-H. Seo, B. Kim, K.-P. Hong, H. Kim, S. Lee, R. A. Shakoor, K. Miyasaka, J.-M. Tarascon and K. Kang, Tailoring a fluorophosphate as a novel 4 V cathode for lithium-ion batteries, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 704 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Fedotov, N. R. Khasanova, A. S. Samarin, O. A. Drozhzhin, D. Batuk, O. M. Karakulina, J. Hadermann, A. M. Abakumov and E. V. Antipov, AVPO4F (A = Li, K): A 4 V Cathode Material for High-Power Rechargeable Batteries, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 411–415 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, I. Park, D.-H. Seo, S. Lee, S.-W. Kim, W. J. Kwon, Y.-U. Park, C. S. Kim, S. Jeon and K. Kang, New Iron-Based Mixed-Polyanion Cathodes for Lithium and Sodium Rechargeable Batteries: Combined First Principles Calculations and Experimental Study, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10369–10372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. V. Kosova and V. A. Belotserkovsky, Sodium and mixed sodium/lithium iron ortho-pyrophosphates: synthesis, structure and electrochemical properties, Advances in Electrochemical Materials Science and Manufacturing Selection of Papers from the 13th ISE Topical Meeting 07-10 April 2013, Pretoria, South Africa,  2018, vol. 278, pp. 182–195 Search PubMed .
V. A. Belotserkovsky, N. V. Kosova and I. I. Gainutdinov, Modeling of chemical and electrochemical Na+/Li+ ion exchange in cathode material Na4Fe3(PO4)2P2O7, Mater. Today: Proc., 2020, 25, 501–504 CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Yu and H. Zhou, Two-electron migration orthosilicate cathode materials for Na-ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11574 RSC .
G. Hautier, A. Jain, H. Chen, C. Moore, S. P. Ong and G. Ceder, Novel mixed polyanions lithium-ion battery cathode materials predicted by high-throughput ab initio computations, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17147–17153 RSC .
H. Chen, G. Hautier, A. Jain, C. Moore, B. Kang, R. Doe, L. Wu, Y. Zhu, Y. Tang and G. Ceder, Carbonophosphates: A New Family of Cathode Materials for Li-Ion Batteries Identified Computationally, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2009–2016 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Yu, E. Hu, K.-W. Nam, X.-Q. Yang and P. G. Khalifah, Divalent Iron Nitridophosphates: A New Class of Cathode Materials for Li-Ion Batteries, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3929–3931 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, J. Huang, H. Tan, J. Huang and B. Zhang, K3V2(PO4)2F3 as a robust cathode for potassium-ion batteries, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 16, 97–101 CrossRef .
I. L. Matts, S. Dacek, T. K. Pietrzak, R. Malik and G. Ceder, Explaining Performance-Limiting Mechanisms in Fluorophosphate Na-Ion Battery Cathodes through Inactive Transition-Metal Mixing and First-Principles Mobility Calculations, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6008–6015 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, J.-J. Braconnier and P. Hagenmuller, A new variety of LiCoO2 with an unusual oxygen packing obtained by exchange reaction, Mater. Res. Bull., 1982, 17, 117–123 CrossRef CAS .
D. Carlier, I. Saadoune, L. Croguennec, M. Ménétrier, E. Suard and C. Delmas, On the metastable O2-type LiCoO2, Solid State Ionics, 2001, 144, 263–276 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mendiboure, C. Delmas and P. Hagenmuller, New layered structure obtained by electrochemical deintercalation of the metastable LiCoO2 (O2) variety, Mater. Res. Bull., 1984, 19, 1383–1392 CrossRef CAS .
C. Heubner, B. Matthey, T. Lein, F. Wolke, T. Liebmann, C. Lämmel, M. Schneider, M. Herrmann and A. Michaelis, Insights into the electrochemical Li/Na-exchange in layered LiCoO2 cathode material, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 27, 377–386 CrossRef .
B. Ammundsen and J. Paulsen, Novel lithium-ion cathode materials based on layered manganese oxides, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 943–956 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Fuchs and S. Kemmler-Sack, Synthesis of LiMnO2 and LiFeO2 in molten Li halides, 8th International Symposium on Systems with Fast Ionic Transport,  1994, vol. 68, pp. 279–285 Search PubMed .

          F. Capitaine, P. Gravereau and C. Delmas, A new variety of LiMnO2 with a layered structure, 8th International Symposium on Systems with Fast Ionic Transport,  1996, vol. 89, pp. 197–202 Search PubMed .
A. R. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, Synthesis of layered LiMnO2 as an electrode for rechargeable lithium batteries, Nature, 1996, 381, 499–500 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao-Horn, S. A. Hackney, A. R. Armstrong, P. G. Bruce, R. Gitzendanner, C. S. Johnson and M. M. Thackeray, Structural characterization of layered LiMnO2 electrodes by electron diffraction and lattice imaging, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 2404–2412 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bruce, A. áRobert Armstrong and R. Gitzendanner, New intercalation compounds for lithium batteries: layered LiMnO2, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 193–198 RSC .
J. M. Paulsen, C. L. Thomas and J. R. Dahn, Layered Li-Mn-Oxide with the O2 Structure: A Cathode Material for Li-Ion Cells Which Does Not Convert to Spinel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 3560–3565 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Robertson, A. R. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, Influence of ion exchange conditions on the defect chemistry and performance of cobalt doped layered lithium manganese oxide based intercalation compounds, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1997–1998 RSC .
A. D. Robertson, A. R. Armstrong, A. J. Fowkes and P. G. Bruce, Li(MnCo)O intercalation compounds as electrodes for lithium batteries: influence of ion exchange on structure and performance, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 113–118 RSC .
A. D. Robertson, A. R. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, Layered LixMn1-yCoyO2 Intercalation Electrodes Influence of Ion Exchange on Capacity and Structure upon Cycling, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 2380–2386 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gwon, S.-W. Kim, Y.-U. Park, J. Hong, G. Ceder, S. Jeon and K. Kang, Ion-Exchange Mechanism of Layered Transition-Metal Oxides: Case Study of LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 8083–8087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, M. Tang, H. Liu, X. Chen, Z. Xu, J. Huang, Q. Su and Y. Xia, O3-Type Layered Ni-Rich Oxide: A High-Capacity and Superior-Rate Cathode for Sodium-Ion Batteries, Small, 2019, 15, 1905311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kataoka, T. Mukai, A. Yoshizawa and T. Sakai, Development of High Capacity Cathode Material for Sodium Ion Batteries Na0.95Li0.15(Ni0.15Mn0.55Co0.1)O2, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A933–A939 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jian, H. Yu and H. Zhou, Designing high-capacity cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 34, 215–218 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Xu, C. Ma and Y. S. Meng, A new O3-type layered oxide cathode with high energy/power density for rechargeable Na batteries, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4693–4696 RSC .
K. Trad, A. Wattiaux, M. Ben Amara, C. Delmas and D. Carlier, A new set of K3Fe3(PO4)4·yH2O (0 ≤ y ≤ 1) layered phases obtained by topotactic reactions, J. Solid State Chem., 2018, 262, 112–120 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Hwang, J. Kim, T.-Y. Yu, S.-T. Myung and Y.-K. Sun, Development of P3-K0.69CrO2 as an ultra-high-performance cathode material for K-ion batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2821–2827 RSC .

          N. Yabuuchi, M. Yano, S. Kuze and S. Komaba, Electrochemical behavior and structural change of spinel-type Li[LixMn2−x]O4 (x = 0 and 0.2) in sodium cells, Electrochemistry for Advanced Materials, Technologies and Instrumentation Selection of Papers from the 63rd Annual Meeting of the International Society of Electrochemistry 19–24 August 2012, Prague, Czech Republic,  2012, vol. 82, pp. 296–301 Search PubMed .
X.-J. Nie, X.-T. Xi, Y. Yang, Q.-L. Ning, J.-Z. Guo, M.-Y. Wang, Z.-Y. Gu and X.-L. Wu, Recycled
LiMn2O4 from the spent lithium ion batteries as cathode material for sodium ion batteries: electrochemical properties, structural evolution and electrode kinetics, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 320, 134626 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kataoka, M. Kitta, H. Ozaki, N. Takeichi and T. Kiyobayashi, Spinel manganese oxide: a high capacity positive electrode material for the sodium ion battery, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 212, 458–464 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kim and G. G. Amatucci, Structural and Electrochemical Investigation of Na+ Insertion into High-Voltage Spinel Electrodes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2546–2556 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kim and G. G. Amatucci, NaMn2-xNixO4 Derived from Mesoporous LiMn2-xNixO4: High-Voltage Spinel Cathode Materials for Na-Ion Batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A696–A705 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Lee, T. N. Ramesh, F. Nan, G. Botton and L. F. Nazar, Topochemical Synthesis of Sodium Metal Phosphate Olivines for Sodium-Ion Batteries, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3593–3600 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Oh, S.-T. Myung, J. Hassoun, B. Scrosati and Y.-K. Sun, Reversible NaFePO4 electrode for sodium secondary batteries, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 149–152 CrossRef CAS .
M. Casas-Cabanas, V. V. Roddatis, D. Saurel, P. Kubiak, J. Carretero-González, V. Palomares, P. Serras and T. Rojo, Crystal chemistry of Na insertion/deinsertion in FePO4–NaFePO4, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17421 RSC .
Y. Orikasa, T. Maeda, Y. Koyama, H. Murayama, K. Fukuda, H. Tanida, H. Arai, E. Matsubara, Y. Uchimoto and Z. Ogumi, Direct Observation of a Metastable Crystal Phase of LixFePO4 under Electrochemical Phase Transition, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5497–5500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-i. Nishimura, R. Natsui and A. Yamada, Superstructure in the Metastable Intermediate-Phase Li2/3FePO4 Accelerating the Lithium Battery Cathode Reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8939–8942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Galceran, D. Saurel, B. Acebedo, V. V. Roddatis, E. Martin, T. Rojo and M. Casas-Cabanas, The mechanism of NaFePO4 (de)sodiation determined by in situ X-ray diffraction, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 8837–8842 RSC .
J. Gaubicher, F. Boucher, P. Moreau, M. Cuisinier, P. Soudan, E. Elkaim and D. Guyomard, Abnormal operando structural behavior of sodium battery material: Influence of dynamic on phase diagram of NaxFePO4, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 38, 104–106 CrossRef CAS .
D. Saurel, M. Galceran, M. Reynaud, H. Anne and M. Casas-Cabanas, Rate dependence of the reaction mechanism in olivine NaFePO4 Na-ion cathode material, Int. J. Energy Res., 2018, 42, 3258–3265 CrossRef CAS .
F. Boucher, J. Gaubicher, M. Cuisinier, D. Guyomard and P. Moreau, Elucidation of the Na(2/3)FePO(4) and Li(2/3)FePO(4) intermediate superstructure revealing a pseudouniform ordering in 2D, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9144–9157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Galceran, V. Roddatis, F. J. Zúñiga, J. M. Pérez-Mato, B. Acebedo, R. Arenal, I. Peral, T. Rojo and M. Casas-Cabanas, Na–Vacancy and Charge Ordering in Na ≈2/3 FePO4, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3289–3294 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hasa, J. Hassoun, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, Sodium-Ion Battery based on an Electrochemically Converted NaFePO4 Cathode and Nanostructured Tin-Carbon Anode, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 2152–2155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Q. Liu, L. Xiao, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, High-Performance Olivine NaFePO4 Microsphere Cathode
Synthesized by Aqueous Electrochemical Displacement Method for Sodium Ion Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17977–17984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yun, J. Pfisterer and A. S. Bandarenka, How simple are the models of Na intercalation in aqueous media?, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 955–961 RSC .
M. Vujković and S. Mentus, Fast sodiation/desodiation reactions of electrochemically delithiated olivine LiFePO4 in aerated aqueous NaNO3 solution, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 184–188 CrossRef .
M. Vujković and S. Mentus, Potentiodynamic and galvanostatic testing of NaFe0.95V0.05PO4/C composite in aqueous NaNO3 solution, and the properties of aqueous Na1.2V3O8/NaNO3/NaFe0.95V0.05PO4/C battery, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 185–193 CrossRef .
A. J. Fernández-Ropero, D. Saurel, B. Acebedo, T. Rojo and M. Casas-Cabanas, Electrochemical characterization of NaFePO4 as positive electrode in aqueous sodium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2015, 291, 40–45 CrossRef .
S. Jeong, B. H. Kim, Y. D. Park, C. Y. Lee, J. Mun and A. Tron, Artificially coated NaFePO4 for aqueous rechargeable sodium-ion batteries, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 784, 720–726 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hilder, P. C. Howlett, D. Saurel, H. Anne, M. Casas-Cabanas, M. Armand, T. Rojo, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Stable cycling of NaFePO4 cathodes in high salt concentration ionic liquid electrolytes, J. Power Sources, 2018, 406, 70–80 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Kim, K.-Y. Park, Y.-U. Park, S. Lee, H.-S. Kwon, H.-I. Yoo and K. Kang, Alluaudite LiMnPO4: a new Mn-based positive electrode for Li rechargeable batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8632–8636 RSC .
Y.-U. Park, J. Bai, L. Wang, G. Yoon, W. Zhang, H. Kim, S. Lee, S.-W. Kim, J. P. Looney, K. Kang and F. Wang, In Situ Tracking Kinetic Pathways of Li+/Na+ Substitution during Ion-Exchange Synthesis of LixNa1.5–xVOPO4F0.5, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12504–12516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bianchini, F. Lalère, H. B. L. Nguyen, F. Fauth, R. David, E. Suard, L. Croguennec and C. Masquelier, Ag3V2(PO4)2F3, a new compound obtained by Ag+/Na+ ion exchange into the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 framework, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10340–10347 RSC .
H. Chen, G. Hautier and G. Ceder, Synthesis, Computed Stability, and Crystal Structure of a New Family of Inorganic Compounds: Carbonophosphates, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19619–19627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yaghoobnejad Asl and A. Choudhury, Combined Theoretical and Experimental Approach to the Discovery of Electrochemically Active Mixed Polyanionic Phosphatonitrates, AFePO4NO3 (A = NH4/Li, K), Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5029–5036 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, P. S. Whitfield, M. R. Saccomanno, S.-H. Bo, E. Hu, X. Yu, J. Bai, C. P. Grey, X.-Q. Yang and P. G. Khalifah, In Situ Neutron Diffraction Studies of the Ion Exchange Synthesis Mechanism of Li2Mg2P3O9N: Evidence for a Hidden Phase Transition, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9192–9202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, L. Yin, X.-Q. Yang and P. G. Khalifah, Li3VP3O9N as a Multielectron Redox Cathode for Li-Ion Battery, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4609–4616 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Du, H. Guo, G. Hu, Z. Peng and Y. Cao, Na3V2(PO4)3 as cathode material for hybrid lithium ion batteries, 13th International Meeting on Lithium Batteries,  2013, vol. 223, pp. 284–288 Search PubMed .
M. Reynaud, A. Wizner, N. A. Katcho, L. C. Loaiza, M. Galceran, J. Carrasco, T. Rojo, M. Armand and M. Casas-Cabanas, Sodium vanadium nitridophosphate Na3V(PO3)3N as a high-voltage positive electrode material for Na-ion and Li-ion batteries, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 84, 14–18 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. Guo, Approaching high-performance potassium-ion batteries via advanced design strategies and engineering, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav7412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, H. Kim, W. Ko, J. H. Jo, Y. Lee, J. Kang, I. Park, S.-T. Myung and J. Kim, Development of K4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) as a novel Fe-based cathode with high energy densities and excellent cyclability in rechargeable potassium batteries, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 28, 47–54 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, M. M. Rahman, L. Mu, Y. Liu and F. Lin, Chemomechanical behaviors of layered cathode materials in alkali metal ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21859–21884 RSC .
C. Delmas, C. Fouassier and P. Hagenmuller, Structural classification and properties of the layered oxides, Physica B+C, 1980, 99, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mizushima, P. C. Jones, P. J. Wiseman and J. B. Goodenough, LixCoO2 (0 < x < -1): a new cathode material for batteries of high energy density, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 783–789 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Paulsen, J. R. Mueller-Neuhaus and J. R. Dahn, Layered LiCoO2 with a different oxygen stacking (O2 structure) as a cathode material for rechargeable lithium batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 508–516 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tournadre, L. Croguennec, I. Saadoune, D. Carlier, Y. Shao-Horn, P. Willmann and C. Delmas, On the mechanism of the P2–Na0.70CoO2 → O2–LiCoO2 exchange reaction—Part I: proposition of a model to describe the P2–O2 transition, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 2790–2802 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tournadre, L. Croguennec, P. Willmann and C. Delmas, On the mechanism of the P2–Na0.70CoO2 → O2–LiCoO2 exchange reaction—Part II: an in situ X-ray diffraction study, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 2803–2809 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Palacín, D. Larcher, A. Audemer, N. Sac-Épée, G. G. Amatucci and J.-M. Tarascon, Low-Temperature Synthesis of LiNiO2 Reaction Mechanism, Stability, and Electrochemical Properties, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 4226–4236 CrossRef .
D. Larcher, M. R. Palacin, G. G. Amatucci and J.-M. Tarascon, Electrochemically active LiCoO2 and LiNiO2 made by cationic exchange under hydrothermal conditions, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 408–417 CrossRef CAS .
R. Berthelot, D. Carlier, M. Pollet, J.-P. Doumerc and C. Delmas, Synthesis and Investigations on an O4-LiCoO2 Polytype, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, A207–A210 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, N. Yabuuchi and Y. Kawamoto, A New Polymorph of Layered LiCoO2, Chem. Lett., 2009, 38, 954–955 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, Y. Kawamoto, R. Hara, T. Ishigaki, A. Hoshikawa, M. Yonemura, T. Kamiyama and S. Komaba, A comparative study of LiCoO2 polymorphs: structural and electrochemical characterization of O2-, O3-, and O4-type phases, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9131–9142 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shivakumara and M. S. Hegde, Low temperature synthesis of layered NaxCoO2 and KxCoO2 from NaOH/KOH fluxes and their ion exchange properties, J. Chem. Sci., 2003, 115, 447–457 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sada, B. Senthilkumar and P. Barpanda, Electrochemical potassium-ion intercalation in NaxCoO2: a novel cathode material for potassium-ion batteries, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8588–8591 RSC .
J. Liu, X. Huang, F. Li, R. Liu and L. Chen, Low-Temperature Magnetic and Thermoelectric Properties of Layered Ca0.33CoO2 Crystals, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2011, 80, 74802 CrossRef .
B. L. Cushing and J. B. Wiley, Topotactic Routes to Layered Calcium Cobalt Oxides, J. Solid State Chem., 1998, 385–391 CrossRef CAS .
G. Khaliullin and J. Chaloupka, Origin of strong correlations and superconductivity in NaxCoO2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 104532 CrossRef .
J. U. Rahman, E.-J. Meang, D. van Nguyen, W.-S. Seo, A. Hussain, M. H. Kim and S. Lee, The Synthesis and Thermoelectric Properties of p-Type Li1−xNbO2-Based Compounds, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 1740–1746 CrossRef .
E. Vera, B. Alcántar-Vázquez, Y. Duan and H. Pfeiffer, Bifunctional application of sodium cobaltate as a catalyst and captor through CO oxidation and subsequent CO2 chemisorption processes, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 2162–2170 RSC .
N. Yabuuchi, R. Hara, M. Kajiyama, K. Kubota, T. Ishigaki, A. Hoshikawa and S. Komaba, New O2/P2-type Li-Excess Layered Manganese Oxides as Promising Multi-Functional Electrode Materials for Rechargeable Li/Na Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301453 CrossRef .
A. D. Robertson, A. R. Armstrong, A. J. Paterson, M. J. Duncan and P. G. Bruce, Nonstoichiometric layered LixMnyO2 intercalation electrodes—a multiple dopant strategy, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2367–2373 RSC .
A. R. Armstrong, A. J. Paterson, A. D. Robertson and P. G. Bruce, Nonstoichiometric layered LixMnyO2 with a high capacity for lithium intercalation/deintercalation, Chem. Mater., 2002, 710–719 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, Electrochemistry Beyond Mn4+ in LixMn1−yLiyO2, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 7, A1 CrossRef .
A. R. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, Layered LixMn1−yLiyO2 intercalation electrodes: synthesis, structure and electrochemistry, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 218–224 RSC .
P. P. C. Frampton, P. D. Battle and C. Ritter, Ln18Li8Rh5O39 (Ln = La, Pr): a Mixed-Metal Oxide with a Charge-Ordered Arrangement of Rh3+ and Rh4+, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 7138–7142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, J. C. Knight, S.-T. Myung, S.-M. Oh and Y.-K. Sun, Nickel-Rich and Lithium-Rich Layered Oxide Cathodes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501010 CrossRef .
J. M. Paulsen and J. R. Dahn, Studies of the layered manganese bronzes, Na2/3[Mn1−xMx]O2 with M=Co, Ni, Li, and Li2/3[Mn1−xMx]O2 prepared by ion-exchange, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 126, 3–24 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Paulsen, R. A. Donaberger and J. R. Dahn, Layered T2-, O6-, O2-, and P2-Type A2/3[M‘2+1/3 M4+2/3]O2 Bronzes, A = Li, Na; M‘ = Ni, Mg; M = Mn, Ti, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2257–2267 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Paulsen and J. R. Dahn, O 2-Type Li2/3[Ni1/3Mn2/3]O2: A New Layered Cathode Material for Rechargeable Lithium Batteries II. Structure, Composition, and Properties, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2478 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Paulsen, C. L. Thomas and J. R. Dahn, O2 Structure Li2/3[Ni1/3Mn2/3]O2: A New Layered Cathode Material for Rechargeable Lithium Batteries. I. Electrochemical Properties, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 861 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, A. D. Robertson, R. Gitzendanner and P. G. Bruce, The Layered Intercalation Compounds Li(Mn1−yCoy)O2: Positive Electrode Materials for Lithium–Ion Batteries, J. Solid State Chem., 1999, 145, 549–556 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Quine, M. J. Duncan, A. R. Armstrong, A. D. Robertson and P. G. Bruce, Layered LixMn1−yNiyO2 intercalation electrodes, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 2838–2841 RSC .
K. Chiba, N. Taguchi, M. Shikano and H. Sakaebe, NaxLi0.7−xNi1−yMnyO2 as a new positive electrode material for lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2016, 311, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Chiba, M. Shikano and H. Sakaebe, Synthesis and electrochemical properties of Li2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 as a novel 5 V class positive electrode material for lithium-ion batteries, 13th International Meeting on Lithium Batteries,  2016, vol. 304, pp. 60–63 Search PubMed .
B. Xiao, K. Wang, G.-L. Xu, J. Song, Z. Chen, K. Amine, D. Reed, M. Sui, V. Sprenkle, Y. Ren, P. Yan and X. Li, Revealing the Atomic Origin of Heterogeneous Li-Ion Diffusion by Probing Na, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805889 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhao, S. Harada, Y. Furuya, S. Yamamoto and H. Noguchi, A new route for the synthesis of Li2MnO3 based cathode material with enhanced first cycle efficiency and cycleability for lithium ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2014, 261, 324–331 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, S.-H. Kang, M. Balasubramanian and C. S. Johnson, High-energy and high-power Li-rich nickel manganese oxide electrode materials, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1618–1621 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, J. R. Croy, E. Lee, A. Gutierrez, M. He, J. S. Park, B. T. Yonemoto, B. R. Long, J. D. Blauwkamp, C. S. Johnson, Y. Shin and W. I. F. David, The quest for manganese-rich electrodes for lithium batteries: strategic design and electrochemical behavior, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1375–1397 RSC .
P. K. Nayak, E. M. Erickson, F. Schipper, T. R. Penki, N. Munichandraiah, P. Adelhelm, H. Sclar, F. Amalraj, B. Markovsky and D. Aurbach, Review on Challenges and Recent Advances in the Electrochemical Performance of High Capacity Li-and Mn-Rich Cathode Materials for Li-Ion Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702397 CrossRef .
E. Hu, X. Wang, X. Yu and X.-Q. Yang, Probing the Complexities of Structural Changes in Layered Oxide Cathode Materials for Li-Ion Batteries during Fast Charge-Discharge Cycling and Heating, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 290–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bublil, M. Fayena-Greenstein, M. Talyanker, N. Solomatin, M. N. Tsubery, T. Bendikov, T. R. Penki, J. Grinblat, I. B. Durán, I. Grinberg, Y. Ein-Eli, Y. Elias, P. Hartmann and D. Aurbach, Na-ion battery cathode materials prepared by electrochemical ion exchange from alumina-coated Li1+xMn0.54Co0.13Ni0.1+yO2, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14816–14827 RSC .
Z. Xue, X. Qi, L. Li, W. Li, L. Xu, Y. Xie, X. Lai, G. Hu, Z. Peng, Y. Cao and K. Du, Sodium Doping to Enhance Electrochemical Performance of Overlithiated Oxide Cathode Materials for Li-Ion Batteries via Li/Na Ion-Exchange Method, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27141–27149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gao, M. Li, N. Guo, D. Qiu, Y. Li, S. Wang, X. Lu, F. Wang and R. Yang, K-Birnessite Electrode Obtained by Ion Exchange for Potassium-Ion Batteries: Insight into the Concerted Ionic Diffusion and K Storage Mechanism, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802739 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, K. Xi, K. Jiang, X. Zhang, Z. Liu, S. Guo and H. Zhou, Enhanced K-ion kinetics in a layered cathode for potassium ion batteries, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7910–7913 RSC .
N. Naveen, W. B. Park, S. C. Han, S. P. Singh, Y. H. Jung, D. Ahn, K.-S. Sohn and M. Pyo, Reversible K+-Insertion/Deinsertion and Concomitant Na+-Redistribution in P′3-Na0.52CrO2 for High-Performance Potassium-Ion Battery Cathodes, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2049–2057 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, D.-H. Kwon, J. C. Kim, B. Ouyang, H. Kim, J. Yang and G. Ceder, Na+ Redistribution by Electrochemical Na+/K+ Exchange in Layered NaxNi2SbO6, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 4312–4323 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kitta, T. Akita and M. Kohyama, Transmission electron microscopy investigation of the LiMn2O4/NaxMnO2 interface as a model study of a Na-ion battery electrode, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 115216 CrossRef .
K. Chiba, Y. Hamada, H. Hayakawa, N. Hamao, K. Kataoka, M. Mamiya, N. Kijima, N. Ishida, Y. Idemoto and J. Akimoto, A novel synthetic route of micrometer-sized LiCoMnO4 as 5 V cathode material for advanced lithium ion batteries, Solid State Ionics, 2019, 333, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, L. Blanc, G. M. Nolis, P. Bonnick, J. Cabana and L. F. Nazar, NaV1.25Ti0.75O4: A Potential Post-Spinel Cathode Material for Mg Batteries, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .
N. Meethong, H.-Y. S. Huang, W. C. Carter and Y.-M. Chiang, Size-dependent lithium miscibility gap in nanoscale Li1−xFePO4, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A134–A138 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gibot, M. Casas-Cabanas, L. Laffont, S. Levasseur, P. Carlach, S. Hamelet, J.-M. Tarascon and C. Masquelier, Room-temperature single-phase Li insertion/extraction in nanoscale LixFePO4, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 741–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Malik, D. Burch, M. Bazant and G. Ceder, Particle size dependence of the ionic diffusivity, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4123–4127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Oh, J. K. Lee, D. Byun, W. Cho II and B. Won Cho, Effect of Al2O3 coating on electrochemical performance of LiCoO2 as cathode materials for secondary lithium batteries, J. Power Sources, 2004, 132, 249–255 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Shin, W. I. Cho and H. Jang, Electrochemical properties of carbon-coated LiFePO4 cathode using graphite, carbon black, and acetylene black, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1472–1476 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, J. Li, X. Song, G. Liu and V. S. Battaglia, A comprehensive understanding of electrode thickness effects on the electrochemical performances of Li-ion battery cathodes, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 71, 258–265 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Wiedemann, G. M. Goldin, S. A. Barnett, H. Zhu and R. J. Kee, Effects of three-dimensional cathode microstructure on the performance of lithium-ion battery cathodes, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 580–588 CrossRef CAS .
C. Heubner, A. Nickol, J. Seeba, S. Reuber, N. Junker, M. Wolter, M. Schneider and A. Michaelis, Understanding thickness and porosity effects on the electrochemical performance of LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2-based cathodes for high energy Li-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2019, 419, 119–126 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, Conveying Advanced Li-ion Battery Materials into Practice The Impact of Electrode Slurry Preparation Skills, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600655 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, C. Luo and C. Wang, Comparison of electrochemical performances of olivine NaFePO4 in sodium-ion batteries and olivine LiFePO4 in lithium-ion batteries, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 780–787 RSC .
C. Heubner, S. Heiden, B. Matthey, M. Schneider and A. Michaelis, Sodiation vs. Lithiation of FePO4: A comparative kinetic study, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 216, 412–419 CrossRef CAS .
C. Heubner, M. Schneider and A. Michaelis, Heat generation rates of NaFePO4 electrodes for sodium-ion batteries and LiFePO4 electrodes for lithium-ion batteries, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 146, 3224 Search PubMed .
S.-W. Kim, D.-H. Seo, H. Kim, K.-Y. Park and K. Kang, A comparative study on Na2MnPO4F and Li2MnPO4F for rechargeable battery cathodes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 3299–3303 RSC .
S. P. Ong, V. L. Chevrier, G. Hautier, A. Jain, C. Moore, S. Kim, X. Ma and G. Ceder, Voltage, stability and diffusion barrier differences between sodium-ion and lithium-ion intercalation materials, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3680 RSC .
S. Maletti, A. Sarapulova, A. A. Tsirlin, S. Oswald, F. Fauth, L. Giebeler, N. N. Bramnik, H. Ehrenberg and D. Mikhailova, Electrochemical behavior of LiV3O8 positive electrode in hybrid Li, Na–ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2018, 373, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
H.-R. Yao, Y. You, Y.-X. Yin, L.-J. Wan and Y.-G. Guo, Rechargeable dual-metal-ion batteries for advanced energy storage, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 9326–9333 RSC .
J. Barker, R. K. B. Gover, P. Burns and A. J. Bryan, Hybrid-Ion: A Lithium-Ion Cell Based on a Sodium Insertion Material, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A190–A192 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barker, R. K. B. Gover, P. Burns and A. J. Bryan, Li4/3Ti5/3O4‖Na3V2(PO4)2F3: An Example of a Hybrid-Ion Cell Using a Non-graphitic Anode, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A882–A887 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. B. Gover, A. Bryan, P. Burns and J. Barker, The electrochemical insertion properties of sodium vanadium fluorophosphate, Na3V2(PO4)2F3, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 1495–1500 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barker, M. Y. Saidi and J. L. Swoyer, A Comparative Investigation of the Li Insertion Properties of the Novel Fluorophosphate Phases, NaVPO4F and LiVPO4F, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1670–A1677 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Kosova, D. O. Rezepova, S. A. Petrov and A. B. Slobodyuk, Electrochemical and Chemical Na+/Li+ Ion Exchange in Na-Based Cathode Materials: Na1.56Fe1.22P2O7 and Na3V2(PO4)2F3, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A6192–A6200 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Kosova and A. A. Shindrov, Na3FePO4CO3 as a cathode for hybrid-ion batteries—study of Na+/Li+ electrochemical exchange, Ionics, 2019, 25, 5829–5838 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Christian Heubner	Christian Heubner graduated from TU Dresden as a chemical engineer in 2012 and received his Ph.D. in Materials Science in 2016 under the supervision of Professor Alexander Michaelis. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Institute of Materials Science (TU Dresden) and joined the Department of Mobile Energy Storage Systems and Electrochemistry of the Fraunhofer IKTS in 2019. His research interests mainly focus on electrochemistry and modelling of materials for energy storage, including Li-ion and next generation batteries.
Tobias Lein	Tobias Lein received his Master of Science degree (Chemistry and Energy) in 2018 from the University of Applied Science Zittau/Görlitz under the supervision of Professor Klaus Seibt and Professor Jens Weber. He is now a PhD candidate under the guidance of Professor Alexander Michaelis at TU Dresden in collaboration with the Fraunhofer IKTS. His current research interest focuses on the electrochemical Li/Na substitution of intercalation materials for secondary batteries.
Michael Schneider	Michael Schneider was born in 1962. He studied metal science at Bergakademie Freiberg and received his diploma degree in 1989. From 1990 to 1992 he worked at the Max-Planck-Institut für Eisenforschung Düsseldorf under the supervision of Dr. Martin Stratmann. In 1993, he received his Dr.-Ing. degree from TU Dresden. From 2001–2006 he managed the working group Corrosion at Fraunhofer IFAM Bremen. Currently, he is group manager of Electrochemistry at the Fraunhofer IKTS in Dresden. His reasearch interest is related to electrochemical energy storage, functional layers for corrosion protection, and electrochemical machining.
Alexander Michaelis	Alexander Michaelis received his degree in physics and PhD in electrochemistry from the University of Düsseldorf (Germany). Since 2004, he has been president of the Fraunhofer Institute for Ceramic Technologies and Systems IKTS and has held the chair of Inorganic Nonmetallic Materials at Technische Universität Dresden. In 2015 he was appointed for the LEE HSUN Award on Materials Science. He is Fellow of the American and the European Ceramic Society. In 2019 he was elected President of the German Ceramic Society. He holds more than 40 patent families in materials science, microelectronics and electronics, and has published more than 360 publications.

Atomic radius [pm]	167	190	243
Ionic radius [pm]	76	102	138
Atomic weight [g mol−1]	6.94	22.989	39.098

E
0
versus SHE [V]	−3.04	−2.71	−2.94
Common coordination environments	Octahedral, tetrahedral	Octahedral, prismatic	Octahedral, prismatic
Abundance in the earth's crust	Negligible	2.8	2.6
Distribution	70% in South America	Everywhere	Everywhere
Price/metric ton, carbonate (99% purity) [$]	2000–2200	200–250	500–1500
Metal electrode theoretical capacity [mA h g−1]	3829	1165	685

 	Fig. 1  (a) Comparison of energy density expectations for LIBs, SIBs, and PIBs. (b) Abundance (wt%) of lithium, sodium, and potassium metal in the Earth's crust. (c) Stokes radii of Li-, Na-, and K-ions in PC. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.41 (d) Olivine, layered and spinel type cathode materials with 1D, 2D and 3D diffusion channels. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, MDPI.42	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the typical AME procedure.	 

LiFePO4	Chemical, electrochemical and combined, Na+ for Li+	NaFePO4	150 mA h g−1, host structure preserved	
21

Na1.5VPO4.8F0.7	Chemical Li+ for Na+	Li1.1Na0.4VPO4.8F0.7	156 mA h g−1, host structure preserved	
49

KVPO4F	Electrochemical, Li+ for K+	Li0.7K0.15VPO4F	Host structure preserved	
50

Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)	Chemical, electrochemical and combined, Li+ for Na+	Li3NaFe3(PO4)2P2O7 or Li1.2Na2.4Fe3(PO4)2P2O7	130 mA h g−1, host structure preserved	
51–53

Li2FeSiO4	Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+	Li0.2FeSiO4	Cycling in Na cells yields 330 mA h g−1	
54

Na3APO4CO3 (A = Fe/Mn)	Chemical, Li+ for Na+	Li3FeCO3PO4 and Li2.67Na0.63Mn0.96CO3PO4	110 mA h g−1 and 135 mA h g−1	
55, 56

Na2Fe2P3O9N	Chemical, Li+ for Na+	Li0.3Fe2P3O9N	125 mA h g−1, preservation of the cubic lattice	
57

Na3V2(PO4)2F3	Electrochemical, K+ for Na+	NaK2V2(PO4)2F3	104 mA h g−1, cycling dominated by K+ insertion and extraction	
58, 59

P2-Na0.7CoO2	Chemical, Li+ for Na+	LiCoO2	Novel polytype O2-LiCoO2	
60–62

LiCoO2	Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+	Li0.5Na0.4CoO2	Na- and Li-rich domains	
63

NaMnO2	Chemical, Li+ for Na+	LiMnO2	Host structure can be preserved but transforms into spinel during cycling	
64–69

P2-type Na2/3[Li1/6Mn5/6]O2	Chemical, Li+ for Na+	O2-type Li2/3[Li1/6Mn5/6]O2	150 mA h g−1, stable cycling performance, no spinel transition	
70

NaMn1−yCoyO2	Chemical, Li+ for Na+	LixMn1−yCoyO2	200 mA h g−1	
71–73

NaNi0.5Mn0.5O2	Chemical, Li+ for Na+	LixNayNi0.5Mn0.5O2	Residual sodium stabilizes the layered structure	
74

LiNi0.82Co0.12Mn0.06O2	Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+	Na0.75Ni0.82Co0.12Mn0.06O2	171 mA h g−1, host lattice preserved	
75

Li1.2(Ni0.15Mn0.55Co0.1)O2	Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+	Na0.95Li0.15(Ni0.15Mn0.55Co0.1)O2	Initial capacity 238 mA h g−1	
76

0.5Li2MnO3·0.5LiMn0.42Ni0.42Co0.16O2	Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+	Na:Li:(Mn + Ni + Co) = 0.832:0.16:0.8	1.08 Li+ extracted, 0.76 Na+ intercalated, 239 mA h g−1	
77

Li1.167Ni0.25Mn0.583O2	Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+	Na0.78Li0.18Ni0.25Mn0.583O2−z	240 mA h g−1	
78

Na3Fe3(PO4)4	Chemical, K+ for Na+	K3Fe3(PO4)4·yH2O	Lattice distortion due to Na–K size difference	
79

O3-NaCrO2	Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+	P3-K0.69CrO2	100 mA h g−1, Na+ continuously replaced by K+ in the host structure	
80

LiMn2O4	Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+	O′3-type NaxMnO2	Spinel to layered transition, reversible capacity 190–200 mA h g−1	
81, 82

Li2MnO3	Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+	Li0.3NaMnO3	200 mA h g−1, spinel structure is preserved	
83

LiNi0.5Mn1.504	Electrochemical, Na+ for Li+	Na0.87Mn1.56Ni0.44O4	Host structure preserved	
84, 85


 	Fig. 3  (a) Typical voltage profile obtained for Na-ion insertion into olivine FePO4. (A), (B) and (C) mark the fully sodiated state (NaFePO4), the emergence of an intermediate phase during charging and the fully desodiated state (FePO4), respectively. (b) XRD data and Rietveld refinement of the NaFePO4 olivine structure. (c) Development of the XRD pattern during heating from 25–650 °C, showing the irreversible transformation of the olivine NaFePO4 into the maricite phase (the inset represents the corresponding DTA results). (d) Crystal structures of (i) maricite NaFePO4, (ii) olivine LiFePO4 and (iii) olivine NaFePO4. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.21	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Development of cyclic voltammograms in the course of electrochemical AME of Li-ions by Na-ions in LiFePO4 (scan rate: 0.05 mV s−1, electrolyte: 1 M NaClO4 dissolved in TEGDME). Path dependence of (b) the entropy of Na-ion intercalation, (c) the exchange current density and (d) the Na-diffusion coefficient determined for the material prepared by electrochemical AME. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd.44	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the aqueous electrochemical AME from olivine LiFePO4 to isostructural NaFePO4. (b) SEM image of an ion-exchanged NaFePO4/C microsphere, corresponding elemental maps and EDS spectrum (inset, element distribution of the mapping area). The results of electrochemical performance of the ion-exchanged NaFePO4/C material against Na-metal counter electrodes in 1.0 mol L−1 NaPF6 in an EC:DEC (1:1 by volume) electrolyte: (c) cyclic voltammogram (scan rate 50 μV s−1, potential range: 2.1–3.6 V vs. Na/Na+), (d) charge/discharge profiles obtained at 0.1C and different cycles, (e) cycling stability test at 0.1C and (f) rate performance test between 0.05 and 2C. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.97	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of reaction profiles for the Li/Na AME in LiFePO4 in (a) aqueous and (b) organic electrolytes. The blue (Na-based) and orange (Li-based) bars represent the energies required for desolvation and adsorption processes in the course of AME. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.43	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Experimental in situ setup for tracking the ion exchange by synchrotron XRD. (b) Temporal development of XRD patterns during ion exchange (5 M LiBr solution, 160 °C) and detailed view of the patterns indicating the transition from a 2-phase (blue) and solid solution (red) by the evolution of the (111) and (002) peaks. (c) Third XRD pattern indicating the coexistence of Na- and Li-rich phases. (d) Evolution of the position of the (002) peak (directly related to the Li content) for different LiBr concentrations and the corresponding phase transformations at different exchange stages. (e) Energy diagram of the LixNa1.5−xVOPO4F0.5 system determined from DFT computations. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.105	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional EBSD and EDS results of a Li–Na-mixed intercalation compound obtained from partial electrochemical AME of Li-ions in LiCoO2 with Na-ions, including the analysis of band contrast, Na-distribution (EDS) and phase distribution of LiCoO2 and P-type NaCoO2 correlated with their crystallographic orientation (EBSD). The dashed rectangles indicate the location of the corresponding crystal structures and orientation relationship of neighboring regions. (b) Schematic illustrations of the partial Li–Na displacement in LiCoO2 (top and bottom rows represent macroscopic and microscopic models). (i) Delithiation generates sub-stoichiometric Li0.5CoO2. (ii) Phase separation and formation of Na-rich and Li-rich domains. (iii) Growth of Na-rich and densification of Li-rich domains. (iv) Final Li–Na-mixed intercalation compound. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier Ltd.63	 

 	Fig. 9  Crystal structures for P2-, O2- and O3-type layered oxides. Displacement of Na-ions in P2-type layered Na5/6[Li1/4Mn3/4]O2 by Li-ions gives O2-type layered Lix[Li1/4Mn3/4]O2. Half of the MeO2 layers in the P2-phase glides toward the direction of (2/3, 1/3, z), forming the O2-phase. Na-ions are located at trigonal prismatic sites (P-site) for the P2-phase. Li-ions are located at octahedral sites (O-site) for the O2-phase. Li-ions (LiO6 octahedra) share a face (denoted as “F”) with metal ions (MeO6 octahedra) for one side after the AME. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.133	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the electrochemical AME of alumina-coated Li1+xMn0.54Co0.13Ni0.1+yO2 to prepare alumina-coated Na1+xLi0.05Mn0.54Co0.13NiyO2−z for SIBs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.154	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Specific discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency obtained during continuous AME of Na-ions with K-ions starting from NaCrO2 and (b) the corresponding voltage profiles in the 1st, 50th, and 300th cycle and for the refreshed cell. (c) Comparison of the XRD patterns obtained from the O3-NaCrO2 precursor and the ion-exchanged P3-KxCrO2 material. (d) Results of Rietveld refinement for the P3-KxCrO2 material. TEM images and the corresponding EDX mapping results of (e) P3-KxCrO2 and (f) the pristine O3-NaCrO2. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.80	 

 	Fig. 12  Differential capacity plots derived from charge/discharge profiles of layered NaMnO2 in Na-cells (black line) and spinel LiMn2O4 in Li-cells (blue line) and Na-cells (red line) including the AME of Li-ions with Na-ions and gradual conversion of the spinel into a layered structure. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2012, The Electrochemical Society.81	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
