Photoinduced intra- and inter-molecular charge transfer dynamics in organic small molecules with an intra-molecular push–pull electronic structure   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC01534J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC01534J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 10106-10113Photoinduced intra- and inter-molecular charge transfer dynamics in organic small molecules with an intra-molecular push–pull electronic structure†

        
          
            Yiwen 
            Ji
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lingxia 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xinyu 
            Mu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenjing 
            Wang
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Kun 
            Gao
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Physics, State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, China. E-mail: gk@sdu.edu.cn
bCollege of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Qilu Normal University, Jinan 250200, China. E-mail: wwj8686@163.com
Received 
      13th April 2022
    , Accepted 19th June 2022First published on 21st June 2022AbstractAs electron acceptor materials, organic small molecules with an intra-molecular push–pull electronic structure have been widely used in high-efficient organic solar cells (OSCs), usually referred to as non-fullerene acceptor (NFA) molecules. Compared with fullerene acceptor molecules, an interesting discovery is that these molecules behave in both photoinduced intra- and inter-molecular charge transfer (CT) effects, thus resulting in some unique photophysical processes and phenomena during the operation of OSCs. In this study, by separately applying a photoexcitation to a single NFA molecule and different molecular aggregates, we clarify the photoinduced electron transition details (including transition mode, peak position, and probability), the resulting intra- and inter-CT dynamics, and the modulating methods (such as the intra-molecular electronic push–pull potential, the inter-molecular aggregation mode, and the photoexcitation intensity). Clarifications of these microscopic quantum processes should be helpful to further understand the photoinduced experimental observations in NFA molecules, and thus provide a clear direction for their rational design to improve the photoinduced charge yield in their aggregates.
Introduction
Benefiting from the rapid development of non-fullerene acceptor (NFA) molecules, power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of organic solar cells (OSCs) have increased substantially up to efficiencies of 15–19% over the last five years.1–3 Compared with fullerene acceptor (FA) molecules, NFA molecules usually have an intra-molecular push–pull electronic structure, that is, an electron-push central fused ring group and two electron-pull terminal groups, sometimes connected by two π-bridges between them.4–6 A significant advantage of combining electron-push and -pull groups is the respective tuning for the molecular HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) and LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) levels, so as to realize the targeted optimization for their energy level structures.7,8 To date, different strategies have been explored to strengthen the electron-push ability of the central group, such as extending the conjugation length,9 introducing a strong electron-push group,10 and inserting a quinone resonance structure.11 To strengthen the electron-pull ability of the terminal groups, one usually introduces halogen atoms (e.g., fluorine and chlorine).12–14 With these optimizations, intra- and inter-molecular charge transfer (CT) effects in NFA molecules have been successively reported.15–21
A basic consensus is that the NFA molecular push–pull electronic structure first induces an intra-CT effect. However, in NFA molecules with only the intra-CT effect considered, their excited state binding energy is still as high as 0.2 eV.16,22 Furthermore, the inter-CT effect was predicted in NFA molecules.16 Experimentally, Wang et al. reported that charge separation in a blend of polymer donor (PM6) and NFA molecules (Y6) is mediated by Y6 excited states instead of the traditional D/A interfacial CT states.17 The excited electron and hole in a Y6 excited state were predicted to be partially separated between Y6 molecules. By utilizing the photoexcitation dependent magneto-capacitance, Zhu et al. also reported that photoexcitation in Y6 molecules results in bulk polarization (i.e., inter-CT effect), which can be improved by strengthening the photoexcitation intensity.18 Recently, Xu et al. employed transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy and observed inter-CT signals in other typical NFA molecules (ITIC, 4TIC, and 6TIC).19 In an earlier work,16 from the static energetic viewpoint, we theoretically clarified that intra- and inter-CT effects intrinsically coexist in NFA molecules, by which the excited state binding energy can be significantly reduced and close to the thermal energy at room temperature.
Despite these advances, an in-depth understanding of the photoinduced intra- and inter-CT dynamics and the relevant experimental observations in NFA molecules remain unclear. For instance, how about the time scale of the photoinduced intra- and inter-CT dynamics? Can it be compared with the time scale for the appearance of stable CT signals observed in experiments?17,20 What are the quantitative correlations of the intra- and inter-CT dynamics with the NFA molecular factors and photoexcitation conditions? In view of these issues, by employing a universal quantum model for NFA molecules with photoexcitation included, we clarify the intra- and inter-CT dynamics, including their quantitative correlations with the molecular factors (e.g., the intra-molecular electronic push–pull potential and the inter-molecular aggregation mode) and the photoexcitation conditions (e.g., the photoexcitation energy and intensity). In particular, to understand the intra- and inter-CT dynamical results, we firstly reveal the corresponding electron transition details (including transition mode, peak position, and probability) during different photoexcitation processes.
Computational methods
NFA molecules usually have variable intra-molecular structures,7 while most of them have some general features, such as a quasi-one-dimensional conjugated backbone, and push–pull electronic structure.16 In Fig. 1a, we build a universal quantum model to describe an NFA molecule. To highlight the molecular electron–lattice (e–l) and electron–electron (e–e) interactions, an extended version of the well-known Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) tight-binding model is employed.23 In this kind of framework, the electronic Hamiltonian of the molecule can be divided into three parts: He = HT + Hπ + HC(1)HT describes the terminal groups (1 ≤ n ≤ 7 and 29 ≤ n ≤ 35), Hπ π-bridges (8 ≤ n ≤ 10 and 26 ≤ n ≤ 28), and HC central group (11 ≤ n ≤ 25), separately written as: (2a) (2b) (2c)C+n,s (Cn,s) denotes the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron at site n with spin s (s = ↑,↓). t0 refers to the nearest-neighbor electron hopping integral for a uniform bond structure, α is the e–l interaction constant, and un is the displacement of site n. t1 and t2 are the symmetry-breaking parameters separately introduced to reflect the lattice features of terminal groups (see eqn (2a)) and the central group (see eqn (2c)).
 Fig. 1  (a) Simplified model description for a typical NFA molecule, where the orange, blue, and black segments separately represent the electron-push central fused ring group, electron-pull terminal groups, and π-bridges. The red upward arrow indicates an incident light field with the form of a femtosecond electric pump pulse (FEPP). (b) Schematic diagram of the NFA molecular energy levels lying in the ground state. 
To consider the effect of heteroatoms X (e.g., S and N atoms) on the electron hopping in the central group, we introduce t3 to describe the hopping between the neighboring sites of a heteroatom (see the second and third terms in eqn (2c)). In addition, the electron-push ability is attributed to the on-site energy Δon (see the fourth and fifth terms in eqn (2c)), which originates from the heteroatom effects. For the electron-pull ability of the terminal groups, we employ Δon′ in eqn (2a) to describe the on-site energy of a fluorinated or chlorinated site. Therefore, the molecular push–pull electronic structure can be described, and the total electron push–pull potential can be tuned by the on-site energy difference ( for simplicity) between the central group and terminal groups.
With the Hartree–Fock approximation, the intra-molecular e–e interactions can be described as: (3)U represents the on-site Coulomb interaction strength, and V‖ the nearest-neighbor off-site Coulomb interaction strength.
The molecular lattice Hamiltonian (Hlatt) is treated classically, where the elastic potential energy and kinetic energy are included: (4)K is the elastic constant between the nearest-neighbor sites, and M is the mass of a site.
To simulate a photoexcitation, we apply a femtosecond electric pump pulse (FEPP) E(t) to the molecule, chosen as a Gaussian form centered at time tc with a width tw:24 E(t) = E0exp{−[(t–tc)/tw]2}cosωt(5)E0 and ω separately describes the photoexcitation intensity and frequency. The Hamiltonian of the light-matter interaction is written as: (6)where e indicates the electronic charge and a is the lattice constant. Here we set tc = 40 fs, tw = 25 fs, and E0 = 1 MV cm−1 without specific clarification. For details of other parameters, see Section S1 of the ESI.†
Results and discussion
Before photoexcitations, we suppose the NFA molecule is lying in the ground state, obtained by iteratively solving the static electronic eigenequation and the lattice balance equation (see Section S2 of the ESI† for details). Fig. 1b schematically presents the NFA molecular energy levels, where we denote εμ (μ = 1,2⋯) to be the valence band levels counted from the top, and  the conduction band levels counted from the bottom. After photoexcitations, a nonadiabatic dynamics method is employed, where the lattice displacement un(t) and the electronic state |Ψν,s(t)〉 are coupled together all through the molecular evolutions (details of the evolution equations are presented in Section S3 of the ESI†).
Firstly, let us reveal the electron transition details after photoexcitation is applied to the NFA molecule, where the effect of the electronic push–pull potential (Δon) on the electron transitions will be focused. By choosing typical values of Δon, Fig. 2a–d separately presents the corresponding variation of the total transited electron population  only counts the conduction band levels) with the photoexcitation energy ħω (1.0 ≤ ħ ≤ 2.5 eV) after the transitions are completed.  indicates the electron occupation number on eigenstate |φμ,s(t)〉 at time t. In fact, these results reflect the stimulated transition probabilities of electrons at different photoexcitation energies, which can be compared with the experimentally observed light absorption spectra. In the case of Δon = 0, there exist two transition peaks for the NFA molecule, as presented in Fig. 2a. With increasing the value of Δon, we know that the molecular energy gap will be reduced,11–13 such that both of the two transition peaks present red-shift behaviors (see Fig. 2b–d). Interestingly, a new higher-energy transition peak appears and red-shifts with increasing the value of Δon.
 Fig. 2  (a–d) Variation of the total transited electron population Γ with the photoexcitation energy ħω in a single NFA molecule, where different values of the electronic push–pull potentials (Δon) are considered. (e) Transition probability (ηpeak) of different peak transitions as a function of the value of Δon, and the inset shows the dependence of the transition dipole moment P upon the value of Δon for different transition modes. (f) Time evolutions of the intra-molecular transferred charge quantity Qintra(t) for the first peak transition with different values of Δon. (g) Time evolutions of Qintra(t) for different peak transitions with a given value of Δon = 0.9 eV. 
To clarify these transition modes, we further check the time evolutions of the electron occupation number Fμ(t) on the six band-edge levels with different values of Δon, where only the three peak transitions are demonstrated (see Fig. S1 in the ESI†). For the first peak transition, we find that the occupation number on level ε1 decreases rapidly after the photoexcitation is applied, and that on level  it correspondingly increases. This means that electrons initially occupying the level ε1 gain energy from the photoexcitation to transit to level , thus the first peak transition should be attributed to . Similarly, the second peak transition originates from . Here, it should be stressed that the third peak transition only appears in cases of Δon > 0, and the transition includes two kinds of modes:  and . Considering the reason, the molecular push–pull electronic structure induces the redistribution of the corresponding electronic states |φμ,s〉. As a result, the transition dipole moment  for transitions  and  increase with the value of Δon, as demonstrated in the inset of Fig. 2e.
Comparing the results of Fig. 2a–d, in addition to the red-shift of the transition peaks, their transition probabilities change with the electronic push–pull potential (Δon), especially for the third peak transition. Fig. 2e shows the quantitative correlations of the transition probabilities (ηpeak) for three peak transitions with the value of Δon. We can see that the effect of the electronic push–pull potential on the first peak transition probability is nonmonotonic. In cases of Δon < 0.5 eV, the transition probability decreases rapidly with increasing the value of Δon; in the cases of Δon ≥ 0.5 eV, however, the transition probability presents a gradually increasing tendency. For the second peak transition, it is found that the electronic push–pull potential has a slight promoting effect on its transition probability. For the third peak transition, we can see that the transition probability increases from zero and presents a rapid increasing tendency with increasing the value of Δon. These results can be understood by calculating the corresponding transition dipole moments (see the inset of Fig. 2e). Apparently, with increasing the value of Δon, the changing tendencies of the transition dipole moments for these peak transitions are basically consistent with their peak transition probabilities.
In general, the electronic push–pull potential (Δon) in an actual NFA molecule (such as ITIC and Y6) has a large value. For the present model calculation, the value of Δon can be estimated by calculating the charge density difference between the molecular excited state and ground state, and then comparing it with the results obtained by Gaussian calculation.25 As presented in Section S5 of the ESI,† in the case of Δon = 0.6 eV, the charge density difference between the excited state and ground state calculated by the model method (see Fig. S2a, ESI†) is basically consistent with that calculated by the Gaussian method (see Fig. S2b, ESI† for ITIC and Fig. S2c, ESI† for Y6). So, we simply consider that the electronic push–pull potential of an ITIC or Y6 molecule is about Δon = 0.6 eV. In actual applications, the molecular electronic push–pull potential can be further improved, such as the chlorination or fluorination for the molecular terminal groups.12–14 Therefore, the results in Fig. 2e mean that all three peak transitions will be promoted in actual NFA molecules by strengthening their electronic push–pull potentials. Reflected in the NFA molecular light absorption spectrum, we conclude that the electronic push–pull potential not only expands the absorption range (due to the red-shift of different transition peaks and the appearance of higher-energy transition modes), but also heightens the absorption efficiency (due to the increase of different peak transition probabilities). For instance, compared with pristine ITIC molecules, Zhao et al. have experimentally observed a broader absorption range and higher absorption efficiency in fluorinated ITIC molecules (ITIC-4F).13
With these photoinduced electron transitions, the excited electron and hole behave with an intra-CT effect due to the NFA molecular push–pull electronic structure. Specifically, electron charges transfer from the electron-push central group (i.e., electron-donating group) to electron-pull terminal groups (i.e., electron-accepting groups), such that an NFA molecule is also described as an A–D–A type electronic structure. Here, taking the first peak transition  as an example, we first focus on the effect of the electronic push–pull potential (Δon) on the photoinduced intra-CT dynamics in an NFA molecule. Fig. 2f presents the time evolutions of the intra-molecular transferred charge quantity Qintra(t) = −Σiqi(t) (i indicates the site index of the central group) along the molecule with four typical values of Δon separately chosen. In the case of Δon = 0, we can see that there is not any intra-CT effect both before and after photoexcitation. In the case of Δon > 0, the molecule behaves in a weak intra-CT effect even before photoexcitation. After photoexcitation, the intra-CT effect can be remarkably improved for any given value of Δon. It confirms that the intra-CT dynamics correspond to the redistribution process of the excited electron and hole. Especially, by increasing the value of Δon, we can get a more apparent intra-CT effect in the NFA molecule. As for the intra-CT time scale, it is found that the intra-CT dynamics are basically synchronous for different values of Δon, and last about tens of femtoseconds. To clarify the effect of the photoexcitation energy on the photoinduced intra-CT dynamics in an NFA molecule, Fig. 2g shows the time evolutions of Qintra(t) for different peak transitions with a given value of Δon = 0.9 eV. It is found that the intra-CT effect induced by a higher-energy transition is relatively weak due to its lower transition probability (see Fig. 2e).
In actual applications, NFA molecules usually present diverse aggregation modes due to the molecular anisotropic geometric configurations.15 To date, there has been growing recognition that an optimized aggregation mode of NFA molecules can significantly improve their photoelectric performances, such as the light absorption,26 charge dynamics,27 as well as the inter-CT effect.19 In view of this, by fixing the intra-molecular electronic push–pull potential as Δon = 0.6 eV, we further consider the inter-CT effect between neighboring NFA molecules with different aggregation modes: A-to-A type J-aggregation, A-to-D type J-aggregation, and D-to-D type H-aggregation (see the inset of Fig. 3a–c). Interactions between two molecules (denoted as M1 and M2) can be described by the Hamiltonian Hinter, written as: (7)where t⊥ and V⊥ separately indicate the inter-molecular electron hopping integral and e–e interaction strength between the vertical-neighbor sites of two molecules (see Section S1 of the ESI† for parameter details).  means the summation only for the sites over the coupling region between molecules.
 Fig. 3  Time evolutions of the electron occupation number Fμ(t) on several band-edge levels in NFA molecules with A-to-A type J-aggregation (a), A-to-D type J-aggregation (b), and D-to-D type H-aggregation (c), where only their first peak transitions are compared. 
Compared with the photoinduced electron transitions in a single NFA molecule, a typical difference in an NFA molecular aggregate is that the peak transition modes might change. For the first peak transition, we calculate the time evolutions of the electron occupation number Fμ(t) on several band-edge levels in different NFA molecular aggregates, as presented in Fig. 3a–c. We can see that the transition mode in the A-to-A type J-aggregate remains unchanged, such as that in a single NFA molecule (i.e., ). In the A-to-D type J-aggregate and D-to-D type H-aggregate, however, both of their transition modes are found to be changed. Specifically, in addition to ,  takes place simultaneously in the initial photoexcitation stage. But soon the transited electron on the higher-energy level  transits to the lower-energy level  through an ultrafast internal conversion process.24,28 Considering the reason, the large inter-molecular coupling area in the A-to-D type J-aggregate and D-to-D type H-aggregate results in the hybridization of energy levels and redistribution of electronic states, thus their electron transition modes might be different from a single molecule case. For the second and third peak transitions, we also find the changes of electron transition modes in different molecular aggregates (see Fig. S3 of the ESI† for details).
A direct result for the changes of the electron transition modes in different NFA molecular aggregates is that the corresponding light absorption spectrum turns out to be different. Experimentally, by comparing the light absorption in ITIC solution, Mao et al. have reported a red-shifted light absorption (∼0.09 eV) in the ITIC film with an A-to-A type J-aggregation.29 Furthermore, by realizing the conversion of the molecular (COi8DFIC) aggregation mode into A-to-D type J-aggregation and D-to-D type H-aggregation, Zhang et al. separately reported a red-shifted and blue-shifted light absorption in the two aggregates compared with that in COi8DFIC solution.30 To support these results, we compare the variations of the total transited electron population Γ with the photoexcitation energy ħω in a single NFA molecule, A-to-A type J-aggregate, A-to-D type J-aggregate, and D-to-D type H-aggregate, as presented in Fig. 4a–d. We can clearly see that all three transition peaks in A-to-A type J-aggregates and A-to-D type J-aggregates present red-shift behaviors, while those in D-to-D type H-aggregates present blue-shift behaviors, consistent with the above experimental observations. The reasons for the transition (or absorption) peak shift in different molecular aggregates are relatively complex. In general, it is a synergistic effecting result due to the changes of the electron transition mode and energy level rearrangement (caused by the inter-molecular coupling and inter-molecular charge interaction in the corresponding coupling region). For instance, comparing A-to-D type J-aggregates and D-to-D type H-aggregates, we find that their inter-molecular coupling areas are different. Especially, the inter-molecular charge interaction in A-to-D type J-aggregates is negative, while that in D-to-D type H-aggregates is positive. As a result, although the first peak transition modes in the A-to-D type J-aggregate and D-to-D type H-aggregate are consistent (see Fig. 3b and c), the energy difference between  and ε1 in A-to-D type J-aggregates is lowered to 1.48 eV from that (1.52 eV) in a single NFA molecule, while the energy difference between  and ε1 in the D-to-D type H-aggregate is heightened to 1.56 eV. So, the first peak transitions in the A-to-D type J-aggregate and D-to-D type H-aggregate separately present red-shift and blue-shift behavior.
 Fig. 4  Variations of the total transited electron population Γ with the photoexcitation energy ħω in a single NFA molecule (a), A-to-A type J-aggregate (b), A-to-D type J-aggregate (c), and D-to-D type H-aggregate (d). (e) presents the time evolutions of the inter-molecular transferred charge quantity Qinter(t) for the first peak transition in different molecular aggregates at Δon = 0.6 eV. (f) shows the time evolutions of the inter-molecular transferred charge quantity Qinter(t) for the first peak transition with different values of Δon in the A-to-A type J-aggregate. 
In NFA molecular aggregates, the photoinduced electron transitions result in an inter-CT effect, as well as an intra-CT effect.31,32 Here, we also take the first peak transition as an example to clarify the photoinduced inter-CT dynamics in different NFA molecular aggregates. Fig. 4e shows the time evolutions of the inter-molecular transferred charge quantity Qintra = −ΣnqM1,n(t) from the M1 to M2 molecule in the cases of A-to-A type J-aggregation, A-to-D type J-aggregation, and D-to-D type H-aggregation. We can see that inter-CT behaviors take place right after a photoexcitation is applied in all cases. Notably, all the inter-CT dynamics experience apparent relaxation processes (200–300 fs), after which the values of Qinter in different molecular aggregates tend to be stable. On the one hand, the results show that the A-to-A type J-aggregation of NFA molecules is more conducive to the inter-CT effect than the other two aggregation modes. Owing to the intra- and inter-CT synergistic effect, the excited state binding energy in NFA molecules can be significantly reduced (lowered to 0.05 eV).16 Therefore, after the inter-CT dynamics tend to be stable, a new stable polaron-like inter-CT signal should be detected in NFA molecules by the TA spectroscopy,17 which is significantly different from the traditional exciton and interfacial CT signals. Recently, by separately adding 1,8-diodoctane (DIO) into ITIC, 4TIC, and 6TIC neat films, Xu et al. obtained more A-to-A type J-aggregation in these molecular films, where they reported a stronger inter-CT TA signal than their films without DIO.19 On the other hand, Fig. 4e shows that the NFA molecular aggregation mode has a weak impact on the time scale of the inter-CT relaxation process. As we know, the inter-molecular coupling can suppress the molecular vibrations and thus lower the molecular reorganization energy.33 So, D-to-D type H-aggregation of NFA molecules experiences the fastest relaxation process (∼200 fs) due to its maximum coupling area, while A-to-A type J-aggregation experiences the slowest relaxation process (∼300 fs) due to its minimal coupling area. Furthermore, we consider the effect of the NFA molecular electronic push–pull potential Δon on the time scale of the inter-CT relaxation process in a given aggregation mode. A comparison result for A-to-A type J-aggregation of NFA molecules is presented in Fig. 4f, where we can see that the relaxation process can be accelerated by increasing the value of Δon. For A-to-D type J-aggregation and D-to-D type H-aggregation of NFA molecules, we obtain similar rules with A-to-A type J-aggregation (see Fig. S4 of the ESI† for details). Considering the reason, with increasing the NFA molecular electronic push–pull potential, the molecular reorganization energy is lowered and thus accelerates the relaxation process.34 From these calculated time scales of the inter-CT relaxation process in different molecular systems, it appears that they are basically consistent with the time scale for the appearance of stable inter-CT TA signals (∼200 fs) observed in the experiments.17,20
Finally, we consider the effects of the photoexcitation intensity E0 on the electron transition and inter-CT effect in different NFA molecular systems. Fig. 5a–d separately show the dependence of the total transited electron Γ upon the photoexcitation energy ħω in a single NFA molecule, A-to-A type J-aggregate, A-to-D type J-aggregate, and D-to-D type H-aggregate, where the results with different photoexcitation intensity E0 are compared. For the present model description, we know that the molecular energy gap will be slightly reduced with increasing the value of E0,35,36 such that an increase in the transition probabilities together with a slight red-shift of transition peaks are obtained for all the peak transitions in different molecular systems. As for the inter-CT effect in different molecular aggregates, we obtain that it can be remarkably improved by increasing the value of E0, as presented in Fig. 5e–g. As an expectation, a photoexcitation in the A-to-A type J-aggregate with a stronger photoexcitation intensity will result in a more apparent inter-CT effect, thus a stronger inter-CT TA signal and a higher charge yield.18
 Fig. 5  (a–d) Separately present the dependence of the total transited electron population Γ upon the photoexcitation energy ħω in a single NFA molecule and different aggregates. (e–g) Separately show the time evolutions of the inter-molecular transferred charge quantity Qinter(t) in different molecular aggregates. Here, the results with different photoexcitation intensity E0 are compared; red lines represent E0 = 0.5 MV cm−1, green lines E0 = 1.0 MV cm−1, and blue lines E0 = 1.5 MV cm−1. 
Conclusions
In summary, by separately applying photoexcitation to a single NFA molecule and different molecular aggregates, we investigated the photoinduced electron transition details and the resulting intra- and inter-CT dynamics. It was found that, in addition to the red-shifts of all transition peaks, the NFA molecular electronic push–pull potential promotes the higher-energy transition modes and improves the transition probabilities of all peak transitions. With the electron transitions, the intra-CT behavior takes place synchronously, and the transferred charges increase with increasing the molecular electronic push–pull potential. After incorporating the molecular aggregations, we found that the electron transition modes and peak positions change with the aggregation modes. Furthermore, the effect of the photoexcitation intensity was considered, by which we clarified that a photoexcitation in the A-to-A type J-aggregate with a stronger photoexcitation intensity will result in a more apparent inter-CT effect. These results provide a microscopic understanding of the photoinduced experimental observations in different NFA molecular systems, and thus provide a clear direction for their rational designs. For instance, by increasing the molecular electronic push–pull potential, we can both expand the light absorption and improve the intra- and inter-CT effects (including the transferred charge quantity and time scale); by optimizing the inter-molecular aggregation modes, these light absorptions and CT effects can be further modulated in actual photoelectric applications of NFA molecules.
Author contributions
K. G. directed the project; Y. J. and L. X. calculated the results. The manuscript was written by Y. J. and K. G. in consultation with X. M. and W. W. All authors contributed to the critical analysis of the results and to the revisions of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 11674195) and the Major Program of Shandong Province Natural Science Foundation (No. ZR2019ZD43).
Notes and references
C. Li, J. Zhou, J. Song, J. Xu, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Guo, L. Zhu, D. Wei and G. Han, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 605–613 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Y. Xu, H. Yao, P. Bi, L. Hong, J. Zhang, Y. Zu, T. Zhang, J. Qin and J. Ren, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bi, S. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Xu, Y. Cui, T. Zhang, J. Ren, J. Qin, L. Hong and X. Hao, 
            et al.
          , Joule, 2021, 5, 2408–2419 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng and P. A. Johnson, 
            et al.
          , Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, J. Zhao, P. C. Chow, K. Jiang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang, F. Huang and H. Yan, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3447–3507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, B. Sun, Y. Li, C. Jiang, D. Fan, J. Fan and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 153501 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Alamoudi, J. I. Khan, Y. Firdaus, K. Wang, D. Andrienko, P. M. Beaujuge and F. Laquai, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 802–811 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, Y. Chen, Y. Qin, R. Yu, Y. Cui, B. Yang, S. Li, K. Zhang and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8283–8287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, Y. Yang, C. Zhong, X. Zhan and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6393–6401 RSC .
D. R. Khanal, E. Lafalce and Z. Valy Vardeny, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 118, 202109 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, S. Li, H. Yao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7148–7151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wan, Y. Ma, D. Cai, W. Lin, P. Wang, J. Wang and Q. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010436 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, X. Zhang, D. Liu and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15607–15619 RSC .
Y. Ji, L. Xu, H. Yin, B. Cui, L. Zhang, X. Hao and K. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 16834–16840 RSC .
R. Wang, C. Zhang, Q. Li, Z. Zhang, X. Wang and M. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12751–12759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, G. Zhang, J. Zhang, H.-L. Yip and B. Hu, Joule, 2020, 4, 2443–2457 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, S. B. Jo, X. Chen, G. Zhou, M. Zhang, X. Shi, F. Lin, L. Zhu, T. Hao and K. Gao, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2022, 2108317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Price, P. A. Hume, A. Ilina, I. Wagner, R. R. Tamming, K. E. Thorn, W. Jiao, A. Goldingay, P. J. Conaghan and G. Lakhwani, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Li, J. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Zhan and G. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 23304–23312 RSC .
X. Liu, Y. Li, K. Ding and S. Forrest, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2019, 11, 024060 CrossRef CAS .
W. Su, J. Schrieffer and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1979, 42, 1698 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, X. Shi, X. Mu, L. Wang and K. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 118, 133301 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wan, C. Li, M. Zhang and Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2828–2842 RSC .
T.-y Li, J. Benduhn, Z. Qiao, Y. Liu, Y. Li, R. Shivhare, F. Jaiser, P. Wang, J. Ma and O. Zeika, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 2684–2691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, V. C. Nikolis, F. Talnack, Y.-C. Chin, J. Benduhn, G. Londi, J. Kublitski, X. Zheng, S. C. Mannsfeld and D. Spoltore, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Gao, S. Xie, S. Yin, R. Meng and Y. Li, Org. Electron., 2016, 28, 73–81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mao, W. Li, M. Chen, X. Chen, R. S. Gurney, D. Liu and T. Wang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 1062–1070 RSC .
X. Zhang, H. Wang, D. Li, M. Chen, Y. Mao, B. Du, Y. Zhuang, W. Tan, W. Huang and Y. Zhao, 
            et al.
          , Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 3747–3755 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Hestand and F. C. Spano, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7069–7163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Hestand and F. C. Spano, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 341–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. Fan, C.-K. Wang and L. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 24705–24713 CrossRef CAS .
R. Duan, G. Han, L.-B. Qu and Y. Yi, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 3903–3910 RSC .
M. Zhang, Q. Lu, F. Qu and K. Gao, Opt. Lett., 2020, 45, 4492–4495 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Gao, S. Xie, S. Yin, Y. Li, D. Liu and X. Zhao, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1601–1605 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Parameter details, iteratively solving the static equations, quantum nonadiabatic evolution method, transition details of a single NFA molecule, selection for the electronic push-pull potential of an actual NFA molecule, higher-energy transition details of different NFA molecular aggregates, and effect of the molecular electronic push–pull potential on the inter-CT relaxation process. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc01534jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
He = HT + Hπ + HC	(1)
	(2a)
	(2b)
	(2c)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Simplified model description for a typical NFA molecule, where the orange, blue, and black segments separately represent the electron-push central fused ring group, electron-pull terminal groups, and π-bridges. The red upward arrow indicates an incident light field with the form of a femtosecond electric pump pulse (FEPP). (b) Schematic diagram of the NFA molecular energy levels lying in the ground state.	 
	(3)
	(4)
E(t) = E0exp{−[(t–tc)/tw]2}cosωt	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 2  (a–d) Variation of the total transited electron population Γ with the photoexcitation energy ħω in a single NFA molecule, where different values of the electronic push–pull potentials (Δon) are considered. (e) Transition probability (ηpeak) of different peak transitions as a function of the value of Δon, and the inset shows the dependence of the transition dipole moment P upon the value of Δon for different transition modes. (f) Time evolutions of the intra-molecular transferred charge quantity Qintra(t) for the first peak transition with different values of Δon. (g) Time evolutions of Qintra(t) for different peak transitions with a given value of Δon = 0.9 eV.	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 3  Time evolutions of the electron occupation number Fμ(t) on several band-edge levels in NFA molecules with A-to-A type J-aggregation (a), A-to-D type J-aggregation (b), and D-to-D type H-aggregation (c), where only their first peak transitions are compared.	 

 	Fig. 4  Variations of the total transited electron population Γ with the photoexcitation energy ħω in a single NFA molecule (a), A-to-A type J-aggregate (b), A-to-D type J-aggregate (c), and D-to-D type H-aggregate (d). (e) presents the time evolutions of the inter-molecular transferred charge quantity Qinter(t) for the first peak transition in different molecular aggregates at Δon = 0.6 eV. (f) shows the time evolutions of the inter-molecular transferred charge quantity Qinter(t) for the first peak transition with different values of Δon in the A-to-A type J-aggregate.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–d) Separately present the dependence of the total transited electron population Γ upon the photoexcitation energy ħω in a single NFA molecule and different aggregates. (e–g) Separately show the time evolutions of the inter-molecular transferred charge quantity Qinter(t) in different molecular aggregates. Here, the results with different photoexcitation intensity E0 are compared; red lines represent E0 = 0.5 MV cm−1, green lines E0 = 1.0 MV cm−1, and blue lines E0 = 1.5 MV cm−1.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Parameter details, iteratively solving the static equations, quantum nonadiabatic evolution method, transition details of a single NFA molecule, selection for the electronic push-pull potential of an actual NFA molecule, higher-energy transition details of different NFA molecular aggregates, and effect of the molecular electronic push–pull potential on the inter-CT relaxation process. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc01534j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
