Augmented photoelectrochemical water reduction: influence of copper vacancies and hole-transport layer on CuBi 2 O 4 photocathode   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA09956F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA09956F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 6623-6635Augmented photoelectrochemical water reduction: influence of copper vacancies and hole-transport layer on CuBi2O4 photocathode†

        
          
            Madhusudana 
            Gopannagari
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            D. Amaranatha 
            Reddy
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Da Hye 
            Hong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            K. Arun 
            Joshi Reddy
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            D. Praveen 
            Kumar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hyun S. 
            Ahn
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Tae Kyu 
            Kim
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea. E-mail: tkkim@yonsei.ac.kr
bDepartment of Science, Indian Institute of Information Technology Design and Manufacturing, Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh 518007, India. E-mail: drreddy@iiitk.ac.in
Received 
      21st November 2021
    , Accepted 4th February 2022First published on 7th February 2022AbstractA ternary metal oxide CuBi2O4 has received immense attention in the research field of photoelectrochemical (PEC) water or CO2 reduction owing to its ideal optical bandgap and positive photocurrent onset potential. However, CuBi2O4 photocathodes have limitations regarding charge-carrier separation within and transport across the interface to an n-type FTO substrate. In this study, a novel thin Fe-doped NiOX layer was attached to the copper vacancy-induced CuBi2O4 (CBO-O2) back-interface. X-ray photoelectron and energy dispersive spectroscopies provided evidence for copper vacancies within CBO; atomic force microscopy and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy revealed improved surface conductivity and interface charge transfer between CBO-O2 and Fe:NiOX. The CBO-O2 photocathode exhibits a higher hole-concentration with superior charge-separation, and the Fe:NiOX layer acts as an efficient hole-transport layer (HTL) at the back interface. The PEC performance characteristic of the Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathode increased four fold than that of a conventional-heating CBO photoelectrode (CBO-Air). Additionally, the Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathode with a protective layer revealed about 4 h stability and 96% faradaic efficiency. The improved photocurrent of the device is attributed to the increased acceptor density in CBO and effective hole transportation across the back interface with positive-band alignment. This work provides an efficient strategy for constructing high-performance ternary metal oxide-based photocathodes/photoanodes for sustainable and environmentally friendly energy applications.
1 Introduction
Over the past few years, the production of clean and eco-friendly energy conversion devices based on solar energy has received great attention owing to the global energy crisis.1,2 Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting enables solar-to-energy fuel conversion and storage of solar light in carbon-free H2 fuel.3,4 The primary process in PEC water splitting is the absorption of light by a semiconductor, which generates electron–hole pairs. These photoexcited charge carriers must be separated to prevent recombination and promote redox reactions.5,6 In general, in photocathodes with p-type semiconductors, the photoexcited electrons drift to the semiconductor–electrolyte interface and participate in water reduction reactions, while the photoexcited holes are transported to the semiconductor back interface and contribute to water oxidation.7 Accelerating the separation of photoexcited charge carriers and preventing charge recombination is crucial for good PEC performance. One of the widely applied methods for improving the charge separation efficiency in photocathodes for high PEC performance is combining n- and p-type semiconductors.8,9 The resulting p–n junction exhibits sluggish charge recombination owing to the equilibrium of the Fermi level. Despite the separation of the charge carriers, the photoexcited electrons accumulate at the surface of the semiconductor and recombine with holes.10,11 The slow transfer of photoexcited holes to the back contact is expected to cause charge accumulation and therefore increased recombination in the semiconductor.12 Therefore, the interfaces at the top and bottom junctions of the photocathode must be optimized to improve the performance of the PEC device.
The p-type CuBi2O4 (CBO) for photocathodes has received increasing attention owing to the excellent absorption energy bandgap, which ranges between 1.5 and 1.8 eV and enables harvesting a significant range of the visible solar spectrum.13–16 The conduction band minimum (CBM) occurs at a higher negative potential than the reduction potential of H+/H2, thereby facilitating solar H2 production8,17,18 and, probably the reduction of CO2.19,20 In addition, the Fermi level is at a higher positive potential, which results in an exceptional positive photocurrent onset potential >1 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE).21,22 Because the material generates a large internal photovoltage, it is an ideal photocathode for PEC devices.23 In such p-type CBO photocathode materials, the holes (i.e., the majority carriers) must be separated and transported across the back interface, while the electrons (i.e., the minority carriers) must participate in the reduction reactions at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface. However, Cu-based metal oxides, such as CBO photocathodes have limitations such as poor charge carrier separation and transport characteristics of photogenerated electrons within the CBO and photogenerated holes across the CBO back interface when n-type fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) is used as the substrate. To improve the poor charge carrier separation and transport properties, a reliable CBO photocathode must be developed.
Defect engineering has become a popular method for tailoring the optoelectronic properties of semiconductors, which is crucial for PEC water splitting.24,25 The nonstoichiometric structures of most thoroughly studied metal oxide-based semiconductors have been usually investigated in terms of the vacancy characteristics owing to the interaction between the gaseous oxygen and oxide lattice.26,27 Only a few reports have been devoted to ternary metal oxide-based photocathodes with Cu-vacancies and their effect on the reaction kinetics at the photocathode–electrolyte interface.28 However, only Cu-vacancy modulation in the photocathode cannot prevent charge recombination at the CBO back interface in devices with FTO substrates. Researchers have applied nickel oxide (NiOX) back-interface layers owing to their high transparency and suitable Fermi-levels (5.0–5.6 eV) on photocathodes.29–32 However, the top and bottom interface junctions need to be structured to overcome the imbalanced energetics. The p-type conductivity of NiOX can be improved with Fe-dopants; the layer can function as an efficient hole extractor at the back interface with a low hole transport resistance.33,34 These characteristics are essential in hole transport layers (HTLs) of photocathode materials based on p-type materials (e.g., CBO) in which holes should be separated at the back interface.
This paper presents a novel Fe-doped NiOX material for HTLs; its fabrication on FTO substrates via spin-coating is inexpensive. Subsequently, a pulsed-electrodeposited Cu/Bi layer is heat-treated by varying the O2-rich partial pressure to introduce Cu-vacancies for the formation of a CBO photocathode with Cu-defects. The influence of the Cu-vacancies on the carrier concentration (holes) and Fe-doped NiOX hole transfer properties was systematically studied. The structural, optical, chemical-state, and electrochemical properties of the Fe-doped NiOX/CBO-O2 photoelectrode strongly support an improved PEC performance (i.e., −1.56 mA cm−2 at 0.2 V vs. RHE) in a neutral electrolyte. This is the highest reported photocurrent density in a neutral electrolyte without the use of an electron scavenger. In addition to that, the Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathode exhibits about 4 h stability at 96% of faradaic efficiency. This work provides new strategies for studying the prospects and constraints of using ternary photocathodes for solar water splitting. Cu-vacancies in the CBO photocathode with a thin Fe:NiOX-HTL result in a low electrical resistivity, high charge carrier separation efficiency, prolonged stability, and an improved photocurrent density owing to superior band energy alignment.
2 Experimental
2.1 Fabrication of NiOX and Fe:NiOX films
NiOX and Fe:NiOX layers were spin-coated onto the devices. A NiOX deposition solution (0.3 mmol Ni(NO3)2·6H2O (Kanto Chemicals)) was dissolved in 3 mL 2-methoxyethanol and heated at 50 °C for 30 min. Subsequently, 30 μL acetylacetone was added to the solution under stirring, and the heating process continued overnight. Iron was incorporated by adding 2:98 (Fe:Ni) mol% Fe(NO3)3·9H2O (Sigma Aldrich) to the Ni-precursor solution. Before the deposition, FTO substrates were sequentially cleaned in acetone, ethanol, isopropyl alcohol, and deionized water for 10 min each and then dried with hot air and N2 gas flow. The prepared solutions were spin-coated onto the substrates at 2000 rpm for 15 s and 4000 rpm for 35 s and subsequently dried on a hot plate at 80 °C for 30 min. In addition, the as-coated films were annealed in a muffle furnace at 250–350 °C for 2 h. The thicknesses of the HTLs were controlled with the spin-coating speed and then examined using cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM).
2.2 Fabrication of Cu/Bi films
CBO electrodes were prepared by pulsed-current electrodeposition on a typical three-electrode system composed of the FTO or FTO/Fe:NiOX layer as the working electrode, an Ag/AgCl (saturated with KCl) reference electrode, and Pt-wire as the counter electrode. The necessary chemicals Bi(NO3)3·5H2O, Cu(NO3)2·3H2O, and 100 mM KClO4 (supporting electrolyte) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The electrochemical plating solutions were prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.8%, Junsei Chemical Co) with 40 mmol Bi3+ and 5–40 mmol Cu2+ solution (Cu/Bi ratios: 1/8, 1/4, 1/2, and 1/1). Electrodeposition was performed at a constant potential (−1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl) by limiting the charge to 0.04–0.2C cm−2 in each of the 10 cycles with 2 s resting time. After a total charge of 0.4–2C cm−2 had been reached, the electrodes were gently washed and dried before the heat treatment.
2.3 Preparation of copper bismuth oxide photocathodes
To introduce Cu-vacancies in the CBO layer, the pulsed-current-electrodeposited Cu/Bi films were annealed at 450 °C for 2 h in different carrier gases at 200 mL min−1 flow rate in a vacuum tube furnace. Under the vacuum conditions, the N2-to-O2 carrier gas flow was decreased from 100% to 0%; the conditions are denoted as follows: N/O-1, N/O-2, N/O-4, and pure-O2 (CBO-O2); for comparison, Cu/Bi electrodes were annealed in a conventional muffle furnace under ambient atmosphere conditions (CBO-Air). The working pressure inside the tube furnace was 0.25–0.4 mbar under continuous carrier gas flow conditions during the entire heat treatment. For reference, the N/O-4 gas composition was approximated during the muffle furnace annealing experiments (ambient air composition).
2.4 Material characterization
The elemental information on CBO-Air and CBO-O2 photocathodes was obtained using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS; Thermo Scientific Inc., UK) with Al Kα radiation (hν = 1.4866 keV) as a source. High-resolution scans of O 1s, Cu 2p, Bi 4f peaks were performed with a pass energy of 40 eV and a step size of 0.1 eV. The sample area had a diameter of approximately 400 μm with 0.1 atomic% of the detection limit. The surface topological images and scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM) measurements of HTL films were analysed with atomic force microscopy (AFM; NX-10, Park Systems, Korea) in the non-contact mode. In the conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) measurements, a Pt-coated cantilever was used to investigate the electrical properties of the films. All scans were performed on the scale of 5 μm × 5 μm with applied bias under 2 V at 0.7 Hz scan speed. Moreover, grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) analysis (Rigaku, Smart Lab, USA) was used to characterize the crystalline properties of the NiOX and Fe:NiOX films on Si wafers and CBO films on the FTO substrate. Raman spectroscopy bands were analysed with LabRam ARAMIS (Horiba, Japan) at a laser excitation wavelength of 532 nm. The surface morphologies of the electrodes were analysed using a field-emission SEM (7610f-plus, JEOL, Japan). The energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) maps were recorded with the same equipment at an acceleration voltage of 15 kV. Furthermore, the absorption measurements were performed inside an integrating sphere using a JASCO V-770 double-beam spectrophotometer. The ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were conducted using the He I (E = 21.2 eV) radiation line with an energy resolution of 0.05 eV at 2 × 10−7 mbar. The Ferm-level edge of the Ag reference film was used to calibrate the binding energy scale.
2.5 Photoelectrochemical and electrochemical measurements
The PEC measurements were performed using a typical three-electrode cell composed of a Pt wire as the counter electrode (CE) and sat. KCl Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode (RE) on an electrochemical workstation (VSP Potentiostat, Biologic Science Instruments) under room temperature conditions. A solar simulator equipped with an AM 1.5G filter and a 150 W Xe lamp (Abet Technologies, USA) was used to produce monochromatic light. The output light intensity was adjusted to 1-sun conditions (100 mW cm−2) with a 15151 low-cost calibrated Si reference cell (Abet Technologies, USA). The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) scan was recorded at 1.25–0.05 V vs. RHE at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH 6.6) aqueous solution (i.e., the electrolyte) with light-on/-off conditions. Evaluation of stability and hydrogen evolution measurements were conducted similarly to that for the photocurrent measurements at a constant potential of 0.2 V vs. RHE under chopped 1 sun AM 1.5 illumination. For the stability assessments over a prolonged time (4 h), electrodes were coated with a TiO2 layer via a spin-coating method. The faradaic efficiency was calculated from the total amount of charge Q(C) passed through the cell and the total amount of hydrogen produced in moles of H2, n(H2). The total charge was obtained by integration over time of the measured current. Thus, the faradaic efficiency (FE) can be calculated using the equation: FE = n(H2)/(Q/2F), where F is the Faraday constant. Moreover, the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were conducted at 0.4 V vs. RHE in the same electrolyte solution under continuous illumination. The EIS data were analysed with the Bio-Logic Z-fit and an equivalent circuit. The Mott–Schottky measurements were performed in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution at 1 kHz. The potential ranges were 0.5–1.5 V vs. RHE for CBO electrodes and 0.1–1.25 V vs. RHE for the NiOX HTLs with 10 mV amplitude. In addition, electron scavenger measurements were performed at 1.25–0.3 V vs. RHE in 0.2 M K2S2O8 + 0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH 7) aqueous solution (electrolyte) under chopped illumination conditions. The potential was converted to the RHE scale based on the following Nernst equation: (1)where  is 0.197 V vs. the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE). The half-cell solar-to-hydrogen efficiency (HC-STH) was calculated as follows: (2)where JPh is the averaged photocurrent density (mA cm−2), EApplied is the applied potential, EH is the standard potential for hydrogen evolution reactions (i.e., 0 V vs. RHE), and PLight is the power density of light (100 mW cm−2). The incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) and absorbed photon-to-current efficiency (APCE) were calculated as follows: (3) (4)where λ is the wavelength of the incident light and A(λ) the absorptance of the photocathode at the wavelength of λ. The measurements were performed using PE-IPCE (HS Technologies, Korea) equipped with a 150 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5G filter) as the light source and a standard CompactStat (Ivium Technology, Netherlands) electrochemical station. Before the measurement, the spectral response and light intensity were calibrated with a silicon detector (AIST-certified).
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Copper vacancy in CBO film and HTL characterization
The photoelectrode fabrication process of CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathodes is illustrated in Fig. 1. First, HTLs were prepared by simply spin-coating either NiOX or Fe-doped NiOX (FN) precursor solutions onto FTO substrates; subsequently, the CBO photocathode was deposited with pulsed electrodeposition (PEd).16,30 In PEd, the transport of ions to a depleted area in the deposition solution during off-time provides the uniform distribution of ions for sufficient availability during on-time. Off-time transport promotes relaxation and the rearrangement of deposited atoms, which creates new nucleation sites during the subsequent deposition process. This, in turn, ensures deposition uniformity and reduces the roughness of the deposit (Fig. S1†). The heating process was controlled in a pure oxygen atmosphere to induce Cu-vacancies (VCu) in the CBO structure.
 Fig. 1  Fabrication process of photocathode with FTO/Fe:NiOX/CBO-Air (or CBO-O2) configuration. Pulsed electrodeposition (PEd) process was recorded with chronoamperometry; applied potential (violet), controlled charge limit (green), and obtained current density (red) are presented with respect to time. Digital images show CBO-Air (left), electrode without heating (middle), and CBO-O2 (right). “FN” represents the Fe-doped NiOX layer. 
To investigate VCu, the influence of oxygen on the carrier concentration was studied. Fig. 2(a) shows the acceptor concentration calculated from the Mott–Schottky (M–S) measurements of the CBO photocathode prepared by varying the oxygen flow rate during annealing. The M–S curves with negative gradients indicate p-type conductivity with holes as majority charge carriers. The carrier concentration (NA) and flat band potentials (φFB) were calculated from the slopes of the M–S curves (1/CSC2) in the linear range: (5)where CSC is the capacitance of the space charge layer of the photoelectrode, εr the relative dielectric constant (εr = 80 and 100 were used for further calculations regarding the CBO and NiO films, respectively),28ε0 the permittivity of free space, and e the electron charge. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the calculated NA of the CBO-Air device (muffle furnace-heated) is approximately 3.91 × 1018 cm−3, which is comparable with values presented in earlier reports.17,29 A similar NA was observed with N/O-4 gas flow (corresponds roughly to the CBO-Air environment) in the tube furnace annealing process. Interestingly, NA increases with increasing oxygen percentage in the carrier gas. The CBO-O2 photocathode shows an increased NA; the positive shift in φFB is probably due to the VCu sites within the CBO structure (Fig. S2†). The flat band potentials and acceptor densities measured at 1 kHz frequency are listed in Table S1.†
 Fig. 2  (a) Calculated hole concentrations of CBO prepared in different N2/O2 (N/O) carrier gas ratios and compared with that of conventional muffle furnace-heated CBO electrode (CBO-Air). Inset in (a) shows Mott–Schottky curves. (b) Deconvolution of O 1s XPS spectra of CBO-Air and CBO-O2. Inset (b) shows O2− lattice with switching Cu2+ and Bi3+ components. Conductive-AFM (c-AFM) maps of (c) NiOX and (d) Fe:NiOX-HTL on FTO substrate under dark conditions. (e) I–V spectroscopy measurements show amplified electrical conductivity characteristics of Fe:NiOX. An inset in (e) shows the schematic diagram of c-AFM measurements. 
Furthermore, in order to quantify VCu, XPS was used to characterize the lattice oxygen, chemical composition, and surface states. As shown in Fig. 2(b), the typical O 1s XPS spectrum can be deconvoluted into the lattice oxygen bonds Cu2+–O2− (OCu2− at 529.3 eV), Bi3+–O2− (OBi2− at 530.5 eV), and the higher binding energy peaks represent oxygen defects and surface hydroxylation (∼531–533 eV).27,35,36 O 1s peak fitting results revealed that OCu2− peaks are reduced and OBi2− are slightly increased in conjunction to pure-O2 partial pressure and other higher binding energy peaks are diminished. The lattice oxygen bond to OCu2− ratio decreases to 65% whereas the OBi2− signal ratio increases to 29.8% in the CBO-O2 photocathode compared with those of the CBO-Air photocathode. The peak positions and proportions of resolved O2− bonds to Cu2+ and Bi3+ components are listed in Table S2.† Furthermore, XPS elemental atomic% assessment reveals that the Cu content gradually decreased as shown in Table S3.† Heating in pure oxygen stimulates the lattice oxygen, which leads to the formation of VCu in the pure CBO photoelectrode.27
The chemical composition and surface states of the prepared photocathodes were determined using XPS; their Cu 2p, Bi 4f and O 1s core-level spectra are compared in Fig. S3.† The XPS full spectra of the prepared CBO samples exhibit overlapping elemental peaks of Cu, Bi, Sn, C, and O (Fig. S4†). Only an unannealed CBO sample shows the presence of K 2p XPS features. The determined relative Cu/Bi atomic ratio (Table S3†) in the CBO-O2 photocathode is lower than that in the CBO-Air photocathode. Furthermore, the elemental maps reveal a decrease in the Cu/Bi ratio, which agrees well with the occurrence of VCu in the CBO-O2 photocathode. The Cu 2p spectra show significant spin–orbit split 2p3/2 (933.5 eV) and 2p1/2 (954.0 eV) peaks with shake-up satellite peaks at higher binding energies, which reveal the typical existence of Cu(II) oxide.37,38 As shown in Fig. S3(b),† lower binding energy peaks (at 932.7 eV) in an unannealed and CBO-Air without K (no supporting electrolyte) shifts to 933.5 eV of Cu(II) state indicating the successful formation of CBO. Bi 4f spectra have characteristic spin–orbit split 4f7/2 (158.4 eV) and 4f5/2 (163.7 eV) peaks, which indicate the presence of Bi3+ in the CBO photocathodes.36,38,39 The additional K 2p peak of the unannealed sample indicates that inert salt in the plating solution was completely removed during the heating process. The C 1s peak originating from the external environment was used for calibration (Fig. S3(d)).† Based on the given results, the hole carrier concentration in the CBO-O2 photocathode was tuned by the O2 partial pressure during the heating process. According to recent reports,27,40 the introduced VCu increases the number of charge carriers (holes) and alters the Fermi level of binary metal oxides. In the case of CBO, the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) are primarily determined by Cu 3d and O 2p orbitals, respectively. These native VCu defect sites are vital charge compensators through the free holes, which shift the Fermi level closer to the VB. Hence, the Fermi level of CBO can be tailored by tuning the concentration of VCu.23,28
The charge carrier transport mechanism at the interface between the CBO-O2 photocathode and a conductive FTO substrate was characterized with AFM. The surface roughness values of NiOX and FN-HTL were calculated in terms of root-mean-square (RMS) values, as shown in Fig. S5.† The RMS surface roughness values of NiOX and Fe-doped NiOX thin-films on FTO are 9.5 nm and 7.4 nm, respectively. Compared with undoped NiOX, the Fe-doped NiOX layer smooths out the sharp peaks and trenches of the FTO surface (3D-view images are shown in Fig. S5†). Moreover, it is believed that the smoother surface of the charge carrier transport layer should lead to better electric contact with the CBO absorber material.41 Moreover, c-AFM measurements were performed to examine the bare NiOX and FN films and the effect of Fe-doping on the film conductivity. As shown in Fig. 2(c) and (d), the dark-current distributions of NiOX and FN thin-films at a bias of 2 V are significantly different. In the bare NiOX thin film, most of the area is in (resistive) blue colour while the (conductive) green colour occupies only a small part of the area, which explains the low current in the sample. In Fig. 2(d), the (conductive) green and yellow parts dominate the entire area of the FN thin film. The significantly improved current in the Fe-doped NiOX layer on the FTO substrate indicates that the doped films have higher conductivity.
The I–V spectroscopy curves in Fig. 2(e) show the evident improvement of the current and, thus, electrical conductivity compared with those of the film without Fe-dopants. According to the previous study on Fe doping of a NiOX thin film, the enhanced electrical conductivity is due to the generation of Ni vacancies and holes with Fe doping.30,33,34 In addition, M–S measurements indicated an increased NA and slightly positive shift φFB (approximately 0.08 VRHE) in the p-type FN layer on the FTO substrate compared to bare NiOX (Fig. S6†). The charge carrier transport mechanism at the bottom interface of the CBO-O2 photocathode upon the introduction of the HTLs was determined with EIS at 0.4 VRHE with 1-sun illumination in the range from 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz at an AC voltage of 10 mV. Fig. S7† shows the Nyquist plots of bare NiOX, (with and without Fe:NiOX-HTLs) on CBO-O2 photocathode cells. The equivalent circuit model (inset of Fig. S7†), which is characteristically used in PEC water splitting, was used to fit the curves. The RCT, which is associated with the total resistance of charge transport and recombination in the photoelectrode, decreased gradually with the insertion of NiOX and Fe:NiOX HTLs, as shown in Table S6.† Evidently, the Fe-dopants in the NiOX under-layer on the CBO-O2 photocathode exhibited a smaller arc radius, thereby demonstrating faster interfacial charge carrier transfer and a reduced recombination rate.42–45 The surface potential variations measured with SKPM reveal that the Fe:NiOX film has a lower surface potential profile than the undoped films (Fig. S8†) on FTO substrates; thus, the Fe-dopants increase the work function (WF) of NiOX films.46 Introducing Fe:NiOX-HTL and copper vacancies to a CBO photocathode resulted in a favourable band alignment for charge carrier (hole) extraction and separation; the effects are discussed in the UPS spectroscopy analysis section. These results confirm that engineering the bottom interface with the introduction of an effective HTL and the formation of Cu-vacancies within the CBO structure has a great effect on the PEC performance.
3.2 Structural and morphological characterization
Before the PEC performance analysis, crystal structures and phase compositions of CBO on different substrates were studied. Fig. 3(a) shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) results of the prepared electrodes on FTO glass substrates; both CBO-Air and CBO-O2 samples contain CuBi2O4 phases, as evidenced by the peaks at 20.88°, 28.01°, 33.3°, and 46.7°, which correspond to (200), (211), (310), and (411) lattice planes of tetragonal CuBi2O4, respectively. Neither Bi2O3 nor CuO-related XRD patterns were observed. Interestingly, the CBO film heat-treated with pure O2 flow has an improved crystalline phase, as demonstrated by the abridged full width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the selected planes. The crystallinity of the prepared CBO photocathodes does not change upon the introduction of the FN layer, as shown in Fig. S9;† thus, the structure is not affected by the insertion of an HTL between the substrate and CBO layer. Lastly, CBO-O2 films have a strongly preferred (211) orientation. The phase identification of the bare NiOX and FN thin-film intermediate layers was conducted with GIXRD. To avoid overlapping peaks of the FTO substrate near 37° in the GIXRD measurements, the HTLs were prepared on Si wafers. Fig. 3(b) shows the diffraction peaks of NiOX and FN; the peaks at 37.25°, 43.28°, and 62.88° correspond to face centred cubic NiO with (111), (200), and (220) lattice planes, respectively. There are no additional diffraction peaks related to Fe-metal or Fe-oxide, which indicates the successful incorporation of Fe atoms in the NiOX lattice. The EDS maps reveal uniform Ni and Fe distributions (Fig. S11†).
 Fig. 3  (a) and (b) X-ray diffractograms (violet and brown coloured patterns represent FTO (JCPDS-01-077-0447) and CBO (JCPDS-01-080-0996), respectively) and (c) and (d) Raman spectra of CBO-Air, CBO-O2 on the FTO substrate, and NiOX and Fe:NiOX HTLs on Si-substrate, respectively. Inset in (a) shows FWHM values of fitted selected peaks of CBO-Air and CBO-O2 photoelectrodes. 
Raman spectra of CBO photocathodes and HTLs are presented in Fig. 3(c) and (d), respectively. The most prominent Raman bands of CuBi2O4 at approximately 79.9, 132.4, 264, 406.7, and 589.9 cm−1 were found in both CBO-Air and CBO-O2 samples deposited on FTO substrates.21,47 Similar Raman bands were observed for the CBO-Air and CBO-O2 photocathodes with Fe:NiOX HTLs, as shown in Fig. S10.† The additional small peak at 190.7 cm−1 is the Eg mode attributed to the Cu–Cu motion in FTO/CBO-Air and FTO/Fe:NiOX/CBO-Air electrodes.48–50 This peak is absent in both CBO-O2 electrodes with and without the FN layer on the FTO substrate; this result is consistent with the reduced FWHM peak in the XRD results and confirms that CBO-O2 electrodes strongly promote the formation of Cu-vacancies in the CuBi2O4 phase.47 As shown in Fig. 3(d), the Raman bands of the devices with and without Fe-dopants are almost identical. The two Raman bands at approximately 560 cm−1 correspond to the one-phonon (1P) or longitudinal optical (LO) phonon mode; the other at approximately 1096 cm−1 was assigned to the two-phonon (2P) or 2LO modes of NiOX.51,52 The first-order Raman scattering peak shifts to a higher wavenumber upon Fe-doping, thereby indicating the generation of Ni-vacancies and holes due to Fe-doping.52 A small amount of Fe-dopant does not cause structural changes or induce a secondary NiOX phase. These Raman measurement results are consistent with the XRD patterns, increased current in the c-AFM results, I–V spectroscopy results (Fig. 2(e)), and improved carrier concentration in the M–S plots (Fig. S6†) of NiOX and Fe:NiOX films.
The microstructure and elemental composition of the HTLs and CBO electrodes on FTO substrates were characterized with field-emission SEM (FE-SEM) and EDS. Fig. 4(b) and (c) show the FESEM images of NiOX, and the FN hole transport layers, respectively. The results demonstrate that both the samples have similar morphologies with thicknesses of approximately 34 nm (Fig. 4(d) cross-sectional SEM image). The existence of Fe-dopant was confirmed from EDS maps (Fig. S11†); the results clearly show the presence of Fe-dopants in the NiOX host lattice. Fig. 4(e) shows the SEM image of the CBO-Air electrode covered by larger particles on the FTO/FN layer and the respective cross-sectional SEM image shown in Fig. 4(f). The CBO-O2 photocathode has an improved porous network with reduced particle size (Fig. 4(g)), which is consistent with the slightly increased optical bandgap of the CBO-O2 photocathode. The charge carrier transport is influenced by the porosity and particle size of thin-film photoelectrodes.53 A higher porosity enables the electrolyte to penetrate the film up to a greater depth such that minority charge carriers can reach the electrolyte more easily. The relevant SEM-EDS map overlays are shown in Fig. S12 and S13.† The EDS map indicates the presence of Cu, Bi, and O. No potassium was detected in the CBO-O2 photoelectrode, whereas Cu, Bi, and O are distributed over the entire film (Fig. S13†). The atomic ratios of both electrodes are listed in Table S4,† indicating a reduced Cu content in the CBO-O2 photocathode. In addition, a representative cross-sectional SEM image of the FTO/FN-HTL/CBO-O2 cell is shown in Fig. 4(h) that indicated a thin and uniform Fe:NiOX film with approximately 34 nm thickness on the irregular FTO glass; by contrast, the CBO-O2 electrode has a layer of worm-like particles with a thickness of approximately 450 nm on the FN-HTL. Thus, the thin FN-HTL maintained its chemical and thermal characteristics during the PEd process of the CBO over layer and continuous pure-O2-flow heating at 450 °C.
 Fig. 4  Top-view FE-SEM images showing surface structures of (a) bare FTO, (b) NiOX-HTL, (c) FN-HTL, and (d) a cross-sectional SEM image of FN-HTL. (e), (f) CBO-Air, and (g), (h) CBO-O2 electrodes top-view and cross-sectional SEM images on FN-HTLs. 
3.3 Optical properties and bandgap calculations
The light absorption characteristics of a photocathode have a great effect on the PEC performance through the charge generation efficiency.5,54Fig. 5(a) and (b) presents the optical properties of the HTLs and CBO photocathodes. The absorptance of the Fe-doped NiOX on the FTO substrate is higher than that of bare NiOX; the FTO reference comparison with bare NiOX is shown in Fig. S14.† Furthermore, the optical bandgap of Fe-NiOX experiences a small decrease compared with that of bare NiOX; the decrease is related to the slight increase in absorption in the range of approximately 300–450 nm, as shown in Fig. 5(a). The slight decrease in the optical bandgap from 3.72 to 3.68 eV (Tauc plot in the inset of Fig. 5(a)), which lowers the bandgap of Fe-NiOX, is ascribed to stoichiometric defects that enable band tailing.33,55 This result is consistent with the slightly increased positive potential in the M–S plot (Fig. S6†) and confirms the successful incorporation of Fe-dopants in NiOX-HTL.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) Absorptance (%A = 100 − %T − %R) characteristics of (a) FTO/NiOX and FTO/Fe:NiOX thin-films without CBO layers and (b) CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and FN/CBO-O2 electrodes deposited on FTO substrates. Tauc plots in the inset represent bandgaps of respective p-type semiconductors. For comparison, the figures enlarged at the specific %A vs. the wavelength. (c and d) APCE measurements of CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and FN/CBO-O2 photocathodes in (c) 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte and (d) in electrolyte with K2S2O8 electron scavenger. 
The CBO-O2 photocathode exhibits higher absorptance values than the CBO-Air photocathode over the entire measured wavelength range. In the absorptance spectra shown in Fig. 5(b), both CBO-O2 and Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photoelectrodes show almost similar absorption edges at approximately 750 nm (1.65 eV). Fig. S15† presents the measured transmittance and reflectance spectra of CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and FN/CBO-O2 photoelectrodes at 300–800 nm. As shown in Fig. S15,† CBO-O2 and FN/CBO-O2 photoelectrodes exhibit lower transmittance and reflectance revealing higher absorption compared to that of CBO-Air electrode. In addition, a thin Fe:NiOX layer shows the minimal influence on the overall optical absorption compared to the CBO-O2 electrode resulting in slightly lowering the bandgap of about 1.648 eV, as seen from the Tauc plot in Fig. 5(b). The results suggest the resulting positive band alignment between the CBO and FN layers. Wherein, FN-HTL acts as a blocking layer for the photogenerated electrons in the CBO-O2 photocathode. The detailed band edge positions of HTL and CBO-O2 materials are discussed in the band diagram discussion. In conclusion, more charge is generated in the CBO-O2 and FN/CBO-O2 photoelectrodes than in the CBO-Air photoelectrode; thus, the first two have improved PEC performance characteristics.
The APCE was determined based on IPCE measurements and optical absorption characteristics. Fig. 5(c) and (d) displays the APCE (%) of the CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathodes with and without K2S2O8 electron scavenger. The IPCE results for an applied potential of 0.2 VRHE for the photoelectrodes in Na2SO4 electrolyte and 0.4 VRHE for the electrolyte with K2S2O8 are displayed in Fig. S15.† The CBO-O2 photocathode shows superior APCE values than the CBO-Air photocathode without electron scavenger, wherein the addition of K2S2O8 electron scavenger is increased by the factor of two. Furthermore, the Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathode with and without K2S2O8 exhibits further improved APCE and IPCE in the investigated wavelength range (350–800 nm). Thus, to inhibit the surface recombination and overcome the constraints in the reaction kinetics at the electrode–electrolyte interface, K2S2O8 can be added as an effective electron scavenger. Therefore, the addition of Fe:NiOX-HTL to the copper vacant CBO-O2 photocathode improves the charge separation efficiency, whereas photocathodes without HTL (CBO-O2 > CBO-Air) have limited charge transfer characteristics.
3.4 Photoelectrochemical performance
The PEC characteristics were systematically investigated in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte with artificial solar light. The Cu2+ molar ratio was decreased from 1/1 to 1/8 concerning the Bi3+ sol for the deposition and conventional heat treatment in the furnace. As shown in Fig. S17,† the anodic photocurrent at 1.23 VRHE was observed while the Cu/Bi ratio was below that of the CBO-1/2 photoelectrode (i.e., the Cu/Bi ratios were 1/4, 1/6, and 1/8 electrodes). We presume that the anodic photocurrent is due to insufficient CBO structure formation, which results in the formation of an n-type (Bi2O3) semiconductor. In addition, the CBO-1/1 photoelectrode shows poor performance characteristics, and the CBO-1/2 photoelectrode has a higher photocurrent density at 0.2 VRHE applied potential. However, when the Cu2+ molar ratio was varied and the devices are heated in a pure O2 atmosphere, CBO-O2 electrodes have significantly improved photocurrent densities, and the CBO-1/2 photocathode shows the best performance (Fig. S18†). This remains true for a wide range of CBO preparation, as demonstrated in Fig. S19;† the photocurrent densities at 0.2 VRHE were extracted from the chopped LSV measurements and plotted as functions of the [Cu/Bi] molar ratio. The HC-STH efficiencies of both CBO-Air and CBO-O2 photocathodes were calculated from the LSV measurements; they are compared in Fig. S20.†
The effect of the PEd charge limit (C-limit) on the PEC performance of the CBO-O2 electrodes was investigated with LSV and transient photocurrent measurements; the optimal C-limit is 0.8C cm−2 (Fig. S21†). Fig. S22† compares the average photocurrent densities with those of the CBO-Air electrode at 0.2 VRHE as functions of the C-limit. The shift of the photocurrent onset potentials to the right occurs in all CBO-O2 photocathodes (inset in Fig. S21(a)),† whereas that of the CBO-Air photocathode remains at approximately 1.06 VRHE. Similar characteristics can be observed in the M–S plot of the CBO-O2 photocathode, which exhibits a positive shift in the φFB potentials (Fig. S2(b)).† The HC-STH efficiency (Fig. S22(b))† of the CBO-O2 electrode is approximately four times greater than that of the CBO-Air photocathode at 0.4 VRHE. The adequate Cu-to-Bi ratio and Cu-vacancies affect the PEC performance owing to the regulated band potential and increased acceptor density at the valence band maximum (VBM) in the CBO-O2 photocathode. Furthermore, the effects of the carrier gas heat treatment on the PEC water reduction characteristics in the CBO photoelectrode were investigated. Fig. S23† shows the chopped LSV curves and respective transient photocurrent densities of the CBO electrodes annealed under different N/O carrier gas-flow conditions. With the addition of pure O2 carrier gas-flow for CBO annealing introduces VCu, thereby increasing the acceptor density (see Fig. 2(a)). The increased hole concentration in the CBO-O2 photocathode promotes high charge separation and hole transport properties. As expected, N/O-4 and CBO-Air photocathodes have comparable photocurrent densities at 0.2 VRHE (Fig. S24†), whereas the other photoelectrodes exhibit improved PEC performance characteristics. The relative HC-STH efficiencies calculated from the LSV curves are presented in Fig. S23(b).†
To study the improved PEC performance more thoroughly, open circuit potential (OCP) measurements were conducted. The characteristics of OCP were compared with those of the CBO-air photocathode and CBO-O2 photocathodes with and without FN-HTL. Passing current through the open circuit enables the measurement of the potential of the working electrode; thereby, the interfacial thermodynamics of the PEC system can be studied.56,57 The Fermi level of a photocathode in equilibrium with the electrolyte can be measured under dark conditions. When illuminated with light, the quasi-Fermi levels of electrons and holes are used to describe the interfacial thermodynamics due to the photogenerated carriers.58–61 Accordingly, ΔOCP is the difference between the OCPs under dark and illuminated conditions. Fig. 6(a) shows that ΔOCP of the FTO/FN/CBO-O2 photoelectrode is approximately 215 mV; the potential under illuminated conditions is >1 VRHE and thereby closer to the onset potential. According to previous reports, the theoretical maximal photovoltage should be equal to the onset potential under sufficient illumination.61,62 Indeed, the Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathode exhibits a higher quasi-Fermi level owing to charge carrier separation under illuminated conditions. In addition, the ΔOCP of the FTO/CBO-O2 photocathode increases from approximately 99 mV (FTO/CBO-Air photocathode) to 160 mV (Fig. S25†). The greater ΔOCP of the FN/CBO-O2 photocathode confirms the formation of a built-in electric field and larger band bending, which promotes the separation of electrons and holes. It is noteworthy that the systematic improvement of PEC water reduction performance strongly requires an operative defect passivation process.
 Fig. 6  Photoelectrochemical characterization. (a and b) (a) OCP measurements and (b) EIS (solid curve: fitted data) of CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and FN/CBO-O2 photocathodes. Inset shows equivalent Randles circuit of fitted EIS data. (c and d) Chopped LSV profiles of CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and FN/CBO-O2 photocathodes in (c) 0.5 M Na2SO4 and (d) 0.2 M K2S2O8 + 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolytes. Inset shows photocurrent density measurements at (c) 0.2 VRHE and (d) 0.4 VRHE applied potentials with respect to time. All measurements were performed with front illumination. 
To investigate the charge transfer kinetics, CBO photoelectrodes were characterized with EIS. Fig. 6(b) shows the Nyquist plots and fitted data of the CBO-Air photoelectrodes and those with and without FN layers between the FTO layer and CBO-O2 film. The inset shows the equivalent circuit model used to fit the EIS spectra; the series resistance (RS), charge transfer resistance (Rct), and constant phase element (CPE) correspond to those at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte are listed in the Table S6.† Evidently, Rct of FTO/CBO-O2 films (approximately 3148 Ω) is lower than that of FTO/CBO-Air films (approximately 4606 Ω). Furthermore, the FTO/FN/CBO-O2 photoelectrode exhibits a significant decrease in Rct (approximately 612.8 Ω) and the lowest arc diameter; thereby indicating superior charge transport properties. The improved charge transfer characteristics of FN/CBO-O2 films are due to the increased hole concentration (Cu-vacancies, Fig. S2†) within the CBO structure and the Fe-doped NiOX, which acts as an HTL. The LSV measurements of the Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathode exhibit much faster charge transfer properties.
The PEC characteristics of the prepared CBO photocathodes were investigated by measuring the photocurrent density vs. the applied potential under artificial solar light. Fig. 6(c) shows the chopped LSV (dark/light) curves of CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathodes in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte. The photocurrent density of the pure-O2-heated CBO photocathode is superior to that of the CBO-Air photocathode (−0.4 mA cm−2 at 0.2 VRHE). Evidently, Cu-vacancies introduced in the CBO-O2 photocathode significantly improve the photocurrent (−1.23 mA cm−2 at 0.2 VRHE); in addition, the photocurrent is approximately three times higher than that of the CBO-Air photocathode. It is the highest reported photocurrent for pure CBO in Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte without an electron scavenger (Table S7†). Furthermore, Fe-doped NiOX-HTL on the back of the CBO-O2 photocathode further increases the photocurrent to −1.56 mA cm−2 at 0.2 VRHE applied potential. In addition to that, the onset potentials of CBO-O2 and FN/CBO-O2 photocathodes move closer to φFB. The respective transient photocurrent measurements with light-off/-on profiles are presented in the inset in Fig. 6(c). Accordingly, Fig. S26† shows the improved HC-STH efficiencies of the CBO-O2 device with and without Fe:NiOX HTL with respect to that of the bare CBO-Air photocathode. The chemical structure has not changed after the investigation of the PEC performance; Fig. S27† shows XPS results after the PEC experiments on the CBO-O2 photocathode. Since the stability of copper-based photocathode materials is a significant area of concern, we performed a stability test by measuring the current vs. time profiles for CBO-Air, CBO-O2 and FN/CBO-O2. As shown in Fig. S28,† despite 50% loss in photocurrent of CBO-O2, it exhibits stability for about 4 h. In the case of CBO-Air, photocurrent drops rapidly over 1 h. Interestingly, we found that the Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathode was significantly more stable for several hours. The amount of hydrogen gas evolved was monitored through offline GC during a potentiostatic chronoamperometry scan for the Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathode and the corresponding faradaic efficiency of about 96% was achieved.
To determine the influences of VCu on CBO and that of the Fe-dopants on NiOX HTLs on the charge carrier separation characteristics, an electron scavenger (0.2 M K2S2O8) was added to the electrolyte for the photocurrent measurements.27 The photocurrent density further increases with the K2S2O8 electron scavenger; thus, the device has a higher charge separation efficiency. According to Fig. 6(d), the photocurrent densities of the CBO-O2 and FN/CBO-O2 photocathodes are improved compared to the CBO-Air photocathode. The recorded photocurrent densities of CBO-O2 and FN/CBO-O2 photocathodes at 0.4 VRHE are −2.89 and −4.50 mA cm−2, respectively. The consistent transient photocurrent measurements are displayed in the inset in Fig. 6(d); the improvement in the PEC performance is maintained for an extended period while K2S2O8 is added. Moreover, the observed transient photocurrent spike of the CBO-O2 photocathode in the Na2SO4 (without K2S2O8) electrolyte is slightly reduced in the FN/CBO-O2 photoelectrode (see Fig. S29†), thereby indicating that the introduction of Fe:NiOX HTL leads to fewer surface recombination. Owing to the addition of the K2S2O8 electron scavenger, the transient spikes in the photocurrent disappear, and the high dark current is blocked. Thus, the charge separation efficiency can be investigated. Overall, combining efficient electron transfer layers and cocatalysts to the surface (outer layer) of an FTO/Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathode can further improve the stability and faradaic efficiency.8,63
3.5 Energy diagram and band structure
The effects of HTL and copper vacancies were further studied with UPS to determine the WF (Φ), which is defined as the difference between the vacuum energy level and Fermi level (EF). Fig. S30† illustrates the schematic band structure with Φ, EF, EVBM, and ECBM (vs. the energy at vacuum level and RHE scale), which can be obtained from the UPS and optical bandgap data. Fig. 7(a) shows the secondary-electron cut-offs (Ecutoff) of the CBO-Air and CBO-O2 photocathodes along with Fe:NiOX-HTL determined based on the intersection of the linear part of the spectrum and the baseline at the higher binding energy edge. The Fermi level was calculated as follows: EF = Ecutoff − 21.2 eV (under He–I radiation)(6)
 Fig. 7  (a and b) Ultraviolet photoelectron spectra of (a) Ecutoff and (b) Eedge under He–I radiation at 21.2 eV. (c) Schematic band diagram showing relative band edge positions of VBM (EVBM) and EF of prepared photocathodes with respect to that of FTO before equilibrium (bare NiO layer is included for comparison). The estimated band diagrams of (d) CBO-Air, (e) CBO-O2 and (f) Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathode in relation to electrochemical redox potentials for water reduction (H+/H2) and water oxidation (H+, O2/H2O). The enlarged depiction of interface between Fe:NiOX and CBO-O2 layers is displayed. 
The VB edge (Eedge) position shown in Fig. 7(b) was determined based on the intersection of the linear part of the spectra near the Fermi edge (low binding energy) with the baseline, which denotes the difference between EF and EVBM. Based on the Eedge data, the VBM levels of each sample were determined as follows: EVBM = EF + Eedge(7)
The calculated EF levels of CBO-Air and CBO-O2 photocathodes are −5.47 and −5.52 eV (vs. vacuum level) or 0.92 V and 1.02 V (vs. RHE), respectively. Based on 4.5 eV vs. vacuum level as the reference value for the electrochemical reduction of water (0.0 V vs. RHE), these values are close to φFB obtained in the M–S assessment (Fig. S2†). In addition, the EF positions of the bare NiOX and Fe:NiOX-HTLs are consistent with their respective φFB values (Fig. S5†); the estimated values are 0.72 and 0.79 V vs. RHE (−5.22 and −5.29 eV vs. vacuum level), respectively. Based on the UPS, M–S plot, and optical absorption data, the detailed band diagrams were constructed. Fig. 7(c) and S30† present the energy band structures of CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photoelectrodes (for comparison, bare NiOX is included) before equilibrium. Notably, the ΔEF level of the bare NiOX layer is approximately 0.25 eV (with CBO-Air) and 0.3 eV (with CBO-O2) lower than that of CBO photocathodes, which exhibit unfavourable band alignment resulting in slight resistance to the charge carrier transport at the back interface. By contrast, Fe:NiOX-HTL has an ΔEF level close to those of the CBO-Air (approximately 0.18 eV) and CBO-O2 (approximately 0.22) photocathodes, thereby indicating the significant effect of Fe-dopants on the charge separation efficiency of NiOX-HTLs (Fig. S6 and S7†). Furthermore, the induced VCu in the CBO-O2 structure has shifted the EF closer to its VBM; the resultant increased carrier concentration (Fig. 2(a)) leads to superior band alignment to Fe:NiOX HTL and improved photo-charge carrier transport (Fig. 6(c) and S6).†
According to the recent reports,29,31,64,65 the CBM of a typical CBO photocathode (CBO-Air) is located close to WF of the back contact electrode (i.e., the FTO substrate); thus, there are more charge recombinations at the back interface. The band alignment between the CBO photocathodes and back contacts after the EF equilibrium has been reached and is schematically illustrated in Fig. 7(e and f). At the FTO and CBO-Air interface, the photoexcited electrons and holes recombine because the electron flow back to the FTO substrate, which degenerates the PEC performance (Fig. 6(c) and 7(d)). In the FTO/CBO-O2 photoelectrode with greater hole concentration due to copper vacancies, the photo-charge carriers contribute to the water reduction kinetics at the electrode/electrolyte interface. However, the possible back-interface recombination in the FTO substrate limits the PEC performance (Fig. 7(e)). The backflow of photogenerated electrons from the CBM of the CBO-O2 layer is prevented upon the introduction of the bare NiOX-HTL between the FTO layer and photocathode owing to the unfavourable VBM retarding the hole extraction, as shown in Fig. S31(c).† By contrast, the band alignment and high electrical conductivity of Fe:NiOX-HTL effectively extract the photogenerated holes from the CBO-O2 photocathode with high a hole concentration, as shown in Fig. 7(f) and S31(d).† Additionally, EVBM of CBO-O2 is negatively higher than that of FN-HTL, as indicated in Fig. 7(f). Therefore, the efficient charge separation and the suppression of electron–hole recombination rate are expected in the bulk CBO-O2 with the external bias applied. This result agrees well with reports that state that a slight variation in the band alignment can have a significant effect on the performance of semiconductor-based devices.32,41,66–68
4 Conclusions
In this work, a novel Fe:NiOX-HTL was attached to the back of a CBO-O2 photocathode to improve the PEC performance and study the influences of the HTL and VCu in the CBO structure. Introducing VCu in the CBO photocathode leads to greater acceptor concentration and tailoring of the VBM, which promotes the separation of photogenerated holes. In addition, the Fe:NiOX layer accelerates their transport across the HTL-CBO-O2 interface. As a result, the photocurrent density in the neutral electrolyte solution is significantly improved. The CBO-O2 photocathode alone exhibits an approximately three times greater photocurrent density; the addition of Fe:NiOX-HTL to the CBO-O2 device increases the photocurrent density by four times compared to the CBO-Air photocathode. As well, Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathode with protecting layer exhibits about 4 h stability and 96% of faradaic efficiency for H2. Furthermore, the photoelectrochemical properties and effects of the copper vacancies in the CBO structure after the insertion of the novel HTL were studied. This work provides a new method for designing and building semiconductor-based photocathodes with charge transport layers for efficient PEC devices with highly active defect sites.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Korean Government (2020R1A4A1017737). D. A. Reddy is thankful to the DST for awarding the Inspire faculty fellowship.
References
T. Faunce, S. Styring, M. R. Wasielewski, G. W. Brudvig, A. W. Rutherford, J. Messinger, A. F. Lee, C. L. Hill, H. de Groot, M. Fontecave, D. R. MacFarlane, B. Hankamer, D. G. Nocera, D. M. Tiede, H. Dau, W. Hillier, L. Wang and R. Amal, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1074–1076 RSC .
S. Ardo, D. F. Rivas, M. A. Modestino, V. S. Greiving, F. F. Abdi, E. A. Llado, V. Artero, K. Ayers, C. Battaglia, J. P. Becker, D. Bederak, A. Berger, F. Buda, E. Chinello, B. Dam, V. D. Palma, T. Edvinsson, K. Fujii, H. Gardeniers, H. Geerlings, S. M. H. Hashemi, S. Haussener, F. Houle, J. Huskens, B. D. James, K. Konrad, A. Kudo, P. P. Kunturu, D. Lohse, B. Mei, E. L. Miller, G. F. Moore, J. Muller, K. L. Orchard, T. E. Rosser, F. H. Saadi, J.-W. Schüttauf, B. Seger, S. W. Sheehan, W. A. Smith, J. Spurgeon, M. H. Tang, R. van de Krol, P. C. K. Vesborg and P. Westerik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2768–2783 RSC .
J. W. Ager, M. R. Shaner, K. A. Walczak, I. D. Sharp and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2811–2824 RSC .
W. Yang, R. R. Prabhakar, J. Tan, S. D. Tilley and J. Moon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4979–5015 RSC .
K. Sivula and R. van de Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15010 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645–4660 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
A. Song, I. Levine, R. van de Krol, T. Dittrich and S. P. Berglund, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 11195–11204 RSC .
Z. Zhang, S. A. Lindley, D. Guevarra, K. Kan, A. Shinde, J. M. Gregoire, W. Han, E. Xie, J. A. Haber and J. K. Cooper, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000948 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, F. L. Formal, A. Kafizas, S. R. Pendlebury and J. R. Durrant, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20649–20657 RSC .
A. A. Dubale, A. G. Tamirat, H.-M. Chen, T. A. Berhe, C.-J. Pan, W.-N. Su and B.-J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2205–2216 RSC .
F. L. Formal, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Cornuz, S. D. Tilley, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2564–2574 CrossRef PubMed .
N. T. Hahn, V. C. Holmberg, B. A. Korgel and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6459–6466 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Berglund, F. F. Abdi, P. Bogdanoff, A. Chemseddine, D. Friedrich and R. van de Krol, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4231–4242 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cao, N. Nasori, Z. Wang, Y. Mi, L. Wen, Y. Yang, S. Qu, Z. Wang and Y. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8995–9001 RSC .
D. Kang, J. C. Hill, Y. Park and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4331–4340 CrossRef CAS .
G. Seo, B. Kim, S. W. Hwang, S. S. Shin and I. S. Cho, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105568 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Kumar, E. H. Kim, H. Park, S. Y. Chun, M. Gopannagari, P. Bhavani, D. A. Reddy, J. K. Song and T. K. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26153–26161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Wang, A. R. Woldu, X. Zhang and T. He, Catal. Today, 2019, 335, 388–394 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Wang and T. He, Chemosphere, 2021, 264, 128508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, J. Jian, F. Li, W. Liu, L. Jia and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21997–22004 RSC .
C.-Y. Lin, S.-Y. Lin, M.-C. Tsai and C.-H. Wu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 625–632 RSC .
G. Sharma, Z. Zhao, P. Sarker, B. A. Nail, J. Wang, M. N. Huda and F. E. Osterloh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2936–2942 RSC .
A. Sawa, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 28–36 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nowotny, M. A. Alim, T. Bak, M. A. Idris, M. Ionescu, K. Prince, M. Z. Sahdan, K. Sopian, M. A. Mat Teridi and W. Sigmund, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8424–8442 RSC .
A. M. Deml, A. M. Holder, R. P. O'Hayre, C. B. Musgrave and V. Stevanović, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1948–1953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Zhang, T. U. Schülli, Y. Bai, S. A. Monny, A. Du and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 17768–17773 CrossRef .
F. Wang, W. Septina, A. Chemseddine, F. F. Abdi, D. Friedrich, P. Bogdanoff, R. van de Krol, S. D. Tilley and S. P. Berglund, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15094–15103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Song, P. Plate, A. Chemseddine, F. Wang, F. F. Abdi, M. Wollgarten, R. van de Krol and S. P. Berglund, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9183–9194 RSC .
H. Lee, W. Yang, J. Tan, Y. Oh, J. Park and J. Moon, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 995–1003 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. Yoon, S. Kim, S. Seo, J. Song, B.-U. Choi, S. Y. Choi, H. Park, S. Ryu, J. Oh and S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12447–12450 RSC .
F. E. Oropeza, N. Y. Dzade, A. Pons-Martí, Z. Yang, K. H. L. Zhang, N. H. de Leeuw, E. J. M. Hensen and J. P. Hofmann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 22416–22425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Chandrasekhar, Y.-H. Seo, Y.-J. Noh and S.-I. Na, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 481, 588–596 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, X. Yang, Y. Lei, H. Yu, Z. Yang, Z. Zheng and D. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8860–8870 RSC .
Y.-H. Choi, K. D. Yang, D.-H. Kim, K. T. Nam and S.-H. Hong, Mater. Lett., 2017, 188, 192–196 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wei, C. Wang, X. Long, T. Wang, P. Wang, M. Zhang, S. Li, J. Ma, J. Jin and L. Wu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 15193–15200 RSC .
S. Masudy-Panah, R. S. Moakhar, C. S. Chua, A. Kushwaha and G. K. Dalapati, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27596–27606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Choi, D.-H. Kim and S.-H. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14901–14913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guan, X. Zhang and Y. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 27170–27174 CrossRef CAS .
H. Raebiger, S. Lany and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 045209 CrossRef .
A. B. Huang, J. T. Zhu, J. Y. Zheng, Y. Yu, Y. Liu, S. W. Yang, S. H. Bao, L. Lei and P. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10839–10846 RSC .
D. A. Reddy, K. A. J. Reddy, D. H. Hong, M. Gopannagari, D. P. Kumar and T. K. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118761 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Reddy, Y. Kim, K. A. J. Reddy, M. Gopannagari, A. P. Rangappa, D. P. Kumar, A. A. S. Devi, D. Murali, H. S. Ahn and T. K. Kim, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 11353–11366 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Do, D. P. Kumar, A. P. Rangappa, J. Wang, Y. Hong, E. Kim, D. A. Reddy and T. K. Kim, Mater. Today Chem., 2021, 22, 1005892 Search PubMed .
M. Gopannagari, D. P. Kumar, H. Park, E. H. Kim, P. Bhavani, D. A. Reddy and T. K. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 236, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, W. Cui, Y. Zhu, F. Zu, L. Liao, S.-T. Lee and B. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 297–302 RSC .
R. Gottesman, A. Song, I. Levine, M. Krause, A. T. M. N. Islam, D. Abou-Ras, T. Dittrich, R. van de Krol and A. Chemseddine, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910832 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Popović, G. Kliche, M. Cardona and R. Liu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 41, 3824 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. V. Popovic, G. Kliche, M. J. Konstantinovic and A. Revcolevschi, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1992, 4, 10085–10092 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Zhang and S. K. Saxena, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 141926 CrossRef .
R. E. Dietz, G. I. Parisot and A. E. Meixner, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1971, 4, 2302–2310 CrossRef .
Z. Qiu, Y. Ma and T. Edvinsson, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104118 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Kelly and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43, 2773–2780 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and N. Wu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 1360–1384 RSC .
K. Fominykh, P. Chernev, I. Zaharieva, J. Sicklinger, G. Stefanic, M. Döblinger, A. Müller, A. Pokharel, S. Böcklein, C. Scheu, T. Bein and D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5180–5188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, S. Li, X. Wang, B. Ding, Y. Li, H. Lin, D. Tang, X. Ren, Q. Wang, S. Luo and J. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 297, 12026 Search PubMed .
Y. Dai, J. Yu, C. Cheng, P. Tan and M. Ni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6984–7002 RSC .
H. Zhu, M. Zhao, J. Zhou, W. Li, H. Wang, Z. Xu, L. Lu, L. Pei, Z. Shi, S. Yan, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 234, 100–108 CrossRef CAS .
X. Long, L. Gao, F. Li, Y. Hu, S. Wei, C. Wang, T. Wang, J. Jin and J. Ma, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117813 CrossRef CAS .
C. Du, X. Yang, M. T. Mayer, H. Hoyt, J. Xie, G. McMahon, G. Bischoping and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 125, 12924–12927 CrossRef .
P. Dai, W. Li, J. Xie, Y. He, J. Thorne, G. McMahon, J. Zhan and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13493–13497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Song, Y. Zhang, Y. Ren, Z. Yuan, D. Zhao, Z. Zheng and L. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 174001 CrossRef CAS .
W. Septina, R. R. Prabhakar, R. Wick, T. Moehl and S. D. Tilley, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1735–1743 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wei, N. Xu, F. Li, X. Long, Y. Hu, L. Gao, C. Wang, S. Li, J. Ma and J. Jin, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3367–3374 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. A. Lindley, R. Dhall, K. Bustillo, W. Han, E. Xie and J. K. Cooper, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4111–4117 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. M. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, F.-Z. Liu, X.-Y. Feng, A. B. Djurišić, W. K. Chan and Z.-B. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700722 CrossRef .
Q. Fu, S. Xiao, X. Tanga and T. Hu, Org. Electron., 2019, 69, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Scanning electron microscopy-energy-dispersive spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction patterns, Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, UV-vis spectroscopy, band diagram schematics, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, Mott–Schottky, IPCE and photoelectrochemical measurements. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta09956fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 1  Fabrication process of photocathode with FTO/Fe:NiOX/CBO-Air (or CBO-O2) configuration. Pulsed electrodeposition (PEd) process was recorded with chronoamperometry; applied potential (violet), controlled charge limit (green), and obtained current density (red) are presented with respect to time. Digital images show CBO-Air (left), electrode without heating (middle), and CBO-O2 (right). “FN” represents the Fe-doped NiOX layer.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Calculated hole concentrations of CBO prepared in different N2/O2 (N/O) carrier gas ratios and compared with that of conventional muffle furnace-heated CBO electrode (CBO-Air). Inset in (a) shows Mott–Schottky curves. (b) Deconvolution of O 1s XPS spectra of CBO-Air and CBO-O2. Inset (b) shows O2− lattice with switching Cu2+ and Bi3+ components. Conductive-AFM (c-AFM) maps of (c) NiOX and (d) Fe:NiOX-HTL on FTO substrate under dark conditions. (e) I–V spectroscopy measurements show amplified electrical conductivity characteristics of Fe:NiOX. An inset in (e) shows the schematic diagram of c-AFM measurements.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) and (b) X-ray diffractograms (violet and brown coloured patterns represent FTO (JCPDS-01-077-0447) and CBO (JCPDS-01-080-0996), respectively) and (c) and (d) Raman spectra of CBO-Air, CBO-O2 on the FTO substrate, and NiOX and Fe:NiOX HTLs on Si-substrate, respectively. Inset in (a) shows FWHM values of fitted selected peaks of CBO-Air and CBO-O2 photoelectrodes.	 

 	Fig. 4  Top-view FE-SEM images showing surface structures of (a) bare FTO, (b) NiOX-HTL, (c) FN-HTL, and (d) a cross-sectional SEM image of FN-HTL. (e), (f) CBO-Air, and (g), (h) CBO-O2 electrodes top-view and cross-sectional SEM images on FN-HTLs.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) Absorptance (%A = 100 − %T − %R) characteristics of (a) FTO/NiOX and FTO/Fe:NiOX thin-films without CBO layers and (b) CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and FN/CBO-O2 electrodes deposited on FTO substrates. Tauc plots in the inset represent bandgaps of respective p-type semiconductors. For comparison, the figures enlarged at the specific %A vs. the wavelength. (c and d) APCE measurements of CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and FN/CBO-O2 photocathodes in (c) 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte and (d) in electrolyte with K2S2O8 electron scavenger.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photoelectrochemical characterization. (a and b) (a) OCP measurements and (b) EIS (solid curve: fitted data) of CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and FN/CBO-O2 photocathodes. Inset shows equivalent Randles circuit of fitted EIS data. (c and d) Chopped LSV profiles of CBO-Air, CBO-O2, and FN/CBO-O2 photocathodes in (c) 0.5 M Na2SO4 and (d) 0.2 M K2S2O8 + 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolytes. Inset shows photocurrent density measurements at (c) 0.2 VRHE and (d) 0.4 VRHE applied potentials with respect to time. All measurements were performed with front illumination.	 
EF = Ecutoff − 21.2 eV (under He–I radiation)	(6)

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) Ultraviolet photoelectron spectra of (a) Ecutoff and (b) Eedge under He–I radiation at 21.2 eV. (c) Schematic band diagram showing relative band edge positions of VBM (EVBM) and EF of prepared photocathodes with respect to that of FTO before equilibrium (bare NiO layer is included for comparison). The estimated band diagrams of (d) CBO-Air, (e) CBO-O2 and (f) Fe:NiOX/CBO-O2 photocathode in relation to electrochemical redox potentials for water reduction (H+/H2) and water oxidation (H+, O2/H2O). The enlarged depiction of interface between Fe:NiOX and CBO-O2 layers is displayed.	 
EVBM = EF + Eedge	(7)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Scanning electron microscopy-energy-dispersive spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction patterns, Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, UV-vis spectroscopy, band diagram schematics, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, Mott–Schottky, IPCE and photoelectrochemical measurements. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta09956f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
