Recent developments in bismuth oxyhalide-based functional nanomaterials for biomedical applications  - Biomaterials Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2BM01182D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2BM01182D
(Review Article)
Biomater. Sci., 2022, 10, 5809-5830Recent developments in bismuth oxyhalide-based functional nanomaterials for biomedical applications

        
          
            Guobo 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuhao 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Baolin 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yuqing 
            Miao
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials and Chemistry & Institute of Bismuth and Rhenium, University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai 200093, China. E-mail: yhli@usst.edu.cn; yqmiao@usst.edu.cn
bSchool of Health Science and Engineering, University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai 200093, China. E-mail: blliuk@163.com
Received 
      27th July 2022
    , Accepted 27th August 2022First published on 30th August 2022AbstractMultifunctional bismuth oxyhalide (BiOX, X = F, Cl, Br, and I) nanomaterials have great potential advantages in medical diagnostic and therapeutic applications. Pure BiOX nanomaterials have some limitations such as limited light absorption range, easy electron–hole recombination, and large nanoparticle size. It is widely assumed that proper functionalization of BiOX nanomaterials can compensate for these flaws and notably improve performance. Due to easy modification of the structures, the multi-functionalization of BiOX nanomaterials can be realized. These nanomaterials can be applied as sensitizers against tumor and bacterial proliferation, as well as contrast agents for computer tomography (CT) imaging, photoacoustic (PA) imaging, and other forms of imaging to provide real-time monitoring and detection guidance. Here, we summarize the methods for functionalizing BiOX nanomaterials and discuss the applications in biomedicine in the past few years, especially focusing on anticancer, antibacterial, and bioimaging. We also discuss how we can use these systems to inhibit and treat tumors, and how we can overcome current limitations to enhance therapeutic efficacy and imaging quality. We hope that this review can serve as inspiration and direction for the development of multifunctional BiOX nanomedicine platforms.Guobo ChenGuobo Chen received her BS degree from Shanghai University of Medicine & Health Sciences in 2021. She is currently a postgraduate student in the School of Materials and Chemistry, University of Shanghai for Science and Technology. Her research focuses on the biomedical application of bismuth-based nanomaterials.Yuhao LiDoctor Yuhao Li received his Ph.D. from Nanjing Tech University, China in 2011. He conducted his postdoctoral research at North Dakota State University and Fudan University in 2012–2015. From 2015 to date, he has worked as an associate professor at the University of Shanghai for Science and Technology. His current research focuses on the development of bismuth-based nanocomposites and organic functional materials for biosensing, intelligent diagnosis, and therapy applications.Baolin LiuProfessor Baolin Liu is a Research Professor at the University of Shanghai for Science and Technology. His research focuses on the cryopreservation of human cells, tissues, and organs. He served on several high-level boards and committees including the Biomedical Engineering Discipline of Shanghai, and the Society for Refrigeration of Shanghai, China. He was an executive director of the Society for Biomedical Engineering of Shanghai, a committee member of the Committee of Cryobiology, and the Society for Refrigeration of China.Yuqing MiaoProfessor Yuqing Miao is a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, and a member of the editorial board of Chinese Chemical Letters and Frontiers in Chemistry. The main research interests are focused on electrocatalysis or photocatalysis of nanomaterials, especially bismuth and rhenium-based nanomaterials, and their applications in biomedicine, energy, environment, and biomedical analysis. Nearly 200 research papers have been published and two of them are ESI highly cited papers.
1. Introduction
Many factors affect human health and life. Aside from cardiovascular diseases, cancer and bacterial infections are also major factors. Tumor proliferation has many features in common with bacterial infections, such as inflammation, drug resistance, and the ability to invade more tissues without treatment. At present, chemotherapy is one of the most common anticancer and antibacterial treatment methods in the clinic. However, chemotherapy not only generates drug resistance but also requires a long process for the development of new drugs. With the flourishing development of nanotechnology, the application of inorganic nanomaterials with unique physical, chemical, and biological properties in biomedicine has received great attention and development. Inorganic nanomaterials are not only applied as diagnostic contrast enhancement reagents but also to detect, prevent, and treat diseases. Among inorganic nanomaterials, bismuth-based nanomaterials have the advantages of easy modification, simple preparation methods, low cost, low toxicity, and excellent biocompatibility.1–6 In particular, bismuth oxyhalide (BiOX, X = F, Cl, Br, and I) nanomaterials have been extensively studied, especially in the scope of photocatalysis. Because the application of BiOX nanomaterials in biomedicine has not been studied for a long time, research on biomedicine-related applications remains to be conducted.
BiOX is a class of V–VI–VII ternary compounds with a tetragonal matlockite structure. Its layered crystal structure is composed of halogen layers and [Bi2O2]2+ layers and two layers arranged alternately. The atoms in the same layer are connected by covalent bonds, and the atoms in the different layers interact by van der Waals force.7–12 These nanomaterials are a class of semiconductors, and the band gaps are 3.64 eV, 3.22 eV, 2.64 eV, and 1.77 eV for bismuth oxyfluoride (BiOF), bismuth oxychloride (BiOCl), bismuth oxybromide (BiOBr), and bismuth oxyiodide (BiOI), respectively. With the increase in halogen atomic number, the band gap decreases.13–15 Due to their special structure, easily tunable energy band, excellent optoelectronic properties, and low toxicity, BiOX nanomaterials have been sought in the field of biomedicine in recent years. However, the application of pure BiOX in biomedicine still has its shortcomings, such as weak absorption of visible to near-infrared (NIR) light and limited function, which requires modifying the structure to improve its multifunctionality and performance.
This review summarizes the functional studies of BiOX (BiOCl, BiOBr, and BiOI) nanomaterials in recent years and their potential biological applications in the field of anticancer and antibacterial treatment, including monotherapy, synergistic therapy, and bioimaging (Fig. 1). Initially, we discuss three methods for functionalizing BiOX nanomaterials: morphology control, element doping, and surface modification. Functionalized nanomaterials can not only broaden the range of absorption from ultraviolet (UV) to the NIR region but can also separate electrons and holes effectively. The following section describes the biomedical applications of BiOX nanoparticles in therapy, including radiotherapy (RT), sonodynamic therapy (SDT), photodynamic therapy (PDT), photothermal therapy (PTT), chemodynamic therapy (CDT), starvation therapy (ST), and radiation catalytic therapy (RCT). The third part focuses on the biomedical applications of BiOX nanomaterials in imaging in vivo, such as computer tomography (CT) imaging, photoacoustic (PA) imaging, and optical imaging. We discuss the potential toxicity of BiOX in biomedical applications in the fourth part. Finally, we discuss the development prospects and challenges of BiOX nanomaterials in biomedical applications. BiOX nanomaterials are rarely reviewed in biomedicine, so this review will help researchers better understand the current research progress on BiOX nanomaterials in biomedicine and identify promising breakthroughs.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the functionalization of BiOX nanomaterials for biomedical applications. 
2. Functionalization of BiOX nanomaterials
2.1 Morphology control
The properties of nanomaterials depend primarily on their particular chemical and physical properties, which are principally affected by their morphology and size.16 For instance, nanoflowers are more conducive to the separation, transfer, and effective utilization of charge carriers in chemical reactions than nanosheets and nanospheres.17 BiOX nanomaterials have many morphologies, mostly including nanosheets,17–21 nanospheres,17,22–24 nanoflowers,17,25–27 cuboid-like structures,28 lantern-like structures,29 tremella-like structures,30 and nanotubes.31 BiOX nanomaterials are mainly synthesized via solvothermal methods,17,22,32–37 hydrothermal methods,23,24,26,38–41 room-temperature hydrolysis and redox methods,42 chemical vapor deposition methods,18,19 calcination methods,27,43 ionic liquid self-combustion methods,44etc. Among them, BiOX nanomaterials synthesized by solvothermal methods tend to be sheet-like, whereas those synthesized by hydrothermal methods tend to be flower-like and sphere-like. Different nanoparticle preparation methods result in different morphologies of BiOX nanomaterials.
Furthermore, the growth of nanocrystals and the exposure of crystal planes are crucial to the morphology and properties of nanomaterials.45 As a result, there has been an increase in research on the crystal growth and crystal surface exposure of BiOX nanoparticles. The change in morphology and the formation of crystal faces depend largely on the characteristic reaction conditions, including reaction time, system temperature, pH value, inducers, etc.44,46–49 As an example, Zeng et al. synthesized two kinds of well-crystallized BiOCl singlet-crystalline sheets by controlling the pH value. Under diverse pH conditions, the two nanosheets catalyze the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) under light irradiation in different ways: one is due to the exciton effect, and the other is due to charge transfer.47
BiOX nanoparticles less than 300 nm are more easily metabolized and removed in vivo than large particles and are more suitable for biomedical applications. For example, Wang et al. designed BiOI quantum dots (QDs) with a mean hydrodynamic size of approximately 5.51 nm, which had a high renal clearance rate and strong internal permeability of solid tumors.50 In addition, a type of oxygen vacancy black BiOCl nanoplate was synthesized by posttreatment of traditional BiOCl with simple UV excitation, and its hydration particle size was approximately 220 nm. And biodistribution data showed that the nanoplate did not cause obvious toxicity to the liver and kidneys, indicating good biosafety.51

2.1.1 Nanosheets. 
Nanosheets, the most common morphology in BiOX nanomaterials, are widely studied in the fields of photoelectrochemical sensors,52,53 photocatalytic degradation of pollutants,54–56 solar-blind photodetectors,57 aqueous anode materials,58 and ultrasound catalytic degradation of harmful substances.59Fig. 2A, D and G represent BiOCl nanosheets, BiOBr nanosheets, and BiOI nanosheets, respectively. However, the band edge position of BiOX is not suitable for photoelectrocatalysis, and the rapid recombination of photogenerated carriers seriously restricts the photocatalytic efficiency of BiOX. Thus, there are some approaches to effectively improve the catalytic efficiency of BiOX, for instance, the design of ingenious morphology of BiOX nanosheets, the construction of a composite BiOX catalytic system, and the reduction of the recombination of photogenerated carriers.18,60
 Fig. 2  Images of BiOX nanomaterials with different morphologies. (A) BiOCl nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (B) BiOCl nanospheres. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (C) BiOCl nanoflowers. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (D) BiOBr nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2020, WILEY–VCH. (E) BiOBr nanospheres. Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (F) BiOBr nanoflowers. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (G) BiOI nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2019, WILEY–VCH. (H) BiOI nanospheres. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (I) BiOI nanoflowers. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 


2.1.2 Nanospheres. 
BiOX nanospheres have various morphologies, including hollow61,62 and mesoporous63,64 structures. Fig. 2B, E and H represent BiOCl nanospheres, BiOBr nanospheres, and BiOI nanospheres, respectively. The microporous structure of materials may also provide additional biological microenvironments in tissue engineering applications. The hollow Bi4O5Br2 photocatalyst due to its bismuth-rich, highly dispersed band structure, and elevated conduction band (CB) potential, favors charge transfer and photoreduction. Meanwhile, the hollow structure provides a large specific surface area and produces a resonance in its interior to boost the adsorption and activation of CO2.61 Mesoporous hierarchical BiOBr/Fe3O4@SiO2, a visible-light-driven magnetic photocatalyst, is synthesized by the solvothermal method. It can produce multiple ROS to degrade pollutants through direct-hole oxidation.63 The BiOCl0.3Br0.7, BiOCl0.7I0.3, and BiOBr0.7I0.3 solid solutions are environmentally-friendly photocatalysts with adsorption and internal hole-scavenging capacity.65,66


2.1.3 Nanoflowers. 
Nanoflowers have many appealing morphologies, such as roses26,32 and Persian buttercup flowers.67Fig. 2C, F and I represent BiOCl nanoflowers, BiOBr nanoflowers, and BiOI nanoflowers, respectively. Due to their large surface area, flower-like BiOX nanomaterials have larger optical receiving areas. These nanomaterials have broad application prospects in the fields of photocatalysis,17,67–69 electrochemical applications,26,70 and sensors.36 The BiOCl microflowers containing many Bi vacancies are assembled by nanosheets, which expose more active facets. The diverse morphology of the BiOX photocatalyst provides noticeable adsorption and catalytic sites.32 In the electrochemical field, BiOBr nanoflowers with a heterojunction structure promote high visible light absorption and effective photogenerated charge separation, which are the basic characteristics of sensitive photoelectrochemical sensors.25

2.2 Element doping
Element doping is one of the common methods for the modification of nanomaterials. The properties of the holistic and surface are modified by introducing elements to improve the properties of nanomaterials. According to the types and quantities of doped elements, doping is divided into metal element doping, non-metal element doping, and co-doping. Fig. 3 shows some BiOX nanomaterials with different element doping.
 Fig. 3  (A) Elemental mapping images of 2% Mo–BiOBr. (B) Photocatalytic mechanism diagram of 2% Mo-BiOBr. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (C) Elemental mapping images of BiOCl-B-OV. (D) Schematic illustration of bulk B doping on excitons dissociation and free charge carrier generation in BiOCl-B-OV. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2021, WILEY-VCH. (E) Elemental mapping images of Nb/Se co-doped BiOI. (F) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic process of Nb/Se co-doped BiOI. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

2.2.1 Metal element doping. 
Doping BiOX nanomaterials with metal elements such as Cu,72,73 Fe,74–76 Zn,77 Nd,78 Ni,76 Mo,76,79 Co,80,81 Sr,82 Se,83 and Sn84 not only pushes forward biomedicine development but also makes a considerable breakthrough in photocatalysis. To give an instance, Liu et al. developed a bismuth-based Cu2+-doped BiOCl therapeutic nanoplatform, in which copper ions catalyze a Fenton-like reaction to generate hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) to enhance oxidative stress in tumor cells for PDT.73 Chen et al. synthesized Se-BiOCl nanosheets via a solvothermal method, and the light absorption range was adjusted from 387 nm (BiOCl) to 540 nm due to the doping of Se, thus achieving effective PDT under visible light.83 Moreover, Wu et al. synthesized Mo-doped BiOBr nanoflowers (Fig. 3A), and the photocatalytic degradation of sulfanilamide was significantly enhanced, mainly owing to the accelerated separation of charge carriers via Mo doping (Fig. 3B).79


2.2.2 Non-metal element doping. 
The doping of non-metallic elements such as I,85 Br,86 S,87 C,88 and B89 in BiOX nanomaterials usually promotes the separation of electron–hole pairs86,88,89 and reduces exciton binding energies.89 Some examples include Chen et al., who synthesized the photocathode of an iodine-doped BiOCl flower array (I0.2:BiOCl0.8). In the p-type semiconductor, a special internal electric field exists between the iodine ion layer and the [Bi2O2]2+ layer, which can increase the cathodic photocurrent response by facilitating the separation of electron–hole pairs under visible light excitation.85 Chen et al. synthesized boron-doped BiOCl nanosheets with B2O3 as molten salt and doping precursor (Fig. 3C). The surface-doped B atoms could extract neighboring lattice hydroxyl groups to create B-oxygen vacancy associates, which could make spontaneous CO2 activation, suppress competitive hydrogen evolution, and promote proton-coupled electron transfer for selective CO production. However, the evenly doped B atoms in the BiOCl bulk bolstered the disconnection of the robust excitons into free charge carriers in the confined nanosheets (Fig. 3D).89


2.2.3 Co-doping. 
It's a potential method for co-doping multiple elements in BiOX nanomaterials, which can combine multiple good qualities of different elements to increase nanomaterial performance. Maimaitizi et al. used an in situ hydrothermal method to synthesize N–Pt co-doped hollow hierarchical BiOCl microspheres. The doping of nitrogen made the energy band gap narrower, and the Schottky barrier due to the existence of platinum improved the charge transfer and carrier separation.90 Moreover, the doping of Fe and Cu also influences the properties of BiOX nanomaterials. Qu et al. prepared Fe and Cu co-doped BiOBr by a simple water bath heating method. Excessive metal doping can form impurity energy levels in the forbidden band, which dramatically promote the separation and migration of photogenerated carriers.91 Similarly, Xu et al. synthesized Nb/Se co-doped BiOI nanomaterials via the solvothermal method (Fig. 3E). Nb/Se co-doping not only increases the active site, but also expands the specific surface area, and improves the charge dynamics by inhibiting carrier recombination, thus facilitating the photocatalytic performance (Fig. 3F).92

2.3 Surface modification
Surface modification is one of the potential strategies for regulating the properties of BiOX nanomaterials. For biomedical applications, the activity of nanomaterials is heavily influenced by surface properties such as surface charge, hydrophilicity, and dispersibility.93 Surface modification technology can make a coating or modified layer that better matches the structure and property of the tissue.94 With the advancement of surface modification technology, the combination of two or more technologies can help BiOX nanomaterials thrive even more. BiOX nanomaterials can be roughly divided into four categories based on the effect of different modifications, including the addition of nanocarbon materials to promote electron–hole separation,93,95–99 polymers to benefit biocompatibility,40,51,100–106 biomolecules to improve targeting,107,108 and photosensitizers to enhance light absorption.109–114

2.3.1 The modification of BiOX with carbon-based materials. 
Modified carbon nanomaterials on the surface of BiOX to form composites not only have low cost and high chemical stability but also the synergistic effect between the two materials can substantially stimulate the catalytic activity of semiconductors.115,116 Graphene, carbon nanotubes, and fullerenes are familiar nanocarbon materials with unique inherent electrical, optical, thermal, and mechanical properties, such as excellent electron acceptance, high thermal stability, and large specific surface area.117,118 Nanocarbon materials are multifunctional materials that satisfy both industrial and biomedical requirements due to the optimal combination of high mechanical strength and exceptional optoelectronic properties.119
C70 is an asymmetric fullerene that has received much attention because of its delocalized conjugated structure and great electron acceptability. An illustration of the mechanism is shown in Fig. 4A. Ma et al. prepared a series of BiOCl nanomaterials by surface modification of C70 to improve the separation efficiency of photoinduced electron–hole charge pairs of BiOCl. C70's special delocalized conjugated structure facilitated the transfer of photogenerated electrons, resulting in the effective separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Furthermore, the separated electrons had high reduction potential on the C70 surface and could react with O2 to form the superoxide anions (˙O2−).97
 Fig. 4  Images of BiOX with different surface modifications. (A) Schematic illustration of the proposed enhancement mechanism for the excellent photocatalytic activity of C70/BiOCl photocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (B) Schematic illustration of the separation of electron–hole pairs in the No.1 hybrid biological signal processor (P1) and the protein signal recognition, PA signal feedback and ROS output capability of P1. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (C) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process for 2D O-BiOCl-PVP nanosheets, including hydrothermal treatment and the generation of oxygen vacancies by UV irradiation. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Schematic illustration of the formation of BiOI/Ru(bpy)32+ microspheres. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Carbon nanotubes, especially multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), can be utilized for the surface modification of nanomaterials due to their large surface area, mechanical strength, and appropriate electrical/thermal conductivity.120 In addition, MWCNTs have similar functions to graphene oxide, which can be utilized as conductive channels to accelerate electron transfer and inhibit the recombination rate of light-induced carriers. Meanwhile, MWCNTs have many active sites, which can regulate the catalytic performance by promoting the separation rate of light-induced carriers. Ma et al. prepared MWCNT-modified BiOCl nanomaterials by a hydrothermal method and found that adding a relatively small amount of MWCNTs could promote the formation of ˙O2−, thereby improving the catalytic activity.96
Carbon quantum dots (CQDs) are trendy zero-dimensional carbon nanomaterials with numerous advantages, including extremely small particle size, low toxicity, excellent water dispersion, great biocompatibility, high chemical stability, and exceptional upconversion luminescence properties, which are widely used in various fields.121–123 Furthermore, compared with other nanomaterials, the surface of CQDs contains abundant carboxyl and hydroxyl groups, whereas the surface of nitrogen-doped CQDs contains a large number of amino and hydroxyl groups, which may lead to some physical or chemical reactions between CQDs and BiOX, resulting in a synergistic effect. Qi et al. utilized a simple ion-etching strategy to prepare a p–n heterojunction BiO2−x/BiOCl modified by N-doped biomass CQDs (N-CQDs). The doping of N-CQDs enhanced the built-in electric field of the p–n heterojunction, promoted carrier migration, and decreased the recombination of carriers during the migration process.99
Due to the development of various carbon fiber production technologies, ideal carbon fiber materials can be obtained for a reasonable price. In addition, the interfacial adhesion between the carbon fiber material and the matrix material is crucial to the performance of the composite, because it is involved in the load transfer from the matrix material or carbon fiber material.124 By surface modification of BiOCl with spiral carbon fiber (SCF), Chen et al. successfully prepared oxygen vacancy adjustable SCF/BiOCl composites, in which SCF could also transfer some photoelectrons generated by BiOCl, achieving effective separation of photogenerated carriers.95


2.3.2 The modification of BiOX with polymers. 
To achieve the preferable biological ability of diagnosis and treatment, the surfaces of BiOX are commonly modified with polymers to increase their water dispersibility, biocompatibility, and blood circulation time. In general, polymers have been utilized for surface modification including polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP),104 polyethylene glycol (PEG),106 polyethyleneimine (PEI),100 polydopamine (PDA),102 polyvinyl alcohol (PVA),102 poly(acrylic acid) (PAA),103 poly dimethyl diallyl ammonium chloride (PDDA),125 and trithiol-terminated poly-(methacrylic acid) (PTMP-PMAA).105 These polymers normally combine with BiOX via electrostatic interactions, coordination, hydrophobic interactions, or other interactions. By modifying the BiOX surface, a polymer can not only fully exploit the advantages of BiOX and improve its performance but also provide the surface with functional groups and a solid foundation for downstream specificity recognition.
PVP is one of the most widely used polymers for surface modification of BiOX, not only because of its good biocompatibility and water solubility but also because of its reasonable price. Dai et al. designed a two-dimensional BiOCl nanosheet (O-BiOCl) with oxygen vacancies (Fig. 4C), and the photothermal performance and PA imaging ability of O-BiOCl nanosheets can be accurately controlled by adjusting the number of oxygen vacancies. By modifying the surface of PVP, O-BiOCl-PVP nanosheets with superior biocompatibility and biocompatibility have been made, which effectively realized PTT guided by dual-mode CT/PA imaging in vivo.104 In addition, PEG is also a popular polymer for surface modification, but its price is higher than that of PVP. Wang et al. coated 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[methoxy(polyethyleneglycol)-2000] (DSPE-mPEG2000) on the surface of oxygen-deficient black BiOCl nanoplates, which greatly improved the water dispersion.51
PDA synthesized from dopamine has active double bonds that can react with amino (–NH2), thiol (–SH), and other groups. A wide range of thiol compounds, including glutathione (GSH), can also degrade PDA, which is beneficial to the tumor microenvironment (TME).126 Besides, PDA has great photoconductivity and can be applied as an electron acceptor to enhance the electron–hole separation rate.102 Furthermore, PDA has the same function as other polymers, which can improve the biocompatibility of nanomaterials. A case in point is Chen et al., who synthesized selenium-doped BiOCl nanosheets (Se-BiOCl) by using a solvothermal method. The islands of Prussian blue analog (PBA) Bi4[Fe(CN)6]3 were then doped into the Se-BiOCl nanosheets via surface ion exchange to produce Se-BiOCl/PBA composite nanosheets. Finally, a layer of PDA was applied to the surface of the composite nanosheets, which further improved the performance of the nanomaterial and enhanced its biocompatibility and photothermal treatment efficacy.83


2.3.3 The modification of BiOX with biomolecules. 
Biomolecules, which are made from organisms, have been widely used in biomedical applications of nanomaterials owing to their good biocompatibility, high responsiveness, long blood circulation time, and various functions. Peptide-semiconductor hybrid materials can be thought of as therapeutic bio-signal processors, because they can recognize protein signals, output ROS signals, and provide PA signal feedback (Fig. 4B). Among numerous polypeptides, plectin-1 targeting peptide (PTP) can specifically recognize plectin-1 on the surface of pancreatic cancer cells.127–130 The CGKRK peptide (CRK) is a mitochondrial protein p32 targeting peptide that can be tightly integrated with the mitochondria of cancer cells.131,132 Therefore, in a study by Zhang et al., PTP and CRK polypeptides were modified on the surface of BiOCl nanosheets with oxygen vacancies to enable nanomaterials to recognize biological signals from the membrane and mitochondria of pancreatic cancer cells.107
As with peptides, enzymes play a crucial role in biological processes. To modify the surface of nanomaterials, glucose oxidase, peroxidase, laccase, and tyrosinase are primarily utilized. ST for tumor cells is a typical example of surface modification with glucose oxidase. Tumor cells require more glucose to generate energy than normal cells during cell growth, and glucose oxidase can consume glucose in tumor cells, thereby starving cells. Glucose oxidase, as a natural oxidoreductase, has the intrinsic catalytic activity to convert β-D-glucose into gluconic acid and H2O2 in the presence of O2.133–137 Glucose oxidase can provide more H2O2 for radiocatalysis therapy and inhibit tumor growth through ST by loading it onto a Z-scheme BiOI/Bi2S3 semiconductor radiosensitizer.108
Amino acids are ideal surfactants that can regulate the morphology and crystal structure because of their extraordinary biocompatibility. For bismuth-based nanomaterials, the coordination of Bi3+ and carboxyl groups in amino acids plays an important role in the preferential growth of nanomaterials. And some studies present that the coordination of Bi3+ with thiol is more stable than that with carboxyl.138,139 Cysteine, as a common amino acid with thiol and carboxyl groups, is widely applied for nanomaterial modification. The coordination ability of thiol and Bi3+ has attracted increasing attention to the crystal growth and photoreactivity of bismuth-based nanomaterials. Using cysteine, arginine, and glycine as the research objects, Chen et al. evaluated the effects of amino acid thiols on the crystal structure, morphology, and photoactivity of BiOBr nanosheets. In comparison to arginine and glycine, cysteine provides a unique environment for the formation of BiOBr nanosheets, in which Bi3+ preferentially coordinate with thiol rather than carboxyl groups. BiOBr nanosheets form in small sizes and orient in the [110] direction, which was more favorable for rapid charge transfer.40


2.3.4 The modification of BiOX with photosensitizers. 
Surface modification of photosensitizers is an effective way to broaden the excitation wavelength range of photoactive nanomaterials and improve the visible light activity of wide bandgap semiconductors.140 Common photosensitizers are ruthenium complexes,112,141 tin porphyrin,142 flavins,143 rhodamine B,144,145 and 2-aminoterephthalic acid.140 For instance, Wang et al. adsorbed the artificial Z-scheme bipyridine ruthenium (Ru(bpy)32+) on BiOI microspheres through electrostatic interactions (Fig. 4D). Due to the sensitization of Ru(bpy)32+, the band gap of the BiOI/Ru(bpy)32+ composite is narrower than that of BiOI microspheres, which effectively improves the utilization of visible light.112 Additionally, researchers from Chen et al. modified BiOBr with abundant oxygen vacancies (BiOBr-H) using the carboxyl-modified ruthenium photosensitizer Ru(bpy)2C-pyCl2 (Rub2d). The photogenerated electrons in Rub2d can smoothly transfer to the intermediary energy level located in the forbidden zone of BiOBr-H, advancing electron–hole pair separation in BiOBr-H/Rub2d and elevating 1O2 production.141
In addition, polar organic molecules can also be used to modify semiconductor nanomaterials, contributing to the absorption of visible light and increasing the polarity of the composites. By way of example, after the surface modification of BiOX with 4-carboxythiophenolate anions, the interaction between the polarity from the anions and the internal electric field of the bismuth-based semiconductor not only enhances the absorption of light but also realizes the effective separation of photogenerated carriers.146 Besides, Hou et al. reported that thiourea, a polar organic molecule, was applied for the surface modification of the nonpolar layered semiconductor BiOCl, and then introduced oxygen vacancies on the surface of BiOCl, thereby narrowing the band gap. Under the action of thiourea, an adjustable three-dimensional hierarchical structure was further formed, which enlarged the specific surface area and realized the beneficial separation of electron–hole pairs.109
In general, first, BiOX nanomaterials with appropriate sizes are more conducive to the absorption and metabolism of organisms. By controlling the morphology, more meaningful crystal planes could be exposed, thus enhancing the properties of BiOX nanomaterials. Second, doping other elements in BiOX nanomaterials could give them more synergistic functions, making them better applied in various fields. Finally, surface modification is mainly used to make BiOX nanomaterials with fabulous biocompatibility, dispersibility, and targeting. Accordingly, each of these three functionalization methods has distinct advantages. However, for biological applications, the biocompatibility and toxicity of nanomaterials are critical, so surface modification is essential in most cases.

3. Applications of BiOX in biomedicine
3.1 The application of BiOX in the therapeutic field
As a result of their excellent catalytic, optical, and electrical properties, BiOX nanomaterials are emerging as a hotspot in photocatalysis. Currently, its application in biomedicine is booming, particularly in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer, which has achieved the transition from single-mode treatment to multi-mode synergistic treatment. Here, we summarize the latest advances in BiOX nanomaterials for cancer diagnosis and treatment (Table 1). As well, BiOX nanomaterials are also used in the antibacterial field.147–149
Table 1 The application of BiOX in the diagnosis and treatment of tumors




Material
Synthetic method
Tumor cell
Application
Ref.




BiOI QDs
Hydrothermal
4T1
RT + CT

50



BiOCl
Solvothermal
Lewis
RT

150



BiOBr-H/Rub2d
Hydrothermal
HeLa, HepG-2, MCF-7
PDT

141



CQDs/Bi4O5Br2
Hydrolysis
A549
PDT

106



BiOBr:Yb,Tm-PEG
Solvothermal
HeLa, L929
PDT + FL/CT

151



BiOCl
Hydrothermal
MCF-7
PDT

152



UCNPs@BiOCl
Hydrothermal
HeLa, L929
PDT + UCL

153



BiOI/BiOIO3
Hydrothermal
HeLa, L929
PDT + CT

105



BiOCl
Hydrothermal
4T1
PTT + CT/PA

104



BSO/B-BiOCl-PEG
Hydrothermal
4T1
SDT

51



BSP
Solvothermal
Panc-1, HeLa
SDT + PA

107



Se-BiOCl/PBA
Solvothermal
HCT, HeLa, glioma, HUVEC
PTT/PDT + MRI/CT

83



BiOI@Bi2S3@BSA
Hydrothermal
BEL-7402, HUVEC
RT/PTT/PDT + MRI/CT

154



BCHN
Hydrothermal
4T1.2
CDT/RT

73



BiNS@NaLnF4
Solvothermal
HeLa, ECA109
PTT/PDT + CT/MRI

114



BBFG
Hydrothermal
Ealy926, HeLa
RCT/ST + CT/PA

108



DOX/APC-BiOI@CuS
Hydrothermal
A549
Chemo-photothermal + CT

155





QDs: quantum dots; Rub2d: Ru(bpy)2C-pyCl2; UCNPs: NaGdF4:Yb,Tm@NaGdF4; BSO: L-buthionine-sulfoximine; B-BiOCl: oxygen-deficient black BiOCl; BSP: a hybrid Bio-Signal Processor is constructed by a BiOCl nanosheet, a semiconductor rich in oxygen vacancies, coated with two functional peptides; PBA: Prussian blue analogs; BSA: bovine serum albumin; BCHN: BiOCl/Cu2+-H2O2@PVP; BBFG: BiOI/Bi2S3@polydopamine nanosheets modified by amine-polyethylene glycol-folic acid (NH2–PEG–FA) and glucose oxidase (GOx); DOX: hydrochloric acid doxorubicin; APC: aspirin phenacetin and caffeine; FL: fluorescence; UCL: upconversion luminescence.

3.1.1 RT. 
One of the most effective methods for treating cancer is RT, which uses high-energy ionizing radiation such as X-rays or γ-rays to ablate tumors. Radiosensitizers are substances that can enhance the radiosensitivity of organisms. They could enhance the ability of radiation to kill tumors and especially help to address the problem of the low cure rate of RT caused by the resistance of hypoxic cells in solid tumors to radiation. Bismuth-based nanomaterials have large X-ray photon capture cross sections and a strong Compton scattering effect. The dose enhancement effect could improve the radiation damage to sensitive target molecules such as DNA and produce radiosensitization on tumor cells. Due to the presence of Bi, a high-Z element (Z = 83), BiOX nanomaterials have strong photoelectric absorption and high secondary electron generation capacity, which could produce the effect of RT sensitization. Compared with RT alone, the effect of BiOX-sensitized RT on tumor cells is more obvious. RT offers the advantages of space–time control and deep penetration, however high-energy ionizing radiation inevitably damages normal tissue to varying degrees.50 To minimize the risk of damaging normal tissue, a wide range of BiOX nanomaterials have been developed, and injection methods have been adjusted to ensure efficient radiosensitization.
Since BiOI contains high-Z elements such as Bi and I atoms, it could be applied as an ideal radiosensitizer to improve the effect of RT.154 Wang et al. produced ultrasmall-sized BiOI QDs and compared their effects on RT when injected intravenously and intratumorally. The results presented that under any injection mode, BiOI QDs were quickly cleared by the kidney and rarely accumulated in the liver and spleen. Compared to intravenous injection, intratumoral injection enhanced the accumulation of BiOI QDs in a tumor and presented a faster-clearance rate after X-ray irradiation. Furthermore, BiOI QDs accelerated the degradation of H2O2 in tumors, thereby generating ˙OH and enhancing the radiation sensitivity of tumors (Fig. 5A).50 In the latest research, BiOBr QDs were also proposed as favorable candidate QDs for anticancer applications.156
 Fig. 5  (A) Schematic illustration of the BiOI-QD-based radiotherapeutic progress and biodistribution of BiOI QDs after therapy. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2020, WILEY–VCH. (B) CB and VB energy levels of BNCs and BvNCs. (C) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of confined water-mediated radiosensitization. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
Confined water is a kind of water bound by pores, biological interfaces, or biological macromolecules.157–160 Its loss will lead to the occurrence of some diseases, such as malignancies, aging, and Alzheimer's disease.161–165 Meanwhile, nanocatalysts with large surface defects have the ability to generate confined water in vivo, which is conducive to disease treatment. Wang et al. made nanocrystals of BiOCl with abundant Bi vacancies (BvNCs). Fig. 5B illustrates how the band gap of BvNCs is significantly narrower than that of BiOCl with few vacancies (BNCs) under the influence of Bi vacancies. Bi vacancies have a high affinity with water molecules, allowing them to capture a large amount of water and convert it to confined water. Confined water is more reactive than bulk water under irradiation and easier to ionize into ˙OH (Fig. 5C). In addition, as a high-Z element, Bi atoms enhanced the radiation sensitivity and further promoted the generation of ˙OH, thereby improving the efficacy of RT.150


3.1.2 PDT. 
PDT is a light-activated treatment method that is usually classified into two types (type I and type II) and produces distinct ROS. In type I, ROS such as ˙O2−, ˙OH, and H2O2 are mainly generated by electron transfer, while singlet oxygen (1O2) is primarily produced by type II through energy transfer.166–168 Compared with commonly used RT and chemotherapy methods, PDT has the advantages of low systemic toxicity, great cell selectivity, and simple operation.169,170
The band gap of BiOX is normally smaller than that of traditional photocatalytic materials like TiO2, and the band gap decreases with the increase of the atomic number of halogens, indicating that their absorption efficiency for visible light is far greater. It is worth noting that the photocatalytic process, similar to the principle of PDT for cancer, generates ROS for organic pollutant degradation or oncotherapy by converting light energy into chemical energy. When choosing photocatalytic nanomaterials for PDT, it is critical to consider not only their photocatalytic properties but also their applicability. Due to their high photocatalytic activity, low cytotoxicity, and excellent biocompatibility, BiOX nanomaterials are considered an attractive choice for PDT of tumors.
Even though PDT has been widely used, it still has many limitations, such as low accumulation and selectivity, as well as oxygen dependence. Currently, the PDT effect of BiOX is mainly embellished by constructing heterojunctions, elemental doping, and surface modification. Biophotocatalysts composed of inorganic materials can generate ROS through type I processes to overcome tumor hypoxia, and have better permeability and retention characteristics than organic materials. In Zhen et al.'s work, they designed a novel reductive surfactant that partially reduces KIO3 to KI, resulting in BiOI/BiOIO3 p–n heterostructure nanometer composites (BB NCs) with suitable nano size as well as favorable water solubility and biocompatibility. Under 650 nm laser irradiation, photoinduced holes and electrons of BB NCs were converted into ˙OH and 1O2 through types I and II reactions, respectively. These ROS decreased the mitochondrial membrane potential, which further inhibited ATP production and promoted tumor cell death (Fig. 6A). BiOIO3 has a high separation capability of photoinduced charge due to the unique hybrid structure and internal polar field. And the insert of BiOI could further activate BiOIO3 by laser in the biological window, thus making BB NCs a hypoxic tumor therapeutic agent in response to the biological window.105
 Fig. 6  (A) Synthesis of BB NCs and their application in efficient type-I and O2 self-supplying type II PDT to overcome tumor hypoxia. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) The band edge positions of BiOBr, BiOBr-H, and Rub2d with the vacuum level set at 0 eV. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Schematic illustration of a possible photocatalytic antibacterial mechanism of BI-110 for Escherichia coli. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2020, Wiley–VCH. 
In semiconductors, oxygen vacancy engineering could efficaciously boost the separation of photoinduced electron–hole pairs, thereby improving photocatalytic activity. BiOBr is an encouraging nanomaterial for PDT due to its abundant oxygen vacancies, moderate band gap, and excellent photostability. Guan et al. successfully designed BiOBr-H/Rub2d nanomaterials by combining BiOBr-H with a ruthenium photosensitizer. The abundant oxygen vacancies in BiOBr-H could considerably enhance the photocatalytic activity of the ruthenium photosensitizer, thus producing more ROS and enhancing the PDT effect. Meanwhile, photoinduced electrons of Rub2d could be easily transferred to the intermediary level located in the BiOBr-H band gap, promoting electron–hole pair separation in BiOBr-H/Rub2d and increasing ROS yield (Fig. 6B). It is worth mentioning that this strategy has universal applicability, and the specific binding of BiOBr-H with zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) and indocyanine green (ICG) could also produce similar consequences.141
PDT function of BiOX semiconductors is also used in antibacterial applications. In one example, Sun et al. synthesized two kinds of defect BiOI nanosheets (BI-001 and BI-002) mainly exposed to the (001) lattice face for BI-001 and the (110) lattice face for BI-110 via a simple ultrasonic-assisted method. First, BI-110 with a superb geometric effect presents stronger absorption to O2 and LPS than BI-001, which could offer more active sites and support the efficiency of O2 to ROS transformation. Furthermore, the oxygen-deficient induced vigorous chemisorption properties of BI-110 enhance its antibacterial activities. Second, BI-110 with oxygen defects causes a red shift in the band gap from visible to NIR. When BI-110 is exposed to 808 nm light, electrons are transferred from VB to the defect level triggered by oxygen vacancies, and a portion of the electrons is then activated to BI-110′s CB. The activated electrons react with the surface-absorbed oxygen, resulting in the production of ROS. Hence, BI-110 has greater killing activity against Escherichia coli under 808 nm light irradiation (Fig. 6C). This work combines lattice face engineering and vacancy engineering, laying the groundwork for future research on the antibacterial PDT of BiOX semiconductors.171


3.1.3 SDT. 
SDT is a non-invasive treatment method. To a certain extent, due to its deep penetration and non-phototoxic nature, SDT could replace traditional photo-trigger therapy.172,173 The usual working mechanism of SDT is that under ultrasound stimulation, the electrons of the sonosensitizer are excited from the valence band (VB) to the CB, resulting in active electron–hole pairs. These activated high-energy electron–hole pairs can further transfer their energy to nearby water and oxygen molecules, converting them into cytotoxic ROS and inhibiting tumor cell proliferation.174 However, there are few studies of SDT on BiOX nanomaterials, and most existing research focuses on creating oxygen vacancies on the surface of BiOX to trigger its response to ultrasound stimulation. In addition, due to the existence of an antioxidant system in a tumor, it is difficult for ROS generated by ultrasound stimulation to achieve an ideal therapeutic effect.
Based on this, Wang et al. synthesized oxygen-deficient black BiOCl (B-BiOCl) nanoplates and loaded them with L-buthionine-sulfoximine (BSO, GSH biosynthesis inhibitor). The oxygen in the lattice of BiOCl is exfoliated under UV light irradiation, thus forming B-BiOCl with oxygen vacancies. The ROS generation principle of B-BiOCl-PEG nanomaterials under US irradiation is shown in Fig. 7A. Since the constructed oxygen defects are conducive to inhibiting or extending the speedy recombination of electron–hole under US irradiation, B-BiOCl-PEG nanomaterials with oxygen defects generate more 1O2 than untreated nanomaterials. What is more, in an acidic TME, excess GSH could degrade the nanoparticles and release BSO. The released BSO has the potential to inhibit GSH biosynthesis and degrade redox in tumor cells. ROS generation mediated by B-BiOCl-PEG nanomaterials and GSH inhibition mediated by BSO could synergistically increase cell oxidative stress under US irradiation (Fig. 7B).51
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration of the enhanced 1O2 generation mechanism of oxygen-deficient B-BiOCl-PEG under US irradiation. (B) Schematic illustration of BSO/B-BiOCl-PEG-mediated ROS damage and GSH depletion amplifying intracellular oxidative stress under US irradiation. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2021, Wiley–VCH. (C) Schematic illustration of P1's output ROS signals under US irradiation. (D) Relative cell viability of Panc-1 cells after different treatments, including PBS, P1, US, OV-Bi NSs + US, P3 + US, P2 + US, and P1 + US. (P1, P2, P3 and OV-Bi NSs: 0.2 mg mL−1). Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
Zhang et al. further introduced oxygen vacancies in BiOX nanomaterials to regulate the band gap, resulting in more active sites and more ROS. Specifically, they synthesized oxygen-rich BiOCl nanosheets with two functional peptides decorated on the surface. As illustrated in Fig. 7C, the nanosheets could generate ROS under ultrasound stimulation and then destroy the redox balance of mitochondria, thus effectively preventing tumor cell growth. The cytotoxicity results confirmed that BiOCl nanosheets could kill 90% of tumor cells under ultrasound (1.0 MHz, 2.5 W cm−2, 50% duty cycle) irradiation, indicating the exceptional SDT effect (Fig. 7D).107


3.1.4 PTT. 
PTT involves artificially raising the temperature of tissue.175 This treatment is of great interest because of its short treatment time, easy localization, low cost, and few side effects.176–178 The optimal photothermal agents for PTT generally need to have a high light extinction coefficient and great photothermal conductivity, referring to the excellent light absorption and photothermal energy conversion efficiency, respectively.104 The optical properties of photothermal nanomaterials are determined by their structure and the optical absorption spectrum; in particular, the efficient absorption of NIR light could improve photothermal conversion efficiency in biological applications. The smaller the size of photothermal nanomaterials, the greater the probability of an enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect, which is beneficial against tumor cells in hyperthermia therapy.
However, tumor cells can tolerate thermal stress at high temperatures and cause a series of side effects, including tumor metastasis and inflammation, resulting in unsatisfactory results of PTT. Concurrently, the insufficient penetration depth of NIR light cannot fully guarantee the photothermal treatment effect. Therefore, a mushrooming number of strategies to adjust photothermal performance have been developed to achieve more efficient PTT. BiOX, a class of non-noble metal nanomaterials, has noble metal-like properties as well as high photothermal conversion efficiency at a much lower cost than noble metal nanomaterials. At present, researchers are focusing on improving photothermal conversion efficiency by introducing oxygen vacancies and creating heterojunctions, thus increasing the effectiveness of PTT.
To take one example, Dai et al. synthesized O-BiOCl nanosheets with oxygen vacancies on their surface by using particular defect engineering strategies. These oxygen vacancies could effectively modulate the band gap, resulting in strong light absorption and high photothermal conversion efficiency in the NIR biological window. The O-BiOCl remarkably improves the photothermal conversion performance by understanding the inherent physical and chemical properties and photocatalytic principles.104 In a similar approach, Zhong et al. introduced oxygen vacancies on the surface of BiOCl nanosheets, which expanded visible light absorption, induced the obvious photothermal effect, and considerably aided effective carrier separation.179
Furthermore, using defect engineering, Ma et al. also achieved efficient photothermal conversion and maximized the utilization of light energy for antimicrobial applications. They designed BiOI nanosheets with oxygen defects and then decorated them with Bi to form composite BiOI-DE, which was applied as an antimicrobial agent. The special oxygen vacancies and heterojunction structure promote the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and enhance ROS generation, while the expanded light absorption range improve the utilization of light. As demonstrated in Fig. 8, BiOI-DE presents excellent photothermal conversion performance compared to BiOI alone, and the local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) of semimetal Bi also promote heat generation due to moderate resonant thermoelectrons. As a result, through reasonable structural modification, the fabricated BiOI-DE acquires acceptable photocatalytic performance and could generate hyperthermia and ROS to realize antibacterial function.180
 Fig. 8  (A) Images of BiOI-DE2 under different NIR power densities. (B) The possible photothermal response mechanism of BiOI-DE2. (C) The photothermal conversion curves of different samples at a power density of 1 W cm−2. (D) The photothermal stability nature after three cycles procedure. (E) The stable stage of the heating and cooling period. Reproduced with permission.180 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 


3.1.5 Synergistic therapy. 
In many cases, combining multiple treatments also known as synergistic therapy can produce greater anti-tumor efficacy than one treatment alone, resulting in more durable and complete tumor destruction.181,182 Specific reported strategies for the application of BiOX in synergistic therapy are PTT/PDT therapy,83,114 RT/CDT therapy,73 RT/PDT/PTT therapy,154 RCT/ST therapy,108 SDT/CDT therapy,100 and chemo-PTT.155 Although immune combination therapy has attracted more attention from researchers contemporarily,183–185 to date there have been no relevant synergistic studies in this area for BiOX.
CDT induces tumor cell death primarily by catalyzing H2O2 in endogenous tumors to produce highly toxic ˙OH.186 The catalytic process is mainly based on Fenton or Fenton-like reactions. Besides, the Fenton reaction can also be engineered to catalyze H2O2 to produce O2 continuously.187 One of the advantages of the CDT/RT combination is that CDT can provide sufficient oxygen in tumor cells, resulting in the reaction with tumor cell DNA to produce stable organic peroxides that lead to irreparable cellular damage, thereby significantly improving the efficacy of RT-induced cell death.188,189 However, CDT cannot be realized by pure BiOX, which is generally achieved by introducing ions such as Cu2+, Fe2+, and Mn2+ that can produce Fenton or Fenton-like reactions. It is illustrated in Fig. 9A that Liu et al. synthesized H2O2-carrying Cu2+-doped BiOCl nanoflowers (BCHN). BCHN could release Cu2+ and H2O2 under weakly acidic conditions, and then produce both ˙OH and O2 through Fenton-like reactions, which provided suitable conditions for RT and improved the efficacy of CDT. Furthermore, Cu2+ and BiOCl also reacted with GSH in tumor cells through redox and coordination, respectively. Overall, there was a reduction in ROS scavenging by GSH consumption further inducing the improvement of CDT and realizing the biodegradation of BCHN.73
 Fig. 9  (A) Schematic illustration of the BCHN (BiOCl/Cu2+-H2O2@PVP) nanocomposite enhancing the synergistic RT/CDT effect by modifying the TME by supplying H2O2, generating O2, consuming GSH, and generating ˙OH. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (B) Schematic illustration of the applications of BBFG NSs for GOx-sensitized RCT and ST synergetic therapy. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Schematic illustration of the antibacterial mechanism of Fe-BBP NP-mediated SCDT. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2020, Wiley–VCH. 
RCT is an enhanced RT strategy based on semiconductor radiosensitizers.190 BiOX nanomaterials are typical semiconductors and can be utilized for radiosensitizers.191 By selecting and designing suitable energy levels for heterostructures, the electrons and holes induced by ionizing radiation can be spatially separated, leading to longer carrier lifetimes and increasing the probability of ROS generation.192,193 One good choice is to build a Z-scheme heterostructure, which can maintain the redox capability of radiation-generated electrons and holes without losing charge separation efficiency.194 ST for cancer is considered to be a treatment that blocks nutrient supply through vascular embolization to inhibit the growth of tumors.133,195–197 Moreover, glucose consumption provides another feasible strategy for ST.198 As showcased in Fig. 9B, Wang et al. accomplished the synergistic treatment of RCT and ST by constructing BiOI/Bi2S3@PDA Z-scheme nanosheets modified by NH2-PEG-FA and glucose oxidase, showing remarkable treatment efficacy.108
Sonication-activated chemotherapy (SCDT) was proposed as a new combination therapy method by Song et al., in which a catalytic reaction was triggered by ultrasound, which in turn generated ROS.100 In addition, metal ions grafted onto semiconductor nanomaterials as shallow traps can enhance the photo/sonocatalytic activity to increase ROS generation.199,200 Based on this, Song et al. constructed an SCDT therapeutic platform by grafting Fe3+ onto polyethylenimine-modified BiOBr nanoplates (Fe-BBP NPs). Under ultrasound catalysis, Fe3+ can effectively separate holes and electrons of BiOBr and shorten the valence electron transport paths, thus activating oxygen reduction and the Fenton reaction to produce abundant ROS against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infection (Fig. 9C). SCDT can generate more ROS than traditional SDT and completely clear the infection with a simple procedure.100

3.2 The application of BiOX in bioimaging
Bioimaging plays an important role in disease treatment, and through bioimaging, individualized treatment plans can be formulated by accurately diagnosing lesion sites. Bioimaging allows researchers to better understand diseases, monitor diseases, and treat diseases. Currently, there are few studies on the utilization of BiOX for imaging, and the only studies focused on contrast-enhanced CT and PA imaging.

3.2.1 CT imaging. 
CT imaging is one of the most widely used imaging techniques in clinics and can provide valuable anatomical structure and functional information with high resolution. Since the Bi element is a high-Z element with strong X-ray attenuation ability (Bi: 5.74, Au: 5.16, and I: 1.94 cm−2 kg−1, at 100 keV), BiOX nanomaterials have appreciable potential in CT imaging. Iodine is similar to bismuth in that both have wonderful X-ray attenuation properties; thus, BiOI nanomaterials are considered to have excellent CT imaging capability. By way of illustration, Wang et al. reported BiOI QD-mediated CT imaging to compare the effects of RT with different injection methods. They evaluated the CT imaging potential of BiOI QDs in vitro by comparing them with Iopromide (a clinical CT contrast agent). The in vivo CT imaging capability of intratumoral and intravenous injections was also evaluated by using 4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/c mice to demonstrate the advantages of intratumoral injection.50 Similarly, by comparing BiOI@CuS with Iohexol (another clinical CT contrast agent), Zhang et al. demonstrated that BiOI@CuS had better CT imaging ability.155 Moreover, Zhen et al. also demonstrated the exceptional CT imaging performance of BiOI/BiOIO3 further consolidating that Bi-containing nanomaterials qualify as having remarkably enhanced CT imaging characteristics.105


3.2.2 CT/PA imaging. 
PA imaging is a fresh non-invasive and non-ionizing biomedical imaging method developed in the last few years. When the pulsed laser is irradiated into biological tissue, the light absorption domain of the tissue will generate ultrasonic signals. By detecting the PA signal, the light absorption distribution in the tissue can be reconstructed to achieve tissue imaging. PA imaging combines the benefits of deep penetration in pure ultrasound tissue imaging and great selectivity in pure optical tissue imaging, resulting in highly sensitive tissue images. The combination of high-resolution CT imaging and high-sensitivity PA imaging can bring out the advantages of precision bioimaging. Unfortunately, most BiOX nanomaterials have weak absorption of NIR light, so it is necessary to introduce other nanomaterials or modify their surface to form nanocomposites to make them have a strong absorption capacity of NIR light. The structural modification could make BiOX nanomaterials effective in PA imaging contrast agents and hyperthermia contrast agents. However, only a few studies have illustrated BiOX nanomaterials as thermal and PA contrast agents.
For example, the BiOI@Bi2S3@BSA heterojunction semiconductor (SHNPs) synthesized by Guo et al. have strong X-ray attenuation and NIR absorption, making SHNPs a promising CT/PA contrast agent. As shown in Fig. 10, SHNPs have superior contrast ability than Iopromide and produce obvious signals at the tumor site after intravenous injection of SHNPs, along with little accumulation in the liver and spleen. In addition, since SHNPs could efficaciously absorb NIR light, they can also be applied to PA imaging. The results illustrated that the PA signal of SHNPs was proportional to both concentration and time.154 In another study, the BiOI/Bi2S3@PDA nanomaterials synthesized by Wang et al. had excellent CT and PA dual-mode imaging properties due to the high X-ray attenuation coefficients of Bi and I, and the great NIR absorption of the PDA shell and Bi2S3. CT images reveal that the tumor site has signal intensity close to the bone after intravenous injection of BBFG NSs. Moreover, there is a significant concentration-dependent PA signal under NIR laser irradiation at 808 nm.108
 Fig. 10  (A) In vitro CT images of Iopromide and SHNPs at different concentrations. (B) CT values of the Iopromide and SHNPs with different concentrations were captured at various voltages. (C) CT images of BEL-7402 tumor-bearing mice injected i.v. at different time points. (D) In vitro PA images of SHNPs. (E) In vivo PA imaging in BEL-7402 tumor-bearing mice. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2017, WILEY–VCH. 


3.2.3 CT/optical imaging. 
Optical imaging is an emerging imaging technique that has been popularly applied in biomedical fields due to its advantages of simple operation, real-time capability, and high sensitivity. Upconversion optical imaging, in particular, can effectively avoid the autofluorescence interference of biological tissue, exhibiting a remarkable imaging effect. Although BiOX nanomaterials cannot emit upconversion light, they can be used as an upconversion light-emitting host to achieve upconversion light emission by doping with rare earth elements. For instance, by doping Yb and Tm elements, Xu et al. constructed BiOBr:Yb,Tm nanosheets to integrate CT and upconversion optical imaging. Emission spectra reveal that BiOBr:Yb,Tm doped with 9% Yb3+ displays the highest luminescence property (Fig. 11A), and no cross-relaxation is monitored in this concentration range (Fig. 11B). Furthermore, red light emission is observed in HeLa cells after incubation with BiOBr:Yb,Tm-PEG under irradiation with 980 nm NIR light (Fig. 11C), indicating the potential application of BiOBr:Yb,Tm-PEG as a real-time probe. BiOBr:Yb,Tm could also be employed as a CT imaging contrast agent due to the existence of Bi and rare earth elements. As shown in Fig. 11D, E and F, the results from in vitro and in vivo studies both indicate that BiOBr:Yb,Tm qualifies to satisfy the capability of CT imaging.151
 Fig. 11  (A) Upconversion emission spectra of BiOBr:Yb,Tm nanosheets with different Yb3+ concentrations under 980 nm laser excitation. (B) CIE chromaticity diagram showing the emission colors for BiOBr:Yb,Tm. (C) Optical images of HeLa cells incubated with BiOBr:Yb,Tm-PEG nanosheets for 1 h. (D) In vitro CT images of BiOBr:Yb,Tm at different concentrations. (E) CT value of BiOBr:Yb,Tm aqueous solution as a function of the particle concentration. (F) CT images of tumor-bearing mice before (upper) and after (lower) intratumor injection. Reproduced with permission.151 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4. The potential toxicity of BiOX in biomedical applications
Bismuth is a green metal with very low toxicity and many bismuth complexes are also used orally in the treatment of H. pylori. These studies show that both elemental bismuth and bismuth ions have better biological safety and low toxicity. BiOX nanomaterials have also been reported to exhibit good biocompatibility for bioimaging and therapy. However, nano-sized BiOX materials are easy to accumulate in the body, and there is a potential risk of toxic side effects. Therefore, designing BiOX nanomaterials with degradable properties and easily metabolized could reduce the potential toxicity to organisms. Meanwhile, modifying the surface of the material is also beneficial to improve the targeting, thereby reducing the intake dose of BiOX nanomaterials and reducing the risk of toxic side effects to the body.
5. Conclusion and perspective
In summary, BiOX nanomaterials have promising biomedical research prospects. Here, we systematically review the latest research advances related to BiOX nanomaterials and their applications in disease treatment and bioimaging including antitumor and antimicrobial therapy, and bioimaging. Because of the high X-ray attenuation coefficient and superior contrast to clinical iodine-based CT contrast agents, BiOX nanomaterials have been extensively studied in CT imaging. Furthermore, simple functionalization methods such as morphology and size modulation, doping of various elements, and surface modification of functionalized molecules can be applied to modify BiOX nanomaterials. This enables us to improve the targeting, photothermal conversion efficiency, and catalytic efficiency of the treatment, as well as enhance the imaging capabilities of the nanomaterials to better guide disease treatment. More importantly, if the advantages of the BiOX photocatalysis field are applied to the reference biomedicine field, this would be a hopeful way to capitalize on the potential of BiOX nanomaterials and promote the advancement of biomedicine.
Although many studies have confirmed the positive effects of BiOX nanomaterials in anticancer, antibacterial, and imaging applications, ongoing efforts to improve the efficiency of BiOX nanomaterials in biomedical applications are still required. It is a valuable research direction for BiOX nanomaterials to inhibit tumor cell proliferation by producing a large amount of ROS through an efficient photodynamic or sonodynamic process and combining their radiosensitization properties for disease treatment. Therefore, it is necessary to develop BiOX nanomaterials with broad light absorption, high carrier separation efficiency, and catalytic activity. In addition, the toxicity of nanomaterials in biomedical applications should not be ignored. Hence, further studies are required to support how BiOX nanomaterials are cleared by organisms. Last but not least, the thermal effect caused by PTT can release tumor-related antigens while immunotherapy could decrease the likelihood of tumor metastasis and recurrence. Considering the exceptional ability for PTT, structure-modified BiOX nanomaterials are supposed to be exercised in the immunotherapy field to clear metastasized tumor cells by invigorating the immune system in vivo.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: Y. H. Li and G. B. Chen. Writing – original draft: G. B. Chen. Writing – reviewing and editing: Y. H. Li and G. B. Chen. Funding acquisition: Y. H. Li, B. L. Liu and Y. Q. Miao. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (19ZR1434700), the construction project of Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular Imaging (18DZ2260400), the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2021YFE0111300). The authors greatly appreciate the support of the Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Energy Therapy for Tumors.
References
X. Ren, S. Yang, N. Yu, A. Sharjeel, Q. Jiang, D. K. Macharia, H. Yan, C. Lu, P. Geng and Z. Chen, Cell membrane camouflaged bismuth nanoparticles for targeted photothermal therapy of homotypic tumors, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 591, 229–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Griffith, H. Li, M. V. Werrett, P. C. Andrews and H. Sun, Medicinal chemistry and biomedical applications of bismuth-based compounds and nanoparticles, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 12037–12069 RSC .
H. Li, R. Wang and H. Sun, Systems Approaches for Unveiling the Mechanism of Action of Bismuth Drugs: New Medicinal Applications beyond Helicobacter Pylori Infection, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 216–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Song, J. Du, X. Wang, L. Zheng, R. Ouyang, Y. Li, Y. Miao and D. Zhang, Biodegradable Bismuth-Based Nano-Heterojunction for Enhanced Sonodynamic Oncotherapy through Charge Separation Engineering, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2022, 11, 2102503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, J. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Zhao, Y. Li and Y. Miao, Lanthanide-doped bismuth-based nanophosphors for ratiometric upconversion optical thermometry, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 8743–8749 RSC .
J. Liu, J. Zhang, K. Song, J. Du, X. Wang, J. Liu, B. Li, R. Ouyang, Y. Miao, Y. Sun and Y. Li, Tumor Microenvironment Modulation Platform Based on Composite Biodegradable Bismuth-Manganese Radiosensitizer for Inhibiting Radioresistant Hypoxic Tumors, Small, 2021, 17, 2101015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Arumugam, T. S. Natarajan, T. Saelee, S. Praserthdam, M. Ashokkumar and P. Praserthdam, Recent developments on bismuth oxyhalides (BiOX; X=Cl, Br, I) based ternary nanocomposite photocatalysts for environmental applications, Chemosphere, 2021, 282, 131054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jin, L. Ye, H. Xie and G. Chen, Bismuth-rich bismuth oxyhalides for environmental and energy photocatalysis, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 349, 84–101 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vinoth, W. J. Ong and A. Pandikumar, Defect engineering of BiOX (X=Cl, Br, I) based photocatalysts for energy and environmental applications: Current progress and future perspectives & nbsp, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 464, 214541 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, C. Guo, Y. Lv, Y. Guo and Q. Liu, A novel BiOCl film with flowerlike hierarchical structures and its optical properties, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 275702 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-L. Zhang, C.-M. Liu, F.-Q. Huang, C. Zheng and W.-D. Wang, Study of the electronic structure and photocatalytic activity of the BiOCl photocatalyst, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 68, 125–129 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Keramidas, G. P. Voutsas and P. I. Rentzeperis, The crystal structure of BiOCl, Z. Kristallogr. – Cryst. Mater., 1993, 205, 35–40 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, B. Huang and Y. Dai, Engineering BiOX (X=Cl, Br, I) nanostructures for highly efficient photocatalytic applications, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2009–2026 RSC .
H. Wang, B. Zhang, Y. Tang, C. Wang, F. Zhao and B. Zeng, Recent advances in bismuth oxyhalide-based functional materials for photoelectrochemical sensing, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2020, 131, 116020 CrossRef CAS .
W. Su, J. Wang, Y. Huang, W. Wang, L. Wu, X. Wang and P. Liu, Synthesis and catalytic performances of a novel photocatalyst BiOF, Scr. Mater., 2010, 62, 345–348 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, J. Chen and H. Qiu, Morphological control of covalent organic frameworks in a PEG-H2O system, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 2193–2202 RSC .
J. Sun, X. Li, Q. Zhao and B. Liu, Ultrathin nanoflake-assembled hierarchical BiOBr microflower with highly exposed {001} facets for efficient photocatalytic degradation of gaseous ortho-dichlorobenzene, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 281, 119478 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, L. Feng, Y. Dou, H. Guo, Y. Liang, G. Li, J. He, P. Liu and J. He, High Carrier Separation Efficiency in Morphology-Controlled BiOBr/C Schottky Junctions for Photocatalytic Overall Water Splitting, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 13209–13219 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zeng, J. Li, L. Feng, H. Pan, X. Zhang, H. Sun and Z. Liu, Synthesis of Large-Area Atomically Thin BiOI Crystals with Highly Sensitive and Controllable Photodetection, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900129 CrossRef .
C. Gong, J. Chu, S. Qian, C. Yin, X. Hu, H. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Ding, S. Jiang, A. Li, Y. Gong, X. Wang, C. Li, T. Zhai and J. Xiong, Large-Scale Ultrathin 2D Wide-Bandgap BiOBr Nanoflakes for Gate-Controlled Deep-Ultraviolet Phototransistors, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shi, G. Li, J. Li, X. Jin, X. Tao, B. Zeng, E. A. Pidko, R. Li and C. Li, Intrinsic Facet-Dependent Reactivity of Well-Defined BiOBr Nanosheets on Photocatalytic Water Splitting, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6590–6595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Arumugam, S. J. Lee, T. Begildayeva, S. S. Naik, Y. Yu, H. Lee, J. Theerthagiri and M. Y. Choi, Enhanced photocatalytic activity at multidimensional interface of 1D-Bi2S3@2D-GO/3D-BiOI ternary nanocomposites for tetracycline degradation under visible-light, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 404, 123868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, K. Jiang, H. Jiang, H. Zhang, Q. Liu and T. You, Photoelectrochemical aptasensor for sensitive detection of tetracycline in soil based on CdTe-BiOBr heterojunction: Improved photoactivity enabled by Z-scheme electron transfer pathway, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Z. Zheng, M. Yang, J. Chen, C. Li, C. Zhang and X. Zhang, 
            In situ fabrication of a spherical-shaped Zn-Al hydrotalcite with BiOCl and study on its enhanced photocatalytic mechanism for perfluorooctanoic acid removal performed with a response surface methodology, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 399, 123070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, S. Zhang, J. Yuan, T. Qin, T. Li, Y. Sun, X. Liu and D. K. Y. Wong, Amplified detection signal at a photoelectrochemical aptasensor with a poly(diphenylbutadiene)-BiOBr heterojunction and Au-modified CeO2 octahedrons, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2022, 197, 113742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Balaji, S. Maheshwaran, S.-M. Chen, N. Chandrasekar, S. Ethiraj, M. S. Samuel and V. Renganathan, High-performance catalytic strips assembled with BiOBr Nano-rose architectures for electrochemical and SERS detection of theophylline, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 425, 130616 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mu, Y. Ao, T. Wu, C. Wang and P. Wang, Synthesis of novel ternary heterogeneous anatase-TiO2 (B) biphase nanowires/Bi4O5I2 composite photocatalysts for the highly efficient degradation of acetaminophen under visible light irradiation, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 382, 121083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zeng, Z. Luo, L. Su, L. Zhang, D. Tang, R. Niessner and D. Knopp, Palindromic Molecular Beacon Based Z-Scheme BiOCI-Au-CdS Photoelectrochemical Biodetection, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 2447–2454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, R. Wei, X. Wu, M. Tahir, X. Wang, F. K. Butt and C. Cao, Lantern-like bismuth oxyiodide embedded typha-based carbon via in situ self-template and ion exchange-recrystallization for high-performance photocatalysis, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 6692–6701 RSC .
T. Jiang, J. Jin, J. Hou, M. Tahir and F. Idrees, Bi4O5I2/nitrogen-doped hierarchical carbon (NHC) composites with tremella-like structure for high photocatalytic performance, Chemosphere, 2019, 229, 426–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, Z. Zhou, Q. Wang, M. Guo, S. Chen, J. Low, R. Long, W. Liu, P. Ding, Y. Wu and Y. Xiong, Visible-Light-Driven Nitrogen Fixation Catalyzed by Bi5O7Br Nanostructures: Enhanced Performance by Oxygen Vacancies, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12430–12439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, R. Wang, T. Qiu, L. Yang, Q. Han, Q. Shen, X. Zhou, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Bismuth Vacancy-Induced Efficient CO2 Photoreduction in BiOCl Directly from Natural Air: A Progressive Step toward Photosynthesis in Nature, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 10260–10266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, J. Fan, T. Cheng, M. Cao, Z. Sun, R. Zhou, L. Huang, D. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Wu, Bilayer nanosheets of unusual stoichiometric bismuth oxychloride for potassium ion storage and CO2 reduction, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104939 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, W. Fei, H. Wang, N. Li, D. Chen, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He and J. Lu, p-n Heterojunction of BiOI/ZnO nanorod arrays for piezo-photocatalytic degradation of bisphenol A in water, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 399, 123109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Xiong, X. Gao, J. Ma, Z. Chen, B. Kang, J. Liu, H. Li, Z. Feng and J. Huang, Novel BP/BiOBr S-scheme nano-heterojunction for enhanced visible-light photocatalytic tetracycline removal and oxygen evolution activity, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 387, 121690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, K. Yan, Z. Xu, J. Wu and J. Zhang, Cathodic “signal-on” photoelectrochemical aptasensor for chloramphenicol detection using hierarchical porous flower-like Bi-BiOI@C composite, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 131, 79–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, W. Shi, Y. Zhu, Y. Xu and F. Cui, Enhanced photoactivity and oxidizing ability simultaneously via internal electric field and valence band position by crystal structure of bismuth oxyiodide, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 262, 118262 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lin, R. Huang, J. Wu, Z. Kang, K. Ke, N. Qin and D. Bao, Recyclable CoFe2O4 modified BiOCl hierarchical microspheres utilizing photo, photothermal and mechanical energy for organic pollutant degradation, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106403 CrossRef CAS .
M. Du, S. Zhang, Z. Xing, Z. Li, P. Chen, K. Pan and W. Zhou, Dual plasmons-promoted electron-hole separation for direct Z-scheme Bi3O4Cl/AgCl heterojunction ultrathin nanosheets and enhanced photocatalytic-photothermal performance, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 384, 121268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Tian, W. Zhu, X. Zhang, R. Li, C. Chen and Y. Huang, L-Cysteine directing synthesis of BiOBr nanosheets for efficient cefazolin photodegradation: The pivotal role of thiol, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 414, 125544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, J. Shen, N. Ma, Z. Li, M. Wu, D. Xu, S. Zhang, W. Feng and Y. Zhu, Bi4O5Br2 nanosheets with vertical aligned facets for efficient visible-light-driven photodegradation of BPA, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 286, 119937 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dong, G. Jiang, Y. He, L. Yang, G. Wang and Y. Li, A novel BiOX photocatalyst for the “green” degradation of polymers used in oilfields, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 428, 128207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, B. Wang, X. Zhu, P. Ding, J. Zhao, H. Li, Z. Chen, W. Zhu and J. Xia, Edge-Site-Rich Ordered Macroporous BiOCl Triggers CO Activation for Efficient CO2 Photoreduction, Small, 2022, 18, 2105228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, Y. L. Li, B. Li, Y.-J. Hao, X.-J. Wang, R.-H. Liu, Y. Ling, X. Liu and F.-T. Li, Construction of adjustable dominant {314} facet of Bi5O7I and facet-oxygen vacancy coupling dependent adsorption and photocatalytic activity, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 289, 120041 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, S. Yu, H. Huang, X. Li, Y. Feng, C. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Ma, L. Guo and Y. Zhang, Unprecedented Eighteen-Faceted BiOCl with a Ternary Facet Junction Boosting Cascade Charge Flow and Photo-redox, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9517–9521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Contreras, V. Melin, K. Marquez, G. Perez-Gonzalez, H. D. Mansilla, G. Pecchi and A. Henriquez, Selective oxidation of cyclohexane to cyclohexanol by BiOI under visible light: Role of the ratio (110)/(001) facet, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 251, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, X. Xiao, J. Chen, Y. Wang and H. Wang, Understanding the effects of co-exposed facets on photocatalytic activities and fuel desulfurization performance in BiOCl singlet-crystalline sheets, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 391, 122198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, J. Zhao, Z. Yin, X. Wang, Z. Li and X. Wang, Highly sensitive photoelectrochemical detection of glucose based on BiOBr/TiO2 nanotube array p-n heterojunction nanocomposites, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 312, 127978 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ding, J. Ai, Y. Duan, L. Han, Z. Qu and S. Che, Mechanism of diastereoisomer-induced chirality of BiOBr, Chem. Sci., 2022, 13, 2450–2455 RSC .
X. Wang, Z. Guo, C. Zhang, S. Zhu, L. Li, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, Ultrasmall BiOI Quantum Dots with Efficient Renal Clearance for Enhanced Radiotherapy of Cancer, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, W. Yang, K. Bian, W. Zeng, X. Jin, R. Ouyang, Y. Xu, C. Dai, S. Zhou and B. Zhang, Oxygen-Deficient BiOCl Combined with L-Buthionine-Sulfoximine Synergistically Suppresses Tumor Growth through Enhanced Singlet Oxygen Generation under Ultrasound Irradiation, Small, 2022, 18, 2104550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mao, H. Liu, L. Yao, W. Wen, M.-M. Chen, X. Zhang and S. Wang, Construction of a dual-functional CuO/BiOCl heterojunction for high-efficiently photoelectrochemical biosensing and photoelectrocatalytic degradation of aflatoxin B1, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, X. Liu, K. Yan and J. Zhang, A cathodic photovoltammetric sensor for chloramphenicol based on BiOI and graphene nanocomposites, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 284, 505–513 CrossRef CAS .
J. Di, C. Chen, C. Zhu, P. Song, M. Duan, J. Xiong, R. Long, M. Xu, L. Kang, S. Guo, S. Chen, H. Chen, Z. Chi, Y.-X. Weng, H. Li, L. Song, M. Wu, Q. Yan, S. Li and Z. Liu, Cobalt nitride as a novel cocatalyst to boost photocatalytic CO2 reduction, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105429 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Xu, Q. Wang, W. Hao, X. Zhai, X. Fei, X. Huang and Y. Bi, Unveiling the activity origin of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets for photocatalytic CO2 reduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 299, 120679 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, K. Gong, J. Liu, Y. Yang, I. Nabi, A.-U.-R. Bacha, H. Cheng, J. Han and L. Zhang, New insights into the role of sulfite in BiOX photocatalytic pollutants elimination: In-operando generation of plasmonic Bi metal and oxygen vacancies, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 418, 126207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, X. Feng, Y. Chen, J. E. Selfridge, S. Gorityala, Z. Du, J. M. Wang, Y. Hao, G. Cioffi, R. A. Conlon, J. S. Barnholtz-Sloan, J. Saltzman, S. S. Krishnamurthi, S. Vinayak, M. Veigl, Y. Xu, D. L. Bajor, S. D. Markowitz, N. J. Meropol, J. R. Eads and Z. Wang, 5-Fluorouracil Enhances the Antitumor Activity of the Glutaminase Inhibitor CB-839 against PIK3CA-Mutant Colorectal Cancers, Cancer Res., 2020, 80, 4815–4827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhu, M. Cheng, X. Yang, B. Zhang, Z. Wan, Q. Xiao and Y. Yu, Self-supported ultrathin bismuth nanosheets acquired by in situ topotactic transformation of BiOCl as a high performance aqueous anode material, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6784–6792 RSC .
F. Chang, F. Wu, W. Yan, M. Jiao, J. Zheng, B. Deng and X. Hu, Oxygen-rich bismuth oxychloride Bi12O17Cl2 materials: construction, characterization, and sonocatalytic degradation performance, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2019, 50, 105–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, K. Chang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, Q. Liu, Z. Wang, D. Ding, Y. Cui, C. Pan, Y. Lou, Y. Zhu and Y. Zhang, Unravelling the electrocatalytic activity of bismuth nanosheets towards carbon dioxide reduction: Edge plane versus basal plane, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 299, 120693 CrossRef .
X. Jin, C. Lv, X. Zhou, H. Xie, S. Sun, Y. Liu, Q. Meng and G. Chen, A bismuth rich hollow Bi4O5Br2 photocatalyst enables dramatic CO2 reduction activity, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103955 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, B. Liao, T. Lu, Y. Ai and G. Liu, Enhanced visible-light photocatalytic degradation of tetracycline by a novel hollow BiOCl@CeO2 heterostructured microspheres: Structural characterization and reaction mechanism, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 385, 121552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khan, C. S. L. Fung, A. Kumar and I. M. C. Lo, Magnetically separable BiOBr/Fe3O4@SiO2 for visible-light-driven photocatalytic degradation of ibuprofen: Mechanistic investigation and prototype development, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 365, 733–743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, Z. Lu, P. Zhang, F. Li, T. Li, L. Zhang, W. Fan and C. Hu, Enhanced photocatalytic efficiency by direct photoexcited electron transfer from pollutants adsorbed on the surface valence band of BiOBr modified with graphitized C, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Deng, Y. Luo, H. Li, B. Xia, X. Luo, S. Luo and D. D. Dionysiou, Efficient toxicity elimination of aqueous Cr(VI) by positively-charged BiOClxI1-x, BiOBrxI1-x, and BiOClxBr1-x, solid solution with internal hole-scavenging capacity via the synergy of adsorption and photocatalytic reduction, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 383, 121127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Wang, F. Dong, Z. Zhang, L. Han, X. Luo, J. Huang, Z. Feng, Z. Chen, G. Jia and T. Zhang, Recent Advances in Noncontact External-Field-Assisted Photocatalysis: From Fundamentals to Applications, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 4739–4769 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, J. Yang, T. Sun, Z. Zhang, D. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Lin, Y. Fang and X. Wang, Persian buttercup-like BiOBrxCl1-x solid solution for photocatalytic overall CO2 reduction to CO and O2, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 734–740 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Fard, M. Haghighi and M. Shabani, Facile one-pot ultrasound-assisted solvothermal fabrication of ball-flowerlike nanostructured (BiOBr)x(Bi7O9I3)1−x solid-solution for high active photodegradation of antibiotic levofloxacin under sun-light, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 320–331 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zeng, Y. Zhou, D. Liang, H. He, X. Liu, R. Zhu, M. Zhang, X. Luo, Y. Wang and G. Huang, Exosomes Secreted From Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem Cells Attenuate Oxygen-Glucose Deprivation/Reoxygenation-Induced Pyroptosis in PC12 Cells by Promoting AMPK-Dependent Autophagic Flux, Front. Cell. Neurosci., 2020, 14, 182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, X. Wu, L. Fan, C. Zhao, Z. Guo, A. Chen, Y. Zhang and N. Zhang, Synergistic effect of multi-electron conversion and anion redox media chemistry for high-performance rechargeable aqueous Zn ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 2807–2812 RSC .
B. Zhang, J. Zhang, R. Duan, Q. Wan, X. Tan, Z. Su, B. Han, L. Zheng and G. Mo, BiOCl nanosheets with periodic nanochannels for high-efficiency photooxidation, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105340 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Long, H. Wang, K. Huang, G. Zhang and H. Xie, Di-functional Cu2+-doped BiOCl photocatalyst for degradation of organic pollutant and inhibition of cyanobacterial growth, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Du, K. Song, J. Liu, X. Wang, B. Li, R. Ouyang, Y. Miao, Y. Sun and Y. Li, Biodegradable BiOCl platform for oxidative stress injury–enhanced chemodynamic/radiation therapy of hypoxic tumors, Acta Biomater., 2021, 129, 280–292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Hu and J. C. Yu, Fe Enhanced Visible-Light-Driven Nitrogen Fixation on BiOBr Nanosheets, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 1488–1494 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhong, K.-X. Zhang, D. Wu, X.-Y. Ye, W. Huang and B.-X. Zhou, Enhanced photocatalytic degradation of levofloxacin by Fe-doped BiOCl nanosheets under LED light irradiation, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123148 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, X. Zhang, Y.-H. Li, M.-Y. Qi, J.-Y. Li, Z.-R. Tang, Z. Zhou and Y.-J. Xu, Transition metal doping BiOBr nanosheets with oxygen vacancy and exposed {102} facets for visible light nitrogen fixation, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 281, 119516 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, X. Liao, M.-H. Lee, G. Hyett, C.-C. Huang, D. W. Hewak, S. Mailis, W. Zhou and Z. Jiang, Experimental and DFT insights of the Zn-doping effects on the visible-light photocatalytic water splitting and dye decomposition over Zn-doped BiOBr photocatalysts, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 502–512 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gong, Y. Wu, R. Zeng, Y. Zeng, X. Liu and D. Tang, CRISPR/Cas12a-mediated liposome-amplified strategy for the photoelectrochemical detection of nucleic acid, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 8977–8980 RSC .
Y. Wu, H. Ji, Q. Liu, Z. Sun, P. Li, P. Ding, M. Guo, X. Yi, W. Xu, C.-C. Wang, S. Gao, Q. Wang, W. Liu and S. Chen, Visible light photocatalytic degradation of sulfanilamide enhanced by Mo doping of BiOBr nanoflowers, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Di, C. Chen, S.-Z. Yang, S. Chen, M. Duan, J. Xiong, C. Zhu, R. Long, W. Hao, Z. Chi, H. Chen, Y.-X. Weng, J. Xia, L. Song, S. Li, H. Li and Z. Liu, Isolated single atom cobalt in Bi3O4Br atomic layers to trigger efficient CO2 photoreduction, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2840 CrossRef PubMed .
E.-C. Cho, C.-W. Chang-Jian, J.-H. Huang, G.-Y. Lee, W.-H. Hung, M.-Y. Sung, K.-C. Lee, H. C. Weng, W.-L. Syu, Y.-S. Hsiao and C.-P. Chen, Co2+-Doped BiOBrxCl1−x hierarchical microspheres display enhanced visible-light photocatalytic performance in the degradation of rhodamine B and antibiotics and the inactivation of E. coli, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 402, 123457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, F. Wang, D. Li, H. Liu, R. Li, T. Chen, W. Lv and G. Liu, Integration of oxygen vacancies into BiOI via a facile alkaline earth ion-doping strategy for the enhanced photocatalytic performance toward indometacin remediation, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 412, 125147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, R. Wang, D. Liu, Y. Tian and L. Ye, Prussian Blue Analogue Islands on BiOCl-Se Nanosheets for MR/CT Imaging-Guided Photothermal/Photodynamic Cancer Therapy, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 1213–1224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, J. Huang, L. Jiang, L. Leng, K. Yi, W. Zhang, C. Zhang and X. Yuan, In situ construction of Sn-doped structurally compatible heterojunction with enhanced interfacial electric field for photocatalytic pollutants removal and CO2 reduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120618 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, L. Dai, X. Ren, H. Ma, X. Wang, D. Fan, Q. Wei and R. Wu, Self-Powered Cathodic Photoelectrochemical Aptasensor Comprising a Photocathode and a Photoanode in Microfluidic Analysis Systems, Anal. Chem., 2021, 93, 7125–7132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, C. Wang, T. Wang and L. Zhu, Highly efficient photocatalytic degradation toward perfluorooctanoic acid by bromine doped BiOI with high exposure of (001) facet, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118442 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, F. Li, T. Li, X. Xing, W. Fan, L. Zhang and C. Hu, Enhanced internal electric field in S-doped BiOBr for intercalation, adsorption and degradation of ciprofloxacin by photoinitiation, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 302, 120824 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, K. Gao, W. Zhu, C. Liang, Q. Li, F. Fu and Y. Zhu, Accurate guided alternating atomic layer enhance internal electric field to steering photogenerated charge separation for enhance photocatalytic activity, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120536 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, G. Zhan, H. Li, X. Wang, X. Liu, L. Shi, K. Wei, C. Ling, Z. Li, H. Wang, C. Mao, X. Liu and L. Zhang, Simultaneous Manipulation of Bulk Excitons and Surface Defects for Ultrastable and Highly Selective CO2 Photoreduction, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2100143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Maimaitizi, A. Abulizi, K. Kadeer, D. Talifu and Y. Tursun, In situ synthesis of Pt and N co-doped hollow hierarchical BiOCl microsphere as an efficient photocatalyst for organic pollutant
degradation and photocatalytic CO2 reduction, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 502, 144083 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, Y. Du, P. Ji, Z. Li, N. Jiang, X. Sun, L. Xue, H. Li and G. Sun, Fe, Cu co-doped BiOBr with improved photocatalytic ability of pollutants degradation, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 881, 160391 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, A. Yan, X. Zhang, F. Huang, D. Li, X. Zhao, H. Weng and Z. Zhang, Nb/Se Co-doped BiOI nanomaterials with exposed (110) facets for enhanced visible-light-driven photocatalytic activity, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 5774–5777 RSC .
W. Zhou, H. Ye, Z. Zhong, Q. Lu, R. Liu, M. Zhang, Z. N. Garba, L. Wang and Z. Yuan, Modification of BiOBr with cellulose nanocrystals to improve the photocatalytic performance under visible light, Cellulose, 2021, 28, 9893–9905 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bose, S. F. Robertson and A. Bandyopadhyay, Surface modification of biomaterials and biomedical devices using additive manufacturing, Acta Biomater., 2018, 66, 6–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. Tang, J. Zhong, J. Li, M. Li and T. Zhang, Fabrication of tunable oxygen vacancies on BiOCl modified by spiral carbon fiber for highly efficient photocatalytic detoxification of typical pollutants, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 578, 152122 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ma, J. Zhong, J. Li, C. Burda and R. Duan, Preparation and photocatalytic performance of MWCNTs/BiOCl: Evidence for the superoxide radical participation in the degradation mechanism of phenol, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 480, 395–403 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ma, J. Zhong, J. Li, L. Wang and R. Peng, Enhanced photocatalytic activity of BiOCl by C-70 modification and mechanism insight, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 443, 497–505 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Si, W. Guo, H. Wang, B. Liu, Q. Zhao, H. Luo and N. Ren, Bio-CQDs surface modification BiOCl for the BPA elimination and evaluation in visible light: The contribution of C-localized level, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 602, 1–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qi, Y. Ye, B. Wei, M. Li, Y. Lun, X. Xie and H. Xie, N-CQDs from reed straw enriching charge over BiO2−x/BiOCl p-n heterojunction for improved visible-light-driven photodegradation of organic pollutants, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 432, 128759–128759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Song, Y. Cheng, Y. Tian, C. Chu, C. Zhang, Z. Lu, X. Chen, X. Pang and G. Liu, Sonoactivated Chemodynamic Therapy: A Robust ROS Generation Nanotheranostic Eradicates Multidrug-Resistant Bacterial Infection, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003587 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, Y. Zhang, B. Wang, H. Li and W. Dong, Novel g-C3N4/BiOClxI1−x nanosheets with rich oxygen vacancies for enhanced photocatalytic degradation of organic contaminants under visible and simulated solar light, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117789 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. Ding, X. Xu, W. Peng, J. Fan, X. Zhou and J. Liu, BiOCl0.875Br0.125/polydopamine functionalized PVDF membrane for highly efficient visible-light-driven photocatalytic degradation of roxarsone and simultaneous arsenic immobilization, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 402, 126048 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Khin, Y. Bao, Y. N. Liang, M. I. Setyawati, H. Gnayem, K. W. Ng, Y. Sasson and X. Hu, BiOClBr-coated fabrics with enhanced antimicrobial properties under ambient light, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 3079–3087 RSC .
C. Dai, R. Hu, C. Wang, Z. Liu, S. Zhang, L. Yu, Y. Chen and B. Zhang, Defect engineering of 2D BiOCl nanosheets for photonic tumor ablation, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 857–868 RSC .
W. Zhen, Y. Liu, X. Jia, L. Wu, C. Wang and X. Jiang, Reductive surfactant-assisted one-step fabrication of a BiOI/BiOIO3 heterojunction biophotocatalyst for enhanced photodynamic theranostics overcoming tumor hypoxia, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 720–726 RSC .
B. He, H.-Y. Jin, Y.-W. Wang, C.-M. Fan, Y.-F. Wang, X.-C. Zhang, J.-X. Liu, R. Li and J.-W. Liu, Carbon quantum dots/Bi4O5Br2 photocatalyst with enhanced photodynamic therapy: killing of lung cancer (A549) cells in vitro, Rare Met., 2022, 41, 132–143 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Zhang, R.-C. Guo, Y.-F. Chen, X. Xu, Z.-X. Yang, D.-B. Cheng, H. Chen, Z.-Y. Qiao and H. Wang, A BiOCl nanodevice for pancreatic tumor imaging and mitochondria-targeted therapy, Nano Today, 2021, 40, 101285 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, L. Wang, S. Liu, M. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Rong, Y. Liu and H. Zhang, Z-Scheme heterostructures for glucose oxidase-sensitized radiocatalysis and starvation therapy of tumors, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 2186–2198 RSC .
J. Hou, D. Dai, R. Wei, X. Wu, X. Wang, M. Tahir and J.-J. Zou, Narrowing the Band Gap of BiOCI for the Hydroxyl Radical Generation of Photocatalysis under Visible Light, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16569–16576 CrossRef CAS .
D. Long, Y. Tu, Y. Chai and R. Yuan, Photoelectrochemical Assay Based on SnO2/BiOBr p-n Heterojunction for Ultrasensitive DNA Detection, Anal. Chem., 2021, 93, 12995–13000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Fan, H. Wang, M. S. Khan, C. Bao, H. Wang, D. Wu, Q. Wei and B. Du, An ultrasensitive photoelectrochemical immunosensor for insulin detection based on BiOBr/Ag2S composite by in situ growth method with high visible-light activity, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 97, 253–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Q. Liu, J. Wei, Z. Dai, L. Ding, R. Yuan, Z. Wen and K. Wang, Visible light-driven photoelectrochemical ampicillin aptasensor based on an artificial Z-scheme constructed from Ru(bpy)32+-sensitized BiOI microspheres, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 173, 112771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, W. He, X. Hao, H. Ji, W. Liu and Z. Cai, Surface modification of BiOBr/TiO2 by reduced AgBr for solar-driven PAHs degradation: Mechanism insight and application assessment, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 412, 125221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, L. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Luo, Z. Zhou, J. Xie, Y. Li, S. Cong, M. Zhou, Y. Xu and G. Ran, “One stone, two birds”: engineering 2-D ultrathin heterostructure nanosheet BiNS@NaLnF4 for dual-modal computed tomography/magnetic resonance imaging guided, photonic synergetic theranostics, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 185–194 RSC .
X. Ma, X. Li, M. Li, X. Ma, L. Yu and Y. Dai, Effect of the structure distortion on the high photocatalytic performance of C60/g-C3N4 composite, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 414, 124–130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Zhu, M. W. Laipan, R. L. Zhu, T. Y. Xu, J. Liu, J. X. Zhu, Y. F. Xi, G. Q. Zhu and H. P. He, Enhanced photocatalytic activity of Zn/Ti-LDH via hybridizing with C60, Mol. Catal., 2017, 427, 54–61 CrossRef CAS .
T. Song, J. P. Huo, T. Liao, J. Zeng, J. Y. Qin and H. P. Zeng, Fullerene C-60 modified Cr2−xFexO3 nanocomposites for enhanced photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 287, 359–366 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cai, Z. F. Hu, Q. Zhang, B. Y. Li and Z. R. Shen, Fullerene (C-60)/CdS nanocomposite with enhanced photocatalytic activity and stability, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 403, 151–158 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Cha, S. R. Shin, N. Annabi, M. R. Dokmeci and A. Khademhosseini, Carbon-Based Nanomaterials: Multifunctional Materials for Biomedical Engineering, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2891–2897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Piao, V. N. Tondare, C. S. Davis, J. M. Gorham, E. J. Petersen, J. W. Gilman, K. Scott, A. E. Vladar and A. R. H. Walker, Comparative study of multiwall carbon nanotube nanocomposites by Raman, SEM, and XPS measurement techniques, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2021, 208, 108753 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao, X. Song, M. Dong, H. Sun, W. Wu, R. Zhang, M. Sun and X. Zhao, Preparation and characterization of CQDs/SBS composites and its application performance as asphalt modifier, Constr. Build. Mater., 2022, 320, 126312 CrossRef CAS .
A. Xu, G. Wang, Y. Li, H. Dong, S. Yang, P. He and G. Ding, Carbon-Based Quantum Dots with Solid-State Photoluminescent: Mechanism, Implementation, and Application, Small, 2020, 16, 2004621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Li, J. B. Ghasemi, J. Li and G. Zhang, Visible-NIR light-responsive 0D/2D CQDs/Sb2WO6 nanosheets with enhanced photocatalytic degradation performance of RhB: Unveiling the dual roles of CQDs and mechanism study, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Uematsu, K. Mune, S. Nishimura, K. Koizumi, A. Yamaguchi, S. Sugihara, M. Yamane, K. Kawabe, Y. Ozaki and S. Tanoue, Fracture properties of quasi-isotropic carbon-fiber-reinforced polyamide 6 laminates with different crystal structure of polyamide 6 due to surface profiles of carbon fibers, Composites, Part A, 2022, 154, 106752 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jing, J. Yang, S. Li, S. Zhao, P. Wang, Y. Liu, A. Liu, Z. Meng, H. Huang, Z. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Construction of PDDA functionalized black phosphorus nanosheets/BiOI Z-scheme photocatalyst with enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 576, 34–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Cho, S. K. M. Perikamana, J.-H. Lee, J. Lee, K.-M. Lee, C. S. Shin and H. Shin, Effective Immobilization of BMP-2 Mediated by Polydopamine Coating on Biodegradable Nanofibers for Enhanced in Vivo Bone Formation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11225–11235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, K. Wang, Q. Hu, Q. Yao, Y. Shen, G. Yu and G. Tang, Targeted Co-delivery of PTX and TR3 siRNA by PTP Peptide Modified Dendrimer for the Treatment of Pancreatic Cancer, Small, 2017, 13, 1602697 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Du, Y. Zhao, G. Nie and Y. Yang, Trap and kill strategy for non-BRCA mutant pancreatic cancer by co-delivery of olaparib and JQ1 with plectin-1 targeting peptide nanoparticles, Nano Today, 2020, 33, 100877 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Zhou, X. Zhi, T. Ma, H. Liu, B. W. Chen, X. Zheng, S. Xie, B. Zhao, X. Feng, X. Dang and T. Liang, Delivery of miR-212 by chimeric peptide-condensed supramolecular nanoparticles enhances the sensitivity of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma to doxorubicin, Biomaterials, 2019, 192, 590–600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bausch, S. Thomas, M. Mino-Kenudson, C. Fernandez-del Castillo, T. W. Bauer, M. Williams, A. L. Warshaw, S. P. Thayer and K. A. Kelly, Plectin-1 as a Novel Biomarker for Pancreatic Cancer, Clin. Cancer Res., 2011, 17, 302–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Agemy, D. Friedmann-Morvinski, V. R. Kotamraju, L. Roth, K. N. Sugahara, O. M. Girard, R. F. Mattrey, I. M. Verma and E. Ruoslahti, Targeted nanoparticle enhanced proapoptotic peptide as potential therapy for glioblastoma, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 17450–17455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Agemy, V. R. Kotamraju, D. Friedmann-Morvinski, S. Sharma, K. N. Sugahara and E. Ruoslahti, Proapoptotic Peptide-Mediated Cancer Therapy Targeted to Cell Surface p32, Mol. Ther., 2013, 21, 2195–2204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fan, N. Lu, P. Huang, Y. Liu, Z. Yang, S. Wang, G. Yu, Y. Liu, J. Hu, Q. He, J. Qu, T. Wang and X. Chen, Glucose-Responsive Sequential Generation of Hydrogen Peroxide and Nitric Oxide for Synergistic Cancer Starving-Like/Gas Therapy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1229–1233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Li, Y. Wang, W. Ke, W. Chen, W. Wang and Z. Ge, Polymer Prodrug-Based Nanoreactors Activated by Tumor Acidity for Orchestrated Oxidation/Chemotherapy, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6983–6990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, P. Zhou, W. Pan, N. Li and B. Tang, A biomimetic nanoreactor for synergistic chemiexcited photodynamic therapy and starvation therapy against tumor metastasis, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5044 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Lin, L. Liu, F. Liu, S. Sheng, H. Tian and X. Chen, Positive feedback nanoamplifier responded to tumor microenvironments for self-enhanced tumor imaging and therapy, Biomaterials, 2019, 216, 119255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, S. Jiang, F. Li, J. Lin, T. Wang and P. Huang, Degradable silver-based nanoplatform for synergistic cancer starving-like/metal ion therapy, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 169–175 RSC .
W. R. Harris, Y. Chen, J. Stenback and B. Shah, Stability Constants for Dimercaptosuccinic Acid with Bismuth(III), Zinc(II), and Lead(II), J. Coord. Chem., 2009, 23, 173–186 CrossRef .
M. Busse, E. Border, P. C. Junk, R. L. Ferrero and P. C. Andrews, Bismuth(III) complexes derived from alpha-amino acids: the impact of hydrolysis and oxido-cluster formation on their activity against Helicobacter pylori, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 17980–17990 RSC .
A. Han, J. Sun, H. Zhang, G.-K. Chuah and S. Jaenicke, Visible Light Induced Selective Aerobic Formation of N-benzylidene Benzylamine over 2-aminoterephthalic Acid Sensitized {110}-Facetted BiOCl Nanosheets, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6425–6430 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guan, L. Wang, S.-M. Xu, D. Yang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, X. Qu and S. Zhou, Vacancy-enhanced generation of singlet oxygen for photodynamic therapy, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 2336–2341 RSC .
M. Yaghoubi-berijani, B. Bahramian and S. Zargari, Synthesis, characterization, and design of a photocatalyst based on BiOBr nanoplates and tin porphyrin with enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2020, 46, 197–213 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rochkind, M. Pandiri, M. S. Hossain, F. W. Foss Jr., K. Rajeshwar and Y. Paz, Enhancement of Photoinduced Visible Light Degradation of Salicylic Acid by Covalently Attached Synthetic Flavins on BiOCl Semiconductor Particle Surfaces, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16069–16079 CrossRef CAS .
X. Mao, C. Fan, Y. Wang, Y. Wang and X. Zhang, RhB-sensitized effect on the enhancement of photocatalytic activity of BiOCl toward bisphenol-A under visible light irradiation, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 317, 517–525 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, Y.-X. Li, G.-J. Jiang, H.-L. Wang and W.-F. Jiang, In Situ Construction of Dye-Sensitized BiOCl/Rutile-TiO2 Nanorod Heterojunctions with Highly Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity for Treating Persistent Organic Pollutants, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 17325–17338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, Y. An, Y. Liu, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai, Z. Wang, P. Wang, M.-H. Whangbo and B. Huang, Enhancing the photocatalytic activity of BiOX (X=Cl, Br, and I), (BiO)2CO3 and Bi2O3 by modifying their surfaces with polar organic anions, 4-substituted thiophenolates, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14406–14414 RSC .
Y. Li, J. Liu, L. Huang, J. Liu, S. Shu and J. Yao, Embedding defective tin oxide quantum dots into flake Bi4O5I2 for antibacterial and degradation by LED light irradiation, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 107626 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ren, Z. Lin, Y. Fan, J. Xing, G. Liu, T. Xiao, Z. Wang, Z. Zhou, T. Zhang, Z. Song, P. Yu and C. Ning, Programmable biological state-switching photoelectric nanosheets for the treatment of infected wounds, Mater. Today Bio, 2022, 15, 100292–100292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, L. Wei, Y. Yan, G. Chen, X. Yang, Y. Liu, M. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Cheng, J. Sun and L. Wang, Bismuth telluride functionalized bismuth oxychloride used for enhancing antibacterial activity and wound healing efficacy with sunlight irradiation, Biomater. Sci., 2022, 10, 467–473 RSC .
H. Wang, H. Gao, X. Jiang, P. Zhao, D. Ni, Z. Tang, Y. Liu, X. Zheng and W. Bu, Regulating water states by vacancies for cancer therapy, Nano Today, 2021, 37, 101099 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, F. He, C. Wang, S. Gai, A. Gulzar, D. Yang, C. Zhong and P. Yang, Lanthanide-doped bismuth oxobromide nanosheets for self-activated photodynamic therapy, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 7939–7948 RSC .
Y. Xu, Z. Shi, L. E. Zhang, E. M. B. Brown and A. Wu, Layered bismuth oxyhalide nanomaterials for highly efficient tumor photodynamic therapy, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12715–12722 RSC .
D. Yang, G. Yang, J. Li, S. Gai, F. He and P. Yang, NIR-driven water splitting by layered bismuth oxyhalide sheets for effective photodynamic therapy, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 4152–4161 RSC .
Z. Guo, S. Zhu, Y. Yong, X. Zhang, X. Dong, J. Du, J. Xie, Q. Wang, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, Synthesis of BSA-Coated BiOI@Bi2S3 Semiconductor Heterojunction Nanoparticles and Their Applications for Radio/Photodynamic/Photothermal Synergistic Therapy of Tumor, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704136 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, R. Wang, W. Li, G. Huang, J. Zhu, J. Cheng and D. He, Construction of DOX/APC co-loaded BiOI@CuS NPs for safe and highly effective CT imaging and chemo-photothermal therapy of lung cancer, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 7176–7183 RSC .
Y. Guo, H. Wen, T. Zhong, H. Huang and Z. Lin, Edge-rich atomic-layered BiOBr quantum dots for photocatalytic molecular oxygen activation, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 445, 136776 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Bellissent-Funel, A. Hassanali, M. Havenith, R. Henchman, P. Pohl, F. Sterpone, D. van der Spoel, Y. Xu and A. E. Garcia, Water Determines the Structure and Dynamics of Proteins, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7673–7697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chakraborty, H. Kumar, C. Dasgupta and P. K. Maiti, Confined Water: Structure, Dynamics, and Thermodynamics, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2139–2146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Manni, S. Assenza, M. Duss, J. J. Vallooran, F. Juranyi, S. Jurt, O. Zerbe, E. M. Landau and R. Mezzenga, Soft biomimetic nanoconfinement promotes amorphous water over ice, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 609–615 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Rieth, K. M. Hunter, M. Dinca and F. Paesani, Hydrogen bonding structure of confined water templated by a metal-organic framework with open metal sites, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4771 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Khatua and S. Bandyopadhyay, Dynamical crossover of water confined within the amphiphilic nanocores of aggregated amyloid peptides, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 14835–14845 RSC .
T. Wang, H. Jo, W. F. DeGrado and M. Hong, Water Distribution, Dynamics, and Interactions with Alzheimer's beta-Amyloid Fibrils Investigated by Solid-State NMR, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6242–6252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Boireau-Adamezyk, A. Baillet-Guffroy and G. N. Stamatas, Age-dependent changes in stratum corneum barrier function, Skin Res. Technol., 2014, 20, 409–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Chong and P. C. Anderson, Molecular Dynamics Simulations of the Hypoxia-Inducible Factor PAS-B Domain Confirm That Internally Bound Water Molecules Function To Stabilize the Protein Core for Ligand Binding, Biochem, 2020, 59, 450–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Martins, A. B. Dinitzen, E. Mamontov, S. Rudic, J. E. M. Pereira, R. Hartmann-Petersen, K. W. Herwig and H. N. Bordallo, Water dynamics in MCF-7 breast cancer cells: a neutron scattering descriptive study, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 8704 CrossRef PubMed .
C. S. Foote, Definition of type I and type II photosensitized oxidation, Photochem. Photobiol., 1991, 54, 659–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Sternberg, D. Dolphin and C. Bruckner, Porphyrin-based photosensitizers for use in photodynamic therapy, Tetrahedron, 1998, 54, 4151–4202 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yoon, J. Z. Li and Y. K. Shim, Advance in photosensitizers and light delivery for photodynamic therapy, Clin. Endosc., 2013, 46, 7–23 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Guo, H. Yuan, T. Cui, S. Yao, S. Jin, H. Fan, C. Wang, R. Xie, W. He and Z. Guo, Golgi apparatus-targeted aggregation-induced emission luminogens for effective cancer photodynamic therapy, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 2179–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Fang, S. Ye, Y. Zhao, A. Wang, Q. Mao, C. Cui, Y. Feng, J. Li, S. Li, M. Zhang and H. Shi, A hydrogen sulphide-responsive and depleting nanoplatform for cancer photodynamic therapy, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, J. Wen, G. Wu, Z. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Wang and M. Liu, Harmonizing the Electronic Structures on BiOI with Active Oxygen Vacancies toward Facet-Dependent Antibacterial Photodynamic Therapy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004108 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liang, X. Deng, G. Xu, X. Xiao, M. Wang, X. Guo, P. A. Ma, Z. Cheng, D. Zhang and J. Lin, A Novel Pt-TiO2 Heterostructure with Oxygen-Deficient Layer as Bilaterally Enhanced Sonosensitizer for Synergistic Chemo-Sonodynamic Cancer Therapy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908595 Search PubMed .
X. Qian, Y. Zheng and Y. Chen, Micro/Nanoparticle-Augmented Sonodynamic Therapy (SDT): Breaking the Depth Shallow of Photoactivation, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8097–8129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Zhen, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhao, S. Song, Z. Wu and H. Zhang, Defect modified zinc oxide with augmenting sonodynamic reactive oxygen species generation, Biomaterials, 2020, 251, 120075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jung, P. Verwilst, A. Sharma, J. Shin, J. L. Sessler and J. S. Kim, Organic molecule-based photothermal agents: an expanding photothermal therapy universe, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2280–2297 RSC .
C. Ou, W. Na, W. Ge, H. Huang, F. Gao, L. Zhong, Y. Zhao and X. Dong, Biodegradable Charge-Transfer Complexes for Glutathione Depletion Induced Ferroptosis and NIR-II Photoacoustic Imaging Guided Cancer Photothermal Therapy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 8157–8163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, Y. Xu, Y. Zhang, H. S. Kim, A. Sharma, J. Gao, G. Yang, J. S. Kim and Y. Sun, Rational design of a multifunctional molecular dye for dual-modal NIR-II/photoacoustic imaging and photothermal therapy, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 8348–8353 RSC .
Z. Li, Y. Hu, Z. Miao, H. Xu, C. Li, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, M. Chang, Z. Ma, Y. Sun, F. Besenbacher, P. Huang and M. Yu, Dual-Stimuli Responsive Bismuth Nanoraspberries for Multimodal Imaging and Combined Cancer Therapy, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6778–6788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhong, C. Wu, Y. Feng, D. Chen, Y. Wang, D. Hao and H. Ding, Enriched surface oxygen vacancies of BiOCl boosting efficient charge separation, whole visible-light absorption, and photo to thermal conversion, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 585, 152656 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, X. Luo, G. Ran, Y. Li, Z. Cao, X. Liu, G. Chen, J. Yan and L. Wang, Defect engineering of ultrathin 2D nanosheet BiOI/Bi for enhanced photothermal-catalytic synergistic bacteria-killing, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 435, 134810 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vanneman and G. Dranoff, Combining immunotherapy and targeted therapies in cancer treatment, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2012, 12, 237–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Zhang, S. F. Kang, H. Lin, M. Y. Chen, Y. H. Li, L. F. Cui, Y. Fan, B. Wang, Y. W. Wang, Z. J. Yang, M. T. Zhao, X. M. Yin, D. Sun, B. Dai, S. L. Zhuang, D. W. Zhang and L. L. Zheng, Regulation of zeolite-derived upconversion photocatalytic system for near infrared light/ultrasound dual-triggered multimodal melanoma therapy under a boosted hypoxia relief tumor microenvironment via autophagy, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132484 CrossRef CAS .
R. Han, Q. Liu, Y. Lu, J. Peng, M. Pan, G. Wang, W. Chen, Y. Xiao, C. Yang and Z. Qian, Tumor microenvironment-responsive Ag2S-PAsp(DOX)-cRGD nanoparticles-mediated photochemotherapy enhances the immune response to tumor therapy, Biomaterials, 2022, 281, 121328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Nie, T. Yu, X. Liu, B. Wang, T. Li, Y. Wu, X. Zhou, L. Ma, Y. Lin, Z. Qian and X. Gao, Non-viral vector mediated CKb11 with folic acid modification regulates macrophage polarization and DC maturation to elicit immune response against cancer, Bioact. Mater., 2021, 6, 3678–3691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, Y. Liu, C. Tang, Y. Tan, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, N. He and S. Li, Recent advance in nanomaterials for cancer immunotherapy, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 435, 134145 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tian, F. Xue, Y. Wang, Y. Cheng, L. An, S. Yang, X. Chen and G. Huang, Recent advances in enhanced chemodynamic therapy strategies, Nano Today, 2021, 39, 101162 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, C. He, Y. Chen, C. Chen, R. Yan, T. Fan, Y. Gai, T. Yang, Y. Lu and G. Xiang, Cyclic reactions-mediated self-supply of H2O2 and O2 for cooperative chemodynamic/starvation cancer therapy, Biomaterials, 2021, 275, 120987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Moeller, R. A. Richardson and M. W. Dewhirst, Hypoxia and radiotherapy: opportunities for improved outcomes in cancer treatment, Cancer Metastasis Rev., 2007, 26, 241–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Chen, B. Wang, P. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, K. Li, G. Song, X.-B. Zhang and W. Tan, NIR-II Driven Plasmon-Enhanced Catalysis for a Timely Supply of Oxygen to Overcome Hypoxia-Induced Radiotherapy Tolerance, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15069–15075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zang, L. Gong, L. Mei, Z. Gu and Q. Wang, Bi2WO6 Semiconductor Nanoplates for Tumor Radiosensitization through High-Z Effects and Radiocatalysis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18942–18952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liao, D. Wang, S. Zhu, R. Zhou, F. Rahbarizadeh and Z. Gu, Piezoelectric materials for synergistic piezo- and radio-catalytic tumor therapy, Nano Today, 2022, 44, 101510 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, X. Zong, L. An, S. Hua, X. Miao, S. Luan, Y. Wen, F. F. Tao and Z. Sun, Consciously Constructing Heterojunction or Direct Z-Scheme Photocatalysts by Regulating Electron Flow Direction, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2209–2217 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Wu, H. Xiang, J. Cao, Y. Li, W. Yin, Y. Zu, J. Li, R. Liu, F. Zhao, Z. Liu, C. Chen, Z. Gu, L. Yan and Y. Zhao, Suppressing the Radiation-Induced Corrosion of Bismuth Nanoparticles for Enhanced Synergistic Cancer Radiophototherapy, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 13016–13029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, S. Liu, L. Wang, H. Zou, Z. Wang, X. Tang, W. Feng, Y. Chong, Y. Liu, B. Yang and H. Zhang, BiVO4@Bi2S3 Heterojunction Nanorods with Enhanced Charge Separation Efficiency for Multimodal Imaging and Synergy Therapy of Tumor, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 5080–5092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Lv, M. Ye, S. Wang, E. Ni, F. Zeng, C. Cao, F. Luo and J. Yan, Novel superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for tumor embolization application: Preparation, characterization and double targeting, Int. J. Pharm., 2012, 426, 248–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jubeli, N. Yagoubi, F. Pascale, L. Bedouet, K. Slimani, D. Labarre, J. P. Saint-Maurice, A. Laurent and L. Moine, Embolization biomaterial reinforced with nanotechnology for an in situ release of anti-angiogenic
agent in the treatment of hyper-vascularized tumors and arteriovenous malformations, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2015, 96, 396–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-X. J. Wang, X.-M. Zhu, Q. Liang, C. H. K. Cheng, W. Wang and K. C.-F. Leung, 
            In Vivo Chemoembolization and Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Liver Tumors by Using Iron Oxide Nanoshell/Doxorubicin/Poly(vinyl alcohol) Hybrid Composites, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4812–4815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-H. Fu, C. Qi, J. Lin and P. Huang, Catalytic chemistry of glucose oxidase in cancer diagnosis and treatment, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6454–6472 RSC .
V. G. Deepagan, D. G. You, W. Um, H. Ko, S. Kwon, K. Y. Choi, G.-R. Yi, J. Y. Lee, D. S. Lee, K. Kim, I. C. Kwon and J. H. Park, Long-Circulating Au-TiO2 Nanocomposite as a Sonosensitizer for ROS-Mediated Eradication of Cancer, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6257–6264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dai, S. Zhang, Z. Liu, R. Wu and Y. Chen, Two-Dimensional Graphene Augments Nanosonosensitized Sonocatalytic Tumor Eradication, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9467–9480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Guobo Chen	Guobo Chen received her BS degree from Shanghai University of Medicine & Health Sciences in 2021. She is currently a postgraduate student in the School of Materials and Chemistry, University of Shanghai for Science and Technology. Her research focuses on the biomedical application of bismuth-based nanomaterials.
Yuhao Li	Doctor Yuhao Li received his Ph.D. from Nanjing Tech University, China in 2011. He conducted his postdoctoral research at North Dakota State University and Fudan University in 2012–2015. From 2015 to date, he has worked as an associate professor at the University of Shanghai for Science and Technology. His current research focuses on the development of bismuth-based nanocomposites and organic functional materials for biosensing, intelligent diagnosis, and therapy applications.
Baolin Liu	Professor Baolin Liu is a Research Professor at the University of Shanghai for Science and Technology. His research focuses on the cryopreservation of human cells, tissues, and organs. He served on several high-level boards and committees including the Biomedical Engineering Discipline of Shanghai, and the Society for Refrigeration of Shanghai, China. He was an executive director of the Society for Biomedical Engineering of Shanghai, a committee member of the Committee of Cryobiology, and the Society for Refrigeration of China.
Yuqing Miao	Professor Yuqing Miao is a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, and a member of the editorial board of Chinese Chemical Letters and Frontiers in Chemistry. The main research interests are focused on electrocatalysis or photocatalysis of nanomaterials, especially bismuth and rhenium-based nanomaterials, and their applications in biomedicine, energy, environment, and biomedical analysis. Nearly 200 research papers have been published and two of them are ESI highly cited papers.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the functionalization of BiOX nanomaterials for biomedical applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  Images of BiOX nanomaterials with different morphologies. (A) BiOCl nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (B) BiOCl nanospheres. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (C) BiOCl nanoflowers. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (D) BiOBr nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2020, WILEY–VCH. (E) BiOBr nanospheres. Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (F) BiOBr nanoflowers. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (G) BiOI nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2019, WILEY–VCH. (H) BiOI nanospheres. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (I) BiOI nanoflowers. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Elemental mapping images of 2% Mo–BiOBr. (B) Photocatalytic mechanism diagram of 2% Mo-BiOBr. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (C) Elemental mapping images of BiOCl-B-OV. (D) Schematic illustration of bulk B doping on excitons dissociation and free charge carrier generation in BiOCl-B-OV. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2021, WILEY-VCH. (E) Elemental mapping images of Nb/Se co-doped BiOI. (F) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic process of Nb/Se co-doped BiOI. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Images of BiOX with different surface modifications. (A) Schematic illustration of the proposed enhancement mechanism for the excellent photocatalytic activity of C70/BiOCl photocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (B) Schematic illustration of the separation of electron–hole pairs in the No.1 hybrid biological signal processor (P1) and the protein signal recognition, PA signal feedback and ROS output capability of P1. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (C) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process for 2D O-BiOCl-PVP nanosheets, including hydrothermal treatment and the generation of oxygen vacancies by UV irradiation. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Schematic illustration of the formation of BiOI/Ru(bpy)32+ microspheres. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

BiOI QDs	Hydrothermal	4T1	RT + CT	
50

BiOCl	Solvothermal	Lewis	RT	
150

BiOBr-H/Rub2d	Hydrothermal	HeLa, HepG-2, MCF-7	PDT	
141

CQDs/Bi4O5Br2	Hydrolysis	A549	PDT	
106

BiOBr:Yb,Tm-PEG	Solvothermal	HeLa, L929	PDT + FL/CT	
151

BiOCl	Hydrothermal	MCF-7	PDT	
152

UCNPs@BiOCl	Hydrothermal	HeLa, L929	PDT + UCL	
153

BiOI/BiOIO3	Hydrothermal	HeLa, L929	PDT + CT	
105

BiOCl	Hydrothermal	4T1	PTT + CT/PA	
104

BSO/B-BiOCl-PEG	Hydrothermal	4T1	SDT	
51

BSP	Solvothermal	Panc-1, HeLa	SDT + PA	
107

Se-BiOCl/PBA	Solvothermal	HCT, HeLa, glioma, HUVEC	PTT/PDT + MRI/CT	
83

BiOI@Bi2S3@BSA	Hydrothermal	BEL-7402, HUVEC	RT/PTT/PDT + MRI/CT	
154

BCHN	Hydrothermal	4T1.2	CDT/RT	
73

BiNS@NaLnF4	Solvothermal	HeLa, ECA109	PTT/PDT + CT/MRI	
114

BBFG	Hydrothermal	Ealy926, HeLa	RCT/ST + CT/PA	
108

DOX/APC-BiOI@CuS	Hydrothermal	A549	Chemo-photothermal + CT	
155


 	Fig. 5  (A) Schematic illustration of the BiOI-QD-based radiotherapeutic progress and biodistribution of BiOI QDs after therapy. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2020, WILEY–VCH. (B) CB and VB energy levels of BNCs and BvNCs. (C) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of confined water-mediated radiosensitization. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Synthesis of BB NCs and their application in efficient type-I and O2 self-supplying type II PDT to overcome tumor hypoxia. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) The band edge positions of BiOBr, BiOBr-H, and Rub2d with the vacuum level set at 0 eV. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Schematic illustration of a possible photocatalytic antibacterial mechanism of BI-110 for Escherichia coli. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2020, Wiley–VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration of the enhanced 1O2 generation mechanism of oxygen-deficient B-BiOCl-PEG under US irradiation. (B) Schematic illustration of BSO/B-BiOCl-PEG-mediated ROS damage and GSH depletion amplifying intracellular oxidative stress under US irradiation. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2021, Wiley–VCH. (C) Schematic illustration of P1's output ROS signals under US irradiation. (D) Relative cell viability of Panc-1 cells after different treatments, including PBS, P1, US, OV-Bi NSs + US, P3 + US, P2 + US, and P1 + US. (P1, P2, P3 and OV-Bi NSs: 0.2 mg mL−1). Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Images of BiOI-DE2 under different NIR power densities. (B) The possible photothermal response mechanism of BiOI-DE2. (C) The photothermal conversion curves of different samples at a power density of 1 W cm−2. (D) The photothermal stability nature after three cycles procedure. (E) The stable stage of the heating and cooling period. Reproduced with permission.180 Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Schematic illustration of the BCHN (BiOCl/Cu2+-H2O2@PVP) nanocomposite enhancing the synergistic RT/CDT effect by modifying the TME by supplying H2O2, generating O2, consuming GSH, and generating ˙OH. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (B) Schematic illustration of the applications of BBFG NSs for GOx-sensitized RCT and ST synergetic therapy. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Schematic illustration of the antibacterial mechanism of Fe-BBP NP-mediated SCDT. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2020, Wiley–VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) In vitro CT images of Iopromide and SHNPs at different concentrations. (B) CT values of the Iopromide and SHNPs with different concentrations were captured at various voltages. (C) CT images of BEL-7402 tumor-bearing mice injected i.v. at different time points. (D) In vitro PA images of SHNPs. (E) In vivo PA imaging in BEL-7402 tumor-bearing mice. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2017, WILEY–VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Upconversion emission spectra of BiOBr:Yb,Tm nanosheets with different Yb3+ concentrations under 980 nm laser excitation. (B) CIE chromaticity diagram showing the emission colors for BiOBr:Yb,Tm. (C) Optical images of HeLa cells incubated with BiOBr:Yb,Tm-PEG nanosheets for 1 h. (D) In vitro CT images of BiOBr:Yb,Tm at different concentrations. (E) CT value of BiOBr:Yb,Tm aqueous solution as a function of the particle concentration. (F) CT images of tumor-bearing mice before (upper) and after (lower) intratumor injection. Reproduced with permission.151 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
