Azobenzene-based solar thermal fuels: design, properties, and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00470F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00470F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7339-7368Azobenzene-based solar thermal fuels: design, properties, and applications

        
          
            Liqi 
            Dong
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yiyu 
            Feng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ling 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Feng
          
          
        
      *abcd
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China. E-mail: weifeng@tju.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 22 27404724;   Tel: +86 22 87402059
bCollaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
cKey Laboratory of Advanced Ceramics and Machining Technology, Ministry of Education, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
dTianjin Key Laboratory of Composite and Functional Materials, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
Received 
      14th June 2018
    First published on 31st August 2018AbstractDevelopment of renewable energy technologies has been a significant area of research amongst scientists with the aim of attaining a sustainable world society. Solar thermal fuels that can capture, convert, store, and release solar energy in the form of heat through reversible photoisomerization of molecular photoswitches such as azobenzene derivatives are currently in the limelight of research. Herein, we provide a state-of-the-art account on the recent advancements in solar thermal fuels based on azobenzene photoswitches. We begin with an overview on the importance of azobenzene-based solar thermal fuels and their fundamentals. Then, we highlight the recent advances in diverse azobenzene materials for solar thermal fuels such as pure azobenzene derivatives, nanocarbon-templated azobenzene, and polymer-templated azobenzene. The basic design concepts of these advanced solar energy storage materials are discussed, and their promising applications are highlighted. We then introduce the recent endeavors in the molecular design of azobenzene derivatives toward efficient solar thermal fuels, and conclude with new perspectives on the future scope, opportunities and challenges. It is expected that continuous pioneering research involving scientists and engineers from diverse technological backgrounds could trigger the rapid advancement of this important interdisciplinary field, which embraces chemistry, physics, engineering, nanoscience, nanotechnology, materials science, polymer science, etc.
Liqi Dong
Liqi Dong received his BS degree in Chemistry from Qingdao University of Science & Technology (China) in 2013 and completed his MS degree under the supervision of Prof. Xuemin Duan and Prof. Jingkun Xu at Jiangxi Science & Technology Normal University (China) in 2016. He is now pursuing his PhD degree under the tutelage of Prof. Wei Feng at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University. Currently, his research is focused on solar energy harvesting and conversion and storage solution based on photo-responsive molecules.
Yiyu Feng
Yiyu Feng is a research professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University. He obtained his PhD from Tianjin University in 2009 and held an academic position at Tianjin University in 2009. He has authored and co-authored over 80 academic articles and reviews. Currently, his research is focused on solar-thermal conversion and thermal interfacial materials and composites, as well as their application in heat-control systems.
Ling Wang
Ling Wang is a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering in Tianjin University (China). He received his PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology Beijing (China) in 2013. From 2013 to 2018, he worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at the Liquid Crystal Institute of Kent State University (USA) and the Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering at Texas A&M University (USA), respectively. His research interests include design, synthesis, and properties of molecular switches, photoactive soft materials or polymers, functional nanoparticles, and 2D nanomaterials, as well as their emerging applications in diverse fields ranging from dynamic photonics to energy and safety issues.
Wei Feng
Wei Feng is a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering in Tianjin University. He obtained his PhD degree from the Xi’an Jiaotong University (China) in 2000. Then, he worked at Osaka University and Tsinghua University as a JSPS fellow and postdoctoral researcher, respectively. In 2004, he became a full professor in Tianjin University. He has obtained the support of National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in China. His research interests include photo-responsive organic molecules and their derivatives, thermal-conductive and high-strength carbon-based composites, and two-dimensional fluorinated carbon materials and polymers.
1. Introduction
Fossil fuel depletion, global warming, and the hidden risks of international conflict are weaving an uncomfortable stranglehold on the world's energy outlook. Coping with these crises requires the development of renewable and sustainable energy technologies and strategies to reduce the dependence on traditional fossil fuels that are currently the main driving force of global economy.1 Often-cited alternatives include clean coal, nuclear energy, and a host of renewable energy sources such as biomass/biofuels, hydroelectric power, geothermal energy, ocean water, tides, waves, wind, and solar energy.2–4 Among them, solar energy is the most abundant and inexhaustible natural resource in our solar system: the sun delivers in 1 h what humankind needs in a year.2,5 Vast amounts of energy enter our atmosphere every day; however, efficient conversion of diffuse sunlight into useful forms of energy is quite a challenge. Toward this end, extensive efforts have been devoted to developing innovative technologies, especially to capture, convert, and store solar energy.6 Nowadays, a variety of technologies have been proposed to harvest the abundant solar energy and reach a sustainable world society (Fig. 1). For example, photovoltaics7–12 could directly convert sunlight into electrical power without any heat engine. Photovoltaic solar cells have seen a dramatic development in the past few years, mainly because of their simple design and structure, flexible installation, avoidance of long-distance transmission, and cost reduction.13,14 Solar thermal collectors15–21 are able to absorb the incoming solar radiation, convert it into heat, and transfer this heat to a fluid (usually air, water or oil) flowing through the collector. There are basically two types of solar collectors: non-concentrating or stationary and concentrating. The temperature range varies with the types of collectors, such as flat-plate collectors, 30–90 °C; evacuated tube collectors, 50–200 °C; parabolic dish reflectors, 100–500 °C; heliostat field collectors, 150–2000 °C.15 Depending on the temperature level, the heat can be employed in industrial production to generate electricity or storable heat, to desalinate salt water, or to synthesize fuels from water and carbon dioxide for storage, transportation, or on-site application. Solar fuels22–25 could collect solar energy and store it through the energetic chemical bonds, where the solar harvesting and energy storage processes are incorporated in a single entity. This approach has been investigated in several variations including CO reduction, CO2 reduction, photoinduced water splitting (i.e., artificial photosynthesis) etc. Interestingly, solar thermal fuels based on photoactive materials have recently attracted increasing attention, where the efficient absorption of solar irradiation leads to a photoisomerization reaction towards a high-energy species, thus enabling the storage of large amounts of heat.6,26,27
 Fig. 1  Emerging technologies for capture, conversion, and storage of solar energy: (a) photovoltaics; reprinted with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Solar thermal collectors; reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2014 Elsevier Ltd. (c) Artificial photosynthesis; reprinted with permission from ref. 1. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH. (d) Solar thermal fuels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Solar thermal fuels (STFs) can store the energy from solar radiation through structural and bond rearrangements of the photoactive materials, and then the energy is released in the form of heat. Such a closed cycle enables reversible solar conversion and energy storage within a single material system. STFs have attractive advantages including no emission, easy transportation, rechargeability and renewability, and on-demand energy release in the form of heat. STFs have started to receive increasing attention since the 1970s, probably as a result of the 1973 oil crisis. Since then, diverse types of molecular photoswitches have been developed for STFs (Fig. 2). For example, anthracene, a rigid aromatic hydrocarbon, undergoes [4+4] cycloaddition to form a dimer when exposed to light at 400 nm, and then a stored heat energy of 65.2 kJ mol−1 can be released through appropriate thermal treatment or light irradiation at below 300 nm.28–30 The storage enthalpy (ΔHstorage, the maximum energy that can be stored per mole of photoactive molecules) could be increased to 83.6 kJ mol−1 by grafting electron-withdrawing groups (EWGs) and electron-donating groups (EDGs) onto the anthracene monomer. However, the quantum yield for the forward reaction is dependent on the relative concentration.28,30–32 Recently, Castellano's research group demonstrated the triplet–triplet annihilation-based photon upconversion properties of an anthracene system through incorporating a sensitizer (such as Ru(II) and Pd(II) octaethylporphyrin) and/or an acceptor (such as 9,10-diphenylanthracene and its derivatives).33–38 Such photon upconversion systems are expected to offer an alternative way toward STFs with high molecular storage capacity.39 Stilbenes undergo a trans-to-cis photoisomerization under light irradiation at wavelengths ranging from 300 to 700 nm.40–43 Although stilbene has a low molecular weight, it is restricted by low ΔHstorage (∼5 kJ mol−1).40,42–44 Mancini and co-workers investigated a range of 9-styrylacridines and discovered that the ΔHstorage could be considerably increased by introducing functional groups. The highest value (104 kJ mol−1) was obtained by replacing the phenyl group with a 1-naphthyl group.42,43 (Fulvalene)tetracarbonyldiruthenium (FvRu2(CO)4) refers to a series of organometallic photochromic complexes, which were first reported by Vollhardt and co-workers in 1983.45,46 In solution, FvRu2(CO)4 undergoes reversible photoisomerization upon irradiation with visible light (470 nm).45–54 The ΔHstorage comprises the overall standard (83 ± 6 kJ mol−1) and activation energies (125 ± 8 kJ mol−1).48 The FvRu2(CO)4 complex is less likely to be attractive for practical applications owing to its high cost and high molecular weight of ∼442 g mol−1. Iron has been used to replace the expensive ruthenium because of its low cost and light weight; however, no isolatable photoisomer can be formed in the iron analogue.51 Besides, an osmium analogue exhibiting photoisomerization was developed; however, the isomerization is irreversible.54 To date, commercially available norbornadiene–quadricyclane (NBD–QC) has been the most investigated system for STF applications.55–65 NBD undergoes a photoinduced [2+2] cycloaddition to convert into its valence isomer–quadricyclane. The strained quadricyclane molecule could store a significant amount of energy (ΔHstorage = 96 kJ mol−1), and such stored energy can be released in the form of heat under the influence of an external stimulus or catalysts. It should be noted that NBD only absorbs ultraviolet (UV) light, and cannot be isomerized by visible light in any range of wavelengths. To increase the quantum yield, the absorption needs to be red-shifted. One of the promising strategies to red-shift the absorption of NBD is to introduce EWGs, or both EWG and EDG at one of the CC double bonds. It was also found that the introduction of substituents at the CC bond helps increase the isomerization quantum yield.64,65 The dihydroazulene–vinylheptafulvene (DHA–VHF) photoreaction is a ring-opening reaction, which is characterized by a high quantum yield.66–70 The large spectral difference between DHA and VHF (about 150 nm), the relatively high enthalpy of the photochemical reaction (ΔHstorage = 35.2 kJ mol−1),71 and the relatively long half-life (21 min to 26 h) make this system an interesting candidate for the development of STF application.71–73 It should be noted that the back conversion of the DHA–VHF system can be stimulated by heating or catalysts (such as Cu(I)).74,75 Moth-Poulsen et al. reported the solar energy storage of a DHA–VHF system under realistic outdoor conditions.74 However, further reducing the spectroscopic overlap between the isomers should be taken into account in the future device and molecular designs.66,72,76 Attempts have also been made to promote the performance of this STF system in terms of lifetimes and ED by introducing functional groups.77 However, it remains a challenge to find the optimum molecule satisfying all the requirements.
 Fig. 2  Photoisomerization of different types of molecular photoswitches. 
In general, efficient STFs should meet the following set of criteria:29,30 (i) solar spectrum match: the absorption of the low-energy isomer should overlap with the most intense region of the solar emission. (ii) Large storage energy capacity: the energy difference between low- and high-energy isomers relative to the molecular weight/volume should be as large as possible. (iii) High quantum yield: the photoinduced conversion towards the high-energy isomer should proceed with high efficiency. (iv) No photon competition: photon competition of two isomers should be avoided since both processes of photoisomerization and back-conversion in most of the photoactive molecules could be activated by light. (v) Long-term stability: the barrier for back-conversion on the ground state energy landscape should be sufficiently large to enable long-term storage and the photoactive materials should exhibit strong cyclability performance. (vi) Low price: the cost of the raw materials as well as synthesis and integration should be competitive.
Toward this end, azobenzene and its derivatives, the most widely investigated molecular photoswitches, emerging as a “star” material have recently attracted tremendous attention in the field of STFs. Pristine azobenzene can absorb UV light (365 nm) to convert solar energy into latent chemical energy and release heat through cis-to-trans isomerization by thermal relaxation or light irradiation at an appropriate wavelength. The ΔHstorage and quantum yield of pristine azobenzene were reported to be 49 kJ mol−1 and 0.49, respectively, and the half-life of cis-azobenzene was determined as 4.2 days.78–81 It should be noted that azobenzene holds a large window of opportunities for rich chemical functionalization of the molecule. Azobenzene derivatives have facile synthesis, low cost, and extraordinary cycling stability through repeated photoisomerization and reverse isomerization between the trans and cis forms, all of which make them very attractive for STF applications.
The discovery of azobenzene can be dated back to the mid-1800s; however, for many years, they were only used as a class of synthetic coloring agents in the dye industry.82 In the 1930s, apart from being used as simple dyes, colorants, or a pH indicator, azobenzene was discovered to possess photoisomerization capability.83 From then on, design, synthesis and structure–property relationship of azobenzene photoswitches have been extensively explored by numerous industrial and academic research groups.84–89 As a result, a variety of azobenzene derivatives with promising properties have been designed and synthesized. Based on its spectroscopic features, azobenzene is classified into three categories: azobenzene, aminoazobenzene, and pseudostilbene. The structure–property relationship of these azobenzene photoswitches with multifarious photoactive properties has also been well studied.81 In the past decades, the photoisomerization characteristic of azobenzene and its use in the development of advanced functional materials have aroused considerable research enthusiasm, which promoted the applications of azobenzene and its derivatives as novel functional materials in diverse fields such as sensors,90,91 actuators,92–95 non-linear optic devices,96–98 optical data storage,99–101 and energy/biological materials.86,102–104 Most recently, a variety of solar energy harvesting and storage solutions using azobenzene and its derivatives have been reported, which is expected to provide important impetus towards the rapid development of this highly interdisciplinary endeavor in photochemistry, nanoscience, nanotechnology, and energy-related intelligent advanced materials.105,106
This article provides a comprehensive review on the advancements in azobenzene-based STF (Azo-STF) materials concerning their fundamentals, diverse azobenzene types as STF materials, recent endeavors in the molecular design of azobenzene toward efficient STFs, and their promising applications. Although the study of solar thermal energy storage materials has already been reviewed in the past years,6,27,79 to the best of our knowledge, a systematic review on the design, properties, and applications of Azo-STFs remains scarce. Herein, we focus on azobenzene derivatives, nanocarbon-templated azobenzene, and polymer-templated azobenzene, representing material platforms that combine solar energy harvesting and storage via the photoisomerization accorded by the azobenzene units. This review is structured as follows: first, we present an overview on the importance of Azo-STFs and their fundamentals in Section 2. In Section 3, we review the recent progress in Azo-STFs, with the aim of launching further research in this highly fascinating area. Section 4 is devoted to the recent endeavors in the molecular design of azobenzene derivatives toward efficient STFs. Finally, in Section 5, the basic design concepts of such advanced energy storage materials are discussed, their promising applications are highlighted, and new perspectives on the future scope, opportunities and challenges are addressed.
2. Fundamentals of azobenzene-based solar thermal fuels
2.1 Solar thermal conversion and energy storage using azobenzene photoswitches
STFs store solar energy through a photochemical conversion process known as photochromism. The idea of a STF was first proposed in 1909 by Weigert after observing the fuel capability of anthracene photodimerization.28 This process, by definition, is a reversible chemical conversion between two states, e.g., A and B, induced in either one or both directions through the absorption of electromagnetic radiation. The two states possess different absorption or emission spectra owing to their different physical and chemical properties. State “A” represents the thermodynamically stable form, while state “B” is the metastable form transformed from state “A” through light irradiation. This structural change is reversible and the reverse process can occur through thermal relaxation or light irradiation at an appropriate wavelength. Ideally, for practical applications, the photochromic cycle could be repeated indefinitely although side reactions can occur that lead to subsequent degradation of the process.106
For a unimolecular system, photochromism can occur through several possible chemical processes and undergo transformation. Some of these chemical processes are bond cleavage, oxidation–reduction, and isomerization. Of these three, isomerization, or more specifically, photoisomerization, is the most favorable photochromism for STFs. Photoisomerization is divided largely into two types: trans-to-cis isomerization and valence isomerization. In the case of trans-to-cis isomerization, a noticeable structural change is observed, whereas in valence isomerization, no significant steric position difference is seen; rather, the electronic structures are rearranged.
For azobenzene, the isomerization process is trans–cis type, which shows a substantial quantum yield and characteristic differences between the trans and cis states. Therefore, azobenzene is one of the most excellent candidates for use as STFs. The photoisomerization of azobenzene is one of the special processes that dissipate the excessive energy of the species by controlling the molecular configurations. This change is often accompanied by other actions including radiation-less/radiative transitions, vibration relaxation, and energy transfer quenching.107 Until now, four mechanisms including inversion, rotation, concerted inversion, and inversion-assisted rotation have been proposed as possible pathways for azobenzene photoisomerization.108–116 To understand these theories, we refer the interested readers to some previously published reviews.6,81,107,110
Here, we elucidate the principle of closed-system energy storage of STFs based on azobenzene photoswitches, as can be seen in Fig. 3. First, the azobenzene molecules exist in the trans conformation at room temperature, which corresponds to the ground state, also called the low-energy state. The ground state azobenzene molecule absorbs photon energy and transforms into an excited state, i.e., the intermediate state. In the photoexcited state, azobenzene is very unstable and undergoes a conformational change within a few picoseconds.114,117–119 Most of the photoexcited azobenzenes convert into the cis-isomer (productive relaxation) while a small number of molecules may revert to the original stable trans-isomer (unproductive relaxation).118,120,121 In the new state, referred to as the metastable state, also called the high-energy state, energy is stored in the chemical bonds. To access this stored energy in azobenzene molecules, an external trigger such as heat or visible light is usually applied to overcome the energy barrier (ΔEa). The stored solar energy is then released in the form of heat and the molecule reverts to its original form. According to the work from Boulatov's research group,6 the maximum energy (ΔG0isom) that can be stored for any period of time per mole of chromophore must satisfy eqn (1): (1)where ΔG‡isom is the activation free energy for the stable to metastable isomer conversion, ΔG‡rev is the free energy of activation for thermal reversion of the metastable isomer to the stable isomer, τ1/2 is the time during which half of the stored energy is dissipated spontaneously (half-life). T is the storage temperature, and R, h, and kB are the gas constant, Planck's constant, and Boltzmann constant, respectively. In this review, the storage enthalpy ΔHstorage is used to characterize the maximum energy that can be stored per mole of azobenzene. ΔEa is used as the energy barrier for thermal reversion of the metastable (cis) isomer to the stable (trans) isomer.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of solar thermal conversion and storage mechanism of azobenzene. ΔHstorage is the standard storage enthalpy of trans-to-cis isomerization, and ΔEa represents the energy barrier for cis-to-trans reversion. X1, X2, X3, Y1, and Y2 represent different substituents. X1, X2, and X3 are NMe2, NO2, COOH, OH, SO3H, or Cl. Y1 and Y2 are NHMe, NO2, OMe, OEt, F, or Cl. 
2.2 Measurement of solar thermal energy storage
The most frequently used thermal analysis technique for measuring the solar thermal energy storage, i.e., the ΔH of azobenzene photoswitches, is differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). DSC measures the differences in heat flow when a sample absorbs or releases heat due to the thermal effect. The observed heat flows were converted to ΔH using eqn (2):78 (2)where q is the heat released (J), as determined by the integration of the DSC signal, m is the mass of the sample, M is the (effective) molecular weight of azobenzene, and χcis is the mole fraction of the cis isomers present. Herein, ΔH is the actually measured storage enthalpy of azobenzene derivatives, whose value often shows a difference with the theoretical maximum storage energy ΔHstorage.
DSC is known to help determine the enthalpy differences due to the changes in the physical and chemical properties of loaded samples as a function of time or temperature. It should be noted that DSC has already proved to be a powerful tool for probing ED of Azo-STFs as discussed in the following review.
2.3 Critical parameters for Azo-STFs
In general, the performances of solar thermal fuels based on azobenzene photoswitches are characterized by three important parameters, energy storage density, energy storage half-life, and solar energy conversion efficiency, which are described below.

Energy density (ED) and power density (PD). 
ED could be considered as the most crucial indicator in the design of a practical high-energy density STF system, which reflects the capability of energy storage. ED can be expressed in several ways, including the mole-energy density (kJ mol−1), mass-energy density (kJ kg−1 or W h kg−1), and volume-energy density (kJ L−1 or W h L−1).
Power density (PD) refers to the average power density delivered by a fully charged cis-Azo as it discharges (i.e., the heat release rate) during the isothermal discharge of cis-Azo. Since the effective volume is sensitive to solvation conditions, we usually consider PD per mass (W kg−1). The relation between PD and ED is given by eqn (3): (3)where T is the time in which cis-Azo fully releases its heat and converts into trans-Azo.


Energy storage half-life. 
Half-life (τ1/2) refers to half the time required by the cis isomer to spontaneously convert into the trans-isomer. The half-lives of azobenzene and its derivatives can range from minutes to hours and even to days. Besides, the half-life is strongly dependent on the energy barrier of cis-to-trans reversion. A cis-Azo with a short half-life is undesirable as an ideal STF because the short-lived cis-Azo needs an intense light source to preserve a sizable fraction of the cis-isomer in the photostationary state. Thus, the utility of an Azo-STF is contingent on not only its energy density, but also its half-life in the photostationary state.


Solar energy conversion efficiency. 
The solar energy conversion efficiency is highly dependent on the isomerization degree of azobenzene, fraction of the cis-Azo in the photostationary state, and the photon absorption efficiency. For the photochemical reaction of azobenzene, the solar energy storage efficiency (η) is defined by eqn (4):78 (4)where ΔHcis–trans is the enthalpy difference between the metastable (cis) and stable (trans) azobenzene isomers. Ehν is the energy of the photons of absorbed light. The limit λ1 is either the lower limit of the UV-vis absorption data for the trans-Azo or the lower limit of the solar spectral irradiance data (ASTM G173-03). The limits λ2 and λ3 are the upper limits for the UV-vis absorption spectrum for the stable (trans) isomer and the upper limit of the solar spectra irradiance data, respectively. The term ηabs,trans(λ) is the wavelength-dependent efficiency of absobance of the stable isomer, and ϕtrans→cis(λ) is the wavelength-dependent quantum yield for trans → cis photoisomerization. It should be noted that eqn (4) is evolved from the calculation of solar energy storage efficiency for a phototchemical reaction A → B, which was firstly determined by Bren et al.64 Besides, the maximum energy conversion efficiency of Azo-STFs tends to be somewhat lower than that of silicon photovoltaics.122 This implies that there is much room for improvement in the solar energy conversion efficiency of Azo-STFs.

3. Advances in azobenzene materials for solar thermal fuels
Until now, a variety of azobenzene derivatives have been designed toward the promising applications of STFs. Although no reported system has fully met the strict requirements yet, researchers have already proposed many useful routes for developing various functionalized azobenzenes including pure azobenzene derivatives, nanocarbon-templated azobenzenes, and polymer-templated azobenzenes. In this section, we present examples of representative Azo-STFs reported in the literature, focusing on the improvement in STF performance by different molecular design engineering. It is expected that such an in-depth review could inspire the researchers for molecular design towards efficient Azo-STFs.
3.1 Solar thermal fuels based on azobenzene derivatives
In 1978, Adamson et al. firstly determined the storage enthalpy (ΔHstorage = 49 kJ mol−1 or 269 J g−1 or 75 W h kg−1) of azobenzene.123 The half-life of cis-Azo was reported to be 4.2 days. Olmsted and co-workers investigated the potential for the storage of solar energy by substituted azobenzenes.102 However, they concluded that azobenzenes were unfavorable for photochemical solar energy storage because of rapid thermal reversion rates and limited solubilities in polar solvents. Unless the azobenzene solution is stored in a cool and dark room, the cis-azobenzene would release heat at high temperature. By taking such precautions, long-term storage and repeated usage of Azo-STFs can be achieved.103
Molecular azobenzene has encountered immense challenges in the field of solar thermal storage. To override these hurdles, a liquid azobenzene derivative (1) as a solvent-free STF was developed by Kimizuka and co-workers.124 A branched 2-ethylhexyl group was introduced in the para-position of azobenzene via an ether bond to fluidify the resulting azobenzene at room temperature (Fig. 4a). It should be noted that the molecular weight of the 2-ethylhexyl group was so small that it could achieve condensed-phase photoisomerization while maintaining a relatively high energy density. After UV irradiation, the compound undergoes a trans-to-cis photoisomerization with the color change from bright orange to dark red (Fig. 4b). Fig. 4c shows the typical photoisomerization behavior of azobenzene photoswitches, wherein the peaks at around 344 nm and 443 nm could be assigned to π–π* and n–π* absorptions, respectively. Fig. 4d shows the DSC curves of cis-Azo 1 with different photoisomerization degrees. In the DSC curve, the exothermic peaks can be observed at around 120 °C, and the energy density was calculated as 35 kJ mol−1 (113 J g−1 or 32 W h kg−1) for a cis-Azo content of 68%. Furthermore, the cis-to-trans isomerization enthalpy is linearly dependent on the molar content of cis-Azo. By extrapolating the plot, the ΔH value corresponding to 100% cis-Azo was calculated as 52 kJ mol−1 (168 J g−1 or 47 W h kg−1) (Fig. 4e). This study demonstrated that a liquid azobenzene derivative with low-molecular weight could be considered a new potential candidate for molecular solar thermal storage materials. Nevertheless, challenges such as limited exothermicities, short half-life, and difficulty in obtaining pure cis-isomers remain.
 Fig. 4  (a) Molecular structure and photoisomerization processes of liquid azobenzene derivative 1. (b) Pictures of azobenzene derivative 1 in trans and cis states. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of liquid azobenzene derivative 1 under certain conditions under UV (365 nm) and visible-light (480 nm) irradiation. (d) DSC curves of cis-Azo 1 at different molar ratios. Heating rate is 50 K min−1. (e) Dependence of cis-to-trans isomerization enthalpy, ΔH, on the molar content of the cis-isomer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To overcome the above-mentioned limitations, Grossman's research group reconsidered the design of pure azobenzene derivatives for solid-state applications. To obtain tunable solid-state STFs, bulky aromatic groups such as biphenyl, phenyl, and tert-butyl phenyl were grafted onto azobenzene derivatives (Fig. 5a, 2a–c).125 Due to repulsion and steric hindrance, the introduction of bulky phenyl groups would elevate cis-Azo to a higher energy state, thus increasing the energy difference between the trans and cis forms. Apart from increasing the energy density, the addition of such groups to azobenzene promotes the formation of a solid-state molecular film. Fig. 5b shows the excellent thermal stability of the azobenzene molecular thin film. It was found that the addition of bulky phenyl groups could effectively prevent the π–π stacking of the azobenzene derivative under thermal annealing conditions. Fig. 5c shows the DSC curves of three azobenzene derivatives in the cis form. The energy density of heat release in a single molecule of 2a–c is 77 kJ mol−1 (134 J g−1 or 37 W h kg−1), 88 kJ mol−1 (100 J g−1 or 28 W h kg−1) and 87 kJ mol−1 (108 J g−1 or 30 W h kg−1), respectively. These data are also given in Table 2. It is noteworthy that the DSC curves do not show a smooth peak, which may be ascribed to the difference in the activation energies of different grafted functional groups caused by the differences in the local environment. This study revealed that structural engineering of pure azobenzene molecules is an effective pathway to obtain high-energy density and thermally stable molecular Azo-STFs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Molecular structure of bulky phenyl group-functionalized azobenzene derivatives 2a–c. (b) Optical images of azobenzene derivative 2c films on silicon at 25 °C (left) and 175 °C (right). (c) DSC curves of cis-azobenzene derivatives 2a–c from top to bottom. The region enclosed with the flat baseline represents the area integrated to obtain energy release. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Most recently, the combination of azobenzene and other heat storage materials has provided some inspiration for the design of novel molecular Azo-STFs. Grossman and co-workers have reported light-controlled thermal energy storage materials, which consist of azobenzene molecules (3) and organic phase-change materials (PCM), i.e., tridecanoic acid, as shown in Fig. 6a.126Fig. 6b shows light-controlled thermal energy storage and release cycle. Firstly, the crystalline composite (solid-PCM + trans-Azo, Fig. 6b, i) absorbed external thermal energy. When the temperature reached its melting point (Tm, 43 °C), the crystalline composite converted into a mixture of liquid PCM and crystalline aggregates of the azobenzene dopant (Fig. 6b, ii). Then, UV irradiation enabled the conversion of trans-Azo dopants to its cis conformation, rendering them well dispersed in the liquid PCM (Fig. 6b, iii). Finally, the liquid state of the composite (liquid-PCM + cis-Azo) was sustained by subsequently cooling to a temperature below the original crystallization temperature (Tc, 38 °C). In the meantime, the stored latent thermal energy was fully maintained (Fig. 6b, iv). The photographs in Fig. 6c show the different stages of azobenzene-doped PCM composites, which are in accordance with the schematic cycle shown in Fig. 6b. These results indicated that the azobenzene-doped PCM composites could sustain the stored latent heat even when the temperature was decreased. Besides, the Tc values of the uncharged (PCM + trans-Azo) and charged (PCM + cis-Azo) composites were measured by DSC (Fig. 6d). For the uncharged composite, the first exothermic peak appeared at 48 °C, which can be ascribed to the crystallization of trans-Azo, followed by PCM crystallization at 38 °C. On the other hand, the charged counterpart crystallized at 28 °C, followed by the crystallization of cis-Azo at 9 °C. It should be noted in Fig. 6d that the Tc and Tm of pristine trans-Azo (60 °C and 73 °C, respectively) significantly decreased for this composite, which is mainly attributed to the solvation effect of the liquid-state PCM. Thus, it can be concluded that the phase-transition temperatures of such azobenzene-doped PCM composites can be varied by adjusting the doping level in the composite and the cooling rate. In this study, the introduction of azobenzene dopants into conventional organic PCMs not only allowed the PCMs to change the intermolecular dynamics and provide stability to the phase storing thermal energy, but also rendered them optically controllable for energy release. This technology could retain the thermal energy of ∼200 J g−1 in the materials for more than 10 h at temperatures below the original crystallization point. This result implies that the azobenzene dopants can be locked in the liquid phase of PCMs as a result of reducing their crystallization temperature by tuning the doping level in the composite and the cooling rate, and thus the thermal energy was kept at a lower temperature. This approach unlocks numerous opportunities for portable thermal energy storage systems.
 Fig. 6  (a) Chemical structures of azobenzene dopant and PCM (tridecanoic acid). (b) Schematic of light-operated thermal energy storage and release cycle, including heat absorption of the PCM composite (1), UV irradiation leads to photoisomerization of azobenzene dopants (2), cooling of the liquefied PCM composite (3), and visible-light drives the reverse isomerization and heat release (4). The straight and curved rods exhibit different degrees of translational and rotational freedom, i.e., phase i represents solid-PCM + trans-Azo (25 °C), phase ii represents liquid-PCM + trans-Azo (43 °C), phase iii represents liquid-PCM + cis-Azo (43 °C), and phase iv represents liquid-PCM + cis-Azo (36 °C), respectively. (c) Corresponding photographs of azobenzene-doped PCM composites during solid-state heat absorption, UV charging, cooling, visible-light-induced discharging, and heat-release processes. (d) DSC curves of charged and uncharged azobenzene-doped PCM composites obtained while cooling from 70 °C at a rate of 5 °C min−1. T1, T2, and ΔTc denote different crystallization points and the gap, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. 

Table 1 summarizes the ED and half-lives of pure azobenzene derivatives for STF applications. Initially, azobenzene derivatives were considered unsuitable for energy storage because of their short half-lives. However, with increasing necessity for solid-state integration of small molecules for functional devices, molecular thin films have attracted tremendous attention because of their versatility, ease of processing, and cost reduction. To date, much efforts, including computational26,128 and experimental, have been devoted to improving the performance of molecular Azo-STFs. As can be seen in Table 1, the grafting of functional groups on unsubstituted Azo increased the energy density by 80%. These results suggest that appropriate molecular engineering of azobenzene could be a valid tactic for designing solid-state STFs.
Table 1 Parameters related to azobenzene derivative STFs




Azo-based molecules
Energy density

τ
1/2

State
Ref.


(kJ mol−1)
(J g−1)
(W h kg−1)





a Cannot be reliably determined owing to low quantum yield.
b No data were found in the references.





Azobenzene
49
269
75
100.0 h
Liquid

102 and 127



4,4′-Dimethoxy Azo
80
331
92
9.6 h
Liquid

28



2,2′-Dimethoxy Azo








168.0 h
Liquid

28



2,2′-Diethyl Azo








33.6 h
Liquid

28



2,6,2′6′-Tetramethyl Azo








108.0 h
Liquid

28



3-Nitro-4′-dimethylamino Azo
98
350
97
14.4 min
Liquid

28



2,6-Dimethyl-4-methoxy-4′-nitro Azo
30
95
26
1.9 h
Liquid

28



Methyl orange
94
287
80
57.6 min
Liquid

28




1

35
113
32




Liquid

124




2a

77
134
37




Liquid ↔ solid

125




2b

88
100
28




Liquid ↔ solid

125




2c

87
108
30




Liquid ↔ solid

125




3





200
56
10 h
Liquid ↔ solid

126





3.2 Solar thermal fuels based on nanocarbon-templated azobenzene
Although the molecular engineering of azobenzene photoswitches could improve the energy storage property of STFs, some obstacles such as short half-life and limited exothermicities need to be addressed. To circumvent these challenges, Grossman's research group recently developed a set of novel Azo-STFs, where azobenzene photoswitches were bound to different robust carbon-based templates such as graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNT), and C60 (Fig. 7a).129,130 Using first-principles calculations, they predicted that these STFs could reversibly store solar energy with densities comparable to Li-ion batteries, potential external efficiencies of up to 35%, and tunable thermal stability from minutes to years.129 As shown in Fig. 7b, compared with the systems using unsubstituted azobenzene, the key fundamental properties of nanocarbon-templated Azo-STFs could be coordinated over a large extent by utilizing carbon templates with diverse geometries and electronic properties. It is anticipated that templated azobenzenes using carbon-based materials could enhance not only the energy densities and storage lifetimes of the resulting STFs, but also the optical and electronic properties, thermal stability, chemical durability, as well as temperature when the thermal back-reaction is triggered.
 Fig. 7  (a) Calculated trans and cis configurations and properties of nanocarbon-templated azobenzenes including graphene-templated azobenzene (i), CNT-templated azobenzene (ii), β-carotene-templated azobenzene (iii), pentacene-templated azobenzene (iv), and C60-templated azobenzene (v). Orange, red, blue, dark gray, and white balls/sticks represent F, O, N, C, and H atoms, respectively. (b) Calculated thermal activation barrier (Ea) vs. stored energy per molecule (ΔE) for nanocarbon-templated azobenzene and gas phase azobenzene derivatives. The alternate axes indicate half-life (τ1/2) and temperature of the released heat (Trelease), estimated from Ea and ΔH, respectively. The size of the symbols illustrates the relative values of the maximum external efficiency (ηmax). Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2013 AIP Publishing. 

3.2.1 Carbon nanotube-templated azobenzene. 
In 2007, our group firstly synthesized a photoactive multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) by grafting azobenzene onto the sidewalls of MWCNT via covalent bonding, as shown in Fig. 8.131,132 We investigated the polarized optical properties of MWCNT-templated azobenzene composites by UV-vis and photoluminescence spectroscopies. Although the property of solar energy storage was not explored, our study provided a wealth of information to guide the synthesis of CNT-templated azobenzene composites. In 2011, Grossman and co-workers theoretically demonstrated that the azobenzenes chemically linked with carbon nanotube (CNT) enabled the formation of highly ordered and closely packed arrays, thus increasing both the storage half-life and energy density of the resulting STFs due to the specific chemical interactions between the neighboring azobenzene molecules.133 Compared to individual azobenzene molecules, the presence of CNT matrices could break the molecular symmetry of azobenzene, imposing a close-packed crystalline-like state to prevent the isomerization reaction via rotation of phenyl rings, thus increasing the potential phase space for the formation of H-bonds. As shown in Fig. 9a, several azobenzene derivatives with different numbers of hydroxyl substituents on phenyl rings were introduced on the CNT to tune the relative stability of the two isomers via the addition of H-bonds. The calculation results showed that the different numbers of molecular H-bonds in trans- and cis-Azo on the surface of the CNT resulted in a significant increase in ΔH and τ1/2. Generally, hybrid structures with more H-bonds and/or stronger (shorter) H-bonds are more stable. Hence, a larger ΔH could be achieved by maximizing the number of H-bonds in the trans state while minimizing the H-bonds in the cis state. In addition, the stability of both trans and cis configurations increased due to the formation of H-bonds, leading to a relatively long half-life. Furthermore, Fig. 9b shows several possible patterns for CNT-templated dihydroxy azobenzene derivatives, and it was found that the strength and the number of H-bonds in the trans and cis configurations are closely related to the relative positions of two OH groups. In short, the crystalline-like structure provides two key improvements: (i) an increase in volume density due to the packing of the photomolecule per volume compared to the solution of free molecules, and more importantly, (ii) the ordered arrangement in close proximity and steric interactions enable new ways to design the inter- and intra-molecular bonding, leading to an increase in storage capacity.
 Fig. 8  Synthesis route to Azo-MWCNT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2007 AIP Publishing. 
 Fig. 9  (a) Density functional theory calculation values of ΔH and Ea for a typical sample of CNT-templated azobenzene systems. (b) Hydrogen bonding effects. The cis and trans isomers of several possible dihydroxy azobenzene molecules bound to a CNT substrate via an attachment at the meta-position. (a) and (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright. 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) Reaction scheme for photochemical energy storage and thermal energy release in CNT-templated azobenzene systems. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. 
In 2014, Grossman's research group turned the theoretical model of CNT-templated azobenzene hybrids into reality (see in Fig. 9c).78 An energy density of 120 kJ mol−1 (∼200 J g−1, or ∼56 W h kg−1) was achieved in the CNT-templated azobenzene, whereas an energy density of 58 kJ mol−1 (∼160 J g−1, or ∼44 W h kg−1) was observed in non-templated azobenzene. Such CNT-templated azobenzene systems display an obvious improvement in the energy stored per molecule while maintaining excellent cyclability and stability. It should be noted that the composite materials reported here did not cover the inter- and intra-molecular H-bonds, which was proposed in their theoretical model. In this research, the authors believed that interactions between azobenzene and the neighboring templates could be more important than those with an individual template.


3.2.2 Graphene-templated azobenzene. 
Despite the great progress in CNT-templated azobenzene hybrids, simultaneous improvement of ΔH and τ1/2 by optimizing molecular structures of azobenzene remains a challenging task because the intermolecular interactions between two azobenzene molecules on a carbon nanostructure template are closely related to a specific steric configuration, a suitable intermolecular distance, and substituent groups on the phenyl ring. Alternatively, graphene, a two-dimensional sheet with sp2-hybridized carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice, presents remarkable potential for optoelectronic devices because of its unique optical, mechanical, and electronic properties.134 Graphene produces no impurities during growth, which enables its facile fabrication directly on the substrate without purification processes and complicated separation. Graphene oxide (GO) is an isolated monoatomic membrane of carbon containing functional groups such as epoxide, carboxyl, and hydroxyl. These functional groups provide opportunities for tailoring the properties of graphene by changing the addends. For example, an optically tunable electronic property could be achieved by attaching a photo-responsive azobenzene molecule on graphene sheets. Interestingly, the photoisomerization reaction can be catalyzed by efficient charge transfer between azobenzene and graphene.130,135–138
Our research group made much effort in optimizing the molecular structure of graphene-templated azobenzene hybrids.64 Firstly, we constructed a series of models of graphene-templated azobenzene hybrids, in which the photo-responsive azobenzene with various functional groups at different positions (ortho-, meta- and para-) was covalently bound to graphene.139 Density functional theory calculations predicted that the intermolecular distance between two adjacent azobenzene molecules on graphene, the electronic interaction, steric hindrance, and inter- or intra-molecular H-bonds lead to a change in ΔHstorage. Thus, we considered that the 2D graphene nanosheet is an ideal platform to support the nanocarbon-templated Azo-STFs. Based on the calculations, a series of graphene-templated azobenzene materials have been designed and successfully synthesized by our research group, as shown in Fig. 10.139–144 We focused on enhancing the energy density and half-life through several efficient methods such as increasing the number of molecular interactions, improving the grafting density, optimizing the steric configuration, and attaching suitable substituents to different positions of azobenzene.
 Fig. 10  (a and b) Chemical structures and time-evolved absorption spectra of RGO–ortho-Azo and RGO–para-AZO hybrids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (c–f) Chemical structures and DSC curves of RGO–ortho-Azo, RGO–para-AZO, and RGO–bis-Azo hybrids. (c) and (d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g and h) Chemical structures and DSC curves of the first heating stage of RGO–bis-Azo-1 and RGO–bis-Azo-2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
Furthermore, we reported reduced graphene oxide-templated azobenzene hybrids (RGO–Azo) via covalent functionalization.140 The ΔHstorage and τ1/2 were improved by intermolecular H-bonds, which were controlled by the substitution (ortho or para) and close-packing arrays of azobenzene on RGO. As shown in Fig. 10a and b, RGO–ortho-Azo exhibited a longer half-life (5, 5400 h) than RGO–para-Azo (6, 116 h), whereas RGO–para-Azo showed a high ED of 75 W h kg−1 than RGO–ortho-Azo (42 W h kg−1). In order to gain a deep understanding of the relationship between ED, graft density, and intermolecular H-bond, we designed three RGO–Azo hybrid materials with methoxyl and/or carboxyl groups on the ortho- (meta- or para-) position of azobenzene, as shown in Fig. 10c–e (7–9).141,142 According to the characterization of thermal stability and chemical structure, every 16–19 carbon atoms of RGO supported one azobenzene molecule. Such close-packed and highly grafted azobenzene–graphene hybrids capacitate the formation of intermolecular H-bonds in both trans and cis forms of azobenzene. In the meantime, the two neighboring trans-Azo formed two intermolecular H-bonds in the form of OH⋯O, and cis-Azo formed only one H-bond (Fig. 11a). The difference in the numbers of intermolecular H-bonds between trans- and cis-Azo resulted in a large enthalpy difference, which led to the improvement in ED and half-life. As shown in Fig. 11b, we considered that H-bonding interactions not only occurred between the two adjacent azobenzenes on the same graphene nanosheets, but also between two azobenzenes on adjacent graphene nanosheets. Furthermore, the DSC curve generated from the second-heating cycle indicated the existence of molecular H-bonds (Fig. 10d and e). These studies indicated that optimizing the molecular structure and steric configuration of azobenzene on the graphene template is very important to facilitate the isomerization and intra/intermolecular interaction.
 Fig. 11  Illustration of inter-molecular H-bond interaction (a) and inter-planar bundling (b) of high-grafting density RGO-templated azobenzene hybrids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Most recently, our group presented three templated assemblies of close-packed bis-azobenzene (bis-Azo) covalently grafted onto RGO ((10–12) in Fig. 10f–h and 12).143,144 Theoretically, the intramolecular coupling of the bis/tri-Azo not only lowers the energy of the trans-isomer, but also stabilizes the cis-isomer due to the large steric hindrance.145,146 The experimental setup as schematically illustrated in Fig. 12a was used to investigate the closed cycle of UV light harvesting, storage in darkness, and heat release in the solid-state films. Fig. 12b and e show the difference in temperature between UV-irradiated and unirradiated films. The continuous heat release led to an increase in the temperature of UV-irradiated RGO–bis-Azo films, which was higher than that of the unirradiated film. As can be seen in Fig. 12c–g, the RGO–bis-Azo-2 film exhibits a maximum temperature difference of 15 °C, releasing 85% of the heat in 8 min (60–140 °C). The result indicated that solid-state RGO–bis-Azo films exhibited a remarkable photothermal effect and excellent cycling, which could be used for energy storage by controlling the heat release and optimizing the molecular interactions. These solid-state heat-release graphene-templated azobenzene hybrids pave the way for the development of highly efficient and high-energy STFs for a multitude of applications.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the experiment using a heating stage with controllable temperature: half of the film was irradiated with UV light and the other half was left in darkness. (b and e) Top-view IR heat map of RGO–bis-Azo films (11 and 12) with and without UV irradiation. Each uniform RGO–bis-Azo film was cut into half. The heat maps show the maximum rising temperature between areas; the color bar indicates the relative magnitude of the heat released. Average temperatures of (c) RGO–bis-Azo-1 and (f) RGO–bis-Azo-2. Average difference in temperatures of (d) RGO–bis-Azo-1 and (g) RGO–bis-Azo-2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 

Table 2 summarizes the EDs, half-lives, and grafting densities of nanocarbon-templated azobenzene STF materials. The following conclusions can be drawn from Table 2: (i) the ED increases along with grafting density. However, the grafting density is restricted by the decrease in reactivity, steric hindrance of azobenzene, and the stacking of nanosheets. (ii) The substituents of azobenzene and the intermolecular H-bonds in both trans-Azo and cis-Azo lead to a robust increase in the ED and half-life. (iii) Compared to a single azobenzene, the bis-Azo molecule displays a higher ED and a longer half-life. Despite our focus on azobenzene photoswitches and carbon-based templates in the mentioned studies, these experimental results strongly suggest that the same principles can be employed to design efficient STFs based on other molecular photoswitches and templated materials.
Table 2 Parameters related to nanocarbon-templated Azo-STFs




Nanocarbon-templated Azo-STFs
Energy density

τ
1/2 (h)
State
Grafting density
Ref.


(kJ mol−1)
(J g−1)
(W h kg−1)





a The mole-energy density (kJ mol−1) is calculated through multiplying Mn (g mol−1) and mass-energy density (J g−1), where Mn is the molecular weight of azobenzene compounds.





4
120
200
56
33
Liquid ↔ solid
1/16

78



5
60a
151
42
5408
Liquid ↔ solid
1/10

140



6
103a
270
75
116
Liquid ↔ solid
1/10

140



7
118
245
68
2
Liquid ↔ solid
1/19

141



8
192
403
112
792
Liquid ↔ solid
1/16

141



9
265
497
138
1248
Liquid ↔ solid
1/17

142



10
318a
288
80
1320
Liquid ↔ solid
1/50

143



11
412a
346
96
1120
Solid
1/59

144



12
572a
472
131
900
Solid
1/46

144






3.3 Solar thermal fuels based on polymer-templated azobenzene
Polymer-templated azobenzenes could form uniform and flat films with controllable thicknesses and display feasibility for the application of large-area heat release. The uniform Azo-polymer films help in capturing photons, and heat release could occur in the solid-state as well as via controlling their cis-to-trans isomerization, which provides the opportunity of integrating STF materials into numerous existing heating devices. Fortunately, in the past few decades, scientists have maintained considerable research enthusiasm for the interesting properties of polymer-templated azobenzenes, such as photoinduced phase transition, photoinduced birefringence and dichroism, optical nonlinearities, and photocontrolled reversible property changes.147 As a result, a large amount of photoactive polymer-templated azobenzenes have been developed, which allows us to explore this rapidly developing field more conveniently. Therefore, polymer-templated azobenzenes serving as STF materials have aroused considerable research interest.

3.3.1 Solid-state Azo-STFs. 
Recently, Grossman et al. designed a simple polymer, in which the main chain consists of an alkyl chain while the azobenzene is the pendant group (Fig. 13a).148 The materials exhibited relatively long half-lives at room temperature (92 ± 1 h for the monomer and 55 ± 1 h for the polymer). Fig. 13b shows the DSC curves of the monomer (42 ± 2 W h kg−1 or 151 J g−1) and polymer (29 ± 2 W h kg−1 or 104 J g−1) species after UV irradiation in a toluene solution (charging process). The ED difference between the monomer and polymer may arise from the variations in light absorption efficiency, photoisomerization quantum yield, influence of photostationary state, and thermal reversion barriers.81 Steric hindrance may restrict photoswitching in the solid state due to the presence of both rotation (steric-sensitive) and inversion mechanisms for isomerization, thus limiting the performance of the STFs.148–150Fig. 13c and d show a photograph of a large-area freestanding polymer film obtained by a facile solution spin-coating process. During the spin-coating process, a liquid cross-linking polymer was applied to balance the dissolution of the underlying film. To test the heat release, they designed an experimental setup that employed a heating stage to trigger the cis-to-trans thermal isomerization (Fig. 13e). In the meantime, an infrared camera was applied to measure the spatial temperature profile. A dramatic temperature spike of 10 °C average temperature variation between the charged and uncharged STFs can be observed in Fig. 13f. Furthermore, the temperature difference caused by heat release in tens of seconds plays a vital role in certain rapid heat-release applications. However, on the other hand, the introduction of superfluous groups and polymers results in limited heat release and heat propagation.
 Fig. 13  (a) Chemical structure of Azo-polymers. (b) DSC curves of charged monomers and polymers. (c) Schematic of spin-coating a polymer solution in toluene on a transparent quartz substrate. The charging process is accomplished under UV irradiation using a lamp of wavelength 365 nm. (d) Photograph of a large-area freestanding polymer film prepared by the cross-linking approach. (e) Heat release in STF polymer films: top-view is IR heat map of charged and uncharged STFs; the color bar indicates the relative heat magnitude. Bottom-view is the illustration of the experimental setup. (f) Average temperature differences between the two STFs. A temperature difference of at least 10 °C is observed between the two STFs because of heat release. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
Previous research showed that different solvent processing could change the physical properties of polymers to tune the ED, heat-release shape, and activation energy of cis-to-trans isomerization of STF materials. Most recently, Venkataraman et al. studied the crucial role of processing solvents and thin film structures in achieving higher EDs. They developed azobenzene-based syndiotactic-rich poly(methacrylate) polymers (Fig. 14a, 14a–c) and achieved a high-ED STF with a maximum value of 698 J g−1 (correspond to 194 W h kg−1).151 In this study, dichloromethane (DCM) and tetrahydrofuran (THF) were chosen to understand the role of polymer–solvent interactions and optimal structures in achieving high EDs based on the fact that both THF and DCM are excellent solvents for polymer 14c. Polymer chains extend in a good solvent, which provides an environment for high polymer–polymer interactions. Moreover, THF and DCM have low boiling points, which allows their removal at low temperatures without adversely affecting the cis–trans isomer ratio. As shown in Fig. 14b, the DSC curves of samples dried from DCM display a lower ED than that of the samples obtained from THF. To be specific, the samples dried from DCM had an average ED of 110 J g−1 (30.6 W h kg−1), while the sample obtained from THF exhibited an average ED of 510 J g−1 (142 W h kg−1). Moreover, they mixed THF with DCM in various ratios and measured the full width at half maximum (FWHM) and the ED of polymer 14c. They found that the FWHM increased and the ED decreased with increasing DCM ratio (Fig. 14c). The main reason is that DCM preferentially interacts with the polymer backbone but does not solvate the dipole formed in the charged cis-Azo, leading to aggregation in solution. This aggregation further leads to a compact inter-polymer packing, a more disorderly alignment of dipoles, and insufficient volume between the polymer backbones for π–π stacking between the pendant cis-Azo after isomerization. Finally, these factors give rise to a solid active layer that lacks cooperative isomerization, thereby resulting in lower EDs. It is inferred that the processing solvent should sufficiently solvate the dipole formed in the charged state to reduce aggregation in solution and lead to optimal structures that allows efficient π–π stacking to achieve a high ED.
 Fig. 14  (a) Chemical structures of Azo polymers with different end-groups. (b) DSC curves of a cis-Azo sample (14c) dried from either THF or DCM. (c) Diagram of FWHM and energy density of Azo-polymer (14c) based on different co-solvent ratios of THF and DCM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. 
Despite the advances in the integration of polymer-templated azobenzene thin films into certain solid-state devices, many of such materials need to be obtained in solution and a formidable difficulty often exists in their transition to the solid state in an efficient manner. Electrodeposition is a fast, conventional, and reliable synthetic technology, which has been widely applied for the preparation of polymer on a conducting surface. Electrodeposition on conducting substrates employs solutions with a low monomer concentration and allows the utilization of various form factors, to give maximum product yield. Based on this consideration, Grossman and co-workers designed novel polymer-templated azobenzene STFs that could be readily obtained by electrodepositing azobenzene and a carboxylic acid-based monomer on different sorts of substrates through copolymerization (Fig. 15a). The substrates could be either flat or structured, depending on the applications (Fig. 15b and c).152 Furthermore, this approach allowed the tuning of thickness via controlled deposition conditions, generating highly uniform films over a large area. Based on the systematic study of the polymer films, they proposed a potential application in the form of STF fibers, where the azobenzene-containing polymer is coated on a thin metal wire surface and integrated into fabrics (Fig. 15d). Consequently, the low-thermal conductivity Azo-STFs combined with high-thermal-conductivity metals would efficiently transfer heat to other parts of the fabric or device. Finally, the authors fabricated an Azo-STF coated wire, as shown in Fig. 15e. The solar energy is stored in the Azo-STFs under UV irradiation. The stored energy would be released as heat via cis-to-trans isomerization and could be directionally transported along the wire to desired locations. This study proved that electrodeposition is an effective way of incorporating Azo-STFs into novel solid-state applications. Moreover, additional functional groups or molecules could be easily introduced into the polymer-templated Azo-STF material via copolymerization without any major compromise on the ED of the STFs. Nonetheless, there is one problem that should be noted. At higher thicknesses, the film may exhibit cracks and deformities due to the high degree of shrinkage during the drying process. Thus, the future research on such fiber STFs may be directed toward the design of high-molecular weight azobenzene-containing polymers or the addition of binders while minimally affecting the ED of the STFs.
 Fig. 15  (a) Chemical structure of Azo-polymers and concept of the electrodeposition scheme. Cross-sectional SEM images of the electrodeposited polymer films on (b) stainless steel and (c) silicon substrates. (d) Concept of a STF fiber in which solar energy is stored in the STF coating, released as heat into the metal wire, and transported along the wire to desired locations. (e) Proof-of-concept for an Azo-STF fiber. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 


3.3.2 Azo-STFs based on crystal-to-liquid phase transition. 
Although much progress has been made in improving and controlling the properties of STFs in the solid state, as shown in the previous studies by using polymer templates and molecular engineering, little work has been done in controlling the specific packing to increase the ED of Azo-STFs. Since the polymer systems showed a decrease in stored ED, a better understanding of the close packing of azobenzene molecules may help improve the storage properties in solid-state STFs.
Recently, Morikawa's research group provided a new perspective that the collective change in cis-to-trans isomerization of Azo-STF materials could be observed as a macroscopic crystal-to-liquid phase transition. The crystal-to-liquid phase transition could impart extra energy to the azobenzene in the exothermic process.153 In this study, Morikawa et al. developed ionic crystals (ICs) of azobenzene derivatives, which consist of spacers with various methylene lengths (m) and alkyl tails (n), an oligo(ethylene oxide)-based ammonium group, and a counter ion (X) (Fig. 16a, 16). The polymer-templated azobenzene ICs showed a phase transition from IC to ionic liquid (IL) upon UV irradiation. Reversibly, the cis-azobenzene ILs crystallized to trans-azobenzene ICs by visible-light irradiation. This conversion is accompanied by a total exothermic enthalpy of 97.1 kJ mol−1 (128 J g−1 or 36 W h kg−1), which is more than twice the energy stored in pure cis-Azo.
 Fig. 16  (a) Chemical structure of cationic azobenzene derivatives 1(n,m)-X. (b) XRD profiles of 1(6,4)-Br prepared on a silicon wafer: from top to bottom are the as-prepared film, UV-light-irradiated film, and visible-light-irradiated film, respectively. Picture of each sample is shown as an inset. (c) DSC curves of cis-1(6,4)-Br. Photographs of corresponding states are shown as insets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 

Fig. 16b shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) profiles and polarizing optical microscopy (POM) images of the 1(6,4)-Br azobenzene derivative subjected to different treatments. The POM image of the as-prepared film exhibits a birefringence phenomenon, which is consistent with the crystalline lamellar structure as shown in the XRD graph. Under UV irradiation, the yellow crystal sample melted into a red liquid phase accompanied by a conformational change of azobenzene from trans to cis. It should be noted that the irradiated part appeared dark under the POM with crossed polarizers. These measurement results indicated that the photoisomerization of trans-1(6,4)-Br azobenzene caused its liquefaction into an isotropic IL. Then, the reversible crystallization of the cis-azobenzene IL occurred upon visible-light irradiation, and the XRD profile showed the characteristic peak of trans-azobenzene. These observations clearly demonstrated reversible photocrystallization and photoliquefaction of the 1(6,4)-Br azobenzene derivative. Fig. 16c shows the DSC curves of cis-azobenzene IL. Unlike in previous studies, two coexisting exothermic peaks could be observed in the temperature range of 34 to 65 °C. The broad peak was ascribed to thermal cis-to-trans isomerization of azobenzene, while the sharp exothermic peak around 46 °C was attributed to the enthalpy of phase transition of cis-azobenzene IL to trans-azobenzene IC. As the heating continued, a sharp endothermic peak appeared at 87 °C, which is associated with the melting of trans-azobenzene ICs. Thus, the photoinduced trans-IC to cis-IL phase-transition Azo-STF technology pushes the limit of current energy storage capacity.
Similarly, Grossman's group took the same view and reported a series of azobenzene-functionalized symmetric diacetylenes, as shown in Fig. 17 (17a–h).154 Diacetylenes can be facilely functionalized and tend to self-assembly into crystalline-like packing because of strong intermolecular interactions. Under UV irradiation, the diacetylene monomers rapidly photopolymerize to polydiacetylenes with azo-containing side chains on the rigid conjugated backbones. This structure is analogous to a rigid template decorated with closely packed photoswitching units (Fig. 17b). Fig. 17c shows a new energy diagram of STF materials that undergo phase change by isomerization of azobenzene. A high ED was obtained for the resulting materials, which could store solar energy of 176 kJ mol−1 (243 J g−1 or 67.5 W h kg−1) for compound 17d and 173 kJ mol−1 (239 J g−1 or 66 W h kg−1) for polymer 17d. According to the understanding gained from the systematic research of the series of molecules in this work, the authors believed that the molecules with high crystallization energies were very suitable for the design of high-ED Azo-STFs. They suggested the following design principle for high-ED Azo-STFs: the trans form of azobenzene should self-assemble to form a crystalline structure and the cis isomers should become liquid through the photoisomerization process.
 Fig. 17  (a) Chemical structures of Azo-functionalized diacetylenes with diverse alkyl chain lengths, terminal functional groups, H-bonding units, and an extended p-system along with a schematic of photoisomerization and reverse isomerization of compounds 17a–d. The inset shows a crystal structure of azobenzene derivative (17c). (b) Scheme of photopolymerization of monomers and the structure of the resulting polymer. (c) Energy diagram of azobenzene derivatives in different phases (gas, amorphous or liquid, and crystalline). ΔHiso is the isomerization energy of azobenzene derivatives in the liquid state or amorphous solid, and ΔHc is the crystallization energy of the trans form of azobenzene derivatives from the liquid state or amorphous solid to crystalline solid. ΔHcoh-trans is the cohesive enthalpy of trans-azobenzene derivatives from the gas state to the crystalline solid, and ΔHcoh-cis is that of cis-azobenzene derivatives from the gas state to the amorphous solid or liquid state. ΔHiso-g is the thermal isomerization enthalpy between trans and cis isomers in the gas phase. ΔHtotal is the heat released from the materials after UV irradiation, which can be expressed as the sum of ΔHiso and ΔHc. Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Most recently, Wu et al. demonstrated that the glass transition temperature (Tg) of Azo-based polymers (18) could be tuned through light irradiation, thus inducing reversible solid-to-liquid transitions of the polymers (Fig. 18a).155 The trans-Azo-polymers are solids with Tg above room temperature, whereas the cis-Azo-polymers are liquids with Tg below room temperature (Fig. 18b). The DSC curve confirmed that the photoinduced solid-to-liquid transition of the polymer was due to its photoswitchable Tg. Although the photo-energy storage properties of these Azo-polymers are not the subject of research in this work, they may provide a new perspective in the study of solar thermal storage technology.
 Fig. 18  Chemical structure (a), photographs (b), and DSC curves (c) of Azo-polymers, which are polyacrylates with a flexible spacer and an azobenzene group on the polymer side chain. The trans-Azo polymer is solid but the cis-Azo polymer is liquid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. 


3.3.3 Full-spectrum Azo-STFs. 
In most Azo-STFs, UV light is often used to accomplish trans–cis isomerization. However, sunlight contains only about 5% UV light, which severely limits the absorption efficiency of Azo-STFs. Therefore, it is of paramount importance to develop an Azo-STF that could efficiently work across the full solar spectrum. Many studies demonstrated that the introduction of substituents to azobenzene can change the absorption bands.156–158 Based on previous studies,155,159 Wu et al. proposed an Azo-STF device that can efficiently store both UV and visible light upon full solar irradiation (Fig. 19a and b).80 As can been seen in Fig. 19c, the device consists of PmAzo (19a), PAzo (19b), Coumarin 314, and a UV-pass filter. In such a four-layered hybrid device, two active layers of PAzo and PmAzo were used to store solar energy through the photoisomerization of the Azo group on the polymer side chains, while the other two filtering layers were used to modify the effective incident spectrum.
 Fig. 19  (a) Reversible photoisomerization of Azo and mAzo chromophores. (b) Chemical structures of UV-responsive polymers (PAzo) and visible-light-responsive polymers (PmAzo). (c) Schematic illustration of four-layered solar thermal cell. (d) UV-vis spectra of PAzo and PmAzo films upon 1 h solar irradiation followed by 2.5 h heating in a vacuum oven at 90 °C. The insets show the tracking absorbance of the π*–π band of PAzo and PmAzo with different cycles. (e) DSC curves of PAzo (365 nm, 2 mW cm−2, 20 min) and PmAzo (530 nm, 4 mW cm−2, 40 min). Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
In the experiment, the spin-coated films of PAzo (≈35 nm) and PmAzo (≈20 nm) were integrated into the STF device with all solid layers. As shown in Fig. 19d, the UV-vis spectra indicate the expected increase in the n–π* transition and decrease in the π–π* transition upon UV irradiation of amorphous polymer PmAzo, due to the trans-to-cis isomerization. Interestingly, the trans-to-cis photoisomerization of PAzo led to an increase in the π–π* transition intensity, which might result from the characteristic photochemical phase transition of liquid crystalline azopolymers PAzo. As is known, the trans-Azo groups in liquid crystalline azopolymers preferably orient perpendicular to the substrate.160 Upon UV irradiation, the azopolymer changed from a “frozen” liquid crystalline state to an amorphous state. On one hand, the π–π* transition band decreased due to the partial photoisomerization of trans-isomers to cis-isomers. On the other hand, the π–π* transition band increased because a more random orientation of azobenzene chromophores was formed by shifting away from the perpendicular orientation. From the DSC measurements shown in Fig. 19e, the cis–trans enthalpy difference was found to be 12.2 kJ mol−1 (14.4 J g−1 or 4.4 W h kg−1) for PmAzo and 54.8 kJ mol−1 (125.2 J g−1 or 34.8 W h kg−1) for PAzo. The experimental results indicated that cis-Azo conversion of 60–70% upon monochromatic irradiation was achieved through the selective blocking of light that could induce cis–trans back-isomerization. It is expected that a remarkable enhancement in the solar efficiency could be achieved by the rational device design and improved spectral overlap.
In summary, polymer-templated Azo-STFs offer the possibility of tuning the monomer structure and polymer backbone to enhance the solar energy storage capacity, light absorption efficiency, and photoisomerization degree, and allow the collection of photons over a wide range of the solar spectrum. Table 3 summarizes the ED, half-life, and cis ↔ trans state of polymer-templated azobenzene STF materials. Compared to carbon-templated Azo-STFs, polymer-templated Azo-STFs have relatively lower EDs and half-lives. Moreover, Azo-based polymers can be easily integrated into existing heating equipment and may have tremendous potential for the development of novel energy storage and heat release applications because of their solid state, controllable liquid-to-crystal transition for extra energy, and triggerabilty for heat release. This is the most important advantage of polymer-templated Azo-STF materials.
Table 3 Parameters related to polymer-templated Azo-STFs




Polymer-templated Azo-STFs
Energy density

τ
1/2

State
Ref.


(kJ mol−1)
(J g−1)
(W h kg−1)





a No data were found in the references.






13





104
29
55 h
Solid

148




14-a





373–469
103–169




Powder

151




14-b





337–551
94–153




Powder

151




14-c





395–625 (698 is the highest)
110–174




Powder

151




15





85–95
24–26
75 h
Solid

152




16

97
128
36




Liquid ↔ crystals

153




17

173 (the highest)
239
66
98 h (monomer)
Liquid ↔ crystals

154




19a

12
14
4
16
Liquid

80




19b

55
125
35
12
Liquid

80






4. Emerging strategies toward efficient solar thermal fuels
The Azo-STF technology has proven to be an efficient, very promising, and versatile tool for solar-thermal conversion and storage solutions. STF materials such as pure azobenzene derivatives, nanocarbon-templated azobenzene hybrids, and polymer-templated azobenzene have shown their potential for favorable solar spectrum matching, stimulated heat release, and robust, multicycle systems. In addition, these systems are being re-explored using modern computational approaches which bring new opportunities for future molecular design. Although great steps have been taken with regard to Azo-STF materials, the development is still in a very preliminary stage. This fast-growing research field is still restricted by their low ED, short half-life, irreversible degradation, and small overlap with the solar spectrum. However, challenges are also opportunities. In this section, we discuss the emerging molecular design of Azo-STFs with high-energy storage capacities as a strategy to overcome the aforementioned limitations.
4.1 Solar thermal fuels with high energy density
The maximum ED of Azo-STFs is typically determined by both the standard free energy of the cis-to-trans isomerization reaction (ΔHstorage) and the fraction of the cis-isomer in the photostationary state. Thus, the strategy for increasing the ED is mainly focused on these two aspects. Below, we discuss several strategies that can increase the ED of Azo-STFs.

4.1.1 Azo-STFs based on phase-change systems. 
The phase change of a material is closely related to intermolecular interactions, such as van der Waals forces, dipolar interactions, and hydrogen bonding. In addition, the difference between the trans and cis states of azobenzene can cause a change in the geometry, length, planarity, and dipole moment. The collective change in these intermolecular interactions in such materials eventually causes the macroscopic solid–liquid phase transition. The solid–liquid phase transition can bring extra energy to the azobenzene in the exothermic process. Therefore, the trans and cis states affect the material phase, giving leverage to the storage ED (see in Fig. 20). Furthermore, phase transitions of matter are generally induced by heat. In contrast, azobenzene undergoes photoinduced transition between solid and liquid phases at a constant temperature. Thus, the concept of utilizing the structural difference between the trans and cis states of azobenzene to influence the phase change properties and increase the ED of Azo-STFs is interesting and promising.
 Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of a photoinduced crystal-to-liquid phase transition and its associated enthalpy change. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Although the previous works mentioned in Section 3 have already demonstrated that the solid–liquid phase change characteristic of azobenzene derivatives could impart extra energy to the STFs,153–155 the development is still in a nascent stage. Many basic challenges and critical issues remain to be resolved. The phase transition temperature of azobenzene derivatives is generally above 80 °C, which inhibits its practical applications. If we can lower the phase transition temperature and design an azobenzene derivative, in which the trans form of azobenzene is solid but the cis form is liquid at a relatively lower temperature (or even at room temperature), we can greatly contribute to the existing PCMs. Based on these considerations, we believe that the next research direction of phase-change Azo-STFs would involve the exploitation of chemistry associated with the design and development of molecular systems. Luckily, the ability of a wide variety of azobenzene derivatives to undergo photoinduced reversible phase changes has been recognized for almost two decades.161–166 Plenty of macrocyclic and linearly structured azobenzene derivatives have already been discovered, which can help us explore the potential of phase-change Azo-STF systems.


4.1.2 Azo-STFs based on dynamic covalent bond systems. 
Dynamic covalent bonds, i.e., reversible covalent bonds, can form under one condition and cleave in another under diverse external stimuli such as light, temperature, pH, oxidation, and reduction.167,168 Based on the bond connections, dynamic covalent bonds can be categorized into C–N bonds, C–C bonds, C–O bonds, C–S bonds, S–S bonds, and B–O bonds (as summarized in Table 1 of ref. 138 and 169 in addition to Se–Se and Se–N bonds developed by Zhang and Xu recently).170–174 Dynamic covalent bonds and azobenzene share three common aspects: (i) they transform from one stable state to another under external stimuli, (ii) they involve the cleavage and reformation of chemical bonds (rotation or inversion of NN for azobenzene and formation and cleavage of covalent bonds for dynamic covalent bonds) resulting in energy change, and (iii) they exhibit superior reversibility and cyclability. These similarities provide the opportunity to introduce dynamic covalent bonds into Azo-STF materials.175,176Fig. 21 shows the basic mechanism of increasing the ED of a STF system by combining azobenzene with dynamic covalent bonds. It can be foreseeable that the combination of dynamic covalent bonds and Azo-STFs will greatly increase the ED of existing Azo-STFs and may endow them with other surprising properties such as changeability and tunability. According to the Pauling equation, the bond energy of a disulfide bond is estimated as 240 kJ mol−1,177 which is more than four times that of pristine azobenzene. If we can combine the dynamic nature of disulfide bonds and the conformation switching property of azobenzene under UV irradiation through proper molecular design, we will probably achieve an ultrahigh-ED Azo-STF material. The design and synthesis of Azo-polymers based on disulfide metathesis are currently underway in our research group.
 Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of a STF system that combines azobenzene and dynamic covalent bonds. 


4.1.3 Fraction of cis-Azo. 
Another strategy for increasing the ED of Azo-STFs is to increase the fraction of cis-Azo in the photostationary state. The photostationary state of azobenzene contains not only the cis-isomer, but also the trans-isomer. It is easy to understand that the higher the quantum yield, the greater will be the cis-Azo fraction in the photostationary state. Thus, we should have the ability to control the degree and rate of photoisomerization and back-isomerization. Many factors can influence the quantum yield and photoisomerization mechanism, including the state of azobenzene,178 thermal isomerization of cis-Azo,109,179 irradiation wavelength,118,180,181 solvent properties,182–184 substituents on the phenyl rings of azobenzene,108,185–187 temperature,183,188–190 energy gap between the π–π* and n–π* states,111,127 and pressure.191–193
There is a paucity of literature on the quantum yield of photoisomerization measured in the solid state.178,194–196 This is mainly because photoisomerization is not uniform across the entire film thickness, and the degree of photoisomerization largely depends on the local light intensity. As a result, the pattern describing the trans-to-cis conversion in the solid state exhibited a more complex problem than in solution. In fact, the experimental procedure is more intractable than in solution because of the spatial distribution of light intensity.197 Therefore, much effort has been focused on factors affecting the isomerization of azobenzene molecules in the liquid state.
Polarity and viscosity can influence the isomerization mechanism. Burdette et al.81 summarized the polarity and viscosity of solvents that affect the quantum yield of isomerization of azobenzene. Non-viscous polar solvents were found to favor rotation, while inversion was preferred in viscous non-polar solvents. Serra et al.198 investigated the kinetics of photoisomerization and thermal isomerization of an azobenzene-containing acrylate molecule in solvents with different polarities (chloroform, toluene, and N-methylpyrrolidone) mixed with different contents of polystyrene to increase the viscosity. The results indicated that the photoisomerization constant was slightly correlated with solvent polarity, whereas the thermal isomerization constant was largely dependent on solvent viscosity and polarity.
Several studies188,189 have shown that the quantum yield of photoisomerization could not be significantly affected by temperature; however, the quantum yield of back-isomerization decreases significantly with an increase in temperature. Yoshii et al.190 investigated the photoisomerization of azobenzene at low temperatures, which indicated that the trans-to-cis isomerization cannot be frozen out completely even at 4 K. Besides, the thermal back-conversion should be considered when analyzing the photoisomerization quantum yield. Many theoretical and experimental studies111,199,200 have indicated that rotation and inversion might be the pathways for thermal isomerization. Hecht et al.201 carried out an extensive theoretical study on the cis-to-trans isomerization of substituted azobenzenes (type, number, and substitution position) in a polarizable environment and gas phase. In the case of a single substituent, the linear transition state could be efficiently stabilized with EWGs at ortho and para positions. In the case of two or three substituents, substitution on one side of the benzene ring has an accumulative effect on kinetics and activation energies, whereas, for the substitution on both the phenyl rings, no simple additivity rule was discovered. In the case of 4-donor–4′-acceptor-substituted azobenzene, the isomerization mechanism relied on the solvent, and inversion was preferred in nonpolar solvents while rotation in polar environments. Furthermore, the 4-donor–4′-acceptor-substituted azobenzene showed a lower energy of the transition state and faster rate of thermal isomerization. With increasing solvent polarity, the activation energy decreased, whereas the thermal back-isomerization rate increased.202,203 Moreover, hydrogen-bonding solvents were found to accelerate the cis-to-trans isomerization compared to aprotic solvents with a similar polarity.204,205
Most importantly, the substituents of azobenzene could dramatically change the isomerization of azobenzene by steric and electronic effects.206 The photoisomerization of EDG-functionalized azobenzene has been well studied using the time-resolved spectroscopic methods.117,184 It shows a rapid photoisomerization that leads to the lowest lying π–π* transition. Roitberg et al.108 studied a series of azobenzene derivatives to determine the substituent effects on the isomerization pathways by using ab initio methods. They have found that appending EDGs to the phenyl rings of azobenzene could increase the ground-state inversion barrier height, resulting in a more difficult back-reversion. In contrast, EWGs were found to lower the same barrier. p-Nitroazobenzene as a typical EWG-functionalized azobenzene has been investigated by resonance Raman spectroscopy.207 It was observed that within 20 fs of photoexcitation of p-nitroazobenzene, the stretching vibrations of NN and C–N bonds undergo great changes and the unsubstituted phenyl ring and the nitro stretching vibrations are also significantly distorted. Furthermore, for di-substituted azobenzenes, such as p-diaminoazobenzene, the symmetric di-substitution could influence the S0 isomerization surface.206 In 4-donor–4′-acceptor-substituted azobenzene, photoisomerization is dominated by rotation. The character of its excited states could be strongly altered through the push–pull substitution of azobenzene.208,209
In the above discussion, the factors affecting the isomerization reaction of azobenzene photoswitches are presented with the aim of tuning the switching process. Upon light absorption, azobenzene will go through various transformations, which are associated with photoisomerization and other energy dissipation processes. The degree of photoisomerization and the rate of thermal isomerization of azobenzene depend on factors such as the polarity and viscidity of the solvent, temperature, free volume, thermal isomerization, and substituents. Thus, when designing high-ED Azo-STF materials, we should consider these factors as much as possible so that the maximum fraction of cis-Azo can be achieved in the photostationary state.

4.2 Solar thermal fuels with long-term thermal storage
It is well known that the half-life of azobenzene is strongly dependent on the energy barrier of cis-to-trans reversion. In most azobenzene derivatives, τ1/2 is approximately from minutes to hours or a couple of days. A short-lived cis-Azo implies that strong light irradiation is required to maintain a large fraction of the cis-isomer in the photostationary state; this will further shorten the half-life owing to the thermal radiation of the intense light source. This limitation is undesirable for Azo-STFs. Thus, the utility of an Azo-STF is contingent on not only its energy density, but also its half-life. It is a very challenging task to increase the half-life of azobenzene while retaining a high ED for Azo-STFs. In the past few years, scientists have developed a couple of newly designed azobenzene photoswitches that may provide the optimum solution to this problem.
2,2′-Ethylene-bridged azobenzene (br-Azo) refers to a class of azobenzene that bridges an ethylene linker at the two ortho-positions of azobenzene.156,210 Such a short bridge severely strains and distorts the trans-isomer, which leads to the existence of the trans form of br-Azo in two conformations: chair and twisted forms. On the other hand, the cis-isomer has a boat configuration, which is more stable than the trans-isomer (Fig. 22a).211 Interestingly, introducing an ethylene bridge leads to two odd consequences: (i) the cis form of azobenzene becomes thermodynamically more stable (the half-life was found to be 4.5 h at 28.5 °C), and (ii) the trans and cis isomers exhibit very distinct n–π* absorption bands. It turned out that the br-Azo exhibits much superior photophysical properties (such as quantum yields and switching efficiencies) compared to the parent azobenzene and other commonly used azobenzene derivatives.212–216 This makes them ideal candidates for solar harvesting and storage applications. Furthermore, the photoisomerization of br-Azo was studied by nonadiabatic ab initio and density-functional-based molecular dynamics simulation.217–222 It was found that the bridging feature in the trans form of br-Azo does not hinder rotation around the NN bond but renders the twisting of the two phenyl rings around the C–N bonds much slower. A number of br-Azo derivatives have been synthesized in the past decade, some of which have relatively long half-lives (Fig. 22a).211,220,223 We hope that researchers will get some inspiration from these br-Azo compounds.
 Fig. 22  Chemical structures of long half-life azobenzenes: (a) bridged Azo, (b) tetra-ortho-methoxy Azo, (c) ortho-fluoroazobenzenes, and (d) azoheteroarene. 
The tetra-ortho-substituted azobenzene derivatives were found to be highly promising such as the ortho-fluorinated compounds reported by Hecht and Bleger,224,225 and the ortho-methoxy analogues reported by Woolley et al.158Fig. 22b and c summarize the half-lives of the tetra-ortho-substituted azobenzene derivatives. For tetra-ortho-methoxy azobenzene, the substituents at the ortho-position could distort the typically planar structure of the trans-isomers. This distortion is caused by the repulsive interactions between the O and N lone pair electrons, which inevitably destabilizes the energy of the π and π* molecular orbitals. This will increase the energy level of all the orbitals and eventually result in a longer half-life (about 14 days). On the other hand, the F atom as an EWG would lower the electron density in the nearby NN bond, resulting in a decrease in the n-orbital energy and stabilization of the cis form of F-Azo, thereby exhibiting an unprecedented long half-life (τ1/2 = 700 days at 25 °C). Thus, the tetra-ortho-substituted azobenzenes proved great candidates for long-term STFs.
Fuchter and co-workers recently reported an alternative approach, wherein one of the aryl rings from the conventional azobenzene family was displaced by a five-membered heteroaromatic ring, i.e., azoheteroarenes (Fig. 22d).226–229 Although the new class of azobenzene photoswitches is relatively understudied, they have significant potential (excellent photoswitching property and long cis-isomer half-life) as compared to other more common azobenzene counterparts. The computational and experimental studies revealed that the structural changes, such as the substitution of the phenyl ring, the modification of the heteroaromatic ring, and the connecting position of the ring relative to the azo group, significantly affect the performance of the novel azobenzene class.230–234 By tuning the heteroaromatic ring, the half-lives of cis-azoheteroarene compounds could be tuned from seconds to minutes, hours, days and even to years. Due to the large tunability of half-lives, and the predictable properties, it is expected that the azoheteroaryl photoswitches will show promising characteristics in the area of Azo-STF applications.
4.3 Solar thermal fuels covering full solar spectrum
The charging of Azo-STFs that have been reported usually requires UV irradiation. However, sunlight contains only about 5% UV light, which severely limits the Azo-STF efficiency. Besides, the organic materials could be damaged by some UV-induced side reactions. It is very important to develop novel Azo-STF materials that could respond to visible and near-infrared light. However, visible light poses an obstacle to the energy storage of Azo-STFs because it can reverse the charge process by converting the high-energy cis-isomers back to low-energy trans-isomers. Therefore, the fabrication of Azo-STFs that can operate efficiently under full-spectrum solar irradiation is fascinating but also challenging.
In the past few years, researchers have successfully designed diverse azobenzene photoswitches that could be stimulated with visible and infrared light.235–247 These azobenzene molecules are mainly applied to biological fields such as in optically controlled drug delivery, photocontrolled ion channels, and biomolecular structures in intracellular environments.248–250 With these existing studies, it may be possible to have an enlightening effect on the molecular design of STF-related applications.
It has been well documented that introducing substituents to azobenzene could change its absorption bands.81 Previous studies showed that EDGs (such as –NH2 and –OH) substituted at the para-position of azobenzene could shift the absorption band to longer wavelengths, and the order of the increasing red-shift effect is H < OH < NH2 < N(CH3)2.251 The 4-donor–4′-acceptor-substituted azobenzene (push–pull Azo) usually has a long wavelength absorption, which is caused by a push–pull system with an EDG on one side of the azobenzene and an EWG on the other.252 Additionally, many studies introduced such push–pull Azos into polymer films through supramolecular interactions.253–255 Although the absorption bands of supramolecular azopolymers are tunable, the half-lives of such materials largely depend on the type of substituents and solvents. This may prove difficult in practical applications.
Researchers have reported some examples of newly designed azobenzene photoswitches in recent years that can be fully photoconverted with visible light. Fig. 23 lists the maximum irradiation wavelengths for isomerization of different types of azobenzene. The first examples, a tetra-ortho-methoxy (27) and an ethylene-bridged azobenzene (22), described by Woolley et al.256 and Herges et al.,156 respectively, were based on the same strategy of separating the n–π* transitions of the cis and trans isomers. The split of the two n–π* absorption bands allowed their application to trigger both forward and reverse isomerization under visible-light irradiation. In the meantime, the π–π* band in the UV region could induce the cis-to-trans isomerization. Beyond that, Herges's group successfully synthesized oxygen and sulfur-bridged azobenzenes, as illustrated in Fig. 23 (25).223 These two azobenzene derivatives could be switched with a far-red (650 nm) light source. Compared to the pristine br-Azo, the sulfur system exhibited higher thermal stability of 3.5 days. The superior photophysical properties of the sulfur-bridged azobenzene system make it an ideal candidate for STF materials. For decades, Woolley and co-workers have been devoted to the exploration of azobenzene-based photoswitching that was employed to control biomolecular targets such as proteins, peptides, and nucleic acids in vitro and in cell extracts through photostimulation.86,248–258 As a result, tetra-ortho-substituted azobenzenes with bulky EDGs such as Cl and Br atoms and thioether groups were synthesized, with which they can be effectively isomerized under red light irradiation (26). All these studies proved that the absorption bands could be tuned by changing the tetra-ortho-substituted groups; thus, we can use this utility tool to develop extended versions of the Azo-STF application.
 Fig. 23  Maximum irradiation wavelength for isomerization of different types of azobenzene. 
Later, Aprahamian and co-workers reported a new type of azobenzene, namely BF2-coordinated azobenzene, in which the positions of π–π* and n–π* transition energy levels were reversed, allowing the conversion of trans-Azo to cis-Azo under visible light.259 Further, density functional theory calculations indicated that an increase in electron density could red-shift the absorption bands in the system. The authors verified the hypothesis by grafting EDGs onto para- and ortho-positions of BF2-Azo (Fig. 23, 24).260,261 Altering the R1 and R2 groups enabled the shifting of absorption bands to the red and even near infrared regions. However, Bai et al.262 found that with an increase in electron-donating ability, the thermal cis-to-trans isomerization rates were accelerated, and therefore, the corresponding half-lives were shortened.
Much progress has been achieved in tuning the long wavelength photoconversion of azobenzene as shown in Fig. 23. Various strategies, which rely on separating the n–π* bands in the visible range or red-shifting the π–π* transition absorption band, have been applied to accomplish this target, including: (i) the introduction of EWGs or EDGs at the ortho or para position, (ii) the use of a push–pull system, and (iii) the utilization of bridged azobenzene, tetra-ortho-position substituted azobenzene, and BF2-coordinated azobenzene derivatives. In general, shifting the absorption bands of azobenzene to longer wavelengths often results in a fast cis-to-trans thermal isomerization, which is undesirable for STF application.263,264 Thus, sometimes, some small compromises need to be made to balance this conflict, thereby achieving the maximum solar energy capacity and conversion efficiency.
Apart from this, other red-shifted azobenzene derivatives are also used for photocontrol.249,258,265–268 However, we did not discuss these compounds here because they contain too many undesirable groups that cause a huge reduction in thermal stability or ED. We can summarize the general principle of designing full-spectrum STFs in that the target azobenzene can be switched upon visible-light irradiation without enhancing the thermal isomerization rate.
5. Conclusions and perspectives
In conclusion, azobenzene-based solar thermal fuels have been proven to be a promising and efficient pathway for solar-thermal conversion and storage solutions. In this context, pure azobenzene derivatives, nanocarbon-templated azobenzene, and polymer-templated azobenzene have attracted increasing attention over the past few years. However, the fast-growing research field is restricted by low ED, low quantum yield, short half-life, narrow overlap with the solar spectrum, and irreversible degradation. Much effort has been devoted by researchers to counterbalance these shortcomings of Azo-STF materials, such as by grafting functional chemical groups to improve the ED and thermal stability, combining PCMs or carbon nanomaterials to facilitate practical applications of the materials, and tuning the microstructures of the monomers and polymer backbones to maximize the absorption efficiency. Undoubtedly, molecular design engineering and microstructure optimization are paramount for achieving Azo-STFs with high-energy storage capacities. To realize the practical applications of Azo-STFs, the following criteria, i.e., “three high and three low,” should be fulfilled: (i) The storage energy density (ΔHstorage) must be as high as possible. (ii) The photoisomerization degree from trans-Azo to cis-Azo should be high to increase the heat release. (iii) The energy barrier (ΔEa) from cis-Azo to trans-Azo should be high enough to enable the necessary long-term storage. (iv) The absorption spectrum should be optimized with respect to the solar emission spectrum to achieve maximal efficiency. In other words, maximum light absorption efficiency should be achieved with minimum illumination. (v) The photoactive materials should exhibit low degradation and strong cyclability performance to satisfy the stability requirements even under the extreme circumstances such as high temperatures, freezing cold, strong acidity, high salinity, etc. (vi) The cost of the Azo-STF materials must be competitive.
However, achieving simultaneous improvements in ED, energy barriers, and absorption efficiency, restraining degradation, and reducing cost are still a challenging task. For example, the trans form of azobenzene photoswitches cannot be fully converted into the cis form under unfiltered sunlight. It is of paramount importance to develop a very facile and more general methodology for the fabrication of Azo-STFs that work efficiently under full-spectrum solar irradiation in the future. A large red-shift in the absorption wavelength of azobenzene photoswitches is required to achieve full-spectrum Azo-STFs, but it inevitably leads to undesirable reduction in ED and thermal stability. Therefore, to accomplish the maximum solar energy capacity and conversion efficiency, we should make a trade-off between different parameters of Azo-STFs such as ED, lifetime, and absorption efficiency. Besides, it is also very important to further explore the underlying mechanisms of STF materials such as EDG/EWG substituents, steric configuration, grafting density, and inter- or intra-molecular interaction. It should be noted that the field of Azo-STFs is still in its nascent stage. New methods for preparing Azo-STF materials should be developed such as controlled self-assembly, electrospinning, electropolymerization, 3D printing, injection molding, and calendar molding. Future investigations of solid-state Azo-STFs could allow the possibility of integrating them into various existing solid-state devices for deicing, seawater desalination, manufacturing salt, and in thermal-driven generators. Azo-STFs could also find important applications in both military and consumer-oriented areas such as deep space probes, thermal power systems, temperature control systems in space stations, warm clothing, solar blankets, thermal-powered cars, and solar water heaters. Additionally, future research can present infinite golden opportunities. For example, the combination of Azo-STFs with directional heat-conduction materials afforded directional transport of heat energy. The combination of Azo-STFs with thermoelectric materials may enhance the thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT). In summary, there is much room for improvement of Azo-STFs in terms of fundamental theory and practical applications. There is no doubt that Azo-STFs pave new avenues for solar energy harvesting and storage. High ED, long storage lifetime, controllable heat release, and outstanding cycling stability have been and will continue to be hot topics in the area of Azo-STFs. Future investigations of these promising topics with infinite possibilities will not only broaden our knowledge of Azo-STFs, but also promote their diverse applications as solar energy harvesting and storage materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholars (No. 51425306), the State Key Program of National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51633007), the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2016YFA0202302), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51573125 and 51573147). W.F. designed and supervised the project; L. Q. D. and L. W. investigated and wrote the original draft; L. Q. D., Y. Y. F., L. W. and W. F. checked the manuscript in detail. The authors sincerely appreciate the anonymous referees for valuable suggestions.
Notes and references
A. Nicola and B. Vincenzo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52–66 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. Perez and R. Perez, IEA-SHCP-Newsletter,  2015, vol. 62, pp. 4–6 Search PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Dincer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2000, 4, 157–175 CrossRef .
D. Abbott, Proc. IEEE, 2010, 98, 42–66 Search PubMed .
T. J. Kucharski, Y. C. Tian, S. Akbulatov and R. Boulatov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4449–4472 RSC .
X. Huang, X. Y. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Wu, S. W. Cheng, Y. J. Cheng and C. S. Hsu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1113–1154 RSC .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Z. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Graetzel, R. A. J. Janssen, D. B. Mitzi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2012, 488, 304–312 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Janssen and N. Jenny, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1847–1858 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Kalogirou, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2004, 30, 231–295 CrossRef .
C. G. Granqvist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1529–1598 CrossRef .

          Z. A. A. Majid, M. Y. Othman, M. H. Ruslan, S. Mat, B. Ali, A. Zaharim and K. Sopian, Energy Environ. Eng. S.,  2009, pp. 342–346 Search PubMed .
A. Fernandez-Garcia, E. Zarza, L. Valenzuela and M. Perez, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 1695–1721 CrossRef .
T. P. Otanicar, P. E. Phelan, R. S. Prasher, G. Rosengarten and R. A. Taylor, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2010, 2, 033102 CrossRef .
Y. Tian and C. Y. Zhao, Appl. Energy, 2013, 104, 538–553 CrossRef .
D. A. Baharoon, H. A. Rahman, W. Z. W. Omar and S. O. Fadhl, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 41, 996–1027 CrossRef .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 26–58 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, X. L. Wang, Y. S. Jia, X. B. Chen, H. X. Han and C. Li, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9987–10043 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu and J. C. Grossman, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7046–7050 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Lennartson, A. Roffey and K. Moth-Poulsen, Tetrahedron Lett., 2015, 56, 1457–1465 CrossRef .
G. Jones, T. E. Reinhardt and W. R. Bergmark, Sol. Energy, 1978, 20, 241–248 CrossRef .
G. Jones, S. H. Chiang and P. T. Xuan, J. Photochem., 1979, 10, 1–18 CrossRef .
Z. Yoshida, J. Photochem., 1985, 29, 27–40 CrossRef .
D. Donati, G. Guarini and P. Sarti-fantoni, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 1972, 17, 187–195 CrossRef .
G. Guarini and P. Sarti-Fantoni, Mol. Cryst., 1970, 6, 423 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, F. Deng, F. N. Castellano and J. H. Kim, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 382–388 CrossRef .
R. R. Islangulov and F. N. Castellano, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5957–5959 CrossRef PubMed .
D. V. Kozlov and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2860–2861 RSC .
R. R. Islangulov, D. V. Kozlov and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3776–3778 RSC .
T. N. Singh-Rachford, J. Lott, C. Weder and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12007–12014 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Vadrucci, C. Weder and Y. C. Simon, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 120–124 RSC .
N. Kimizuka, N. Yanai and M. Morikawa, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 12304–12322 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Waldeck, Chem. Rev., 1991, 91, 415–436 CrossRef .
J. M. Hicks, M. T. Vandersall, E. V. Sitzmann and K. B. Eisenthal, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1987, 135, 413–420 CrossRef .
V. Caia, G. Cum, R. Gallo, V. Mancini and E. Pitoni, Tetrahedron Lett., 1983, 24, 3903–3904 CrossRef .
C. Bastianelli, V. Caia, G. Cum, R. Gallo and V. Mancini, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1991, 679–683 RSC .
D. Schulte-Frohlinde, H. Blume and H. Güsten, J. Phys. Chem., 1962, 66, 2486–2491 CrossRef .
K. P. C. Vollhardt and T. W. Weidman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 1676–1677 CrossRef .
K. P. C. Vollhardt and T. W. Weidman, Organometallics, 1984, 3, 82–86 CrossRef .
R. Boese, J. K. Cammack, A. J. Matzger, K. Pflug, W. B. Tolman, K. P. C. Vollhardt and T. W. Weidman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 6757–6773 CrossRef .
Y. Kanai, V. Srinivasan, S. K. Meier, K. P. C. Vollhardt and J. C. Grossman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8926–8929 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Cho, L. Berbil-Bautista, I. V. Pechenezhskiy, N. Levy, S. K. Meier, V. Srinivasan, Y. Kanai, J. C. Grossman, K. P. C. Vollhardt and M. F. Crommie, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3701–3706 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Moth-Poulsen, D. Coso, K. Borjesson, N. Vinokurov, S. K. Meier, A. Majumdar, K. P. C. Vollhardt and R. A. Segalman, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8534–8537 RSC .
Z. R. Hou, S. C. Nguyen, J. P. Lomont, C. B. Harris, N. Vinokurov and K. P. C. Vollhardt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7466–7469 RSC .
K. Borjesson, D. Coso, V. Gray, J. C. Grossman, J. Q. Guan, C. B. Harris, N. Hertkorn, Z. R. Hou, Y. Kanai, D. Lee, J. P. Lomont, A. Majumdar, S. K. Meier, K. Moth-Poulsen, R. L. Myrabo, S. C. Nguyen, R. A. Segalman, V. Srinivasan, W. B. Tolman, N. Vinokurov, K. P. C. Vollhardt and T. W. Weidman, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 15587–15604 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Borjesson, A. Lennartson and K. Moth-Poulsen, J. Fluorine Chem., 2014, 161, 24–28 CrossRef .
B. Zhu, O. Š. Miljanić, K. P. C. Vollhardt and M. J. West, Synthesis, 2005, 3373–3379 Search PubMed .
C. Philippopoulos, D. Economou, C. Economou and J. Marangozis, Ind. Eng. Chem. Prod. Res. Dev., 1983, 22, 627–633 CrossRef .
V. Gray, A. Lennartson, P. Ratanalert, K. Borjesson and K. Moth-Poulsen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5330–5332 RSC .
O. Brummel, D. Besold, T. Dopper, Y. L. Wu, S. Bochmann, F. Lazzari, F. Waidhas, U. Bauer, P. Bachmann, C. Papp, H. P. Steinruck, A. Gorling, J. Libuda and J. Bachmann, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1424–1432 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kuisma, A. Lundin, K. Moth-Poulsen, P. Hyldgaard and P. Erhart, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1786–1794 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Kuisma, A. M. Lundin, K. Moth-Poulsen, P. Hyldgaard and P. Erhart, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3635–3645 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Brummel, F. Waidhas, U. Bauer, Y. L. Wu, S. Bochmann, H. P. Steinruck, C. Papp, J. Bachmann and J. Libuda, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2819–2825 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Dreos, K. Borjesson, Z. H. Wang, A. Roffey, Z. Norwood, D. Kushnir and K. Moth-Poulsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 728–734 RSC .
J. Gurke, M. Quick, N. P. Ernsting and S. Hecht, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2150–2153 RSC .
K. Jorner, A. Dreos, R. Emanuelsson, O. El Bakouri, I. F. Galvan, K. Borjesson, F. Feixas, R. Lindh, B. Zietz, K. Moth-Poulsen and H. Ottosson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12369–12378 RSC .
V. A. Bren, D. D. Alexander, I. M. Vladimir and V. A. Chernoivanov, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1991, 60, 451–469 CrossRef .
D. D. Alexander, A. B. Vladimir and V. A. Chernoivanov, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2002, 71, 917–927 CrossRef .
H. Goerner, C. Fischer, S. Gierisch and J. Daub, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 4110–4117 CrossRef .
H. Görner, C. Fischer and J. Daub, J.
Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1995, 85, 217–224 CrossRef .
A. Plaquet, B. Champagne, F. Castet, L. Ducasse, E. Bogdan, V. Rodriguez and J.-L. Pozzo, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 1349–1356 RSC .
S. Lara-Avila, A. V. Danilov, S. E. Kubatkin, S. L. Broman, C. R. Parker and M. B. Nielsen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18372–18377 CrossRef .
S. L. Broman, S. Lara-Avila, C. L. Thisted, A. D. Bond, S. Kubatkin, A. Danilov and M. B. Nielsen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4249–4258 CrossRef .
A. Vlasceanu, S. L. Broman, A. S. Hansen, A. B. Skov, M. Cacciarini, A. Kadziola, H. G. Kjaergaard, K. V. Mikkelsen and M. B. Nielsen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 10796–10800 CrossRef PubMed .
A. B. Skov, S. L. Broman, A. S. Gertsen, J. Elm, M. Jevric, M. Cacciarini, A. Kadziola, K. V. Mikkelsen and M. B. Nielsen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 14567–14575 CrossRef PubMed .
A. B. Skov, J. F. Petersen, J. Elm, B. N. Frandsen, M. Santella, M. D. Kilde, H. G. Kjaergaard, K. V. Mikkelsen and M. B. Nielsen, ChemPhotoChem, 2017, 1, 206–212 CrossRef .
Z. H. Wang, J. Udmark, K. Borjesson, R. Rodrigues, A. Roffey, M. Abrahamsson, M. B. Nielsen and K. Moth-Poulsen, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3049–3055 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cacciarini, A. Vlasceanu, M. Jevric and M. B. Nielsen, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5874–5877 RSC .
A. Vlasceanu, B. N. Frandsen, A. B. Skov, A. S. Hansen, M. G. Rasmussen, H. G. Kjaergaard, K. V. Mikkelsen and M. B. Nielsen, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 10398–10407 CrossRef PubMed .
S. L. Broman, M. Jevric, A. D. Bond and M. B. Nielsen, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 41–64 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Kucharski, N. Ferralis, A. M. Kolpak, J. O. Zheng, D. G. Nocera and J. C. Grossman, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 441–447 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Feng, W. Luo and Y. Y. Feng, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6118–6134 RSC .
A. K. Saydjari, P. Weis and S. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601622 CrossRef .
H. M. Bandara and S. C. Burdette, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1809–1825 RSC .

          H. Zollinger, Color Chemistry: Syntheses, Properties, and Applications of Organic Dyes and Pigments, Wiley-VCH,  2003 Search PubMed .
G. S. Hartley, Nature, 1937, 140, 281 CrossRef .
E. Merino, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3835–3853 RSC .
D. Wang and X. Wang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 271–301 CrossRef .
A. A. Beharry and G. A. Woolley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4422–4437 RSC .
L. F. Wu, X. L. Tuo, H. Cheng, Z. Chen and X. G. Wang, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 8005–8013 CrossRef .
Y. N. He, X. G. Wang and Q. X. Zhou, Polymer, 2002, 43, 7325–7333 CrossRef .
B. Priewisch and K. Ruck-Braun, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 2350–2352 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Gunnlaugsson, J. P. Leonard and N. S. Murray, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 1557–1560 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Zhou, T. Zifer, B. M. Wong, K. L. Krafcik, F. Leonard and A. L. Vance, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1028–1033 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. L. Yu, M. Nakano and T. Ikeda, Nature, 2003, 425, 145 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Hosono, T. Kajitani, T. Fukushima, K. Ito, S. Sasaki, M. Takata and T. Aida, Science, 2010, 330, 808–811 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Q. Qin, Y. Y. Feng, W. Luo, C. Cao, W. P. Hu and W. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16453–16460 RSC .
H. K. Bisoyi and Q. Li, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 15089–15166 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Delaire and K. Nakatani, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1817–1845 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. G. Zheng, Y. N. Li, H. K. Bisoyi, L. Wang, T. J. Bunning and Q. Li, Nature, 2016, 531, 352–356 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, D. Chen, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, H. K. Bisoyi, J. Fan, R. S. Zola, G. Q. Li, A. M. Urbas, T. J. Bunning, D. A. Weitz and Q. Li, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 1190–1195 RSC .
R. Hagen and T. Bieringer, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1805–1810 CrossRef .
P. O. Astrand, P. S. Ramanujam, S. Hvilsted, K. L. Bak and S. P. A. Sauer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 3482–3487 CrossRef .
A. S. Matharu, S. Jeeva and P. S. Ramanujam, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1868–1880 RSC .
J. Olmsted, J. Lawrence and G. G. Yee, Sol. Energy, 1983, 30, 271–274 CrossRef .
H. Taoda, K. Hayakawa, K. Kawase and H. Yamakita, J. Chem. Eng. Jpn., 1987, 20, 265–270 CrossRef .
H. K. Bisoyi and Q. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3184–3195 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang and Q. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 1044–1097 RSC .

          E. N. Cho, PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  2017 .

          X. Wang, Azo Polymers, Synthesis, Functions and Applications, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,  2017 Search PubMed .
C. R. Crecca and A. E. Roitberg, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 8188–8203 CrossRef PubMed .
C. W. Chang, Y. C. Lu, T. T. Wang and E. W. G. Diau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10109–10118 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ishikawa, T. Noro and T. Shoda, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 7503–7512 CrossRef .
P. Cattaneo and M. Persico, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 4739–4743 RSC .
T. Schultz, J. Quenneville, B. Levine, A. Toniolo, T. J. Martinez, S. Lochbrunner, M. Schmitt, J. P. Shaffer, M. Z. Zgierski and A. Stolow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 8098–8099 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ciminelli, G. Granucci and M. Persico, Chem. – Eur. J., 2004, 10, 2327–2341 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Stuart, R. R. Frontiera and R. A. Mathies, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 12072–12080 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Conti, M. Garavelli and G. Orlandi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5216–5230 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Tiberio, L. Muccioli, R. Berardi and C. Zannoni, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 1018–1028 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Azuma, N. Tamai, A. Shishido and T. Ikeda, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 288, 77–82 CrossRef .
I. K. Lednev, T. Q. Ye, P. Matousek, M. Towrie, P. Foggi, F. V. R. Neuwahl, S. Umapathy, R. E. Hester and J. N. Moore, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 290, 68–74 CrossRef .
T. Fujino and T. Tahara, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 4203–4210 CrossRef .
H. Satzger, S. Spörlein, C. Root, J. Wachtveitl, W. Zinth and P. Gilch, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 372, 216–223 CrossRef .
Y. C. Lu, E. W. G. Diau and H. Rau, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 2090–2099 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Börjesson, A. Lennartson and K. Moth-Poulsen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 585–590 CrossRef .
A. W. Adamson, A. Vogler, H. Kunkely and R. Wachter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 1298–1300 CrossRef .
K. Masutani, M. Morikawa and N. Kimizuka, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15803–15806 RSC .
E. N. Cho, D. Zhitomirsky, G. G. D. Han, Y. Liu and J. C. Grossman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8679–8687 CrossRef PubMed .
G. G. D. Han, H. S. Li and J. C. Grossman, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Monti, G. Orlandi and P. Palmieri, Chem. Phys., 1982, 71, 87–99 CrossRef .
E. Durgun and J. C. Grossman, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 854–860 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Kolpak and J. C. Grossman, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 034303 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hu, D. Y. Zhang, L. Yu and Y. D. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 518–526 RSC .
Y. Y. Feng, W. Feng, H. Noda, T. Sekino, A. Fujii, M. Ozaki and K. Yoshino, Carbon, 2007, 45, 2445–2448 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Feng, W. Feng, H. Noda, A. Fujii, M. Ozaki, K. Yoshino and K. Yoshino, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 053102 CrossRef .
A. M. Kolpak and J. C. Grossman, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3156–3162 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Du, I. Skachko, F. Duerr, A. Luican and E. Y. Andrei, Nature, 2009, 462, 192–195 CrossRef PubMed .
T. L. Cao, F. Y. Zhao, Z. L. Da, F. X. Qiu, D. Y. Yang, Y. J. Guan, G. R. Cao, Z. R. Zhao, J. X. Li and X. T. Guo, Z. Phys. Chem., 2017, 231, 1797–1814 Search PubMed .
C. J. Xia, M. Ye, B. Q. Zhang, Y. H. Su and Z. Y. Tu, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 56, 105101 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, C. Y. Liu and J. Ma, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19017–19025 RSC .
S. C. Shekar and R. S. Swathi, Carbon, 2018, 126, 489–499 CrossRef .
M. Li, Y. Y. Feng, E. Z. Liu, C. Q. Qin and W. Feng, Sci. China: Technol. Sci., 2016, 59, 1383–1390 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Feng, H. P. Liu, W. Luo, E. Z. Liu, N. Q. Zhao, K. Yoshino and W. Feng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3260 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Luo, Y. Y. Feng, C. Cao, M. Li, E. Z. Liu, S. P. Li, C. Q. Qin, W. P. Hu and W. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11787–11795 RSC .
W. Luo, Y. Y. Feng, C. Q. Qin, M. Li, S. P. Li, C. Cao, P. Long, E. Z. Liu, W. P. Hu, K. Yoshino and W. Feng, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16214–16221 RSC .
W. Feng, S. P. Li, M. Li, C. Q. Qin and Y. Y. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8020–8028 RSC .
X. Z. Zhao, Y. Y. Feng, C. Q. Qin, W. X. Yang, Q. Y. Si and W. Feng, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1395–1404 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bleger, J. Dokic, M. V. Peters, L. Grubert, P. Saalfrank and S. Hecht, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 9930–9940 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bahrenburg, C. M. Sievers, J. B. Schonborn, B. Hartke, F. Renth, F. Temps, C. Nather and F. D. Sonnichsen, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2013, 12, 511–518 RSC .
H. Wang, H. K. Bisoyi, L. Wang, A. M. Urbas, T. J. Bunning and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1627–1631 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhitomirsky, E. Cho and J. C. Grossman, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502006 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Shen and H. Rau, Makromol. Chem., 1991, 192, 945–957 CrossRef .
M. Schönhoff, M. Mertesdorf and M. Lösche, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 7558–7565 CrossRef .
S. P. Jeong, L. A. Renna, C. J. Boyle, H. S. Kwak, E. Harder, W. Damm and D. Venkataraman, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 17773 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhitomirsky and J. C. Grossman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26319–26325 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Ishiba, M. Morikawa, C. Chikara, T. Yamada, K. Iwase, M. Kawakita and N. Kimizuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1532–1536 CrossRef PubMed .
G. D. Han, S. S. Park, Y. Liu, D. Zhitomirsky, E. Cho, M. Dinca and J. C. Grossman, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16157–16165 RSC .
H. W. Zhou, C. G. Xue, P. Weis, Y. Suzuki, S. L. Huang, K. Koynov, G. K. Auernhammer, R. Berger, H. J. Butt and S. Wu, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 145–151 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Siewertsen, H. Neumann, B. Buchheim-Stehn, R. Herges, C. Näther, F. Renth and F. Temps, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15594–15595 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Cheng, Y. Zhang, R. Yin and Y. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4888–4896 RSC .
A. A. Beharry, O. Sadovski and G. A. Woolley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19684–19687 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Weis, D. S. Wang and S. Wu, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 6368–6373 CrossRef .
K. Nishizawa, S. Nagano and T. Seki, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2624–2631 CrossRef .
O. Tsutsumi, T. Kitsunai, A. Kanazawa, T. Shiono and T. Ikeda, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 355–359 CrossRef .
Y. Norikane, Y. Hirai and M. Yoshida, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1770–1772 RSC .
E. Uchida, K. Sakaki, Y. Nakamura, R. Azumi, Y. Hirai, H. Akiyama, M. Yoshida and Y. Norikane, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 17391–17397 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hoshino, E. Uchida, Y. Norikane, R. Azumi, S. Nozawa, A. Tomita, T. Sato, S. Adachi and S. Y. Koshihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9158–9164 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Norikane, E. Uchida, S. Tanaka, K. Fujiwara, E. Koyama, R. Azumi, H. Akiyama, H. Kihara and M. Yoshida, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 5012–5015 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, B. Li, M. He, W. Wang, T. Wang, A. Wang, J. Yu, Z. Wang, S. W. Hong, M. Byun, S. Lin, H. Yu and Z. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4961–4970 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Rowan, S. J. Cantrill, G. R. L. Cousins, J. K. M. Sanders and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 898–952 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Maeda, H. Otsuka and A. Takahara, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 581–604 CrossRef .
Y. Jin, C. Yu, R. J. Denman and W. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6634–6654 RSC .
H. Xu, W. Cao and X. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1647–1658 CrossRef PubMed .
M. E. Belowich and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2003–2024 RSC .
N. Ma, Y. Li, H. Xu, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 442–443 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yi, H. Xu, L. Wang, W. Cao and X. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 9506–9510 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, R. Fang, D. Wang, J. Wang, H. Xu, Y. Wang and X. Zhang, Small, 2015, 11, 1537–1541 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Chen, D. Wang, Y. Yang, Q. Huang, S. Zhu and Z. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700890 CrossRef .
R. J. Wojtecki, M. A. Meador and S. J. Rowan, Nat. Mater., 2010, 10, 14 CrossRef PubMed .
N. K. Kildahl, J. Chem. Educ., 1995, 72, 423 CrossRef .
K. Stranius and K. Borjesson, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41145 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Fujino, S. Y. Arzhantsev and T. Tahara, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 8123–8129 CrossRef .
E. Fischer, M. Frankel and R. Wolovsky, J. Chem. Phys., 1955, 23, 1367 CrossRef .
P. Bortolus and S. Monti, J. Phys. Chem., 1979, 83, 648–652 CrossRef .
N. Siampiringue, G. Guyot, S. Monti and P. Bortolus, J. Photochem., 1987, 37, 185–188 CrossRef .
D. Gegiou, K. A. Muszkat and E. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1968, 90, 12–18 CrossRef .
S. G. Mayer, C. L. Thomsen, M. P. Philpott and P. J. Reid, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 314, 246–254 CrossRef .
H. Rau and E. Lueddecke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 1616–1620 CrossRef .
M. Hagiri, N. Ichinose, C. Zhao, H. Horiuchi, H. Hiratsuka and T. Nakayama, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 391, 297–301 CrossRef .
H. B. Zhang and M. Barra, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2005, 18, 498–503 CrossRef .
E. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1960, 82, 3249–3252 CrossRef .
S. Malkin and E. Fischer, J. Phys. Chem., 1962, 66, 2482–2486 CrossRef .
K. Yoshii, S. Machida and K. Horie, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2000, 38, 3098–3105 CrossRef .
T. Asano, T. Yano and T. Okada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 4900–4904 CrossRef .
E. Bassotti, P. Carbone, A. Credi, M. Di Stefano, S. Masiero, F. Negri, G. Orlandi and G. P. Spada, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 12385–12394 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Asano, T. Okada, S. Shinkai, K. Shigematsu, Y. Kusano and O. Manabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 5161–5165 CrossRef .
I. Mita, K. Horie and K. Hirao, Macromolecules, 1989, 22, 558–563 CrossRef .
Y. Yasushi, H. Hirofumi, I. Hiroshi and K. Yukio, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1990, 63, 1607–1610 CrossRef .
T. Naito, K. Horie and I. Mita, Macromolecules, 1991, 24, 2907–2911 CrossRef .
G. Pariani, A. Bianco, R. Castagna and C. Bertarelli, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 12184–12193 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Serra and E. M. Terentjev, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 981–986 CrossRef .
A. Cembran, F. Bernardi, M. Garavelli, L. Gagliardi and G. Orlandi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3234–3243 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ikegami, N. Kurita, H. Sekino and Y. Ishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 4555–4562 CrossRef .
J. Dokic, M. Gothe, J. Wirth, M. V. Peters, J. Schwarz, S. Hecht and P. Saalfrank, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 6763–6773 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Norio, S. Toshinobu, Y. Hideyuki, I. Etsuko, Y. Shunzo and H. Shigeo, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1976, 49, 1381–1387 CrossRef .
K. Gille, H. Knoll and K. Quitzsch, Int. J. Chem. Kinet., 1999, 31, 337–350 CrossRef .
M. Kojima, S. Nebashi, K. Ogawa and N. Kurita, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2005, 18, 994–1000 CrossRef .
K. S. Schanze, T. F. Mattox and D. G. Whitten, J. Org. Chem., 1983, 48, 2808–2813 CrossRef .
A. A. Blevins and G. J. Blanchard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4962–4968 CrossRef .
N. Biswas, B. Abraham and S. Umapathy, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 9397–9406 CrossRef .
N. Biswas and S. Umapathy, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 5526–5536 CrossRef .
B. Schmidt, C. Sobotta, S. Malkmus, S. Laimgruber, M. Braun, W. Zinth and P. Gilch, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 4399–4404 CrossRef .
H. Duval, Bull. Soc. Chim. Fr., 1910, 7, 727–732 Search PubMed .
H. Sell, C. Näther and R. Herges, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2013, 9, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Tauer and R. Machinek, Liebigs Ann., 1996, 1996, 1213–1216 CrossRef .
M. Bockmann, N. L. Doltsinis and D. Marx, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3382–3384 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Carstensen, J. Sielk, J. B. Schonborn, G. Granucci and B. Hartke, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 124305 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, S. Yuan, W. H. Fang and Y. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 10027–10034 CrossRef PubMed .
N. O. Carstensen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 15017–15026 RSC .
C. W. Jiang, R. H. Xie, F. L. Li and R. E. Allen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 244–249 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bockmann, N. L. Doltsinis and D. Marx, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 22A505 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Gao, B. Li, P. Y. Zhang and K. L. Han, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 204305 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Joshi, M. J. Mitchell, D. Bruce, A. J. Lough and H. Yan, Tetrahedron, 2012, 68, 8670–8676 CrossRef .
J. Cao, L. H. Liu, W. H. Fang, Z. Z. Xie and Y. Zhang, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 134306 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, Y. Wang and Q. Fang, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 146, 064308 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hammerich, C. Schütt, C. Stähler, P. Lentes, F. Röhricht, R. Höppner and R. Herges, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13111–13114 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bleger, J. Schwarz, A. M. Brouwer and S. Hecht, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20597–20600 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Knie, M. Utecht, F. Zhao, H. Kulla, S. Kovalenko, A. M. Brouwer, P. Saalfrank, S. Hecht and D. Bléger, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 16492–16501 CrossRef PubMed .
C. E. Weston, R. D. Richardson, P. R. Haycock, A. J. White and M. J. Fuchter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11878–11881 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Calbo, C. E. Weston, A. J. P. White, H. S. Rzepa, J. Contreras-García and M. J. Fuchter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1261–1274 CrossRef PubMed .
C. E. Weston, R. D. Richardson and M. J. Fuchter, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4521–4524 RSC .
C. E. Weston, A. Krämer, F. Colin, Ö. Yildiz, M. G. J. Baud, F. J. Meyer-Almes and M. J. Fuchter, ACS Infect. Dis., 2017, 3, 152–161 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Otsuki, K. Suwa, K. Narutaki, C. Sinha, I. Yoshikawa and K. Araki, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 8064–8069 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Otsuki, K. Suwa, K. K. Sarker and C. Sinha, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 1403–1409 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kawai, D. Kawamori, T. Monji, T. Asaka, N. Akai and K. Shibuya, Chem. Lett., 2010, 39, 230–231 CrossRef .
T. Wendler, C. Schütt, C. Näther and R. Herges, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 3284–3287 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Stricker, E.-C. Fritz, M. Peterlechner, N. L. Doltsinis and B. J. Ravoo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4547–4554 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Dong, Y. N. Li, C. M. Xue, L. D. Sun, C. H. Yan and Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4480–4483 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Dong, Y. Li, R. Liu, Y. F. Wang, H. K. Bisoyi, L. D. Sun, C. H. Yan and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2065–2069 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bleger and S. Hecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11338–11349 CrossRef PubMed .
M. X. Dong, A. Babalhavaeji, S. Samanta, A. A. Beharry and G. A. Woolley, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2662–2670 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Philipp and W. Si, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1700220 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Si and B. Hans-Jürgen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1208–1226 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, A. Urbas. and Q. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 247–251 CrossRef .
L. Wang, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, H. K. Bisoyi, J. Xiang, G. Singh, R. S. Zola, S. Kumar, O. D. Lavrentovich, A. Urbas and Q. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15039–15042 RSC .
K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, L. Wang, C. Xue, G. Singh, S. Kumar, A. Urbas and Q. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9845–9848 RSC .
X. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Chen, C. Li, G. Hou, X. Liu, X. Zhang, W. He and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 691–694 RSC .
X. Chen, L. Wang, C. Li, J. Xiao, H. Ding, X. Liu, X. Zhang, W. He and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10097–10099 RSC .
Y. H. Lee, L. Wang, H. Yang and S. T. Wu, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 22658–22666 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, Liq. Cryst., 2016, 43, 2062–2078 CrossRef .
O. Sadovski, A. A. Beharry, F. Zhang and G. A. Woolley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1484–1486 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Samanta, A. Babalhavaeji, M. X. Dong and G. A. Woolley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 14127–14130 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Samanta, C. Qin, A. J. Lough and G. A. Woolley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6452–6455 CrossRef PubMed .
W. R. Brode, J. H. Gould and G. M. Wyman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1952, 74, 4641–4646 CrossRef .
J. Griffiths, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1972, 1, 481–493 RSC .
J. Vapaavuori, C. G. Bazuin and A. Priimagi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2168–2188 RSC .
S. Yagai and A. Kitamura, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1520–1529 RSC .
A. Priimagi, G. Cavallo, A. Forni, M. Gorynsztejn-Leben, M. Kaivola, P. Metrangolo, R. Milani, A. Shishido, T. Pilati, G. Resnati and G. Terraneo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2572–2579 CrossRef .
S. Samanta, T. M. McCormick, S. K. Schmidt, D. S. Seferos and G. A. Woolley, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10314–10316 RSC .
S. Samanta, A. A. Beharry, O. Sadovski, T. M. McCormick, A. Babalhavaeji, V. Tropepe and G. A. Woolley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9777–9784 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, O. Sadovski and G. A. Woolley, ChemBioChem, 2008, 9, 2147–2154 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, R. P. Hughes and I. Aprahamian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15221–15224 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, R. P. Hughes and I. Aprahamian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13190–13193 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, X. Su, C. N. Carroll and I. Aprahamian, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 610–613 RSC .
Y. P. Wang, Z. X. Zhang, M. Xie, F. Q. Bai, P. X. Wang and H. X. Zhang, Dyes Pigm., 2016, 129, 100–108 CrossRef .
J. Garcia-Amoros and D. Velasco, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2012, 8, 1003–1017 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mourot, T. Fehrentz, Y. Le Feuvre, C. M. Smith, C. Herold, D. Dalkara, F. Nagy, D. Trauner and R. H. Kramer, Nat. Methods, 2012, 9, 396–412 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rullo, A. Reiner, A. Reiter, D. Trauner, E. Y. Isacoff and G. A. Woolley, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14613–14615 RSC .
M. Dong, A. Babalhavaeji, M. J. Hansen, L. Kalman and G. A. Woolley, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12981–12984 RSC .
A. A. Beharry, L. Wong, V. Tropepe and G. A. Woolley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1325–1327 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wu, L. M. Yao, T. S. Yang, R. Y. Yin, F. Y. Li and Y. L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15810–15813 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Liqi Dong
	Liqi Dong received his BS degree in Chemistry from Qingdao University of Science & Technology (China) in 2013 and completed his MS degree under the supervision of Prof. Xuemin Duan and Prof. Jingkun Xu at Jiangxi Science & Technology Normal University (China) in 2016. He is now pursuing his PhD degree under the tutelage of Prof. Wei Feng at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University. Currently, his research is focused on solar energy harvesting and conversion and storage solution based on photo-responsive molecules.

Yiyu Feng
	Yiyu Feng is a research professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University. He obtained his PhD from Tianjin University in 2009 and held an academic position at Tianjin University in 2009. He has authored and co-authored over 80 academic articles and reviews. Currently, his research is focused on solar-thermal conversion and thermal interfacial materials and composites, as well as their application in heat-control systems.

Ling Wang
	Ling Wang is a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering in Tianjin University (China). He received his PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology Beijing (China) in 2013. From 2013 to 2018, he worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at the Liquid Crystal Institute of Kent State University (USA) and the Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering at Texas A&M University (USA), respectively. His research interests include design, synthesis, and properties of molecular switches, photoactive soft materials or polymers, functional nanoparticles, and 2D nanomaterials, as well as their emerging applications in diverse fields ranging from dynamic photonics to energy and safety issues.

Wei Feng
	Wei Feng is a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering in Tianjin University. He obtained his PhD degree from the Xi’an Jiaotong University (China) in 2000. Then, he worked at Osaka University and Tsinghua University as a JSPS fellow and postdoctoral researcher, respectively. In 2004, he became a full professor in Tianjin University. He has obtained the support of National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in China. His research interests include photo-responsive organic molecules and their derivatives, thermal-conductive and high-strength carbon-based composites, and two-dimensional fluorinated carbon materials and polymers.

 	Fig. 1  Emerging technologies for capture, conversion, and storage of solar energy: (a) photovoltaics; reprinted with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Solar thermal collectors; reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2014 Elsevier Ltd. (c) Artificial photosynthesis; reprinted with permission from ref. 1. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH. (d) Solar thermal fuels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photoisomerization of different types of molecular photoswitches.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of solar thermal conversion and storage mechanism of azobenzene. ΔHstorage is the standard storage enthalpy of trans-to-cis isomerization, and ΔEa represents the energy barrier for cis-to-trans reversion. X1, X2, X3, Y1, and Y2 represent different substituents. X1, X2, and X3 are NMe2, NO2, COOH, OH, SO3H, or Cl. Y1 and Y2 are NHMe, NO2, OMe, OEt, F, or Cl.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Molecular structure and photoisomerization processes of liquid azobenzene derivative 1. (b) Pictures of azobenzene derivative 1 in trans and cis states. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of liquid azobenzene derivative 1 under certain conditions under UV (365 nm) and visible-light (480 nm) irradiation. (d) DSC curves of cis-Azo 1 at different molar ratios. Heating rate is 50 K min−1. (e) Dependence of cis-to-trans isomerization enthalpy, ΔH, on the molar content of the cis-isomer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Molecular structure of bulky phenyl group-functionalized azobenzene derivatives 2a–c. (b) Optical images of azobenzene derivative 2c films on silicon at 25 °C (left) and 175 °C (right). (c) DSC curves of cis-azobenzene derivatives 2a–c from top to bottom. The region enclosed with the flat baseline represents the area integrated to obtain energy release. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Chemical structures of azobenzene dopant and PCM (tridecanoic acid). (b) Schematic of light-operated thermal energy storage and release cycle, including heat absorption of the PCM composite (1), UV irradiation leads to photoisomerization of azobenzene dopants (2), cooling of the liquefied PCM composite (3), and visible-light drives the reverse isomerization and heat release (4). The straight and curved rods exhibit different degrees of translational and rotational freedom, i.e., phase i represents solid-PCM + trans-Azo (25 °C), phase ii represents liquid-PCM + trans-Azo (43 °C), phase iii represents liquid-PCM + cis-Azo (43 °C), and phase iv represents liquid-PCM + cis-Azo (36 °C), respectively. (c) Corresponding photographs of azobenzene-doped PCM composites during solid-state heat absorption, UV charging, cooling, visible-light-induced discharging, and heat-release processes. (d) DSC curves of charged and uncharged azobenzene-doped PCM composites obtained while cooling from 70 °C at a rate of 5 °C min−1. T1, T2, and ΔTc denote different crystallization points and the gap, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group.	 



Azobenzene	49	269	75	100.0 h	Liquid	
102 and 127

4,4′-Dimethoxy Azo	80	331	92	9.6 h	Liquid	
28

2,2′-Dimethoxy Azo	
	


	
	168.0 h	Liquid	
28

2,2′-Diethyl Azo	
	


	
	33.6 h	Liquid	
28

2,6,2′6′-Tetramethyl Azo	
	


	
	108.0 h	Liquid	
28

3-Nitro-4′-dimethylamino Azo	98	350	97	14.4 min	Liquid	
28

2,6-Dimethyl-4-methoxy-4′-nitro Azo	30	95	26	1.9 h	Liquid	
28

Methyl orange	94	287	80	57.6 min	Liquid	
28


1
	35	113	32	


	Liquid	
124


2a
	77	134	37	


	Liquid ↔ solid	
125


2b
	88	100	28	


	Liquid ↔ solid	
125


2c
	87	108	30	


	Liquid ↔ solid	
125


3
	


	200	56	10 h	Liquid ↔ solid	
126


 	Fig. 7  (a) Calculated trans and cis configurations and properties of nanocarbon-templated azobenzenes including graphene-templated azobenzene (i), CNT-templated azobenzene (ii), β-carotene-templated azobenzene (iii), pentacene-templated azobenzene (iv), and C60-templated azobenzene (v). Orange, red, blue, dark gray, and white balls/sticks represent F, O, N, C, and H atoms, respectively. (b) Calculated thermal activation barrier (Ea) vs. stored energy per molecule (ΔE) for nanocarbon-templated azobenzene and gas phase azobenzene derivatives. The alternate axes indicate half-life (τ1/2) and temperature of the released heat (Trelease), estimated from Ea and ΔH, respectively. The size of the symbols illustrates the relative values of the maximum external efficiency (ηmax). Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2013 AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 8  Synthesis route to Azo-MWCNT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2007 AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Density functional theory calculation values of ΔH and Ea for a typical sample of CNT-templated azobenzene systems. (b) Hydrogen bonding effects. The cis and trans isomers of several possible dihydroxy azobenzene molecules bound to a CNT substrate via an attachment at the meta-position. (a) and (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright. 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) Reaction scheme for photochemical energy storage and thermal energy release in CNT-templated azobenzene systems. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a and b) Chemical structures and time-evolved absorption spectra of RGO–ortho-Azo and RGO–para-AZO hybrids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (c–f) Chemical structures and DSC curves of RGO–ortho-Azo, RGO–para-AZO, and RGO–bis-Azo hybrids. (c) and (d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g and h) Chemical structures and DSC curves of the first heating stage of RGO–bis-Azo-1 and RGO–bis-Azo-2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  Illustration of inter-molecular H-bond interaction (a) and inter-planar bundling (b) of high-grafting density RGO-templated azobenzene hybrids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the experiment using a heating stage with controllable temperature: half of the film was irradiated with UV light and the other half was left in darkness. (b and e) Top-view IR heat map of RGO–bis-Azo films (11 and 12) with and without UV irradiation. Each uniform RGO–bis-Azo film was cut into half. The heat maps show the maximum rising temperature between areas; the color bar indicates the relative magnitude of the heat released. Average temperatures of (c) RGO–bis-Azo-1 and (f) RGO–bis-Azo-2. Average difference in temperatures of (d) RGO–bis-Azo-1 and (g) RGO–bis-Azo-2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 



4	120	200	56	33	Liquid ↔ solid	1/16	
78

5	60a	151	42	5408	Liquid ↔ solid	1/10	
140

6	103a	270	75	116	Liquid ↔ solid	1/10	
140

7	118	245	68	2	Liquid ↔ solid	1/19	
141

8	192	403	112	792	Liquid ↔ solid	1/16	
141

9	265	497	138	1248	Liquid ↔ solid	1/17	
142

10	318a	288	80	1320	Liquid ↔ solid	1/50	
143

11	412a	346	96	1120	Solid	1/59	
144

12	572a	472	131	900	Solid	1/46	
144


 	Fig. 13  (a) Chemical structure of Azo-polymers. (b) DSC curves of charged monomers and polymers. (c) Schematic of spin-coating a polymer solution in toluene on a transparent quartz substrate. The charging process is accomplished under UV irradiation using a lamp of wavelength 365 nm. (d) Photograph of a large-area freestanding polymer film prepared by the cross-linking approach. (e) Heat release in STF polymer films: top-view is IR heat map of charged and uncharged STFs; the color bar indicates the relative heat magnitude. Bottom-view is the illustration of the experimental setup. (f) Average temperature differences between the two STFs. A temperature difference of at least 10 °C is observed between the two STFs because of heat release. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Chemical structures of Azo polymers with different end-groups. (b) DSC curves of a cis-Azo sample (14c) dried from either THF or DCM. (c) Diagram of FWHM and energy density of Azo-polymer (14c) based on different co-solvent ratios of THF and DCM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2017 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Chemical structure of Azo-polymers and concept of the electrodeposition scheme. Cross-sectional SEM images of the electrodeposited polymer films on (b) stainless steel and (c) silicon substrates. (d) Concept of a STF fiber in which solar energy is stored in the STF coating, released as heat into the metal wire, and transported along the wire to desired locations. (e) Proof-of-concept for an Azo-STF fiber. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Chemical structure of cationic azobenzene derivatives 1(n,m)-X. (b) XRD profiles of 1(6,4)-Br prepared on a silicon wafer: from top to bottom are the as-prepared film, UV-light-irradiated film, and visible-light-irradiated film, respectively. Picture of each sample is shown as an inset. (c) DSC curves of cis-1(6,4)-Br. Photographs of corresponding states are shown as insets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Chemical structures of Azo-functionalized diacetylenes with diverse alkyl chain lengths, terminal functional groups, H-bonding units, and an extended p-system along with a schematic of photoisomerization and reverse isomerization of compounds 17a–d. The inset shows a crystal structure of azobenzene derivative (17c). (b) Scheme of photopolymerization of monomers and the structure of the resulting polymer. (c) Energy diagram of azobenzene derivatives in different phases (gas, amorphous or liquid, and crystalline). ΔHiso is the isomerization energy of azobenzene derivatives in the liquid state or amorphous solid, and ΔHc is the crystallization energy of the trans form of azobenzene derivatives from the liquid state or amorphous solid to crystalline solid. ΔHcoh-trans is the cohesive enthalpy of trans-azobenzene derivatives from the gas state to the crystalline solid, and ΔHcoh-cis is that of cis-azobenzene derivatives from the gas state to the amorphous solid or liquid state. ΔHiso-g is the thermal isomerization enthalpy between trans and cis isomers in the gas phase. ΔHtotal is the heat released from the materials after UV irradiation, which can be expressed as the sum of ΔHiso and ΔHc. Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Chemical structure (a), photographs (b), and DSC curves (c) of Azo-polymers, which are polyacrylates with a flexible spacer and an azobenzene group on the polymer side chain. The trans-Azo polymer is solid but the cis-Azo polymer is liquid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2017 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Reversible photoisomerization of Azo and mAzo chromophores. (b) Chemical structures of UV-responsive polymers (PAzo) and visible-light-responsive polymers (PmAzo). (c) Schematic illustration of four-layered solar thermal cell. (d) UV-vis spectra of PAzo and PmAzo films upon 1 h solar irradiation followed by 2.5 h heating in a vacuum oven at 90 °C. The insets show the tracking absorbance of the π*–π band of PAzo and PmAzo with different cycles. (e) DSC curves of PAzo (365 nm, 2 mW cm−2, 20 min) and PmAzo (530 nm, 4 mW cm−2, 40 min). Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 




13
	


	104	29	55 h	Solid	
148


14-a
	


	373–469	103–169	


	Powder	
151


14-b
	


	337–551	94–153	


	Powder	
151


14-c
	


	395–625 (698 is the highest)	110–174	


	Powder	
151


15
	


	85–95	24–26	75 h	Solid	
152


16
	97	128	36	


	Liquid ↔ crystals	
153


17
	173 (the highest)	239	66	98 h (monomer)	Liquid ↔ crystals	
154


19a
	12	14	4	16	Liquid	
80


19b
	55	125	35	12	Liquid	
80


 	Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of a photoinduced crystal-to-liquid phase transition and its associated enthalpy change. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of a STF system that combines azobenzene and dynamic covalent bonds.	 

 	Fig. 22  Chemical structures of long half-life azobenzenes: (a) bridged Azo, (b) tetra-ortho-methoxy Azo, (c) ortho-fluoroazobenzenes, and (d) azoheteroarene.	 

 	Fig. 23  Maximum irradiation wavelength for isomerization of different types of azobenzene.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
