Modified TiO2  nanotube arrays (TNTAs): progressive strategies towards visible light responsive photoanode, a review  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00488J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00488J
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1065-1086Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsModified TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNTAs): progressive strategies towards visible light responsive photoanode, a review

        
          
            Ahmed 
            El Ruby Mohamed
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Sohrab 
            Rohani
          
          
        
      *a
aChemical and Biochemical Engineering Department, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada N6A 5B9. E-mail: srohani@uwo.ca
bElectronic and Magnetic Materials Division, Advanced Materials Department, Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDI), P.O. Box 87, Helwan, Cairo, Egypt. E-mail: aelruby10@yahoo.com
Received 
      27th September 2010
    , Accepted 18th January 2011First published on 17th February 2011AbstractSince first introduced by Zwilling and co-workers in 1999, titania nanotube arrays (TNTAs) fabricated by simple electrochemical anodization method have attracted great interest due to their outstanding photoelectrochemical properties which render them the most promising candidate for many solar energy harvesting applications. In this contribution, the fabrication, properties, and applications of TiO2 nanotube arrays have been reviewed, with special focus on synthesis by anodization in fluoride-containing electrolytes. The effect of anodization process parameters such as electric potential, pH, anodization duration and electrolyte composition on the size, and morphology of TNTAs has been discussed in detail. Electronic property modification strategies of the wide band gap TNTAs to enhance the material responsiveness to visible light irradiation have also been reviewed. Modification strategies include nonmetal doping such as nitrogen, carbon, boron and sulfur; metal ion doping such as Fe, Zn, Zr and Cr; surface decoration with precious metal nanoparticles such as Pt, Ag, Au; and sensitization with CdS nanoparticles.Ahmed El Ruby MohamedA. E. Mohamed studied Chemical Engineering at Minia University, El Minia, Egypt where he received his BSc degree (with honor's degree) and M Sc in 1998 and 2003, respectively. He worked as a Research Assistant at Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDI), Helwan, Cairo, Egypt from 1999–2006. He is currently pursuing PhD studies at Chemical and Biochemical Engineering Department, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. His research is devoted to the synthesis and modification of well-ordered nanostructured semiconductor materials for solar energy conversion applications applying electrochemical, wet chemical and nanofabrication techniques.Sohrab RohaniDr Rohani is a professor of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering Department at the University of Western Ontario. He obtained his BSc in Chemical Engineering from Pahlavi (Shiraz) University and his PhD from the University of Wales in Process Control. He spent two years at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) in Zurich before joining the Chemical Engineering Department of the University of Saskatchewan in 1982. He has spent sabbatical leaves at the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology (UMIST), England; ETH (Switzerland); the Ecole Nationale Superieure des Industries Chimiques (ENSIC), Nancy, France; and Apotex PharmaChem Inc. (Canada). He has been the recipient of Engineering Medal in Research and Development from the Professional Engineers, Ontario, in 2008 and Western Faculty of Engineering Award for Excellence in Research in 2009. Dr Rohani has over 200 refereed publications. He is a registered professional engineer in Ontario and a Fellow of Chemical Institute of Canada (FCIC). His main areas of research are in the development and control of active pharmaceutical ingredients, zeolitic nanomaterials and TiO2 nanophotocatalysts.

Broader context
The big challenge toward harvesting solar energy for renewable and clean H2 production as well as for other solar light-driven applications is to fabricate an efficient photoanode with high surface area, chemical stability that can use solar photons in both UV and visible spectrum regions. In this review we report the recent developments toward fabrication techniques, mechanism of formation, properties, modification and applications of modified TiO2 nanotube arrays as a very promising photoanode for applications in a wide range of solar energy applications such as water-splitting photoelectrochemical cells (PEC) for H2 generation, dye-sensitized solar cells and photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants from both aqueous and air streams.

1. Introduction
Nanostructural materials of highly ordered one dimensional (1D) architecture such as nanowires and nanotubes have attracted much interest in the last decade due to their high surface-to-volume ratios and other unique properties compared to their bulk similitudes. New chemical and physical properties appear when the size of the material decreases down to the nanometre scale. Properties depend not only on the size of the nanomaterials but also on the shapes of the shrinking nanomaterials. Many excellent reviews and reports on the preparation and properties of nanomaterials have been published recently.1–4 One of the most important and unique properties of nanomaterials is that the transfer of electrons and holes in semiconducting nanomaterials is mainly governed by the quantum confinement phenomenon, and the transport characteristics related to phonons and photons are largely affected by the size and geometrical building of the materials.2,5,6 The specific surface area and surface-to-volume ratio increase dramatically as the size of a material decreases. For example, for a cube of iron of 1 cm3, the percentage of surface atoms would be only 10−5%, when the cube is divided into small cubes with an edge of 10 nm, the percentage of surface atoms would increase to 10%. In a cube of iron of 1 nm3, every atom would be a surface atom.7 The high surface area brought about by size shrinking of nanomaterials is beneficial to many of applications such as heterogeneous catalysis, photocatalysis, sensing and electronic applications as it facilitates reaction/interaction between the devices and the interacting media, which primarily takes place on the surface or at the interface and strongly depends on the surface area of the material. Hence, the performance of nanomaterial-based devices is largely influenced by the sizes of the building units, obviously at the nanoscale.7
The discovery of carbon nanotubes by Iijima8 with their interesting properties has stimulated the quest for the synthesis of nanotubular structure of other inorganic materials such as V2O3, SiO2, TiO2, ZrO2 and MoO3. Nanotubes present a unique combination of shape, nanosize and functionality so that the properties can be directly influenced by the 1D-nanoscale feature of the geometrical morphology.9–12 Among all nanotube materials, titanium oxide nanotube arrays (we will refer to it as TNTAs hereinafter) are of particular interest because they are highly functional materials with many applications. These wide applications of TiO2 nanotubes are based on their semiconducting and biocompatibility properties coupled with high surface area and excellent electrons/holes separation properties. Furthermore, the great oxidizing ability of photogenerated holes in titania associated with the high physical and chemical stability and low cost makes it the preferred semiconductor material for many applications that utilize solar energy.13 These properties make titania suitable for photocatalysis,14–16 water-splitting,17,18 self-cleaning,19 sensing,20 and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).21 In biological and medicinal applications, the biocompatibility is extremely important where the TiO2 nanostructured layers on Ti are directly in contact with the biological tissue in dental or hip implants.22 Titania nanotubes can be synthesized in two forms: powdery form and self-organized nanotube arrays. The immobilized nanotubes are self-organized, vertically oriented and supported on a surface forming an integrated unit. Powdery titania nanotubes, and nanotube arrays, have been produced by a variety of methods including deposition into a nanoporous alumina template,23 sol–gel24,25 and hydrothermal processes.26,27 However, among these nanotube fabrication routes, the electrochemical anodization method has attracted the most interest since first reported by Zwilling and co-workers28 due to its ability to produce integrative, vertically oriented highly ordered nanotube arrays with controllable dimensions.29–31 The progressive increase in research interest in the TiO2 nanotube arrays fabricated by anodization method is easily noticed from publication statistics (see Fig. 1). Publication number increased several times from the first work by Zwilling and coworkers, 199928 where only short nanotubes of a few hundred nanometres in length and low degree of self-organization were obtained to the present time where highly ordered, vertically oriented, high-aspect ratio TiO2 nanotube arrays with lengths of hundreds of micrometres can be obtained.32 In contrast to random nanoparticle systems where slow electron diffusion typically limits their performance, the precisely oriented nature of the crystalline nanotube arrays makes them excellent electron percolation pathways for the vertical transfer of electrical charges across the length of nanotubes.33–35 In addition, the nanotube array architecture is able to influence the absorption and propagation of light through the architecture by precisely designing and controlling the nanotube internal diameter, wall thickness, and length.36–38 In this review, we focus on the recent progress in synthesis, characterization and modification methods of titania nanotube arrays (TNTAs) as a most promising photoanode in solar energy conversion devices.
 Fig. 1  The number of publications on the topic of titania nanotube arrays in the last decade. (Statistics analysis was obtained from SciFinder Scholar database on August 10, 2010.) 
2. TNTAs versus TiO2 nanoparticles
A significant progress in the field of low cost photoelectrochemical energy conversion has been achieved using porous nanostructured semiconductor films. Up to now, the most effective photoelectrochemical cells (PEC) made of several micron-thick porous films consisted of 15–20 nm sized crystalline TiO2 nanoparticles.39,40 Nazeeruddin and co-workers have demonstrated liquid junction dye-sensitized solar cells with photoconversion efficiency higher than 10%.41 In Si-based conventional solar cells, the photogenerated electrons and holes are to be separated using built-in potential of the p–n junction. In the absence of such mechanism to separate the opposite charges, the photogenerated electrons and holes are lost due to recombination with each other. In nanoparticle-based solar cells, the nanoparticle size is too small to maintain significant electric potential therefore other ways must be used to attain the holes/electrons separation. The photogenerated electron/hole charges are separated kinetically and because of the small size of nanoparticles, the hole may diffuse to the particle–electrolyte interface to react with a solution ion and hence a successful charge separation occurs but it may also happen that the small size of nanoparticle facilitates the recombination process between the electron–hole pair before the hole successfully reacts with the solution ions. Furthermore, the movement of the electrons from the point where they were photogenerated to the electrons collector—the conducting back contact of the photoanode—is a limiting factor in the photoanode consisted of nanoparticles, obstructing the process to achieve a higher efficiency. The structure disorder at the boundary between two nanoparticles increases the scattering of the generated free electrons and, consequently, this reduces the electrons transport rate and collection property of the photoanode.42,43 Although nanoparticle TiO2 films have a highly effective photooxidation of a very wide variety of organic substances, they demonstrate, in contrast, very low photoconversion efficiency (PE) for the water photolysis to H2 and O2 in both acidic and alkaline solutions. This may be ascribed to the above mentioned poor electrons mobility as the water splitting primarily depends on the photogenerated free electrons rather than photogenerated holes.44,45 In nanoparticulate films, the photogenerated electrons may also react with the intermediates of the photooxidation reactions between the photogenerated holes and electrolyte solution. The poor performance of the nanoparticulate TiO2 films may be ascribed to the possibility of back-charge reactions of intermediates of photooxidation of water.46 The electrons′ slow percolation through a random nanoparticle network and the low absorption capability of the low energy photons are both major factors hindering further enhancement in the photoconversion efficiency, PE, in nanoparticulate TiO2-based dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The increase of nanoparticulate film thickness (above 10 µm) to enhance the photons absorption is undermined by the slow electron transport through the nanoparticulate network. The haphazardness of the particles arrangement in the film almost duplicates the pathway length of the electrons.34,47 Highly ordered, vertically oriented TNTAs perpendicular to the photoanode surface allow the vertical charge transport from the photoanode/electrolyte interface to the conductive substrate in the back of the photoanode, thereby, minimizing the charge losses occurred due to the hopping of electrons through the boundaries of the nanoparticles. Therefore, electron transfer through TNTAs is superior to electron percolation through the random particulate films. This enhancement in electron charge transport in TNTAs is expected to increase the overall photoconversion efficiency.48–50 The highly ordered vertically oriented nanotubular structure of TNTAs provides a better opportunity to harvest sunlight more efficiently than the randomly oriented nanoparticulate films or even nanotubes prepared by the sol–gel or hydrothermal processes.51 Additionally, the nanotubular structure can improve the lifetime of the photogenerated charges by more than an order of magnitude.35,52–54 TNTAs exhibited a photoanodic response 10 times higher than that of a TiO2 nanoparticulate film under the same irradiation condition.55 It is expected that the performance of TNTAs could be further significantly improved if their structure–property relationship is established and the involved phenomena are fully understood.
3. Fabrication of TNTAs
Electrochemical anodization of metal and semiconductors is a relatively simple process for creating precisely engineered semiconductor nanostructures. Anodization is used to create highly ordered, self-oriented nanoporous materials such as alumina, silica, titania and zirconia. Anodization of titanium foils and thin films are conducted using a two-electrode electrochemical cell with a platinum foil as cathode at a constant potential—a third electrode could be used as a standard reference electrode to eliminate noise effect when measuring the cell potential by potentiostat.56Fig. 2 shows an illustrative drawing of a two electrode electrochemical cell in which Ti foils are anodized when electrical potential is applied.
 Fig. 2  Illustrative drawing of a two-electrode electrochemical cell for anodization. 
3.1. Fabrication of TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNTAs) in aqueous electrolytes
Titania nanotube arrays are grown on titanium surface by potentiostatic anodization of the parent Ti foil in aqueous electrolyte containing F− ions.57–59 Self-organized TNTAs were first fabricated by electrochemical anodization of Ti metal foils in aqueous hydrofluoric acid electrolyte by Gong and co-workers.57 In this study, anodization voltage and HF concentration were investigated. Below 10 volts, no nanotubes formed. Porous or particulate films were formed instead. Nanotubular structure was successfully fabricated in a voltage window from 10 to 40 V. Above 40 V, TNTAs structure disappeared and randomly porous layers began to appear again. HF concentrations from 0.5 to 3.5 wt% were used and results showed that the appropriate voltage range required for the formation of TNTAs decreased by increasing HF concentration.57 By using HF aqueous electrolyte, TNTAs could be grown up to only 500 nm in length. This limited length of TNTAs was due to high chemical dissolution at the top of nanotubes because of the strong acidity of the electrolyte (pH < 2). Later on, many studies focused on precise control and extension of the nanotubes architecture.58,60,61

Effect of anodization potential. 
Cai and co-workers studied the effect of potential in strong acidic (pH < 1) aqueous electrolytes consisting of 1 M H2SO4 and 0.1 M HF and found that nanotube arrays formed only in the range of 10–25 V. Also, they reported the inner diameter of nanotubes increased from 40 nm to 110 nm with potential increase from 10 to 25 V. Fig. 3 shows the effect of anodization potential on the formation and morphology of titania nanotube arrays in 1 M H2SO4 and 0.1 M HF aqueous electrolyte.62
 Fig. 3  Effect of anodization potential on TNTAs formation and morphology in 1 M H2SO4 and 0.1 M HF aqueous electrolyte at (01) 5 V, (02) 10 V, (03) 15 V, (04) 20 V, (05) 25 V and (06) 30 V (reprinted with permission from ref. 62 © 2005 Materials Research Society). 
For specific electrolyte composition, there is an anodization potential window within which TNTAs can be fabricated. This window depends on chemical and physical properties of the electrolyte as well as its pH. Gong and coworkers57 fabricated TNTAs over the potential range from 10 to 40 V while Cai and co-workers62 found that TNTAs fabrication was possible only over potential range from 10 to 25 V. Tian and co-workers63 obtained TNTAs at potential of 20 V in NH4F/H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte. Anodization potential has a key role in the formation of TNTAs as the formation of TNTAs is basically the result of equilibrium between electrochemical oxidation of Ti to TiO2 and the chemical dissolution of TiO2 in fluoride-containing electrolyte.63 Very interestingly and in contrast to any electrolyte system for TNTAs formation, titania nanotube arrays were formed at a potential as low as 1 V in 1 M H3PO4 + 0.3 wt% HF aqueous electrolyte in an electrochemical cell with three electrodes configuration employing Ag/AgCl as reference electrode.64
The nanotubes inner diameter and nanotube length were found to be dependent on anodization potential and when potential increased from 1 to 25 V, nanotubes diameter and length increased linearly from 15 nm and 20 nm to 120 nm and 1 µm, respectively, as it can be seen from Fig. 4. The high adjustability of the nanotubes geometry and long nanotubes, compared to the nanotubes fabricated in HF electrolyte, was ascribed on one hand to the fact that H3PO4 acts as a buffer which regulates local acidity during the nanotubes growth. And, on the other hand the phosphate ions were strongly adsorbed on TiO2 surfaces, the fact that was verified by XPS characterization.64
 Fig. 4  Effect of anodization potential on titania nanotube morphology (SEM top view and cross-section images) formed in 1 M H3PO4 + 0.3 wt% HF at: 1 V (a), 2.5 V (b), 5 V (c), 10 V (d), 15 V (e), 20 V (f) and 25 V (g) for 1 h. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 64 © 2006 Elsevier B. V.) 
Although acidic electrolyte is essential for nanotube formation, lower pH electrolyte results in few hundred nanometres in nanotube length while higher pH buffered electrolytes give longer nanotubes up to 6 µm at pH 5–6. This was explained by the fact that the chemical dissolution rate of TiO2 nanotubes is increased by lowering pH of the electrolyte.35 Cai and co-workers62 synthesized titania nanotube arrays in aqueous electrolytes with pH range from 1 to 6.4 and their results showed that in strong acidic electrolytes, with pH between 1 and 2, titania nanotubes with few hundred nanometres in length were formed and by increasing pH to 5.6, the length increased to 4.4 µm after anodization for 20 h. According to Cai and co-workers,62 there was no effect of pH on the inner diameter. In contrast to the above study, Yin and co-workers found that the inner diameter of nanotubes decreased from 80 nm to 40 nm by decreasing pH from 5.6 to 4.65Fig. 5 indicates the effect of pH on nanotube length and nanostructure of the surface of nanotube samples.
 Fig. 5  Lateral views of TNTAs formed in different pH solutions (preprinted with permission from ref. 62 © 2005 Materials Research Society). 
Bai and co-workers67 studied the morphology of anodized titanium foil after different anodization times, 10, 30, 60, 200, 800 and 1800 s in 0.5 wt% HF in aqueous electrolyte. The FESEM images of the resulting anodized samples are shown in Fig. 6. As can be seen from Fig. 6, after 10 s, the surface was covered with titanium oxide film (Fig. 6a). At 30 s, the oxide layer was partially dissolved and randomly distributed grooves appeared in the oxide film (Fig. 6b). This was ascribed to localized dissolution of the oxide layer by HF.29 After 60 s (Fig. 6c), the original oxide layer was almost removed and replaced by another oxide layer consisted of small pores with 8 to 15 nm diameter. The inset in Fig. 6c shows the formation of larger pores by the integration of several small pores. After 200 s, larger tubes were formed with the integration of small tubes (Fig. 6d). At this time a tubular structure with uneven diameters ranging from 20 to 100 nm was observed. This means that the large pores, which previously formed from the integration of the small pores, are transformed into nanotubular structure. After 800 s (Fig. 6e), the nanotube arrays with a diameter of about 100 nm were formed. After 1800 s (Fig. 6f), the development of highly ordered TNTAs was completed.67 Based on this study and other similar work, a formation mechanism of TNTAs was proposed which will be discussed in a separate section in this review.
 Fig. 6  SEM top views of titania nanotube arrays anodized at 20 V in 0.5 wt% HF aqueous electrolyte at different anodization times: (a) 10 s, (b) 30 s, (c) 60 s, (d) 200 s, (e) 800 s, and (f) 1800 s. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 67 © Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2008.) 

3.2. Fabrication of TNTAs in organic electrolytes
Many organic solvents are known to be used in anodic fabrication of microporous silica and aluminium oxide.68–70 It has been demonstrated that organic solvents crucially inhibit the electrochemical oxidation of Si compared to an aqueous electrolyte and that organic solvents behave as a mild oxidizing reactant for Si. Furthermore, it has been shown that the nanotubes growth benefits from the mildly reducing conditions in organic electrolytes compared to water due to the more difficult oxygen donation process. An organic electrolyte is a more reducing medium in comparison to an aqueous electrolyte.68,71,72 The TNTAs formation is strongly dependent on the chemical solubility, and chemical and physical properties of the electrolytes. In high acidic aqueous solutions (pH < 1), the nanotube growth rate and dissolution rate are both high resulting in short nanotubes even after long anodization times. In comparison to aqueous electrolytes, much longer TNTAs can be formed in polar organic electrolytes due to low chemical dissolution rate resulting from low water content.52,56 Illustrative organic solvents for TNTAs formation include: glycerol, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), formamide (FA), N-methylformamide (NMF), acetic acid and ethylene glycol (EG).

3.2.1. Fabrication of TNTAs in glycerol-based electrolyte. 
Macak and Schmuki73 investigated the formation of TNTAs in glycerol electrolyte containing 0.5 wt% NH4F as well as in 1 M (NH4)2SO4 aqueous electrolyte containing 0.5 wt% NH4F at 20 V and 20 °C. Although after 3 h anodization time, the tube length anodized in aqueous electrolyte was slightly more than 2 µm while it was only 1.3 µm in glycerol electrolyte, extending anodization time to 18 h resulted in increasing tube length up to 6.1 µm in the case of glycerol electrolyte while there was no noticeable increase in tube length in the case of aqueous electrolyte as shown in Fig. 7a. Fig. 7b shows the cross-section side view of TNTAs fabricated in glycerol electrolyte showing the extending tube length of 6.1 µm. The inset image is the cross-section of the same sample at high magnification to show the smooth walls of nanotubes which is another interesting feature of anodization in glycerol electrolyte where ripples structure that usually appears in aqueous electrolyte anodization disappeared. It is noteworthy that the smoothness of the nanotube walls could improve various properties of the self-organized TNTAs. For instance, ripples absence may influence the light reflection behavior and that may facilitate applications of TNTAs as photonic crystals74,75 or waveguides.76Fig. 7c and d show the top and bottom views, respectively, of the nanotubes anodized in glycerol electrolyte at 20 V for 18 h.73
 Fig. 7  (a) The tube length as a function of anodization time of samples formed during different times in glycerol + 0.5 wt% NH4F and 1 M (NH4)2SO4 + 0.5 wt% NH4F at 20 V at 20 °C. SEM images of (b) cross-section, (c) top view and (d) bottom view of self-organized TiO2 nanotubes of length 6.1 µm formed after 18 h anodization in glycerol electrolyte. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 73 © 2006 Elsevier Ltd.) 
Another interesting difference is that TNTAs anodized in glycerol electrolyte possessed a smaller pore diameter (approximately 50 nm) than TNTAs anodized in aqueous electrolyte (approximately 100 nm).73,77 Changing anodization temperature influenced both the length and diameter of nanotubes where both of them increased linearly with temperature in the range of 0 to 40 °C. This explains the vital role of viscosity of glycerol electrolyte on the TNTAs morphology.73
The low growth rate of nanotubes in glycerol electrolyte and the strong dependence of the results on the viscosity and temperature of the electrolyte show that the tubes growth rate is a diffusion-controlled process.78 Viscous electrolytes such as glycerol are characterized by self-induced local acidification at the bottom of nanotube pores which is caused by electrochemical dissolution of Ti metal. This local acidification is mainly caused by Ti oxidation and hydrolysis as in the following reactions:Ti + 2H2O → TiO2 + 4H+Ti + 6HF → [TiF6]2− + 2H+
By using a buffered neutral solution as an electrolyte, one can create a pH profile gradient that is increased from the bottom to the mouth of the tube pore and consequently, increasing the chemical etching at the bottom of the tubes while reducing the chemical dissolution at the mouth of the tubes resulting in increasing growth rate of the tubes.58 Anodization in glycerol electrolytes/NH4F showed current efficiencies close to 100% compared to 30–40% current efficiency for anodization in 1 M (NH4)2SO4 + 0.5 wt% NH4F aqueous electrolyte, and only 5–15% current efficiency for anodization in 1 M H2SO4 + 0.15 wt% HF. The current efficiency was defined as the ratio of the tube length values measured directly from SEM cross-sections to the tube length values calculated from Faraday's law assuming a four electron process and an oxide density of 3.84 g cm−3.73 By returning to the above three electrolytes, it will be easy to correlate the loss in current efficiency to the high chemical dissolution rate of each electrolyte.
A key parameter in TNTAs formation is fluoride ion concentration. With no F− ions in the electrolyte, no nanotubes are formed, instead a compact layer of oxide is formed. By increasing fluoride concentration from 0.135 M to 0.54 M, the anodization current density and the nanotubes length were increased. The anodization potential window widened from 10–25 V in aqueous electrolytes to 2–40 V in glycerol electrolyte. Glycerol/water/NH4F mixture electrolyte provided a platform for fabrication of TNTAs with a very high level of flexibility towards the tube dimensions and morphology. TNTAs with diameter ranges from 20 to 300 nm were fabricated by tuning the potential from 2 to 40 V as shown in Fig. 8.79 It can be seen in SEM images in this figure that mixing glycerol with water results in the appearance of ripples on the walls of nanotubes. Increasing water content in glycerol electrolyte results in increasing tube diameter and appearance of ripples on the tube walls and decreases the tube length.73,79
 Fig. 8  SEM top and cross-sectional images of the TNTAs grown in water/glycerol (1:1, v/v)/0.27 M NH4F for 3 h anodization time at different potentials. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 79 © 2008 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.) 


3.2.2. Fabrication of TNTAs in DMSO electrolyte. 
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is the organosulfur compound with a chemical formula of (CH3)2SO. DMSO is a dipolar aprotic solvent. Unlike protic solvents, aprotic solvents do not have a hydrogen atom directly bonded to an electronegative atom such as oxygen or nitrogen. The hydrogen atoms in such solvents are only bonded to carbon atoms. DMSO has a very weak ability to donate protons (hydrogen bond donation) and is more basic than water, and therefore, it has a protophilic nature. DMSO has a dielectric constant of 47 which is lower than the dielectric constant of water at 80 °C. The viscosity of DMSO (1.99 cP) is very close to that of water (0.89 cP) and much lower than the viscosity of glycerol (945 cP at 25 °C).80 Ruan and co-workers81 conducted the first study of TNTAs formation by anodization in DMSO electrolyte. They obtained 2.5 µm long TNTAs using an electrolyte composed of DMSO:ethanol (1:1 volume ratio) and 4% HF after anodization time of 72 h at 20 V. It was worthy to mention that nanotubes were only observed after 48 h of anodization while in aqueous electrolytes nanotubes were observed in the first hour of anodization. The anodized samples showed an inhomogeneous cracked surface with TiO2 nanotubes bundled together. To see the effect of anodization electrolyte on the photoelectrochemical properties of TNTAs, photocurrent and photoconversion efficiency of TNTAs sample anodized in DMSO:ethanol (1:1 volume ratio) and 4% HF at 20 V and TNTAs sample anodized in aqueous 1% HF electrolyte were measured. The photocurrent of DMSO sample was 6 times higher than that of aqueous HF electrolyte sample and the photoconversion efficiency of DMSO sample was 10.7%, 14 times greater than the photoconversion efficiency of aqueous HF electrolyte sample.81 Paulose and co-workers82 increased the length of DMSO anodized TNTAs up to 93 µm. The HF concentration was varied from 1 to 6 wt%, anodization potential was studied in the range of 10 to 70 V and anodization time was varied from 20 to 90 h. As DMSO is a protophilic solvent, it accepts the hydrogen proton from HF reducing its effect in chemical dissolution of nanotubes at the tube mouth leading to an increase in nanotube growth rate. Fig. 9 shows representative FESEM images of TNTAs grown at 40 V in DMSO containing 2% HF: (a) cross-section view, (b) lateral view and (c) view of top surface. The nanotubes have a length of 45 µm, an inner tube diameter of 120 nm and a wall thickness of 15 nm. The roughness factor (total surface area of the nanotubes per the flat surface are of the sample) for this sample was 1800.82 Increasing anodization potential from 20 to 60 V resulted in an increase in TNTAs length from 10 to 93 µm. The inner diameters of nanotubes were 50, 120 and 150 for 20, 40 and 60 V, respectively.82,83 The increase in the diameter with increase in potential is in line with the trend that previously observed in aqueous HF electrolyte anodization.84,85 When HF concentration increased from 1 to 4 wt% at anodization potential 20 V the nanotube length increased from 4.4 to 29 µm. Also, when Ti foil pre-anodized in 0.5% HF aqueous electrolyte before anodization in 2% HF DMSO electrolyte at 40 V, nanotube length of 82 µm was obtained, almost a 100% increase in nanotube length, from that obtained without pre-anodization of Ti foil in aqueous HF electrolyte.82Fig. 10 shows the effect of anodization parameters on the length of nanotubes. Fig. 10a shows that TNTAs length increased with increasing anodization potential as mentioned above but it reached its maximum at 60 V and then decreased rapidly at 70 V. The figure shows also how the pre-anodization of Ti foil in HF aqueous electrolyte enhanced the growth rate of the nanotubes where the pre-anodization worked as tinplating the surface for rapid nanotube growth rate.
 Fig. 9  SEM images of TNTAs fabricated in DMSO containing 2% HF at 40 V for 69 h: (a) cross-sectional view, (b) lateral view and (c) top view (reprinted with permission from ref. 82 © 2006 American Chemical Society.) 
 Fig. 10  TNTAs length as a function of (a) anodization potential for 70 h anodization in 2% HF–DMSO with and without a pre-anodization step, (b) HF concentration in DMSO at 40 V and 60 V for 70 h, (c) H2O concentration in 2% HF–DMSO (at 40 V and 40 h), and (d) anodization duration time at 40 V in 2% HF–DMSO electrolytes with 0%, 3%, and 5% deionized water content (reprinted with permission from ref. 83 © 2006 American Chemical Society). 

Fig. 10b indicates that 2% HF concentration was the optimum concentration at which longest nanotubes were obtained at both 40 and 60 V. HF concentration higher than 2% increased the chemical dissolution rate of the tubes resulting in reducing the final nanotube length while low concentration of HF below 2% resulted in very slow growth rate of nanotubes extending the anodization time required to obtain the same length of TNTAs. The addition of water to the 2% HF–DMSO electrolyte increased the chemical dissolution of TiO2 and decreased the nanotube length as shown in Fig. 10c and d. Fig. 10d, also, shows that nanotube length increased with extended anodization time up to 70 h and decreased after 70 h. The reason behind the reduction in length by increasing the time after 70 h is that the nanotube growth rate at the bottom of the tubes becomes slower due to the increased diffusion resistance of both F− ions and the reaction products at the tube bottom by increasing the tube length while the dissolution rate of the tubes at the tube mouth may be increased with increasing the conductivity of the electrolyte due to the dissolved Ti ions. This results in the dominance of the dissolution rate and decreases the nanotube length with time.86 Anodization in previously used DMSO electrolytes influences the pore size and length of the formed TNTAs and improved the adhesion between the nanotubes and the underlying oxide barrier. The important difference between fresh and used electrolytes is that the used electrolytes have very high conductivity compared to fresh electrolytes, for example, the conductivity of 2% HF–DMSO electrolyte used for anodization of Ti foil at 40 V for 70 h is 100.6 µS cm−1 compared with 8.76 µS cm−1 for the fresh electrolyte. Previously used DMSO electrolytes usually produce TNTAs of shorter length if compared with fresh electrolytes. For example, using a fresh 2% HF–DMSO electrolyte, 53 µm length TNTAs were obtained after 24 h at 40 V and then, by using the same electrolyte again with other Ti foil for 70 h at 40 V, only 50 µm length TNTAs were obtained. It is worth mentioning that the higher conductivity of used electrolytes was found to be useful in increasing the initial nanotube growth rate. In addition, nanotubes fabricated in used electrolytes do not have debris and have unclogged tubes.83,86,87


3.2.3. Fabrication of TNTAs in formamide (FA) and N-methylformamide (NMF). 
Formamide (FA) and N-methylformamide (NMF) are both protophilic like DMSO, meaning their acidity nature is weaker than water. Therefore, they provide a more reducing environment than that of water. In addition, they have a high dissolving power for both H+ and F− ions. Furthermore, FA and NMF are highly polar and their dielectric constants are 111 and 182.4, respectively which are much higher than dielectric constant of water, 80. Also, their viscosities are comparable to that of water (3.3 and 1.65 cP for FA and NMF, respectively). The higher polarity of the electrolyte facilitates the dissolving of HF and makes it chemically available in the reaction sites at TiO2–electrolyte interface.80 Few reports were published on fabrication of TNTAs in FA and NMF electrolytes.87–89 Paulose and co-workers82 fabricated TNTAs of 70 µm long anodized in a FA based electrolyte for 48 h at a constant voltage of 35 V. The nanoubes had an average outer diameter of 180 nm and an aspect ratio of 390. The average wall-thickness was about 24 nm. Keeping water content in the anodization organic electrolyte below 5% is crucial to successfully grow long TNTAs.82 By reducing water content in organic electrolytes, the availability of oxygen for oxide formation is reduced resulting in thinner oxide barrier beneath the nanotu0be arrays.69 Furthermore, reducing water content inhibits chemical dissolution of TiO2 at the mouth of nanotubes in F−-containing electrolytes hence assisting growth of longer TNTAs.86 FA electrolytes used in Ti anodization usually included FA and/or NMF solutions containing 1–5 wt% of deionized water and 0.3–0.6 wt% NH4F.82,88,90 The potential window in which TNTAs can be grown in FA/NMF electrolytes is from 10 to 50 V which is wider than potential window for both aqueous (10–30 V) and glycerol electrolytes (5–40 V). Increasing anodization potential generally increases both diameter and length of nanotubes—the same phenomenon which was found in aqueous, DMSO and glycerol electrolytes. The increase in nanotube length with anodization potential is ascribed to the increased driving force for ionic transport through the oxide layer barrier beneath the nanotubes, consequently, resulting in faster movement of the Ti/TiO2 interface towards the Ti metal. Nanotube length was found to increase with anodization time up to a maximum length. Increasing anodization time after reaching the maximum length decreases the length of nanotubes which may be attributed to the nanotubes cleavage due to chemical dissolution.86 The effect of the presence of different cations in the water–FA mixture electrolyte was studied by Shankar and co-workers.88 Five different fluoride compounds, namely HF, NH4F, sodium fluoride (NaF), tetrabutylammonium fluoride (Bu4NF) and benzyltrimethyl ammonium fluoride (BnMe3NF), were the fluoride ion bearing species used to study the effect of the corresponding cations, H+, NH4+, Na+, Bu4N+ and BnMe3N+, respectively. Under similar conditions, the nanotube length and aspect ratio increased with increasing the cation size. The longest nanotube arrays (94 µm) were obtained from the electrolyte containing Bu4N+, while the shortest nanotubes were grown in the electrolyte containing only H+ cations. The large difference in nanotubes length was ascribed to the repressive effect of the quaternary ammonium ions which confined the thickness of the barrier oxide layer beneath the nanotube arrays. The thinner the barrier oxide layer the faster the ionic transport through this barrier which increases the nanotube growth rate.88


3.2.4. Fabrication of TNTAs in ethylene glycol (EG). 
As mentioned earlier, viscosity of the electrolyte has a direct impact on diffusion of reactants and products to and from the titania nanotubes surface. It is necessary to control diffusion for synthesis of well organized titania nanotubes; however, there is a certain range out of which the viscosity has negative impact on synthesis and growth rate of titania nanotubes. The growth rate was low in glycerol-based (η = 945 cP at 25 °C) electrolytes and addition of water improved the growth rate due to the reduction in the viscosity of electrolyte solution. Ethylene glycol (EG) is less viscous (η = 16 cP at 25 °C) compared to glycerol and results in lower diffusion resistance. Therefore, the growth rate would be higher in EG-based electrolytes. The anodization process of titanium to fabricate TNTAs in EG-based electrolytes has two distinctive characteristics.82,87,91,92 First distinctive characteristic is the highly rapid TNTAs growth rate of up to 15 µm per hour which is five times the maximum growth rate of TNTAs formed in FA- or DMSO-based electrolytes and an order of magnitude greater than the growth rate of TNTAs formed in aqueous79,93,94 or glycerol based electrolytes.95,96 In EG-based electrolytes, TNTAs were fabricated within anodization window from 20 to 65 V with water content varying from 1 to 4 vol% and ammonium fluoride ranging from 0.1 to 0.5 wt%. At constant voltage of 60 V, 2 vol% water content and anodization time of 17 h, it was found that the length of TNTAs increased by increasing NH4F concentration from 0.1 to 0.3 wt% from 85 to 165 µm. While, when keeping NH4F concentration at 0.3 wt% and other parameters unchanged, TNTAs increased from 67 µm to 165 µm by increasing water content from 1 vol% to 2 vol% but further increase of water content to 3 vol% reduced the TNTAs to 136 µm which implies that the optimum condition for production of longest TNTAs is 2 vol% water content and 0.3 wt% NH4F in ethylene glycol. Inner and outer diameters and TNTAs length were found to increase by increasing anodization potential from 20 to 60 V, where inner diameter increased from 45 to 105 nm, outer diameter increased from 65 to 155 nm and tube length increased from 5 to 165 µm, respectively. Further increase of anodization potential to 65 V, resulted in a further increase in both inner and outer diameters to 135 and 185 nm, respectively, but it resulted in a decrease in tube length to 105 µm. This implies that at these conditions, the optimum anodization potential at which longest TNTAs can be obtained is 60 V. The resulting TNTA lengths showed a power low dependence on the applied potential in the potential range from 30 to 60 V. At 80 V and a variety of electrolyte compositions, Ti foil was merely corroded and no nanotubes were formed.91 The effect of time on nanotube length was studied at 0.3 wt% NH4F and 2 vol% water content at 60 V anodization potential. Samples were anodized for different intervals, namely, 4, 17, 21, 48 and 96 h. Fig. 11 shows cross-sectional views of TNTAs obtained at these intervals. The TNTA lengths were 58, 160, 188, 289 and 360 µm for 4, 17, 21, 48 and 96 h, respectively. The TNTA lengths fabricated at various anodization times of up to 21 h were proportional to the charge passed during those anodization times indicating that the current efficiency was constant and very close to 100%. This implies that there are almost no side reactions during the anodization and the bulk chemical dissolution of formed TNTAs is negligible. The proportionality between the total charge passed and the length of formed TNTAs was also held for anodization potentials lower than 60 V while above anodization potential of 60 V, the current efficiency decreased.91
 Fig. 11  FESEM images of cross-sectional views indicating the lengths of TNTAs as a function of time at 60 V in ethylene glycol, 0.3 wt% NH4F and 2 vol% H2O. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 91 © 2007 American Chemical Society.) 

3.3. TNTAs formation mechanism
The fundamental processes responsible for anodic oxidative formation of nanoporous alumina and titania are the same, and are principal to the formation of straight titania nanotubes.97,98 These processes are:56,67,86,99
(1) Formation of oxide layer at the surface of the metal takes place due to interaction of the metal with O2− or OH− ions. After the development of an initial oxide layer, these anions move through the oxide layer towards the metal/oxide interface where they react with the Ti metal.
(2) Metal ion (Ti4+) transfer from the Ti metal at the metal/oxide interface by ejection under application of an electric field and migration towards the oxide/electrolyte interface.
(3) Field-assisted dissolution of Titanium oxide at the oxide/electrolyte interface. Under applied electric potential, the Ti–O bond is polarized and tends to be weak facilitating dissolution of the metal cations. Ti4+ cations dissolve into the electrolyte, and the free O2− anions transfer towards the metal/oxide interface to interact with the Ti metal.
(4) Chemical dissolution of the Ti metal or oxide also occurs due to the acidic electrolyte. Chemical dissolution of titania plays a key role in the formation of TNTAs rather than a nanoporous structure. As mentioned before, the chemical dissolution rate depends on the pH-value, which then causes more etching at the pore-bottom than at the opening and at the walls (as illustrated in Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  The chemical dissolution rate in (c), depends on the pH-value as in (b), caused by the reaction illustrated in (a). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 58 © 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) 
The overall reactions for the anodization process of titanium can be represented as: H2O → O2 + 4e +4 H+(1) Ti + O2 → TiO2(2)
In the early stages of the anodization process, field-assisted dissolution dominates chemical dissolution which can be attributed to the relatively large electric field across the thin oxide layer (the resistance to the current is minimum). Small pits form due to the localized dissolution of the Ti oxide and act as nuclei for pore formation. The formation of these small pits is represented by the following reaction: TiO2 + 6F− + 4H+ → TiF2−6 + 2H2O(3)
Then, these pits convert into larger pores. Subsequently, the pores spread uniformly over the surface. The pore depth increases due to the inward movement of the pore bottom (barrier layer). This occurs due to processes (1)–(3) mentioned above (see Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Illustrative diagram of the evolution of a nanotube array at a constant anodization voltage: (a) oxide layer formation, (b) pit formation on the oxide layer, (c) growth of the pit into scallop shaped pores, (d) metallic part between the pores undergoes oxidation and field assisted dissolution, and (e) fully developed nanotube array with a corresponding top view. Redrawn with permission from ref. 56 © 2006 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 
Although the formation mechanism was originally proposed for the generation of TNTAs fabricated in low pH HF aqueous electrolytes, it still holds for all organic electrolytes discussed above in Section 3.2 considering the following differences:
(1) Using organic electrolytes with low water content, the inhibiting organic medium and low oxygen availability hinder the growth of oxide layer barrier thickness beneath the nanotube arrays which help increase the transfer rate of different ionic species across this oxide layer barrier and consequently, increase the nanotube growth rate.
(2) The corrosion-inhibiting organic medium at low water content minimizes the chemical dissolution rate of TiO2 at the nanotube mouths which increases the nanotube growth rate and enhances the electrical current efficiency.
(3) Replacing the strong acidic HF aqueous electrolytes with near-neutral fluoride salt electrolytes such as NH4F and KF minimizes the chemical dissolution rate of TiO2 nanotubes.
(4) Although high viscous glycerol electrolyte helps widen the pH gradient across the nanotube length (see Fig. 12) which increases the nanotube growth at the bottom and decreases the chemical dissolution rate at the nanotube mouths, the low transfer rate of different ionic species through the electrolyte due to high viscosity results in a relatively low growth rate of nanotubes if compared with other organic electrolytes such as DMSO and ethylene glycol.79
(5) The anodization potential window within which TNTAs can be fabricated is a characteristic of the electrolyte and depends on its chemical and physical properties. For aqueous electrolytes, the potential window for TNTAs fabrication was found to be within 10–30 V with an optimum potential of 20–25 V,62 whereas for organic electrolytes, the potential window tends to be wider: for glycerol electrolyte (1–40 V),79 for DMSO (10–70 V)83 and for ethylene glycol (20–65 V) with a maximum growth rate at 60 V.91
4. Modification of TNTAs electronic and photoelectrochemical properties
4.1. Non-metal doping
The electronic structure of a semiconductor (e.g. band gap value as well as the level of valence and conduction bands) plays a key factor in semiconductor photoactivity. A semiconductor comprises of energy valence band (VB) and energy conduction band (CB). The energy difference between these two bands is known as band gap energy or band gap (Eg). Electrons in VB are excited to CB when absorb photons with energy equal or higher than Eg. The valence band maximum edge of titania mainly comes from the oxygen 2p orbitals and the conduction band minimum edge comes from the 3d orbitals of titanium. The electron transitions from the dopants 2p or 3p orbitals to the 3d orbitals of titanium generally result in optical property modifications.100 Highly ordered, vertically oriented, high surface area titania nanotube arrays are ideal for water photolysis and photocatalytic degradation of wide range organic substances due to high catalyst/electrolyte interface area, electrolyte percolation and highly efficient charge transfer.56 TiO2 nanotube arrays demonstrate quantum efficiency exceeding 80% under UV illumination for water photolysis.101 However the widespread application of TiO2 is limited by its wide band gap (∼3.2 eV) which is photoresponsive only under UV illumination. Because UV portion accounts for only about 5% of the solar spectra while visible light accounts for about 45%, any shift in photoactivity of TiO2 from UV toward visible light region increases the photoconversion efficiency and therefore has a positive impact on photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical applications of the materials.56,99 In order to resolve the above problem and modify the electronic structure of TiO2 to narrow its band gap, non-metals such as carbon,102 nitrogen,103,104 phosphorus–fluorine105 and nitrogen–fluorine–iodine106 have recently been doped into TiO2 and proved significant enhancements in visible light photoactivity of the material.
Asahi and co-workers107 calculated densities of states (DOSs) of the substitutional doping of N, C, F, P and S for O in anatase TiO2 and found that when mixing p states of N with 2p of O in the substitutional doping of N, valence band (VB) edge shifted upwards leading to narrower band gap of TiO2. Although doping of S resulted in a similar band gap narrowing, the ionic radius of S was found to be too large to be introduced into TiO2 lattice as proved by larger formation energy needed for the substitution of S than that needed for the substitution of N. N-Doped TiO2 films were prepared by sputtering TiO2 in N2 (40%)/Ar gas for 4 h and the films were a mixture of anatase and rutile crystal phases. It is worth mentioning that authors of this study107 set the following requirements to introduce visible-light photoactivity by doping: (1) doping should introduce states in the band gap of TiO2 that absorb visible light photons; (2) the conduction band minimum (CBM), after doping, should be as high as that of TiO2 or higher than the potential level of H2/H2O to secure the photoreduction activity; and (3) the introduced states in the gap should overlap adequately with the band states of TiO2 to carry over the photoinduced electrons to reactive sites at the surface within their lifetime. Requirements 2 and 3 are most likely achieved when using non-metal doping rather than metal doping.107
The densities of state (DOS) calculations conducted by Asahi and co-workers107 proved that the substitutional doping of N for O site was expected to be the most effective among other non-metal dopants considered because the nitrogen p states placed just above the valence bands maximum (VBM) of TiO2 may contribute to the band gap narrowing without noticeable increase of the carrier recombination. Experimental investigation of nitrogen doped TiO2 conducted by Chen and co-workers using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy confirmed the findings of Asahi study.108
A huge number of publications have been reported on the photocatalytic properties of N-doped TiO2 under visible-light.109–115 N-modified TNTAs were synthesized by annealing the as-prepared amorphous TNTAs at 400 °C in the presence of urea pyrolysis gaseous products.116 In contrast to the pure TNTAs, modified TNTAs demonstrated photocurrent under visible light illumination. For the pure TNTAs, the photocurrent disappeared at wavelengths >400 nm, which corresponds to anatase band gap, Eg, of 3.2 eV. While N-modified TNTAs demonstrated photocurrent down to wavelength of 750 nm showing strong response in visible light region. N1s X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of modified TNTAs showed two sub-peaks at 400.1 eV and 398.2 eV which can be ascribed to C–NC and C–NH2 species.116,117 Vetiello and co-workers103 synthesized TNTAs in HF/H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte under anodization potential of 20 V for 2 h. The produced TNTAs were of an average inner diameter of 100 nm, wall thickness of 15 nm and tube length of 500 nm. To induce nitrogen doped TNTAs, some samples were annealed in pure ammonia atmosphere at a temperature of 600 °C, where other samples were annealed in air at 450 °C and 600 °C for comparison. The ammonia-treated TNTAs exhibited photocurrent in the visible light range up to 525 nm while the other two samples annealed in air at 450 and 600 °C did not demonstrate photocurrent in the wavelength range above 400 nm. The photocurrent of NH3-treated TNTAs is attributed to the introducing of nitrogen doping of TNTAs which was confirmed by XPS spectra peak at 395.8 eV which corresponds to atomic nitrogen in the form of mixed titanium oxide–nitride.103,118 N-Doped TNTAs were also synthesized by annealing the as-anodized TNTAs in ammonia gas atmosphere at 500 °C.119 In this study, the nanotubular structure was found to remain unchanged after annealing. X-Ray diffraction and Raman spectra demonstrated the presence of both anatase and rutile phases in the N-doped TNTAs as well as the non-doped TNTAs but the XRD spectra of the nitrogen-doped TNTAs showed increased peak intensity in the rutile (110) peak and an emerging (210) rutile peak implying that nitrogen doping could have enhanced the phase transition from anatase to rutile at lower annealing temperature.119,120 The photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange using nitrogen doped TNTAs was shown to be evidently higher than that of undoped TNTAs which may be ascribed to the role of nitrogen doping in band gap, Eg, narrowing.121 During anodization process, Ti metal foil is positively biased against Pt cathode. Under the effect of this positive bias, negative ions will move toward the anode surface and get oxidized and some of these atoms may be incorporated into the growing TiO2 layer. Nitrogen atoms may be incorporated into growing TNTAs by adjusting the electrolyte composition so that only nitrogen and fluoride containing species are added into anodization electrolyte. Shankar and co-workers prepared nitrogen-doped TNTAs in one anodization step in 0.07 M HF aqueous electrolyte containing varying concentrations of NH4NO3 from 0.2 to 2.5 M for various anodization times ranging from 17 s to 6 h. XPS spectra showed formation of TiO2−xNx with a maximum value of x = 0.23 in sample anodized for only 17 s with decreasing until reaching x = 0.02 for sample anodized for 6 h. Unfortunately, at very short anodization times such as 17 s, there are no nanotubes formed. Only thin oxide layer with small pits and pores appearing on it was formed. With completely formed TNTAs after 6 h and x = 0.02, the absorption edge was slightly shifted from around 400 nm to 423 nm whereas for sample anodized for 17 s (no nanotubes were formed), and x = 0.23, the absorbance shift was from 400 nm to 510 nm. The nitrogen doping and TNTAs formation were found to be competing process.122 In 2010, Xu and co-workers123 reported a new approach for N-doped TNTAs. They immersed short amorphous TNTAs, previously prepared by anodization in 0.1 M HF and 1 M H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte for 60 min at 20 V, in hydrazine hydrate (80%) for 6 h and then dried in air at 110 °C. The dried TNTAs were annealed at 450 °C for 3 h to crystallize amorphous TNTAs to anatase phase. Nitrogen content of hydrazine-treated crystalline TNTAs was determined using EDX characterization. The atomic ratio of N/Ti was 8/25. Photocurrent of hydrazine-treated nitrogen-doped TNTAs was found to be double that of untreated TNTAs (samples annealed in air at 450 °C for 3 h without immersing in hydrazine hydrate). The photocurrent of N-doped TNTAs was 182 µA while it was only 92 µA for undoped TNTAs. The UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of nitrogen doped and un-doped TNTAs showed a clear red-shift in the absorption edge for doped TNTAs and a band gap value for nitrogen-doped TNTAs of 3.04 eV (corresponding to wavelength of 408 nm) compared to 3.26 eV (corresponding to wavelength of 380 nm) for un-doped TNTAs. In addition, N-doped TNTAs exhibited a higher visible light absorbance (from 400–450 nm). The photocatalytic activity of N-doped and un-doped TNTAs was investigated by the degradation of reactive brilliant X-3B dye. The degradation percent of X-3B was 59% using un-doped TNTAs in photocatalysis, while it was 99% when N-doped TNTAs was used. The apparent first order rate constant (kapp) of photodegradation of the X-3B dye was 0.04 min−1 for N-doped TNTAs whereas it was only 0.009 min−1 for un-doped TNTAs.123 Although the EDX spectra did not show doped nitrogen atoms inside the TiO2 lattice, the UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra, photocurrent enhancement and the increase in photodegradation efficiency of hydrazine-treated TNTAs all proved the effectiveness of this approach to enhance the visible light activity of TNTAs.
Aqueous electrolyte containing 1/12 M oxalic acid and 0.5 wt% NH4F was employed to prepare N- and F-co-doped TNTAs by Su and co-workers.124 The prepared TNTAs were annealed at 400 °C to induce anatase crystalline phase. The incorporation of N and F atoms into TNTAs crystal lattice was verified by XPS spectral peaks of 401.9 eV and 396.25 eV for N1s and 686.4 eV and 688.5 eV for F1s, respectively. The large peak of 401.9 eV was ascribed to adventitious N2 and NH3 adsorbed on TiO2 surface whereas the peak of 396.25 eV was attributed to the presence of Ti–N bonds formed by replacing O atoms in TiO2 lattice. The F1s peak at 686.4 eV was ascribed to TiOF2 while the peak at 688.5 eV may belong to Ti–F bonds.124,125 Preparation of N- and F-co-doped TNTAs in one anodization step followed by annealing in either N2 or air atmosphere was also reported in ref. 126. They used electrolyte consisted of glycerin:water (9:1 volume ration) containing 0.36 M NH4F and 0.25 M NH4Cl for TNTAs formation at anodization potential of 20 V and then annealed as-prepared TNTAs at 500 °C in a flow of nitrogen. XPS spectra confirmed both nitrogen and fluorine doping by the presence of peaks at 397 and 687.7 eV which attributed to Ti–N and Ti–F bonds, respectively. N- and F-co-doped TNTAs both annealed in air and nitrogen flow showed an enhanced absorbance in the whole visible light region but the one that annealed in nitrogen flow showed higher absorbance than that annealed in air. This may be attributed to the resubstitution of dopants by oxygen when annealed in air resulting in lower dopants concentration. The N- and F-co-doped TNTAs exhibited a high degradation rate of methyl blue (MB) under visible light illumination leaving only 19% of the initial concentration of MB after 2 h irradiation, compared to 60% of the initial concentration left in the case of un-doped TNTAs.126 Ghicov and co-workers reported the preparation of N-doped TNTAs using ion implantation.127 The approach was to first anneal as-prepared TNTAs at 450 °C for 3 h in air to induce the crystalline phase then implant nitrogen ions into the crystallized TNTAs using a multipurpose implanter at 60 keV accelerating energy and a nominal dose of 1 × 1016 ions per cm2. Finally, the N-implanted TNTAs were reannealed again at 450 °C for 3 h in air to reform the structure damage that might have happened during ion implantation process. Photocurrent measured for samples after first annealing without ion implantation was only below 400 nm wavelength. The photocurrent measured after ion implantation was also below 400 nm but its value was very small compared to the photocurrent measured before N-implantation process. The loss in photocurrent after ion implantation process was ascribed to the huge damage to the crystal structure caused by ion implantation process. After reannealing at 450 °C for 3 h in air, the damage was reformed and photocurrent spectra exhibited an increase in the value in the range below 400 nm and also an extension up to 550 nm which corresponds to a sub-band gap of 2.2 eV.127
Since the very publicized report by Khan and co-workers in 2002, many attempts have been made to decrease the band gap energy of TiO2 by carbon doping.55,102,128–131 The most common approach for synthesis of a carbon-doped TiO2 film is by direct oxidation in a burning flame.102,132 Although flame annealing method exhibited enhanced absorbance in visible light region as well as enhanced photocurrents, a substantial damage occurred in the TNTAs resulting in a subsequent decrease in the overall performance. C-Doped TNTAs were prepared by reannealing the crystalline anatase phase TNTAs in CO gas flow at temperatures ranging from 500 to 800 °C. Although the carbon content ranged between 8 and 42 atom% according to XPS results, no appreciable peak was found at 281.5 eV meaning that there was no Ti–C bonding.55
Very interestingly, fabrication of TNTAs in organic electrolyte such as ethylene glycol-based electrolyte and then annealing in a reducing atmosphere (H2 gas flow) helped introducing carbon dopant from the reduced ethylene glycol to give C-doped TNTAs with a modified band gap of 2.2 eV.51 Carbon-modified TNTAs were also obtained by annealing as-annodized TNTAs at 550 °C under an argon and acetylene gas mixture (9:1) flow for 1 h. XPS spectra of carbon modified TNTAs exhibited a peak at 288.9 eV which can be ascribed to the carbon existing in the form of interstitial atoms which come from the diffusion of carbon atoms into the TNTAs lattice during carbon modification process.133Fig. 14 shows that the absorbance edge of carbon-modified TNTAs was shifted towards the visible light region compared to the un-modified TNTAs. Photoactivity of carbon-modified TNTAs was evaluated by photodegradation of methyl blue under the sunlight irradiation. Fig. 15 shows the change in MB concentration with irradiation time using un-modified TNTAs, carbon-modified TNTAs and without any TNTAs (just photofading under sunlight irradiation). The large enhancement of photoactivity after carbon-modification is very clear from Fig. 15. The MB is almost completely removed by photodegradation after 300 min using carbon-modified TNTAs whereas only 18% and 9% were removed after 300 min using un-modified TNTAs and without any catalyst, respectively.133
 Fig. 14  UV-Vis absorption spectra of TNTAs and carbon-modified TNTAs reprinted from ref. 133 © 2008 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 
 Fig. 15  Change of MB concentration with irradiation time under different photocatalysts (reprinted from ref. 133 © 2008 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved). 
Boron doping was found to enhance the performance of TNTAs. Lu and co-workers134 prepared B-doped TNTAs by chemical vapor deposition. The as-anodized TNTAs were first annealed at 450 °C in oxygen for 3 h to be converted to anatase phase, then boron doping process was carried out using chemical vapor deposition (CVP). The boron source was trimethyl borate and N2 was used as a carrier gas. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process was carried out at 600 °C for 40 min. The XPS spectra for B-doped TNTAs exhibited a binding energy peak at 192 eV which lies between the standard binding energy for Ti–B in TiB2 (187.5 eV) and the binding energy for B–O in B2O3 (193.1 eV), implying that the boron atoms could be probably incorporated into TNTAs crystal lattice and boron might exist as Ti–B–O.59,134 Although UV-Vis spectra for B-doped TNTAs revealed small absorption edge shift toward visible light region (from 385 nm to 405 nm), compared with the large shift occurred in N-doping and C-doping, there is enhancement in the light absorbance in UV region implying an enhancement in the photocurrent and photoconversion efficiency under UV irradiation. B-Doped TNTAs exhibited photocurrent density 60% higher than un-doped TNTAs and maximum 31.5% photo-conversion efficiency compared to only 16% for un-doped TNTAs under UV irradiation.134–136 Although introducing sulfur into TiO2 lattice as dopant narrows band gap similar to nitrogen doping, the large ionic radius of sulfur would make it more difficult to incorporate it into the TiO2 crystal which is proved by the much higher formation energy necessary for the sulfur substitution than that required for nitrogen substitution.107 Tang and Li137 prepared sulfur-doped TNTAs by annealing as-anodized TNTAs at 380 °C for 14 h under H2S flow at 10 mL min−1. XPS studies of sulfur-doped TNTAs showed the presence of two distinctive peaks of s2p at 167.70 and 163.88 eV. The higher peak was ascribed to surface adsorbed SO2 according to Umebayashi and co-workers138 and Sayago and co-workers,139 while the lower peak at 163.88 eV was attributed to mixed state such as S–Ti–O according to ref. 135. Fig. 16 shows the UV-Vis spectra of sulfur-doped TNTAs and undoped annealed TNTAs. As shown, sulfur-doped TNTAs demonstrate a strong responsiveness over the whole visible light region which is reflected on the large enhancement in the photocurrent compared to the un-doped TNTAs.137
 Fig. 16  UV-Vis DR spectra of sulfur-doped TNTAs and un-doped annealed TNTAs (reprinted from ref. 137 © 2008 American Chemical Society). 
Silicon-dopant was successfully incorporated into TNTAs using chemical vapor deposition method by Su and co-workers.140 The as-anodized TNTAs were first annealed at 450 °C for 3 h to convert the amorphous phase to anatase crystalline phase. Then the crystalline TNTAs were subjected to CVD treatment. Tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) carried by Ar gas was admitted to the tube furnace as a silicon source at 500 °C for 15 min. The silicon concentration in the carrier gas was about 156 mg L−1. After CVD process, the TNTAs were reannealed at 650 °C for 30 min. XRD patterns for Si-doped TNTAs and un-doped TNTAs which were treated at the same conditions except CVD process, indicated that Si-doping was inhibiting the crystallite growth and the anatase-to-rutile phase transformation at high annealing temperatures. The reason behind these phenomena is attributed to the presence of the amorphous silica phase. The UV-Vis DRS showed a blue shift in the band gap due to Si-doping where the band gap absorption edge for Si-doped TNTAs was 375 nm (corresponding to 3.62 eV) and for un-doped TNTAs was 388 nm (corresponding to 3.32 eV). The blue shift in the band gap absorption edge of Si-doped TNTAs showed photocurrent spectra 1.5 times higher than the un-doped TNTAs under UV irradiation. The enhancement of photoresponse of Si-doped TNTAs was also confirmed by the increase in photoelectrochemical degradation of PCP under UV irradiation with a degradation kinetic constant of 1.22 h−1 which was 84.8% higher than that of un-doped TNTAs.140
4.2. Metal ions doping
Doping of TiO2 nanoparticles with transitional metal ions and rare earth metal ions to improve the TiO2 photocatalytic performance has been extensively investigated.115,141–143 Metal ions doping can expand the photo-responsiveness of TiO2 into visible light spectrum. Due to metal ions incorporation into the TiO2 lattice, extrinsic energy levels in the band gap of TiO2 are formed, according to the following equations:115 Mn+ + hν → M(n+1)+ + e−(ch)(4) Mn+ + hν → M(n−1)+ + hν−(vb)(5)where M and Mn+ represent metal and metal ion dopant, respectively. It is very important to understand that the electron (hole) transfer between metal dopant and TiO2 may also increase the rate of electron/hole recombination. The energy level of metal ion reduction should be less negative than the conduction band edge of TiO2 while the energy level of metal oxidation should be less positive than the valence band edge of TiO2. Metal ion dopants should exist near titania surface to facilitate charge transferring. Deep metal ion dopants act as recombination centers. Additionally, there is an optimum concentration for each metal dopant, above this concentration the photocatalytic performance decreases because of the increase in electron/hole recombination process.115,141,144,145 It should be recognized that in contrast to metal doping of TiO2 nanoparticles, metal ions doping of TNTAs is more difficult as one should choose carefully the doping method that introduces the metal ions efficiently into TNTAs crystal lattice and at the same time not damage the highly organized nanotubular structure. Yang and co-workers146 prepared Zn-doped TNTAs by immersing TNTAs in Zn-containing solution for hours then annealing samples at 400 °C for 3 h. The incorporation of Zn+ was concluded only from FESEM images and HRTEM observations of Zn-doped TNTAs. The powerful XPS investigation did not clarify the chemical state of zinc ions.146 Liu and co-workers147 employed an electrochemical strategy to fabricate Zr-doped TNTAs. After short TNTAs were formed by anodization in aqueous electrolyte containing 0.14 M NaF and 0.5 M H3PO4, the formed TNTAs and platinum electrode were used as a cathode and anode, respectively, in an electrolyte of 0.1 M Zr(NO3)4 for preparation of Zr-doped TNTAs at varying electric potentials ranging from 3 to 15 V and post-annealing temperatures ranging from 400 to 700 °C. Zr and Ti have similar atomic radii (Ti, 2 Å; Zr, 2.16 Å) and they are both IV B elements and tetravalent (+4) elements. Thus, it is possible to introduce Zr atoms into TiO2 lattice. XPS spectra demonstrated a peak at 182 eV which is ascribed to the presence of Zr in the TiO2 lattice but the UV-Vis DRS did not show any difference between Zr-doped TNTAs and pure TNTAs. Photocatalytic degradation of rhodamine B using Zr-doped and un-doped TNTAs exhibited an enhancement due to Zr-doping.147 W-Doped TNTAs were prepared by a one anodization step of 3% tungsten titanium alloy foil in 0.5% HF containing ethylene glycol at 60 V. The UV-Vis DRS of the produced W-doped TNTAs showed a red shift in the absorbance edge and a reduction in band gap about 0.14 eV which resulted in an increase of photocurrent density compared to the un-doped TNTAs.148 Cr-Doped TNTAs prepared by ion implantation method exhibited a significant enhancement in photocurrent response in both UV and visible light regions.149
Many studies have focused on iron ion doping to TiO2 nanoparticles or nanoparticulate films including preparation methods, characterization, charge transport and recombination dynamics, and photocatalytic performance.150–156 Adan and co-workers153 reported that the presence of iron shifts the absorption edge of TiO2 towards the visible region and this red shift increases with increasing the iron content, consistent with the changes in the sample color from white to yellow or light brown. The enhanced absorbance of Fe-doped TiO2 in the visible light region could be ascribed to the excitation of 3d electrons of Fe3+ to the conduction band of TiO2 resulting in a band centered at ca. 400 nm.151,157 The wide red shift of absorbance edge to ca. 500 nm which particularly appeared at high Fe content (5.1%) was attributed to the d–d transitions of Fe3+ or the charge transfer between the Fe ions due to the following reaction.151,158 Fe3+ + Fe3+ → Fe4+ + Fe2+(6)
To explain how the reaction in eqn (6) can occur in Fe-doped TNTAs electrode under UV-visible light irradiation, the following reactions were proposed by Sun and co-workers:159 TiO2 + hν → e−(CB) + h+(VB)(7) Fe3+ + h+ → Fe4+ (hole trap)(8) Fe3+ + e− → Fe2+ (electron trap)(9)

Eqn (8) and (9) explain that Fe3+ may behave either as an electron or a hole trap, depending on the favorable energy levels (see Fig. 17); consequently, photogenerated charges are separated more effectively. Furthermore, the electrons trapped in Fe3+ sites may transfer to the molecular oxygen more rapidly.160,161
 Fig. 17  Illustrative diagram for the charge transfer in Fe-doped TiO2. 
There are very few reports about Fe-doped TNTAs. Sun and co-workers159 prepared Fe3+-doped TNTAs by anodization of Ti foil in HF-aqueous electrolyte containing ferric nitrate. The TNTAs were very short (only 220 nm length), with an average inner diameter of 50 nm and wall thickness of 10 nm. The concentration of ferric nitrate was found to affect the TNTAs formation which means that an appropriate concentration of ferric nitrate must be chosen to obtain regular uniform nanotubes. XPS spectra coupling with Raman spectra confirmed that the presence of Fe2O3 dispersed uniformly in the bulk of TNTAs. The Fe-doped TNTAs prepared in the electrolyte containing 0.1 M ferric nitrate exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity with apparent first order rate constant of 0.972 h−1 for MB photodegradation under a 365 nm UV light irradiation which was 80% higher than undoped TNTAs.159 Li and co-workers162 prepared Fe-doped TNTAs by anodization of Ti foil in F− containing aqueous electrolytes containing ferrous sulfate. The prepared Fe-doped TNTAs were about 500 nm in length, a tube diameter of 90 nm and a wall thickness of 13 nm. The as-anodized TNTAs were annealed at 450 °C. The photocurrent spectra and UV-Vis DR spectra confirmed the extension of photoresponse of Fe-doped TNTAs to visible light region with a calculated band gap of 2.9 eV.162 Although, there was an enhancement in photocurrent due to the introducing of Fe dopant into TNTAs by Sun and co-workers159 and Li and co-workers,162 the photocurrent densities were very low about several µA which can be attributed to the low surface area of the short TNTAs produced in aqueous electrolyte compared to the high surface area of long TNTAs of the third and fourth generations which are prepared in organic electrolytes. Another synthesis route for preparing Fe2O3-modified TNTAs was reported by Kuang and co-workers.163 First, TNTAs of a 340 nm length and inner diameter of 90 nm were fabricated by anodizing Ti foil in an aqueous electrolyte containing 0.1 M NaF and 0.5 M NaHSO4 for 3 h at a potential of 15 V. Then TNTAs electrode was immersed in turn in FeCl3, NaOH and H2O for 5 min each time and this immersion cycle was repeated four times. The as-anodized amorphous TNTAs have positive charges on their surfaces, so that OH− groups can be easily absorbed on the surface by electrostatic forces during the immersion process in NaOH solution. Then the rich OH− TNTAs were immersed in FeCl3 aqueous solution in which the OH− groups on TNTAs surface can easily combine with Fe3+ to form Fe(OH)3. After the four immersion cycles completed, Fe(OH)3–TNTAs were annealed at 550 °C. The amount of Fe2O3 loaded on TNTAs can be tuned by varying FeCl3 concentration in the immersion solution. The existence of Fe2O3 on TNTAs was verified by both SEM scan and EDX spectra. Fe2O3-modified TNTAs exhibited enhanced absorption in the visible light region which increased by increasing Fe content from 0.01 M to 0.2 M. The absorption edge shift of Fe2O3-modified TNTAs towards visible light region is attributed to the low band gap Fe2O3 (2.2 eV). The photocurrent response of Fe2O3-modified TNTAs was also enhanced significantly and increased with increasing Fe2O3 loading.163
4.3. CdS nanoparticle sensitization
Another method to modify the wide band gap of TiO2 is to couple TiO2 with a small band gap semiconductor thin film or nanoparticles. Coupling a wide band gap semiconductor with a small band gap semiconductor with a more negative conduction band level will facilitate the injection of electrons from the conduction band of the small band gap semiconductor to the CB of the wide band gap semiconductor. CdS has a small band gap of 2.4 eV which allows the absorption of low energy photons from the visible light region up to 520 nm and its conduction band, CB, is 0.5 eV more negative than that of TiO2 which should be beneficial in enhancing the charge separation as illustrated in Fig. 18. Therefore, sensitization of TiO2 with CdS nanoparticles or thin film could make the performance more efficient in solar energy conversion applications by increasing the ability to harvest the visible light as well as improving charge separation process.66,164–168 Previous studies about combination of CdS and TiO2 showed outstanding photoelectrochemical properties under visible light spectrum.169,170 Chen and co-workers164 first reported the preparation of CdS-sensitized TNTAs by electrodeposition method. CdS was deposited into TNTAs surface by cathodic reduction from benzene saturated with elemental sulfur and 0.6 M CdCl2 mixed with DMSO. The counter electrode was a rod of Cd and the cathodic potential was −0.5 V. The existence of CdS was verified from XPS spectral peaks for sulfide at 161.9 eV and for Cd 3d3/2 at 411.9 eV and for Cd 3d5/2 at 405.3 eV. The CdS sensitization has red-shifted the absorption edge of TNTAs towards the visible light spectra up to a wavelength of 500 nm. The CdS-modified TNTAs annealed at 400 °C exhibited a photocurrent of 2.51 mA cm−2 under illumination intensity of 1 sun (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2). This high photocurrent value is about 16 times higher than that obtained from bare unmodified TNTAs.164
 Fig. 18  Illustrative diagram for the charge injection from excited CdS into TiO2. CB and VB refer to the energy levels of conductions and valence bands respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 164 © 2005 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.) 
Furthermore, Yin and co-workers demonstrated that the cathodic deposition parameters such as cathodic potential and deposition time would affect the photoelectrochemical performance of CdS-modified TNTAs. The maximum photocurrent of about 3.8 mA cm−2 was obtained when the cathodic potential was 5 V and deposition time 30 min.65 Bai and co-workers167 prepared CdS-modified TNTAs on a conducting glass by depositing CdS nanoparticles into the crystallized TNTAs by S-CBD (sequential chemical bath deposition) method.167,171,172 The crystallized TNTAs were successively immersed in CdSO4 solution and Na2S solution as one cycle for several times. CdS-modified TNTAs fabricated by this method demonstrated very high photocurrent of 4.8 mA under AM1.5 illumination which was more than 6 times higher than photocurrent obtained from un-modified TNTAs (0.75 mA cm−2) under the same conditions.167 Despite the outstanding photoelectron-chemical properties of CdS-modified TNTAs, the instability of CdS nanoparticles in aqueous solutions164,167 may hinder industrial and commercial applications of CdS-modified TNTAs.
4.4. Loading of precious metal nanoparticles
Attaching noble metal nanoparticles to TNTAs provides nanotube/nanoparticle composite materials with enhanced photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical properties which increase the overall performance of TNTAs.173 TiO2 has been loaded with various noble metal particles such as Pt,174–177 Au,178,179 Pd,180 Ag181,182 and Co–Ag–Pt.183 Noble metal nanoparticles loading on TNTAs is beneficial to depress the recombination of photogenerated electron/hole charges and consequently increase the overall photocatalytic process efficiency. For example, for Ag-loaded TNTAs, the flat CB potential of TiO2 is lower (more negative) than that of metallic Ag and this allows the photogenerated electrons to follow towards Ag and accumulate there forming a Schottky barrier between the TNTAs and Ag nanoparticles.181,184–186 The photogenerated electrons accumulated on Ag nanoparticles surface have a good fluidity and could be easily transferred to the absorbed oxygen on Ag surface forming O2− active species. The O2− species favors the photocatalytic process. Furthermore, the accumulated hole charges at the VB of TNTAs react with water to produce hydroxyl radical OH˙ which is very active oxidant for many organic compounds in water.187
5. Advantages of TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNTAs) over nanowires and nanorods
Although nanowires and nanorods are one dimensional nanomaterials like nanotube arrays with unique properties which make them promising candidates for many diverse applications, the hollow structure gains the nanotube arrays further advantages as explained below:
(1) For the same outer diameter and length, nanotubes have larger surface area than nanowires and nanorods due to internal surface area of the hollow tubes which results in enhanced photoanode performance.188
(2) Nanotubes can be easily functionalized by filling their hollows with either organic or inorganic nanomaterials to produce a wide range of nanocomposites for a vast number of applications: for instance, synthesis of CdS-sensitized TiO2 nanotube arrays as visible light responsive photoanode.164 And, filling nanotubular hollows with iron oxide189 or nickel oxide nanoparticles or nanorods190 produces nanocomposites with excellent semiconducting and magnetic properties for photocatalytic and electronic applications.
(3) The TiO2 nanotube arrays produced by anodization are vertically oriented, well-organized and top-opened nanotubes and attached to a conducting Ti-metal support which plays as an electron collector to facilitate rapid separation of photogenerated charges before recombination.
(4) The above feature in point (3) also facilitates the propagation of the incident and scattered photons over the internal and external surfaces through the whole length of nanotubes which increases the light absorptivity.191
(5) TiO2 nanotubes produced by anodization are integrated and immobilized arrays over large surfaces which help their incorporation in a photoreactor or a photoelectroreactor either continuously or in a batch fashion without the need for an expensive solid–liquid separation step that is necessary in the case of nanoparticles, nanowires or nanorods.
(6) The unique hollow structure of nanotube arrays along with the excellent TiO2 biocompatibility makes nanotube arrays a promising candidate for drug delivery applications by using nanotubes as a drug carrier to control the drug release in the body.52,188
(7) The anodization process is inexpensive (compared with other nanomaterials synthesis methods such as sol–gel) and already is a well established industrial process and has been used in metal industries for about 100 years which means that large scale production and commercialization of TiO2 nanotube arrays are more reliable and cost-efficient.
6. Applications of TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNTAs) photoanodes
The positive environmental and economic impact of TNTAs photoanodes is extremely high due to the versatile applications of this new nanomaterial. One major application is in photoelectrochemical cells for the production of ultimately clean and renewable H2 fuel from photolysis of water using the abundant and renewable solar energy. This technology will help reduce the world consumption of fossil fuels and consequently reduce the green house gas (GHG) emissions.192 Secondly, using TNTAs as a photoanode in photochemical reactions for photodegradation of a wide range of organic contaminants in both water and air streams will result in a cleaner and healthier environment.188
Since the year 1972, when Fujishima and Honda reported photoelectrochemical generation of hydrogen by water splitting using TiO2 nanoparticles,17 significant research interest has been raised and many subsequent efforts have been devoted to improve the photoconversion efficiency through the use of different semiconducting materials or different material structures. Generally, any application where titania in a compact or powder form is presently used is a potential application for TNTAs, for example, photocatalytic degradation of organic contaminants in both aqueous and air streams, low cost dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), water splitting by light for generation of clean H2 fuel, self-cleaning, anti-fogging and many other applications. The highly ordered vertically oriented well defined structure of TNTAs strongly attached to Ti-metal support can bring specific advantages and help enhancing the performance in such applications.12 Dye-sensitized solar cells, DSSCs, also known as Gratzel cells, schematically represented in Fig. 19a, represent one of the widest and most important applications of TiO2. DSSC efficiencies have reached over 11% using nanocrystalline TiO2 films.193 As mentioned in Section 2, these nanocrystalline particulate-based DSSCs are characterized by slow percolation of electrons through the random polycrystalline network and the poor absorption of low energy photons by the available dyes which are two of the major factors hindering further improvement in photoconversion efficiencies. Detailed kinetic and dynamic studies of DSSCs made of nanoparticulate TiO2 films revealed that the limiting factors are random path processes of charges and trapping/detrapping of electrons through the porous network. When using crystallized highly ordered vertically oriented TiO2 nanotube arrays as photoanodes they offer large surface areas with vectorial charge transport along the length of the nanotubes as schematically represented in Fig. 19b.12,34,194 TNTAs length and diameter are proved to be crucial parameters in photoconversion efficiency optimization as it can be seen from Fig. 19c.12 A DSSC fabricated from 3.6 µm thick nanotube array as a photoanode sensitized with N719 dye exhibited a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 10.3 mA cm−2, an open-circuit potential (Voc) of 0.84 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.54, for an overall conversion efficiency of 4.7% under AM1.5 solar simulator illumination.194,195 A maximum photoconversion efficiency of 6.89% was obtained from 20 µm length TNTAs photoanode DSSC sensitized with N719 dye under AM1.5 solar simulator illumination with an open circuit voltage of 0.817 V, short circuit current density of 12.72 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.663.87 Although these results are very promising in terms of the overall photoconversion efficiency under whole solar spectrum illumination (AM1.5 solar simulator), effects of parameters such as anodization conditions, nanotube length, diameter, wall thickness, and nanostructure disorder still need further investigations from researchers to optimize the TNTAs photoanode-based dye sensitized solar cells for further increase in photoconversion efficiency.54,196
 Fig. 19  Schematic representation of dye-sensitized solar cells based on TNTAs (a), electron path through a percolated nanoparticulate and oriented TNTA structures (b) and I–V characteristic of DSSCs based on different diameter nanotubes (empty symbols correspond to 8 µm and filled symbols to 16 µm nanotubes length) (c). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 12 © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009.) 
Photoelectrolysis of water to generate renewable and clean H2 fuel is another very promising application of TNTAs photoanode. Mor and coworkers197 reported hydrogen generation by water splitting using first generation short TNTAs as photoanode at a power-time normalized rate of 960 µmol h−1 W−1 (24 ml h−1 W−1) at an overall conversion efficiency of 6.8% under 320–400 nm light illumination of 100 mW cm−2 intensity. Mohapatra and coworkers51 designed a photoelectrochemical cell consisting of carbon-modified TNTAs as a photoanode and Pt-nanoparticles decorated TNTAs as a cathode for H2 generation from water splitting under both UV and visible light illumination. They achieved photoconversion efficiencies of 13.3% and 8.5% for UV and visible illumination, respectively, which were very encouraging.51
Furthermore, TNTAs photoanode exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity compared with traditional powder counterpart for degradation of a wide range of organic pollutants in both water and air streams such as phenol,90 2,3-dichlorophenol,198,199 pentachlorophenol,134 tetracycline,130 methylene blue 159 and methyl orange.200 For instance, 80% degradation of bisphenol A (BPA) was achieved using 4 µm length TNTAs after 180 min photocatalysis which was much higher than 51% for micro-structured TiO2 photoanode under the same UV illumination.201
7. Concluding remarks
Photocatalytic reactions of TiO2 have gained much interest during the past decades due to their vast applications based on solar energy conversion. More recently, during the last decade, TiO2 nanotube arrays which were produced by electrochemical anodization of Ti metal in F− ions containing electrolytes have attracted more research interest due to their outstanding properties rendering them the most promising photoanode in many solar energy conversion applications including both environmental and energy production applications. The big challenge is to increase the light energy to electrical or chemical energy efficiency. There are three key factors for increasing the efficiency of solar energy applications using TiO2 photoanodes. The first key factor is to increase the surface area. The second key factor is to minimize the recombination of photogenerated electon/hole charges by facilitating rapid charge separation. The third factor is to extend the photo-responsiveness of TiO2 to the visible light region by modifying the band gap energy of the material. Although the high surface area could be achieved by reducing material size to nanoscale, minimizing the photogenerated electron/hole charges recombination could only be achieved through the unique architecture of highly ordered, vertically oriented titania nanotube arrays produced by electrochemical anodization of parent Ti metal foil in F− ions containing electrolytes. The nano-architecture and high surface area can be easily tuned by controlling the anodization process parameters, especially, anodization potential, anodization duration, pH and chemistry of the anodization electrolyte. For example, titania nanotube length can be easily produced in the range from few hundred nanometres in HF aqueous electrolytes to up to several hundreds of microns in ethylene glycol-based electrolytes. Inner diameter and wall thickness can also be tuned by controlling anodization potential and other anodization conditions. In this contribution, we reviewed fabrication of titania nanotube arrays in different anodization electrolytes such as HF-aqueous electrolyte, glycerol-based electrolytes, DMSO electrolyte, formamide electrolyte and ethylene glycol electrolyte. Process parameters and results were discussed in detail. Ethylene glycol was proved to be the best anodization electrolyte in terms of rapid growth rate of nanotubes and the smoothness and well order of produced nanotube arrays. The third key factor to enhance the performance of TiO2 is to modify electronic bands structure to be able to harvest low energy visible light photons. Many different strategies have been proposed to achieve this target, including non-metal doping such as nitrogen, carbon and boron, metal doping such as iron, CdS sensitization and noble metal nanoparticles loading. In each strategy, basic principles and selected results have been discussed in this review.
Acknowledgements
Support of this work by NSERC fund is gratefully appreciated. Ahmed El Ruby Mohamed gratefully acknowledges support under Egyptian Government scholarship provided by Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDI), Helwan, Cairo, Egypt.
References
A. Fujishima, T. N. Rao and D. A. Tryk, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2000, 1, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Adams, L. Brus, C. E. D. Chidsey, S. Creager, C. Creutz, C. R. Kagan, P. V. Kamat, M. Lieberman, S. Lindsay, R. A. Marcus, R. M. Metzger, M. E. Michel-Beyerle, J. R. Miller, M. D. Newton, D. R. Rolison, O. Sankey, K. S. Schanze, J. Yardley and X. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6668–6697 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13226–13239 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Guozhong, Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties and Applications, ImperialCollege Press,  2004, p. 15 Search PubMed .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. N. T. Kuchibhatla, A. S. Karakoti, D. Bera and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2007, 52, 699–913 CrossRef CAS .

          C. N. R. Rao, A. Muller and A. K. Cheetham, The Chemistry of Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties and Applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. Ghicov and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2791–2808 RSC .
K. Shankar, J. I. Basham, N. K. Allam, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, X. Feng, M. Paulose, J. A. Seabold, K.-S. Choi and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6327–6359 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nakamura, N. Ohashi, A. Imanishi, T. Osawa, Y. Matsumoto, H. Koinuma and Y. I. Nakato, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1648–1651 CrossRef CAS .
B. Neumann, P. Bogdanoff, H. Tributsch, S. Sakthivel and H. Kisch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16579–16586 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CAS .
M. Paulose, G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 178, 8–15 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, K. Hashimoto, M. Chikuni, E. Kojima and A. Kitamura, Nature, 1997, 388, 431 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoriya, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, G. K. Mor, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Sens. Lett., 2006, 4, 334–339 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ngamsinlapasasathian, S. Sakulkhaemaruethai, S. Pavasupree, A. Kitiyanan, T. Sreethawong, Y. Suzuki and S. Yoshikawa, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 145–151 CrossRef .

          D. M. Brunette, P. Tengvall, M. Textor and P. Thomsen, Titanium in Medicine, Springer, Berlin,  2001 Search PubMed .
P. Hoyer, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 1411–1413 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Lakshmi, P. K. Dorhout and C. R. Martin, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 857–862 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Y. Brando and K. Wada, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 2001, 20, 167–170 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Bavykin, V. N. Parmon, A. A. Lapkin and F. C. Walsh, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 3370–3377 RSC .
H.-H. Ou and S.-L. Lo, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2007, 58, 179–191 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zwilling, E. Darque-Ceretti, A. Boutry-Forveille, D. David, M. Y. Perrin and M. Aucouturier, Surf. Interface Anal., 1999, 27, 629–637 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, M. Niloy and C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Res., 2003, 18, 2588 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Wang, R. Chen and L. Li, Solid State Commun., 2005, 134, 705–710 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Wang, T. Sun and L. Li, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2450–2454 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Albu, A. Ghicov, J. M. Macak and P. Schmuki, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2007, 1, R65–R67 Search PubMed .
A. J. Frank, N. Kopidakis and J. V. de Lagemaat, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1165–1179 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 215–218 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paulose, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, L. Peng, K. C. Popat, G. K. Mor, T. A. Desai and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14992–14997 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wan, X. Yan, J. Ding, M. Wang and K. Hu, Mater. Charact., 2009, 60, 1534–1540 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang and C. Pan, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 492, 133–135 .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Pechy, T. Renouard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte, P. Liska, L. Cevey, E. Costa, V. Shklover, L. Spiccia, G. B. Deacon, C. A. Bignozzi and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1613–1624 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cao, G. Oskam, G. J. Meyer and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 17021–17027 CrossRef .
P. E. De Jongh and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3427–3430 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wahl, M. Ulmann, A. Carroy and J. Augustynski, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 2277–2278 RSC .
C. Santato, M. Ulmann and J. Augustynski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 936–940 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wahl, M. Ulmann, A. Carroy, B. Jerman, M. Dolata, P. Kedzierzawski, C. Chatelain, A. Monnier and J. Augustynski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 396, 41–51 CrossRef CAS .
P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. P. Rutzinger, E. J. Frank and M. Gratzel, J. Mol. Catal., 1989, 52, 63–84 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adachi, Y. Murata, I. Okada and S. Yoshikawa, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, G488–G493 CrossRef CAS .

          C. N. R. Rao and A. Govindaraj, Nanotubes and Nanowires, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK,  2005 Search PubMed .
M. Paulose, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, 2498–2503 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Mohapatra, M. Misra, V. K. Mahajan and K. S. Raja, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8677–8685 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1451–1457 RSC .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, T. B. Vinzant, N. R. Neale and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3739–3746 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24–28 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2011–2075 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gong, C. A. Grimes, O. K. Varghese, W. Hu, R. S. Singh, Z. Chen and E. Dickey, J. Mater. Res., 2001, 16, 3331–3334 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macák, H. Tsuchiya and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2100–2102 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, W. H. Ma, C. C. Chen, J. C. Zhao and Z. G. Shuai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4782–4783 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cai, L. Yang and Y. Yu, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 1802–1806 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, C. T. Yip, K. Y. Cheung, A. B. Djurisic, M. H. Xie, Y. H. Leung and W. K. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 023508 CrossRef  , 1–3.
Q. Cai, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 230–236 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tian, X.-F. Xiao, R.-F. Liu, H.-D. She and X.-F. Hu, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 42, 5539–5543 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bauer, S. Kleber and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1321–1325 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, Z. Jin, F. Hou and X. Wang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 90, 2384–2389 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, Z. Jin and F. Hou, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 495608 CrossRef  , 1–6.
J. Bai, B. Zhou, L. Li, Y. Liu, Q. Zheng, J. Shao, X. Zhu, W. Cai, J. Liao and L. Zou, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 1880–1884 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Propst and P. A. Kohl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 1006–1013 .
M. Christophersen, J. Carstensen, K. Voigt and H. Főll, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2003, 197, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Ponomarev and C. Levy-Clement, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1998, 1, 42–45 CrossRef CAS .
H. Főll, M. Christophersen, J. Carstensen and G. Hasse, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2002, 39, 93–141 CrossRef .
H. Főll, S. Langa, J. Carstensen, M. Christophersen and I. M. Tiginyanu, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 183 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak and P. Schmuki, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1258–1264 CrossRef CAS .
A. Birner, R. B. Wehrspohn, U. M. Gősele and K. Busch, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 378 .
D. I. Petukhov, A. A. Eliseev, I. V. Kolesnik, K. S. Napolskii, A. V. Lukashin, Y. D. Tretyakov, S. V. Grigoriev, N. A. Grigorieva and H. Eckerlebe, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 114, 440–447 CrossRef CAS .
C. Haginoya, M. Ishibashi and K. Koike, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 2934 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsuchiya, J. M. Macak, A. Ghicov, L. Taveira and P. Schmuki, Corros. Sci., 2005, 47, 3324–3335 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, L. Taveira, S. Aldabergerova and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7463–7465 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, H. Hildebrand, U. Marten-Jahns and P. Schmuki, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2008, 621, 254–266 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Izutsu, Electrochemistry in Nonaqueous Solutions, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, 2nd edn,  2009 Search PubMed .
C. Ruan, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15754–15759 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paulose, K. Shankar, S. Yoriya, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, T. A. Latempa, A. Fitzgerald and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16179–16184 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoriya, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13770–13776 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bestetti, S. Franz, M. Cuzzolin, P. Arosio and P. L. Cavallotti, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 5253–5258 CrossRef CAS .
D.-J. Yang, H.-G. Kim, S.-J. Cho and W.-Y. Choi, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2008, 7(2), 131–134 CrossRef .

          C. A. Grimes and G. K. Mor, Titania Nanotube Arrays: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications, Springer Science + Business Media, LLC, New York, NY, USA,  2009, 22–26 Search PubMed .
K. Shankar, G. K. Mor, H. E. Prakasam, S. Yoriya, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 1–11 .
K. Shankar, G. K. Mor, A. Fitzgerald and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 21–26 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, E. M. Barea, J. Bisquert, G. K. Mor, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11312–11316 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Zhang, S. Nishimoto, M. Jin, D. A. Tryk, T. Murakami and A. Fujishima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 253–259 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Prakasam, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7235–7241 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Yang, S. L. Luo, Q. Y. Cai and S. Z. Yao, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2010, 55, 331–338 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Mohapatra, M. Misra, V. K. Mahajan and K. S. Raja, J. Catal., 2007, 246, 362–369 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ruan, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1283–1295 CrossRef CAS .
A. Watcharenwong, W. Chanmanee, N. R. de Tacconi, C. R. Chenthamarakshan, P. Kajitvichyanukul and K. Rajeshwar, J. Mater. Res., 2007, 22, 3186–3195 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chanmanee, A. Watcharenwong, C. R. Chenthamarakshan, P. Kajitvichyanukul, N. R. de Tacconi and K. Rajeshwar, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2145–2149 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Thompson, Thin Solid Films, 1997, 297, 192 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Sul, C. B. Johansson, Y. Jeong and T. Albrektsson, Med. Eng. Phys., 2001, 23, 329–346 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Mohamed, N. Kasemphaibulsuk, S. Rohani and S. Barghi, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 1998–2008 CrossRef .
X. Chen and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5018–5019 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, K. Shankar, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2005, 5, 1158–1165 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, Y. A. Shaban, W. B. Ingler and S. U. M. Khan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 938–943 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Vitiello, J. M. Macak, A. Ghicov, H. Tsuchiya, L. F. P. Dick and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 544–548 CrossRef CAS .
J. Geng, D. Yang, J. Zhu, D. Chen and Z. Jiang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 146–150 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. Su and L. Lei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 6693–6696 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lei, Y. Su, M. Zhou, X. Zhang and X. Chen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2007, 42, 2230–2236 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, P.-A. Glans, X. Qiu, S. Dayal, W. D. Jennings, K. E. Smith, C. Burda and J. Guo, J.
Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2008, 162, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kosowska, S. Mozia, A. W. Morawski, B. Grzmil, M. Janus and K. Kalucki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 88, 269–280 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Yates, M. G. Nolan, D. W. Sheel and M. E. Pemble, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 179, 213–223 CrossRef CAS .
P.-G. Wu, C.-H. Ma and J. K. Shang, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2005, 81, 1411–1417 CrossRef CAS .
T. Horikawa, M. Katoh and T. Tomida, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 110, 397–404 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sano, E. Puzenat, C. Guillard, C. Geantet and S. Matsuzawa, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2008, 284, 127–133 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, M. Chen, J. Shi and W. Shangguan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1326–1331 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
R. Beranek, J. M. Macak, M. Gartner, K. Meyer and P. Schmuki, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2640–2646 CrossRef CAS .
R. Beranek and H. Kisch, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 761–766 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Saha and H. G. Tompkins, J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 72, 3072 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, G.-X. Cao, Y. Ma, X.-L. Jia, G.-T. Ye and S.-K. Guan, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2009, 19, 11583–11587 Search PubMed .
L. Dong, Y. Ma, Y. Wang, Y. Tian, G. Ye, X. Jia and G. Cao, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 2009, 64, 1598–1600 .
F. Dong, W. Zhao, Z. Wu and S. Guo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 162, 763–770 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, K. C. Tep, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, 2361–2366 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Ao, M. Chen and D. Fu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 4397–4401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, X. Zhang, M. Zhou, S. Han and L. Lei, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 194, 152–160 CrossRef CAS .
C. Menero, G. Mariella, V. Maurino, D. Vione and E. Pelizzetti, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 8964–8972 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li and J. K. Shang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 8923–8929 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghicov, J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, J. Kunze, V. Haeublein, L. Frey and P. Schmuki, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1080–1082 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, R. Killmeyer, M. L. Gray and S. U. M. Khan, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 64, 312–317 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Shaban and S. U. M. Khan, Chem. Phys., 2007, 339, 73–85 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, G. Liu and Q. Zhou, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 182, 3238–3242 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Yun, H. Lee, J. B. Joo, N. D. Kim and J. Yi, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 769–772 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, M. Paulose, G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 3543–3549 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, T. Zhang, Z. Jin, J. Zhang, W. Xu, J. Yan, J. Zhang, L. Zhang and Y. Wu, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 1579–1581 CrossRef .
N. Lu, X. Quan, J. Y. Li, S. Chen, H. T. Yu and G. H. Chen, J. Phys. Chem., 2007, 111, 11836–11842 Search PubMed .
N. Lu, H. Zhao, J. Li, X. Quan and S. Chen, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2008, 62, 668–673 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, S. Han, X. Zhang, X. Chen and L. Lei, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 110, 239–246 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5405–5409 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umebayashi, T. Yamaki, H. Itoh and K. Asai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 454–456 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Sayago, P. Serrano, O. Bohme, A. Goldoni, G. Paolocci, E. Roman and J. A. Martin-Gago, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2001, 64, 205402 CrossRef  , 1–7.
Y. Su, S. Chen, X. Quan, H. Zhao and Y. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255, 2167–2172 CrossRef CAS .
W. Choi, A. Termin and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 84, 13669–13679 CrossRef .
D. Dvoranova, V. Brezova, M. Mazur and M. A. Malati, Appl. Catal., B, 2002, 37, 91–105 CrossRef CAS .
A.-W. Xu, Y. Gao and H.-Q. Liu, J. Catal., 2002, 207, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Tu, S.-Y. Huang, J. P. Sang and X.-W. Zou, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 482, 382–387 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Tu, S. Y. Huang, J. P. Sang and X.-W. Zou, Mater. Res. Bull., 2010, 45, 224–229 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. Wang and L. Li, Key Eng. Mater., 2010, 434–435, 446–447 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, L. Yang, S. Xu, S. Luo and Q. Qai, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1748–1751 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Wang, Y. Kang, X. Xu and Y. Li, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2008, 20, 1213–1215 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghicov, B. Schmidt, J. Kunze and P. Schmuki, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 433, 323–326 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Zhu, W. Zheng, B. He, J. L. Zhang and M. Anpo, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 216, 35–43 CAS .
J. F. Zhu, F. Chen, J. L. Zhang, H. J. Chen and M. Anpo, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 180, 196–204 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Carneiro, V. Teixeira, A. Portinha, A. Magalhaes and P. Coutinho, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2007, 138, 144–150 CrossRef CAS .
C. Adan, A. Bahamonde, M. Fernandez-GarcUa and A. Martunez-Arias, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 72, 11–17 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Xin, Z. Y. Ren, P. Wang, J. Liu, L. Q. Jing and H. G. Fu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 4390–4395 CrossRef CAS .
N. Asong, F. Dukes, C. Wang and M. J. Shultz, Chem. Phys., 2007, 339, 86–93 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, W. Sun, Z. Zhang, Z. Jiang, X. Wang, R. Xu, R. Li and X. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 320, 202–209 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umebayashi, T. Yamaki, H. Itoh and K. Asai, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2002, 63, 1909–1920 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, P.-L. Yue and C. Kutal, New J. Chem., 2003, 27, 1264–1269 RSC .
L. Sun, J. Li, C. L. Wang, S. F. Li, H. B. Chen and C. J. Lin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1875–1880 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, C. Bottcher, D. W. Bahnemann and J. K. Dohrmann, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2322–2329 RSC .
B. Tryba, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2008, 2008, 1–15 CrossRef  , article ID 721824.
J. Li, H. Yun and C.-J. Lin, ECS Trans., 2008, 3(43), 1–9 Search PubMed .
S. Kuang, L. Yang, S. Luo and Q. Cai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 7385–7388 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, M. Paulose, C. Ruan, G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, D. Kouzoudis and C. A. Grimes, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 177, 177–184 CrossRef CAS .
W.-T. Sun, Y. Yu, H.-Y. Pan, X.-F. Gao, Q. Chen and L.-M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124–1125 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Cheng, L. Liu and J. Mu, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 353, 226–231 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, J. Li, Y. Liu, B. Zhou and W. Cai, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 95, 408–413 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, C. Tang and J. H. Bang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1124–1128 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vogel, K. Pohl and H. Weller, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1990, 174, 241–246 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kohtani, A. Kudo and T. Sakata, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 206, 166–170 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Lin, Y. H. Yu and Y. H. Liou, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 93, 119–125 CrossRef CAS .
G. Larramona, C. Chone, A. Jacob, D. Sakakura, B. Delatouche, D. Pere, X. Cieren, M. Nagino and R. Bayon, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1688–1696 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Zhu, Q. Guo, X. L. Huang, S. R. Wang, S. M. Zhang, S. H. Wu and W. P. Huang, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 249, 211 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. G. Mussy, J. V. Macpherson and J. L. Delplancke, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 1131 CrossRef .
B. Lei, J. Xue, D. Jin, S. Ni and H. Sun, Rare Met., 2008, 27, 445–450 Search PubMed .
Y. Ikuma and H. Bessho, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2689–2692 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Y. Xiao, G. Zeng, S. Luo, S. Kuang and Q. Cai, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 3134–3138 CrossRef CAS .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852–14853 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Milsom, J. Novak, M. Oyama and F. Marken, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 436 CrossRef .
J.-H. Lee, H.-S. Choi, J.-H. Lee, Y.-J. Kim, S.-J. Suh, C. S. Chi and H.-J. Oh, J. Cryst. Growth, 2009, 311, 638–641 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, J. Li, C. Wang, S. Li, Y. Lai, H. Chen and C. Lin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 171, 1045–1050 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. He, B. Dong and H. L. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 425 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, D. He, Q. Cai and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8214–8217 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Xiong, B. Cheng and S. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 60, 211–221 CrossRef .
V. Subramanian, E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11439–11446 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anandan, P. Sathish Kumar, N. Pugazhenthiran, J. Madhavan and P. Maruthamuthu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 929–937 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Hyung, R. C. Hea, J. H. Hoe, M. K. Sang and C. B. Young, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 163, 37–44 CrossRef CAS .

          D. V. Bavykin and F. C. Walsh, Titanate and Titania Nanotubes: Synthesis, Properties and Applications, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK,  2010 Search PubMed .
V. Haehnel, S. Fähler, P. Schaaf, M. Miglierini, C. Mickel, L. Schultz and H. Schlörb, Acta Mater., 2010, 58, 2330–2337 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, L. Zhou, C. Huang, H. Huang and J. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 3643–3649 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Ong, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 250–257 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Raja, M. Misra, V. K. Mahajan, T. Gandhi, P. Pillai and S. K. Mohapatra, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 1450–1457 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kroon, N. J. Bakker, H. J. P. Smit, P. Liska, K. R. Thampi, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel, A. Hinsch, S. Hore, U. Wuerfel, R. Sastrawan, J. R. Durrant, E. Palomares, H. Pettersson, T. Gruszecki, J. Walter, K. Skupien and G. E. Tulloch, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 1–18 Search PubMed .
S. Rani, S. C. Roy, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, S. Kim, S. Yooriya, T. J. LaTempa and C. A. Grimes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 22780–22800 Search PubMed .
M. Paulose, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, G. Mor, B. Hardin and C. A. Grimes, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 1446–1448 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Xie, S. Adams, D. J. Blackwood and J. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 405701 CrossRef  , 1–6.
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 191–195 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Liang and X.-Z. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 162, 1415–1422 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Liang and X.-Z. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 86, 8–17 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, X. Li, N. Wang, Y. Hou, X. Quan and G. Chen, J. Nanopart. Res., 2009, 11, 2153–2162 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 3399–3406 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Ahmed El Ruby Mohamed	A. E. Mohamed studied Chemical Engineering at Minia University, El Minia, Egypt where he received his BSc degree (with honor's degree) and M Sc in 1998 and 2003, respectively. He worked as a Research Assistant at Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDI), Helwan, Cairo, Egypt from 1999–2006. He is currently pursuing PhD studies at Chemical and Biochemical Engineering Department, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. His research is devoted to the synthesis and modification of well-ordered nanostructured semiconductor materials for solar energy conversion applications applying electrochemical, wet chemical and nanofabrication techniques.
Sohrab Rohani	Dr Rohani is a professor of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering Department at the University of Western Ontario. He obtained his BSc in Chemical Engineering from Pahlavi (Shiraz) University and his PhD from the University of Wales in Process Control. He spent two years at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) in Zurich before joining the Chemical Engineering Department of the University of Saskatchewan in 1982. He has spent sabbatical leaves at the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology (UMIST), England; ETH (Switzerland); the Ecole Nationale Superieure des Industries Chimiques (ENSIC), Nancy, France; and Apotex PharmaChem Inc. (Canada). He has been the recipient of Engineering Medal in Research and Development from the Professional Engineers, Ontario, in 2008 and Western Faculty of Engineering Award for Excellence in Research in 2009. Dr Rohani has over 200 refereed publications. He is a registered professional engineer in Ontario and a Fellow of Chemical Institute of Canada (FCIC). His main areas of research are in the development and control of active pharmaceutical ingredients, zeolitic nanomaterials and TiO2 nanophotocatalysts.

Broader context
The big challenge toward harvesting solar energy for renewable and clean H2 production as well as for other solar light-driven applications is to fabricate an efficient photoanode with high surface area, chemical stability that can use solar photons in both UV and visible spectrum regions. In this review we report the recent developments toward fabrication techniques, mechanism of formation, properties, modification and applications of modified TiO2 nanotube arrays as a very promising photoanode for applications in a wide range of solar energy applications such as water-splitting photoelectrochemical cells (PEC) for H2 generation, dye-sensitized solar cells and photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants from both aqueous and air streams.


 	Fig. 1  The number of publications on the topic of titania nanotube arrays in the last decade. (Statistics analysis was obtained from SciFinder Scholar database on August 10, 2010.)	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustrative drawing of a two-electrode electrochemical cell for anodization.	 

 	Fig. 3  Effect of anodization potential on TNTAs formation and morphology in 1 M H2SO4 and 0.1 M HF aqueous electrolyte at (01) 5 V, (02) 10 V, (03) 15 V, (04) 20 V, (05) 25 V and (06) 30 V (reprinted with permission from ref. 62 © 2005 Materials Research Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  Effect of anodization potential on titania nanotube morphology (SEM top view and cross-section images) formed in 1 M H3PO4 + 0.3 wt% HF at: 1 V (a), 2.5 V (b), 5 V (c), 10 V (d), 15 V (e), 20 V (f) and 25 V (g) for 1 h. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 64 © 2006 Elsevier B. V.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Lateral views of TNTAs formed in different pH solutions (preprinted with permission from ref. 62 © 2005 Materials Research Society).	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM top views of titania nanotube arrays anodized at 20 V in 0.5 wt% HF aqueous electrolyte at different anodization times: (a) 10 s, (b) 30 s, (c) 60 s, (d) 200 s, (e) 800 s, and (f) 1800 s. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 67 © Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2008.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The tube length as a function of anodization time of samples formed during different times in glycerol + 0.5 wt% NH4F and 1 M (NH4)2SO4 + 0.5 wt% NH4F at 20 V at 20 °C. SEM images of (b) cross-section, (c) top view and (d) bottom view of self-organized TiO2 nanotubes of length 6.1 µm formed after 18 h anodization in glycerol electrolyte. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 73 © 2006 Elsevier Ltd.)	 
Ti + 2H2O → TiO2 + 4H+
Ti + 6HF → [TiF6]2− + 2H+

 	Fig. 8  SEM top and cross-sectional images of the TNTAs grown in water/glycerol (1:1, v/v)/0.27 M NH4F for 3 h anodization time at different potentials. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 79 © 2008 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.)	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images of TNTAs fabricated in DMSO containing 2% HF at 40 V for 69 h: (a) cross-sectional view, (b) lateral view and (c) top view (reprinted with permission from ref. 82 © 2006 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 10  TNTAs length as a function of (a) anodization potential for 70 h anodization in 2% HF–DMSO with and without a pre-anodization step, (b) HF concentration in DMSO at 40 V and 60 V for 70 h, (c) H2O concentration in 2% HF–DMSO (at 40 V and 40 h), and (d) anodization duration time at 40 V in 2% HF–DMSO electrolytes with 0%, 3%, and 5% deionized water content (reprinted with permission from ref. 83 © 2006 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  FESEM images of cross-sectional views indicating the lengths of TNTAs as a function of time at 60 V in ethylene glycol, 0.3 wt% NH4F and 2 vol% H2O. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 91 © 2007 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 12  The chemical dissolution rate in (c), depends on the pH-value as in (b), caused by the reaction illustrated in (a). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 58 © 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.)	 
H2O → O2 + 4e +4 H+	(1)
Ti + O2 → TiO2	(2)
TiO2 + 6F− + 4H+ → TiF2−6 + 2H2O	(3)

 	Fig. 13  Illustrative diagram of the evolution of a nanotube array at a constant anodization voltage: (a) oxide layer formation, (b) pit formation on the oxide layer, (c) growth of the pit into scallop shaped pores, (d) metallic part between the pores undergoes oxidation and field assisted dissolution, and (e) fully developed nanotube array with a corresponding top view. Redrawn with permission from ref. 56 © 2006 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 14  UV-Vis absorption spectra of TNTAs and carbon-modified TNTAs reprinted from ref. 133 © 2008 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 15  Change of MB concentration with irradiation time under different photocatalysts (reprinted from ref. 133 © 2008 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved).	 

 	Fig. 16  UV-Vis DR spectra of sulfur-doped TNTAs and un-doped annealed TNTAs (reprinted from ref. 137 © 2008 American Chemical Society).	 
Mn+ + hν → M(n+1)+ + e−(ch)	(4)
Mn+ + hν → M(n−1)+ + hν−(vb)	(5)
Fe3+ + Fe3+ → Fe4+ + Fe2+	(6)
TiO2 + hν → e−(CB) + h+(VB)	(7)
Fe3+ + h+ → Fe4+ (hole trap)	(8)
Fe3+ + e− → Fe2+ (electron trap)	(9)

 	Fig. 17  Illustrative diagram for the charge transfer in Fe-doped TiO2.	 

 	Fig. 18  Illustrative diagram for the charge injection from excited CdS into TiO2. CB and VB refer to the energy levels of conductions and valence bands respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 164 © 2005 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.)	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic representation of dye-sensitized solar cells based on TNTAs (a), electron path through a percolated nanoparticulate and oriented TNTA structures (b) and I–V characteristic of DSSCs based on different diameter nanotubes (empty symbols correspond to 8 µm and filled symbols to 16 µm nanotubes length) (c). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 12 © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
