Thermal activation of mass transport and charge transfer at Pt in the I 3 − /I − electrolyte of a dye -sensitized solar cell  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C002840A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C002840A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 10786-10792Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsThermal activation of mass transport and charge transfer at Pt in the I3−/I− electrolyte of a dye-sensitized solar cell

        
          
            A. 
            Petrocco
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Liberatore
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            A. Di 
            Carlo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Reale
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            T. M. 
            Brown
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            F. 
            Decker
          
        
      *a
aDipartimento di Chimica, Università di Roma “Sapienza”, 00185 Roma, Italy. E-mail: franco.decker@uniroma1.it
bCentre for Hybrid and Organic Solar Energy (CHOSE) and Department of Electronic Engineering University “Tor Vergata”, Via del Politecnico 1, 00133 Roma, Italy
Received 
      10th February 2010
    , Accepted 12th May 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      15th July 2010
    AbstractThe electrochemical properties of the I3−/I− reaction mediator as a function of temperature in the range from 30 °C to 80 °C were investigated by means of symmetric Pt electrodes thin-layer cells (TLC), using three electro-analytical techniques: Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS), Slow Scan Cyclic Voltammetry (SSCV) and Chronoamperometry (CA). Our study pointed out that raising the cell temperature has a beneficial effect both on charge transfer and on mass transport, with an activation energy for the electron transfer process at equilibrium of 24 kJ mol−1, and of 12 kJ mol−1 for the mass transfer process at equilibrium. Viscosity and conductivity measurements have demonstrated that most of the ionic mass transport in the solvent (methoxypropionitrile) follows the Stokes' law and that the Walden product is constant, in the temperature range investigated. The diffusion of I3−, however, was found to be partly “non-Stokesian” at lower temperature where the viscosity of the electrolyte is higher. We have shown that EIS and chronoamperometry are both valid methods to derive diffusion coefficients of redox ions in TLC, even if their exact concentration in the electrolyte is not known.
1. Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) are devices that have already seen considerable development, showing for a small area cell energy conversion efficiencies up to 11.1%1,2 when operating with a patented electrolyte (“A6141”) containing the I3−/I− couple as the redox mediator and in simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2 of light intensity and Air Mass 1.5). The operating temperature of a solar cell in open air depends on various parameters, mainly wind speed and sunlight intensity. For a typical amorphous Si module, for example, the temperature elevation is often between 10 °C and 40 °C above the ambient temperature, and it is approximately independent of it.3 The presence of glass windows and light-absorbing electrolytes in a DSSC would probably widen further the gap between ambient and cell temperature, whose upper limit will likely be 80–90 °C, if not even higher.4,5
Several authors,6–9 in order to perform accelerated ageing tests, have reported on the DSSC behaviour at higher temperatures; in particular, Hinsch and coworkers6 have shown that the cell degradation, caused by aging in elevated temperatures (≥60 °C), is very likely due to temperature-induced chemical changes in the electrolyte and that cell stability is strongly dependent both on the chemical composition of the electrolyte and on the tight fitting of the cell sealing material (to avoid possible contamination by water and oxygen). Moreover, Toivola and coworkers10 studied the behaviour of DSSC at 20, 40, and 70 °C, respectively, pointing out that at 40 °C there is an increase of cell efficiency due to more efficient electron diffusion in TiO2, whereas the efficiency dropped at 70 °C because of the thermally activated recombination reaction for the conduction band electrons with the I3− in the electrolyte.
However, to the best of our knowledge a systematic investigation of the temperature effect on the electrochemical reactions of DSSCs is still lacking. Our objective has been to measure at various temperatures the important kinetic parameters of reactions occurring at the Pt electrode in a DSSC. Furthermore, we intended to approach the true conditions for solar cell operation in two ways: by using a typical methoxypropionitrile (MPN) solvent,9,11 often selected for DSSCs due to its high boiling point and low volatility, and by performing thermal cycles to simulate the effect of sunlight on a DSSC, as explained below. Due to the viscosity of MPN being larger than that of other more common solvents like acetonitrile (ACN), slow ion mass transport is a matter for concern, and in fact this could explain the 8% efficiency reported for such an electrolyte.9 Higher operation T, however, will likely help ion motion due the large temperature dependence of MPN viscosity. Electrolytes employed so far in order to get the top values of conversion efficiency, as a matter of fact, do contain the I3−/I− redox couple dissolved in a solvent of low viscosity (usually a mixture of ACN with other solvents) to minimize concentration overvoltage losses in the cell. To certify the reaction rates in a realistic environment for a photoelectrochemical solar cell we have chosen to study only thin layer cells (TLC) in the two-electrode configuration12,13 and to consider a range of operation temperatures from slightly above room T (30 °C) up to 80 °C, taking one experimental point every 10 °C. Heating and cooling cycles between 80 °C and room T are, de facto, unavoidable when operating solar cells in sunlight over times greater than 24 h. Besides controlling that the TLC withstands such thermal (and associated mechanical) stress, the experimentalist using our strategy has the opportunity to check the effect of temperature-dependent properties, like solvent density and viscosity, on the redox mediator transport and on the electrocatalysis at the counter electrode (CE).
The methodology adopted has been to test a set of different electrochemical techniques, all applicable in a temperature-controlled, symmetric TLC with two parallel CEs made of platinum nanoparticles on FTO glass slides, facing each other with the same separation as in a standard DSSC photocell. In this investigation, we have taken advantage of the comprehensive literature studies on electrochemical methods applied to symmetric TLCs.14–17 Our purpose has been to analyse the cell kinetic parameters both close to equilibrium (when the Fermi level of the CE approaches the redox level in the electrolyte) and farther away from it, when mass transport limitations are more likely to occur. In separate experiments, we have checked how electrolyte dynamic viscosity and equivalent conductivity depend on T, and if the Walden product is satisfied in the temperature range of interest for solar cells. Combining the information from all the different techniques above, we intend to address the limiting steps in the cell reaction, except those depending exclusively on the photoelectrode,18–21 and to indicate their trend as the cell temperature increases, because this will help the understanding of a DSSC under direct sunlight.
2. Experimental
2.1 Thin-layer cell preparation and assembly
(2 cm × 2 cm) SnO2:F (FTO) glasses (Pilkington©), with 8 Ω □−1 surface resistance, were used as substrates for the electrodes preparation. Such substrates have been accurately rinsed in both acetone and ethanol and dried; then, a few drops of Platisol® solution were sprayed on their conducting face. Finally, they were annealed at 400 °C for 5 min, yielding a layer of dispersed Pt nanoparticles with an average surface density of about 4 μg cm−2. These electrodes (having a geometrical area of 0.49 cm2 in all experiments reported here) were pressed together to form thin-layer symmetric cells (named M1 and M2). The role of sealant and spacer was played by a thin Surlyn® square frame foil that, after the hot pressing process, left a chamber between the electrodes whose thickness ranged from 45 to 66 micron, depending on the sample, measured by a digital feeler gauge Käfer©. The electrolyte was prepared by dissolving I2 and LiI in methoxypropionitrile (MPN), in concentrations of 0.05 M and 0.5 M, respectively; I3− was immediately quantitatively formed according to the equilibrium I2 + I− = I3−.22 Finally, the electrolyte was introduced into the chamber via a predrilled hole, using a vacuum backfilling technique. As current collectors, two silver paste fingers were painted on the external part of each electrode. The Platisol solution and the Surlyn were provided by Solaronix©, the silver paste was provided by DuPont© and all the above mentioned chemicals were provided by Sigma-Aldrich©.
2.2 Electrochemical measurements
All electrochemical measurements were performed using the potentiostat/galvanostat AUTOLAB/PGSTAT 302 N®. In particular, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) experiments were undertaken on the TLC at open circuit voltage (0 V); a perturbation of 0.01 V rms was used in the frequency range comprising 6 × 104 Hz to 2 × 10−3 Hz. Impedance data were plotted on a Nyquist diagram and the fit process was achieved using ZSimp-Win 3.22d® software. The Slow Scan Cyclic Voltammetry (SSCV) was carried out taking a scan rate of 2 × 10−3 V s−1 in the potential window of ±1 V. The data have been elaborated and plotted using Kgraph software®; concerning SSCV, the same software was used to calculate the limiting current and the slope of I × V curve. To carry out chronoamperometry (CA) the cell voltage was stepped from open circuit to ±1 V and the current during the transient was recorded until a new steady-state current value was achieved. In data analysis, the current was plotted versus the inverse of the square root of time. A BUCHI Model 585 oven was used to control, within ±1 °C, the cell temperature during all electrochemical measurements.
2.3 Rheology
Using an Ubbelohde viscometer model Schott Gerate AVS 400 the kinematic viscosity was measured at four different temperatures by applying the Poiseuille equation.23 After measuring the fluid density at the same temperatures, the absolute viscosity (η) of the electrolyte was determined. The value of η at 20 °C is 1505 × 10−5 Poise. The experimental data of η as a function of temperature are best fitted (with a factor of R > 0.9999) by an Arrhenius-type equation, as discussed in section 3.3.
3. Results
3.1 Impedance measurements
Impedance spectroscopy measurements at the open circuit voltage provide a good overview of the electrochemical behaviour of the redox electrode close to equilibrium in a symmetric TLC.14Fig. 1 shows the Nyquist plots for spectra taken in the frequency range from 6 × 104 Hz to 2 × 10−3 Hz at three different cell operation temperatures (T = 40, 50, and 60 °C). The lowest resistance in each plot (Rs) is about 10 Ω, due to the surface resistance of the two FTO substrates,24 in series with the electrolyte resistance. Each spectrum consists of two loops, the smaller one at lower frequencies taking off as a straight line at 45° and bending down to the real axis, a behaviour typical of a Nernst finite diffusion element. From this element the mass transport in the TLC can be studied, typically dominated by the diffusion of the redox species, in our case the less concentrated I3− ion. The width of this loop along the Re(Z) axis is the diffusional resistance RD.25 The larger loop at higher frequencies represents the electrode interface element, providing information about the electrode reaction rate constant and double layer capacity, and its diameter is twice the charge–transfer resistance Rct, because in a TLC it arises from two identical electrodes to be considered in series with each other.12 The radius of both loops shrinks as the cell temperature is increased, because both mass transport and charge transfer rates are strongly activated thermally. This trend is very favourable for solar cells in the TLC configuration, as such a cell typically operates well above room T and its series resistance will consequently become lower under sunlight than in the dark.
 Fig. 1  Nyquist plot of impedance spectra taken at zero voltage on cell M1 at three different temperatures: 40 °C (○), 50 °C (□), 60 °C (◇). Frequency range 60 kHz to 2 mHz. Several frequency decades are marked. 
The temperature effect is more striking for the kinetic loop than for the diffusive loop: the ratio 2Rct/RD is declining from 1.02, to 0.99 and to 0.88 for the three values of T in the same order as above, respectively. The values of Rct from the fitting procedure over the impedance spectra for two different cells have been used to extract the activation energy of the redox reaction, i.e. the exchange current density for the I3−/I− redox couple at (or close to) equilibrium. Fig. 2 shows the Arrhenius plots of 1/Rct and of 1/RDvs. 1/T: the former has a steeper slope than the latter. The same slope of the linear fit to the 1/Rctvs. 1/T for two sets of experimental data indicates that the activation energy in both cells is the same. The exchange current density may vary from cell to cell according to the Pt electrode preparation procedure, but its activation energy does not. The value of this activation energy calculated from the slope in Fig. 2 is 24 kJ mol−1, in good agreement with the activation energy reported by Macagno and coworkers26 from RDE experiments with the same redox ions (4700 ± 500 cal mol−1), although in a lower temperature range (from 0 to 30 °C).
 Fig. 2  Arrhenius plots for the inverse of Rct and of RD (data taken from the fits to Nyquist plots at zero voltage as in Fig. 1) for two cells: cell M1 (○) and cell M2 (△), using the same units for both vertical axes. 
The fit parameters of the low frequency loop have been used to deduce the diffusion coefficients of the ion responsible for the mass transfer limitation in the TLC (the I3− having a concentration 10 times lower than I− in our electrolyte): the values of D, at different T, are listed in Table 1. The increase of D with T is a consequence of the temperature dependence of electrolyte viscosity (see section 3.3), and corresponds to a decrease of the diffusional resistance RD. From the slope of the linear fit to the Arrhenius plots of 1/RDvs. 1/T taken for the same two cells as above, the activation energy for this diffusion process has been derived, 12 kJ mol−1, half of that for the electrode charge transfer process.
Table 1 Complete set of values for series, charge-transfer, and diffusion resistance (Rs, Rct, RD) and for double-layer pseudo-capacitance Cdl from the fit of impedance data, for the TLC termed M1 at four temperatures. The diffusion coefficient from impedance (DEIS) and from chronoamperometry (Dt) are the calculated values for the same cell M1. Viscosity (η) and equivalent conductivity (Λ) data for the same supporting electrolyte as in cell M1 are taken from experimental measurements at the same temperatures





T/°C

R
s/Ω cm2

R
ct/Ω cm2

R
D/Ω cm2

C
dl/μF cm−2
105DEIS/cm2 s−1
105Dt/cm2 s−1
105η/Poise

Λ/S cm2 eq−1




40
10.4
3.8
7.5
22.6
1.01
1.00
1111
69.98


50
10.8
3.2
6.4
22.7
1.15
1.10
953
82.42


60
10.8
2.5
5.7
21.1
1.38
1.23
819
94.56


70
10.6
1.7
4.9
19.7
1.50
1.30
704
107.2




3.2 Voltammetry and chronoamperometry
A thin layer cell such as any DSSC, actually operates out of equilibrium under sunlight at a typical current of several mA cm−2. Slow scan cyclic voltammetry (SSCV) is the most appropriate technique giving a direct measure of the cell current (near to steady-state conditions) as a function of the potential difference between the electrodes.15,16 Such SSCVs taken at three temperatures (namely 40, 50, and 60 °C), are shown in Fig. 3. Their sigmoidal shape, roughly symmetrical with respect to the origin, is determined at large overpotentials by mass-transport limitations. The limiting current observed (jlim = ±20 mA cm−2 at 40 °C) is not as high as would be desirable for applications in solar cells under full sunlight; this is due to a combination of low ion concentration, small diffusion coefficient and the width of the TLC (66 μm in this particular case). Some irreversibility can be noticed in the region of the negative limiting current, indicating a slow reaction step appearing only at high current rates.
 Fig. 3  Slow scan cyclic voltammetry (SSCV) recorded on cell M1 between ±1 V with scan rate of 2 mV s−1, at 40 °C (○), 50 °C (□), 60 °C (◇). The fit to the current–voltage curve at 60 °C around 0 V is shown. 
The inverse slope of the tangent to those curves at the origin (see Fig. 3) gives the lowest cell resistance that can be attained when operating at far lower currents than jlim. The cell resistance value from the fit shown in Fig. 3 is in the range of 20 Ω cm2, a value in agreement with the cell total impedance at the lowest frequencies taken from EIS in Fig. 1. This high resistance value is caused to a great extent by FTO resistance (10 Ω cm2), but also by slow mass transport and charge transfer rates, and is one of the most serious drawbacks if a solar cell application is targeted, because it has a negative effect on the cell fill factor (FF, i.e. the ratio of the maximum power point divided by the open circuit voltage and the short circuit current) and on the conversion efficiency. To counteract the slow ion transport a less viscous solvent than MPN, a much thinner spacer between electrodes and/or higher T should be considered. Recently, ionic liquids showing a non-stokesian, faster ion diffusion, have been used to replace the traditional, solvent-based electrolytes.27,28 The replacement of the redox ions with others having higher D values is a more difficult task: all the Co(II) complexes studied so far for DSSCs have shown, in fact, much lower diffusion coefficients than I3−, for the same cell temperature and supporting electrolyte.24,29,30
In Fig. 4 the chronoamperometric response following a potential step of ±1 V is shown at different temperatures. Although this technique has been reported for TLCs in the past,17 there is no evidence of such experiments in the recent literature about DSSCs and associated devices. One of the reasons why chronoamperometry has been disregarded might be the relatively high initial currents due to the sudden potential step in this experiment. In cells like ours using a FTO substrate with a limited conductivity, the above conditions could result in non-uniform current distribution, difficult to take into account in a model. In Fig. 4a the cell current in the short time regime appears to be mainly limited by the ohmic drop in the two FTO substrates, although the time-dependent spherical diffusion of redox ions to a random array of Pt nanodots could also play a role in this time window.31–33 As a matter of fact, the weak temperature dependence of this current at short times (in contrast to that at longer times) indicates ohmic drop rather than electrochemical kinetic limitation to be the probable cause of this effect. Interesting results in the long time regime, consisting of a Cottrell-like current decay (see Fig. 4b), were obtained by plotting the current against the inverse square root of time. This decay was followed by a steady-state current at long times, having in principle the same value as the limiting current at the upper potential limit in the SSCV shown above.
 Fig. 4  A (left frame) Chronoamperometries recorded on cell M1, at 40 °C (○), 50 °C (□), 60 °C (◇). Potential step from 0 V to +1 V. B (right frame) Cottrell region, limiting current and transition time t highlighted at 40 °C. 
From such measurement it is possible to derive graphically the “transition time” t. This transition time is given by the intersection of the two straight lines in Fig. 4b (representing ideal transient and steady-state conditions, respectively). In this instant the concentration profiles in front of each electrode, initially semi-infinite and non-interacting with each other, merge to form a single linear profile extending across the whole cell by the end of the transient experiment. Measuring t, a direct evaluation of the ion diffusion coefficient without knowing its concentration is possible, an alternative to the fitting of the low frequency data points in the EIS shown above. In fact, when both the Cottrell equation34 and the expression for the jlim in the TLC35 hold, this time constant t can be derived from the identity: (1)where L is the TLC width, C is the concentration of the more diluted component in the redox couple, and n, F and A have their usual meaning. Eqn (1) can be used to derive the diffusion coefficient Dt (to distinguish it from DEIS) as follows: (2)The values of Dt, as a function of cell T, have been given in Table 1 for comparison with the data deduced by means of impedance at a cell potential close to equilibrium. A reasonably good agreement between Dt and DEIS has been found, demonstrating the validity of using chronoamperometry in a TLC to derive diffusion coefficients of redox ions by means of a simple transient experiment.
3.3 Viscosity and conductivity measurements
The kinematic viscosity of the supporting electrolyte has been measured at four different temperatures. The value of the absolute viscosity η at 20 °C was calculated to be 1505 × 10−5 Poise. The experimental data of η as a function of temperature are listed in Table 1; the best fit has been obtained by the following Arrhenius-type equation: η = 1.2969 × 105[exp(−0.01521T)](3)where T is the temperature in K. The temperature dependence of the electrolyte viscosity is expected to promote higher ion mobilities and consequently higher conductivity at higher T. The conductivity of a solution 0.05 M of I2 in 0.5 M LiI in MPN was measured in a glass cell with a well known cell constant, and the equivalent conductivity was derived at the same values of T as we have done for η. The constancy of the Walden product (equivalent conductivity times solvent viscosity) has been verified in our electrolytes at all temperatures investigated, as expected for a Stokesian motion of the ions responsible for charge transport (Li+ cations and I− anions in our case). Fig. 5 shows in fact that the logΛvs. log(1/η) plot has a line fit with the slope very close to one. In the same figure, log(D/T) was plotted, because a similar straight line with the same slope as for the conductivity data is expected, in this case the Einstein–Smoluchowsky relation holds. One can observe that although the general trend for both plots is the same, the D/T ratio grows somehow less than Λ with increasing T. One should remember, however, that the diffusion coefficient D is that of the more diluted I3− cations, as explained previously, whereas Λ is determined by the mobility of Li+ and I− ions. The I3− anions may, in principle, follow a slightly different mass-transport mechanism as the monovalent ions in the supporting electrolyte; this effect could become clear as the cell temperature is varied, and will be discussed below.
 Fig. 5  Logarithmic plot for the ratio DEIS/T (temperature in K, data from cell M1, (○) on the left axis, and for the equivalent conductivity of the supporting electrolyte of the same cell ((□) on the right axis), vs. the inverse electrolyte absolute viscosity η. 
4. Discussion
Different temperature-dependent mechanisms have to be taken into account in the discussion of an electrochemical thin layer cell. EIS data have shown that the overall DC cell resistance close to equilibrium is the sum of three almost comparable terms, Rs, Rct, and RD (see Table 1). Given the high electrolyte conductivity (section 3.3), the value of Rs can be ascribed largely to the electronic resistance of the FTO conducting film on glass. The temperature invariability of Rs can be explained by two mutually compensating effects: the positive temperature coefficients of FTO resistivity and of electrolyte conductivity. To cut down Rs, thicker FTO films and metallic current collectors closer to (or even under) the film electrodes should be used; secondly, a thinner electrolyte layer would also be effective. Regarding Rct and RD, we already remarked that both charge transfer and mass transport rates increase at higher T, and our Arrhenius plots have shown that the activation energy of the latter is about half that of the former. This lower activation energy for mass transport suggests that heating the cell would not help much in decreasing RD. A shorter inter-electrode distance in the TLC, instead, would very effectively decrease RD, to a much larger extent than it would decrease Rs. The term Rct is the one depending more strongly on T among the three R terms. According to the Pt thermal preparation, we have found Rct values ranging typically from 1.5 to 5 Ω cm2 at room T. The temperature dependence of 1/Rct is in substantial agreement with the literature data for j0vs. T,26 confirming that the Pt nanoparticles on FTO are well behaved and thermally stable redox electrodes for the I3−/I− couple in the temperature range studied. The thermal activation energy of the reaction rate is similar to that of most redox reactions, and encourages the use of temperatures above room T, as is often the case in electrochemical devices such as electrolyzers, fuel cells etc. The temperature-invariant double-layer capacitance deduced from EIS, i.e. Cdl equal to 22 μF cm−2, is a further proof of a very stable electrode–electrolyte interface at open circuit. Moreover, it certifies that even at high T the cell sealant does not release many organic molecules adsorbing at the electrode surface, an important feature for a solar cell component.
Two other electrochemical methods have been used to confirm the data from EIS. Comparisons were made not only close to zero bias (e.g. when taking the cell conductance from the slope in SSCV, Fig. 3) but also when the cell potential was moved away from equilibrium, as in chronoamperometry. The calculation of the transition time t (and consequently of Dt, see eqn (2)) is equivalent, in the time domain, to the deduction of the time constant from the frequency at the top of the loop representing the Nernst diffusion layer element, in a Nyquist plot. The meaning of this transition time is the time for a molecule or redox ion (the I3− anion in our case) to diffuse across the thin layer, whose thickness is half of the cell width. At this boundary, the concentration of the ion is always the same, like in the case of a steady-state diffusion layer at a rotating disc electrode. Both EIS and chronoamperometry, therefore, allow for the derivation of the diffusion coefficient from the value of the cell width alone, independently of the knowledge of the concentration of the diffusing ion. The values of Dt calculated from t, however, were found to be more scattered, on average, than those of DEIS. SSCV experiments have shown a certain hysteresis, regardless of scan rate and scan direction, in the region of the limiting current (0.5 V to 1.0 V): this could explain some data scattering after a potential step to 1 V. Moreover, considering that the Rs of 10 Ω cm2 arises from a distributed surface resistance of the FTO film substrate, it is no surprise that the diffusion limited current may result from flux lines distributed non-uniformly over the whole electrode area. Further experiments with more conductive substrates (i.e. thick Pt film) would be helpful to address this question.
Finally, we have plotted DEIS/T vs. the reciprocal electrolyte viscosity for a number of cells having the same redox couple and supporting electrolyte concentrations. The average slope in a double-logarithmic plot (see for example cell A in Fig. 5) was 0.84 ± 0.12, a clear enough departure from the linear behaviour shown by the electrolyte conductivity (with slope 1.06). It has been reported in the literature that the I3− anion diffusion mechanism could follow a Grotthus-type exchange mechanism, occurring in ionic liquids and in solvents with highest viscosity. Should such a behavior be present in our solvent too, it would more likely appear at the lower cell temperatures where MPN is more viscous. We conclude that a partially non-Stokesian transport of the I3− anion, vanishing at higher T with the decreasing solvent viscosity, is compatible with our findings. The Stokesian behavior observed for the supporting electrolyte, on the contrary, would be related to the more complete solvation of the smaller Li+ and I− ions, that would promote a classical drift mechanism for those ionic species.
5. Conclusions
The thermal activation of the electroactive ion mass transfer and of charge transfer at the Pt counter electrode in a DSSC cell has been studied for the I3−/I− redox couple dissolved in MPN. Our study indicates that the two main components of the cell impedance (Rct and RD) decrease with increasing T, with a well defined activation energy; two other components of the impedance (Cdl and Rs) remain constant in the temperature range from room T to 70 °C (results up to 80 °C confirm the same trend). As a consequence, an increase in the FF is expected when heating the DSSC due to the drop of the solar cell series resistance. It is well known, on the other hand, that the open circuit photopotential (Voc) of a DSSC decreases with increasing T due to the thermal activation of the recombination reaction between electrons in the photoelectrode and the I3− ions. An ideal temperature elevation may probably lie between 20 and 40 degrees, in agreement with the recent literature suggesting the ideal operating T to be in the interval from 40 °C to 70 °C. The interplay of increasing FF and decreasing Voc will most likely determine the exact temperature elevation needed to reach the optimal solar cell efficiency, and will be different for each cell. One must be aware of the fact that consecutive rampings of cell temperature, although unavoidable under real conditions under sunlight, are likely to accelerate a performance degradation of the DSSC as well, as reported elsewhere.10,36 Most of the degradation factors identified so far, however, appear to be triggered by water and oxygen penetration in the cell and by dye desorption from TiO2 and are often associated with the impermeability of the sealing materials. Further conclusions from our work are the agreement between the activation energy for the I3−/I− reaction measured on nanostructured Pt in a TLC, and that on a Pt RDE from the literature; the Stokesian behavior observed for the supporting electrolyte from conductivity measurements as a function of temperature, in contrast to the diffusion mechanism in the same electrolyte for the I3− anion, which is partially deviating from this ideal behavior. Moreover, we have shown the validity of using chronoamperometry in a TLC to derive diffusion coefficients of redox ions, even if their exact concentration is not known, by means of a simple transient experiment.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Prof. C. La Mesa for helpful discussions and support in viscosity and conductivity measurements, Dr F. Caprioli for assistance in the electrochemical experiments, and “Regione Lazio” for financial support.
References
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chiba, A. Islam, Y. Watanabe, R. Komiya, N. Koide and L. Han, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, L638 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kondo, H. Nishio, S. Kurata, K. Hayashi, A. Takenaka, A. Ishikawa, K. Nishimura, H. Yamagishi and Y. Tawada, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 49, 1 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Jyrkas and R. Sipila, Improvements in Weatherability Testing of Coil Coatings, Conference Transcript for ECCA General Meeting, Brussels, Belgium,  1998 Search PubMed.

          C. Sjostrom, Service Life Analysis of Organic Coatings on Sheet Metal Façade Claddings, Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden,  1990 Search PubMed .
A. Hinsch, J. M. Kroon, R. Kern, I. Ulhendorf, J. Holzbock, A. Meyer and J. Ferber, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2001, 9, 425 Search PubMed .
M. Grätzel, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 578 CrossRef .
P. M. Sommeling, M. Späth, H. J. P. Smit, N. J. Bakker and J. M. Kroon, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 137 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, C. Klein, R. Humphry-Baker, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 123508 CrossRef .
M. Toivola, L. Peltokorpi, J. Halme and P. Lund, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1733 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 402 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hauch and A. Georg, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 3457 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liberatore, F. Decker, L. Burtone, V. Zardetto, T. M. Brown, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2009, 39, 2291 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Buck, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1986, 210, 1 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Cloyer, P. J. J. Connelly, H. L. Gordon and K. B. Oldham, Can. J. Chem., 1988, 66, 1333 CrossRef .
L. Daruhàzi and K. Tokuda, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1989, 264, 77 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Nahir and R. P. Buck, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1992, 341, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dürr, A. Yasuda and G. Nelles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 061110 CrossRef .
T.-V. Nguyen, H.-C. Lee and O.-B. Yang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 967 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Chen, C.-Y. Chen, S.-J. Wu, J.-Y. Li, C.-G. Wu and K.-C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1723 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halme, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and P. Lund, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5623 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kebede and S.-E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1999, 57, 259 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Atkins and J. De Paula, Atkins’ Physical Chemistry, Oxford University Press, 7th edn,  2002 Search PubMed .
M. Liberatore, A. Petrocco, F. Caprioli, C. La Mesa, F. Decker and C. A. Bignozzi, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4025 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zistler, P. Wachter, P. Wasserscheid, D. Gerhard, A. Hinsch, R. Sastrawan and H. J. Gores, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 161 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Macagno, M. C. Giordano and A. J. Arvia, Electrochim. Acta, 1969, 14, 335 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kawano, H. Matsui, C. Matsuyama, A. Sato, Md. A. B. Hasan Susan, N. Tanabe and M. Watanabe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 87 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, F. Li, H. Yang, T. Yi and C. Huang, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1293 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Cameron, L. M. Peter, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1447 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Nelson, J. T. Amick and C. M. Elliott, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18255 CrossRef CAS .
C. Beriet, R. Ferrigno and H. H. Girault, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2000, 486, 56 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Scharifker, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1988, 240, 61 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shoup and A. Szabo, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1984, 160, 19 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .

          D. Mac Donald, Transient Techniques in Electrochemistry, Plenum Press, NY, 1st edn,  1977 Search PubMed .
N. Kato, Y. Takeda, K. Higuchi, A. Takeichi, E. Sudo, H. Tanaka, T. Motohiro, T. Sano and T. Toyoda, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 893 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2010
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Nyquist plot of impedance spectra taken at zero voltage on cell M1 at three different temperatures: 40 °C (○), 50 °C (□), 60 °C (◇). Frequency range 60 kHz to 2 mHz. Several frequency decades are marked.	 

 	Fig. 2  Arrhenius plots for the inverse of Rct and of RD (data taken from the fits to Nyquist plots at zero voltage as in Fig. 1) for two cells: cell M1 (○) and cell M2 (△), using the same units for both vertical axes.	 

40	10.4	3.8	7.5	22.6	1.01	1.00	1111	69.98
50	10.8	3.2	6.4	22.7	1.15	1.10	953	82.42
60	10.8	2.5	5.7	21.1	1.38	1.23	819	94.56
70	10.6	1.7	4.9	19.7	1.50	1.30	704	107.2

 	Fig. 3  Slow scan cyclic voltammetry (SSCV) recorded on cell M1 between ±1 V with scan rate of 2 mV s−1, at 40 °C (○), 50 °C (□), 60 °C (◇). The fit to the current–voltage curve at 60 °C around 0 V is shown.	 

 	Fig. 4  A (left frame) Chronoamperometries recorded on cell M1, at 40 °C (○), 50 °C (□), 60 °C (◇). Potential step from 0 V to +1 V. B (right frame) Cottrell region, limiting current and transition time t highlighted at 40 °C.	 
	(1)
	(2)
η = 1.2969 × 105[exp(−0.01521T)]	(3)

 	Fig. 5  Logarithmic plot for the ratio DEIS/T (temperature in K, data from cell M1, (○) on the left axis, and for the equivalent conductivity of the supporting electrolyte of the same cell ((□) on the right axis), vs. the inverse electrolyte absolute viscosity η.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2010
