Centralized and distributed hydrogen production using steam reforming: challenges and perspectives  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SE01870A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SE01870A
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 1923-1939Centralized and distributed hydrogen production using steam reforming: challenges and perspectives

        
          
            Ja-Ryoung 
            Han
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            So-Jin 
            Park
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hyoungtae 
            Kim
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shinje 
            Lee
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Jong Min 
            Lee
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Institute of Chemical Processes, Seoul National University, 1, Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, South Korea. E-mail: jongmin@snu.ac.kr
bKOGAS Research Institute, Korea Gas Corpration, 1248, Suin-ro, Sangnok-gu, Ansan, Gyeonggi-do 15328, South Korea
cEngineering Development Research Center, Seoul National University, 1, Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, South Korea. E-mail: shinjelee@snu.ac.kr
Received 
      23rd November 2021
    , Accepted 6th March 2022First published on 7th March 2022AbstractSteam methane reforming (SMR) has been adopted for the mass production of hydrogen that has been actively used in various industrial processes for several decades. Currently, the demand for hydrogen for small-scale domestic and vehicular applications is growing rapidly. Although essential technical elements are similar at the industrial and retail levels, large-scale centralized SMR techniques do not apply to small-scale distributed SMR systems owing to the difference in their production capacity and purposes. In this review, we summarize the state-of-the-art centralized and distributed SMR processes for large- and small-scale hydrogen production. No review has been reported on the differences and difficulties in SRM technology according to productivity. By categorizing conventional and new technologies and presenting practical issues according to production capacity, this review will contribute to the rapid adoption of decentralized SMR based hydrogen production systems.
1. Introduction
In recent years, considerable efforts have been made in industry and academia to achieve a hydrogen economy, which involves the adoption of hydrogen-based energy systems over conventional fossil fuel-based systems. The need for hydrogen energy has garnered consensus around the world for a variety of reasons, such as the serious environmental problems of traditional fossil fuel use, the biased distribution of hydrogen-based energy sources, the ever-increasing need for sustainable energy, and its expected economic benefits.1
Hydrogen has been actively used in large-scale industrial processes for several decades, including oil refining processes for purifying heavy hydrocarbons into lighter hydrocarbons, hydrotreatments to remove impurities such as acidic components, ammonia production using the Haber–Bosch process, methanol production, and steel and glass treatment processes. Approximately 70 million tons of pure hydrogen are produced annually for industrial use, and continued growth is forecasted.2Fig. 1 shows the hydrogen consumption in a typical plant for large-scale essential applications, such as oil refining, ammonia synthesis, and methanol synthesis.3
 Fig. 1  Hydrogen consumption in major industrial areas; others include steel production, flat glass production, and the electronics industry. 
In addition to large-scale centralized hydrogen production for industrial purposes, the growth of the hydrogen market supports the expansion of small-scale hydrogen production and distribution routes for commercial and domestic purposes, such as vehicles and buildings. Underpinning this growth is the installation of infrastructure, such as hydrogen refueling stations. As of November 2019, there are 300 hydrogen refueling stations in operation, most of which are in Japan, Germany, and the United States, as shown in Fig. 2. In addition, 296 stations are planned for construction in Germany, the United States, and Korea, and 100 charging stations will be built in many European countries. Worldwide, 215 refueling stations have been installed that are no longer in operation, mainly in the United States, Germany, and Japan.4
 Fig. 2  Number of hydrogen refueling stations in various countries currently in operation, planned for construction, and defunct as of November 2019. 
Although the expansion of hydrogen production technology holds great promise for promoting the hydrogen economy, the large gap in the required capacity of hydrogen production for industrial and retail use is a major bottleneck for the widespread adoption of hydrogen. The capacity of industrial hydrogen production typically exceeds 100000 kg per day, whereas the production capacity for retail distribution, such as refueling stations and fuel cell systems, generally does not exceed 500 kg per day. Fig. 3 shows a histogram of the number of on-site refueling stations according to the hydrogen production capacity.5 Most hydrogen stations (72%) produce less than 150 kg of hydrogen per day.
 Fig. 3  Number of on-site hydrogen refueling stations according to hydrogen production capacity. 
Although they share technical fundamentals, their production purposes and applications at the industrial and retail levels are significantly different. Therefore, it is imperative to review hydrogen production approaches from the perspective of capacity, mainly to promote growth in domestic use of hydrogen because small-scale SMR techniques are still immature. As shown in Table 1, reviews examining the technical and economic aspects of SMR have been published recently, but no review has been reported analyzing the SMR technology in terms of hydrogen production capacity. They mainly focused on improving catalytic performance,7,8,11 SMR with carbon capture,12,13 and techno-economic evaluation of SMR.10
Table 1 Topics covered in recent reviews on SMR for hydrogen production




Topics covered
Ref.


Ni-based catalyst
Carbon capture
Techno-economic analysis
Advanced SMR process
Pd-alloy membrane
Artificial intelligence




O




O




Arman et al.6


O




O




Boretti and Banik7


O










Chen et al.8










O


Habib et al.9






O
O




Kannah et al.10


O










Meloni et al.11


O
O


O


O
Soltani et al.12




O


O




Wang et al.13


O




O




Zhang et al.14




In this review, we explore recent advances in steam methane reforming (SMR) using natural gas or biogas, focusing on the practical issues of centralized and decentralized hydrogen production systems. SMR is the most widely used method for industrial hydrogen production and is also applied in systems with small capacities. Problems in large-scale hydrogen production include non-uniform temperature distribution in the reactor, selection of the optimal catalyst type to improve reaction performance, CO2 emissions, and the use of hydrocarbon fuels. In small-scale hydrogen production, issues are encompassing low economic feasibility, difficulty in miniaturizing the size of the SMR system, CO2 emissions similar to those in large-scale systems, and the production of green hydrogen via biogas. This review elucidates the research conducted to solve these challenges.
Section 2 outlines various methods for hydrogen production, focusing on SMR. In Section 3, the types of SMR reactors are summarized based on their hydrogen production capacity. Section 4 and Section 5 describe large-scale centralized and small-scale distributed SMR processes, respectively, along with practical problems that hinder the supply of hydrogen. Section 6 concludes the review by providing future research directions for large-scale and small-scale SMR.
2. Steam methane reforming for hydrogen production
Numerous technologies exist for hydrogen production, including reforming, electrolysis, thermal cracking, biological processes, and gasification of various organic or fossil-based carbonaceous resources, as shown in Fig. 4. The most widely adopted method is the reforming of raw hydrocarbon-based feedstocks, such as liquefied petroleum gas, natural gas, and naphtha.10
 Fig. 4  Hydrogen production technology using various energy sources. 
Steam reforming or SMR is a process that produces CO, CO2, and hydrogen from hydrocarbons. Despite advances in various hydrogen production technologies, SMR is still the most widely used because the amount of hydrogen produced by SMR per mole of feedstock is higher than that of other reforming methods. Owing to its technological maturity and economic feasibility, SMR currently accounts for the largest share of hydrogen production worldwide.
As shown in Fig. 5, an SMR process typically consists of a reforming process, a water–gas shift reaction, and a hydrogen purification process. Desulfurization or adsorption of impurities is occasionally included in the process as a pre- or post-treatment step.15
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the steam methane reforming process. 
It is necessary to lower the concentration of sulfur to 0.2–0.5 ppm to prevent catalyst poisoning during reforming. Trace amounts of organic sulfur compounds contained in the feed can be removed in the form of hydrogen sulfide through hydrogenation.
SMR is advantageous under conditions of high temperature and low pressure because of the strong overall endothermic reactions, as shown in reactions (1) and (2).14 (1) (2)
Therefore, the SMR process requires a significant external energy supply. Of the entire process, the steam reforming unit accounts for the largest portion of the energy requirement.16,17 Thus, an efficient heat supply device and an energy recovery scheme are required to improve energy efficiency.
In the water–gas shift reaction, the CO produced from the reformer reacts with water vapor and is converted into CO2 and additional hydrogen, as shown in reaction (3). CO + H2O ⇌ CO2 + H2, exothermic(3)
A high-temperature shift or low-temperature shift reactor, which reacts at 400 and 200 °C, respectively, can be utilized independently or simultaneously depending on the process conditions and the desired CO concentration.
For fuel cell applications, the concentration of CO should be less than 10 ppm because CO deteriorates the performance of the electrode.18 A preferential oxidation of CO (CO-PROX) process, as shown in reaction (4), can be applied to further remove the CO that is not completely removed in the water–gas shift reaction. 2CO + O2 → 2CO2, exothermic(4)
Pressure swing adsorption (PSA) is typically applied as a gas purification system to obtain high-purity hydrogen using a pressure difference. Other purification methods include vacuum swing adsorption, temperature swing adsorption, and membranes.
3. Types of SMR according to production capacity
In order to analyze the types of different steam reformers according to hydrogen production, we investigated the articles published in the past 25 years that clearly specified the hydrogen production scale. We divided the hydrogen production systems into two categories: centralized processes with production capacities of more than 1000 kg per day and distributed processes with production capacities of less than 500 kg per day.
3.1 Large-scale SMR

Fig. 6 summarizes the various SMR reactor types and their specific hydrogen production capabilities in the range of 1317 to 11322000 kg per day. A unique feature of large-scale centralized systems is that the thermal energy required for the reforming reaction is supplied by nuclear energy that is hardly used for small-scale hydrogen production. Also, CO2 capture and combustion systems, such as chemical looping combustion (CLC) and oxygen-enriched combustion (OEC), are more commonly applied to large-volume production processes, although they are being studied over a wide range of capacities. In the two systems with the highest capacity,19,20 nuclear energy is used as the heat source for steam reforming.
 Fig. 6  Different types of steam methane reforming reactors for large-scale centralized hydrogen production ordered by their hydrogen production capacity; different colors represent different types of steam reforming reactors, and the diagonal bars indicate the combination of steam reforming and external processes for specific purposes. 

Table 2 recapitulates studies on centralized hydrogen production processes with production capacities of over 1000 kg per day in more detail. The exact capacity, reactor type, and characteristics are outlined for each large-scale hydrogen production process. In large-scale hydrogen production, many efforts have been made to improve the overall process efficiency.32,37,43 Because large-scale SMR processes are energy-intensive, many steam reforming processes have used nuclear power to supply large amounts of energy.19,20,38–40 In particular, Bruno et al.42 combined the SMR process with trigeneration to increase the thermal efficiency of the process. Additionally, there has been considerable research on advanced SMR processes to reduce CO2 emissions in the wide range of production capacities from 14992 to 1492286 kg per day.21,22,28,34,35 In addition to CO2 capture techniques, advanced combustion systems such as chemical looping combustion (CLC) are more commonly applied to large-volume production processes.23,34,35 It is worth noting that the membrane reactor mainly used in small-scale SMR has also been studied for large-scale hydrogen production of more than 100000 kg per day.29–31
Table 2 Strategies and features of steam methane reforming processes for centralized hydrogen production with capacities of over 1000 kg per day




Capacity (kg per day)
Process strategy
Features
Ref.




11320000
SMR with heat source from nuclear energy
Efficiency evaluation of a solid moving breeder reactor (SOMBRERO) heated by nuclear fusion blankets
Demir19


1527000
Exergy analysis of a high-temperature gas-cooled reactor (HTGR) coupled with SMR with a modified Brayton cycle or modified steam cycle
Kim et al.20


1492286
SMR-carbon capture
Sequential combustion process for SMR plants with CO2 capture integrated with electricity generation using a combined cycle gas turbine
Herraiz et al.21


720000
DR-SMR
Effective control structure of dry reforming and SMR under disturbance and setpoint change
Luyben22


589248
SE-CLC-SMR
Thermodynamic comparison of conventional SMR, sorption-enhanced SMR (SE-SMR), and SE-SMR with chemical looping combustion (SE-CLC-SMR)
Antzara et al.23


468000
SE-SMR
Techno-economic analysis and sensitivity analysis for six SE-SMR process cases
Yan et al.24


252679
Conventional SMR
Development of a numerical model to calculate temperature profiles for outer and inner tube walls, furnace gases, and process gases of top-fired and co-current reformers
Latham25


245749
DR-SMR
Comparison of the capital cost, environmental impact, and global warming potential of the SMR + CO2 separation membrane and DR-SMR
Gangadharan et al.26


240000
Conventional SMR
Development of a mathematical model of a top-fired reformer for online monitoring of tube wall temperature
Latham et al.27


173516
SMR-carbon capture
Economic analysis of the optimal configuration of CO2 capture in SMR
Meerman et al.28


159840
SMR with heat source from nuclear energy
Design and economic potential evaluation of hydrogen production using a sodium-cooled fast reactor as a heat source
Chikazawa et al.29


143571
Membrane reformer
Analysis of the membrane reforming process to elucidate the effect of various process parameters on reactor performance
Aasberg-Petersen et al.30


133929
Comparison of membrane reactors and conventional industrial reactors by calculating two sustainability metrics (mass and energy intensities)
Bernardo et al.31


91200
Conventional SMR
Finding optimal operational conditions using multi-objective optimization with a non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm
Rajesh et al.32


63469
Software development considering kinetic and thermodynamic models and catalyst types for reformer furnace simulation
Zamaniyan et al.33


16953
CLC-SMR
Life cycle greenhouse gas assessment of conventional SMR and CLC-SMR
Wang et al.34


14992
Analysis and comparison of exergy efficiency and economics of conventional SMR and CLC-SMR
Fan et al.35


9000
SMR with heat source from nuclear energy
Development of the P2A code system to ensure the safety of the SMR process against fire and explosion accidents
Inaba et al.36


8500
OEC-SMR
Feasibility study and exergy analysis of oxygen-enriched combustion (OEC) to improve the performance of SMR
Lambert et al.37


7071
SMR with heat source from nuclear energy
1/30 scale mock-up test performance evaluation of an HTGR with nuclear energy as a heat source
Ohashi et al.38


7071
1/30 scale mock-up performance test under fluctuations in the feed flow rate
Inaba et al.39


5357
Development of a pseudo-homogeneous one-dimensional steam reformer model and evaluation of the effect of process parameters on methane conversion and hydrogen yield
Yin et al.40


4286
Membrane reformer
Development of reformer and membrane modules and integration of gas turbines to improve overall thermal efficiency
De Falco et al.41


3600
SMR-trigeneration
Feasibility analysis of SMR integrated with trigeneration using a discounted cash flow approach
Bruno et al.42


1318
Conventional SMR
Development of a heterogeneous model of SMR considering catalyst deactivation and optimal control to increase hydrogen production
Taji et al.43




3.2 Small-scale SMR

Fig. 7 summarizes the various SMR reactor types and their specific hydrogen production capabilities in the range of 0.003 to 284 kg per day. In contrast to the large-scale centralized hydrogen production system, research on the configuration of the SMR reactor has been actively conducted to optimize the size of the reformer. Membrane reactors are promising for distributed hydrogen supply systems owing to their compact nature. Microstructured reactors and cylindrical reactors are only used for small-scale hydrogen production because of their compactness; they are not suitable for large-scale supply owing to their limited production.
 Fig. 7  Different types of steam methane reforming reactors for small-scale distributed hydrogen production ordered by their hydrogen production capacity; different colors represent different types of steam reforming reactors, and the diagonal bars indicate the combination of steam reforming and external processes for specific purposes. 

Table 3 outlines studies on SMR reactors with specific hydrogen production capacities of 500 kg per day or less in more detail. The main SMR reactor concepts and features are described for each study. Many studies have focused on the compactness of SMR systems for small-scale hydrogen supply as shown in Table 3. To this end, membrane reactors and microstructured reactors have been extensively studied for the miniaturization of steam reforming. Pd-based membrane reformers have been mainly studied to improve the performance of the membrane and their yields ranged from 0.01 to 214 kg per day.45,48,51,69,75 Notably, microstructured reformers have been used in processes with lower productivity of 11 kg per day or less.56,72,74 In addition, various reformer types have been developed to reduce the size of the reactor, including heat-exchanger-type reformers44,64,76 and cylindrical reformers49,50,60 For the removal of CO2, sorption-enhanced SMR technology has also been developed for small-scale hydrogen production and its production capacities are 0.1 and 3 kg per day.61,73
Table 3 Strategies and features of steam methane reforming processes for distributed hydrogen production with capacities of less than 500 kg per day




Capacity (kg per day)
Process strategy
Features
Ref.




284
Heat-exchanger-type reformer
Determination of the length and diameter of a reformer using solar energy from a 2D mathematical model
De Falco and Piemonte44


214
Membrane reformer
Development of a staged-separation membrane reformer to reduce the area and thickness of Pd-based membranes
Li et al.45


171
Study on the effect of residence time and wall temperature on the performance of a Pd-based membrane reformer
De Falco46


86
Development of a Pd-based membrane reformer for improved energy efficiency and long-term durability and reliability
Shirasaki et al.47


86
Development of a more compact and cheaper Pd-based membrane on the catalyst (MOC) and comparison of reforming performance under various reaction conditions
Kume et al.48


64
Cylindrical reformer
Development of a 3D CFD model of a compact steam reforming reactor based on experimental data measured in a pilot-scale charging station
Han et al.49


64
Development of a 3D CFD model of an SMR reactor and integration with an overall H2 process to simultaneously evaluate H2 productivity and process thermal efficiency
Han et al.50


60
Membrane reformer
Development of a pseudo-2D non-isothermal model to evaluate different types of membrane reformers (tube-in-tube or sandwich-type, granular or structured catalyst)
Shigarov et al.51


58
Cylindrical reformer
Finding optimal process parameters to minimize the size of process subunits for on-site hydrogen production
Lee et al.52


43
Membrane reformer
Testing of a two-step membrane reformer module using a SiC foam catalyst under various operating conditions
De Falco et al.53


15
Cylindrical reformer
Design and validation of an SMR-based hydrogen production process using a Fischer–Tropsch diesel
Hulteberg et al.54


11
Plate-type reformer
Performance evaluation of a plate-type steam reformer for application in fuel cells and hydrogen stations
Oh et al.55


11
Microstructured reformer
Design and operation of a microstructured SMR for standalone operation in small facilities
Haynes and Johnston56


11
Microchannel system configuration and evaluation using techniques proven in Heatric printed-circuit heat exchangers (PCHE)
Seris et al.57


11
Cylindrical reformer
Demonstration of temperature distribution and exhaust gas composition according to various operating conditions and burner types
Jo et al.58


11
Parametric study on combustion fuel quantity via numerical simulations and experiments
Jo et al.59


6
Development of a computational fluid dynamics model of a compact SMR reformer and experimental validation
Ngo et al.60


3
SE-SMR
Simulation of thermal-swing sorption-enhanced SMR (SE-SMR) integrated with thermal regeneration using a continuous stirred-tank reactor (CSTR)-in-series model
Lee et al.61


2
Membrane reformer
Testing of membrane reactors comprising a Pd–Ag foil tube and an Inconel-supported Pd–Ag film
Simakov and Sheintuch62


2
Heat-exchanger-type reformer
Development of a planar heat-exchanger-type steam reformer for solid-oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) and determination of the catalytic combustor structure and inlet conditions
Lee et al.63


2
Development of a heat-exchanger-type compact reformer for on-site hydrogen supply and evaluation of the effect of reactor temperature on methane conversion
Yang et al.64


0.3
Membrane reformer
Optimized bench-scale Pd-based membrane reactor for durability and high methane conversion
Sarić et al.65


0.3
Microstructured reformer
Experimental performance evaluation of microstructured reformers for hydrogen generation in fuel cells under static and dynamic load conditions
Cremers et al.66


0.2
Membrane reformer
Modeling and simulation of a fluidized bed membrane reactor using Aspen Plus
Ye et al.67


0.2
Performance evaluation of a Pd-based fluidized bed membrane reactor at various feed flow rates, temperatures, and pressures
Roses et al.68


0.2
Design of a multichannel membrane reactor for small-scale hydrogen production and comparison of SMR and methane catalytic combustion (MCC) gas channels
Vigneault and Grace69


0.1
Modeling of a fluidized bed membrane reactor considering differences in diffusivities
Adris et al.70


0.1
Development and performance evaluation of a multi-membrane reformer composed of a coin-shaped Ni catalyst and a Pd-based membrane
Hwang et al.71


0.1
Microstructured membrane reformer
Functional testing and thermodynamic analysis of a planar modular Pd-based membrane reactor named μ-EnH2ancer
Boeltken et al.72


0.05
SE-SMR
Numerical study of SMR combined with simultaneous CO2 removal using CaO carbonization
Lee et al.73


0.03
Microstructured reformer
Development of a microchannel reformer with a combustion reaction and evaluation of reactor performance under various operating conditions
Hwang et al.74


0.01
Membrane reformer
Modeling of a Pd/Ag-based membrane reactor and calculation of optimal values for design variables
Chen et al.75


0.003
Heat-exchanger-type
Development of a heat exchanger reformer for residential power generation using a proton-exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) and performance evaluation according to the inlet process gas flow rate, process gas pressure, flue gas flow rate, etc.
Patel and Sunol76




4. Challenges for large-scale centralized SMR
In this section, critical issues raised in SMR for large-scale centralized hydrogen production are addressed, namely, homogeneous heat distribution, catalytic morphology, carbon sequestration, and the use of a variety of heat sources.
4.1 Homogeneous heat distribution
A centralized production system involves the installation of hundreds of reaction tubes filled with catalysts. As the operating temperature of the SMR increases, the forward reaction of SMR is favored, and a larger amount of hydrogen is generated. However, this causes damage to the tubes owing to thermal stress. When the operating temperature is 20 °C higher than the design temperature, the life of the reaction tubes is reduced by half.77 Retubing costs 10% of the total installation cost of the plant, which is 5–8 million USD.27,78 High-thermal-resistance materials can be used, but this also increases the capital cost. Hence, it is important to achieve a uniform temperature distribution to avoid mechanical replacement or damage. As shown in Fig. 8, the heat distribution should be homogenized to maintain the design temperature uniformly while avoiding superheating problems in specific areas, such as hot spots or hot tubes.
 Fig. 8  Balancing furnace temperature, adapted from Kumar et al.79 
Many researchers have addressed the thermal uniformity of centralized SMR systems, and the notable studies are summarized below.
As shown in Fig. 9(a), a uniformly balanced temperature distribution was achieved in a top-fired reformer model consisting of 96 burners and 336 tubes by regulating the fuel flow in a single tube.80 A reduced-order model was used to reduce the calculation time, and the affected zone was discretized into squares. For real-time optimization of the temperature distribution of a full-scale reformer, cloud-based profile data were utilized with a commercial computational fluid dynamics (CFD) program.
 Fig. 9  Study on temperature uniformity; (a) single tube,80 (b) egg-crate steam methane reforming model,79 (c) grouped full-scale furnace,83 (d) two-dimensional axisymmetric reforming tube,85 and (e) furnace balancing in the 0th (left) and 6th (right) iterations,86 reproduced with permission from American Chemical Society and Elsevier. 
Furnace temperature predictions have been conducted to optimize the temperature distribution in real-time.79,81 An egg-crate SMR (EC-SMR) temperature model, which combines the direct and induced effects of burner fuel on the tube wall temperature, was developed for this purpose.82 This model was based on a furnace-wide temperature model calibrated using measurement data. Mixed-integer programming was applied to a steady-state full-scale furnace, as shown in Fig. 9(b). It was found that the furnace operating temperature and tube wall temperature strongly influence the thermal efficiency of the SMR process.
A full-scale model is still needed to lower the computational cost because extensive sets of measurement data are difficult to obtain. Considering that the wall temperatures of adjacent tubes have similar values and dynamics, the tubes and burners were grouped, and a physics-based furnace model was developed using differential-algebraic equations.83,84Fig. 9(c) shows the simulation results of the developed grouped full-scale model. A narrow temperature distribution improves not only the efficiency of the reactor but also the efficiency of the entire system including a shift reactor, a steam separator, and a heat exchanger.
Lao et al.85 presented a fourth-order polynomial semi-variogram of the relationship between the outer tube wall temperature and the tube inlet location. As shown in Fig. 9(d), a model was developed based on a two-dimensional axisymmetric reforming tube using CFD. This study shows that the process operates stably in the presence of disturbances in the feed to the furnace side through a closed-loop proportional-integral controller.
The multi-objective optimization of the tube temperature uniformity and compressor duty was solved in a few iterations using simplified assumptions regarding the heating zone and flow rate of the outer and inner burner lanes, as shown in Fig. 9(e).86 The results suggested that an increased total fuel flow rate would achieve the maximum allowable outer tube wall temperature.
Various approaches have been developed to achieve a homogeneous temperature distribution, from predicting and normalizing the temperature of a single tube to optimizing the entire reactor furnace. However, there is still room for improvement to balance the temperature distribution of the reactor in the practical field. There are two approaches to improving the thermal uniformity of SMR reactors: control and design aspects. The thermal uniformity of reactors already in operation can be improved through real-time control and optimization; the productivity of the reactor must also be optimized in real-time while the overall temperature distribution is improved. The SMR reactors planned to be installed, on the other hand, can be configured from the initial design stage to ensure the thermal uniformity of the reactor.
4.2 Catalyst morphology
The efficiency of the catalyst is closely related to its morphology and particle size. Smaller particles that have higher activity increase the pressure, and it can be severe in tubes that are approximately 10 m, which is the typical length of reaction tubes in industrial-scale facilities. Therefore, a catalyst with a suitable size and shape is required, and the effect of physical parameters, such as size and shape, on catalytic performance has been examined to improve flow interactions at the particle scale. There are differences in the performance of catalysts of the same shape but different sizes, as well as differences due to the change in the surface area corresponding to different shapes.
In recent years, researchers have gone beyond the analysis of a single particle or a small number of regularly aligned and packed catalysts and have been studying many randomly packed catalyst particles to provide more accurate results that are closer to real-world conditions. The interface resistance between the fluid and the spheric catalyst was investigated using a two-dimensional steady-state non-isothermal model.87 The effect of wall resistance on pressure drop was also demonstrated via the Ergun equation, Eisfeld–Schnitzlein correlation, and Di Felice–Gibilaro correlation.
Karthik and Buwa88 compared the pressure drop, heat transfer, and reaction performance of six different catalyst shapes (cylinder, trilobe, daisy, hollow cylinder, cylcut, and seven-hole cylinder) using CFD, as shown in Fig. 10(a). They had the same aspect ratio and were randomly packed in the θ and π directions. The trilobal and daisy-shaped particles with external shapes showed a lower pressure drop, while particles with internal shapes, such as hollow cylinders, cylcut, and seven-hole cylinders, provided a larger surface area and reduced diffusion limitations. The heat transfer and reaction performance per pressure drop were the highest for the trilobal particles.
 Fig. 10  Various catalyst types developed to enhance reaction performance; (a) six different catalyst particle shapes,88 (b) dependence of the methane conversion and methane conversion per pressure drop on the surface area of the catalyst shape,89 and (c) experimental images of four different catalyst shapes,91 reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Royal Society of Chemistry, and Elsevier. 
As shown in Fig. 10(b), the methane conversion efficiency in SMR was compared for five catalyst shapes (trilobe, daisy, hollow cylinder, cylcut, and seven-hole cylinder), randomly arranged in several rows, using CFD.89 Owing to the effect of the large surface area, the methane conversion was higher for particles with an internal shape than for those with an external shape. The methane conversion per pressure drop was the highest for the cylcut particles.
Three different catalyst structures, namely, seven-hole pellets, monoliths, and foams, have been proposed to enhance the surface area within a compact space, and their effect on SMR performance has been explored with CFD.90 The monolithic structure exhibited the lowest pressure drop and the highest methane conversion per pressure drop because the monolith has a lower velocity owing to the streamlined flow guided by the channel walls.
Pashchenko91 conducted experiments to investigate the effects of four different catalyst types on methane conversion and pressure drop: a cylinder, a ring, a convex cylinder with seven holes, and a sphere with seven holes, as shown in Fig. 10(c). The seven-hole sphere showed a 23% higher methane conversion than the cylinder because of its larger surface area.
Catalysts of various sizes and shapes have been proposed because their morphology directly affects the reaction performance. In industrial areas, however, it gives rise to maintenance issues. Therefore, extensive research on the physical properties of catalysts of various shapes and their performance improvement is required, e.g., the effect of reactor operating conditions on the strength of the catalyst. In this respect, operating cost is also a critical factor to consider in a large-scale steam reforming reactor.
4.3 Carbon sequestration
Hydrogen has gained considerable attention in the transition from fossil-fuel-based energy systems to environmentally friendly low- or zero-carbon systems. However, conventional SMR generates CO2 during the reaction, and this is a fatal drawback because CO2 has been identified as a major contributor to global warming. There has been active research on the development of an SMR process combined with carbon capture technology to reduce CO2 generation. Among the various CO2 capture methods (e.g., adsorption, absorption, and membrane separation), absorption has been the most addressed, and studies on SMR combined with CO2 absorption have been mainly conducted from a process design point of view.12,28 Two well-developed SMR methods for carbon capture are presented below.
The sorption-enhanced reforming (SER) process, shown in Fig. 11, separates CO2 using adsorbents such as CaO, K2CO3, and MgO and promotes the forward reaction of SMR: CaO(s) + CO2(g) → CaCO3(s), exothermic(5)
 Fig. 11  Schematic of a sorption-enhanced steam methane reforming process, adapted from Johnsen et al.93 
The temperature of the reforming process can be lowered to 600–700 °C, and the hydrogen concentration can be increased to approximately 95% or more, thus simplifying the purification facility. However, there are challenges associated with energy consumption and reproducibility when integrating continuous and repetitive regeneration reactions.92
Abbas et al.94 evaluated the methane conversion, hydrogen yield, and capture performance of SER using an adiabatic packed bed. The hydrogen yield and methane conversion increase as the space velocity decreases because of the longer residence time. The SER performance improves as the steam-to-carbon (S/C) ratio increases and the pressure decreases. The methane conversion rate increases with increasing temperature, but the CO2 capture efficiency decreases, revealing a trade-off between methane conversion and hydrogen purity.
Chemical looping combustion (CLC) occurs by a metal-oxide reduction in the fuel reactor and oxidation in the air reactor, as shown in reaction (6) and (7), respectively, rather than by supplying heat through direct combustion. This is advantageous in terms of CO2 capture compared to conventional SMR. The CO2 generated by the CLC process is not diluted with N2, as shown in Fig. 12, facilitating its separation and reducing energy consumption.35 (6) (7)
 Fig. 12  Schematic of chemical looping combustion, adapted from Fan et al.35 
There has been considerable research in recent years on the development of oxygen carriers, such as Ni-, Ce-, Fe-, Cu-, Mn-, Pr-, or Ca-based materials and perovskite-type materials, and their surface treatment to enhance their performance.95 Recently, solar-driven CLC using various types of oxygen carriers, including Cr-based,96 Ce-based,97 and perovskite-based98 materials, has been introduced. Furthermore, it has been suggested that integrating CLC with SER or water-splitting technology reduces energy requirements, particularly when combined with heat integration.23,99
SMR technology combined with carbon capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS) is not yet cost-competitive. For the realization of SMR with CCUS, it is crucial to increase its economic viability. Recently, the techno-economic feasibility of SMR combined with carbon capture was investigated,100 and a conceptual design of SMR with carbon storage or utilization was proposed.101,102
Even in large-volume SMR, the technology for reducing the amount of carbon emitted is still in its infancy. In order to use hydrogen as a truly clean energy carrier, intensive research on advanced steam reforming systems, including SER and CLC, is urged.
4.4 Application of various heat sources
Although industrial-scale SMR systems ensure high economic viability mainly due to the recovery of a significant portion of the waste heat, there is further room for reducing energy requirements by considering heat sources other than conventional hydrocarbon fuels. This is also beneficial in terms of reducing CO2 emissions. Therefore, various heat sources have been investigated, including the waste heat recovered from flue gases,23 heated helium,103 and solar energy especially for SMR-ATR hybrid reforming,104 and a gliding arc discharge plasma.105 Also, solar-driven SMR with CLC has been proposed and compared with other renewable hydrogen production methods in terms of energy efficiency.106 This process ensures consistent performance over a long period of four seasons.
5. Challenges for small-scale distributed SMR
In this section, critical issues in SMR for distributed hydrogen production are addressed, namely, feasibility, compactness, use of membranes, and carbon sequestration. Small-scale hydrogen production technologies enable the operator of a distributed hydrogen infrastructure to supply various consumers including hydrogen-powered vehicles, fuel cells, and hydrogen grids.
5.1 Enhancement of feasibility
Distributed SMR, encompassing hydrogen fueling stations and fuel cell systems, is a suitable route for small-scale hydrogen production because distributed SMR is considered the optimal solution to address the inadequacies in hydrogen supply.107 To this end, facilities for distributed SMR are essential to expanding consumer access, which will drive the hydrogen economy. However, while centralized SMR guarantees both economic feasibility and thermal efficiency, this is not the case for distributed SMR systems.108 Increasing economic viability is the most critical issue for accelerating the adoption of distributed and on-site hydrogen production. Several notable studies that have attempted to increase feasibility are introduced in this section.
Small-scale SMR plants have practical difficulties in recovering waste heat to increase the total heat efficiency of the system. Song et al.109 proposed an energy-saving process integrated with PSA technology. In a small-scale SMR system, it is difficult to increase the pressure difference between the inlet and outlet of the PSA process, which is the driving force of purification; therefore, the recovery rate of hydrogen is low, and the amount of hydrogen flowing into the tail gas of the PSA is large, resulting in high energy consumption. They proposed heat integration using pinch technology to reduce the requirements, and the total energy consumption and operating costs were reduced by 60.5% and 34.3%, respectively.
Researchers have also examined how to optimize operating conditions, such as the S/C ratio, reformer inlet temperature, and heat source flow direction, to enhance reforming efficiency and productivity at low temperatures for integration into fuel cell systems with stationary power engines.110,111 The changes in the thermal efficiency and conversion rate with the S/C ratio and air–fuel ratio of a 5 kW proton-exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) showed that the conversion rate increased linearly as the S/C ratio increased, but the thermal efficiency varied in a concave shape.58
Despite these efforts, the economic feasibility of small-scale distributed SMR is still questionable. In some cases, it is more economical to transport hydrogen produced from a large-scale centralized facility to an on-site hydrogen station. In order to secure the viability of small-scale SMR and facilitate its adoption in areas close to consumers, it is necessary to lower the hydrogen production price by simultaneously increasing hydrogen productivity and thermal efficiency.
5.2 Compact integration
Efficient distribution of hydrogen in residential areas is required for vehicles and households, but the size of SMR units is limited by the installation area, which hinders their distribution. For this reason, vendors of commercial on-site hydrogen production systems, including HYSERVE of Osaka Gas, Hy.GEN of HyGear, and HYDROFORM-C of Mahler AGS, advertise the compactness of their systems to increase their acceptance by residents. In addition, as the volume of the reactor increases, the likelihood of dead volume in the furnace increases, considerably reducing the thermal uniformity and heat transfer in the furnace. Therefore, numerous efforts have been made to enhance the compactness of distributed SMR processes.
Ngo et al.60 and Nguyen et al.112 developed a small-scale on-site SMR system as shown in Fig. 13(a). They proposed a compact annulus-sleeve-type reformer with 16 nozzles via a three-dimensional half-scale CFD model and experiment. When producing 2.5 Nm3 h−1 of hydrogen, a thermal efficiency of 60% could be achieved. An optimized sleeve gap with the highest hydrogen production rate and thermal efficiency among the six geometries was proposed using a three-dimensional Eulerian CFD model.
 Fig. 13  Reactor and various catalyst packing systems for compact steam methane reforming; (a) sleeve-type compact reformer,112 (b) macropatterned catalytic layer,113 (c) honeycomb-type catalyst,114 and (d) foam catalyst,115 reproduced with permission from Elsevier. 
Conventional catalyst packing systems have limitations in designing narrow tubes and furnaces because table-type catalyst particles are packed into reaction tubes. In this respect, studies have been conducted to refine catalyst packing systems. A compact heat-exchanger-type reformer incorporating a metallic foam catalyst was proposed to produce 1 Nm3 h−1 of hydrogen, and its activity and performance were examined as a function of temperature, time, and gas hourly space velocity (GHSV).64 The metallic foam catalyst reached a high GHSV without a pressure drop, and a higher methane conversion rate and hydrogen production rate were obtained at higher operating temperatures and GHSVs, respectively.
It was found that methane conversion and hydrogen production could be improved by macropatterning of the catalyst layer, as shown in Fig. 13(b).113 The macropatterned catalyst also exhibited a uniform temperature profile and enhanced methane conversion.
Monolithic, honeycomb-type, and foam-shaped catalysts (shown in Fig. 13(c) and (d), respectively) have been proposed to improve heat transfer.114,115 In addition to the compactness of these novel packing strategies, other advantages, such as effective heat flux and large surface area, of the proposed catalyst types have been claimed. The honeycomb-type catalyst enhances the reformer performance owing to its large surface area.
Additionally, a reactor consisting of a Pt-based catalyst-coated combustion channel and a Rh-based catalyst-coated reforming channel has been proposed, with hundreds to thousands of channels stacked in parallel.116 Rectangular protrusions were designed to improve the effectiveness and performance of the reactor. To maximize the hydrogen production yield, fluid velocity, the flow direction of the two channels, and wall thermal conductivity were examined using numerical simulations.
As can be seen from the above results, a variety of catalyst packing systems have been proposed for microstructured reformers. An efficient catalyst packing system increases drastically the efficiency of the reactor, but the ancillary process units involved in the overall steam reforming process still occupy a place. Another approach to reducing space is to use a membrane reformer that will be investigated in the next section.
5.3 Membrane reformer
Membrane reforming technology has been increasingly advanced to replace large PSA units for small-scale distributed SMR systems. As shown in Fig. 14, the separation of hydrogen through the membrane promotes the forward SMR reaction, increasing the efficiency of the overall reaction even at low operating temperatures. Membrane reformers enable high-purity hydrogen separation and more importantly, they facilitate the compactness of the SMR system.
 Fig. 14  Membrane reformer for compact hydrogen production, adapted from Shirasaki et al.47 
There are two most critical challenges of membrane reactors: low cost-competitiveness due to the use of expensive Pd and membrane instability due to long-term operation.
Pd is a major component of membrane materials used to separate hydrogen. Pd-based membranes, typically used as hydrogen-permeable materials, are expensive because of the high cost of the metal. Various types of membranes, such as dense metals, polymers, or microporous ceramics, have been investigated to overcome this. A microporous silica membrane is one of the promising candidates for hydrogen separation, but it is hydrothermally unstable at high temperatures. Akbari and Omidkahah117 proposed a silica-zirconia membrane on a mesoporous modified alumina support using a chemical vapor deposition technique to enhance hydrothermal stability. The membrane support also plays an important role in production cost. Di Marcoberardino et al.118 analyzed the optimal area and production cost of a support layer made of porous stainless steel and alumina ceramic over a wide range of operating pressures and sweep gas flows through techno-economic analysis. Ceramic-based supports are less expensive than stainless steel-based supports but require 1.4 times more surface area, leading to higher hydrogen production costs.
As the reaction temperature increases, the methane conversion efficiency increases because it promotes the equilibrium reaction. However, the stability decreases above 550–650 °C owing to pore collapse.119 Numerous studies have been conducted to explore their reliability. Kume et al.48 demonstrated reliable and durable long-term operation while ensuring cost competitiveness. Anzelmo et al.120 evaluated a composite membrane with approximately a 13 μm Pd layer deposited on a porous stainless-steel support. Methane conversion in the membrane reactor was 72% in the first test and decreased to 30% in the last test.
Membrane reactors are promising alternatives to water–gas shift and purification, addressing safety issues as they operate under mild temperature and pressure conditions, but long-term stability must be ensured for the commercialization of membrane reactors because the performance of the membrane decreases over time.
5.4 Carbon sequestration
Similar to industrial SMR systems, small-scale SMR systems also have inherent problems with CO2 emissions. One solution is to improve the efficiency of the SMR process so that fewer carbon feedstocks and hydrocarbon-based fuels are required. However, there are still intrinsic limitations when using carbon-based feedstocks.
Sharma et al.121 proposed a simple novel idea of using waste heat to increase the reforming temperature to 100 °C while capturing 30–40% of the emitted CO2, resulting in a loss of exergy efficiency of only 0.53%. They developed a detailed process scheme that included a compact monolithic vacuum PSA to capture CO2 with only a 30–50% exergy penalty compared to that in the literature.122
Abbas et al.123 presented a one-dimensional heterogeneous numerical model of an adiabatic packed-bed SE-SMR reactor for application in small or mobile plants and evaluated the thermal efficiency under various operating conditions under low pressure. Furthermore, the cost compositions of the conventional CO2 capture, SE-SMR, and SE-SMR-solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) systems were analyzed.124 Each economic feasibility was compared against fluctuations in the spot price of electricity, carbon tax, and CO2 transport and storage prices.
Recently, a microreactor manufactured by direct metal laser sintering has demonstrated 500 sccm of methane conversion by absorbing solar radiation as a heat source instead of a carbon-based energy source.125
Research to reduce carbon emissions is much less active in distributed SMR processes than in centralized ones because carbon emissions in small systems are not as fatal as they are in large systems. However, more effort will need to be devoted to this area for the widespread adoption of small-scale SMR technologies in the long run.
5.5 Green hydrogen
There is growing interest in green hydrogen production through steam reforming of biogas and/or biomethane as a hydrogen source for future distributed hydrogen infrastructure elements. Biogas from biomass degradation has attracted attention for its use to supply heat to high-temperature fuel cells. This newly developed technology is rarely applied on a large scale due to the limited supply of biogas. In this section, we highlight the recent notable findings in biogas-assisted green hydrogen production.
A mathematical model of biogas reforming processes was developed and validated with experimental data showing a good correspondence between experimental and calculated gas compositions.126 Also, Di Marcoberardino et al.127 evaluated the potentiality of a biogas membrane reformer for decentralized green hydrogen production. From the results, they claim that membrane reactors are a promising technology for green hydrogen production using raw biogas. Reinders et al.128 investigated biogas as a source for producing hydrogen at wastewater treatment plants. The raw material for hydrogen production is digester gas, a renewable energy source. They evaluated the potential for integration of a hydrogen production system into a local supply chain in the vicinity of wastewater treatment plants. Park et al.129 carried out a system optimization for effective hydrogen production via anaerobic digestion and biogas steam reforming from food waste. Optimized conditions of anaerobic digestion and biogas reforming were a reaction temperature of 700 °C and an H2O/CH4 ratio of 1.0. More recently, Madeira et al.130 studied hydrogen production from swine manure biogas via SMR and water–gas shift and evaluated the potential of this waste to produce green hydrogen. The ecological efficiency, pollution indicator, and energy efficiency of the process were 93.7%, 19.2%, and 79.1%, respectively, showing viability from an ecological standpoint.
Steam reforming using biogas can be a promising alternative to fossil fuel-based reforming in the long term. Although this does not apply to large-scale plants due to the limited capacity of biogas, we believe that future research should be focused on producing green hydrogen using steam reforming of biomethane in small-scale systems.
6. Concluding remarks
Industrial SMR-based hydrogen production processes have become increasingly mature through the optimal design of SMR reactors. Although small-scale SMR technology for domestic applications, including fuel cells, is not as mature as large-scale reforming, many studies are being conducted for its rapid adoption. However, despite the technological difference in SMR according to the production scale, the analysis of SMR with different production capacities has rarely been performed.
In this review, we summarize the recent literature on SMR technologies for the centralized and distributed production of hydrogen. We conclude this review by suggesting future research directions for hydrogen production on different scales. First, to further advance SMR technology for centralized hydrogen production, real-time control and optimization of the reactor are of paramount importance. In industrial-scale plants, there is still a need to optimize the entire process to increase hydrogen productivity and maximize process efficiency at the same time. To this end, a multi-objective Bayesian optimization framework can be utilized. Second, for small-scale distributed hydrogen production, it is imperative to reduce the cost of hydrogen production by increasing energy efficiency or optimizing operating conditions. Furthermore, metal-based membrane reactors that are compact and do not degrade the system efficiency are also required. Regardless of the capacity, SMR has inherent limitations associated with CO2 emissions; thus, new advanced SMR techniques need to be developed to reduce CO2 emissions or capture emitted CO2. In small-scale systems, steam reforming technology using biogas is noteworthy as a promising solution.
This review will serve as a guide for the comprehensive analysis of SMR hydrogen production technology at scale and contribute to the rapid realization of the hydrogen economy.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning under grant 20193510100040. The Institute of Engineering Research at Seoul National University provided research facilities for this work.
References
A. Demirbas, Energy Sources, Part B, 2017, 12, 172–181 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Töpler and J. Lehmann, Hydrogen and Fuel Cell, Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg,  2016 Search PubMed .

          F. Birol, The Future of Hydrogen, IEA, Paris,  2019 Search PubMed .

Hydrogen refuelling stations worldwide, https://www.h2stations.org, accessed November 2021 Search PubMed.

Hydrogen Analysis Resource Center, https://h2tools.org/hyarc/hydrogen-data/international-hydrogen-fueling-stations, accessed November 2021 Search PubMed.
A. Arman, F. Y. Hagos, A. A. Abdullah, R. Mamat, A. R. A. Aziz and C. K. Cheng, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 736, 42032–42048 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boretti and B. K. Banik, Adv. Energy Sustainability Res., 2021, 2, 2100097 CrossRef .
L. Chen, Z. Qi, S. Zhang, J. Su and G. A. Somorjai, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 858–875 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Habib, A. Harale, S. Paglieri, F. S. Alrashed, A. Al-Sayoud, M. V. Rao, M. A. Nemitallah, S. Hossain, M. Hussien, A. Ali, M. A. Haque, A. Abuelyamen, M. R. Shakeel, E. M. A. Mokheimer and R. Ben-Mansour, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 5558–5593 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Kannah, S. Kavitha, O. P. Karthikeyan, G. Kumar, N. V. Dai-Viet and J. R. Banu, Bioresour. Technol., 2021, 319, 124175–124188 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Meloni, M. Martino and V. Palma, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 352–389 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Soltani, A. Lahiri, H. Bahzad, P. Clough, Mi. Gorbounov and Y. Yan, Carbon Capture Sci. Technol., 2021, 1, 100003 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, M. Z. Memon, M. A. Seelro, W. Fu, Y. Gao, Y. Dong and G. Ji, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 23358–23379 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. Sun and Y. H. Hu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 149, 111330 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nikolaidis and A. Poullikkas, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 67, 597–611 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hajjaji, M. N. Pons, A. Houas and V. Renaudin, Energy Policy, 2012, 42, 392–399 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Durán, F. Dorado and L. Sanchez-Silva, Energies, 2020, 13, 3807–3821 CrossRef .
O. Marie, X. Portier, N. Korsunska and L. Khomenkova, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 278, 119258 CrossRef CAS .
N. Demir, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 853–860 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Kim, J. H. Kim, K. F. Barry and H. Y. Kwak, Nucl. Technol., 2011, 176, 337–351 CrossRef CAS .
L. Herraiz, M. Lucquiaud, H. Chalmers and J. Gibbins, Front. Energy Res., 2020, 8, 180–197 CrossRef .
W. L. Luyben, J. Process Control, 2016, 39, 77–87 CrossRef CAS .
A. Antzara, E. Heracleous, D. B. Bukur and A. A. Lemonidou, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2015, 32, 115–128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, V. Manovic, E. J. Anthony and P. T. Clough, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 226, 113530 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Latham, MS thesis, Queen's University,  2008 .
P. Gangadharan, K. C. Kanchi and H. H. Lou, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2012, 90, 1956–1968 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Latham, K. B. McAuley, B. A. Peppley and T. M. Raybold, Fuel Process. Technol., 2011, 92, 1574–1586 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Meerman, E. S. Hamborg, T. Van Keulen, A. Ramírez, W. C. Turkenburg and A. P. C. Faaij, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2012, 9, 160–171 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chikazawa, M. Konomura, S. Uchida and H. Sato, Nucl. Technol., 2005, 152, 266–272 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aasberg-Petersen, C. S. Nielsen and S. L. Jørgensen, Catal. Today, 1998, 46, 193–201 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bernardo, G. Barbieri and E. Drioli, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2010, 65, 1159–1166 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Rajesh, S. K. Gupta, G. T. Rangaiah and A. K. Ray, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2000, 39, 706–717 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zamaniyan, A. T. Zoghi and H. Ebrahimi, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2008, 32, 1433–1446 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, L. Li and G. Zhang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 179, 335–346 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, L. Zhu, P. Jiang, L. Li and H. Liu, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 131, 247–258 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Inaba, T. Nishihara and Y. Nitta, Nucl. Technol., 2004, 146, 49–57 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lambert, M. Sorin and J. Paris, Energy, 1997, 22, 817–825 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohashi, Y. Inaba, T. Nishihara, Y. Inagaki, T. Takeda, K. Hayashi, S. Katanishi, S. Takada, M. Ogawa and S. J. Shiozawa, Nucl. Sci. Technol., 2004, 41, 385–392 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Inaba, H. Ohashi, T. Nishihara, H. Sato, Y. Inagaki, T. Takeda, K. Hayashi and S. Takada, Nucl. Eng. Des., 2005, 235, 111–121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, S. Jiang, Y. Zhang and H. Ju, J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 2007, 44, 977–984 CrossRef CAS .
M. De Falco, D. Barba, S. Cosenza, G. Iaquaniello, A. Farace and F. G. Giacobbe, Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng., 2009, 4, 259–269 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Bruno, S. Lamonaca, M. La Scala, G. Rotondo and U. Stecchi, Presented in Part at 2009 Asia-Pacific Power and Energy Engineering Conference, Wuhan, China, March,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. Taji, M. Farsi and P. Keshavarz, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 13110–13121 CrossRef CAS .
M. De Falco and V. Piemonte, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 7759–7762 CrossRef .
A. Li, C. J. Lim and J. R. Grace, Chem. Eng. J., 2008, 138, 452–459 CrossRef CAS .
M. De Falco, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 3036–3040 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shirasaki, T. Tsuneki, Y. Ota, I. Yasuda, S. Tachibana, H. Nakajima and K. Kobayashi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4482–4487 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kume, Y. Ikeda, T. Iseki, H. Yakabe, H. Tanaka, H. Hikosaka, Y. Tataki and M. Ito, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 6079–6084 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Han, S. Lee and J. M. Lee, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2022 DOI:10.1007/s11814-021-1029-4 .
J. R. Han, J. J. Urm, S. Lee and J. M. Lee, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2022, 178, 466–477 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shigarov, V. Kirillov and I. Landgraf, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 20072–20093 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Lee, K. Y. Koo, D. J. Seo and W. L. Yoon, Renewable Energy, 2012, 42, 234–242 CrossRef CAS .
M. De Falco, G. Iaquaniello and A. Salladini, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 368, 264–274 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Hulteberg, H. Burford, K. Duraiswamy, B. Porter and R. Woods, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 1266–1274 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Oh, T. Y. Song, Y. S. Baek and L. S. Choi, Transactions of the Korean Hydrogen and New Energy Society, 2002, 13, 304–312 Search PubMed .
B. S. Haynes and A. M. Johnston, Catal. Today, 2011, 178, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. C. Seris, G. Abramowitz, A. M. Johnston and B. S. Haynes, Chem. Eng. J., 2008, 135, S9–S16 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jo, J. Han, B. Koo and D. Lee, Heat Mass Transfer, 2016, 52, 2459–2469 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jo, B. Koo, Y. Lee, H. So and D. Lee, J. Mech. Sci. Technol., 2018, 32, 679–687 CrossRef .
S. I. Ngo, Y. I. Lim, W. Kim, D. J. Seo and W. L. Yoon, Appl. Energy, 2019, 236, 340–353 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Lee, M. G. Beaver, H. S. Caram and S. Sircar, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 5003–5014 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Simakov and M. Sheintuch, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 1123–1129 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, J. Yun, K. Ahn, S. Lee, S. Kang and S. Yu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4767–4775 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Yang, T. W. Kim, J. C. Park, T. H. Lim, H. Jung and D. H. Chun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 8176–8183 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sarić, Y. C. van Delft, R. Sumbharaju, D. F. Meyer and A. de Groot, Catal. Today, 2012, 193, 74–80 CrossRef .
C. Cremers, A. Pelz, U. Stimming, K. Haas-Santo, O. Görke, P. Pfeifer and K. Schubert, Fuel Cells, 2007, 7, 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ye, D. Xie, W. Qiao, J. R. Grace and C. J. Lim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4755–4762 CrossRef CAS .
L. Roses, F. Gallucci, G. Manzolini and M. van Sint Annaland, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 222, 307–320 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vigneault and J. R. Grace, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 233–243 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Adris, C. J. Lim and J. R. Grace, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1997, 52, 1609–1622 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Hwang, C. B. Lee, S. K. Ryi, S. W. Lee and J. S. Park, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 6601–6607 CrossRef CAS .
T. Boeltken, A. Wunsch, T. Gietzelt, P. Pfeifer and R. Dittmeyer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 18058–18068 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Lee, I. H. Baek and W. L. Yoon, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2004, 59, 931–942 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Hwang, C. B. Lee, S. W. Lee, S. K. Ryi and J. S. Park, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 473–481 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Chen, Y. H. Chi, K. J. Chen and J. D. Ward, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2010, 41, 492–499 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Patel and A. K. Sunol, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 503–512 CrossRef CAS .

          P. W. Farnell, Modern Techniques for Optimization of Primary Reformer Operation, Johnson Matthey Group, London,  2003 Search PubMed .

          J. Boudreau and A. Rocheleau, Major Qualifying Project, Worcester Polytechnic Institute,  2010 Search PubMed .
A. Kumar, M. Baldea and T. F. Edgar, Control Eng. Pract., 2016, 54, 140–153 CrossRef .
A. Kumar, M. Baldea, T. F. Edgar and O. A. Ezekoye, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 4360–4370 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, M. Baldea and T. F. Edgar, AIChE J., 2016, 62, 3225–3237 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tran, M. Pont, A. Aguirre, H. Durand, M. Crose and P. D. Christofides, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2018, 131, 465–487 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, M. Baldea and T. F. Edgar, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2017, 105, 224–236 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, T. F. Edgar and M. Baldea, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2017, 107, 271–283 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lao, A. Aguirre, A. Tran, Z. Wu, H. Durand and P. D. Christofides, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2016, 148, 78–92 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tran, A. Aguirre, M. Crose, H. Durand and P. D. Christofides, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2017, 104, 185–200 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. R. Kuncharam and A. G. Dixon, Fuel Process. Technol., 2020, 200, 106314 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Karthik and V. V. Buwa, AIChE J., 2017, 63, 366–377 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Karthik and V. V. Buwa, React. Chem. Eng., 2020, 5, 163–182 RSC .
K. Gopal Manoharan and V. V. Buwa, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 22363–22375 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pashchenko, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 185, 465–472 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Fernández and J. C. Abanades, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2017, 17, 1–8 CrossRef .
K. Johnsen, H. J. Ryu, J. R. Grace and C. J. Lim, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2006, 61, 1195–1202 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Abbas, V. Dupont and T. Mahmud, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 18910–18921 CrossRef CAS .
M. Luo, Y. Yi, S. Wang, Z. Wang, M. Du, J. Pan and Q. Wang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 3186–3214 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhosale, F. AlMomani and G. Takalkar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 10370–10380 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chuayboon, S. Abanades and S. Rodat, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 356, 756–770 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, H. Zhang, Y. Cao, H. Hong and H. Jin, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 187, 523–536 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bahzad, N. Shah, N. Mac Dowell, M. Boot-Handford, S. M. Soltani, M. Ho and P. S. Fennell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 21251–21263 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Subraveti, S. Roussanaly, R. Anantharaman, L. Riboldi and A. Rajendra, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 256, 117832–117851 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Navas-Anguita, D. García-Gusano, J. Dufour and D. Iribarren, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 771, 145432–145438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shi, M. Elgarni and N. Mahinpey, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2021, 223, 116364–116473 CrossRef .
M. Mozdzierz, G. Brus, S. Kimijima and J. S. Szmyd, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2016, 745, 032081 CrossRef .
H. Ishaq and I. Dincer, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 234, 242–257 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, N. Lu, J. Li, N. Jiang, K. Shang and Y. Wu, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 37, 248–259 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiu, L. Zhu, L. Li, Y. He and M. Zhou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 24441–24449 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Luk, H. M. Lei, W. Y. Ng, J. U. Yihan and K. F. Lam, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2012, 20, 489–496 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khzouz, E. I. Gkanas, J. Shao, F. Sher, D. Beherskyi, A. El-Kharouf and M. A. Qubeissi, Energies, 2020, 13, 3783–3801 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, Q. Liu, N. Ji, Y. Kansha and A. Tsutsumi, Appl. Energy, 2015, 154, 392–401 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shin, J. Yun and S. Yu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 14697–14707 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yun and S. Yu, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2019, 134, 600–609 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Nguyen, S. I. Ngo, Y. I. Lim, W. Kim, U. D. Lee, D. Seo and W. L. Yoon, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 1973–1987 CrossRef CAS .
A. Settar, R. Nebbali, B. Madani and S. Abboudi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 1490–1498 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fukuhara, K. Yamamoto, Y. Makiyama, W. Kawasaki and R. Watanabe, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 492, 190–200 CrossRef CAS .
M. Patrascu and M. Sheintuch, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 262, 862–874 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, W. Song and D. Xu, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 15600–15614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Akbari and M. Omidkaha, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 16698–16706 CrossRef CAS .
G. Di Marcoberardino, J. Knijff, M. Binotti, F. Gallucci and G. Manzolini, Membranes, 2019, 9, 116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dittmar, A. Behrens, N. Schödel, M. Rüttinger, T. Franco, G. Straczewski and R. Dittmeyer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 8759–8771 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anzelmo, J. Wilcox and S. J. Liguori, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 552, 343–350 CrossRef .
I. Sharma, D. Friedrich, T. Golden and S. Brandani, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 14732–14743 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sharma, D. Friedrich, T. Golden and S. Brandani, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 7109–7120 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Abbas, V. Dupont and T. Mahmud, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 1505–1513 CrossRef CAS .
G. Diglio, D. P. Hanak, P. Bareschino, E. Mancusi, F. Pepe, F. Montagnaro and V. Manovic, J. Power Sources, 2017, 364, 41–51 CrossRef CAS .
P. Camus, J. F. Dufault, D. Mehanovic, N. Braidy, L. G. Fréchette and M. Picard, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2019, 1407, 012005 CrossRef CAS .
A. Galvagno, V. Chiodo, F. Urbani and F. Freni, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 3913–3920 CrossRef CAS .
G. Di Marcoberardino, S. Foresti, M. Binotti and G. Manzolini, Chem. Eng. Process., 2018, 129, 131–141 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reinders, P. Beckhaus, F. Illing, U. Misz, H. Riße, M. Schröder, P. Schulte and B. Teichgräber, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 8601–8606 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Park, J. H. Kim, Y. H. Lee, H. M. Kim and D. W. Jeong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 30188–30200 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. F. Madeira, E. M. Oliveira, M. V. Springer, H. L. Cabral, D. F. do Carmo Barbeito, A. P. G. Souza, D. A. da Silva Moura and A. R. S. Delgado, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 8961–8971 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Hydrogen consumption in major industrial areas; others include steel production, flat glass production, and the electronics industry.	 

 	Fig. 2  Number of hydrogen refueling stations in various countries currently in operation, planned for construction, and defunct as of November 2019.	 

 	Fig. 3  Number of on-site hydrogen refueling stations according to hydrogen production capacity.	 


O	
	
	O	
	
	Arman et al.6
O	
	
	O	
	
	Boretti and Banik7
O	
	
	
	
	
	Chen et al.8

	
	
	
	O	
	Habib et al.9

	
	O	O	
	
	Kannah et al.10
O	
	
	
	
	
	Meloni et al.11
O	O	
	O	
	O	Soltani et al.12

	O	
	O	
	
	Wang et al.13
O	
	
	O	
	
	Zhang et al.14

 	Fig. 4  Hydrogen production technology using various energy sources.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the steam methane reforming process.	 
	(1)
	(2)
CO + H2O ⇌ CO2 + H2, exothermic	(3)
2CO + O2 → 2CO2, exothermic	(4)

 	Fig. 6  Different types of steam methane reforming reactors for large-scale centralized hydrogen production ordered by their hydrogen production capacity; different colors represent different types of steam reforming reactors, and the diagonal bars indicate the combination of steam reforming and external processes for specific purposes.	 

11320000	SMR with heat source from nuclear energy	Efficiency evaluation of a solid moving breeder reactor (SOMBRERO) heated by nuclear fusion blankets	Demir19
1527000	Exergy analysis of a high-temperature gas-cooled reactor (HTGR) coupled with SMR with a modified Brayton cycle or modified steam cycle	Kim et al.20
1492286	SMR-carbon capture	Sequential combustion process for SMR plants with CO2 capture integrated with electricity generation using a combined cycle gas turbine	Herraiz et al.21
720000	DR-SMR	Effective control structure of dry reforming and SMR under disturbance and setpoint change	Luyben22
589248	SE-CLC-SMR	Thermodynamic comparison of conventional SMR, sorption-enhanced SMR (SE-SMR), and SE-SMR with chemical looping combustion (SE-CLC-SMR)	Antzara et al.23
468000	SE-SMR	Techno-economic analysis and sensitivity analysis for six SE-SMR process cases	Yan et al.24
252679	Conventional SMR	Development of a numerical model to calculate temperature profiles for outer and inner tube walls, furnace gases, and process gases of top-fired and co-current reformers	Latham25
245749	DR-SMR	Comparison of the capital cost, environmental impact, and global warming potential of the SMR + CO2 separation membrane and DR-SMR	Gangadharan et al.26
240000	Conventional SMR	Development of a mathematical model of a top-fired reformer for online monitoring of tube wall temperature	Latham et al.27
173516	SMR-carbon capture	Economic analysis of the optimal configuration of CO2 capture in SMR	Meerman et al.28
159840	SMR with heat source from nuclear energy	Design and economic potential evaluation of hydrogen production using a sodium-cooled fast reactor as a heat source	Chikazawa et al.29
143571	Membrane reformer	Analysis of the membrane reforming process to elucidate the effect of various process parameters on reactor performance	Aasberg-Petersen et al.30
133929	Comparison of membrane reactors and conventional industrial reactors by calculating two sustainability metrics (mass and energy intensities)	Bernardo et al.31
91200	Conventional SMR	Finding optimal operational conditions using multi-objective optimization with a non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm	Rajesh et al.32
63469	Software development considering kinetic and thermodynamic models and catalyst types for reformer furnace simulation	Zamaniyan et al.33
16953	CLC-SMR	Life cycle greenhouse gas assessment of conventional SMR and CLC-SMR	Wang et al.34
14992	Analysis and comparison of exergy efficiency and economics of conventional SMR and CLC-SMR	Fan et al.35
9000	SMR with heat source from nuclear energy	Development of the P2A code system to ensure the safety of the SMR process against fire and explosion accidents	Inaba et al.36
8500	OEC-SMR	Feasibility study and exergy analysis of oxygen-enriched combustion (OEC) to improve the performance of SMR	Lambert et al.37
7071	SMR with heat source from nuclear energy	1/30 scale mock-up test performance evaluation of an HTGR with nuclear energy as a heat source	Ohashi et al.38
7071	1/30 scale mock-up performance test under fluctuations in the feed flow rate	Inaba et al.39
5357	Development of a pseudo-homogeneous one-dimensional steam reformer model and evaluation of the effect of process parameters on methane conversion and hydrogen yield	Yin et al.40
4286	Membrane reformer	Development of reformer and membrane modules and integration of gas turbines to improve overall thermal efficiency	De Falco et al.41
3600	SMR-trigeneration	Feasibility analysis of SMR integrated with trigeneration using a discounted cash flow approach	Bruno et al.42
1318	Conventional SMR	Development of a heterogeneous model of SMR considering catalyst deactivation and optimal control to increase hydrogen production	Taji et al.43

 	Fig. 7  Different types of steam methane reforming reactors for small-scale distributed hydrogen production ordered by their hydrogen production capacity; different colors represent different types of steam reforming reactors, and the diagonal bars indicate the combination of steam reforming and external processes for specific purposes.	 

284	Heat-exchanger-type reformer	Determination of the length and diameter of a reformer using solar energy from a 2D mathematical model	De Falco and Piemonte44
214	Membrane reformer	Development of a staged-separation membrane reformer to reduce the area and thickness of Pd-based membranes	Li et al.45
171	Study on the effect of residence time and wall temperature on the performance of a Pd-based membrane reformer	De Falco46
86	Development of a Pd-based membrane reformer for improved energy efficiency and long-term durability and reliability	Shirasaki et al.47
86	Development of a more compact and cheaper Pd-based membrane on the catalyst (MOC) and comparison of reforming performance under various reaction conditions	Kume et al.48
64	Cylindrical reformer	Development of a 3D CFD model of a compact steam reforming reactor based on experimental data measured in a pilot-scale charging station	Han et al.49
64	Development of a 3D CFD model of an SMR reactor and integration with an overall H2 process to simultaneously evaluate H2 productivity and process thermal efficiency	Han et al.50
60	Membrane reformer	Development of a pseudo-2D non-isothermal model to evaluate different types of membrane reformers (tube-in-tube or sandwich-type, granular or structured catalyst)	Shigarov et al.51
58	Cylindrical reformer	Finding optimal process parameters to minimize the size of process subunits for on-site hydrogen production	Lee et al.52
43	Membrane reformer	Testing of a two-step membrane reformer module using a SiC foam catalyst under various operating conditions	De Falco et al.53
15	Cylindrical reformer	Design and validation of an SMR-based hydrogen production process using a Fischer–Tropsch diesel	Hulteberg et al.54
11	Plate-type reformer	Performance evaluation of a plate-type steam reformer for application in fuel cells and hydrogen stations	Oh et al.55
11	Microstructured reformer	Design and operation of a microstructured SMR for standalone operation in small facilities	Haynes and Johnston56
11	Microchannel system configuration and evaluation using techniques proven in Heatric printed-circuit heat exchangers (PCHE)	Seris et al.57
11	Cylindrical reformer	Demonstration of temperature distribution and exhaust gas composition according to various operating conditions and burner types	Jo et al.58
11	Parametric study on combustion fuel quantity via numerical simulations and experiments	Jo et al.59
6	Development of a computational fluid dynamics model of a compact SMR reformer and experimental validation	Ngo et al.60
3	SE-SMR	Simulation of thermal-swing sorption-enhanced SMR (SE-SMR) integrated with thermal regeneration using a continuous stirred-tank reactor (CSTR)-in-series model	Lee et al.61
2	Membrane reformer	Testing of membrane reactors comprising a Pd–Ag foil tube and an Inconel-supported Pd–Ag film	Simakov and Sheintuch62
2	Heat-exchanger-type reformer	Development of a planar heat-exchanger-type steam reformer for solid-oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) and determination of the catalytic combustor structure and inlet conditions	Lee et al.63
2	Development of a heat-exchanger-type compact reformer for on-site hydrogen supply and evaluation of the effect of reactor temperature on methane conversion	Yang et al.64
0.3	Membrane reformer	Optimized bench-scale Pd-based membrane reactor for durability and high methane conversion	Sarić et al.65
0.3	Microstructured reformer	Experimental performance evaluation of microstructured reformers for hydrogen generation in fuel cells under static and dynamic load conditions	Cremers et al.66
0.2	Membrane reformer	Modeling and simulation of a fluidized bed membrane reactor using Aspen Plus	Ye et al.67
0.2	Performance evaluation of a Pd-based fluidized bed membrane reactor at various feed flow rates, temperatures, and pressures	Roses et al.68
0.2	Design of a multichannel membrane reactor for small-scale hydrogen production and comparison of SMR and methane catalytic combustion (MCC) gas channels	Vigneault and Grace69
0.1	Modeling of a fluidized bed membrane reactor considering differences in diffusivities	Adris et al.70
0.1	Development and performance evaluation of a multi-membrane reformer composed of a coin-shaped Ni catalyst and a Pd-based membrane	Hwang et al.71
0.1	Microstructured membrane reformer	Functional testing and thermodynamic analysis of a planar modular Pd-based membrane reactor named μ-EnH2ancer	Boeltken et al.72
0.05	SE-SMR	Numerical study of SMR combined with simultaneous CO2 removal using CaO carbonization	Lee et al.73
0.03	Microstructured reformer	Development of a microchannel reformer with a combustion reaction and evaluation of reactor performance under various operating conditions	Hwang et al.74
0.01	Membrane reformer	Modeling of a Pd/Ag-based membrane reactor and calculation of optimal values for design variables	Chen et al.75
0.003	Heat-exchanger-type	Development of a heat exchanger reformer for residential power generation using a proton-exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) and performance evaluation according to the inlet process gas flow rate, process gas pressure, flue gas flow rate, etc.	Patel and Sunol76

 	Fig. 8  Balancing furnace temperature, adapted from Kumar et al.79	 

 	Fig. 9  Study on temperature uniformity; (a) single tube,80 (b) egg-crate steam methane reforming model,79 (c) grouped full-scale furnace,83 (d) two-dimensional axisymmetric reforming tube,85 and (e) furnace balancing in the 0th (left) and 6th (right) iterations,86 reproduced with permission from American Chemical Society and Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Various catalyst types developed to enhance reaction performance; (a) six different catalyst particle shapes,88 (b) dependence of the methane conversion and methane conversion per pressure drop on the surface area of the catalyst shape,89 and (c) experimental images of four different catalyst shapes,91 reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Royal Society of Chemistry, and Elsevier.	 
CaO(s) + CO2(g) → CaCO3(s), exothermic	(5)

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of a sorption-enhanced steam methane reforming process, adapted from Johnsen et al.93	 
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of chemical looping combustion, adapted from Fan et al.35	 

 	Fig. 13  Reactor and various catalyst packing systems for compact steam methane reforming; (a) sleeve-type compact reformer,112 (b) macropatterned catalytic layer,113 (c) honeycomb-type catalyst,114 and (d) foam catalyst,115 reproduced with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Membrane reformer for compact hydrogen production, adapted from Shirasaki et al.47	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
