High performance self-heated membrane distillation system for energy efficient desalination process   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA11724B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA11724B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7868-7880High performance self-heated membrane distillation system for energy efficient desalination process†

        
          
            Subrahmanya 
            T. M.
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Po Ting 
            Lin
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Hsuan 
            Chiao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Januar 
            Widakdo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cheng-Hsiu 
            Chuang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shaneza Fatma 
            Rahmadhanty
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shiro 
            Yoshikawa
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Wei-Song 
            Hung
          
        
      *a
aAdvanced Membrane Materials Research Centre, Graduate Institute of Applied Science and Technology, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, 10607, Taiwan. E-mail: wshung@mail.ntust.edu.tw
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, 10607, Taiwan. E-mail: potinglin@mail.ntust.edu.tw
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, 72701 Arkansas, USA
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
Received 
      2nd December 2020
    , Accepted 17th February 2021First published on 18th February 2021AbstractThe membrane distillation (MD)-based desalination process is thought to be a promising strategy to address global challenges, such as safe water-energy crisis and environmental pollution. Here, we demonstrate a novel self-heated vacuum (MD) system employing a graphene–PVDF flat sheet membrane Joule heater that enables the combination of the interfacial heating of a feed stream and conventional VMD for energy efficient sea water desalination. In this system, the direct delivery of low voltage DC power to a superhydrophobic graphene–PVDF flat sheet membrane Joule heater was placed in a filtration module, and effectively heats the feed stream directly at the feed/membrane interface. Thus, it eliminates the preheating of feed solution and temperature polarization (TP), along with enhanced permeate flux, which in turn significantly reduces the energy requirement for the desalination process. The graphene–PVDF flat sheet membrane Joule heater was obtained via simple phase inversion technique, and exhibited excellent Joule heating performance, superhydrophobicity, and graphene laminar stacking-induced high porosity. While treating a saline feed without preheating, and with optimum membrane and experimental variables, our self-heated MD system achieved a permeate flux of 23.44 L m−2 h−1 and salt rejection of 99.41%, with the lowest specific heating energy (Qsh) consumption of 0.109 kW h L−1 and the highest gain output ratio (GOR) of 5.72, respectively. This is the greatest performance achieved so far, compared to the performance of solar heating (photothermal) and induction heating-based self-heated MD systems reported previously. The optimum membrane surface temperature (T* = 38 °C) and effective membrane area (71.1%) were assessed using FVM simulation, and were validated by the corresponding experimental results. This energy efficient self-heated vacuum MD system is suitable for high purity water production and effective sea water desalination. Furthermore, by harvesting the electrical energy required for membrane Joule heating from renewable energy (solar energy) and using feed streams with low grade waste heat, we could further increase the economic viability and application potential of the system. The self-heated vacuum MD system demonstrated here constitutes an effective approach for a sustainable, decentralized water desalination technology.
Introduction
In view of the advantage of the utilization of waste heat energy, efficient rejection of non-volatile compounds, and anticipation of providing safe water with lowest energy consumption, membrane distillation (MD) is an emerging technology for desalination.1–3 The MD process offers the advantage of both membrane separation and thermal distillation. In MD systems, the hot feed and cold permeate sides are separated by a hydrophobic membrane, which permits only vapour to pass through from the feed side to the permeate side, due to the temperature gradient-induced vapour pressure difference across the membrane.4,5 The conventional MD systems differ in the technology used at the permeate side to maintain the driving force.6 In vacuum membrane distillation (VMD), vacuum pressure that is lower than the saturation pressure of the vapour molecules will be applied at the permeate side using a vacuum pump.7 In VMD mode, vapour molecules transported through the membrane will be condensed outside the module using a cold trap containing liquid nitrogen. In all modes of MD, the heat energy must be utilized efficiently to drive water evaporation, so that there will be a continuous availability of vapour at the feed/membrane interface to maintain the driving force.5
Recently, some novel MD systems have been proposed for the direct heating of the feed stream on the membrane surface within the MD module by employing a photothermal (solar irradiation heated) membrane, Joule heating membrane or an induction heating membrane to overcome the temperature polarization (TP), and also to enhance the MD performance in terms of the permeate flux and energy efficiency.8,9 In the literature, these membranes are known as self-heating membranes, and the MD system employing such self-heating membranes is known as a self-heated MD system. Unlike conventional MD systems that utilize fossil-fuel energy for feed preheating (the feed inlet temperature varies between 60–70 °C), the self-heated MD systems utilize solar heating (photothermal), induction heating or Joule heating (ohmic heating) to mitigate the energy consumption by directly heating the feed (feed inlet temperature varies between 20–30 °C) on the membrane's surface. Generally, in the case of solar (photothermal) self-heated MD systems, the feed is heated directly on the membrane's surface within the module by using solar absorption spacers, or plasmonic (noble metal nanoparticles, carbon-based nanomaterials or polydopamine) nanoparticles10–20-coated membranes. Such nanomaterials absorb light energy and generate heat on the membrane's surface, and thus locally heat the feed stream at the feed/membrane interface for water vaporization. While the solar self-heated MD systems are capable of reducing energy consumption and temperature polarization, these systems suffer from the relatively low permeate flux due to the lower intensity of solar heat (≈1 kW m−2).11 Also, not all of the coated photothermal material can be exposed to light, and the excess loading of the photothermal material results in a membrane pore blockage, leading to lower distillate flux.21 Moreover, the solar self-heated MD systems are productive only during the availability of sunlight.22 For the rest of the time, alternative light sources (such as UV or IR lights) and membranes coated with materials of high photothermal conversion ability have to be used for the long term use of solar self-heated MD systems with enhanced productivity.
In the case of induction-heated self-heating MD systems, the electrically and thermally conducting layer loaded with magnetic nanoparticles is fabricated onto a hydrophobic membrane, and the membrane is heated by electromagnetic induction via heat generated in the membrane by eddy currents for direct feed heating at the feed/membrane interface within the module. For example, an induction-heated MD system was introduced by Anvari et al.,23 and used the iron oxide-loaded carbon nanotubes coated on a flat sheet PTFE membrane, which resulted in almost six times higher performance than conventional MD systems, resulting in specific heating energy (Qsh), permeate flux, and gain output ratio (GOR) values of 0.2 kW h L−1, 4 L m−2 h−1 and 3.45, respectively. Whereas in the Joule-heated self-heating MD systems, when an electric current is passed through a conducting membrane with limited conductivity, the membrane gets heated due to the resistance offered by the membrane against the flow of electrons, resulting in the transduction of the electron's kinetic energy into Joule heat.12,24 This enables the membrane to localize the thermal energy required for water evaporation at the feed/membrane interface. Thus, it effectively suppresses the temperature polarization and the energy requirement. The first membrane Joule heating element for membrane distillation was developed by Dudchenko et al.,12 and they fabricated the hydrophilic/hydrophobic dual layer conducting membrane by spray coating the solution containing carbon nanotubes, polyvinyl alcohol and the crosslinking agent onto a PTFE membrane for direct contact MD application. When an electric current is passed, the hydrophilic CNTs layer heats up and vaporizes the surrounding water and the hydrophobic layer allows only vapour to pass through. Therefore, while treating the feed (NaCl, 100 g L−1), the Joule heating effect induced by an electric power of 50 W at a feed flow rate of 6.6 mm s−1 resulted in permeate flux, specific heating energy (Qsh) and gain output ratio (GOR) values of 3.5 L m−2 h−1, 1.25 ± 0.02 kW h L−1 and 0.55, respectively. Some studies used the Joule heating approach to enhance the performance of the MD systems. However, those systems cannot be considered under self-heated MD systems since the feed solutions were preheated using external feed heaters before applying them for the membrane distillation process.25 However, the lower distillate flux of solar (photothermal) self-heating MD systems and the requirement of high input energy and advanced membrane materials for Joule-heated and induction-heated MD systems have made the commercialization of self-heated MD systems remain a great challenge. Hence, there is an urgent need for high performance self-heated MD systems.
Here, we present a novel self-heated VMD system employing a graphene–PVDF flat sheet membrane Joule heater that enables the advantage of the combination of an interfacial Joule heating of the feed stream and conventional VMD for energy efficient sea water desalination. In this system, we directly deliver low voltage DC power to the membrane, and demonstrate that the membrane can efficiently generate Joule heat for the interfacial evaporation of the feed stream within the module, rather than preheating the entire feed, so as to overcome the temperature polarization and energy inefficiency in the MD-based seawater desalination process. Finally, based on the experimental results of the optimum membrane, we developed simulations to realize our best feed heating process within the module and determine the optimum temperature, effective heating area of the membrane surface, and validate with the corresponding experimental results.
Result and discussion
To ensure that the interfacial heating of the saline feed stream within the module on the surface of a highly porous superhydrophobic flat sheet membrane Joule heater can lead to an energy efficient desalination process, we first developed the high performance graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters loaded with different amounts of graphene via an immersion precipitation-based phase inversion technique. Then, we characterized the membranes in detail to confirm their Joule heating performance in air medium and their suitability for MD application via different physicochemical characterizations. We chose the best heating membrane Joule heaters to investigate the sea water desalination performance using a custom-designed module operating in VMD mode (Fig. 1, S1 and Movie S1† show different components of the module assembly) under different applied voltage and feed flow rates. Furthermore, we developed the FVM simulations, and determined the optimum membrane surface temperature and an effective heating area of the membrane to validate with the experimental results. The results obtained by the membrane Joule heating performance, characterizations, self-heated VMD desalination performance and simulations are discussed as follows.
 Fig. 1  Diagram showing the assembly of the self-heated VMD module with a graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heater, schematic representation of the interfacial heating of the feed stream in the self-heated VMD process, and different properties of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heater. 
Membrane characterization

Morphological characterization of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. 
The morphological features of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters were characterized by FESEM. From the surface images (Fig. 2a–e), it can be seen that compared to the pristine PVDF membrane (Fig. 2a), the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes (Fig. 2b–e) exhibited the characteristic of high surface porosity. In addition, the extent of the increase in the surface porosity appeared to be proportional to the graphene content of the membranes, with a pore size ranging from 0.1 μm to 0.5 μm. The increase in the surface porosity can be attributed to the decrease of the PVDF polymer phase, which serves as a matrix to host the graphene layers. No agglomerations were found on the membrane surfaces of all the chosen graphene concentrations, indicating the uniform dispersion of graphene in the PVDF matrix. Interestingly, the cross-sectional images (Fig. 2f–j) exhibited the pore morphology transformation upon incorporation of graphene. The cross-section of the pristine PVDF membrane (Fig. 2f) showed several finger-like projections extended along the thickness of the membrane. However, after the addition of graphene, the finger-like voids transformed into tortuous pores due to the laminar structures of graphene occupying the voids, and the degree of such pore morphology transformation was found to be proportional to the graphene content of the membrane. In addition, compared to the thickness of the pristine PVDF membrane (80 μm), the thickness of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes increased initially, and then decreased significantly from 118.5 μm to 96.2 μm with the increase of the graphene content. This can be attributed to the quick exchange of solvent and non-solvent at lower graphene content, resulting in finger-like voids and the random orientation of graphene stacks forming a thick foam-like matrix, and a slow exchange of the solvent and non-solvent at higher graphene content providing enough time for the horizontal orientation of graphene stacks, resulting in a thin laminar structured matrix. Fig. 2p shows the surface porosity (%) and bulk porosity (%) of the membranes. The surface porosity (%) was determined by analysing the surface FESEM images of the membranes by using ImageJ software,26 while the bulk porosity (%) of the membranes was evaluated by water absorbency method.27Fig. 2p confirms that the surface porosity (%) of the membranes gradually increases with the increase of the graphene concentration. In contrast, the bulk porosity initially increases and then decreases drastically with the increase of the graphene concentration. It can also be observed clearly from the cross-section FESEM images of the membranes. The decrease of the bulk porosity (%) of the membranes leads to the transformation from finger-like pores to tortuous pores, and the pores may have richer connectivity as the pore walls get opened by the graphene laminar stackings. The surface porosity (%) and the bulk porosity (%) values were provided in Table S1.† The effect of the graphene concentration on the surface roughness of the graphenex–PVDF1 membrane Joule heaters was further investigated by using digital microscopy (DM) surface images at a scan size of 300 μm × 300 μm (Fig. 2k–o). In these images, the brighter areas represent the highest points of the membrane surface and the dark blue regions present the grooves or pores on the membrane surface.
 Fig. 2  Morphological characterization of the flat sheet membrane Joule heaters; (a–e) FESEM surface images of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (f–j) FESEM cross sectional images of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (k–o) Digital microscopy (DM) surface images of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (p) Surface and bulk porosity of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (q) Surface roughness parameters (Sa, Sz, Sq) of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. 
The surface roughness values of the membrane Joule heaters were compared in terms of the areal roughness parameters, including the arithmetical mean height of the surface (Sa), root mean square height of the surface (Sq), and maximum height of the surface (Sz). As depicted in Fig. 2q, the overall increasing trend of the values of the surface roughness parameters (Sa from 1.8 μm to 3.3 μm, Sz from 8.4 μm to 19.5 μm, and Sq from 2.0 μm to 4.1 μm) of the graphenex–PVDF1 membrane Joule heaters compared to those of the pristine PVDF membrane could be due to the increased surface porosity with increasing graphene content, as evidenced by the surface FESEM images (Fig. 2a–e) of the membranes.


Physicochemical characterization of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. 
The higher graphene content in the graphenex–PVDF1 membrane Joule heaters endowed outstanding electrical and thermal properties to achieve high electrothermal efficiency. To evaluate the Joule heating performance, a graphenex–PVDF1 membrane sample with dimensions of 50 mm × 25 mm was powered by a low voltage DC power source, and the increase in the membrane temperature with respect to the applied voltage was measured by obtaining IR thermal images. The temperature of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes significantly increased with the increase of the applied voltage (Fig. 3d and S3†). For all of the chosen voltages, the graphene1–PVDF1 membrane exhibited almost no change in temperature. This is due to the lower electric power transduction into heat energy attributed to the extremely low current flowing through the membrane. The electric power consumed by each membrane under different voltages is provided in Table S2.† The graphene1.5–PVDF1 membrane showed a significant increase in the electrothermal performance, and the maximum temperature of 85 °C was recorded when the power was 2.5 W under 20 V. In contrast, the graphene2–PVDF1 membrane showed twice the efficiency of the graphene1.5–PVDF1 membrane with a temperature around 85 °C under power of 1.35 W at 10 V, and around 160 °C under power of 6.24 W at 20 V. The highest Joule heating efficiency was exhibited by the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane with a temperature of 210 °C when the power was 16.2 W under 20 V. The increase in the Joule heating efficiency of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes was found to be proportional to the power consumed by the membranes at a given applied voltage. This can be attributed to the increased current through the membrane, resulting in increased power consumption with an increase in the conductive material (graphene) content in the membrane. This was further evidenced by the conductivity versus resistance measurements of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes. Movie S2† shows the uniform Joule heating of the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane with the increase of the applied voltage from 0 V to 20 V.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the preparation of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (b) Digital image of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heater. (c) Digital photo of the experimental setup used to measure the Joule heating efficiency of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters in air medium. (d) Joule heating efficiency of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters in air medium. (e) Resistance and conductivity measurements of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (f) FT-IR spectra of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (g) X-ray diffraction analysis of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (h) Raman spectroscopy of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (i) Water contact angle (WCA) measurements of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. 

Fig. 3e presents the relationship between the resistance and conductivity of the membranes with respect to their graphene to PVDF wt% ratio. The conductivity of the pristine PVDF membrane was zero, indicating its insulator property. The graphene1–PVDF1 membrane and graphene1.5–PVDF1 membrane did not exhibit any considerable improvement in the electrical properties, showing poor conductivity values of 0.025 S cm−1 and 0.14884 S cm−1, respectively. An instantaneous enhancement in the conductivity was found for the graphene2–PVDF1 membrane and graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane, exhibiting the resistance values of 36.3 Ω and 14.03 Ω and conductivity values of 0.33 S cm−1 and 0.84 S cm−1, respectively. This increasing trend of conductivity was due to the increase in the graphene content. The graphene content can significantly affect the changes in the conductivity of the membranes due to its efficient electron transportation network of sp2 carbon.
FTIR spectroscopy and XRD have been found to be suitable characterization techniques to properly identify the α and β crystal phases of PVDF.28 Generally, at ambient temperature and pressure, pristine PVDF exists in its thermodynamically stable form in the α crystal phase, unless it is modified through chemical or physical processes. By FTIR spectroscopy, the α crystal phase PVDF can be clearly identified. In order to confirm that graphene induced the crystal phase transformation from the α phase to β phase in PVDF, the FTIR spectra (Fig. 3f) were recorded for both pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 membranes. The peaks at 763 cm−1, 876 cm−1 and 974 cm−1 correspond to the α phase PVDF, and the peaks at 841 cm−1 and 1275 cm−1 corresponded to the β phase PVDF. Whereas, in the case of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes, the peaks corresponding to the α phase at 796 cm−1, 793 cm−1, and 974 cm−1 almost disappeared, indicating that the α phase to β phase transformation was due to the interaction between graphene and PVDF.29 On the other hand, the clearly resolved peak of the β crystal phase of a PVDF was confirmed by XRD analysis. Fig. 3g depicts the XRD patterns of the pristine PVDF membrane and different graphenex–PVDF1 membranes recorded in the 2θ range of 10° to 30°. The XRD pattern of the pristine PVDF membrane exhibited peaks at 2θ = 18.02° and 2θ = 20.05° as a characteristic of the (020) and (110) lattice planes of the α-crystal phase PVDF.30,31 In the case of all of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes, the diffraction peak at 2θ = 20.08 is the characteristic of the (200)/(110) lattice plane assigned to the graphene-induced β phase crystal structure of PVDF, while the pronounced diffraction peak at 2θ = 26.63° corresponds to the (002) lattice plane of graphene present in the PVDF matrix of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes.32
In order to investigate the effect of the graphene content on the degree of graphene defect of the synthesized graphenex–PVDF1 membranes, Raman spectra were recorded (Fig. 3h). The D band peak at 1345 cm−1 was assigned to the out-of-plane vibrations, indicating the presence of the structural defects in graphene, while the G band peak at 1577 cm−1 was assigned to the in-plane vibrations of the sp2-bonded carbon atoms of graphene. The symmetric 2D band peak with reduced intensity at 2713 cm−1 can be attributed to the presence of the few-layer graphene. The degree of graphene defect in the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes was analysed by calculating the intensity of the D band relative to that of the G band (ID/IG). As the wt% ratio of graphene to PVDF increased in the membranes, the ID/IG ratio decreased drastically from 0.86 to 0.41, indicating a notable decrease in the graphene defect with an increase in the graphene content of the membrane. The ID/IG ratio of 0.41 for graphene2.5–PVDF1 was found to be almost equal to the ID/IG ratio of the pristine few-layer graphene, indicating that at higher graphene content, graphene itself acts as a lubricating agent and makes its layers slippery in the PVDF matrix, rather than inducing defects in the layers during the homogenization of the membrane casting solutions.28,33
The superhydrophobic nature is crucial for the MD membranes in order to overcome the membrane wetting caused by water penetration or vapour condensation inside the membrane pores.34,35 Membrane wetting is a major drawback that often affects the MD performance of a membrane by blocking the vapour transport through the pores.36 Therefore, the degree of hydrophobicity with respect to the graphene content of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes was evaluated by water contact angle (WCA) measurements. Fig. 3i and S5† present the WCA measurements of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 membranes. Before the WCA measurement, the water droplets were observed for a few minutes on the membrane's surface to attain their stable WCA. As expected, the pristine PVDF membrane confirmed its inherent hydrophobicity with WCA of 93.4°. While for the graphene1–PVDF1 membrane, the WCA increased to 107.3°. This could be attributed to the slight enhancement in the surface roughness as a result of the increased surface porosity compared to that of the pristine PVDF membrane. For the graphene1.5–PVDF1, graphene2–PVDF1 and graphene2.5–PVDF1 membranes, the hydrophobicity was advanced to superhydrophobicity with WCA values of 143.6°, 148° and 152°, respectively. This drastic advancement in the surface hydrophobicity revealed the strong relationship between the surface roughness and wettability. The drastic increase in the hydrophobicity of the membranes with an increase in the graphene content can be attributed to the hydrophobicity of graphene, as well as the significant increase in the surface roughness due to the increased surface porosity at higher graphene contents (as revealed by SEM surface images, Fig. 2a–e), which endow the hierarchical microstructured rough surface with trapped air within the cavities (air pockets) of the surface pores, while hindering the contact between the water droplet and the membrane surface.37 Movie S3† shows the dewetting nature of the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane for the droplet, as well as for the falling thin jet of water. In addition, we show the WCA stability over time of the membranes in Fig. S6.† As graphene was added to PVDF, the WCA test hydrophobicity of the membranes remains almost unchanged for a long time.


Self-heated VMD desalination performance of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. 
In the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heater-enabled self-heated VMD desalination system, the feed stream can be locally heated within the module at the feed/membrane interface to overcome the temperature polarization and loss of heat energy to the bulk feed. Direct feed heating can be accomplished by applying the voltage directly to the membrane using an external DC power source. To investigate the desalination performance, we used a custom-made VMD cell (Fig. 4a and S1†) and based on the Joule heating ability, we chose graphene2.5–PVDF1, graphene2–PVDF1 and graphene1.5–PVDF1 membranes to evaluate the permeate flux and salt rejection under different applied voltages and feed flow rates. The experimental set up and operating variables are discussed in detail under the Experimental section. The self-heated VMD performance of each of these membranes was evaluated under 3 different applied voltages, such as 20 V, 15 V and 10 V, and under each applied voltage, the membrane surface temperature (MST °C), bulk feed temperature (BT °C) and the effect of the feed cross flow rates of 1 mL min−1, 1.5 mL min−1, 2 mL min−1 and 2.5 mL min−1 on the transmembrane flux and salt rejection were evaluated.
 Fig. 4  (a) Digital photo of the self-heated VMD module assembly with other components. The VMD performance of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes; (b) permeate flux. (c) Membrane surface temperature (MST °C). (d) Salt rejection (%). (e) Temperature polarization factor (TPF%). (f) Delta temperature (ΔT °C). (g) Schematic representation of the graphenex–PVDF1 membrane Joule heater-enabled direct feed heating in the self-heated VMD process. (h) Specific heating energy consumption (Qsh). (i) Gain output ratio (GOR). 
The applied voltage dominated the permeate flux performance of the membranes. With the increase of the applied voltage from 10 V to 20 V, the permeate flux rapidly increased (Fig. 4b and Table S2†). However, at a given applied voltage, the increase in the feed cross flow rate showed a decreasing effect on the permeate flux. This could be attributed to a slight increase in the loss of heat energy to the out-flowing feed with the increase of the flow rate. This was confirmed by measuring MST °C and BT °C (Fig. 4c and Table S2†) for all cases of the experimental variables. In the case of the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane at 20 V, with an increase of the cross flow rate from 1 mL min−1 to 2.5 mL min−1, the MST °C decreased from 65 °C to 44 °C, resulting in a decrease of the permeate flux from 28.72 L m−2 h−1 to 26.36 L m−2 h−1. For the same membrane under the same variation of feed cross flow rate, by decreasing the voltage from 20 V to 15 V, it showed a decreasing effect on MST °C from 64 °C to 41.5 °C, resulting in the flux decline from 27.12 L m−2 h−1 to 17.32 L m−2 h−1. By further reducing the voltage to 10 V, the membrane exhibited a decrease of MST °C from 56 °C to 34.5 °C, with a decrease of the permeate flux from 23.44 L m−2 h−1 to 7.97 L m−2 h−1.
The Joule heating ability of the graphene2–PVDF1 membrane was found to be weaker than that of the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane (Fig. 2d). As a result, at a given applied voltage, the graphene2–PVDF1 membrane exhibited lower performance compared to the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane. With the increase of the feed cross flow rate from 1 mL min−1 to 2.5 mL min−1 under 20 V, the graphene2–PVDF1 membrane exhibited a decrease in MST °C from 62 °C to 40.5 °C, resulting in a flux decline from 28.14 L m−2 h−1 to 13.92 L m−2 h−1. Similarly, under 15 V, MST °C decreased from 53 °C to 36 °C, resulting in a flux decline from 21.58 L m−2 h−1 to 12.16 L m−2 h−1. Upon further reducing the voltage to 10 V, the MST °C decreased to 36 °C under the lowest flow rate of 1 mL min−1, resulting in a flux of 12.5 L m−2 h−1. A further increase in the flow rates brought MST °C to room temperature (21 ± 1 °C), resulting in a lack of heat energy at the membrane surface to drive the water evaporation. Among the three membranes, the graphene1.5–PVDF1 membrane had the lowest Joule heating ability (Fig. 2d). Therefore, the lowest VMD performance was observed for this membrane. The feed cross flow rate dominated the MST even when the applied voltage was 20 V. Under 20 V, when the feed cross flow rate was increased from 1 mL min−1 to 2 mL min−1, MST °C decreased from 49 °C to 34 °C. As a result, the flux decreased from 16.8 L m−2 h−1 to 5.1 L m−2 h−1. When the feed cross flow rate increased to 2.5 mL min−1, the MST °C dropped to 21 ± 1 °C, without generating pure water flux. The performance of the graphene1.5–PVDF1 membrane reduced highly under 15 V. The flux decreased from 9 L m−2 h−1 to 4.14 L m−2 h−1 when the MST °C decreased from 43 °C to 35.5 °C with increasing the feed cross flow rate from 1 mL min−1 to 1.5 mL min−1. Upon further reducing the voltage to 10 V at the flow rate of 1 mL min−1, the lowest permeate flux of 4 L m−2 h−1 was obtained and no flux was generated for the feed cross flow rate above 1 mL min−1 due to the decrease in MST °C to room temperature (21 ± 1 °C). As for the salt removal concerned, there was no significant impact of experimental variables on the salt rejection. For all cases of experimental variables, the salt rejection was >99% (Fig. 4d and Table S3†).
The temperature polarization (TP) phenomenon plays a crucial role in determining the energy efficiency of MD-based desalination processes in terms of both pure water flux and energy consumption. Generally, in the case of conventional MD processes, the temperature at the membrane/feed interface will be lower than the bulk feed temperature due to the heat energy loss at the feed/membrane interface caused by conduction and convection, and also through the outflowing bulk feed. As a result, in the conventional VMD process, the TPF (%) value will be lower than 100% (mf < bf, TPF < 1), indicating the negative impact on the flux performance. In this work, the heating of the feed stream within the module at the membrane surface using the Joule heating effect of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes resulted in less heat energy loss to the bulk feed (Fig. 4g). In other words, MST °C became greater than the bulk feed temperature (mf > bf, TPF > 1). In addition, the PDMS-treated PET nonwoven support layer was used to minimize the heat loss through conduction. Thus, the pure water flux increased and TP was suppressed very effectively.
For the self-heated VMD desalination experiments, in all cases of the applied voltage and feed flow rate, the TPF (%) value of >100% was obtained (Fig. 4e and Table S3†). When the feed cross flow rate increased from 1 mL min−1 to 2 mL min−1, a decrease in the TPF (%) values was observed, which could be due to a slight increase in the loss of heat energy to the bulk feed at higher flow rates, resulting in the decrease of the delta temperature (ΔT °C or DT °C) (Fig. 4f and Table S3†). Whereas, in the case of the flow rate at 2.5 mL min−1, the TPF (%) increased rather than decreased. This can be attributed to the poor transfer of heat to the bulk feed at higher flow rates due to a decrease in the water residence time on the membrane's surface, owing to the short path length (4 cm) of the module. The suppression of TP was extremely increased upon decreasing the graphene content of the membranes, with TPF (%) ranging from 138.9% to 170%. This can be attributed to the lower rate of Joule heating and lower rate of heat dissipation from the membrane surface to the bulk feed at lower graphene content, and the higher rate of electrothermal heating and higher rate of heat energy dissipation from the membrane surface to the bulk feed at higher graphene content, owing to the higher electrical and thermal conductivity of graphene.
Finally, to assess the applicability of the self-heated VMD desalination system, the performance of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes was evaluated in terms of both specific heating energy (Qsh) and gain output ratio (GOR). Qsh (kW h L−1) indicates the ratio between the energy delivered for feed heating to the rate of permeate flux, while GOR indicates the ratio between the energy spent for water evaporation and the total input thermal energy to the system. Therefore, the best membrane Joule heater is the one that results in the highest permeate flux with lowest Qsh and highest GOR. In this self-heated VMD system, all cases of the experiment were shown to have better efficiency in terms of Qsh and GOR (Fig. 4h, i and Table S3†). For all three membranes (graphene2.5–PVDF1, graphene2–PVDF1, and graphene1.5–PVDF1), the value of Qsh increased and GOR decreased with an increase in the flow rate from 1 mL min−1 to 2.5 mL min−1 in the case of all ranges of the applied voltage. Interestingly, the lowest Qsh value of 0.109 kW h L−1 and the highest GOR value of 5.72 were obtained for the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane, when the permeate flux and MST °C were 23.44 L m−2 h−1 and 56 °C, respectively, under a working voltage, current and feed cross flow rate of 10 V, 0.2 A and 1 mL min−1, respectively.
At higher graphene content, the increased current through the membrane Joule heater resulted in the increased transduction of electrical energy into thermal energy, and the higher surface roughness increased the membrane/feed contact area for heating. The increased thermal conductivity helped the membrane to effectively and uniformly dissipate heat energy to the feed stream, resulting in the increased rate of water evaporation at the feed/membrane interface. In addition, the lower feed flow rate increased the water residence time at the membrane surface, providing more time for water evaporation. Therefore, at higher graphene content of the membrane, all of these factors synergistically influenced the sustainable utilization of the input energy for water flux production. Thus, this resulted in lower Qsh and higher GOR values, along with higher permeate flux. Whereas, at lower graphene content, the weaker electrothermal heating of the membrane resulted in lower MST. As a result, the lack of heat energy at the membrane surface suppressed the water evaporation rate. Besides, the higher feed flow rate reduced the water residence time at the membrane surface, and took a significant amount of heat energy out of the cell through the outflowing feed, suppressing the water evaporation at the feed/membrane interface. Therefore, the Qsh and GOR values were not evaluated for some cases of the experimental conditions.
We also compared the energy efficiency of this system with that of the other self-heated MD systems in terms of the Qsh and GOR (Fig. 5 and Table S4†). Some of these Qsh and GOR values are reported in the literature. For some studies, the Qsh and GOR values were calculated using eqn (4) and (5) by obtaining the permeate flux (J) and input energy (Qin) data from the literature. The majority of the self-heated MD systems were operated by using solar irradiation energy (ranging from 0.7 kW m−2 to 1.4 kW m−2) heated photothermal membranes. These photothermal membranes were fabricated by using different materials such as carbon-based materials, noble metal nanoparticles, and poly dopamine (PDA). These photothermal membranes exhibited Qsh values ranging from 0.2 kW h L−1 to 2.12 kW h L−1, and GOR values from 0.3 to 2.66. The Qsh value of 1.12 kW h L−1 and GOR value of 0.48 were reported for the Joule-heated CNTs–PVA membrane, and the Qsh value of 0.2 kW h L−1 and GOR value of 3.49 were reported for the induction-heated Fe–CNTs membrane. With these values, the Fe–CNTs membrane reported better energy efficiency compared to the energy efficiency of photothermal membranes used in solar MD systems. However, a comparison of the Qsh and GOR values of all of these self-heated MD membranes with the lowest Qsh value of 0.109 and the highest GOR value of 5.72 (obtained from the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane for the case of the applied voltage of 10 V and feed flow rate of 1 mL min−1) revealed that our self-heated VMD system can be considered to be more energy-efficient than all other previously reported self-heated MD systems.
 Fig. 5  Comparison of specific heating energy (Qsh) values (blue squares) and gain output ratio (GOR) values (red circles) of some of the published self-heated MD systems with the lowest specific heating energy (Qsh) and gain output ratio (GOR) values obtained in this study (the numbers inside [] indicate references). 

Simulation
Simulations of the temperature distribution within the self-heated VMD cell, developed using a finite volume method (FVM), were found to be in agreement with the experimental results. This indicated that the direct heating of the feed stream using the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane (optimum membrane) resulted in a higher MST °C to produce higher pure water flux and lower out flowing bulk feed temperatures (Fig. 6a–d). The results obtained from the self-heated VMD experiment and FVM simulations confirm that a graphene–PVDF membrane Joule heater enables the direct heating of the saline feed stream at the feed/membrane interface to achieve high permeate flux by maintaining the heat energy necessary for driving the water evaporation at the membrane surface. Furthermore, from the simulation results of the temperature profile at the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane surface under different cases of experimental conditions (Fig. 6e–h), the optimum membrane surface temperature (T*) was determined to be 38 °C. Therefore, under the chosen case of the experimental variables, the area of the membrane that had a temperature greater than or equal to 38 °C (effective heating area) resulted in the effective permeate flux formation (Fig. 6e–j and Table S4†). The case that had the maximum percentage of effective heating area with minimum out flowing feed temperature was found to be 10 V + 1 mL min−1 (Fig. 6e), indicating the effective heating of the feed stream at the membrane surface with the lowest heat energy loss through the bulk feed. Thus, the optimum simulated conditions agreed with the experimental results, reporting the lowest specific heating energy of 0.109 kW h L−1 and gain output ratio (GOR) of 5.72 (Fig. 4h and i) for the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane when the MST and BT values were 56 °C and 38.5 °C, respectively, under the case of 10 V + 1 mL min−1.
 Fig. 6  FVM simulation results of the feed temperature distribution within the self-heated VMD module for the direct heating of the feed stream by the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane under different voltages and feed cross flow rates of (a) case 1: 10 V + 1 mL min−1. (b) Case 2: 10 V + 2.5 mL min−1. (c) Case 3: 20 V + 1 mL min−1. (d) Case 4: 20 V + 2.5 mL min. (e–h) FVM simulation results showing the temperature distribution at the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane surface for the (e) case 1: 10 V + 1 mL min−1. (f) Case 2: 10 V + 2.5 mL min−1. (g) Case 3: 20 V + 1 mL min−1. (h) Case 4: 20 V + 2.5 mL min−1. (i) Effective heating area versus different values of T*. (j) Difference between the effective heating area and flux versus different values of T° for the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane. 
Conclusions
In this work, we demonstrated a novel self-heated VMD system employing a graphene–PVDF flat sheet membrane Joule heater that enables the advantage of the combination of the interfacial heating of the feed stream and conventional VMD for the energy efficient sea water desalination. While performing the self-heated VMD desalination, under different working voltage and feed flow rates, this system with an optimum membrane Joule heater (i.e., graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane) resulted in an extreme suppression of the temperature polarization with a significant enhancement in the energy efficiency with the lowest specific heating energy (Qsh) of 0.109 kW h L−1, highest gain output ratio (GOR) of 5.72, and permeate flux and salt rejection values of 23.44 L m−2 h−1 and 99.41%, respectively, under an optimum experimental condition of applied voltage at 10 V and feed flow rate of 1 mL min−1. A comparison of the lowest Qsh and the highest GOR values of this system with those of the previously published self-heated MD systems highlighted that this system is more energy efficient. In addition, the optimum membrane surface temperature (T* = 38 °C) and effective heating area of the membrane (71.1%) were determined using the FVM simulation, and were validated with the corresponding experimental results. By harvesting the electrical energy required for membrane Joule heating from the solar energy and by using feed streams with low grade waste heat, we could further increase the economic viability and application potential of the system. Finally, we believe that the self-heated VMD system demonstrated here constitutes a promising approach for a sustainable, decentralized water desalination technology.
Experimental
Materials
Kynar® 4000 HD polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) powder was procured from Arkema Co., Ltd. The N002-PDR few-layer graphene powder was purchased from Angstrom Materials (OH, USA). N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) was procured from Sigma-Aldrich. PET nonwoven fabric (model: AS092, thickness = 88 μm) was purchased from Asahi Kasei Corporation. PDMS and the curing agent (trade name-Sylgard 184A) were purchased from Sil-More Industrial, Ltd. All chemicals were used as received without further purification throughout the experiment.
Fabrication of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters
The graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters were fabricated via phase inversion technique (non-solvent induced phase separation).38 The homogeneous solutions of the graphenex–PVDF1 mixtures (where ‘x’ denotes different wt% values of graphene, such as 10%, 15%, 20% and 25% relative to the solvent NMP, and 1 denotes the 10 wt% of PVDF relative to the solvent NMP), with graphene to PVDF wt% ratios of 1:1, 1.5:1, 2:1 and 2.5:1 in solvent NMP (90 g), were prepared using a homogenizer (125 Ultra Turrax), stirring at 6000 rpm for 2 hours, followed by ultra-sonication for 1 hour to remove trapped air bubbles. As-obtained graphenex–PVDF1 homogeneous solutions were then cast on a PDMS-treated nonwoven PET fabric (Fig. S2a†) using a stainless steel casting knife, and transferred into a coagulation bath (a tray containing distilled water). The gap between the surface of the fabric and that of the casting knife was 0.3 mm. To prepare the neat PVDF membrane, a 10 wt% PVDF solution was cast onto a PDMS-treated nonwoven PET fabric and transferred into a coagulation bath. The resultant membranes were finally transferred into a fresh distilled water bath, and kept in it for 24 hours for the complete removal of the solvent NMP. All membranes were prepared under the ambient condition of humidity at 66% and room temperature (20 °C).
Membrane characterization
The surface and cross-sectional morphologies of graphenex–PVDF1 membrane Joule heaters were studied by obtaining SEM images using the high-resolution field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) Model JEOL JSM-6500F from Hitachi Co., Japan. The surface roughness images of the membranes were obtained using a digital microscope (Keyence VHX-7000, USA). The Joule heating efficiency of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes with respect to the working voltage was studied by obtaining thermal images using an IR thermal camera (TI450, Fluke 60 Hz). The conductivity of the membranes was measured using a four-point conductivity probe (Veeco). The hydrophobicity of the membranes was examined by water contact angle (WCA) measurements (Model PV-DP, Kyowa Interface Science, Japan). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected by using Bruker D2 PHASER, Germany, with a reference Cu Kα1 radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å). The attenuated total reflection Fourier-transform infrared spectra (ATR-FTIR) were recorded by using ATR-FTIR, PerkinElmer, USA. The Raman spectra were measured by using a JASCO NRS-5100 series spectrometer with 533 nm laser with a power of 50 mW. The membrane surface temperature (MST) during the desalination process was recorded by using a digital thermometer (K-type with 0.1 °C resolution) with a flat leaf temperature probe. The liquid entry pressure (LEP) was calculated by using the Cantor–Laplace equation,39 and surface porosity (%) was obtained by analysing the surface FESEM images using ImageJ software, and the bulk porosity (%) of membranes was evaluated by water absorbency technique.
Experimental set up
The self-heated VMD experiments were performed using a custom-made membrane module. The real picture of the VMD module and the whole experimental set up is provided in Fig. S1.† The dimensions of both feed and permeate side flow channels of the module were 40 mm × 20 mm × 1.5 mm, and the inlet and outlet diameters were 3 mm. The graphenex–PVDF1 membrane sample (effective membrane area = 778.54 mm2) was placed into the module in such a way that its conducting layer should face the feed side, and the PDMS-treated PET nonwoven support layer should face the permeate side. A copper foil with conductive adhesive was applied to the two ends of the membrane on the conducting layer side to connect to the external DC power source (Agilent E3646A) to deliver power directly to the membrane's conducting surface under voltages of 10 V, 15 V and 20 V. To the feed channel, a flat leaf temperature probe was inserted, and placed in contact with the membrane's conducting surface to measure the increase in the membrane surface temperature (MST °C) with the increase of the applied voltage during the VMD process. While another temperature probe inserted into the feed outlet was used to measure the bulk feed temperature (BT °C). The 3.5 wt% NaCl solution was stored in 500 mL feed tank at room temperature (20 ± 1 °C), and was passed continuously through the feed channel at different cross flow rates of 1 mL min−1, 1.5 mL min−1, 2 mL min−1, and 2.5 mL min−1. The inlet of the permeate side was closed, and then a vacuum pressure of 30 mbar was applied from the permeate outlet side using a vacuum pump (AS-3, Newlab Instruments Co., Ltd.) to carry vapour molecules to a cold trap outside the module for condensation. The conductivities of the feed and permeate were measured using the conductivity meter (Eutech CON 700). The mass of the permeate was measured using a weighing balance (SHS GX4000) at intervals of 12 hours. In the VMD experiments, the membrane performances, including the pure water flux (L m−2 h−1) (for each membrane, five flux measurements were carried out and an average value was reported), salt rejection (%), temperature polarization factor (TPF%), delta temperature (ΔT °C) and specific heating energy (Qsh) and gain output ratio (GOR) values were evaluated, respectively.

Permeate flux. 
The permeate flux was calculated as per eqn (1): (1)where Jw is the permeate flux (L m−2 h−1), V is the volume of the liquid collected (L), T is the operating time (h), and A is the effective membrane surface area (m2).40


Salt rejection. 
The salt rejection R (%) can be calculated as per eqn (2): (2)where Cp and Cf are the concentration of permeate and bulk feed, respectively.41


Temperature polarization factor (TPF). 
The temperature polarization factor (TPF) is generally used to quantify the degree of temperature polarization (TP) phenomenon at the membrane surface.10 TPF can be evaluated as per eqn (3): (3)where mf is the membrane surface temperature at the feed side, and bf is the temperature of the bulk feed.


Specific heating energy (Qsh). 
Specific heating energy is the ratio of the heating energy consumption (Qin) in kW m−2 to the rate of the permeate flux (Jw) in L m−2 h−1. The input heating energy during the VMD process includes the electrical energy used for membrane Joule heating. The Qsh can be calculated as per eqn (4): (4)


Gain output ratio (GOR). 
GOR is the ratio of the required energy for water evaporation to the input heating energy of the system. The GOR can be calculated as per eqn (5): (5)where hv is the latent heat of evaporation for water (2256 kJ kg−1).

Simulation
Ansys Fluent software was used to carry out FVM simulations with the boundary conditions that matched the experimental setup. There were 27761 finite volumes with 58442 nodes created in the FVM simulations. For the boundary selection, the geometry of the flow channel was specified by four distinct regions, including the inlet (i.e., with a specified inlet flow rate), outlet (i.e., with a specified outlet flow rate), wall (i.e., which was set to room temperature), and heat wall (i.e., graphene–PVDF membrane with a specified heat flux). The operating and initial variables were analogous to our experimental system (Table 1).
Table 1 Operating and initial variables




Parameter
Value
Unit




Membrane area
778.54
mm2


Membrane thickness
0.15
mm


Feed concentration
3.5
wt%


Inlet temperature
25
°C


Boundary wall (polycarbonate)
5
mm




The simulation involved the following calculation steps. First, the heat flux by the membrane surface was determined using eqn (5), where I is the current; V is the voltage; and, A is the area. Second, the inlet and outlet velocity magnitudes of the saline feed were determined by eqn (6), where V is the feed flow velocity; Q is the flow rate; and, A is the cross sectional area. (6) (7)
The FVM simulations were developed on the basis of the following assumptions that the graphene–PVDF membrane was a solid structure, with a stationary wall, no slip condition, no transport of water through the membrane pores (i.e., superhydrophobic membrane), and trivial heat loss to the environment. The calculations of the heat transfer assumed that the thermal conductivity of the membrane remains unchanged, and had a value of 5000 W mK−1 and thickness of 150 μm. The inlet and outlet temperatures were assumed as the ambient temperature (25 °C/298.15 K). Steady-state analyses were conducted to produce the simulated temperature distributions inside the VMD cell under various control parameters, as shown in Fig. 6a–h.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors express their sincere gratitude to the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan (MOST 108-2628-E-011-003-MY3, MOST 108-2622-E-011-018-CC3, MOST 109-3116-F-011-002-CC1) and National Taiwan University of Science and Technology-Tokyo Institute of Technology joint research program (TIT-NTUST-108-05) for financially supporting this research.
Notes and references
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. M. van Loosdrecht and D. Brdjanovic, Science, 2014, 344, 1452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alkhudhiri, N. Darwish and N. Hilal, Desalination, 2012, 287, 2–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. El-Bourawi, Z. Ding, R. Ma and M. Khayet, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 285, 4–29 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Khayet and T. Matsuura, Introduction to Membrane Distillation,  2011, pp. 1–16,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-444-53126-1.10001-6 .
M. R. Qtaishat and F. Banat, Desalination, 2013, 308, 186–197 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. E.-R. Abu-Zeid, Y. Zhang, H. Dong, L. Zhang, H.-L. Chen and L. Hou, Desalination, 2015, 356, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
A. Deshmukh, C. Boo, V. Karanikola, S. Lin, A. P. Straub, T. Tong, D. M. Warsinger and M. Elimelech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1177–1196 RSC .
D. González, J. Amigo and F. Suárez, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 80, 238–259 CrossRef .
A. Politano, P. Argurio, G. Di Profio, V. Sanna, A. Cupolillo, S. Chakraborty, H. A. Arafat and E. Curcio, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603504 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-S. Jun, X. Wu, D. Ghim, Q. Jiang, S. Cao and S. Singamaneni, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 1215–1225 CAS .
A. V. Dudchenko, C. Chen, A. Cardenas, J. Rolf and D. Jassby, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 557–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Politano, G. Di Profio, E. Fontananova, V. Sanna, A. Cupolillo and E. Curcio, Desalination, 2019, 451, 192–199 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ye, X. Li, L. Deng, P. Li, T. Zhang, X. Wang and B. S. Hsiao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 3269–3281 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gong, H. Yang, S. Wu, G. Xiong, J. Yan, K. Cen, Z. Bo and K. Ostrikov, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 51 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, K. R. Zodrow, P. B. Szemraj and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23712–23719 RSC .
X. Wu, Q. Jiang, D. Ghim, S. Singamaneni and Y.-S. Jun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18799–18807 RSC .
X. Han, W. Wang, K. Zuo, L. Chen, L. Yuan, J. Liang, Q. Li, P. M. Ajayan, Y. Zhao and J. Lou, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 567–575 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Dongare, A. Alabastri, O. Neumann, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 13182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Dongare, A. Alabastri, S. Pedersen, K. R. Zodrow, N. J. Hogan, O. Neumann, J. Wu, T. Wang, A. Deshmukh, M. Elimelech, Q. Li, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, H.-Q. Liang, Z.-K. Xu and Z. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, S. Hong, L. Shi, J. Chang, R. Li, Y. Jin, C. Ong, S. Zhuo and P. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3012 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Anvari, K. M. Kekre, A. Azimi Yancheshme, Y. Yao and A. Ronen, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 589, 117253 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, T. Chen, Y. Li, S. Liu, H. Pan, Y. Ma, Z. Chen, Y. Zhang and S. Zhu, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2498–2508 CrossRef CAS .
L. Song, Q. Huang, Y. Huang, R. Bi and C. Xiao, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 591, 117359 CrossRef .
W. Sun, T. Chen, C. Chen and J. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 305, 93–102 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, R. Xiu, S. Lu, X. Xu, S. Yang and Y. Xiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8847–8854 RSC .
J. Widakdo, Y.-H. Chiao, Y.-L. Lai, A. C. Imawan, F.-M. Wang and W.-S. Hung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 30915–30924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Janakiraman, A. Surendran, S. Ghosh, S. Anandhan and A. Venimadhav, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 292, 130–135 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Hung, S.-Y. Ho, Y.-H. Chiao, C.-C. Chan, W.-Y. Woon, M.-J. Yin, C.-Y. Chang, Y. M. Lee and Q.-F. An, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 5750–5758 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huang, S. Yang, P. He, J. Sun, S. Zhang, D. Li, Y. Meng, J. Zhou, H. Tang, J. Liang, G. Ding and X. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30732–30740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Woo, Y. Kim, W.-G. Shim, L. D. Tijing, M. Yao, L. D. Nghiem, J.-S. Choi, S.-H. Kim and H. K. Shon, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 513, 74–84 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Ferrari and D. M. Basko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 235–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Eykens, K. De Sitter, C. Dotremont, L. Pinoy and B. Van der Bruggen, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 182, 36–51 CrossRef CAS .
S. Munirasu, F. Banat, A. A. Durrani and M. A. Haija, Desalination, 2017, 417, 77–86 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rezaei, D. M. Warsinger, J. H. Lienhard V, M. C. Duke, T. Matsuura and W. M. Samhaber, Water Res., 2018, 139, 329–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, L. Dong, D. Yang and H. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5352–5359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Asad, D. Sameoto and M. Sadrzadeh, in Nanocomposite Membranes for
Water and Gas Separation, ed. M. Sadrzadeh and T. Mohammadi, Elsevier,  2020, pp. 1–28,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-816710-6.00001-8 .
S. S. Ray, S.-S. Chen, C. T. Ngoc Dan, H.-T. Hsu, H.-M. Chang, N. C. Nguyen and H.-T. Nguyen, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 1808–1819 RSC .
X. Q. Cheng, L. Shao and C. H. Lau, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 476, 95–104 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Li, J. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Yin, L. Cao, Y. Zhong and H. Wu, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 523, 273–281 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta11724bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Diagram showing the assembly of the self-heated VMD module with a graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heater, schematic representation of the interfacial heating of the feed stream in the self-heated VMD process, and different properties of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heater.	 

 	Fig. 2  Morphological characterization of the flat sheet membrane Joule heaters; (a–e) FESEM surface images of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (f–j) FESEM cross sectional images of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (k–o) Digital microscopy (DM) surface images of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (p) Surface and bulk porosity of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (q) Surface roughness parameters (Sa, Sz, Sq) of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the preparation of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (b) Digital image of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heater. (c) Digital photo of the experimental setup used to measure the Joule heating efficiency of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters in air medium. (d) Joule heating efficiency of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters in air medium. (e) Resistance and conductivity measurements of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (f) FT-IR spectra of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (g) X-ray diffraction analysis of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (h) Raman spectroscopy of the graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters. (i) Water contact angle (WCA) measurements of the pristine PVDF membrane and graphenex–PVDF1 flat sheet membrane Joule heaters.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Digital photo of the self-heated VMD module assembly with other components. The VMD performance of the graphenex–PVDF1 membranes; (b) permeate flux. (c) Membrane surface temperature (MST °C). (d) Salt rejection (%). (e) Temperature polarization factor (TPF%). (f) Delta temperature (ΔT °C). (g) Schematic representation of the graphenex–PVDF1 membrane Joule heater-enabled direct feed heating in the self-heated VMD process. (h) Specific heating energy consumption (Qsh). (i) Gain output ratio (GOR).	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of specific heating energy (Qsh) values (blue squares) and gain output ratio (GOR) values (red circles) of some of the published self-heated MD systems with the lowest specific heating energy (Qsh) and gain output ratio (GOR) values obtained in this study (the numbers inside [] indicate references).	 

 	Fig. 6  FVM simulation results of the feed temperature distribution within the self-heated VMD module for the direct heating of the feed stream by the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane under different voltages and feed cross flow rates of (a) case 1: 10 V + 1 mL min−1. (b) Case 2: 10 V + 2.5 mL min−1. (c) Case 3: 20 V + 1 mL min−1. (d) Case 4: 20 V + 2.5 mL min. (e–h) FVM simulation results showing the temperature distribution at the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane surface for the (e) case 1: 10 V + 1 mL min−1. (f) Case 2: 10 V + 2.5 mL min−1. (g) Case 3: 20 V + 1 mL min−1. (h) Case 4: 20 V + 2.5 mL min−1. (i) Effective heating area versus different values of T*. (j) Difference between the effective heating area and flux versus different values of T° for the graphene2.5–PVDF1 membrane.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

Membrane area	778.54	mm2
Membrane thickness	0.15	mm
Feed concentration	3.5	wt%
Inlet temperature	25	°C
Boundary wall (polycarbonate)	5	mm
	(6)
	(7)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta11724b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
